To Sir. John Trevelyan Bar^. (...) This Portrait of his late Uncle Sir WALTER
BLACKETT Bar^.
From a Painting by Sir Joshua Reynolds* (...) of NEWCASTLE upon TYNE* (...)

portrait of Sir Walter Blackett

The History AND Antiquities OF THE TOWN AND COUNTY OF THE TOWN OF Newcastle
upon Tyne, including an Account of the Coal Trade of that place and embellished
with Engraved Views of the Public Buildings, etc.

Vol. I.



By JOHN BRAND, M. A. Fellow and Secretary of the Society of Antiquaries,
LONDON.

Urbs antiqua
dives opum stud^sque asperrima belli.
VIRG. LONDON Printed for B. White and Son, Booksellers, Horace's Head, Fleet
Street, and T and L Egerton, Whitehall.

A. D. MDCCLXXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE MAYOR, RECORDER, ALDERMEN, SHERIFF, AND COMMON
COUNCIL OF THE TOWN AND COUNTY OF THE TOWN OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE, THE NATURAL
PATRONS OF THIS WORK, THE FOLLOWING HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS ARE MOST
RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR VERY OBLIGED, AND MOST DEVOTED, FAITHFUL,
HUMBLE SERVANT,

THE AUTHOR.
LONDON, March 1st, 1789.
PREFACE.
EVERY work on the subject of Topography, founded on authentic records, and
executed with accuracy and fidelity, has a natural claim upon the patronage of
that particular place or district, of which it treats. The following may in
some degree boast of more extensive pretensions, two considerations making an
History of Newcastle upon Tyne of general and national importance: its
situation, not far from the borders of Scotland, which rendered it one of the
principal frontier towns during the hostilities with the sister kingdom; and,
since that unhappy time, its extensive coal trade.

The oldest printed account of that place, is, a small book in quarto,
consisting of thirty-four pages, and entitled, "Chorographia, or a Survey of
Newcastle upon Tyne, etc. Newcastle printed by S. B. 1649. S. P. D. dilectis
Burgensibus et probis Hominibus Novi Castri super Tinam. W. G."

The last letters stand for the initials of William Gray, of whom I have not
been able to recover any particulars. -- The Greys of Backworth in
Northumberland are said to be of the same family. This work, an imperfect
outline, but which is extremely scarce, was reprinted in the Harleian
Miscellanies, vol. iii. in 1745, with some additional remarks.

Another small quarto volume on the same subject, very rarely to be met with,
is entitled, "England's Greivance discovered in relation to the Coal Trade;
with the map of the river of Tyne, and situation of the town and corporation of
Newcastle, etc. by Ralph Gardener of Chriton (Chirton) in the county of
Northumberland, Gent. London, 1655." It is dedicated to the Lord Protector
Cromwell, consists of two hundred and eleven pages, and is ornamented with the
heads of several kings and queens of England. The author appears to have been a
most pointed enemy to the magistrates of Newcastle The mayor and corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne, in their answer to the complaint of Ralph Gardener to the
committee appointed for trade, etc. 1653 (a MS. which I have read), expressly
say that that writer "broke the goal of Newcastle last summer, being there
imprisoned for diverse great sums of money, and again imprisoned at the suit of
the sheriff of the said town;" and to this they attribute his malicious charge.

The MS. Life of Alderman Barnes, which I shall often have occasion to cite, in
a note, p. 420, informs us, that, "upon some methods agreed on for reformation
of manners in the town, according to that clause in the charter, which impowers
them to make be laws, there was one Gardener writ a malicious invective against
the government of Newcastle; but he got his reward, being afterward at York
hanged for coining."

Chirton, where he lived, is a village east of Newcastle, near the town of
Sheilds. "He was," says Bourne, "a bitter enemy to this town, and did all the
mischief to it that lay in his power, as appears in every page of his book, in
which are numbers of falsities."


. From each of these curious tracts I have adopted in the subsequent
collections whatever I thought worthy of being preserved.

With regard to MS. authorities, I shall constantly refer my readers to the
great national repositories -- the Heralds' and Augmentation Offices, the
British Museum, the Rolls' Chapel, and the Tower of London.

The Bodleian library at Oxford, the public library, and those of Trinity and
Bennet Colleges in the university of Cambridge, were open to my inspection.

I found a very copious source of unedited materials in the archives of the
corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne Permission was granted to me in the most
liberal manner by the late John Baker, Esquire. alderman of that town, during his
last mayoralty, to inspect all the records, with liberty at the same time to
make what extracts I thought proper.
.

My honored patron, the Duke of Northumberland, condescended to allow me the
liberty of perusing and extracting whatever I found to my purpose from many of
the valuable records of his illustrious house.

I was indulged with the free use of a MS. collection, entitled, "An Abstract
in order of Time of the Charters and other Records concerning the Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne."

It appears to have belonged to some former recorder or town clerk, but comes
no lower down than the fifth year of the reign of King Charles the First.

I cite this under the name of "the Aubone MS." it having belonged to the late
Mr. Aubone, secretary to the Trinity-House. A copy of it, taken by Mr. Aubone's
permission, is preserved in the library of John Erasmus Blackett, Esquire. alderman
of Newcastle That gentleman used his utmost endeavors, but without success, to
obtain for me a sight of the Milbank MS. so often quoted by Bourne.
.

I have derived very considerable information from a MS. in folio, which I call
"the Murray MS." having received the loan of it from a gentleman Mr. George
Parker.
to whom it was bequeathed by the late Mr. James Murray, attorney at law Mr.
Murray served his clerkship to Mr. Ord, attorney at law in Newcastle. -- He was
afterward in the town-clerk's office. -- The MS. devolved to him on the death
of Mr. Ord. I have some reasons for thinking that the greatest part of this
collection was made by Sir Robert Shaftoe, on^^ recorder of Newcastle. Mr.
Murray died in 1779. See Inscriptions in St. Andrew's churchyard, in the
following work.
. It is written in various hands, and evidently at different periods; so that
probably it has also been the property of some former recorder or town clerk.

I was favored with the perusal of a curious MS. by the present possessor,
John Medley, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne. It is entitled, "A Catalogue
of all the Mayors and Sheriffs of his Majesty's Town and Countye of Newcastle
upon Tyne, with their Coats of Arms and the Reigns of the several Kings and
Queens of this Land, with certain Briefs of Chronicles that happened in their
several Reigns since Anno Domini 1432." I call this throughout the following
work "the Carr MS." as it appears to have owed its preservation to one of that
family. -- The subsequent inscription is stamped in golden letters on the
binding: "Robert Carre, Esquire. St. Helen Auckland 1730;" with the family arms:
viz. gules, on a chevron argent three mullets fable. This is doubtless the
identical MS. mentioned by Bourne in page 121 of his History of Newcastle In
the Introduction to the first volume of the Archaeologia, p. 25, notes, it is
said that Mr. Elstob, son of Ralph Elstob, merchant at Newcastle upon Tyne, who
was born in 1673, fellow of University College, Oxford, and died rector of the
united parishes of St. Swithin and St. Mary Botham in London, 1714, collected
for an History of Newcastle; but what is become of the MS. is not known.

For this collection I made every inquiry, but in vain.


.

I have occasionally made considerable use of a MS. "Life of Ambrose Barnes,
merchant and sometime alderman of Newcastle." It is in folio, closely written,
with a dedication to Sir Theodore Talbot. It contains several curious
anecdotes; but the writer, whoever he was, appears to have been deeply
tinctured both with religious and political fanaticism.

The dedication, signed with the initials M. R. is dated June 19th, 1716.

From Bourne's History of Newcastle upon Tyne, a thin folio volume, which was
published three years after the death of the author, A. D. 1736, a circumstance
which both apologizes and accounts for the various contradictions with which it
abounds, I have selected whatever I thought authentic and interesting to my
subject In the Newcastle Courant for November 20th, 1731, are inserted Mr.
Bourne's proposals for publishing this work by subscription: He had advertised
for materials in the same Courant for September 18th, 1731.

The posthumous work was advertised ibid. April 24th, 1736, to be delivered to
the subscribers on the 3d of May following.

Mr. Bourne, after a very lingering illness, died about four o'clock in the
afternoon of February 16th, 1733.


.

George Allan, Esquire. F. S. A. of Darlington in the county of Durham, favored
me, in the most liberal and polite manner, with the loan of several volumes of
MSS. copied from original records remaining in the church of Durham, and which
had been bequeathed to him by the indefatigable transcriber, the Rev. Mr.
Randall, late of that city, with liberty of making such extracts as I should
think proper. I cite these passim by the title of "Randall's MSS. Dr. Hunter of
Durham, often mentioned with respect by the learned Mr. Horsley, in his
Britannia Romana, transcribed a great number of records, relating to Newcastle
upon Tyne, from the archives of the church of Durham, (as I gather from
Randall's MSS.) and sold a copy of Bourne's History aforesaid, with these
transcripts interleaved, to Mr. Akenhead, bookseller at Newcastle, for five
guineas, in 1740. This collection was the groundwork of Mr. Akenhead's
engaging in the design to publish an History of Newcastle, for which he gave
out proposals, not long after the above purchase. This intended work was,
however, never published, nor could I by any means procure a sight of the
interleaved copy of Bourne's History; but I have every reason to think that I
found transcripts of the same records in Randall's MSS. Mr. Akenhead's
proposals for printing by subscription a History of Newcastle upon Tyne in two
volumes in quarto, were published in the Newcastle Journal some time in the
year 1750.


"

I selected some very interesting materials from the MS. collections of the
late George Gray, of Newcastle upon Tyne, Esquire. barrister at law: all of which,
together with his library, had been sold by his executors to Mr. Robert
Harrison, formerly of that town, of whom they were purchased (with several
notes, extracts, and references to books, concerning the same place, which he
himself had made and collected in the course of his very extensive reading),
for the use of the following work.

Vicinity and other circumstances once tempted me to hope that, in the course
of my progress in it, I should have profited much by his judicious
observations; but from the circumstance of his removing to the south of
England, and of my leaving the north before his return, my expectations on that
head were entirely frustrated.

Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. governor of the Merchants' Company, indulged
me in the politest manner with the liberty of inspecting the records of that
society.

Alexander Adams, Esquire. steward of the Hostmen's Company, did me a similar
favor with respect to those of that fraternity.

I am indebted to John Erasmus Blackett, Esquire. for the loan of a curious MS.
collection of pedigrees, etc. which formerly belonged to the Calverley family,
and to their late most respectable representative, Sir Walter Blackett, Bart.

I owe the perusal of Dr. Ellison's MS. collections, with many other
attentions, to the kindness of his grandson the Rev. Nathaniel Ellison, M. A.
vicar of Bolam in Northumberland, and lecturer of St. Andrew's in Newcastle
upon Tyne.

The late George Stephenson, Esquire. procured me leave to inspect the old books
and other records of the Trinity-House of that town.

Liberty to examine and collect notes from the parish registers was granted me
in the most friendly manner by the several clergy and keepers of the registers
in Newcastle and Gateshead I must not omit to mention that a collection of neat
drawings of monuments, arms, etc. in the several churches of Newcastle, was
purchased of Mr. Lambert, formerly clerk to the recorder of Newcastle, for the
use of this work; and had the copies of the inscriptions on the monuments been
as accurate as they ought to have been, they would have anticipated a great
deal of my most ungrateful labor.
.

I owe acknowledgments for permission to inspect several ancient MSS. curious
deeds, etc. to Thomas Astle, Esquire. F. R. S. and S. A. keeper of the records in
the Tower of London; to John Topham, Esquire. F. R. S. and S. A. of the State Paper
Office; to Craven Ord, Esquire. F. R. S. and S. A. of the Exchequer; to John Caley,
Esquire. keeper of the records in the Augmentation Office.

For various communications in the course of the following work, I stand
indebted to Charles Coombe, M. D. F. R. S. and S. A.; to the Rev. Mr. Penneck,
F. R. S.; the Rev. Mr. Southcote, and the Rev. Mr. Ascough, of the British
Museum; to Mrs Adair, formerly Miss Shaftoe, of Benwell Lodge, in the county of
Northumberland; to Hugh Hornby, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne; to John
Davidson, Esquire. clerk of the peace for the county of Northumberland; to
Nathaniel Clayton, Esquire. town clerk, and Nathaniel Punshon, Esquire. undersheriff
of Newcastle; to Jonathan Airey, Esquire. to Thomas Davidson, Esquire. to Jasper
Harrison, Esquire. to Mr. George Anderson, architect; to the late Mr. Davison, and
to Mr. Rutter, attorneys at law in Newcastle; to Robert Page, Esquire. deputy
comptroller of the Custom-House of that place; to Mr. Ralph Beilby, and Mr.
Richard Fisher, of the same town.

To the several stewards of the incorporated companies of Newcastle, I was
obliged for the liberty of searching in their respective archives for their
ordinaries and other ancient writings I shall just barely mention, that the
late Rev. Mr. James Murray, a dissenting minister in Newcastle, undertook, some
time before his death, to compile a history of that town; but, having no means
of procuring any other information on the subject than was to be obtained from
printed books, his design came to nothing.

From motives of delicacy I contented myself with this account of his MS. from
those who perused it, declining, for very obvious reason, to read a line of it
myself.

There is a brief history of Newcastle included in Wallis's History of
Northumberland, and in Hutchinson's View of the same county.


.

After pleading, in excuse for the rough and unpolished style of the following
collections, the rudeness of my materials, deduced from the records of
barbarous ages, corrupted in many places by the ignorance and inattention of
former transcribers, I shall conclude in the language of the learned prelate,
Dr. White Kennet:

"If the present age be too much immersed in pleasures to take any relish, or
to make any use of these discoveries, I then appeal to posterity: for I believe
the times will come, when persons of better inclination will arise, who will be
glad to find any collections of this nature, and to supply the defects and
carry on the continuation of it. -- I am under no concern to vindicate it from
the slights and ridicule that may be cast upon it by idle, witty (his Lordship
might have added, ignorant) people, who think all history to be scraps, and all
antiquity to be rust and rubbish." Or in that of the great Camden, in the
preface to the Latin edition of his Britannia:

"Si qui sint, qui in urbe sua hospites, in patria sua peregrini, et cognitione
semper pueri esse velint, sibi per me placeant, sibi dormiant, non ego illis
haec conscripsi, non illis vigilavi."

LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
A.
GAWEN Aynsley, Esquire. Little Harle Tower James Allgood, Esquire. Nunwick Henry
Askew, Esquire. Red Heugh Mr. John Anderson, Newcastle Mr. George Anderson, ditto
Alexander Adams, Esquire. ditto Mr. George Adams, ditto Henry Airey, Esquire. ditto
Jonathan Airey, Esquire. ditto Mr. Archdeacon, -- ditto George Allan, Esquire. F. S. A.
Darlington Thomas Adams, Esquire. Alnwick Mr. William Anderson, Newcastle Mr.
Edward Alder, Weetslet, Northumberland
B.
Sir Thomas Blackett, Bart. Bretton Sir Edward Blackett, Bart. F. S. A. Matfen
Sir Francis Blake, Bart. Fowberry John Erasmus Blackett, Esquire. alderman of
Newcastle Rev. Mr. Blackett, rector of Boldon Christopher Blackett, Esquire.
Newcastle Charles Brandling, Esquire. M. P. for Newcastle Thomas Charles Big,
Esquire. Benton-House Thomas Big, jun. Esquire. C. C. C. Oxon. Rev. Doctor Bates,
rector of Whalton Ralph Bates, Esquire. in the 6th or Inniskilling Dragoons Richard
Bell, Esquire. Newcastle Matthew Bell, Esquire. Wolsington Bryan Burrell, Esquire. Broom
Park Mr. William Burdon, Emanuel College, Cambridge George Brooks, Esquire. Durham
John Brooks, Esquire. Biddenham, Bedfordshire Mr. Jasper Brewell, Linkhouse Mr.
William Bloxham, London Mr. John Birch, Gateshead Charles Brown, Esquire. M. D.
Newcastle Mr. Ralph Brown, -- ditto Mr. Thomas Barker, -- ditto Mr. Charles
Dalston Barker, ditto Mr. Robert Barkass, -- ditto Mr. Ralph Beilby, -- ditto
Mr. Richard Burrell, -- ditto Mr. John Blake, Morpeth R. H. A. Bennett, Esquire.
Pall Mall, London Mr. Richard Brown, Wylam Rowland Burdon, Esquire. Castle Eden
John Blackett, Esquire. Wylam Mr. Michael Bryan, Ghent, Flanders Mr. George
Brumell, Newcastle
C.
Sir Thomas Clavering, Bart. M. P. Axwell Park Percival Clennell, Esquire.
Harbottle Castle Edward Collingwood, Esquire. Chirton George Collpits, Esquire.
Killingworth John Clutterbuck, Esquire. Warkworth Rev. Dr. C. Cooper, Kirby
Overblow The Rev. Mr. Joseph Cook, Sheepwash William Charlton, Esquire. Heslieside
Ralph Carr, Esquire. Dunston Hill Benjamin Colborne, Esquire. Bath Mr. R. Christopher,
Stockton Mr. Cole, Chester-le-street Mr. Croduce, Lambton The Social Club,
Hexhamshire Captain John Cunningham, Tinmouth William Cr^amlington, Esquire.
alderman of Newcastle Nathaniel Clayton, Esquire. town clerk of ditto Mr. Snow
Clayton, Newcastle Robert Clayton, Esquire. ditto Richard Chambers, Esquire. ditto
Isaac Cookson, Esquire. ditto Mr. William Charnley, ditto Mr. Robert Coulter, ditto
Mr. Ralph Clarke, London Robert Carlisle, Esquire. Haltwhistle John Christian, Esquire.
Workington Hall George Crawford, Esquire. King's Langley, Herts Edward Charlton,
Esquire. Reedsmouth Mr. George Carr, St. Petersburgh
D.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Durham The Dean and Chapter, ditto Captain
Durnford, Royal Engineers John Davidson Esquire. Newcastle Thomas Davidson, Esquire.
ditto Mr. James John Davis, ditto Mr. William Darnell, ditto Edward Dale, Esquire.
ditto Mr. Isaac Dixon, ditto Mr. John Dagnia, ditto Mr. George Dickenson, ditto
Mr. John Dodds, ditto Sir John Dick, Bt. Harley-street, Land. Captain Dent,
Short Flat The Rev. Mr. Drummond, rector of Rothbury
E.
Sir John Eden, Bart. Windlestone Henry Ellison, Esquire. Hebburn Rev. Mr.
Nathaniel Ellison, Newcastle
F.
Joseph Forster, Esquire. Newcastle James Fenwick, Esquire. M. D. ditto William
Fenwick, Esquire. Grange House, near Morpeth Barnabas Fenwick, Esquire. Ryton Thomas
Fenwick, Esquire. Earsdon Mr. George Fenwick, Lambton Mr. John Fenwick, Newcastle
Mr. Edward Fawcett, ditto Mr. John Fish, ditto Mr. Richard Fisher, ditto Mr.
Fishwick, White Lead Works, near ditto William Fenwick, Esquire. Bywell Christopher
Fawcett, Esquire. recorder of Newcastle
G.
The Right Hon. Lord Adam Gordon William Greive, Esquire. Ord House Mr. Thomas
Gibson, merchant, Newcastle Mr. A. T. Griffith, ditto John Gregson, Esquire.
Buckton Ralph William Gray, Esquire. Backworth
H.
Hugh Hornby, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle Mr. Thomas Emmerson Headlam, Newcastle
Mr. Robert Hedley, Newcastle Right Worshipful John Hedley, Esquire. mayor of
Newcastle Rev. Mr. Haigh, Newcastle Mr. Ralph Haigh, ditto Rev. Mr. Hornby,
ditto Jasper Harrison, Esquire. ditto Mr. Thomas Hawdon, ditto Mr. John Hindmarsh,
ditto Mr. George Henderson, ditto Mr. S. Hodgson, ditto Mr. John Hall, ditto
William Hargrave, Esquire. Shawdon Henry Hudson, Esquire. Whitley Rev. Mr. Hogarth,
Kirknewton Mr. Thomas Harvey, Gateshead Mr. Howlitte, Coventry Rev. Mr. Hugh
Hodgson, M. A. vicar of Eglingham Mr. Thomas Hannay, Blythe Mr. Anthony Hood,
Newcastle Mr. Thomas Hibbert, Grosvenor-street, London John Hall, Esquire. M. D.
Newcastle Ralph Heron, Esquire. ditto Mr. William Handasyde, London Mr. Thomas
Hall, Newcastle Thomas Haggerstone, Esquire. Sandoe House Carpenters' Company,
Newcastle
I.
Robert Ilderton, Esquire. Westoe Mr. William Ingham, Newcastle Francis Johnson,
Esquire. alderman of Newcastle Joiners' Company, Newcastle Mr. Jacob Jackson,
Bluntswall, Essex Mr. George Johnson, Byker
K.
Mr. Richard Keenlyside, Newcastle Mr. William Kent, ditto John Kirton, Esquire.
London Mr Thomas Kerr, Alnwick
L.
Sir John Lawson, Bart. Brough Hall Lady Liddell, Ravensworth Rev. Mr.
Lushington, vicar of Newcastle Robert Lisle, Esquire. Acton House Mr. Ralph
Laidler, Twizell Samuel Lacy, Esquire. Kirk Oswald John Lowes, Esquire. Ridley Hall
Anthony Leaton, Esquire. Whickham Mr. Edward Lawson, Morpeth Mr. Jos. Langstaff,
Newcastle Mr. Samuel Lawton, ditto Mr. Richard Lambert, ditto Mr. William
Lloyd, ditto Mr. John Langlands, jun. ditto Mr. David Landell ditto Wilfred
Lawson, Esquire. Brayton, Cumberland Mr. William Leighton, Newcastle
M.
Sir William Middleton, Bart. Belsay Castle Edward Mosley, Esquire. alderman of
Newcastle Mr. Miles Monkhouse, Newcastle Rev. Mr. Manners, ditto Rev. Mr.
Moises, rector of Greystock Mrs. Montague, Portman-square, London Mr. John
Morrison, White House Mr. John Doyne M'Arthur, Newcastle Mrs. Mills, ditto
James Milnes, Esquire. Thorns House Mr. David Martin, Sheffield Right Hon. Lord
Mountstuart
N.
Mr. Joseph Naters, Sandifordstone Mr. William Newton, Newcastle His Grace the
Duke of Norfolk
O.
Ralph Ord, Esquire. Sands William Ord, Esquire. Fenham William Ord, Esquire. Morpeth Mr.
Leonard Shaftoe Ord, University College, Oxford William Ogle Wallis Ogle, Esquire.
Cawsey Park
P.
Robert Meggison Pearson, Esquire. Newcastle Nathaniel Punshon, Esquire. ditto Mr.
George Pickering ditto Mr. Ralph Pickering ditto Mr. George Parker ditto Robert
Page, Esquire. ditto Samuel Phipps, Esquire. Lincoln's Inn, London Mr. Peter Paxton,
Newcastle Thomas Pugh, Esquire. London Thomas Pennant. Esquire.
R.
Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. alderman and member of Parliament for
Newcastle, two copies Nicholas Ridley, Esquire. Gray's Inn, London Rev. Henry
Ridley, Newcastle Sir James Riddell of Ardnamurchan and Sunart, Bart. James
Rudman, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle Mr. John Robertson, Newcastle Mr. R. Rain,
Newcastle Mr. William Rain, ditto J. S. Raisbeck, Esquire. Stockton Mr. William
Raisbeck, Newcastle Mr. Richard Rogerson, ditto Mr. Thomas Robson, ditto Mrs.
Ann Robinson, ditto Joseph Ritson, Esquire. Gray's Inn, London Rev. Mr. Rotheram,
Houghton-le-Spring Mr. Robert Rumney, Warden Admiral Roddam, Roddam Lowther
Rutter, Esquire. Newcastle
S.
Aubone Surtees, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle Aubone Surtees, jun. Esquire. Newcastle
William Surtees, Esquire. ditto Mr. John Surtees, ditto Rev. Matthew Surtees,
University College, Oxford Mr. John Soulsby, Newcastle Mr. James Scott, ditto
Mr. William Scott, ditto Mr. Henry Scott, ditto Mr. John Scott, Dockwray's
Square, North Shields George Stephenson, Esquire. Elswick Mr. David Stephenson,
Newcastle Mr. Thomas Sopwith, ditto Mr. John Stokoe, ditto Rev. Dr. Sharp,
archdeacon of Northumberland James Storey, Esquire. Otterburn Mr. Joseph Storey,
Queen Street, Cheapside, London Henry Collingwood Selby, Esquire. John Silvertop,
Esquire. Minster Acres Bernard Shaw, Esquire. Usworth Place Mr. John Smart, Trewit Mr.
Robert Storey Robert Smith, Esquire. Castle-yard, Holborn
T.
Sir John Trevelyan, Bart. Wallington Walter Trevelyan, Esquire. Nether Witton Rev.
Mr. Thorp, rector of Gateshead Marmaduke Tunstall, Esquire. Wycliffe Mr. David
Tailor, Little Britain, Land. Mr. John Todd, York, two copies Trinity-House,
Newcastle Mr. Anthony Tailor, Newcastle Mr. Edward Twizell, ditto Rev. Mr.
William Turner, ditto Taylors' Company, ditto John Thorpe, Esquire. M. A. F. S. A.
Bexley, Kent Edmund Turnor, Esquire. F. R. A. S.
U.
The University College, Oxford
V.
Hon. Frederick Vane, Esquire. Sellaby James de Vismes, Esquire. London
W.
John Widdrington, Esquire. Hauxley John Walker, Esquire. Rotheram Thomas Ward, Esquire.
Nunnikirk Rev. Mr. Webster, prebendary of Durham Mr. Isaac Westmoreland and Co.
Caldbeck Mr. Whitelock, Bushblades John Wilkie, Esquire. Hetton Mr. George Wood,
Durham Mr. Nicholas Walton, jun. Farnacres Mr. Richard Wilson, Bartlet's
Buildings, London Messrs. Alexander Wilson and Son, Glasgow Mr. Edward Wilson,
South Shields William Wilson, Esquire. Newcastle Mr. Robert Wilson, ditto Mr.
William Wilson, ditto Mr. Ogle Wallis, Newcastle Mr. William Wolfall, ditto Mr.
George Weatherby, ditto Mr. Williams, ditto Mr. James Wilkinson, ditto Mr. John
Rawling Wilson, ditto Mr. Ralph Waters, ditto Mr. Thomas Waters, ditto Mr.
Wentworth, Minerva House Rev. Mr. Wilson, rector of Wolsingham Mr. Williamson,
Great Russell-street, Bloomsbury, London
Y.
Mr. David Yates, jun. Manchester
A Plan of NEWCASTLE upon Tyne and GATESHEAD 1788.
Engraved by R. Beilby.

A Kings manner B Kings Lodgings C Grammar Schole D The manner F New house H
Black friars I Saint John's K High Castle L Almese Houses M Saint Nicholas N
Alhallowes O Trinity House P Pandon Hall Q The wall Knoll R The Stone Hill S
The maisen deeu T Almose Houses V West Spittle W White Friars X Scottish Inn Z
New yate 3 West gate 4 Pandon yate 6 Sandgate yate 7 Close gate 8 The Key.


map of Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead

HISTORY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE.
ANCIENT FORTIFICATIONS, STREETS The oldest Plan I have seen of Newcastle is
that in Speed's Map of Northumberland. See a fac-simile copy of this in a
corner of the new plan that accompanies this work. It was described by William
Matthew, who is mentioned in an inquisition 18th James I. in the account of the
castle, about the year 1610.

A. D. 1723, a Plan of Newcastle upon Tyne, dedicated to Matthew
Featherstonehaugh, mayor, the aldermen, sheriff, and common council of that
town, was published in two sheets, with twenty-six views of public buildings,
by James Corbridge.

The plan prefixed to Bourne's History, published in 1736, is without any
engraver's name, and seems only a copy of the above, with additions and
improvements.

Gough, in his British Topography, Vol. II. p. 57, tells us, he was informed,
that "a very correct plan (of Newcastle) was taken soon after the rebellion, by
order, and at the expense, of the late Duke of Cumberland, and is now in the
hands of Mr. Thompson, who drew it." I inquired of Mr. Thompson's son, but
could neither learn of him whether ever such a plan had been taken, nor into
whose hands it had fallen.

A most correct plan of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Gateshead, taken from an
actual survey, finished in the year 1770, engraved in two sheets by J. Ellis,
was published by Charles Hutton, mathematician.

Thoresby, in his Ducatus Leodensis, p. 497, mentions a Prospect he had of
Newcastle, drawn by Mr. William Lodge, of Leeds, who was born in 1649, and died
1689.

A south prospect of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, taken from the top of
Gateshead-Church-steeple, by Samuel Buck, was engraved and published in the
month of April, 1724.

A large north-east view of Newcastle was published by Samuel and Nathaniel
Buck, 1715.

Gray, in his Chorographia, p. 27, tells us, that Camden makes Newcastle upon
Tyne 22 grad. 30 min. longitude -- 54 grad. 57 min. latitude: and that Hues
makes it 23 grad. 10 min. longitude -- 55 grad. 20 min. latitude.

According to Dr. Hutton's plan, it stands precisely in 55 degrees of north
latitude, and about 1 17 longitude west from London.


, CHURCHES, MONASTERIES, BRIDGES, AND OTHER PUBLIC EDIFICES, IN NEWCASTLE UPON
TYNE.
HARDYNG, in his Chronicle, informs us that Newcastle upon Tyne was enclosed
with a wall during the reign of William Rufus See History of Newcastle, as a
borough town, under that reign: His words are; "The town to build, and wall
as did append,
He gave them ground and gold full great to spend,
To build it well, and wall it all about, etc."
That part of the wall near St. Andrew's-Church, which is of a more antique
fashion than the rest, may perhaps be a specimen of the earliest and original
walls of Newcastle -- it extends from Newgate to Ever-Tower.


.

In a charter of King John to that town, dated January 28th, 1216, express
mention occurs of the walls thereof See History of the Merchants Adventurers.
-- The words are; "Et quod nullus eorum qui fuerit infra gildam suam
mercatoriam placitet extra muros Novi Castri."
.

In a grant from the King to the Black-Friars of Newcastle, dated Sept. 18th,
1280, the west part of the present wall of that town, near the house of that
order, is called the New-Wall To have a passage into their garden. -- The words
are; "Quod per medium novum murum circumagentem villam predictam, quem per
medium gardini predictorum fratrum fieri oportebit, etc." See afterward in the
account of that house. The wall appears to have been finished a year or two
afterward, by the subsequent extract from the Aubone MS. "A. D. 1283, 11th Ed.
I. Upon a writ of ad quod damnum, inquiry was made before the mayor and
bailiffs of Newcastle, whether there were, between the town-wall and the house
of the friars preachers there, a place called the King's-Place. And it was
found that there was such a place, purchased the last year of the issues and
profits of the murage, upon part of which the wall was built, and part left for
necessary carriages unto it, which is called the void place, and is necessary
for the defense thereof."

Among the writings preserved in the hutch, or common treasury of Newcastle, A.
D. 1565, was one entitled, "A grant for building the walls of the town." The
original is now lost, and the date has not been transmitted.


.

Most respectfully inscribed (...). Hugh H^rn^y Esquire. (...)

An inside View of part of the TOWN WALL of Newcastle upon (...) St. Andrew's
Church between Newgate and Westgate.



In a record, dated May 26th, 1307, the building anew of the wall Leland, in
his Itinerary, p. 114, vol. v. tells us, that "The walls of Newcastle were
begun in King Edward the Firstes day, as I have hard, by this occasion; a
great rich man of Newcastle was taken prisoner by the Scotts, out of the town
self, as it is reported. Hereupon he was raunsomed for a great sum, and
returning home he began to make a waulle on the ripe of Tyne ryver, from
Sand-Hille to Pandon-Gate, and beyond that to the tower again the
Augustine-Freres." -- He afterward says, the walls were not entirely finished
till Edward the Third's time. -- Indeed he speaks merely from the report of
others, who plainly appear to have known nothing of the matter. -- He adds,
"The strength and magnificens of the waulling of this town far passith all the
waulles of the cities of England, and most of the towns of Europe."

The following I extracted from a MS. in the Cotton Library. Julius, F. 10. --
"Edwardo primo regnante civis Novocastrensis vir opulentissimus ex ipso oppido
in Scotiam abductus fuit, qui demum pretio redemptus Novocastr' muro primus
circumdare coepit, quod reliqui cives imitati, Edwardo Tertio regnante,
firmissimo muro circumdedit."


of Newcastle, on the side toward the east, occurs A grant to the Carmelites
to remove from Wallknoll to another site: -- "Eo quod murus ejusdem villae de
novo constructus per medium clausi ipsorum, etc." See account of White-Friars.
: this was, in all probability, occasioned by the union of Pampedon, or Pandon,
with that town, by the charter of Edward I. dated Dec. 20th, 1299 See History
of Newcastle, as a corporate town, under that year.
.

King Edward the Third, in the first year of his reign, A. D. 1327, granted the
custom of things sold at Newcastle upon Tyne to be taken for seven years, to
contribute toward the reparation of the walls of that town Aubone MS.
.

The above King repaired the walls of Newcastle during his residence there in
1334 MS. in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Bernard's Catalogue, p. 86.
. The year following Hugh de Merchinleigh, one of the bailiffs of that place,
was removed from his office by the commonalty of the town, for having procured
murage against them Aubone MS. -- Mention occurs of defects in the walls of
Newcastle, in the 16th and 18th years of this king's reign. See in the tower of
London, "Fin. Anno 16. Ed. III. Et Fin. 18. Ed. III. m. 11."
.

A. D. 1386, 10 Ric. II. there was an assignment to the mayor and bailiffs of
Newcastle upon Tyne, to take workmen for repairing the walls of that town
Aubone MS. They had formerly (3 Ric. II.) petitioned to have the defects
thereof surveyed.
.

August 16th, 1403, King Henry IV. granted to the mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne,
all fines and forfeitures for the reparation of the walls and bridge of that
town Randall's MSS. -- See Historical Events.

November 20th, 1402. Nightly watches by an hundred persons upon the walls of
Newcastle upon Tyne, for the defense of that place and the parts adjacent,
appear as established there, and sustained at the charge of the inhabitants.
Pat. 4, Hen. IV. p. 1, m. 9.


.

A. D. 1527, mention occurs of an annuity of twenty pounds, granted by King
Henry the Eighth, for the support of the walls and bridge of Newcastle upon
Tyne See under that year, in Bourne's History, the receipt for that sum by the
mayor, sheriff, and chamber clerk, to Leonard Musgrave, Esquire. collector of the
customs of that port.
.

The walls here were much damaged during the remarkable siege, and at the
taking of the town by storm, in the year 1644. There was afterward a grant
from Parliament, of the sum of 2,564l. for repairing them See Historical
Events. -- There is an order of common council, dated March 15th, 1647, to
present Sir Arthur Hazlerigg, Bart. with a silver basin and ewer, of the value
of 30l. for his good services in that affair. (Common council books.)

Mention occurs, ibid. March 7th, 1648, of a "Committee about the repayringe of
the town wall at the Friars (probably the White-Friars, near which a great
breach was made at the storming of the town), being 56 or 57 yards." There is
also, ibid. September 20th, 1647, an order for repayring the town wall --
urged by Colonel Lilburne, the Governor of Newcastle -- especially a breach
near a place called "The Pink-Tower," in length 55 yards, about 3 yards thick,
and 6 yards and an half high.


.

June 17th, 1667, there is an order of the common council of Newcastle upon
Tyne for the immediate reparation of the walls, gates, and draw-bridges of that
town Common council books.
.

Several houses, erections, buildings, and other obstructions near these walls,
were pulled down at the rebellion in 1745. There are orders of the common
council, dated September 28th, and October 7th that year, to indemnify the
town's surveyor, and make up the damages of the private sufferers Ibid.
.

November 17th, 1762, the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, on their
petition, stating, that that part of the town-wall, which extended from the
Sand-Hill to Sand-Gate, was no longer of any use for defense, but a great
obstruction to carriages and hindrance to the dispatch of business, obtained an
order of the privy council to remove it at their own expense At the Court of
St. James's, (L. S.) the 17th Nov. 1762. Present the King's most excellent
Majesty in Council.
Whereas the mayor, aldermen, sheriff and common council of the town and county
of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in council assembled, did some time since
present to his Majesty at the Board, an humble petition, setting forth, that
the ancient wall of the said town, from the Sand-Hill to the Sand-Gate-Gate, is
not of any use for defense; and being on the key, where all goods are landed
and shipped off, is a very great obstruction to carriages, and a hindrance to
the dispatch of business; and humbly praying that his Majesty would be
graciously pleased to grant them leave to remove the said wall, at their own
expenses, and to make use of the stones, and other materials, for building a
church; and whereas the Lords of the Committee of Council, to whom his Majesty
was pleased to refer the consideration of the said petition, have this day
reported as their opinion, that it may be advisable for his Majesty to comply
with the petitioners' request: his Majesty taking the same into consideration,
was pleased, with the advice of his privy council, to approve thereof; and does
hereby give power and authority to the petitioners to remove the said wall
(provided the same be done at their own expense), and to make use of the
stones, and other materials, for building a church, as is desired. -- Whereof
all persons concerned are to take notice, and govern themselves accordingly.

HEN. FANE.



.

FOSSE.
THE Fosse or Ditch, that has anciently surrounded the walls of Newcastle, is,
in most places at present, filled up, and made level with the adjoining ground.
The space, however, which it occupied, is still called "The King's-Dikes." It
appears to have been uniformly of the breadth of twenty-two yards, or a chain.
It is claimed as the property of the corporation, to whom every waste within
their jurisdiction devolves, by the authority of their charter. It occurs, A.
D. 1312, by the name of "novum fossatum." See account of Black-Friars.

The subsequent entry occurs in the common council books, Sept. 28th, 1648.
"Ordered, upon the petition of James Turner, sheweing, that whereas he farmed
the Kinge's-Dikes of the town, and was to pay about 30 and odd shillings rent
for the same -- By reason of the trenches it became a common road for man and
horse, and especially for the towns kie, so that he could make no benefit by
it, etc."

As does the following: "February, 1654. The ground called the King's-Dikes,
leadinge from Sand-Gate toward Wallknole-Tower, ordered "to be canted," i. e.
let to the highest bidder, with the Wallknole-Close -- as likewise the dikes
from Pandon to Sand-Gate."

TOWERS AND GATES.
THE town, says Bourne, after the completing of the walls, was divided into
twenty-four wards These appear to have been, 1. Close-Gate. -- 2.
White-Friar-Tower. -- 3. Denton, or Nevil-Tower. -- 4. West-Spital-Tower. -- 5.
Stank-Tower. -- 6. Gunner-Tower. -- 7. Pink-Tower. -- 8. West-Gate. -- 9.
Durham-Tower. -- 10. Herber-Tower. -- 11. Morden-Tower. -- 12. Ever-Tower. --
13. Andrew-Tower. -- 14. Newgate. -- 15. Bartram-Monbowcher-Tower. -- 16.
Ficket-Tower. -- 17. Pilgrim-street-Gate. -- 18. Carlell-Tower. -- 19.
Plummer-Tower. -- 20. Austin-Tower. -- 21. Corner-Tower. -- 22. Pandon-Gate. --
23. Wallknoll-Tower. -- 24. Habkyn-Tower.

Another account makes but 23, as Wallknoll and Habkyn-Towers are said to be
"now but a ward."

In the modern distribution of wards, "Sand-Gate and Castle-Garth" occur.


, according to the number of the gates In a list of old salaries, entered in
the common council books, Dec. 23d, 1669, the following occur: L. s. d. "To
shutting and opening the Water-Gates 5 0 0 "To shutting and opening the
Close-Gate 0 13 4 "To shutting and opening the Pandon-Gate 1 0 0 "To shutting
and opening the Sand-Gate 1 0 0 "To shutting and opening the Pilgrim-Gate 1 0 0
"To shutting and opening the Newgate 1 0 0 "To shutting and opening the
West-Gate 1 0 0 "To shutting and opening the Bridge-Gate 2 0 0." By which it
appears that the gates were shut up every night.

October 21st, 1695, there is an order for entirely taking off the above
salaries.

Sept. 17, 1745, there is an order of common council to build up all the gates
leading into the town, except Sand-Gate, Newgate, the gates upon Tyne-Bridge,
and the Water-Gates, signed by Matthew Ridley, mayor. -- This was done for the
security of the town against the rebels.


, and round towers in them, which were wont to be defended, in times of
hostility with the Scots, by the particular wards appropriated to them.

There was a turret, or tower, fifty-two yards to the south of the Close-Gate,
adjoining to the river Tyne There is an order of common council, March 22d,
1648, that "the peers at the Close-Gate should be repaired."
-- part of it is still remaining. -- It has been made use of, successively, as
a meeting house for the companies of house-carpenters and sail-makers.

The Close-Gate "Close-Yate," says a curious account of the wards, preserved in
the archives of the corporation, in a very old hand, but without date, "shall
have in ward unto the Javil-Grippe, but nothing of Javil-Grippe. Also from the
High-Stare foreanenste Javil-Grippe, so going westward upon the North-Rawe unto
the Close-Yate."
, which since the fall of Tyne-Bridge, in 1771, has been converted into a
temporary prison, has evidently had its name from the street called the Close,
both sides of which it had in ward as far as the place called Javel-Grip. From
the Close-Gate there are an hundred and forty steps, on the top of the wall, as
it mounts a very steep hill to White-Friar-Tower, at the distance of sixty-nine
yards and one foot. -- The common name of these, i. e. the Break-Neck-Stairs,
is of very obvious etymology.

White-Friar-Tower was so called from the adjoining house of the Carmelites, or
White-Friars. The fraternity of masons had their hall in the upper apartment of
this tower; in the lower one was the meeting house of the companies of
bricklayers and mettors "White-Freer-Tower," adds the authority
abovementioned, "shall have in ward fro' the east end of Baly-Gate
foreanenste the Javil-Grippe, with all that dwell upon that High-Stare. Also
fro' that High-Stare in the Close, unto and with the west side of that Stare
that ledeth fro' the Sowth-Postern of the Castle toward the Close, with all
Javil-Grippe, and fro' the Javil-Grippe estwarde to the Sowth-Rawe of the
Close, and with all Bryge-Ende."

The subsequent extract is from Warburton's MSS. penes honoratissimum virum
Ducem Northumbriae: "On the White Tower, seven yards diameter, is written,
Timothy Davison, Esquire. mayor, Geo. Morton, Esquire. sheriff, 1674."

There is an order of common council, September 23d, 1776, for a lease of the
White-Fryer-Tower to Isaac Cookson, Esquire. for twenty-one years, under the annual
rent of one shilling, with liberty to make a battlement and way from his
summer house to the top of the said tower, etc. He has converted it into an
ice-house.


.

The distance from White-Friar-Tower to Postern-Gate, which adjoins on Denton,
or Nevil-Tower, is two hundred and fourteen yards and two feet.

Denton, or Nevil-Tower "Denton-Tower, otherwise called Nevel-Tower," our MS.
continues, "that stands by north a Yate called White-Freer-Yate, now mured up
with stones, shall have to ward all the Haire-Hugh behind the White-Freers,
with all the howses standing there upon the Burn-Banck, betwixt the Freer-Kirk
and a Burn, unto a stone brigge in Baly-Gate, with all Baly-Gate upwarde that
same raw unto Denton-Chare, but nothing of Galou-Gate."

John de Denton was a bailiff of Newcastle in 1339. This tower may probably
have been built by him, or some of his family, who might also have had great
property in the lane called Denton-Chare.

Ralph Nevil, Lord of Raby, was created Earl of Westmoreland, in the 21st year
of the reign of Richard the Second.

This is at present the hall of the company of wallers, bricklayers and
plaisterers. -- See account of that society.


, probably derives the first of these appellations, from the same person that
gave a name to the lane called Denton-Chare -- As it undoubtedly does the
second from the Nevil family, whose townhouse, called Westmoreland-Place,
stood near, and is said to have communicated with it by a subterraneous passage.

From the Postern-Gate On the wall over the Postern-Gate is the following
inscription: "The walls were repaired and fortified for the defense of this
town against the rebels, A. D. 1745; Cuthbert Smith, Esquire, Mayor, Henry
Partis, Esquire. Sheriff."

Bourne supposes this postern in the wall to have been an outlet to the (White)
Friars, that they might walk to the Forth and the neighboring fields, and that
it might be of use to the castle in times of hostility with the Scots. He
imagines also this to have been the gate out at which the townsmen in the reign
of Edward III. to the number of three hundred valiant men, issued, and came
suddenly, in the night, upon a great army of the Scots, which lay in the west
part of the town; and raised and put them to flight, taking Earl Murray
prisoner in his tent, etc. See Historical Events. Over this gate, toward the
town, are the following arms, cut in stone: Quarterly a Bend; Clavering -- On a
Bend three mullets; Shaftoe. -- Also for the town, three castles. -- Persons of
the names of Clavering and Shaftoe were mayors and sheriffs here, A. D. 1607 --
1629 -- 1663.

The following entries concerning this place occur in the common council books,
June 19th, 1753.

"Way through the Postern-Gate to the Firth. -- Ordered that Mr. Joshua Douglas
be applied to to open the way to the Firth through the Postern-Gate, and the
closes contiguous thereto, now in his possession, as it has heretofore been.
And there being of right no carriage-way through the said Postern-Gate, to or
from the said closes -- Ordered that a committee of the common council do cause
posts to be fixed, or the passage blocked up in such other manner as they shall
direct, so as to prevent any horses or carriages passing that way, to or from
the said closes for the future."

And September 25th, 1753, "Mr. Joshua Douglas having been applied to by a
committee of the common council, in pursuance of a former order, to open the
way to the Firth, through the Postern-Gate, and the closes contiguous thereto,
now in his possession; and he having proposed to the said committee, to refer
the right of the way through the said closes to Edward Collingwood, Esquire.
Recorder, and Christopher Fawcett, Esquire. -- Ordered that bonds of arbitration be
entered into with Mr. Douglas, or the present owner of the said closes, by the
mayor, appointing the said E. C. and C. F. Esquires, arbitrators, in order to
put an end to the said dispute.

HENRY PARTIS, Mayor."
to West-Spital-Tower "West-Spitell-Tower," continues our ancient authority,
"shall have in ward in the side, that is to say, upon the West-Rawe, under
Castel-Mote, fro' the Castell-Yate; so going downward on that raw, to and with
a great waiste (that belonged) Laurence Acton, now Thomas Heryng, foreanenst a
corner shop of a chaunterie in Saint John-Kirk, next the pant. Also fro that
pant before Swinburn-Doore, so going upward upon the East-Rawe in the Side unto
the South-Kirke-Stile of Saint Nicholas, by the east side of Saint
Nicholas-Pant and no farrer."
it measures an hundred and eighteen yards and four feet. This tower
undoubtedly derived its name from St. Mary's Hospital, otherwise called
West-Spital, which stands very near it. Bourne supposes it was built by the
master and brethren of that hospital for their protection. It is certain they
had hereabouts a postern in the Town-Wall See account of St. Mary's Hospital.
.

The next to West-Spital is Stank-Tower "Stank-Tower," continues the above MS.
"shall have in ward all Gallow-Gate foreanenst Castle-Yate, so going northward
fro' the east end of Gallow-Gate upward that same raw, unto the est end of
Denton-Chare with the Iron-Market, with all the howseis foreanenst Iron-Market,
down to Saint Nicholas-Pant, as their doors open toward the Iron-Markett,
or toward the pante, or toward Saint Nicholas Kirk-Yarde, with all that
dwell in the same yard on the sowth side of the kirck."
.

The next to Stank is Gunner-Tower: the distance from West-Spital to
Gunner-Tower is two hundred and six yards and one foot.

From Gunner-Tower "Gunner-Tower," proceeds our ancient authority, "shall have
in ward from All-Hallowe-Pant beside Cordiner (or Gardener)...... so going
downwardes the same raw toward Cale-Crosse, and so going upward by that
Flesher-Rawe unto Painter-Hugh, besides Swinburn-Place, with a place called
Pencher-Place, beyonds Painter-Hugh, as it stands upon the Lorke-Burne."

Between Gunner-Tower and the next toward West-Gate is a postern conducting to
the Firth, made, as appears by an inscription over the gate-way, when Thomas
Wasse, Esquire. was mayor, and Matthew Matfen Esquire. sheriff, A. D. 1705. When this
was made, a Mr. Whitfield, of whom Henry Utrick Reay, Esquire. is the present
representative, gave to the public, out of his private property, the lane or
narrow passage which leads to it from the street, called West-Gate.

Grey's MSS. say, "1704, 1705, gate to Firth made."


to Pink-Tower West-Yate, "upon the north side of West-Yate," adds the old
authority, "aliter Pinck-Towre, shall have in ward in the Sic.
close fro a high stare that ledes fro the sowth postern of the Castle,
toward the close so going eastward that same raw, by the north side of
Sand-Hill, unto and with Saint Mary-Lane, with the howseis upon the corner,
called Saint Mary Lands, in All-Hallowe-Kirke, and so going upward all the
West-Rawe in the side unto a great waist upon the Castell-Hugh, sumtime called
Old Laurence Acton's Waist, now Thomas Heryng's, foreanenst a pante in the side
before Swinborn's Door, upon Lork-Burn."
it measures eighty yards and one foot.

From Pink-Tower to the West-Gate the distance is ninety-three yards and two
feet.

To the Rev. John Brand. A. M. Rector of the City of London Chaplain (...) his
(...) of the Society of (...) This Plate exhibiting a VIEW of the WEST GATE in
NEWCASTLE upon TYNE (...)


This gate consists of four wards, and is said to have been built by Roger de
Thornton, a merchant, who from small beginnings became equally distinguished
for his wealth and munificence. This place was formerly a prison for unruly
apprentices, and is at present the hall of the company of house-carpenters. A
foot way was opened out on the north side of this gate, 1782; "Edward Mosley,
Esquire. mayor, George Collpits, Esquire. sheriff "West-Yate" proceeds our old MS.
"shall have in ward fro that vennell that ledeth into White-Freer-Kirk, so
goinge upon the west raw of West-Gate unto the West-Yate, with all that
dwells without that yate. Also fro' the west end of Denton-Chare, so goeng
upward upon the est raw of West-Gate, unto the West-Yate, with those that
dwell in Saint John Kirk-Yard, and with all that dwell fro the said Kirk unto
the West-Yate."

Roger de Thornton is said to have come originally from the country west of
Newcastle, according to the old saying, which Bourne gives as follows: "At the
West-Gate came Thornton in,
With a hap and a halfpenny and a lambskin."


In Stow's transcript of Leland's Itinerary, it is somewhat different; "In at
the West-Gate came Thornton in,
With a happen hapt in a ram's skynn.


He adds, "This Roger Thornton was the richest merchant that ever was dwelling
in Newcastell. The isle and almost all the lands that the Lord Lomely has in
Yorkshire and Northumbreland were this Thornton's". (Vol. v. p. 114.)

Lord Lumley married his daughter. -- There is a tradition in the family that
the descendants of this great benefactor to the town were exempted from paying
toll at the gates of Newcastle.

Mention occurs of West-Gate used for a prison, in the following extract from
Rushworth's Collections, Part IV. vol. ii. p. 1219. -- "On Monday night last,
in the time of the storm, all that were in West-Gate in the town of Newcastle,
to the number of seventeen, of the prisoners lately taken in Northumberland,
escaped away. Having had friends come to visit them several times, diverse ropes
were brought in to them, which was not known till they were gone: In the dark
of the night, when the storm was violent, blew hard, and much rain, by the
ropes let themselves down by a privy."

This happened about the beginning of August 1648. -- It appears that six of
the chief of the prisoners that were in Tinmouth-Castle escaped at the same
time, letting themselves down through a privy, built on the north side of the
Castle, with sheets sewed together.


."

Leland calls this gate "a mighty strong thing of four wards and an iron
gate."

From the West-Gate to Durham-Tower "Durham-Tower," says the MS. so often
cited, "shall have in ward fro Saint John-Chare to goeng upward by Urd-Place
upon the west raw of Bere-Market, unto the Shod-Freer-Chare, with all the
Shod-Freer-Chare."
it measures an hundred and one yards and one foot.

From Durham to Herber-Tower "Herber-Tower," it proceeds, "shall have in ward
all the Meale-Markett fro Denton-Chare to Pudding-Chare, with all Pudding-Chare
and St. John-Chare.
, the distance is seventy-seven yards and one foot.

This is the meeting house of the armourers, curriers and felt-makers, who made
an agreement to repair it for that purpose, July 3d 1620 See the books of that
society, where it is called "Harbot-Tower.
.

From Herber to Mordon-Tower "Mordon-Tower" says the above authority, "shall
have in ward both the east raw of Spurior-Gate, Sadler-Gate and over
Flesh-Shamels, from the north-west Kirk-Stile of Saint Nicholas unto the
Fishe-Shamels, as the said raw opens either to the Clothe-Markett or to the
Mele-Market."
it measures an hundred and fifteen yards.

This is at present the hall of the glaziers, plumbers, pewterers and painters,
who repaired it A. D. 1700. It appears to have been granted to them in 1619 A
gilded ball hangs suspended from the center of this meeting room: it probably
had been shot from the cannon of the Scottish army during the great siege of
the town in 1644; and having lodged in the wall, was discovered on the
alteration of the tower. It is curious to observe hereabouts on the outside of
the wall, how many of the stones still bear the marks of the above very
memorable siege.
.

Between Herber and Mordon-Tower there has been a postern in the wall. -- See
the account of the Monastery of Black-Friars.

From Mordon to Ever-Tower "Ever-Tower," adds the old MS. "shall have in ward
the Shod-Freer-Yate, so going up that raw beside White-Crosse unto New-Yate,
with all the Darn-Crooke, and with all the Gallowe-Gate without Newe-Yate, unto
the Barriers as men go to the Gallows."
the distance is ninety-nine yards and one foot.

This was built by some of the ancient family of Eure, or Ever, lords of
Kirkley, near the river Blyth, and barons of Witton, in the county of Durham.
It is now the hall of the paviers, colliers and carriage-men.

To the Right Worshipful Ed^^. Morley E^q^ Mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne. This
View taken from the North of the GATE of that TOWN called NEWGATE. John Brand
1781


From Ever to Andrew-Tower "Andrew-Tower," it continues, "shall have in ward
fro' the Great Nun-Yate, so upwarde upon that East-Rawe unto a burn besides
Lam-Place, that rynns to Lork-Burn, with all the Cockstole Bothes, and with all
the west raw of Sid-Gate, fro' Gallowe-Gate unto the Water-Myln besides Saint
James Kirk." In an original deed dated at Newcastle upon Tyne, Tuesday before
the feast of St. Hillary, 1354, "Cockstole Bothes" occur with the appellation
of "les Coksour Bothes." By this deed John son of Robert de Castle and Matilda
(his wife) released and quitclaimed to William del Strother, burgess of the
town of Newcastle, all their right "in tota illa placea terre cum suis
pertinen' in villa Novi Castri super Tynam quam Petrus de Ogle tenet de nobis
in feodo -- Et in toto illo messuagio Ricardi de Werdall sicut jacet in
predicta villa in vico Fori ex opposito les Coksour Bothes -- Et in illa Botha
quam Robertus de Wellis tenet de nobis in feodo sicut jacet in predicta villa
in vico pelliperiorum." -- Matilda swore on this occasion before the mayor and
bailiffs of the town, "infra quatuor bancos. Hiis testibus Ricardo Scot,
Johanne de Emeldon, Willielmo de Acton, et Johanne de Camera, tunc ballivis
dicte ville Novi Castri, Roberto de Angerton, Gilberto de Duxfeld, Johanne de
Stanhope, Thoma Hette, Willo de Cauce, et aliis."
it measures one hundred yards. This has evidently got its name from its
vicinity to St. Andrew's Church.

From St. Andrew-Tower to Newgate "Newe-Yate," adds our ancient MS. "shall
have in ward all Raton-Rawe as it opins toward the pillarye in Clothe-Market,
with them that dwell in the north side of Saint Nicholas, upon that east raw
of the Clothe-Market, unto the Overdene Brig-Ende."
the distance is an hundred yards.

We may infer, from the name of this gate, that it has been erected on the site
of an older one, which appears to have been called Berwick-Gate Froissart tells
us, that the bishop of Durham going to join the English army that sought with
the Scots at Otterbourn, A. D. 1388, issued out of Newcastle at "Berwick-Gate,"
"ils se departitent du Neus-Chastel, et issirent par la port de Berwick, et se
mirent sur les champs," etc. Their route appears to have been by the way of
Ponteland, in their road to which place, this is still the usual gate through
which travelers go out of the town.
. On the north front there remain three ancient shields of arms -- St. George's
cross -- Arms of England, with the fleurs de lis semee Henry the Fifth is said
to have been the first of our monarchs that reduced the sleu^s de lis in the
royal arms to the number of three.
-- and those of Newcastle upon Tyne. -- The upper part of this front seems
considerably more modern than the rest of the structure.

The statue thereupon appears to resemble King James I See account of Tyne
Bridge, under 1651.
. -- It is placed under an arch of Roman architecture, has a crown and robes,
holding a scepter in the right, and a globe or mound in the left hand. --
Newgate was built before Newcastle In an inquisition in the Tinmouth
chartulary at Northumberland-House, mention occurs of this gate with its
present appellation, June 19th, 1390. "Tenementum extra le Newjate."
was made a county of itself, and took custody of its own prisoners, who, no
doubt, before that period, were confined in the prison of the castle of that
town, in common with other delinquents of the county of Northumberland. The
additional wings or flanks on each side of the south front of this structure
appear to have been erected about the beginning of the present century The one
anno 1702, William Ramsey, Esquire. mayor, William Boutflower, Esquire. sheriff. The
other anno 1706, Sir Ralph Carr, mayor, William Ellison, Esquire. sheriff. See
common council books, March 25th, 1702, and Bourne's History.
. The portcullis of this gate still remains.

June 21st, 1676, there was an order of common council to appoint a minister
for reading prayers every Wednesday and Friday, and preaching a sermon to the
prisoners confined here, once a month, with an annual Common Council books. --
William Greenwell was the first appointed, and was succeeded Dec. 14th, 1686,
by John Medcalfe. -- The following names of succeeding chaplains occur --
William Hall after Medcalfe. 1722, William Simcoe. July 20th, 1724, William
Wilkinson. Dec. 20th, 1756, -- Askew. March 21st, 1763, -- Scott. Nathaniel
Ellison, John Brunton, John Brand, John Brown, Thomas Ellison. There was an
order of common council, April 15th, 1765, appointing the curate of St. John's
and St. Andrew's for the time being, chaplains of the gaol, to officiate
monthly by turns, with each a salary of ten pounds per annum. The parish clerk
of St. Andrew's to attend them, with a salary of thirty shillings per annum.

For a particular account of this prison, see Howard on the State of Prisons,
1777, quarto, p. 421, etc. Also the Appendix to that work, 1780, quarto, p. 177.

The following names of gaolers here were all I have met with: Sep. 21, 1653,
William Preston. Before 1718, Christopher Barker. Oct. 13, 1718, Michael
Dawson. George Ord. John Craister. Thomas Harle. Martin Mordue.


January 14th, 1744, the corporation of Newcastle purchased of John Hudson,
Tailor, the present gaolef's house, called at that time, "The Old Gaol-House."
(Common Council books.)

It appears, ibid. Sept. 21, 1653, that there had been an ancient custom, which
was at that time revived, for the jailer to have a livery-cloak given him, and
to attend the sheriff twice a day on every Sunday to church.


salary of 10l. In the year 1765, a foot-way was opened into Sid-Gate on the
east side of Newgate, through the Town-Wall, for the convenience of the
public.

PILGRIM STREET GATE South Front.
(...) Author (...)

Most respectfully ^ded to James -- Rudman. Esquire. ALDERMAN of NEWCASTLE upon
TYNE.



From Newgate to Bartram Mombowcher-Tower "Bartram Momboweher-Tower,"
continues our ancient authority, "shall have in ward all the west end of
Over-Dean-Brig, with the shoppes betwixt the Fishe-Shamells and the
Bere-Market, and fro' the same Brig-Ende unto the Great Nun-Yate."
it measures an hundred and twenty-six yards and one foot. This has plainly had
its name from the Bertram Mombowcher, who was several times sheriff of
Northumberland See Fuller's Worthies. -- The following occurs in the Harleian
MSS. 708. Eschaets 12 Ric. II. "Bertramus Monboucher miles tenuit die quo obiit
de Rege in villa Novi-Castri super Tynam, 2 messuagia cum annuo reddit: 10s.
exeunt' de quodam ten' in Pilgrym-Stret juxta murum ville predicte in libero
burgagio."
.

From Bartram Mombowcher to Fickett-Tower "Fickett-Tower," adds the above MS.
"shall have in ward from Whelpington-Barne beside the great Cross standing
within Maudlen Bars, without the New-Yate, so coming upon the east raw of
Sid-Gate, without New-Yate unto the New-Yate: And also within the New-Yate, so
goeing upon the east raw sowthward into a burn besides Lam-Place, that runs
towerds Lork-Burn, with all Graie-Freer-Chare, fro the Bars foranenste
Fickett-Tower and the North-Kirk-Dower of the said Freers westward, and noe
further eastwarde in that lane."
it measures an hundred and thirty-two yards.

From Fickett-Tower to Pilgrim-Street-Gate "Pilgram-Street-Yate," proceeds our
old authority, "shall have in ward without that same yate, beginning at the
great waist barn called Emeldon-Barn, foranenst the Mawdlaines, so coming
downwerds and inward upon that west raw of Pilgrim-Street-Yate, within the
yate unto All-Hallowes-Pant besides Cordiners (or Gardiners) Place, beside the
Sowth-Kirk-Stile of All-Hallowes-Kirke, with all Painter-Hewgh, and with all
Nether-Dean-Brig, and with all the north end of Over-Dean-Brig, both sides
thereof fro' Lork-Burn, eastward to Pilgram-Street, with Pencher-Rent, and in
Graie-Freer-Lane, fro Fickett-Tower eastward."

This gate is at present the hall of the joiners' company, who repaired it A.
D. 1716. "Thomas French and Paul Cook being wardens."


the distance is an hundred and thirty-seven yards. Convenient foot-passages
have lately been opened out on each side of this gate communicating with
Northumberland-Street The workmen began in June 1771. Newcastle Courant.
.

From Pilgrim-Street-Gate to the Weavers or Carlel-Tower "Carlel-Tower,"
continues this MS. "shall have in ward all the east raw of Pilgrim-Street,
within the yate and without the yate, fro and with the Mawdelens, so coming in
ward upon the Fast-Rawe unto the Austin-Chare."
, between which there are three less ones, One of these was called the Waits'
Tower, and was formerly the meeting house of the town's band of musicians, who
still retain that appellation.

Here is an arch resembling that above Pandon-Gate, which was also the hall of
one of the companies.


the distance is an hundred and fifty-seven yards and two feet. This is at
present the hall of the weavers' company, and is called Carlel or
Carliol-Tower, from the family who gave its name also to the Carlel-Croft. The
weavers repaired it A. D. 1682.

From Weaver or Carlel-Tower, to Carlel-Croft-Tower "Carlel-Croft-Tower,"
proceeds our old MS. "shall have in ward fro the Austine-Chare in
Pilgram-Street, upon that east raw of Pilgram-Street, unto the kirk-yard of
All Hallowes, with all Tempil-Gate, otherways called All-Hallowe-Gate, beneth
All-Hallowe-Kirk, into a burn called Gogo, with all Cow-Gate, and other placis
betwixt Gogo and Kynges-Wall, unto the stone brigg over Pandon-Burn: also upon
the Sand-Hill in the east side of Lork-Burn, beginning at William Barbor's
shop, upon the corner in Boothes-Rent, foreanenst the Maison Di^u, so goinge
upon the east side of Lorke-Burne, all that raw toward Cale-Crosse, to and
with the corner called Olmer Rent, and so upwards all that corner unto the
north end of Grindon-Chair."
, otherwise called Plummer-Tower, the distance is an hundred and seventy-six
yards. This was also called Cutlers' Tower, having once been the hall of that
company, who are now extinct in Newcastle. It has been fronted after an elegant
design, and is at present the meeting house of the fraternity of masons.

From Carlell-Croft or Plummer-Tower, to Austin-Tower "Austin-Tower," it
continues, "shall have in ward fro' the north end of Grindon-Chare, so up
that sowth raw of the Nether All-Hallowe-Gate into Galewaie-Rent, with them
that dwell in Brown-Chair, Grindon-Chair, Rodes-Chair, Norham-Chair,
Philip-Chair, Shipman-Chair, Oliver-Chair, Galowaie-Chair, with half of
Freers-Austins."
, it measures (...) Duke (...) Earl Northumberland (...) ^arter (...) NEWCASTLE
(...) TYNE. (...)
one hundred and eighty-seven yards. This tower has evidently had its name from
its vicinity to the house of Austin-Friars. It has been, successively, the hall
of the millers and coopers, and is at present the meeting house of the ropers,
who repaired it, A. D. School, John Langlands and John Dawson being wardens.

From Austin-Tower to Corner-Tower "Corner-Tower," it adds, "shall have in
ward all the howseis upon the Key-Side, as their dowirs opin southward toward
the King's-Wall upon the Kei-Side, from the Stone-Stair beside the common
seigeie "Siege (a necessary-house), latrina, videri possit desumptum ex G.
Siege.
, so going eastward upon the Key-Side unto the sowth end of Brade-Chair-Yate,
in the said King's-Wall."

Mention occurs of this tower in the common council books, June 9, 1688, by the
name of "Corn-Hill-Tower," an evident corruption of Corner-Tower.


, the distance is an hundred and thirty-two yards.

From Corner-Tower to Pandon-Gate "Pampeden-Yate," continues our MS. "shall
have in ward fro' Galewaie-Rent, in Cros-Gate, beside All-Hallowes-Pant, both
the rawes of that Cross-Gate, so goeng estward down to the pante called
Brad-Chare-Pant, with Bell-Place that stands upon the pant. And with all the
Brad-Chare and Narrowe-Chare, otherwise called Colier-Chair, with Michel-Place
buttant upon the west side of Pampeden-Burn, beside the common seegeis upon the
same burn."
, it measures ninety-five yards and two feet.

Over the gate-way, the barber surgeons had once their meeting house. It has
resembled, in its original state, three turrets, between Pilgrim-Street-Gate
and the Weavers' Tower. -- The western wall of this meeting house appears to
have been taken away during the civil wars. It has been called, but
erroneously, a tower of the Roman wall, which passed it at a considerable
distance, and went over the top of the hill called Wallknoll.

From Pandon-Gate to Wallknoll-Tower "Wallknol-Tower," concludes our MS. "and
Habkyn-Tower, are now but a ward, and it shall have in ward fro' the
Brad-Chair-Pant, beside Bell-Place, so going to a burn called Gogo, both the
towers unto the south side Gogo-Burn, as it runs besides the Stane-Brig unto
Pampeden-Burn, fro Pampeden-Yate to the Sand-Yate, either in Pampeden or in
Fisher-Gate, or in another place fro' the said burn castward within the ward,
with all that dwell upon north raw in Sand-Gate."

There is a postern-gate under the Carpenters' Tower, in which is the hall of
the ship-wrights' company, built in the year 1716.

Bourne, on the authority of his MS. entitled, "Lib' de Reb. Novocastri',
informs us, that before the taking down of the top of the old tower, it was
much of the same size, model and stone, with the tower of Routchester in
Northumberland, which was certainly one of the towers belonging to the
Picts-Wall."

Gray, who wrote his Chorographia in 1649, speaking of the towers of the
Roman-Wall, says: "One of these towers remains whole in the towne-wall of
Newcastle, in Pampden, older than the rest of the towers, and after another
fashion, standing out of the wall."


, or the Carpenters' Tower, it measures ninety-five yards and one foot.

From Wallknoll, or Carpenters' Tower, to the farther side of Sand-Gate
Sand-Gate has evidently had its name from being built upon the sand on the side
of the river.

Bourne, speaking of the towers on the walls of Newcastle, informs us, on the
authority of the Milbank MS. that "between every one of these towers there
were, for the most part, two watch towers made square, with the effigies of men
cut in stone upon the tops of them, as though they were watching, and they were
called Garret, which had square holes over the walls to throw stones down."


, the distance is two hundred and thirty-two yards and one foot The above
measures are taken from a MS. communicated by the late Mr. Thomas Aubone,
entitled, "The distance of the towers one from another, with the breadth of
their faces on the town's-wall, beginning at the Close-Gate." He made the
admeasurement himself, A. D. 1745. His account proceeds as follows: "From
Sand-Gate to Close Gate -- From Sand-Gate to the Broad-Chare, 143 yards 2 feet.
-- From the Broad-Chair to Trinity-Chair, 68 yards. -- From Trinity-Chair to
Sand-Hill-Corner, 198 yards. -- From Sand-Hill-Corner to the Bridge-End, 132
yards. -- From the Bridge-End to the Mayor's House, 252 yards. -- And from the
Mayor's House to the Close-Gate, 117 yards and 2 feet, -- making the
circumference, in all, two miles, two hundred and ninety-three yards, and two
feet.

Bourne makes the whole circumference two miles and an hundred and seventy-six
yards.

According to Hutton's plan, the circuit of the wall now standing, from the
Close-Gate to Sand-Gate, is 2740 yards, or one mile and an half, and an hundred
yards.

A passage, leading from the Sand-Hill to the Key-Side, still retains the name
of the Watergate. -- Mention of it occurs in the common council books, August
24th, 1649, where it is called "the Windowes-Gate." Leland, who visited
Newcastle in the time of Henry VIII. tells us, there were "a strong wardyd gate
at Gateshed, a strong ward and tower on Tyne-Bridge, and a gate at the
Bridge-End" -- i. e. that end next the town.

-- Leland's Itinerary, vol. viii. See account of "Tyne-Bridge."
.

The Town-Wall, which formed a right angle here, and ran parallel with the
river Tyne to Close-Gate, which had Broad-Chare-Gate, with many smaller
water-gates, and Bridge-Gate in it, is now almost entirely taken away.

HOUSES, STREETS, etc.
IT appears, by the books of the window-cess, for 1781, that two thousand three
hundred and eighty-nine houses were then rated to pay that tax within the four
parishes of Newcastle Communicated by Mr. Jacob Lambert, clerk.

St. Nicholas' Parish 444 All Saints. Sand-Gate Quarter 495 Pilgrim Quarter 312
Pandon Quarter 202 Sand-Hill Quarter 137 1146 Total of All Saints Parish. St.
John's Parish 433 The houses without the West-Gate, which are in the county of
Northumberland, are not included. St. Andrew's Parish 366 2389 Total of four
parishes.

But it must be noted, that there are several houses marked "poor," which pay
no window-cess, and consequently are not included in the above account.


.

Hutton's plan makes the number of houses in that town two thousand four
hundred and fifty, and in Gateshead five hundred and fifty Hutton supposes
Newcastle and Gateshead to contain not less than thirty thousand inhabitants.
He adds, that the houses are chiefly built of brick. "This great number of
people," he continues, "is supplied with all kinds of provision from the very
plentiful markets of the town, here being used, annually, above 5,000 beeves,
10,000 calves, 143,000 sheep and lambs, with swine, fish, poultry, eggs,
butter, etc. in a prodigious abundance. The market days for corn are Tuesdays
and Saturdays."

The subsequent extract from the Newcastle Courant informs us how late that
town was in adopting the great convenience of having nightly lamps in the
streets:

"October 1st, 1763. Thursday night the lamps put up in the streets of this
town were lighted up for the first time." -- This was in consequence of an act
lately passed for lighting the streets, and other places, and maintaining a
regular and nightly watch within the town and county of the town of Newcastle
upon Tyne, and for regulating the hackney coachmen and chairmen, cartmen,
porters and watermen within the same.

A proposal was made and published, A. D. 1755, for illuminating the streets of
that town with 150 lamps.

Dr. Stukeley, in his Itinerary, speaking of the inhabitants of Newcastle upon
Tyne, observes: "They speak very broad; so that, as one walks the streets, one
can scarce understand the common people, but are apt to fancy oneself in a
foreign country."

The following obsolete and forgotten names of places in this town, occur in
the account of "Fee farm rents, belonging (in 1758) to Edward Pauncefort, Esquire.
etc." in the possession of John Widdrington, Esquire. receiver -- "A place called
Galls-Trip -- A waste place called Bell-Gate -- Weddon-Place -- and
Jackman-House."


.

QUAY, OR KEY-SIDE This place occurs in an original deed now before me, dated
September 3d, 38 Hen. VI. -- "Sicut jacet in villa Novi Castri super Tynam
super le Key-Syde."
.
THIS street, at present, lies open to the river -- It was formerly bounded on
the south side by the Town-Wall "On the top of this wall," says Bourne, "was a
walk -- and at the bottom of it a great many gates, called Water-Gates, A. D.
1616. These were ordered to be locked up every night, except one or two to
stand open, for the masters and seamen to go to and fro to their ships. This
was done to prevent servants casting ashes, and other rubbish, into the river:
and these two gates were watched all night long."

Ships of great burden can come up and unload at this wharf.

In the common council books, January 23d, 1638, mention occurs of two cranes
upon it.

There is an order, ibid. Dec. 16th, 1771, to forbid the practice of setting up
shambles, and exposing beef to sale on the Key-Side, as illegal and prejudicial.


, which, in this place, was perforated by a great number of small gates: it has
been much enlarged by the removal of this part of the wall, and is, indeed, at
present, one of the longest and most commodious wharfs in the kingdom. The
length of it, according to Bourne, is 103 rods. The custom-house of the port of
Newcastle was, a few years ago, removed from the upper, or western end of the
Key-Side, to a situation nearer to its center See History of the Custom-House
of Newcastle upon Tyne.
.

Twenty narrow lanes The lane, or passage, adjoining to the Town-Wall, and
terminating at Sand-Gate, is not included in this number of chares: a similar
passage, for the purpose of conveying ammunition, etc. during a siege, in many
places still remaining open, has anciently conducted quite round the town on
the inside of the wall.
, or, as they are called here, chares Cerre, vices, turns, courses, changes;
item, versio, flexus, a turning, winding, or bending. -- Diverticulum,
anfractus -- viae flexus -- the turning or bending of a way. Hinc preclari
illius diverticuli in suburbris Londinensibus. Charing-Crosse, vulgo vocati
ortum nomen, ut nobis jam observatum notis ad Glossas Lipsianas in voce Scurgi.

(Somner's Saxon Dictionary in verbo.) See also Benson's Anglo-Saxon
Vocabulary, and Manning's Lye's Saxon Dictionary in verbo.


, lead from the Butcher-Bank, Pandon, etc. and terminate in the Key-Side. --
Their names, which they seem to have changed almost with every change of their
owner, are given, as follow, in Corbridge's Plan of Newcastle, A. D. 1723.

In an original deed, now lying before me, dated August 10th, 1583, six
tenements are described, "jacen' infra dictam villam Novi Castri super Tinam in
quadam venella Vennel, in Latin venella, is a legal word. -- In Spelman's
Glossary it is called, "Via angustior quae in urbe, domibus, in rure, fossis,
sepibusque utrinque clauditur, a veniendo dictum ut iter ab eundo. -- Anglice,
a lane.
, vocat Graipe... Layne alias dict' Deynes-Chayre and modo vocat'
Shipman-Chayer."

Bourne saw, in a deed drawn in the reign of Hen. VI. the name of a chare
which, he quaintly observes, "had it been worth remembering, would, in all
probability, have been forgot long before now." See in Drake's Eboracum, an
account of a street with a similar immodest appellation.


1. The Dark-Chare. In Bourne's plan it is written "Granden-Chare."
2. Grinding-Chare. 3. Blew-Anchor-Chare. 4. Pepper-Corn-Chare. 5.
Palester's-Chare. In Bourne's plan, "Colvin's-Chare -- Coleman's-Lane" occurs
in a deed tempore Ca^. II.
6. Colwin's-Chare. Alias "Maryon-House-Chare."
7. Hornsby's-Chare. A. D. 1376, Robert Plumber occurs as one of the bailiffs
of Newcastle.
8. Plumber-Chare. Alias "Fenwick's-Entry," -- So called from its owner
Cuthbert Fenwick, esquire. alderman. -- Bourne supposes this was anciently called
"Kirk-Chair."
9. Fenwick's-Chare. In Bourne's plan, "The Dark-Chare."
10. The Park. 11. Broad-Garth. 12. Peacock-Chare. 13. Trinity-Chare. 14.
Rucastle-Chare. Harleian MSS. 708. Eschaets 14 Ric. II. "Le Brod-Chere" occurs.
15. Broad-Chare. 16. Spicer-Lane. 17. Burn-Bank. In Bourne's plan,
"Byker-Chare."
18. Baker-Chare. In Bourne's plan, "Cockis-Chare."
19. Coxton-Chare. In a deed, dated 1666, "Gowerley-Rawe, alias Love-Lane,"
occurs.

Bourne could not ascertain the following names which he met with. --
"Brown-Chare. -- The Chare of Nicholas de Salicibus. -- Tod's-Chare. --
Norham-Chare. -- Philip's-Chare. -- Shipman-Chare. -- Oliver-Chare. --
Galway-Chare."

I have seen, in old deeds, "Heworth-Chare," 2 Ric. III. -- "Roskel's-Chare,"
tempore Ed. III. -- "Gor-Chayr, alias Rods-Chayr," A. D. 1432. --
"Manwell-Chare, otherwise Heworth-Chare," A. D. 1654. -- "Wetwang-Chare," and
"Gowerley-Chare," occur 35th Queen Elizabeth.


20. Love-Lane.
Betwixt Grindon-Chare and Blue-Anchor-Chare, there is a remarkable old
building: the front toward the Quay has a balcony, supported by posts with
shields on them, but at present not charged with any armorial bearings. --
Behind, in Grindon-Chare, is a very observable house May not this have belonged
to the Knights Hospitale^s of St. John of Jerusalem?

Among the writings preserved A. D. 1565, in the hutch, or common treasury of
the town, there occurred one with the following title: "The agreement made
betwixt the prior of St. John, and the town of Newcastle, touching a Water
Gate;" whence it seems plain they had property of some kind at this place
David, King of Scots, gave them lands at Newcastle. -- See King John's Charter,
A. D. 1200.

A. D. 1376, suits and contentions occur between the prior of the hospital of
St. John of Jerusalem, and the mayor and commons of Newcastle, concerning
Fenham, a village in the vicinity of that town. See Rolls of Parliament, vol.
ii. p. 348. There still remains, in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne, an original receipt, dated 4th March, 1404, from Brother
Holdebrand Wotton, preceptor of Clerkenwell, and Henry Grendon, attorneys
general of the Lord Brother Walter Grendon, prior of the hospital of St. John
of Jerusalem in England, to the mayor, aldermen, and community of the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, for 12l. 10s. sterling, in part of payment of the sum of
37l. 10s. due the Michaelmas following, for the rent of mines of sea-coal at
Fenham, which pla^e was, it should seem, at that time, the property of this
famous order. -- The above receipt is dated at their house in Clerkenwell,
London: they were suppressed about the year 1540. On the express testimony of
Boethius, Fordun, and other Scottish historians, David King of Scotland, during
his residence at Newcastle, founded a monastery of Praemonstratensians, but no
particulars have been transmitted, either where their house stood, or with what
lands it was endowed.


, of stone, with buttresses on the outside, with a crypt, or vault, arched with
stone, now converted into a cellar. -- Human bones have been found here, and
there is a tradition, that this was once called St. John's Chapel.

SAND-HILL.
THIS is said to have been, anciently, at low-tide, an hill of naked sand,
where the inhabitants of the town were wont to assemble for their recreation A.
D. 1393. Records in the Tower of London. Novum Castrum super Tinam. A
proclamation, commanding to remove all merchandise, and all other stuff, etc.
from a certain common place there, called Sand-Hill, where were wont to
assemble the inhabitants thereof, for their recreation. Claus. 16 Ric. II. m.
15 Dorso. (Aubone MS. etc.)

A. D. 1565. There occurred among the town's writings, "A grant for the
Sand-Hill and the Windows."


. It is at present the great marketplace of Newcastle.

On the south side of the Sand-Hill stood the hospital called Maison de Dieu,
for a warden, being a priest, and nine poor men, brethren, and four poor women,
sisters, which was founded about the beginning of the reign of King Henry the
Fourth, by Roger de Thornton See Leland's Itinerary, vol. v. p. 114, new
edition.
(a most opulent merchant, representative in parliament, and a great benefactor
to the town of Newcastle), and dedicated to St. Catharine.

February 12th, 1403, King Henry IV. granted a license to Roger Thornton,
burgess of Newcastle upon Tyne, to alien in mortmain to the mayor, sheriff,
aldermen and commonalty of that town, a piece of ground an hundred feet in
length, and twenty-four in breadth, within that town, wherein certain poor
persons were to be provided with meat and clothing, in an "House of God," to be
built thereupon by the said Thornton, and where they should pray daily for the
health of the said mayor, sheriff, aldermen and commonalty; as also for that of
the founder, while he lived, and after their respective deaths for their souls,
and the souls of the father and mother of the founder, and those of all the
benefactors of that intended hospital Ex rotulo 2ae partis patentium de anno
quarto regni Regis Henric. IV. m. 38. Henricus Dei gratia Rex Anglie and
Francie et dominus Hibernie omnibus ad quos presents litere pervenerint
salutem. Licet, etc. De gratia nostra tamen speciali et pro december solidis quos
Rogerus Thornton, burgensis ville Novi Castri super Tynam nobis solvit in
hanaperio cancellarie nostre concessimus et licentiam dedimus pro nobis and
heredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est eidem Rogero quod ipse centum pedes
terre in longitudine, and quatuor viginti pedes terre in latitudine cum
pertinen' in eadem villa que de nobis tenentur in burgagio ut dicitur dare
possit et assignare majori vicecomiti and aldermannis ville predicte habend et
tenend sibi et successoribus suis ad inveniend' certas pauperes personas in
victu et vestitu in quadam Domo Dei per ipsum Rogerum super terram predict'
edificand' singulis diebus pro salubri statu nostro and majoris vicecomitis and
aldermannorum predict' and communitatis ville predict' et ipsius Rogeri dum
vixerimus ac animabus nostris cum ab hac luce migraverimus. Nec non animabus
patris and matris ipsius Rogeri and animabus omnium benefactorum ejusdem domus
juxta ordinacionem ipsius Rogeri in hac part faciend' oratur' imperpetuum. Et
eisdem majori vicecomiti and aldermannis quod ipsi terram predictam a prefato
Rogero recipere possint et tenere sibi et successoribus suis predictis sicut
predictum est Licentiam similiter tenore presentium dedimus specialem statuto
predicto seu eo quod terra predicta de nobis tenetur in burg^agio ut predictum
est non obstante. Nolentes quod idem Rogerus vel Herodes sui aut presati major
vicecomes and aldermanni seu successores sui ratione premissorum per nos vel
heredes nostros justic' escaetor' vicecomites aut alios ballivos vel ministros
nostros vel heredum nostrorum quoscunque molestent' occonent' in aliquo seu
gravent'. Salvis tamen capitalibus dominis feodi illius serviciis inde debitis
et consuetis. In cujus etc. Test meipso apud Westmon. duodecimo die Februarii
anno regni nostri quarto." "Convenit cum Recordo Aug. Vincent..

(Murray MS. p. 280 --)
.

The royal license for the foundation of this hospital is dated June 10th,
1412, when the edifice appears to have been completed. By the name of the
warden, brethren and sisters of the hospital of St. Katherine, called
Thornton's Hospital, in Newcastle upon Tyne, they might plead and be impleaded
in all courts, and have a common seal. -- This grant included also the license
for the chantry of St. Peter, in the chapel of All Saints, in that town See
Bourne, from Dugdale's Monasticon, vol. ii. fol. 474, ex pat. 13 Hen. IV. p. 2,
m. 14. Also in the Appendix to this vol.
.

July 6th, 1424. King Henry VI. by his patent, setting forth, that whereas the
king's grandfather had given license to Roger Thornton, his heirs, assigns, and
executors, to acquire for this hospital to the yearly value of ten pounds,
therefore granted a license to the said Roger, to assign a portion of ten
messuages and ten tofts, with their appurtenances, in Newcastle upon Tyne, of
the value of seven pounds per annum, as appeared by an inquisition made by John
Wall, late mayor of Newcastle, and eschaetor there, to this hospital, in aid of
their support for ever, in full satisfaction of the lands, tenements and rents,
to the value of ten pounds per annum aforesaid "Tertia pars paten' de anno
regni Regis Henrici sexti secundo, m. 9.

"Rex omnibus etc. sciatis quod cum Dominus II. nuper Rex Anglie avus noster
per literas suas patentes concessisset and licenciam dedisset pro se and
heredibus suis quantum in ipso fuit Rogero de Thornton quod ipse heredes
assignati vel executores sui terras tenemen' and redditus ad valorem december
librarum per annum tam ea que de ipso avo nostro tenebantur in burgagio quam ea
que de ipso avo nostro non tenebantur adquirere and custodi fratribus and
sororibus hospitalis Sancte Catherine vocati Thornton's Hospital in Novo
Castro super Tynam ac capellano cantarie ad altar beati Petri in capella
omnium sanctorum in Novo Castro super Thynam juxta dis^retionem and
limitationem suam divisim and proporcionaliter dare assignare and concedere
possent habend and tenend poteronem terrarum ten' and reddituum predictorum
prefatis custodi fratribus and soreribus per ipsum Rogerum limitand' dand' and
assignand' sibi and successoribus suis ac porcionem inde prelato capellano per
ipsum Rogerum limitand' dand' and assignand' sibi and successoribus suis in
auxilium sustentacionis sue imperpetuum statuto de terris and ten ad manum
mortuam non ponend edito non o^stante prout in literis predictis before
continetur Nos volentes dictam concessionem pr^dicti avi nostri predictam
effectum debito mancipari de gratia nostra speciali concessimus and licentiam
dedimus pro nobis and heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est prelato Rogero
quod ipse december messuagia and december tofta cum pertinen' in Novo Castro super
Tynam que de nobis tenentur in liberum burgagium Et que valent per annum in
omnibus exitibus juxta veram valorem earundem septem libras sicut per
inquisitionem per Johannem Wall nuper majorem ville Novi Castri super Tynam and
escaetor' nostrum in eadem villa de mandato nostro captam and in cancellar'
nostra retornatam est compertum dare possit and assignare prefatis custodi
fratribus and sororibus ac capellano cantarie predicte habend and tenend
porcionem messuag' and toft' predict' prefatis custodi fratribus and sororibus
per ipsum Rogerum limitand' dand' and assignand' sibi and successoribus suis ac
porcionem inde prefato capellano per ipsum Rogerum limitand' dand' and
assignand' sibi and successoribus suis in auxilium sustentacionis sue
imperpetuum in plenam satisfactionem terrarum ten' et reddituum ad valorem
december librarum per annum predict' Et eisdem custodi fratribus et sororibus and
capellano quod ipsi messuagia et tofta predict' cum pertinen' a prefato Rogero
in forma predicta recipere possint and tenere sibi and successoribus suis
predictis sicut predictum est imperpetuum Tenore presencium similiter licentiam
dedimus specialem statuto predicto aut eo quod messuagia et tofta predicta de
nobis teneantur in liberum burgagium ut premittitur non obstante Nolentes quod
predictus Rogerus vel heredes sui aut prefati custos fratres sorores et
capellanus vel successores sui per nos vel heredes nostros justic' escaetor'
vicecomites aut alios ballivos seu ministros nostros vel hered' nostrorum
quoscunque vel occonentur molestentur in aliquo seu graventur Salvis nobis and
heredibus nostris serviciis inde debitis et consuetis. In cujus etc. Test Rege
apud Westm' 6 die Julii."

(This is a true copy, etc. Robert Lemon, clerk.)
.

Roger Thornton, by his will, dated the Thursday before Christmas Day, 1429,
bequeathed to this place, which he styles "The Meson-Dieu of St. Katherine of
my foundation, for their enorments," twenty pounds Bourne in Anno.
.

In the year 1456, Roger Thornton, probably the son of the founder, granted to
the mayor and community of Newcastle upon Tyne, the use of the hall and kitchen
belonging to this hospital, to the following purpose; "for a young couple,"
says the Milbank MS. "when they were married, to make their wedding dinner in,
and receive the offerings and gifts of their friends: for at that time houses
were not large This was an ancient custom used, it should seem, for the
encouragement of matrimony.

The learned author of the Glossary to Douglas' Virgil, verbo "Thig," tells us
of something similar to this, in use, formerly, in the Highlands and North of
Scotland.


."

February 5th, 1531, Sir John Lomley, Knt. Lord of Lomley, the true and
undoubted patron, granted to Robert Ayton, of Fishborn, in the county of
Durham, and to Robert Halyman, of Newcastle, yeoman, jointly, the next
vacation, nomination and jus patronatus of the free chapel of St. Catherine,
called Masyndue Bishop Tunstal's Register, p. 40. "Advocatio libere capelle S^^
Catherine voc' Masyndue. Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum
pervenerit Johannes Lomley miles, Dominus de Lomley, verus et indubitatus
patronus libere capelle Sancte Katherine virginis super montem Sabuli infra
villam Novi Castri super Tynam fundat' salutem in omnium Salvatore ac fidem
indubiam presentibus adhibere Sciatis me prefatum Johannem Lomley dedisse
concessisse ac hoc presenti scripto meo confirmaste dilectis mihi in Christo
Roberto Ayton de Fishborn in comitatu Dun' et Rob. Halyman ville Novi Castri
super Tynam yomen conjunctim et eorum utrique per se divisim primam et proximam
vacationem and nominationem libere capelle predicte et jus patronatus ejusdem
pro unica and proxima vice tantum cum eadem etc. vacaverit. In cujus etc.
sigillum meum ad arma apposui. Dat' quinto die Febr' anno Regis Henrici octavi
etc. vicesimo quarto. Exhibit' ult' die Dec' anno Domini 1532."
.

The following account of this place is extracted from a certificate of
colleges and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. A. D. 1546,
remaining in the augmentation-office. "The Hospitalle of Saint Katheryne,
called le Maison-Dieu, in the parish of All-Saynts, in the town of Newcastell
upon Tyne, was founded by report to find a priest for ever to be there daily
resident in keeping of hospitality to the relief of the poor, and to
herborowe the sickke, and to gyve in alms yearly certain cooles to poor
folks, to the value of 26s. 8d. and bredde to the valewe of 13s. 4d. and to
keep two yearly obytts for the founders sowles, but the deed of the foundation
we have not seen -- yearly value 8l. 1d. -- yearly value according to this
survey 20l. 3s. 2d. as appears by a rentall, whereof is paid out for rents
resolut 23s. For a perpetual salarie, 6l. 13s. 4d. -- For two obitts, 16s. 4d.
and for alms, 40s. to be distributed according to the foundation. -- And for
the Kings Majesty's tenths, 16s. quad. -- 11l. 8s. 8d. quad. And remains
clearly 8l. 13s. 5d. ob. quad. which the incumbent has toward his lyvyng,
according to the order of the foundation. -- It is about a furlong in distance
from the parish church. -- Value of ornaments, jewels, plate, goods and
catalls, 62.s. 8.d. as appears by a particular inventory of the same. -- There
were no other lands nor yearly profits, etc."

A. D. 1535, this house appears to have been valued at 12l. 3s. 10d. in the
whole, and at 8l. 1d. clear Sancroft's MS. valorum.
.

In 1551, five poor women resided in the Maison-Dieu Merchants old books.
Bourne, after Gray, tells us, "that upon this building ( i. e. the Maison de
Dieu), stands the stately court of the merchant-adventurers, etc." Grey's words
are, "The merchants-court was built above the Maison-Dieu."
.

February 14th, 1582, and July 7th, 1586, Martin Hallyman occurs as master of
the "Masendew Bishop Barnes' Visitation. -- Randall's MSS.
."

This place appears to have continued in the family of the founder after its
dissolution: for Sir Richard Lumley, of Lumley-Castle, in the county of Durham,
knight, a descendant of Thornton by the female line, conveyed, June 1st, 1624
From a deed remaining in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon
Tyne. -- Bourne says, that it was in 1629, and that Sir Richard did it in
consideration of an hundred pounds.
, to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, and their successors for
ever, "all that building of stone covered with lead, standing near to the water
of Tyne, and to the east part of the town's chamber of the said town of
Newcastle, being about sixteen yards in length, and anciently part of, and
belonging to the hospital of St. Catharine the Virgin, commonly called
Thornton's Hospital." An annual rent appears to have been reserved Table for
rents payable by the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, June 21st, 1676.
(Common Council books.)

"Charnell-House, 13s. 4d. -- Towne-Chamber, 3s. 4d. -- payable to the Lord
Lumley yearly, at Michaelmass, 16s. 8d." -- The following occurs, ibid, "March
14th, 1657, ordered to inform Mr. Wilson, Lord Lumley's steward, that the
merchants-court is dangerous, and like to fall;" -- as does the subsequent
entry, "Sept. 24, 1700. Chernol-House, ordered, that (a committee) do examine
how the right thereof comes to be in the town."

Among the fee-farm-rents, received at present by John Widdrington, Esquire. for
the representatives of Edward Noell, Esquire. occurs the following: "Sand-Hill,
Masondicu -- 6l. yearly rent, receipts to the Right Hon. the Earl of
Scarborough" -- i. e. paid by him.


.

In Speed's Plan of Newcastle the Maison-Dieu is the only public place, or
building A. D. 1576, the new key at Windows The part of the Sand-Hill, near
the Watergate, has been called "Windows," as appears by several old records.
builded." (Dr. Ellison's MS.) The following memorial occurs, ibid, "1586,
clock on Sand-Hiil was set up." I extracted the following note in MS. from a
copy of Camden's Britannia, preserved in the Bodleian library at Oxford,
written by a Mr. Thomas, about A D. 1690. "In muro Stephani Potts sutoris super
Sandy-Hill in Newcastle super Tinam, the picture of an armed knight in cote of
mayle cut to the full in stone." -- "The Gun-Howse of the Sand-Hill" occurs in
St. Nicholas' register of burials, August 19th, 1587.
, marked on the Sand-Hill, through which Lork-Burn is represented as passing
There is a tradition, that the town's waits, or musicians, stood and played on
a small bridge, thrown over this Lork-Burn, opposite to the house called at
present Katy's coffee-house, while Oliver Cromwell was entertained at dinner,
either on his way to, or on his return from Scotland.
on the east side. It has, since that time, been arched over. In this place
stand the exchange and town-court, built between the years 1655 and 1658
Common Council books. -- Robert Trollop, of York, mason, was the architect. --
He entered into articles, which are still preserved in the archives of the
corporation, to build it for 2,000l. sterling. Bourne, on I know not what
authority, says it cost, in all, above 10,000l.
. An old townhouse appears to have occupied nearly the same site Leland, in
his Itinerary, vol. viii. thus describes the Sand Hill. -- "Then turning on the
right hand to the Key, a chapel of the town with a Maison Dieu -- with a
watar-gate and a square haul place for the town." -- Dr. Ellison's notes say,
"that Mr. Shaftoe had a house adjoining to the west end of the old town court,
which was bought and pulled down." In a very old deed, a booth is described in
the town of Newcastle, "situatam inter Botham Hospitalis occident' and veneliam
versus Aulam Ghylde." (See account of nunnery.)
, which, as Bourne informs us, was built by the munificent Roger Thornton.

The present town-court is of beautiful architecture. -- The ceiling is adorned
with various paintings, and the floor laid with chequered marble. The benches
are, at the west end, considerably raised above the floor of the court The MS.
Life of Alderman Barnes, p. 30, has the following account: "A. D. 1658, the
Exchange was finished, which is an handsome neat structure, well contrived for
the convenience of merchants, and for the courts of justice, in memory whereof
every alderman had his name cast in one of the chimes set in the steeple of
that edifice. -- That bell, which had Alderman Barnes' name upon it, was
afterward removed, and put up in a new chapel erected without the walls." --
i. e. St. Ann's, or Sand-Gate Chapel.

March, 1783, a pair of crows built, and reared their young, above the
weathercock on the very top of this steeple, in a truly singular situation, as
the nest shifted about with every change of the wind. They attempted to build
it again the year following, but other crows pulled it to pieces before it was
finished. In the years 1785, 1786, and 1787, the same crows, as it was thought,
built on the same spot, or rather point, and succeeded each year in hatching
and rearing their young. See plate of miscellaneous antiquities, No. 7. They
have done the same this present year, 1788.


-- Above hang portraits of Charles II. and James II. at full length, and as
large as the life It is probable that both these pictures were ordered at one
time, and were the work of the same master. -- There is an act of the common
council of Newcastle, April 12th, 1686, ordering Sir Nathaniel Johnson, Sir
William Creagh, Mr. Henry Ball, Mr. Robert Jennison, and Mr. Edward Ridley, to
"use their interest, and apply themselves for obtaining his Majesty's picture,
to be taken by some able artist, if his Majesty can be prevailed with, for
which the town will defray the expense." In the riot that happened at Newcastle
in 1740, the drapery of these pictures, of the brother kings, was torn, and the
painting miserably defaced. -- The faces and frames escaped without damage. --
In 1753, the drapery was restored and the pictures replaced.

August 14th, 1779, a portrait of his present Majesty, taken by Ramsay in 1760,
a present to the town by Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. was put up in the
Guild Hall, over the entrance into the Merchants-Court.

The statue of King Charles II. in a Roman habit, which formerly stood over the
Magazine-Gate on Tyne-Bridge, has been lately removed to a niche under the
clock of the Exchange on the Sand-Hill.


. The windows are on the south -- one is in form of a catharine-wheel, in which
is a large sun-dial of painted glass -- the motto, Eheu fugaces! Under this
window is a large balcony, which overlooks the river. -- Here the mayor and
sheriff hold their courts of guild, etc. Here was, formerly, the court of
admiralty kept, and here, also, the judges on the northern circuit hold the
assizes once a year.

A little before the revolution Common Council books, March 16th, 1685. "A
figure of his Majesty, in a Roman habit, on a capering horse, in copper, as big
as the figure of his majesty King Charles I. at Charing-Crosse, on a pedestal
of black or white marble -- to be set up for 800l. sterling."

Ibid. August 27th, 1688. Sir Christopher Wren's certificate was read, "that
Mr. Laison had very sufficiently performed his work in casting the said
statue." -- Bourne, on I know not what authority, says, it cost 1700l. A print
of this was published, price 5s. at Newcastle, Dec. 1st, 1742, by Joseph
Barber, music and copper-plate printer. -- In his proposals, he says, it was
done from a drawing in the possession of Sir Hans Sloane, Bart.

There is a tradition, that when the Duke of Somerset quitted the court, on his
nobly refusing to appear in his official character at the public entrance of
the Pope's Nuncio, in that arbitrary reign, and was retiring, to his estates in
Northumberland, his Grace took off his hat, and remained uncovered while he
passed this statue of his royal master.


"a statue of King James the Second, Statues of the K. ^ Charles (...) James
(...)

JAMES the II. By the Grace of God of Great Britain France and Ireland King
Defender of the Faith (...) Cre^gh Knight Mayor P^^^ Gill Esquire. Sheriff 1685

on horseback, cast in copper, of the size of the famous equestrian statue of
Charles I. at Charing Cross, was erected on the Sand-Hill. It was the work of
Mr. William Larson, was approved of by Sir Christopher Wren, and cost the town
800l. sterling. -- It was thrown down and cast into the Tyne, by a mob of the
town, at the revolution in 1688 This statue was afterward cast into a set of
bells.
.

Passing from the Sand-Hill to Tyne-Bridge, on the left hand, near the entrance
to the bridge, stands the chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr.

It is, at present, unknown by whom, or at what time, this chapel was founded.

From the circumstance of its being dedicated to St. Thomas a Becket,
Archbishop of Canterbury, it must be of a date posterior to 1171, the year in
which that prelate was assassinated.

Mention of it occurs in the year 1248 Bourne's History of Newcastle.
.

A. D. 1255, Robert Valesine gave an annual rent to the support of Tyne-Bridge,
and to a chaplain to pray for the souls of his father, his late wife Emma, and
his own soul, in this chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr Ibid. p. 130.
.

One Laurence was keeper of Tyne-Bridge and this chapel, A. D. 1269 Ibid. p.
129.
.

William of Stanhope occurs as guardian here, A. D. 1289 and 1297 Bourne's
History of Newcastle, p. 130.
.

A rent of 12d. a year, payable from a house in Pilgrim-Street, to the keeper
of the chapel and bridge of Tyne, is mentioned in a deed dated at Newcastle
upon Tyne, on the Monday after the feast of St. Mark the Evangelist, A. D.
1311. -- Also in another deed, concerning the same property, dated ibid. Feb.
1st, 1349 MS. Rental at Northumberland-House.
.

In the year 1329, William Heron founded a chantry, dedicated to St. Ann, in
this chapel, with an annual rent of six marks, arising from tenements in the
Sand-Hill "De cantaria facienda in capella beati Thome in Novo Castro super
Tynam Et de sex marcis redditus ibidem conces'-per Willielm' Heron. Pat. 2 R.
Ed. III. p. 2, m. 26." -- The following account of it is extracted from the
certificate of colleges and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen.
VIII. remaining in the augmentation-office: "The chauntrie of Saint Anne in the
chappelle of Saint Thomas upon Tyne-Bridge within the parish of Saint Nicholas
in the town of Newcastell aforesaid -- was founded by a license obtained of K.
Edward the IIId. by one William Heryng as it is reported to find a priest to
say mass and to pray for his foul and all Christen fowls for ^^r And it is
so used hitherto, but the deed of the foundation thereof is lost -- Yearly
value 4l. 15s. 6d. -- yearly value according to this survey 4l. 17s. as apereth
by a rentall whereof is to be deducted for the yearly tenthes paid to the Kings
Majesty 9s. 6d. ob. qu. and remains clerly 4l. 7s. 5d. qua. which are
employed to the sustentacon and relief of Richard Softeley clerk, incumbent
that according to the order of the said foundacon. -- A furlonge distant from
the perish church of Saint Nicholas -- Ornaments etc. 70s. 11d. as does pere
by a particular inventory of the same -- There were no other lands etc."
. -- There was also, in this chapel, a chantry dedicated to St. Mary, the
founder of which is unknown. It was endowed with an annual revenue of five
marks, out of five messuages in the Close and the Side, two streets of
Newcastle "De quinque messuag' in Novo Castro dimissis ad firmam Thome Creindon
pro termino annotum per capell^num cantarie beati Thome ibidem redd' per annum
5 marc. Pat' 13 R. Ric. II. p. 2, m. 32." -- The following account of this
occurs in the above certificate, etc. 37 Hen. VIII. "The chauntrie of our Lady
in the chappelle of Saint Thomas upon Tyne-Bridge etc. There is no foundacon of
the said chauntrie to be showed, but the incumbent now being is resident upon
the same and he and his predecessor have been always presented by the mayre of
the town of Newcastell for the time being, and Christofer Threkeld, patrons of
the same by report -- Yearly value 4l. 3s. 6d. -- Yearly value according to
this survey 102s. 6d. as apereth by a rentall whereof is to be deducted for
rents resolut' 11s. and for yearly tenthes paid to the Kings Majesty 8s. 4d.
ob. qua. -- 19s. 4d. ob. qua. -- and remains clearly 4l. 3s. 1d. ob. qua.
which ben employed to the sustentacon and relief of John Littell priest
incumbent there -- about a furlong distant from the parish church of St.
Nicholas -- Ornaments etc. 40s. 11d. as does apere by a particular inventory of
the same -- There were no other lands etc."
.

A. D. 1341, Nicholas de Stockton was master of this hospital Bourne's History,
p. 130.
.

William Spynn occurs as keeper of Tyne-Bridge, and chaplain of this chapel, A.
D. 1347, and 1352 Bourne tells us, that Spynn, with the consent of the
corporation of Newcastle, A. D. 1347, confirmed by his own charter to Gilbert
de Mitford, burgess of Newcastle, the middle one of the three cellars, or
crypts, under this chapel, on condition of an annual payment at Martinmas, of
14s. to the said master. This grant, sealed by the town's seal, was witnessed
by Peter le Draper, mayor, William de Acton, Hugo de Angreton, Hugo de Carliol,
and John de Emeldon, bailiffs. Bourne, and Wallis after him, spell the mayor's
name, erroneously, "Grasser."
.

In the eschaets, A. D. 1370, several rents occur belonging to the reparation
of the bridge and St. Thomas' Chapel in Newcastle upon Tyne "De diversis
redditibus in Novo Castro pertinentibus reparationi pontis and capelle Sancti
Thome. Eschaet. 43 R. Ed. III. p. 2, n. 56, tom. iv. Rot. Turr' Londinen'
Northumbr'." The Aubone MS. says, "A fine of twenty marks belonged to the
reparation of the bridge and chapel of St. Thomas."
.

In Hilary-Term, A. D. 1408, before the King it was determined by the verdict
of a jury, that three acres of land called Sandy-Ford-Flatt, with a windmill
below Jesmond, near Newcastle upon Tyne, were not held of the King in capite,
but of the keeper of the chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr on Tyne-Bridge "Hill.
8 Hen. IV. coram Rege Northumbr. Novum Castrum super Tynam consyderatum fuit
quod manus Domini Regis amoveantur de 3 acris terre vocat' Sandy-Ford-Flatt cum
molendin' ventritico infra Gessemouth que per jurat' non tenentur de Rege in
capite sed de custode capelle Sancti Thome Martyris super pontem Tyne."

(From a MS. in a very old hand, communicated by T. Davidson, Esquire.) About this
time, according to Bourne, George Carr, merchant, of Newcastle, founded here a
second chantry of our Lady, which was licensed, and of the value of five pounds
six shillings and eight-pence, arising from property in the streets called
Sand-Hill and the Side, in that town. But the above certificate of 37 Henry
VIII. states this chantry to have been in the church of St. Nicholas.


.

John Wernmouth occurs as master of this chapel, A. D. 1411 and 1413 Randall's
MSS.
.

In the year 1426, there was a grant from the mayor and commonalty of Newcastle
upon Tyne, to John Crofte, to be master of the chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr,
and collector of the rents of Tyne-Bridge. He is mentioned, A. D. 1457, as
having lost his eyesight From the original in the archives of the corporation
of Newcastle. -- There is, ibid. a grant in see, from the said John Croft to
William Hunter, of a message and garden, "prope Pampden-Yate" extending "usque
muros domus Sancti Michaelis de Walknoll retro versus orientem" -- 6 Ed. IV.
Ibid. 12 Ed. IV. A lease from the same to John Side, of a message and land in
Ravensworth.
.

Roger Thornton, by his will dated 1429, left six fothers of lead to the
reparation of this chapel Bourne.
.

A. D. 1445, upon an inquisition taken after the death of John Duke of Bedford,
it was found that the tenement in Newcastle, in the street called the Close
there, named the Earl's Inn of Northumberland, was held in burgage, and paid
twenty shillings per annum to the warden of the free chapel of St. Thomas the
Martyr, upon Tyne-Bridge Aubone and Murray MSS. -- "Tenementum in Novo Castro
super Tynam vocatum Earls Inn of Northumberland tenetur in burgagio and redd.
per annum libere capelle Sancti Thome Martyris custodi super pontem aquae Tynae
20s. post mortem Johannis Ducis de Bedford." -- Escaet. 14 R. Hen. VI. n. 36.
.

A. D. 1498, Thomas Scott was master of this chapel Bourne, p. 131. -- There
occurs, in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, dated 13th January, 13
Hen. VII. a conveyance from this Thomas Scott, of a tenement in the Side, to
John Bewick, merchant.
.

It appeared, by an inquisition taken at Gateshead, October 6th, 1536, that
Roger de Thorneton gave three acres of meadow, and three acres of land in
Whickham to a chantry in the chapel of St. Thomas, on Tyne-Bridge, without
license of the Bishop of Durham Randall's MSS. Register of Bishop Tonstal, anno
6. p. 167.
.

August 30th, 1538, John Brandlyng, clerk, was appointed master of this chapel
-- he occurs in the same office, A. D. 1541 From the original, in the archives
of the corporation of Newcastle. -- There appears, at that time, to have been a
little garden at this place; "cum mansione, camera magistrali et gardino
capelle predict' spectan' and adjacen' etc."

There occurs, ibid. 32 Hen. VIII. a grant in fee from the said John Brandlyng,
to Thomas Pattinson, cordwainer, of a house and garden without
Pilgrim-Street-Gate, "inter fossas vocat' lez Kings Dickes et muros dicte
ville ex part occidentali." All these grants of the masters here are said to
be with the consent of the mayor and burgesses.


.

Cuthbert Ellison must have been appointed master of this chapel before March
13th, 1556, when he appears to have been ordained subdeacon, on the title of
his chapel on Tyne-Bridge Register of Bishop Tonstal, p. 48.

In the account in Grey's MSS. of muniments, remaining in the town's hutch,
July 24th, 1565, one occurs, entitled, "A presentacion made by the town of
Newcastle to Sir George Carr, priest, to be master of the chapel on
Tyne-Bridge."


.

This chapel was united to the hospital of St. Mary Magdalene, in the beginning
of the reign of King James I. -- and on the 12th of June, 1611, they were
incorporated by a royal charter. -- See the continuation of their common
history, under "St. Mary Magdalen's Hospital."

From St. Thomas' Chapel we enter upon

TYNE-BRIDGE.
THE proofs that a Roman bridge Bourne tells us, "The bridge is of great
antiquity, undoubtedly as old as the times of the Romans: there must have been
a communication between this and the other side of the river, and therefore
there was a necessity for it." -- The ingenious Mr. Horsley, p. 104, says, "I
think there are some certain and visible remains of a military way on
Gateshead-Fell, pointing directly toward the part where, I suppose, the
station has been at Newcastle, and coming, as I apprehend, from
Chester-le-Street. Dr. Hunter assured me he had also observed visible remains
of such a way. And it is the common opinion that there has been a military way
from Chester-le-Street to Newcastle. This way tends toward the place where the
bridge now is. There must then have been a bridge in the Roman times over the
river Tyne, near the place where the present bridge stands." Thus far from
Bourne. -- Horsley's words are, p. 399, Romana Britannia -- "That Dr. Hunter
informed him, that "he had observed a military way going off from
Watling-Street, near Binchester, which he (Dr. H.) supposed went to
Chester-on-the-Street, between Durham and Newcastle; he traced it to
Branspeth-Park, but could find it no farther." He adds, p. 391, "That the name
of Chester-on-the-Street does not a little confirm the opinion, that there has
been a Roman settlement there of some kind or other, and that a military way
has passed from Newcastle to it." -- He adds farther on this subject, p. 451,
"The gardener at Cousins'-House told me, that he had observed, when he wrought
thereabouts, the military way from Newcastle to Chester-le-street, and that it
lay to the west of the present highway, through the Fell. And Dr. Hunter was
positive that he had observed the same way upon this Fell: as also some
remaining tracks of a via vicinalis beyond Chester, between Binchester and
Brancepeth-Castle (as I remember) pointing toward Chester, which he therefore
concluded must have gone that way."

Dr. Stukeley, in his Iter Boreale, p. 69, speaking of Gateshead, says, "The
Roman road here, which is the true Hermen-Street, coming from Suffex, coming
down Gateshead-Fell, passes in a strait line to the bridge."


occupied either the same, or nearly the same site with the present bridge at
Newcastle, appear stronger than those generally are which are brought in
confirmation of truths of such remote antiquity.

Two eminent antiquaries Mr. Horsley, author of the Britannia Romana, and Dr.
Hunter, of Durham.
of this country, to one of whom we owe the greatest part of our intelligence
concerning Roman Britain, were persuaded, from visible remains existing in
their time, that there was a Roman road from Binchester, through
Chester-in-the-Street, to the site of the present Newcastle upon Tyne.

An ancient Itinerary, discovered since they wrote, seems to confirm their
account beyond the possibility of a doubt The Itinerary of Richard of
Cirencester, discovered and first printed by Mr. Bertram in Sweden. We trace,
on the ancient map, delineated in this very valuable acquisition to English
antiquartes, the Roman great road, leading straight from Cataract, in
Yorkshire, to Binchester, in the county of Durham, where it branches out into
two different iters, one of which stretches toward Falkirk, in Scotland, by
way of Ebchester, Corbridge, etc. while the other, passing through
Chester-in-the-Street, terminates at the Roman wall at Newcastle upon Tyne.

At Corbridge the remains of a Roman bridge are still visible.

The very high antiquity of this Itinerary is said, by Dr. Stukeley, to be
marked out by such names as "ad Murum -- ad Tesam -- ad Alaunam -- ad Tuedam,"
etc. showing that the roads were generally made or marked out, but that towns,
cities, and castles were not then built, only some inns for present
convenience. -- He adds, that we may reasonably judge from hence, that the
original Itinerary and Map, which this Richard of Cirencester copied, was
constructed in Agricola's time -- though afterward additions were made to it.
Some have supposed that there was one of those inns at Gateshead, called, at
that time, from the sign of a goat's head, "Caprae Caput." -- But see account
of "Gateshead."


.

The Emperor Aelius Hadrian, who connected the forts erected by Agricola, by
raising the great vallum, that in this part of the island extended nearly from
sea to sea, was probably the first that built a bridge at this place; from
which circumstance, the station it led to from the Roman road was afterward
called "Pons Aelii," an appellation plainly derived, as were those of others of
his public works, from the name of his own family "Thus," says Pennant,
"Jerusalem was styled Aelia Capitolina," and the games he instituted at Pincum
in Maesia, "Aeliana Pincensia." It may be added, that the bridge which Hadrian
throw over the Tyber at Rome, is called to this hour "Ponte Elio Adriano." See
Piranesi's Views.

Two coins appear to have been struck upon the building of two bridges by this
Emperor: one is doubtless to be referred to that at Rome: may not the other
have been intended to commemorate the work we are now considering? One of the
bridges marked on these coins has seven, the other five arches. The Tyber being
a very inconsiderable river, when compared with the Tyne, we must therefore
claim that with seven arches -- especially as we find a view of the Pons Aelius
at Rome in Piranesi's Collection, without the modern ornaments, where it is
represented as consisting of exactly five arches. See Vaillant, tom. i. p. 68,
where, speaking of the coins of Hadrian, he thus describes one of them: "Sine
epigraphe Pons Aelius cum septem fornicibus sub eo plurimae figurae;" -- and
the other, p. 194, as follows: "Sine epigraphe Pons Aelius cum quinque
fornicibus." -- (Edition of Paris, 1692, quarto.)

See also "Numismatum Antiquorum in Musaeo Pembrochiano Sylloges, pars 3."


.

Many Roman coins "I cannot help thinking," says Pennant, Tour, vol. iii. p.
313, "that part of the Roman bridge remained there till very lately: for from
the observation of workmen upon the old piers, they seem originally to have
been formed without any springs for arches. This was a manner of building used
by the Romans: witness the bridge built over the Danube by Trajan, at Severin,
twenty Hungarian miles from Belgrade, whose piers, I believe, still exist." Of
the coins that were found, Mr. Pennant describes the following: -- "Coins,
posterior to the time of Adrian, probably deposited there in some later
repairs. One is a beautiful Faustina the Elder, after her deification -- her
forehead is bound with a small tiara -- her hair full, twisted and dressed a la
modern -- round is inscribed "Diva Faustina." On the reverse is a Ceres, with
a torch in one hand, and ears of corn in the other: the inscription "Augusta S.
C."

"The next has the laureated head of Antoninus Pius -- on the reverse, Apollo,
with a patera in one hand, a plectrum in the other -- the legend defaced.

"The third is of Lucius Verus, after consecration -- reverse, a magnificent
funeral pile, and the word "Consecratio, S. C." -- The originals of these are
in the possession of the Bishop of Durham."

I have one of Trajan found here also -- it is the same as that described in
Thoresby's Leeds, p. 297, No 294, -- as also one of Antoninus, of the larger
size.

I have caused one of the Emperor Hadrian, though much defaced, to be engraved.
It was found in the same ruins, and communicated by John Erasmus Blackett, Esquire.
alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne. See plate of coins.


were discovered in the ruins of the piers of this bridge, after the fall
thereof, A. D. 1771, proving, it should seem, that some of the original Roman
structure remained here, till every part of the ancient building was cleared
away on the erection of the new bridge.

Bourne's reasoning His words are these: "It has been a query whether the
bridge was originally of wood or stone, but I think it is altogether needless:
all the bridges in England were originally of wood. -- In the reign of Richard
I. Philip, Bishop of Durham, sent to the burgesses of Gateside a grant of
forestage, in which are these words: "And it shall be lawful for every burgess
to give wood to whomsoever he will, to be spent about the river of Tyne,
without any license." This, I imagine, has been for the building of keys, and
especially for the repairing of the Bishop's part of the bridge, which is a
further proof that the bridge, which was the original one, was wood." See
afterward under "Gateshead"
on the Bishop of Durham's charter to the burgesses of Gateshead, in the reign
of Richard I. is founded on an error in translating the passage he selected
from the original Latin: -- The clause, which he has either found wrong or made
so, ought to be rendered as follows: "Any burgess ( i. e. of Gateshead) may
give his wood to whom he pleases, provided they live on this side of the Tyne,"
that is, on the Durham side of that river.

In a charter of King Henry II. to the town of Newcastle, cited in one of King
John, the existence of a bridge here, at that period, is implied in his
exempting the burgesses from the duty of pontage for their own goods See, under
that reign, "History of Newcastle as a corporate town."
.

In the year 1248, the greatest part of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne,
together with the bridge there, was destroyed by fire "In Anglia etsi de aliis
sileamus, maxima pars burgi qui Novum Castrum super Thinam appellatur, cum
ponte, igne quasi suriosa consumpta est." Matthew. Paris, Watts Edit. p. 753.
.

Bourne tells us, without subjoining on what authority, that after this event
the town of Newcastle joined with the Bishop of Durham in erecting a bridge of
stone From his Liber Cartarum. -- Laurentius was then the master of the bridge.
-- The archdeacon of Northumberland wrote to the clergy of his archdeaconry,
and desired them to assist the work of the bridge, enforcing the command of the
Bishop of Durham to set about the affair of indulgencies, preferring the
episcopal ones to others. -- In like manner the official of Carlisle promised
an indulgence of ten days to any one that would assist the repairing of Tyne
Bridge.
, and that the business was effected by a method common at that time, i. e. by
sending indulgencies to all persons who would assist them, either with money or
labor, to rebuild it. Here he first mentions that the Bishops of Durham were
bound to repair a third part of Tyne-Bridge See the reasons for this in the
History of the River Tyne.
.

A. D. 1251, Simon de Shotton, Robert de Seaton, and Henry Gategang, parson of
Emildon, occur as benefactors to this bridge Bourne's History, p. 130.
.

A. D. 1255, during the mayoralty of Henry de Carliol, Robert Valesine gave an
annual rent to the support of Tyne-Bridge Ibid.
.

On the 14th of the kalends of October, 1256, Walter, Bishop of Durham, granted
an indulgence For the collection of the alms raised by indulgencies, an officer
was appointed, who was styled the custos, or guardian of the bridge. This was
often held with the mastership of the Hospital of St. Thomas the Martyr.
of twenty days, to any person that would contribute to the reparation of
Tyne-Bridge Bourne, ut supra.
.

On the ides of September, 1257, Sewald, Archbishop of York, granted an
indulgence of thirty days to come, to every person bestowing any thing toward
the building and reparation of Tyne Bridge. About the same time Andrew, Bishop
of Cathness in Scotland, gave liberty, by a grant, to collect alms throughout
his whole diocese for the reparation of Tyne-Bridge.

The Bishop of Waterford, in Ireland, granted also to those that would assist
in the reparation of Tyne Bridge, a promise of being prayed for in the
cathedral church of the Holy Trinity, in Waterford, and the other churches of
his diocese: as also an indulgence for ten days Bourne, p. 129.
. By this means considerable benefactions were procured Ibid. -- "John," he
says, "the son of Decanus, and Bartholomew, the son of William, son of
Benedict, guardian of the alms collected for the support of the Tyne Bridge,
with the council and assent of the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, confirmed to
Gervasius, the son of Ralph, the whole land, with every thing belonging to it,
in the fields of Jesemuthia, which Henry de Bulmar and Ralph gave, and by their
charters confirmed to the said Tine Bridge, etc. on condition that he rendered
to the said Tyne Bridge one plank, or six shillings, annually, at the feast of
St. Michael: Adam de Jesemuthia was the first witness to this grant.

"Adam de Jesumuthia granted to God, and to the Tyne Bridge, on account of the
soul of William de Greenville, and the souls of his ancestors, part of tho
ground in the land of Jesumuth.

"Some of the witnesses to this charter were, Gilbert de Valle, Adam de Plesly,
Gilbert de Oggell, William de Byker, Elge de Gosford. Richard de Northefold,
and Hugh of London, gave nine shillings and six pence out of certain lands
lying in the Vico Fori, to the repairing of the bridge. One Stephen, of
Benwell, is mentioned in this grant, as having land adjoining to that out of
which this money is granted. Some of the witnesses to this grant were, Thomas
Carliol, then mayor of the town, etc. J. Lindisay, bail. Robert de Mitford,
Adam de Blakedon."


.

A. D. 1269, in the mayoralty of Nicholas Scot, an anonymous benefaction
toward the reparation of Tyne-Bridge occurs, when one Laurence was keeper
Bourne, p. 129.
.

On the 8th of the ides of September, 1277, Walter, Bishop of Rochester,
granted an indulgence of twenty days, to any that would assist in the
reparation of this bridge, either by contributing money or personal service
Ibid. p. 128.
.

A. D. 1292, the following persons appear to have been benefactors to this
bridge: Peter le Graper, Adam, son of Henry de Carliol, burgess of Newcastle;
Nicholas, son of Adam de Carliol, burgess of Newcastle; Henry Lewyn, Johannes
Aurifaber, Robert de Valenceres, and Emma his wife, Henricus Gervasius, John de
Burneton, John Brune, Johannes Page, Richard de Cromclif, and Roger Amyas Ibid.
p. 129, 130.
.

A. D. 1315, William de Salisbury occurs as a benefactor Ibid. p. 130.
.

A. D. 1323, Ralph Brydock, of Gateside, occurs as another benefactor Ibid. p.
130.

I know not the date of the subsequent benefaction recorded by Bourne:
"Laurentius de Moreton, and Alice his wife, granted a message, in Pampeden, to
John de Brinklawe, of Newcastle, and his wife, on condition that they paid to
the guardian, or master of the bridge, four shillings, at the terms agreed
upon, and gave to them and their heirs one rose, at the Feast of the Nativity
of St. John Baptist." P. 130 from the Liber Cart' p. 55.


.

In the year 1339, part of Tyne-Bridge was carried away by a sudden inundation
From a curious fragment on parchment, supposed to have been taken out of the
archives of the corporation of Newcastle, at the riot which happened there, A.
D. 1740. -- An hundred and twenty persons were drowned on this occasion.
.

A. D. 1342, Tyne-Bridge is mentioned as being in a ruinous and falling
condition, and not having its rents duly paid: it was agreed upon, and ordered
on this occasion, that the master thereof, assisted by some of the magistrates
of Newcastle, should call in and levy the arrears to be applied to the
repairing thereof "Item eo quod pons de Tyne ville predicte est in casu
corruendi cadendi et perdendi; pro eo quod reddit' predict' ponti debit' sunt
subtract' et detent' Ordinatum est quod magister pontis predict' cum auxilio
predict' viginti quatuor misteriorum predict' ac auxilio tocius communitatis
predict' reddit' et arreragia predict' ponti debit' absque alicui par^endo
levet et operacione directione and reparacione dicti pontis apponat et
expendat." -- (See History of Newcastle as a corporate town under that year.)
.

November 18th, 1362, farther mention occurs of many defects in Tyne-Bridge,
toward the reparation of which, as well as of the fortifications of the town,
there was an order to take tolls of goods coming into Newcastle for ten years
following Murray MS. p. 287. Ex rotulo patentium anno regni Regis Edwardi
Tertii tricesimo sexto, m. 9.
.

A. D. 1370, it appeared, upon an inquisition, that Tyne-Bridge was in so
ruinous a condition, as to require more than a thousand pounds to repair it. --
There was found, at the same time, a revenue of ten marks belonging to it; with
one of the like value to St. Thomas' Chapel Bourne's History, p. 130. The
Aubone MS. calls the whole a fine of twenty marks.
.

In the year 1394, a license was granted to John Cochet, to alien to the mayor,
bailiffs, and commonalty of Newcastle upon Tyne, and their successors, two
parts of five messuages for the reparation of Tyne-Bridge: this year, also,
there was a grant of customs for a certain number of years for the like purpose
Murry MS. p. 282. Ex rotulo paten' de anno regni Regis Ricardi Secundi decimo
octavo, m. 40, p. 2^. "Test Edmundo Duce Eborum custode Anglie apud Scroby 19
die Decembr'."
.

January 28th, 1416, Thomas Langley, Bishop of Durham, recovered from the mayor
and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, the third part of this bridge, adjoining
to Gateshead, in the county of Durham, together with a tower which that body
had lately caused to be erected thereupon In a petition, presented by Thomas,
Bishop of Durham, to the King in Parliament, in ^aster-Term, A. D. 1412, it was
set forth, that he, and all his predecessors, Bishops of Durham, from this
unmemorial, had h^ld the county and liberty of Durham, between the waters of
Te^s and Tyne, together with moieties of these waters, and the soil of the said
moieties of the waters, a parcel of the county and liberty, of which they had
been seized all that time, with the franchise, jurisdiction, and royalties in
them, as the right of their church of St. Cuthbert, of Durham, peaceably and
entirely. As also a moiety of Tyne Bridge, on their soil, till the first of
May, 1383, when William Bishopdale, mayor of Newcastle, and the commonalty of
that town, began to build a tower on the bishop's part of the bridge at
Gateshead, and removed, and carried into Newcastle, two stones, called St.
Cuthbert's Stones, the ancient boundaries of the liberty aforesaid, and which
tower they occupied at that time. The mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, in
vindication of their proceedings, pretended they had authority for so doing, in
a charter, dated February 5th, in the 15th year of King John. -- The
corporation of Newcastle, it is needless to add, were cast in this trial,
compelled to take back and replace St. Cuthbert's Stones, and give up the tower
they had built, together with their claim to the Bishop's right to a third part
of this bridge, of which seizin was made for the said bishop as above, January
28th, 1416. -- (From a record in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle
upon Tyne: see also Wharton's Anglia Sacra, p. 776.)

The Aubone MS. says, "In the 2d of Henry V. the Bishop of Durham had judgment
against the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, for removing his stones, and
incroaching upon his liberties, upon the third part of Tyne Bridge. It appears,
in the little black book in the hutch, under 4 Hen. V. that the execution of
the said judgment, of the 2d Hen. V. was opposed when Sir Christopher Moresby,
sheriff of Westmoreland, Sir William Claxton, sheriff of Durham, and others,
came to take seizin of the said one-third part of the bridge for the Bishop of
Durham, upon the false verdict (as it is there called) of the jurors of
Westmoreland and Cumberland, against the mayor and commonalty of Newcastle."

"The blue stone," on this bridge, occurs in the common council books, March
22d, 1648.

Bourne, speaking of this "blue stone," says, "here is the boundary of
Newcastle southwards."


.

In the year 1429, a recluse appears to have lived in a hermitage upon
Tyne-Bridge, and was appointed by Roger Thornton, in his will This will is
dated the Thursday before Christmas day, 1429. "Item, I will that the recluse
of Newcastle -- be parcel of the thirty priests etc. -- and the recluse six
marks yearly etc. -- till an hundred marks be dispended if they live so long."
-- (See Bourne under that year.)

That there was a hermitage on this bridge anciently, appears from a deed
remaining in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, dated November 20th,
1643. "Hermitages," says Tanner, in the preface to the Notitia Monastica, p.
28, "were religious cells, created in private and solitary places, for single
persons, or communities: many times endowed, and sometimes annexed to larger
religious houses."


, one of the thirty priests he had ordered to sing for his soul, with a bequest
of six marks, annually. This year, also, the above Roger Thornton left an
hundred marks to the reparation of this bridge See the will in Bourne, ut supra
-- on the following singular condition: "if so that the mayor and commons will
release me all actions, as I that never hindered them, nor naught awe them at
my witting, but this I desire for eschewing of clamor."
.

In an ordinary, granted A. D. 1477, to the fullers and dyers of Newcastle,
half of a fine of twenty shillings, imposed as the penalty for taking a
Scotsman to apprentice, or for employing one of that nation, is ordered to be
paid toward the support of Tyne-Bridge See account of companies. -- So also in
the weaver's ordinary, half of the fines are ordered to go to "Tine Brige
work," and "to the use and reparacon of Tine Brige."

Before 20th May, 1471, William Blaxton, merchant, held a certain waste
message, by grant from Henry, Earl of Northumberland, in the street called the
Close, paying to the mayor and community of Newcastle, to the work of
Tine-Bridge, an annual rent of 26s. and 8d. issuing out of the above message.


.

Thomas Ruthal, who was appointed Bishop of Durham, A. D. 1509, and held that
see fourteen years, repaired a third part of Tyne-Bridge "Hic reparavit tertiam
partem pontis Tynae versus Austrum." -- Wharton's Anglia Sacra.
.

A. D. 1517, a grant was made in fee, by the mayor and community of Newcastle
upon Tyne, to Edward Surtis, bowyer, of a tenement in the street there called
the Side, under the yearly rent of sixteen shillings for the use of Tyne-Bridge
From the original, in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne,
dated "in Guyhalda dicte ville Novi Castri in crastino claus' pasche." The
tenement extended "a via regia ante ex part orientali usque le Castle Moote
retro ex part occidentali."
.

Thomas Wolsey, who was made Bishop of Durham, A. D. 1523, and held that see
till 1530, repaired the third part of this bridge "Iste tertiam partem pontis
de Tyne versus Austrum reparavit." -- Wharton's Anglia Sacra.
.

A receipt occurs of the date of 1527, given by the mayor and sheriff of
Newcastle upon Tyne, to Leonard Musgrave, Esquire. collector of the customs of that
town, for an annuity of 20l. granted to them by the King, toward the support
of their walls and bridge Bourne sub anno.
.

Cuthbert Tunstal, who was translated to the sea of Durham, A. D. 1530, and
deprived thereof in 1559, repaired, at two separate times, with stone and wood
work, the third part of Tyne-Bridge "Tertiam partem versus Austrum pontis de
Novo Castro vocati Tyne Bridge opere lapideo, binis sejunctim temporibus
proprio sumptu reparavit." -- Wharton ut supra.

Leland, who visited Newcastle between the years 1536 and 1542, tells us, that
when he was there, there was "a strong wardyd gate at Geteshed," -- that "Tyne
Bridge had ten arches, and a strong ward and tower on it," and that there was
"a gate at the bridge end," i. e. toward Newcastle. -- By this strong ward
and tower, must have been meant what was lately called, "the tower on the
bridge," and an iron gate, which was beyond it, toward the south, and is
marked in Speed's Plan of the town. "The gate at the bridge end," must have
been a gate in the town-wall, perhaps considerably nearer to St. Thomas' Chapel
than the late magazine-gate, which had the date of 1636 upon it; and Gray, in
his Chorographia, published in 1649, mentions it as lately built.

Bourne tells us, "this bridge had once twelve bold arches, but now only nine,
the rest being turned into cellaring at the building of the keys," describing
it "as a pretty street, beset with houses on each side." He adds, "At the end
of the bridge, which leads into Gateside, is another tower, where has been a
drawbridge."


.

About the year 1559, the very mavelous event related by Bourne, and others,
concerning Mr. Anderson's ring, dropped by accident over this bridge, as he was
fingering it, is supposed to have happened. The part of the story, which some
have ventured to doubt the truth of, is, that this identical ring was brought
back again, after some time, in a fish bought in Newcastle market, by a servant
of the above merchant, and most unexpectedly restored to its owner In the
parchment fragment before mentioned, supposed to have been stoler out of the
archives of the corporation of Newcastle, at the riot there in 1740, is
entered, by an after insertion, an account of what is there called "Sir Francis
Anderson's ring," under the year 1559.

Yet the writer of Vox Piscis, or the Book Fish, published in 1627, tells us,
p. 13, that this event "fell out in our memory," to a "citizen of Newcastle,
whose name I take to be M. Anderson." -- He does not mention the kind of fish
in which the ring was found.

In Grey's Chorographia, M. Anderson is styled an alderman, and the fish called
a salmon, which, some say, is incapable of swallowing any thing so large as a
ring. See a story similar to this in Herodotus, lib. iii. c. 41. -- In
Littlebury's translation of that work, it is in vol. i. p. 272.

There is another of the same kind related in the English Morery, or Collier's
Dictionary, in verbo "Kentigern."

Fuller, in his Worthies, takes notice of this event, referring, in the margin,
to the Vox Piscis.

Bourne tells us, p. 132, "This gentleman, from whose finger the ring fell, was
mayor of Newcastle, and was ancestor of the present Mr. Abraham Anderson,
merchant, on the Sand-Hill: the said Francis Anderson made over his estate to
his son, Henry Anderson, who was the father of the said Abraham's grandfather."
He adds, "On the inside of the ring, just under the signet, is the picture of a
salmon, in commemoration of the fish and the transaction; on the one side of
which is the letter F. and on the other, the letter A. in commemoration of the
person," calling it, at the same time, "A curiosity so great, that not only the
whole kingdom cannot show the like of it, but the whole world beside."

This ring is at present, A. D. 1783, in the possession of Mr. Edward Anderson,
merchant, who permitted me to take a drawing of it, with an impression on wax
of the signet, the engraving on which appears to me to be a Roman antique,
though Bourne says, it represents Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. -- This Mr.
Edward Anderson is a descendant of the person to whom the accident happened,
and has a deed of family property, the seal of which exhibits an impression of
the signet of this memorable ring, and i^ of a date prior to the supposed date
of this most extraordinary, but by no means incredible event. See plate of
Miscellaneous Antiquities, No 6.


.

A. D. 1579, an ordinary granted to the company of slaters and bricklayers,
directs, that half of the penalty of ten shillings, for any brother's invading
the province of the wallers in working with black mortar, or clay; as also,
half of all the other fines of the company shall go to the maintenance of the
great bridge of Newcastle See "History of Companies."
.

February 12th, 1582, a decree was made in the Exchequer, that the Bishop of
Durham, for the time being, and not the inhabitants of the county of Durham at
large, should repair the third part of this bridge Aubone MS.
.

In a deed, preserved in the archives of Newcastle upon Tyne, dated November
20th, 1616, a tenement here is mentioned, "as known by the name of the Ladies
Chapel." This i^ plainly a corruption of "our Lady's Chapel." and evinces,
that there was a chapel on Tyne-Bridge in the Popish times, dedicated to the
Virgin Mary It was on the east side of the pier, next on the south to that
whereon the tower of the bridge stood. "In this tower," says Bourne, "are kept
lewd and disorderly persons, till they are examined by the mayor, and brought
to due punishment, except the crime be of a very gross nature, and then are
removed to Newgate, and there continued till the assizes." There was a stone,
with the town's arms on it, placed on the south front of this tower, with the
motto, "F Fortiter defendit triumphans, 1646." It is at present built up in the
garden wall of Hugh Hornby, Esquire. alderman.

In the MS. Life of Alderman Barnes, p. 73, is given a ludicrous account of one
Harry Wallis, a master shipwright, who was so abusive to the said Alderman B.
that he committed him to the tower on the bridge, where being enraged at the
stone doublet, which his rudeness had got him, and finding a quantity of malt
lying in the chamber, where he was lodged, the chamber standing over the Tyne,
he threw it out of the window, with a shovel, into the water, and made the
following verses on the occasion, with such wit as his ale had inspired him
with: "O base malt,
Thou did the fault,
And into Tyne thou shall."
There is thought to have been, anciently, a chapel in this tower also, for on
taking it down, after the fall of the bridge in 1771, a stone coffin and a
skeleton were found in it: see Newcastle Courant, for July 8th, 1775. On the
north side of this tower there was cut, rudely, in stone, on a shield, a Holy
Lamb, passant. Arms attributed by Nesbit, in his Heraldry, to some northern
bishop.


.

In the common council books, Dec. 23d, 1646, and July 5th, 1647, mention
occurs of the reparation of Tyne-Bridge.

It appears, ibid. March 28th, 1649, that the late King, i. e. Charles the
First, had allowed a portion of trees out of Chopwell Woods, in the vicinity of
Newcastle, for the reparation of Tyne-Bridge The common council had directed,
that application should be made to the Parliament for forty trees, there marked
for the King's use, to be employed in the said reparation.
.

By authority of the ordinance for abolishing episcopacy, two different sales,
one in the year 1647, and the other in 1651, were made of the late Bishop of
Durham's property on this bridge In the particular of lands belonging to the
Bishop of Durham, sold by virtue of an ordinance, entitled, "An ordinance for
abolishing of archbishops and bishops within the kingdom of England and
dominion of Wales, and for settling their lands and possessions upon trustees,
for the use of the commonwealth, to be disposed of as both Houses of
Parliament shall think fit and appoint." Strype's Annals, vol. ii. Appendix, p.
65, Willis' Cathedrals, I find the following articles: L. s. d. "1647, Feby.
2d, Houses, shops, and waste-ground, on Tyne Bridge, sold to Francis Alder, for
59 2 6 "1651, March 12th, Several parcels of land on Tyne Bridge, sold to
Francis Alder, for 52 5 8
.

A. D. 1651, a statue of King James I. with the arms of the late King Charles,
having been taken down from the Magazine-Gate on this bridge, by an order of
the Parliament, the common council of Newcastle directed, that the arms of the
commonwealth should be put up in their stead Common Council books. -- The
following mottoes ordered to be engraven on the same -- "the same being
englished as follows: Principatus ac libertas res dissociabiles,
Anno Domini 1651.
That is: princedome and liberty things unsociable.
Vera libertas nullius jus imminuit.
True liberty takes away noe man's right, or hinders no man's right.
Ea demum libertas est quae suum cuique tuetur.


That indeed (or at last) is true liberty that defends every man's right or
party."

Grey's account of Tyne-Bridge, in his Chorographia, published in 1649, is to
the following effect: "The bridge of this town, over the river Tyne, consists
of arches high and broad, having many houses and shops upon the bridge, and
three towers upon it: the first on the south side, the second in the middle,
and the third in Newcastle side, lately built upon an arch in the bridge, used
for a magazine for the town, and an old chapel. There is a blew stone about
the middle of the bridge, which is the bounds of Newcastle southward, from
Gateside in the county palatine of Durham." P. 9.


.

Soon after the restoration of King Charles II. the arms of the commonwealth
beforementioned were taken down from the said gate, and their place supplied
by the royal arms, and a statue of the late restored King, in a Roman habit,
with this motto: "Adventus Regis solamen gregis," i. e. the coming of the King
is the comfort of the people.

There were the visible remains of a portcullis above this gateway, in Bourne's
time: on the north side, an inscription, marking it to have been repaired, A.
D. 1713, "Henry Reay, Esquire. mayor; Joseph To the Right Worshipful John Erasmus
Blackett Esquire. Mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne* This VIEW of the RUINS of the
BRIDGE of that TOWN, as they appeared after the Fall thereof in November 1771.
(...) respectfully (...) by his oblig^^^ (...) faithful humble Servant (...)
Green, Esquire. sheriff." This gate was taken down in 1770, and the statue
removed, as beforementioned, to the front of the Exchange, on the Sand-Hill.

In the month of July, 1770, the Bishop of Durham repaired, with stone work,
that part of Tyne-Bridge where there had anciently been a drawbridge "In July,
1770, Richard Trevor, Bishop of Durham, repaired, with stone, one of the south
arches of the Tyne-Bridge, then in decay, having been made of large beams of
timber, and overlaid with thick planks, upon which the pavement had been made.
-- Begun on Saturday night, or Sunday morning, and finished on Thursday
following; all the materials, of stone, being prepared beforehand, with a
proper number of workmen, and boats and wherries above and below bridge, for
conveying passengers and carriages over the river, during the time the repair
was carrying on."

Gyll's interleaved Bourne, p. 129. There were anciently three portcullises on
this bridge -- one at the Magazine-Gate; a second at the tower, called the
Tower on the Bridge, and the third at the South-End, in Gateshead, near to
which last was also a drawbridge. -- On the front of the covered entrance to
Tyne-Bridge from Gateshead, were the arms, cut in stone, of Nathaniel Lord
Crew, Bishop of Durham. This stone is at present built up in the garden-wall of
Hugh Hornby, Esquire. alderman, in Pilgrim-Street.


.

On the Saturday night preceding the 17th of November, 1771, a great land
stood, occasioned by the fall of heavy rains in the west, happened in the river
Tyne, causing it to overflow its banks, and every where marking its progress
with the most dreadful devastation. At Newcastle upon Tyne, the water began to
rise about eleven o'clock at night, and continued increasing in height till
seven the next morning: about three o'clock, the arches of this bridge were
filled up, and between three and four, two of them on the south side were
driven down, as was the north arch, adjoining to the toll shop, about five
o'clock, burying the houses erected thereon, together with several of their
inhabitants, in the ruins The water rose six feet higher than in the fresh
which came down in the river Tyne in 1763. See "Historical Events."

November 20th, 1771, an order was published by the magistrates of Newcastle
upon Tyne, in consequence of a survey of the ruins of Tyne Bridge, to prevent
the passage of keels, boats, etc. through any other of the arches, but the four
that remained on the north side of the river.

"The arches of the old bridge," says Hutton, in his Plan of Newcastle, dated
January 10th, 1772, "were of different figures; some of them resembling Gothic
ones, and others scheme arches; nor did the arches decrease regularly from the
middle to the ends, and the exceeding narrowness of the passage over it, which
was still more contracted by the houses built upon it, rendered it exceedingly
inconvenient."


.

January 20th, 1772, the common council of Newcastle ordered a petition to be
presented to the House of Commons, for leave to bring in a bill for building a
temporary bridge, and also a bridge of stone over the river Tyne, as also for
moneys to be granted them to defray the expenses necessary for such a work
Common Council books.
. A second petition, from the same body, and on the same subject, occurs
February 25th, 1772 Ibid. This was signed by the mayor, aldermen, and
common council, and was presented to the House of Commons on Friday the 28th
following.

January 13th, 1772, the common council appointed two receivers of the taxes
that were taken for crossing the river Tyne, in the ferries they had provided
for that purpose. L^mps were also ordered to be fixed on each side of the
landing places, one of which, as likewise the station of the fare-gatherers,
was at Wide-Open, in Sand-Gate, and the other on the opposite shore. -- The
following appeared in the Newcastle Courant, for January 25th, 1772: "Last
Friday, as the workmen were clearing away the rubbish of Tyne-Bridge, the
stones were so cemented, that they were obliged to be separated by mall and
hammer -- on separating two stones, they discovered a parchment, with old
characters on it, very fresh, but on being exposed to air, the characters
disappeared, and the parchment mouldered away."


.

February 26th, 1772, a petition of the Right Rev. John, Lord Bishop of Durham,
was presented to the House of Commons and read, praying that leave might be
given to bring in a bill, to raise out of, or charge upon, the said see, such
sum of money as was necessary to repair his part of Tyne-Bridge, which was
referred to the consideration of a committee In 1772, an Act passed, to enable
the Lord Bishop of Durham, and his successors, to raise a competent sum of
money, to be applied for repairing, rebuilding, and improving such part of
Tyne-Bridge as belongs to the sea of Durham. This is to be done by raising
12,000l. to be secured by granting annuities upon lives, not exceeding ten per
cent." Gyll's MSS.
.

An agreement having been entered into by the bridge committee at Newcastle,
with Mr. Stephenson, carpenter, to finish a temporary bridge in four months, to
be reckoned from June 18th, 1772 In the year 1772, an Act of Parliament passed
for building a temporary bridge here, from which it appears, that the
corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne had agreed to expend 2400l. out of its
revenues on the occasion, and if the work cost more, the overplus was to be
reimbursed by a toll. -- It was limited in the Act to stand seven years.
, under a large penalty. On the 17th of July following they began to drive the
piles, and the bridge was opened on the 27th day of October in that year.

April 1st, 1774, the above bridge committee advertised for masons to undertake
the rebuilding of such part of a new intended stone bridge over the river Tyne,
as belonged to the town of Newcastle, having previously provided a great
quantity of large blocks of stone for that purpose, which were at that time
lying upon Felling and Elswick-Quays Hand-bill of that date -- also Newcastle
Courant, February 19th, 1774.

In the year 1774, a quarry was opened at Elswick, for stones to rebuild the
Newcastle part of Tyne-Bridge, and another at a village a little way down the
river, called St. Anthony's, for the same purpose. -- The Bishop of Durham
wrought stones for his part of the bridge, in a field behind Oakwell-Gate, in
the same quarry where the stones had been formerly won for building Gateshead
Church-steeple.

The foundation stone of the Bishop of Durham's part of Tyne-Bridge was laid on
Friday, October 14th, 1774.

On Saturday, July 8th, 1775, the first arch of the Bishop's side of
Tyne-Bridge was closed in. -- Newcastle Courant.

"Tuesday evening, April 25th, 1775, the first stone on the Newcastle side of
Tyne-Bridge was laid by Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. mayor, amidst a great
concourse of people, who ardently wished prosperity and permanency to the
undertaking." -- Ibid. April 29, 1775.

August 15th, 1772, "The Principles of Bridges, etc. by Charles Hutton,
mathematician," was advertised in the Newcastle Courant.

January 4th, 1772, Mr. John Smeaton, and Mr. John Wooler, published their
first Report relating to Tyne-Bridge. Newcastle, printed by T. Saint. 8vo, 16
pages.

March 12th, 1772, Mr. Robert Mylne, architect of Black-Friars-Bridge, London,
published a Report respecting Tyne Bridge, with a plan for a temporary bridge,
and Mes^^. Rawling's and Wake's abstract of the borings into the bed of the
river Tyne. Newcastle, printed by Isaac Thompson, Esquire. 8vo, 24 pages. With a
plan by R. Bellby.

March 17th, 1772, Mr. John Wooler published some Observations on the
abovementioned Report of Mr. Mylne, in 8 pages -- no printer's name --
Addressed to the mayor, aldermen, and common council of Newcastle.

There was an intention, but it was overruled, of having the new bridge built
from the Javil-Groop to the opposite shore. -- The following occurs in the
Newcastle Courant, for February 1st, 177^* "At a very respectable meeting of
the inhabitants of this town, yesterday, a subscription was entered into for
the support of a petition to Parliament against the building of the intended
bridge over the Tyne, at the Jabel-Groop." -- The subscription then amounted to
upwards of fifty pounds.


.

July 8th, 1776, a medal was deposited in the first new pier, and the boundary
of that part of Tyne-Bridge, that belongs to the corporation of Newcastle upon
Tyne, southward, by the mayor and sheriff of that town: over the device, which
exhibited the Newcastle Exchange, with the Genius of Commerce sitting by it,
supporting the arms of the corporation, and presenting a purse to a figure in
the robes of magistracy, directing his attention to a prospect of some rising
piers of a bridge, with shipping and lighters on the river, is the following
motto: "Quod felix faustumque sit;" and on the reverse, this inscription: "This
stone, being the boundary of the corporation of Newcastle, southward, was laid
Anno Domini, 1776, in the mayoralty of Charles Atkinson, Esquire. William
Cramlington, Esquire. sheriff."

This medal was of copper, about four inches diameter, and being enclosed in a
thick glass-case, was placed in the south-east corner of the above pier
Newcastle Chronicle, July 13th, 1776.
.

March 22d, 1779, there was an order of common council for a thousand pounds to
be expended in purchasing the property that was on the west side of the north
avenue to Tyne-Bridge, on condition that the Act of Parliament, for which that
body were then petitioning, could be obtained Common Council books.
.

A. D. 1779, an Act passed for enlarging the former Act of the 12th of George
the Third, for building a temporary bridge over the river Tyne, between the
town of Newcastle and Gateshead, for completing the new stone bridge there, and
for making the avenue to, and the passage over it, more commodious. -- This Act
was to be continued for the term of three years, and no longer. No houses,
except toll shops, were to be erected on the new bridge, and the tolls were to
be raised upon it for twelve years, from June 24th, 1779 It appears, by this
act, that the corporation of Newcastle had expended, of their own money,
December 29th, 1778, the sum of 21042l. 16s. 11d. including 1838l. 9s. 8d. the
price of property on the old bridge; and that it was supposed, that before it
was finished, it would cost them 10,000l. more. It appears, also, that on the
above 29th of December, 1778, they had expended above the sum of 2400l.
mentioned in the former Act, for building the temporary bridge, the sum of
321l. 18s. 9d. more than the tolls on that temporary bridge had produced, nor
was it expected that the money to be taken for tolls there, from that time to
June 24th, 1779, would reimburse the overplus of expense.

September 13th, 1779, in the forenoon, the sixth and last arch of that part of
the new stone bridge belonging to the corporation of Newcastle was closed. --
Newcastle Courant.

November 13th, 1780, the workmen began to pull down the houses on the west
side of Tyne-Bridge, for the purpose of widening the avenue to the new bridge.
-- Ibid.

On the last day of April, 1781, the workmen began to take down the temporary
bridge.


.

THE CLOSE.
FROM Tyne-Bridge we enter the street called the Close Bourne says, "it was
formerly the part of the town where the principal inhabitants lived, Sir John
Marley, Sir William Blackett, Sir Mark Milbank; and the houses of many other
gentlemen of figure are still remembered by the ancient inhabitants. The houses
within speak magnificence and grandeur; the rooms being very large and stately,
and for the most part adorned with curious carving. Of late," he adds, "these
houses have been forsaken, and their wealthier inhabitants have chosen the
higher parts of the town."

A deed now lies before me, dated March 31st, 1518, that mentions a waste
tenement in this street, lately belonging to Sir Thomas Ilderton, Knight.

A finely carved chimney-piece was removed a few years ago from Sir John
Marley's house, to that of Charles Williams, Esquire. without the Close-Gate.


, in which the chief merchants of the town had anciently their habitations, and
which, probably, had its name from its closeness, or narrowness. The house of
the Earls of Northumberland stood on the side of this street, next to the
river, bounded, on the east, by Bower-Chare, betwixt Tyne-Bridge and
Javil-Groop. -- April 10th, 1482, Henry, Earl of Northumberland, demised it to
his servant George Bird, by the name of the Earl's Inn, under an annual rent of
13s. 4d. Bourne tells us, that it stood on the site of a house, having, in his
time, "a great gate at its entrance, with a large round ball of stone Vulgo,
"The Round Stone Entry."
, and that in the lower part of the building, toward the water, were very
manifest tokens of its antiquity "Henry Earl of Northumberlande Lord of
th'onor of Cok'rmouth and Pettworth Warden of Est and Middel Marches of England
anenst Scotland and Justice of all the Kings Forests from Trent north to all
true Christen men to whom yis present writing shall come se or here greting in
our Lord God everlasting And whereas my right well (...) deservant George Bird
is seized and possessed in his demen as of fee of a tenement with the
appurtenaunce latly called ye Earls In within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne
(...) ye Close bitwixt a tenement pertaining unto ye Hospital of Saint Ka^^^
(...) upon ye ^^nd-Hille of ye said town late in the haldyng of William Byrd
(...) and a vennell called Bower-Chare upon the est side and extend from (...)
^way before anenst the north unto the ground ebb of the water of Tyne (...)
^st the south by the right metis and bounds of the yift and feoffment of (...)
ye which tenement with the appurtenance ye said Willm late hadd by ye g^f^ and
(...) ye said Earl yeldyng yerfor yerly to me the same Earl and mine h^y^^. 13^.
4l. by year as by a charter indented under mine sealle beryng date the 10 day
of May in the 11 y^^^ of ye ^^^gne of our Sovereign Lord King Edward ye Fourth
y^ upon made to the said Willm Blakston more at large it appers. Know ye me ye
said Earl ye astate (...) and possession of the said George in the said
tenement with the appurtenaunce (...) present (...) have ratefyed approved and
confermed for me and mine (...) know ye me ye said Earl by y^es presents to
have remysed and (...) ye (...) and (...) ^yat I have hadd o^ shall have in ye
said tenement with (...) ^purt^naunce to ye said George his heirs yerlye to be
reserved And I forsoth^ ye said tenement with the appurtenaunce for ye (...)
said yearly (...) said George Byrd his heyrs and assigns shall warrant and
defend (...) In witness whereof I ye said Earl to veis presents have do (...)
Castle W^^wyk ye 10 day of April in ye 23 year of ye (...) Edward ye 4th
after ye conquest of England.

"(...) NORTHUMBERLAND." S^^^ red wax. append. (...) from the original (...) in
the possession of his Grace the Duke of (...) Mr. Robert Harrison.)


."

A little to the west of the Earl's Inn, is an opening toward the river,
called the Javel-Groop In a deed preserved in the archives of the corporation
of Newcastle, dated 20 Hen. VII. A. D. 1505, the name of it is spelled "le
Gaoell Grype in vico vocat' le Closse." And in St. Nicholas' register, April,
1590, "Jayle-Groupe." I am informed that "Gaol" is called "Javell" in the
Cumberland dialect.

In Corbridge's Plan of Newcastle, dated 1723, the name of this place is
spelled "Gable-Groope." -- In Bourne's History, "Javill-Gripp," and in an
inrolment in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, Sept. 6, 1723,
"Gavell-Groop."


: Groope, or Grype, signifies a ditch, and Javel is said to be a corruption of
gaol. The castle of Newcastle was long the common prison of the county of
Northumberland, and here, it is probable, has been anciently the communication
between the ditch, or fosse, of the castle and the river Tyne.

On the right hand, after we have entered the Close There were formerly two
pants in the Close -- one near the place called Aubone's Entry -- the other
near the mansion house, and opposite the foot of the Tuthill-Stairs.
from Tyne-Bridge, is a flight of stairs, conducting to the castle by the
southern postern They are called Castle-Stairs.
. And farther along, on the same side, is another flight of stone steps,
opposite to Javel-Group, called Long-Stairs Long-Stairs, or part of the street
so called, appears, anciently, with the name of "The Castle Mote." -- In a deed
of property, on the Long-Stairs, belonging to Mr. John Stephenson,
house-carpenter, the tenement is described as being "in quodam vico vocato le
Castle Mote."
.

Beyond these, to the west, on the same side, and nearly opposite the
mansion house, is a third flight of stairs, called the Tuthill-Stairs Bourne's
conjecture concerning the etymology of the name of this hill appears very
erroneous: "The proper name of it," says he, "should be Touthill, from the
^^^^ting or winding of a horn upon it, when an enemy was at hand." It seems
more probably to be a corruption of Toothill, i. e. the Hill of Observation. --
^^ Sir John Maundevile's Voyage, p. 378: "In the myd place of on of his gardyns
is a lyttile mountagne where there is a little medewe and in that medewe is a
l^ylle Toothill with toures and pynacles -- and in that littyl Toothill wolle
he sitten oftentym for to taken the air and to disportyn him."
, communicating with the foot of West-Gate. There is an anabaptist
meeting house, with a well for the immersion of adults in the Tuthill-Stairs.
There is said to be another meeting of this sect held at a private house in the
town.

The present mansion house of the mayors of Newcastle There is an order of
common council, May 7, 1706, to enforce the mayor's residence in this house
during the year of his mayoralty.
, in the Close, was begun to be built A. D. 1691, and cost the corporation, in
building, 6,000l. besides the furniture Dr. Ellison's MSS. -- There appears to
have been a house on the same site, appropriated to the same purpose, which
belonged to an hospital of the town, and which the common council had thoughts
of altering, or rebuilding, A. D. 1683. (Common Council books, Sept. 18th,
1683.) Bourne calls this mansion house, "a building grand and stat^ly, and,
considering the place it stands in, very ornamental."
.

The judges of assize, with their chief officers and servants, are usually
entertained here, during the assize week Common Council books, May 15, 1694. --
Order to provide two beds for the judges' chambers in the mansion house. --
There is an order of common council, Sept. 29, 1760, to discontinue the custom
of giving vails to servants in the mansion house.

When no prisoner is capitally convicted at the assizes, it is customary for
the corporation to present the judges, etc. with white gloves.

July 7th, 1773, order to discontinue the entertainment annually given on
Michaelmas Monday in the mansion house. -- The mayor is allowed a state-coach,
a barge, etc. -- There is an ord^^ for a barge with eight oars, common council
books, Dec. 16, 1675. -- A new one was ordered, April, 1709. -- A new one was
sent down, by sea, from London, in 1785.


. The mayor gives entertainments in it to very large companies of the gentlemen
of Newcastle and its vicinity, and it is furnished, for that purpose, with a
valuable and elegant service of plate The following inscription is on the great
mace, of silver gilt, and carried before the mayor in processions: "Made for
the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, anno regni Jacobi Secundi tertio
annoque Domini 1687; Nicholas Cole, Esquire. mayor, Thomas Pace, Esquire. sheriff." The
arms of the town, with those of Cole, on the knob, at the bottom -- on the part
under the crown, the rose, thistle and flower de luce, and the harp, with a
crown ever catch, and the initials, J. R. -- Under the mound, the King's arms,
with J. 2. R. th^^ is carried by the water bailiff. -- Here are also kept two
swords of state, of very elegant workmanship -- the one covered with black, the
other with scarlet velvet -- the black (...) in common p^^ce^^^^ns, the red one
on great festivals, when the magistrates wear scarlet gowns. -- In these
processions, the sword bearer wears on his head a cap of maintenance, covered
with fur, with tassels of crimson and gold.

On a silver basin and ewer are the subsequent inscriptions:

"This basin and ewer was by Sir Gilbert Gerrard Bart. and his two sons Gilbert
and Samuel Gerrard Esquires grandchildren to the Rev. Father in God Dr. John
Cosins late Bishop of Durham, presented to the right worshipful Sir Nathanael
Johnson and the Court of Aldermen of the ancient town of Newcastle and is
designed for the use of the Mayor that annually governs accordingly to be
delivered by the present Mayor to the Court of Aldermen and by them to the next
Mayor that shall be chosen and so successively for ever June 8, 1681." The
arms also of the town, and those of Johnson and Gerrard, are engraved on them.
On the ewer is this inscription: "This ewer with a basin was presented by Sir
Gilbert Gerrard Bart. and his two sons Gilbert and Samuel Gerrard Esqrs. to the
use of the annual Mayor of the ancient town of Newcastle for ever June 8,
1681." -- Arms also of Johnson and Gerrard, with those of the corporation.

On a large silver basin is the following:

"Ex dono Lioneli Vane armigeri majori and burgensibus villae and comitatus
Novi Castri super Tinam." -- Arms of the town, and those of Vane and Fenwick.

On a silver salver and epergne, given by Mr. Bows:

"The first royal purse of one hundred guineas, run for at Newcastle upon Tyne,
was won, June 25th, 1753, by a bay horse called Cato, belonging to George
Bows, Esquire. who generously presented it to the corporation to purchase a piece
of plate, in remembrance of his Majesty's grace and favor." -- The King's
arms, those of the town, and Bows.

There is preserved, also, in this house, a gilt silver cup, of very elegant
design and execution, in which it is usual to present mulled wine to the new
mayor, at his first entrance into the mansion house; for which purpose it is
said to have been given to the corporation.


. The fire arms, belonging to the corporation, are the furniture of the
spacious saloon Above hang buckets and fire-caps, for the use of fire-men, and
to supply the engines for extinguishing fires, with water. -- Over the
chimney-piece some fragments of ancient armor claim the attention of the
curious visitant.
.

In the Close, says Bourne, were many houses that paid an annual rent to the
master and brethren of St. Mary's Hospital December 15th, 29 Hen. VIII.
"Johannes Lumley Miles Dominus de Lumley," feoffed Edward Baxter with a house
in the Close. -- This lately belonged to Mr. Russell, wine-merchant, near the
Close-Gate. -- (From a deed, in Latin, communicated by Mr. George Anderson,
master builder.)
.

"This street," he adds, "is commemorated in many ancient writings for a mill,
which, in ancient times, was wont to stand upon the Hoga Hoga, Hoghia, Hogium
and Hogum; Hough, Heugh, How, Ho, i. e. Hill a Germ' Hoch. S. Hog. Belg. Hooh,
idem. Hence Gr^^nhow, i. e. Green-Hill. -- Stanhow Stone-Hill, etc. --
Harrison's MS. Notes, in an interleaved copy of Bourne's History of Newcastle.

There is a meeting house for dissenters in the Close. I have only discovered
two names of the ministers there -- Mr. Alexander Nimmo and Mr. Graham.


, i. e. the Bank without the Close-Gate. -- In a grant from the master and
brethren of St. Mary's, in West-Gate, it is permitted to the parties concerned,
that they have "quandam placeam terrae in vico qui vocatur le Closs sicut se
extendit in longitudine de Hoga ubi antiquum molendinum solebat stare usque ad
aquam Tinae et quantum de Tina acquirere poterit."

WEST-GATE To call the street "West-Gate-Street" is a pleonasm.

"Gate in locorum nominibus significat viam, semitam: in quo sensu apud
boreales vox etiamnum usurpatur: australibus autem significat januam, portam."
In the Islandic, "Gata" est via -- In the north, porta, seu janua, is commonly
called "Yate."


.
THIS street has plainly had its name from its western situation. Near the foot
of it stood the house of the Friars This order is said to have commenced in
Provence, A. D. 1245, when the General Council of Lions was sitting, by means
of an expelled novice. It was confirmed by Pope Nicholas the Fourth. They are
reported to have admitted both sexes, who were allowed to have property. If
they were married persons, they were to continue so; and although they could
not lawfully or regularly marry after admission, yet, if they did, the marriage
was still reputed valid. It was not a perfect, or complete religion, and has
been accounted not a true order, so that, though its members were esteemed
ecclesiastical persons, authors are not agreed whether or not they enjoyed the
personal and real privileges of clerks and religious. -- See Hospinian de
Monachatu.
of the Sac A name supposed to have been taken from the shape, or stuff of
their habit. Dufresne, in verbo, tells us: "Saccus, vulgo inter monachicas
vestes recensetur, diciturque fuisse sordidum quoddam amiculum, quod ceteris
vestimentis superaddebatur: in quo a cilicio differebat seu tunica, e pilis
caprinis texta, quae carni nudae adherebat."
, or of the penance of Jesus Christ. They occur, as being settled here, A. D.
1268 and 1272 In 1268, in a patent of the 51st of King Henry III. by which, at
the desire of Robert Bruce, the King gave them an additional place, called, at
that time, Stable-Garth. Bourne calls it, Constable-Calgarth. His words are as
follow: "King Henry III. by his letters patent, dated 20th of November, in the
51st year of his reign, at the instance of Robert de Bruce, "dedit fratribus de
penitentia J. Christi quandam placeam vocatam Constable-Calgarth in villa Novi
Castri super Tinam et quae contigua erat clauso et placeae dictorum fratrum in
eadem villa." p. 38. Wallis, in his History of Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 210,
seems to quote the very words of the patent, thus: "Nov' Castr' super Tynam.
Fratres de penitentia Jesu Christi de quadam placea ibidem vocata Stable Garth
contigua claus' dictorum fratrum concessa ad placeam suam elargendam." -- Pat.
51 R. Hen. III.

In 1272 they are mentioned by Mr. Pegge, in a paper in the Archaeologia, vol.
iii. p. 130, concerning this order.

The first house of this order (in England) was near Aldersgate, in London, in
1257. -- They were put down in 1307, by the Council of Lions.


.

Their house here was near the White-Friar-Tower "Such," says Bourne, citing
here a MS. de rebus Novi Castri, p. 13, "was the opinion of Sir John Fenwick."
-- He adds, "it was late in the holding of Sir Ralph Delaval, then ( i. e.
tempore Hen. III) called by the name of Domus tratrum de penitentia J. Christi."
.

January 8th, 1299, on King Edward the First's arrival at Newcastle, the Friars
of the Sac, of that town, received (in common with the other orders of
religious there) 2s. for their pittance of two days, by the hands of brother
Walter de Carleton "Fratribus de Sacco ville Novi Castri per Tynam pro pitancia
sua duorum dierum in adventu Regis Ibid. mense Januar' per manus fratis Walteri
de Carleton Ibid. 8 die Januar'. 2^." -- Wardrobe account of 23 ^ d. ^
published by the Society of Antiquaries of London.
.

A. D. 1307, this Walter de Carleton occurs as the only surviving brother in
their house, which the King, by letters patent, dated May 26th that year,
granted to the order of Carmelites, of the same town, upon condition that they
should support the above brother, in a way becoming his rank, during the
remainder of his life. The residence of the Carmelites, before this time, was
upon the Wall-Knoll, from whence their being greatly straitened for want of
room caused their removal, having just before lost part of their land by the
building of the town-wall See afterward in the account of the White-Friars.
.

HOUSE OF CARMELITES, OR WHITE-FRIARS This order of mendicants, called
Carmelites, or White-Friars, and sometimes the brethren of the Blessed Virgin,
with whom they were fond of boasting a familiar intercourse, are reported, by
some, to have come into England, A. D. 1240, and to have held their first
European Chapter at Ailesford, in Kent, in the year 1245 -- but according to
others, not till A. D. 1250, when they settled at Holme, now called Huln-Abbey,
near Alnwick, in Northumberland. Speed, very erroneously, p. 1076, says, that
their house in Newcastle was founded by King Edward I.

Leland and Dugdale, both of them most egregiously mistaken, ascribe the
foundation of it to Roger Thornton, merchant.


.
THE first residence of this order of mendicants at Newcastle was on the
Wall-Knoll, as before related, which, by license of King Henry III. they
acquired to themselves and successors in fee of John de Byker "Quandam placeam
terrae vocatam le Walkenoll -- quam quidem placeam quondam fratres de ordine
predicto ( i. e. beat Marie de Monte Carmeli) de Johanne de Byker tempore
Domini Henrici quondam Regis Anglie proavi nostri de licentia ejusdem proavi
nostri dictis fratribus and successoribus suis in feodo adquisiverunt." Prima
pars paten' de anno Ed. III. 34to m. 28. -- See account of the Trinitarians.

Bourne had discovered this from a writing of the date of 1287, in which some
land is thus described: "Quae extendit in longitudine super le Wallknoll in
australem partem domus fratrum de Monte Carmel, usque ad communem viam quae
solebat ducere versus Fishergate."


.

On the 8th of January, 1299, the White-Friars of Newcastle received 16s. 8d.
for their pittance of two days, by the hands of brother Roger de Felton, on the
King's arrival at Newcastle. They appear to have received, by the hands of the
same person, 9s. for their pittance of one day, on the King's passing through
that town in the beginning of the preceding December "Fratribus de Monte
Carmeli Novi Castri super Tynam pro pittancia sua unius dici in transitu Regis
per ibid. mense Decembr' in principio per manus fratris Rogeri de Felton 9s. --
Fratribus de Monte Carmeli ejusdem ville pro pittancia sua duorum dierum in
adventu Regis Ibid. mense Januar' per manus fratris Rogeri de Felton ibidem 8
die Januar'." -- Wardrobe account of 28 Ed. I. before cited.
.

King Edward the First, by a charter dated May 26th, 1307, granted to the
White-Friars of Newcastle, straitened at that time in their house on the
Wall-Knoll, by the incroachment of the town-wall upon part of their site, this
place of the Friars of the penance of Jesus Christ, on the condition
beforementioned, of their granting to Walter de Carleton, the then only
surviving brother of that order, a decent subsistence for his life "Edwardus
Dei gratia Rex Anglie Dominus Hibernie and Dux Aquitanie omnibus ad quos
presents litere pervenerint salutem Sciatis quod cum locus in quo dilecti
nobis in Christo prior and fratres ordinis beat Marie de Monte Carmeli in
villa nostra Novi Castri super Tynam morantur eo quod murus ejusdem ville de
novo constructus per medium clausi ipsorum prioris and fratrum prope eorum
ecclesiam se extendit, in tantum artatus sit and restrictus, quod iidem prior
and fratres ibidem non poterunt competenter nec honest nec eciam absque magno
incommodo and gravamine ville predicte diucius commorari Nos predictis priori
and fratribus in hac part ac eciam securitati ville predicte providere
volentes, dedimus and concessimus pro nobis and heredibus nostris quantum in
nobis est eisdem priori and fratribus locum illum in quo fratres de penitencia
Jesu Christi morari solebant in eadem villa, habend' and tenend' eisdem priori
and fratribus de Monte Carmeli and successoribus suis ad commorand' ibidem
imperpetuum adeo integre libere and quiet sicut dicta fratres de penitencia
locum illum prius tenuerunt sine occone vel impedimento nostri vel hered'
nostror' justic. esc' vic' aut aliorum ballivor' seu ministror' nostrorum
quorumcunque Ita tamen quod iidem prior and fratres de predicto ordine beat
Marie, fratri Waltero de Carleton de predicto ordine de penitencia in eodem
loco adhuc commoranti ad totam vitam suam prout statui suo convenit
rationabilem inveniant sustentationem. In cujus rei testimonium has literas
nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud Karliolum 26 Maii anno regni
nostri tricesimo quinto." -- The above was confirmed by an Inspeximus of the
4th of Ed. II. Test Rege apud Berewycum super Twede 16 die Feb. A. D. 1311.
.

August 1st, 1322, the brethren of this house received 8s. for their pittance
of one day, and on the 14th of September following, on the King's arrival at
Newcastle, 8s. for the same, by the hands of the King's almoner Wardrobe
account of the 15th, 16th, and 17th of Edward II. penes Th. Astle Armig. p. 31.
See under Black-Friars. -- "Fratribus de Monte Carmeli ejusdem ville pro eodem
per manus ejusdem ibidem eodem die 8s. -- 14 Septembr' fratribus de Monte
Carmeli ejusdem ville etc. (ut supra) 8s." -- There occurs, ibid. p. 215, "13
die Augusti ponebatur per preceptum Regis super corpus Johannis Estmer clerici
hospicii Regis defuncti die sepulture ejusdem in ecclesia fratium de Monte
Carmeli ejusdem ville unus pannus ad aurum in canabo."
.

November 20th, 1337, King Edward the Third granted a license of mortmain, to
enable Ada Page, of Newcastle upon Tyne, to assign to the prior and brethren of
this house, a garden, with its appurtenances, that lay contiguous to their
house, in order to enlarge it "Secunda pars paten' de anno regni Regis Edwardi
tercii decimo, m. 14. pro fratribus carmelis de Novo Castro super Tynam. Rex
omnibus etc. Licet etc. Volentes tamen dilectis nobis in Christo priori and
fratribus ordinis beat Marie de Monte Carmeli in villa Novi Castri super Tynam
gratiam facere specialem concessimus et licenciam dedimus pro nobis et
heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est Ade Page de dicta villa Novi Castri quod
ipse unum gardinum cum pertinentiis in eadem villa manso ipsorum prioris et
fratrum ibidem contiguum quod de nobis non tenetur, sicut per inquisitionem per
dilectum nobis Johannem de Denton majorem dicte ville Novi Castri escaetorem
nostrum ibidem de mandato nostro captam et in canc' nostram retornatam, est
compertum dare possit et assignare predictis priori and fratribus habend' et
tenend' sibi and successoribus suis ad elargacionem mansi sui predicti
imperpetuum etc. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Bothevill 20 die Novembr'." --
In the Tower of London.
.

Doctor Nicholas Durham, the famous opponent of Wickliff, appears to have
flourished in this convent, about the year 1360 Steph. Addit. 2 vol. in Carm'.
He wrote on the Master of the Sentences, Originals of Doctors, Resolutions of
Questions, and against Wickliff's Articles.
.

February 24th, 1361, King Edward the Third granted a license of mortmain to
the Carmelites of this convent, to enable them to make a grant of the place of
their former residence on the Wall-Knoll to William de Acton, for the purpose
of founding thereupon the hospital of the Holy Trinity See the Account of that
Hospital.
.

A. D. 1424, a suit occurs between William Glynn, vicar of Newcastle upon Tyne,
and William Boston, prior of this house, concerning the offering of wax-candles
on Candlemas-Day "Lis inter Willielmum Glynn vicar' and Willielmum Boston
priorem domus Carmelit' de oblatione candelarum cerearum die purificationis cum
submissione prioris 17 Feb. 1424." -- Reg. Langley, fol. 119.
.

A. D. 1450, Edward Dynley, born of a good family in Newcastle upon Tyne, and a
learned writer of this order, flourished in this house Bale Scriptor' Brit' p.
94. Tanner's Bibliotheque, p. 228.
.

Brother Robert Benton, of this convent, was ordained priest, March 23d, 1497
Randall's MSS. e Registro Fox p. 15.

"Fr. Rob. Benton ord. frat. Carmelit. ord. presbiter Martii 23o. 1497."


.

January 10th, 1539, Gerald Spor, prior, with seven brethren and two novices,
surrendered this house "Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum
pervenerit Geraldus Spore prior sive gardianus domus conventualis fratrum
carmelitarum ville de Novo Castro super Tynam et in comitatu ejusdem ac ejusdem
loci conventus salutem in Domino sempiternam et fidem indubiam presentibus
adhibere Noveritis nos prefatos priorem sive gardianum et conventum unanimi
assensu et consensu nostris ex quibusdam causis justis et racionabilibus animas
et conscientias nostras specialiter moventibus ultro et sponte dedisse
concessisse ac per presents dare et concedere reddere et deliberare et
confirmare illustrissimo in Christo Principi et Domino nostro Henrico octavo
Dei gratia Anglie et Francie Regi Fidei Defensori Domino Hibernie et in terris
supremo ecclesie Anglicane sub Christo capiti totam dictam domum nostram
conventualem ac totum scitum fundum circuitum et precinctum ejusdem necnon
omnia et singula maneria dominica mesuagia gardina curtilagia tofta terras et
tenementa nostra prata pascuas pasturas boscos redditus reversiones servicia
mollendina passagia communias libertates aquas piscarias pensiones porciones
annuitates decimas oblaciones ac omnia et singula emolumenta proficua
possessiones hereditamenta ac jura nostra spiritualia et temporalia quecunque
tam infra regnum Anglie et marchias ejusdem quam alibi ubicunque prefate domui
nostre quoquomodo pertinentia spectantia sive incumbentia habend' tenend'
gaudend' and libere percipiend' domum nostram conventualem predict' ac scitum
fundum circuitum et precinctum ejusdem necnon omnia et singula predicta maneria
dominica mesuagia gardina curtilagia tofta terras et tenementa ac cetera
premissa cum suis juribus et pertinenciis universis prefato invictissimo
Principi et Domino nostro Regi heredibus et assignatis suis imperpetuum cui in
hac part ad omnem juris effectum qui exinde sequi poterit aut potest nos et
domum nostram conventualem predict' ac omnia jura nobis qualitercunque
acquisita ut decet subjicimus et submittimus dantes et concedentes eidem regie
majestati omnem et omnimodam plenam et liberam facultatem auctoritatem et
potestatem nos et domum nostram predictam una cum omnibus et singulis manerijs
terris tenementis redditibus revercionibus ac ceteris premissis cum suis
ju^^^u^ et pertinentijs universis disponend' ac pro sue libere voluntatis regie
libito ad quo^^un^^sus majestati sue placentes alienand' donand' convertend' et
transferend' hujus^ (...) positiones alienaciones donaciones conversiones et
translaciones per dictam majestatem suam quovis modo fiend' exnunc ratificantes
et ratificamus ratasque et grat^^ a^ p^pe^^t^ firmas habitu^os nos promittimus
per presents Et ut premissa omnia et singula (...) debitum sorti^i valiant
effectum electionibus nobis et successoribus nostr^ (...) querelis
provocationibus appellationibus actionibus littibus et inst^ (...) cunque juris
et facti remedijs ac beneficijs nobis forsan et successoribus nostris in ea
part pretextu dispositionis alienacionis donacionis conversionis et
translacionis predict' ac ceterorum premissorum qualitercumque competentibus et
competituris omnibusque doli metus erroris ignorancie vel alterius materie sive
disposicionis exceptionibus objectionibus et allegacionibus prorsus semotis et
dispositis palam public et express ex certa scientia nostra animisque nostris
spontaneis renunciavimus et cessimus prout per presents renunciamus et cedimus
ac ab eisdem recedimus in hijs scriptis Et nos prefati prior sive gardianus et
conventus et successores nostri dict' domum nostram conventualem scitum fundum
circuitum ac mansionem et ecclesiam nostram predict' ac premissa omnia et
singula cum suis juribus et pertinentijs universis prefato Domino nostro Regi
heredibus et assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warantizabimus et defendemus
imperpetuum per presents In quorum testimonium atque fidem nos prefati prior
sive gardianus et conventus sigillum nostrum commune presentibus apposui It is
thus in the record, but ought to be "apponi."
fecimus. Dat' in domo nostra capitulari xmo die mensis Januarij anno regni
Regis Henrici octavi tricesimo.

Per me Gerald' Spor priorem etc. Johannes Barrow presbyter Wyllielmus Ynggo
presbyter Thomas Walls presbyter Edwart Maxwell presbyter Thomas Furnes
presbyter Clement Bell presbyter Thomas Hedle presbyter Robert Conere Novicii."
Bawge Store Novicii."
Seal: red wax -- Under a castle, the Virgin Mary sitting with her child -- a
shield of arms on each side of the castle -- a figure on each side also -- one
hand of each lifted up, the other under the castle. -- Inscription: "Sig.....
de Carmelo Novi Castri super Tinam." See seals, plate ii. No. 5.

(From the original surrender, remaining in the Augmentation-Office.)
, after it had been valued by Nicholas Harpsfield, at nine pounds eleven
shillings and four-pence The following occurs in the Harleian MSS. 604. "A
brefe certificate made upon the dissolucons of diverse monasteres and priores
etc. 30 Hen. VIII. surrend -- Newcastle -- White Freres there -- Sir George
Lawson keeper -- cler value etc. 5s. Nombre 10. -- The clear money etc. 5s. --
The stock etc. 117s. 2d. -- Rewards etc. 65s. -- The remaner etc. 52s. 2d. --
Lead and bells. 12 fother lead -- Bells 2. -- Woods etc. nil. plate etc. 41
unc. -- Detts owyng unto and by nil."

The following occurs in the minister's, or bailiff's accounts of diverse
religious houses in the county of Northumberland, from Michaelmas 30 Hen. VIII.
to 31 Hen. VIII. at the same term. -- "Domus nuper fratrum carmelit' infra
villam Novi Castri -- computus Georgii Lawson militis firmarii ibidem per
tempus predictum -- arreragia -- nulla quia primus computus dicti computantis
-- summa nulla -- redditus and firm' -- sed reddit de firma scitus dicte nuper
domus cum edificiis eidem annex' and scituat' in West-Gate infra villam Novi
Castri super Tinam, et gardinis eidem pertinen' continen' unam acram sic'
dimiss' Jacobo Lawson militi per indentur' dat' 28 Junii, anno regni Regis Hen.
VIII. tricesimo primo pro termino viginti et unius annor' extunc sequen'
reddend' inde annuatim ad terminos Sancti Michael' Archi and Annunciat' beat
Marie Virginis porcionibus equalibus -- summa 5s. summa totalis rec. 5s. quos
solvit Guillielmo Grene receptori Dom' Regis ibidem ex recogn' dicti receptoris
super hunc computum."

From the original remaining in the Augmentation-Office.
.

The church of this convent was dedicated to St. Mary, who, as Speed informs
us, was the patroness of above thirty houses of this order in England "From
West-Gate to Tynside," says Leland, "I saw the White Freres, whose Garth came
almost to Tynside." See his Itinerary.
. In the year 1546, a grant of this house was made to Sir Richard Gresham and
Richard Billingford Sir Richard Gresham, an eminent merchant of London, third
son of John Gresham, of Holt in Com. Norfolk, Esquire. and father of the famous Sir
Thomas Gresham, who built the Royal Exchange in London -- in the 37th year of
King Henry VIII. had, in conjunction with Richard Billingford, a grant of the
house of White Friars, between the West-Gate and the Side of the river Tyne in
Newcastle. -- Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 397-8. Biog. Brit. vol. iv. 2375.
.

The convent of White Friars is marked in Speed's Plan of Newcastle, dated
1610. -- January 27th, 1647, this Friary occurs as being the property of Dr.
Jennison, vicar of Newcastle, who claimed a pound of pepper on account thereof
annually, on Christmas Day, from the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne
Common Council books -- January 27th, 1647 -- "moved that a pound of pepper
claimed by Dr. Jennison as belonging to his house, called the Friars, payable
every 25th of December, be paid, and the common council desire that they may be
informed by him for what cause it is to be paid."

A person still alive informed me, that, within her memory, all the ground from
the Close to the Postern was laid out in gardens, except the house of the White
Friars, o^ at least a considerable part of the remains thereof, standing in the
midst of them, and converted into a gardener's house. It then belonged to a
Mrs. Jennison, who claimed and received yearly of the town the above pound of
pepper. -- This was considered as an acknowledgment, that that part of the
town-wall that lies near it had been erected on the ground of this convent.


.

The ground where this convent stood was purchased by Dr. Adam Askew, who in
1740 built a handsome house upon it, in the kitchen of which some vestiges of
the windows, etc. of the Priory still remain On the wall facing the town-wall
are discoverable two small windows of the old priory, and in the corner an
arched door-way, now built up, and appearing to be sunk deep in the earth. --
See "Denton-Tower," in the old account of the wards of the town.

A. D. 1364, a grant was obtained for founding in the town of Newcastle a
fraternity in honor of the nativity and resurrection of our Lord -- This was
repealed the year following: "Pro fraternit' in Novo Castro super Tynam
faciendo in honorem nativitatis et resurrectionis Jesu Christi. Pat. 37 R. Ed
III. p. 2. m. 30. et anno 38. p. 2. m. 33. pro revocatione ejusdem. Et m. 12.
in dorso -- Et anno 39. p. 1. m. 24. Tom. iv. Rot. Turr' Londinen." --
Northumbrie.

In a MS. account of records relating to Newcastle, remaining in the Tower of
Lond^n, communicated by Thomas Astle, Esquire. is the following entry: "Pat. 37 Ed.
III. p. 1. m. 2. pro fraternitat' ibidem sac' et 20th terre acquirend." And in
the year 1404 a grant was obtained for founding a fraternity in honor of St.
John the Baptist and St. John the Apostle, in that town. -- I have not been
able to discover the reasons why the above design was not carried into
execution.

"De fraternitate Sancti Johannis Baptistae and Johannis Apostoli in Novo
Castro facienda et fundanda." Pat. 5 R. Hen. IV. p. 2. m. 25. tom. iv. Rot.
Turr. Londinen.

The above MS. account of Mr. Astle calls this a Guild or Fraternity. Can this
have been founded in St. Mary's Hospital? See account of that hospital under A.
D. 1412.


.

WEST-GATE.
Bolbeck-Hall Bourne says, that it was built by the Baron of Bywell and Bolbeck
about the 9th of King Edward III. when Ralph, Nevil, Lord of Raby, was created
Earl Marshall -- It is now the property of Mr. George Anderson, master builder
-- A remarkable wall about 8 feet broad pas^es the garden -- it has been
converted into a terrace -- under this there is a vaulted pass^^e, made of very
old bri^k^, and leading to Nevil-Tower.
, which, after the founder of it was, in 1398, created an Earl, took the name
of Westmoreland-Place, from the title of his Earldom, stood in this street,
where, opposite nearly to Pudding-Chare, part of it still remains. From a
survey of the possessions of Charles, Earl of Westmoreland, made June 10th,
1569 "Jacobu^ Bertram tenet ^^um tenementum in villa Novi Castri in vico vocato
West-Gate, quod quidem tenementum dictus Jacobus tenet libere de Comite
Westmoreland ^n libero ^ocagio. Et reddit inde per annum ad Fest' Pentecostes
and Martini in hieme equal' 3s. 4 l." -- From the record in the Remembrancer's
Office in the Temple, London.
, it appears that James Bertram To the Reverend HUGH MOISES, A. M. Morning
Lecturer of the CHURCH of ALL SAINTS. Master of A MARY'S HOSPITAL and of the
ROYAL G^AMMAR SCHOOL (...) Newcastle upon Tyne ^as VIEW of part of the Ancient
Church of that Hospital (...) a GRAMMAR SCHOOL. his at (...) ^^pence, to most
respectfully (...) and most (...) faithful humble servant John Brant
held this tenement in free soccage of the Earl of Westmoreland, at the yearly
rent of 6s. 8d.

It was afterward in the tenure of Robert Bertram Bourne, from his "Lib. de
Rebus Novi Cast."
.

A little higher up, but on the same side of the street, stands the hospital of
St. Mary the Virgin.

ST. MARY'S HOSPITAL.
THIS house, anciently consisting of an hospital and chapel, was founded in the
reign of Henry the Second, by one Aselack of Killinghowe Bourne, p. 31. -- "Ego
Aselack de Killinghowe fundavi hospitale Sanctae Mariae Virginis and capellam
super terram meam in Novo Castello super Tynam et ibi posui duos fratres
regulares et unum capellanum ad serviendum Deo et pauperibus: reddidi meipsum
Deo and beatae Mariae, and fratribus ejusdem hospitalis ibidem Deo servientibus
ad hospitandum pauperes et egenos clericos and peregrinos transeuntes pro
salute animae patris mei matris meae and omnium pertinentium and pro salute
animarum omnium hospitalis benefactorum. -- Lib. Cart. Some of the witnesses
were "Gilbert, parson of Eland, Richard, parson of Standfordham, Waldon, parson
of Newburne, Eustachius, parson of Benton." --

The words above, "super terram meam fundavi," seem plainly to infer that he
raised the structure from the ground, although Bourne, on the authority of the
MS. he so often cites, and which he calls "Liber Cartarum," styles Aselack the
second founder. Having found in Cambden's Britannia, a Lord Walter de Bolbeck
conveying lands to the church of Winchester, A. D. 1135, and one of the same
name among the first benefactors to this place, he thinks them one and the same
person, adding, that "it is a strong reason that this hospital was founded in
King Henry I.'s reign." Yet we find in Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 393, a
Walter de Bolbeck founding the Abbey of Bl^nchland, A. D. 1165, at or near the
time, it may be supposed, of the first foundation of this house, and to which
that Baron may have been a benefactor before he was sixty years of age. It may
be added, that what he has cited from the charter of Henry II. to the m^ns of
Newcastle, favors out hypothesis; as does also the confirmation charter to
this house by Richard I. mentioned afterward, in which Aselack the founder
(...) ^poken of as then alive. What Tanner, in his Notitia Monastica, has
recorded concerning the different foundations of this house, being only a
transcript of Bourne's very confused account, must necessarily follow the
fortune of its original.


, who not only raised the fabric, but gave the ground also upon which it was
erected, and placed therein two friars regular, and a chaplain, to serve God
and the poor; farther intending it to be a place of entertainment for the
indigent clergy and such pilgrims as were passing this way This house has been
called at different periods, "The Hospital of Newcastle." See Bishop Pudsey's
Charter to it, and that of Henry II. to the nuns. -- "Of St. Mary the blessed
virgin of West-Gate," see afterward various records; -- "of St. Mary and St.
John the Evangelist," see a record from Bishop Langley's Register, A. D. 1412;
also, "The West-Spittle," and, since the Hospital of the Trinity, which stood
in an eastern extremity of the town, has been generally forgotten, "the
Spittle," omitting the epithet which had clearly been used by way of
contradistinction. "Spital" is evidently a corruption of "Hospital." --
.

Hugh Pudsey, made Bishop of Durham, A. D. 1154, and who died in the year 1192,
granted a charter of episcopal confirmation to this hospital "H. Dei gratia
Dunolm' Episcopus omnibus hominibus tocius episcopatus sui clericis et laicis
Francis et Anglis salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse and presenti carta
confirmasse fratribus de hospitali de Novo Castello omnes terras and tenuras
que eis rationabiliter date sunt vel quas in futuro Deo juvante poterint
adipisci. Quare volumus et precipimus quod predicti fratres de prescripto
hospitali habeant et teneant omnes terras suas et tenuras et elemosinas
pacifice quiet et integre cum omnibus libertatibus et liberis consuetudinibus
et quietanciis suis sicut carte sue quas inde habent testantur. Testibus
Willielmo Archid. Symone Camerario Magistro Ricardo de Colding Magistro
Willielmo Blesen Willielmo filio Archiepiscopi Willielmo de Hoved Ricardo
Capellano de Novo Castello Magistro Waltero Capellano Episcopi Magistro Hamoe
Willielmo Elemosinar' et aliis plunibus." -- From the original still preserved
among the writings of this hospital. It is finely written, and in the highest
preservation. Enough of the seal remains to prove it is the same seal which has
been engraved under the direction of Mr. Allan of Darlington.
.

King Henry the Second appears to have granted the first charter of royal
confirmation to this house "H. Rex Anglie and Dux Normann' et Aquitan' et Comes
And' Archiepiscopo Ebor' et Episcopo Dunelm' and justic' and baron' and vic'
and ministris et omnibus fidelibus suis de Northumberlanda Francis et Anglicis
salutem. Sciatis me concessisse et confirmasse Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie et
hospitali de Novo Castello and fratribus ibidem Deo servientibus omnes terras
et tenuras que eis rationabiliter date sunt vel in futur' Deo adjuvante
poterint adipisci. Quare volo and firmiter precipio quod predicta domus
hospitalis and fratres ejusdem loci habeant et teneant omnes terras et tenuras
and ^lemosinas suas been and in pace et quiet et integre cum omnibus
libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus and quietanciis suis sicut carte sue
quas inde habent testantur. T. Willielmo fil' Johannis et Simone fil' Petri et
Nigello de Brok apud Dunolm."

(Transcribed from a charter of inspeximus of 24 Ed. III. p. 1. m. 20. to this
hospital -- See afterward.)

"Simon filius Petri" occurs in the list of the Barons of the Exchequer, in the
11th year of the reign of Henry II. -- Madox's Exchequer, p. 743.


. He is said also to have made it in some way or other dependant upon the
Nunnery of St. Bartholomew in the same town See a charter of confirmation to
that nunnery, in which is the subsequent clause:

"H. Rex, etc. Sciatis me concessisse et charta confirmasse monialibus Sancti
Bartholomei de Novo Castello super Tynam omnes donationes que eis
rationabiliter factae sunt: videlicet, etc. -- Et hospitale Sanctae Mariae de
predicto Castello et terram, etc." -- Bourne, p. 48, who supposes this hospital
to have been a cell to that nunnery. Leland, in his Collectanea, vol. i. p. 41,
new edition, has the following note: "Monasterium monialium S. Bartholomei in
Novo Castro super Tinam Fl.' -- Hospitale S. Mariae de predicto Castello in
usus monialium datum."


.

Another charter of royal confirmation was granted to this hospital by King
Richard I "Sciatis me dedisse et concessisse Domino et Sanctae Mariae and
Sanctimonialibus de Novo Castello pro salute animae meae et antecessorum
meorum. -- Aselack burgensem meum de Novo Castello etc. -- Lib. Cart. Bourne,
p. 3^. from a charter of Richard I. -- In this too is pointed out the
connection of this house with the nunnery.
.

Robert de Heddon, clerk, with the consent and confirmation of his lord, Walter
de Bolbeck "Carta Walteri de Bolebec -- Hec est agnicio de terra Walteri de
Bolebec de Northumberland, etc. occurs in the Liber Niger Scaccarii tempore
Henrici secundi, p. 33^. vol. i."
, gave a yearly sum to the support of this hospital, probably on its first
foundation, and on condition that the fraternity should pray for the soul of
his said lord, and for his own and those of his ancestors Bourne, p. 31. No
mayor's name as principal witness is affixed to this deed -- Other witnesses
are "Reginald de Benwell, John Morress, and several others."
.

About the year 1251, Adam de Neusum, for the sake of his own soul, that of Eve
his wife, and those of his ancestors and heirs, granted to the fraternity of
this hospital, in free, pure, and perpetual alms, all the land they held in the
village of Newsham, remitting to them an annual rent of thirteen pence for the
same "Sciant omnes presents and futuri quod ego Adamus de Neusum concessi et
presenti carta mea confirmavi Deo et beatae Mariae et fratribus hospital'
Sancte Marie de Novo Castro in West-Gate totam terram quam ipsi tenent in villa
de Neusum cum omnibus pertinen' suis in liberam puram et perpetuam elemosinam.
Et sciend' quod ego remisi eis et quietum clamavi redditum tredecim denariorum
quos ipsi solebant reddere mihi annuatim pro firma predicte terre pro salute
anime me et uxoris me Eve and antecessorum and heredum meorum. Hiis testibus
Walt' Grafard Ricardo de Hereford Willielmo de Stikelaw Johanne Maudut Rogero
de Halewell Simon de Walteden Petro Scotto and multis aliis." (From the
original in the archives of the hospital.) Dorso "Quieta clamatio omnium in
Newsham per Adamum de Newsham, Petro Scotto majore de Novo Castro test." --
Peter Scot was mayor A. D. 1251.
.

Henry the Third appears to have granted a charter for liberties to this house
in the year 1253 See Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 395. "Cart. 36 Hen. III. m.
5. pro libertatibus."
.

About the year 1257, Julian, daughter of Agnes Blanch, made some charitable
donation to this hospital, that the fraternity might pray for her soul, and for
the souls of her ancestors, and upon condition that she should be supplied with
a lodging there whenever she visited Newcastle upon Tyne Bourne, p. 31. --
Henry de Carliol, mayor, Adam Clericus, Thomas de Carliol, John Flemmynge, John
Sante, bailiffs of Newcastle, occur as witnesses to this deed. Our author
farther informs us, that Robert Lacy was at that time rector of this hospital:
an office which one Simon had held A. D. 1251. As had one Radulphus before him,
but it is unknown at what time.
.

Martin Coyman gave a message to this place, A. D. 1259 Bourne, p. 31. To this
writing was annexed the seal of the town of Newcastle, Henry de Carliol being
mayor that year, which was probably the year 1^59, the sixth year of his
mayoralty, for he was mayor ten years together -- Other witnesses were Robert
de Mitford (probably of the Northumberland family of that name) and Adam de
Blakedene.
.

One Simon was master of this house, A. D. 1264, as was John Norrys in 1267
Ibid. p. 32.
.

Roger de Quintingham occurs as a benefactor to this house in the year 1269
Ibid. p. 31. Witnesses, Nicholas Scott, Gilbert de Tindale, Robert Scott.
.

About the year 1269, Gerard, preacher or master of this hospital, with the
brethren, demised to Robert, chaplain of Bingefeldthune and his assigns, at the
annual rent of twelve pence, two acres of land and a toft, which had been given
them by Godfrey, Lord of Bingefeld, in free, pure, and perpetual alms, for the
sake of his own soul and the souls of his ancestors From the original deed
still preserved among the writings of this house -- "Hiis testibus Rad.
Capellano Toma Capellano de Hospitali Jurdano Capellano Sancti Johannis, etc."
.

About the same time the said Gerard and his brethren granted to Udard, son of
Richard of Pilgrim-street, the land that had been given them in pure and
perpetual alms by John Skinner, to hold of the said hospital at an annual rent
of five shillings From the original, ibid. "Habendum et tenendum de prenominato
hospitali et nobis illi et heredibus ejus reddendo annuatim prenomin' hospitali
5 fol. scilicet 2 fol. and dimid. ad Pascham and 2 sol. and dimid. ad Fest.
Sancti Michaelis sicut pro hoc tenemento nobis predictus Udardus in Gersuma duo
tilleta" Nicholas Scot, who was mayor 1269, occurs as a witness.
.

A. D. 1290, the brethren of this hospital, on their petition to the king in
parliament, setting forth, that the new town-wall of Newcastle had been built
through the middle of their courtyard, leaving the greater part of their
edifices on the outside thereof, obtained a patent for making a postern-gate of
communication through the said wall See Rotuli Parliament. vol. i. p. 57 -- 59,
and Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 395. Pat. 18 Ed. I. m. 6. de posterno
faciendo in muro civitatis. Tanner cites, ibid. "Placita in com' Northumb' 21
Ed. I. Assis. Rot. 5. dorso, de Mess. in Novo Castro."
.

Nicholas Essot occurs as a benefactor to this house, A. D. 1292 Bourne, p. 31.
The names of witnesses to this deed were those of Hugo de Carliol, William de
Og^el, and Walter de Cowgate -- the first was mayor, and the others two of the
bailiffs of Newcastle that year. -- At this time Hugo de Pandon was master of
this hospital.
.

A. D. 1296, letters of protection were granted to the master of this hospital.
The king granted these protections to religious houses, for their persons,
servants, lands, rents, possessions, goods and chattels Prynne's Records, vol.
iii. p. 684. "Pat. 24 Ed. I. m. 22. dorso, protectiones pro personis
ecclesiasticis -- Magister hospitalis beatae Mariae de West-Gate de Novo Castro
super Tynam."
.

May 5th, 1304, King Edward I. granted a license of mortmain to enable John de
Insula (Lisle) to devise to the master and brethren of this hospital a
message, four shops, and a rent of 16 shillings, in the town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, as also a message, with its appurtenances, in the said town, which
Dionisia, relict of Laurence Swayn, held of the said John as her dower, and
which had reverted to him at her death From an authenticated copy of the
original record, "Paten' de anno regni Regis Edwardi primi tricesimo secundo,
m. 19. -- See also Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 395.
.

Robert Tunnikysiman, and Matilda his wife, occur as benefactors to this house,
A. D. 1305 Bourne, p. 31. Witnesses to this deed, Peter le Graper, Nicholas
Scott, Walter de Cowgate, Richard Emmelden, the first of whom was mayor, and
the second one of the bailiffs of Newcastle that year.
.

A. D. 1317, William Herringe occurs as a benefactor to this hospital Bourne,
p. 31. -- Witnesses, Richard de Emmeldon, mayor of Newcastle, and Thomas de
Morpeth. One James occurs as master of this hospital about this time, and also
A. D. 1333.

Bourne has preserved, but without dates, the names of a few more of the
benefactors to this place. Alan de Wylam, Alan de Gateside, John Porter, Thomas
de Gosforth, Radulphus de Causi, William, son of Robert de Corbrigg, Gilbert de
Mora, etc.


.

It appears from an original record still preserved among the writings of this
house, but without a date, that Geofry, son of Gerard of Whickham, and
grandfather of Robert of Whickham, had given to this hospital, in pure and
perpetual alms, a pound of pepper and a pound of cinnamon, payable out of his
lands at Whickham, on St. Cuthbert's day, in September, in every year: and that
the above Robert confirmed this donation, and charged it upon a capital
message in that village for ever "Hiis testibus Domino Johanne Marmeduck,
Willielmo de Farneacres, Alexandro de Trifford, Gilberto Gategang -- Johanne de
Birteley, Johanne de Kyblesworth, Thoma de Pelton, Willielmo de Redhow," etc.
.

King Edward the Third, for the relief of St. Mary's Hospital, the possessions
of which had been destroyed by various inroads of the Scots, granted a license,
dated at Newcastle upon Tyne, August 2d, 1334, to the fraternity of that house,
to acquire lands, tenements, and rents to the yearly value of an hundred
shillings, notwithstanding the statute of mortmain From the original license
preserved among the writings of this hospital, to which a very large seal of
white wax still remains appendant; each side of which corresponds with the cut
of the great seal of King Edward III. prefixed to the account of his reign in
Speed's Chronicle. -- Dorso in another hand -- "Postmodum vicesimo die Martii
anno regni Regis Edwardi tertii vicesimo quinto magister and fratres infra
scripti praetextu concessionis ist^us adquisiverunt terras and tenementa ad
valorem sexaginta et quatuor solidorum" -- purporting that eighteen years
afterward, the house, in consequence of this license of mortmain, had
purchased lands and tenements to the value of sixty-four shillings per annum.

See also Tanner's Notiti^ Monastica, p. 395, "Pat. 7 Ed. III. p. 2, m. 5, vel
6."


.

Richard de Bury, Bishop of Durham, by a charter of inspeximus, dated at
Gateshead, January 8th, 1335, confirmed the former charter of Hugh Pudsey, his
predecessor in that see, for the confirmation of lands, rents, rights,
privileges, etc. belonging to this hospital From the original, still preserved
among the papers of this hospital. The seal is much defaced.
.

A. D. 1343, Joan, widow of Nicholas de Ellirker, of Newcastle upon Tyne,
remitted to the fraternity of this house, all her right in the lands and
tenements, which reverted to her as her dower, after the death of her said
husband, and which they held at that time by his gift From the original, still
preserved, ibid. "Hiis testibus Ricardo de Galoway tunc majore dicte ville Novi
Castri, Willielmo de Acton Johanne Wodeman Thoma Flemyng Roberto de Penreth,
ball^^is ejusdem ville. Dat' apud villam Novi Castri predictam die Jovis
pro^im' ante festum Sancti Pe^ri in Cathedra anno Domini 1343."
.

A full guild of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne was held at the hospital of
St. Mary, in West-Gate, on the Friday before Valentine Day, 1343, when several
articles were agreed upon for the better government of the town, which were
sealed under the common-seal of the corporation of that place, and afterward
received the royal confirmation See "History of Newcastle upon Tyne and
corporate town."
.

A. D. 1347, Gilbert Palmer granted to the master and brethren of this
hospital, a message and ten acres of land, in the town and territory of
Newbigging on the Moor From the original, preserved among the papers of this
house: "Hiis testibus Roberto de Raymes tunc vicecomite Northumbr', Roberto de
Fenwick, Johanne de Ovyngham, Johanne de Whitchester, Gilberto Scot, etc. Dat'
apud Neubiggyng super Moram die Sabbati prox' ante (seu post) festum Sancti
Valentini, A. D. 1347."

See also Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 395, "Pat. 25 Ed. III. p. 1, m. 10,
vel 20, pro terris in Newbygging," -- probably a license of mortmain to confirm
the above gift of Gilbert Palmer.


.

King Edward III. by a charter of inspeximus, dated at Westminster, April 12th,
1351, confirmed to this hospital a charter granted to them by King Henry the
Second: The fraternity are here styled "the prior and brethren From an
authenticated copy of the original record in the Tower of London: "Pars prima
paten' de anno regni Regis Edwardi tercii 24, m. 20 de confirmatione." -- See
also Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 395.
."

Robert de Morton, canon of the church of the Blessed Mary, in West-Gate,
Newcastle upon Tyne, of the order of St. Austin, having been elected prior of
that church, by an authority which Thomas Hatfield, then Bishop of Durham, did
not admit of: the above Robert, on the death of Friar William de Norton, was
created by the said Bishop, on his own authority, and confirmed in that office,
August 13th, 1369 "Praefectio in prioratum de West-Spitall.

"Reg. Hatfield Dun. p. 66. "Thomas permissione divina Dunolm' Episcopus
dilecto filio Roberto de Morton canonico ecclesiae B. Mariae in West-Gate de
Novo Castro ordinis S. Augustini nostrae dioc' in priorem dictae ecclesiae
electo salutem gratiam and benedictionem. Praesenta' nobis ex part tua et
confratrum tuorum nuper de tua electione in ecclesia seu prioratu B. Mariae
predict' (ipso prioratu per mortem fratris Willielmi de Norton, ultimi prioris
loci ejusdem vacant) de tua person^i facta verumque ipsam absque decreto et
aliis juris solemniis de facto invenimus attemptatam, ac canonicis obviam
institutis. Deliberato concilio candem electionem electionis vitio non personae
cassavimus et ad tuae personae meritum nostrae mentis oculos convertentes, te
Robertum predictum in dicti prioratus priorem et auctoritate nostr^ propri^
praesecimus et creamus, tibique plenam et liberam administrationem tam in
spiritualibus quam in temporalibus in omnibus que ad officium seu dignitatem
dicti prioratus pertinent seu pertinere poterunt quoquomodo concedimus et
communicamus p^ presents jure et dignitate nostris et ecclesiae nostrae
Dunolm' in omnibus semper salvis. In cujus rei etc. Dat' in manerio nostro de
Aukland etc. et consecrationis nostrae 25."


.

King Edward III. having granted a license to one Allan Pulthore, of Newcastle
upon Tyne, to assign a rent of one hundred shillings out of three messuages in
that town (held of the crown in burgage, by a service of 6d. per annum), to a
chaplain, to perform daily service in a chantry, in All Saints Church in that
town, for the souls of all the faithful, and which the said Allan having
neglected to perform, the King, by letters patent, had made a similar grant to
John, the son and heir of the said Allan. This John, by virtue of the royal
license, had assigned the said rents to this fraternity, for the above purpose;
and they had been seized of them, till on the tenements becoming empty, they
could no longer be raised out of them.

Upon which the said John, unwilling that the chantry should go down, had
assigned the three messuages themselves, instead of the rents, to this
fraternity, to be by them maintained and repaired; but being in possession,
without the royal license, the King, in consideration of a fine of ten pounds,
to be paid him by William de Norton, master, and the brethren of this house,
had granted them a license of mortmain, and confirmed to the said house the
gift of the messuages, in lieu of the rents, for the purposes before related,
November 4th, 1378 From an authenticated copy of the original record in the
Tower of London. "Anno 41 Ed. III. p 2, m. 11, pro magistro hospit. B. Marie in
de West-Gate de Novo Castro -- Test Rege apud Westmon."
.

A. D. 1401, Brother William de Burnham, prior and master of the hospital of
St. Mary, in West-Gate, granted a message, and three shops, before the great
gate of the castle of Newcastle, to John White, draper and burgess of that
town, at the annual rent of thirty-seven shillings Original grant, among the
writings of the hospital.
.

Upon the death of William de Burnham, which happened August 9th, 1412, William
Karlell, and Robert Lekynfeld, the then only surviving regular brethren of this
hospital (called, at this time, "The Hospital of the Blessed Virgin, and St.
John the Evangelist"), transferred their right to elect a new master, to Thomas
Langley, then Bishop of Durham, October 26th, 1412 See the Register of Bishop
Langley, p. 91.
. -- October 1st, 1413, the Bishop collated the abovenamed William Karlell
Bourne says, but it should seem erroneously, that John Colman was master here,
A. D. 1415. The form of collation runs thus: "Thomas permissione divina Dunelm'
Episcopus dilecto filio and religioso viro fratri Willielmo Karlell ordin.
regular. S. Augustini in domo sive hospitali B. Marie and S. Johannis
Evangelistae vulgariter nuncupat' West-Spitell de Novo Castro ordinis
supradicti nostrae dioc' etc." See Bishop Langley's Register.
, who resigned, February 20th, 1416 Regist. Langley, p. 91.
.

February 2d, 1416, the said Bishop of Durham issued a citation, to warn the
master of his intention to visit this house: issuing also, at the same time, a
commission for the safe keeping of the goods of the hospital Ibid. In the
citation mention occurs of the keeper, or master, the canons, brethren, and
sisters, presbyters and servants of this house.
.

October 28th, 1417, Thomas Langley, Bishop of Durham, collated John Fitzhenry,
canon of the priory of Newbrugh, in the diocese of York, to succeed the above
William Karlell in the mastership of this hospital Vide Bishop's Register.
.

January 5th, 1428, the Bishop of Durham issued a sentence of excommunication
against every person stealing the goods of this hospital Ibid. "Ad de
nunciendum omnes and singulos sore excommunicatos qui quamplurima et diversa
bona hospitalis de West-Spittell dictae villae Novi Castri, viz. libros,
calices aliaque jocalia and ornamenta de ipso* hospitali substraxerunt et ad
loca ignota asportaverunt, te^^asque re^d^tur and possessiones nec non cartas,
literas and munimenta ac alia jura dicto hospitali pe^^nen' a diu detinnerunt
et adhuc detinent, concelant and occultant Et qui etiam ^botes de boscis dich
hospitalis apud St. Mary Sheles and Chesterhop exciderunt and abduverunt, etc."
.

A bequest of two fothers of lead, to the reparation of this hospital, occurs
in the will of the elder Roger Thornton, dated A. D. 1429 Bourne, p. 210.
.

An account of the wardrobe, etc. of this hospital, of the date of 1444, has
been transmitted "Three gilt chalices, one entire vestment of bloody velvet,
woven about with gold fringes, with one cap, one casule, and three albs for the
principal festivals. -- Also one cap of cloth of gold, of red color, wrought
with golden images, with one casule, and three albs. -- One cap of a black
color, woven, with dragons and birds, in gold. -- One single vestment, wrought
in with peacocks, with a corporal belonging to the same. -- Another single
vestment, for the priest, only of white, bordered about with roses, and with a
corporal belonging to it. -- Another, of a bloody color, with a corporal. --
Another, of cloth of gold. -- Another of the same, interwoven with leopards and
birds. -- One hood, or cap. -- One casule. -- One alb, with a stole. -- A
single vestment, for the priest, in the hands of John Fitzhenry, the present
master. -- One single vestment, for the priest of St. Nicholas. -- One hood. --
A cover of bloody velvet, for a sepulcher. -- Two casule (...) the middle of
white color. -- One hood, of a red color, for an ornament to the altar of St.
Nicholas. -- Two linen cloths, of a red color, for the side ornament of the
altar. -- One frontale, of satin, of a bloody color, woven with golden
images, for the altar. -- One quadrigesimal veil, of linen cloth, of white
color, with a red cross below in the same. -- One table, set apart as an
ornament for the linen of the altar. -- One table, gilded, with the image of
the Blessed Virgin Mary. -- Two tables, with the pax, one of them gilded, and
beset with precious stones, etc." -- Bourne, p. 32, 33.
.

John Bird, LL. B. was master of this hospital, A. D. 1501 Hutchinson's
Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 392, from Randall's MSS. "Mag^. Johannes Bird in
legibus B. custos, 1501."
.

In the ordinary of the drapers company, in Newcastle upon Tyne, dated June
1st, 1512, mention occurs, that the election of the mayor and officers of the
town had been, by the ancient usage of that place, held in this hospital See
History of the Mysteries.
.

November 29th, 1528, Roland Swinburn, A. M. was inducted to the mastership of
this hospital, to which he had been presented by Edward Swinburn, mayor, and
the community of Newcastle upon Tyne, the true patrons thereof. -- Swinburn
resigned this mastership, August 29th, 1531, having exchanged with Robert
Davell, for a prebend in Norton Church, to which he was collated on the day
following See Tunstal's Register, p. 6.
.

The presentation of Robert Davell, clerk, by Gilbert Myddleton, Esquire. mayor,
the sheriff, aldermen, and community of Newcastle upon Tyne, is dated August
29th, 1531 Regist. Tunstal, p. 6.
.

The famous Leland seems to have been recommended to this Doctor Davell, and to
have been indebted to him for his information in several particulars, when he
visited this town in his tour through England, for the purpose of collecting
antiquarian knowledge Itinerary, vol. vii. p. 60, new edition. -- Ibid. vol. v.
p. 112, 113, 115. "Between West-Gate and the Tyne side, I saw the hospital of
St. Mary Virgin."
.

Davell was also archdeacon of Northumberland Deed in the archives of the
hospital, dated January 1st, 25 Hen. VIII.
.

January 26th, 1532, there was an exemplification of a record of the common
pleas, whereby the presentation of the hospital of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
called West-Spittle, was adjudged to pertain to the town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, and not to the King Aubone MS.
.

This hospital had revenues, A. D. 1535, that were valued at 26l. 13s. 4d. See
Sancroft's MS. valor' cited in Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 395. -- But by an
extract out of the First-Fruits-Office, preserved among the writings of this
house, and dated January 30th, 26th Hen. VIII. the clear value thereof is said
to be 26l. 8s. 4 d. "Unde pro decima Domino Regi 53s. 4d."

The following account of this house is preserved in a certificate of colleges
and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. A. D. 1546, remaining
in the Augmentation-Office:

"The hospitalle of our Lady called West-Gate-Spittell within the town of
Newcastell upon Tyne -- was founded (as it is reported) by the inhabitants of
the town of Newcastell to have a master contynually resident upon the same and
a chaplayn with him to say divyne service the^ and to keep six bedefolks in the
alms house there and to lodge all ^o^^ and waifayring people being destitute
of lodginge and to bury such as fortuned there to dye at the costs and chan^^^
of the said master and to distribute yearly nine chalders of coals among poor
people and to give ten shillings yearly in ready money to the be^^^olks toward
the maintaining of their lyvynge, which order is not observyd at the present --
Yearly value 25l. 13s. 4d. -- value according to this survey 33l. 15s. as
apereth by a rentall whereof is to be dedu^ted for a rent resolut' 13s. 4d. for
an yearly alms 19s. and for the tenthes paid to the Kings majesty 53s. 4d.
-- 4l. 5s. 8d. -- And remains (...) 29l. 9^. 4d. which Robert Davell doctor
of the law now master of the said hospital takes and perceives yearly to
his own use and is not resident upon the same hospital nor in hospitality there
kept savyng one priest that keeps the house and orchards and has fyve pounds
yearly for his stipend by way of one annuitie. The said hospital is no parish
church of itself but is within the parish of Saint Nicholas afforesaid -- Value
of ornaments, jewels, plate, goods and catalls 9l. 14s. 3d. as apereth by a
particular inventory of the same. There were no other lands nor yearly profitts
belonging to the said hospital sith the 4th of February in the 26. year of the
Kings majesty's reign more than is mentioned to our knowledge."

Bourne, p. 31, cites from the authority "de Rebus Novocastr'," something like
the substance of the above, which he calls a third foundation of this hospital.

In St. John's Register, September, 1592, "Spitle Almous House" occurs. --
This, which stood near this hospital in West-Gate, was pulled down a few years
since, and its inhabitants removed to that in the Pudding-Chare, with which
this hospital is at present connected, and where the brethren of it now live.

Randall's MSS. say this hospital is valued, in the King's books, at 9l. 11s.
51d. -- The yearly tenths, 19s. 1d. -- Episcopal procuration, 13s. 4d.


.

It came to the crown by the statute of the 31st of Henry VIII. A. D. 1540, for
the dissolution of abbeys, priories, colleges and hospitals: but it never
appears to have come in charge before the auditors of the county of
Northumberland, nor to have paid rent to the King's receiver there.

The house, with the rents thereof, were still enjoyed, and the community of
Newcastle presented a master to the Bishop of Durham, as though the foundation
had not been dissolved, or reverted to the crown.

By a rental of this hospital, dated 1547, it appears to have had property in
West-Gate, Denton-Chare, Pudding-Chare, Meal-Market, Flesh-Market, Big-Market,
Middle-Street, without Newgate, in St. Nicholas' Churchyard, before the
Castle-Gate, in the Side, in the Sand-Hill and Close, in Pilgrim-Street, in
Manor-Chare, Pandon and All-Saints-Street, White-Cross, rents of gardens
without the Close-Gate and in the Forth, all in, or contiguous to, Newcastle;
also at Jesmouth, Whickham, Whittonstale, Fenham, Newsham, Bolam, Old Heaton,
Wossington, Mearsfen, Horton and Stewkley, Newbiggen on the Moor, Byngfield,
Stamfordham and Hewght, Little Babington, and in Riddesdale Preserved among the
writings of the house. -- There is another of the date of 1572, when John
Raymes was master, and George Gray, chaplain.
.

A. D. 1551, a grant is said to have been made to the Duke of Northumberland of
this tenement, called therein the West-Spittle In a MS. note of such muniments
and writings as remained in the common hutch of Newcastle, A. D. 1565, I found
the following articles relating to this house: "An exemplification of certain
presentations made touching the West-Spittell.

"An indenture, containing goods, and the contents of them, sometime belonging
to the West-Spitell.

"An instrument, declaring that certain priests, there named, desired (of) the
mayor and bailiffs of Newcastle, as patrons and founders of the West-Spittell,
to be admitted as brethren into the same.

"An indenture of the goods belonging to the West-Spitell.

"The presentation of the West-Spitell."

And in an inquisition, dated September 2d, 1577, I found the subsequent,
concerning this and the other hospitals of the town.

"Item, the Weste-Spittell, the hospitalle called the Magdalens and the chapel
of Saint Thomas otherwise called the chapel of Tyne-Brydge-Ende has been
gyven by the mayor and comburgesses of the said town of Newcastell time
without memory of man, -- for we have seen dyvers and sundry ancient graunts
remaynyng in our town chamber of the donations thereof so that we find no
confilement thereof harthe been from her majesty nor from any of her noble
progenitors."


, and included as parcel of the monastery of Tinmouth 5 Edward VI. Aubone MS.
.

April 25th, 1558, John Raymes, A. M. was instituted to the mastership of this
hospital, vacant by the death of Doctor Davell. He had been presented by John
Swinburn, of Chopwell, Esquire. and John Swynborn of Wylom, Gent. patrons for that
turn, by an advowson from the mayor, sheriff, aldermen and community of
Newcastle upon Tyne Tunstal's Register, p. 50.
.

October 9th, 1579, Anthony Garforthe, clerk, was instituted to the mastership
of this hospital, on the deprivation of Raymes, for contumacy (May 29th
preceding), and on the presentation of Ralph Lawson, of Brough, in Yorkshire,
Esquire. and William Selbie, merchant and alderman of Newcastle, for that turn, by
an advowson from Richard Hod^hon, mayor, and the burgesses of Newcastle upon
Tyne Barnes' Register, p. 6. -- Yet there is found, in that of Bishop
Pilkington, p. 59, an institution, dated at Aukland, January 19th, 1564, of
Richard Master, M. D. "Regiae majestatis in aula servientis" to the custody of
this hospital.

Randal observes upon this: "There seems to be a sort of contradiction as to
the dates of the two last instruments, and also of the subject matter thereof:
for Raymes was instituted to the mastership, April 25th, 1558, and was not
deprived till May 1579; and if Richard Master was appointed warden as above, in
1564, it was most certainly whilst Raymes was master, which is inconsistent,
not only to have two masters or wardens at the same time, but because Raymes
held the wardenship for above fourteen years after this institution of Master
bears date; and likewise, because Anthony Garforthe is said to be Raymes's
successor in the instrument by which he was appointed on Raymes's deprivation.

The preamble to King James's charter to this hospital sets forth, that John
Raymes, in the rebellion in the north, was committed to Durham gaol.

He occurs, as master of this hospital, in a lease dated January 30th, 1575.


.

June 30th, 1580, Henry Dethicke, LL. B. was instituted to the mastership of
this house on the death of Garforthe, and on the presentation of the mayor and
burgesses of Newcastle. -- He was official of the dean of York, under Dr. M.
Hutton Barnes' Register, p. 9.
.

This hospital is said to have been granted, in fee simple, by Queen Elizabeth,
under the great seal, to be held in soccage Grey's MSS. Yet he subjoins a
query, "When, and to whom, such grant was made?" The subsequent note, which
perhaps answers Mr. Grey's query, was copied at the Rolls chapel, in May, 1781,
and communicated by N. Punshon, Esquire. undersheriff of Newcastle. "At the Rolls,
9 Dec. 22 Eliz. p. 8. (A. D. 1580) Grant to John Farneham in fee of the
Hospital of the Blessed Mary in West-Gate in Newcastle called the West-Spittle:
and of a house belonginge to the chantery of the Blessed Mary Magdalene in
Newcastle, and diverse hereditaments belonging to the said hospital and
chantery."

Bourne, p. 33, tells us, that "In the 24th of the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
the hospital of St. Mary, in West-Gate, and St. Mary Magdalene, without
Pilgrim-Street-Gate, were granted to Theophilus Adams, and James Woodshaws,
under the yearly rent of 3s. 4d."

See Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 392, "Pat. 24 Eliz. 431" -- he is speaking
of the Magdalen Hospital.


.

Ralph Pattenson, A. M. succeeded Dethicke on his resignation of the mastership
of this hospital, to which he was presented by the mayor and burgesses of
Newcastle upon Tyne, May 9th, 1583 Register Barnes, p. 12.
.

Henry Ewbanke, A. M. was instituted to the mastership of this hospital, March
15th, 1585, on the presentation of the mayor and burgesses aforesaid, upon the
resignation of Pattenson Ibid. p. 21. In the time of Ewbank's Ewbank was
prebendary of Durham and rector of Whickham. -- See History of Durham.
mastership, the great charter of the 42d of Elizabeth was obtained, when the
chancel of the old church of this hospital was converted into an election room
for the corporation of Newcastle. Bourne says, it was the vestry -- but he is
plainly mistaken, for the vestry projected to the south -- it is now a cellar.
-- It communicated, in his time, by a door with the chancel. -- The grand
eastern window, now entirely built up, contained in its painted, or stained
glass, an image of the Virgin Mary, with her child on her knees. -- In this
window, also, Sir George Selby, who was mayor in 1600, put up his own arms, and
made, as our author adds, "a traverse over it, and sent to London for
twenty-four chairs of mustinie leather (quaere), and there is the election,
though the mayor lays down his staff in the old school" -- i. e. in the place
which is now the writing school, and was formerly the grammar school, before
the present one was fitted up. To do this, it appears they have pulled down the
side aisles of the hospital church, and enclosed the middle aisle by a wall on
each side, under the arches. -- There has been a large window, now built up
also, at the west end. This was plainly discovered at the opening out of one of
these arches, on making a new entrance to this place, A. D. 1782.

The present wood floor of the school covers the pavement of the old chapel or
church, which consisted of Dutch tiles, of different colors, disposed
lozenge-wise. There is still preserved a very observable old table in the
writing school, over which, on the election day, the old mayor breaks his rod.
It appears, from the style of some of its ornaments, as old as Henry VI.'s
time. -- I found the following names of writing masters here in the
common council books -- William Ga^^e. Feb. 4, 1655, George Armstronge. -- Nov.
1, 1693, William Banson. -- 1727, Henry Banson, son of the former. -- 1744,
William Barison, son of Henry. -- 1776, James Wright. -- 1778, Robert Askew.


.

May 27th, 1611, King James I. granted a new charter to this hospital; the
preamble whereof sets forth, that John Raymes, a former master of this house,
had, in the rebellion in the north, been committed to Durham gaol, when the
original charters, grants, and letters patent, concerning the foundation of
this place, had been lost; as also, that attempts had been made by some persons
to appropriate the possessions of the hospital to their own use: whereupon it
is to be founded anew, and decreed to consist of a master, who should, at
least, be a master of arts, and of six unmarried poor old men, constituting
together a body politic in law, having a common seal The matrix of a seal
still used by the master of this house, and probably made on this occasion,
gives an impression as represented in Plate I. of Seals, No 2. There is affixed
to a deed of Robert de Mordon (who was master, A. D. 1371), and still preserved
in the archives of the house, the fragment of what has been a beautiful oval
seal, representing the Virgin Mary and Child under a canopy of Gothic work, the
execution whereof much exceeds that of the seal in present use. See "Seals,
Plate II. No 7."
, with power to sue and be sued, to let leases, etc. the mayor and burgesses of
Newcastle to be the patrons. The King granted the house of the hospital at the
same time, with all its possessions, under an annual rent of thirteen shillings
and four-pence From a copy in Latin, in Grey's MS. collections. -- See Appendix.
.

Robert Fowberry, A. M. probably succeeded to the mastership of this hospital,
on the resignation of Ewbank There was a trial at York. The mayor and burgesses
of Newcastle against this Ewbank, relative to the rents of St. Mary's Hospital.
-- The decree of court is dated March 21, 1614, Ewbank to pay one hundred
pounds to the mayor and burgesses, but no costs in the suit. -- Records of the
hospital.
, October 18th, 1615. He occurs as master, granting a lease This lease is still
preserved among the writings of the hospital.
, January 26th, 1618. He was master, also, of the royal grammar school, which,
a little before this time, had been removed to part of the church of this house.

Edward Wigham, A. M. was instituted to the mastership of this hospital, August
30th, 1623, on the presentation of the King, to whom, through lapse of time,
that right had reverted for this turn Register of Bishop Neile, p. 57.
.

A question having arisen, upon some expressions in the new charter of this
hospital, whether the master's office was presentative or donative, it was
answered by Hen. Yelverton, July 19th, 1623, in the subsequent words: "If this
church, or place, was anciently presentative, the King's new grant does not,
nor can, make it donative, especially as the grant is made, for the patrons are
to enjoy it as formerly they did, or ought to enjoy it; and if the patrons
should attempt to make it donative, the bishop of the diocese, after six months
passed without presentation, may collate by lapse, for a church once
presentative cannot, without act of parliament, or after dissolution thereof,
become donative Grey's MSS.
."

March 11th, 1629, Francis Gray, A. M. was appointed master of this hospital,
on the death of Wigham. -- He was also master of the grammar school He occurs,
as such, in a lease still preserved in the archives of this house, dated Jan.
17th, 1630.
.

Nicholas Hall, B. D. of Ellemar-Hall, in the county of Durham, was master of
this hospital, A. D. 1649, and occurs as such, in a lease, dated Feb. 22d, 1657
Records of the house.
.

John Bewick, A. M. was master here, June 7th, 1669 He occurs, as master, in a
lease still preserved among their writings, dated August 26th, 1669.
.

Richard Garthwaite, A. M. occurs as master of this hospital, A. D. 1671
Archives of the house.
.

John Cotterell, A. M. appears to have been master here, A. D. 1690 Occurs in a
lease preserved ibid. and dated June 5th, 1691.
.

Thomas Rud, A. M. occurs as master of this house, A. D. 1699 Occurs in a lease
preserved ibid. and dated May 1st, 1703.
.

James Jurin, A. M. appears to have been master in the year 1710 Occurs, as
master, in a lease, dated March 18th, 1714.
.

Robert Thomlinson, D. D. was appointed master of this hospital, A. D. 1715
Occurs, as such, in deeds belonging to the hospital, dated February 2d, 1721.
Also September 28th, 1738.
.

About the year 1738, upon a question, whether the mayor and burgesses, who, as
visitors, had made an order that no leases should be let, without their
consent, and had ordered a schedule of all the papers, leases, etc. to be
delivered to them, had a right to do so -- Dud. Ryder gave the following
opinion: "That the master and brethren may make leases for three lives,
reserving the ancient rent, and take fines on granting such leases, the power
by charter of granting leases reserving the last rent does not abridge the
power they have as a corporation. The master and brethren are not bound to obey
the order of the mayor and burgesses, not to grant leases without their
consent, but as the mayor and burgesses are visitors, the hospital ought to
return such schedule as ordered. And the mayor and burgesses have a right to
regulate the distribution of the profits of the estate, and to increase the
maintenance and payment of the brethren, so far as is reasonable, though
different from the proportions usually observed Grey's MSS.
."

Richard Dawes was appointed master of this hospital, October 9th, 1738. -- He
occurs, as such, in a lease, dated February 13th, 1748 Archives of the hospital.
.

Henry Featherstonehalgh, B. D. occurs, as master of this hospital, in a lease,
dated in November 1749 Archives of the hospital. -- January 24th, 15 Geo. III.
A. D. 1775, a lease was granted by Henry Featherstonehalgh, bachelor in
divinity, master of this hospital, to Philadelphia Horseley, of lands in Bolam,
belonging to the said hospital, for three lives. -- Fine on renewal of one
life, 67l. 12s. 8d. -- Yearly rent, 1l. 2s. 4d. -- Land 120 acres. -- Ibid.
.

Hugh Moises, A. M. was appointed master of this hospital, at a common council,
held June 14th, 1779, on a vacancy by the death of Featherstonehalgh Newcastle
Courant.
.

ROYAL GRAMMAR SCHOOL It is said, in the life of Bishop Ridley, that that
prelate received the first rudiments of literature at Newcastle school. Sed
quaere.
IN ST. MARY'S HOSPITAL.
IT was not till the beginning of the sixteenth century, that a custom of long
continuance began to grow into difuse, that of educating our youth in
monasteries Warton's History of English Poetry, vol. ii. p. 433.

"Soon after the year 1500, Lillye, the famous grammarian, who had learned
Greek at Rhodes, and had afterward acquired a polished Latinity at Rome, under
Johannes Sulpicius and Pomponius Sabinus, as one of the most exact and
accomplished scholars of his age, was appointed the first master of St. Paul's
School in London, then newly established." -- Ibid.


. Twenty new grammar schools, a number greater than had been established for
three hundred years before, were founded and endowed between that period and
the reformation.

Among these novel institutions occurs the present grammar school of Newcastle
upon Tyne, which, owing its origin to the ancient munificence of a magistrate,
stands indebted for its growth and continuance to the patronage of the
community of that town.

Thomas Horsley, alderman, and who was mayor of Newcastle in the years 1525,
and 1533, devised all his lands in that place, after his death and that of his
wife, for the endowment of a grammar school, which was to be free for any
within or without that town: in augmentation of which endowment, the corporate
body of that place settled a stipend of four marks, to be paid annually out of
their chamber, for ever "Omnibus Cristi fidelibus ad quos pres^ns scriptum
pervenerit Thomas Horslay mayor ville Novi Castri super Tinam Johannes Watsone
vicecomes ejusdem ville ac Cristoferus Brigham, Thomas Riddalle Johannes
Blaixtone Edwardus Baxter Henricus Andersonne and Gilbertus Myddeltone,
aldermanni dicte ville ac communitas ejusdem ville salutem in Domino
sempiternam. Sciatis quod cum predictus Thomas Horslay per ultimam voluntatem
suam constituerit et declaraverit quod omnes exitus firm and reverciones
omnium et singulorum tertarum et tenementorum suorum unde Willielmus Herone,
miles, ac alii diverse person conjunct^m scoffati seisiti existunt infra
villam Novi Castri super Tinam ex dono et feoffamento predicti Thome Horslay
immediate post obitum ejusdem Thome Horslay ac cujusdam Johanne modo consortis
sue perciperentur et levarentur per majorem v^cecomitem aldermannos and
communitatem dicte ville ad usum and proficuum cujusdam idonei presbeteri sive
magistri profunditer etuditi et instructi in grammatica, qui quandam communem
scholam grammaticalem infra dictam villam pro eruditione and instructione
omnium and singulorum scholarium in villa predicta sive ad villam predictam
inhabitantium et confluentium absque aliquo regardo seu aliquo alio proinde
reddendo seu solvendo custodiet prout per dictam ultimam voluntatem dicte Thome
Horslay before apparet. Nos vero prefati major vicecomes aldermanni and
communitas considerantes ultimam voluntatem predicti Thome fore pro communi
utilitate and proficuo ville predicte temporibus in futuris cupientes et
volentes dictam ultimam voluntatem juxta veram intentionem et effectum ejusdem
perimpleri and observari in augmentationem sustentacionis capellani sive
magistri predicti and successorum suorum unanimi nostro consensu and assensu
dedimus and concessimus ac per presents damus et concedimus Willielmo Herone
Willielmo Bulmar juniori Thome Tempeste militibus Roberto Davell clerico
Christophero Brigham Christophero Mytford generosis Thome Riddalle Johanni
Blaxton Gylberto Middelton Willielmo Blithman Thome Arthore Edwardo Fiffe
clericis Georgio Beidnelle and Willielmo Dente quandam annualem redditum sive
annuitatem quatuor marcarum exeuntem de camera nostra dicte ville vulgariter
vocata Le Town Chawmer, habend' et percipiend' dictum annualem redditum sive
annuitatem quatuor marcarum prefatis Willielmo Herone Willielmo Bulmar Thome
Roberto Christophero Christophero Thome Johanni Gilberto Willielmo Thome
Edwardo Georgio and Willielmo heredibus et assignatis suis in perpetuum ad usum
cujusdam capellani sive magistri profunditer eruditi in grammatica post mortem
predicti Thome Horslay and Johanne uxoris sue per majorem vicecomitem
aldermannos et communitatem ville predicte providend' nec non et successorum
suorum juxta vim formam and intentionem ultime voluntatis dicti Thome Horslay
cujus una pars penes nos in camera nostra predicta remanet salvo custodiend'
solvend' annuatim ut predictum est ad festa Pasche seu Sancti Michaelis proxim'
post obitum dictorum Thome Horslay and Johanne et deinceps ad dicta festa
annuatim solvend' equis porcionibus per manus camerariorum nostrorum ville
predicte pro tempore existent'. In cujus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum
commune presentibus apposuimus." -- From a deed in the archives of the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, inscribed dorso "1525, A Reciteal of Tho. Horseley's Will,
whereby he devised all his lands in Newcastle, after the death of him and his
wife, for the endowment of a free school there."
.

This school was at first in St. Nicholas' churchyard, in a building on the
north-east side of the church In Doctor Eliison's interleaved copy of Grey's
Chorographia, p. 20, he says: "The Grammar School was anciently in St.
Nicholas' churchyard, as appears by some leases belonging to that church. --
See also Speed's Plan of Newcastle, in his Map of Northumberland, where the
Grammar School is marked to be in that churchyard -- See also Bourne, p 34.

At the visitation of the Bishop of Durham, Feb. 1, 1577, Humphrey Gray and
Thomas Bo^well, schoolmasters (probably of Horseley's School here), occur. --
Randall's MSS.

It appears by St. Nicholas' Register, that Humphrey Gray was buried July 8th,
1594.

Ibid. -- December ^7, 1596, Cuthbert Ogle, grammar schoolmaster, occurs.


. When it afterward became a royal foundation, and was incorporated by a
clause in the charter of Queen Elizabeth, granted to that town in the
forty-second year of her reign, it was removed to the Hospital of St. Mary in
West-Gate Dr. Ellison's MS. -- Grey's Chorographia, p. 20. Bourne says that the
removal was in 1559, but this must be a typographical mistake for 1599, for he
himself assigns the incorporation by charter for the reason of the removal:
adding on his MS. authority, that on the resignation of Mr. Barras, the last
master on the old foundation, Mr. Fowberry, on the invitation of George
Chapman, mayor, in 1599, 1600, was appointed the first on the new one. The
subsequent entry in an old Pew-Book of St. Nicholas' church proves that Burrows
was Master in 1598. "Anno 1598. The fifth stall let to Francis Burrows,
schoolmaster of the hye School."

A petition occurs in the common-council-books, Feb. 13th, 1657, to make the
old school into a dye-house, which was rejected: part of it has since been made
subservient to more necessary purposes, and having experienced the fate of
Baal's Temple of old, it "remains a draught-house unto this day."


.

The clause in the abovementioned charter Elizabeth Dei gratia Anglie, etc. --
Insuper sepius animo nostro volventes quantum interfit reipublice Anglicane,
cui Deus optimus maximus praeesse voluit nos, juventutem habere been institutum
et a teneris animis in vere Christian religionis rudimentis, doctrina et bonis
moribus instructum, ex gratia nostra speciali et benevolentia quas erga omnes
subditos nostros et precipue erga inhabitants ville nostre Novi Castri super
Tynam gerimus, voluimus ordinavimus et constituimus ac per presents pro nobis
heredibus et successoribus nostris volumus ordinamus et constituimus et
concedimus quod infra villam predictam Novi Castri super Tinam, libertates,
limits et precinctus ejusdem erigatur et in perpetuum sit una libera schola
grammaticalis, que quidem libera schola grammaticalis de cetero erit et
vocabitur Libera Schola Grammaticalis Regine Elizabethe in Novo Castro super
Tinam et erit et consistet de uno magistro and scholatibus in eadem instruendis
et quod iidem magister and scholares ejusdem schole de cetero in perpetuum sint
et erunt unum corpus corporatum et politicum in re, facto et nomine per nomen
Magistri et Scholarium libere Schole Grammaticalis Regine Elizabethe in Novo
Castro super Tinam et unum corpus corporatum et politicum realiter et ad plenum
pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris elegimus facimus ordinamus
constituimus et creamus per presents. Et quod per idem nomen habeant
successionem perpetuam et sint et erunt perpetuis futuris temporibus person
habiles et in lege capaces ad habendum perquirendum recipiendum and possidendum
terras tenementa libertates jurisdictiones franchesias et hereditamenta
quecunque cujuscunque generis nature sive speciei fuerint sibi et successoribus
suis in feodo simplici et perpetuitate aut aliter aut pro aliquo termino
annorum dummodo non excedant annuum valorem quadraginta librarum et dummodo non
teneantur de nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris in capite aut per
servitium militare statuto de terris and tenementis in manu mortua non ponendis
aut aliqua alia ordinacione vel statuto in contrarium non obstante. Nec non ad
dand' concedend' dimittend' et assignand' eadem terras tenementa et
hereditamenta et ad omnia et singula alia facta et res faciend' et exequend'
per nomen predictum. Et quod per idem nomen placitare et implacitari respondere
and responderi defendere et defendi valiant et possint in quibuscunque curiis
and locis et coram quibuscunque heredum et successorum nostrorum in omnibus et
singulis actionibus sectis querelis causis materiis et demandis quibuscunque
cujuscunque sint generis nature conditionis seu speciei eisdem modo et forma
prout alii legii nostri hujus regni Anglie person habiles et in lege capaces
placitare et implacitari respondere and responderi defendere et defendi et
habere perquirere recipere possidere dare concedere and dimittere valiant et
possint. -- Et quod dicti magister et scholares and eorum successores pro
tempore existentes habeant in perpetuum commune sigillum pro causis et negotiis
suis quibuscunque et successorum suorum agend' servitur' Ac quod been liceat et
licebit eisdem magistro and scholaribus and successoribus suis sigillum illud
ad libitum suum de tempore in tempus frangere mutare et de novo facere prout
eis melius videbitur expedire. Et volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus
et successoribus nostris concedimus prefatis majori et burgen' dicte ville Novi
Castri super Tinam et successoribus suis quod major and burgenses ville
predicte and succe^sores sui aut major pars eorundem quorum majorem ejusdem
ville pro tempore existentem unum esse volumus vel major et commune concilium
ville predicte pro tempore existen' vel major pars eorum quorum major et sex
aldermanni ejusdem ville septem esse volumus habeant et habebunt plenam
potestatem and authoritatem eligendi nominandi and perficiendi unum honestum
doctum et discretum virum fore et esse primum et modernum magistrum schole
predicte ac alium honestum doctum et discretum virum fore primum et modernum
hypodidasculum schole illius in officiis et locis predictis remansur' durante
been placito majoris et burgen' ville predicte pro tempore existen' vel majoris
partis eorundem quorum majorem et sex alderman' ejusdem ville pro tempore
existen' septem esse volumus ad scholares ejusdem schole erudiend' et
instruendos. Et si contingat magistrum and hypodidasculum vel aliquem eorum sic
ut prefertur nominat' et elect' obire aut scholam predictam aut locum suum vel
sua in eadem relinquere aut decedere aut ob aliquam justam causam deponi et
amoveri quod tunc semper perpetuis futuris temporibus et toties quoties
hujusmodi casus evenerint predicti major et burgen' ville Novi Castri super
Tinam predicte et successores sui aut major pars eorundem quorum majorem ville
predicte pro tempore existentem unum esse volumus vel major and commune
consilium ville predicte vel major pars eorundem quorum majorem et sex
alderman' ejusdem ville septem esse volumus habeant et habebunt plenam
potestatem et authoritatem alium sive alios honestos doctos and discretum virum
seu viros eligendi nominandi and perficiendi fore magistrum and hypodidasculum
schole illius in loco vel locis ejusdem vel eorundem sic obeuntis relinquent'
decedentis depositi aut amoti, qui quidem sic electus nominat et perfectus
electi nominati aut perfecti magister and hypodidasculus erit et habebitur
secundum formam and propositum hujusmodi electionis nominationis and
perfectionis -- In cujus rei, etc. Test meipsa apud Westmon' 22 die Martii
anno regni nostri quadragesimo secundo. -- Per breve de privato sigillo."
sets forth that the Queen's motive for the new institution was her regard for
the instruction of youth from their tender years in the rudiments of the true
Christian religion, and in learning and good manners. She enacts that her
foundation be styled the Free Grammar School of Queen Elizabeth; the master and
scholars whereof are to be a body corporate in law, with perpetual succession,
to have a common seal -- a legal capacity of purchasing and holding lands, etc.
to themselves, and successors, in fee simple, or for term of years, provided
they exceed not the annual value of forty pounds, are not held of the crown in
chief, or by military service, notwithstanding the act of mortmain. The
governing part of the corporation of Newcastle, of whom the mayor and six
aldermen to be seven, are appointed the patrons of this school, with the power
of electing a master and usher thereof, whose offices are held under their
pleasure, and are to be filled up by them on every removal or vacancy by death.

Robert Fowberry, A. M. a person eminent for his industry and learning, was
invited hither from Hull in Yorkshire, to be the first master of this school
Chorographia, p. 20.

See account of the masters of St. Mary's Hospital.


.

Edward Wigham, A. M. occurs as master, A. D. 1623 t.

Francis Gray, A. M. succeeded on the death of Wigham The famous Lieutenant
Col. John Lilburn received part of his education at Newcastle school. "I was
brought up," says he, "well nigh ten years together in the best schools in the
North, namely at Aukland and Newcastle, in both which places I was not one of
the dronesset school boys there: and besides my knowledge in the Latin tongue,
I was a little entered into the Greek also. And at Newcastle I did not only
know, but also was known of the principal men there." -- Innocence and Truth
justified, p. 8, printed 1645, quarto.
, in 1629 See account of the masters of St. Mary's Hospital.
.

Amor Oxley was master about 1637. -- Edward Lumsden, his under usher, with a
salary of 20l. per annum Common Council books.
.

May 30th, 1645, Amor Oxley being a loyalist was displaced from the mastership
of this school by an order of the lords and commons.

Nicholas Augar succeeded on the removal of Oxley, with a salary of 40l. per
annum, and other perquisites. Matthew Gouch, a graduate of Cambridge, was his
usher Ibid. See also Walker's Sufferings of the Clergy, p. 420.

The subsequent is the preface to an order of the common council of Newcastle,
dated July 28th, 1637: "Whereas there is usually paid out of the revenewes of
this town, to five scholars being freemen's sons goeing from this school
to either of the universityes of this kingdom, the some of 5l. a piece for
seven years, for their better encouragement and education." -- The order
appoints Richard and Cuthbert Stote, the sons of Edward Stote, a free merchant,
to the first vacancies -- This donation, which the gradual diminution of the
value of money had rendered very inconsiderable, was discontinued, by an order
dated September 30th, 1736, for I know not what reason; but was revived June
18th, 1778. Highly distinguished as this body is for every other species of
munificence and charity, it appears extremely deficient in making no handsome
provision, out of its ample and increasing revenues, to encourage the laudable
ambition of the scholar of fortune.


.

A. D. 1646, Daniel Gibson occurs as usher of this school.

February 27th, 1647, Nicholas Augar resigned on account of his ill state of
health Common Council books.
.

August 29th, 1648, George Ritschel was appointed master -- the year following
ten pounds additional salary were granted him for his industry and careful
discharge of his duty Ibid.
. He removed to the vicarage of Hexham George Ritschel, eldest son of George
Ritschel, a Bohemian, by Gertrude his wife, was born at Deutschkana, in the
borders of Bohemia, February 13th, new style, 1616, and was sent by his
relations at seventeen, to the university of Strasburg, where he continued
about seven years. He gave a very convincing proof of his zeal for
protestantism, for on the death of his father, when Ferdinando the Second
banished the protestants from his dominions, rather than conform to the errors
of popery, he gave up his estate to his younger brother, on condition that he
should be furnished with money to travel. On this he came to England, and
settled at Oxford, from whence, on the breaking out of the rebellion, he went
to the Hague, Leyden, and Amsterdam. In the year 1643, he traveled into
Denmark, and after passing a year at Copenhagen, and So^a, visited Dantzick, in
Poland, and from thence returned to England; where, after passing some time in
London, he came again to Oxford, settling in Kettle-Hall, a member of Trinity
College, where he became a severe and constant student in the Bodleian library.
After he had left the university (where he wrote and published a book, but
where it appears he took no degree) he became head master of the grammar school
at Newcastle, whence, after many years, he was removed to the church of Hexham,
where he was both minister and lecturer; preferments which he enjoyed almost
twenty-eight years. This learned and great man, who in his travels had been
tutor to the sons of the Prince of Transylvania, died December 28th, 1683, and
lies buried in the chancel of the church of Hexham, to the vicarage of which
his son George Ritschel, of Edmund Hall, succeeded. Major Allgood, rector of
Simonbourne, preached his funeral sermon, which he printed, with an elegy at
the end, London, 1684. In the choir of Hexham church, near the reading desk, on
a blue marble flat stone, is the subsequent inscription: "Sub hoc marmore
sacrae reconduntur reliquiae
Georgii Ritschel, patria Bohemi
Religione reformati: qui, saeviente in protestants
Ferdinando secundo, omnibus gentilitiis
Hereditalibus exutus, sed Argentorati
Lugduni Batavorum, aliarumque Academiarum exterarum spoliis onustus;
Quicquid eruditionis in istis florentissimis
Musarum emporiis viguit, secum detulit
Oxonium anno Domini 1644.
Qua celeberrima academia consummatis
Studiis, aliorum commodo studere coepit
Et contemplationibus metaphysicis
Vindiciisque ceremoniarum ecclesiae Anglicanae
Aliisque scriptis eruditissimis editis toto
Orb statim inclaruit;
Tanta fama auctus, ecclesiam
Augustaldensem, ad quam electus erat
Et cui praesuit annos plus minus 27,
Magis augustam et tantum non
Cathedralem, qualis olim fuit, reliquit.
Natus anno Domini 1616, denatus 1683."


Ritschel published, at Oxford, in 1648, in octavo, "Contemplationes
Metaphysicae ex Natura Rerum et rectae Rationis Lumine deductae, etc."
dedicated to Sir Cheney Culpeper and Nicholas Houghton, Esquire. This was reprinted
at Frankfort, in 1680, under the inspection of Magnus Hesenthalerus, the famous
professor of Wirtemberg. He wrote also another book, entitled "Dissertatio de
Ceremoniis Ecclesiae Anglicanae, qua Usus earum licitus ostenditur, et a
Superstitionis and Idolatriae Crimine vindicatur, Authore Georgio Ritschel,
Hexhamiae in Northumbriae Comitatu Ministro." This gained him great credit with
his diocesan, Doctor Jo. Cousin, is commended by Dr. Durell in his S. Ecclesiae
Anglicanae Vindiciae, and is taken notice of by Bishop Kennet, in his
Historical Register. Afterward, at the request of the Wirtemberg Professor
before named, he sent over thither, in MS. two volumes, entitled, "Ethica
Christiana," quarto; and another volume, quarto, styled, "Exercitationes
Sacrae," in order to be printed, but it does not appear that they ever saw the
light. At his death, also, he left with his son two manuscripts, ready for the
press; one, de Fide Catholica, and the other, against the English quakers, both
in Latin, quarto, which seem also to have been suppressed. -- See Athenae
Oxonien. vol. ii. p. 754.


.

April 27th, 1662, Amor Oxley was appointed a second time master of this
school, with a salary of an hundred pounds per annum, with perquisites; when
William Sanson occurs as usher, and Allan Gilpon as under-usher: the former
with a salary of 40l. the latter with one of 30l. per annum Common Council
books.

He was the fourth son of Mr. Amor Oxley, of Morpeth, in Northumberland. He was
ordained priest, September 19th, 1630. -- Neil's Register. -- After his
sequestration he suffered the greatest distresses. There is an order of
common council, January 26th, 1656, to pay him forty pounds, in part of his
arrears due to him at the time of his discharge, "in consideration of the great
wants and necessities, and poverty and indigent condition of the said A. Oxley."

It is said, in a note in Gyll's interleaved copy of Bourne's History of
Newcastle, that his father's death may be fixed, A. D. 1609, for administration
of his effects was granted to his son Thomas Oxley, Nov. 2d, 1609.

Lib. Actor. in Cur. Consist. Dunelm. No 4, p. 113. Amor Oxley appears to have
died, November 9th, 1669. -- The following is an extract from the register of
burials of the parish of Chicknal St. James, Essex. "1692, Mar. 26, Amor Oxley,
rector hujus ecclesiae." -- Gents. Mag. Dec. 1786. -- Can this have been a son
of the above?

It appears, from an order of common council, dated May 15th, 1657, that the
scholars of this, and other schools in the town, were invited to attend the
magistrates when they perambulated the boundaries of the town.


.

About Christmas, 1669, Richard Garthwaite, A. M. was appointed master of this
school, with a salary of 50l. with other fees.

March 24th, 1674, Robert Gray occurs as usher, and Ralph Wilson as
under-usher; the former with a stipend of 30l. the latter with one of 26l. 13s.
4d. afterward, March 30th, 1682, raised to 31l. 13s. 4d. a year Common Council
books. George Ritschel, son of the above George Ritschel, was a student in
Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where, on his being a candidate for the Durham
scholarship, the injustice done him by the president and fellows of that
society, occasioned the following order of the common council of Newcastle,
dated January 18th, 1674. "Mr. George Ritschel, a student in Corpus Christi
College in Oxford. The common council were acquainted of the injustice the
president and fellows the electors of that college had done by the exclusion of
the said George Ritschel, and admission of one of another diocese into a
scholarship belonging to one of the diocese of Durham of which he was: and of
the injury they had done to the Bishop of Winton, the visitor and patron of
that college, in not acknowledging his authority upon the appeal made to him.
And whereas the counties of Durham and Northumberland are herein concerned as
well as the town of Newcastle, and do resolve to seek redress and maintain
their privilege. It is therefore ordered that when occasion offers there be
paid out of the towns revenues twenty pounds for and toward the managing and
prosecutinge of the premises." -- I found nothing more upon the subject. --
This George Ritschel, the younger, who was afterward of Edmund-Hall,
published, at Newcastle upon Tyne, 1713, an account of certain charities in
Tyndale Ward, in the county of Northumberland, with a description of the parish
and parish church of Hexham, 8vo. 69 pages. -- In Gyll's interleaved copy of
Bourne's History of Newcastle, p. 34, is the following note: "One John
Ritschell was vicar of Bywell St. Andrews in 1695, and was probably the son of
George Ritschell."
.

Richard Garthwaite published a censure upon Lilly's Grammar, in duodecimo,
London, 1684. He was removed from his office here Common Council books, March
11th, 1690.
, A. D. 1690.

December 7th, 1677, Richard Gower, A. M. was appointed usher, on the death of
Gray, and in 1682 his salary was raised to 35l. a year Ibid.
.

June 11th, 1683, Ralph Gower occurs as under-usher.

July 11th, 1683, John Metcalfe was appointed usher, in the room of Richard
Gower Ibid.
.

Dec. 17th, 1690, John Cotteral, A. M. was appointed master Ibid.
.

Thomas Rudd, A. M. occurs as master here, 1699 Common Council books. -- He had
removed hither from Durham school, to the mastership of which he had returned
in 1710. -- He was made vicar of St. Oswald's in that city, and collated from
thence to Northallerton, and in 1729 to the rectory of Washington, in the
county of Durham, where he died, March 17th, 1733.

In 1707 he published, at Cambridge, in 12mo, "Syntaxis Anglice and Latin et
Prosodia. Editio altera. Adjicitur de Figuris Grammaticis and Rhetoricis
Libellus in usum Scholae Novocastrensis." He wrote the disquisition concerning
the true author of the history of the church of Durham, attributed by some to
Simeon, and by others to Turgot. It is in Latin, and prefixed to Bedford's
edition of that work. London, 1732, 8vo. It ought not to be omitted here, to
the honor of Mr. Rudd's memory, that on his motion and request, backed by the
recommendation of Sir Robert Shaftoe, recorder, some valuable editions of the
classics were purchased by the common council, for the use of this school. --
Common Council books, March 20th, 1700.


.

January 23d, 1710, James Jurin, M. A. was appointed master of this school. He
resigned this office, A. D. 1715, and afterward became M. D. and F. R. S.
fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and president of the College of
Physicians. -- In November, 1721, he was elected secretary to the Royal
Society, on the resignation of Dr. Halley. In April, 1725, he was elected, with
Dr. Oldfield, physician to the new hospital in Southwark, founded by Guy, a
bookseller, of London. Having acquired a great fortune by his profession, he
died at his house in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, March 22d, 1750, leaving a
considerable legacy to Christ's Hospital, where he had been educated Mr. Jurin
published, while at Newcastle, the following edition of Varenius' Geography:
"Bernhardi Varenii Geographia generalis, in qua Affectiones generales Telluris
explicantur. Adjecta est Appendix, praecipua recentiorum inventa ad Geographiam
spectantia continens, a Jacobo Jurin, A. M. Collegii S. Trinitatis Socio et
Scholae publicae Novocastrensis Archididascalo. Cantabrigiae, etc." 1712, 8vo.
p. 511. App. 54, and dedicated to Dr. Bentley.

During his residence at Newcastle he gave lectures on experimental philosophy,
and is said to have amassed a thousand pounds, which enabled him to take a
degree in physic.

It appears, by the common council books, that on April 17th, 1710, James
Fern, clerk, was appointed usher in the room of John Metcalfe, removed to St.
Ann's Chapel; and that on July 28th, 1710, Henry Wilson, from Pentith, in
Cumberland, was appointed under-usher, on the death of Ralph Wilson, as was
Richard Stewardson, Dec. 18th, 1710, on the death of Henry Wilson.

There was an order of common council, Dec. 15th, 1714, that the sons of
freemen, not living within the liberties of Newcastle, should pay no more that
those residing within the same, i. e. one shilling per quarter to this school.


.

September 26th, 1715, Edmund Lodge, clerk, was appointed master here, on the
resignation of Jurin Common Council books. -- He resigned in 1733, and retired
to Whickham, near Newcastle upon Tyne. The subsequent inscription marks the
place of his interment, beneath an altar-tomb in the churchyard of that
village:

"Here lies the body of the Rev. Edmund Lodge, curate of this parish, and
sometime head master of the grammar school in Newcastle upon Tyne. He died,
October 15th, 1742, aged 63."


.

September 26th, 1726, George Carr was appointed under-usher, on the decease of
Richard Stewardson Common Council books. -- Mr. Arnot, in his History of
Edinburgh, p. 286, gives us an account of the posthumous honors which were
paid to Mr. Carr, at Edinburgh. -- "These (the Scots, says he) can now behold,
without emotion, even the funeral service performed publicly. -- Upon the
death of Mr. Carr, the first senior clergyman in this (the episcopal) chapel,
he was interred under its portico: the funeral service was sung, and the voices
were accompanied by the organ."
: Carr removed afterward to the episcopal chapel at Edinburgh: a collection of
his sermons, published since his death, has deservedly met with great
approbation.

July 10th, 1738, Richard Dawes, A. M. fellow of Emanuel College, in Cambridge,
was appointed master here on the resignation of Lodge. He was also master of
St. Mary's Hospital Common Council books.
. He resigned both these offices about A. D. 1750, but not before he had
secured an annuity of 80l. per annum, to be paid him by the corporation of
Newcastle for his life By a bond, dated September 25th, 1749.
. He was a person of great learning He acquired, and most deservedly, a great
reputation for his intimate knowledge of the niceties and elegancies of the
Greek tongue. Bowyer, the learned printer, in his Dissertation "de vero mediae
Vocis Usu," prefixed to his edition of Kuster, thus compliments him, when he
has occasion to cite his authority. "Ut monet (...) R. Dawes. Misc. Critic. p.
177-8." See also Holwell's edition of Select Treatises of Dionysius Hal. If I
mistake not, the same epithet is used by Morell, and others.
, but so wild and irregular as to be thought, generally, a little insane. The
school under him was reduced to a very low ebb, and his refractory behavior
occasioned great trouble, and gave no small offense to his patrons, the
magistrates of Newcastle.

In the year 1736, Mr. Dawes published proposals for printing, by subscription,
"Paradisi amissi a cl. Miltono conscripti Liber primus, Graeca Versione
donatus, una cum Annotationibus," with a specimen Vide Birch's Critical
Dictionary, vol. vii. p. 587. Biographia Britannica, vol. v. article, "Milton."
-- See also Peck's Memoirs of Milton.
.

After his resignation, Mr. Dawes retired to a house at Heworth-Shore, a little
below Newcastle, on the banks of the Tyne: he died, March 21st, 1766 He had,
long before his death, been afflicted with an incontinence of urine. -- To row
a boat upon the river Tyne was his favorite amusement and exercise.
, and was, by his own desire, interred in Heworth churchyard, where his grave
is still marked by a common head-stone, with the following inscription: "In
memory of Richard Dawes, late head master of the grammar Sic.
school at Newcastle, who died the 21st of March, 1766, aged 57 years A
trumpet, intended for that of Fame, but the idea of it seems to have been taken
from one of those toys sold at a fair. -- A sword also, and scythe, of equally
vile sculpture, drawn and grouped with singular wretchedness of taste, are
carved on this "frail memorial," the poor workmanship of some country mason,
who knew not how to spell, and which soon would have consigned the most eminent
Grecian of his time to oblivion, had he not, in his Miscellanea Critica, built
himself a more lasting monument.
."

John Wibbersley, A. B. of St. John's College, Cambridge, occurs as
under-usher, July 12th, 1742 Common Council books. -- He was nominated by Lord
Ravensworth, October 8, 1751, to the curacies of Lamesley and Tanfield, with
the title of A. M. He published a sermon preached at St. Nicholas' Church, in
Newcastle upon Tyne, at the assizes there, Tuesday, July 28th, 1752. He had
been appointed usher, June 26th, 1749, on the death of Fern. May 11th, 1766,
he was inducted to the vicarage of Woodhorn, in Northumberland, and collated,
by the Bishop of Durham, to the rectory of Whickham, in September, 1768. -- He
left behind him a very curious and valuable library, which was purchased by Mr.
Pain, in London.
.

On the resignation of Dawes, in 1749, Hugh Moises, A. M. first of
Trinity-College, and afterward of Peter-House, in Cambridge, was appointed
master of this school By great learning and abilities, the sweetest manners and
most uniform conduct, he restored this school, which he found almost entirely
deserted of scholars, to a flourishing condition, and for his eminent services
in this station, was nominated by the corporation of Newcastle to the morning
lecture of All Saints church in that town. January 15th, 1750, the corporation
of Newcastle raised the salary of the master of this school, from 50l. to 120l.
per annum.
.

January 2d, 1752, Anthony Munton, A. M. of St. John's College, Cambridge, was
appointed usher, on the resignation of Wibbersley Common Council books. --
Munton died January 9th, 1755.
.

June 18th, 1755, Jeffry Clarkson, LL. B. was appointed usher, on the death of
Munton Ibid. Clarkson resigned February 6th, 1760.
.

In 1758, the corporation of Newcastle purchased a pair of globes for the use
of this school Newcastle Courant.
.

John King, A. M. was appointed usher, on the resignation of Clarkson, February
6th, 1760 John King was elected fellow of Peter-House, Cambridge, in January,
1760. -- He resigned his office here December 15th, 1766, and removed to the
school of Ipswich, in Suffolk, where he was appointed lecturer of St. Mary's;
and afterward, June 13th, 1772, presented to the rectory of St. Matthew's in
that town. -- January 20th, 1776, he was promoted to the rectory of Witnesham,
in Suffolk, void by the death of Edward Osborne, A. M. He published, while at
Newcastle, "Sententiae ex diversis Auctoribus excerptae, et primis Linguae
Latinae Tyronibus accommodatae, opera Johannis King, A. B. apud Novocastrenses
Sub-praeceptoris." Newcastle, printed by R. Marchbank, and sold by J. Fleming,
bookseller, on Tyne-Bridge, 1761.
.

September 24th, 1764, William Hall, A. M. fellow of St. John's College,
Cambridge, was appointed under-usher Sub-master of Morpeth school, Sept. 29,
1763. -- Editor of a pamphlet "On the Neglect of Public Worship, in a Letter
to a young Gentleman." Newcastle, printed for T. Saint, 1776.
.

December 15th, 1766, W. Hall was appointed usher, and Weaver Walter, A. M.
afterward fellow of Christ's College, in Cambridge, was appointed under-usher
Common Council books. -- Elected fellow of Christ's, Cambridge, in July, 1776.
.

At the Midsummer common council, 1778, John Brand, A. B. of Lincoln-College,
Oxford, was appointed under-usher, on the resignation of W. Walter.

September 20th, 1781, J. Brand Published a poem on Illicit Love, -- and in
1777, Observations on Popular Antiquities, etc. -- In May, that year, he was
chosen fellow, as he was afterward, on St. George's Day, 1784, secretary to
the Society of Antiquaries of London; -- afterward A. M. rector of St. Mary at
Hill, London, and chaplain to his Grace Hugh Duke of Northumberland.
was appointed usher, on the removal of W. Hall.

At the Easter common council, 1784, Moses Manners, A. M. of Lincoln-College,
Oxford, was appointed usher, on the resignation of J. Brand. -- And soon
afterward Robert Wilson, A. B. of All Souls College, Oxford, was appointed
under-usher.

June, 1787, Edward Moises, A. M. was appointed head-master, on the resignation
of his uncle, Hugh Moises, A. M. master of St. Mary's Hospital.

ADDENDA CONCERNING FELLOWSHIPS, SCHOLARSHIPS, AND EXHIBITIONS THAT MAY BE
ENJOYED, AT BOTH THE UNIVERSITIES, BY SCHOLARS OF NEWCASTLE-SCHOOL.
No I.
EXTRACT from Lord Crewe's will, relating to the choice of exhibitioners at
Lincoln-College, Oxford. -- "Item, I do hereby declare that I have given and
devised my said manors, advowsons, lands and hereditaments in the said
counties of Northumberland and Durham as aforesaid upon trust and confidence
that they the said John Mountague, John Dolben, etc And upon this further trust
that the said John Mountague, John Dolben, etc. do and shall out of the rents
and profits of my said manors, hereditaments and premises in the said counties
of N. and D. for ever hereafter pay or cause to be paid the yearly sum of
twenty pounds to each and every of the twelve exhibitioners of Lincoln-College
in the said university of Oxford, which I have already named and appointed, or
which I shall hereafter name or appoint -- and to each and every of twelve
exhibitioners to be elected and chosen after my decease, as herein after
mentioned, who shall be under graduate commoners in Lincoln-College aforesaid,
and who are or shall be natives of the diocese of Durham -- And for want of
such natives, of Northallertonshire or Howdenshire in the county of York or of
Leicestershire, and particularly of the parish of Newbold Verdon, or of the
diocese of Oxford whereof I was formerly bishop, or of the county of
Northampton in which county I was born. -- And my will is and I do hereby
direct that such exhibitioner or exhibitioners by me already named and
appointed, or to be by me hereafter named and appointed, or upon any other
vacancy or vacancies whatsoever, shall be from time to time and at all times
for ever after my decease elected and chosen by the rectors and fellows of
Lincoln-College aforesaid for the time being or by the major part of them, and
to enjoy the said exhibitions or annual payments for eight years, if they shall
respectively so long continue resident in the college aforesaid, and no longer,
unless they have leave from the rector of the college aforesaid for the time
being to be absent, which I desire he will not grant but upon reasonable cause.
And I do hereby direct that as often as any vacancy or vacancies shall happen
of such exhibitioner or exhibitioners, others shall be elected in their room
within three months, in manner as aforesaid."

No II.
From Anthony Wood's MSS. in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, F. 28, 8490. "In
libro statutorum magnae aulae sive Collegii Universitatis Oxon. ex manu veteri
sic legimus, p. 8, et in altero exemplari, p. 24.

"Memorandum quod circa annum Domini 1280 venerabilis and devotus vir
Willielmus de Dunelm' tunc archidiaconus Dunelm' qui eo quod post indotavit
collegium possessionibus, nominatus est fundator, in testamento suo statuit et
reliquit, quod si non forent magistri vel bachillarii non promoti et pauperes
diocesis Dunelm' tunc essent sophistae illius patriae, si qui pauperes
invenirentur, socii illius collegii: in tantum quod si non forent socii in
collegio ad eligendum ipsos tunc peterent dictum collegium and quan' de jure
reciperenter statim in socios ejusdem. Ut satis deducitur ex antiquiorum
statutorum vicesimo. Quod statutum sic incipit, "Item cum in dicto collegio."

Ex ordinationibus Comitis Northumbriae. -- Nos prefatus comes volumus et
ordinamus quod praefatus magister and scholares, alias dicti senior-socius and
consocii and eorum successores in dicti collegii socios perpetuos eligant et
deinceps in perpetuum habeant tres artium baccalaureos seu magistros de
diocesibus Dunelmensi Carleolensi et Eboracensi ad prosiciendum in sacra
theologia magis aptos. Ita quod ipsi ceteris paribus electione et ordinis
senioritate praeferantur qui in partibus Northumbriae oriundi reperiuntur.

The statutes of University College in Oxford, relating to the fellowships that
belong to the diocese of Durham: From an interleaved copy of Bourne's History
of Newcastle, ex autograph' viri reverendi Nath. Ellison, M. A. Col. Mert. non
ita pridem socii, hodie vero Bolam in agro Northumbr' vicar', nec non capellae
parochialis S. Andreae apud Novocastrenses ministri.

E. Statut. Willielmi Dunelmensis. Eligantur sine acceptatione patriae vel
personarum: caeteris vero paribus ille praeferatur qui de partibus Dunelmiae
The visitor Lord Hardwicke, when he determined an appeal in favor of the late
Durham Fellow, Mr. Hobson, who died in May 1777, decreed that Dunelmia meant
the city of Durham, giving it the preference, and ordering that the parts
nearest the city of Durham should be considered in the second place. Fgomet
proximus mihi!
proxime oriundus extiterit.

Stat. Walteri Skirlow. Eligantur qui in diocesibus Ebor' and Dunelm' oriundi
fuerint, si idonei reperiantur potius quam de oriundis in aliis partibus
quibuscunque.

Stat. Hen. Percy. Habeant tres socios de diocesibus Dunelmensi Carleolensi and
Eboracensi et ipsi ceteris paribus praeferantur qui in partibus Northumbriae
oriundi reperiantur.

No III.
The clause in Dr. Hartwell's Will concerning the Exhibitions. "A. 8. Item I
give and bequeath twenty pounds per annum, to be divided into two exhibitions
of ten pounds each, toward the maintenance of two scholars to be sent to
either of the universities out of the schools of Durham and Newcastle. These
exhibitions to continue four years, with a year of grace to take a degree if
the trustees think fit.

"A. 8. These charities, from Art. 3d inclusive, are to be paid out of the
rents of Fishburn estate, and having a presumption I shall not be denied in a
cause of charity, I do appoint the dean and chapter of Durham, or any three of
them my trustees herein (with the assistance if need be of the mayor and
aldermen of Durham, or any part of them), to receive the rent of the said
estate of Fishburn, and to see it applied according to the directions before
expressed." From a copy in the archives of the Virgin Mary's Hospital in
Newcastle. See afterward a copy of the order of chapter.

The following is an opinion of lawyer Gray. -- Grey's MSS.

"Upon perusing a copy of Dr. Hartwell's Will, wherein he devises 20l. per
annum to be divided into two exhibitions of 10l. each, toward the maintenance
of two scholars to be sent to either university out of the schools of Durham
and It is not in the disjunctive.
Newcastle, I am of opinion that Newcastle school has an equal right to the
benefit of this exhibition with the school of Durham, and that one of the
scholars ought to be sent from Newcastle school."

No IV. Dr. Smith's Exhibition.
Dr. Michael Smith, rector of Freckenham in the county of Suffolk, bequeathed
to Emanuel-College in Cambridge, the sum of eight hundred pounds, one half of
the interest of which is to go to the reparation of the chapel and college, and
the other half to the maintenance of a scholar, either from the school of
Durham, or that of Newcastle upon Tyne. -- Dr. Smith was the son of a Mr.
Smith, alderman of the city of Durham, and nephew of Cuthbert Smith, Esquire.
alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne. -- The above exhibition has already been
claimed and enjoyed by scholars from Newcastle school. -- The following epitaph
is in Emanuel-College chapel: "M. S. Michaelis Smith, S. T. P. De agro
Dunelmensi nati, Ecclesiae de Freckenham in com. Suff. Rectoris, Viri comis,
benevoli, justi, qui in hoc collegio cooptatus, quod beneficiis non vulgaribus
sibi devinxerat, amoris ergo, corpus suum in hoc porticu humari voluit. Obiit 6
Maii 1773. Aetat. 73."

December 18th, 1755, a lease was granted to Mr. William Lowes, from the mayor
and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, of "Spittle-Croft," with a liberty
reserved for the scholars of the free grammar school to play in the said croft,
commencing from Lammas, 1756. We sincerely hope and wish that that body will,
in every future lease of the same field, which may be called the Campus Martius
of this school, continue the same reservation.

An elegant new porch was built as an entrance to this school, 1782, after a
design by Mr. Newton, architect, with the following inscription: "Scholam
Novocastrensem A viro venerabili Thoma Horsley Regnante Henrico octavo
fundatam, Ab illustrissima Elizabetha Auctoritate regia insignitam, Pro solita
munificentia reficiendam curabant Very patroni major and commune concilium A.
D. 1782. Edvardo Mosley, majore, Georgio Colpitts, vicecomite."

The impropriated, or great tithes of Bolham parish, in Northumberland, belong
to this school. See Wallis's History of Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 234.

Warburton's MSS. in the possession of his Grace the Duke of Northumberland,
inform us, that the then lessees were Sir John Middleton and Marmaduke Cutter,
Gent.

"Die Lunae vicesimo nono die mensis Novembris anno Domini 1725, convenerunt ad
capitulum generale celebrand' honorabilis Johannes Mountague S. T. P. decanus
Jonathan Hall S. T. P. vice decanus Jacobus Finne S. T. P. Thomas Mangey S. T.
P. Thomas Rundle legum doctor and Georgius Sayer A. M. ecclesiae cathedralis
Dunelm' prebendarii and capitulares in presentia mei W. Pie, N. P. registrarii.
Agreed that Mr. Walton's son of Corbridge and Mr. Lodge's son of Newcastle have
Dr. Hartwell's two first exhibitions, the one for Durham, the other for
Newcastle, according to the tenor of the doctor's will."

"Vera copia examinata per W. Pie, N. P. registrarium."

(From a copy preserved among the writings of St. Mary's Hospital -- indorsed,
"A copy of the order of chapter for Dr. Hartwell's exhibition to Mr. Walton's
son and mine.")

WEST-GATE.
UNIVERSITY College, in Oxford, had possessions in this street: Arthur
Charlott, D. D. and master of the college of the great college Sic.
of the great hall of the university of Oxford, commonly called University
College, and the fellows of the same, by indenture, dated September 28th, 1693,
demised to William Metcalf, of Newcastle upon Tyne, hostman, two houses or
tenements, in the town of Newcastle aforesaid, in the street there called the
West-Gate, between the common street, on the east part, and a tenement
belonging sometime to a chantry of the Blessed Virgin, in the church of St.
Nicholas, on the west part -- the highway on the north, and the back walls of
the said town of Newcastle on the south, for 31 years From a paper now lying
before me, in an old hand. -- The common street must mean here, it should seem,
the narrow passage opposite to the new assembly-house, leading from West-Gate
to the Forth, having the town's arms over the arched entrance. Yet see before,
"Walls and Towers."

In the account of University College, in Oxford, in Tanner's Notitia
Monastica, p. 416, is the following entry: "Pat. 25 Hen. VI. p. 2, m. 13, de
ten' in Novo Castro super Tinam." -- Mr. Smith, in the preface to his Annals of
University College, Oxford, p. 21, tells us, that he found a great many deeds
in the treasury there, "all of them relating to lands and houses, which the
college was once possessed of in Newcastle." He farther intimates, that these
had lain so long in disorder and obscurity, till the possessions to which they
related had been forgotten and lost.


, under the yearly rent of ten shillings.

The parsonage, or vicarage house of Newcastle, is situated in this street, not
far from St. John's Church There was a hall in it in Bourne's time, very grand
and stately, as he tells us, according to the hospitality of the times it was
built in. There is an order of common council, dated September 24, 1649, "to
save harmless Dr. Robert Jennison from dilapidations concerning the
vicarage-house," which appears to have been almost entirely destroyed by the
Scots, soon after the taking of the town in 1644. This house was repaired and
enlarged, A. D. 1694. An elegant great room was fitted up in it by the late Dr.
Brown. The Roman wall is said to have passed through the garden of this house.
.

There was a building in this street, called Spital-Alms-House: it stood nearly
opposite to St. John's Church. -- It is mentioned by Bourne, and marked in his
plan of the town. It was pulled down not many years ago, and a handsome house
erected on the site.

ST. JOHN'S CHURCH.
IT is alike unknown by whom, or at what time, this church or chapel was
founded See Bourne's account.
.

Bourne says, that it appears to have been built, A. D. 1287 In a charter, 15
Ed. I. "Venellum quo itur ad ecclesiam Sancti Johannis."
.

Great alterations were probably made, both in the steeple and body of the
church, by Robert Rhodes, the great benefactor to all our religious buildings.

His arms, which remain in two of the other churches, are found here also,
under the belfry. -- They are also placed over the window, on the outside of
the south-cross. One William Hutton is conjectured to have been one of the
first benefactors to this church, from some punning devices, expressive of his
name, after the manner of those times, which are still preserved in the glass
of one of the south-east windows of the south-cross, and upon one of the
pillars before the western gallery Dr. Ellison's MSS. -- "In one of the
south-east windows of the south-cross there is a coat of arms in the glass, but
not colored, viz. two fuller's clubs (I think), and in base, a tun. W. H. are
set in the dexter and sinister points of the clubs -- and in the west gallery,
upon one of the pillars there is W. in the clu^l point, and underneath H. U.
and a tun."
.

In the year 1379, this place occurs with the title of "capella," or "chapel In
Nicholas Cooke's will. -- See Bourne, sub anno.
."

There were three chantries here in the papal times; one dedicated to St.
Thomas the Martyr -- a second to the Virgin Mary -- and the last to the Trinity
See Bourne's account -- and Wallis's Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 233.
.

St. Thomas' chantry was founded about A. D. 1319, by Adam of Durham, a burgess
of Newcastle, for the souls of his father and mother, etc. and his own. -- It
is supposed to have been situated near the north-cross. Roger de Burnet occurs
as first chaplain in the deed of foundation, by which the mayor and bailiffs of
Newcastle are appointed patrons. The yearly value of this chantry was 4l. 3s.
arising out of property in the Sand-Hill and West-Gate. John Ragge (alias Rige)
was the last incumbent, and had an annual pension of 3l. 16s. Brown Willis, p.
160. In a deed preserved in All Saints vestry, and dated May 24th, 3 Hen. VIII.
mention oc^^^^ of land belonging to this chantry. -- "Terra pertinen' cantarie
Sancti Thome Marinis in Ecclesia Sancti Johannis." -- One of th^se three
chantries is still plainly discernible on the west side of the north cros^.
. -- The subsequent account of this chantry is taken from the certificate of
colleges and chantries, in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining
in the Augmentation-Office: -- "The chauntrie of St. Thomas in the parish
church of Saint John within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by
report to find a priest for ever for the mayntaynance of Godd's service and to
pray for all Christen sowles and is so used at the present but there is no deed
of any foundacon to be showed -- Yearly value 4l. 2s. 8d. -- Value according to
this survey 4l. 3s. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid out for a rent
resolut' 2s. and for the Kings majesty's tenthes 8s. 3d. -- 10s. 3d. and
remaynith clearly 72s. 9d. which ben employed to the sustentacon and relief of
John Rige clerk incumbent there according to the ordynnance of the said
foundacon -- Ornaments etc. 22s. 1d. as apereth by a particular inventory of
the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

Our Lady's chantry was sounded by Edward Scott, in the time of Edward III. Its
yearly value was 4l. 4s. 4d. out of property in Sand-Hill and West-Gate See
Bourne's account.
. -- The following account of it is preserved in the abovementioned
certificate, etc. 37 Hen. VIII. -- "The chauntrie of our Lady in the parish
church of St. John within the town of Newcastell was founded by one Edward
Skott by a license obtained of King Edward III. to find a priest for ever to
say mass there daily and to pray for his soul and all Christen sowles by
report but the foundacon thereof we have not seen -- Yearly value 4l. 3s. 4d.
-- Value according to this survey 4l. 4s. 4d. as apereth by a rentall whereof
is paid to the Kinge's majesty for the yerelie tenthes thereof 8s. 4d. and
remains clerly 76s. which ar employed to the sustentacon and relief of
Edward Skott, clerk, incumbent there according to the ordynnaunce of the
foundacon. -- Ornaments etc. 27s. 10d. as apereth by a particular inventory of
the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

The chantry of the Holy Trinity is said to have been founded by John Dalton,
William Atkinshawe, and Andrew Accliffe, clerks. -- Its yearly value was 5l.
13s. 4d. arising out of tenements in West-Gate and the Side, and one with a
Close without the West-Gate See Bourne's account.
. Bertram Bertley was the last incumbent, and had a pension of 5l. per annum,
which he enjoyed in 1553 Brown Willis, p. 166
.

The following account of this chantry is preserved in the abovecited
certificate, 37 Hen. VIII. -- "The chauntrie of the Trinity in the parish
church of Saint John within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by a
license obtained of King Edward IV. by John Dalton, William Atkynshawe and
Andrew Aclif clerk, to find a preeste for ever to say mass and pray for their
sowles and all Christen sowles by report which is so used hitherto but there
is no deed of any foundacon to be showed -- Yearly value 109s. 2d. -- Value
according to this survey 113s. 4d. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid
yearly to the Kinge's majesty for the tenthes 10s. 11d. -- and remains
clerly 102s. 5d. which ben employed to the sustentacon and relief of Bartram
Barkeley priest incumbent there -- Ornaments etc. 22s. 11d. as apereth by a
particular inventory of the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

The present vestry of this church has probably been one of the chantries. --
There is a nich in the wall, evidently intended to hold holy water. -- There is
preserved there also a curious specimen of old carving, on what has been part
of an ancient chest. The subject, George and the Dragon.

The ancient font of this church, which had been given by one John Bertram, was
destroyed by the Scots in 1639 See Bourne's account. -- There was written
thereon, "For the honor of God and St. John, John Bertram gave this font
stone."
. The present one has probably been the gift of Andrew Bates, A. M. appointed
lecturer of this church, A. D. 1689, as there is a shield on it with the arms
of that ancient family.

Mention occurs of an organ, or rather "organes," in this church, in the year
1570 Bourne, p. 24, from the will of Mr. John Wilkinson, merchant, dated
February 1st, 1570. -- "I John Wylkinson etc. commend my soul unto almyghtie
God and my body to be buried in Saint John church on the north side of the
same church, nygh where the organes doithe stand." -- A little below this he
thus orders: "I will have the dyvyne service at the day of my buryal,
according to the laws and custom of this realm. Item I will have dealt and
gevyn to the poor the day of my buryal 40s. -- Item I will that mine
executors shall in the day of my burial make a dynner for my brethren the
aldermen and for my neighbourheade in the Myddle-Streete etc."
.

The present organ was built by subscription, A. D. 1734, on which occasion the
corporation of Newcastle gave twenty guineas, and settled a salary of 20l. per
annum on the organist Common Council books. -- Ibid. July 12th, 1736, Charles
Avison appointed organist. October 20, 1736, James Clark, sadler, on the
removal of C. Avison to St. Nicholas. October 10th, 1748, Mr. Bridges, of
London, then at Durham, having engaged for 16^l. to put this organ into order,
which had been long useless, Mr. Avison offered to give 100l. if the parish
would raise the other 60l. and upon condition that the corporation would
appoint him organist, with a salary of 20l. and permit him to supply the place
by a sufficient deputy. -- Ibid. -- Mr. Charles Avison, junior, was appointed
on the death of his father. -- September 25, 1777, Mr. Simpson appointed, on
the resignation of the above.
.

More painted glass remains in the windows of this than of any other church in
the town.

The great eastern window, in particular, abounds with curious specimens In the
middle compartment at the top, within a crown of thorns, are the three first
letters in the Greek name of Jesus. Underneath is a personage seated with a
globe on his knee, with surrounding figure, in the act of adoration -- probably
meant for Christ. -- Below, the arms of England, quarterly, three lions passant
gardant, and three fleurs de^li^. -- Supporters, a dragon on the side facing
the spectator's right -- the other seems a lion. -- A skin mark. -- In the
compartment facing the spectator's left, the arms of the town of Newcastle --
those of Thornton underneath. -- In the compartment facing the spectator's
right hand, Lucy and Percy. -- Also the arms of Old -- with many inverted skin
marks and mutilated inscriptions. "Pro animabus, etc."
.

There are six indifferent bells in the steeple. -- It a^pears, by the
common council books, September 20th, 1724, that the names of the mayor, M.
Featherstonhaugh, etc. engraved on a stone, were set up in the steeple of this
church, with an order, "that lest it might be claimed as a precedent for such
repairs, that the said steeple ought to be repaired by the parishioners."

The communion table of this church, says Bourne, was given by Mr. Robert Crow,
merchant, anno 1712.

Mr. Robert Rymer of this town, he adds, left to this church, in the year 1722,
a large flaggon, a chalice and a plate, all of silver, valued at 60l. to be
used at the holy communion.

Lady Musgrave presented an altar cloth and cushion, being a legacy left to St.
John's Church, by Mrs. Hilton. -- Newcastle Courant, May 11, 1754.

There is a painting, by one Henry Mort, on the altar-piece, representing
cherubs ascending and descending in the clouds, etc. under a crimson curtain,
with gold fringe.

The cross is left standing on the outside of this church, on the top of the
choir.

This church was beautified in the year 1765.

A. D. 1762, the churchyard here was enclosed by subscription with a
brick-wall and rail work above, and planted round in the inside with lime and
elm trees. -- On a table monument therein is the following inscription: "Here
lie the remains of John Cunningham. Of his excellence as a pastoral poet, His
works will remain a monument For ages, After this temporary tribute of esteem
is in dust forgotten. He died in Newcastle, September 18th, 1773, aged 44."

The register of this church for births, marriages, and burials, begins in
January, A. D. 1587.

In the year 1785, 58 males, and 43 females were christened: and 58 males, and
84 females, buried at St. John's. -- Newcastle Courant.

There was a chapel and burying ground at Benwell, in this parish, now both
destroyed. -- "The old tower of Benwell-Hall," says Bourne, p. 113, "was the
place where the prior of Tinmouth The following account of Benwell is extracted
from the minister's or bailiff's accounts of diverse reli^^^us houses in
Northumberland, from Michaelmas, 30 Hen. VIII. to the same term in the 31st of
hunter^^, (...) in the Augmentation-Office

"^^nwell (...) -- (...) 23s. 4d. de (...) alii^ ed^ici^ eidem annex' (...) cum
(...) ^th Close continent' (...) act^ pla^ et (...) ^lanso voc' North Close
(...) ^^ti, que omnia e^angula nuper f^^tum (...) occupatione (...) de
Parmouth) nunc in t^nura et ^^^^^one Ro^ Pl^keney nuper prioris (...) solvend'
alterm' S. M^tim and p^^^t' equalitet."


resided some part of the summer, and the chapel, which Mr. Shaftoe opens and
supplies for the good of the people of his village, was the prior's domestic
chapel." A Mr. Dalgarner occurs as minister, A. D. 1680. It was supplied by the
curate of St. John's till it was pulled down. -- There is a register book
belonging to it, ending A. D. 1742, at present, or very lately, in the
possession of Mr. Rutter, attorney-at-law. -- There is a vault, and a few grave
stones still continue to mark the site of the burying-ground.

LEGACIES LEFT TO THE POOR OF ST. JOHN'S.
(See Bourne's account.) A. D. 1640, Henry Hilton, Esquire. left to this parish 4l.
per annum, for 99 years. This charity determined in 1739.

1644, Sir Alexander Davison left to this parish 2l. per annum.

1644, Sir Thomas Davison left to this parish 1l. per annum.

Mr. Aldworth left 1l. per annum, as to St. Nicholas and All Saints.

Mr. William Carr, who died April 14th, 1660, left 1l. 2s. 4d. to this parish.

Mr. William Carr (another person) left 1l. 10s. aliter 1l. to this parish.

Mr. Thomas Davison, who died November 28th, 1676, left 1l. 6s. 8d. to be paid
out of the merchants company to this church.

Mr. Mark Milbank, 1679, left 3l.

Sir William Blackett, 2l. per annum.

Mr. John Rumney left 2l. 10s. aliter 3l.

Mr. Timothy Davison left 1l. 10s. aliter 1l. 5s.

Nicholas Ridley, 1l.

Mr. Wrightson, 2l. 10s.

Matthew White, Esquire. 1l.

Mr. William Harrison, the interest of 50l. for ever.

Margaret Percival, widow, a house in Back-Row; yearly rent, 3l. 7s. 6d.

Mr. Robert Percival, a house in the Wool-Market; yearly rent 20l.

George Mallaber, Esquire. left 50l. the interest whereof to be paid yearly.

Lady Jane Clavering, relict of Sir John Clavering, left 50l. the interest
whereof to be paid yearly.

CHARITY-SCHOOL.
THIS school was founded, A. D. 1705, for the education of 40 boys, by an
anonymous person, discovered afterward to have been Mr. John Ord.

December 15th, 1708, there was an order of common council, to purchase a house
for the schoolmaster of St. John's school. -- Common Council books.

MONUMENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS IN ST. JOHN'S CHURCH.
In the chancel.

"This is the burial-place of Thomas Errington, merchant-adventurer." These
words are writ about the arms cut upon the stone: "Remember Death,
God's word never shun,
With wings Time flies
Whilst glass does run."


"The burial place of William Wallas mercer, and merchant adventurer of
England. He departed this life the 23d day of September 1664. William Wallas
son of the said William departed this life the 11th day of January anno 1688,
aetatis suae 23."

"The burial place of Charles Clark barbar chyrurgeon. He departed the 2d of
August 1667. Margaret his wife departed this life the 30th day of March 1683.
At the bottom of the arms De pretient' Dei."

"The burial-place of the Rev. Matthew Forster, lecturer of this church, who
dyed October 23d 1723, aged 46."

"Oswold Chayter lining weaver 38 year clerk of this church, departed to the
mercy of God July 21st A. D. 1623, aged 68 years."

"Here lies the body of John Dixon plummer, who died April the 12th, 1728,
aged 42."

On a stone near the altar. "Hic quod remanet Johannis Shaw hujus ecclesiae
pastoris: Deo, ecclesiae, patriae, regi pie fidelis -- obiit Maii 22o A. D.
1689, Aetatis suae 77."

Near the altar table.

"Sepulchrum Roberti Fenwick mercatoris and Dorotheae uxoris ejus suorumque
filiorum and filiarum. Ille obiit Sept. die 8vo. A. D. 1689, aetatis suae 61.
Robert filius natu maximus obiit 23 die Martii 1690. Illa obiit 15 Julii 1701.
Petrus Potts Geners Annam filiam eorum natu maximam duxit uxorem ex qua liberos
suscepit quorum sex sibi fuere superstites (viz.) Dorothea, Jana, Maria,
Petrus, Robertus, Johannes; illa obiit 3o April A. D. 1719, aetatis suae 63."

"The burial place of Mr. John Bell, merchant adventurer, and Margaret his wife
Margaret Bell died the 21st of November, 1710, aged 55. John Bell died the 22d
of June, 1716, aged 62."

Sepulchrum Radulphi Scourfield generosi qui obiit Februarii 16, 1675, et Janae
uxoris ejus quae obiit Maii 12o, 1689. Quorum filius Radulphus Scourfield
Armiger, de comitatu Northumbrie quondam vicecomes, obiit Septembris 1o, 1728."

"The burial place of John Clutterbuck, gent. and Barbara his wife, and their
children. Hannah buried July 16th, 1683. Catharine buried July 23d, 1683. James
buried April 3d, 1692. Barbara his wife buried September 2d, 1695. Richard
their son departed the 9th of November 1702. He departed the 3d of July 1717."

In the chancel -- much defaced.
"Exuviae Gulielmi Astell
Quas sub die resurrectionis spe
Fideliter hic custodiendas
Lubens deposuit..........
Sept. 14. Ao. Domini MDCL... III.
Iterumque die illo magno... crucis
Hinc cum gaudio petendae
Gloriose induet immortalitatem.
Stay, reader, stay, who would but can not buy
Choice books, come read the churches library,
Which like Sybelline leaves here scattered flies
Perused alas here by men's feet, that lies
In single sheets, then neatly to be bound
By God's own hand, when the last trump shall sound;
Amongst the rest glance on this marble leaf,
It Is Astell's title page and therefore brief.
Here lies the relics of a man
But who was truly christian
Whose founder judgment frantic zeal
Never hurried on her wheel
Of giddy error, whose heart bled
When rebel feet cut off their head,
And great good Shepherd humbly lay
To his mad flock a bleeding prey,
Who cheerfully sustained the loss
Of all for his dread Master's cross,
Triumphant Charles he is gone to see
For militant praise heaven's victory."
"Hic jacet Johannes Astell Armiger and Maria uxor ejus, ille obiit 17 die
Martii Anno Domini 1633, aetat. 73. Haec 22 Maii 1658, aetatis suae 95."

"Here lies interred the body of Peter Astell, gentleman: he departed this life
19th March 1678, and had issue by Mary his wife two sons and a daughter.
William his son departed this life 15 March 1672."

South isle and cross.
On a very large stone in the south isle the arms of Bertram -- and underneath
those of the merchant-adventurers. Initials R. B. crest, seemingly a bull's
head out of a coronet. -- Robert Bertram was sheriff of Newcastle 1522.

"The burial place of Robert Wheatley, cordwainer, with Elizabeth his wife, and
their children." -- Arms of the company of cordwainers.

"George Nicholson deputy town clerk: he departed 16 February 1624 and Margaret
his wife" -- with the following singular Latin inscription: "Corpus heus animus
conclusum
Libera clarus
Est fruitur spectat carcere
pace Deum."
Which with great diffidence I venture thus to translate: "The body alas is
shut up in this prison -- the bright mind enjoys free peace and beholds its
God." --

"Tomkins 1639 -- 1666." "Robert Bredy physician ob. 11 July 1723, aged 54
years." "George Gatis."

Cross isle.
"Sepulchrum Edwardi Bell et Mariae uxoris ejus."

"Jhu have marcy uponn the soull of John Wilkenson merchant aventurer and
draper, sometime mayor of this town, and Margeree and Margaret his two wyffes
and three children, Anno 1570, the 16 of March."

"Henry Wouldhave, sadler." Escutcheons: Percival -- Allgood impaling Lewis --
the rest duplicates of Sir W. Blackett, Mallabar, Clavering, Harrison, Ramsay,
Ridley, White, Aldworth, and Proctor, as in St. Nicholas'. "John Kellet" --
"Adam Askew, M. B. died January 15th, 1773, anno aetatis 77." His death was
occasioned by a fall backwards, as he was going up stairs to bed. -- He made an
immense fortune by his practice of near 50 years. See Nicholson's and Burn's
History of Westmoreland and Cumberland, vol. i. p. 255 -- 257. He purchased the
burial place of Kellet, where he lies interred.

North isle.
"Henry Shaw, 1715" -- Sanderson -- Whithouse -- " Thomas Hutchinson, sword
cutler, July 1655." -- "Dawson" -- "Aubone" -- "Bacon" -- "Peter Fuel" --
"John Bennet." Escutcheon: "Thomas Wolfall, pastor of St. John's." --
"Christopher Cook" -- "Thomas Robinson, merchant" -- "Rain" -- "Robert Carr"
-- "Yeilder" -- "Hall" -- "Edward French." "The burial place of Robert Bonner,
Esquire. of High Callerton."

West end and middle isle.
"William Scott, linen-draper."

"Bartho' Anderson."

Bourne says, that in his time there was a funnel or wood box in the form of a
spout, which hung from the top of this quire -- the conveyance, in times of
popery, for an artificial dove, on the day of pentecost. -- Gray tells us that
this church was commended by an archprelate of this kingdom, because it
resembles much a cross -- The porch of this church was rebuilt 1710, Thomas
Fletcher, Robert Percival, John Quincy, John Fairlam, churchwardens. -- The
north gallery was built in 1710, for 33 persons, by Mr. Robert Percival,
pin-maker -- He contributed 3l. to the bells in 1707 -- In the year 1710 he
beautified the altar at his own expense. -- He died Feb. 8th, 1729.

CLERGY OF ST. JOHN'S, MINISTERS, LECTURERS AND CURATES.
The vicar of Newcastle pays to the lecturer of this church 3l. 10s. per annum,
the king 4l. 0s. 10d.

Jurdan, chaplain of St. John's, occurs as witness to a deed preserved among
the writings of St. Mary's Hospital, supposed to be about the date of 1269 See
account of that hospital.
.

A mandate occurs dated at Aukland, March 19th, 1419, to the archdeacon of
Northumberland, to receive the purgation of William Medcalfe, of Morpeth,
clerk, charged with stealing a horse and saddle from John Rauchif, of Morpeth,
in the church of St. John in the town of Newcastle upon Tyne Register Bishop
Langley, p. 269.
.

John Eland occurs 1424. Randall's MSS.


William Talbot on Eland's death, 1431. Randall's MSS.


Robert Bonner and Robert Woller occur in 1500 Register Bp. Fox, p. 36. "In
ecclesia Sancti Johannis villie Novi Castri super Tynam, 14. d. m. Jan. Ao.
1500. present' Dominis Rob. Bonoret Rob. Woller Capnis."
.

George Graye, in 1575 -- he occurs in Barnes' Visitation, Feb. 1, 1577, and
July 6th, 1579 -- He died in 1579 Randall's MSS.
.

Humphrey Sicklemore occurs at the bishop's visitation, January 3, 1580.

Thomas Maslet occurs in 1582. Oswald Chaitor 10 Nov. 1582, licensed parish
clerk Lib. Actor. No 6. in Cur. Consist. Dunelm'.
.

Lancelot Graye, 1583 Randall's MSS.
.

Martin Liddall, clerk, occurs 1585, 1586 Bishop's Visitation.
.

Edmund Robinson, curate, before September, 1589 Parish Register.
.

March 1590, Mr. Bowland, curate Ibid.
.

August 22, 1590, Mr. John Murra, minister of St. John's Parish Register.
.

Henry Patteson occurs 1591 Randall's MSS.
.

Clement Cockson, curate, before October 27th, 1598 Parish Register.
.

Shaw occurs lecturer about 1614 Randall's MSS. from a MS. of Dr. Hunter,
written soon after the civil wars.

"Mr. Shaw was, about 1614, lecturer of St. John's, and had a salary quarterly
paid him out of the town, and the like for several years after, during his
continuance."


.

Phil. Doncaster occurs 1626 Randall's MSS.
.

John Shaw occurs 1st February, 1632 -- he died in 1637 Ibid. and
common council books.
.

July 28th, 1637, there is an order of common council for settling Mr. Robert
Urthwart at St. John's, with a salary of 20l. which October 2d, 1643, was
augmented to 40l. per annum Common Council books.
.

He occurs June 16th, 1646, sending a recantation of his principles to the
common council, and expressing his sorrow for having preached against the
parliament Ibid. I find his name spelled three or four different ways Mr.
Durant and Mr. Syderham officiated a lectures here, one on the forenoons, and
the other on the afternoons, after the removal of Urquart, and before they were
settled in other churches in the town.
."

Bourne says, that having suffered in the civil wars, he went afterward beyond
the seas, and having turned papist, died in a convent.

June 14th, 1647, Mr. Thomas Woolfal settled at St. John's, to preach forenoon
and afternoon, with a salary of 150l. per annum Common council books. See his
escuscheon in this church.
. He died before 24th November, 1652.

March 25th, 1652-3, Mr. William Cole, on the death of Woolfal -- He was
minister of Kirby Kendal in Westmoreland, salary 150l. per annum Ibid. -- The
writer of the MS. Life of Barnes tells us that "Mr. Cole was a polite man, and
an eloquent preacher. -- He afterward conformed."

September 15th, 1654, there is a humane order of common council to allow 10l.
per annum to Woolfal's widow, who was left with children.


.

Henry Leaver "had a call" hither from Brancepeth about Candlemas, 1659, on the
resignation of Cole Common Council books -- The MS. Life of Barnes tells us
that "Mr. Leaver was a descendant of a popish prebendary of Durham of that
name." He was buried in St. Nicholas' church, June 6th, 1673.

Kennet, in his Register, p. 909, mentions that "Mr. Henry Leaver was ejected
from St. John's in Newcastle. -- He was remarkable for his generosity and
liberality. Besides his wife's jointure, he had an estate of his own of about
100l. per annum, and he had no children."


. He was established here June 20th, 1660, and was afterward deposed for
nonconformity.

August 27th, 1662, John Shaw, A. M. on the removal of Leaver, to preach
forenoon and afternoon -- salary 60l. and 10l. for his turn in the Thursday's
lecture, at St. Nicholas Common Council books. See Athenae Oxonienses -- also
Bourne's Account. The corporation of Newcastle appear to have printed some
books of his against popery, at their own expense. Common Council books, Dec.
19th, 1676.

Anthony Proctor, ordained priest September 25th, 1664, was curate of this
church -- he was buried at St. Nicholas, Nov. 7th, 1688.

Mr. Bullock succeeded to the curacy on his death. Mr. Bullock was succeeded by
John Potts, A. B. of St. John's College, Cambridge.


. He died May 22d, 1689.

July 25th, 1689, Andrew Bates, A. M. on the death of Shaw, to preach forenoon
and afternoon, with a salary of 90l. and 10l. for his turn at Thursday's
lecture The MS. Life of Barnes, p, 52, says, "Mr. Andrew Bates, a gentleman
born, came to St. John's -- he had in writing a s^uffle with Dr. Gilpin,
touching conformity, wherein the doctor was said to treat him with worse
manners than were due to his birth, which was sat superior to his own. -- But
the doctor had the better of him, the gentleman's zeal fan exceeding his
abilities."
.

Matthew Forster, A. M. 1710, on the death of A. Bates. He died October 23d,
1723 Bourne.

Joseph Car^ A. M. of Trinity College, Cambridge, was curate of St. John's, on
the death o^ l. ^otts.


.

March 7th, 1724, Henry Featherstonhaugh, B. D. of St. John's College,
Cambridge, was appointed lecturer on the death of Mr. Forster Bourne.
.

September 7th, 1731, on the removal of H. Featherstonhaugh to All Saints,
there is an order of common council to appoint Mr. Nathanael Clayton to St.
John's -- one to officiate for him nine months on his going up to Cambridge to
take orders.

June 15th, 1732, there is an order of common council that the Reverend Mr.
Richard Cuthbert Richard Cuthbert, B. D. second son of John Cuthbert, sergeant
at law, and younger brother of William Cuthbert, Esquire. respectively recorders of
Newcastle upon Tyne -- fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge -- being A. M. he
was licensed to Upletham chapel, in the county of York, Nov. 20th, 1722, by
Archbishop Dawes. He was proctor of the university in 17... -- and on the death
of William Crosby, A. M. a native of Durham, was presented by Trinity College
to the vicarage of Kendal, in December 1733, where he died November 7th, 1744.
be removed from Sandgate (St. Ann's) Chapel, to the lectureship of this
church. He was son to a recorder of Newcastle.

On the removal of Mr. Cuthbert to Kendall, September 29th, 1736, Mr. N.
Clayton Presented by the dean and chapter of Winchester, to the vicarage of
Puddletrenthryde, in the county of Dorset and diocese of Bristol, with 150l.
per annum, about August 1773. -- Newcastle Courant.

About March, 1775, presented by the Bishop of Durham, to the vicarage of
Whelpington in Northumberland. Ibid -- And about November 1775, presented by
Robert Ogle, Esquire. to the vicarage of Ingram in Northumberland, in the room of
Mr. Radley.

April 15th, 1765, there was an order of common council for the addition of
10l. per annum to the lectureship of St. John's, on condition that the lecturer
shall give no less than 30l. per annum to his assistant curate, who was ordered
by the same authority to officiate henceforth every other month at the gaol,
with a salary of 10l. per annum.

September 8th, 1775, it was ordered by the same authority that the yearly sum
of 11l. 5s. to each be paid to the lecturers of St. John's and St. Andrew's, as
an addition to their respective salaries, out of the revenues of the
corporation, during the pleasure of the common council.

"The town of Newcastle," says Bourne, p. 28, "was wont to give to this church
at Easter, 15 gallons of wine.

"The weekly prayers," he continues, "are on Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays
-- on the two former days in the morning, at 9 o'clock -- and at 2 in the
afternoon. On the latter at two in the afternoon."

"The sacrament is administered at this church every third Sunday of the month."


was appointed to enter on this lectureship.

John Thompson, A. M. of St. John's College, Cambridge, succeeded to the curacy
of St. John's after J. Carr.

J. Thompson was succeeded in the curacy here by John Brunton, A. B. of
Christ's College, Cambridge, who died March 17th, 1780, and was succeeded by J.
Brown, clerk, curate of Kirkharle in the county of Northumberland.

To the MEMBERS of the SUBSCRIPTION ROOMS in NEWCASTLE upon TYNE. This (...) of
the ASSEMBLY HOUSE, etc. in that Town, Enquired at their Expense is
respectfully, Inscribed by their very obliged ^obedt. humble Sert John. Bram


September 21st, 1786, Thomas Hornby, A. M. was appointed to the lectureship of
St. John's, on the death of his uncle, Mr. N. Clayton.

WEST-GATE.
FROM the Postern and Back-Row, as far as the Tuthill-Stairs, Westgate, in
Bourne's time, changed its name to "Tuthill In an inrolment in the books of the
corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, Nov. 4th, 1701, "Fenkell-Street, alias
Tuthill" occurs.

Ibid. 1658. "Fenkell-Street, alias the Back-Rawe" occurs.

"Nicholas Fenkell, merchaunte" occurs in St. Nicholas' Register, January 1577.

There is the following entry, ibid. October 5th, 1593: "Dame Hall of the
Tutehill buried."

It appears by the common council books, August 28th, 1662, that Mr. Thomas
Jennison, then sheriff, obtained license for the conveyance of water into his
house, situate in "Tutthill-Street."

In Corbridge's Plan of Newcastle, 1723, Fenkell-Street at the head of
West-Gate is spelled "Fennell-Street." -- A pant or public fountain is marked
in the same plan, opposite Denton-Chare in this street: not many years ago a
public pump stood in the same place. In the same plan that part of the lower
end of West-Gate between Baily-Gate and Back-Row, is called "Keel-Head," a name
which it retained within my memory.

At present that division of West-Gate from Cross-House to Charlotte-Square is
called Fenkell-Street. Bourne spells it, "Fennell-Street." -- From the
West-Gate there is a little street, called Ratten-Rawe."


."

An elegant assembly-house, built by contribution on part of the garden
belonging to the vicarage of Newcastle, near the head of this street, was
opened at the time of the races at Newcastle, A. D. 1776 August 19th, 1773, the
subscription for this building commenced. -- At a meeting for carrying on this
business, February 22d, 1774, the ground adjoining to the vicarage house on the
west side was pitched upon as a proper site. -- The corporation of Newcastle
subscribed 200l. -- Monday, May 16th, 1774, at noon, the foundation stone of
this new assembly house was laid by William Lowes, Esquire. in the presence of a
great company of ladies and gentlemen: A plate bearing the following
inscription was put under the stone: In an age
when the polite arts,
By general encouragement and emulation,
Have advanced to a
State of perfection,
unknown in any former period:
The first stone
of this edifice,
Dedicated to the most elegant recreation,
was laid by William Lowes, Esquire.
on the 16th day of May 1774." -- Newcastle Courant.


"June 24th, 1776, the new Assembly Rooms were opened by a very numerous and
brilliant company." -- Ibid.

There was an act of parliament 14 Geo. III. to enable Dr. Fawcet, then vicar,
to grant a lease of some part of the ground, belonging to this vicarage, for
999 years, reserving to himself and successors an annual ground rent of twenty
pounds. See Appendix.


. It cost about 6701 pounds in building, furniture and other expenses Printed
state of the accounts from June 24th, 1776, and ending June 17th, 1777.
. In the lower apartments is kept a subscription coffee-house.

Near the head of West-Gate, behind a handsome new square, built by Mr. Newton,
architect, stands the house of the Black Friars.

BLACK FRIARS.
THIS house was filled with Dominicans, one of the four orders of mendicants or
begging friars The orders of mendicants were instituted, according to the
learned Warton, on the following occasion: -- "The monastic orders, in
consequence of their ample revenues, had degenerated from their primitive
austerity, and, long before the thirteenth century, were totally abandoned to
luxury and indolence. Hence a new order of religious was introduced, who being
destitute of fixed possessions, and of consequence obliged to rely on their own
merits with the people, might restore respect to the monastic institution, and
recover the honor of the church." -- This order, one and the first of the
four, is said to have been founded by St. Dominic, a native of Cologna, in
Spain, A. D. 1198. Pope Innocent III. approved it in 1215, and it was confirmed
by a bull of Pope Honorius the Third, in 1216. By some they are reported to
have come into England, A. D. 1217, but according to others, not till the year
1221. -- Their first residence was at Oxford. -- They boast of having produced
a great number of martyrs and confessors -- three popes, sixty cardinals, an
hundred and fifty archbishops, and eight hundred bishops, and to have furnished
in this kingdom no less than eighty writers of eminence.

Their habit was a white cassock, with a white hood over it, and abroad they
wore a black cloak and hood over all. -- At the dissolution they had
forty-three houses.


.

In France they are called Jacobins, from their house in St. James's Street,
Paris. -- They are named Black Friars, from the color of their garments:
Dominicans, from the name of their founder: Preaching Most respectfully (...)
(...) of the (...) An inside (...) of the MONASTRY of BLACK FRIARS (...)
Friars, from their office of preaching and converting heretics. -- At
Newcastle they appear to have had the title of Shod Friars The lane near this
house, called at present Low-Friar-Chare, anciently was styled
Shod-Friar-Chare, from the circumstance of its vicinity to this monastery.

Gray, who certainly mistakes in saying this was called in old time, "The Gray
Friars," adds, that they were called also "Bennet-Chessie-Friars," a
corruption, some have thought, of "Benoists Chausses," i. e. "Shod Bennets,"
from their having adopted, in a certain measure, the rule of St. Bennet or
Benedict. The only real evidence for this supposed title (for I do not think
they were ever called so) occurs in the common council books of Newcastle, June
1st, 1649, in the account of a parcel of ground, called Benny-Chesses-Close,
in Fenkell-Street, which was, doubtless, part of the possessions of this
monastery; but I cannot help being of opinion that it was so called from the
name of the lessee, after the dissolution. -- In the books of the merchants of
Newcastle, A. D. 1560, there occurs one "Bennat Chessye," an officer of that
respectable body, and who was buried, as appears by St. Nicholas' Register,
October 23, 1587.


, in contradistinction, as it should seem, to their neighbors, the Gray
Friars, who went barefooted. Sir Peter Scot, and his son Sir Nicholas Scot, are
said to have invited the order to Newcastle, and to have founded this house
This Sir Peter Scot was the first chief magistrate of Newcastle, who had the
title of mayor, A. D. 1251. His son was one of the four bailiffs in the years
1254, and 1257, and mayor in 1269. Neither of them has the title of knight in
the list of mayors, but Leland and a MS. which Bourne often cites, "De Reb.
Novocastr" affix a "Sir" to each of their names. According to Leland, they were
both merchants in Newcastle, and owners of the lordship of Eshett in
Northumberland. "The beginning of these "Scotts," he observes, "was by
merchandice."
.

The precise date of the building has not been transmitted Tanner says, it was
about the year 1260, or shortly after.
.

The ground on which it stands is said to have been given by three pious
sisters, whose names have been ungratefully consigned to oblivion.

November 6th, 1264, after an inquisition taken by Adam de Gessemuth, sheriff
of Northumberland, and the mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne, by which it appeared
that the aqueduct made by the Friars Preachers of that town, under a royal
grant, from a certain fountain beyond their courtyard, and to their monastery,
and from thence into the town, ought to remain as an advantage to the public at
large, the King confirmed it to them for ever "Paten' de anno regni Regis
Henrici tercii quadragesimo octavo.

"Pro fratribus predicatoribus Novi Castri super Tynam. Rex omnibus, etc.
salutem. Quia accepimus per inquisicionem quam per dilect' et fidel' nostrum
Adam de Gessemuth vic' nostrum Northumbr' et majorem nostrum Novi Castri super
Tinam fieri fecimus quod non est ad nocumentum vel prejudicium nostri aut
aliorum quod aqueductus quem fratres predicatores Novi Castri super Tynam de
concessione nostra duci fecerunt a quodam font extra cur' suam usque domum
suam et exinde usque ad villam nostram Novi Castri super Tynam remaneat in
codem statu in quo nunc est, immo ad commodum and melioracionem tocius ville
predicte concedimus fratribus predictis quantum ad nos pertinet pro nobis and
heredibus nostris quod ipsi habeant and teneant predictum aqueductum ibidem
sicut predictum est imperpetuum. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Oxon. 6 die
Novembr." -- From the original in the Tower of London.


.

September 18th, 1280, there was a grant from the King to the Black Friars of
this house to make a postern-gate through the town-wall, to communicate with
that division of their property, which had been placed in the suburbs by the
building of the said wall: reserving to the king's constable, or the sheriff of
Northumberland, power to build it up when it should be found necessary to do so
for the security of the town "Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglie Dominus Hiberniae
Dux Aquitaniae omnibus ad quos presents litere pervenerint salutem. Sciatis
quod de nostra gratia speciali concessimus dilectis nobis fratribus
predicatoribus de Novo Castro super Tynam quod per medium novum murum
circumagentem villam predictam, quem per medium gardini predictorum fratrum
fieri oportebit, ut dicti (fratres) facere possint quandam strictam portam ad
ingressum in gardinum suum habend' portam sust' Sic.
sibi et successoribus suis tenere in perpetuum. Dum tamen porta illa ad
voluntatem nostram, vicecomitis Northumbriae and constabuli nostri ibid' qui
pro tempore fuerit, obstruatur. In cujus, etc. Test meipso apud Dunelm' decimo
octavo die Septembris anno regni nostri octavo." -- Bourne, p. 14. From the
original in the hands of Mr. Joshua Douglas.
.

December 15th, 1299, the Friars Preachers here received eleven shillings for
their pittance of one day on the King's passing through the town in the
beginning of that month -- as also on the 8th of January following, for their
pittance of two days, on the King's arrival, twenty two shillings "Fratribus
predicatoribus ville Novi Castri super Tynam pro pittancia sua unius diei in
transitu Regis per ibid' mense Decembr' in principio per manus fratris Walteri
de Whitborne apud Berewicum super Twed' 15 die Decembr' 11s. -- Fratribus
predicatoribus ville Novi Castri super Tynam pro pittancia sua duorum dierum in
adventu Regis ibid' mense Januar' per manus fratris de eodem apud Novum Castrum
8 die Januar' 22s." -- Wardrobe Account, 28 Ed. I. printed by the Society of
Antiquaries.
.

June 4th, 1312, King Edward II. granted a license to the prior and brethren of
this house, to make a drawbridge of wood, five feet broad, over the new fosse of
the town, for a passage to their garden in the suburbs, with pale-work, in lieu
of the garden-wall, upon condition that the bridge and pale-work should be
taken away on the appearance of any imminent danger "Secunda pars paten' de
anno regni Regis Edwardi secundi quinto, m. 5, pro priore and fratribus de
ordine predicatorum ville Novi Castri super Tinam. Rex etc. Sciatis quod de
gratia nostra speciali concessimus and licentiam dedimus dilectis nobis in
Christo priori and fratribus de ordine predicatorum ville nostre Novi Castri
super Tinam quod ipsi quendam pontem versatilem latitudinis quinque pedum de
ligno ultra novum fossatum ejusdem ville per quem a domo sua infra murum
ejusdem ville per posternam suam dicti muri ibidem usque in gardinum suum ultra
fossatum predictum transire valiant ac eciam ex utraque part fossati et
gardini predictorum ubi murus ejusdem gardini primitus fuit palicium usque in
idem fossatum facere possint ita quod si periculum immineat quod palicium et
pons predict' cum omni festinacione amoveantur. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud
Ebor' quarto die Junii per ipsum Regem." -- From the original in the Tower of
London.
.

March 1st, 1318, the King granted for ever to the brethren of this house, for
the purpose of enlarging their house and burial-ground, a message contiguous
thereto, which had belonged to Gilbert de Middleton, and had escheated to the
crown on his being hanged for felony and treason "Secunda pars paten' de anno
regni Regis Edwardi secundi undecimo, m. 31, pro fratribus de ordine
predicatorum. Rex etc. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali dedimus et
concessimus dilectis nobis in Christo fratribus de ordine predicatorum de Novo
Castro super Tynam unum messuagium cum pertinen' in villa Novi Castri super
Tynam quod fuit Gilberti de Middelton proditoris nostri manso and cimiterio
ipsorum fratrum ibidem contiguum et quod racione felony per ipsum Gilbertum
commisse pro qua suspensus fuit ad manus nostras tanquam escaeta nostra devenit
habendum eisdem fratribus and successoribus suis ad elargacionem mansi et
cimeterii suorum predictorum per eadem servicia per que messuagium illud
tenebatur antequam ad manus nostras devenit imperpetuum, salvo jure alterius
cujuscunque. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. primo die Marcii, per ipsum
Regem." -- From the original in the Tower of London.
.

A patent concerning this house, of the date of 1322, is mentioned in Tanner's
Notitia Monastica.

August 1st, 1322, the brethren here received 8s. for their pittance of one
day; and on the 14th of September following, on the King's arrival at
Newcastle, the like sum, for their pittance of one day "Fratribus
predicatoribus ville Novi Castri super Tynam de elemosina Regis pro gutura sua
unius diei per manus Ricardi de Gippewico elemos' Regis apud Novum Castrum
primo die Augusti 8s. -- Fratribus predicatoribus ville Novi Castri super Tynam
pro putura sua unius diei in adventu Regis ibidem per manus fratris Ricardi de
Gippewyco ibidem quarto die Septembris, 8s."

Wardrobe Account of 15, 16, and 17 Ed. II. penes Th. Astle Armig. p. 31.

Roger de Gamelton occurs as prior of this house, ibid. p. 267.

The following occurs, ibid. p. 34: "Morgano de Avene pro expens' per ipsum
factis circa exequias corporis Griffini filii Domini Griffini Thloyt militis
defuncti et in ecclesia fratrum de ordine predicatorum ville Novi Castri super
Tynam sepulti 9 die Octobris anno presenti 16 de elemos' Domini Regis in
subsidium expensarum predict' per manus dicti Morgani 40s." -- As does the
subsequent, p. 35: "Fratribus de ordine predicatorum de Novo Castro super Tynam
de elemosina Domini Regis in denariis quos ipse Dominus Rex eisdem fratribus
perdonavit de elemosina and gratia sua speciali per breve suum de scaccario de
illis duodecim libtis quas iidem fratres debebant ipsi Domino Regi pro
victualibus ipsius Domini Regis eis nuper venditis in villa predict. anno 16 in
fine 6l."


.

May 16th, 1330, King Edward III. granted a license of mortmain to John Baroun,
of Newcastle upon Tyne, to empower him to assign to the prior and brethren of
this monastery, a piece of ground contiguous thereto, 60 feet long, and as many
feet broad, for the purpose of enlarging their said house "Prima pars paten' de
anno R. Regis Edwardi tercii m. 17, pro priore and fratribus ordinis fratrum
predicat' de Novo Castro super Tynam de quadam placea recipiend' R. omnibus
etc. Licet de communi consilio etc. volentes tamen dilectis nobis in Christo
priori and fratribus ordinis fratrum predicator' de Novo Castro super Tynam
gratiam facere specialem concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro nobis and hered'
nostris quantum in nobis est Johanni Baroun de Novo Castro super Tynam quod
ipse quandam placeam terre cum pertinen' in villa Novi Castri super Tinam
continentem in se sexaginta pedes terre in longitudine and sexaginta pedes
terre in latitudine manso ipsorum prioris and fratrum in eadem villa contiguam
dare possit and assignare eisdem priori and fratribus habend' and tenend' sibi
and successoribus imperpetuum in elargacionem mausi sui predicti Et eisdem
priori and fratribus quod ipsi placeam predict' cum pertinen' a presato Johanne
recipere possint and tenere sibi and successoribus suis predictis imperpetuum
etc. Test Rege apud Eltham 16 die Maii, "per breve de privato sigillo." --
From the original in the Tower of London.
.

On the Feast of Gervasius and Prothasius, 1334, Edward Baliol, King of
Scotland, did homage to King Edward the Third, for the whole kingdom of
Scotland, in the church of this house See Historical Events.
.

December 6th, 1342, the King, on the supplication of the prior and brethren of
this house, granted them power to renew and set up again certain gates on their
ground, for ingress to, and to shut up their house, (which they had been
accustomed to have, till, on a dispute between the men of Northumberland and
some persons of the said town, when the Earl of Warren, the warden of the March
of Scotland, lodged at their house, the said gates were broken down, and they
had been prevented from setting them up again by some persons of Newcastle), to
hold to themselves and successors for ever, in like manner as they had been
held before such demolition "Tertia pars paten' de anno regni Regis Edwardi
tercii quinto decimo, m. 4, pro priore and fratribus de ordine predicatorum
ville Novi Castri super Tynam. Rex etc. salulem. Monstrarunt nobis dilecti
nobis in Christo prior and fratres de ordine predicator' ville nostre Novi
Castri super Tynam quod cum ipsi et predecessores sui habere consueverint
portas in solo suo pro introitu and claustura mansi sui in eadem villa totis
temporibus retroactis quousque quedam contencio ibidem inter homines com'
Northumbrie and quosdam de villa predicta tempore quo dilectus and fidelis
noster Comes Warr' tunc custos marchie Scocie per nos deputatus in dicto manso
habitabat exstitit suscitata, in qua quidem contencione port predicte preter
culpam ipsorum prioris and fratrum confracte fuerant et prostrate Et licet
iidem prior et fratres portas illas prout eis licuit de novo construere and eas
levare voluissent, quidam tamen homines ville predicte dictos priorem and
fratres easdem portas construere et eas levare voluntary hactenus impediverunt
and adhuc impediunt minus just super quo iidem prior and fratres nobis
supplicarunt sibi per nos de remedio provideri Nos intuitu Dei cujus obsequiis
fratres predicti specialiter ascribuntur pro salubti statu nostro and animabus
progenitor' nostror' jugiter celebrantes volentes ipso, favorabiliter persequi
in hac part concessimus pro nobis et heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est
quod iidem prior and fratres portas illas construere et levare et easdem portas
sic constructas et levatas habere et tenere possint sibi and successoribus suis
imperpetuum sine occone vel impedimento nostri vel heredum nostror' justie'
escaetor' vicecomitum aut aliorum ballivorum seu ministrorum nostrorum
quorumcunque prout ipse prior et fratres portas ibidem habere et eas antequam
sic fracte fuerunt habere consueverunt. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Novum
Castrum super Tinam 6 die Decembr'. Per breve de privato sigillo." -- From the
original in the Tower of London.
.

March 27th, 1380, the Bishop of Durham granted a license to the prior and
convent of this house, to celebrate mass in the church of St. Nicholas, in
Newcastle upon Tyne, on asking leave of the vicar of that church for the time
being, although such leave should be refused them "Licentia concessa ordini
predicator' ville Novi Castri super Tynam celebrandi missas in ecclesia B.
Nicolai. -- Reg. Hatfeld, p. 172. Thomas permis. divina Dunelm' Episcopus
dilectis filiis priori and conventui ordinis predicator' in villa de Novo
Castro salutem gratiam and benedictionem. Cupientes quantum cum Deo possumus
augmentum divini cultus utrobique and precipue per eos quorum vita and religio
multiplicibus meritis decoratur vobis de gratia speciali concedimus ut
quicunque fratres vestri in ordinibus presbyteratus constituti presents and
futuri quamdiu nobis placuerit missas tam pro vivis quam defunctis et precipue
ubi devotio paroch' in ultima voluntate express hoc dictaverit seu
affectaverit aut vobis eo intuitu seu conventui vestro predicto solemni vel
nuncupatu legaverit in ecclesia B. Nicolai dicte ville singulisque capellis
eidem ecclesie pertinentibus and quibus alii stipendiarii celebrare ibidem
consueverunt licite valiant celebrare licentia petita a vicario dicte ecclesie
qui pro tempore fuerit, licet ab eodem non obtenta cui et per presents in
virtute sancte obedientie conjungimus ne ipse vobis aut alicui vestrum fine
causa rationabili per se aut suos impedimentum maliciose prestet de cetero in
ea part ita tamen quod per celebrationem hujusmodi prejudicium dictae paroch'
ecclesie aut parochis ejusdem nullatenus generatur, nec aliis precipue
capellanis secularibus occasio seu malum exemplum mobedientiae ac absentandi se
more illicito a matutinis aut aliis horis canonicis per vos aut vestrum aliquem
quod absit suturis temporibus prebeatur. In cujus etc. -- Dat' in manerio
nostro de Aukland 27 die Marcii anno Domoni 1380."
.

December 1st, 1390, King Richard II. prohibited the conferring of the degree
of master on certain apostate brethren of the order of Friars Preachers. There
occurs a letter of the same King, dated July 27th, 1397, to the vicar of the
provincial chapter of the same order, to be held at Newcastle upon Tyne,
concerning the said apostates Appendix to Dugdale by Stevens, vol. ii. p. 369.
.

Lord Scroop, by his will, dated June 23d, 1415, bequeathed 13s. 4d. to the
recluse in this house of Friars Preachers, at Newcastle upon Tyne Foedera, tom.
IX. p. 272. "Item recluso apud Novum Castrum in domo fratrum prae^atorum 13s.
4d.
.

John Rokesburgh occurs as prior of this house, July 13th, 16 of Edw. IV See
Suburbs of West Gate.
.

October 9th, 1537, an indenture passed between Rolande Hardynge, the last
prior of this house, for himself and the convent, and Robert Davel, clerk,
archdeacon of Northumberland, by which the former bound themselves, and their
successors, for ever, on condition of receiving 6l. 18s. from the said R.
Davel, to sing daily an anthem, and perform certain other services, and pray
for the souls of William Davel and others "This indentr. made the nient day of
October the nien and twenty year of the reign of our sovraign Lord K. Henry
the Eight betwext Rob. Davell clerk arched^kyn of Northumberland appon the
oone party and Rolande Hardynge prior of the Blake Friars otherwise called the
Shode Freers within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne with the express and
free consent and assent of the hol convent of the same place upon the other
party witnesses that the said prior and convent has promised covenanted and
grant^d and by these presents covenant and grants to and with the said Robert
that everi day from the date hereof for evermore betwixt the owr of six of the
clock in the morning and the owr of niene of the same morning before the
pyctur of our Lord named the Crucifix that is betwixt the closyers and the
utter quire door within the church of the same convent shall appon their knes
kneling devowteley sing an antem of the holy cross beginning O Crux etc. with
the versikle Adoramus te Christ Jesu fili Dei vivi etc. with a collect of the
same Domine Jesu Christ fili Dei vivi etc. the which so done they shall
devoutly say for the sowles of William Davell John Brygham late of the town of
Newcastell merchant their wyfes and children with their benefactors and all
Christeyn soulls de profundis etc. with the process thereto belongyng concludyng
or endyng with the oracion of Absolve quesimi' Domine and sede ad dextram etc.
And for such antem and pr^irs so devowtly to be song said and done the said
Robert has gevyn and p^^d into the hands of the ^^d prior and convent in their
great need and necessity six pound ei^hteen shilling of lawful money of
England. The which said some of ^l. 18s. the ^^^d ^ and C. knowledge themselves
to have had and received at the day of the ^^yng (...) And the said Robt (...)
h^^rs and executors thereof ch^^ily acqui^^^d and dis^^^^^ (...) by th^^
presents* And (...) h^mo^e the said P. and C. ^^^^ements (...) and promotes to
and with the said Robt that (...) the said antem and plairs be not (...) and
lead own and (...) is afore^^^d ^^yd be the space of two (...) then for evry
such (...) that they shall sing ^ solempn d^^^ with a mass of requiem with
(...) (...) about the said town to (...) the same that some day come to the
(...) to make ob^^^ (...) then friend (...) and all Christen fowls And far
thermo^^^ the said P. and C. coven his grant, and promises to and with the
said Robt by th^^ presents (...) any of the promises, as (...) not truly
without a any (...) or any discert observ^d and kept daily for ever that then
they the said P. and C. and their successors shall redeliver and repay to the
said Robert Daval his heirs executors or assigns all the said sum of 6l. 18s.
by these presents. In witness hereof the forseid P. and C. has set to their
covent seal to this part of the indentre remaynyng in the custody of the
seid R. Davel. Yeven at town of Newcastell upon Tyne the day and year above
written." -- Randall's MSS.

By a lease remaining in the Augmentation-Office, dated July 12th, 1537,
"Rowland Hardinge priour of the Freazours Preachours of Newcastell upon Tyne
let to Andrew Bewick merchaunt of that town a medowe cloce called the Horte
Clooce within the said town boundring of the said Freazours Preachours of the
west party and of the walls of the said town of the north party." -- Term
80 years. -- Annual rent 6s. 8d.


.

This house, which is said to have been dependant upon the priory of Tinmouth,
surrendered, June 10th, 1539 "Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens
scriptum pervenerit Rollandus Harding prior sive gardianus domus fratrum
predicatorum de Novo Castro super Tynam in com' ejusdem ac ejusdem loci
conventus salutem in Domino sempiternam and fidem indubiam presentibus
adhiberi. Noveritis nos etc. In quorum testimonium atque fidem nos presatus
prior sive gardianus and conventus figillum commune presentibus apponi fecimus.

"Dat' in domo nostro capitulari decimo die mensis Januarii anno regni Regis
Henrici octavi tricesimo. (Thus signed.) Per me fratrem Rolandum Hardynge
priorem per me fratrem David Symson presbyterum per Johannis Sic.
Sowerby presbyterum per me Carolum Newton presbyterum per me Thomas Sic.
Wyecher presbyterum per me Georgium Borrodon presbyterum, per me Andream
Marshall presbyterum per me Georgium Taytt presbyterum per me Thomam Bowllok
presbyterum per me Andream Rye presbyterum per me fratrem Laurentium Robson per
me Johannem Watson per me Radolfus Sic.
Trotter." -- Seal, red wax -- under a Gothic arch, at bottom, a figure, with a
staff in his hand -- The virgin and child sitting -- Inscription,
"Sigill..........cator' Novi Castri super Tynam." -- See Seals, Plate II. No 9.
-- From the original in the Augmentation-Office.


. It consisted of a prior and twelve friars at the dissolution, when its annual
value was 2l. 19s. 4d. alias 6d. The following extract concerning this place is
taken from the minister's or bailiff's accounts of diverse religious houses in
the county of Northumberland, from Michaelmas 30 Hen. VIII. to the same time
next year, remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"Redditus and firm' -- sed reddit de 8s. de firma scitus dicte nuper domus
(Black-Friars) cum edifici^s eidem' annex' scituat' infra mutos ville Novi
Castri super Tynam ac pardinis et pomeriis eidem pertmen' continen'..... acras
in tenura predicti Henrici Anderson (nunc majoris ville and custodis ibidem) ad
voluntatem Domini Regis annuatim solvend' ad termin' Martin' and Pent'
equaliter Et de 13s. 4d. de firma unius all cum 2 cameris et in sine
occidental' all predict' 1 cross chamber cum domibus sublim' ac duobus parvis
gardinis sic dimiss' Johanni Davell clerico per indentur' annuatim solvend'
eisdem terminis equaliter Et de 5s. de firma unius claus' jacen' infra portam
occidentalem sic dimiss' Andree Bewyke per indentur' cujus tenor nondum vis'
annuatim solvend' eisdem terminis equaliter Et de 6s. 8d. de firma unius clausa
infra muros jacen' juxta scitum predict' in tenura Andree Bewyke annuatim
solvend' eisdem terminis equaliter Et de 3s. 4d. de firma unius pomarii ibidem
jacen' ex part boreal' scitus dicte nuper domus sic dimiss' Johanni Noble per
indentur' annuatim solvend' eisdem terminis equaliter Et de 20s. de firma unius
clausi jacen' extra muros ville predicte cum una parva domo scituat' in eadem
claus' continen' 3 acras sic dimiss' Jacobo Lawson per indentur' pro termino
annorum cujus tenor nondum vis' annuatim solvend' eisdem terminis equaliter Et
de 3s. de firma unius domus ibidem vocat' le Yate House juxta regiam stratam
cum 3 burgagiis eidem domui annex' in tenur' diversor' tenentium ad voluntatem
Domini Regis annuatim solvend' eisdem terminis equaliter. -- Summa 59s. 4d.
quos solvit Willielmo Grene receptori Domini Regis."


. -- I find no particular account of any pensions granted to the prior or monks
The following occurs in the Hatleian MSS. No 604: "A brefe certificate made
upon the dissolucon of diverse monaster' and priores that surrendrid in the
months of Decembre Januar' and Februar in the 30 year of the regne of our
soverane Lord King Henry the eght as insuyth "Newcastell -- Blake Fretes there
-- Henry Anderson keeper -- clear value of the possessions over and above the
annual reprizes 5s. -- The nombre of the prior and brethren 14. -- The clear
money remanyng of the yerly possessions 5s. -- The stock, store and domestical
stuff sold with detts receyvyd 103s. 4d. -- Rewards with porcions paid unto the
priors 73s. 4d. -- The remayner of the price of goods and chattalls sold 30s.
-- Lead and bells -- lead 18 sother -- bells two. -- Woods and underwoods nil.
-- Playte etc. 38 uno. dotts owyng unto the house nil. -- Detts owyng by the
house nil."
.

A. D. 1551, Richard Marshall, one of the brethren of this house at the
dissolution, and, it should seem, formerly prior, occurs at St. Andrew's in
Scotland, very learnedly informing his audience there, that Pater noster should
be addressed to God, and not to the Saints. See in a note subjoined, from the
Preface to Knox's History of the Reformation, a picture of the manners of our
monks, drawn from the life, and marked with striking traits of the wretched
ignorance that prevailed in those times One Richard Marshall prior of the
Blacke-Friars at Newcastle in England preached in St. Andrews, that the
Paternoster should be said to God only and not to the Saints. The doctors of
St. Andrew's attended at it, made a Gray-Friar called Tottis preach a^^inst
Marshall his tenet, which he did (...) (taking his (...) out of the 5th of St.
Matthew, "Blessed are the poor in spirit"): Seeing we say good day, rather, to
any old man in the street, we may call a Saint, Pater, who is older than any
alive. And seeing they are in heaven, we may say to any of them, our Father
which art in heaven. And seeing they are holy, we may say to any of them,
hallowed be thy name. And since they are in the kingdom of heaven, we may say,
thy kingdom come. And seeing their will is God's will, we may say to any of
them, thy will be done. But when the Gray-Friar preaching came to the fourth
petition, give us this day our daily bread, he was hissed at, and so was
constrained not only to leave off preaching, but also to leave the city for
shame. Yet among the doctors then assembled the dispute continued about the
Pater, for some would have it said to God formaliter, and to the Saints
materialiter. Others to God principaliter, to the Saints minus principaliter;
others primario to God, secundario to the Saint^, others would have it said to
God taking it stricte, and to the Saints taking it late. Notwithstanding all
their distinctions, the doctors could not agree upon the business. A fellow
called Tom, servant to the sub-prior of St. Andrews, one day perceiving his
master much troubled with some business, and as he conceived weighty, said to
him, sir, what is the matter of this your trouble? The master answered, we
cannot agree about the saying of the Pater. The fellow replied, to whom should
it be said but to God alone? The master answers, what shall we do then with the
Saints? The fellow replies, give them aves and credes enough, that may suffice
them and too well too." Bourne tells us, that he saw a grant of a tenement near
the White-Cross, signed by friar Richard Marshall, doctor and prior, and friars
David Simpson and John Sowrily, dated 28th of Hen. VIII. to Anthony Godsave, on
condition of paying 9s. per annum to the said priory -- that the grant was, in
his time, in the possession of Thomas Marshall, joiner, who had purchased the
tenement, and lately rebuilt it, and paid the same rent to the town of
Newcastle, as the tenement used to do before to the monastery.
.

March 10th, 1544, King Henry VIII. granted the Black-Friars, with the houses
and ground thereto belonging, at that time of the yearly value of 2l. 19s. 6d.
to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, in consideration of the sum of 53l.
7s. 6d. reserving to himself and successors for ever, a yearly rent of 5s. 11d.
Among the sea ^^rm rent, received 1783, by John Widdrington, Esquire. for the
representatives of -- Paun^^fort, Esquire. occurs the following: "For diverse lands
and tenements, called Preaching Fryes, received of the mayor and burgesses 5s.
11d. -- parcel of reputed parcel of the late monastery of Tinmouth."
together with the bells, lead, stones, iron, and timber of the church and
other edifices From the original preserved in the archives of the corporation
of Newcastle, entitled, Dorto, "10 March, 35 Hen. VIII. a grant to the mayor
and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, of the Blackfriars, with the houses and
ground thereunto belonging, which was of the yearly value of value of (...).
6d. in consideration of 53l. 7^. 6d." -- In Latin -- much (...) -- great (...)
property specified there in consisted of a close, or little field, within the
West-Gate -- two gardens and a close on the north -- the field, still called
Warden's-Close on the west, and without the town's-wall, that anciently had a
lodge or house in it -- And a house called the Gate House, near
New-Gate-Street, from whence the great entrance seems to have been to this
monastery. -- Bourne tell us, that a mill at the Barrows-Bridge belonged to it,
which in the year 1558 paid a rent of 2s. per annum to the town of Newcastle.
.

In the year 1552, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne demised, for
a term of years, this house of Black-Friars, with its appurtenances of
orchards, gardens, etc. to nine of the mysteries, or most ancient trades of the
town, at the yearly rent of forty-two shillings, a ninth part of which was to
be paid by each company, to the respective uses of which were portioned out the
several apartments of the monastery, with the adjacent grounds From an original
instrument, much defaced, remaining among the papers of the company of tanners
Seal lost off.

It still continues the property of the several companies to whom it was
demised by the corporation of Newcastle. -- Enough of this monastery remains,
notwithstanding all the alterations that have taken place in it, to give a more
than faint idea of what it must originally have been. There is a perspective
view of the outside of it in Grose's Antiquities.

This monastery would, long before this time, have been ranked among the places
whose very ruins are annihilated, had it not been for the above grant. The
chapel has been converted into a meeting house, and apartments for widows of
the company of smiths. The societies of tailors, cordwainers, sadlers, dyers,
bakers and brewers, skinners and glovers, butchers and tanners have their
respective halls in it, and by that means it has been preserved from
dilapidation. The companies of tailors and cordwainers having, since the above
grant, procured meeting houses in other parts of the town, sitted up their old
ones in this house for apartments for their poor. -- But see afterward in the
account of "Manor-Chare."

Bourne complains of the d^rtiness that prevailed in this place in his time. I
could not, on a late visit, compliment the present tenants with profiting any
thing by his censure, of which, however, it is probable they have never heard.
Their want of cleanliness is the more to be wondered at, as they still enjoy
the advantage of abundance of fine water in the old well adjoining to it, and
still called our Lady's Well, which, whatever imaginary qualities it may have
(...), to the present hour, its purifying virtues.

The west window of the chapel, now partly built up, still discovers it to have
been of a most elegant design and beautiful execution See a sketch of what
remains, at the bottom of the annexed perspective view.
. -- The whole pile ha^ still a monastic appearance, and affords a mournful
instance of the vicissitude of all human things. -- Once the recess of a
respectable order of religious, who were the sole patrons and possessors of the
learning of their times, it is now tenanted by ignorant old women: some of it
is converted into stabling, and its out-offices are appropriated to the feeding
of hogs.

In a ground room, on the right hand as one enters the quadrangle, there are
still remains of the wooden ceiling, about the pannels of which are arms, or
punning devices, no doubt expressive of the names of its ancient benefactors. I
particularly noticed a tun. In the account of St. John's Church, mention is
made of a similar device.

The area, or quadrangle, represented in the view annexed, is about 87 feet
square See Plate II. of Seal^ N^ 10, for the representation of an impression,
as it is supposed, of a very moment seal of this house.


.

Low-Friar-Chare, commonly called Shod-Friar-Chare, from its vicinity to the
house just described, and Low-Friar-Chare in contradistinction to the Upper, or
High-Friar-Chare, near Newgate, leads from that division of West-Gate, now
called Fenkill-Street, to the White-Cross.

A. D. 1777, an elegant hall was erected Hutchinson's Northumberland, vol ii.
"To attend the ceremony," says he, "of the dedication of this lodge, there was
the most respectable and numerous convention of that order, that ever appeared
in the northern parts of this kingdom. The music was performed by an excellent
band, the vocal parts of which were done by the best voices from the choir of
Durham cathedral. A pathetic exhortation was delivered by Mr. H^ntley, and an
elegant oration, displaying the antiquity, progress, and excellence of the
order, by the Rev. Dr. Scott of Simonburn. The festival was held in the New
Assembly Room, when near four hundred of the brethren dined together at three
tables."
in this street, by the society of free and accepted masons, of the lodge of
St. John. It contains, together with two paintings by Bell An ingenious artist
of Newcastle upon Tyne.
, one representing St. John, the other a portrait of the present master of the
lodge Mr Francis Peacock, ^^per.
, an excellent small organ for their solemn rites. There is a Greek inscription
on the front, in capital letters -- a text from the first chapter of St. John's
Gospel, signifying, "The darkness comprehended it not." -- "(...)."

Pudding-Chare, anciently, says Bourne, Budding-Chare, a cross street leading
from West-Gate to the Big-Market, is in some places narrow and inconvenient for
carriages. It communicates with St. John's churchyard, or rather with a new
foot-way railed off at the end of it, called "Grave's End-Walk," by another
little street called, anciently, St. John's Chare, at present Rosemary-Lane, in
which is the lying-in hospital for poor married women.

January 12th, 1774 A subscription appears to have been set on foot for the
establishment of this hospital before September 13th, 1760. -- A general court
of contributors was held November 26th following, when they elected a
physician, surgeon, surgeon extraordinary, man-midwife, and matron. -- By an
advertisement, dated Rosemary-Lane, Dec. 3d, 1760, notice was given to the
public, that the house was then open for the admission of pregnant women.

Dec. 10th, 1760, the annual subscriptions to this humane institution amounted
to 87 guineas, and the benefactions to 69 guineas.


, the magistrates of Newcastle upon Tyne, at the general quarter sessions of
the peace, as justices for that town and county, granted a license to Mrs.
Sarah Hudson From the book of inrolments in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne.
, to keep this house, in pursuance of an act of parliament made in the 13th
year of the reign of King George the Third.

May 9th, 1778, mention occurs of a bequest of an hundred pounds to this
charity, by the late Lady Allgood Newcastle Courant. -- Mrs. Baker, wife of
John Baker, Esquire. alderman, added ten pounds, to enable the charity to purchase
two hundred pounds stock in the three per cents. where its funds were before
deposited.
.

A. D. 1781, an hundred and five children were born in this hospital Ibid.
.

In the year 1761, a similar charity It commenced in the winter of 1760. It is
the intention of this charity that each married woman or widow, pregnant at her
husband's death, and recommended to it by a subscriber, shall be attended and
delivered by an experienced midwife; or, if necessary, by a surgeon expert in
midwifery: and in difficult cases by a physician, and supplied, during the
month, with proper medicines and suitable provision.
was instituted for poor lying-in women at their own houses, in Newcastle There
was published, "An Address to the Public on Behalf of the Charity, for the
Relief of poor Lying-in Women at their own Houses: to which is added, the
General Plan and Rules for conducting the said Charity. Newcastle, 1761." 8vo.
No printer's name.
and Gateshead.

January 2d, 1762, it appeared that, out of 180 poor women who had been
recommended to this charity since its first institution, 158 had been safely
delivered and preserved from the extremities of want in their distressed
situation January 2d, 1769, it appeared, that, out of 865 women who had been
recommended, 835 were safely delivered, and 30 remained on the books. --
Newcastle Courant.
.

It appeared, March 18th, 1775, that 1250 poor women had received the benefit
of this charity in Newcastle and Gateshead, since the time of its first
establishment State of the charity, May 31, 177^, -- 93^ had been recommended
-- 899 delivered -- 31 remained upon the books. -- Newcastle Courant.

Friday, March 3d, 1780, the tragedy of H^^let was performed at the theater in
Newcastle, for the benefit of the charity -- the part of Hamlet by Nicholson ^t
wart, Esquire. and that of the Ghost by Cap^^^ M^^. -- Ibid.

January 20th, 1783, a (...) ^^t St. Nichol^' Church, for the benefit of this
charity, by Dr. Scott of ^^^^^burn, on Pr^^n 1, which produced (...).


.

Opposite the south end of Rosemary-Lane stands an almshouse, which has lately
been rebuilt.

It is marked as a large pile in Bourne's Plan of Newcastle. "Seven poor
persons," he tells us, "reside in it, who have a small allowance from the town
at Christmas."

There is an order of common council, June 6th, 1645, confirming to the ten
poor widows in Pudding-Chare almshouse, their former allowance of ten
shillings, and two chaldrons of coals, yearly. This has lately been filled with
the brethren of St. Mary's Hospital.

Back-Row, which leads from the foot of West-Gate, opposite the postern,
toward the gate of the castle, commonly called the Black-Gate, had anciently
the name of Gallow-Gate In the Hat^^an MSS. 7^8 (...) 14 Richard II. mean (...)
occurs (...) "in Galon Gate, in (...) N^^ Castri." The person (...) to be (...)
county prison in the castle, at brought along it in the (...) way to the (...)
for (...) e^^^tions without the Wall Gate.

In a^^molm in the archive of the corporation of Newcastle, dat^d November ^th,
16^8, mention o^ ours of "Fenhall Street (...) the Back Raw."


.

The Postern is a little street, which conducts from the foot of West-Gate
westward to the Postern in the town-wall, called White-Friar-Gate In the
Tinmouth Chartulary, at Northumberland-House, in a deed, dated 1^9^, a tenement
is described in le West-Gate juxta venellum quo itur ad le Whit-frer-Yate."
.

Bayly-Gate Gray, in his Chorographia, p. 20, tells us, that "the street of
Bailiff-Gate formerly belonged to the castle and county of Northumberland." It
appears to have been ob^^medes crown-land, i. e. belonging to the Castle of
Newcastle, A. D. 1649. but in the following year was given up again to the town
of Newcastle. See Bourne, p. 36. -- The south side of this street, that in
Bourne's time was chiefly the property of Mr. Joshua Douglas, town clerk,
belongs at present to Sir Thomas Cl^^^n, Part. who married his daughter.

In a deed lying before me, dated 1373, it is called "le Baillye-Gate."

See Grose's Antiquities, vol. i. preface -- And Antiq. Report. vol. 1. p. 51.

In the Ledger-Book of Brinkbourn Priory, mention occurs of a grant from the
master and brethren of St. Mary's Hospital in West-Gate, of a not rising from a
house "in fra balleam Novi Castri." -- The Barley and Barley Gate occurs is names
of streets at Durham and Alnwick, and are contiguous to the castle of each
place.


leads toward the castle, into which it has anciently conducted by a
postern-gate. It has plainly had its name from the ballium of the Castle,
though Bourne (I think erroneously) derives it from "the coming of the felons
of the county of Northumberland along it, attended by the county-bailiffs." The
east end of this street is intersected by the passage from the descent into the
close called Long-Stairs Lone Stairs appears anciently to have been called "Le
Castle Mate," (...) served before. -- A deed lies before me, dated ^^ November,
1615, in which at (...) describ^^ "in quodam vico vocato le Castle Mote --
inter tenementum, etc. ^^part^ australi ten mentum, etc. ex part bortal, v^a
regin ante ex part orientali et quodam venello vo^^^ ^^ley Borne ex part
occidentali."

As also in another, dated March 2^, 1697, concerning the same property.


, which, from thence to the east end of Back-Row, is at present called
Queen Street. There is a communication between the head of Long-Stairs and
Castle-Stairs, called Bank-Side, and a still shorter by a subterraneous or
arched passage, called Sheep-Head Alley.

Before I enter upon the history of the Castle of Newcastle, I shall take
occasion to give a brief account of the famous wall of the emperor Hadrian,
which ended at the castrum of the Roman station of Pons Aelii, and that of the
emperor Severus, which passed through the site of the present Newcastle, and
ended at Wall's End.

Hadrian's Wall or Vallum, made A. D. 120, was a wall of turf, with a deep fosse
or ditch accompanying it on the north side: the original height of it is not
known.

Severus' Wall was built, A. D. 207, of square stones, and every where also,
except on the edges of precipices, was accompanied by a deep ditch or fosse. The
original height thereof was 12 feet, and the breadth 8. Between the village of
Walker, i. e. the town by the wall, and Byker-Hill, the Wall of Severus, with
its fosse, are still plainly distinguishable: the site of the wall at present is
covered with brushwood and stunted trees. Dr. Stukeley has preserved in his
Iter Boreale a view of the appearance of the Roman Wall, between Byker-Hill
Mill and Newcastle, when he wrote. From this mill to the Smith's shop near the
first mile-stone on the Shields road, the site of the wall and hollow of the
fosse, running parallel with the present turnpike way, are yet clearly
discernible.

At the head of the bank, over-looking Ouse-Burn, was a castellum or
exploratory tower, out of the foundations of which I saw many Roman stones
taken, not many years ago, to build an adjoining house.

Coing down the hill from thence to the rivulet of Ouse-Burn, the fosse on the
north side of the hedge is still very deep, and forms what is here called a
little gill.

Severus' Wall must have formed a small angle at the arch by which it has
crossed Ouse-Burn.

On the rise of the hill between this streamlet and Red-Barns I found, April
3d, 1783, many of the square stones which had evidently been the plunder of the
wall.

About Red-Barns the garden grounds have destroyed every vestige both of the
wall and the fosse: but when we are past the gardens, the remains of the wall
seem again to appear, and, having crossed the field, proceed in a straight
line, behind the Keelman's Hospital, to the Sally-Port, or Ship-Carpenter's
Tower. There was a rope-walk here, upon the foundation of the wall, not many
years ago.

Near the present Sally-Port Gate stood a turret or Roman castlellum. From
hence the wall, as the foundations thereof, which were discovered some years
ago Thomasin Scott, an old woman about 60 years of age, living on the
Wall-Knoll, informed me April 3d, 1783, that several years ago some workmen, in
building a coach-house there for Alderman Sowerby, discovered plainly the
foundations of the Roman Wall coming over the top of the hill, and bearing to
the north side of the present Sally-Port Gate, and that a great many curious
gentlemen came to view it.

The passage of Virgil, lib. vii. may be strictly applied to the etymon of
Wall-Knoll, from the Roman Wall. --

-- "Ab illo
Dicitur, aeternumque tenet per saecula nomen."

, plainly evinced, passed over the top of the hill, to which it gave the name
of Wall-Knoll, and must have crossed Pandon-Burn by an arch near Stock-Bridge,
as it is said to have been the ancient boundary and defense of the royal
mansion of Pandon-Hall on the north Gray, in his Chorographia, speaking of
Pandon-Hall, calls it, "A safe bulwark, having the Picts' Wall on the north
side, and the river Tyne on the south.
.

From Pandon-Hall the Roman Wall must have climbed over another hill toward
Lort-Burn, which it has spanned by an arch near the present Low-Bridge, in
order to form the northern rampart of the station of Pons Aelii: where it has
The Milbank MS. cited so often by Bourne, tells us, that (about Charles I.'s
time) the Roman Wall might be traced down the hill by Mr. Leonard Carr's house,
which stood in Pilgrim-Street, on the west side, a little before you come to
Silver-Street.

Gray, in his Chorographia, p. 9, says: "The Picts' Wall came over Nether-Dean
Bridge, and so along unto Pandon."

Horseley, Britannia Romana, p. 132, tells us that "in laving the foundation of
a building in the Groat-Market about 15 or 16 years since, the masons struck
upon the Roman Wall at each of the side walls, so that the building stands
cross the Roman Wall."

Dr. Davel, master of St. Mary's Hospital when Leland visited Newcastle in the
^^nge of Hen. VIII. told him that "St. Nicholas' church (...) upon the (...)
Wall."

Leland' (...), vol. vii. p 51. In la^ing the foundation of the new Assembly
Hour, the wor^ (...) said to have discovered the fosse of Several Wall -- but
Mr. George And^^^, master (...) of a contrary opinion.

The north side of the wall of the great wall (...) the chancel of the (...)
All Saints church was plainly built with Roman stones, the plunder of this wall.

The north wall of a stable in the Spread (...) Denton Ch^^e, (...) dently
composed of Roman stones. -- The followin^ occurs among Dr. Ellison's MSS
notes. "The Picts' Wall goes through the (...) of Newcastle."


run a little to the north of that part of St. Nicholas' church, which is
called St. George's Porch; stretching from thence through the gardens of the
vicarage house, it has afterward intersected the line of the town-wall, a
little to the north of the West-Gate, where Horseley supposes a very small turn
has been made in it, in order to come up to the north rampart of the station
Horseley thus determines the boundaries and situation of the station of Pons
Aelii: "I hinted before that there was a traditionary account of the wall's
passing through St. George's Porch, near the north-west corner of St. Nicholas'
church. But it is certain that the line of the wall lies a little to the north
of this end of the church, and I think has not touched this porch, though it
comes near it. And therefore I conjecture that the wall which has passed
through this porch must have been the east rampart of the station; for the
supposition will reconcile these seemingly different accounts: and if a line be
erected perpendicular to that of Severus' Wall, so as to pass through that
porch, and be continued along the brow of the hill, at the head of the side,
till it meet the line of Hadrian's Vallum, near the cast end of Belygate, and
not far from the Castle, this line seems to answer so well in all respects,
that I cannot much doubt its having been the eastern limits of the ancient
station: for this brings the station near to the Castle, which probably has
been built a little more to the south-east, in order to bring it nearer to the
top of a steep hill. And fixing the eastern boundary of the station here,
leaves a plain and level area for the station itself, and without it, a descent
toward the south and the river, for the town to stand upon, which might extend
itself to the bridge, supposing the ancient bridge to have been near the same
place where the present one stands. From which bridge the ancient town and
station might probably take the name of Pons Aelii. This eastern boundary of
the station must at that time have been nearer the river than it is now; since
it is certain, that the river formerly flowed farther up toward this part of
the town. The position of the eastern rampart of the station being thus
determined, the other boundaries may be also defined; for the distance here
between the lines of the walls seems to be about 6 charms, and it is not much
to be questioned, but the two walls here (as in other cases they frequently
did) have fallen in with the northern and southern ramparts of the station; so
that these 6 chains have been the breadth of the station. And if we suppose the
station to have been of a middle size, we must make it a square, and allow 6
chains for the length of it. If at this distance another line be drawn equal
and parallel to the former, and between the lines of the wall, it will be the
western boundary of the station, as the two respective parts of the two walls
make the northern and southern limits. And upon this supposition, a line drawn
from the scot of the Flesh Market to Barley Gate, near the east end of it, will
be the eastern limits of the ancient station. That part of the vallum which
reaches from Baily-Gate to Mr. Ord's house, will be the southern limit, and a
line drawn from hence to that part of the line of Severus' Wall, which is about
30 yards east from the end of Rosemary-Lane, must be the western boundary, and
the part of Severus' Wall included between this and the foot of the
Flesh-Market, remains for the line of the northern rampart," page 133.
at Newcastle, and to get to a sufficient distance from Hadrian's Vallum.

Horseley with great probability supposes that one of the extremities of
Hadrian's Vallum was on the bank of the Tyne, beyond the castle, perhaps near
the present half moon battery (covered now with modern buildings), where there
may have been a circular turret in the time of the Romans, to command the pass
of the bridge.

This vallum, passing the north corner of the castle, went in a straight line
It crossed West-Gate, we collect from that writer, between the part or
con^luit, (...) stood in his time not far from the end of Denton-Chare, and
Barley Gate, but (...) to Baily-Gate, and, passing near the free school,
intersected the line of the town well, but ^ West-Gate and the smaller gate
that leads to the Earth. (...) that, (...) before he wrote, a coin of Vespasian
was found (...) he was told by the person that found it. I am of opinion that
the inscriptions belonging to the state ^^ of Pons (...) all built up in the
old keep of the castle, and that ^^ch (...) of this (...) or other be
discovered lurking in its almost impregnable walls by future (...).
to the place where, in Horseley's time, it became distinguishable, without the
West-Gate, and so onwards to that rising which still is so remarkable in a
field, without the Turnpike-Gate, along which are ranged a set of boundary
stones, where it certainly has passed.

Hadrian's Vallum, is with extreme probability supposed to have formed the
southern rampart of the station of Pons Aelii, as Severus' Wall, at the
distance of about six chains, may be naturally thought to have been the
northern one. This station, most likely, has been square -- The brow of the
hill at the head of the Side easily directs us where to draw the line of the
eastern rampart, running from St. George's Porch, till intercepted by Hadrian's
Vallum, near Baily-Gate. And a line drawn from what was in Horseley's time Mr.
Ord's house (lately Mr. Gibson's, the town-clerk's), to that part of the line
of Severus' Wall which was about 30 yards east from the present Rosemary-Lane,
shows as what must have been the western boundary of this fortification.

From that part of the line of the town-wall, where we left Severus' work, the
track of it running westward has entirely been destroyed by buildings and
gardens, till near the Turnpike-Gate, where it was thought distinguishable, in
Horseley's time, in a small field between Quarry-House and Newcastle. That
writer was of opinion that it passed through the site of this quarry-house,
just beyond which, on the west, an immense quarry has eradicated every vestige
both of the wall and fosse of Severus: but mounting to the top of the rising
ground beyond it westward, the hollow of the fosse begins to re-appear, running
along pretty close to the north side of the turnpike road to Benwall, called in
the Notitia the Station of Condercum.

Hadrian's Vallum, which we left running up a field west of the Turnpike-Gate,
and marked by a range of boundary They are marked G. A. (George Anderson) on
the north side, and J. H. (John Hodgson) on the south. Mr. Anderson showed me a
deed, dated Feb. 14, in the 40th of Elizabeth, wherein Elynor Swynborne demised
to Robert Heslop, armorer, and others, her stone-quarries in the territories of
Elslwick, "boundring upon an old wast quarrye theare in the east part, upon a
corn field theare on the west part, upon the Queen's majesty's high way
there on the north part, and upon an old wall theare called the Wall on the
south part by the right meets, etc."

Mr. Anderson informed me, that his deeds for the ground on which Mr.
Dickenson's house stands, just without the West-Gate, call the site of it
"Pies-Wall or Hole."

N. B. The lines of Hadrian's Vallum and Severus' Wall, the former ending here,
the letter passing through Newcastle, are marked in the engraved plan that
accompanies this work. For a more particular account of the Roman Walls during
the whole progress, consult Horseley's Romana Britannia, Warburton's Vallum
Romanum, etc.


stones, disappears through the next field, where it has been destroyed by the
working of pits Dr. Stukeley, in his (...) Boteale, 1725, says, "that out at
West-Gate many shafts of the coal min^s are (...) upon the Roman Wall."

A part of the fosse of Severus' Wall very d^^p and observable, yet remains,
near the first ^ril^ stone at the west end of the farm-house: as do also some
remains of Hadrian's wo^^^ a field opposite to it on the south.

In the deep hollow below Benwall Hill, near the bridge over Denton-Burn, and a
few (...) south of the tumpike-^ond is preserved a curious fragment of Severus'
Wall: it me^^ares about nine feet in breadth: five courses of the facing-stones
on both sides of it are observed. A small apple tree at present grows out of
the middle of it. See Appendix.


, but rises again into obvious notice after we pass the old mill, and is a long
way distinguishable (with its fosse) as it stretches westward toward Benwall,
at the distance of a bow-shot in some places from the present turnpike-way.

To SIR (...) KNT. the GRANTEE under the CROWN. This (...) the Old Castle of
Newcastle upon Tyne. (...) John Br^^d.


CASTLE OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE.
THE date of the first building, or rather perhaps of the enlarging "When the
Normans," says Gross, in the preface to his Antiquities, p. 5, "found the ruins
of an ancient building on the site of their intended structure, they either
endeavored to incorporate it into their work, or made use of the materials; as
may be seen by many buildings of known Norman construction, wherein are
fragments of Saxon architecture, or large quantities of Roman bricks; which has
caused them often to be mistaken for Roman or Saxon edifices."
, re-edifying, or refounding of this once very strong and important fortress,
is differently fixed by different historians; some placing it in the year 1079
Hemingford's Chronicle. Gale, p. 461. Also Matthew of Westminster, Flores
Histor. p. 7. lib. ii.
, others in 1080 Simeon of Durham apud december Scriptores, p. 211. Chronicle of
Mailross. Gale, p. 161. Dugdale's Monasticon, tom. i. p. 42. Howe's edition of
Stowe, 1632, p. 118.
, and 1082 Hollingshead, Chron. vol. iii. p. 310. Grafton's Chronicle, p. 15.
. And if we will believe our metrical annalist Hardyng, it was not erected till
the reign of William Rufus Chronicle, 1542, fol. 132. 2. "William Rufus," says
he, "builded -- The Newcastell upon Tyne
The Scotts to gaynstande and to defend
-- he made then Westmynster Hall
And the Castle of Newcastell withal
That stands on Tyne, therein to dwell in war
Again the Scotts the country to defend."
So also Baker's Chronicle, p. 48. And Howe's edit. of Stowe, 1632, p. 131, as
if he had forgotten what is before related in p. 118.

Boethius and Buchanan say this castle was only repaired by Robert Curtois, son
of the Conqueror. Boeth. p. 258. Buchanan, vol. i. p. 264.


. Many considerations induce us to lament that no one has set about to give us
a work to be entitled, "The Harmony of English Historians:" till that appear we
may perhaps do something toward reconciling the various and clashing accounts
of the building of this castle, by supposing that the earliest relate to the
year when it was begun, and the others to the time of its final completion.

However that may be, the greater part of our historians agree that this work
was undertaken during the reign and at the command, of William the Conqueror,
under the direction of Robert Curthose, his eldest son, on his return from an
unsuccessful enterprise against Malcolm king of Scotland, who, presuming on the
absence of William on the Continent, where he was likely to have been a long
while detained by the revolt of the Normans, and the diversion of his French
enemies, had passed the borders of the two kingdoms, and wasted the northern
provinces of England.

Its having been called, on its erection, the "New Castle," seems strongly to
imply that it arose from the site of some older fortress, from which, by way of
contradistinction, it derived a name extended afterward to the adjoining town,
and which is still retained in its present appellation See Bourne. -- The
Milbank MS. he says, tells us, "that this New Castle may be distinguished from
the old one," i. e. the Round Tower, since called the Half Moon Battery, which
is supposed to have been a Roman fortress, to command the pass of the bridge
over the river Tyne, built by the Emperor Hadrian, and which gave its name to
the Roman station, i. e. Pons Aelii. See Account of Tyne-Bridge.
. Thus, as Dr. Plot, in his History of Staffordshire, informs us in a very
similar instance, Newcastle under Lyme Leland, in his Itinerary, vol. vii. fol.
36, says, "Newcastell under Line" is "so cawllid of a brook renning thereby, or
of an hille or wodd thereby so cawllid. There cummith a broke out of the pole
about the castle.

In Rymer's ^^rdera, tom. v. A. D. 1346, "Novo Castro subtus Lynam" occurs.

The English Monery says it is called Newcastle upon Line from the rivulet Line
upon which it is seated, to distinguish it from Newcastle upon Tyne in
Northumberland. In the Rolls of Parliament, vol. vi. p. 375, A. D. 1485, there
occurs mention of "Newcastell under Line, otherwise called Newcastell under
Lyme, within our county of Stafford."


or Line, in that county, had its name from the old castle of Chesterton under
Lyme, which at the time of its erection was falling into ruin.

Scarcely had this castle been completed, before it was converted to a purpose
very different from the intention of building it, having been secured to
protect the rebellion of Earl Mowbray against William Rufus, the son and
successor of William the Conqueror. The King marched against it, in the year
1095 The words of Brompton are: "Detecta et cognita eorum fraud, Rex cum
exercim m^gno Northumbriam adiit, ubi cito in quadam firmitate quae Novum
Castrum vocatur, plures de proceribus se invicem alligatis cepit et eos in
custodia posuit pro voto extra Angliam relegandes." -- December Scriptores. p. 991.

Huntingdon's account is somewhat different: "Promovit Rex exercitum in
Northumbre, statimque in quadam firmitate quae vocatur Novum Castellum omnes
meliores consules et proceres cepit." -- Hon. Huntingdon. Hist. p. 214, lib.
vii.

Matthew Paris, p. 13, says. "In Novo Castello potentisumos quosque familiae
comitis cepit et vinculis redidit"

The Saxon Chronicle does not contra^he^ the above, and mentions the taking of
a great many of Mowbray's adherent, "in a certain fortress."

The Durham MS. in the Cotton library has these words. "He (the King) entered
Newcastell, wherein he took preesoners the best soldiers of the said count,
etc."

But where is the probability that the best soldiers of this noble delinquent
would yield themselves prisoners till a short siege at least, ended perhaps by
storming the fortress, had convinced them of the impossibility of holding it
out against the king?


, with a great army, and took it after a short siege, together with several of
the partisans of that noble traitor. William, having missed the great object of
his northern journey in this castle, sat down before that of Tinmouth, on the
taking of which also he was a second time disappointed, for Earl Mowbray was
found to have taken refuge in the fortress of Bambrough. After a tedious and
fruitless siege of that castle, rendered by its natural situation almost
impregnable, the King returned southward, but not till he had erected a castle
before it to cut off all hopes of throwing in succors, and filled it with his
army, whom he directed to continue the blockade.

Driven, perhaps, to great straits through want of provisions, Mowbray closed
with an offer of some of his faithful adherents, of whose loyalty the King had
however entertained no suspicions, as he had appointed them the guards of this
Newcastle upon Tyne: these had traitorously, and with secrecy, invited the Earl
to take shelter in it. The unfortunate nobleman escaped from Bambrough, but was
discovered during his flight to this castle, on which he suddenly changed his
route, and took sanctuary in the church of St. Oswin at Tinmouth. The holy
asylum could not protect so formidable an enemy of the King, for after being
wounded, he was dragged out by violence from the altar, and made a prisoner
Thompton's account^^: "Inde vero quodam also castello conquisito et statre
consulis in eo capto, apud Bamburgh consulem post haec obsedit; quod cum armis
inexpugnabile Rex viderit, aliud castellum ante illud paravit, quod Malveyseyn
appellavit, in quo partem exercitus sui relinquens recessit. Cumque postmodum
quadam nocte Robertus Consul a castro de Bamburgh latenter recessisset, eum
usque Tynmuth regalis exercitus est secutus, ubi cum se defendere non posset ad
ecclesiam Sancti Oswyni regis and martyris fugit, in qua demum vulneratus
violenter extrahitur et in Regis custodia secure ponitur." -- December Scriptores,
p. 991.

"Robert" (says Ridpeth, in his Border History, p. 71), "by means of some
secret correspondence he had in the garrison of Newcastle, hoped to make
himself master of it: for this purpose he set out from Bamburgh in the night,
accompanied by thirty horse. But being observed by the garrison of Malvoisin,
he was pursued by a part of them; and his pursuers having advertised the
garrison of Newcastle to be upon their guard, he found himself shut out from
that place, and directed his flight to the monastery of St. Oswin at Tinmouth."

Odericus Vitalis says that the Earl was betrayed by his own men. See Bourne
Account.


.

In the year 1174, by the King's writ, the sum of fifty pounds was expended on
the tower of this castle; as also, the same year, a farther sum of 125l. 13s.
6d. by the above writ, on the view of Robert de Diveliston and Ralph Baiard
From the Pipe Rolls. -- "Com' de termino Sancti Michaelis 21 Ann. H. R. 2, apud
Westm' fact. Regerus de Stutevill reddit comp' de 100l. 45s. 2d. de veteri
firma de Northumb' qui remanserit pro werra ut dicitur -- Thesaur' 10l. Et in
operacione turtis Novi Castri super Tinam 5^l. per breve Regis Et per visum
Roberti de Diveliston and Rad. Baiard -- Et in operacione turris de Novo Castro
125l. 13s. 6d. per idem breve et per vitum predictorum." -- Copied from the
original record, July 12th, 1787.
.

A. D. 1213, King John made a fosse round this castle, with some new and
additional works toward the river Tyne By his charter to the burgesses of
Newcastle, February 5th, in the 14th year of his reign, King John remitted
certain eschaet rents which he had in that town, to the value of 110 shillings
and 6d. to such of the inhabitants as had lost, or had their property inputed
by a fosse, and new work, made below the castle toward the water.
.

This year William, Earl of Warren, had the custody of the castles of Bamburgh
and Newcastle upon Tyne, with the whole bailiwick of Northumberland, committed
to his trust Dugdale's Baronace, tom. i. p. 76, citing Pat. 14 Joh. m. 4. --
"Royal castles were generally committed to the custody of some trusty person,
who seems to have been indifferently styled governor and constable: sometimes,
also, they were in the possession of the sheriff of the county, who often
converted them into prisons." -- Grose's Preface, p. 4.
.

A. D. 1224, William Briwere was constituted governor of Newcastle upon Tyne
Dugdale's Baronage, p. 702, citing Pat. 7 Hen. III. p. 1, m. 5.
.

In the year 1225, Hugh de Bolebec, by a special precept from the King, was
acquitted from his service of castle-guard at Newcastle upon Tyne, having been
with the King in his army at Bedford Ibid. p. 452, citing claus. 8 Hen. III. m.
7.
. This year, also, Roger de Merley, for his assistance of the same occasion,
was acquitted of the service due from him, for that time, in warding the castle
of Newcastle Ibid. p. 571, citing the same. -- It was upon the insurrection of
the Earl of Chester. Falcase de Breant, and others.
.

This year John, son of Robert (Clavering), sheriff of Northumberland, occurs
as governor of this castle Ibid. vol. i. p 107.
.

A. D. 1226, John Clavering was also sheriff of Northumberland and governor of
this castle, in which trust he is said to have continued for the tenth,
eleventh, and half of the twelfth year of that King's reign: his father's
christian name having been Robert, he was commonly called John, son of Robert,
or John Fitz-Robert Ibid. tom. i. p. 107, citing Pat. 9 Hen. III. m. 9.
.

Yet in the year 1228, Brian, son of Alan, sheriff of Northumberland, occurs
also as governor of this castle. -- He was Earl of Britanny and Richmond. -- He
continued in this important trust till the 19th of Henry the Third Ibid. p. 53,
citing Pat. 22 Hen. III. m. 5, Rot. Pip. de eisdem annis.
.

A. D. 1229, there was a determination that neither the King, nor the keeper of
the King's castle at Newcastle upon Tyne, had a right to take prize of an
hundred herring for each boat and vessel coming up to that town, and that
thenceforth they should not be claimed "Novum Castrum super Tinant. Quod prisa
halecis ibidem, viz. de quolibet batello et nave centum halec' non pertineat ad
custodem castri Regis ibidem nec sit ad commodum Regis et quod proinde cesset."
-- Claus. 13 Hen. III. m. 15. -- Murray and Aubone MSS.
.

In the year 1234, twenty-two pounds appear to have been expended on the work
of the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne Harleian MSS. 624, Plut. 29/^ F. p. 169,
b. "19 Hen. III. Rot. 2, in tergo. Robertus filius Avicie and Robertus de
Neuham visores operis castri de Novo Castro affidaverunt in vigilia Sancti Luce
pro 22l. et ob. positis in opere dicti Castri."

The following occurs, ibid. p. 173: "20 Hen. III. A. D. 1235, pro vicecomite
Northumberland. breve Regis de computandis ducentis marcis vicecomiti
Northumbr' in exitibus ejusdem comitatus pro custodia predicti comitatus et
c^strorum de Bamberg et Novi Castri super Tynam a Festo Sancti Michaelis anno
20, usque in unum annum. Est in forulo Marescalli."


.

A. D. 1237, Hugh de Bolebeck, sheriff of Northumberland, occurs also as
governor of Bamborough castle, and the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne Dugdale's
Baronage, tom. i. p. 452. He died in 1263. In the account of an aid granted to
the King this year, to marry his sister to the Emperor, the sheriff of
Northumberland occurs as receiving 200 marks for (...) ^^^ping of the two
castles of Newcastle and Bambrough, and the county of Northumberland. Madox's
History of Exchequer, p. 412, folio edition
.

In the year 1248, a new gate, at the expense (to the crown) of 514l. 15s. 11d.
was made in this castle Harleian MSS. No 624, p. 184, b. "Memorand' penes
remem' Domini Thesau^^^ anno 33 Hen. III. Rot. 8, in tergo. Northumberland.
vis' Willielmus de Burneton and Nicholaus de Wardelesford assidaverunt pro
514l. 15s. 11d. positis in operationibus cujusdam nove port in castro Novi
Castri super Tynam usque ad Festum Sancti Johannis Baptiste anno 31."
.

A. D. 1250, a gate of the same castle was repaired at the expense of 36l. 0s.
8d. Ibid. p. 187. "Commun' memorand' penes re^^^m' Domini Thesaura^i de anno ^^
Hen. III. Rot. 1^, in tergo. -- Northumberl^^^ vis' Nicholaus de Wardelesford
and Johannes de ^in^dime vitores operationum Regis in castir de Bamburg and
Novi Castri super Tinam affidaverunt pro 36l. 8d. pontis in reparacione port
Novi Castri super Tinam Et pro 17l. 9s. 8d. positis in reparacione tu^^s ad
tontem Eilmundi in castro de Bamburg, et Barbecatre ante portam Et pro 33l.
15s. 9d. positis in reparacione molendi^^i Regis apud Laumberg."
.

In the year 1266, Robert de Lisle, having taken part with the rebellious
barons, who had made the King their prisoner, was by them appointed governor of
Newcastle upon Tyne Dugdale's Baronage, vol. i. p. 738, citing Pat. 49 Hen.
III. m. 27. After the rebellion was crushed, Adam de Gesemue was sheriff and
keeper of this castle. -- The following occurs, Harleian MSS. 624, p. 201 --
anno 50 Hen. III. -- "Northumbr' visores. Simon le Charpenter and Ricardus le
Porter visores operationum Regis in castro Novi Castri super Tynam and
expensarum factarum ad predictum castrum muniend' et stipend' militum and
commorancium in eodem castro tempore turbacionis habit affidaverunt pro 513l.
9s. 8d. positis in eisdem operacionibus municione and stipendiis tempore
predicto per Adam de Gesemue vicecomitem Northumbrie."
.

A. D. 1268, the reparations of the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne cost 14l.
16s. 6d. Ibid. p. 202, b. -- "Com' ex part remem' Domini Thesaurarii anno 53
Hen. III. Rot. 2, in tergo. -- Northumbr' visores -- Novum Castrum super Tinam.
Johannes de Bentone and Rogerus Darreyns visores operacionis Regis in predicto
castro affidaverunt pro 14l. 16s. 6d. positis in reparacione et emendacione
ejusdem castri."
.

In the year 1250, the King's tower in the castle of Newcastle cost, in
repairing, 67l. 5s. Ibid. p. 204, b. -- "Anno 55 Hen. III. Rot. 6. in tergo. --
Novi Castri super Tynam visores -- Johannes de Bentone and Henricus Gerneys
visores reparacionis turtis Regis in castro Novi Castri super Tinam
affidaverunt pro 67l. 5s. posius in reparacione et emendacione turris predicte."
.

There is said to be a roll, of the date of 1278, remaining in the Tower of
London, wherein is preserved an account of the different lands and tenements in
the county of Northumberland, which were at that time charged with the repairs
and support of some edifices within this castle Wallis's History of
Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 236, notes -- citing claus. 6 R Ed. I. dorso.......
Tom. iv. Rot. Tutr. Londonen'. -- Also Murray MS.
.

December 26th, 1292, John Baliol, King of Scotland, did homage for the crown
of that kingdom to Edward I. King of England, in the great-hall of his palace,
within the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne "Apud Novum Castrum super Tynam in
aula palatu ipsius Domini Regis infra castrum etc." Rymeri Foedera, vol. ii. p.
593 -- p. 600.

A. D. 1293, John de Eslington occurs as holding the manor of Eslington, in
Northumberland, by the service of 4l. rent to the King's Exchequer at
Newcastle, etc. and making seek at the castle of that town. -- Ex Bund. Escaet.
Turri Land. ^ anno ^^ Ed. I ^ 23.


.

There is a writ, dated 1297, by which the King commanded the sheriff of
Northumberland to store the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne with victuals, and
other necessaries, and to cause it to be safely guarded Madox's Exchequer, p.
260, folio edit.
.

A. D. 1299, Alan de Molton occurs as porter of this castle "Duodecim
prisonibus Scotie incarceratis apud Novum Castrum super Tynam de dono Regis ad
calciamenta et alia necessaria sibi emenda per manus Alani de Molton janitoris
castri ibidem ultimo die Octobris -- 1l. 0s. 0d." -- Wardrobe Account, 28 Ed I.
p. 181.
.

In the year 1305, Thomas de Lucy occurs as holding the manor of Langley, in
Northumberland, of the King in chief, by the service of one knight's see, an
annual rent of 8s. 6d. for cornage to the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne, and by
doing county suit and service there Wallis's History of Northumberland, vol.
ii. p. 39, notes.
.

May 3d, 1315, King Edward II. appointed William Ridell, Knt. sheriff of
Northumberland, and committed to him the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne, to
account in the King's Exchequer as former sheriffs and keepers had done, for
what related to the office of sheriff and to the custody of this castle Ibid.
vol. ii. p. 65, notes.
.

By an inquisition taken at Newcastle upon Tyne, September 13th, 1317, it
appeared that Adam de Valentia, Earl of Pembroke, held, at the day of his
death, the manor of Mitford in Northumberland, of the King in capite, by the
service of a barony, and payment of 31s. 4d. for cornage to the castle of
Newcastle upon Tyne Wallis's Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 315, notes.
.

In the year 1323, one quarter of the body of Andrew de Hartela, who had
suffered death for treason, was ordered to be stuck up on the tower of this
castle Rymer's Foedera, tom. iii. p. 999. "Un autre quarter amount, de la tour
de Novel Chastel."
, which appears about this time to have been put into a posture of defense
Wardrobe account of the 15th, 16th, and 17th of Ed. II. penes Th. Astle Armig.
p. 281.

"Johannes de Fenwyk vicecom' Northumbr' 20 balist' 2000 quarrel et 19 baudi'
nov' sibi lib' per Willielmum de Kyrkeby clericum pro municione Novi Castri
super Tynam sexto die Marcii anno sexto decimo." And ibid. p. 41, "Johanni
Walays et Johanni Flecher artillariis de Novo Castro super Tynam pro 20
balistis 2000 quarell' et 19 bandt' novis empt' de eisdem per dominum
Willielmum de Kirkeby clericum ad hoc assignat' et liberat' Johanni de Fenwyk
vicecom' Northumbr' pro municione Novi Castri super Tynam, prec' cujuslibet
baliste 3s. prec' cujuslibet millene quarellor' 25s. Et prec' cujuslibet bandi'
12d. per manus dicti Willielmi 6 die Marcii -- 6l. 9s."


.

A. D. 1336, there was an inquisition taken at Newcastle upon Tyne concerning
the reparation of this castle, whereby it was found, that at the battle of
Bannockburn, in the year 1313, when John de Kenton, Knt. was sheriff of
Northumberland, the fortress, and all the edifices about it, were in good
repair -- that afterward Nicholas Scot, Adam de Swinburn, William Riddell,
John de Fenwick, Cuthbert de Boroughdon, John de Fenwick, John de Wodhorne,
John de Lilleburne, William de Tyndale, Roger Mauduit, and Robert Darreins were
sheriffs of Northumberland -- during which time it was affirmed that the great
tower, and also the lesser ones of the said castle, the great hall, with the
King's chamber adjoining thereto; together with diverse other chambers below in
Queen's mantle, and the buttry-cellar and pantry: the King's chapel Bourne
says, "This chapel, I have been told, stood on that part of the castle-yard
where ^h^ moot-hall is, but, upon searching, I found it in the castle itself,
according to this account. The door of it is at the bottom of the south-wall of
the castle, adjoining to the stairs which s^^d into the state-chamber. It has
been a work of great beauty and ornament, and is still, in the midst of dust
and darkness, by far the most beautiful place in the whole building, the inside
of it being curiously adorned with arches and pillars. It is easy to observe
the (...) part^ of it, the entrance, the body of it, and the chan^^^. On the
left side of the entrance, you go into a dark little room, which undoubtedly
was the vestry. The full length of it is 15 yards, the breadth of it is 6 yards
and a half. It had 3 or 4 windows toward the ^^st, which are now all filled
up* no^ (...) there (...) but what comes (...) ^little (...) in the wall.
within the castle; a certain house beyond the gate which is called the
Checker-House, with the bridges within and without the gate, and one postern,
were 300l. worse than before: they say also, that there were in the custody of
Roger Mauduit, late sheriff, four hundred and twenty fothers of lead. They say
also, that it was thought highly necessary, that the Baron Heron, of Haddeston,
the Baron of Walton, Lord Robert de Clifford, of the New-Place, Chief Lord of
the Barony of Gaugie, the Lords of the Barony of -- and Devilston; that the
Lord of Werk upon Tweed, the Lord of the Barony of Bolbeck, alias Bywell, the
Baron of Bothall, and, lastly, the Baron of Delaval, should build each of them
a house within the liberties of the castle, for the defense thereof. The house
of the Baron of Werk was built over the Postern Bourne's History. Wallis's
Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 236. Murray MS. -- "No^um Castrum super Tynam --
inquis' de reparacione castri ibidem ad diversas personas pertinen' Et de
purprestur' et usurpac' sac' super motam and solum Regis. Esch' 9 Ed. III. n.
68."

N. B. "Mota" was sometimes used for a fortress or castle. -- Blount's
Dictionary in verbo.


.

In the year 1340 John de Biker occurs as holding the manor of Biker,
containing a carucate of land, an hundred acres of wood, and 17s. 7d. ob.
annual rent, of the King in chief, by the service, among others, of payment to
the King, by the hand of the sheriff for the time being, 10l. yearly, for
castleward, to the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne Wallis's Northumberland, vol.
ii. p. 250, notes.
.

A. D. 1341, Lord John Nevil, of Hornby, occurs as captain of this castle; when
Earl Murray appears to have been confined in it as a prisoner Grafton's
Chronicle, p. 249. -- Barnes's Ed. III. p. 254.
.

In the years 1342 and 1343 Dugdale's Baronage, vol. ii. p. 65, citing Rot.
Scot. 15 Ed. III. m. 4.
, William de Felton appears to have been sheriff of the county of
Northumberland, and governor of this castle Ibid. citing Rot. Fin. 16 Ed. III.
m. 9.
.

A. D. 1346, Robert Lord Bertram occurs as sheriff and governor of this castle
Barnes's Ed. III. p. 379. -- Also Dugdale, ut supra, vol. i. p. 545, citing
Rot. Fin. 19 Ed. III. m. 23.
.

December 27th, 1351, the King appointed William de Watford keeper of the gate
of this castle, with the same salary that Nicholas de Ufton, deceased, had, and
his predecessors in that office Murray MS. p. 279.
.

A mandate occurs from the King to John de Coupeland, sheriff of
Northumberland, to keep the person of David Brus safely and securely in this
castle, unless Henry de Percy, and Ralph de Nevill, should agree at Berwick
upon Tweed to deliver him up for certain hostages of Scotland Rymer's Foedera,
tom. v. p. 72^.
.

A. D. 1357, Castle-Moor and Castle-Field, anciently annexed to the castle of
Newcastle upon Tyne, were granted by the crown, and made parcel of the
corporation of that town See History of Newcastle as a corporate town.
.

In the year 1360, Richard de Cramlington, brother and heir of John de
Cramlington, occurs as paying for his lands in the village of Cramlington
(amongst other things), three shillings and four-pence for ward to the castle
of Newcastle Wallis's Northumberland, vol. ii p. 270, notes. -- A. D. 1393,
William de Cramlington occurs as doing the same, ibid. p. 270, notes.
.

A. D. 1361, the King granted the custody of the gaol, and of the gate of the
castle of Newcastle upon Tyne, to Thomas Rote, for the term of his life, and
with such fees as his predecessors in those offices, William de Watford and
William Fox, had been accustomed to receive Murray MS. p. 279.
.

May 20th, 1362, a mandate occurs from the King to Henry del Strother, late
sheriff of Northumberland, to deliver up John Gray and Thomas de Hay, hostages
of Scotland, to Roger de Wyderington, then sheriff of Northumberland, by whom
they are directed to be kept safe in the King's castle at Newcastle upon Tyne.

A similar mandate occurs, dated June 20th, 1363, to the above Roger de
Wyderington, to deliver up Thomas del Hay to Richard de Horsley, then sheriff
of Northumberland, to be safely kept in the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne
Rymer's Foedera under these years.
.

Among the petitions in parliament, A. D. 1377, there occurs one for the
reparation (among other northern castles) of that of Newcastle upon Tyne, and
for the placing of a proper constable to reside in the same Rot. Parl. vol.
iii. p. 30.
.

In the year 1384, Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, had the sherissalty of
that county, and the custody of Newcastle upon Tyne, committed to his trust
Dugdale's Baronage, vol. i. p. 277, from Rot. Fin. 8 Ric. II. m. 16. The next
year, also, this Earl was again constituted sheriff of Northumberland, Rot.
Fin. 9 Ric. II. m. 22.
.

A. D. 1390, Sir Ralph Eure, Knt. occurs as sheriff of Northumberland, and
governor of the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne Dugdale, ut supra, tom. ^^. p.
385, citing Rot. Fin. 13 Ric. II. m. 17.
.

In the year 1399, King Henry IV. granted a charter to separate the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne from the county of Northumberland, and make it a distinct
county of itself: it is observable, that there is no express mention of any
exception of this castle, or the limits thereof, called Castle-Yard, in the
above charter See History of Newcastle as a corporate town under that year.
There is said to be, in the Rolls-Chapel, a private act of parliament for
putting this castle, and its limits, into the county of Northumberland, for the
convenience of the judges at the assizes, etc. Taking this for granted, the act
must have been obtained soon after the above charter of separation, for in
1447, in an inquisition dated January 5th that year, it is mentioned in the
following words, "Apud castrum Domini Regis de Novo Castro super Tinam in
comi^atu Northumbriae etc."

As also in the subsequent extract from the "Bolden Buke," in a memorial of the
date of 1461.

"Be it remember that I Robert Rodes satt at the castle in the Newcastel upon
Tyne in the county of Northumberlande etc." -- 30th April, 1 Ed. IV. --
Randall's MSS.

It is also said to be in the county of Northumberland in a charter to the
corporation of Newcastle, of the 31st of Queen Elizabeth.

In an old MS. communicated by Thomas Davidson, Esquire. entitled, "A Copy of Sir
Thomas Tempest's Instruccions to defend the town of Newcastle's rights against
a survey lately returned wherein it certified that the greatest part of the
town is hold of the crown." Speaking of Henry IVth's charter of separation, it
is observed, "But the castle was still reserved to be a prison for
Northumberland"


.

An extraordinary grant, and which was afterward most ungratefully repaid The
following curious letter from the Duke of Gloucester, afterward Richard III.
to Lord Nevil, is copied, literatim, from the Calverley MS. and selected from
what is there entitled, "A coppie of some letters which were found in
Rabie-Castle after the rebellion to show the fashion of those times: "To my
Lord Nevyll in have
"My Lord Nevyll I recommaunde me to you as heartily as I can and as ever ye
love me and your own weal and sewrty and yis realm that ye come to me with
that ye may make defensably arrayde in all the have that is possible and that
ye will yef credence to (...) Richard Ratclyff this beerer whom I now do
send to you enstructed with all my mind and intent And my Lord do me now
good service as ye have always before don and I trust now so to remember you as
shall be the making of you and yours. And God send you good fortune. Written at
London 11 day of June with the hand of your hertely loving cousyn and master

"R. GLOUCESTRE."




It appears, from the Rolls of Parliament, vol. vi. p. 344, that King Edward
IV. sometime in his reign, had granted, by letters patent, to Henry Earl of
Northumberland, the offices of constable and porter of Newcastle, sheriff of
the county of Northumberland, and constable of the castle of Dunstanborough and
Bamburgh in that county. By the list of sheriffs, it appears, that the above
Earl was appointed, first in 1475, and continued till 1481.


, of the wardenship of the north marches, together with the castles, towns,
lordships, customs, and fee-farms of Carlisle and Newcastle upon Tyne, etc.
etc. to be held of the King by knight's service, was made by King Edward the
Fourth, in his 20th year, to Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and confirmed by the
parliament at Westminster, in the year 1482 Parliamentary History, vol. ii. p.
376.
.

September 21st, 1485, King Henry VII. granted, by letters patent, to William
Case, Esquire. during life, the office of constable of the castle of Newcastle upon
Tyne, with the accustomed wages and fees Bourne's History. -- This William
Case, who was also steward of the lordship of Trowbridge in Wiltshire, occurs
in the act of attainder, 1483 -- 1 Ric. III. "William Case son and heir to
John Case gentilman." -- Rot. Parl. vol. vi. p. 246.
.

February 15th, 1494, the office of constable of this castle, then vacant by
the death of Sir Robert Multon, Knt. was granted, by letters patent of the
same, to Roger Fenwick, Esquire. with the wages and fees of 20l. per annum, out of
the revenues of the county of Northumberland, with other emoluments Bourne, ut
supra. -- He adds, that "Not any letters patent of the office of constable
since the last abovementioned, for the custody of the castle (as supposed) was
committed to the sheriff of Northumberland for several years."
.

By a clause in a charter of the 31st of Queen Elizabeth, to the corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne, the supposed private act of parliament, whereby this
castle and its precinct had been restored Perhaps the charter of 1 Hen. IV. had
neither power nor intention to sever it from thence. The following is extracted
from Grose's Antiquities, vol. i. "The castle of Chester, with the precincts
thereof, were reserved out of that charter by King Henry VII. by which that
city was made a county of itself, and accordingly has ever since been used for
the King's majesty's service of the county of Chester, and esteemed a part
thereof, and not of the county of the city."

Morant, in his History of Colchester, p. 10, tells us, "The castle of that
town, with the bailey, is independent of the corporation." -- The Tower of
London is exempted from the city jurisdiction -- The castle of Norwich stands
in the middle of the city, yet is wholly exempted from it -- The same may be
observed of Worcester Castle, which, as far as the bounds thereof go, is out of
the corporation.


to the county of Northumberland, after the charter of the 1st of Henry IV. had
constituted the town of Newcastle a county of itself, was in a great degree
invalidated, and the same power given to the magistrates of Newcastle in this
place, the dungeon only excepted, as in all others under their peculiar
jurisdiction "Elizabeth Dei gratia etc. -- Cumque quoddam vetus et ruinosum
castrum scituat' existit infra predictam villam nostram Novi Castri super Tynam
sed in com' nostro Northumbric extra libertates etc. ejusdem ville: racione
cujus multe et diverse person nequissime ibidem commorantes qui licet infra
villam predictam impune evadere nullo modo permittuntur ipsi tamen sugientes in
castrum predictum multocies puniciones metitas evadunt Qui quidem major et alii
officiati^ ville predicte nullam habent libertatem seu auctoritatem hujusmodi
malefactores in castrum predict' seu clausum procinct' ambit' et c^rcuit'
ejusdem castri fugam seu evasionem facientes attachiand' arrestand' seu
apprehendend' licet vetus castrum illud et clausus circuitus procinctus et
ambitus ejusdem castri ad nullum alium usum conducant quam pro prisona seu
communi gaola pro com' nostro Northumbr' predict' et pro communi aula vocat' le
Moat-Hall seu Aula Sessionum ejusdem comitat' Sciatis igitur quod nos de gratia
nostra speciali et ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris dedimus and
concessimus ac pro nobis hered' and successor' nostris pro consideracione
predict' per presents damus and concedimus prefato majori and burgens' ville
predict' and successor' suis quod ipsi and successores sui imperpetuum habeant
et habere possint and valiant libertatem and auctoritatem de tempore in tempus
intrandi in clausur' castri predicti ac in dom' and mansion' quascunque infra
ambit' circuit' and procinct' ejusdem castri (except' tantummodo gaola nostra
ibidem vulgariter vocat' the Dungeon) ac infra clausum domos and mansion'
predict' exercend' faciend' gaudend' tot tanta talia eadem hujusmodi and
consimiles authoritat' libertates jurisdictiones praeeminen' and libertat'
quaecunque in attachiand' arrestand' corrigend' et puniend' omnes and omnimod'
hujusmodi malefactores and personas ibidem seu infra clausum castri predicti
domos et mansion' predict' de tempore in tempus commotantes inhabitants and
existen. Nec non in committend' eosdem malefactores jail ville predicte et
eosdem ibidem detinend' quot quant' and qual' auctoritat' libertat' jurisdic'
and preeminen' prefat' major and burgen' ville predict' antehac exer^u^^nt
habuerunt vel gavisi fuerunt aut exercere habere vel g^udere debuerunt in
attach^and' arrestand' corrigend' puniend' et committend' malefactores
quoscunque infra villam Novi Castri predict' et libertates ejusdem commoran'
inhabitari' et existen' -- Test meipsa apud Westmori' 30 die Augusti anno
regni nostri tricesimo primo."

POWLE per breve de privato sigillo. Examinatur per Wilhelmum Ere^che.



.

From the year 1605 to 1616, this castle, no longer a fortified place, was
farmed, for I know not what purpose, by the incorporated company of tailors of
Newcastle upon Tyne, at the annual rent of one pound sterling -- part of the
keep, however, still continued to be used as a prison Books of the taylors'
company. -- In St. Nicholas' Register, October 1597, "Giles Wallys jailor of
the high castle" occurs -- he was buried October 25, 1614. He appears to have
been the receiver of the above rent from the taylors' company.

In St. Nicholas' register of burials, August 23d, 1787, "Gilbert Heron, Gent.
prisoner in the high castle," occurs as having been buried on that day.

In the register of the same church, November 21, 1625, a child i^ mentioned as
having been begotten "in the jall of the hic castle."


.

King James I. by letters patent, dated April 14th, 1618, granted, and let to
farm, at the rent of forty shillings per annum, for the term of fifty years, to
Alexander Stevenson, Esquire. one of the pages of his bedchamber, "all that his old
castle of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne and the scyte and herbage of the said
castle as well within the walls of the same as without, with the rights,
members, privileges, etc. thereto belonging." The county prison for
Northumberland, with the Moot-Hall By the royal arms, cut in stone, over the
entrance of the present moot-hall In the survey of the castle, etc. dated
October 29th, 1649, remaining in the Augmentation-Office, the following occurs
concerning Moot-Hall: "There is an ancient building within the inner-wall of
the Castle-Garth which is commonly called or known by the name of the
Moote-Hall, which is now in the State and is used by the justices of assize,
sessions and jail delivery for the keeping of their assize and sessions for
the county of Northumberland. Therefore we do not value the same conceiving it
is excepted in the act."
, in which those of Scotland are quartered, it appears that this building
cannot be older than the time of James I.

"Moot (from the Sax. Motian, to treat or handle) is well understood at the
inns of court to be that exercise, or arguing of cases, which young barristers
and students perform at certain times, for the better enabling them for
practice and defense of clients causes. The place where moot cases were argued
was anciently called a moot-hall." -- Blount's Law Dictionary in verbo.

I am not satisfied with this etymology for the Moot-Hall in the castle of
Newcastle. See before a note under 1336, where "mota" is used, in the original
record, for the castle itself. -- May not therefore moot-hall mean no more than
"the hall of the castle?" See Blount also for this sense of the word "mota."


, and other conveniences for keeping the assizes and sessions for the use of
the county of Northumberland, were excepted in this grant, at the time of the
date of which the castle-ward rent amounted to 32l. per annum Extracted from a
grant of Mrs. Langston's interest in the Castle-Garth to the mayor and
burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, preserved in their archives. -- We gather
from it, also, that the grant of King James to Stevenson fell into the
possession of Barbara Black, widow of Patrick Black, from whom, about
November 29th, 1648, it was conveyed Jane Langston, of St. Martin's in the
Fields, in the county of Middlesex, London: This Jane Langston, in
consideration of the sum of 300l. made over her right and title to the
Castle-Garth to William Maddison, of Westminster, who was an agent and in trust
for the corporation of Newcastle. See afterward under 1652.

Gardener, in his England's Grievance of the Coal Trade, etc. p. 44, chap. xv.
tells us, that Stevenson died in October 1640, in debt of 2,500l. and left Mr.
Auditor Darel his executor, who was also one of his principal creditors. --
This censorious writer goes on to charge the magistrates of Newcastle with
greatly abusing their authority in this place, adding, that an information
thereupon was exhibited against the mayor and burgesses of that town, by Sir
Henry Yelverton, Knt. attorney general, in the 18th year of the reign of King
James I.


.

August 18th, 1620, an inquisition was taken concerning the bounds of this
castle, and the lands thereto belonging, and there was an information thereupon
in the exchequer chamber It appeared, says Bourne, by this inquisition, that
the ancient castle, belonging to the King, situated within the walls of
Newcastle upon Tyne, belongs to the county of Northumberland, and is surrounded
with a great stone-wall -- that below the castle there is a great hall, where
the county of Northumberland hold their assizes. -- There is also a great
tower, full of chinks, under which are two vaults, which are the places where
the prisoners of the said county of Northumberland are kept, which are within
the circuit of the castle itself. -- And that there is in being the exterior
wall of the castle (He goes on to describe the boundaries of it, which, from
the change of owners of the different tenements, etc. surrounding it, is
unintelligible at this distance of time.) which contains, by measure, 3 acres
of ground and one rood.

Complaint was made of an enormous dunghill, in length 98 yards, and 32 in
breadth, and 10 yards deep, which imposed so prodigious a weight upon the wall
on the west side of the castle, in length 40 yards, 10 yards in height, and two
yards broad, as to have thrown down a great part thereof to the great detriment
of the strength of the castle, the damage of which was computed at 120l.

It was also complained of, that the great square tower was full of chinks and
crannies, and that one-third of it was almost taken away; that all the lead and
covering which it had of old was embezzled and carried off, insomuch that the
prisoners of the county of Northumberland were most miserably lodged, by reason
of the showers of rain falling upon them. -- They computed that the charge of
repairing it would amount to 809l. 15s. -- He adds, in a note, that the above
enormous dunghill was taken away by Sir John Marley, mayor, and his adherents,
to rampart the town's walls against the parliament and commonwealth.


.

In the year 1643, Sir John Marley, Knt. then mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne,
covered the keep of this castle with planks Books of the company of shipwrights
in Newcastle. -- "At a meeting, August 21st, 1643, to treat concerning the
right worshipful the mayor his propositions, concerning covering the castle
with plank, etc."
, and placed cannon thereupon for defense of the town against the Scots: he
retired to it, with some others, after the enemy had taken Newcastle by storm,
October 19th, 1644, and held it out against them for eight days with great
gallantry Bourne, p. 233. -- "In the year 1644, the round-tower under the
Moot-Hall toward the Sand Hill, called the Half Moon, which was the old castle
of Monkchester, was, by Sir John Marley, made use of to secure the river and
key-side against the Scots; and the other castle he put into good repair, which
was very ruinous: on the former he had great guns for the use abovementioned,
and on the latter he placed great ordnance, to beat off those guns which the
Scots had laid upon the banks of Gateshead against the town."
.

An information occurs in the House of Commons' Journals, Nov. 17th, 1646,
concerning the moat of this castle, and the wall thereof, which appears to have
fallen and destroyed many houses Vol. iv. 17th November, 1646. -- In a deed,
dated November 2, 1615, of an house, at present the property of Mr. John
Stevenson, house-carpenter, situated on the west side of the street at the head
of the Long-Stairs, the tenement it conveys is said to stand in a street called
"the Castle-Mote." -- This street occurs, with the same name, in another deed
of the same property, dated March 26th, 1697.

A deed of a tenement, situated near the castle stairs, dated 16th Charles II.
now in the possession of Mr. George Anderson, who favored me with an extract,
describes the premises as "boundering on the Close, on the south part, and
extending itself from the said street called the Close, before, unto the
High-Castle-Moote, behind, on the north-p^^te."


.

There is remaining in the Augmentation-Office the original of "A survey of the
farm of the old castle of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne with all the rights
members and appurtenances thereof lyeing and being in the county of
Northumberland late parcel of the possessions of Charles Stuarte late King of
England made and taken by us whose names are hereunto subscribed 29 October
1649 by virtue of a commission grounded upon an Act of the Commons assembled in
Parliament for the sale of the honors manors and lands heretofore belonging
to the late King Queen and Prince under the hands of seven of the trustees
in the said act named and appointed."

The description and boundary are as follows: "All that the old castle being a
strong and great tower of free stone situate in the midst of the Castle-Garth
in the county of Northumberland and bounded with strong works of stone and
mudde is now garrisoned by the parliament's forces and used by them as a
magazeene of ammunicion for the garrison of Newcastle and therefore we have not
surveyed nor valued the same.

"Which said old castle with the seyte thereof together with all the
appurtenances thereunto belonging are butted and bounded by a channel which
begins and leads from the north side of the fore part of a house and shopp
now in the occupacion of Alexander Veache of Newcastle by the wall from the
north-west of the Black-Gate and so the channel leads south-weste from the
said house and shopp by the wall within which is a piece of waste ground over
against Bayly-Gate. It boundreth all alonge within the channel without an
outward wall to the west. This wall leads south south-west the corner whereof
is butted by a dwelling house now inhabited by Cuthbert Maxwell bordring on the
west side of the said corner from thence southe alonge the channel through the
grate of the Longe-Stayres and so along the channel to another grate below
adjoining to a corner of an old stone-wall which points direct weste and is
part of the house of Michael Moore And so the wall leads south through the
said house a small distance to Mr. James Claverynges garden and so leads
along east on the south side of a tenement now in the possession of Robert
Peacock and south of the inner-wall of the Castle-Garth directly by an old
ruined wall south on Mr. Bows his garden to the boundring stone on the common
passage called the Castle-Staires under which boundring stone there is a grate
and a channel or water passage that falls through the same and boundreth south
on the inner-wall of the Castle-Garth east from the said boundring stone and on
the south of Mr. William Calverleyes garden alonge the outward-wall to the end
of a stone and bricke-house in the same garden belongyng to the said Mr.
William Calverley and in possession of Mr. Mark Milbankes. From thence it
boundreth by a corner of the old wall and leads directly north and on the
east side of the inner-wall of the Castle-Garthe and on the east side of the
Moote-Hall and east of diverse gardens and wast grounds belonging to the old
castle and now in the possession of diverse persons of Newcastle whose houses
bounder on the east of the said gardens All which houses are in the town and
county of Newcastle viz. from the garden now in the possession of Mrs. Joane
Carre 16 yards in length east and west and 7 yards in breadth unto Mrs. Alice
I Will her gardens 9 yards square which lies the northermost part of all the
gardens and wast grounds and adjoins to the inner-wall of the Castle-Garthe to
the west and to the backside of her now dwellinge house on the east and so
boundring north-west of Thomas Huntley and Mr. Robert Huntley's gardens without
and adjoininge to the north-west side and corner of a square old ruined tower
near the drawbridge of the Castle-Garth, leadinge north and without the
Black-Gate of the said Castle-Garthe and so alonge by an old wall which
leads north-west to the backside of the said Alexander Veache his house and
shopp to the north thereof and unto the channel of the street west from the
forepart of the house and shopp aforesaid and do contain by estimacion five
acres and a half more or less and all ways passages, lights, easments,
waters, watercourse commodities advantages and appurtenances to the aforsayd
old castle and scyte thereof or any part or parcel thereof in any wise
belonging or apperteyning per annum.

Summa totalis 116l. 15s. 6d. The Aubone MS. dates this survey as having been
taken in January, 1649, and adds that the castle, and certain lands and houses
pretended to be thereto belonging, were thereby valued at 2,000l. 3s. 4d. and
returned to the trustees for sale of the King's lands. But upon solemn debate,
the right of the corporation of Newcastle was allowed to their ancient
possessions, which did not belong, as was pretended, to this castle. -- In
consequence of which determination, an order was sent down, April 25th, 1650,
for annulling and vacating the said survey. -- See Bourne's account -- and
afterward "Castle-Field and the Firth."

The county gaoler's house is described in the above survey: -- "All that
cottage or tenement of stone and dawbing situate on the south side of the
Castle-Garth within the inner wall and adjoining thereunto containing one low
room with a chamber and a shedd where a smith now keeps a shopp now in the
tenure or occupacion of Bartholomew Herle jailer of the prison for
Northumberland and is now worth per annum (if it might be let) 50s. and for the
same is paid to the crown yearly by the sheriff of Northumberland 5s. But by
what grant the sheriff holds it we cannot be informed And therefore we
conceiving it to be a place of public office and depending upon the
Moote-Hall do only incerte the ancient rent being 5 shillinges."

In the above survey are also comprised "Two small tenements situate betwixt
the Black-Gate and the drawbridge of the Castle-Garth."

"Item -- one other wast ground lying west and north of the old castle without
the works or moate thereof over against Bayli-Gate and Back-Rowe containing by
estimation 140 poales worth per annum 6s. 8d."


.

Signed Robe. Stafford Rob. Boittours William Peglors Benja. Jones

Examine. per Willielmum West

Supervisor' General 1649.

By order of the committee for removing of obstructions dated 25 March 1650
Resolved that auditor Phillipp Darrell has the right of preemption in and to
the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne with appurtenances.

Will. Webb 1650."




A. D. 1652, the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne purchased of Mrs. Jane
Langston, relict of John Langston, groom porter, for the sum of 300l. her right
and title to this castle, and the precincts thereof Common Council books. --
"November 11th, 1652, Order to empower Mr. Maddison to conclude with Mrs.
Langston for her interest in the high castle."
.

About the year 1662, the King was petitioned to grant this castle and its
precincts, the lease whereof to Stevenson was within a few years of expiring,
for the use of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

Upon this a dispute arose, whether a grant thereof were not more proper for
the county of Northumberland than for the town, because it was alleged, though
the said castle and garth stand in Newcastle, yet they belong to the county of
Northumberland.

Lord Ogle, on behalf of that county, having had a conference with those who
appeared for Newcastle, was convinced that it was more proper for the town of
Newcastle to have them, on being assured that the gaol, etc. should still
continue for the service of the county as heretofore.

In the interim of this dispute, Lord Gerard prevented the corporation of
Newcastle, and obtained a grant under the seal of the exchequer, dated August
13th (or 30th) 1664, for 99 years in reversion, determinable on three lives, at
the annual rent of forty shillings Collected from original papers concerning
"Castle-Garth," preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon
Tyne.

The three lives were, his own, and those of Charles and Fitton Gerard, his
sons. The Moot-Hall, and other conveniences for keeping the assizes, etc. were
excepted in this grant, and he to keep all the premises in ^^pan. This Lord
Gerard, afterward Earl of Macclesfield, had petitioned for a grant of the
constableship of the said castle, but that was found no ways necessary for his
majesty's service.


.

In the year 1668, we find the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of Newcastle,
petitioning the King to revoke Lord Gerard's grant, as it was only under the
exchequer seal, was at an under value, and had been obtained by surprise. The
matter was referred to the lords commissioners of the treasury, but they could
obtain no redress for the present From the petition (a copy), still preserved
in the archives of the corporation.
.

The matter of annexing the Castle-Garth to Newcastle, and dismembering it from
the county, having been referred by the lords commissioners of the treasury to
the attorney general, it was by him reported, that he conceived it might be
more fit for the government of the inhabitants of Castle-Garth, if that place
was put within the limits and jurisdiction of the town of Newcastle, which
might be done by the King's letters patent, with a proviso that the assizes and
sessions be kept there for the county, as formerly: whereupon, after great
consideration had of the matter by the right honorable the lord high
treasurer, a grant passed the great seal, by way of indenture, between his
majesty, on the one part, and the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, on the
other part, dated June 17th, 1685, for the term of 31 years, and at the annual
^ent of one hundred chaldrons of coals, London measure The coals were for the
use of Chelsea Hospital.
, to be delivered in the pool of London. The King's rents in the said castle,
of the yearly value of 32l. were excepted in this grant; as also, "All that
great hall called the Moot-Hall within the walls of the said castle where his
majestyes justices heretofore used to hold the assizes, sessions and
jail-deliver and now do yearly from time to time use to sit for the handeling
and ordering matters and businesses concerning the service of the Kinge's
majesty and the state and good government of the said county of Northumberland
and also all other houses and buildings and other fit and usual places as
well within the said castle as without where his majestye's people and subjects
of his highnesses said county of Northumberland use to come reside and be at
the assizes sessions and jail-deliver and other such like causes and matters
whereto they shall be called for the better dispatch and performance of their
several services and offices and duties in that behalf due unto the King's
majesty, his heirs and successors according to the custom of the place
aforesaid and the laws of his majestyes kingdom. And also except all those
lower places within the said castle now used for the common prison and gaol by
the sheriff of the said county of Northumberland for the time being." -- The
grant is "of all that his said majestye's old castle of the town of Newcastle
upon Tyne and the seite and herbage of the said castle as well within the walls
of the same as without with the rights members and appurtenances of what nature
or kind soever situate lying and being or to the said premises in any wise
belonging or appertaining in the county of Northumberland or in the county of
the town of Newcastle upon Tyne or either of them -- And all those his
majestye's lands, closes of meadow or pasture called or known by the name or
names of the Castle-Fields and the Fryth with their and every of their
appurtenances lying and being in the county of Northumberland or the said
county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid or either of them From the
original papers and records in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle
upon Tyne. -- This grant cost them 600l.

King James II. the grantor, died September 6th, 1701.

The Earl of Macclesfield died without issue, Nov. 5th, 17^1, viz. two months
after, when the grant to the town of Newcastle commenced, for it was only a
grant of the reversion of the premises.

May 15th, 1685, his majesty, King James II. had granted a warrant for
Castle-Garth to be parcel of Newcastle.

From a view of the Castle-Garth, and return made under the hands and seals of
Sir William Blackett, Sir Ralph Jennison, and others, in the year 1685, the
rental of the premises by building and improvements amounted to 149l. 1s. 8d.
per annum: but it was alleged that it rose to that height by strangers and
fugitives harboring there, in a place not subject to the government of the
town. Surveyor General's Report, dated 22d December, 1735.


."

In Trinity Term, 1690, the Earl of Macclesfield caused a scire facias to issue
out to revoke the letters patent, pretending that the King had not power to
take the Castle-Garth out of the county of Northumberland, and annex it to the
town of Newcastle: the corporation of that town retained Mr. Thomas Pingrey, a
clerk in the petty Bag, to appear to the above, and give notice to them the
defendants when to plead: but he neglecting to give such notice, judgment was
afterward signed on the said writ by default.

On a petition of the corporation of Newcastle to the lords commissioners of
the great seal, dated December 6th, 1690, to set aside the judgment obtained by
default, their lordships after a hearing, December 19th, 1690, declared that it
should be set aside, and that the defendants (the corporation of Newcastle), by
the 13th January, 1691, should plead in chief to the above scire facias.

Proceedings at law between the contending parties appear to have been
continued till July 18th, 5th of William and Mary, when, Macclesfield,
plaintiff, against the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, defendants, the lord
keeper ordered that an injunction should be awarded for stay of the defendants'
proceedings against the said plaintiff and his tenants The corporation of
Newcastle is charged with vexing them with frivolous suits, breaking open their
houses, etc. etc. by virtue of some bye laws of their own -- seizing their
goods -- inditing them for following their several trades, etc. on presumption
that the Castle Garth was part and parcel of Newcastle upon Tyne, by virtue of
the warrant of James II. dated May 15th, 1685 -- which by this order was set
aside and abrogated.
. And also to quiet them in such their several possessions of the premises in
question, as they had at the time of filing the bill, and for three years
before, until the defendants should appear and answer the same plaintiff's
bill, and the further order of the court to the contrary, unless cause should
be shown to the contrary, at the next general seal, Mr. Solicitor Rawlingson
praying a day till then to be heard therein.

July 24th, 5th William and Mary -- No cause being then shown to the contrary,
it was therefore upon the motion of Mr. Hollis, being of the plaintiff's
council made at the rising of the court, ordered that the said former order be
made absolute Original papers in the archives of Newcastle upon Tyne.
.

October 2d, 1704, the mantle-wall in the Castle-Garth is mentioned as either
having fallen down, or as being in such a state as rendered it necessary it
should be immediately repaired Common Council books. -- The following is an
extract from the Newcastle Courant. "Dec. 14, 1733. This day se'nnight the
flying man flew from the top of the castle into Baily-Gate; and after that he
made an ass fly down, by which several accidents happened -- for the weights
tied to the ass's legs knocked down several, bruised others in a violent
manner, and killed a girl on the spot."
.

September 23d, 1734, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle petitioned the King
for a farther term of the Castle-Garth, their former grant thereof from King
James II. having expired Common Council books. In the Surveyor-General's
Report, dated Dec. 22d, 1735, read at a subsequent common council, he thus
stated the then value of the premises. "By the best accounts I have been able
to obtain of the present value, the same amounts to 119l. 15s. per annum --
clear of taxes and repairs."
.

October 27th, 1735, Colonel George Liddell petitioned his Majesty on the same
subject, but with more success, for July 2d, 1736 In this grant the
Castle-Garth is said to be in the county of Northumberland -- the following
exceptions occur: "Excepting nevertheless, and always reserving out of this our
present grant and demise all that strong building there used for a common gaol
or prison for the said county of Northumberland; and also excepting and
reserving the great hall commonly called the Moot-Hall, used for the justices
of assize, sessions and jail-deliver, for the keeping of assize and sessions
for the said county, and all other buildings and offices to the same usually
belonging or appertaining." -- "And also excepting and always reserving out of
this our grant or demise, all free rents, castle guard rents, and other rents
belonging to our honor of the said old castle." -- The above grant expired in
the month of July 1786. --
, on the payment of a fine of 150l. the King granted the Castle and
Castle-Garth for the term of 50 years to George Liddell, Esquire. on condition of
his paying annually to the Royal Hospital of Chelsea, an hundred chaldrons of
good Newcastle coals, and of keeping all the buildings, as well those excepted
in the lease as granted, in good repair.

March 26th, 1739, George Liddel, Esquire. occurs as demanding a sum of money of
the corporation of Newcastle, for dilapidations in this Castle-Garth
Common Council books.
, the great gate whereof had fallen down on the 13th of the preceding January
Newcastle Courant -- "The ancient gate, known by the name of the Black-Gate."
. -- Dec. 2d, 1740, they agreed to pay him 250l. on the above account.

In the year 1741, the rental for Castle-Garth amounted to 224l. 7s. 6d.
Common Council books.
-- Nov. 19th, 1777, the Castle and Castle-Garth were demised from the crown to
Henry Lord Ravensworth, for the term of 40 years and an half -- from the 13th
of July, 1786, at the same rents, under the same description, and with the like
exceptions and covenants as in the above grant to Colonel Liddell, dated July
2d, 1736 From an account communicated by the late Duke of Northumberland. --
The following occurs in the Newcastle Courant -- "February 19th, 1756, several
very curiou^ fireworks were played off from this Castle on account of the
marriage of the daughter of the Right Honorable Lord Ravensworth to the Earl
of Euston."
.

May 19th, 1779, the above leasehold estate of the Castle-Garth, after having
been advertised to be sold by auction on that day by Mess. Christie and Ansell,
in Pall Mall, London, was purchased by John Chrichloe Turner, Esquire. one of the
agents for the Greenwich Hospital estates in the northern counties of England
In the printed proposals for this sale the nett rent of the property was stated
as being then 242l. 16s. per annum -- and that by the above new lease of May
19th, 1777, they (the then lessees) are bound to repair the old castle,
out-walls and stairs, Moot-Hall, grand jury room, and gaoler's house.

September 14th, 1782, Mr. Turner published proposals for letting the old
castle in the Castle-Garth, to be converted into a windmill for the purpose of
grinding corn, bolting flour, making oil, etc. -- He has since erected a great
many new buildings on the half moon battery.

There is a meeting house for dissenters near the castle, called Castle-Garth
Meeting House. I find the following names of ministers here -- Mr. Dawson --
Mr. Edward Atkin, obiit 21st October 1771. He founded the first charity-school
among the dissenters in Newcastle upon Tyne. -- He was succeeded by Mr.
Davison, who married his daughter.


.

Among several rents and revenues arising to this castle, Bourne mentions the
subsequent as payable from the twelve following baronies:

1. The barony of the Herons The subsequent occurs, Harleian MSS. Eschaets,
708, dorso -- Duodecima pars -- anno regni Regis Edwardi primi 25to -- Walterus
fil' Willielmo de Heron tenuit manerium de Haddeston in com' Northumbr' de Rege
in capite ac manerium de Parva Benton, ac manerium de West-Swynburne ac
manerium de Colewell de Rege in capite per servicium unius feodi militis et
reddend' quolibet anno 1 marcam argenti ad wardam Novi Castri super Tynam."
, which contained Haddeston, Chirton, Little-Benton, Coldwell, Swinburne and
Flatford, paid for castleward "It was no uncommon thing for the conqueror and
the kings of those days to grant estates to men of approved fidelity and
valor, on condition that they should perform castle-guard with a certain
number of men, for some specified time. In process of time these services were
commuted for annual rents, sometimes styled Ward Penny and Wayt Fee, bet
commonly Castle-Guard Rents, payable on fixed days, under prodigious penalties
called sursizes." -- Grose's Antiquities, preface, p. 3.

"Castle-guard rents were restrained by an act of parliament made in the reign
of King Hen. VIII. and finally annihilated with the tenure by knights' service,
in the time of Charles II. 12 Car. II. cap. 24." -- Ibid. p. 4.

The following notices (of the date of 126^) concerning ward rents, payable to
this castle, are extracted from the Harleian MSS. No 624, p. 196. "Commun' ex
part remem' domini thesaurarii (scaccar') de anno 46 Hen. III. A. D. 1261,
Rot. 5. Memorand' de wardis debitis Novo Castro quas Thomas fi^ius Michaelis
vicecomes Northumbrie calumpniabatur. Idem Thomas peciit predictas wardas sicut
Robertus de Neville et Willielmus Heerun has habuerunt, set Sic.
thesaurarius et barons hoc noluerunt concedere Rege inconsulto quia Rogerus
de Turkelly et Johannes de Crachale tunc thesaurarius commiserant eidem Thome
comitatum Northumbrie cum Novo Castro super Tynam custodiend' quamdiu Regi
placeret. Ita quod redderet per annum pro proficuis ejusdem comitatus 40l. et
perficeret corpus comitatus et redderet elemosinas constitutas et custodiret
comitatum et castrum ad custum suum et responderet de predictis wardis. Postea
ostenso Domino Regi quod predictus Robertus et Willielmus et al^i vicecomit^s
ejusdem comitatus consueverunt habere predictas wardas et quod plura deciderunt
predicto Thome de perquisitis comitatus per provisionem Oxon' precepit Dominus
Rex quod ei sieret justicia. Ita quod haberet quod alii vicecomites
consueverunt habere ante cum et ideo consideratum est quod habeat wardas
predicta^ sicut alii vicecomites ejusdem comitatus habere consueverunt pro
custodia predictorum ca^tri et comitatus."


,13s. for cornage Tenure by cornage, which was to wind a horn when the S^^^ o^
other enemies entered the land, in order to warn the King's subjects, was a
species of grand serjeantry." Blackstone's Commentar. book ii. c. 5.
, 5s. 10d.

2. The barony of Dilstone, containing Devilstone or Dilston, Corbrigg,
Togeston, etc. paid for castle-ward, 13s. 4d. -- for cornage, 10s.

3. The barony of Walton, given by King John to Robert son of Roger, and
confirmed by his charter, contained Walton, Ripplingdon, Newham, Denton,
Newbigging, Kenton, Gosford and Fawden: and also Oggle, Burndon, Horton with
Sticklaw and Hereford and Wodrington, paid for castle-ward, 2l. for cornage,
10l.

4. The barony of Bolbeck, containing Stifford, Brumhall, Slavely, Shotton,
Heddon of the Wall, Hedwin East, Thornton, Whitchester, Haughton, Benwell,
Elswick, Angerton, Hertbourne, Middleton, Morel, Burneton, Beril, Fenwick,
Matifin, East Hawkwell, Shalow, Middleton South, Cambhow, Hertweigh, Hawick,
Kirkherle, Rocheley, Newton Grange, and the moiety of Bywell, paid for
castle-ward, 3l. 6s. 8d. for cornage, 1l. 12s.

5. The barony of Bolam, containing Bolam, Litedon, Burneton, Thornbury, Cupum
Parvam, Wittington, Hayden, Belsow, Bradeford, Denum, Trewick and Tunstall,
paid for castle-ward, 2l. for cornage, 8s.

6. The barony of Gaugye, containing Ellingham, Cramlington, Heaton, Hartelaw,
Jesemuth and Whitley, paid for castle-ward, 2l. for cornage, 7s. 2d.

7. The barony of Marley, alias Morlaw, alias Morpeth, containing Morpeth,
Grimnest membrum suum, Newham, Hebscot, Shillington, Tuysell, Saltwick, Dudden
East, Dudden West, Clyfton, Caldwell, Stannington, Shotten, Blakeden,
Wetteslade North, Wetteslade South, Killingworth, Benton and Walker, paid for
castle-ward, 2l. 13s. 4d. for cornage, 7s. 8d.

8. The barony of Bothall, containing Bothall cum membris suis, viz. Whetworth,
Newmore, Oldmore, Peggesworth, Hebborne, Fenrother, Tricklington, Fresdon,
Longhirst cum membris suis, et Nishenden, Veter' Morae or the Old Moor, and
Eringdon, paid for castle-ward, 2l. for cornage, 8s. 8d.

9. The barony of Delaval, containing Blackalladay, Seton cum membris suis,
Neusum et Dissington, paid for castle-ward, 2l. 6s. 8d. for cornage, 3s. 3d.

10. The barony of Rosse, containing Werk, Mindram, Karham, Prestfen, Manilawe,
Dunum, Palwister, Shotton, Killom, Holthall, Newton and the other Newton,
Langeton, Lilleburn, Hilderton, Weperden, Russenden, Tithington, Butlisden, and
the moiety of Glattendon.

11. The barony of Bywell Among the Harleian MSS. Eschaets, 708, dorso, occurs
the following: "Duo le^^ma pars -- Esc' tempore Regis H. filti Regis Johannis:
Northumbr' -- Hugo de Bailliol tenuit de Rege in capite in com' Northumbr'
maner' de Bywell, Cromleclin^, Ovynton et aliam villat' de Bywell pertinen' ad
Bywell et maner' de Wodhorn, Newbigging, Seton, Hirst et reddit ad wardam Novi
Castri, 5 m. 6d. cund' in exercitu Regis cum duobus militibus sumptibus suis
proptits per 40 dies et postea sumptibus Regis."

N. B. Five marks and sixpence make 3l. 7s. 2d.


, containing Newbigging, Woodhorn, Lynmouth, Hyrste, Hallywell, Lynton,
Ellington, cum Cresswell and Ayden membris suis, Bychefield, Inghym, Black
Heddon, Samfordham, Newton West, Newton East, Scheellinge, Ovington, Ovingham,
Milkylleye, Whitlye, Falderlye, Bromley, Appleby, the moiety of Bywell,
Stokefield, Swynburne East, Swynburne West, Ryhill.

12. The barony de Copun paid 13s. 4d.

Thus far the baronies -- But besides these rents, there were houses, yards,
and gardens, etc. which paid to it The following extract from a writ directed
to the sheriff of Newcastle upon Tyne, dated 23 June, 17 Geo. III. "Minute
Farms, etc." was communicated by N. Punshon, Esquire. undersheriff. "Of Thomas
Bolome for the custody of one message, and eight gardens, within the King's
castle, called Kingsby Castle, 7s. 0d."

There is a note in Grey's MSS. purporting that King's Meadows, an island in
the middle of the river Tyne, opposite to Elswick, belonged to this castle, as
also that several streets in Newcastle belonged to it.


.

The liberties and privileges of the castle extend northwards to the river of
Tweed, and southward to the river of Tees Bourne, p. 120. For an account of the
several villages, etc. see Wallis' History of Northumberland, vol. ii. --
Hutchinson's Northumberland, etc
."

The subsequent observations on the present remains of this once famous and
important fortress were made July 9th, 1778.

The Keep, or Great Tower, measured 28 yards and a quarter in height: it
appears anciently to have been somewhat higher, and had, no doubt, a kernelled
battlement.

The ichnography of this keep would describe nearly a square, the lines of two
sides of which bear to the north-west. That front however, which, properly
speaking, ought to be called the south-west front, is generally styled the
south one. The others are named the west, north, and east sides, with the same
little impropriety.

The grand entrance, originally, no doubt, the only one, is at a great height
from the ground Mr. King, in his ingenious Essay on ancient Castles,
Archaeologia, vol. iv. speaking of Canterbury castle, says, p. 390, "Whoever
looks at that ancient structure attentively, will easily perceive that the
present entrances have been forced, and could never have been there originally."
. Two portals, as it were, must be passed before we can arrive at it "The
entrance was not in any ancient castle that I have seen, in the lower story, or
upon the ground, or near it, but at a considerable height, and was by means of
a grand staircase -- there was also a strong gate about the middle of the
staircase." -- Ibid. p. 369.
. -- From the first of these, which is on the south, and in a great wall "There
were two great strong walls," says Bourne, "which surrounded the castle. The
interior wall was of no great distance from the castle itself, as may be still
seen in several places. The exterior wall surrounds the verge of the castle
bounders. From this outer wall were four gates: the great gate and three
posterns. On the north side of the castle is the main gate, now called the
Black-Gate. It has had two portcullises, one without the gate, as may be still
seen, and another within it at a little distance from it, the ruins of which
were to be seen a few years ago. On the east side of the castle there was a
postern which led down to the street called the Side, which is still to be
seen. -- On the south side of the castle is another gate, which leads down the
castle stairs to the street called the Close. This was called the
South-Postern. There is an old building upon it, which was the county-gaoler's
house. On the west side was the postern facing Bailiff-Gate. -- There is an
house in the yard ( i. e. Castle-Garth or Yard), where they say was the chapel
of the garrison, which is called the Chapel-House to this day: it stands
north-east from the chapel (he means the chapel of the castle or keep); its
common name now is the Three Bulls Heads" ( i. e. an Inn with that sign).

Since Bourne's time, in digging cellars for this inn, human bones, as also a
large stone coffin, were found.

Dr. Stukeley, who visited this castle in 1725, seems to have mistaken a part
of its outer-wall for what he calls, "a bit of the true old Roman Wall." See
Iter Boreale, p. 64, et seq.

There is a place still called the Mount, on the south side of this keep, and
within the outer wall of the fortification.

"Large mounts," says Gross, ut supra, p. 7, "were also often thrown up in this
place: these served like modern cavaliers to command the adjacent country."


, which, at a few yards distance, has enclosed the whole keep, we mount by
eleven steps to the second one, which is of prodigious strength, and from the
top of it the besieged appear to have had great power to annoy the assailants.

From this second portal to the grand entrance are eighteen steps, part leading
from south to north, and part from east to west. No grooves for portcullises
"The Hearse or Portcullis was a strong grating of timber, fenced with iron, made
to slide up and down in a groove of solid stone-work, within the arch of the
portal, just as a sash-window does in its frame, and its bottom was furnished
with sharp iron spikes, designed both to strike into the ground or floor, for
the sake of greater firmness and solidity, and also to destroy and break
whatever should be under it at the time of its being let fall; and its groove
was always contrived to deep in the stone-work that it could not be injured or
removed without pulling down the whole wall." -- King, ut supra, p. 370.
are discoverable in either of the portals, but so much appears to have been
demolished that one cannot from thence infer that there have never been any.

The grand entrance which is toward the east, has had its arch adorned in a
superb manner, with zig-zag, and other Saxon or semi-Saxon ornaments.

The wall here measured four yards and a quarter in thickness Pennant, in his
Tour in Scotland, vol. m p. 305, speaking of the place, tells us, "The walls of
Roberts Tower are thirteen feet thick, with galleries ga^^ed out of them." He
adds, "The height of this tower was eighty-two feet: the square on the outside
sixty-two by fifty four."
.

Near this grand entrance, and in front as you ascend to it from south to
north, is a door-way leading into a little apartment, which has been richly
adorned on the inside. -- It stands over a crypt or vault of considerable
height, on two great arches that intersect each other, of beautiful Gothic
masonry. -- This had a distinct roof, and the whole forms a projection eastward
at the north-east angle, against the east end of which a modern house has been
built. From the garret of this house there is at present an entrance into it
through an arched passage, where there must have been anciently a window. At
present it is a currier's shop. From the richness of its interior ornaments I
suspected it to have been the chapel, to which supposition its direction from
east to west is not unfavourable. It must however have been but a very small
one. Bourne supposes the chapel to have been within the walls of this keep, on
the ground floor, in a place which at present composes a part of Mr. Fife's
very curious and extensive cellar.

The great entrance seems to have led immediately into the state apartments
"The room," says Bourne, "this grand entrance leads into, has its floor broken
down close to the castle-wall, as indeed all the other floors are, to the top
of the castles so that, excepting the floor above the county-gaol, there is not
one left, though there have been five divisions or stories of the castle
besides this. This floored room, flagged by William Ellison, Esquire. mayor of
Newcastle, in 1723, seems to me, without any doubt, to have been the common
hall of the castle -- because, on the north side of the same room there is an
entrance by a descent of some steps, into one where is the largest fireplace I
saw in the castle, which plainly speaks it to have been the kitchen." -- Near
this kitchen Bourne supposed he could also trace the pantry and cellar. -- "On
the south of this room," says Bourne also, "there is an entrance into a sort of
a parlour, or withdrawing-room, which has a fireplace in it, which has been a
piece of curious workmanship, as is visible to this day. And this place has no
communication with any part of the castle but this room."
, which have been lighted from the east, by the most magnificent window in the
whole great tower. Near this, and in the body of the wall, is an apartment with
a curious draw-well in it -- at sixteen yards depth The water was two yards
lower in Bourne's time.
we reached the water. The depth in all is thirty-one yards and a quarter. The
water is hard and very cold. There are square cavities in the wall on each side
of this well, in which are round holes for pipes, used anciently to convey the
water to the several apartments. It measures eleven yards to the ground from
the window of the apartment that contains the well.

There is no way at present to the top of this keep, where one is surprised to
find a little artificial garden, producing apple trees, rose-bushes, etc.
except by one great winding staircase, about two yards wide, in the north-east
angle. There is another staircase Thus King, ut supra, p. 390 -- speaking of
Canterbury castle, he tells us, "There are two circular stair-cases in the
corners."
in the south-east angle, but it is now built up at the top. It has come down
to the ground floor, at which place also the communication is now closed up.

By the rows of square holes in which the beams have rested, there must have
been five stories of apartments, of which the great hall and state rooms were
the lowest, from the present flagged floor to the top of this tower.

There is a gallery of communication in the center or thickness of the wall,
and on all four sides of it, about five yards and a half Thus King, ut supra,
p. 379 -- "Within the thickness of the wall -- a gallery -- that orders might
be speedily communicated to all parts. -- And there was besides another smaller
and narrower gallery within the thichness of the wall in the floor above."

Speaking also of Guildford castle, he says, "There are also galleries in the
thickness of the wall, as at Rochester."


from the top. This passage is about two yards and a half high, and has three
or four loup holes on each side, all widening gradually inwards.

Below this in the south front is a gallery in the center of the wall, about
fifteen yards and three quarters from the ground, in which there have been two
large ornamented windows -- nearly on a level with which on the north front is
another window of the like sort.

Two great windows have let in light to the great hall "These great rooms,"
says King, ut supra, p. 378, 379, "were undoubtedly hung with arras."
of this keep; that in the south front, near the south-west angle, having had
the pillar or division in it broken away, has now the appearance of a door-way.
A door hardly half its size is at present hung in it. The other window is very
observable: it is on the west side near the south-west angle.

The kitchen of this great tower has been in the north wall: it contains a much
larger fireplace than any other of the apartments. The chimney appears on the
outside of the wall by a square projection, ending abruptly, and yet I know not
with any degree of certainty whether ever it has been carried up any higher:
one of its windows has been enlarged with great labor, to give more light to a
joiner's shop, into which it has been converted.

The north-west angle of this tower is of an hexagonal form "Neither do they
seem to have confined themselves to any particular figure in their towers;
square, round, and polygonal oftentimes occurring in the original parts of the
same building." Gross, ut supra, p. 5.
, and projects in a manner different from any of the others Thus King, ut
supra, p. 388. -- "The outlets to the sinks and other conveyances of filth were
nearly in the same manner (as the chimneys), only reversed and going downwards."
. In the wall of the western front have been several necessary-houses,
communicating with the great drains.

All the apartments of the ground-floor, and the county-prison itself, except
when used at the assizes, have been converted into cellars: a purpose for which
their great coolness renders them very fit. -- There is a place here, into
which if water be poured in the largest quantities, it immediately disappears.
-- It probably communicates with one of the large drains.

In the center of the present county prison is a remarkable pillar, from which
arches branch out very beautifully on all sides. This column is hollow, and a
pipe has "Having a hollow in the middle," says Bourne, "of a foot wide, with a
lead spout in the side of it."
conducted water down through it from the well beforementioned. There is a
very observable window "Windows," says he, "were so contrived, that it was
almost impossible for any weapon to be shot into the room, so as to do any
hurt: for if it went at all ascending, it would strike against a low arch,
purposely contrived over every window, and could not enter the room at all."
King, ut supra, p. 374.

I know not which is the house, which, Bourne says, was anciently the
county-gaol, and underneath which, he adds, "It is reported there is a vault
which leads to the castle." -- "There is indeed a large door," he continues,
"still to be seen, which was perhaps the entrance into it: and Mr. George Gray,
the present possessor, told me that it was certainly so because he had put down
through his own sloot a bailiff's rod, to the very end, and could find no
bottom."

I know not on what authority Bourne rests his information when he tells us
that the castle-gate (I suppose he means the Black-Gate) was begun to be built
by one George Hayroy, but was finished by one John Pickle, who kept a tavern in
it.


in this place, with an arch turned in the inside to repel missile weapons,
etc. See an account of many similar ones in King's ingenious account of ancient
castles, ut supra.

Great alterations must have been made in the appearance of the low parts of
the south front, when the temporary prison of the county was made in this keep.
The present entrance, to which we descend by four or five steps, must have been
first made on that occasion, for there is no arch over it in the wall. Another
similar kind of entrance on the eastern side of the south-east angle, which is
now built up, with a swine-stye before it, is also, without doubt, of a date
much posterior to that of the original building. --

If there has been a dungeon in this keep, as there probably was, I mean that
dreary kind of mansion, to which the only entrance was by a square hole in the
top, it must have been filled up, as no traces thereof can be discovered at
present.

NEWGATE-STREET.
NEWGATE-STREET has plainly had its name from the Newgate which bounds it on
the north.

Bourne mentions a tenement on the east side of this street, given by Mrs.
Alice Belaysis to University-College in Oxford On the east side of this street,
near the Newgate, is a tenement which was given by Mrs. Alice Belaysis to
University-College in Oxford, A. D. 1444. The site of it is thus described:
"Situatum est infra predictam villam, juxta novam portam ejusdem ville inquo
quidem tenemento Thomas Gray, Lidster, modo inhabitat, viz. inter tenementum
Roberti Daunt ex part boreali et vicum ducentem ad fratres minores ab ecclesia
Sancti Andree ex part australi." But the same writing goes farther -- "Ac tria
tenementa et duo tofta inde insimul situantur in eodem vico ducente a dicta
ecclesia Sancti Andree usque fratres predictos," etc. Bourne, p. 47.
.

The same writer tells us that a tradition remained in his time, that there had
been anciently several markets between Newgate and the White-Cross In an
inrolment in the archives of Newcastle upon Tyne, dated 15 Car. II. "the
Nolt-Market" occurs as "near the White-Crosse." -- Ibid. May 2d, 1722, "the
great inns in the Nolt-Market" occur.

A mutilated deed preserved in St. Andrew's vestry, mentions a message in this
street, called "Horse-Market-Gate," inter terram abbatis de novo monasterio,
etc." dated, 1281.

In the Harleian MSS. 708, Eschaets 14 Ric. II. a message occurs in
"Horse-Market-Gate."

There are four fairs kept in this street in the year, one at Lammas and
another at St. Lukesmass, both for horses. -- The other two are for black
cattle: the one on All Souls Day, and the other at Martinmas. -- Bourne.


.

An ancient street, called Darne-Crook, runs westward to the town-wall, at the
bottom of St. Andrew's churchyard. In this, says Bourne, were some wastes and
houses that belonged to the nuns of St. Bartholomew.

Almost contiguous to Newgate stands St. Andrew's church.

ST. ANDREW'S CHURCH.
THIS building appears to have retained more of its original masonry than the
other churches, and, from the style of its architecture, has been generally
thought to be the oldest in the town See Bourne's account. David King of Scots,
it is unknown for what reason, is mentioned in the MS. de Rebus Novo Castr',
which he often cites, as its founder.

The arch that separates the chancel from the body of the church is of the semi
Saxon style, with zig-zag ornaments, which proves it to have been built not
long after the conquest.

In the columns that support this arch, there are proofs hewn out in stone,
that some of the Romish exhibitions in churches were, comparatively speaking,
no more than innovations. These plainly appear to have been cut away in
parallel directions, to gain supports for the rood loft, which stood under this
arch before the Reformation. -- For an account of rood lofts, see Staveley on
Churches, p. 199.


.

Mention of it occurs, A. D. 1218, in the time of King Henry III Chartulary of
Tinmouth monastery at Northumberland-house -- Anno R. R. II. fil' Johannis 3tio
"Item de terr' Gilberti Marishall 3d, unde paroch' Sancti Andree respond."
.

Bourne is of opinion that it was founded by the townsmen and religious houses.

A. D. 1280, the justices itinerant appear to have held their courts in this
church Tinmouth MS. ut supra, fol. 206. "Quod quidem breve Dominis G. et M.
justic' -- in ecclesia Sancti Andree Novi Castri fuerat ex part Domini Regis
per predictum priorem traditum, etc. anno R. R. E. octavo."
.

The oldest writing that I have seen belonging to this church is dated 1281 It
begins, "Anno ab incarnacione Domini Mo. CoCo octogesimo primo, etc."
.

John, Bishop of Durham, granted an indulgence of forty days to those who
should contribute any thing to the reparation of St. Andrew's Church, in
Newcastle, and to the chapel of the Holy Trinity in the same, etc. dated at
Gateshead, July 19th, 1387 See afterward under the account of the chantry of
the Trinity belonging to this church.
.

Oswald, Bishop of Galloway, granted an indulgence of forty days to such
persons as should say their prayers devoutly at this church. It is dated in the
year 1392 "Universis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos presents literae
pervenerint Oswaldus permissione divina Candidae See Bede's Ecclesiastical
History, folio, p. 106.
Casae Episcopus salutem in sinceris amplexibus Salvatoris. Obsequium Deo
gratum totiens impendere opinam' quotiens fideles Christi ad pietatis opera
excitamus cupientes idcirco per allectiva indulgentiarum munera mentes fidelium
ad pietatis et caritatis opera quantum cum Deo possumus propensius excitare de
Dei igitur omnipotentis misericordia gloriosaeque Virginis Mariae genetricis
ejusdem nec non beatorum Petri and Pauli apostolorum ejus, sanctissimique ejus
Niniani See Bede's Ecclesiastical History, folio, p. 106.
patroni nostri et omnium sanctorum meritis et precibus confidentes omnibus
parochianis nostris et aliis quorum diocesani hanc nostram indulgentiam ratam
habuerint et acceptam de peccatis suis vere contritis et confessis, qui ad
reparationem seu ornamentum, sive emendationem ecclesiae Sancti Andreae villae
Novi Castri super Tynam Dunolm' dioces' ac capellae Sanctae Trinitatis in part
aquilonari ejusdem ecclesiae, aurum, argentum, vestimenta, libros, calices aut
quaevis alia ornamenta dictae ecclesiae capellae seu altari et imagini Sanctae
Trinitatis in dicta capella existenti necessaria donaverint, legaverint seu
donari procuraverint seu qui lampades luminarum vel oblationes fecerint aut qui
ante imaginem Sanctae Trinitatis predict' genuflexerint et pro salubri statu
Domini Aymeri de Atholi^ militis dum vixerit et pro anima sua post obitum suum
et pro anima Dominae Mariae sponsae suae cujus corpus in eadem capella Sanctae
Trinitatis quiescit et pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum Orationem
Dominicam cum salutatione angelica dixerint mente pia totiens quotiens ista
predicta fecerint, vel aliquod premissorum quadraginta dies indulgentiae
concedimus per presents. In cujus rei testimonium sigillum quo in presenti
utimur est appensum Dat' Eborac' Dr. Ellison's MS. adds, "The reason that we
find Oswald's indulgence dated at York, perhaps, is because the sea of Galloway
anciently belonged to the kings of Northumberland. -- See december Scriptores, p.
801, n. 32, where we read: "Rex vero Northumbriae tenent and^ ac eciam isti
regno episcopatus Candidae Casae, sive Galeweyae est subjectus:" and in
particular to the province of York, see p. 1111, n. 58. "Dicebat enim idem
episcopus episcopatum suum ad legantiam Eboracensis Archiepiscopi, qui eum in
episcopum conseor verat secundum antiquam predecessorum utriusque consuetudinem
pertinere." The Bishop of Galloway was suffragan to the Archbishop of York.
Matthew Paris, p. 131.
in festo Sancti Martini anno Domini 1392 et nostrae consecrationi 12o." --
From a copy in Dr. Ellison's MS. collections.
.

This church received so much damage during the siege of Newcastle, A. D. 1644,
that no service was performed therein for a year afterward St. Andrew's
Register. "1645, There was no child baptd in this parish for 1 years tim after
the town was taken nor sarmon in this church for 1 years tim."
.

A. D. 1652, this church was repaired by an assessment upon the houses and
lands in the parish Common Council books.
.

In the year 1678, the parishioners of St. Andrew's petitioned the
common council of Newcastle to assist them in repairing this church Ibid.
.

A. D. 1707, the floor of this church appears first to have been covered with
flag stones Old parish book.
.

In the year 1708, the corporation of Newcastle gave 10l. toward the
reparation of this church: a cess of 6d. per pound on all the lands and
tenements in the parish having been found insufficient for that purpose
Common Council books.
.

CHANTRIES IN ST. ANDREW'S.
THERE were three chantries here in the times of popery -- one dedicated to St.
Mary, another to the Holy Trinity, and a third to St. Thomas.

St. Mary's chantry is supposed to have been founded in the reign of King
Edward the First, as mention of it occurs in a charter dated in the latter part
of his reign.

It was of the yearly value of 6l. 12s. 10d. See Bourne's account.
.

Sir John Sadler was priest thereof at the suppression Deed, dated August 12th,
12 Hen. VIII. "between Sir John Sadler, chauntrye priest at the altar of
blessed Marye within the church of St. Andrews with the consent of the
churchwardens patrons of the said chauntery, etc." cited in a presentment upon
an inquisition, dated September 2d, the 19th of Queen Elizabeth, concerning
(inter alia) "a house perteyning to the chaunterye of our Lady in St. Andrewe
church whereof Sir John Sadler was priest at the suppression of the same,
abuttinge of the north next to the New-Yate and of the east on the
Heigh-Street and of the west of Saint Andrews church-yarde etc. annui valoris
7 solidorum."

In a deed of some property (part of which was purchased in 1783, by the parish
of St. Andrew, to make an addition to the west end of the churchyard), dated
October 30th, 11 Jac. I. it is thus described: "All that their tenement with
the appurtenances situate and being in Darwen Crook in the town of Newcastel
upon Tyne in the county of Newcastell upon Tyne now or laite in the tenure or
occupation of John Sadler or his assigns paying the yearly rent of 6s. 8d. to
the crown. -- Parcel of the lands and possessions of the late chanterie of the
blessed Marie founded in the church of St. Andrewe within the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne sometime being." -- This property is the highest on the
north side of Darn-Crook, next to the town-wall.


.

The churchwardens of St. Andrew's appear to have been patrons of this chantry
Deed, dated August 12th, 12 Hen. VIII. "between Sir John Sadler, chauntrye
priest at the altar of blessed Marye within the church of St. Andrews with the
consent of the churchwardens patrons of the said chauntery, etc." cited in a
presentment upon an inquisition, dated September 2d, the 19th of Queen
Elizabeth, concerning (inter alia) "a house perteyning to the chaunterye of our
Lady in St. Andrewe church whereof Sir John Sadler was priest at the
suppression of the same, abuttinge of the north next to the New-Yate and of
the east on the Heigh-Street and of the west of Saint Andrews church-yarde
etc. annui valoris 7 solidorum."

In a deed of some property (part of which was purchased in 1783, by the parish
of St. Andrew, to make an addition to the west end of the churchyard), dated
October 30th, 11 Jac. I. it is thus described: "All that their tenement with
the appurtenances situate and being in Darwen Crook in the town of Newcastel
upon Tyne in the county of Newcastell upon Tyne now or laite in the tenure or
occupation of John Sadler or his assigns paying the yearly rent of 6s. 8d. to
the crown. -- Parcel of the lands and possessions of the late chanterie of the
blessed Marie founded in the church of St. Andrewe within the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne sometime being." -- This property is the highest on the
north side of Darn-Crook, next to the town-wall.


.

The following account of it occurs in a certificate of colleges and chantries
in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in the
Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of our Lady in the parish church of Saint Andrewe in the
town of Newcastel upon Tyne was founded by report to find a priest for ever
for the mayntenaunce of God's service and to pray for all Christen sowlis and
the said priest to have the revenues of the same for his servyce which is so
continued hitherto and there is no deed of foundation to be showed -- Yearly
value 4l. 13s. -- According to this survey 6l. 12s. 10d. as apereth by a
rentall whereof is to be deducted 17s. 8d. for decay of certain rents charged in
the sum aforsaid, for rents resolut. 2s. 6d. for one obytt, 3s. and for the
tenthes 9s. 5d. paid to the Kings majesty as apereth in the said rentall,
32s. 7d. and remains clerly 100s. 3d. which ar employed to the sustentacion
and relief of John Sadler, priest, incumbent there as has been accustomyd
hertofore. -- Ornaments etc. 20s. 2d. as apereth by a particular inventory of
the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

The second chantry was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and is thought to have
been founded by Sir Adam de Athol "Universis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad
quos presents literae pervenerint Johannes John Fordham.
permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus salutem in sinceris amplexibus
Salvatoris. Cupientes per allectiva indulgentiarum munera mentes fidelium ad
caritatis et devotionis opera quantum cum Deo possumus propensius excitare de
Dei omnipotentis misericordia gloriosaeque Virginis Mariae matris suae ac
beatorum apostolorum ejus Petri et Pauli nec non sanctissimi confessoris
Cuthberti patroni nostri omniumque sanctorum meritis et precibus confidentes,
omnibus parochianis nostris et aliis quorum diocesani hanc nostram indulgentiam
ratam habuerint et acceptam de peccatis suis vere contritis penetentibus et
confessis, qui ad reparationem and emendacionem ecclesiae Sancti Andreae villae
Novi Castri super Tynam ac capellae Sanctae Trinitatis in eadem grata de bonis
a Deo collatis contulerint subsidia caritatis ac pro falubri statu Domini
Aymeri de Athele militis et pro animabus uxotis suae and Aymeri filii sui et
pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum Orationem Dominicam cum salutatione
angeiica dixerint mente pia quadraginta dies indulgentiae concedimus per
presents sigillo nostro consignatas. Dat' apud Gatesheved decimo nono die
^ensis Julii anno Domini 1387, et nostrae consecrationis sexto." -- From a copy
in Dr. Ellison's MSS.
, knight, sheriff of Northumberland, 1383.

The yearly value thereof was 4l. 2s. 10d. -- Thomas Westhe was the last
incumbent, and had a pension of 2l. 1s. 5d. per annum Brown Willis, p. 166.
.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate abovecited, of
the 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of the Trinity in the parish church of Saint Andrewe in the
town of Newcastel upon Tyne was founded by report to find a priest for ever
for the mayntenance of Godd's service and to pray for all Christen fowls which
is so continued hitherto but there is no deed of foundation to be showed. --
Yearly value 64s. 2d. -- According to this survey 4l. 2s. 10d. as apereth by a
rentall whereof is paid out for rents resolut' 18s. and for the tenthes 6s. 5d.
paid to the Kings majesty, 24s. 5d. and remains clearly 58s. 5d. which ben
employed to the sustentacion and relief of Davy Sympson priest incumbent
there. -- Ornaments etc. 8s. 10d. as apereth by a perticler inventory of the
same. -- There were no other lands etc In the window of the north wall of
Trinity Chapel, are still preserved three panes of stained glass; the middle
one plainly represents a crucifixion. -- It has been said, but I know not for
what reason, that they were meant to designate the three persons of the
Trinity, in the times of the papal superstition. -- See before the indulgence,
dated 1392, and Bourne's Remarks on the same.
."

The third chantry in this church was dedicated to St. Thomas See Bourne's
account. -- It is said in a presentment upon an inquisition, taken September
2d, 19th of Elizabeth, preserved in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle, that a tenement, boundering as follows, was supposed to belong to
the chantry of St. Thomas, in St. Andrew's Church: -- "On the weste of St.
Andrews church end and east of the High-Streete and of the southe against
the church-style annui valoris 10s."

One of these chantries has been on the north side of the church, where it
still remains, having been used not very many years ago, as an ale-cellar to an
adjoining alehouse. -- It appears, from an old parish book, that it was once
the habitation of the beadle. -- The vestry, perhaps, has been the third
chantry. -- It is very ancient. -- The roof is formed by ribbed arches, and
covered with large square stones.


. No mention occurs of it in the certificate above cited, of the 37 Hen. VIII.
in the Augmentation-Office.

THE ALTAR.
A RENTCHARGE of five shillings per annum to the sustentacion or support of
the altar of the church of St. Andrew, occurs about A. D. 1251, issuing out of
certain lands near the street leading to Pilgrim-Street Old deed in the
archives of the church. -- By the witnesses' names, "Petro Scotico Steph. de
Lindsey etc." certainly about that date.
.

The altar here (as was the whole church at the same time) was beautified in
the year 1781. A new service of silver-plate was subscribed for, and procured,
with a beautiful altar-cloth, on the occasion.

THE STEEPLE.
THIS steeple has probably had the name and arms of Robert Rodes in the center,
under the belfry, as in the other churches of the town By a view from the
present bell-loft it is discoverable, that the belfry has been anciently
supported by intersecting arches, as well as those of the other three churches
of the town. These arches were probably destroyed at that time. -- Three great
windows appear to have been built up. -- Against the east end of this steeple,
on the outside, there is the same mark of a sloping roof, that is often seen in
the remains of churches that have belonged to religious houses. -- See Grose's
View of Brinkburn-Abbey, etc.
.

It appears to have been battered down by the cannon of the Scots army, during
the memorable siege of the town in 1644 Common Council books.
.

It contains six bells, of a soft melodious sound.

PARISH REGISTER.
THE register of this church begins about 1597. Some few leaves of a prior date
appear to have been lost. -- Bourne, very unjustly, complains that this
register has been badly kept The following entry occurs in St. Andrew's
register: "December 6th, 1646, Hugh Brown bured the 6 day in the church the
King's kouchman," i. e. coachman.

This seems to prove what tradition informs us, that the unfortunate monarch,
during his stay at Newcastle, resided in the house (in this parish) which
belonged to the late Sir Walter Blackett, Bart.

The following entry occurs ibid. "March 19th, 1658, Thomas Smith and Kattren
Lawson asked 3 market days in the Marketplace, ackording to the late act of
parliament and married by Mr. Thompson."


.

From January, 1688, to January, 1708, there were baptized, at this church,
1531 children -- married 348 -- buried 1671.

From January, 1729, to January, 1749, there were baptized here 1866 -- married
516 -- and buried 2224.

From January, 1759, to January, 1779, there were baptized here 1751 -- married
731 -- buried 1931 Collected from the registers 1781, at the request of Mr.
Howlett.

-- "There, where to be born and die
Of rich and poor makes all the history;
Enough that virtue filled the space between
Proved by the ends of being to have been."
Pope's Ethic Epistles to Lord Bathurst, l. 287. In the year 1785, 33 males and
55 females were christened -- 53 males and 63 females were buried at St.
Andrew's. -- Parish Register.


.

CHARITY-SCHOOL.
THIS was founded by Sir William Blackett, Bart. Sir William Blackett died
December 2d, 1705, and left one thousand pounds, the profits of the whole, in
three parts, equally to be divided, and yearly to be disposed of at Christmas,
as follows, viz.

One-third part to binding of apprentices to trades.

One-third part to poor householders.

The remaining third part to a schoolmaster, to teach 30 children.


and the first boy entered the school in January 1708. -- It was for thirty
boys. -- The last Sir William Blackett, the son of the founder, about the year
1719, made an additional endowment for the purpose of clothing them See
Bourne's account.
.

ORGAN.
AN organ, purchased by a voluntary subscription of the parishioners, was
erected in this church, A. D. 1783. An order of the common council was made in
1776, to establish a salary of 20l. per annum, for the organist of the organ
intended to be set up in this church Common council books, April 15th, 1776.
.

In 1783, the parishioners of St. Andrew's parish purchased a piece of waste
ground, lying on the west side of the churchyard, to enlarge their burial
ground. This was consecrated by the Bishop of Clonfort, in the month of
September, 1786.

LEGACIES LEFT TO THE POOR OF ST. ANDREW'S.
IN the year 1592, Christopher Chaitor, of Butterbye near Durham, by his last
will, gave to the poor of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the parish of St. Andrew's,
where he was born, forty shillings Lib. Testament. No 68 in consist. Dunelm.
p. 215.
.

Left by Mr. William Carr, 1l. 2s. as a legacy to the church Old parish book.
.

To be distributed amongst poor householders.

Left by Henry Hilton, Esquire. 4l. per annum Bourne.
.

Mr. Robert Anderson, 5l. Old parish book.


Dr. Aldworth's land in Akewell-Gate, in Gateshead, 1l. Bourne.


Left by Sir Alexander Davison, to be paid out of the town-chamber, upon
Lady Day, March 25th, 2l. Old parish book.


Left by Mr. Thomas Davison, to be paid yearly, in December, out of the
merchants' company, besides another legacy out of three tenements, 3s. each. --
In all, 1l. 9s. Bourne.


Left by Mr. Timothy Davison, to be paid yearly, in December, at Christmas, for
15 poor freemen, or widows, not merchants, out of the merchants' company, 1l.
Ibid.


Paid out of the town of Newcastle, at two payments, Michaelmas and Lady Day,
4l. Ibid.


Left by Sir Mark Milbank, 3l. per annum Old parish book
.

"Sir William Blackett, Bart. alderman, and sometimes mayor, also a burgess for
this town departed this life May 16th 1680. By his last will did bequeath to
the poor of the parish of St. Andrew's forty shillings yearly for ever From the
escutcheon preserved in St. Andrew's church.
" -- (out of a house at the Bridge-End.)

"Sir William Blackett, Baronet, alderman, twice mayor and also burgess for
this town departed this life the 2d of December 1705. He in his life time gave
an out-rent of 13s. 4d. to this church of St. Andrew's and also a close of
three pounds a year and by his last will gave one thousand pounds to purchase
an estate for the use of this parish for ever From ditto, ibid.
."

Madam Margaret Allgood gave 100l. the interest to be given to the poor of this
parish, on Christmas day, yearly, for ever From ditto, ibid.
.

Richard Gibson, who died January 22d, 1718, gave 30l. the interest to be
divided on Christmas day, yearly, for ever From ditto, ibid.
.

Dame Jane Clavering, by her will, dated Dec. 11th, 1734, gave 50l. the
interest to be yearly distributed by the churchwardens From ditto, ibid.
.

George Mallabar, Esquire. who died August 20th, 1734, gave 50l. the interest to be
yearly divided, on Christmas day, for ever From ditto, ibid.
.

Mrs. Isabel Wrightson, who died March 13th, 1716, gave 50l. the interest to be
paid yearly for the poor of St. Andrew's From ditto, ibid.
.

John Rumney, Esquire. who died February 3d, 1694, gave 260l. a fifth part of the
interest of which to be given to the poor of this parish From ditto, ibid.
.

Mr. William Harrison, who died July 10th, 1721, gave 50l. the interest whereof
to be yearly distributed, on St. Andrew's day, for ever From ditto, ibid
.

John Scafe Slayter left 20l. the interest to be given to the poor of St.
Andrew's Common Council books, September 24th, 1764.
.

OUT-RENTS BELONGING TO ST. ANDREW'S. (Communicated by the present collector,
1782.)
L. s. d. "Lease -- Mr. Wilson, for houses in Sid-Gate 7 15 0 Lease -- Mr.
Hedley, the houses in the Churchyard 1 14 0 Mr. Pott's house, above the
hospital, Gallow-Gate 0 2 6 Mr. Davis, for his house in Pilgrim-Street 0 2 0
Mr. Peter's, ditto 0 2 0 Mr. Dodd, the tan-yard, left side of Darn-Crook 0 5 0
Mr. Yeilder, right side ditto 0 3 4 Lease -- Mr. Coulson, the Thatch-House,
ditto 0 4 10 Mr. Westgarth's shop, at the Church-Gate 0 0 6 Mrs. Young,
alehouse next the church 0 13 0 Mr. Mason, for houses in the High-Friar-Chare
0 6 0 Mrs. Strickett, for ditto 0 3 4 Mr. Younger, for ditto 0 3 0 Mr.
Robinson, for his house in the Great-Market 0 13 4 Mr. Donkin, for an house,
head of Dog-Bank 0 8 0 Lease -- Mr. Gunn, for a coach-house above Mr. Darnell's
0 3 4 Mr. Hedley, Saville-Row 0 2 0 Mr. Moseley's house 0 2 6 Mr. Charleton,
for Dr. Hall's house 0 2 0 Mr. Lowes, for a house in the Oat-Market, above the
Unicorn 0 4 9 Mr. Armstrong, for the same 0 4 9. Common Council books,
September 24th, 1764.


MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTIONS IN ST. ANDREW'S CHURCH AND CHURCHYARD.
TRINITY Chapel. Sir Adam de Athol, and his wife Mary, under a very large
stone, which has originally been plated very curiously with brass. The remains
of their effigies are still to be seen. -- He is pictured at length in armor,
having a sword on his left side, and a dagger on his right. -- Her effigy has
nothing remaining of it but from the shoulders upwards. -- The arms of both
their families are still to be seen on the tombstone.

What remains of the inscription is this: "Hic jacent Dominus Adamarus de
Atholl miles and Domina Maria uxor ejus quae obiit quarto decimo die
mensis..... anno Domini millesimo tricentesimo...... Animarum propitietur." --
The remaining part of the date is broken off: Gray, however, in his account of
this stone, tells us, it was in the year 1387, which is very probably the time
that his wife died; for it is a mistake that he died then, as appears by the
indulgence abovementioned. -- Bourne.

There was, very lately, on this stone, inlaid with brass, a shield with arms,
as quartered at this day by the Dukes of Athol.

Joshua Twizell, June 23d, 1718.

Thomas Winship, tanner, September 2d, 1695.

Christopher Rutter, baker and brewer, March 17th, 1714.

Mrs. Elizabeth Davison, mother of Mr. Thomas Davison, January 20th, 1724, aged
84 years.

Nicholas Fenwick, merchant, 14th December, 1725.

Mr. John Dawson, tailor.

Mrs. Barbara Davison, January 8th, 1730.

In the chancel near the altar.

James Ogle, of Causey-Park, Esquire. upon whose tombstone, which is of marble, is
the following inscription: "Hic jacet Jacobus Ogle de Causey-Park in comitatu
Northumb' armiger, antiquitate domus utpote ex prenobili baronia Ogle de Ogle
stirpe recta linea oriundus, vere clarus. sed invicta in perduelles,
grassantibus nuperis civilibus bellis, animi magnitudine, constantia in regem
etiam in tristissimo authoritatis deliquio. Fidelitate, in superiores
observantia, in pace comitate, in inseriores benignitate, quae omnia justissimo
titulo sua vocare poterat, multo illustrior. Obiit Dec. 4o. die annoque Domini
1664."

Thomas Harrison, barber surgeon, who died Feb. 24th, 1679.

Thomas Bednel, 14th July, 1701.

Christopher Barker, Oct. 26th, 1718.

Robert Tod, October 5th, 1730.

Within the rails of the communion lie interred the bodies of Cuthbert Lambert,
M. D. and of Cuthbert his son -- as yet without any inscription.

-- Tanner -- Rutter -- Roman -- Younger -- Mills -- Drum ^^nd.

William Reed, 1683 -- David Cooper, 1748 -- Christopher Barker, 1705. --
Thomas Beadnell, 1715. -- Thomas Harrison, 1675.

North-Isle.

Robert Mills, house-carpenter.

South-Isle.

Dorothy Harrison, May 27th, 1702.

West End.

William Milburn, 1772 -- R. Bates, Esquire. -- Richard Ward of Wallcott in
Norfolk, Esquire. -- Joseph Richmond, 1763 -- Henry Cowell, 1761.

Churchyard.

On a table monument opposite the porch door: "H. R. I. P. Car. Avison denati 9
Maii, 1770. ao aetatis 60. Cath. uxor denati 14 October. 1766. -- 53. Simul cum
filia Jana conjugi moestissimo Roberto Page immature erepta 14 Julii, 1773,
annos nata, 28." On an adjoining table monument, ibid. "In memory Of Edward
Avison and Margaret his wife, who were eminent for piety and primitive
simplicity of manners: Having each borne a lingering disease, with the most
exemplary patience and resignation; They rejoiced at the approach of death, and
expired with hopes full of immortality. He died in October, 1776, aged 29. She
in November, 1777, aged 33."

On an upright head-stone in St. Andrew's churchyard: "Here lies the body of
Jane Murray, the Daughter of George Murray and Margaret, his wife, who died
29th September, 1765, aged 22 years. Also of Margaret Murray, his wife, who
died March 19th, 1772, aged 57. Also the above George Murray, who did 30th
January, 1779, aged 68. Also James Murray, son of the above George and Margaret
Murray, who died 19th April, 1779, aged 39."

January 12th, 1376, Thomas, Bishop of Durham, granted leave to the
parishioners of St. Andrew's to build in their churchyard, saving the
episcopal rights and those of the parish church of St. Nicholas in Newcastle
upon Tyne. -- Register Hatfeld, p. 119. Randall's MSS.

CURATES, LECTURERS AND ASSISTANT-CURATES OF ST. ANDREW'S.
THE vicar of Newcastle pays to the minister or lecturer of this church, as
curate, 3l. per annum -- The corporation of Newcastle pays him as lecturer,
100l. per annum, and the King pays him 5l. 2s. 6d. aliter 5l. 5s. 5d. per
annum. -- Randall's MSS.

William Hydewyn occurs as parish priest here, A. D. 1378 Register Hatfeld, p.
135. In a deed belonging to this church dated 1322, "Domino Henrico Edwyn
capellan' occurs. -- In another ibid. dated 1319, "Domino Roberto de Gosford,
capell" occurs.

In another, ibid. 14 October. 1426, "Johanni de Anbell clerico et Johanni de
Dalton capell" occur.

In another, ibid. dated 1434, "Willielmus Blackwell capellanus" occurs.

In another, ibid. dated July 20th, 1450, Domini Johannis Hall capellani"
occurs.

In another, ibid. of the same date, "Dominum Willielmum More capell" occurs.

In another, ibid. dated April 14th, 1470, "Domino Johanne Rose, capell" occurs
amongst the witnesses. Dr. Ellison's MSS. -- Some of the above probably
belonged to this church.


.

William Hunter occurs 1424 Randall's MSS.
.

Bartram Cowghram, February 1st, 1578 Barnes' Visitation. -- He was buried at
St. Nicholas, Sept. 20th, 1589. -- Register.

In a deed preserved in St. Andrew's vestry, dated August 12th, 17 Hen. VIII.
mention occurs of "unum tenementum sive burgag' vulgariter nuncupat' The
Priests Chamber prout jacet et situatur in quadam venella vocat' Darne Cruke
infra tenementum pertinens ecclesiae predict."


.

Thomas Maislete occurs as curate, January 23d, 1580. Also July ^th, 1586
Barnes' Visitation.
.

Robert Askewe occurs A. D. 1589 Book of Wills, p. 228.
.

Robert Bonner, A. B. licensed Dec. 17th, 1636. See afterward 1669 Register of
Bishop Morton.
.

Francis Gray about 1622, buried January 14th, 1641 Randall's MSS.
.

In 1641, Mr. Ander occurs as minister of this church Parish Register.
.

March 7th, 1641, John Clark, A. M. and free burgess of Newcastle upon Tyne,
was on the petition and recommendation of the parishioners, appointed by the
common council to succeed Mr. Gray, with a salary of 40l. per annum
Common Council books, and Walker's Sufferings of the Clergy, part ii. p. 224.
. He was sequestered and plundered -- Buried April 5th, 1667, at St. Nicholas.

April 5th, 1647, there is an order of common council, to six Mr. Stephen
Dockray at St. Andrew's, where he had been for some time upon trial -- salary
80l. per annum. June 20th, 1660, he was established there by the same
authority, to preach forenoon and afternoon -- salary 80l. per annum. -- He was
buried August 11th, 1660, at St. Andrew's He was of the presbyterian judgment.
-- The following occurs in the register of this parish: -- "1652, January 21,
Mr. John Wigham, preacher of the word," buried -- Quaere if he belonged to this
church.
.

In September 1660, Dr Wishart was appointed in the place of Mr. Dockray by the
common council, by a letter from the King -- salary 80l. per annum. He was
removed from thence to St. Nicholas.

August 27th, 1662, John Clark, A. M. was reinstated at St. Andrew's -- salary
80l. "to begin since Mr. Dockray's decease."

Henry Ashburnham occurs, A. D. 1668 He was buried at St. John's May 28th,
1669. Bishop Cosins wrote a recommendatory letter to the corporation of
Newcastle, desiring that Mr. Bonner (see before 1636) might be appointed to
succeed on the death of Mr. Ashburnham at St. Andrew's -- but it should seem
without effect.
.

John Weld A. B. curate, occurs September 19th, 1669 Cosins Reg. p. 48 and 87.
; when A. M. confirmed by the common council at St. Andrew's to preach and read
prayers both forenoon and afternoon, and do all other duty at St. Andrew's --
salary 40l. per annum; raised January 18th, 1674, to 60l. per annum, and 10l.
for lecturing at St. Nicholas. He was buried October 19th, 1677.

October 29th, 1677, Mr. Robert Roddam, son of the mayor of Newcastle, was
appointed by the common council, on the death of Weld Common Council books.
.

April 7th, 1684, Daniel Potenger, minister, was appointed by the
common council, in the place of Mr. Robert Roddam, who had resigned -- salary,
in all, 100l. Ibid.
.

Dec. 2d, 1687, Mr. John Leigh was appointed by the common council on the
resignation of Potenger -- salary, in all, 100l. Ibid.
.

August 27th, 1688, Mr. Charles Maddison in the place of J. Leigh Ibid.
.

October 8th, 1688, Mr. William Drake, and Mr. Andrew Bates, were presented to
the parish for their probation, in case Mr. C. Maddison should refuse to
officiate Common Council books.
.

July 25th, 1689, Mr. William Richards was appointed by the common council to
this church -- salary, in all, 100l. -- Mr. William Drake ordered 20l. for
having officiated at the same time Ibid. See Wood's Athenae Oxon. vol. ii. p.
1072.
. He was buried in the chancel of St. Andrew's, 22d August, 1705.

March 7th, 1693, Mr. Peter Strachan, curate -- removed to All Saints Parish
Register.
.

July 3d, 1695, Mr. William Aynslay, curate Ibid.
.

July 30th, 1696, Mr. Charles Stoddart, curate Ibid.
.

August 6th, 1702, Mr. Richard Musgrave, curate Ibid.
.

April 18th, 1704, Mr. John Perkin, curate Ibid.
.

September 25th, 1705, Thomas Shadforth, M. A. minister -- salary, in all,
100l. -- He died September 11th, 1724, and was buried at Branspeth, com.
Dunelm', where he had before been curate "Hic conditus est Thomas Shadforth, A.
M. Ecclesiae Sancti Andreae apud Novocastrenses per annos 19 capellanus et
prius hujus parochiae curatus, Qui obiit Sept. 11, 1724. Aetat is suae 58."
.

A. D. 1705, Mr. George Pie, curate Parish Register -- certainly different
persons.
.

February, 1706, Mr. Thomas Pie, curate Parish Register -- certainly different
persons.
.

February, 20th, 1707, Mr. John Potts, curate, removed to St. John's Ibid.
.

May, 1707, Mr. George Lion, curate, removed to Earsdon Ibid.
.

1714, Mr. John Mitcalfe, curate Ibid.
.

1718, Mr. William Hall, curate, removed to All Saints Ibid.
.

1772, Mr. James Farin, curate Ibid.
.

1722, Mr. William Simcoe, curate Ibid
.

1724, Mr. William Wilkinson, curate, removed to St. Nicholas, 1739 Ibid.
.

John Ellison, A. M. of University College, Oxford, was appointed minister of
this church, on the death of T. Shadforth -- licensed Sept. 16th, 1725. He was
the eldest son of Dr. Nathanael Ellison, vicar of Newcastle. September 29th,
1766, he resigned in favor of his son Nathanael Ellison, A. M Vicar of
Bedlington -- published a sermon preached before the sons of the clergy at St.
Nicholas' church in Newcastle upon Tyne, on Thursday September 6th, 1750,
quarto. --
.

Richard Brewster, A. B. of St. John's College, Cambridge, curate, licensed
Sept. 12, 1741, in the place of W. Wilkinson Richard Brewster, A. M. published
in quarto a sermon preached in St. Nicholas' church in Newcastle upon Tyne on
Thursday, Nov. 29th, 1759. Thanksgiving.
.

Anthony Munton, A. M. curate, head-usher of the grammar school. He died
January 9th, 1755, and was buried at St. John's There is a posthumous
publication of several sermons preached at Newcastle upon Tyne by Anthony
Munton, A. M. Newcastle, printed by John White, 1756, 8vo. in one volume,
dedicated to the generous subscribers, by his widow Dorothy Munton.
.

George Stephenson, clerk, curate, on the death of A. Munton -- removed to All
Saints Parish Register.
.

John Ellison, clerk, curate, 1756, removed to the second curacy at St.
Nicholas Ibid.
.

John Askew, A. B. curate, December 1756. George Stephenson, clerk, appears to
have officiated as deputy to J. Askew, for several years Ibid.
.

John Scott, curate, March 1763. Buried at St. Andrew's, December 2d, 1764.

Bryan Leeke, A. M. curate, 1765, occurs here, Bishop's visitation, August 6th,
1766. Removed afterward to the living of St. John-Ley near Hexham.

September 29th, 1766, Nathanael Ellison, A. M. formerly of Lincoln-College,
afterward fellow of Merton-College, Oxford, one of the White Hall preachers,
was appointed lecturer of St. Andrew's, on the resignation of his father He was
presented by the commissioners of the great seal to the vicarage of Bolam in
Northumberland, and inducted June 4th, 1770. -- Newcastle Courant. January
12th, 1773, he married Miss Furye, eldest daughter of the late Col. Noel Furye
-- (Ibid.) In the year 1768, he was appointed one of the domestic chaplains of
the Earl of Tankerville.

In August 1782, he was nominated by the Duke of Northumberland to the
perpetual curacy of Doddington, near Chillingham in the county of
Northumberland, vacant by the resignation of Mr. Thorp, rector of Gateshead.


.

June, 1773, John Brand, A. B. of Lincoln-College, Oxford, -- curate -- removed
hither from the curacy of Bolam in Northumberland -- presented to the perpetual
curacy of Cramlington, October 6th, 1774; when A. M. removed, in 1784, to the
rectory of St. Mary at Hill and St. Andrew Hubbard, London. In 1786, appointed
one of the domestic chaplains to the Duke of Northumberland.

Thomas Ellison, A. B. on the resignation of J. Brand.

Mr. Hague on the removal of T. Ellison.

ST. JAMES' CHAPEL IN THE PARISH OF ST. ANDREW'S.
BOURNE supposes this chapel, on the north side of the Barrows Bridge, to have
been a chapel of ease to St. Andrew's, for the out parts of the parish See
Bourne's account.
.

It seems rather to have belonged to the lazar house that once stood near it,
and was an appendage to St. Magdalen's Hospital A. D. 1542, Edward Burell, then
master of St. Magdalen's Hospital, is styled also "Previsour of the chapel of
St. Jaymes, and of the Lazer House neighe adjoining to the said hospital." See
account of that hospital.

Mention of this place occurs in the account of the wards of the town, as
follows:

"From Gallowsgate unto the Water-Mill beside St. James' kirk."

In the will of John Cragg, of Newcastle upon Tyne, dated Tuesday after the
feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, 1349, he bequeaths five marks to the
chaplain that went to St. James' -- "cuidam capellano, etc.

cuidam hujusmodi eunti apud S. Jacobum quinque marcas."

See Bourne sub anno.
.

The western end of this chapel has been converted into a cow-house: in the
east end is at present a dwelling house, the fireplace of which stands on the
site of the communion table. Old arches built up with brick are still
observable, and the eastern window may be traced out from the stairs of an
adjoining house. The whole building is called at present "The Sick-Man's House."

ST. MARY'S CHAPEL AT JESMONT IN THIS PARISH Randall's MSS. say, "St. Mary's
Chapel and Hospital of Gesmond, Jesumonde or Jesumuth was a free chapel distant
north-east from Newcastle two miles. The name is spelled many different ways.
Jes'mont, i. e. the Mount of Jesus, noted for its chapel and hospital." There
is said to have been an artificial mount at or near this village, on which a
cross or some image of Christ stood, from whence the place is thought to have
derived its name. Sed Quaere.
.
THE founder of this free chapel at Jesmont, dedicated to St. Mary, is unknown.

June 12th 1351, Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, instituted Sir William de
Heighington chaplain to the free chapel of Jesmuth, within the parish of
Newcastle, on the presentation of Sir Alexander de Hilton and Matilda his wife,
patrons See Bourne's account. -- It appertained to the barony of Robert de
Gaugy in the 3d of Hen. III. Adam de Athol, who lies buried in the chapel of
the Holy Trinity in St. Andrew's church, lived in this village, and is styled
"Dominus de Jesmond." It was also in possession of the Orde family.

A. D. 1370, Hylton died, seized of a third part of Jesmond. Warburton's
Collections MS. penes h. v. Ducem Northumbriae.


.

A. D. 1379, one Staynley died seized of the presentation of the chapel of
Jesmond In the Harleian MSS. 708, eschaets 14 Ric. II. I found the following:

"Jacoba que fuit uxor Johannis Stryndlyn obiit seisit' in feodo talliato sibi
et heredibus de corpore suo exeunt' de tercia part manerii de Jessemuth una
cum tercia part advoc' ecclesiae sive cantariae ejusdem cum acciderit in com'
Northumbriae que tenentur de Rege in capite per homagium et fidelitatem redd'
per annum 2s. 2d. ad wardam castri Novi Castelli super Tynam.


.

It appears that, A. D. 1399, Bertram Mumboucher held the advowson of this
chapel "Anno 1 Henrici quarti.

Bertramus Mumboucher -- et servitium militare tenuit etiam in comitatu
Northumbriae -- sextam partem manerii de Jesemuth -- et advocationem capellae
beatae Mariae ibidem cum acciderit de Rege per servitium sextae partis unius
feodi militis." Dodsworth, 11 Bod. Library. Extracts from the bundels of
eschaets Tower of London.


.

A. D. 1426, William Harbottle died seized of the advowson of this chapel
Warburton's Collections, ut supra -- et Dodsworth, ut supra.
.

A Mr. Lumley appears to have been chaplain at Jesmond, before A. D. 1483
Bibli' Harleian. No 433. (Randall's MSS.) "246 -- Ric. III. (K) granted to
Doctor Roby the fre chapelle of our Lady of Gisemond besides Newcastle upon Tyne
being void by the decesse of Mr. Lumley."
.

In the year 1483, King Richard the Third presented Dr. Roby to this chapel,
vacant by the death of Mr. Lumley Bibli' Harleian. No 433. (Randall's MSS.)
"246 -- Ric. III. (K) granted to Doctor Roby the fre chapelle of our Lady of
Gisemond besides Newcastle upon Tyne being void by the decesse of Mr. Lumley."
.

March 4th, 1549, King Edward the Sixth granted to the mayor and burgesses of
Newcastle upon Tyne the free chapel of the blessed Mary at Jesmont, in the
parish of St. Andrew in Newcastle upon Tyne, with all its walls, stones, timber
and lead, together with an annual rent of 3s. 4d. out of lands at Old Heaton,
and whatever else belonged to the said free chapel The chapel of St. Laurence
was included in this grant. The consideration was 144l. 13s. 4d. which sum was
paid by the hands of Sir Robert Brandling, Knight. into the Augmentation-Office, as
appears by the receipt still preserved in the archives of the corporation, 16th
February, 3 Ed. VI.

The original is preserved in the said archives.

Bourne says, that the same year the mayor and burgesses granted the hospital
of the blessed Mary at Jesmond, with the lands and grounds belonging to it, to
Sir John Brandling, and his heirs and assigns for ever. See Bourne's account of
St. Mary's Well.

There remains one of the little windows of the hospital in the west gable of a
house at present a public house with the sign of the Nag's Head. The chapel
has had a north isle which is now a stable. There is the fragment of a window
on the north gable. -- The chapel itself is now a barn -- within remain two
columns with their capitals, with a niche, etc. -- on the outside toward the
south are the remains of a curious window. See Appendix.

The chapel and hospital are at present, or were very lately, the property of
Dr. Andrew, of Scots-House near Sunderland, by the sea. Com. Dunelm.


.

Opposite Darne-Crook In a deed preserved in St. Andrew's vestry, dated 12
August, 17 Hen. VIII. there is mentioned "quadam venella vocata Darnecruke
insia tenementum pertinens ecclesie predict' (St. Andree) ex part orientali et
gardinum pertinens ecclesie predict' ex part occidentali, et extendit in
latitudine a quodam Ronul vocat' Lortebourne versus austrum usque cimeter'
ecclesie Sancti Andree supradicte retro versus boreal'" -- Can Crook be derived
from Crecca, a creek?
is a little running water which goes into Lork-Burn.

See the account of Ficket-Tower Ward -- The debtors not confined to close
prison in Newgate have liberty to walk as far as this runner, which at present
is arched over, and is generally known by the name of Execution-Dock According
to the glossary of Kennett's Parochial Antiquities, "Doke," in Essex, is the
name of a small brook or stream of water. -- See Sulcus Aquae. Ibid.
.

A little way beyond this, toward White-Cross, stood a row of houses, nearly
in the middle of the street, called the Hucksters Booths -- they were pulled
down several years ago, having been repeatedly complained of as a nuisance to
the street The site of these houses is marked in Bourne's Plan of Newcastle. --
They appear to have been anciently styled "Coksour or Cokstole Bothes." -- See
account of Wards -- Andrew Tower.
.

I find mention of the White Cross, A. D. 1410 Dodsworth's Collections,
Bodleian Library -- 11 Hen. IV.

Mention occurs of "White-Cross-Street" in an inquisition dated September 2d,
1577. "This Cross," says Bourne, on the authority of the Milbank MS. "was
pulled down that very night after Sir George Selby died, and King James of
sacred memory, March 24th." He adds, "On the place where the cross stood was a
cistern for receiving the water which was then called the New Water. This," he
continues, "was lately pulled down, and there is now in the place where the
cross was, a pillar of stone-work."

There is an order of common council, April 4th, 1687, in which mention occurs
of the White Cross, as almost quite demolished and fallen down, with directions
to the then town's surveyor to rebuild it with steps and other conveniences.

A. D. 1773, a milk-market was established at White-Cross. -- Newcastle
Courant, Sept. 4. In the year 1783 it was pulled down and rebuilt after a
design by Mr. David Stevenson, architect.


.

Newgate-Street, from the Scotch Inn It stood directly opposite to the inn
called the Turk's Head. Bourne describes it as an "ancient building, with a
large gate, which has formerly been a piece of stately workmanship." He adds,
that "Sir Robert Shaftoe, recorder of this town (in a MS. de Rebus Novocasti')
was of opinion that this was the house of the earls of Northumberland, and was
called the Earl's Inn." -- Sir Robert was, however, certainly mistaken. -- See
before in the account of the Close.
(a place where anciently the kings, nobility, etc. of Scotland lodged in time
of truce or league with England, the arch of the great gate-way of which
remained till October 1783), takes the name of Bigg-Market and Oat-Market In an
inrolment in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, dated 17
Car. II. mention occurs of "The Oate alias the Bigg-Markett."

"At the end of it southward," says Bourne, "is a very great market for
poultry, which gives the name of the Pullen-Market to this part of the street."
-- The Poultry or Pullen-Market has been removed since Bourne's time into the
street called High-Bridge. -- The street hereabouts is now called Union-Street.

In Corbridge's Plan of Newcastle, the foot of Bigg-Market is called "The
Butter-Markett."

Bigg is the old name for a particular kind of barley.


.

NUNNERY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE.
A LITTLE above the Scotch Inn, on the opposite side of the street, there still
remains part of the arch of the great entrance to the Nunnery of St.
Bartholomew.

The account of this, evidently the oldest of the monastic buildings here, of
which any vestiges are now to be found, cannot be improperly prefaced with a
short history of the first introduction of Christianity into this part of the
island.

Bid, the father of our church history, who was born in this northern
extremity of England, fixes this great event to A. D. 627 See Smith's Bid,
lib. ii. cap. 14.
.

The place now called Newcastle upon Tyne he mentions, 26 years afterward, as
the scene of occurrences instrumental, in no common degree, to the general
propagation of our religion throughout the whole island, by the name of "Ad
Murum See under "Annals and Historical Events," the proofs that "Ad Murum" was
neither "Wall-Town," -- "Walbottle," nor "Benwall," but stood upon part at
least of the site of the present Newcastle upon Tyne.
" ( i. e. At Wall), as the residence of the then Christian King of
Northumberland, and where two other royal converts became such by the
initiatory rite of baptism.

A. D. 653, Peada "A. D. 653. His temporibus -- Peada, Merciorum Regis filius,
venit ad Regem Nordanhymbrorum Osvin, postulans filiam ejus Alchfledam sibi
conjugem dari; neque aliter quod petebat impetrare potuit, nisi fidem Christi
et baptisma, cum gente cui praeerat, acciperet. -- Baptizatus est ergo a Finano
Episcopo, cum omnibus qui secum venerant comitibus ac militibus, corumque
famulis universis, in vico Regis illustri, qui vocatur Ad Murum." Smith's Bid,
p. 125.
, son of Penda, King of Mercia, being here on a visit at the court of Oswy,
King of Northumberland, to demand his daughter Alchfleda in marriage, could on
no other conditions obtain her father's consent but by being baptized himself,
and promising that all his subjects should become Christians. Struck with the
excellence of the doctrines of this new faith, which were warmly recommended to
him on the occasion by his friend Alchfrid, the natural son of Oswy, who had
married Cyniburga his sister, he declared himself a convert by conviction; and
having been baptized, together with his retinue, by Finan, Bishop of
Lindisfarn, obtained a bride, with whom he may be said to have received a truly
royal dower, and who would, doubtless, encourage him in the promulgation of the
Christian faith, throughout his extensive dominions. There accompanied him on
this mission of conversion from the court of the Northumberland King, four
priests, Cedda, Adda (brother of Uttanus, abbot of Gateshead), Betti and Dinmi,
to teach and baptize his Mercian subjects, on their return home.

About A. D. 653 -- Eo tempore -- Sigebert (Rex orientalium Saxonum) baptizatus
est cum suis a Finano in villa regia cujus supra meminimus, quae cognominatur
Ad Murum ubi tunc temporis erat Rex supradictus Oswin." -- Smith's Bid, p. 126.
the same time the zealous Oswy, as well by argument as friendly persuasion,
recovered to the faith of Christ, Sigebert, King of the East Angles, who had
apostatized after a former conversion, and who, after having been baptized,
together with his attendants, by the bishop aforesaid, was accompanied home by
two priests, whom Oswy, at his own request, deputed to preach the gospel to the
East Saxons "Thus were the East Angles recovered to our faith, whose kingdom
bounded on the east and north by the sea, on the west by St. Edmund's Dyke and
part of Hertfordshire; and on the south by Essex, containing the present
counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire and the isle of Ely. -- On his
return to his own kingdom, he caused proper places of instruction to be
erected, and the new taught religion began greatly to flourish in the kingdom."
Strutt's Chronicle, vol. i. p. 154.
.

As no account of any building appropriated to baptism, or any other rite of
Christian worship, which in that age appear to have been of the rudest and most
simple architecture, is given in the relation of the above very important
events, we may suppose the ceremony to have been performed in the river Tyne,
if some temporary structure, enclosing a baptistery, had not previously been
provided, as had before been done at York, where King Aidun was baptized, on
Easter Day, A. D. 627, in a church of wood, which he himself had hastily
erected for the occasion.

To the ancient name of our town, "Ad Murum," succeeded the appellation of
Monk-Chester: it is uncertain at what period this new title took place, which
has generally been interpreted "The fortified residence of persons of the
monastic order, "Sir Robert Shastoe (a former recorder of Newcastle) was of
opinion that Monk-Chester had its name from the neighboring monks' retiring to
it for occasional protection in times of danger and devastation." Dr. Ellison's
MS. Notes.
" who may have crowded into it for reasons impossible to be known at this very
distant period of time.

On the introduction of monastic orders, with whom not only the relics of
saints, but also the scenes of events of great consequence to religion, were
held in the highest estimation, it seems no very improbable conjecture that a
place consecrated to the warm imaginations of these well-meaning zealots, by
circumstances so remarkable as have been just related, should be accounted
sacred in more than a common degree: if we farther unite the idea of personal
safety expected in what had been so recently a Roman fortification, and so
often wanted in the times of the Danish invasions, with that of sanctity
affixed to it by something not unlike superstition, it seems natural to suppose
that those ancient devotees would prefer it on both accounts. However this may
have been, we are certain, from the clearest testimony of historians, that
monks, in more than ordinary numbers, resided at it, and learn farther that
neither the idea of local sanctity with which we have presumed its then
inhabitants to have been impressed, nor the military works left in it by former
owners, could preserve it from destruction in the predatory incursions of
foreign or neighboring barbarians Matthew of Westminster informs us that in
the year of grace 800, an army of Danish pagans ravaged and spoiled the church
of Tinmouth, carrying off the spoil instantly to their ships -- That
sixty-seven years afterward, the same cruel victors d^populated the whole
province of Northumberland to the mouth of the river Tyne, and subjugated the
whole country -- As also that three years afterward, the noble monasteries on
our coast, those of Lindisfarn, Tynmouth, Gyrway (Jarrow) and Weremouth were
utterly plundered and destroyed.
.

The monasteries of Monk-Chester having fallen, almost with every memorial of
them, in the common destruction of sacred edifices, by the infidel Danes, the
ruins of that place seem to have been unnoticed till about the middle of the
eleventh century, when they were visited on motives of religious zeal, similar
to those by which we have supposed the Town had before been rendered famous,
but when scarce any vestiges of the habitations or religious houses of its
former monastic orders could be found. Aldwine Hoveden's Annal, p. 201.

Brompton inter december Scriptores, p. 973.

Warton's Anglia Sacra, vol. i. p. 785.


, monk and prior of the monastery of Winchelsea, having gathered from ancient
monuments, which he appears to have studied both from motives of christian
piety and literary curiosity, that Northumberland had been particularly
distinguished for its sacred edifices, formed a resolution of visiting their
remains. He was accompanied in what was then a perilous journey by Elfwius and
Reinfridus, two monks of Evesham. The holy travelers performed it on foot, in
all the plainness of pristine simplicity, leading a little ass carrying some
books and sacred vestments necessary for the performance of divine service.
This happened A. D. 1073. On their arrival at Northumberland their residence
was for some time at Monk-Chester: but finding there no vestige of the former
monastic orders, and having been invited by Walcher, then Bishop of Durham, to
place themselves under the jurisdiction of the church, rather than accept an
habitation under the power of secular persons, they removed from thence a
little way down the river to Jarrow, which before that time had been a famous
monastery, and, though then in ruins also, was fitted up a second time for the
reception of these devout strangers. Thus was a revival given to monkery in
this part of the island, after it had been extinguished and unknown here for
about two hundred years, that is, from the time when the Danes had destroyed
the convents Ridpath's Border History, p. 65.
.

Mention occurs of a small Benedictine nunnery at Newcastle upon Tyne, A. D.
1086 "Anno 1086 -- quo anno Clito Eadgarus Etheling frater Sanctae Margaretae,
cum ducentis militibus mare transiens Apuliam adiit -- reperi autem sic
scriptum quod Agatha, matter Sanctae Margaretae et Christina foror ejus apud
Novum Castrum super Tyne sponsae Christi consecratae sunt." J. Forduni Scoti
Chron. lib. v. p. 269.

See also Leland's Collectanea, vol. i. p. 531, who says it was of the
Benedictine order. This order or rule was common to monks and nuns, the latter
of whom, omitting only what was improper for their sex, wore habits of like
color with the former, and had their heads always covered with a veil.


. Hither Agas, the mother of Margaret, Queen of Scotland, and Christian, her
sister, after King Malcolm was killed at Alnwick, retired and took the sacred
veil.

If we may credit a manuscript in the Bodleian library See Bernard's Catalogue
of MSS. preserved in that most venerable repository -- p. 86. "Collectiones
quaedam de Berwico et Novo Castro." -- "Notandum quod Baron de Hilton, miles
olim strenuissimus per generaciones et successiones heredum legitimorum
appellatus est fundator illius monasterii monialium, in Novo Castro super
Tynam." This MS. is without date. It refutes Speed's account of the founder of
this house, and if it does not confirm, must be admitted not to contradict that
of Fordun abovementioned. "The family of the Hiltons," says Carter in his
Analysis of Honor, p. 92, "whose antiquity, not only by an ancient pedigree,
which I have seen taken out of the office, but by the records of the Tower,
does produce the noblest descent that I know any family in England."
at Oxford, this nunnery owed its origin to an ancient baron of the name of
Hilton. This family was of distinction in the north in times of the most remote
antiquity. It has lately become extinct, and experienced at last the fate of
all human greatness.

Speed, on I know not what authority, ascribes to King Henry the First the
foundation of the Hospital of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, for nuns, at
Newcastle upon Tyne See his Catalogue of Religious Houses.
.

David On the express testimony of Boethius, Fordun, and other Scottish
historians, this David, King of Scotland, during his residence at Newcastle,
founded there a monastery of Praemonstratensians. Admitting the fact, no
accounts, either by tradition or writing, have been transmitted, where their
house stood in Newcastle, or with what lands or possessions it was endowed.
, King of Scotland, who resided at this town soon after A. D. 1135, is
reported, by some historians, to have been the founder of this nunnery
"Moniales apud Novum Castrum fundatae per Sanctum David Regem Scotorum."
Appendix ad Joh. de Fordun Scoti Chronicon, p. 1559, Hearne's edit. vol. v. --
See also ibid. lib. v. cap. 48, citing this authority: "Ut patet in prologo
ejus super statutis burgorum."
. It appears by a charter of King John, that the Scottish King endowed it with
some land In a charter of the 2d of King John to the town of Newcastle, mention
occurs of a claim from that town, of fifty-one shillings and a halfpenny, from
the land which the nuns of that place held at that time, by the gift of King
David. See under "History of Newcastle as a corporate town."
.

King Henry I. may have done the same, and for one common reason both these
royal benefactors may have been reputed the original founders.

Some time before A. D. 1149, William de St. Barbara "Willielmus Dei gracia
Dunelmensis Episcopus priori et conventui Sancti Cuthberti et archidiaconis et
omnibus sancte matris ecclesie filiis salutem. Notum facimus universitati
vestre nos dedisse et presenti carta nostra confirmasse Deo et Sancto
Bartholomeo and sanctimonialibus de Novo Castello, Stellinglei cum omnibus
pertinenciis suis in bosco et plano, in aquis et piscariis, in viis et semitis,
in divisis et exitibus, in pratis et molendinis et quicquid continetur infra
divisas de Stellinglei sit extra forestage, et in forestia mea pascua ad averia
sua habebunt et quiet per forestiam erunt de panagio. Merim' et shohail et
closturam et virgas in forestia mea ubi eis sit magis ad aisiamentum habebunt.
Quare volo et firmiter precipio ne vicecomes vel forestarius vel prepositus nec
aliquis ministrorum eorum invasionem in domos vel in terras earum faciet ad
namium capiend' vel contumeliam faciendam nec in hospiciis capiendis nec in
aliis molestiis faciendis. Hec omnia do eis in puram et liberam et perpetuam
elemosinam existere. Siquis autem aliquid mihi minuere vel auserre presumpserit
Deo reddat rationem in die judicii nisi ad emendacionem congruam venerit. Qui
vero hoc in pace dimittere vel augmentare voluerint participes omnium
beneficiorum ecclesie Sancti Cuthberti and Sancti Egidii et nostrorum eis
facimus nec in presenti sic transeant per bona temporalia nec non amittant
eterna. Hiis testibus Rog' Priore Rannulfo Archid' Nic' Canonic' Waltero
Monach' Rob' de Tribois, Ingelar' Ric' de Ketelvilla Rob' de Trescoberyard
Medic' Sym' Canonico Godwino Canonico." -- (Seal broken off.) -- From the
original grant, confirmed by the prior and convent of Durham, remaining in the
Augmentation-Office. -- Roger, prior of Durham, died A. D. 1149. -- William de
St. Barbara was elected Bishop of Durham, 14th March, 1143.
, Bishop of Durham, with the prior and convent there, granted Stellingley (now
called Stella), to God and St. Bartholomew, and the nuns of Newcastle.

King Henry II. granted a general charter of confirmation to this nunnery
Bourne's History of Newcastle. "H. Rex, etc. Sciatis me concessisse et charta
confirmasse monialibus Sancti Bartholomei de Novo Castello super Tynam omnes
donationes quae eis rationabiliter fact sunt: videlicet ecclesiam Sancti
Bartholomei et hospitale Sanctae Mariae de predicto castello et terram etc. et
20 acras de scala S^^^a -- modus agri. -- See Dufresne, in verbo.
et 9 tofta et horseyol Horseyol is probably the same with "horsgal ulum" in
Dufresne, which he defines to mean, "Redemptio pecuniaria, nomine census,
alicujus servitii, quod cum equo quis debebat."
et duos solidos de Gatisheved et omnia alia quae eis rationabiliter data sunt
vel dabuntur. Quare volo et firmiter precipio etc. Test' Will' de Mandevilla,
Reginald' de Curtnay, Willielmo de Stuttevilla, Thoma de Bardulf, Robert de
Scutevilla, Richard Gosfard." Bourne seems perfectly right in assigning this
charter to the Second Henry, for in Rymer's Foedera, tom. i. p. 50, under A. D.
1177, the 23d of Henry II. mention occurs of "Willielm' de Mandevilla and Rob.
de Stutevilla." -- Bourne adds, that he was not able to find out the twenty
acres mentioned in the above charter. "A MS." he says, "of Mr. Joshua Douglas
tells us, that probably all that side of the street, from the Nuns to Newgate,
belonged to these nuns, for their garden reaches to High-Fryer-Chare. This,
indeed, is highly probable, for the nine tofts, or crofts, confirmed to them in
this charter, seem to be a good proof of the truth of it."
.

Between A. D. 1153 and 1194, Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, confirmed the
former grant of Stellinglei to the nuns of this house; giving them by the same,
in pure and perpetual alms, "Twille," in exchange for Olworthe "Hugo Dei gratia
Dunelmensis Episcopus priori et contrentui Sancti Cuthberti et archidiacoms et
omnibus sancte matris ecclesie silus salutem; notum facimus univer^ati vestre
nos dedisse et presenti carta confirmasse Deo and Sancto Bartholomeo and (...)
de Novo Castell' omnes donaciones quas Will' predecessor noster ^^ dedi^^^
confirmavit, scilicet Stellinglei cum omnibus pertinenciis suis in bosco et
plano, in aquis et piscariis in viis et semitis, in divisis et exitibus in
pratis et molendinis et quicquid continetur intra divisas de Stellinglei, sit
extra forestage et in foresta mea pascua ad averia sua habebunt et quiet per
forestiam meam erunt de pannagio Merem' et fuhail et closturam et virgas in
foresta mea ubi eis sit magis ad aisiament habebunt. Nos igitur damus eis
Twille pro escambio de Olw'rtthe cum omnibus pertinenciis suis in liberam et
puram et perpetuam elemosinam. Ita ut ne aliquis ministrorum meorum nec
forestarius nec ministri ejus invasionem in domos vel in terras earum faciat ad
namium capiend' vel contumeliam faciendam nec in hospiciis capiendis nec in
aliis molestiis faciendis. Hiis testibus Johanne Archidiacono Waltero Monac'
Willielmo fil' Tosti, Rob' de Tribois Tedbaldo Senescaldo Sic.
Gill' Cam' Alano de Walesende Walckelin Decano de Werremue." -- Seal lost off.
.

There remains, in the Augmentation-Office, a very ancient original grant, by
one of the prioresses of this house, of six acres of arable land, in Haliwell,
to Roger of Backworth, on the annual payment of five shillings to the light of
St. Mary Omnibus hoc script' etc. Priorissa de Sancto Bartholomeo Novi Castri
et ejusdem loci conventus salutem. -- Noverit universitas vestra nos de comuni
consilio et consensu capituli nostri dedisse concessisse et hac presenti carta
nostra confirmasse Rogero de Bacwith ad firmam sex acras terre arabilis in
campo de Haliwell quas Rogerus de Haliwell nobis dedit in ligia potestate sua
in puram et perpetuam elemosinam scilicet in Wythenes duas acras in
Pipewithrigg versus Chestres unam acram in Hetherigg unam acram in
Westlonggeleyes unam acram et juxta viam que ducit de Seton ad castellum unam
acram et unum toftum quod Thoret Molendinar' tenuit in villa de Halliwell
habend' et tenend' sibi et heredibus suis de nobis in perpetuum cum comuni
pastura et aliis aisiamentis pertinentibus ad tantam terram in eadem villa
libere quiet ab omni servicio consuetudine and exaccione reddendo inde per
annum ad luminare beat Marie quinque sol' ad duos anni terminos scilicet ad
Pentecost etc. Et hoc tenemur warantizare etc. Quod ut ratum sit et firmum huic
presenti scripto comune sigillum nostrum dignum duximus apponend' Hiis testibus
Thom' de Haliwell Steph' de Heddun Joh' fil' Galfrid' Petro de Haliwell Will'
fil' Radul' Symone de Neusom et multis aliis." -- Seal lost off.
.

In the same invaluable repository is preserved an original very ancient grant
of Robert de Dyveltune, of four shillings of rent, in Milburn, to God and St.
Mary, and St. Bartholomew, and the nuns of this house, in pure and perpetual
alms "Omnibus sancte matris etc. Robertus de Dyveltune salutem -- Sciatis me
dedisse consilio et confensu uxoris me Margarete et hac presenti carta
confirmasse Deo and Sancte Marie and Sancto Bartholomeo and sanctimonialibus
quatuor solidatas redditus in Milneburnee in liberam and perpet' elemos' pro
salute anime me et antecessor' meorum et successorum meorum scilicet ex illa
terra quam Wace tenet et ex illa alia terra quam Helias fil' presbitui tenet,
illis reddentibus 4 solid' predict' scil' 2 sol' ad fest' Sancti Joh' and 2
fol' ad festum Sancti Martini salvo alio servicio quam illa terra debet Roberto
de Divelstute and hered' suis. His testibus Magistr. Adam Sancti Egidii Dunelm'
Radulphus Capellanus Will' de Haveltune Gilb' de Mileburne Nicolas Juvenis
Will' ejus filius Randulf' nepos Roberti de Divelstune Helias fil' Gilb' de
Mileburne, Wace Clericus." -- Sigillo avulso.
.

About A. D. 1190, Sir Roger Bertram, for his health, and for the souls of his
father and mother, and all his ancestors, gave to the nuns here two acres and a
half of his pasture in Merdesfen -- an acre and half next the road, with a toft
in the town of Merdesfen, in free, pure, and perpetual alms. -- Also pasture
for their oxen, during the half year they drew in carts "Schir Roger Bertram
onto every sone of ye holy kirk present and for to cum greiting in our Lord. I
make it knawin me for the luif of God by ye fight of cherite and for my health
and for the sowlis of my father and mothir and all my antecessors to haif
giffin and concedit and be yis my present charter to haif confermit to God and
to ye holy nunis of Sanct Bertholemew of Newcasstill 2 acreis and ane half of
my pasture of Merdesfen in ye est part of ye Stainelie and nixt ye way ane oyir
and ane half one yt oyn part of ye way and ane toft in the town of Merdesfen of
ten pratis in lenth and four in breid to heif and to be haldin in liberal pyyr
and perpetual almons of me and my aires freely and quietly without service
consuetude or exactione with fre goin to and cuming fro without impediment of
me and mine. Also pasture unto yair oxon als lang as yai draw in cairtis af on
yir. Witness Schir John Symson Schir Waltir of Sanct Petir Schir William Corbet
Schir John of Fslington Wid' of Aram William of Prestwic with money oyiris." --
From an ancient grant, copied (perhaps a translation) on old paper, in a very
old hand.
.

Between A. D. 1195 and 1208, Philip de Poictou, Bishop of Durham, confirmed
the grant made of Stellinglei, by his predecessors, William and Hugh, to the
nuns of this house "Philippus Dei gratia Dunelm' Episcopus priori et conventui
Sancti Cuthberti etc. salutem. Notum facimus universitati vestre nos dedisse
and presenti carta confirmasse Deo et Sancto Bartholomeo and sanctimonialibus
de Novo Castello omnes donaciones quas predecessores nostri W. et Hugo eis
dederunt et confirmaverunt scilicet Stellinglei cum omnibus pertinenciis suis
in bosco et plano in aquis et piscariis in viis et semitis in divisis et ex
itibus, in pratis et molendinis et quicquid continetur infra divisas de
Stellinglei sit extra forestage et in foresta nostra pascua ad averia sua
habebunt et quiet per forestam erunt de panagio. Merem' et fohal et closturam
et virgas in foresta nostra ubi eis sit magis ad aisiamentum habebunt. Quare
volumus and firmiter precipimus ne vicecomes vel forestarius vel prepositus nec
aliquis ministrorum eorum invasionem in domos vel in terras earum faciat ad
namium capiendum vel contumeliam faciendam nec in hospiciis capiendis nec in
aliis molestiis faciendis. Hec autem omnia donamus eis in puram et liberam and
perpet' elemos' existere sicut in cartis predictor' predecessor' nostror'
before continetur. Hiis testibus B. priore Dunelmen' Ham' Dunelmen' et
Karlcolen' archidiacono et Domini Pape subdiacon' et Petro Thebert nepotibus
nostris Hen'r decan' Northumbrie Magistro Henric' de Dunelm' officiali nostro
et Gilberto officiali Northumbrie et W. de Perci vicecomite Northumbrie Mattho
Persona de Kerkeby Adam de Selebi Hugone Clerico Helia filio Torald' Ricard'
Oisu Daniele de Novo Castro Ranulfo Bocha et Galerant servientibus nostris et
aliis multis." -- Seal torn off.

In a confirmation of Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, Toce, son of Toce and
Alan, his brother, occur; the former as devoting himself to religion in this
house, and giving land to it in the town of Durham; the latter as selling it
some land. -- Madox's Formulare Anglicanum, p. 50.


.

About the time of King John, who began his reign A. D. 1199, Mermaduke de
Tueng, and Margaret his wife, bequeathed a house and some land at Hartlepool,
in the county of Durham, for the singular purpose of purchasing smocks for the
nuns of this priory Madox's Formulare Anglicanum, p. 8 of the Prefatory
Dissertation, where, speaking of gifts of land in frankalmoigne, he tells us,
that sometimes the donor marked out the particular use to which the profits of
the land should be applied. -- He instances tapers, pittances, etc. and also
this very remarkable designation, "to purchase smocks for the nuns," citing,
for his authority, a deed preserved in the Augmentation-Office, and dated about
the time of King John, in which these words occur: "ad cammisias ad opus
monialium inveniendas in charta Marmaduci de Tueng et Margaretae sponsae ejus
de domo et terra de Hertepol donata monialibus S. Barthol' de Novo Castro." --
See also Hearne's Liber Niger, vol. i. p. 212, in not.

There remains in the Augmentation-Office, a grant of Johanna Lawson, prioress
and the convent of St. Bartholomew, in Newcastle upon Tyne, to Percival
Lambton, for his life, of a burgage, or waste of theirs, in Hertilpool, "in
vico vocat' Southgate juxta crucem ibidem," at the yearly rent of 12d. -- Dated
September 26th, 16 Hen. VII.


.

Before A. D. 1223, Germanus, prior, and the convent of Tinmouth granted a
charter to the nuns here, to receive eight quarters of wheat, yearly, from the
granary of Tinmouth See Account of Tinmouth Monastery, sub anno 1216.
.

About A. D. 1230, Sir Robert de Neuham, for the health of his soul, and that
of the souls of his wife and ancestors, and successors, granted and confirmed
to the house of St. Bartholomew, and the nuns therein, all the grants and sales
which William his father had made to them, or conferred upon them "Omnibus hoc
scriptum visur' vel auditur' Dominus Robertus de Neuham salutem in Domino
Noveritis me pro salute anime me and uxsoris me and antecessor' meor' et
successor' meor' concessisse and presenti scripto confirmasse domui Sancti
Bartholomei de Novo Castello et ibidem monialibus Deo servientibus omnes
donaciones and vendiciones quas Willielmus pater meus fecit et contulit dicte
domui Sancti Bartholomei and monialibus ibidem Deo servientibus secundum
tenorem omnium cartarum suarum. In hujus rei testimonium huic scripto in
testimonium sigillum meum apposui. Hiis testibus Domino Rogero de Ridal Domino
de Witecest' Domino Hugone de Burneton Domino Rob' de Faudun Domino Gilbert' de
Mora Rog' de Neuham et fratre ejus and multis aliis." -- Seal lost off. -- From
original in the Augmentation-Office.
.

A. D. 1233, there was a release of a message in fee, from Peter, son of Hawys
de Pert, and Matilda and Wincey, his sisters, to the nuns of Newcastle, after a
writ of right had been brought for it against John Miller, and Emma his wife
Madox's Formulare Anglican. p. 375.
.

The same year Christian, prioress of this house, demised twenty acres of land,
in the village of Halliwell, with two tofts and houses therein standing, to
Gilbert Claviger of that place, for twenty years, at the annual rent of 12s.
6d. Ibid. p. 132.
.

Milisand Godefray, by his will, bequeathed his body to be buried in the
churchyard of the church of St. Bartholomew, in Newcastle upon Tyne, and to
the nuns there a booth, situated between the booth of the West-Spital, and the
street toward the Ghylde-Hall in the said town "In nomine Patris etc. ego
Milisand Godefray licet egra corpore sana tamen mente condo testamentum meum in
hunc modum. In primis animam meam Deo and beat Marie ac omnibus sanctis ac
corpus meum in cymeterio ecclesie Sancti Bartholomei sepeliend' do et lego in
villa Novi Castri super Tinam. Item lego Deo and dicte ecclesie Sancti
Bartholomei and monialibus ibidem Deo servientibus unam botham in dicta villa
Novi Castri situatam inter botham hospitalis occident' and venellam versus
Aulam-Ghylde. Ita videlicet quod Willielmus filius Osberti le Tollar dictam
botham tota vita sua de dictis monialibus teneat ac inde eisdem singulis annis
vite sue tres fol' argenti pro requisitione Domini de dicta botha persolvat --
Mortuo autem dicto Willielmo dicta botha monialibus in dicta ecclesia Sancti
Bartholomei Deo servientibus imperpetuum remaneat." -- James Tanar and Robert
de Buredun, executors. -- The seals lost.
.

Some time between 1249 and 1260, Walter de Kirkham, Bishop of Durham, granted
a confirmation of Stellinglei to the nuns of this house "Omnibus, etc. Walterus
Dei gratia Dunelm' Episcopus salutem in Domino Noverit universitas vestra nos
cartas venerabilium predecessor' nostror' Willielmi Hugon' and Philippi quondam
Episcoporum Dunelm' in quibus continentur donaciones quas fecerunt in puram et
perpetuam elemosinam Deo et Sancto Bartholom' and monialibus de Novo Castro,
scilicet Stellingel' cum pertinenc' etc. in dictis cartis content' insp^xisse.
Quas quidem donaciones auctoritate pontificali confirmamus. In cujus rei
testimonium presenti scripto sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi. Hiis testibus
Mag^ Ric' de Kirkeham Symone Goher Gilberto de Hynkell etc. etc." -- Seal
nearly destroyed. -- From the original in the Augmentation-Office.
.

In a very old deed, preserved in the Augmentation-Office, witnessed, among
others, by "Stephano Capellano de Thinem'," Roger de Halliwell granted six
acres of arable land to God and St. Bartholomew, of Newcastle, to procure a
light at the altar of St. Mary, "ad procurandum luminare ad altar Sancte
Marie."

Some time in the reign of Henry III. Sir Roger de Merley confirmed to the nuns
of this house, an annual and perpetual rent of four quarters of London wheat,
given them by John Deaconson "Universis, etc. Johannes silius Decani et Ysouda
uxor ejus salutem. Noveritis nos caritatis intuitu and pro salute anime
nostrar' and anime Domini Rogeri de Meilaco and anim' antecessor' and
successor' suorum dedisse concessisse and presenti carta confirmasse Deo and
Sancto Bartholomeo in Novo Castello and sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo
servientibus in puram and perpe^uam elemosinam quatuor quarteria frumenti Lund'
percipienda singulis annis ad fest' Sancti Martini in Hyeme de terra nostra
quam Dominus Rogerus de Merlaco dedit nobis in Magna Bentona. Unde volumus and
concedimus and presenti carta tam nos quam nostros in perpetuum obligamus vel
quicunque post nos predict' terram tenue^it sive fuerit here is vel assignat' mei
Johannis sive -- me Isoude solvat singulis annis de pred' terra dictis
sanctimonialibus ad festum S. Mart. Hyem. quatuor quarteria frument^ Lund' sine
dilacione qualibet ac difficultate Et in hujus rei testimon' pres. script.
sigillis nostris signavimus et ad diuturniorem memoriam commune sigillum Novi
Castri huic scripto fecimus apponi His testibus Domino Roberto de Wittelle
Domino Roberto de Camhou Domino Ada Barat Domino Roberto de Kandun Rad. Baart
Magistro Willielmo filio Decani Petro Scotico Bartholomeo Benet Rogero silio
Willielmi Henrico de Carleolo Hugone Pain Roberto de Valeciis et multis aliis."
-- Newcastle town seal remains -- Original in the Augmentation-Office; as is
the following: "Universis etc. Dominus Rogerus de Merlaco salut. Noveritis me
pro salute anime me and anim' antecessor' meor' concessisse and confirmasse
domui Sancti Barthol' in Novo Castro et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo
servientibus annuum and perpetuum redditum quatuor quarterior' frument' Lund'
quem Johannes filius Decani and Ysouda uxor ejus eis in puram and perpetuam
elemosinam contulerunt de terra quam ego dedi dictis Johanni and Ysoude in
Magna Bentona Et in hujus rei testimon' huic scripto sigillum meum apposui." --
Seal, green wax, inscribed -- "Sigill' Rogeri de Me^lai."
, and Isouda his wife, in frankalmoigne, out of land in Great-Benton, which
they possessed by gift of the said Sir Roger.

On the vigil of St. Michael, 1257, Roger de Whytcester, for the health of his
soul, and those of his father, mother, brother Nicholas, and sister Mabil, and
his ancestors and descendants, gave and confirmed to the nuns here, to the
support of a certain chaplain performing divine service in their conventual
church, at Newcastle, for the souls aforesaid, and especially for his own after
his death, and all faithful souls, five bovates of lands, with their
appurtenances, in Dunington, with tofts and crofts belonging to the same Roger'
de Whytcester "Pro salute anime me and pro animabus patris mei matris me
Nicholai fratris mei Mabilie sororis me and antecessor' hered' and parentum
meorum dedisse concessisse et hac presenti carta mea confirmasse Deo et
ecclesie Sancti Bartholomei de Novo Castro and monialibus ibidem Deo
servientibus ad sustentacionem cujusdam capellan^ divin^a celebrantis in
ecclesia sua conventuali Novi Castri pro animabus predictis et specialiter pro
anima mea cum in fata decessero and pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum
quinque bevatas terre cum pertinen' in Dunington cum toftis et croftis ad
easdem terras pertinen' and Hiis testibus Domino Hugone de Bolebek Eustacho de
la Val Willielmo Heyrun tune vic' Northumbr' Roberto de Cumboo Johanne de
Haulton Johanne fil' Si^^unis Ad. Baret Johanne de Plesseyt Johanne de
Middilton Ricardo de Middilton Willielmo de Whytington Stephano de Hadham
Nicholao de Skiringham and aliis. Dat' apud Whytcester vigil' Sancti Michaeli
anno gratie 1257."
.

This was confirmed 1268, by Dame Johan de Rihil, heiress of the above Sir
Roger de Whytcester To her confirmation occurs as a witness, Domino Wiscardo de
Charun tunc vicecomite etc
.

About 1286, Hugh, son of Nicholas Brun, occurs, as letting to farm to John
Elgi, all his land in the Market-Street of Newcastle, on condition of paying to
him and his heirs, yearly, 7s. 6d. and to the nuns of Newcastle upon Tyne, 18d.
at the stated terms "In vico Fori" -- Testibus Henrico Scoto tunc majore
Johanne Scoto Johanne le Flemeng Hugone de Karl' Ricardo Tinctor' tunc ballivis
-- et aliis. -- Seal, a bird -- inscribed, "S. Hugon' Brun."
.

A. D. 1291, mention occurs of the nuns of this house, and those of Nesham, as
enjoying a pension of 13l. 6s. 8d. from the church of Wesington MS. in the
Exchequer of that date -- Memorandum quod moniales domorum Novi Castri and de
Nesham habent pensionem 13l. 6s. 8d. in ecclesia de Wesington et sunt quasi
mendicantes.
, to each 10 marks.

This appears to have been given them by Richard, Bishop of Durham "Omnibus
etc. Ricardus D. g. Dunelm' Episc' etc. Noveritis quod nos compatientes
paupertati monialium Novi Castri super Tynam de consensu capituli nostri
Dunelm' and Magistri Ade Len rectoris ecclesie de Wessington intuitu Dei
dedimus and assignavimus eisdem monialibus december marcas annuas de proventibus
ecclesie de Wessington per manum rectoris ejusdem ecclesie qui pro tempore
fuerit percipiendas ad duos termin' viz. quinque M. ad F. Sancti Martini in
Hyeme and quinque M. ad Pentecosten donec per nos vel successores nostros in
consimili vel majore redditu in prop^ios usus habendo dictis monialibus fuerit
provisum. Cum autem ita fuerit provisum eisdem volumus quod rector ecclesie
prefate qui pro tempore fuerit absque reclamacione monialium earundem omnino
sit quietus a solucione tocius pecunie memorate. Et in hujus rei testim' etc.
dictus Magister A. sigill. suum apposuit Hiis testibus Domino Johanne de
Rumeseye senescallo nostro Magistris Willielmo de Arundell Johanne Forti Hug'
de Gaherst Stephano de Burton Rogero de la Leye clericis nostris and aliis.
Dat' apud Dunelm' per manum Henrici capellani nostri decimo kal' Decembris'
pontific' nostri anno octavo." -- From the original in the Augmentation-Office.
-- Bishop's seal in fine preservation appendant. -- That of Ade Len is broken
off.
, confirmed by Thomas, the prior "Thomas prior' and convent' Dunelmensis
ecclesie omnibus hoc scriptum videntibus vel audientibus eternam in Domino
salutem Noverit universitas vestra nos gratam e^ ratam habere donacionem and
concessionem quam venerabilis pater noster Ric' Dei grati^ Dunelmen' Episcopus
fecit monialibus de Novo Castro super redditu dec^m marcarum annuatim de
ecclusia de Wessington per manum person qui pro tempore fuerit percipiendar'
sicut in carta dicti venerabilis patris nostri Ric' Dei gratia Dunelm' Episc'
before continetur. Et in hujus rei testimonium presenti scripto sigillum
nostrum apposuimus. Test capitulo nostro." -- Original in the
Augmentation-Office. -- Seal lost off.
, and convent there, and by a bull of Pope Gregory "Gregorius Episcopus servus
servorum Dei dilectis in Christo filiabus priorisse and conventui Novi Castri
super Tinam ordinis Sancti Benedicti salutem and apostol' benedictionem -- Cum
a nobis petitur quod justum est et honestum tam vigor equitatis quam ordo
exigit rationis ut id per solicitudinem officii nostri ad debitum perducatur
effectum. Significastis siquidem nobis quod venerabilis frater noster Episcopus
Dunelmensis diocesanus vester facultatum monasterii vestri tenuitate pensata
december marcas argenti percipiendas tamdiu annuatim de proventibus decimarum
ecclesie de Wessington dioc' Dunelmen' ad ecclesiam Dunelmen' spectantium pia
vobis liberalitate sui capituli accedente consensu concessit donec per eum vel
successores ipsius in simili redditu vel majori vobis ad usus proprios perpetuo
fit provisum vestris igitur precibus inclinati quod ab eodem Episcopo super hoc
pie ac provide factum esse dinoscitur auctoritate apostolica confirmamus and
presentis scripti patrocinio communimus. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc
pagin^m nostre confirmationis infringere vel ei ausu temerario contraire.
Siquis autem hoc attemptare presumpserit indignationem omnipotentis Dei and
beatorum Petri and Pauli apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum Dat' Petusii 13
kalend' Maii pontificat' nostri anno nono." -- Original bull preserved, ibid.
-- The leaden seal lost off.
.

It appears from a MS. remaining in the Exchequer, that in the year 1292, the
yearly revenue of this nunnery was 17l. 10s. 7d. "Taxatio bonorum temporalium
Domini Dunelm' Episcopi et religiosor' omnium ejusdem Dunelm' dioc' fact' anno
Domini 1292. -- Priorissa de Novo Castro habet 17l. 10s. 7d."
.

A. D. 1293, mention occurs of several rolls of the pleas in the county of
Northumberland, at the assizes there, concerning this nunnery Tanner's Notitia
Monastica.
.

In the year 1299, Henry Droys, with Philip and Reginald his brothers, appears
to have fled for felony, and taken sanctuary in the church of this house
Wardrobe account 28 Ed. I. p. 7, a MS. remaining in the archives of the Society
of Antiquaries of London: "De catall' felonum -- de majore and ballivis ville
Novi Castri super Tynam de bonis Henrici Droys, Philippi Droys and Reginaldi
Droys fratrum suorum qui tugerunt ad ecclesiam monialium ejusdem ville pro
felonya quam fecerant -- per manus ejusdem majoris apud Novum Castrum super
Tynam 8vo die Januar' in sterl' putis 2^l. 15s. 9d. et in crokerds currentibus
pro sterling' 75s. 3d. et in pretio 20 coclea^' argenti 20s. et in pretio trium
equorum eorundem fratrum liberatorum per eosdem major' and ballivos Domino
Waltero de Bellocampo senescallo hospicii Regis et Domino Waltero filio suo
ibid. 10 die Januar' 4l. 8d. summa 38l. 11s. 8d."
.

A. D. 1320, Philippa de Wolteby, prioress, and the convent of this house,
confirmed to Robert de Halliwelle, clerk, and Alicia his wife, 14 acres of
arable land, in Halywell, at the yearly rent of six shillings sterling for ever
"Omnibus etc. Domina Philippa de Wolteby priorissa monialium ecclesie Sancti
Bartholomei de Novo Castro super Tynam and conventus ejusdem loci salutem in
Domino sempiternam Noveritis nos unanimi consilio tocius capituli nostri
dimisisse concessisse and hac presenti carta nostra cyrograffata confirmasse
Roberto de Halliwelle clerico and Alicie uxori sue quatuordecim acras terre
arabilis in campo and in territorio de Hallywelle cum tofto and crofto ad
predictam terram in eadem villa pertinentibus quarum tres acres jacent super le
Norhclavos versus Moram et una acra and dimid' jacent juxta Saltesford et una
acra apud Ertheldunlethe et due acre super Papew'rte Rigge dimid' acra super
Reverrokys In le Westelangleys tres acre super Goddesbuttes due acre super
Cuplethe tres rod' apud le Wodyland una rod' habend' et tenend' dictis Roberto
and Alicie and heredibus suis seu eorundem assignat' de nobis and successoribus
nostris libere quiet integre been and in pace cum omnibus suis libertatibus
and aisiamentis ad predictam terram pertinentibus in perpetuum reddendo inde
annuatim nobis and successoribus nostris sex sol' sterlingorum ad duos anni
terminos viz. ad F. Pentecost tres solid' and totidem ad fest. Sancti Martini
in Hyeme pro omni consuetudine and demanda and accione seculari etc. In cujus
rei testimonium etc. Hiis testibus Nichol' de Ka^liolo tunc capitali ballivo de
villa Novi Castri Thoma de Tyndal Johanne Toriald Thoma Clerico Ricardo de
Emildun tunc ballivis de eadem Henr' Scoto Petro Graper Nichol' Scoto Gilberto
Flamang Johanne de Heton et aliis." -- From the original in the
Augmentation-Office. -- Seal, green wax -- impression, a ship -- inscription,
"S. Gervasi Fil' Nigelli."
.

August 1st, 1322, the sisters of this nunnery received 6s. 8d. for their
pittance of one day, of the King's alms, and September 14th following, on the
King's arrival at Newcastle, for the same, 6s. 8d. by the hand of the King's
almoner "Monialibus Sancti Bartholomei ejusdem ville, i. e. Novi Castri super
Tynam de elemosina Regis pro putura sua unius dici per manus Ricardi de
Gippevico elemos' Regis apud Novum Castrum primo die Augusti 6s. 8d." --
Wardrobe account of 15th, 16th, and 17th of Edward II. in the library of Thomas
Astle, Esquire. p. 31. -- The subsequent, which immediately follows, seems to show
that the nuns of Lambley and Halistan had, at that time, deserted their
respective nunneries, and fled to Newcastle for safety: "Monialibus de
Lambelegh and Halistan morantibus in eadem villa pro eodem per manus ejusdem
ibid. eodem die 14s. 8d." -- The following also occurs; "In clemosina Regis per
manus Magistri Roberti de Baldock recipientis denarios ad solvend' diversis
infra scriptis juxta preceptum Domini Regis, viz. monialibus de Halistan 10
marc' monialibus de Lambelegh 8 marc' monialibus de Gysnes 5 marc' monialibus
Sancti Bartholomei de Novo Castro super Tynam 4 marc' et monialibus de Nesham
40s. apud Novum Castrum pred. 3 di^ Augusti -- 20l. -- priorisse and monialibus
de Gysnes de elemos' Domini Regis in subsidium recompensationis dampnorum que
sustinuerunt per adventum predictum Wallens' ibidem versus Guerram Scocie per
manum Mariote monialis ejusdem domus apud Felton 8 die Augusti, 100s. -- 14 die
Septembr. monialibus Sancti Bartholomei ejusdem ville pro eodem per manus
ejusdem ibidem eodem die -- i. e. in adventu Regis ibidem, 6s. 8d. --
monialibus de Lambelegh pro eodem etc. 7s. 4d. -- monialibus de Halistan pro
eodem etc. 7s. 4d. -- monialibus de Gysnes pro eodem etc. 6s. 8d."
.

A. D. 1331, Sibilla Gategang, prioress of this house, granted and confirmed to
John de Wedirhall, and his heirs and assigns for ever, a booth in the
Marketplace of Newcastle upon Tyne, at the annual rent of six shillings
Bourne's History, sub anno.

There is preserved, in the Augmentation-Office, an original deed, in which
Agnes, prioress here, "Agnes priorissa ville Novi Castri super Tynam and
conventus ejusdem ville," grants a message in the village of Haliwell to
Robert, son of Walter Truket, of Halliwell. -- The witnesses are, "Domino
Roberto Dareys tunc vic' Northumbrie Domino Roberto de la Vall Milite Alano de
Fenewyk Thom' de Fenewyk Roberto de Ryall Roberto de Lykere Roberto Vescy de
Haliwell Johanne de Kelyngworthe and multis aliis." -- Robert Dareys occurs as
sheriff of Northumberland, July 8, 1338. Rymer's Foedera, tom. v. p. 62.


.

May 9th, 1355, Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, confirmed to the nuns of
this house their election of Alice Davill, to be their prioress. -- The former
election of this prioress, having been irregular, had been set aside, but being
a person much approved of by the convent, the Bishop, by special favor,
permitted her to preside over them Bourne's History, sub anno. -- From a record
communicated by Dr. Hunter.
.

In the week of Pentecost, 1360, Dame Isabelle Russell, prioress of this house,
and the convent of the same, granted to Richard de Kirkeby, tailor, that for
arrears of rent due to them from a burgage in the city of Durham, for the first
year ensuing, he should pay them one shilling, and four shillings for each of
the nine following years "Ceste endenture tesmoigne que come Dame Isabelle
Russell priorisse de la meson des nonayns de la ville de Noeff Chastell sur
Tyne and le covent de mesme le lieu ount un anuelle rent de 8 soutz per an
issaunt dun burgage od les appurtenanz en le burgh de Duresm lequele Robert de
Seton tient en fee et le quell burgage gist wast au temps de la confeccon de
cestes issuit que les ditz priorisse and covent ount pardone and quitt clame
touz les arrerages ent dues du temps pass a Richard de Kirkeby tayllour que
tient mesme le burgage du dit Robert a term des aunz en eyde de edifier and
repailler le dit burgage pour salvacion de lour rent avaunt dit et ount grante
outre que le dit Richard and sez heirz duraunte les primers 10 aunz prochens
ensuantz apres la confeccon de cest lettres cest a dire le primer an ils
paierount a la fest de St. Martine en yver 12d. and a la fest de Pentecost
adungs prochen ensuaunt 12d. and chescon an de les 9 auns adungs ensuanz 4
soutz a mesm les terms de S. Martine and de Pentecost per ouweles porcons a
les avaunt ditz prioresse and covent and a lour successors pour tous manners des
accons and chalenges quecunq des arrerages du temp pass a touzjours En
tesmoignaunce de quele chose a ceste endentures auxi bien les avandiz prioresse
and covent com le avaunt dit Richard entrechaungeablement ount mys lour seals.
Done a Duresm le Lundy en le semaign de Pentecost lan de grace 1360. Ceuz
tesmoignes Meistre John Appelby officiale de Duresm Thom' de Coxsidd Richard de
Stafford baillifs de meism le burgh John de Heberine Thom' de Appilby John de
Bishopdale Thom' de Tudhow et autres. "From the original in the Augmentation
Office. Seal destroyed.
.

Tuesday after the feast of St. Gregory, 1363, Amisia, prioress, and the
convent of nuns of Newcastle upon Tyne, released to Thomas de Loksyde part of
rent due to them from a burgage at that time lying waste in the city of Durham,
from which they had an annual rent of eight shillings, and which the said
Thomas de Loksyde held in see "Cest endentre tesmoigne q' com' Amise prioresse
de la meson des nonayns de la ville de Noeschastell soer Tyne and le covent de
mesme le lieu ounc un annucle rent de oets soncs per an issant d un burgage od
les apurtenanes en le burgh de Dunelm lequ^le Thomas de Loksyde fient en fee
lequele burgage gist wast au temps de la conseccon de ^est istiuit q' le dit
prioresse and covent ounct pardone and releese a dit Thomas and ses heirs per
les premei^, etc. Tesmoignianes Mestre John de Appelby clerk Robert de Angirton
may^e de Noeschastell adongs etc. Don' a Duresme le Mardy procheyn ap^es le
fest de Saint Gregg' ^ane de grace, 1363." From the original -- Seal defaced.
.

January 3d, 1365, a commission was granted by Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of
Durham, to Alan de Shutlyng and William de Farnham, to visit this nunnery, in
order to punish and reform such excesses and crimes as they should discover the
nuns to be guilty of, in the course of their visitation Randall's MSS.
"Commissio ad visitand' mo^iales S. Bartho' de Novo Castro -- Reg^. Hatfeld,
fol. 46.

Thomas permissione divina Dunolm' Episcopus dilectis filiis Domino Alano de
Shutlyng, vicario nostro generali and Magistro Willielmo de Farnham offic'
nostro Dunelm' salutem gr^tiam et benedictionem. De vestris fidelitate et
industria plenam in Domino fidem optinentes ad visitand' domum monialium S.
Bartholomei de Novo Castro nostre dioc' nec non omnes alias domus monialium
nostre dioc' tam in capite quam in membris, non exemptas auctoritate ordinar'
et exemptas auctoritate apostolica: nec non ad corrigend' pu^iend' et
reformand' excessus, crimina et defectus in hujusmodi visitatione, compert'
ceteraque omnia and singula faciend' expediend' et exercend' que in premissis
et circa ea necessaria fuerint seu opportuna de consuetudine feu de jure, vobis
conjunctim et divisim et utrique vestrum per se et in solidum cum cujuslibet
coercionis canonice potestate committimus vices nostras; proviso quod nos de
omni eo quod feceritis in premissis opportuno reddatis plenarie certiores per
literas vestras patentes harum seriem continentes. Valete. Datum in manerio
nostro de Aukland 3 die mens' Januar' A. D. 1365, et consecrationis nostre
vicesimo primo."


.

A. D. 1366, the same bishop, pitying the miserable estate of this house both
as to spirituals and temporals, and dreading the immediate ruin thereof, unless
some speedy remedy should be applied, committed it to the care "Curatio
monialium de Novo Castro. -- Reg. Hatfeld, p. 47.

Thomas permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus dilecto filio Domino Hugoni de
Arnecliffe in ecclesia B. Nicholai de Novo Castro nostre dioc' divina
celebranti, salutem gratiam et benedictionem. Nostrum convertentes intuitum ad
statum miserabilem domus et monialium S. Bartholomei de Novo Castro predict'
que quidem domus tam in spiritualibus quam temporalibus non modicum patitur
detrimentum et vicinam minatur ruinam, nisi eisdem cit^us provideatur de
remedio opportuno. De tuis circumspectione provida fidelitate et industria
plene considentes tibi curam et custodiam domus predicte et monialium ejusdem
in spiritualibus and temporalibus committimus per presents sigilli nostri
appensione munitas pro nostro beneplacito duraturas. Priorisse insuper et
monialibus dicte domutenore presentium firmiter injungimus and mandamus quod
tibi in premissis quatenus utilitatem dicte domus quietem et pacem monialium
and divini cultus sustentacionem and augmentum recipient and concernunt absque
contradictione malevola pareant humiliter and intendant censuras etiam
ecclesiasticas, si quas in hoc casu rite tuleris in rebels, rit^s habebimus
and acceptas pariter. Ad premissa siquidem eo specialius excitati sumus quo
pauperum Christi famularum Deo inibi deservientium per tuam prudentiam suppler^
speramus defectus a^ eas per tuam diligentiam a miseriis et inopiis juvante Deo
subleva^i proviso quod nos de omni eo quod feceris et inveneris in premissis et
circa ea distinct plenarie et aperte certifices cum circa hoc congrue fueris
requisitus. Vale. Datum in manerio nostro de Aukland 18 die mensis Aprilis A.
D. 1366."


of Hugh de Arnecliffe, priest, in the church of St. Nicholas in Newcastle upon
Tyne, strictly enjoining the prioress and nuns to be obedient to him in every
particular, and trusting to his prudence to find relief for those whom he calls
"The poor servants of Christ" here, in their poverty and distress.

May 10th, 1367, a second commission was granted by the same bishop to the said
Hugh de Arnecliffe to proceed against Amisia de Belford (who is charged with
having intruded into this priory) in a cause moved against her concerning
intrusion, dilapidation, incontinence, and other crimes. It does not appear
that she was convicted of the several crimes laid to her charge -- but by an
order of the above bishop, dated at Aucland, May 21st following, this Amisia,
who affirmed that she was prioress, was warned to permit two nuns, Emma del
Hill, and Joan de Farneleye, whom she had expelled from this house, to return
to it, and was commanded at the same time to treat them in future with becoming
affection "Commissio secunda contra priorissam S. Bartholomei -- Thomas
permissione, etc. Dunelm' Episc' dil. filio Domino Hugoni de Ernechife salutem,
etc. De vestris fidelitate and industria circumspect' plenam in Domino fiduciam
optinentes ad reassumend' et procedend' contra Amisiam de Belford intrusam in
prioratu monialium S. Bartholomei ville Novi Castri super Tynam nostre dioc' in
quadam causa per nos et commissar' nostros dictum prioratum auctoritate nostra
visitantes super intrusione, dilapidatione, incontinentia et aliis in hujusmodi
visitatione contra eam compertis ex officio mota et pendente, et si ad ipsius
dimissionem ac amotionem seu declarationem nullitatis tituli sui, seu
intrusionis dilapidationis and criminum predictor' fuerit procedend' et
ulterius ad faciend' in dicto negotio exequend' expediend' exercend'
diffiniend' omnia and singula que in dicto negotio fuerint quomodolibet
opportum vobis vices nostras committimus cum cujuslibet coercionis canonice
potestate. In cujus rei testimon' sigillum nostrum presentibus apponi fecimus.
Datis in manerio nostro de Aukland 10 die men' Junii A. D. 1367.

"Memorandum quod scriptum fuit eisdem die et loco fratri Though Stubbes etc. ad
recipiend' juramentum dicti Domini Hugonis debit' in hoc casu.

"Et memorand' quod sub dat' apud Aukland 21 die dict' mensis scriptum fuit
dicto Domino Hugoni ad monend' Dominam Amisiam asterentem se priorissam dicte
domus, quod permittat Dominus Emmam I suspect that this Emma was afterward
prioress, and granted the following quit-claim to William de Scowland, of half
an annual rent of ten shillings to the light of St. Mary and St. Bartholomew in
the church of the said nunnery, given them by Margery de Gauland, out of a toft
and certain land in Pelton. "Hoc scriptum cyrograffatum factum inter Emmam
priorissam and moniales de Novo Castro super Tynam ex una part et Willielmum
de Scowland ex altera testatur quod cum prefatus Willielmus reddere tenebatur
endem priorisse et monialibus december solid' annuatim ad luminare beat Marie and
Sancti Bartholomei in ecclesia dictarum monialium ad duos anni terminos, scil.
medictat' ad Pent' and ad fest. Sancti Martini in Hyeme aliam medictat'
annuatim percipiend' de uno tofto and tota illa terra quam quondam firmavit
Henricus de Granwell in villa de Pelton quem quidem redditum december solid'
Margeria de Gouland dedit and concessit monialibus predictis ad luminare
predictum Predicte priorissa and moniales medietat' predicti redditus scilicet
quinque solid' eidem Willielmo, hered' and assignatis suis pro quadam summa
pecunie quam idem Willielmus eis red'........ remiserunt relaxaverunt and
quiet clamaverunt de se and successoribus suis imperpetuum. Et pro hac
remissione relaxatione and quieta clamancia predictus Willielmus concessit quod
ipse and heredes sui and illi qui dicta tenementa imposterum tenebunt fideliter
reddent annuatim dictis priorisse and monialibus and successoribus suis
residuos quinque solidos ad term' predict' ad luminare predict' faciend'
percipiend' de predict' ten' sicut predictum est -- Clause of distress -- In
cujus, etc. Hiis testibus Johanne de Hyrteleye Henrico de Scouland Thoma de
Urpath Domino Guidone de Dunelm' persona de Fyngal Domino Roberto vicar'
ecclesie Sancti Oswaldi and aliis." From the original.
del Hill and Johannam de Farneleye moniales dicte domus libere et pacifice
redire ad domum suam et ibidem Deo samulari et quod pertrectet eas affectione
debita etc. ut in litera continetur."


.

March 24th, 1377, Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, granted a license for one
year to Margaret York, a sister of this house, to choose herself a confessor,
from whose hands she might receive absolution and salutary penance "Licentia
eligendi confessorem concessa moniali prioratus Sancti Bartholomei." E Regist.
Hatfeld. p. 133.

"Thomas permissione divina Dunolm' Episcopus dilecte nobis in Christo filie
devote mulieri Margarete York moniali recluse in monasterio Novi Castri super
Tynam nostre dioc' salutem gratiam and benedictionem. Tuis precibus
favorabiliter inclinati ut confessorem idoneum eligere valeas cui peccata tua,
etc. in casibus a jure nobis permissis et specialiter a canone reservatis
quotres et quando ad hoc tua conscientia inclinaverit consiteri valeas ac
cuicunque confessori sic per te electo pro hujusmodi peccatis sibi confessis
manus tibi absolutor' imponendi et penitentiam salutarem injungendi tenore
presentium concedimus facultatem hac nost^^ licentia p^^nnum a data presentium
continue numerand' duratur'. In cujus rei testimon' sigillum nostrum
presentibus apponi fecimus. Dati^ apud Aukland 24 die Marti^ anno Domini 1377,
et nostre consecrationis tricesimo tercio."


.

There was a monition dated the 2d of the nones of November, A. D. 1377
"Monitio sacta priorisse and monialibus S Bartholomei ville Novi Castri super
Tynam, pro Idoma de Staunford, commoniali. E Regist. Hatfeld. p. 127.

Thomas permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus dilectis in Christo priorisse
prioratus S. Bartholomei de Novo Castro super Tynam nostre dioc' et monialibus
ejusdem prioratus quibuscunque salutem gratiam and benedictionem. Cum alias pro
Domina Idoma de Staunford vestri et dicti prioratus commoniali et in eodem
prioratu express profess', que ex justa et rationabili causa a dicto suo
prioratu aliquamdiu absens extiterat et sue absentie hujus tempore quocunque
laudabiliter et honest se gesserit et in commitiva honesta fuerat conversata,
prout de premissis omnibus coram nobis sufficiens extitit facta fides; ad
ipsius Idome supplicationem juri et equitati consonam, quod vos ipsam ut
commontatem et sororem vestram spiritualem ad dictum prioratum et statum in quo
fuerat tempore quo a dicto prioratu sic recesserat, admitteretis et eam debite
tractaretis eidem nullam sue absentie hujus pretextu molestiam aut injuriam
inferendo nostras literas monitorias direxerimus. Nos etiam affectione
paternali rogantes quod ipsam Idomam vobis cum prout convenit et hactenus
solebat conversari et Deo debite famulari permitteretis gratanter cum favore.
Vos tamen monitiones and rogatum nostros hujusmodi multipliciter contemnentes
ipsam Idomam juxta formam and effectum literarum nostrarum hujusmodi inter vos
admittere seu eam ut sororem vestram debite pertractare non curastis, sed id
facere express recusastis et plus debito distulistis and differtis in nostri
contemptum manifestum and dicte Idomae prejudicium valde grave* Quocirca vobis
mandamus in virtute obedientie et sub excommunicationis majoris sententie pena
quam si monitionibus nostris in ea part, visis presentibus, quatenus in vobis
est, non parueritis cum effectu vos et vestrum quamlibet incurrere volumus ipso
facto, firmiter injungentes quatenus ipsam Dominam Idomam ut monialem and
sororem vestram juxta effectum literarum nostrarum predict' admittatis and
secundum observan^^a, regulates benign pertract^tis, ipsam occasion absentie
sue pre..... minime puniendo quousque coram nobis aut commissiatiis nostris
specialiter ad hoc et legitime deputandis per vos legitime and in forma juris
doctum fuerit illam secundum exigentiam regule vestre et ordinis esse merito
puniendam. Nosque de omni eo quod (...) in premissis citra festum (...). Marie
prox' futur' post dat' pres^n^ium literis vestri^ patentibus sive clausis harum
seriem continentibus sigillo authentico consignatis, sub (...) supradicta (...)
quod nisi premissa (...) provestris ostenta and contemptu contra vos in ^^^vi
severus procedemus et vo^ pro vestris d^m^^^tis taliter puniemus quod vestra
p^^^tio vobis et aliis nostris su^^lit^^ cedet in terrorem. Datum London', 2d'
nonas Novembr' A. D. 13^^."


, from the same Bishop of Durham to the prioress and nuns of this house in
behalf of Idoma de Staunford their sister, who after having been some time
absent, though on just and reasonable cause and in good company, had, against
the express request of the bishop, been refused admittance at the said nunnery
on her return: This monition threatened them with the sentence of the greater
excommunication if they persisted to exact punishment for such absence, or
continued obstinate in their refusal to reinstate her.

A commission was granted at the same time to the bishop's suffragan, he
himself being absent in London, to proceed against the said prioress and house
Regist. Hatfeld.
.

November 4th, 1379, Raymund, master-general of the friars preachers, granted
to the prioress and nuns of this house, a special participation of all the
masses, sermons, preachings, vigils, fastings, etc. etc. etc. of his order
Religiosis and in Christo sibi dilectis domine priorisse Sancti Bartholomei cum
suo conventu Novi Castri super Tynam, ordinis Sancti Bernardi (sic) frater
Raymundus ordinis fratrum predicatorum humilis magister et servus salutem and
eternorum affluenciam gaudiorum. Vestre devocionis affectus quem audivi ad
nostrum vos habere ordinem exigencia digna requirit beneficia nostro collata
ordini a copiosa clemencia Redemptoris vobis graciosius impartiri, propter quod
vobis omnium missarum orationum predicationum jejuniorum abstinenciarum
vigiliarum laborum ceterorumque bonorum que per fratres nostri ordinis Dominus
Jesus Christus per mundum fieri dederit universum, participacionem concedo
tenore presencium specialem in vita, periculo et in morte, ut multiplici
suffragiorum presidio et hic augmentum gracie et in futuro mereamini eterne
vite premium possidere. In cujus concessionis testimonium sigillum mei officii
duxi presentibus appendendum. Datum Calonie provincie Theutonie anno Domini
millesimo trocentisimo nonagesimo septimo quarta die mensis Novembris. J.
Cawod."

From the original remaining in the Augmentation Office. -- Curious seal
representing the crucifixion -- on red wax.


.

September 21st, 1403, mention occurs of Katherine prioress of this house Rot.
Skirlaw. No 93. Joh. Gyldford, Willielmus Gategang, sen. and Thomas Hoton
venerunt in cancelar' Dunelm' 21 die Sept. anno pontificat' Domini Walteri
Episcopi Dunelm' sexto decimo et recognoverunt se et quemlibet eorum in solid'
debere Katerine priorisse domus S. Bartholomei ville Novi Castri super Tynam
quatuor libras solvend' in festo Purificationis beat Marie Virginis prox'
futur'. Et nisi fecerint concedunt quod vic' Dunelm' and Sadb' fieri fac' etc.
A. D. 1403.

Roger Thornton the elder, by his will, dated the Thursday preceding Christmas
day, 1429, left two sothers of lead to the reparation of this nunnery. Bourne's
History, sub anno.


.

October 7th, 1448, Robert Nevill, Bishop of Durham appropriated the chapel of
St. Edmund in Gateshead to the nuns of this house, on their representing to him
in a petition their misfortunes by fire, the non-payment of their pensions,
etc. so that without speedy relief their ruin would shortly ensue. The
conditions of the above union were to the following effect: the nuns to find
two chaplains for the hospital, and repair the chapel and other edifices
thereof -- the bishop reserving to himself and successors, from this nunnery,
an annual pension of 6s. 8d. as also another of 3s. 4d. per annum, to the prior
and chapter of Durham. For the payment of which last, a bond occurs, signed by
the above nuns in their chapter house, October 20th, 1448 Bourne's History, sub
anno.
.

May 1st, 1449, William Hilderskelfe, master of St. Edmund's Hospital in
Gateshead, granted the same hospital, with all the possessions thereof, to
Margaret Hawkswell, prioress, and the convent of this house, on condition of
their finding for ever a chaplain to perform divine service at that hospital:
as also another sit priest to celebrate divine service in the church of St.
Bartholomew, either at the death or upon the promotion of the said William to
any benefice of the clear value of ten pounds per annum; and also of their
paying yearly to the said William the sum of ten marks Madox's Formulare
Anglicanum, p. 271.
.

Robert Nevill, Bishop of Durham, confirmed the above donation made to this
priory, in frankalmoigne, by his deed, dated October 7th, 1449 Ibid. p. 69.
.

Pope Pius, by his bull, dated at Rome, November 16th, 1458 ^ius Episcopus
servus servorum Dei ad suturam rei memoriam digna reddimatur attentione.
Soliciti ut in admittendis earum votis gratum prestemus assensum, que mundanis
illecebris et mortalis viti toro propulsis in illius qui speciosus est pre
filiis hominum beneplacitis famulantur et his que pro earum comoditate proinde
facta sunt ut firma perpetuo and illibata persistant cum a nobis petitur
adjecimus apostolici muniminis facultatem. Exhibita siquidem nobis nuper pro
part dilectarum in Christo filiarum priorisse and conventus moni^lium
monasterit Sancti Bartholomei de Novo Castro super Tynam per priorissam soliti
gubernari ordinis Sancti Benedicti Dunelm' droc' petitio continebat quod dudum
bone memory Robertus Episcopus Dunelmen' proinde considerans quod monasterium
predictum per ignis incendra et alia mundi infortunia in suis redditibus erat
adeo diminuta quod ad sustentationes priorisse and conventus dicti monasterii
ac hospitalitate observanda et supportationem aliorum onerum eis incumbentium
minime sufficiebant et occasion pensionis december marcarum super fructibus
redditibus and proventibus parochialis ecclesie de Ryton predict dioc'
priorisse et conventui predictis per bone memory Robertum olim Episcopum
Dunelm' assignate quam rector ecclesie parochialis de Wesschyngton ejusdem
dioc' eisdem priorisse and conventui solvere consueverat et que propter
exilitatem fructitum dicte ecclesie ad prefatam ecclesiam de Ryton per eundem
Robertum Episcopum translata fuit: inter priorissam and conventum ex una ac
rectorem prefate ecclesie de Ryton part ex altera lites et controversy oriri
dubitabantur ut eadem ecclesia de Ryton a solutione pensionis hujusmodi
liberaretur prefateque priorissa and conventus sustentari hospitalitatem
servare et alia onera sic incumbentia commodius perferre possent, capellam
Sancti Edmundi Episcopi in Gatesheved prefate dioc' ad collationem ipsius
Episcopi Dunelmensis pro tempore existentis pertinentem cum omnibus juribus and
pertinentiis suis prefato monasterio ad humilem supplicationis instantiam
priorisse et conventus predictarum capituli ecclesie Dunelmen' ad hoc expresso
accedente consensu auctoritate ordinaria perpetuo incorporavit annexuit et
univit ita quod cedente vel decedente rectore seu custode dicte capelle vel
alias illam quomodo libet dimittente, liceret eisdem priorisse and conventui
corporalem possessionem dicte capelle auctoritate propria apprehendere and
perpetuo retinere et insuper voluit statuit et ordinavit idem Robertus quod
quamprimum predicte priorissa and conventus eidem Roberto and pro tempore
existenti Episcopo Dunelm' sex solidos and octo denarios Nec non priori and
capitulo Dunelm' ecclesie tres solid' and quatuor denarios monete in partibus
illis currentis singulis annis in festo Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptiste
perpetuis futuris temporibus solvere deberent et tenerentur prout in quibusdam
literis auctenticis dicti Roberti Episcopi sigillo munitis quarum tenorem
presentibus inferi fecimus plemus continetur. Quare pro part dictarum
priorisse and conventus asserentium quod ipse vigore unionis annexionis and
incorporationis predictarum in pacifica possessione dicte capelle existunt,
nobis suit humiliter supplicatum ut unioni annexioni incorporationi voluntari
ordinationi et literis hujusmodi pro illarum subsistentia firmiori robur
apostolici confirmationis adjicere aliasque in premissis opportune providere de
benignitate apostolica dignatemur Nos qui dudum inter cetera voluimus quod
potentes beneficia ecclesiastica aliis uniti teneantur exprimere verum annuum
valorem fructuum tam beneficiorum (corundem) quam illius cui uniti petitur
ahoquin unto non valeat et semper in union^^s commissio fiat ad parts onerando
conscientiam illorum quibus...... voluimus in confirmationibus unionum
observari fructuum reddituum and proventium tam monasterii quam capelle
hujusmodi veros annuos valores....... presentibus quod nicholominus voluntate
nostra predicta non obstante, valide et efficaces sint et este censeantur, pro
expressis habentes... hujusmodi supplicationibus inclinati prenussa unionem
annexionem and incorporationem statutum voluntatem and ordinationem ac literas
episcopi hujusmodi ratas et gratas habentes illas et inde secuta quecunque
auctoritate apostolica et ex certa scientia tenore presencium confirmamus et
approbamus ac presentis scripti patrocinio communimus supplentes omnes defectus
si qui forsan intervenerint in eisdem non obstantibus hujusmodi voluntate
nostra and aliis premissis ac apostolicis nec non bone memory Othonis et
Octoboni olim in regno Anglie apostolice sedis legator' ac in provincialibus et
synodalibus conciliis editis generalibus vel specialibus constitutoribus
ordinationibus statutis quoque previlegiis litteris indultis and
consuetudinibus monasterii et ordinis ac capelle predictor' incremento
confirmationem apostolicam vel quavis alia firmitate roboratis ceterisque
contrariis quorum omnium tenores pro sufficienter expressis haberi volumus
quibuscumque. Tenor vero hujusmodi Episcopi talis est Universis etc." -- See
Bourne, A. D. 1448. -- "Et nos prior and capitulum ecclesie cathedralis
Dunelmenii predict' unioni annexioni incorporationi and appropriationi
ceterisque omnibus et singulis per prefatum reverendum patrem Dunelmensem
Episcopum sub forma predict' ordinatis gestis et habitis nostrum prebentes
consensum and assensum ea omnia et singula quantum ad nos attinet ratificamus
approbamus and confirmamus per presents sigillo nostro communi roborato dato
quoad appositionem sigilli nostri communis hujusmodi in domo nostra capitulari
20 die dict' mensis Octobris anno Domini etiam supradict' Et insuper cupientes
ut premissa omnia firmiter observentur venerabili fratri nostro Episcopo
Carleolen' and dilecto filio archidiacono Northumbrie in ecclesia Dunelmen' per
apostolica scripta mandamus quatenus ipsi vel alter eorum per se vel alium seu
alios premissa omnia and singula ubi and quando expediri viderint solemniter
publicantes faciant ea inviolabiliter observari dictasque priorissam and
conventum pacifica dicte capelle possessione perpetuo gaudere eisque de illius
fructibus redditibusque proventibus juribus and obventionibus universis ac
juxta modum et formam compositionis per bone memory Robertum Episc' desuper
fact per fructuum sequestrationem censuras ecclesiasticas et alia juris
remedia de dicta pensione december marcarum integre responderi contradictores per
censuras ecclesiasticas appellatione postposita composcendo non obstantibus
omnibus supradictis aut si aliquibus communiter vel divisim ab apostolica sit
sede indultum quod interdici suspendi vel excommunicari non possint per literas
apostolicas non facientes plenam et expressam ac de verbo ad verbum de indalto
hujusmodi mentionem. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostre
confirmationis appropriationis communionis supplectionis and mandati insringere
vel ei ausu temarario contraire Si quis autem hoc attemptare presumpserit
indignationem omnipotentis Dei and beatorum Petri and Pauli apostolorum ejus se
noverit incursurum Dat' Rome apud Sanctum Petrum anno Incarnacionis Dominice
mill^simo quadringentesimo quinquagesimo octavo, sexto decimo kal' Novembris
pontificatus nostri anno primo." -- From an inrolment, inscribed dorso, "16
Novr. 1458, Pope Pius' bull."
, after reciting the abovementioned episcopal confirmation, strengthened it
with the sanction of the papal authority, threatening, as usual, those that
should rashly infringe it, with the indignation of Almighty God, and that of
his apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul.

Dame Anne Danby, prioress of this house, with the assent and consent of the
convent of the same, granted, for six years, from Whit-sunday, 1470, to Robert
Schyplaw Smith, a tenement of theirs, bounded by a waste of theirs on the
north, and a tenement of theirs on the south, stretching from the Nolt-Market
to the Convent-Orchard, at the rent of eight shillings per annum "This present
script indentyd wytnes y^ we Anne Danby prioress of ye hus of Saint Bartolmew
apostyll in ye town of ye Newcastell on Tyn with full assent and will of ye
systers of the said hus grawnts and gyffys and be yis present or charter
indented to Robt Schyplaw Smyth of the said Newcastell a tenement of ours as it
lygs next ye wast of ye said nonnys in the haldyng of Thomas Sandelord of the
north part and i^ tenement o^ ye said nonnys in the haldyng of Thomes Ochar
Weffar of the south part strech fro ye streyt yt is called ye Notmarket to ye
Covent Orchard a part of the said orchard in ye haldyng of ye foresaid Ochar to
all the bunds yt langs to ye said tenement to hasse and to (...) ye said
tenement for 6 er to said Robt and his assy^rnes fro Whytsonday next coming in
ye er of our Lord God 1470 for vi er yan sewyng next after and folly complete
paying erly till has prioress and our systers 8s. of lawful money of Yngland at
2 ter^^ in y er at Mart^nmes and Wytsonday be evyn porcions etc. etc." -- Seal
annexed, but defaced.
.

May 1st, 1471, some property in Durham was granted to this Anne, alias Agnes
Danby, and the convent of St. Bartholomew, as appears by an original deed of
that date, given at Newcastle upon Tyne, and now remaining in the
Augmentation-Office.

October 9th, 1471, John Hilton, chaplain, released an annuity of forty
shillings, out of the hospital of St. Edmund, in Gateshead, to Agnes Danby,
prioress, and the convent of this house; which annuity appears to have been
granted to him by Margaret Mytford, late prioress of this nunnery of St.
Bartholomew Rot. Booth. B. No 25. "Memorandum quod Johannes Hylton capellanus
nono dic Octobris anno etc. 14. coram Domino Episcopom cancellaria Dunelmensi
recognovit ^ relaxate and imperpetuum quietum clemare Agneti Danby nunc
priorisse domus Sancti Bartholomei in villa Novi Castri super Tynam and ejusdem
loci conventui quandam anum tatem quadragnita solidorum sibi per Margaretam
Mytford nuper priorissam dicte donnis and conventum ejusdem loci ad terminum
vite sue concessam percipiendam annitatim de hospital' Sancti Edmundi
Confestoris in Gateshead ad certos terminos ita quod nec ipse nec aliquis alius
nomine suo aliquo Ejus, tatulum, statum vel ^anctum in dicta a^^ntate versus
dictas nunc priorissam and conventum vel successores suos de cetero exigere vel
clamare vel vendicare poterit sed ab omni action juris et clamii inde sit
exclusus per presents in perpetuum etc."
.

August 20th, 1486, Joan Baxter, prioress of this house, granted in fee-farm to
Thomas Lokwood, merchant, of Newcastle upon Tyne, a parcel of waste ground,
with a croft in Gateshead, at the yearly rent of six shillings and eight-pence
Madox's Formulare Anglicanum, p. 287.
.

September 6th, 1500, Johan, prioress of this house, granted some property
belonging to the same, in Hertlepool, to Percival Lampton From a deed remaining
in the Augmentation-Office.
.

March 27th, 1501, Richard Dinsforth was admitted into holy orders on the title
of priest of the nuns of St. Bartholomew in Newcastle upon Tyne Register Bp.
Fox, p. 36. "Ricardus Dinsforth ad titulum monialium Sancti Bartholomei in Novo
Castro ordinat' presbyter 27 Mar. 1501."

"Dame Johane Baxter priores" of this house occurs in a deed preserved in the
Augmentation-Office, and dated 26 April, 1511.

In the pedigree of the ancient northern family of Kinton (Harleian MSS. 1448)
we are informed that the heiress thereof married William Hedwen, whose daughter
and heiress married a Bennet: a daughter of whom, in the third generation,
married a Scotchman against her friends' will, and that another daughter, Jane,
was a man at St. Bartholomew's, in Newcastle.


.

A. D. 1513, the prioress and convent of this house granted to the mayor and
corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, a lease of part of their property, called
Nun-Moor, near the said town, for an hundred years, at the annual rent of three
shillings and four-pence See account of Nun-Moor.
.

A. D. 1520, there was an award between this house and William Bennet, Esquire.
proprietor of the adjoining village of Kenton, concerning the boundaries of
Nun-Moor Ibid.
.

John Brandlyng, of Newcastle, merchant, let to Dame Johan Baxter, prioress of
this house, and the convent of the same, for 99 years, from Whitsunday, 1521,
at the yearly rent of seven shillings, certain ground called the Magdalen-Deen,
which had been granted to him by the master of the Magdalen-Hospital of
Newcastle upon Tyne From an original indenture (seal broken off) dated in the
chapter house of the nuns of Newcastell, March 20, 1520, between John
Brandlyng, of the town of Newcastell upon Tyne, merchant, and Dame Johan
Baxter, priores of the house of Saint Bartholomew, of the nonnes in the said
town, and convent of the same -- This "witnesses that where the said John
Brandlyng has by the grawnt dimission and less of Master Edward Burrell
clerk master of the hospital of Mary Magdalen without the walls of the said
town brethern and susters of the same with the consent of the meyre burgesses
and comonaltie of the said town patrons of the said hospital emonges other
londs for years certain ground bilongyng to the said magdalens called the
Magdalen-Deyn with the aisiaments thereto bilongyng lying on the south side of
the burn called the Magdalen-Burn and it extendith north-west wards in lynth
to the Dycke of the Magdalen church-yarde longest as the ground bylongyng to
the said priores and nonnes in the said dene extendith on the north side of the
said burn," as appeared by a writing indented under the seal of the town, etc.
etc.
.

About A. D. 1523, or 1524, great differences occur concerning the right of
creating an abbess, or prioress, in the nunnery of this house. A prioress, it
seems, had been elected to it by the abbot of Newminster, which Wolsey, then
Bishop of Durham, as the ordinary, thought an infringement of his power.

Lord Dacre, warden of the marches, had interested himself in favor of the
prioress and the claim of the abbot; but numerous precedents, found in the
bishop's registers, fully established the justice of the episcopal pretensions.

The personal worth of the lady, then not quite thirty years of age,
conciliated favor on this occasion, and she was re-instated by a new and
proper election; the vicar general advising her friends to procure a
dispensation for her nonage, and promising, in consideration of the poverty of
the house, a mitigation of the fees of election and institution See Hearne's
Chronicle of Otterbourne and Whethamstede, vol. ii. p. 556, letter-B^and 5.
.

On the feast of St. Martin the bishop in winter A. D. 1529, Dame Agnes Lawson,
prioress, and the nuns of this house, let to farm to James Lawson, merchant, of
Newcastle upon Tyne, a parcel of ground, beside the town of Gateshead, in the
bishopric of Durham, for twenty years, at the yearly rent of thirty-three
shillings and four-pence sterling Original in the Augmentation-Office. --
"Indenture between Dame Agnes Lawson priores of the hows and place of Sancte
Bartholomew the apostle within the town of Newcastell and her susters the
convente of the same place of the one party and James Lawson of the said town
of Newcastell merchaunte of the other party witnesses that the said priores
and convente with their hole and voluntary assent and consent have dimised
granted and to form latten unto the said James Lawson a parcel of ground
conteynyng 5 acres belonging to their said hows and place of Sancte Barthol'
which parcel of ground lies within the bushoprick of Duresme besides the
town of Gatesheved and boundeth the self the on Tame Brig upon the south part
and the common lonyng called the Swardes upon the north part and
Bencham-Medows upon the west part and Bencham-Pasture within the two Lee
Closes upon the est part which parcel of ground was late in the holding of
Sir Henry Boynton Knight." -- In confirmation, "The abovenamed priores and
convente for them and their successors have put there common seal dated at
Newcastell etc." ut supra. -- This seal represents St. Bartholomew under a
canopy -- one hand lifted up, the other holding the knife with which he was
stead alive. -- Red wax. -- Inscription that remains, "Sigill............
ialium Sancti Bartholomei in Novo Castro." -- "Ialium" is plainly part of the
word "monialium." -- See second plate or seals, No 3.
.

The nunnery of Newcastle upon Tyne was one of those religious houses, which,
by letters patent of King Henry VIII. was sounded anew, and preserved from the
dissolution of lesser monasteries, March 30th, 1537 Tanner's Notitia Monastica,
preface, p. 37. The original royal grant is remaining in the
Augmentation-Office -- It is dated 30th January, 28 Hen. VIII.
.

It resigned afterward, and was fully suppressed, January 3d, 1540, and
appears to have consisted of a prioress, a prioress that had resigned, probably
on account of her age and infirmities, and nine other nuns, at the time of its
dissolution Rymer's Foedera. -- "Omnibus Christi fidelibus etc. Agnes Lawson
priorissa domusive monasterii Sancti Bartholomei apostoli infra com' Novi
Castri super Tynam and ejusdem loci conventus salutem in Domino sempiternam
Noveritis nos etc." -- See form.

"In quorum testimonium nos presati priorissa and conventus huic presenti
scripto nostro sigillum nostrum commune apposuimus Dat' in domo nostra
capitulari tertio dic menti Januarii anno regni predicti Domini nostri Regis
Henrici octavi tricesimo primo. Et memorandum quod die and anno predictis
venerunt prefati priorissa and conventus in domo sua capitulari apud Novum
Castrum super Tynam coram Ricardo Layton uno clericorum cancellarie dicti
Domini Regis and recognoverunt scriptum predictum ac omnia and singula in eodem
contenta in forma predicta."

In the book of pensions, remaining in the Augmentation-Office, the following
sums occur under the head of " Monasterium in Novo Castro, 31 Hen VIII." as
pensions then granted to the prioress and sisters of this late house. -- "Agnes
Lawson monialis ibidem 6l. -- Johanna Scott 40s. -- Johanna Baxter 40s. --
Johanna Prior 30s. -- Margareta Pendo^^th 26s. 8d. -- Johanna Colyer 33s. 4d.
-- Johanna Broderigg 26s. 8d. -- Elizabetha Shaftoo 26s. 8d. -- Cecilia
Middelton 26s. 8d. -- Johanna Younger 26s. 8d. -- Elizabeth Crawmere 26s. 8d."
-- In 1553 there remained in charge the pensions of Agnes Lawson, Johanna Prior
-- Johanna Brodrigge -- Johanna Younger -- Eliz. Craumer and Cicely Middleton.


.

It has been supposed that all the hospital lands and revenues of St Edmund's
Hospital, in Gateshead, were comprised in Agnes Lawson's surrender in 1540, as
above, and that they continued in the hands of the crown from that time till
the year 1610, when King James I. by letters patent, refounded the hospital in
Gateshead Allan's printed collections.
.

The annual revenue of this house, 26 Hen. VIII. was about 36l. 10s. according
to Dugdale, but Speed makes it 37l. 4s. 9d.

Stevens, in his Continuation, vol. ii. p. 25, values it thus: "Summa inde 37l.
4s. 2d. -- summa clara 36l. 0s. 10d. "In Darn-Crook," says Bourne, "were some
wastes and houses belonging to the ^^ms of St. Bartholomew, as there were in
almost every street of the town." -- "In the Pudding-Chare," he adds, "there is
a waste which belonged to the nuns of St. Bartholomew boundering on the west on
the common gutter, and on the north on the chantry lands." -- This waste is the
ground where, in Mr. Bourne's time, were the gardens of Mr. James Bell,
postmaster, and the old houses on the north of these gardens, at that time the
property of Mr. Ralph Trotter, were the chantry lands here mentioned. --
Wallis, in his History of Northumberland, is much mistaken in his references on
this head.

By an inquisition, dated September 2d, 1577, it appears, that a waste in a
street of Newcastle, called "Allhallow Ban^ke," belonged to these nuns. --
There occurs also, ibid. mention of the waste belonging to them in St. John's
Church-Chare. -- Also of two house, their property, in the Side, and a house
and waste in Darne-Crooke, of the annual value of 6s. 8d. -- In the above
inquisition, it is said, that Sir Robert Brandling, Knight, purchased certain
of the lands pertaining to the said nuns of St. Bartholomew.

Bourne says also, that "Mr. Riddell's house and chapel in Gateshead (commonly
called Gate^^d House) was, according to some, a (...) ^^firmary for the nuns of
this hospital. Dr. Smith, in a note on Bid, says, there is a tradition that
that beautiful chapel was a call to the nuns of Newcastle."


."

The subsequent very curious rental of the possessions of the nuns here is
copied from that on parchment, remaining in the Augmentation-Office, and
inscribed dorso (in the hand writing of Mr. Madox): "Rentale prioratus Sancti
Bartholomei in Novo Castro super Tin'." -- It must be of a date between 4 Hen.
VII. and the dissolution. -- "A rentale of all the lands and tenements
belongyng to the pryores and nuns of the house of Sancte Bartholomewe.

L. s. d. It' the town of Newcastell for the Nonne-More by the year 1 3 4 It'
two howses in the hands of Rycherd Stot by yer 1 3 4 It' a close in the tenyre
of Rafe Car by year 1 0 0 It' a close in the tenire of Georg' Comb by yer 0 6
8 It' a house in the hands of Gylbart Myddylton by yer 0 5 0 It' a house in the
hands of Robart Morpeth by yer 0 6 8 It' a hows in the hands of Wyllm. Car by
yer 0 5 0 It' a hows in the hands of Rafe Dun by yer 0 4 0 It' a hows in the
hands of Thomas Baxter by yer 0 1 6 It' two howses in the hands of John Langton
by yer 0 8 0 It' a hows in the hands of Edward Jakson by yer 0 8 0 It' a hows
in the hands of Wyllm. Nycolson by yer 0 8 0 It' a hows in the hands of Edward
Pendrot by yer 0 8 4 It' a hows in the hands of Robart Patoson by yer 0 10 0
It' the glebe lands in Jesmuth-Feld by yer 2 6 8

Northumberland.
It' a tenyre in the hands of Roger Eryngton of Denton by yer 0 8 0 It' a
tenyre in the hand of Thomas Duxfeld of Donyngton by yer 0 13 4 It' the new Hal
at Newam by yer 0 3 4 Carried over. 10 9 2

Gateshede, in the bushoprick of Durham.
L. s. d. Brought forward, 10 9 2 It' the hospytall of Sanct Edmund the Bushop
and Confessor by yer 12 0 0 It' a tenire and a clos in the hands of Henry
Anderson by yer 0 6 8 It' a tenyre in the hands of the prests of Farnacres by
yer 0 13 4 It' in Whikham a tenire in the hands of Thomas Pendrat and his falo
by yer 0 6 0 It' a tenire in Usworth in the hands of Thomas Harle by yer 0 8 4
It' a tenire in Kyo in the hands of Robart Marla and Wyllm. Laws by yer 2 1 0
It' Ulston by yer 6 13 4 It' Stellenglay by yer 3 13 4" L.36 11 2

The house of this nunnery, after its dissolution, was granted to William
Barantyne, Kenelme Throgmorton, Genesis and Henry Annetson, by letters patent of
King Henry VIII. dated at Hampton Court, August 4th, in the 36th year of his
reign The following entry concerning this place occurs in the see-farm rolls,
remaining in the Augmentation-Office: "Parcel of the possessions of the house
of nuns within the town of Newcastle upon Tyne -- A free rent or tenth
reserved for lands in Nonne-More granted to William Barrantyne, Kenelme
Throgmorton Genesis and Henry Annetson by lettres patent of King Henry the VIII.
dated at Hampton-Courte the 4th of August in the 36 year of his reign
yiedling yearly at the feast of St. Michaell the Archangell on for ever 2s.
4d. a free rent issueing out of the manor of Halliwell alias Harwell by the
year 3s. 4d." -- In the writs claiming the rents of old and new farms, etc.
due to the crown, and still continued to be sent annually to the sheriff of
Newcastle upon Tyne, I found (inter alia) the following article: "Parcel unius
domus sororum monialium in Newcastle sup. Tin.
Decim' scit' and Grang' de Owston 16s.
Decim' in Neumoore (Nun-Moor) in Novo Castro 2s. 4d.
Una cotag' in Pelton in Dunelm' nuper Roth' Millets' 2s. 0d.
Unum tenement' in Novo Castro et nuper Rob. Whites' 3s. 0d."



.

It became afterward the property of Lady Gaveere, who sold it to Robert
Anderson It was ordered to be sold by Henry Anderson (probably the son of this
Robert), as appears by the following clause in his will: -- "Within three
years next after my death make sale of my house, land and orchards with the
appurtenances, called the Nuns of St. Bartholomew in Newcastle." -- Vid. Lib.
Testamen. No 68, in Consist' Dunelm.
: after this it became so great a receptacle of Scots, and others not free
burgesses of the town, persons who, during the odium that prevailed at that
time against foreigners, were not accounted the most respectable neighbors,
that Mr. Anderson thought proper to pull it down, in order to dislodge them. He
purchased the garden also, and having filled up the dene Leland mentions this
deen: "The Nunnes-Dene having two bridges resortyth toward Pilgrime-Gate and
so downewarde to Tine."

"The water of booth the deenes (he had been speaking immediately before of
Pandon-Deen) cummith from the cole-pits at Cow-Hill or Cow-More half a mile out
of Newcastell."


, or hollow, that intersected it, and cleared it of all the rubbish, converted
it into a very pleasant field.

Within our own memory it belonged to the late Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. and
after his death was sold, A. D. 1783, to Mr. George Anderson Among the fee-farm
rents, received in 1783, by John Widdrington, Esquire. for the representatives of
Edward Noell, Esquire. occurs the following:

"2s. 8d. Several tenements called the Nuns in the Bigg-Markett recd of the
late Sir Walter Blackett."


.

The exact site of this nunnery is now unknown Two great houses are marked out
hereabouts in Speed's Plan of Newcastle, 1610 -- one is called "King's
Lodgings," -- the other, "The Manor," a part of the Nuns. -- I should think it
stood near the spot where a playhouse has since been erected. Indeed the
playhouse seems supported by part of the north-wall of St. Bartholomew's
church, in which the north door-way, built up with stone, is still observable;
so that where once these daughters of celibacy and retirement heard their
masses, Thalia and Melpomene now laugh and weep by turns, and farces of another
kind have succeeded to the superstitious rites of papal Rome.

The above playhouse, erected by Mr. William Parker, master of the Turk's Head
Inn, was finished in the latter end of the year 1748.

On a view of the Nuns in 1777, I discovered that part of the meadow which,
Bourne tells us, was filled up to make the ground level -- part seems to have
been left in its original state, in order to preserve a very fine well -- this
has occasioned a remarkable artificial hollow. I found also the issues of the
two great conduits, where Lamborn and Lorkburn unite in the deen. -- One of
them points up toward Fickett-Tower, where it passes through the town-wall,
and the other toward Execution-Dock.


: Bourne, as I think, erroneously supposes, that the passage still called
Nun-Gate was not the grand entrance to it. Here very lately remained part of a
great arch, that once formed a gateway, very unlike that of a back passage;
especially when we consider the general poverty of style in building that
prevailed at the time when this was erected.

The popular tradition, of a subterraneous communication with a neighboring
monastery, prevailed here also See Grose's account of Godstow nunnery, in
Oxfordshire: there is a similar tradition of a subterraneous passage under the
Thames, from Syon nunnery to the friary of Sheen, now called Richmond, in Surry.
: this was said to have been made for purposes that we shall but hint at, and
to have ended at the house of Black-Friars. Some large vaulted drain has
probably given rise to the charge against our fair and, as it should seem by
this account, frail sisterhood, and it has owed its support to the ill nature
of religious party, than which no species of rancour has been found to be more
malignant.

Among Fairfax's Views, published in the time of the civil wars, and now
extremely rare, there occurs a small one of the then remains of this nunnery,
inscribed at bottom, the "Nunns Newcastle I have caused a fac simile of this to
be engraved. See Plate of Miscellaneous Antiquities, No 9.
."

Nearly at the end of the Pudding-Chare, the street called Bigg, or Oat-Market,
is separated into three divisions; of which that next to West-Gate is called
the Meal, or Groat-Market An order of common council, dated June 20th, 1743,
confined the meal-sellers, etc. to sell their commodities in this street, "the
ancient and accustomed markett-place appointed for the sale of meal and
groats."
; that next to Pilgrim-Street, the Flesh-Market; and the street between the two
former is properly called the Middle-Street.

Mention occurs of a message called "Pold-Hall, in the Mele-Market-Gate," in a
deed, dated Thursday after the feast of St. Michael, 20 Ric. II. and in another
dated 12th February, 1414 Gyll's interleaved Bourn, p. 53 -- "Prout jacet inter
tenementum quod Beatrix de Bedlyngton tenet de hospital' b. Marie in le
West-Gate ex part australi et tenementum etc. ex part boreali et in
longitudine a vico vocat' le Mele-Market-Gate usque ad dictum vicum del
West-Gate."
.

Bourne tells us, that in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, a house in this street,
belonging to one William Penrith, the site of which is now lost, paid an annual
rent to the chantry of our Lady, in the parish church of Long-Benton Also in
the inquisition, Sept. 2d, 19 Elizabeth.
.

Horseley, in his Romana Britannia, p. 132, informs us of a house in this
street, in the laying of the foundation of which (about fifteen or sixteen
years before he wrote), the masons struck upon the Roman wall, at each of the
side walls, so that the building stands across it.

Toward the lower end of the Groat-Market is a wide communication with the
Middle-Street, where a market is held every Saturday for wool In the
common council books, August 30th, 1676, the Wool-Market is mentioned as having
been removed, "from the Pullen-Markett to the lane betwixt Groate-Markett and
Middle-Street, adjacent to Mr. Lewin's house there."

Near the Wool-Market, and opposite the shop of W. Charnley, bookseller, a
house stood in my remembrance, on the top of which a reservoir was built for
the water that came from Gateshead-Fell. -- It has lately been taken down and
rebuilt.


.

The continuation of this street, beyond the east end of Denton-Chare, was the
ancient Iron-Market In the book of inrolments, in the archives of the
corporation of Newcastle, in a deed dated 15th of November, 1672, a tenement is
described as situate in a street called "the Iron-Markett at or near the foot
of the same street and St. Nicholas' church boundring upon the said street or
place called the Iron-Market on the east; a street or place there called
Lovers-Laine on the west part: on the King's Street on the south part, and upon
or near to a certain message belonging to one Roger Hudspeth on the north."

There was a chapel for nonjurors in the Groat-Market. -- The sect is said to
be nearly extinct, at present, in Newcastle. -- Mr. Man-field, the minister,
removed from thence to London.

There is a meeting house for dissenters in the Pudding-Chare, communicating,
also, with the Groat-Market. -- Ministers, Mr Arthur, Mr. Andrew Ogilvie, Mr.
David Grant.

Mr. Grant, in 1782, published a sermon on the necessity and advantages of
religious consideration, preached in the Groat-Market meeting, in Newcastle, on
Tuesday, 1st January, 1782, by the Rev. David Grant.


, opposite to St. Nicholas' church.

ST. NICHOLAS' CHURCH.
THIS very capacious and superb structure, dedicated to St. Nicholas St.
Nicholas was Bishop of Myra, a city in Lycia, a province of Asia Minor; he
lived about the beginning of the fourth century, and during the persecution of
Licinius the Roman Emperor, was sent into banishment: but after the death of
that tyrant, he revisited his diocese, and threw out all the idols which he
found in it. He is said to have assisted at the general council of Nice, where
he strenuously opposed the Arians. He commemorated on the sixth of December.

Bourne says, that in his time a large flag, which was the first step into the
church, at the north door, was cut all along the surface with uneven lines, in
imitation of the waves of the sea, as a silent remembrancer of this Saint, so
famous among some for his miracles and apparitions by sea, that he has merited
the title of the Patron of the Sailors.

There is a perspective view of "St. Nicholas' church in Newcastle upon Tyne,"
inscribed to Lord Crew, Bishop of Durham. W. Horseley, del.


, is styled, in the earliest accounts of it, "The church of Newcastle upon Tyne
See afterward under Henry I.

Yet perhaps it was so called by way of eminence: for we find, that although in
the ordering of the vicarage by Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, A. D. 1194, it
is called "the church of St. Nicholas, of Newcastle upon Tyne;" yet afterward,
in the year 1248, it is simply styled, "the church of Newcastle," when that of
St. Andrew appears to have been built by unquestionable evidence.

However that may have been, it was certainly the mother, or parish church, to
which the other three were no more than parochial chapels, built, it is
probable, at different periods, as the town was enlarged or became more
populous.

The respective limits of the four parishes, or parochial districts, in
Newcastle upon Tyne, are said to have been settled in the year 1220, if we may
credit an account in Warburton's MS. collections remaining in the archives of
the Duke of Northumberland.


:" a circumstance which seems to prove it to be the oldest, as having been at
that time the only church of the town.

To John sons of Redley Hall in the County of Northumberland Esquire. This View of
the elegant STEEPLE etc of the CHURCH of ST. NICHOLAS. (...) Newcastle and Tyne
(...) South East (...)


Bourne supposes it was built by King Henry I. but on the authority of a book
remaining in the vestry of this church in his time, it is said to have been
founded in the year 1091, and, as it farther appears, by Osmund, Bishop of
Salisbury Dr. Ellison's MSS. inform us, that A. D. 1091, in the fourth year of
William Rufus, the church of St. Nicholas was founded by Osmund, Bishop of
Salisbury, adding that their authority is a book (doubtless a MS.) of this
church. I was truly sorry to find, that not only this book, but almost all the
other ancient writings and evidences of this church, are now lost.
. -- This Osmund, who was canonized after his death, which happened in 1099,
was a Norman by birth, came over with William the Conqueror, was created Earl
of Dorset, and afterward, according to some, made Chancellor of England See
Godwin de Presulibus Angliae.
.

Between the year 1115, and 1128 The Christian names of the Bishops who
attested the charter afford internal evidence that it must have been given
after the 16th, and before the 29th of the reign of King Henry I. -- See Godwin
de Presulibus.
, King Henry I. gave the church of Newcastle "Henricus Rex Anglie Archiepiscopo
Eborum et Episcopo Dunelmensi and vicecomiti de Northumbrelanda et omnibus
baronibus and fidelibus suis de Northumbrelanda salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and
concessisse Deo et Sancte Marie de Carliolo and canonicis ejusdem loci
ecclesiam de Novo Castello desuper Tynam, et ecclesiam de Newburne et ecclesias
quas Richardus de Aurea Valle de me tenet, post obitum ejus: et Richardus and
clerici qui ipsis ecclesiis deserviunt, recognoscant de canonicis ipsis et
faciant eis servicium quod mihi facere solebant. Et post obitum eorum
redigantur ecclesie in manus canonicorum ita quod clerici qui eis deservient
habeant inde necessaria et canonici habeant reliquum. Et volo et precipio
firmiter ut been et in pace et quiet et honorifice teneant. T. Willielmo
Episcopo Winton. et Bernardo Episcopo de Sancto David, et Roberto de sigillo
apud Roth'." -- Nicholson's and Burn's Westmoreland and Cumberland, vol. ii. p.
540.

The above charter appears to have been confirmed by an inspeximus, 8 Ed. II.
n. 25, and another, 6 Ed. III. n. 10. -- See Dugdale's Monasticon, tom. ii, p.
73.

Leland, in his Collectan. vol. i. p. 121, tells us, that one Walter, a Norman
priest, whom William Rufus set over the city of Carlisle, began to build the
monastery there in honor of the blessed Virgin, but that Henry the First
completed it, introduced into it regular canons, and gave six churches to the
monastery, i. e. Newcastle, Newburn, Warkworth, Rothbury, Whittingham, and
Corbridge.

Henry I. appears to have granted to this Richard de Aurea Valle, whom I find
called also Richard Goldburn,, the churches of Warkworth, Corbridge,
Whittingham, and Rothbury, by a charter. -- See afterward under A. D. 1293.


, with that of Newburn and others, held of him by Richard de Aurea Valle, to
the church of Carlisle, at that incumbent's death. By this charter the above
Richard, and the clergymen that served the other churches, were ordered to
acknowledge of the canons of Carlisle, and to do them such service as had been
usually done to himself.

The churches, on the demise of each of their respective incumbents, were to
revert to the above canons, and the clerks that served them were to have
necessary subsistence out of their several revenues, and the said canons the
remainder.

In the year 1193, Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, confirmed to the prior and
convent of Carlisle, all the churches that belonged to them in his diocese.
Among the usual yearly pensions to be paid to the incumbents, there occur 26
marks to be paid from this of St. Nicholas: on the respective deaths of each of
these incumbents, the above prior and convent were to take the churches into
their own hands, and severally present vicars to them, paying to the Bishop,
annually, forty marks, in lieu of aids for the whole "Carta Hugonis Episcopi
Dunelm' priori and conventui Karliol' de omnibus ecclesiis quas tenent in
dioces' Dunelm'.

"Hugo Dei gratia Dunelm' Episcopus omnibus sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad
quos literae istae pervenerint salutem. Noverit universitas vestra nos in anno
Incarnationis Domini 1193, pridie ante cathedram S. Petri de communi consilio
personarum and ecclesiae nostrae concessisse et presenti carta nostra
confirmasse dilectis filiis nostris Johanni priori and conventui B. Mariae
Karliol' omnes ecclesias quas in episcopatu nostro tenent and habent ut
viventibus personis quae tunc eas tenebant, ab eis annuatim pensiones solitas
percipiant scil. de ecclesia de Novo Castello super Tynam 26 marcas de ecclesia
de Neuburn 12 marcas de ecclesia de Werkeworth 25 marcas de ecclesia de
Routhebery 9 marcas de ecclesia de Whittincham 9 marcas de ecclesia de Corbrig
medietatem tam terrae quam decimarum et omnium aliarum obventionum. Et Petrus
de Ros Karliol' archidiaconus quem ad eorum presentationem in alia medietate
personam instituimus aliam medietatem in omnibus teneat reddendo inde dictis
priori and canonicis annuatim unam libram incensi ad Assumptionem B. Mariae
apud Karleolum. Et ipsi pariter supportabunt onus deserviendi ecclesiae per
honestos vicarios and reddendi synodalia and hospitia archidiacono inveniendi
predictis autem personis ab hac luce migrantibus ipsi vacantes ecclesias in
propria manu sua retineant et habeant Et earum fructus and exitus in proprios
usus suos ad libitum fuum convertant and in singulis honestos vicarios, sicut
aliae personae faciunt, ponant qui ecclesiis honest deserviant and curam
animarum habeant Ipsi vero tanquam personae archidiacono and aliis officialibus
nostris, de his quae ad ipsos pertinent, respondebunt et satisfaciant.
Verumtamen de hospitiis nostris et communibus auxiliis quieti erunt. Ipsi vero
pro tam gratuita benignitate nostra quam eis impendimus, in recompensationem
hospitiorum nostrorum and auxiliorum nobis et ^uccessoribus nostris annuatim
imperpetuum 40 marcas, 20 scil. ad Pentecost' and 20 ad festum S. Martini
persolvent, sed de december quieti erunt donec aliqua predictarum ecclesiarum in
eorum proprietatem deveniat. His testibus Bertramo priore Dunelm' Burchardo and
Willielmo archidiaconis Symone camerario Magistro Ricardo de Coldingham
Magistro Willielmo Blesensi Willielmo de Hoveden Mago Rob. de Adington, Symone,
Johanne and Ricardo capellanis, Nicolao Medico Rob. de Ellewych Rob. de Hedon,
Rob. de Dunelm' Mago Willielmo elemosinario, Adam, Ricardo, Hagrun, and Will'
de Norham clericis et multis aliis." -- Bourne's History.


.

January 24th, 1194, the above Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, with the consent
of the prior and convent of Carlisle, who held the vicarage of this church,
appointed, for the support of the vicar thereof for the time being, all fruits,
annual profits, oblations, and obventions whatsoever belonging thereto, except
the great tithes "Ordinatio vicariae B. Nicholai, de Novo Castro.

"Noverint universi quod nos Thomas, permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus
inspecto registro bonae memoriae Hugonis dudum Dunelm' Episcopi predecessoris
nostri, comperimus in eodem quod dictus Hugo Episcopus vicariam villae Novi
Castri super Tynam, nostrae dioces' ordinavit and portionem pro sustentatione
vicarii ejusdem qui pro tempore fuerit in eadem de fructibus ad dictam
ecclesiam pertinentibus taxavit statuit and limitavit sub hac forma:

"Hugo Dei gratia Dunelm' Episcopus omnibus sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad
quos literae istae pervenerint salutem. Noverit universitas vestra quod nos
anno Dom' 1194 pridie ante conversionem Sancti Pauli vicariam ecclesiae beati
Nicholai de Novo Castello super Tynam nostrae dioces' (inter) alias, in eadem
ordinatum de unanimi consensu dilectorum filiorum nostrorum prioris et
conventus Karliol' dictam ecclesiam beati Nicholai in usus suos canonice
obtinentium portionem infra scriptam pro sustentacione vicarii ejusdem qui est
et pro tempore erit in eadem ex nostri pastoralis officii debito taxamus,
statuimus et ordinamus, viz. quod quilibet vicarius illius ecclesiae qui pro
tempore fuerit pro sustentatione sua and portione congrua percipiat and habeat
omnes fructus, proventus, oblationes, obventiones quascunque ad dictam
ecclesiam qualitercunque pertinentes de quibuscunque rebus existentes, decimis
garbarum dictae ecclesiae duntaxat exceptis. In quarum inspectionis and
compertionis testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat' in manerio
nostro de Auckland, sexto die mensis Junii anno Dom. 1360, et nostrae
consecrationis quinto decimo." -- Bourne's History.


.

The church of Newcastle occurs, A. D. 1197, as standing indebted sixty
shillings to the King, for an aid, set in charge upon several churches and
parsons Madox's History of the Exchequer, p. 493, folio edition.
.

In the year 1216, the church of St. Nicholas is said to have been destroyed by
fire Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

Richard de Marisco, who was consecrated Bishop of Durham on the 9th of the
kalends of August, 1218, ratified the churches of Newcastle, Newburn,
Werkworth, Corbridge, and a moiety of that of Whittingham (no mention occurs of
Rothbury on this occasion), to the bishop, prior, and convent of Carlisle, and
their successors, for ever The prior and convent of Durham, October 22d, 1248,
confirmed this ratification, for which the bishop, prior, and convent of
Carlisle obliged themselves and successors to keep them indemnified, in the
following words: "Obligatio episcopi and prioris Karliol' de indemnitate
confirmationis ecclesiarum earundem in proprios usus: Omnibus hoc scriptum
visuris vel audituris Silvester Dei gratia Karliol' Episcopus and Robertus
prior et conventus Karliol' salutem in Domino. Ne processu temporis priori and
capitulo Dunelm' ecclesiae possit aliquo eventu dispendium provenire per hoc
quod ratihabitionem quam ratis^cavit Dominus Ricardus Dei gratia Dunelm'
Episcopus super ecclesiis de Novo Castro, Newburne, de Werkworth, de Corbrigg
and medietate ecclesiae de Wytingham nobis et successoribus nostris in proprios
usus secundum ordinationem Magistrorum Wilhelmi de Kylkenny archidiaconi
Coventrens' Thomae de Wymundham precentoris Lichfeldens' Odonis de Kylkenny and
Walteri de Merton clericorum liberaliter confirmarunt presenti scripto nos and
successores nostros and ecclesiam Karliol' in perpetuum obligamus quod
conservabimus indemnes in omnibus et per omnia praesatos priorem and conventum
Dunelm' quoad hoc: in cujus rei etc. presenti scripto sigilla nostra fecimus
apponi. Dat' 22 die October. A. D. 1248." -- Ratification is particularly used
for the confirmation of a clerk in a prebend, etc. formerly given him by the
bishop, etc. where the right of patronage is doubted to be in the King.

In the pleadings on a quo warranto, etc. A. D. 1293, it appeared that King
John was seized of the advowsons of this church and others, in feodo et jure,
and presented clerks to them. -- The following is in the Tinmouth Chartulary,
tempore Johannis: "Ecclesia de Novo Castro est de dono Domini Regis and
Gylbertus Lacye eam tenet per Willielmum Longechamp qui fuit justic' Domini
Regis." -- See afterward under the year 1293.


.

Nicholas Farnham "Carta Nicholai Episcopi Dunelm' facta ecclesiae de Karliol'
super ecclesiis in proprios usus retinendis.

"Omnibus sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit
Nicholaus Dei gratia Dunelm' Episcopus salutem in Domino. Noverit universitas
vestra quod nos attendentes tenuitatem seu paupertatem possessionum episcopatus
and ecclesiae Karliol' ecclesias de talibus locis in proprios usus retinendas
fructibus and proventibus earundem ecclesiarum aequalibus portionibus inter
ipsos distribuendis salvis competentibus vicariis and sustentatione honesta
vicariorum in prefatis ecclesiis quos vicarios nobis et successoribus nostris
presentabunt per nos et successores nostros instituendos; salvis etiam nobis
and successoribus nostris imperpetuum jure, auctoritate and dignitate
episcopali in omnibus ecclesiis antedictis: salvis etiam quadraginta marcis
annuis de bonis earundem ecclesiarum a dicto venerabili fratre Silvestro
Karliol' Episcopo cum termino solvendis Dunelm' ad scaccarium nostrum quoad
vixerit et post ejusdem episcopi discessum salvis quadraginta libris
sterlingorum ab episcopis Karliol' et dictis priore et conventu Karliol' et
eorum successoribus in perpetuum termino antedicto ad scaccarium Dunelm'
persolvendis de bonis ecclesiarum memoratarum." -- Bourne's History.

This was confirmed as follows, by the chapter of Durham: "Confirmatio capituli
Dunelm' super carta predicta.

"Omnibus Christi fidelibus Pertramus prior and convent^rs Dunelm' ecclesiae
salutem in Domino Noveris nos inspexisse c^rtam venerabilis patris Domini
Nicholai Dunelm' Episcopi cujus tenor talis est Omnibus S. matris etc. Nos
igitur apparationem s^u concessionem antedictam ecclesiarum prefato Episcopo
Karliol' and successoribus suis ac priori and capitulo Karliol' factam, prout
canonice facta est, ratam habentes ipsam munim^^ sigilli capituli nostri
confirmamus septimo die Augusti anno Domini 1246." -- Bourne, ut supra.


, who resigned the bishopric of Durham in 1249, or 1250, in consideration of
the poverty of the church and see of Carlisle, granted them their several
churches in his diocese, to be equally divided amongst them, reserving out of
their revenues a competence to the respective vicar of each church, and
excepting forty marks which had been granted from thence by Silvester, Bishop
of Carlisle, during his life; and after his death forty pounds sterling, to be
paid by the bishop, prior, and convent of Carlisle, at a certain term for ever,
at the exchequer of Durham, out of the possessions of the above churches.

A. D. 1280, the justices itinerant occur, as holding their courts in this
church Tinmouth Chartulary, fol. 206 -- "Coram quibus justic' comparuer' prior
et alii in ecclesia Sancti Nicholai de Novo Castro. Et prior allegavit, etc.
anno R. R. E. octavo."
.

In the year 1290, King Edward I. by his charter of inspeximus confirmed the
charters of Henry I. and Henry II. of the above churches to the Bishop and
Canons of Carlisle Occurs in the trial, A. D. 1293, between the King and the
Bishop and Prior o^ Carlisle.
.

In a valuation of benefices, etc. in the diocese of Durham, made in the year
1291, the following are the entries concerning this church "Taxatio civitatis
et dioc' episcopatus Dunelm' facta per tres duodenas sub sigillo corundem C. et
I. vicar' de Herteburn et Akeley apud Novum Castrum 13 kal' Januar' A. D. 1291.

Rector beati Nicholai Novi Castri super Tynam videlicet Episcopus L. s. d.
Karleol' una cum pens' 13 marcar' quam de vicar' percipit 38 13 4 Porcio
prioris Karleol' in eadem 38 13 4 Porcio prioris de Tynemue in eadem 8 ^ 0
Vicar' ejusdem 20 5 0

Copied from a MS. book in the Exchequer, by permission of Craven Ord, Esquire. May
10th, 1784. The same occurs in the Tinmouth Chartulary, fol. 155.


:

"The Rector of St. Nicholas at Newcastle upon Tyne, i. e. the Bishop of
Carlisle, together with a pension of 13 L. s. d. marks which he receives of the
vicar 38 13 4 The portion of the prior of Carlisle 38 13 4 The portion of the
prior of Tinmouth in the same 8 0 0 The vicar of the same 20 5 0"

In the year 1293, King Edward I. brought an assize before H. de Cressingham
and his companions, the itinerant justices at Newcastle upon Tyne, against the
Bishop and Prior of Carlisle, for the advowsons of the churches of St. Nicholas
of Newcastle upon Tyne, of Rothbury, Corbridge and Warkworth.

In this trial, where the jury gave a verdict against the King, the bishop and
prior pleaded that they held this church of St. Nicholas in common "In the
Tower of London -- Placita de quo warranto and Ragm' 21 Ed. I. A. D. 1293. The
King brought an assize against the Bishop of Carlisle and the Prior of St.
Mary's in Carlisle, for the advowsons of the church of St. Nicholas at
Newcastle upon Tyne, Rowberry, Corbrigge and Warkworth, per tria brevia:

"And counted that King John was seized of the said advowsons in feodo and
jure, and presented several clerks to the churches aforesaid, who were
instituted and inducted.

"To which the bishop and prior pleaded, that they held the church of St.
Nicholas at Newcastle in common. -- The prior pleaded per se, that he held the
church of Corbrigge, and the bishop, that he held the churches of Rowbury and
Warkworth; that as to the advowson of the church of Rowbury, the King having
recovered it against Robert, late Bishop of Carlisle, he did, in the 18th year
of his reign, grant it to the church of St. Mary in Carlisle, and the then
bishop and his successors.

"And as to the advowsons of the other churches, pleaded the charter of the
King in the year aforesaid, which is by inspeximus, repeating the grant of King
Henry I. made to the aforesaid church, of the said churches, and of Newburn;
and another charter by which the said King Henry granted to Richard de Aurea
Villa, the churches of Werecheorda, Colbrigge, Wintringham and Rodberia and
another charter of King Henry II. by which he granted to the aforesaid church,
and the canons thereof, the aforesaid churches. The King, by his charter,
confirmed them; whereupon the jury gave a verdict against the King." -- Grey's
MSS.

N. B. This account is confirmed by the subsequent extract which I made from a
MS. of Brown Willis, Esquire. in the Bodlelm library at Oxford, intitl^d, "Placita
de quo warranto and de Rageman' coram II. de Cressingham and sociis suis
justiciariis Domini Regis itinerantibus apud Novum Castrum sup' Tynam in
comitatu Northumbr' in crastmo Sancti Hillar' anno R. Regis Edwardi fil' Regis
Henrici 21o."

"Rot. 3 dorso, Dominus Rex, etc. petit versus Episcopum Carl' et priorem
eccles' beatae Mariae Karl' advocationem ecclesiae Sancti Nicolai de Novo
Castro super Tynam."


.

In a valuation of the temporals and spirituals of the clergy of the bishopric
of Durham, A. D. 1318, the portion of the Bishop of Carlisle in the church of
St. Nicholas at Newcastle upon Tyne is mentioned as being an hundred shillings
-- the portion of the Prior of Carlisle as a like sum -- that of the Prior of
Tinmouth in the same forty shillings, and that of the vicar ten pounds sterling
"Nova taxatio bonorum temporal' et spiritual' cleri episcop' Dunolm' facta anno
regni Regis E. fil' Regis E. undecimo per breve Regis. -- Porcio Episcopi
Carliol' in ecclesia beati Nicholai de Novo Castro 100s. -- Porcio Prioris
Carliol' in eadem 100s. -- Porcio Prioris de Tynemouth in eadem 40s. vicar'
ejusdem 10l." From the MS. in the Exchequer, cited before under A. D. 1291.
.

September 18th, 1322, a mass was celebrated in St. Nicholas' church in
Newcastle upon Tyne, at the interment of the body of Peter le Mareshal, an
officer of the King's household Wardrobe account of the 15th, 16th and 17th
years of King Edward II. in the library of Thomas Astle, Esquire. p. 32. "18 die
Septembris in oblacionibus participatis per preceptum Domini Regis ad missam
celebratam in ecclesia parochiali Sancti Nicholai ville Novi Castri super Tynam
pro anima Petri le Mareshal scutiferi de hospic' dicti Domini Regis defuncti
die sepulture corporis ejusdem fact in eadem ecclesia 3s. 4d." -- The
following occurs ibid. p. 215. "18 die Septembr' ponebatur per preceptum Domini
Regis super corpus Petri Marshall scutiferi Regis defuncti die sepulture
ejusdem in ecclesia parochiali Sancti Nicholai ville Novi Castri unus pannus ad
aurum in servicio de Luk." -- Ibid. "Primo die Octobris ponebatur ut supra
super corpus Henrici de Farnedon servientis Regis ad arma defuncti die
sepulture ejusdem in ecclesia parochiali Sancti Nicholai de Novo Castro
predicto unus pannus ad aurum in canabo." -- Ibid. -- "Sexto die Octobris
ponebatur ut supra super corpus Willielmi de Riggethorne janitoris Regis
defuncti die sepulture ejusdem in ecclesia predicta unus pannus ad aurum in
servicio de Luk." -- Ibid. p. 35. "Laurentio de Dunolm' mercatori pro 12lb.
cere and factura ejusdem solut' per Henr' de Shirokes ad exequias corporis
Radulphi de Inncks servientis Domini Regis ad arma defuncti faciend' die
sepulture ejusdem in cimeterio Sancti Nicholai Novi Castri super Tynam 18 die
Jul^i anno 18, 8^. 6d. -- Willielmo de Sancto Botho mercatori pro 12lb. cere ab
eo emptis and pro factura ejusdem cere solut' per dictum Henric' ad exequias
circa corpus Johannis Drieys waffrarii Regis defuncti faciend' die sepulture
ejusdem in eodem cimeterio 15 die Septembr' anno predicto -- 8s. 6d."
.

John Craggs, of Newcastle upon Tyne, by his will, made on the Tuesday after
the Nativity of St. John Baptist, 1349, gave to the high altar of the church of
St. Nicholas, for his tithes and oblations not duly paid, 6s. Bourne's History.
.

In the year 1359, the church of St. Nicholas in Newcastle upon Tyne is said to
have been rebuilt Dr. Ellison's MSS. say, that it was finished at this time,
that there was a record in the church for it, and that he had this account from
Sir Robert Shaftoe's short notes which he had taken in a paper.
.

This year also an indulgence of forty days From the original communicated by
Mr. Richard Fisher of Newcastle upon Tyne: "Universis sancte matris ecclesie
filiis ad quos presents litere pervenerint Nos miseratione divina Raphael
Archadien' Franciscus Lapsacen' Angelus Calamonen' Lazarus Botretonen' Johannes
Veglen' Petrus Valonen' Bertoldus Andrianopolen' Augustinus Salubrien' Johannes
Aytonen' Ricard' Naturen' Johannes Carmien' et Albertus Surmanen' Episcopi
salutem in Domino sempiternam. Splendour paterni luminis qui sua mundum
ineffabili illuminat claritate pia vota fidelium de sua clementissima majestate
sperancium tunc precipue benigno favore prosequitur cum devota ipsorum
humilitas sanctorum meritis et precibus adjuvatur. Cupientes igitur ut ecclesia
fundata in honor beati Nicholai ville Novi Castri super Tynam Dunelmen' dyoc'
congruis honoribus frequentetur et a Christi fidelibus jugiter veneretur
omnibus vere penitentibus and confessis qui ad dictam ecclesiam in festo sui
patroni et in omnibus aliis infra scriptis videlicet Natal' Domini
Circumcision' Epiphanie, Parascev' Pasche, Ascension' Penthecost' Trinitat'
Corporis Christi Invention' et Exaltacion' sancte Crucis Sancti Michaelis
Archangeli Nat' et Decollacionis Sancti Johannis Baptiste beatorum Petri and
Pauli apostolorum and omnium aliorum apostolorum and evangelistarum in festo
omnium sanctorum and in commemoratione animarum et in dicte ecclesie
dedicatione sanctorumque Stephani, Laur', Georgii, Martini, Dyonisii, Blasii,
sanctarumque Marie Magd', Katerine, Agathe, Margarete et per octav' omnium
festorum oct' habencium singulisque diebus Dominicis et Sabbatis tocius anni
causa devocionis oracionis aut perigrinacionis accesserint seu qui missis
predicationibus matutinis vesperis aut aliis divinis officiis ibidem
interfuerint aut qui corpus Christi vel oleum sanctum cum infirmis portentur
secuti fuerint aut qui cimiterium dicte ecclesie circumeunt exorando pro
defunctis. Necnon qui ad fabricam luminaria libros calices vestimenta aut
quevis alia ornamenta dicte ecclesie necessaria manus porrexerint adjutrices
aut qui dicte ecclesie aurum argentum vel aliquod suarum facultatum de naverint
legaverint aut qui dixerint orationes Dominicas in pulsat' campane ad
consecutionem corporis Christi in missa magna Necnon pro anima Katerine de
Camera cujus corpus est sepultum in dicta ecclesia ac salubri statu Johannis de
Camera Gilberti de Dukesfold et Agnetis ejus uxoris dum vixerint et animabus
eorundem cum decesterint pie Deum exoraverint quociescumque quandocumque and
ubicumque premisla vel aliquod premissorum devote fecerint de omnipotentis Dei
misericordia et beatorum Petri and Pauli apostolorum ejus auctoritate consisi,
singuli nostrum 40 dies indulgentiarum de injunctis eis penitentris junctim in
Domino relaxamus dummodo dyocesani voluntus ad id accesterit et consensus. In
cujus rei testimonium presentibus litteris sigilla nostra sunt appensa. Dat'
Aumion' die 2 mensis Julii anno Domini 1359 and pontificatus Domini Innocentii
Pape sexti anno septimo."

In another Hand:

"Et nos Thomas permissione divina Dunelmen' Episcopus premissas indulgentias
ex causa premissa concessas et imposterum concedendas ratificamus and
approbamus ac quantum in nobis est confirmamus et ex gratia nostra speciali
omnibus parochanis nostris et aliis quorum dioc' hanc nostram indulgentiam
ratam habuerint pariter et acceptam de precatis suis vere contritis confessis
qui premissa adimpleverint quadraginta dies indulgencie concedimus per
presents." There have been 13 seals the fragments of some of them remain.


was granted by twelve foreign bishops, and confirmed by Thomas Hatfield,
Bishop of Durham, to such persons as should frequent the church of St. Nicholas
in Newcastle upon Tyne, at several festivals, and upon several occasions
therein specified, and should also pray for the soul of Katherine de Camera,
and for the health of John de Camera, Gilbert de Dukesfield, and Agnes his
wife, while they lived, and after their respective deaths for their souls.

June 6th, 1360, Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, confirmed by a charter of
inspeximus, the ordering of the vicarage of this church, made by Hugh Pudsey, a
former bishop of that see See before A. D. 1194.
.

Nicholas Coke, of Newcastle upon Tyne, by his will, dated September 3d, 1379,
gave to the high altar of St. Nicholas' church twenty shillings; also to the
fabric of the window in the choir there twenty shillings, and to chaplains to
celebrate for his soul in that church thirty pounds Bourne's History.
.

In the ordinary of the company of coopers in Newcastle upon Tyne, dated
January 20th, 1426, part of their fines is directed to go to "Sancte Nicholas
kyrke warke," which probably means "to the reparation of this edifice See
account of that society.
."

Roger Thornton, senior, merchant, by his will, dated Thursday before Christmas
day, A. D. 1429, gave to the church of St. Nicholas, to the "reparation and
enorments thereof," forty marks Bourne's History.
.

August 13th, 1451, a ratification of the truces of Scotland was made in the
vestry of St. Nicholas' church in Newcastle upon Tyne Rymer's Foedera.
.

King Henry VIII. by his charter, dated May 6th, 1541, granted to the Dean and
Chapter of Carlisle, among other things, "a moiety of the rectory of Newcastle
upon Tyne," enjoining the payment of "eight pounds to the Bishop of Durham out
of the said moiety Nicholson's and Burn's History of Westmoreland and
Cumberland, vol. ii. p. 246 The priory of Carlisle was surrendered to the
crown, A. D. 1539, and on the 8th of May that year the King erected the dean
and chapter.
." --

July 26th, 1777, the church of St. Nicholas was opened by a sermon for the
benefit of the infirmary, after having been shut up for several weeks, for the
purpose of having it thoroughly cleaned and repaired.

A. D. 1783, a subscription was opened, which produced a very large sum of
money, to defray the expenses of a plan for converting this church into a kind
of cathedral The weekly prayers are read in St. Mary's porch, which has been
properly fitted up and railed off for that purpose.
, which is now completed with great taste and elegance, but the antiquary must
for ever lament the alteration, as almost all the ancient funeral monuments
have been destroyed.

CHANTRIES IN ST. NICHOLAS' CHURCH.
IT was a fashion in the times of the papal superstition for lords of manors,
and other persons of great wealth and importance, to build small chapels
"Chantry (Cantaria), aedes sacra ideo instituta et dotata praediis ut missa
ibidem cantaretur pro anima fundatoris and propinquorum ejus. These were
usually little chapels, or particular altars in some cathedral or parochial
church, and endowed with lands or other revenue for the maintenance of one or
more priests to officiate as abovesaid." -- Blount in Verbo.

See also Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 28.

See also Lethieullier's Observations on sepulchral monuments in the
Archaeologia, vol. ii. p. 291, et seq.

See also Fuller's Church History, p. 350, where in his quaint manner he tells
us, that "These were adjectives, not able to stand of themselves, and therefore
united for their better support to some parochial, collegiate or cathedral
church."


or side isles in their parish churches, designed for burying-places for their
families, and which they frequently endowed with lands, etc. for the support of
chantry priests to pray daily at altars erected therein for the souls of the
founders, and those of their ancestors and posterity. There were nine (if not
ten) chantries in this church. One of St. John the Baptist and St. John the
Apostle -- two of St. Catherine -- one of St. Peter and St. Paul -- one of St.
Thomas -- one of St. Mary -- one of St. Margaret -- one of St. Cuthbert, and
one of St. Loy. The total valuation of which amounted to 48l. 4s. 6d. per
annum. A certificate in the Augmentation Office makes a second chantry of St.
Mary in this church.

1. The chantry of St. John the Baptist and St. John the Apostle, which was
situated on the north side of the church "In ecclesia Sancti Nich' de dicta
villa Novi Castri ad altar boreale Joannis Baptistae et Johannis Apost' et
Evangel.' Lib. Cartarum, p. 121." -- Bourne.
, is said to have had for its first founder Laurentius, Prior of Durham, A. D.
1149 Bourne's History. -- "It boasts," says he, "still an higher antiquity, and
is said to have been founded by Laurence of Durham, who was prior of Durham in
the year 1149, which, by the way, is a farther proof of our conjecture of this
chapel's being founded by King Henry I. in that reign at latest."

According to Dr. Ellison's MSS. this chantry was founded by Laurentius, prior
of Durham.


. It was refounded in the year 1333, by Richard de Emeldon "Richard de Emeldon,
who had been above twelve times mayor of Newcastle, was permitted by letters
patent from King Edward III. to build upon a piece of vacant ground over
against the chapel of St. Thomas the martyr, that he might present it to three
chaplains to procure their prayers for him whilst he was living, and after he
was dead. And also for the souls of his wives and his father and mother, etc.
every day at the altar in St. Nicholas, which was dedicated to John the Baptist
and John the Apostle and Evangelist. This gentleman died about the 6th or 7th
of the reign now mentioned, as is clearly gathered from the authority above;
and the letters in which this chantry is mentioned beat date the sixth of this
reign: and therefore it is a mistake to suppose this chantry founded in the
reign of Henry VI. which was almost an hundred years after."

"The priests set apart to attend this altar were every day to pray for his
soul and the others above mentioned. And by an order from the then Richard,
Lord Bishop of Durham, the chaplains for the time being were obliged, on the
anniversary of his death every year for ever, to celebrate his memory with a
solemn tolling of the bells, and devoutly singing by note in the evening of the
anniversary, and on the anniversary itself, and solemnly to sing mass for the
soul of Richard himself, and the souls abovementioned, and the souls of all
the faithful departed. And after mass one of the chaplains was to distribute
among 160 poor people the sum of 6s. 8d. and this annually for ever. This,
together with several other things, was ordered by Richard, Bishop of Durham,
in the third year of his consecration, A. D. 1335, which was with all other
things mentioned in the charter confirmed by Edward III. in the 10th year of
his reign. Thus it appears that this chantry is of a much older date than the
reign of Henry VI." -- Bourne's History.

See V^^llis' Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 222. "Confirmatio ordinationis factae
per Episcop. Dun^lm' in cantaria fundata in ecclesia Sancti Nicholai apud Novum
Castrum per Ricard^m de Emeldon. Pat. R. Ed. III. p. 1, m. 15."


, an eminent magistrate of the town, for three chaplains.

This chantry is said to have been founded a third time by Robert de Rhodes
Bourne, p. 59. "It is said to have been f^unded by Robert Rhodes, and Agnes his
wife, and licensed by King Henry VI. If there be any truth in this, it is that
he was a third founder. He allowed a priest 7l. 7s. 10d. per annum to pray for
his soul and the soul of his wife: and the town of Newcastle, it is said, out
of respect to his memory, gave the priest a house to live in." "We have also a
farther a count of this gentleman (R. Rhodes) in the year 1500; for an
instrument bearing, that date informs us, that the mayor and inhabitants of
Newcastle gave a tenement to a priest to live in, who was to pray for the soul
of Robert Rhodes and Agnes his wife, at the altar of St. John the Baptist, and
St. John the Evangelist in St. (...) 1."
, and Agnes his wife, and licensed by Henry VI. A. D. 1428 Dr. Ellison's MSS.
, for one chaplain, with an annual allowance of 7l. 7s. 10d. with an house for
his residence, given by the corporation of Newcastle, out of respect to the
memory of this R. de Rhodes, to whom they owed the greatest obligations.

Before the year 1540, George Lighton occurs as chaplain of this chantry, to
which he had been presented by James Lawson, mayor, and the gild brethren of
Newcastle, its true patrons Bishop Tunstal's Register, p. 3^.
.

March 12th, 1540, William Clerk was instituted chaplain of this chantry, on
the death of G. Lighton Ibid.
.

The subsequent account of this chantry is copied from a record remaining in
the Augmentation-Office, containing the answer of the following commissioners,
i. e. Cuthbert, Bishop of Durham; William, Lord Evers; Thomas, Lord Wharton;
Sir Robert Bows, Knight; Sir Francis Lecke, Knight; Robert Mennell, Esquire. Henry
Whitereason, Esquire. and Humphrey Warren, gentleman, to certain articles of
inquiry, concerning colleges, chantries, etc. in Northumberland and Durham. The
King's commission for this purpose is dated at Westminster, February 14th, the
37th of King Henry VIII.

"The chauntrie of Saint John Baptiste and Saint John the Evangeliste in the
parish church of Saint Nicholas within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was
founded by one Robert Roodes and Agnes his wyffe by license of King Henry the
6th to find a priest for ever to say mass daily and pray for their sowles and
all Christen sowles as by the said license showed before the said commissioners
more largely does appear and is so used hitherto by report -- Yearly value
100s. -- value according to this survey 7l. 7s. 10d. as appears by a rentall
of the same whereof is to be deducted for the charge of an yearly obytt 10d. and
for the tenthes paid to the Kinge's majesty 10s. -- 10s. 10d. and remains
clearly 6l. 17s. which ben employed to the sustentacion and relief of William
Clarke, priest, incumbent there according to th'ordynnance of the said
foundation. -- The said chauntrie is within the parish church of Saint
Nicholas aforesaid. -- Ornaments, jewels, plate, goods and catalls 113s. 4d.
as does appear by a perticler inventorye of the same. -- There were no other
lands nor yerelie profits etc. belongyng to the said chantric syns the 14th day
of February in the 27th year of the said Kings majesty's reign more than is
before mencyoned."

One of the chantries of St. Catharine, said to have been anciently founded by
Alan Durham Deed in St. Nicholas' vestry, No 2. -- Dr. Ellison's MSS.

"Ab Alano Durham ab antiquo fundat." -- Bourne's History.


, appears to have had a second foundation or augmentation, in the reign of
Edward III. by William Johnson and Isabel his wife "Roger Thornton, the son of
Roger the great benefactor, in a deed dated Dec. 20th, 1451, is made, together
with some others, a trustee by a feoffment of Roger Booth, the surviving
feoffee of William Johnson, who gave the lands and tenements therein mentioned,
for the better support of a perpetual chaplain to attend the chantry of St.
Catharine." -- Bourne.
. The yearly value of this was 6l. 15s.

"Dispensatio pro P. Angrym capellano cantariae ad altar B. Katherinae in
ecclesia S. Nicholai in villa de Novo Castro super Tynam. -- Regist. Hatfeld,
p. 168.

"Thomas permissione divina Dunolm' Episcopus dilecto filio Domino Petro Angrym
capellano salutem gratiam and benedictionem. Quia in visitatione ultimo
auctoritate nostra facta per commissar' nostros ad hoc deputatos in villa de
Novo Castro super Tynam nostrae dioc' compertum est quod ad solam
presentationem and nominationem ac admissionem majoris et balliv' and aliorum
laicorum cantariam ad altar B. Katerinae fundatam absque consensu seu
auctoritate nostra ordinaria incumbis diutius sicuti incumbebas pro teque a
nobis humiliter petebatur dispensationem tecum inde misericorditer faceremus
Nos tuis precibus benignius inclinati tecum dispensamus, ut dictam cantariam
perpetuam licite retinere valeas ac si per nos legitime fuisses admissus et
auctoritate ordinaria institutus cum suis juribus and pertinentiis tibique
eandem ex abundanti dum tamen ipsa ad collationem nostram jure devoluto
pertineat conferimus et tenore presentium te investimus and instituimus in
eandem ad celebrand' et deserviend' in dicta cantaria, quantum ad nos pertinet
liberam tibi concedimus facultatem, decernentes quod absque auctoritate feu
potestate ecclesiastica and ordinaria ab eadem de cetero nullatenus amovearis.
In cujus, etc. Dat' in manerio nostro de Auckland 27 die mensis Augusti A. D.
1378, and consecrat' nostrae tricesimo quarto."

Randall's MSS. "Dominis Pet. Angrym, cap. of the chantry of St. Catharine." --
He had been nominated to this chantry long before by the mayor, etc. but never
licensed. -- The bishop took no advantage of the lapse.


Sir Peter Angrym was confirmed in the chaplainship of this chantry August 27th,
1378, on the presentation long before of the mayor, bailiffs, etc. of Newcastle
upon Tyne, its true patrons.

Rob. Mitford -- per -- Angrym. -- Ibid.
Robert Mitford succeeded the above P. Angrym as chaplain of this chantry.

On an inquisition taken at Newcastle upon Tyne, September 2d, 1557, a house
and waste near St. Nicholas' church is said to have belonged to this chantry,
of the annual value of 3s. 4d. "Item a house and a wayste boundering on the
weste of the Queen's Street against the little Flesh Shambles and of the
north of a house of Edward Shasto and of the east of a water vennell
dyssendynge through the nether Deene Bring and on the south of a wall leading
from the Hally-Howse end unto the Church St. le^^^ading to the Clothe-Markett,
which said house and wayste was supposed to belong to the chaunterie of St.
Katheryn in St. Nycholas church annui valoris 3s. 4d. late in the t^m^e of
Edward Erington Cowpar and after him Sir Robert Brandlyng did occupy the same.
We have not only seen sundry acquittances whereby it doithe appear that the
death and chapter of Carlell being seized of the said house and wayste in the
right of there church did de^^^ grant and to fee-farme let the said house
with the appurt' to Sir R. Brandlyng Knt. and his hears for ever yiedling and
^ayinge therefore yearly to the said deane and chapter and their successors 3s.
4d. at the feast of St. Peter ad vincula but also we have had before u^ etc. --
(The receiver of the said rent.)'
.

The following account of this chantry is copied from the above cited
certificate of colleges, chantries, etc. remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of Saint Katheryne in the parish church of Saint Nicholas
within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by one Willyam Johnson and
Isabella his wyffe by a license obtained of King Edward the 3d for thentent
to find one priest to say mass daily and to pray for their sowles and all
Christen sowles as apereth by a deed of the same foundation exhibited before
the said commissioners which is so usyd hitherto by report -- Yerelie value
112s. 10d. -- value according to this survey 6l. 15s. as aperethe by a rentalle
of the same whereof is to be deducted for rentes resolut' 13s. 4d. and for the
tenthes 11s. 3d. ob. paid to the Kings majesty -- 24s. 7d. ob. and remains
clearly 110s. 4d. ob. which ben employed to the sustentacion and relief of
Wyllyam Johnson William Johnson had a pension of 5l. per annum assigned him,
which he enjoyed in the year 1553. -- Brown Willis, p. 166.
priest now incumbent there for his service according to the tenor of the said
foundation. -- Ornaments etc. nil. -- because all the ornaments of this
chauntrie do serve also for the other chauntrie of Saint Katheryne within the
same church here under written and be charged in the same within the sum of
79s. 2d. as plainly does appear." etc.

Another chantry of St. Catharine is said to have been founded in this church
by Nicholas and John Ellerker, the deed of the foundation of which was
embezzled by Richard Wallas, one of its chaplains. The yearly value of this
second chantry of St. Catharine was 3l. 14s. 8d. which arose out of certain
tenements situated in the Close, Castle-Mote, in the Side and in Sandgate
Bourne's History.
.

The following account thereof is copied from the above cited certificate
remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"One other chauntrie of Saint Katheryn in the parish church (aforesaid) was
founded by one Nicholas Ellerker and John Ellerker as it is said to find a
priest to pray daily for their sowles and all Christen sowles which is so used
hitherto by report but the deed of the foundation was imbecilled away by one
Robert Walls late incumbent there as it is said -- Yearly value 73s. -- value
according to this survey 74s. 8d. as apereth by a rentall of the same whereof
is to be deducted for the tenthes paid yerly to the K. majesty 7s. 5d. and
remains clearly 67s. 3d. which ben employed to the sustentacion and relief of
Edward Walker clerk now incumbent there for his service according to the
foundation. -- Ornaments etc. 79s. 2d. for all manner of ornaments there
apperteynyng as well to the other chauntrie of Saint Katherine above written as
to this chauntrie as apereth by a perticler inventory of the same. -- There were
no other lands, etc."

4. The chantry of St. Peter and St. Paul is said to have been founded by Adam
Fenrother and Alan Hilton, and licensed by King Henry IV. The annual value of
this chantry was 4l. 13s. 4d. which arose out of some tenements in the Close,
the Side, and Westgate Bourne's History.
.

At the dissolution, A. D. 1547, Edward Fyffe was incumbent of this chantry,
and had a yearly pension allowed him of 4l. 4s. 6d. which he enjoyed in the
year 1553 Brown Wallis, p. 166.
.

The following account thereof is copied from the above cited certificate of
colleges, chantries, etc. remaining in the Augmentation-Office.

"The chauntrie of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in the parish church of Saint
Nicholas within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by one Adam
Fenrother and one Alan Hilton by a license obtained of King Henry IV. to
thentent to find a priest to pray for there sowles and all Christen sowles for
ever as by the deed of foundation exhibited before the said commissioners does
apere which is so used hitherto by report -- Yearly value 4l. 7s. 4d. --
yearly value according to this survey 4l. 13s. 4d. as apereth by a rentall of
the same whereof is to be deducted for the yerelie tenthes paid to the Kings
majesty 8s. 8d. ob. quad. and remains clearly 4l. 4s. 7d. quad. which ben
employed to the sustentacion and relief of Edward Fyffe clarke now incumbent
there according to the foundation. -- Ornaments etc. 78s. 10d. as does appear by
a particular inventory of the same. -- There were no other lands etc.

5. The chantry of St. Thomas appears to have been founded by John Shapecape,
and licensed by King Edward the Third Bourne's History.
, having an annual revenue of 4l. 12s. 6d. The following account of it is
extracted from the above cited certificate, remaining in the
Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrye of Saint Thomas in the parish church of Saint Nicholas within
the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by a license obtained of K.
Edward 3d by one John Shapecape to find a priest to say mass and to pray for
his soul and all Christen sowles for ever as by the deed of the foundation
exhibited before the said commissioners does appear which is so used hitherto
by report -- Yearly value 4l. 2s. 2d. -- value by this survey 4l. 12s. 6d. as
apereth by a rentall whereof is to be deducted for rents resolut' 6s. 2d. for an
yearly obytt 5s. 4d. and for the tenthes 8s. 2d. ob. paid to the Kings
majesty -- 19s. 8d. ob. and remains clearly 72s. 9d. ob. which are employed
to the sustentacion and relief of Charles Newton incumbent there according to
the ordynnaunce of the foundation. -- Ornaments etc. 18s. 6d. as doothe appear
by a particular inventory of the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

6. The chantry of our Lady, styled also the altar of our blessed Virgin Mary,
is said to have been sounded in the reign of King Edward I. Ibid. p. 48. There
is mention made of it, and of two shillings a year given to it, in a charter
which was signed by Nicholas de Carleol, then capital bailiff of the town in
1328. "And in the year 1305, Peter Graper, then mayor of the town, gave two
shillings a year to the chaplain that waited upon the altar of the blessed
Virgin Mary in the church of St. Nicholas. Et cuidam capellano celebranti
divina ad altar beatae Mariae Virginis in ecclesia beatae Nicholai de Novo
Castro duos solidos argenti etc. Lib. Cart." -- Bourne, ut supra.
It is uncertain who was the founder, as the deed of foundation was embezzled
by Thomas Ireland, one of its chaplains Ibid.
.

It is supposed to have been what is now called the south cross of the church,
where a figure in stone, cross-legged, lies in a niche in the wall, conjectured
by some to be that of its founder See afterward under the account of monuments
in St. Mary's Porch.
. -- Weekly prayers are now read in this place.

The yearly value of this chantry was 5l. 16s. Bourne, ut supra.


John Coke, of Newcastle, by his will, dated -- 1379, left to the altar of St.
Mary, in this church, the sum of 6s. 8d. Ibid.


The following account of this chantry is copied from the above cited
certificate, remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of our Lady in the parish church of Saint Nicholas within the
town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by report to find a priest to say
mass daily and to pray for all Christen sowles which is so used hitherto but
the deed of the foundation was imbecylled by one Thomas Ireland late incumbent
there. -- Yearly value 105s. -- value according to this survey 116s. 10d. as
appears by a rentall of the same whereof is to be deducted for the yearly
charges of two obits 12s. and for the tenthes paid to the Kings majesty 22s.
6d. and remains clearly 4l. 14s. 4d. which are employed to the sustentacion
and relief of Robert Baker priest incumbent there. -- Ornaments etc. 6l. 2s.
10d. as apereth by a particular inventorie of the same. -- There were no other
lands etc."

7. The chantry of St. Margaret, situated on the south side of St. Nicholas'
church, and now called Bewick's Porch, was founded by Stephen Whitgray, and
Mary his wife, A. D. 1394 "Pro cantaria facienda ad altar Sancte Margaretae in
part australi in ecclesia Sancti Nicholai in Novo Castro super Tynam. Et pro
^^ mare' redd'." -- Pat. 17 R. Rich. II p. 1, m. 36. Et Pat. 3 R. Hen. IV. p.
1, m. 13. -- Wallis's History of Northumber land, vol. ii. p. 223.

"They constituted," says Bourne, "John de I tell chaplain of this chantry to
pray for their souls and the souls of the faithful de parted. The (...) of this
country was 10 mar^^ yerelie which was raised out of certain to ^^^ments, viz.
out of one (...) the C^l^. Cross, and from a tenement which paid somewhat to
the chantry of St. eligie (St. Loy) in the ^^arch of All-Ha^^ws in this town;
and from another tenement near the Cale-Cross, (...) they ^ear Grimdon Ch^^^;
and from another tenement over against St. Nicholas' (...) and from another
tenement in Ha^ker-Gate near the chapel of All Saints; and (...) tenement near
Kirk-Chare; from a tenement in Pampedon -- from a tenement in Ca^^-Ga^th in
Broad-Chare, etc. The chaplain of this chantry, after the decease of the
sounder, was to be chosen by the vicar of St. Nicholas, the mayor and bailiffs
of this town, and tour of the honest parishioners of St. Nicholas. -- Witnesses
of this chart^r were Laurentius de A^ton, mayor, Henry de Carliol, Thomas de
Gryndon, John de Newb^^yne, John de Appreton, bailiffs; Thomas de Hennyton,
John de Coket. -- Given at Newcastle April 2th, A. D. 139^, 17 Ri^. II."

The following entry occurs in the Murray MS. "Novum Castrum super Tynam, pro
te^^ concess' all sustentac' cant a' ad alta^e Sancte Man^ar' in ecclesia
Sancti Nichola^^ (...). ^' -- Inq. anno 3 Hen. IV. No 33.


. The annual value thereof was 5l. 8s. John Cowper, clerk, was the last
incumbent.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate above cited,
remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of Saint Margarete in the parish church of Saint Nicholas
within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by the license of King
Richard the Second by one Stephane Whitgrave and Mary his wyffe to find a
priest to say mass there daily and to pray for there soul and all Christen
sowles as appears by the deed of the foundation exhibited before the said
commissioners which is so used hitherto. -- Yerelie value 106s. 8d. -- value
according to this survey 108s. as apereth by a rentall of the same whereof is to
be deducted for rents resolut. 3s. 6d. and for the tenthes paid to the Kings
majesty 10s. 8d. -- 14s. 2d. -- and remains clearly 4l. 13s. 1^d. which ben
employed to the sustentacion and relief of John Cowper, clerk, incumbent there
according to the tenor of the said foundation. -- Ornaments etc. 58s. 10d. as
doothe appear by a particular inventory of the same. -- There were no other
lands etc."

8. The chantry of St. Cuthbert was founded in the reign of Richard II. by
Thomas Harrington and William Redmarshall. The yearly revenue of this chantry,
arising out of tenements in the Sand-Hill, Side and Close, in Newcastle,
amounted to 7l. 3s. 2d. Bourne's History.
. Ralph Watson was the last incumbent, and had an annual pension of 5l. which
he enjoyed A. D. 1553 Brown Willis, p. 166.
.

The subsequent account of this chantry is copied from the certificate, cited
above, remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of Saint Cuthbert in the parish church of Saint Nicholas
within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by a license obtained of
King Richard the 2d, by Thomas Herington and William Redmarshill to find a
priest there to say mass and pray for their sowles and all Christen sowles for
ever as by the deed of the foundation showed before the said commissioners it
does appear and also to find one obytt yearly which is so used hitherto --
Yerelie value 110s. 2d. -- value according to this survey 7l. 3s. 2d. as
apereth by a rentall of the same whereof is to be deducted for rents resolut'
7s. 4d. going out of the same for an yerelie obytt 4s. for an yerelie alms 6s.
8d. and for the tenthes paid to the Kings majesty 11s. quad -- 29s. quad. --
and remains clerelie 114s. 1d. ob. quad. which ben employed to the
sustentacion and relief of Rauffe Watson, clerk, incumbent there. -- Ornaments
etc. 4l. 20d. as does appear by a perticler inventorye of the same. -- There
were no other lands etc."

9. The chantry of St. Loy was founded by Robert Castle. The annual revenue of
this, amounting to 4l. 10s. arose out of tenements in the Close, West-Gate, and
a little field situated without the West-Gate, called Goose-Green-Close
Bourne's History.
.

A license was granted, May 22d, 1498, to John Galile, chaplain of this
chantry, to take annual service Randall's MSS. "Chantry of St. Loy (Sancti
(...))

"Dominus Joh. Galile, cap. oce. May 18, 1^^8.

"Venerabilis vi^ -- Cook in decret. B. vic' in spirititalibus genralis Mai^
2^, 1498, concessit licentiam and facultatem capellano cantarie Sancti Eligii
etc. ad recipeind' annual' servicium per spatium trium annorum propter
exilitatem cantarie etc. proviso quod fructus et obvenciones domorum et
reddituum dicte cantam interim incumben' convertantur and applicantur in
reparacionem domorum ruinosorum ejusdem cantarie etc." -- Regist. of Bishop
Fox, p. 18.


for three years, on account of the lowness of its revenues.

Thomas Hollyman, alias Holman, was the last incumbent of this chantry, and had
a pension of 4l. 1s. 2d. which he enjoyed A. D. 1553 Brown Willis, p. 166. --
Willis, by mistake, has rendered "Sanctus Eligius" -- "St. Giles." -- Aliquando
bonus dormitat Homerus.
.

The following is the account of it in the certificate so often cited,
remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of St. Loye in the parish church of Saint Nicholas within the
town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by one Robert Castle by a license
obtained of King Edward 3d to find a priest for ever to pray for the sowles of
the said Robert, Johanne his wyffe and all Christen sowles and to thentent that
the incumbent should be there daily resident by report but the deed of the
foundation was lost or imbecilled away long syns and Thomas Hollyman, clerk now
incumbent there is not resident but gives to one other old priest 46s. 8d. to
supplye his rometh. -- Yearly value 4l. 8s. -- value according to this survey
4l. 10s. as apereth by a rentall whereof is to be deducted for the yerelie
tenths paid to the King's majesty 8s. 9d. ob. quad. and remains clerly 4l.
14d. qua. which are employed to the sustentacion and relief of the incumbent
aforesaid. -- Ornaments etc. 8s. 6d. as does appear by a particular inventory.
-- There were no other lands etc."

10. The following account of a second chantry of our Lady, in St. Nicholas'
church, occurs in the certificate so often above cited, remaining in the
Augmentation-Office:

"One other chauntrie of our Lady in the parish church of Saint Nicholas
within the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by one George Carre
merchant of Newcastell to find a priest for ever by reports which is
discontinued and dissolvyd as hereafter does appear -- Yearly value nil -- for
it does not appear to be charged in the certificate taken out of the court of
the first fruits and tenths delivered to the said commissioners -- Value
according to this survey 106s. 8d. to be paid yearly by the heirs of George
Carr founder of the said chauntrie out of the manors of Irby, Madomysley and
Evington in the county of York and the bishopric of Durham by way of a
rentcharge as by a feoffment thereof made and a will declared upon the same
beringe date the 16th day of September (16 Hen. VII.) remaininge at present in
the custody of Henry Whitereason Esquire to the Kings majesty's use and behofe
more plainly is specified and declared to the fyndyng a chauntrie priest which
is deteyned by one Thomas Carr as hereafter is declared -- Ornaments etc. nil
-- for that such goods and ornaments as were apperteynyng to this chauntrie
ar charged before in the value of the goods and ornaments of the other
chauntrie of our Lady being within the same parish church in the sum of 6l.
1s. 10d. which do serve for the use of booth the said chauntries. -- The
said chauntrie has been dissolved and the service thereof discontinued sith the
4th day of Februar' in the 27th of (Hen. VIII.) now being of a late time by one
Thomas Carr without any license obtained of the Kings majesty in that behalf
and by what title or color we know not."

ST. GEORGE'S PORCH.
GRAY, for what reasons I know not, has supposed this to have been built by one
of the kings of England Chorographia.
.

Bourne, without giving his authority, says that it was one of the chantries of
St. Nicholas' church Bourne's History. -- "It has under it," says he, "a
vault, and there is on the north window the head of the King, the father of the
lady which (whom) St. George delivered from the dragon."

"On the east window," he continues, "is still remaining some of the painted
glass. -- There is particularly the picture of St. Lawrence and some skin marks
and coats of arms. -- It has been a beautiful little place -- It is ceiled at
the top, and has been surrounded with carved work in wood, some of which still
remains to speak the curious art and commendable expense of the days of old."


.

This place would unquestionably be made use of when the feast of St. George
was celebrated in Newcastle upon Tyne, A. D. 1617 See Historical Events under
that year.
.

July 28th, 1710, there was an order of the common council of Newcastle to give
100l. toward the rebuilding and reparation of this porch Common Council books.

In the ordinary of the society of drapers in Newcastle, dated Sept. 29th,
1652, the brethren are ordered to meet every year, on the Monday after St.
Bartholomew day, at 9 o'clock, A. M. in St. George's porch, in St. Nicholas'
church, to choose two auditors. -- (Draper's Record.) Their electors are also
to claim "their place in St. Nicholas' church, which was the north side in St.
George's porch, under a penalty of forty shillings."

The arms still preserved in the painted glass windows are those of St. Oswin,
or Tinmouth monastery -- of Edward the Confessor, and those of St. George. On
the north window is a mermaid combing her hair, and a female saint below, with
a whip in her hand, treading on some angry beast.


.

ST. NICHOLAS' STEEPLE.
NO ideas of the elegance of the design of the forgotten architect, or
lightness of the execution of the masonry of the pinnacle or upper part of this
steeple, can be conveyed by descriptions of the pen: Mr Pennant "The tower of
St. Nicholas' church," says he, "is very justly the boast of the inhabitants.
Its height is 194 feet. -- Round the top are several most elegant pinnacles,
from whose base spring several very neat arches, that support the lanthorn, an
open edifice, ornamented with other pinnacles of uncommon lightness." -- Tour
in Scotland, vol. iii. p. 3^8, quarto.

Dr. Stukeley, speaking of it in his Iter Boreale, p. 64, says, "It is of a
very ingenious model, the original of one near London Bridge."

Wallis, in his History of Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 221, describes it as
follows: "Four stone images, at full length, adorn each corner of a square
tower, out of which rises a curious steeple, in height 64 yards, 1 foot, and 3
quarters, decorated with thirteen pinnacles; two bold stone arches, supporting
a large and beautiful lanthorn, on which is a tall and stately spire: the whole
much admired."


STEEPLE OF ST. NICHOLAS CHURCH. Most respectfully inscribed to John Medley
Esquire. Alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne
allows it to be very justly the boast of the inhabitants, being a subject
truly worthy of the pencil of a Sandby or the burin of a Rooker. It is
generally thought to be a superstructure It is probable that the body of the
church was new roofed at the same time, as there remain at present on the roof
timbers the arms of several families the chiefs of whom were magistrates of the
town about that time -- such as those of Harding, Carlell, Lawson, Baxter,
Lockwood, etc.

The shape of this pinnacle, which some have thought resembled that of an
imperial crown, others have supposed to be an imitation of the ornamented cover
of the box in which the consecrated host was preserved.


, and to have been raised upon the original tower in the time of Henry the
Sixth.

The original tower appears to have had a battlement of open stone work and
embrasures like those still remaining on the top of Durham Abbey. At present
this part is built up with bricks, which probably was done at the erection of
the upper structure. However that may be, it is plainly an after-work, which,
whatever it may have added to the strength, most certainly in some degree
impairs the general beauty of the fabric. Some have ascribed the building of
this steeple to David The author of a book entitled A Journey through Scotland,
published in 1732, speaking of St. Giles's church in Edinburgh, says, "A top of
this church is erected a large open cupola, in the shape of an imperial crown,
that is a great ornament to the city, and seen at a great distance. King David
erected a copy after this over St. Nicholas' church in Newcastle, but it does
not near come up to it." P. 65, 66.
, the first king of Scots of that name, but I think very erroneously, and that
those have much more probability on their side who suppose it to have been
raised by Robert Rhodes Mention occurs of this Robert Rhodes, in the Appendix
to Smith's edition of Bede's Church History, January 10th, 1446, as having
presented a cross of gold to the shrine of St. Cuthbert at Durham -- he is
styled "Robertus Rhodes de Novo Castro super Tynam juris regni Anglie peritus
et senescallus prioratus Dunelm."

The same person, we have noticed before, founded in this church the chantry of
St. John the Baptist, and St. John the Evangelist, A. D. 1428.

January 16th, 1437, "Robert Rodes, of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne,"
conveyed a house in Gateshead to William Abletson and Agnes his wife.

"Robert Rodes, Esquire," occurs in an inquisition taken at the castle of
Newcastle A. D. 1447. Also in an instrument dated 1451. -- Also in a deed dated
Nov. 1st, 145^.

April 3d, 1461, Robert Rodes occurs "at the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne,"
taking an inquisition after the death of the Earl of Warwick concerning Bernard
Castle.

After A. D. 1486, Robert Rodes occurs as one of the bishop's justices -- at
the same time mention occurs of Agnes his wife.

A. D. 1500, Robert Rodes and his wife are mentioned as both dead. --

I have seen and carefully examined, and can therefore attest the truth of all
the above evidences.

On the ceiling under the belfry of this steeple there is an inscription as
follows, with the arms of Rhodes: "Orate pro anima Roberti Rhodes." The same
occurs at All Saints and at St. John's, on the ceiling, as in this church.

Near the above, on the north side of the eastern arch that supports the
steeple there is a coat of arms cut in a stone, a dolphin between three mullets.

The following riddle is preserved in Grey's Chorographia, said to have been
made by Ben Jonson the poet, concerning this steeple: My altitude high, my body
four square,
My foot in the grave, my head in the air,
My eyes in my sides, five tongues in my womb,
Thirteen heads upon my body, four images alone;
I can direct you where the wind does stay,
And I tunc God's precepts twice a day:
I am seen where I am not, I am heard where I is not,
Tell me now what I am, and see that ye miss not."


N. B. The great tower of the cathedral of Durham is 72 yards and 2 feet high
according to Brown Willis, vol. ii. p. 528, it is only 70 yards and a half.

The height of the lanthorn to the vault of York Minster is 188 feet, or 62
yards 2 feet.


, a most munificent friend in general of St. Cuthbert, the great tutelar saint
of the diocese, and more particularly of the churches in Newcastle upon Tyne,
where he resided.

This steeple contained originally but five bells: the peal at present consists
of eight Bourne's History. -- "They are," says he, "very large ones, have a
bold and noble found, and yet an exceedingly sweet and harmonious one."
. The three latter additional ones were given by the corporation of Newcastle,
who appear to have been charged with the reparation of this structure from time
immemorial See History of Newcastle as a corporate town -- time of William
Rufus. -- See also ^^ders of common council, Sept. 4th, 1645, Nov. 3d. 1656,
etc. etc.
.

A former great bell or common bell, so called, it should seem, from convening
the burgesses to guild or other public assemblies at the annual election of
officers, appears to have been cast in the year 1593 Carr MS.
.

In the year 1608, some of the higher part of this steeple was taken down and
rebuilt Dr. Ellison's MSS. -- "Three yards 10 inches of the highest part was
taken down and new builded, with sundry reparations and new fanes."
.

A. D. 1615, the great bell here, which weighed 3129 pounds, was sent to
Colchester to be new cast Bourne's History.
.

There is a tradition that during the siege, and before the town was taken in
the month of October, 1644, the general of the Scottish army sent a threatening
message to Sir John Marley, then mayor, informing him, that if he persisted in
his refusal to deliver up the town, they would direct their cannon so as to
demolish this beautiful steeple.

The mayor, upon this, instantly ordered the chief of the Scottish prisoners to
be taken up to the top of the tower, below the lanthorn, and returned him an
answer, that if that structure fell, it should not fall alone, as their
countrymen were placed in it with a view either to preserve it from ruin, or be
destroyed with it. -- This spirited reply is said to have had the desired
effect in preventing its demolition Ibid. -- There is an order of
common council, dated September 4th, 1645, for repairing this steeple, which
should seem to imply that it had been much battered during the siege of the
town.
.

A. D. 1723, this steeple was repaired at the expense of the corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne Bourne's History.
.

About 1754, the great bell of this steeple having been broken, was sent up to
London to be new cast. The present one weighs 36 hundred weight Common Council
books, September 23d, 1754. -- Also Newcastle Courant, Dec. 21st, 1754.
.

In the month of October, 1761, a new clock with chimes, made by Mr. Walker, of
Newcastle, was finished and put up in this steeple Newcastle Courant, October
10th, 1761.
.

In the year 1777, a conductor was affixed to this steeple to preserve it from
lightning. -- One of the pinnacles was rebuilt, and several other necessary
reparations were made at the same time, at the expense of the corporation of
Newcastle Common Council books. Dec. 18th, 1777, Mr. Wooler, the engineer
employed by the corporation for Tyne bridge, conducted the business of this
reparation.
.

GALLERIES AND PEWS.
STAVELEY History of Churches, p. 276.
is of opinion, that before the reformation there were no pews in churches, but
such as were appropriated to persons of distinction.

"Stall Room" and "Stalls" are mentioned in an old parish book of All Saints in
this town, of the date of 1488 See account of that church.
; and Dr. Ellison's MSS. take notice of an old pew-book belonging to this
church, of the date of 1579, containing references to a still older one Dr.
Ellison's MSS.
.

A. D. 1620, the gallery commonly called the School-Gallery, on the north side
of the church, was built Ibid.
. -- It has been removed It had the arms of the merchant adventurers on the
front of it. "At the cast end of it," says Bourne, "an addition was made to it
by the Rev. Dr. Thomlinson, for the use of his successors, the lecturers of St.
Nicholas, and his own family." P. 61.
, in consequence of the late alterations, to the front of St. George's porch.

Some time between the year 1632 and 1645, an order having been received from
the King to remove the gallery, which obstructed the chancel (the rood-loft in
times of popery), and the churchwardens refusing to comply therewith, Dr.
Morton, then Bishop of Durham, wrote to Mr. Alvey, vicar of this church, to
enforce their obedience to the royal edict "Mr. Alvey. It was required of the
churchwardens of St. Nicholas, according a^ his Majesty has commanded, that
the gallery which obstructs the chancel should be removed: which being not
done, the churchwardens of All-Hallows, who were afterward commanded the
like, presumed that theirs might likewise stand. I pray you, therefore, to call
upon the churchwardens of St. Nicholas, that they, without any longer delay,
perform his Majesty's command: and if they shall neglect to do it, let me
understand, that I may question them accordingly: and as soon as they begin,
require the same performance of the churchwardens of All-Hallows for their
gallery: for without farther questioning both must be down: and thus commending
you to the presence of the Almighty, rest your loving friend, THOMAS DURESME."
-- Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

An organ appears to have been erected upon it afterward. -- See account of
the organ of this church.

A. D. 1635, some new pews or seats were built in this church Ibid.
.

A. D. 1785, an entirely new set of pews were erected in this church On the
above alteration of this church the roof has been ornamented with a great
number of additional coats of arms. -- There are three rows of these on the
ceiling, between the organ-loft and great eastern window, partly modern and
partly old ores. The following are on that row that is on the spectator's right
hand, as he stands under the center row and looks up the church from the
communion table. -- 1. Rhodes (old). 2. Selby (old). 3. Law, late Bishop of
Carlisle. 4. Lushington, present vicar. 5. Arms of England, with a file of five
points or lambeaux. "The file of five points or lambeaux," says Leigh, "is the
difference of the heir whilst the grandfather lives, but his grandfather
being deceased, then he leaves this, and takes that of three, which was his
father's difference. But herein his rule fails: for that they have been
anciently borne with five points for the difference of the eldest son in the
time of King Edward the First, as appears by diverse seals and other good
authenticke proofs of antiquity." (Guillim, edit. 1638, p. 36.) 6. Musgrave,
as supp^^sed (old). 7. (...) ^mme, lion rampant ^able (old). 8. Earl of Bute.
9. Alderman Simpson. 10. Alderman Baker. 11. Sir Thomas Clavering, Bart. 12.
Mrs. Atley. -- On the center row, ^^^^inting at the eastermost. -- 1. St.
George's cross. 2. Thornton (old). 3. Arms of Newcastle. 4. Sir Matthew White
Ridley, Bart. 5. Arms of England, with only three stems d^^lis (old). N. B. In
Hall's Chronicle, 1. H^n. IV. there are but three in the royal arms. In French
(...) Nobility, p. 1^4, are the arms of Anne, wife of Richard II. in which the
royal arms have but three flouts de lis. -- 6. Lucy and Percy (old). 7. N^^ll^
(old). 8. Lord Ravensworth. 9. Alderman Bell. 10. Alderman Sur^^^^. 11.
Alderman Money. 12. Date "1783." -- On the row on the (...) Aldermen (old). 2.
Ditto. 3. Egerton, Bishop of Durham. 4. Dr. D^^^^^^. 5. Arms of England (old),
file of their points. 6. Ogle (old). 7. (...) (old). 8. Lord Mon^t^a^^. 9.
Alderman Forster. 10. Alderman Black^^^. 11. Alderman H^^lb^y. 12. D^^^harp,
and le^^^on of Northumberland. -- On the ceiling in St. Mary's porch, on the
spectator's left hand, standing near the reading desk in the center, and
looking toward the organ -- 1. Rev. N. Ellison. 2. Joseph Reay, Esquire. 3.
William Lowes, Esquire. 4. George Stephenson, Esquire. 5. Mr. Ingham, surgeon. 6. T.
Bulman. -- The center row all old except the 6th, Snow Clayton, Esquire. -- On the
row on the spectator's right hand, 1. Rev. Mr. Ridley. 2. Mr. Joseph Saint. 3.
George Errington, Esquire. 4. Ralph Carr, Esquire. 5. Rev. Mr. Moises. 6. Bartholomew
Kent. -- The seventh on the left hand row, Sanderson, churchwarden. -- 8.
Ditto, Pollard, churchwarden. The seventh on the right hand row, Johnson,
churchwarden. 8th, Ditto, Greenwell, churchwarden. -- Continuing row on the
left hand, 9. Tyne Bank, 10, 11, 12, 13 (old). 14. Christopher Wilkinson, Esquire.
Continuing row on the right hand, 9. Exchange Bank. 10. (old.) 11. C. Fawcett,
Esquire. 12, 13. (old.) 14. Isaac Cookson, Esquire. -- In the center row, 9. New Bank.
10. Alexander Adams, Esquire. 11. Richard Bell, Esquire. 12. Alderman Yeilder. 13.
(old.) 14. James Thomas Loraine, Esquire. -- In St. George's Porch -- 1. Next to
the School Gallery, Ogle Wallis, Esquire. 2. W. Cramlington, Esquire. 3. Ralph Heron,
Esquire. 4. -- Wilson, Esquire. There is also a row of coats of arms on the ceiling
between the west end of the church and the organ, under the belfry, Rhodes --
1. Next to Rhodes, Alderman Rudman. 2. Alderman Hornby. 3. (old.) 4. Alderman
Atkinson. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. (old.) The old ones are of Harding, Carlell, Lawson,
Baxter and Lockwood, who were magistrates of Newcastle, about the middle of the
fifteenth century.
.

CHANCEL OF ST. NICHOLAS.
THE holy table or altar, which in the primitive and in the late reforming
times was made of wood, in the middle corrupted times was generally composed of
stone, "as more corresponding with the import of an altar, whereon the
sacrifice of the mass was and is still offered up in the Roman church Staveley
on Churches, p. 207.
."

This, to distinguish it from the smaller altars dedicated to saints in
chantries, was styled in the papal times the high altar See before A. D. 1349
and 1379.
.

It appears to have been placed anciently in different parts of the church,
sometimes in the middle and sometimes in the eastermost part of the chancel,
according to the different fashions of the building Staveley, ut supra, p. 212,
213.

The words of Bourne are, "The chancel of this church is a very noble and
stately one. At the top is the word Jehovah, and under that in a glory a part
of the name of the Lord, which he himself proclaimed before Moses. -- See in
the altar of All-Hallows."

The Plate for the Altar.

Two flaggons, three chalices and covers, three salvers, a small spoon drainer.


.

In the year 1712, the chancel of this church was wainscotted, etc. at the
expense of the corporation of Newcastle It cost them 126l. viz. for the
joiner's work for the altar-piece, 45l. -- For wainscotting the outside, 17l.
The books and velvet over the altar cost 21l. The carpet, 38l. The painter's
charge, 5l. -- Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

By the late alteration of this church, the chancel has been thrown entirely
open, and the communion table removed close under the great eastern window.

FONT.
IN primitive times the rite of baptism was performed in rivers and fountains.
Fonts were at first erected in private houses, and afterward placed in the
church porch, and lastly in the church itself, near the entrance, as
subservient to the sacrament of initiation or admittance Bede's Eccles. Hist.
lib. ii. cap. 14. Staveley on Churches, p. 219, 220.
.

The font of this church, with a wooden cover to it of very light and elegant
workmanship, has either been made or repaired by Robert Rhodes, the builder of
the upper part of the steeple: for his coat of arms, with another, probably his
wife's, is sculptured on the basis Bourne.

The arms are "parted per fess, gules and azure -- in chief is a greyhound
current, and in base three annulets."

There is quartered with this coat argent, a chevron gules, between three
rooks, or, within a border engrailed -- supposed to be the coat of Agnes, wife
of Robert Rhodes.


.

WINDOWS.
"IN this church" says Bourne, "are many sumptuous windows, but that in the
east surpasses all the rest in height, largeness and beauty." Gray says, that
there were in this window the twelve apostles, and the seven deeds of charity
painted in the glass. He tells us also, that this window was built by the
beneficent Roger Thornton the elder, and that there was this inscription on it:
"Orate pro anima Rogeri de Thornton and pro animabus filiorum et filiarum." At
present there is nothing remaining of these pictures but fragments -- two
heads, etc. etc.

The windows of this church have many of them been entirely new built on the
late alteration. -- The figure of our Savior in modern stained glass, of very
miserable execution, has been happily concealed by it.

ORGAN.
STAVELEY is of opinion that organs History of Churches, p. 203.
are of eastern invention, and tells us that the first used in the western
church was sent out of Greece to Pepin, King of France, about the year 766. I
have found no account of any organ in this church during the times of popery,
though it is very probable there has been one See account of St. John's.
.

About the year 1676, the corporation of Newcastle contributed 300l. toward
the erection of the present organ. Common Council books.
. They added a trumpet stop to it June 22d, 1699 Ibid.
.

A. D. 1710, the back front of this organ was finished, which cost the said
corporation 200l. together with the expense of cleaning and repairing the whole
instrument Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

June 26th, 1749, the common council of Newcastle ordered a sweet stop to be
added to this organ Common Council books -- from whence I selected the
following names of the organists: Mr. Samuel Nichols.
October 1st, 1719, Mr. Thomas Powell, on the death of the above.
July 12th, 1736, Mr. Charles Avison, on the death of Powell.
Edward Avison, on the death of his father, in 1770.
Dec. 17th, 1776, Mr. Matthias Hawdon, on the death of E. Avison.


Sept. 25th, 1777, the corporation augmented the organist's salary to 50l. per
annum.

Mr. Charles Avison published an Essay on Musical Expression, 1753, and a
second edition in 1769. In 1753 Mr. Jortin wrote an ingenious and learned
letter to Mr. Avison, the author of an Essay on Musical Expression, concerning
the music of the ancients, and some passages in classic writers, relating to
that subject. -- Nichols' Anecdotes of Bowyer, p. 260.

There is a character of Mr. Charles Avison, given in Dr. Gregory's Faculties
of Man compared with those of the Animal World. He is said to have been
assisted in his Essay on Musical Expression by Dr. Brown and Mr. Mason. -- He
was much esteemed by Geminiani and Giardini, both of whom visited him at
Newcastle, and the latter played the first violin at his concert there. Mr.
Charles Avison died May 10th, 1770. See an account of him in Kippis's new
edition of the Biographia Britannica.


.

LIBRARY.
BOOKS, chained in the choirs, and other convenient places, where the
parishioners might come and read them, constituted the ancient libraries of our
churches A. D. 1774, I observed such a collection in the great church at
Abingdon, in Berkshire.
.

Such a collection has originally, no doubt, been in this In St. Nicholas'
register, January 12th, 1598, a person occurs as buried before the library door.
. -- No account has been transmitted at what time they were first shut up in a
private and separate apartment.

A. D. 1661, John Cosins, draper, and alderman of Newcastle, bequeathed 100
volumes (60 folios and 40 quartos) to the library of this church Dr. Ellison's
MSS.
.

A. D. 1677, there is an order of the common council of Newcastle, for three
pounds per annum, for a librarian to superintend this collection Common council
books. -- The books of the old library are kept in a separate large room below
that which contains Dr. Thomlinson's collection.

The following persons have been librarians:

Sept. 5th, 1677, Mr. William Nicholson.

Rev. Mr. N. Clayton -- Rev. Mr. Stoddart.

October 7th, 1734, Mr. William Thompson, under-curate, with 11l. 7s. 4d.
salary.

Sept. 24th, 1750, Rev. Mr. Richard Brewster.

December 20th, 1756, Rev. Mr. John Ellison, under-curate. -- Salary at present
25l. per annum.

In the old library is a very curious MS. copy of the Bible, which, by a note
on the first page, appears to have belonged to the church of Hexham. -- I
cannot suppose it to be less than 600 years old. It contains many beautiful
illuminations; some of the largest have been cut out. The note on the first
leaf runs thus: -- "Librum hunc vetustum et sacris scripturis refertum, olim
Sancti Andreae de Hexham, nactus sum ex dono Magistri Johannis Welde clerici
vicesimo die Augusti anno Domini 1666. Richardus Matthew apud South Sheeles in
com' Dunelm' oriundus et in schola grammaticali Dunelm' per eruditos quosdam
maxim honorandos educatus."

On the first leaf also, in the handwriting of Dr. Ellison -- "Ex dono Thomae
Mathews filii Ricardi Mathews."


.

In the year 1736, Walter Blackett, Esquire. was at the expense of erecting an
edifice on the south side of the church of St. Nicholas, the under part whereof
to be the vestry, and the upper apartments to contain the original library,
together with a great and valuable collection of books bequeathed to this
church library by Dr. Thomlinson. The following inscription is on the front:

"This library was built by Walter Blackett, Esquire. for the books of the Rev. Dr.
Robert Thomlinson and other benefactors."

The ground floor of this edifice is the present vestry of St. Nicholas I
found, in the old register in this vestry, the following names of ministers,
supposed to have been dissenters:

"October 28th, 1628, Mr. Robert Slingsbie, preacher, buried."

"June, 1651, Thomas Powell, preacher," occurs; as does

"Dec. 9, 1650, Mr. John Allen."

In the year 1785, 31 males, and 23 females, were christened: 42 males, and 56
females, buried in St. Nicholas'. -- Newcastle Courant.


.

In the vestry are preserved the parish registers.

That of baptisms begins A. D. 1558. That of marriages and burials in 1574.

Parochial registers were first appointed in the year 1538.

CHURCHYARD.
IN the year 1761, St. Nicholas' churchyard was enclosed with a brick wall,
with rails upon it. There was left a convenient passage all around it on the
outside for foot people. This was done by subscription Newcastle Courant.
.

LEGACIES LEFT TO THE POOR OF ST. NICHOLAS.
HENRY Hilton, of Hilton, Esquire. by his last will, dated February 26th, 1640,
bequeathed, for 99 years, commencing A. D. 1640, the sum of six pounds per
annum, interest money, to the poor of St. Nicholas' parish. This was reduced,
by the interest act, to four pounds per annum Bourne, p. 78.
.

Robert Anderson, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle, who died May 9th, 1640, left, by
deed, five pounds per annum to the poor of this parish. This was lost in the
grand rebellion From an escutcheon, now almost decayed, in St. Nicholas'. --
Also Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

Andrew Aldworth, of Newcastle, physician, by his will, dated November 16th,
1648, left the sum of one pound per annum, issuing out of property in
Gateshead, to the poor of this parish, for ever From the will.
.

Thomas Davison, Esquire. by his will, dated November 25th, 1675, left to the poor
of this parish the sum of two pounds three shillings and sixpence, yearly,
payable in December, issuing out of property in the town of Newcastle Bourne,
p. 77, and the will.
.

Left by Sir Alexander Davison, 2l. per annum Paid half yearly, at Lady Day and
Michaelmas.

-- Sir Thomas Davison, 1l. per annum Paid half yearly, at Lady Day and
Michaelmas.

-- William Carr, Esquire. 1l. 10s. per annum Paid half yearly, at Lady Day and
Michaelmas.

-- Mark Milbank, Esquire. 3l. per annum Paid half yearly, at Lady Day and
Michaelmas.

-- John Rumney, Esquire. 2l. 10s. per annum Paid half yearly, at Lady Day and
Michaelmas.

-- Sir Mark Milbank, 6l. per annum Bourne, ut supra.
Paid half yearly, at Lady Day and Michaelmas.

Left by Mr. Robert Ellison, the sum of 33l. 6s. 8d. the interest whereof to be
paid yearly to the vicar and churchwardens. -- This was lost Bourne.
.

William Carr, Esquire. by his will, dated 11th of April, 1660, left to the poor of
this parish the sum of two pounds per annum, out of property in the town of
Newcastle "To be paid at two payments, viz. St. Eleanor Day, being the 3d of
May, and St Martin's Day the bishop in winter, as follows: Out of a house in
the Bigg Market, 1l. 6s. 8d. out of a house in Ganner-Ward 13s. 4d. In all 2l."
.

Sir William Blackett, Bart. who died May 16th, 1680, left to the poor of this
parish, out of a house at the Bridge-End, to be paid in the month of December,
the sum of two pounds per annum Bourne, p. 7. Also Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

Left by John Jefferson, to be paid yearly, in March, the sum of two pounds
Bourne.
.

Left by Timothy Davison, Esquire. to be paid yearly, in December, out of the
merchants company, one pound five shillings Ibid.
.

Left by Mrs. Jane Brokesby a quit-rent of twenty shillings per annum, out of
houses in Trinity-Chare, now held by Mr. Fenwick and others. Also fifty pounds
out of her lands in Forest-Hill, to secure the payment of three pounds per
annum. The said sum of four pounds per annum to be distributed at twenty
shillings per quarter Ibid.
.

Left by Nicholas Ridley, Esquire. out of grounds in Heaton, to be paid yearly, in
the month of December, one pound ten shillings Ibid.
.

Left by Joseph Atkinson, Esquire. the sum of fifty pounds, the interest to be paid
yearly, on the 30th of September, two pounds ten shillings Ibid.
.

Left by Matthew White, Esquire. to be paid yearly, in December, out of a house in
Pilgrim-Street, one pound ten shillings Bourne.
.

Left by Isabel, wife of William Wrightson, Esquire. the sum of fifty pounds, the
interest to be paid yearly, on the 30th of September Ibid.
.

Left by Leonard Wetherly, Gent. the sum of twenty pounds, the interest to be
paid yearly, on the 11th of September, one pound Ibid.
.

Left by Mr. Richard Randal the sum of seven pounds Ibid.
.

Left by Mrs. Ann Davison the sum of two hundred pounds, the interest of which
to be distributed at two doles, five pounds each, viz. on St. Thomas's Eve, and
on the 7th of February Ibid.
.

Left by Mr. William Harrison, the sum of fifty pounds, the interest to be paid
yearly on St. Andrew's Day Ibid.
.

Left by Mrs. Margaret Ramsey, the sum of twenty pounds, the interest to be
paid yearly, for ever, one pound Ibid.
.

Left by Mr. James Coward, the sum of twenty pounds, the interest to be paid
yearly, for ever Ibid.
.

William Gray, of Backworth, Esquire. by his will, dated May 26th, 1714, in case of
failure of issue, male and female, of his own body, charged his estates in
Durham and Northumberland, among other charities, with the payment of one
hundred pounds to the church of St. Nicholas, in Newcastle, the interest of
which to be given to poor widows and necessitous housekeepers of the parish,
at Christmas, for ever. -- He left one son, Ralph William Gray, living in 1749.
Margaret and Ann, his daughters From Gyll's interleaved Bourne, p. 79.
.

Elizabeth Rogers, of Newcastle upon Tyne, by her will, dated December 15th,
1733, gave the sum of fifty pounds to the poor of this parish, the interest of
which to be given annually, on the day of her death, for ever From a copy of
the will, communicated by Mr. Thomas Davison, attorney, High-Bridge, Newcastle.
.

George Mallabar, Esquire. who died August 20th, 1734, appears to have left some
benefactors to the poor of this parish Newcastle Courant -- Also an escuteheon
in the church.
.

Dame Jane Clavering, relict of Sir John Clavering, Bart. and who died February
21st, 1735, left, by her will, fifty pounds to the poor of this parish
Newcastle Courant, and an escutcheon in the church.
.

Mrs. Timothia Davison, sister of Thomas Davison, Esquire. of Ferry-Hill, who died
June 4th, 1757, aged 88, among other charities, left twenty pounds to the poor
of St. Nicholas' parish, in Newcastle, to be distributed immediately after her
death Newcastle Courant.
.

William Moulton, of Newcastle upon Tyne, skinner and glover, by his last will,
dated February 26th, 1771, bequeathed an annuity of fifteen pounds, to be
divided by his executors (and their successors), in rotation, at the parish
church of St. Nicholas, upon the first Sunday in every month, and on
Easter Day, Whit-Sunday, and Christmas Day, for ever, immediately after the
celebration of the sacrament, amongst twenty of the poorest persons who shall
then and there have attended divine service, and been partakers of the holy
communion. A flaw has been discovered, it seems, in the will, so that Mr.
Moulton's pious intentions have never been fulfilled. The annuity was charged
upon houses in the Ship-Entry, in the Flesh-Market From an examined copy of the
original will, in the registry of the Consistory-Court of Durham, attested by
W. Maxwell, deputy register, and communicated by Mr. Burton, churchwarden of
St. Nicholas, 1782.
.

CHARITY-SCHOOL OF ST. NICHOLAS.
CHARITY-SCHOOLS, founded with the view of opposing and defeating the
pernicious effects of the seminaries set up by the Papists during the reign of
King James the Second, first began in this kingdom about the year 1688 Thee
Morant's Colchester, b. iii. p. 17, and Bishop Kennett's Complete History of
England, vol. iii. p. 501.
.

Mrs. Eleanor Allan, of Newcastle, February 20th, 1705, founded this school for
forty boys and twenty girls, born in this parish, and in the chapelry of St.
John's "By her deed of gift bearing date February 20th, 1705, she assigned a
farm-hold and tenant right in Wall's land in the county of Northumberland, held
under the dean and chapter of Durham, of the yearly value of 61l. 19s. 5d. to
trustees in trust to herself for life and after her death (which happened
January 21st, 1708), for setting up a school for teaching 40 boys and 20 girls
of the parish of St. Nicholas and chapelry of St. John, which was accordingly
done A. D. 1^^9. The boys are taught to read, write and east account, and after
that are put out by the trustees to some trade or to sea, and have 40 shillings
a^piece allowed them for that purpose; as also a Bible and Common Prayer bound
up together, a Whole Duty of Man, and Mr. Lewis's Ex^^^nation of the Church
Cat^^^^. The girls are taught to read, write, few and knit, and then
apprenticed out o^ put to service, and have (...) shillings allowed them, with
a Bible, Whole Duty of Men, and Catechism, as the boy. The master's salary
(...) 5l. per annum and 20 shillings for coal^^. -- That of the mistress 10l.
per ann. and 10 shillings for coals." -- Bourne.
.

A. D. 1708, an annual subscription was entered into by the parishioners of
this parish, to clothe the children of this school Bourne's History.
.

In the year 1723, Mr. Gilbert Campel, innholder, left, by will, the sum of
twenty pounds, and Mr. Samuel Nichols, organist, ten pounds, to be put out at
interest for the benefit of this school.

The interest of five hundred pounds was left to this school, for ever, by Mrs.
Chisholm, relict of the Rev. Mr. Chisholm, of Wooler, in Northumberland Ibid.
.

Mrs. Elizabeth Rogers, of the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, by her
will, dated December 15th, 1733, bequeathed the sum of fifty pounds to this
school From a copy of her will communicated by Mr. Thomas Danton, attorney
(...), Hugh Bridge, Newcastle.
.

John Hewit, alias Huet, of Newcastle, goldsmith, by his will, dated September
9th, 1738, bequeathed to this school of St. Nicholas, the sum of two hundred
and fifty pounds, which was lent to the corporation of Newcastle at four per
cent See common council books, July 14th, 1740.

This Huet is said to have been a near relation to the famous Huet, Bishop of
A^^^ches, in France: he amalsed a considerable fortune, most of which he left
to his nat^^^ daughter, Mary, late wife of Francis Johnson, M. D. of Newcastle.
-- Dr. Johnson (...) before the 22d of August, 1771.


.

Ibid.
John Fenwick, of Newcastle upon Tyne, Esquire. gave in perpetuity fifty pounds to
the corporation of that town, for the annual payment of twenty shillings
Newcastle Courant, Dec. 17th, 1771. -- See also escutcheon in St. Andrew church.
to the charity-school of St. Nicholas, and twenty shillings to the prisoners
in Newgate, to be made seven days before Christmas, for ever.

A. D. 1786, the corporation of Newcastle built a new charity-school for this
parish, in the Manor-Chare Newcastle Courant.
.

SHRINES, MONUMENTS, AND MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTIONS, FORMERLY IN ST. NICHOLAS'
CHURCH, MOST OF WHICH HAVE BEEN REMOVED BY THE LATE ALTERATION IN THE INSIDE OF
THAT EDIFICE.
IN the north part of this church of St. Nicholas, was a shrine of Henry, the
fourth Earl of Northumberland, who, on the day of St. Vitalis the Martyr, i. e.
April 28th, 1489, fell a victim to the unrelenting avarice of King Henry VII.
to whom the parliament, in that year, had granted a subsidy, for carrying on
the war in Bretagne, which fell heavy on the people, and put the whole country
in a flame. -- The good Earl, then Lord Lieutenant, wrote to inform the King of
the discontent, and prayed an abatement. -- The King's answer was, that not a
penny should be abated. This message being delivered by the Earl with too
little caution to the populace, who had come in a tumultuous manner to complain
of the grievance, they supposed him to be the promoter of their calamity, and
instantly breaking into his house at Cock's-Lodge, near Thirske, in Yorkshire,
murdered him, and several of his attendants. He was buried in Beverly Minster,
where Monuments on the Churches of St. Nicholas and All saints
a very magnificent monument, some vestiges of which remain, was erected to his
memory Collins's Peetage, vol. ii. p. 37^, edit. 1779. -- Skeleton wrote an
elegy on his death, which is printed in the Relics of ancient English Poetry,
vol. i. p. 95, 3d edit.

The bill of the charges of his funeral, preserved in Peck's Desiderata
Curiosa, lib. vii. No 6, amounts to 1510l. 8d. of the money of that age, which,
in modern valuation, would now be 12,080l. 5s. 4d.


.

Gray, in his Chorographia, tells us, that in this part of the church there was
such a monument in his time, "that was made in memory of him in his own
country, he having a house in this town and parish See account of the Earl's
Inn in the account of the street called the Close.
;" and that part of the inscription upon it was, "Orate pro anima Henrici Percy
4 (com') Northumbriae qui per rebellium manus occubuit etc."

"The Milbank manuscript," as we read in Bourne's History, "says that it was in
the north corner of the church: that it was a monument of wood, on which was
painted an old man, our Savior on his right hand, and the Virgin Mary on his
left. There came a label from her mouth, but what it was this authority had
forgot; but that from our Savior's was Quaeso Pater, fac, quod rogat mea
matter. Then followed some Latin verses, done in the rhyming way of the monks,
but they are so dark and obscure, that little can be made of them." The MS.
goes on: "When Mr. William Selby was buried, this monument was removed out of
that corner, and Sir George Selby did set his magnificent tomb there." --
"After that it was placed against the wall, next to Sir George's tomb, and so
continued till Mr. Lanc' Hodshon got leave of Vicar Nailor to remove it, and
place his father; where it is now I know not." -- At present, 1787, no vestiges
of this cenotaph remain.

In the north-east corner of this church was the tomb of Sir George Selby. His
effigies, and that of his lady, were at length, resting upon pillows, with
uplifted hands -- On the south of the tomb were the effigies of his children,
in a posture of prayer, kneeling, with raised hands. -- Upon a marble stone,
placed in the wall, a little above the tomb, was the following inscription:
"Georgius Selby eques auratus ab antiqua et clara Selbeiorum de Selby in
comitat' Ebor' familia oriundus, quater hujus villae praetor, vicecomes
comitat' palat' Dunelm' serenissimi Regis Jacobi hospitio et servitio
nobilitatus. Ob lautum certe and affluentem perpetuo apparatum et
liberalissimae mensae communicationem merito passim celebratissimus. Margaretae
uxoris Joannis Selby de Twifell militis filiae consortio apprime faelix. Ex qua
suscepit quinque filius, immatura morte sublatos, et sex silias superstites.
Quatuor ante illius obitum nuptas Margaretam primam Gulielmo Balasys de Morton,
Elizabetam secundam Joanni Delavale de Dissington equitibus auratis. Barbaram
tertiam Roberto Delavale haeredi Radulphi Delavale de Seaton equitis aurati.
Isabellam quartam Patricio Curwen de Workington armigero. Et duas innuptas
Dorotheam and Mariam, per totum vitae cursum lautissima usus fortuna. In hoc
vere beatus quod sub indubitata spe plenae peccatorum omnium remissionis et
suae ad aeternam vitam resurrectionis spiritum in manus Domini commendavit, in
coque placide obdormivit 30o Martii 1625, an. aetatis 68. Corpus sepultum jacet
in crypta sub hoc tumulo charae uxoris cura extructa.

"Amoris honoris and memoriae ergo." Under the coat of arms -- "Mortuus vivo."

Within the palisadoes, upon a flat marble stone -- "Jesu have mercy of the
sowlle of George Selbe merchant-adventurer, sometime alderman of this town, and
Margaret his wife and their children." In the margin, on his side, anno 1542;
on her side, 1562.

In the north side of the middle porch, under the great eastern window, were
the remains of a monument on which statues had been inlaid, but taken away,
probably, for the sake of the brass. On the south side of it was the monument
of George Carr The inscription on Carr's tomb said he died 1400. No such name
occurs in the list of mayors till 1481, so that one of these authorities must
be mistaken. On the shields were the arms of Carr alone -- then Carr impaling
Bird -- then Carr's skin mark. These skin marks were not used instead of arms,
but rather as distinct insignia appropriated to the profession of merchandise.
On an inverted tablet over this monument, were the characters which have been
corrupted into J. H. S. and made to signify Jesus Hominum S^lvator, whereas
they are certainly no more than the three first letters in the Greek na^^^^ of
Jesus. -- See Preface to D. Casley's Catal. p. 23.

I am of opinion that here has been the altar of the second chantry of our
Lady, which was founded by George Carr. See account of the chantries.


, with this inscription: "Orate pro anima Georgii Car quondam majoris istius
ville qui obiit anno Domini millesimo cccc Cujus animae propitietur Deus."

The effigies of him and his wife at length, resting on pillows, with their
hands raised. Above them an arched canopy, with a defaced inscription; but a
MS. in this church gave the following words: "For George Car's sawll his wyffes
and childers sawlls all and to make a solemn dyrge-mass with all his bruthern in
the qwyre and to sing as aperyth in his writing of Rimae."

At the feet of the effigies were the ruins of a large image of our Savior
upon the Cross, with an inscription equally dark as the other, but said to be
this: "Our Lady prays him to say at the day."

When the Scots took the town they plundered the churches, and these, and many
more, were defaced; for they broke down the carved work thereof with axes and
hammers.

On the north side of the south-east porch was a small monument, commemorating
the wife of William Wrightson, Esquire. "Near this place lies the body of Isabel
the wife of William Wrightson, Esquire. one of the burgesses in several parliaments
for this town and county. She died. the 13th of March 1716."

Almost contiguous was the beautiful monument of Mr. Matthews, the first
husband of Isabel abovementioned, with this inscription: "Underneath lie
interred Mr. Francis Burton, merchant-adventurer, and Ann his wife. Mr. Burton
died Sept. 16, 1682 His wife died August 11th, 1676. They had issue one son and
three daughters, viz. Francis, Isabel, Elizabeth and Ann. Elizabeth died
January 25th, 1675 Anne died April 9th, 1681 Francis died December 17th, 1684.
Thomas Matthews, Gent. married Isabel, in memory of whom she erected this
monument. They had issue a daughter named Anne, Who died March 6th, 1684 Mr.
Matthews died April 6th, 1697."

"The burial-place of Timothy Davison, alderman, some time mayor of this town,
and governor of the merchants company, and Elizabeth his wife, by whom he had
issue sixteen children, of which survived them six sons and four daughters: she
departed this life the 10th day of September, 1694; and he the 20th day of
December, 1696, in the 55th year of his age."

"Here lies the body of Robert White, merchant. He departed October 1644."

"The burial-place of Sir Ralph Jennison, of Elswick, in the county of
Northumberland, Knight. some time mayor of this town. Obiit 3 die Aprilis, anno
1701, aetatis suae 88."

"The burial-place of Mr. John Stephenson, merchant-adventurer, who died 20th
April, 1725."

"Robert Bulman, felt-maker, 16th May, 1716. Rachel, his daughter, who was wife
of William Henderson, upholsterer, died 22d of August, 1730."

"The burial-place of John Ogle, Esquire. -- his daughter Mary Lisle, relict of
Robert Lisle, of Hazon, Esquire. died 19th December, 1728."

"Roger Raw, twice mayor of this town, 1596."

"Robert Barker, sometime mayor of this town, and his four wives. He departed
4th of August, 1588."

"Ralph Cock, Esquire. alderman, and sometime mayor of this town, 27th Jan. 1652.
His four daughters survived him, and Judith his wife, viz. Dorothy, Jane, Ann,
Barbara. The wives of Mark Milbank, William Carr, Thomas (Alexander) Davison,
Henry Marley, merchants."

"Robert Jennison, merchant, 27th October, 1668."

"Francis Brandling."

"William Carr, merchant-adventurer, and Jane his wife, by whom he had issue
eleven children. He departed April 14th, 1660. She departed Jan. 31, 1666."

"Bartram Anderson, merchant-adventurer, June 24th, 1605."

"Jesu have mercy on the sawlles of Hendry Anderson, M. A. sometime mayor of
this town, 1562."

"Isabell Anderson, his wife, was buried under the next stone to him. She died
in August 1582."

"Bertram Anderson, merchant-advent'. August 1606."

"Mark Shafto, merchant-adventurer, sometime mayor of this town, April 1593."

"Under the same lie -- Shafto, who died December 1581. And Robert Shafto,
alderman of this town, who died September 1623."

"Jesu have mercy on the soul of Mark......."

"Sir Peter Riddell, knight, twice mayor of this town, 18 April 1593." On a
table monument, near where the tomb of Sir George Selby stood.

"Lancelot Hodshon, son of John Hodshon, Esquire. departed this life the 4th of
May, 1677. And Margaret his wife, daughter of Sir Thomas Haggerston, Bart.
departed this life August 18th, 1663. Adelm his 2d wife, daughter of James
Cholmley, Esquire. departed this life March 19th, 1672 Arms on the grave-stones
hereabouts -- Harle impaling....... -- Anderson impaling Craister. -- Davison
impaling Blackett. -- Coulter impaling Morley. -- Carr impaling Cock. --
Jennison single. -- Milford impaling....... -- Davison impaling Cock. --
Blenkinsop impaling Coulter. -- Ogle impaling....... -- Names not in Bourne:
Francis Brandling, Archibald Kennedy, James Bird, Michael Forster.
."

In the quire.

"The burial-place of Nicholas Ridley, Esquire. twice mayor of this town, and
governor of the merchants' company, and Martha his wife, by whom he had issue
9 children, viz. John, Mary, Richard, Ann, Nicholas, Edward, Ann, Martha and
John. He departed this life the 22d of January, 1710. John their eldest son
dyed April 14th, 1686."

"Sept. 8, 1787. We are favored with the following description of the elegant
monument, lately erected in St. Nicholas' church, in this town, to the memory
of Matthew Ridley, of Blagdon and Heaton, in the county of Northumberland, Esquire.
-- A figure in statuary marble, as large as life, bearing a resemblance of the
features and person of the late Mr. Ridley (at the period to which the
medallion and inscription allude), is represented in a Roman habit, sitting in
the curule chair, the seat of magistracy, with a serious, but placid
countenance, as considering of the general welfare of the people over whom he
presided; under the chair are placed the scales and fasces, as emblems of
justice and authority; beneath this is the entablature, containing the
following inscription: "To the memory of Matthew Ridley, Esquire. of Blagdon and
Heaton, in the county of Northumberland, senior alderman of the corporation of
this town, and governor of the company of merchant-adventurers. He four times
served the office of mayor, in which station, in the year 1745, he rendered
essential service to his country; averting, by his prudence and activity, the
attack meditated against this town, by the enemies of the House of Brunswick,
and thereby materially checking the progress of their arms. He was unanimously
elected by his fellow burgesses to represent them in five successive
parliaments, and retired from that situation when the declining state of his
health rendered him incapable of conscientiously fulfilling the duties of it.
He lived respected and beloved, and died unfeignedly lamented, April 6, 1778.
Aged 66."

"The base of the monument is formed by a medallion, on which the town of
Newcastle is represented by a female figure, crowned with turrets, having a
shield by her, bearing the arms of the town; near her is an urn, from which are
seen issuing salmon, the peculiar attribute of the river Tyne, attacked by
Rebellion, who, treading on the crown and scepter (ensigns of royalty), bears
in one hand the torch of sedition, in the other the sword of destruction: in an
attitude of supplication she inclines herself toward an armed figure, who
protects her with his shield, and with a sword in his right hand resists the
figure of Rebellion; on the shield are represented the arms of the family of
Ridley; the helmet is ornamented with a bull, which is the crest. As a
finishing, under the medallion two cornucopias are introduced, representing the
general effect of plenty (attendant on the care of active magistrates),
connected by a civic crown, the reward amongst the Romans of civil virtue. The
figure is placed against an obelisk of white marble, eight feet high, on the
top of which is a very elegant urn, bearing the family arms emblazoned; and on
the foot of it is engraved the motto, "Constans Fidei." The whole is relieved
by a ground of dove-coloured marble.

"We feel it a justice we owe to the superior abilities of the artist, to add,
that this elegant monument was executed by John Bacon, Esquire. of the Royal
Academy, whose natural genius, unassisted by foreign travel, has raised him
decidedly to the first rank in his profession, and has enabled the present day
to vie with the most celebrated ages of antiquity in works of sculpture. The
many invaluable proofs of excellence with which this artist has enriched his
native country, as well as foreign lands, it is unnecessary here to enumerate;
until the magnificent monument in Westminster-Abbey, designed and executed by
him, to the memory of the late Earl of Chatham, shall moulder into dust, his
fame will be had in remembrance Newcastle Courant
."

"M. S. Janae Yeldardi Alvey, hujus ecclesiae vicarii Uxori lectiff. et
dilectiss. december liberorum Utriusque sexus aequaliter foecundae matri, Cultu in
Deum, Obsequio in maritum, Pictate in prolem, dilectione in proximum, Charitate
in pauperes ad exemplum celebri, Quae postquam 34 aetat' ann. complevisset pie
et placide in Domino obdormivit. Denata est tempore antelucano magni Paschatis
festi 1643. Maritus moerens hoc in amoris aeternum Duraturi testimonium merito
posuit." "Radulphus Jennison quondam major hujus oppidi qui tempore
praefecturae suae e vivis decessit anno Domini 1597, hoc tumulo sepultus jacet.

Prudens, pacificus, largus, justusque piusque.
Sydera qui quaerit, sis ubi quaerit Sic.
ubi;
Jacet et hic Robertus filius ejus, quondam
Theologiae doctor et minister verbi Dei Dr. Ellison's MSS. contain the
following inscriptions, formerly legible on gravestones in this chancel: --
"William Salkeld, A. M. vicar of Newcastle, buried 25th of August, 1568."

"Thomas Liddell, merchant-adventurer and alderman, who died 19th August, 1610.
Also Margaret and Jane, his wives. -- Margaret died March 21, 1585, and Jane
July 15th, 1602."

"Lancelot Bow, hoastman, died the last of September, 1641."

"Thomas Liddell, merchant-adventurer, died 8th May, 1577." To this date there
was a rhyme -- "whose soul in God we trust went straight to heaven," etc.

"Edward Archer, merchant-adventurer, who died April 22d, 1647."

"Here lies the body of Edward Man, merchant-adventurer, and towne-clarke. He
departed Dec. 10th, 1654. He had issue by Dorothy his wife eleven children,
whereof ten are deceased -- She departed 11th July, 1667. Miles, his son,
departed November 10th, 1682, and had ten children by Elizabeth his wife --
only three survived."

Within the rails.

"Here lies the body of Mrs. Margaret Lindsay, late wife to Lieutenant Colonel
Richard Douglas, Esquire. and Governor of Hartellpool, son to Sir William Douglas,
of Cavers, Knt. and sheriff of Tiviotdale, who departed this life the 31st of
December, 1645.

In life beloved, in death deplored of all,
Here lies the world's loss to heaven a gayn:
She living died to vice, and now dead shall
Her precious name still live free of all stayne"
"The burial place of Henry Horsley, of Milbourn-Grange, Esquire. and Margaret his
wife. He departed the 16th of November 1657. Aetatis suae 56."

" -- Mr. Lillbourne -- Mr. Briggs --."

The following epitaph was written by Mr. Gyll, and designed to be placed upon
the grave of his aunt Hargrave, who was buried within the rails enclosing the
communion table in St. Nicholas' church: "Hic subtus reconditur quod mortale
fuit
Florentiae Hargrave
Viduae Jonathan Hargrave quondam hujus villae
Mercatoris et vicecomitis anno 1699. Et
Filiae natu maximae Thomae Gyll de Barton
In agro Richmondiae inter Eboracenses generosi
Ex antiqua et honesta familia orti.
Qua vix ne vix suit altera, Dei reverentior, mariti observantion,
Liberorum denique (et summo cum religionis tum morum studio) indulgention.
Quotum omnes Jacobus, Thomas, Jonathan, Franciscus et Anna,
Praeter Elizabetham viduam Johannis Martin,
Jum fato functi sunt.
Denata 3o die Maii
Anno Domini 1735.
Thomas Gyll, armiger, in memoriam amitae suae colendissimae
Hoc inscribi voluit."
Gyll's interleaved Bourne, p. 6^.


."
"Mr. Thomas Robinson's burial-place."
"Here lies buried under this stone,
Of John Bennet both body and bone,
Late of these north parts, master of the ordnance,
Which deceased by God's providence
The eighth day of the month of July,
In perfect faith, love and charity,
A thousand five hundred sixty and eight;
Whose soul to heaven he trusted went straight,
Through God's great mercy, bloodshed and death,
Which only he trusted to during his breath.
So trust we his wife and children that caused this,
And Captain Carvel a friend of his."
"Here lies the body of Sir William Blackett, Bart. alderman and sometime
mayor of this town, and burgess in parliament for this corporation, and Dame
Elizabeth his wife, by whom he had issue nine children, of which survived him
three sons and three daughters, viz. Edward, Michael, William, Elizabeth,
Isabel and Christian: she departed this life the 7th of April, 1674, and he the
16th of May, 1680. Michael, his son, sometime alderman, departed this life the
26th day of April, 1683, who had Elizabeth only. She departed this life the
12th day of January, 1677."

"William, Isabel, Edward, Christian, Michael, John, William and Christian, the
children of William Blackett, alderman, and Elizabeth his wife. -- John buried
4th May, 1654; William buried 9th August, 1654; Christopher buried 8th July,
1678."

There was an escutcheon of Sir William Blackett, Bart. who died in 1728. He
married Barbara, daughter of the Earl of Jersey. A supporter to her arms.

"The burial-place of John Rumney, merchant."

"The burial-place of William Jennison, merchant-adventurer."

Arms on the grave-stones: Cookson -- Liddell -- Ridley.

On white marble, against one of the pillars.

"Near this place lie interred the remains of Thomas Dockwray, A. M. many years
lecturer of this church, who, after a life worn out in learned and religious
employments, departed to the mercy of God on the 15th of May, 1760, in the 71st
year of his age. He had an able head, and an upright heart. As a preacher he
was instructive, nervous, eloquent. In private life he was adorned with those
virtues which distinguish the worthy man and the good Christian. -- His nephew,
Thomas Dockwray, placed this monument of his gratitude to the memory of the
best of friends."

"Memoriae Edwardi Man, vere generosi, verissime christiani, cum in
transmarinis mercator emporiis, in publico ecclesiarum senior consultissimus
moderamine: in secretioribus nobilis hujus Novi Castri conciliis sidelissime
diu laborasset GPAATEYS. December. 9, anno 1654, requievit in Domino.

Dimetrum hoc EPITAPHION sacrat W. C.
Sub isto jacet marmore
Vir inter viros optimus
Haud nosse fas est titulus
Cognominis alicujus
Qui sic quadrat et convenit.
Quid sibi vult Edwardus hoc
Vocatus Camden referat
Nomen utcunque conspicis
Unum si vir o proxima
Constituant epitheton Sic.

Vir genii suavissimi
Vir pregnans in acumine
Cui GNSION ingenium
Fuit velut fons ebulliens
Quam placida dulcedine
Vir liberalis spiritus
Vir publica propositi
Cujus acta et concilia
Boni semper ambicrunt
Privato quid sublimius?
Vir semper idem si nosti
Tempus hoc mirabile
Vir vere fuit arcticus
Ut polus sic immobilis
In publica vertigine
Viscerum vir inopibus
Amicis amicissimus
Vir vere pater famili Sic.

Desperate nostra ambitio
Amantem sic univoce.
Vir vere gratus populo
Vir generis deliciae
Humani, non amasset hunc
Si quis hoc esset impii
Legitimum TEKPION.
Ecclesiae vir senior
Et felix pars regiminis
Lugete tribunalia
Orbata viri placido
Et suavi moderamine.
Huic urbi valde nobili
Nobile suit ingenium
Si manum si vel oculum
Dixerim minus fallerem
Nam vere fuit omnia.
Sed quod long felicius
Fuit pars aeternae foederis
Vir bonus cui religio
Suavissimum consortium
Et Christus scopus omnium.
Hunc in aeternum amplectitur
Et qui sic aegre anhelitans
Quaesivit vivus rivulos
Coelestes, nunc immergitur
Invisceratur Sic.
fontibus."
South Isle.
"In this isle," says Bourne, "opposite to the altar, against the wall of the
church is a beautiful and curious monument of William Hall, Esquire. sometime mayor
of this town, and Jane his wife, which was erected in commemoration of them by
Sir Alexander Hall, Knight, their only surviving son. At the top of the
monument are the arms of the family, with an angel on each side of them. The
body of the monument has on each side of it a pillar of the Corinthian order;
between which is the representation of a desk with open books upon it, and he
on the one side of it, and his wife on the other, in the posture of prayer,
kneeling before it, with their folded hands upon the books: below this are the
essigies of their children in the same posture; one of which is represented
kneeling alone, at one side of a desk, with an open book upon it; and other
five on the other side of it, kneeling one after another. The former supposed
to be designed for their son, the other for their daughters. Below is the
following inscription: "Gulielmus Hall, Armiger, quondam major hujus villae, et
Jana uxor ejus charissima: felici prole ditati, juxta hoc monumentum in Domino
requiescunt. Ille vicesimo octavo die Julii anno Domini 1631, aetatis suae 63.
Illa duodecima die Augusti anno Domini 1613, aetatis 36. In quorum memoriam
Alexander Hall, Eques Auratus, unicus eorum filius superstes hoc merito posuit."

"William Bonner, sometime sheriff of this town, Jan. 22, 1626."

"James Coward, glasier."

"William Gray, Esquire. 1707."

"George Dawson, alderman."

"Edward Johnson, alderman and sometime mayor, March 12, 1726, aged 69."

"Jesu have mercy on the sowlle of Edward Surtis, merchant-adventurer."

"Thomas Gibson, mason, Feb. 7th, 1699."

"Pray for the sawlle of John Todd, mer. ad. and Elizabeth his wife, daughter
was unto Wm -- merchant and his children."

In this isle against one of the pillars a marble monument with this
inscription: "Memoriae Patricii Crow He was father of Mitford Crow, governor
of Barbados.
olim de Ashlington, Armigeri, cujus corpus haud procul marmore isto sepultum
jacet. Obiit die Januarii tricesimo primo Anno Domini 1694."

On a mural monument of elegant design and finely executed, above the vestry
door: "Sacred to the memory of Sarah Blackett Late wife to John Erasmus
Blackett, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne, by whom she left two daughters.
Arms -- Blackett and Roddam on an escutcheon of pretense. She was a coheiress
of the name of Roddam.

Arms on the stones: Potter -- Swinburn -- Chapman -- etc. -- Blaxton, Chater.
A large stone with J. B. for Joshua Barnes.


, who departed this life, July 14th, 1775, aged 35. This monument is erected in
testimony of the tender remembrance of an affectionate husband, whose grief for
the loss of an amiable wife can only find comfort in full assurance of that
promised reward which virtue inherits in the regions of immortality. Mess.
Fishers sculp. York." On a monument erected against the south wall of St.
Nicholas' church, a little west of the vestry door.

"In Saint George's porch are interred the remains of Matthew Duane, of
Lincoln's Inn, London, Esquire. Fellow of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies, and
a Trustee of the British Museum.

"He was of great eminence in the knowledge of the law, and of the strictest
integrity and liberality in the practice of it, at the same time the friend and
patron of the polite and fine arts, and particularly distinguished by his
singular skill, judgment and taste in choosing and collecting a most complete
series of Syrian, Phoenician, Grecian, Roman and other coins, now deposited in
the museum of the late William Hunter, M. D. for the illustration and
confirmation of history.

"The virtues of his heart were equal to the endowments of his mind; justice,
benevolence and charity dictated his sentiments in promoting the happiness of
mankind.

"He died the sixth of February MDCCLXXXV. aged LXXVIII. In testimony of her
affection and sincere esteem his widow erected this monument to his memory."

"Mr. Chapman's stone. -- Mr. Wilkinson's place -- Henry Chapman,
merchant-adventurer, and sometime mayor of this town: Roger departed 1592 --
Jane 1592 -- Susannah 1599 -- Thomas 1602."

"Michael Kirlair, mer. ad. 31 July, 1620."

"Thomas Bows, mer. ad. He departed 1593 -- his wife Agnes, 1624."

"Henry Bows, mer. ad."

"Robert Bower, mer. ad. 1621."

"William Johnson, alderman, and sometime mayor, departed 1678."

"Robert Ledgard, draper."

"William Sheerwood, mer. ad."

(This is now the burial place of Alderman Sowerbie. -- Bourne.)

"Humphry Pibus, mer. ad. April 1691. His daughter Elizabeth was the wife of
John March, vicar of this town. She departed in April 1680 -- He the 2d of
December 1692."

"Robert Hessilrigg, March 28th, 1728."

"Richard Wright, sheriff, 1671."

(This is now the burial place of Mr. Roger Wilson, merchant. -- Bourne.)

A stone, dated 1531.

"William Jackson, sometime sheriff, 1630."

Opposite to Maddison's monument, a small square mural one, with much labor I
recovered what follows of the inscription: "Margaretta Thomae Ledgard, hujus
villae
Tunc majoris charissima conjux
--
-- mortalitate
Sursum recepta est 13 die Junii
Anno -- Dei 1648."


Underneath lies the body of an unfortunate young officer of the name of
Montgomery, who was accidentally killed by a fowling-piece, when out on a
shooting party near Chester-le-Street, 1773.

Maddison's Inscription: "Here rest in christian hope the bodies of Lionel
Maddison, son of Rowland Maddison, of the county of Durham, Esquire. and of Jane
his wife: she died July 9th, 1611. He having been thrice mayor of this town
departed December 6th, 1624, aged 94 years. He lived to see his only son Henry
father to a fair and numerous issue. Here interred also are the bodies of Henry
Maddison and Elizabeth his wife, daughter of Robert Barker, of this town, who
lived together most comfortably 40 years. He was sometime mayor of this town,
and having lived in good name and same 60 years, deceased in the true faith of
Christ the 14th of July 1634. Elizabeth his only wife had issue by him ten
sons, viz. Sir Lionel Maddison, Knight; Ralph, Robert, William, Henry, Peter,
George, Timothy, and Thomas: and six daughters; Jane, Susan, Elizabeth,
Barbara, Eleanor, and Jane: all the sons at his death were living but John, who
died in his expedition to Cadiz. She lived his widow 19 years; died 1653."

Underneath the sixteen smaller statues, representing the 16 children of Henry
and Elizabeth Maddison, is a beautiful series of small shields, pointing out
their intermarriages, as follow: 1. Tempest impaling Maddison, for Jane, who
married William Tempest, Esquire. -- 2. Lozenge shield, for Susan, who must have
died unmarried. 3. Bewick impaling Maddison, for Elizabeth, who married William
Bewick. 4. Lozenge shield, for Barbara, who died unmarried.

5. Bows impaling Maddison, for Eleanor, who married Mr. Francis Bows. See
St. Nicholas' Register. 6. Jane, it should seem, married a husband who proved
no arms, as an empty shield impales the coat of Maddison.

7. and 8. Lionel (afterward Sir Lionel) and Ralph, the 1st and 2d sons,
appear to have married two sisters of the name of Hall -- on both shields
Maddison impaling Hall.

9. Robert, the 3d son, has married a Draper -- Maddison impaling Draper. 10.
William has married a Gray -- Maddison impaling Gray. -- See St. Nicholas'
Register of Marriages.

11. Henry must have died unmarried -- Maddison's arms alone.

12. Peter, the 6th son, has married a Thonge or Tongue (a Durham family) --
Maddison impaling Tongue -- as I gathered from Forster's MS. of arms in the
possession of Mr. Ralph Waters. 13. George; 14. Timothy; 15. Thomas, must each
of them have married a woman of a family that proved no arms -- each of the
three shields -- Maddison impaling an empty shield. 16. John, supposing him the
youngest, who died in the expedition to Cadiz, has married one of the Cock
family -- Maddison impaling Cock. -- Below the inscription on the four squares,
"Animae super aethera vivunt" -- "Decus vitae est honorata mors" -- "Beati
mortui qui in Domino moriuntur." -- "Serius aut citius metam properamus ad
unam." -- At the top -- "Memorare novissima" -- and "Memoriae sacrum."


monument, which still remains.

This monument is of marble, which has been painted At the expense of Mr.
Robert Percival, commemorated among the benefactors of St. John's church. The
whole is surrounded with a strong iron rail.
and gilded since its first erection -- it is assixed to a pillar on the north
side of the south isle. At top are the images of Faith, Hope and Charity, with
their usual attributes. Below these are the statues of three persons of each
sex, in suppliant attitudes, and on their knees. The two on each side of the
desk in front are evidently meant for Henry Maddison and Elizabeth his wife,
the daughter of Robert Barker. -- Above their heads a shield -- Maddison
impaling Barker -- He is represented in the habit of an alderman of Newcastle.
The two figures behind them on the west side represent old Lionel Maddison,
also an alderman of that town, who married a Seymour. -- Above them a shield --
Maddison impaling Seymour. The figures on the east side seem intended for Sir
Lionel Maddison (knighted by King Charles I. whom he entertained at dinner June
4th, 1633), and his wife, who must have been a Hall -- Maddison impaling Hall,
on a coat of arms above, with the helmet of a knight, with the crest of Marley,
which I find was granted to him, with liberty to quarter the arms of Marley, by
Le Neve, norroy king at arms, June 5th, 1635, the crest of Maddison being a
lion's head erazed, as it appeared on an adjacent gravestone. I suppose this
Sir Lionel to have erected the monument, having modestly left a compartment
without any inscription on that side, which his descendants have never filled
up. -- Indeed as he deserted the royal cause, he would therefore be an
unpopular character after the restoration.

"Lionel Maddison, mer. ad. mayor of this town, July 1624."

"Jane Tempest, wife of William Tempest, Esquire. second son of Sir Nicholas
Tempest, Knt. and Bart. and daughter to Henry Maddison, sometime mayor,
departed 29 December, 1616. Aetat. 20."

"Barbara Maddison, daughter of the said Henry Maddison, 1627, aged 17 years."

On Mr. Forster's stone.

"I Have kept the faith, a good fight fought have I;
My God and sovereign served here quartered lie;
With dust disbanded till the last trump hence
Rally these atombs by its influence,
Then with the loyal bands receive I may
A crown of glory for the general pay."
Epitaph of Thomas Loraine, Esquire. About the border. "Hic jacet Thomas Loraine,
olim de Kirkharle, Armiger, qui obiit vicesimo quarto die Octobris, aetatis
suae 35, anno Domini 1649."

Upon the copper-plate.

"Ite precor, Musae, vos et dolor iste requirit,
Iste labor; circum tempora taxus eat;
Plangite solicitis moerentia pectora palmis;
Rumpat et ornatus quique....... suos
Publica quippe vocat clamantia Sic
publica virtus
Hujus erat...... hic dolor..... minor
Fata magistratum rapiunt cum ferrea regnum
Debilitant mundum cum rapuere bonos
Et bonus et laurus modo cum decesserit orbis
Non satis ad stetus, si lachrimarit, erit."
Arms on stones: Weldon -- Christ. Brigham.
ST. MARY'S PORCH:
Now converted into a place where the daily prayers are read.

"P. M.

Alexandri Davison Equitis Aurati et Annae siliae Radulphi Cock ejus conjugis
charissimae: Ex qua filios quinque Thomam Equitem Auratum, Radulphum Davison de
Thornley, Samuelem Davison de Wingate-Grange, Josephum centurionem cordatum (in
hujus oppidi contra Scotos rebels propugnatione strenue ad mortem usque
dimicantem hic juxta tumulatum) Edwardum mercatorem caelibem defunctum; filias
etiam binas, Barbaram primo Radulpho Calverley, Deinde Thomae Riddell de Fenham
in comitatu Northumbriae Equitibus Auratis, Ac Margaretam Henrico Lampton
Armigero enuptas, suscitavit. Qui quidem Alexander, grassante tunc conjuratione
perfidissima, optimo Regi, causaeque regiae semper fidelissimus

Gravem rei familiaris jacturam maximo animo perpessus, tandemque in hujus Novi
Castri obsidione cum Scotorum rebellium exercitu irruenti magnanimiter
confligens, novissimum spiritum (octogenarius fere) fortiter effudit, undecimo
die mensis Novembris anno ab incarnatione Domini 1644.

Hoc monumentum posuit Thomas primogenitus Eques Auratus."

"M. S. Egregio adolescenti Thomae Hamiltono, animi indole, forma corporis and
robore prae caeteris insigni, Domini Patricii Hamiltonii a Preston filio
dignissimo a nobilissima familia Haddingtonia oriundo, centurioni sub Domino
Alexandro Leslaeo exercitus Scoticani foederis imperatore, excellentissimo
Domino Alex. Hamiltono rei tormentariae praefectus, avunculus moerens posuit.
Cum totius exercitus planctu maximo obiit anno Domini 1640, Octobris 29.
Aetatis suae 20."

The motto of the coat of arms above. "Mihi palma cupressus."

The arms of Wallis on a stone in the east wall of this porch.

Sir Richard Stote's burial place.
"Quinto die Februarii anno 1615 Richardus Stote quondam hujus villae mercator
obiit. Decimo sexto die Aprilis anno 1589 Hellinor uxor ejus secunda ex hac
vita decessit.

"In sacra memoria parentum suorum Edwardus Stote hoc monumentum posuit.

"Richardus Stote, Miles, serviens Domini Regis Caroli secundi ad legem, obiit
vicesimo quinto die Decembris anno Domini 1682."

On a stone, Bulmar, apothecary -- Cut in stone against the west wall different
quarterings of Gray, Riddell, Lawson, Cramlington, and two unknown. Motto, "Sto
firmiter in petra." -- Another near it -- Gray and Riddell quarterly
impaling.....

Under the south window of this porch lie the effigies of a man in stone at
full length, with his legs across, and his dog at his feet, having a shield of
arms and a sword. "This," says Bourne, "we are informed was the fashion of
burying those only who took upon them the cross, and were marked with the badge
of the cross for sacred warfare in recovering the Holy Land from the Turks. He
is supposed to have been one of the family of the Scroopes." There is a bend on
the shield.

See, concerning cross-legged figures, Lethieullier's Observations on
Sepulchral Monuments, in the Archaeologia, vol. ii. p. 291 and seq.

Some have supposed this to have been the effigies of the founder of the
chantry. -- Peter de Mauley, a noble baron, who bore, according to Guillim, or,
a bend sable, was in the 42d of Edward III. joined with the Bishop of Durham,
and some others, for guarding the east marches -- also 43 Edward III. and in
the 3d of Richard II. with the Earl of Northumberland and others. -- He died
March 19th, 6 Richard II. -- See Dugdale's Baronage, tom. i. p. 735. As warden
of the east marches he would probably reside at Newcastle, where also he might
die, and be buried in this church. -- However that may be, his arms correspond
exactly with those on the shield of the cross-legged figure in this porch.

Coats of arms on grave-stones: Lawson quartering Warmouth; Isaacson impaling
Lawson; Roddam impaling.....; Emmerson impaling three wives, of the names of
Shafto, Lawson and Sanderson. -- Coats -- Stote impaling Bertram -- Fulthorp
impaling Emmerson -- Errington impaling Ewbanks.

"Near this place is interred the body of Joseph Huddleston, late citizen and
fishmonger of London (second son of Andrew Huddleston, of Hutton John in the
county of Cumberland, Esquire.) who departed this life the 14th of June, anno
Domini 1679. He married Mary daughter of John Emmerson, merchant, sometime
mayor of this town, and by her had issue Joseph (who died in his infancy), and
Dorothy, who survives."

"John Lawson, Esquire. of Cramlington in the county of Northumberland, 5th Nov.
1680."

"Anthony Isaacson, Esquire."

"Robert Roddam, alderman and sometime mayor of this town, July 1682. Jonathan
his son, sometime mayor of Newcastle, died 21st August 1712. He left issue by
Jane his wife a son and a daughter."

"The burial place of Paul Cook, joyner."

"John Emmerson, sometime mayor, died" --

"Thomas Jennison, sometime mayor, departed December anno 1676."

"Isabel Riddel, 1663."

"Richard Huddleston and Elizabeth his wife; he died June 1707; she 1730, aged
82 years."

"Christopher Nicholson, alderman, departed 29th September 1670, in the 68th
year of his age."

Against the wall a monument of Michael Weldon, son of Michael Weldon, of
Weldon, Esquire. and Sarah his wife, who departed this life 3d April 1680.

ST. MARGARET'S CHANTRY.
Burial place of Bewick Family.

On a monument of variegated marble.

H. S. E.
Vir moribus integer fide Christianus
Robertus Bewicke,
De Close-House in agro Northumbriae, Eques Auratus,
Qui provinciam publicam favore Regis insignitam et sibi
Et patriae honorifice administravit,
Qui domesticae officiis vitae tam aequo benignoque
animo satisfecit,
ut omnibus desideratus decessit,
Uxori autem desideratissimus,
Quae marmor hoc parvulum quoddam amoris sui pignus
pie et moerenter
P. C.
Filiis duobus filiabusque septem
Superstitibus. Obiit 3o die Septembris 1771,
Aetatis 44.
"Hic sepultum jacet corpus Gulielmi Bewicke, filii Roberti Bewicke, Armigeri,
primogeniti, qui cum Elizabetha Henrici Maddison, Armigeri, filia matrimonio
conjunctus binos filios filiasque tres ex illa suscepit: Et postquam ad
tricesimum octavum aetatis suae annum pervenisset animum suum 22 die Februarii
religiose expiravit anno Domini 1636." -- Arms, Bewick, with the difference of
eldest son, impaling Maddison.

"Here lies interred the bodies of Robert Bewicke, merchant-adventurer and
twice mayor of this town, and also high sheriff of the county of
Northumberland, and Ellenor his wife. -- He departed this life the 15th day of
March, 1641. She departed this life the 1st of June, 1661."

"Jane Bewicke, the wife of Thomas Bewicke, Esquire. -- She departed this life the
9th of August, 1682. Thomas Bewicke, Esquire. departed this life the 17th of
November, 1690. Robert Bewicke, Esquire. departed this life the 9th of January,
1703-4."

Near Bewick's porch.

"The burial place of John Butler, merchant-adventurer, and sometimes sheriff
of this town, and his wives Ann and Isabel, and their children. He departed
January 12th, 1695-6. Ann his wife, 14th June, 1655."

Henry Lord Borthwick was buried near the south-west door of this church. See
"Annals and Historical Events."

West end of the church.

"The burial place of William Errington, master and mariner."

"John Gill."

"William Boutflower."

In the middle isle.

"The burial place of William Rutter, merchant-adventurer."

At the east end of the middle isle.

"Richard Wright, merchant-adventurer, and sometime sheriff, departed this life
5th of May, 1671."

"Cuthbert Ellison, merchant-adventurer." "Now" (says Bourne) "the burial place
of Mr. Richard Wall, descended from the elder brother of Robert and Benjamin
Ellison."

"The burial place of Robert Ellison, merchant-adventurer, sometime sheriff: he
died January 12th, 1677."

"The burial place of Benjamin Ellison, who departed this life 25th June, 1676."

"Abraham Anderson, merchant."

"Joseph Ellison, merchant, who dyed 21st of January, 1686."

Cross isle.

"Richard Wright, sheriff, ob. May 5th, 1671."

ST. GEORGE'S PORCH.
"Samuel Gill, Esquire. who died 26th October, 1720."

"William Warriner 1706."

" -- Marlay, Esquire. 1676." "Now" (says Bourne) "Mr. Perith's."

"Another of John Marlay, merchant, who departed October 16, 1561.

"Under which lies also William Marlay, who departed 16th Jan. 1609.

"And also Sir John Marlay, Knight, son of William, who had been five times
mayor, and departed anno 1673, aged 83 years and 3 days."

"Jesu have mercy on George Birds soul" on the border of Matfen's stone.

"Matthew Matsen, merchant-adventurer, died 1st October, 1697."

"Timothy Robson, alderman, twice mayor, departed 30th December, 1700."

"The burial place of George Heron, merchant." -- On the top of which stone was
"Jesu have mercy on the soul of John Ord."

On the wall a handsome marble monument, with the following inscription: "Hic
sitae sunt exuviae
Roberti Shafto, Equitis Aurati,
nec non ad legem servientis,
et hujus municipii propraetoris.
In desideratissimi patris memoriam
hoc marmor posuit unicus defuncti filius
Marcus Shafto de Whitworth
in comitatu Dunelmen' Arm'
Obiit Maii 21o,
A. D. 1705.
Vixit annos 72."


"Matthew Jefferson, sometime mayor of this town, departed March 1st, 1687."

"Matthew Newton obiit 1668."

On a mural monument.

"To the memory of William Peareth, Esquire. of Uzworth-House in the county of
Durham: a man of abilities and worth, whose amiable qualities endeared him to
his family and friends. He served this corporation with great assiduity and
integrity as clerk of the town's chamber and alderman, near fifty years, always
declining the office of mayor. He married in 1731 Ann, youngest daughter of
Richard Jennens, Esquire. of Warwickshire, by whom he had issue fifteen children:
of these two sons survived him, William, and Richard Thomas; and six Daughters;
Susannah, married to Henry Wight, Esquire. of Northamptonshire; Elizabeth, Ann,
Mary, Henrietta and Barbara. He died May the 20th, 1775, aged 72 years.

His widow, in testimony of her affection

And gratitude, caused this monument to be erected."

The arms are, quarterly, those of Peareth and Jackson (his mother having been
a Jackson, of Chaitor's Haugh, com. Dunelm.), and on an escutcheon of pretense
the coat of Jennens.

Monument -- quarterly -- Riddell or Gray and Surtees -- Supporters, a mermaid
with a looking-glass, and a naked man with a club. -- On the old carved benches
-- Gray and Vescy -- arms of Archdeacon -- Creagh -- Rogers -- Archdeacon --
and Whitaker in surtout.

In the north isle.

"Thomas Partis, tobacconist, who died 9th of May, 1684."

"The burial place of Roger Ive, citizen and stationer of London, who died 6th
August, 1675."

"Roger Proctor, merchant-adventurer, who died 20th Nov. 1664." (Now, says
Bourne, Mr. Malliburne's burial place.)

"John Winship, tanner, 1607."

Against the north wall a monument of Major Robert Bugg, citizen and
haberdasher of London, who died 22d of May, 1688.

"George Winfield, merchant-adventurer, alderman and twice mayor, died 18th
Nov. 1684."

"Michael Hall, gentleman, 25th July, 1647."

"Nicholas Stricker, who died August 5th, 1689."

"Barbara Riddell, wife of William Riddell, merchant, and sometimes mayor,
1627."

"Mark Shafto."

Mural monument, north-wall. "In St. George's porch lie interred the remains of
Mrs. Barbara Dawson, the widow of Mr. Thomas Dawson. She died in the year 1736,
aged 38 years. And of Mrs. Susannah Peareth, her sister, who died in the year
1769, aged 71 years. Both were the daughters of Henry Peareth, Esquire. by
Elizabeth Jackson his wife. This monument of filial duty and respect for one of
the best of mothers, and a sincere regard for an affectionate aunt, was erected
by Dorothy, daughter of the said Barbara Dawson, and wife of Matthew Duane,
Esquire. in the year 1776." Arms -- Dawson impaling Peareth.

Escutcheons of arms affixed to north wall: Mrs. Davison -- Mr. Weatherly --
Mrs. Wrightson -- Mrs. Brookesby -- Mr. Procter.

VICARS OF ST NICHOLAS IN NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE "The town of Newcastle upon Tyne
gives denomination to a deanery within the archdeaconry of Northumberland. The
whole town is but one parish -- the mother church is that of St. Nicholas,
which has three parochial chapels within the walls belonging to it, viz.
All Saints, St. John's, and St. Andrew's, besides two parochial chapels without
the town, viz. South-Gosforth and Cramlington in Northumberland. There was
formerly another chapel at North-Gosforth, but it is now demolished. The Queen
pays the four curates within the town a yearly stipend out of the fee-farm
rents, and so does the vicar.

"The vicarage was endowed with all tithes, "decimis garbarum duntaxat
exceptis," by the prior and convent of Carlisle, and confirmed by Hugh Pudsey,
Bishop of Durham, 1194. The vicarage is in the gift of the Bishop of Carlisle.
One half of the corn tithes belongs to the Bishop of Carlisle, and the other to
the Dean and Chapter of Carlisle.

"There are three chapels more belonging to the town, which are not parochial,
viz. one belonging to St. Thomas' Hospital, another to the Trinity-House, and
another to a school in Sandgate. There is no one of all the churches endowed
but St. Nicholas's; but such is the generosity of the corporation, that for
several years last past they have allowed the clergy of these churches 671l.
13s. 4d. per annum out of the revenue of the town, besides 180l. 13s. 4d. which
they give to the schoolmasters and the chaplain of the gaol, which is very
generous. But all this is gratuity." -- Dr. Ellison's MSS. This account,
written in Queen Anne's time, he says, he affixed to the brief for All Saints,
Oxon.


.
RICHARD de Aurea Valle, or Goldburn So "De Aurea Valle" is translated. See
before.
, was parson of this church in the time of King Henry the First, as was

Gilbert de Lacy in the time of Henry the Third "Ecclesia de Novo Castro est de
dono Domini Regis et Gilbertus Lacye came tenet per Willielmum Longchamp qui
fuit justic' Domini Regis." -- Tinmouth Chartulary, anno R. R. H. fill. Johan'
tertio.
.

William de Burdone was vicar in the year 1316 -- He occurs also in 1327
Nicholson's and Bourne's History of Westmoreland and Cumberland, vol. i. p. 588.
.

Master John de Herlaw was vicar in 1342 Hutchinson, from Randall's MSS.
.

Matthew de Bolton was vicar in 1353 Ibid. p. 57. It appears by Bishop
Hatfield's Register, that he was cited to reside March 6th, 1372. He appears to
have been instituted on the presentation of King Edward III. on account of the
vacancy of the sea of Carlisle, the last of August 1374, as we learn from the
same register, p. 78.

He occurs as vicar of Newcastle in 1378. -- Blome's Norfolk, vol. i. p. 620.

In the above bishop's register, p. 152, is the following: "Commissio episcopi
ad compellend' parochianos ad solvend' 5 marcas Episcopo Letchlinensi
suffraganeo episcopi pro reconciliatione ecclesiae Sancti Nicholai Novi Castri
8 Januar' 1378."

I know not what authority the MS. Life of Barnes has for saying, that
Wickliff, the famous reformer, "had been long since at Newcastle upon Tyne." --
He was born about the beginning of the 14th century, at Wickliff, in Yorkshire,
and died 31st December, 1384.


.

Henry Headlam was vicar here 10 Ric. II. A. D. 1386 There is a pat' 10 Ric.
II. p. 2, m. 21, "pro vicar' eccles' Sancti Nicholai in Novo Castro redditus
13s. 4d. exeun' de quibusdam messuag' in eadem villa." -- See Tanner's
Bibliotheque, in verbo "Hedelam."
.

Nicholas de S....... occurs as vicar October 10th, 1401 Dr. Ellison's MSS. --
He says it must be a monosyllable. -- It occurs in a deed dated October 10th,
1401.
.

Roger de Thresk was vicar before 1418 Hutchinson's Northumberland, from
Randall's MSS.
.

William Glyn was instituted to this vicarage January 20th, 1418. He exchanged
with the above Thresk for the vicarage of St. Michael's, Coventry Bishop
Langley's Reg. p. 1039. Ibid. p. 119. He occurs in a deed in All Saints vestry,
dated 1432.
.

John de Heyworth was made vicar A. D. 1436, on an exchange with Glyn See
Dugdale's Warwickshire. -- Also Reg. 3, dec' et capit' Dunelm. fol. 210.
.

Thomas Harelred was vicar before 1494 Bourne's History -- Appendix to p. 73.
.

John Deye, D. D. succeeded T. Harelred. -- He occurs as vicar at the feast of
St. Cuthbert, in March, 1494 Bourne's History.
.

William Fell was vicar before 1499 Bishop Fox's Register, p. 27. -- A monition
to reside.
.

John Sanderson was vicar before the year 1532 Hutchinson, from Randall's MSS.
says, "1506." -- He occurs in an old deed belonging to St. Nicholas' church,
dated 1532.
.

John Heryn, L. L. D. occurs as vicar in 1536. Also in 1541. He had obtained a
license, which never took effect, to resign his vicarage to Nicholas Morrey, L.
L. B. with a pension reserved to himself. He died A. D. 1543 He alienated the
tithe of Cramlington for a cheese and a couple of capons, to be tendered on the
9th of May, St. Nicholas' day, in every year, in the porch of St. Nicholas. --
See Bishop Tunstal's Register, p. 30.
.

Henry Aglionbye, S. T. P. was instituted to this vicarage November 15th, 1543,
on the death of Heryn. -- He was deprived on account of his not paying his
tenths to the King Bishop Tunstal's Register, p. 33. -- See Hutchinson, from
Randall's MSS. p. 58, a note. -- He was instituted canon of Windsor, October
12th, 1546.
.

William Purye, A. M. was instituted July 15th, 1549, on the vacancy occasioned
by Aglionby's deprivation Patron Rob. Aldriche de Brugham, com. Berks,
generos', pro hac vice. -- Register of Bishop Tunstal, p. 41. Bourne, by
mistake, calls him "Purge."
.

William Salkeld, A. M. was vicar about 1553. -- He was buried in the chancel
of this church, August 25th, 1568 Occurs as witness to the will of William
Thompson, of North-Gosforth, March 28th, 1564. Lib. Test. p. 132. See epitaphs
in the chancel.
.

John Magbrey, clerk, was instituted to this vicarage November 13th, 1568. --
He was buried here, November 16th, 1584 Register of Bishop Pilkington, p. 66.
Patron, John Bishop of Carlisle.

See Tanner's Biblioth. p. 498.

Strype (Q. Elizabeth, p. 136) says, "One Mackbray, a Scot, an eminent exile in
Queen Mary's days, preached at St. Paul's Cross in 1559."

Dr. Jackson on the Creed, lib. x. c. 51, complains that Mackbray, Knox and
Udale, had sown their tares in Newcastle.

See Dr. Heylin's Presbit. p. 141.

See St. Nicholas' Register of burials.

It must be noted, that the celebrated reformer Knox was a preacher at
Newcastle, undoubtedly in this church, between the years 1550 and 1553. See
Tanner's Bibliotheque. -- Also Knox's History of the Reformation. He appears to
have inveighed, at this place, with great warmth against the Papists, by which
he gave great offense to Sir Robert Brandling. He was offered a bishopric by
King Edward VI. probably the new founded one at Newcastle, which he refused --
revera noluit episcopari.

The following passage occurs in a letter from the Duke of Northumberland, to
the two secretaries of state, dated Chelsea, 23d November, 1552: "And forder I
have thought good to putt you and so my Lords in memory that some order be
taken for Knokks, otherwise you shall not avoid the Scotts from out of
Newcastell, which all things considered my think should not be forgotten." --
Haynes' Burleigh's State Papers, vol. i. p. 136.

Knox wrote an epistle to the faithful in London, in Newcastle, etc. declaring
that the death of Edward VI. had happened on account of their sins, and the
sins of others. Romae ante castrum S. Angeli, Julii 1554," 12mo. -- Also, "The
Copy of an Epistle sent to the Inhabitants of Newcastle and Berwick. Geneva,
1559," 16mo. -- Tanner's Bibliotheque.

About 1589, Mr. John Udale, a puritan minister, preached a year in Newcastle,
probably in this church. -- He was sent for from thence to London, and
afterward tried. -- The MS. Life of Barnes, p. 47, says, "Mr. Udal, an active
nonconformist, when in danger of his life, hid himself amongst good people in
Newcastle."


.

Richard Holdsworth, clerk, was instituted to this vicarage August 10th, 1585,
and buried in the church of St. Nicholas, September 5th, 1596 Register of
Bishop Barnes, p. 19. He was father to Dr. Richard Holdsworth, who was dean of
Worcester. See Athenae Oxon. vol. i. p. 828 -- Fasti Oxon. vol. i. p. 207 --
English Worthies, by Fuller, 409 -- Kennet's Register, p. 572. -- See the life
of this son, who was his youngest, in Lloyd's Memoirs, 457.
.

William Morton, S. T. P. was preferred to this vicarage on the death of R.
Holdsworth, and was buried in St. Nicholas' church, July 26th, 1620. In St.
Nicholas' Register, January 1601, he occurs with the title of "Archdeacon of
Northumberland;" and in the same register, April 1604, he is called,
"Archdeacon of Durham Randall's MSS. say 1594, but certainly by mistake.
."

Henry Power, A. M. was inducted to this vicarage September 23d, 1620 Reg. of
Bishop Neil, p. 33. Patron, Joh. Smithson, hac vice ratione advocationis per
Robertum Carl' Episcop'.
. He was buried in this church September 3d, 1623 St. Nicholas' Register of
burials.
.

Thomas Jackson, S. T. P. was instituted to this vicarage November 27th, 1623,
which he resigned in 1630. He was sworn president of Corpus-Christi College,
Oxford, February 17th, 1630. -- He died September or December 21, 1640, and was
buried in the inner-chapel of that college Register of Bishop Neil, p. 62.
Patron, Richard Bishop of Carlisle.

See his life prefixed to his works, in three volumes, folio.

He was descended from a very worthy family of the county of Durham, and was
first designed by his parents to be a merchant in Newcastle upon Tyne, where
many of his friends and alliance lived in great wealth and prosperity. At the
instance of a noble lord he was sent to the university of Oxford, where he
entered at Queen's College, under the tuition of Dr. Crakanthorp, and from
thence removed to Corpus-Christi College. Going one day to bathe in the river,
he had a narrow escape from death, having lain so long under the water, that
with great difficulty he was recovered by the skill of Dr. Channel, an eminent
physician of that house. -- Bishop Neil made him his chaplain. -- A
dispensation occurs to hold the rectory of Winston, Durham, together with this
vicarage, May 12th, 1625, and was confirmed by the King on the 14th of the same
month. -- Foedera, tom. xviii.

When Bishop Neil was translated to Winchester, he made him prebendary of
Winchester, and vicar of Witney in Oxfordshire; and the King made him dean of
Peterborough.

See Biog. Brit. vol. iv. p. 2748. Athen. Ox. vol. i. col. 636, p. 539. Also
Arch bishop Usher's Letters, fol. 394.


.

Yelderd Alvey, S. T. P. was preferred to this vicarage on the removal of Dr.
Jackson to Oxford, in 1630. By the title of A. M. of Trinity-College, Oxford, a
license was granted him to preach in the town of Newcastle. -- He was collated
to the vicarage of Eglingham December 10th, 1627. -- He was deposed from this
vicarage May 26, 1645, by an order of the Lords and Commons, and was buried in
this church March 19th, 1648 Register of Bishop Neil, p. 49. See Prynne's
Hidden Works of Darkness. -- He calls him "the Arminian and superstitious vicar
of Newcastle."

See Journals of Lords and Commons -- also St. Nicholas' Register of burials.

Grey's MSS. say, "He was outed by the violence of the Scots when they took
Newcastle 1640; but I presume he returned when they were gone, and was not
formally sequestered till the ordinance of Parliament, 1645."

See Bourne's account of him. -- He buried his wife in 1643, after she had
borne him ten children.


.

Robert Jennison, D. D. by a resolution of the House of Commons, dated Dec.
5th, 1644, was appointed to the vicarage of Newcastle, in the place of Y.
Alvey, removed for his delinquency See Journals of the House of Commons, vol.
iii.
.

By an order of the common council of Newcastle, dated July 21st, 1645
Common Council books.
, Dr. Jennison, who had been called from Dantzick, and placed as vicar here,
was allowed a salary of 100l. per annum, and appointed Thursday's lecturer. --
By an order of the same body, February 20th, 1645-6, his salary was augmented
to 140l. per annum Ibid.
.

Dr. Jennison died November 6th, 1652, and was buried in this church on the 8th
following.

He wrote a book "concerning the Idolatry of the Israelites;" also,
"Newcastle's Call to her Neighbor and Sister Towns and Cities throughout the
Land," etc. London, 1637, 12mo, occasioned by the pestilence. -- He had been
suspended from a lectureship at All Saints September 24th, 1649, there was an
act of common council to indemnify Dr. Jennison from dilapidations concerning
the vicarage-house, which appears to have been almost totally demolished by the
Scots, soon after the taking of the town in 1644. November the 18th that year,
there was an act, by the same body, for the confirmation of the yearly stipend
of 140l. per annum to Dr. Jennison. On Dr. Jennison's death, the corporation of
Newcastle applied for a grant of the vicarage to be in "the disposing of the
town."
.

November 5th, 1652, there was an order of common council to appoint Mr. Samuel
Hammond to preach at St. Nicholas' on Sunday forenoons, and to lecture on
Thursdays, with an annual salary of 150l. He was of the sect called "The
Congregational Judgment." He would not conform at the restoration In S.
Hammond's Answer to his call, or invitation to Newcastle, he says, "That he was
ready with all cherfulness to embrace his call and to serve God and the
town in that great work, findeing himself and the people much in the hearts
of one another." He was to preach every Lord's day at Nicholas' church ("Saint"
was at that time rejected as superstitious) in the forenoon, and upon every
Thursday lecture in the morning -- likewise to preach upon all other solemn
days, as often as occasion required.

The MS. Life of Barnes, p. 52, says, that "Mr. Hammond was a butcher's son of
York, but raised the meanness of his birth by the eminency of his
qualifications. He was long of Cambridge, afterward he was colleague with Mr.
Weld, of Gateshead."

Dr. Ellison's MSS. inform us, that when Mr. Hammond, upon the restoration, was
questioned by Bishop Cosins about his orders, he had nothing to plead but
either a university or college license.

There is an order of common council, March 6th, 1657, that the clerk of the
town's chamber should send for the several parish-clerks of the churches in
Newcastle, quarterly, and receive the vicarage dues. -- Common Council books.


. S. Hammond is said to have been succeeded here by John Knightbridge Randall's
MSS. In an address of the ministers of Newcastle upon Tyne, etc. to the
Protector, dated July or August, 1657, he signs himself, "John Knightbridge,
pastor of Christ, at Nicholas' in Newcastle." -- Thurloe's State Papers, vol.
vi. p. 431.
.

Thomas Nailer, A. M. was instituted to this vicarage, February 9th, 1662
Common Council books. -- Register of Bishop Cosins, p. 12. Patron, Tho.
Burwell, LL. D. pro illa vice. -- Regist. Neil, p. 108. Mr. Nailer had been
recommended by King Charles II. to the dean and chapter of Durham, A. D. 1672,
to be prebendary there upon the next vacancy.

See Dr. Ellison's MSS. List of obits of the vicars of Newcastle.


, with the salary of 100l. per annum. By an order of the common council,
January 18th, 1675, the vicar's stipend from the corporation of Newcastle was
settled to be, in future, 60l. per annum, with 10l. more for sermons on
Thursday's lecture.

Mr. Nailer was buried in this church April 15th, 1679.

John March, B. D. occurs June 25th, 1679 Common Council books. -- The
following curious entry occurs, ibid. July 15th, 1690: "Mr. March, vicar --
Ordered that Mr. Mayor, etc. acquaint him, his salary will be stopped unless he
pray for King William and Queen Mary by name."

On the death of Mr. March, there was an order of common council, Dec. 3d,
1692, to take off the stipend of 90l. per annum, and not pay it to any future
vicar, upon any pretense or account whatsoever.

Bourne's account is, that "John March, B. D. was born in this town. He was an
admirable scholar, a man of strict piety, and a most powerful preacher. The
last sermon he preached was from the Epistle to the Hebrews, c. ii. ver. 3.
'How shall we escape, etc.' This was on a Sunday morning, and on the Sunday
following he was buried." This sermon, with eleven more, was published in 1693,
by Dr. John Scot, author of the Christian Life, who wrote the preface to
recommend them. "A Vindication of the present great Revolution in England, in
five letters, passed betwixt James Welwood, M. D. and Mr. John March, vicar of
Newcastle upon Tyne, occasioned by a sermon preached by him on January 30th,
1689, before the mayor and aldermen, for passive-obedience and non-resistance.
Second edition, printed for Dorman, London."

Several sermons of his were published in his lifetime, viz. "The False
Prophet Unmasked, or the Wolf Stripped of his Sheep's Clothing," preached on
the 30th of January 1^83, before the mayor, etc. and dedicated to them. Another
on the 29th of May, 1684, dedicated to the same. Also another preached on the
30th of January, 1677, dedicated also to the mayor and magistrates of Newcastle.


; salary from the corporation 60l. per annum, with 10l. for his turns on
Thursday's lectures, "by the unanimous consent of the patron and others
concerned in the donation." March 30th, 1682, this salary from the corporation
was increased to 90l. per annum.

Mr. March died December 2d, 1692, and was buried, on the 4th following, in
this church. There is an engraved portrait of him.

Leonard Welstead was inducted to this vicarage in February, 1693. He came in
by option This L. Welstead had been collated prebendary of Riccall, in York
church, Jan. 3, 1684, which he resigned for Shillington prebend, July 29th,
1685. -- Willis.
. Mr. Welstead died November 13th, 1694, and was buried on the 15th following,
in the chancel of this church Dr. Ellison's list of obits of vicars of
Newcastle.
.

Nathanael Ellison, D. D. was appointed vicar of this church April 30th, 1695.
With consent of the patron, his salary from the corporation to be 80l. per
annum, with 10l. more for Thursday's lectures Common Council books. -- He had
been instituted November 22d, 1694, and inducted Dec. 5th following.

See Bourne's account -- Wood's Fasti Oxon. p. 210. -- and Thoresby's History
of the Church of Leeds.


.

He had been installed archdeacon of Stafford July 14th, 1682. He was besides
rector of Whitburn in the county of Durham, had a prebend in the church of
Durham, and was also a prebendary of Litchfield.

In the year 1700 he published, at London, a sermon preached before the mayor
and magistrates of the town of Newcastle, in this church, October 8th, 1699, on
the Sunday after the election of the mayor, entitled, "The Magistrate's
Obligation to punish Vice."

A. D. 1701, his sermon on confirmation, preached June 23d, 1700, before the
Lord Crew, Bishop of Durham (who made him his chaplain), at St. Nicholas'
church in Newcastle, was printed at London.

In the year 1710 he printed a sermon at London, which was preached at
All Saints church in Newcastle, on All Saints day, 1709, at the opening of a
charity-school in that parish. It is entitled, "The Obligations and
Opportunities of doing good to the Poor," quarto; with an appendix, giving an
account of some charities to the poor.

October 7th, 1712, Henry Reay, Esquire. mayor, with the recorder and aldermen of
Newcastle, wrote a letter of thanks to Lord Crew, Bishop of Durham, on his
Lordship's promoting Dr. Ellison to a prebend in the church of Durham Ex copia
penes R. Trotter, registrar' Dunelm. -- Gyll's interleaved Bourne, p. 245.

His grandson, Nathanael Ellison, A. M. late Fellow of Merton-College, Oxford,
vicar of Bolam in Northumberland, and lecturer of St. Andrew's in Newcastle
upon Tyne, etc. is in possession of a portrait of this excellent man and very
distinguished scholar, which, though but coarsely executed, is said to be a
very striking likeness. To this gentleman I owe, with many other obligations,
the liberty of perusing all Dr. Ellison's MSS. He had collected, I know not
whether with any view of publishing, what fell in his way concerning the town
of Newcastle. -- If the doctor intended to write the history of that place, the
public will join with me in regretting that he had made no farther progress in
his collections for that purpose, to which I have constantly referred whenever
I had occasion to cite them.

Sir Benjamin Rawling, Knt. (who had been knighted when he served the office of
sheriff of the city of London) dying intestate, at Putteridge in Hertfordshire,
in December 1775, aged 97, his considerable real estate devolved to Mr. Miles
Corney, bookseller, at Penrith, in Cumberland; and his personal effects,
amounting, it is said, to upwards of 120,000l. to Mrs. Elizabeth Ellison, of
West-Gate, in Newcastle, the only surviving sister of Dr. Ellison. Mrs. Ellison
died unmarried, February 12th, 1776, having, with great propriety, left equally
among her nephews and nieces, the great fortune which had devolved to her as
related above.


. He died May 4th, 1721, aged sixty-four years, and was buried on the 7th
following, under the east window of the south isle of this church.

William Bradford, A. M. and aged twenty-five years, was inducted to this
vicarage August 2d, 1728 He was fellow of Bennet-College, Cambridge, and was
presented by his father, Samuel, Bishop of Carlisle. A little before his death,
which was occasioned by a fever, and happened at Bromley in Kent, he was
preferred to the archdeaconry of Rochester. He died July 15th, 1728, in the
thirty-second year of his age, and was buried in Westminster-abbey
Common Council books.

He married Mrs. Ann Barnes, May 28th, 1728, as appears by St. Andrew's
Register.

He had a halt in walking, occasioned by a lameness in one of his legs.


.

Thomas Turner, A. M. He had been curate of Walkern in Hertfordshire. -- He is
mentioned in the common council books, January 20th, 1729, as requesting the
salary usually given by the corporation to the vicar for the time being, which
was granted him.

He published a sermon preached before the sons of the clergy, in St. Nicholas'
church, Sept. 6, 1731, on James, i. 27, dedicated to the Bishop of Durham. --
Newcastle, printed by J. White.

Also a sermon preached ibid. Dec. 18th, 1745, being the public fast, on that
text of St. Matthew, "Moreover when ye fast be not as the hypocrites."


of St. John's College, Cambridge, was inducted to this vicarage August 2d,
1728. He came in by option, having been presented by the executors of Sir
William Dawes, Archbishop of York.

He married Martha, daughter of Francis Winnington, of Broadway, in the county
of Worcester, Esquire. who survived her husband, and was buried in this church
September 22d, 1771, aged 74 years.

He died in the 57th year of his age, June 1st, 1760, and was buried in the
chancel of St. Nicholas'.

There is a portrait of him in the possession of Mr. Thomas Gaul, wine-merchant
in Newcastle, who married his niece.

John Brown, D. D. was inducted to the vicarage of Newcastle upon Tyne January
6th, 1761. He had been collated, in 1752, to the vicarage of Lazonby in
Cumberland, by Dr. Osbaldiston, Bishop of Carlisle: this he resigned in 1756 or
1757, on being presented to the rectory of Horksley, in Essex, by Jemima
Campbell, Marchioness de Gray, and the Honorable Philip York, Esquire. afterward
Lord Viscount Royston. This too he vacated on becoming vicar of Newcastle The
following is an extract from the common council books:

"March 19th, 1761. Vicar's salary. -- Ordered, that the same be paid to the
Rev. Dr. Brown (in such manner as to the late Rev. Mr. Turner, deceased) from
Midsummer last, during the pleasure of the common council. -- HENRY PARTIS,
Mayor."


.

This ingenious writer both in verse and prose died by an act of suicide,
September 23d, 1766, at his lodgings in Pall Mall, London. He was on his way to
the court of Petersburgh, whither he had been invited by the Empress of Russia,
to frame a new code of laws for that great empire.

See his life, with an account of his writings, in Dr. Kippis's new edition of
the Biographia Britannica.

Richard Fawcett, D. D. was inducted to this vicarage January 3d, 1767 There is
an order of common council, January 19th, 1767, for Dr. Fawcett, who had
petitioned that body, to receive the like salary with former vicars.

N. B. In the list of procurations due to Edward, Lord Bishop of Durham, A. D.
1740, in Newcastle deanery -- St. Nicholas' vicarage to pay 1l. 2s. -- Also in
the procurations payable to the Archdeacon of Northumberland, St. Nicholas' in
Newcastle to pay, at Easter, ten shillings -- at Michaelmas, six shillings.


. He was the son of John Fawcett, Esquire. late recorder of Durham, who died
October 20th, 1760, aged above 80 years. -- Dr. Fawcett had been fellow of
Corpus-Christi College, Oxford -- A. M. Feb. 7th, 1737 -- B. D. April 29, 1745
-- D. D. November 17th, 1748. -- Also rector of Ingelstree and Church-Eyton, in
the county of Stafford -- one of the King's chaplains in ordinary -- chaplain
also to John, Lord Bishop of Durham, by whom he was collated, A. D. 1772, to
the rectory of Gateshead, which he held by a dispensation with this vicarage.

He was also a prebendary of Durham, where, at his house in the college, he
died, April 30th, 1782.

Dr. Law, son of the Bishop of Carlisle, was appointed, on the death of Dr.
Fawcett, to the vicarage of Newcastle, but was never inducted, as he was then
in Ireland, attending as chaplain to the Duke of Portland, where, having been
promoted to the sea of Clonfort, Stephen Lushington, A. M. his brother in law,
was nominated to this vicarage, and inducted Saturday, August 10th, 1782.

AFTERNOON LECTURERS AT ST. NICHOLAS'S.
WILLIAM PEIRSON occurs A. D. 1604 St. Nicholas' Register, November 1st, 1604
-- also May, 1604. -- Randall's MSS. from a MS. of Dr. Hunter, "written soon
after the civil wars," say, "It appears that Peirson, lecturer of this church
about the year 1606, was paid quarterly a salary out of the town of Newcastle,
and likewise for several years after during his continuance." (See also
lecturers of the other churches.) "The salaries were not one and the same, but
added and increased as the town thought fit. Upon this first settlement they
had those salaries out of the town for preaching in the forenoon, and the
parish did contribute for their preaching in the afternoons. Some time after
the town of Newcastle made an addition to the former salaries, and gave them an
allowance for preaching both forenoon and afternoon; upon which augmentation
the parishes gave no farther contribution. In this state have the lectureships
continued ever since, with an alteration still of salaries, more or less as
there was occasion, and at the will and pleasure of the patrons. And when any
vacancy happened in any of the churches of the town, the mayor, aldermen and
common council of Newcastle from time to time have chosen another in such room
and stead, and the Bishop of Durham for the time being did always hitherto
allow and approve of, by license, such person so chosen, being duly qualified.

"Note, the lecturers of St. Nicholas' and All Saints' have this further
advantage in it, which makes it the more valuable, that this preferment does
no-ways disqualify or incapacitate them from holding other livings with the
cure of souls." Quere, is not the case the same with the lectures of St. John's
and St. Andrew's?


.

Thomas Stephenson is mentioned as lecturer here Aug. 31st, 1634 St. Nicholas'
Register of burials.
.

-- He resigned his lectureship December 9th, 1639 Common Council books.
.

John Bewick, A. M. was appointed to succeed him Ibid.
.

May 12th, 1643, Dr. Wiseheart, or Wishart, was appointed to this lecture Ibid.
.

There is an order of common council, May 30th, 1645, for appointing Mr.
Cuthbert Sydenham and Mr. William Durant Dr. Ellison's MSS. say "Mr. Durant was
not the wash-ball maker mentioned by Edwards in his Gangraena, but had
university education, and was bred up in Exeter College, and took one if not
more degrees there. But he was in no orders."
to this lecture, the former with a salary of 100l. and the latter with one of
80l. per annum For an account of Cuthbert Sydenham, see Wood's Athenae, vol.
ii. p. 170, 171. -- The MS. Life of Alderman Barnes says, that "he was of an
ancient Cornish family, of St. Alban-Hall, Oxon, where he continued till that
city was garrisoned for the King. -- A genteel comely personage. His aquiline
nose called to remembrance the description given by scornful Lucian of St.
Paul, when he calls him that hawk-nosed Galilean, who mounted up to the third
heaven, and thence fetched those goodly notions which he preached to the world.
-- He published a book entitled, The Mystery of Godliness." -- There is a print
of him prefixed to that work. See Granger's Biographical History.

Wood tells us he became lecturer of St. Nicholas' church, without any orders
unless those of presbytery. He was a great statesman -- a greater divine. "He
was no commissioner, yet was very inwardly employed in drawing up the papers
that passed in the debates between the live dissenting brethren and the synod
at Westminster."


.

July 5th, 1647, Mr. Sydenham was settled singly at St. Nicholas on Sunday
afternoons, with a salary of 100l. per annum Common Council books.
. April 5th, 1648, there was an addition of 40l. more to his stipend from the
corporation Ibid.
.

March 20th, 1656, there was an order of common council for Mr. John Tilsley,
"of the presbyterian judgment," to preach here every Lord's day in the
afternoon, and once a month in the forenoon, at the monthly sacrament, with a
salary of 150l. per annum Ibid.
.

March 2d, 1657, Mr. Tilsley having removed into Lancashire, and "the elders
and others of Nicholas' having given a call to Mr John Knightbridge, fellow of
Peter-House, Cambridge," there is an order of common council appointing him to
preach on Sunday afternoons, and once a month in the forenoon at the monthly
sacrament, also on other solemn days, with a salary of 150l. per annum Ibid.
.

Dr Wiseheart occurs again about 1660 Bourne's History. -- Yet I find
Knightbridge established June 20th, 1660, with 150l. salary. -- I have not been
able to discover precisely the time either when Mr. Knightbridge was made
morning lecturer, instead of a vicar, or when Dr. Wiseheart was removed to this
lecture from St. Andrew's.
.

August 27th, 1662, on the removal of Dr. Wiseheart to the bishopric of
Edinburgh, John Bewick, A. M. was appointed to this lecture, with a salary of
150l. per annum, for preaching on Sunday afternoons and holidays Common Council
books.
.

July 27th, 1671, Mr. William Mair or Mayer, was appointed to this lecture, on
the death of J. Bewick -- salary only 80l. for the same duty. -- This was
advanced, January 18th, 1674, to ninety pounds per annum Ibid.
.

August 30th, 1676, Mr. John March, a conformist, afterward vicar, was
appointed to this lectureship on the removal of W. Mayer to All Saints Ibid.
There is a portrait of Mr. March in the possession of Hugh Hornby, Esquire.
alderman of Newcastle. -- There is a print of him prefixed to his sermons.
.

June 25th, 1679, Mr. John Rawlett was appointed to this lectureship, on the
removal of Mr. March to the vicarage, with a salary of 90l. but raised March
30th, 1682, to 120l. per annum. He died Sept. 28th, and was buried Sept. 30th,
1686, in this church -- aged 44 years Common Council books. Bourne's account.
-- In Granger's Biographical History there is an account of a print of him. In
Gyll's MS. notes in an interleaved Bourne's History is the following: "There is
an original picture, as I take it, of this Mr. Rawlett, in the parsonage house
at Lanchester, in the county of Durham, in the possession of the Reverend Mr.
Patrick, drawn by Sir Peter L^ly, together with another picture of Dr. Simon
Patrick, late bishop of Ely, painted by the same hand, 1737. -- This picture I
have ex dono Johannis Patrick, mercator' Dunelm' 1777." -- Afterward he adds,
"I made a present of Bishop Patrick's picture to the dean and chapter of
Durham, who placed it in their library." -- P. 76.

The subsequent very observable anecdote concerning this person is related in
the MS. Life of Alderman Barnes, p. 16:

"Mr. Butler left a daughter, who married Mr. John Rawlett, a conformist
minister -- a devout and laborious lecturer of St. Nicholas' church. -- They
had been some time in love together, but he falling sick (at her request, and
that she might bear his name), married her upon his deathbed, and left her
both a maid, a wife and a widow." He was author of the following works: -- 1.
"A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ," etc. -- 2. "An Explication
of the Creed," etc. -- 3. "A Dialogue betwixt two Protestants," etc. -- 4. "The
Christian Monitor," etc. With poetic miscellanies.


.

October 4th, 1686, Jonathan Davison, B. D. was appointed to this lectureship,
with a salary of 120l. per annum, on the death of J. Rawlett Common Council
books. -- He was son of Thomas Davison, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle. -- He was a
nonjuror. -- He resigned.
.

Dec. 2d, 1687, George Tully, A. M. was appointed to this lectureship. -- He
died April 24th, 1695 Ibid. -- He was sub-dean of York -- collat. Oct. 9, 1680.
See Wood's Athenae Oxon. vol. ii. p. 925.
.

In the year 1695 Mr. (afterward Dr.) Robert Thomlinson was appointed to this
lectureship, on the death of G. Tully -- the salary 120l. per annum. He was
rector of Whickham A. D. 1712, and prebendary of St. Paul's. -- He died March
24th, 1748, aged 79 years Common Council books. -- He left his great collection
of books to the library of this church.

March 7th, 1724, Mr. Joseph Carr was appointed holiday preacher at this
church, with a salary of 20l. per annum. -- Common Council books.


.

March 7th, 1724, Thomas Dockwray, A. M. of St. John's College, Cambridge, was
appointed lecturer of St. Nicholas', on the resignation of Dr. Thomlinson Ibid.
-- He was licensed August 28th, 1724, to have 70l. per annum during the life of
Dr. Thomlinson, and 30l. per annum additional afterward.
.

A. D. 1752 Thomas Dockwray, A. M. (afterward D. D.) fellow of St. John's
College, Cambridge, was appointed to this lectureship on the resignation of his
uncle, Dec. 20th, that year, with a salary of 100l. per annum, and March 26th,
1753, to the holiday lecture, with a salary of 20l. per annum. -- He died
Sunday, December 14th, 1783 Vicar of Stamfordham in Northumberland.

He published a sermon preached at St. Nicholas' church, before the governors
of the infirmary of Newcastle, June 26th, 1754, to which is added an account of
the rise, progress, and present state of that infirmary.


.

Dec. 17th, 1783, Henry Ridley, A. M. late fellow of University College,
Oxford, was appointed afternoon and holiday lecturer of St. Nicholas', on the
death of Dr. Dockwray. The brother of Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart.

CURATES OF ST. NICHOLAS' The curate of St. Nicholas' receives from the crown
6l. 16s. 8d. per annum, and surplice fees.

The curate, i. e. the head curate of St. Nicholas receives from the vicar 4l.
per annum -- from the corporation of Newcastle 40l. (in Bourne's time only 35l.)


.
THE vicar's assistant, or curate, is styled in an ancient writing, "The Parish
Priest "Absque impedimento vicarii aut presbyteri parochialis." -- Lib' Cartar'
cited by Bourne, p. 124.
."

Sir Hugh of Arnecliffe occurs as curate here April 18th, 1366, and June 10th,
1367 "Dominus Hugo de Arnecliffe."
.

Alan Whitehead, A. D. 1369 "Alan Whiteheved." -- Randall's MSS.
.

John de Skyndilby, 1380 Ibid.
.

John Mitford, 1424 Ibid.
.

Sir Thomas Arthur occurs October 8th, 1499 Ibid.
.

Thomas Key, curate, is mentioned in the parish register A. D. 1577. -- He died
January 25th, 1585 Thomas Key, curat, non licen' comparuit Feb. 10o, 1577, et
Januar' 19o, 1578. -- Bishop's Visitation. -- Also Dr. Ellison's MS. List of
Obits of Clergy.
.

Mr. Cuthbert Ewbancke, curate, occurs May, 1595. (Ibid.)

William Peirson is mentioned May 20th, 1604. Ibid. See account of Lecturers.

Christopher Forster occurs A. D. 1622 and 1633 Neil's Register, p. 51.
.

Thomas Turner -- ejected A. D. 1645 Walker's Sufferings of the Clergy,
Appendix, p. 423.
.

Nicholas Stote occurs A. D. 1663 Bishop Cosins' Register, p. 32.
. Cuthbert Stote is mentioned in the parish register, March 2d, 1660. Quaere if
different persons?

Ralph Astell, A. M. occurs A. D. 1667 Ibid. p. 85. -- Suspended for bad
behavior December 17th, 1677. -- He is supposed to have been uncle to the
famous Mary Astell -- See Biographia Britannica.
.

William Drake, A. M. occurs A. D. 1678 The salary at this time 25l. per annum.
W. Drake was buried May 24th, 1693.
.

Francis Woodmass, A. M. was appointed June 27th, 1693 Afterward vicar of
Bedlington -- famous for his skill in the Greek tongue.
.

Michael Fenwick, A. M. occurs as curate of St. Nicholas' A. D. 1697 Afterward
rector of Long Newton in the county of Durham -- occurs in the town's books,
Dec. 20th, 1697 -- also Sept. 22d, 1696, when he was ordered quarterly 8l. 15s.
as curate of St. Nicholas' parish.
.

Edmond Lodge, A. D. 1706. -- Removed, Sept. 26th, 1715, to the mastership of
the grammar school Occurs in the common council books, July 12th, 1708.

The upper clerk of this parish dying 1724, it was thought more beneficial to
the parish to have an assistant to the curate, which was done accordingly the
same year. His salary arises from the fees of the clerkship.

William Thompson, clerk, appointed under-curate October, 1724.

July 6th, 1725, Mr. George Hall, with the salary which the under-clerk there
had.

John Thompson appointed under-curate March 26th, 1739.

-- Stoddard, under-curate. -- Quaere, at what time?

John Ellison, clerk, -- removed hither from St. Andrew's, December 20th, 1756.

In a list of the old salaries paid by the corporation of Newcastle in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and entered in the common council books, Dec. 23d, 1669, is
the following note, by which it appears that a bell was rung here at four
o'clock in the morning at that time -- "Under-clerk of St. Nicholas for ringing
4, 6, 8 o'clock bell 3l. 18s. 8d."

Thomas Peirson, under-clerk, occurs 1600. -- St. Nicholas' Register.

Thomas Heldo occurs Sept. 28th, 1680, as under-clerk here. -- Common Council
books.

Edward Reid was clerk before 1745.

Timothy Philipson, before 1768.

April 11th, 1768, Mr. Richard Fisher, on his petition, ordered 5l. per annum.
-- Common Council books.


.

John Cowling, A. M. of Peter-House, Cambridge, was appointed Sept. 26th, 1715,
on the removal of E. Lodge On his appointment ordered "to quit the vicarage he
has in the county of Durham." -- Son of Cuthbert Cowling, of Richmond in
Yorkshire.
.

William Wilkinson, A. M. of Christ's College, Cambridge, was appointed on the
death of J. Cowling, A. D. 1739 Came hither from St. Andrew's March 26th, 1739
-- died 26th April, 1780. One of the beadmen of St. Thomas' or Magdalen
Hospital.
.

December 20th, 1756, Richard Brewster, A. M. was appointed on the removal of
W. Wilkinson. -- He was afterward made vicar of Heighington in the county of
Durham Common Council books, June 17th, 1762.
.

June 17th, 1762, Cuthbert Wilson, A. M. of Queen's College, Oxford, on the
resignation of R. Brewster Ibid.
.

CHAPELS OF EASE TO ST. NICHOLAS. BRIDGE-END CHAPEL.
FOR the ancient account of this place, see the history of St. Thomas' Chapel
and the Magdalen Hospital.

After having been beautified and pewed, it was on Sunday, Sept. 10th, 1732
(the whole body of the magistrates of Newcastle coming to it with the usual
solemnities and formalities), set apart by the corporation of that town for a
chapel of ease to the church of St. Nicholas Bourne's History, p. 131.

September 24th, 1691, there is an order of common council to take down the
steeple of St. Thomas's Chapel on Tyne Bridge.

September 22d, 1696 -- to allow Mr. Straughan the sum of 1l. 13s. 4d.
quarterly for reading divine service several times at this chapel.

July 1^th, 1697, to allow Mr. Peter Straughan 3l. for performing service at
the chapel on the bridge.

Dec. 20th, 1697 -- to allow Mr. Michael Fenwick, curate of St. Nicholas', the
yearly salary usually paid by the town for reading prayers twice every week at
the chapel.


.

There is an order of common council, June 15th, 1732, appointing Mr. Richard
Cuthbert and Mr. N. Clayton to read prayers and preach alternately in this
chapel, in the Sunday afternoons Common Council books.
. The Rev. Mr. Cowling was appointed to have the master of the hospital's share
of the revenues for reading prayers and preaching at the said chapel every
Sunday in the forenoon, and reading prayers there every Wednesday and Friday
Common Council books.
.

May 6th, 1736, Mr. T. Maddison, on the removal of R. Cuthbert -- same
alternate duty -- salary 10l. Ibid.
.

At the same time Mr. John Thompson appointed on the removal of N. Clayton --
same duty and salary as above Ibid.
.

October 8th, 1739, Mr. Henry Featherstonehaugh morning lecturer, on the death
of J. Cowling Ibid.
.

Dec. 20th, 1756, Mr. John Ellison, of St. Nicholas', appointed to read weekly
prayers here, on the resignation of R. Brewster, who had been Mr.
Featherstonehaugh's deputy Ibid.
.

Dec. 21st, 1761, Richard Brewster, A. M. appointed alternate afternoon
lecturer on the death of J. Thompson Ibid.
.

June 21st, 1764, Mr. Cuthbert Wilson, of Gateshead, was appointed alternate
afternoon lecturer, on the resignation of T. Maddison Ibid.
.

Dec. 17th, 1772, on the death of R. Brewster, and resignation of C. Wilson,
Mr. William Hall was appointed sole afternoon lecturer at St. Thomas' chapel --
salary 20l. per annum Ibid.
.

July 7th, 1773, Mr. Emanuel Potter was appointed sole afternoon lecturer at
St. Thomas's, on the removal of W. Hall to St. Ann's Ibid.
.

Mr. Nathanael Clayton was appointed morning lecturer at this chapel, on the
death of H. Featherstonehaugh Ibid.

June 20th, 1770, the west end of St. Thomas' chapel was pulled down, and after
the angle was rounded off to widen the passage to the north end of the bridge,
it was rebuilt with brick in a motley and unpleasing manner.

This chapel was opened on Sunday, February 17th, 1782, having been shut up for
several months, and curtailed a second time, to widen the entrance to the
bridge.

It was newly chipped all over on this occasion, and there was a cross put up
at the east end, as usual in the papal times, which is said to have given great
offense to the protestant association at Newcastle.


.

SOUTH-GOSFORTH, OR GOSFORD, A CHAPEL OF EASE TO ST. NICHOLAS'.
ROBERT LISLE, of Gosford, gave to his son, Otwell Lisle, with Isabel his wife,
in frank marriage, South-Gosford, with the advowson of the church and the miln,
etc.

This Robert Lisle married the daughter of Richard Canvill, who, with consent
of his wife, gave him Gosford in Northumberland, and King Henry II. by his
charter, confirmed the gift Calverley MS.
.

In the year 1377 disputes occur concerning the advowson of the church of
South-Gosford, between the King, the Bishop and Prior of Carlisle, and Matthew
Bolton, clerk, vicar of Newcastle "Lis de advocatione eccles' de South-Gosforth
in foro Regis inter Dominum Regem pretendent' ratione custody terre et heredis
Roberti Lyle defuncti and Tho. episcopum Carleol', Johan' prior' Carleol' et
Matthe' de Bolton clericum, 51 Ed. III. and 1 Ric. II." -- Register of Bishop
Hatfeld, fol. 121, etc.
.

A. D. 1391 Sir Robert Lisle was presented with the lordship of Gosford, with
the advowson of the church, with the mill, etc. by his elder brother Thomas
Lisle. This Sir Robert Lisle, Knt. married Mary, one of the daughters and heirs
of Aymer of Athol, uncle to David Strabolgie, Earl of Athol. This Adamar, or
Aymer, of Athol lived at Jesmond, and was buried with his lady in the Trinity
chapel, in St. Andrew's church, in Newcastle Calverley MS.
.

March 20th, 1494, an agreement was made between Humphrey Lisle, Esquire. and the
vicar of Newcastle upon Tyne, when the former appears to have quitted his claim
to the advowson of South-Gosford See Bourne's History, Appendix, p. 73.
.

Sir Edward Maxwell occurs as curate of South-Gosforth, August 5th, 1564 Book
of Wills, Durham, p. 124.
; also March 5th, 1563.

Humphrey Sicomer occurs Feb. 1st, 1577; also in 1578 Bishop Barnes' Visitation.
.

Thomas Maslet occurs as curate July 6th, 1579 Bishop Barnes' Visitation.
.

Michael Frisell, A. D. 1580, and 1586 Ibid.
.

Alexander Lighton in 1605 Ibid. Randall's MSS.
.

Richard Cockburne, A. M. 1626 Neil's Register, p. 89.
.

-- Thompson, 1658 In St. Andrew's Register -- August, 1659, the common council
order 10l. per annum to the minister of Gosforth, during their pleasure.
.

Henry Garnett, A. M. occurs as curate here A. D. 1665 A. M. apud Scotos. --
Cofins' Register. p. 39.
.

Master Alex. Reed before 1670. He was buried February 8th that year, at St.
Nicholas' St. Nicholas' Register.
.

William Musgrave occurs in September 1674 Bourne's History of Newcastle.

June 11th, 1675, the parishioners of Nort^ and South Gosforth occur as
petitioning charitable constitutions of the (...) -- Also merchants book,
(...), 1676.


.

Rev. Mr. Ellison -- Mr. Clark Wa^burton' (...) MSS. -- Present (...) --
curate, Mr. Clark, 4l. pe^. (...).
.

William Wilkinson, A. M. occurs July 18th, 1754. -- Bishop's Visitation.

Richard Brewster, A. M. ibid. August 10th, 1758.

George Stevenson, clerk, present curate -- on resignation of the above. --
Duty every other Sunday morning.

NORTH-GOSFORTH CHAPEL.
THIS has been pulled down. -- The chapel-yard remains, with several
grave-stones.

A clergyman, now alive at Newcastle, remembers to have read the burial service
in it.

John Graunger occurs as curate February, 1577 Barnes' Visitation.
.

Umfrid' Sicomer, 1578. -- He appears to have officiated at both Gosforths.

Tho. Maslet occurs July 6th, 1579 Ibid.
.

Mich. Frisell, January 23d, 1580, and July 7th, 1586 Ibid.

Warburton's MSS. (penes h. v. Ducem Northumbriae) describe North-Gosford as "a
small village, in a low ground, with a ruinous chapel."


.

CRAMLINGTON CHAPEL Warburton's MSS. ut supra, say, that in "A. D. 1369,
Ryblesworth died, seized of a third part of Cramlington, and half the advowson
of the church there."

"In the 9th of King Richard II. -- Cramlington died seized of half the manor
of Cramlington -- 20 acres of land and meadow -- 10 villains -- 2 bondmen -- 2
cottagers -- with a rent of 13d. per annum, and half the advowson of the chapel
there." -- Ibid.

In the chapel at Cramlington, upon a marble gravestone, the following
epitaph: "Orate pro anima Thomae Lawson, generosi, qui obiit 2do die mensis
Julii anno Domini 1489. Cujus animae propitietur Deus." With the arms of Lawson
-- Argent, a chevron fable between three martlets of the same, impaling those
of Cramlington -- 3 annulets and 3 bars azure -- field argent. -- From the
pedigree of William Cramlington, Esquire. alderman of Newcastle.


.
THIS is a chapel of ease to St. Nicholas', about eight miles distant from
Newcastle. -- It is dedicated to St. Nicholas Randall's MSS. cite the following
from the Book of Wills, p. 122:

"Agnes Johnson, wedow, of Cramlington, bequiethes her body to be buried in
the church of St. Nicholas at Cramlington toward her husband's grave, geves
4s. in a (dole) to be divided emongst the poor. Witness John Rayge clerk."

In an estimate of the yearly value of the small vicarages, rectories, and
cunacies in Northumberland, taken upon oath in the chancel of St. Nicholas' in
Newcastle, August 4th, 1719, Cramlington curacy is valued at 6l. It is at
present worth about 40l. per annum.


. -- A perpetual curacy. Patrons by turns -- Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart.
and -- Lawson, formerly of Cramlington, Esquire.

Chri. Palmer occurs as curate February 1st, 1577, and January 19th, 1578. --
Barnes' Visitation.

Alex. Lighton, 1586. -- Ibid.

Humphrey Green, clerk, licensed October 19th, 1621.

-- Dickenson, -- 1663.

John Potter, clerk, licensed September 1722. Died October 30th, 1763, aged 78.
His patron was -- Lawson, Esquire.

George Stephenson, clerk.

William Alderson, clerk, occurs August 6th, 1766. -- Bishop's Visitation. --
Died October 2d, 1774, of an apoplectick fit at Cramlington.

John Brand, A. B of Lincoln-College, Oxford, presented October 6th, 1774.
Patron, Matthew Ridley, Esquire. of Heaton, pro hac vice.

John Falcon, A. B. curate of Gateshead, sub-curate, with a salary of 20l. per
annum.

CHARITY OF THE SONS OF THE CLERGY.
THE charter of King Charles II. for erecting a corporation for the relief of
the poor widows and children of clergymen, is dated July 1st, 1678. By this
they are not permitted to purchase to above the value of 2000l. per annum. King
George I. granted his royal license, dated December 16th, 1714, to enable this
corporation to make farther purchases, not to exceed the sum of 5000l. per
annum. This is a general charity From an account, in one sheet, printed by
Richard Wilkin, a clergyman's son, at the King's Head in St. Paul's Church
yard, 1720.
.

The society of the Sons of the Clergy, belonging to the diocese of Durham,
which is at present of so considerable extent, was in its origin a private
appointment of a few gentlemen, who lamented the necessities of the descendants
of this order, and thought a subscription would be a partial alleviation.

April 7th, 1709, an agreement was entered into by a number of gentlemen at
Newcastle upon Tyne, to subscribe annually no less than five shillings each to
this charity. They styled themselves the Society of Clergymen's Sons. Mr.
Nathanael Clayton, merchant, and Mr. Deodatus Therlkeld occur among the first
promoters of this very pious design, and were appointed the first stewards.
They fixed their annual meetings to be on the first Monday in September in
every year "Orders and rules to be observed by the Society of Clergymen's Sons
in the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne:

"We whose names are hereunder written, for good and charitable uses, do
hereby severally promise to pay unto the stewards of the said society, for the
time being, not under the sum of five shillings a-piece, at the annual
meeting, on the first Monday in September every year. In witness whereof we
have hereunto subscribed our names this 7th day of April, 1709.

Mr. Deodatus Therlkeld Stewards for the year 1709. Mr. Nath. Clayton Stewards
for the year 1709. Leo. Shaftoe Tho. Rud John Potts Edm. Lodge Deodatus
Therlkeld Tho. Davison John Rain Robert Shafto Antho. Proctor Nath. Clayton
Ra. Pemberton Isaac Algood John Bourne John Cotterell Timo. Tullie Robert
Webster Robert Sorsbie La. Allgood."
(From the original paper, signed by the several subscribers abovenamed.)


. -- The first was on September 5th, 1709, when the subscription amounted but
to five pounds: so slender were the beginnings of this institution, the seeds
of which may truly be said to have fallen on good ground, and produced an
hundred fold.

September 14th, 1709, an attempt of the like kind appears to have been made in
Northumberland, for the benefit of the two deaneries of Alnwick and Bambrough
Mr. Robert Harrison's MS. collections and notes.
.

September 10th, 1711, Dr. John Smith, prebendary of Durham, preached a sermon
before them at St. Nicholas' church, in Newcastle upon Tyne, which was printed.
-- This was called their first solemn meeting, and the subscription this year
amounted to 13l. 11s. Quarto, by White, Newcastle -- Text, Exodus, xx. 12.
.

September 19th, 1712, Nicholas Burton, A. M. lecturer of St. Nicholas',
Durham, preached before the society at Newcastle, and his sermon also was
printed. A collection, for the first time, was made at church, amounting to 7l.
14s. 7^d. -- The subscription in all this year, 25l. 11s. 6d. Octavo, by White,
Newcastle -- Text, 1 Peter, ii. 17.
.

George Ritchell, clerk, lecturer of Hexham, by his will dated 14th June, 1717,
lest forty shillings per annum to this society, payable out of lands at
South-Nun-Bush, near Newbrugh in Northumberland Paper in the possession of the
secretary.

In 1723 the society put out at interest 600l. with the corporation of
Newcastle.


.

In 1725 the society at Newcastle, and the above, for the benefit of the two
deaneries of Alnwick and Bambrough, were united Books of the society.
.

September 6th, 1731, Thomas Turner, A. M. vicar of Newcastle, preached before
the society. The sermon was afterward printed. The subscription this year,
213l. 18s. 6d. In octavo -- Text, James, i. 27.
.

Mrs. Elizabeth Rogers, by her will dated 15th December, 1733, bequeathed 10l.
to the use of this society; as also 50l. more by an additional clause From a
copy of the will, communicated by the secretary.
.

September 22d, 1737, Edmund Tew, D. D. rector of Boldon in the bishopric of
Durham, preached before this society in St. Nicholas' church, Newcastle, a
sermon which was afterward printed. The subscription this year was 251l. 14s.
3d. Quarto, London, 1737, 2d edition -- Text, Romans, xvi. 12.
.

October 23d, 1746, Thomas Sharp, D. D. archdeacon of Northumberland, and
prebendary of Durham, preached before this society at St. Nicholas', Newcastle,
a sermon which also was afterward printed. The subscription this year amounted
to 195l. 14s. 10d. Octavo -- Text, 2 Kings, iv. 1, 2.


September 6th, 1750, John Ellison, A. M. vicar of Bedlington, and lecturer of
St. Andrew's in Newcastle upon Tyne, preached before this society, ibid. a
sermon which was afterward printed. The subscription this year amounted to
242l. 8s. 3d. Quarto, by White, Newcastle -- Text, Gal. vi. 10.
.

September 4th, 1766, John Darch, B. D. fellow of Baliol-College in Oxford, and
vicar of Long-Benton in Northumberland, preached ibid. before this society, a
sermon which was afterward printed. The subscription this year amounted to
298l. 16s. 7d. Quarto -- Text, James, i. 27.
.

In the year 1773 it was agreed upon that the anniversary meetings of this
society should in future be held alternately at Durham and Newcastle. The first
meeting held at Durham was in 1774 Books of the society.
.

Margaret Dongworth, of Old Elvet, Durham, spinster, by her last will, dated
October 11th, 1775, bequeathed a thousand pounds to this charity, to be paid
within twelve calendar months after her death, which happened on the 5th of
July, 1779 Ibid. copy of the clause in her will.
.

In the year 1780 this society appears to have had a fund of 1500l. put out at
interest with the corporation of Newcastle at 4l. per cent. As also the farther
sum of 500l. lent to the same body at 3 per cent. the interest of both sums
amounting to 77l. 10s. per annum Ibid.

September 6th, 178^, the anniversary of the society, Dr. Scott, of Simonbur^^,
preached before them at St. Nicholas', on Galat. vi. 10. Collection at church
20l. 16s. Collected by the stewards 526l. 16s. 4d. -- Newcastle Courant.

A similar institution has been established in the north of England, for a fund
to support the widows and orphans of protestant dissenting ministers. The first
account I have (...) with, after it was established, is of the date of 1760,
when they put out to the corporation of Perwick upon Tweed the sum of 297l. at
interest, for the use of the said association.

In 1783 the capital stock amounted to 3116l. 2s. 5d.

A sermon was advertised in the Newcastle Courant, April 28th, 1764, which had
been preached in the chapel at Hanover-Square, Sunday, March 25th, 1764, for
the encouragement of a scheme for the relief of the widow, etc. of dissenting
ministers, by Samuel Lowthion.


.

MIDDLE-STREET.
THIS street appears to have been called anciently Glover-Gate In a deed dated
10th November, 29 Hen. VIII. a tenement is described to be "in vico vocato le
Myddle-Street." And in another dated March 3d, 1 Ed. VI. a tenement is said to
be "in vico vocat' Glover-Gaite alias dict' Myddle-Strete."

"Skinner-Gate" occurs in a MS. in the Bodleian Library, 7 Hen. IV. as a street
of Newcastle. -- See before under "Wards" -- "Andrew-Tower."


, alias Middle-Street: Bourne says it bare formerly three names. The upper part
of it was called Skinner-Gate, the lower Spurrier-Gate and Sadler-Gate.

Part of Flesh-Market, anciently inhabited by the principal merchants See
Bourne's History.
of the town, was called Cloth-Market In an original deed lying before me,
dated June 15th, 1596, a tenement is described as extending "a vico vocat' le
Middle-Streate ex occidentali part."

"The Cloth-Markett, alias Flesh-Markett," occurs in a deed in the archives of
the corporation of Newcastle, A. D. 1663.


, part of it Flesh-Market, and part Fish-Market Bourne's History.
. -- See account of Morden-Ward. -- Many houses in it paid an annual rent to
University-College in Oxford Ibid.
. -- Mention occurs of one A. D. 1304, near the churchyard, paying six
shillings a year to that seminary.

Bourne tells us, that toward the south end of the Flesh-Market was a large
cross, with a lead cistern at the top, to hold the water called the New-Water,
which was pulled down about three years before he wrote his history In an
authority preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, dated July
12th, 1692, mention occurs of "a cross at the Flesh-Markett."

Here stood a pillory also. -- The cross was in the center of the street
opposite to what are at present called "Bulman's Buildings."


.

There is a narrow passage, leading from the Flesh-Market to Mosley-Street near
the new playhouse, called Drury Lane.

At the foot of the Flesh-Market stands the cordwainer's meeting house, called
formerly "The spinn, or workhouse In the common council books, October 12th,
1702, is the following entry relating to this place: "Workhouse, alias
spinn-house. Ordered, that a standing committee inspect and manage this affair.
-- The said committee to order cloth, and grant allowance for the children's
maintenance, as they shall think meet and convenient."
."

A very great market for flesh is held in this street every Saturday, as are
also two fairs, each for eight days every year, at Lammas and St. Luke's Mass
There still remains a custom of erecting booths to sell cloth, at the two
annual s^^^ of the town, in the upper part of Flesh-Market.
.

There has lately been a new street made to communicate with Pilgrim-Street,
from the foot of the Flesh-Market, called, in compliment to the very worthy
alderman of that name, "Mosley-Street," in which have been built a new
playhouse and a new post office See New Plan of Newcastle upon Tyne. Also
Appendix. They are at present ^^^king a new street to conduct from near the
middle of the Side to Mosley-Street; (...) purpose they have pulled down the
curious old arch of the Low-Ov^rd^^n-Bridge. It is said this new street will be
called (and with great propriety) Dean-Street.
.

Before A. D. 1688, the place of worship for Roman Catholics at Newcastle was
in a chapel down a courtyard in the Flesh-Market, adjoining to what is at
present the White-Hart-Inn.

On the accession of King James II. the magistracy of Newcastle was composed of
papists and protestants, conformists and non-conformists; the cap, the mace,
and the sword were one day carried to the church, another day to the
mass-house, and on a third to the dissenting meeting house See MS. Life of
Alderman Barnes.

A most extraordinary sermon in quarto lies before me, London, printed by H.
Hill, etc. 1688, entitled, "A Sermon preached before the Right Worship at the
(...) of (...) town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, on the 29th of January,
1688, being the (...) of Th^^^ (...), at the catholic chap^^^, by Phil.
Metcalfe, P. of the Society of J^^^, (...) allowance." -- D^^bated to "The R.
W. Sir William Cr^^^h, mayor of the town and county (...) upon Tyne."

(...) the (...) pr^^^^ng with child. -- (...) "Jan^^^ t^ J^^^." -- (...) of
(...).

Men of (...) to (...) degree, it situated at that time. -- I copied the (...),
from the accounts of the churchwarden (...) St. Andrew's in (...) that year.

"Paid for ringing for the Queen's conception, 1s. 4d."
The subsequent entry, ibid. almost immediately follows:
"Paid for bells ringing for deliverance from popery, 1s. 4d."

.

January 28th, 1746, about one o'clock in the morning, a popish chapel at
Gateshead was set on fire by the mob, assembled there to wait for the arrival
of his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland, on his way to meet the rebel army.

An attack, equally cruel and unjustifiable, appears to have been made on the
same occasion upon another Roman-catholic chapel at the Nuns, in Newcastle See
Historical Events.

I found the following memorandum in Dr. Ellison's MSS.

"The number of the papists in Northumberland, as they were returned into the
House of Lords 1705: St. Nicholas' in Newcastle 15 St. Andrew's there 12 St.
John's there 20"

All Saints is not mentioned.

In November 1723, the town of Newcastle gave public notice for all papists to
take the oaths of allegiance to his majesty, and for this purpose adjourned the
sessions.


.

A Mr. Walsh is said to have been priest at the chapel in Gateshead, which was
afterward removed to a house that once belonged to Sir John Marley, the
celebrated loyalist, in the street called the Close.

The chapel in the Nuns was removed to a place, the entry to which is near the
Black-Horse-Pant, in the Bigg-Market, where Mr. Cordell at present officiates.

The chapel in the Close has also been removed since that time to a house near
the foot of West-Gate, at which Mr. Warilow is the present officiating priest.

From the head of the street called the Side, to about the middle of it, there
is a very steep descent: this name is plainly derived from the circumstance of
its being erected on the side of a hill. About halfway down it becomes more
than double its breadth in the steep descent. Bourne tells us, that the east
side of the wider part was anciently called "Cordiner, or Cordwainer-Rawe See
the description of Gunner-Tower-Ward. -- It is plain from thence that
All-Hallow-Pant and Cordiner-Place have been near the head of what is now
called the Butcher-Bank; as also that the west row of the Side, from Cale-Cross
to Painter-Hugh, was called "Flesher-Rawe," i. e. Butcher-Row. -- The "going
downwards," which seems to have missed Bourne, is meant for the descent from
All Saints' church to the Cale-Cross.

The following entry occurs in the Harleian MSS. 708, eschaets 1 Ric. II.
"Andreas de Tyndale fuit seisit' die quo obiit de una shopa in villa Novi
Castri super Tynam in le Fleshewer-Rawe quam tenuit de Domino Rege in libero
burgagio per servicium unius oboli per annum et de una placea terrae vastae in
le Coke-Rawe quam tenuit de Rege in libero burgagio per servic' 2d. per annum."


."

There was a postern, called the Eastern-Postern of the Castle, that
communicated by a very narrow and steep flight of steps with the Side, a little
above the middle of that street. -- See account of the Castle.

A little above, on the opposite side, we descended by a small flight of steps
into a short narrow lane, which communicated with the bottom of the street
called Painter-Hugh. Bourne supposes that this was anciently called
Swinburn-Place It must have been somewhere hereabouts.

See account of Pink-Tower-Ward, which included "all the west raw in the Side
unto a great waiste upon the Castel-Hugh sumtime called Old Laurence Acton's
Waiste, now Thomas Heryng's foreanents a pant before Swinborne's door upon
Lorke-Burne." This too is the pant which Bourne has erroneously called
All-Hallow-Pant.

In Corbridge's Plan of Newcastle, 1723, this is called Dog-Loop, i. e. Leap.


. At the north end of this lane there was a place called Pencher-Place It has
been conjectured that Pencher-Place means the place of paunch, i. e.
tripe-women. -- Sed quaere? for "Pencher" may have been the surname of the
owner of the property.
. He adds, "perhaps the whole lane was called so."

It went up as far as the late Nether-Dean-Bridge See afterward
"Nether-Dean-Bridge."
.

"Under this very high and ancient arch," he continues, "I am told the rings
are still to be seen that the boats were fastened to, which brought up the
merchant-goods, when the merchants had their shops in the Flesh-Market." This
arch was lately taken down.

Lort, or Lork-Burn, up which, for a considerable way, the tide flowed
formerly, made a division anciently in the lower part of the Side. This runner
of water was covered over with stone, A. D. 1696 "1696. Lort-Burn arched over
and paved from the foot of Side-Pant to the Keyside-Wall." -- Grey's MSS.
quarto, No. 3, dorso.
.

On the north side of Lork-Burn, near the Sand-Hill, stood the Cale-Cross
Bourne supposes it to have been called Cale-Cross, because of the cale, or
broth, which was sold there in former times: I think much more probably from
the herb kailwort, which also gave a name to broth in the north. -- Bourne
adds, "This seems to have been its original name, for I meet with it in the
reign of King Richard II. and also in a writing dated in the time of King
Edward the Third."

In the confirmation of the Wall-Knowl hospital, A. D. 1360, it is called
"Cale-Cross."

In a deed preserved in All Saints' vestry, dated October 19th, 1319, it is
thus mentioned: "In vico qui ducit del Cale-Crosse."

In the common council books, October 10th, 1653, the name is spelled
"Keale-Crosse."


, which Gray, in his Chorographia, describes as a "fair one, with columns of
hewn stone covered with lead."

There was a cistern at the top of it within my remembrance, to hold what was
then called the New-Water. It was taken down about November 1773 Newcastle
Courant, November 6th, 1773.
. It is sometimes, but erroneously, called Scale-Cross.

This cross was rebuilt, A. D. 1783, after a design of Mr. David Stevenson,
architect. -- The inscription as follows: "Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart.
mayor, Richard Bell, Esquire. sheriff." Here continue to be sold eggs, milk,
cheese, butter, etc.

High-Friar-Chare, which leads from Newgate-Street, near the Newgate, to
Pilgrim-Street, has had its name to distinguish it from the other called the
Low-Friar-Chare, lower down the street, and communicating with West-Gate.

Adjoining to this street stood the house of Grey-Friars, or Minors, called
also Franciscan-Friars.

They were one of the most eminent of the four orders of mendicants Before
persons could be admitted into this order they were obliged to give a
convincing proof of the disinterestedness of their motives, by selling all they
had and giving it to the poor.
. St. Francis, their founder, gave them one of their names. -- They were called
Gray Friars from the color of their habit, and Minors through humility Minor,
i. e. less, inferior.

Their habit was a loose garment reaching to the ancles, with a cowl and a
cloak over it when they went abroad -- they girded themselves with cords and
went barefooted. -- Yet it should seem, from the prints in Creccelius's
Collectanea, that the Observants only, a rigid branch of the order, had their
feet uncovered.


. Their house in Newcastle is said to have been founded by the Carliols Their
great estate, according to Leland, went by marriage to the family of the
Thurgills, of the Wolds in Yorkshire.
, wealthy merchants in the time of King Henry III The site of this house must
have been somewhere in the garden of the late Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. most
probably in that part of it which lies opposite to Ficket-Tower.

Bourne, from the authority of the Milbank MS. says it stood near
Pilgrim-Street Gate, and that there was a little lane between it and the walls.

The High-Friar-Chare must have conducted to it, being styled, in several
ancient writings, "Vicus qui ducit ad Fratres Minores."

The burial-ground of the monastery was immediately opposite to Ficket-Tower,
as appears before in the old account of Ficket-Ward.


.

Bourne, on the authority of ancient writings, observes that they were a
regular and settled body, A. D. 1267.

At a general chapter of this order held at Narbone in France, A. D. 1258, it
appeared that the English province had seven custodies, whereof the custody of
Newcastle, containing nine convents, was one See History of English
Franciscans. The following are the nine monasteries that were under the custody
or wardenship of Newcastle -- Newcastle monastery in Northumberland; Dundee,
Dumsties and Haddington in Scotland; Carlisle in Cumberland; Hartlepool in
Durham; Berwick in Northumberland; Roxburgh in Scotland; and Richmond in the
shire of that name in the county of York.
.

A. D. 1284 Hugh of Newcastle, commonly called the Scholastic Doctor,
flourished in this house Bale, Cent. 4. p. 352. Also Pits, p. 364.
.

In the year 1299 the brethren of this house received of the King for their
pittance of one day on his passing through Newcastle, by the hands of Walter de
Whitborne, at Berwick, 15th of December, eleven shillings and four-pence, and
for their pittance of two days on his coming to that town in the January
following, by the hands of Thomas de Dunholme, twenty-two shillings and
eight-pence Wardrobe account, 28 Ed. I. edited by the society of Antiquaries of
London.

"Fratribus Minoribus ville Novi Castri super Tynam pro pittancia sua unius
diei in transitu Regis per ibid. mense Decembr' in principio per manus Walteri
de Whitborne apud Berewicum super Twed' 15 die Decembr' 11s. 4d. -- Fratribus
Minoribus ejusdem ville pro pittancia sua duorum dierum in adventu Regis ibid.
mense Januar' per manus fratris Thome de Dunolm' apud Novum Castrum 8 die
Januar' 22s. 8d."

It was usual for persons of note to be buried among these Gray or Franciscan
Friars, and also in the habit of their order. -- I found built up in the wall
of a house adjoining to the site of the monastery the fragment of a gravestone,
which has, no doubt, been taken out of their burial-ground. -- A sword is
marked on it -- the mutilated inscription runs thus: "Hic jacet.... eming." The
last, I suppose, has been "Fleming," a name which often occurs anciently among
the magistrates of Newcastle.


.

Dr. John Scot, usually called Duns Scotus, and the Subtle Doctor, entered the
order of Minors in this house before A. D. 1300 Leland, from certain old
records of Merton-College in Oxford, gathered that he was born in the parish of
Emeldon, in a hamlet or manor place belonging to that college called Dunstan --
from whence, by contraction, he got the epithet of Duns. -- His father's name
was Scot. -- The place belongs to Merton-College to this day. He was the son of
a tenant of that house. -- In one of his MS. works, folio, D. 1. 6. Theolog.
are these words: "Explicit lectura doctoris subtilis in universitate Oxoniensi
super quartum librum Sententiarum, scilicet, Domini Johannis Duns, nati in
quadam villula parochiae de Emyldon vocata Dunstan in comitatu Northumbriae
pertinente domui scholarum de Merton Hall in Oxonia et quondam socii dictae
domus." The words "Scotia me genuit" upon his tomb seem to contradict the above
account, but Fuller attributes it to an easy mistake of foreigners, considering
that Northumberland had anciently comprehended all the lands from Humber to
Edinburgh Frith.
.

August 1st, 1322, the brethren of this house received eight shillings for
their pittance of one day, and on the 14th of September following, eight
shillings for the same by the King's almoner, on the King's arrival at
Newcastle Wardrobe account of 15th, 16th, and 17th of Edward II. penes Th.
Astle, Armig. p. 31. -- See before, under this year, Black Friars. --
"Fratribus de ordine Minorum ejusdem ville per manus ejusdem ibid. eodem die
pro eodem 8s." -- "14 Septembr' fratribus de ordine Minorum ejusdem ville pro
eodem per manus ejusdem ibidem eodem die 8s."

The following occurs ibid. p. 215: "14 die Septembris ponebatur per preceptum
Domini Regis super corpus Forcii Caillan servientis Regis ad arma die sepulture
ejusdem in ecclesia Fratrum Minorum ejusdem ville -- unus pannus ad aurum in
canabo. -- Eodem die ponebatur per preceptum Regis super corpus Dominici
Johannis servientis Regis ad arma defuncti die sepulture ejusdem in eadem
ecclesia -- unus pannus ad aurum in canabo -- 17 die Septembr' ponebatur ut
supra super corpus Bernardi Brun defuncti et sepulti in eadem ecclesia -- unus
pannus ad aurum in canabo."


.

A. D. 1336 Friar Martin of Alnwick died, and was buried in this convent, where
he had taken the habit of a Franciscan, and from whence he was sent to Oxford,
where he took a doctor's degree Bourne's History, p. 85.
.

December 6th, 1342, on a representation to King Edward III. then at Newcastle
upon Tyne, by the warden and friars of this house, that they and their
predecessors had long held a conduit of water, running to their convent, from a
fountain called Seven-Head-Wells, which they had enclosed with stone, and put a
door to, of which they were in possession of the key; but the fountain
abounding with water, they had granted a part of it to the use of the public of
that place, who abusing their favor had broken the conduit, diverted the
course of the water, and hindered them from recovering it: the King granted
them the sole use of this fountain, and empowered them a second time to enclose
it, lock it up, and keep the key thereof, in the same manner as before the
infringement of their exclusive right "Tertia pars paten' de anno regni Regis
Edwardi tercii decimo quinto, m. 4, pro gardiano et Fratribus Minoribus ville
Novi Castri super Tynam -- R. omnibus etc. salutem. Monstrarunt nobis dilecti
nobis in Christo gardianus et Fratres Minores ville nostre Novi Castri super
Tynam quod licet ipsi et eorum predecessores per tempora diutina habuerint
quendam conductum aque de quodam sonte vocato Seven-Hed-Welles usque mansum
suum in villa predicta currentis et sontem illum de petra et calce firmatum et
clausum et ostio obserratum tenuerint clavemque ejusdem ostii penes se
retinuerint absque eo quod aliquis se inde preter ipsos gardianum and fratres
intromisit, postmodumque dicti gardianus and fratres ad requisitionem hominum
communitatis ville predicte pro eo quod sons ille si^ erat exuberans quod
sufficere poterat hiis et illis, partemque aque dicti fontis sub conductu
generose sacere permiserunt. Homines tamen ville predicte concessa sibi gratia
abutentes, conductum predictorum gardiani and fratrum noviter fregerunt et
cursum aque ejusdem divertere voluntary presumpserunt, ipsos gardianum et
fratres conductum suum reparare et aquam conductus predicti in rectum et
antiquum cursum reducere impedientes injuste super quo nobis supplicarunt sibi
per nos de remedio provideri. Nos intuitu Dei cujus obsequiis dicti fratres
specialiter ascribuntur volentes eos super hoc favore persequi generoso,
concessimus pro nobis et heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est quod iidem
gardianus et fratres conductum suum predictum habere et illum reparare et
emendare et aquam inde in pristinum cursum reducere ac dictum fontem petra et
calce includere et ostio obserrato firmare et clavem inde penes se retinere ac
dictum conductum sic reparatum and emendatum et aquam ad cursum pristinum
reductam, fontemque inclusum and ostio obserratum ut premittitur tenere possint
sibi et successoribus suis imperpetuum sine occone vel impedimento nostri vel
heredum nostrorum justic' escaetor' vic' aut aliorum ballivorum seu ministrorum
nostrorum aut alterius quorumcunque prout iidem gardianus and fratres vel little
predecessores ea tenere consueverant antequam per dictos homines sic fuerant
impediti. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Novum Castrum super Tynam 6 die
Decembr'. Per breve de privato sigillo." -- From the original in the Tower of
London.
to the same.

A. D. 1350 Henry de Huda, an Englishman, occurs as provincial of England, and
of the custody of Newcastle upon Tyne Tanner's Bibliotheque, p. 418.
.

March 23d, 1497, Thomas Baxter was ordained priest, John Cook, John Esby, and
William Hudson, subdeacons, and John de Macklinia and Francis de Macklinia,
acolythists. They all belonged to this order and house -- the two last are
styled of the order of Friars Minors de observancia "Frater Though Baxter ord'
Fratrum Minorum ord' presbiter Mar. 23, frater Joh' Cook, frater Joh' I^sby,
frater Will' Hudson, ord' sub-diac' Mar. 23. 1497.

Fratres Joh' de Macklinia ord' Frat' Minorum de observanc' accoliti."

Fra' de Macklinia ord' Frat' Minorum de observanc' accoliti." 1497.

(Fox's Regist. p. 15. Randal's MSS.)
.

King Henry VII. who died A. D. 1509, some time in his reign appears to have
expelled the conventuals of this order from this house, and filled it with
observants in their stead Antiquities of English Franciscans, p. 216. In
Stowe's Annal, ed. 1632, it is said* very erroneously, that "Henry VII. builded
a house of Franciscan Friars, called Conventualles, at Newcastle."
.

In the year 1536 the house of Friars Minors in Newcastle was again made
conventual About the year 1400 a reformation was made in this order by Saint
Bernard of Sienna, and such as accepted it were called Observants or
Recollects, who had two or three houses built for them by K. Henry VII. The
rest were styled Conventual, and had about 55 houses at the dissolution.
by King Henry the Eighth "The following passage occurs in the 1st vol. of the
History of the Reformation, p. 153.

"The Observant Friars of Richmont, Greenwich, Canterbury, Newark and Newcastle
were removed out of their houses (upon occasion of the imposture of Eliz.
Barton, called the Holy Maid of Kent, in 1534), and put with the other Gray
Friars, and Augustine Friars were put in their houses, and this was all the
severity which at this time followed on it."

The subsequent extract is from the second part of the Antiquities of the
Franciscans.

"King Henry VII. placed the Observants in this seat ( i. e. their house at
Newcastle), but whether it was a new house built for them by that King, or the
old convent of the Conventuals resigned to them by his majesty's command, I do
not find; but believe it was the latter: and that the said Conventuals again
took possession of it, when the Observants were turned out of this as well as
out of all their other houses, by King Henry VIII. And that which confirms me
in this opinion is, that Burnet says this house was surrendered 30 Hen. VIII.
by the warden, 8 friars, and 2 novices, which was five years after the
Observants were suppressed and violently expelled out of all their houses."


.

It was prevailed The word prevailed is here made use of because neither the
houses above the value of 200l. nor the less abbeys were within the statute of
suppression.

"The Franciscans of the province of England, as Speed writes from the royal
records, subsisted chiefly by a charitable and free donation of five pence once
in three months, from every house or family." -- Hist. of English Franciscans,
p. 220.


upon to surrender January 9th. 1539, at which time it consisted of John
Crayforth, prior, eight friars and two novices "Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad
quos presens scriptum pervenerit Johannes Crayforth prior five gardianus domus
conventualis Fratrum Minorum de Novo Castro super Tynam et in com' ejusdem et
ejusdem loci conventus salutem etc. Noveritis etc. (See form under White
Friars.) In quorum testimon' etc. Dat. in domo nostra capitulari nono die
mensis Januarii anno R. Regis Henrici octavi tricesimo, Johannes Crayforth
guardianus Jhon Hesselden pressed Wyllyam Mawr pryst ac subgardianus Thomas
Pentland pressed William Greated pressed Wyllyam Kyrebe preast Robarte Heart priest
Robert Cartter priest Thomas Watson priest.

Jhon Phye^son Novicii." -- From the original in the Augmentation-Office.

Jhon Byellye Novicii." -- From the original in the Augmentation-Office.

Seal red wax -- Over a shield with the arms of England having only three
fleurs de lis; the virgin Mary standing on a crescent with rays of glory
issuing from each side of her -- -- below, the seven stars. Inscription "Sigill
-- us Minor' in Novo Castro." -- See Seals, Plate II. No 8. -- Perhaps the
Observants had another seal, i. e. the figure of St. Francis with a cross in
his hand.


.

James Rokesby occurs as the keeper after the suppression In the ministers' or
bailiffs' accounts of diverse religious houses in Northumberland, from
Michaelmas 30 Hen. VIII. to that term 31 Henry VIII. in the Augmentation Office
is the following: "Domus nuper fratrum vocat' le Gray-Freres infra villam Novi
Castri super Tynam. Computus Jacobi Rokesby custodis ibidem per tempus
predictum -- se^ reddit de 13s. 4d. de suma scitus dicte nuper domus fratrum
scituat' in Pylgramstrete infra villam Novi Castri super Tynam cum edificiis,
tribus parvis ponta^iis ac tribus patris gardinis et uno pa^vo clauso juxta
muros dic^e ville et uno parvo bauk juxta Dean continen' per estimacionem 3
actas et d^^id' in tenura predicti Jacobi Rokesby ad voluntatem Domini Regis
annuatim s^lvend' ad terminos Pent' and Sancti Martini in ye^^e equaliter,
summa 13s. 4d."
.

The Franciscans having enjoyed nothing either in propriety or common but a
subsistence depending upon the charity of others, their house here had
accordingly no rents, and there is on that account so small a value of it
recorded at the suppression Harleian MSS. 604. "A brese certificate made upon
the dissolucions of diverse monaster etc. 30 Hen. VIII. Newcastell, Gray Freres
there, Robert Brandlyng, merchant, keeper. -- Clear val^w, etc. 58. The nombre,
etc. 12. -- The clear money 58. -- The ^tok, etc. 11l. 11s. Rewards, etc. 6^s.
4d. The remaner, etc. 8l. 7s. 8d. Lead, 24 fother. -- Bells, two. -- Woods,
etc. ^l. -- Playte, etc. 32 un^'. -- Deus owyng unto and by nil."

Leland, and Tanner after him, informs^^, that "The Observant Freres house
stood by Pandon-Gate. It is a very fair thing." -- Pandon must be a mistake
here for ^ilgri^ Gate.


.

Tanner informs us, in his Notitia Monastica, that this house, in 1545, was
granted to the Earl of Essex, James Rokesby, and others.

The street called Upper-Dean-Bridge, or High-Bridge, to distinguish it from
the Nether or Low Bridge, conducts from the foot of the Bigg-Market to
Pilgrim-Street. The corporation of Newcastle have lately made on the south side
of part of it a covered place for a poultry market, which is held there
accordingly every Saturday.

A meeting house for dissenters was erected not many years ago in this street,
of which Mr. James Murray was minister. -- He published Sermons to Asses, The
History of the American War, etc. -- Died January 28th, 1782, and was buried in
St. Andrew's churchyard.

The Low or Nether Dean-Bridge conducted from St. Nicholas' churchyard into
Pilgrim-Street, and has plainly had its name from its situation lower down in
the town than the Upper or High-Bridge There was preserved in the town's butch,
among other writings preserved there, A. D. 1565, "a grant by one King Richard
for the building of Nether-Dean-Bridge."

In the Harleian MSS. 708, 14 Ric. II. mention occurs of five cottages "juxta
le Dene-Brigge."


. The Roman Wall, it is said, went along it.

Formerly there was a small descent by stone steps from the churchyard into the
Low-Bridge, and at the foot of these steps was an almshouse, for two or three
poor women, which lately remained, but has at present no allowance, nor is the
founder known.

Dr. Ellison's MSS. call it "an hospital in the Nether-Deen-Bridge." It often
is mentioned in St. Nicholas' old registers -- 1579, 1581, 1650, etc.

The Painter-Hugh, by a steep descent, conducted from the bottom of
Pilgrim-Street to the middle of the Side. -- There is a flight of stone steps
on one side, for the convenience of foot passengers. Bourne derives the name of
it from "painter," a rope by which boats are moored; and "hugh," a steep hill
or bank. -- The latter is clear, but I should suspect the former to have been
the surname of the owner of the property In a deed preserved in All Saints
vestry, dated 1373, "Payntor Hugh" occurs. Also, in another, ibid. dated 1405.
There is a strange derivation of the name of this place given by Dr. Stukeley,
in his Iter Boreale, p. 68. He says it "is probably from the old name Panna,
corrupted." This Panna, the doctor supposes (but it is a mere supposition) was
the ancient name of the station at Newcastle.
.

Pilgrim-Street This street appears to have been called Vicus Peregrinorum as
early as the year 1292. It is mentioned in the copy of a grant of a house to
Brinkburn priory in Northumberland, of that date, preserved in the ledger-book
of that priory, from whence this note was extracted by Mr. Robert Harrison.
, on I know not what authority, is said to have had its name on account of
pilgrims who came from all parts of the kingdom to worship at our Lady's chapel
at Jesmond, in the vicinity of Newcastle.

There was an inn Perhaps there have been more Pilgrims Inns in this street
than one: there seems reason also for supposing, from the following extract,
that pilgrims came hither too to visit certain relics of St. Francis that
were preserved in the house of Gray Friars, near the head of this street. -- It
is from Bale's Life of Hugh of Newcastle, a famous Franciscan of that town:
"Hugo de Novo Castro Dunelmensis quoque ditionis alumnus ejus oppidi minoritis
a parentibus suis traditus fuit, ut una cum christianae vitae exemplis bonas
imbiberet arts. Sed ecce pro vita mors, et pro religione plusquam vanissima
omnium qui unquam fuerunt gentilium superstitio. Non in sculptilibus solum
ligneis ac lapideis sed in iptissimis idololatriarum omnium sordidissimis
fecibus. Francisci nempe perforatis calceis, chordis et braccis: quae parituris
statim mulierculis et aliis sibi et suo Francisco devotis peregrinis,
contrectanda, exosculanda atque summa veneratione in Antichristi regno colenda,
devotissime exhibere solent."

Mention occurs in the Carr MS. A. D. 1564, of the execution of one Partrage,
for coining false money in "the great innes in Pilgrim-Street."

Dr. Ellison's MSS. say, that this house, called the Pilgrim's Inn, was holden
of the dean and chapter of Durham, and belonged in his time to Mr. Ralph Ogle.

Bourne describes it as adjoining to the north side of Mr. Edward Collingwood's
house, and exactly 116 yards from the southermost corner of Upper-Dean-Bridge:
he adds, it is holden of the dean and chapter of Durham, and belongs at present
to Mr. James Hargrave.

This appears to have been called St. Cuthbert's Inn in the time of Henry VIII.
See the ministers' or bailiffs' accounts of the monastery of Durham, 4th of
February, 32 Hen. VIII. remaining in the Augmentation-Office, from whence the
following is an extract: "Novum Castrum super Tynam. -- Valet in firma unius
burgagii ibidem vocat' Saint Cuthbert's Inn per annum 34s. 8d. jacen' in
Pilgramestrete et in parochia Omnium Sanctorum ville predicte."

The last building in this street, to which tradition had continued the name of
Pilgrim's Inn, was pulled down a few years ago by its owner Mr. Thomas Barker,
merchant, who has built on the site of it a large house to front the street,
and converted the back parts of the premises into a starch manufactory. Windows
of a very ancient model, thick wall, etc. as also a crucifix of wood, were
discovered on pulling down the old building.

In the summer of 1777 I saw at Canterbury a place for similar purposes, where
the shoals of pilgrims that went thither to visit the shrine of St. Thomas a
Becket, were accustomed to lodge, which has undergone little or no alteration
in its appearance. Chaucer is said to have often slept in it. See Gostling's
Canterbury, p. 57, 63, 64. 2d edition.


in this street, says Bourne, which the Pilgrims in their journey were wont to
call at, which occasioned their constant coming up this street, and so it got
its name of Pilgrim-Street, as the inn did that of Pilgrim's Inn.

The meeting house of the inoffensive sect called Quakers is in Pilgrim-Street,
nearly opposite to the site of the Pilgrim's Inn.

Adjoining to it is a burying-ground for persons of that denomination.

In Corbridge's Plan of Newcastle upon Tyne, of the date of 1723, a dissenters
meeting house is marked hereabouts, and not far from the Manor-Chare.

The first place of meeting George Fox, in his Journal, p. 281, tells us, that
he came to Newcastle upon Tyne in 1657, but meeting with no encouragement, and
finding (says he) "we could not have a public meeting among them, we got a
little meeting among friends and friendly people at the Gateside; where a
meeting is continued at this day in the name of Jesus." -- Friend George
inveighs with great warmth against the then priests of Newcastle, saying, that
"the power of the Lord rose in me to warn them of the day of the Lord that was
coming upon them; and not long after all these priests of Newcastle, and their
profession, were turned out when the King came in." He adds, "one L^dger, an
alderman of the town, was very envious against truth and friends."

I found the following inscription on a stone in a garden belonging to Captain
Lampton, near the middle glass-house: "Abigail Tizacke, daughter of John and
Sarah Tizacke, departed this life the 7th day of the 12th month, and in the 7th
weack of her age, anno 1679." -- The "12th month" is an expression for
December, which clearly marks the sect to which J. and S. Tizacke belonged.


which this sect had in the vicinity of Newcastle upon Tyne, was in the street
called Pipewell-Gate, in Gateshead, in a house not many years ago the property
of a Mr. Swift, who kept a tavern in it, with the sign of the Fountain.

On the same side of Pilgrim-Street, a little higher up, there is kept, at
present, a dispensary, which was opened October 2d, 1777 Newcastle Courant,
October 4th, 1777.
for the humane purpose of "administering advice and medicines to the poor
confined to their own habitations by sickness."

The corporation of Newcastle subscribed 40l. per annum September 25th, 1777.
Common Council books. -- The salary of 50l. per annum, heretofore paid to the
town's surgeon, is now lessened to 20l. per annum, "for giving his attendance
and assistance to such of the dispensary patients, and others, in this town, as
shall require surgical aid, and be recommended by the corporation."

A general meeting of the governors of the dispensary was held on the 29th of
September, 1777, when the regulations for the government thereof, etc. were
confirmed -- John Baker, Esquire. mayor, president. -- Newcastle Courant, October
4th, 1777.

A pamphlet lies before me, entitled, "An Account of the Newcastle Dispensary
for the Relief of the Poor, instituted 1777, published by order of the
Governors. Newcastle, printed by T. Saint, 1778." 35 pages, octavo.


to this charitable institution, which is a very necessary appendix to the
infirmary.

The limits for visiting patients were appointed as follows: Shield-Road-Bridge
to the eastward, and the utmost extent of the town to the west, north, and
south. Gateshead to become a district for medical practice, as soon as a
sufficient subscription should be raised. John Baker, Esquire. was the first
president; Lord Ravensworth was afterward patron.

In November, 1785, the Duke of Northumberland was chosen patron of this
charity.

In September, 1786, the present Duke of Northumberland was elected patron.

Near the head of this street, on the left hand in going up, stands a princely
mansion, the main body whereof is said to have been built out of the ruins of
the house of the Grey-Friars. -- The two wings were added by Sir William
Blackett, Bart. whose granddaughter married its late lamented owner and
inhabitant, Sir Walter Blackett, Bart This house, the view of which, from the
street, often called to my remembrance the passage of Virgil, which describes
the palace of Anchises: -- "Quanquam secreta parentis
Anchisae domus arboribusque obtecta recessit." -- Aeneid, lib. ii. l. 299.
was purchased, with the extensive gardens, etc. around it, A. D. 1783, by Mr.
George Anderson, master builder, of Sir Thomas Blackett, Bart.

There is a bird's eye view of it among Kip's Views, entitled, "The seat of the
Hon. Sir William Blackett, Bart. with part of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne."

Gray (and Bourne after him) calls it a princely house, and very stately and
magnificent, being supposed to be the most so of any house in the whole kingdom
within a walled town. It is surrounded with a vast quantity of ground.

It is added, "That part of it which faces the street is thrown into walks and
grass-plots, beautified with image and beset with trees, which afford a very
pleasing shade: the other part of the ground, on the west side of it, is all a
garden, exceedingly neat, and curiously adorned with statues, and several other
curiosities. But this house is not more remarkable or memorable upon any
account than for its having been the lodgings of King Charles I. whilst he was
a prisoner at this town."

It appears from Corbridge's Plan, 1723, that the meeting house of the company
of spurriers was in an apartment in an old pile of buildings immediately below
this house: a view of which is given in that plate by the title of "Mr. Fenwick
Lambert's House." -- On a stone over one entrance, "Gloria Deo in excelsis." --
Over another fronting the street, "De bon vouloir servir le Roi."


.

The almshouses built by Christopher Brigham, merchant, and after him called
Brigham's almshouses, stood at the head of this street, near the Grey-Friars'
House, and almost contiguous to Pilgrim-Street-Gate.

The founder was sheriff of Newcastle A. D. 1495, and mayor A. D. 1504 and 1505.

This place is mentioned as having been inhabited, in the year 1556, by poor
religious women. The site of this place is marked in Speed's Plan of Newcastle,
A. D. 1610.

Leland mentions this little hospital, which appears by Speed's Plan to have
consisted of several houses, occupying all, or most of that space, separated by
a little lane near the head of Pilgrim-Street, and then at a right angle
turning northward into the High-Friar-Chare. They were bounded on the east and
north by Pilgrim-Street and the said Chare Mr. Fenwick, town's surveyor,
informed me, that within his remembrance there was an old building there, over
the door of which was a stone with a Latin inscription.
.

Between Pilgrim-Street and the town's wall on the east, is a little field
Bourne thus mentions it -- "On that side of Pilgrim-Street next the town-wall,
is a very agreeable walk, generally frequented in a summer's evening by the
gentry of this part of the town." There is a passage into this field from the
Manor-Chare, another from Pilgrim-Street-Gate, and a third from behind
Surgeons' Hall.

In a mutilated deed, preserved in St. Andrew's vestry, dated 15th Ed. IV.
mention occurs of "Carle-Croft." -- In a deed dated August 20th, 19 Ed. IV.
"Johannes Carl^ll, Armiger," occurs as owner of considerable property in
Pilgrim-Street.


that formerly belonged to the family of Carlels, or Carliols, from whom it was
called the Carle, or Carliol-Croft. There is a runner of water through it near
the garden walls, the ancient name of which was Ayrekeburn In a deed, dated
April 29th, 1518, a message in Pilgrim-Street is described as extending itself
"a via regia ante ex part occidentali usque rivolum vocatum Ayrekeburn retro
ex part orientali."
.

Near the foot of this street is held a market for wheat and rye every Tuesday
and Saturday.

Lord Scrope had a house in this street A. D. 1456, near some property of Sir
John Heron, of Ford, Knt Deed dated 27th August, 31 Hen. VI. -- "Inter
tenementum Domini de Scr^pe ex part boreali -- et extendit se in longitudine a
vico vocato Pilgrym-Strete ex p^^te o^^nt^li usque rivolum vocat' Lorte-Burne
ex part occidentali." -- From the original, to which Heron's seal is affixed,
in the possession of the owner of the tenement described in it, Mr. Thomas
White, custom-house officer.
.

The house of Laurence Acton, who was mayor of Newcastle in the year 1433, was
in this street.

Pilgrim-Street, growing narrower as it approaches to All Saints church, winds
down the hill toward the foot of the Side, taking the name at present of
Butcher-Bank, as being chiefly inhabited by persons of that trade, but it was
formerly called All-Hallow-Bank In a deed preserved in All Saints vestry, dated
October 29th, 1319, it is called "vicus qui ducit del Cale-Crosse ad ecclesiam
Omnium Sanctorum."
.

There was an almshouse near All Saints church, which was founded about the
beginning of the sixteenth century, by Elizabeth Nykson, widow As may be
gathered (...) the fragment of a deed in All Saints vestry, in which Elizabeth
Nykson, widow, grants to Roger Dent, Esquire. and other feoffees, her two
tenements, with an alms house adjou^in^, in Pilgrim-Street, which feoffees,
after her death, (...) to deliver up the above property to the churchwardens
of All Saints, to the use of the poor, on condition of an annual d^^ge and soul
mass being performed in that church. Roger Dent was sheriff of Newcastle A. D.
1510, and mayor A. D. 1515.

There are several entries concerning it in the old parish-books in All Saints
vestry A. D. 16^^, 1^34, 1642, 1666.


. Two houses adjoining were given with it, to the use of the poor of All Saints
parish -- Four women, who were allowed twenty shillings per annum for coals,
lived in it. -- Bourne tells us, that in his time it was going fast to ruin,
and that the then sole inhabitant was allowed eight chaldron of coals by the
year, and three shillings a quarter by the churchwardens of All Saints.

It was opposite to the west stairs of that church.

It appears, by an inquisition taken September 2d, 1577, that a waste in
Pilgrim-Street belonged to the nuns of Lamlaye, whose lands were purchased by
Albayne Fetherstonehaugh at the dissolution.

Manor-Chare The present name may be accounted for as follows: the house of
Austin-Friars, after the dissolution, was reserved for the King's use, for his
council in the northern parts, and was therefore called King's Manor. -- See
Speed's Plan of Newcastle.
, which leads from Pilgrim-Street to Jesus' Hospital, and from thence to the
head of the Broad-Chare, by a part Yet it should seem by the following, that
the whole street was called Cow-Gate. -- Deed dated February 20th, 5 Ed. IV. --
"Prout jacet in Vico Peregrinorum i^^ia ^lla a Novi Castri super Tynam inter
tenementum nuper Laurentri de Acton ex part (...) et tenementum nuper Thomae
Clerk ex part australi et extendit in lo^ itudi^e a vi^^gra ante usque vicum
quondam vocatum Cow-Gate, modo vocatum Austyn-Chare (...)." -- The meeting
house of the taylors' company was till lately in this street. They have now
removed from their hall in the Manor-Chare to their ancient on^ in the
Black-Friar^, which they have rebui^t in a handsome manner, with convenient
accommodations for their poor brethren and widows. -- In the front the arms of
the company in ba^-relief,inscribed underneath, "Taylor's Hall, rebuilt anno
1788.
Richard Franks Stewards.
Thomas Robson Stewards.
Jasper Harrison, Esquire. Sec."

of it anciently called Cow-Gate, was formerly styled Austin-Chare, as
conducting to the house of Austin, or Augustine-Friars.

The first appearance of this order of mendicants in England was, according to
some accounts, in 1250; others place it in 1252.

This house is said to have been founded by William, Lord Ros, Baron of Wark
upon Tweed, about the year 1290 See afterward A. D. 1309.
.

A. D. 1291 King Edward I. granted a license to John de Capella, to give and
assign a message in Penrith to the prior and brethren of this house Tanner's
Notitia Monastica. Pat. 19 Ed. I. m. 7, vel. 8. And Bourne, from an account
communicated by a clergyman of Bampton in Westmoreland.
.

A. D. 1299 King Edward I. gave to the brethren of this monastery 8s. 4d. for a
pittance of one day, on his passing through Newcastle in the month of December,
and for their pittance of two days, on his coming to that town on the 8th of
January following Wardrobe account, 28 Ed. I. published by the Society of
Antiquaries. -- "Fratribus Sancti Augustini ville Novi Castri super Tynam pro
pittancia sua unius diei in adventu Regis per ibid. mense Decembr' in principio
per manus........

"Fratribus Sancti Augustini ejusdem ville pro pittancia sua duorum dierum in
adventu Regis ibid. mense Januar' per manus fratris Willielmi de Pordelye ibid.
eodem die 8 Januarii 16s. 8d."

N. B. The sum of the former entry is defaced in the MS. I have presumed it was
half as much as the latter.


.

In the year 1306 the King granted a license of mortmain to Bartholomew Patun,
of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Christian his wife, to assign to the prior and
brethren of St. Augustine, of that town, a certain place contiguous to their
convent, 200 feet in length, and 24 feet in breadth, for the purpose of
enlarging their burial-ground "Paten' de anno R. R. Edwardi primi vicesimo
quarto, m. 27.

"Pro fratribus Sancti Augustini de Novo Castro super Tynam.

"Rex omnibus ad quos etc. salutem. Licet de communi consilio regni nostri
statuerimus quod non licet viris religiosis seu aliis ingredi feodum alicujus
ita quod ad manum mortuam deveniat sine licentia nostra et capitaiis domini de
quo res illa immediate tenetur. Volentes tamen dilectis nobis in Christo priori
et fratribus Sancti Augustini de Novo Castro super Tynam gratiam facere
specialem, concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro nobis et heredibus nostris
quantum in nobis est Bartholomeo Patun de Novo Castro super Tynam and
Christian uxori ejus quod ipsi quandam placeam suam in villa de Novo Castro
super Tynam manso ipsorum prioris et fratrum in eadem villa contiguam
continentem in se ducentos pedes terre in longitudine et quatuor viginti pedes
terre in latitudine dare possint et assignare eisdem priori and fratribus ad
elargacionem cimeterii sui ibidem, habend' et tenend' eisdem priori and
fiatribus and successoribus suis ad elargacionem cimeterii sui predicti
imperpetuum et eisdem priori et fratribus quod ipsi predictam placeam a
presatis Bartholomeo et Christiana recipere possint et tenere sicut predictum
est tenore presentium similiter licenciam dedimus specialem, nolentes quod
predict' Bartholomeus and Christiana vel heredes sui aut predicti prior and
conventus vel successores sui ratione statuti predicti per nos vel heredes
nostros inde occonentur, molestentur in aliquo seu graventur salvis etc. In
cujus etc. T. R. apud Wynton' 20 die......." -- From the original in the Tower
of London.


.

A. D. 1309, there was a patent containing a confirmation of land lying in
Cow-Gate, which had been granted by William Ros to the brethren of this house;
as there was also another of the same date, by which King Edward II. granted
some messuages in Newcastle, late parcel of the possessions of Robert de
Middleton, who had been attainted, for the enlargement of this convent Wallis's
History of Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 209. "Fratribus Sancti Augustini in Novo
Castro super Tynam confirmatio cotae terrae quae jacet in Cow-Gate ibidem
concess' per Willielmum Ros. Pat. 2 R. Ed. II. p. 1, m. 23." -- (I take this to
be what Tanner, by mistake, calls 11 Ed. II. p. 1, m. 23, concerning land in
Cow-Gate granted to this house by William Ros de Hamelake. The 11 is often
confounded with the figure 2.)

"De messuag' in Novo Castro super Tynam parcel' possessionum Roberti de
Middleton attincti per Regem pro manso elargendo. Pat. 2 Ed. II. p. 2, m. 31."


.

Tanner, in his Notitia Monastica, mentions a patent to this house, of the date
of 1319 Pat. 12 Ed. II. p. 1, m. 4 vel 5.
.

August 1st, 1322, the brethren of this house received eight shillings for
their pittance of one day; and September 14th following, on the King's arrival
at Newcastle, eight shillings for the same, by the hands of the King's almoner
Wardrobe account of 15th, 16th, and 17th years of Edward II. penes Thom. Astle,
Armig. p. 31. See before under this year "Black-Friars." -- "Fratribus de
ordine Sancti Augustini ejusdem ville pro eodem per manus ejusdem ibidem eodem
die 8^. -- 14 Sep. fratribus Sancti Augustini etc. ut supra 8s." -- The
following entry occurs ibid. "Eodem die ( i. e. primo Augusti) in exequiis
factis per preceptum Regis circa corpus Domini Johannis de Penryth militis die
sepulture sue in ecclesia fratrum de ordine Sancti Augustini ejusdem ville ut
in cera, oblacionibus et aliis expensis necessariis circa ^dem corpus appositis
per manus Domini Willielmi de Kirkeby clerici 72s. 9d." Ibid. p. 215: "Primo
die Augusti ponebatur per preceptum Domini Regis super corpus Domini Johannis
de Penreth militis defuncti die sepulture ejusdem in ecclesia fratrum Sancti
Augustini de Novo Castro super Tynam unus pannus ad aurum in servicio de Luk --
unus pannus ad aurum in canabo."
.

About this time one Elias was prior of this house Ibid. p. 268, "Frater Elias
Prior Sancti Augustini de Novo Castro" occurs.
.

In the year 1323 a patent was granted to this convent, concerning a piece of
ground contiguous thereto, 28 feet in length, and 160 feet in breadth, to be
procured of John Denton to enlarge their house Tanner. -- Also Wallis, in his
History of Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 209: "Fratres Sancti Augustini
monasterii in Novo Castro super Tynam de quadam placea terre ibidem continente
28 pedes in longitud' and 160 pedes in latitudine perquirenda de Jo. Denton pro
manso elargendo." -- Pat. 16 R. Ed. II. p. 2, m. 15.
.

Tanner, in his Notitia Monastica, mentions a patent of this fraternity, dated
A. D. 1330, which cannot now be found 3 Ed. III. p. 1, m..... -- Tanner's
Notitia Monastica was not published till after his death: he wrote a bad hand,
and it is supposed that his executors, etc. have not been able to read, or make
out, all his references. This is given by Mr. Kipling, of the rolls, as the
very probable reason why there are so many mistakes in that book.
.

September 23d, 1331, King Edward III. after an inquisition made by John de
Bolingbrok, his eschaetor north of Trent, granted a license of mortmain to Adam
de Colewell, chaplain, to assign three roods and an half of land in Newcastle,
contiguous to this house, to the prior and brethren thereof, in order to
enlarge it; with a proviso that the mayor and community of that town should
have sufficient space between this convent and the town's wall to ride in, for
the custody and defense thereof, as they had in other places in the circuit of
the said town, within the above wall. This land was held of the King in chief,
and paid three-halfpence per annum for all service "Secunda pars paten' de anno
regni Regis Edwardi tercii quarto, m. 41, pro priore and conventu de ordine
Sancti Augustini ville Novi Castri super Tynam.

"R. omnibus etc. salutem. Quia accepimus per inquisitionem quam per dilectum
nobis Johannem de Bolingbrok escaetorem nostrum citra Trentam fieri fecimus
quod non est ad dampnum vel prejudicium nostrum aut aliorum nec ad nocumentum
ville nostre Novi Castri super Tynam si concedamus Ade de Colewell capellano
quod ipse tres rodas terre et dimidium cum pertinen' in dicta villa Novi Castri
manso dilectorum nobis in Christo prioris and fratrum de ordine Sancti
Augustini in eadem villa contiguas dare possit et assignare eisdem priori and
fratribus habend' et tenen^' sibi et successoribus suis fratribus de ordine
predicto ad elargacionem mansi sui predicti imperpetuum. Dum tamen major et
communitas ville predicte habeant inter mansum predictum et (...) ville
predicte spacium sufficiens ad equitand' pro custodia et defensione ville
predicte prout alibi habent in circuitu ejusdem ville infra murum predictum et
quod terra predicta tenetur de nobis in capite per servicium trium denanorum
per annum pro omni servicio Nos eisdem priori et fratribus volentes in (...)
part gratiam facere specialem concessimus et licentiam dedimus pro nobis et
heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est eidem Ade quod ipse terram predictam cum
pertinen' da^e possit et assignare presatis priori et fratribus habend' and
tenend' sibi et successoribus suis predictis ad clargacion^m mansi sui predicti
imperpetuum Dum tamen major and communitas ville predicte habeant inter mansum
predict' et murum ville predict' spacium sufficiens ad equitand' pro custodia
et defensione ville predicte prout alibi habent in circuitu ejusdem ville infra
murum predict' et eisdem priori et fratribus quod ipsi terram predictam cum
pertinen' a prefato Adam recipere possint et tenere sibi and successoribus suis
predictis imperpetuum sicut predictum est tenore presencium similiter licenciam
dedimus specialem, statuto de terris and tenuris ad manum mortuam non ponend'
edito non obstante, etc. In cujus etc. T. R. apud Clipston 23 die Septembr'.
Per breve de privato sigillo." -- From the original in the Tower of London.


.

A writ of King Richard II. of a date posterior to A. D. 1389, the 12th of his
reign, is preserved in Fitzherbert's Natura Brevium, and appears to have been
sued forth by this convent. It is directed to the bailiffs of Newcastle upon
Tyne, who were ordered to make proclamation to prevent the casting of filth
into rivers, ditches, streets, etc. several persons having thrown excrements,
filth, and garbage, in a certain way that led near to the house of the
Austin-Friars, to their great annoyance and peril, and contrary to the tenor of
a late statute.

July 24th and 25th, 1503, Margaret, eldest daughter of King Henry VII. was
entertained at this house. This princess was at that time affianced to the King
of Scotland, and upon her journey thither See Annals and Historical Events.
.

By an ordinary of the fraternity of weavers in Newcastle upon Tyne, dated 31st
of August, 1525, every brother of that society is enjoined to be "at the Sante
Augustines in the day of the Exaltacion of the Holy Cross," in every year,
and on the "none of the same to go to the dirige and soul mass to be done for
the brederes and susters of the said fellowship See account of that company.
.

December 23d, 1531, Cuthbert Jordayne and John Ruther.... (probably
Rutherford), brethren of this house, were ordained priests Randall's MSS. --
From the Bishop of Durham's Register.

"Cuth. Jorcayne Fratres ordin' Sancti Augustini ord' presbiteri Dec. 23. 1531."

"Joh. Ruther.... Fratres ordin' Sancti Augustini ord' presbiteri Dec. 23.
1531."


.

Andrew Kel, prior, with seven brethren and three novices, surrendered this
house January 9th, 1539 "Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum
pervenerit Andreas Kelle prio^ sive gardianus domus conventualis Fratrum
Augustini ville de Novo Castro super Tynam et in com' ejusdem ac ejusdem loci
conventus salutem in Domino sempiternam et fidem indubiam presentibus adhibere.
Noveritis nos, etc." (See White Friars.)

"In quorum testimonium atque fidem nos prefati prior sive gardianus and
conventus sigillum nostrum commune presentibus apponi fecimus. Dat' in domo
nostra capitulari nono die mensis Januarii anno regni Regis Henrici octavi
tricesimo. Andreas Kel prior Robartus Walker presbyter Jhon Moscrop presbyther
Henricus Boys presbyther Robertus Bowlock presbyter Johannes Rutter presbyter
Wyllielmus Reed presbyter Thomas Cowper presbyter.

Rycherd Robson Novicii." Thomas Smythe Novicii." Thomas Dawlton Novicii."
(Rymer's Foedera, and the original remaining in the Augmentation Office.)
Seal, red wax. -- The figure of St. Austin, with a mitre and crosier -- a
person in the attitude of praying to him. Inscription: "Sigi -- stere o --
augus --."

See Seals, Plate II. No 4.

The following occurs among the Harleian MSS. 604: "A brefe certificate made
upon the dissolucions of diverse monaster' and priores there surrendrid in the
months of Decembre, Januar' and Februar' in the 30 year of the regne of Hen.
VIII. Newcastell Augustyne Freres -- Richard Benson, keeper.

Clear value, etc. nil. -- Gratia reservationis pro Domino Rege.

The nombre with pencions. -- Prior, nil -- 12 confrat' nil.

The clear money, etc. nil.

The stock, etc. 4l.

Rewards, etc. Prior 13s. 4d. Confratr' 68s. 4d.

The remaner, etc. 11s. 8d.

Lead and bells. -- Lead, 20 sother -- bells, 2.

Woods, etc. nil.

Playte, etc. 27 unc'

Detts owyng unto and by, nil."


.

A. D. 1540, this place occurs as having been reserved to the use of the King,
for his council in the north to reside in In the ministers' or bailiffs'
accounts of diverse religious houses in the county of Northumberland from
Michaelmas, 30 Henry VIII. to the same term 31 Henry VIII. remaining in the
Augmentation-Office, occurs the following: "Domus nuper Fratrum Augustinen'
ville Novi Castri super Tynam. -- Computus Ricardi Benson custodis ibidem per
tempus predictum -- arreragia -- nulla -- quia primus computus dicti
computantis -- summa nulla -- redditus et firm'. -- Nec respondit de firma
scitus nuper domus Fratrum Augustinen' infra villam Novi Castri super Tynam cum
edificiis gardinis and uno clauso adjacen' eidem nuper domini pertinen' eo quod
dicta nuper domus cum edificiis gardinis et claus' predict' ad usum Domini
Regis reservantur pro consilio suo in partibus borealibus existen' inhabitand'
et diversis temporibus requisit' permanend' et nullum proficuum de eisdem
perveniebat per tempus hujus computi -- summa nulla."
.

A. D. 1551, the house of Austin-Friars is said to have been granted to John,
Duke of Northumberland, "as parcel of Tinmouth monastery Aubone MS.

Leland tells us that this place, when he visited Newcastle, "had three or
four fair towers belonging to it."


."

August 1st, 1553, Richard Benson occurs as keeper of the house of Augustine
Friars in Newcastle, with a fee of forty shillings per annum, under the crown
MS. in the library of the Society of Antiquaries of London, entitled "A Book
o^ Fees and Offices, primo die Augusti anno primo regni Mariae."

"The Augustyne Friars in Newcastle.

"Keeper of the house -- Richard Benson -- see, 40s."


.

The Milbank MS. informs us, that King James I. gave it to a person of his own
nation, who had begged it of him Bourne.


The same authority tells us, that it afterward belonged to one Captain Sykes
Ibid.
.

This place occurs in Speed's Plan of Newcastle, 1610, under the title of "The
King's Manor."

A. D. 1648, it is mentioned as being in the possession of the corporation of
Newcastle, who had either recently purchased it, or claimed it as a waste
Common Council books, March 13th, 1648.

"Ordered that Mr. Recorder be desired, when he comes to London, to make search
in the Court of Augmentations, or elsewhere, to understand the bounders of the
Manner^, and that the hutch be perused if any records concerning the same may
be sound there."


.

March 15th, 1648, the company of barber surgeons petitioned the
common council of Newcastle upon Tyne for a grant of part of the Manors,
whereon to build themselves a meeting house Common Council books.

See Bourne's description of their meeting house or hall, in this place.

There is an order of common council, Sept. 2d, 1653, for "Mr. Blaickston to
have leave to dig as many foundation stones forth of the ground in the Manors
as he shall have occasion to use."

Ibid. 1655, mention occurs of an "old ruinate chapel" in this place.


.

The Manors has since that time continued in the possession of the corporation
of Newcastle upon Tyne. A division of it, still called the artillery ground,
was used by the townsmen as a place where they performed the exercise of the
pike and gun. Part of it was turned into a house of correction. Part of it the
butchers company converted into a tallow Common Council books, Sept. 23d, 1708.

"Butchers -- who have now the house in the artillery grounds for a
tallow-house -- -- Ordered that they remove from thence, etc."

Bourne thus describes the appearance of this place in his time: "The left hand
passage has still the remains of a large gate, which has been one of the gates
leading to St. Austin Friars, which, having passed the gate, is a little above
upon the right hand.

"There is also a complete quadrangle to be seen, the south side of which has
undoubtedly been the chapel. -- The enclosed ground all round it, where is now
the pasture of Nathanael Clayton, Esquire. alderman, the Surgeons' Hall, the
hospitals, etc. did undoubtedly belong to them, and was their garden."


house, and at different periods of time the hospital of the holy Jesus,
Blackett's hospital, and the hospitals of the two Davisons, the charity-school
of All Saints parish, a workhouse, and lastly a penitentiary house, have been
erected on distinct parcels thereof.

The present workhouse or general hospital It is now called the General
Hospital for the reception of the poor of the several parishes of the town. --
An addition has been lately made to it, on which is the following inscription:
"This addition to the General Hospital was built at the expense of the parish
of All Saints, with the assistance of the corporation, and for the larger
reception of the poor of the said parish: James Rudman, Esquire. mayor, Edward
Dale, Esquire. sheriff.
Wardens,
Thomas Barkas Peter Paxton William Lloyd Joseph Straker.
Overseers,
Thomas Guthrie, Joseph Liddell, George Hunter, Thomas Slurth.
1785."


, out of which the old windows were taken about fifty years ago, has formed, it
should seem, one of the quadrangles of the convent. In what is called now the
cellar of that building, two ancient arches still remain over the doorways,
near the hall or common eating-room.

Jesus' Hospital, commonly called the Town's Hospital Bourne's account of this
place is as follows: "You ascend to it by stairs from the High Street, and then
enter into a pleasant field, on the north side of which is the said hospital.
It is three stories high, and the under story is adorned with piazzas, which
are about 60 yards in length, and make a very agreeable walk. About the middle
of the piazzas is the entrance into the second and third stories, and over
against this entrance is a fountain (very much beautified) for the use of the
hospital. -- It was founded for a master and thirty-nine poor freemen or
freemen's widows.

The town allows them quarterly 20s. and the master 30s."


, situated near the foot of the Manor-Chare, was founded, erected, and endowed,
at the charge of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, A. D. 1681.

It is mentioned in the common council books, Dec. 18th, 1682, under the title
of an almshouse or hospital, lately erected for poor people in the Manors, at
which time some rules (which, afterward, April 16th, 1683, were revised with
some alterations) were confirmed by that body.

March 26th, 1683, this hospital was incorporated by the name of the master,
brethren and sisters of the Hospital of the holy Jesus, founded in the Manors
in the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, at the charge of the mayor and
burgesses of that town, for support of poor impotent people, being freemen and
freemen's widows, or their sons and daughters that had never been married, for
ever.

Thomas Lewen, merchant, was appointed the first master, with thirty-nine
others, to have power to sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded -- purchase
and hold lands, and have a common seal, with a cross graven thereon, and in the
circumference, "Sigillum Hospitalis Sancti Jesu in Novo Castro." The mayor,
aldermen and common council of Newcastle, for the time being, were appointed
visitors, and to give rules and laws to this hospital Common Council books.
.

The rules dated at a common council, April 16th, 1683, were sealed on the 3d
of October following Ibid.
.

March 27th, 1683, a message, key or quay, and garden, in the street called
the Close, in Newcastle, was purchased by the mayor and burgesses of that town
for 700l. and settled on the master, brethren and sisters of this hospital From
a deed in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle.
.

November 6th, 1683, an estate at Edderley, in the county of Durham, was
purchased by the mayor and burgesses aforesaid for 1610l. and settled in the
above master, brethren and sisters: the inheritance thereof to be in fee simple
Books of the hospital.
.

Sept. 25th, 1685, an estate at Whittell in the county of Northumberland, was
purchased by the above mayor and burgesses, for 1300l. and settled as above on
this hospital Ibid.
.

September 18th, 1695, mention occurs of Mr. John Rumney, as having bequeathed
250l. to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle; the interest whereof to be
yearly distributed to this hospital, and the poor of the several parishes of
Newcastle Common Council books.
.

December 19th, 1716, the mayor and common council of Newcastle petitioned
parliament for leave for the master, etc. of this hospital to sell their lands
at Edderley and Whittell aforesaid, which they alleged were not a sufficient
fund for their support.

The said mayor and common council were desirous, on this occasion, of charging
certain lands and tenements within the manor of Walker, in the county of
Northumberland, of the yearly value of 250l. with a yearly rentcharge for ever
of 185l. (105l. more by the year than the annual produce of Edderley and
Whittell), but they were unable to complete the purchase of the said manor of
Walker See Lords' Journals, vol. xx. p. 427. -- Also p. 588.

"January 17th, 1717, there was a bill in parliament for vesting of several
lands, belonging to the master, brethren and sisters of this hospital, in trust
(...) to be sold; and to settling on the said master, brethren and sisters, a
perpetual yearly rent of 185l. in (...) money in lieu thereof, to be charged
upon the estate of Walker, was brought into the House of Lords, and rejected by
the Lords, upon an allegation of Lord Cadogan that the corporation of Newcastle
had purchased the estate of Walker without license, and therefore, by the
statute of mortmain, it belonged to the crown." -- Grey's MSS.

Walker manor cost the corporation of Newcastle 12,220l. (Sir Robert Raymond's
Report, 1723.)

13th December, 10 George I. Pat. part 1. A pardon and license granted to the
mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, to hold the manor of Walker, and
the ballast-shore, and other lands particularly mentioned in the license.
Journals of Commons, vol. xxii. p. 710.

The following occurs in Gyll's interleaved Bourne, p. 245:

"Newcastle upon Tyne, January 21st, 1724. Yesterday our magistrates went in
their formalities to the Guildhall of this corporation, where there was
assembled a very great concourse of people. At which time William Carr, Esquire.
our representative in parliament delivered to the mayor, Matthew Featherstone,
Esquire. his majesty's license and pardon to this corporation, for having some time
ago made a considerable purchase of land contrary to the statute of mortmain.
The instrument was read by the town clerk, and loud acclamations followed
thereupon. The magistrates in common council unanimously agreed to address his
majesty, to return their thanks for this great mark of his favor to them.
After which, an handsome entertainment being prepared at the mayor's house,
most of the gentlemen of the town and neighborhood resorted thither, where his
majesty's health, and the health of the Prince and Princess of Wales, and the
royal family were drank with the utmost loyalty, and the evening concluded with
ringing of bells, and other demonstrations of joy. Upon Mr. Carr's late arrival
among us with the abovesaid license, he was immediately elected one of the
magistrates of this corporation."

The King was addressed on this occasion, February 7th, 1724.


, unless they obtained leave to dispose of Edderley and Whittell, to raise part
of the purchase money.

Mr. John Ord, by his will, proved at Westminster, A. D. 1721 or 1722, devised
to this hospital a rentcharge of 1l. 6s. 8d. from a message on the west side
of the Bigg-Market in Newcastle: also a rentcharge of 6s. 8d. out of another
message in the Side there for ever: these sums to be divided by his heir at
law in the presence of the mayor of Newcastle for the time being Hospital book.
.

January 2d, 1752, there was an order of common council for giving forty
fothers of coals annually to this hospital, at the festival of Christmas Common
council books.
.

December 18th, 1769, there was an order of common council for the master of
this hospital to be paid 8l. and each brother and sister 6l. per annum
Common Council books.
.

March 22d, 1779, the mayor and common council of Newcastle, in consequence of
a resolution to prefer, in future, the most aged claimants to the places that
should fall vacant in this hospital, made an order that the several candidates
should produce certificates of their respective ages, to be regularly filed in
the town-clerk's office Ibid.
.

Here also an hospital for matrons, for a governess and five sisters, to be
widows of protestant clergymen, merchants, and freemen of the town of
Newcastle, endowed by the charity of Mrs. Anne Davison Anne, relict of Benjamin
Davison, merchant, by her last will, dated Dec. 3d, 1719, bequeathed the sum of
940l. to general uses of charity, at the discretion of her executors. Dr.
Thomlinson, Alderman William Ellison, George Gray, Esquire. and Mr. Ord, were the
trustees.
, widow of Mr. Benjamin Davison, merchant, was erected by the corporation of
that town in a field near the hospital of the holy Jesus, in the year 1725.

George Gray, Esquire. surviving trustee, founded this hospital In the
incorporation of this hospital, the governess and sisters have power to sue and
be sued, to implead and be impleaded, to use a common seal with the letters A.
D. and a proper inscription, and to purchase lands: the mayor and
common council of Newcastle to be visitors of this hospital on the death of Mr.
Gray, and to appoint governesses and sisters, or, on any misbehaviour, to
remove them.

The following inscription was on the old house which was pulled down:

"This hospital for six poor widows of clergymen and merchants was endowed by
the charity of Mrs. Anne Davison, widow of Mr. Benjamin Davison, merchant, and
erected by the corporation of Newcastle, anno 1725."

This Mrs. Ann Davison, by her will, dated as above, appointed, after payment
of her debts, legacies and funeral expenses, that the surplus of her personal
estate should be divided amongst the poor, at the discretion of her executors,
George Gray, Esquire. the Reverend Robert Thomlinson, William Ellison, Esquire. and
John Ord, Gentleman. This surplus was 940l. which the executors agreed to lay
out in the endowment of an hospital for the relief of the widows of poor
protestant clergymen, merchants, and freemen of Newcastle, for ever.

A. D. 1725, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, at the request of the
executors, built a dwelling house, with offices, in the Manors, and conveyed
them to Mr. Gray, the only surviving executor, and his heirs for ever; who, by
his deed, dated 25th March, 1748, founded the said building an hospital, and
appointed at the same time the first governess and five sisters.

The mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, by an indenture, dated 24th
March, 1748, in consideration of 940l. paid by Mr. Gray, sold to him, his heirs
and assigns, an annuity of 55l. payable out of Walker estate.


March 25th, 1748.

A. D. 1754, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle having been appointed the
patrons of this charity, by the above surviving trustee, erected a handsome new
set of apartments for the governess and five sisters of this hospital, nearly
on the same site with the former house At the same time when they erected
apartments for the hospitals of Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. and Thomas Davison,
Esquire.

Inscription over the door:

"This hospital, for a governess and five sisters, widows of protestant
clergymen, merchants, and freemen of the town, was endowed by the charity of
Mrs. Ann Davison, relict of Mr. Benjamin Davison, merchant, first erected by
the corporation of Newcastle A. D. 1725, and rebuilt at their common charge A.
D. 1754.


.

March 21st, 1771, there was an order of common council for each woman in Mrs.
Davison's hospital to have 8 carts of coals in every year Common Council books.
.

Here also Sir Walter Blackett's hospital for six unmarried men, to be poor and
decayed burgesses of the town, was founded in 1754; the worthy baronet, on the
receipt of a bond given him by the corporation, having deposited 1200l. in
their hands for that purpose As yet there appears to have been no endowment
made of this hospital under the common se^l of the corporation of Newcastle.
.

The foundation-stone of this house was laid July 29th, 1754 Newcastle Courant,
August 3d, 1754.
.

March 21st, 1777, there was an order of common council to give an allowance of
eight carts of fire-coal, yearly, to every man in this hospital Common council
books.
.

There is a stone put up over the door of their apartments, inscribed as
follows:

"This hospital for six unmarried men, to be poor and decayed burgesses, built
on the ground, and at the common charge of the corporation of this town, was
founded by Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. the munificent magistrate and
representative, in seven successive parliaments, of Newcastle upon Tyne, A. D.
1754." Here also is an hospital for six unmarried women, to be the daughters or
widows of free burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, indebted for its foundation
and support to the charity of Thomas Davison, Esquire. of Ferry-Hill in the county
of Durham, and his two sisters Timothia and -- Davison Mr. Davison died March
6th, 1760.

His sister Timothia died June 4th, 1757.


.

A. D. 1754, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle erected here, on their
ground, and at their common expense, an elegant set of apartments for the above
six unmarried women, under the same roof with those intended for the two former
hospitals of Mrs. Anne Davison, and Sir Walter Blackett, Bart The following is
extracted from a London newspaper, from August 6th to August 8th, 1754: -- "We
learn from Newcastle, that on Monday se'nnight the hospital was begun near the
surgeons' hall, at the foot of the Manor-Chare, for accommodating six poor old
maidens, and the like number of old bachelors: the fund for supporting the same
being generously subscribed by Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. one of their
representatives, and Thomas Davison, of Ferry-Hill, Esquire. each having given
120^l. the interest of which is to be applied to the charitable purposes
abovementioned. The foundation-stone was laid by the mayor; and the
magistrates, in order to keep the above sum entire, for the use before
signified, have undertaken to be at the charge of the building on the town's
account. The workmen had several handsome present^ made them by the gentlemen
present, after the cornerstone was laid, to encourage them to fresh the
building well."
.

March 21st, 1771, there was an order of common council, to give an allowance
of eight carts of fire-coal, yearly, to every woman in this house
Common Council books.
.

The following inscription is on a stone over the door: "This hospital for six
unmarried women, to be daughters and widows of burgesses, built on the ground
and at the common charge of the corporation of this town, was founded by Thomas
Davison, Esquire. of Ferry-Hill in the county of Durham, A. D. 1754."

Ward's almshouse John Ward was sheriff of Newcastle A. D. 1445, and mayor
1448 and 1450.

Leland, in his Itinerary, vol. v. p. 114, gives the following account of it:
"One John Ward a rich merchant of Newcastelle made a maisun Dieu for 12 poor
men and 12 poor women by ( i. e. near to) the Augustine-Freres in Newcastell."

Among the disbursements in an old parish-book in All Saints vestry, dated
1642, occurs the following entry:

"Alms house in Manor-Chaire, 3s."

Bourne cites the Milbank MS. concerning this place as follows: "The chief
almshouse in the town is Ward's, near the Manor: the mills at Pandon-Gate
should give them, as I remember, twenty shillings per annum to buy them coals,
but old Mr. Brandling pulled off the lead, on purpose to expel the poor
people, which he did. The mills are now fallen into one Homer's hands, and so
are lost for ever. I have seen the writings and know it."

It is styled, in an old deed dated Dec. 1st, 1475, "John Wards almous house
stondyng in Cowgate nigh the Frer Augustyns lately edified and belded by the
said John Ward."

Bourne tells us, that it was situated at the bottom of a garden belonging, in
his time, to Mr. Waters, where old persons had informed him they remembered the
ruins of such a building.


stood near the above, founded in the reign of Edward the Fourth, by John
Ward, a rich merchant of Newcastle, for twelve poor men, and the like number
of poor women. The site of this building is marked, in Speed's Plan of the
town, in what is now called the Manor-Chare, where an old wall toward the
street, with a door-way built up in it, is still remaining.

SILVER-STREET.
SILVER-STREET, which leads down a very steep hill from the foot of
Pilgrim-Street to Pandon, was anciently called All-Hallow-Gate Which is said to
be "Ex part boreali ecclesiae Omnium Sanctorum."
, as also Temple-Gate From templum -- as lying near, or conducting to, the
church.
, it should seem from the circumstance of its communicating with All Saints
church. It occurs too in old writings with the name of Jew-Gate In a release
dated 7th October, 12 Will. III. A. D. 1700, mention occurs of two messuages
situated "in Newcastle upon Tyne, in a certain street or place there called
Silver-Street, alias Jew-Gate, on the north side of the same street." --
Extract from a title deed of a house in Silver-Street belonging to Mr. John
Stokoe.

These two names owe their origin, it is not improbable, to the same cause, i.
e. the place having been principally inhabited by Jews, who dealt in
silver-plate.

In an inrolment remaining in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon
Tyne, dated November 16th, 1658, this street is mentioned by the name of
"Silver-Streete, thus All-Hallow-Gate."


.

There is a presbyterian meeting house in Silver-Street, of which Mr. George
Ogilvie, who died April 21st, 1765, aged 57 years, was minister. -- He was
succeeded by Mr. Sheilds.

CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS, OR ALL-HALLOWS.
THE conjecture of Gray Gray -- cited by Bourne.
, in his Chorographia, that this church was dedicated to All Saints, or
All-Hallows, from the ancient name of that part of the town, Pampedon, which,
he adds, was so called from the Pantheon at Rome, appears to be too ridiculous
to deserve either to be considered or refuted.

It is not known at what period this church was built. Bourne met with an
account, of the date of 1286, in which it is mentioned as erected at that time
Bourne.

"This church, seated upon a hill, much about the same height with the
situation of St. Mary's in Gateshead, and upon the same line with it, is not so
long as St. Nicholas', being only 55 yards 1 foot and long, but it is broader,
as being 25 yards 2 feet in breadth." -- Ibid.

"The extent of the parish of All Saints is as follows: Beginning at Sand-Gate
it is bounded by the river to St. Antons, thence to Biker and Biker-Hill, to
Arcle-Dean, to Ewsburn, thence to Gesmonde, Sandeford-Stone to the
Shield-Field, from whence it crosses the dean and meadows to
Over-Dean-Bridge-End, and down to the west side of Pilgrim-Street to the
Painter-Hugh, so to the east of the Butter-Cross and Sand-Hill to the Key-Side,
so to Sand-Gate." -- Warburton's MSS. penes h. v. Ducem Northumbriae.


.

A deed preserved in the vestry of this church, dated October 29th, 1319,
describes the street now called Butcher-Bank, as leading from the Cale-Cross to
the church of All Saints In vico qui ducit del Cale-Crosse ad ecclesiam Omnium
Sanctorum."
.

In the years 1651 and 1655, this church appears to have undergone some
material alterations Common Council books.

"Sept. 15, 1651, stones granted out of the Manners for the under-building and
but tressing All Saints church wall."

February 4th, 1655, petition of the churchwardens of All-Hallows, for stones
out of the Manors, "to build up the east end of All-Hallows church, being now
ready to fall." -- On this occasion "the stones of the old ruinate chapel"
were granted them.


.

In the year 1728 a lecture was founded at All Saints, and settled upon Mr.
Henry Bourne, the curate, for instructing the people in the rubric and liturgy
of the church Bourne's History.
.

A. D. 1776 this church was thoroughly cleaned and repaired.

In the year 1786 an act passed for the taking down and rebuilding of
All Saints church, several of the inside pillars of that structure having given
way, and it being hazardous to assemble any longer therein. See Appendix.

The foundation stone of the new edifice was laid by the Rev. James Stephen
Lushington, vicar of Newcastle, on the 19th of the kalends of September, A. D.
1786 The following is a copy of the inscription placed under the
foundation-stone of All Saints church: "Ut omnipotentis Dei cultus decorus
Et Christi humani generis salvatoris
Evangelium floreant et augeant,
Hoc primum saxum aedis sacrae novae
(Antiqua omnino collapsur^)
A Jacobo Stephano Lushington
Novi Castri vicario pontur
Nono decimo kalendarum Septembris,
Et in ^allesimo s^ptro^e t^^^no
Octagesimo sexto anno salut^^,
Davide Stephenson and (...)."


September 2d, 1786, Mr. William Hedley was falled by the s^ll o^ some stones
from the steeple of the old church, as the workmen were blasting it with gun
powder.


.

CHANTRIES.
THERE were seven chantries here in the papal times -- one dedicated to St.
Thomas -- one to the Virgin Mary -- one to St. John the Evangelist -- one to
St. Peter -- one to St. Catharine -- one to St. Loye -- and one to St. John the
Baptist and St. John the Evangelist Bourne's History.
.

1. That of St. Thomas is said to have been founded by John Pulhore, clerk
Ibid. This John Pulhor^ was to let of Wh^^kham ^^^6 -- ^^ for also of Whitburn,
which he resigned in 1352 for Warkworth (...) ^^^ble also of Durham Castle, and
receiver general to Bishop Hatheld, but removed ^^ the bishop from these two
offi^c^ -- Randall's MSS.
, about 1356. The yearly value was 4l. 8s. 4d. -- William White was the last
incumbent, and had a pension of 3l. 10s. or 18s. 6d. per annum.

The following account of it occurs in the certificate of colleges and
chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in the
Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of Saint Thomas in the parish church of All-Saynts within the
town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by one John Pulhore clarke, to find
a preiste to say mass and to pray for his soul and all Christian sowles as by a
deed of the foundation thereof exhibited before the said commissioners does
appear and is so used hitherto by report -- Yearly value 4l. 7s. 8d. -- value
according to this survey 4l. 8s. 4d. as does apere by a rentall whereof is
paid yearly to the Kings majesty for the tenthes 8s. 9d. ob. and remains
clearly 79s. 6d. ob. which are employed to the sustentacion and relief of
Wyllyam White priest incumbent there according to the order of the foundation.
-- Ornaments etc. 106s. 6d. ob. qua. as does apere by a particular inventory
of the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

2. The foundation deed of our Lady's chantry in this church appears to have
been lost. Its yearly value was 4l. 5s. 10d.

September 25th, 1334, Thomas de Karliol, of Newcastle upon Tyne, granted to
Peter, son of Peter Draper, and to Cecily his wife, and their heirs, his
patronage of the chantry of the Virgin Mary, in All Saints church, reserving to
himself one turn of presentation Bourne's History.
.

Robert Manners, chaplain, the last incumbent of this chantry, occurs April
29th, 1518 Deed in the possession of lawyer Gyll.
; also July 17th, 1527 From an original deed, communicated by John Davidson,
Esquire.
. -- He had a pension of 4l. 6s. 4d.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate of colleges,
etc. 37 Hen. VIII. cited above:

"The chauntrie of our Lady in the parish church of All-Saynts within the
town of Newcastell upon Tyne. There is no deed of foundation to be showed but
it has been of old time accustomyd to find a preeste there for the mayntenance
of Godd's service and so it is used at this present by report -- Yearly value
63s. 4d. -- value according to this survey 4l. 5s. 10d. as apereth by a rentall
whereof is paid yearly to the Kings majesty for the tenthes 5s. 4d. and
remains clearly 4l. 6d. which Roberte Manners clerk now incumbent there has
toward his lyvynge as it has accustomably ben used hertofore. -- Ornaments
etc. 4l. 3s. 6d. as does appear by a particular inventory of the same. -- There
were no other lands etc."

3. The chantry of Saint John the Evangelist was founded by Richard Willeby and
Richard Fishlake. -- It was supported by some tenements in the Sand-Hill and
the Side. -- The yearly value was 4l. 15s. 4d. -- The last incumbent, whom one
account, I think erroneously, makes Anthony Hexham, alias Houghton, had a
pension of 3l. 3s. 1d. November 10th, 1406, there was a confirmation by the
prior and convent of Durham of some mortgaged rents to this chantry of St. John
the Evangelist in All Saints. This is by inspeximus of a confirmation of
Walter, Bishop of Durham, allowing Richard Fychlake, chaplain, to assign a
tenement in Gateshead, and an annual rent of 9s. 6d. out of a tenement there,
both held in capite under the Bishop, to Richard Willesby, chaplain, keeper of
this chantry. -- Bourne.

There is a deed dated December 20th, 2 Ric. III. by which Robert Wylson,
perpetual chaplain of the chantry of St. John Evangelist in All Saints, with
the consent of the churchwardens and vic' the patrons lets to Alexander
Tailor, baker, his tenement in All-Hallow-Gate, between Heworth-Chair on the
west; a tenement of Sir George Lumley, Knt. on the north; and a tenement of
John Carleyll, Esquire. on the south. -- Rent, 2s. -- George Carr, mayor, and
George Bird, sheriff. -- From the original in All Saints vestry.

Pentecost, A. D. 1541. David Tailor, perpetual chaplain at the altar of St.
John the Evangelist in All Saints, with the consent of the churchwardens of
that church, the true patrons for that turn, let to John Clerk, mariner, a
tenement, with a garden adjacent, in Pampdene between the lands belonging to
John Lumley, Knight, Lord of Lumley, etc. extending from the King Street to
Hony-Layn backwards -- 10s. yearly rent. -- From the original in All Saints
vestry.


.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate of colleges,
etc. 37 Hen. VIII. cited above:

"The chauntrie of Saint John the Evangelist in the parish church of
All-Saynts within the town of Newcastle upon Tyne was founded by one Richard
Willeby and one Richard Fishelake to find a priest for ever to pray for their
sowles and all Christen sowles and to keep two obitts yearly for the founders
sowles as it is reported and is so used at this present but the deeds of the
foundation were lost long syns -- Yearly value 72s. 5d. -- value according to
this survey 4l. 15s. 4d. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid yearly for
rents resolut' 13s. 8d. for two perpetual obytts 8s. 8d. and for the Kings
majesty's tenthes 7s. 3d. -- 29s. 7d. and remains clerly 65s. 9d. which ben
employed to the sustentacion and relief of John Musgrope incumbent thereof. --
Ornaments etc. 112s. 2d. ob. qua. as does apere by a particular inventory of
the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

4. St. Peter's chantry was founded about A. D. 1411, by Roger de Thornton,
when he also founded St. Catharine's hospital on the Sand-Hill Bourne. -- It
was in that waste place which was above the vestry, opposite to the tomb of
Roger de Thornton. -- A priest, set apart for that purpose, was to pray for the
founder while he lived, and for his soul when he was dead, together with the
souls of his father and mother, and of Agnes his wife, and also of his
ancestors and his children, and the whole company of the faithful departed.

In the window, at the east end of this chantry, remained, about Bourne's time,
the images of St. Lewis, St. Barbara, St. Laurence, St. Elizabeth, etc. -- On
the south side were the arms of the Dents reversed; -- in the next window the
representations of two men and three women kneeling at an altar, supposed to
have been designed for Roger Thornton's children.


. -- The yearly value was 6l. -- See account of that hospital, called also
Maison-Dicu.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate of colleges,
etc. 37 Hen. VIII. cited above:

"The chauntrie of St. Peter in the parish church of All-Saynts ibid. was
founded by report to find a priest for ever to the mayntenaunce of Godds
service there and to pray for all Christian sowles and the said priest to have for
his stipend or salary 6l. yearly to be paid out of all the possessions of the
hospital of Saint Katheryn called La Maison-Dieu in the town of Newcastell and
the same order is observed there at this present by report. -- Yearly value 6l.
-- value according to this survey 6l. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid to
the Kingis majestye for the tenthes 12s. and remains clerly 108s. which are
employed to the sustentacion of William Teisdale clerk now incumbent there
according to the order of the foundation. -- Ornaments etc. 8s. 5d. as apereth
by a particular inventory of the same. -- There were no other lands etc."

5. The chantry of St. Catharine was founded in the time of King Edward III. --
A copy of the foundation deed is still preserved in All Saints vestry In Latin.
See Appendix. -- The following occurs in the Murray MS:

"Novum Castrum super Tynam -- Cantar' Sancte Katerine in ecclesia Omnium
Sanctorum ibidem pro quibusdam mess. et terr. in eadem villa." -- Pat. 20 Ric.
II. p. 3, m. 12.

By a deed dated in June, 14th Hen. VIII. the churchwardens of St. Andrew's in
Newcastle demised to Thomas Holland, burgess of that town, a tenement in
Sid-Gate, for which, inter alia, he was to pay to the perpetual chaplain of the
chantry of St. Catharine the Virgin, in the church of All Saints, seven
shillings, at a certain term, for ever. -- Dr. Ellison's MSS.


. -- The King, by his charter, having granted license to Robert de Chirton,
burgess of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Mariot his wife, daughter and heiress of
Hugh Hankyn, burgess of that town, to give a stipend to a certain chaplain, to
perform divine service in the church of All Saints, for the souls of the said
Hugh, and Beatrix his wife, Gilbert Hankyn his father, etc. they, out of their
devotion to Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary his mother, the blessed Virgin
Catharine, etc. granted to Sir Ada Nynepenys, chaplain at the altar of St.
Catharine in All Saints, 100s. annual rent, out of tenements in Russel-Chare,
near "Olle-Crosse Quaere if a mistake for "Cale-Crosse."
." Failing the founders' heirs, the mayor and bailiffs of the town, for the
time being, were to be the patrons. -- The above Mariot appeared in full court,
between the four benches, and was there sworn, before the mayor and bailiffs,
never to contradict her husband's act.

The yearly value of this chantry was 5l. 3s. 8d.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate of colleges,
etc. 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of Saint Katheryne in the parish church of All-Saynts within
the town of Newcastell upon Tyne was founded by a license of King Edward 3d to
one Hugh Hawking and Betteresse his wyffe to find one priest there for ever to
say mass and to pray for their sowles and all Christian sowles as by a deed of
the foundation thereof bering date 20 January A. D. 1335, more plainly does
appear and it is so used at this present by report. -- Yearly value 118s.
18d. -- value according to this survey 103s. 8d. as apereth by a rentall whereof
is paid out for a rent resolut' 3s. and for the Kings majesty's tenthes 10s.
9d. ob. qua. and remains clearly 4l. 5s. 10d. qua. which ben employed to the
sustentacion and relief of Miles Swalwell pressed now incumbent there according to
the ordynnaunce of the said foundation. -- Ornaments etc. 119s. 4d. as apereth
by a particular inventory of the same. -- There werno other lands etc."

6. The chantry of St. Loy, or Saint Elgie, was founded by Richard Pykeryng, in
the reign of King Edward III. -- The yearly value was 3l. 8s. 4d. Bourne.
. -- William Brown was the last incumbent, and had an annual pension of 3l.
2s. 8d.

John Ward, of Newcastle, merchant, by his last will, dated June 24th, 1461
From the original in All Saints vestry. See Appendix.
, left certain lands in trust, for finding a priest to perform divine service
at the altar of St. Loye, in All-Hallows church. The priest's salary to be
eight marks.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate of colleges,
etc. 37 Henry VIII. remaining in the Augmentation-Office.

"The chauntrie of Saint Loye in the parish church of All Saints ibid. was
founded by one Richard Pykering by a license obtained of K. Edward III. to
find a priest for ever to say mass and pray for all Christen sowles by
report which is so used at this present, but the deed of the foundation was
lost many years syns as it is said. -- Yearly value 60s. -- value according to
this survey 68s. 4d. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid yearly to the
Kings majesty for the tenthes 6s. and remains clearly 62s. 4d. which ben
employed to the sustentacion and relief of William Brown priest incumbent there
according to the ordynnance of the said foundation -- Ornaments etc. 71s. 8d.
as apereth by a particular inventorie of the same as well for the goods and
ornaments of this chauntrie as of the chauntrie of St. John Baptist and St.
John the Evangelist next ensewyng because the said two chauntries be both
founded at one altar the said ornaments do serve for them boothe
indifferently. -- There were no other lands etc."

7. The chantry of St. John the Baptist and St. John the Evangelist was founded
by John Ward -- yearly revenue 7l. 15s. 8d. William Hepson, alias Hixsonne,
was the last incumbent, and had a pension of 5l. per annum. The following
account of this chantry occurs in the certificate 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in
the Augmentation-Office.

"The chauntrie of St. John Baptist and St. John Evangelist in the parish
church of All Saints ibid. was founded by one John Ward to find a priest for
ever to say mass and pray for all Christian sowles as by the deed of the
foundation exhibited before the said commissioners does appear and is so used
at this present by report -- Yearly value 106s. 8d. -- value according to this
survey 7l. 15s. 8d. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid out for a rent
resolut' 38s. 6d. and for the Kings majesty's tenthes 10s. 8d. -- 49s. 2d. --
and remains clerly 106s. 6d. which ar employed to the sustentacion and
relief of William Hepson priest incumbent there according to the said foundation
-- Ornaments etc. nil here because all the goods and ornaments of this
chauntrie be charged before in the value of the goods and ornaments of St.
Loye's chauntrie within the sum of 71s. 8d. as is there declared. -- There were no
other lands etc."

For the "altar of the Trinity" in this church, see account of the
Trinity-House.

STEEPLE OF ALL SAINTS.
THE steeple of this church, of somewhat remarkable form as to the spire rising
from its square tower, was of mean height, and no very elegant design. Robert
Rhodes, the great benefactor to the churches of this town, who lived in this
parish, and was buried in the chancel of this church, had his name and arms
also under the belfry in this steeple, in which he probably made great
alterations See Bourne's account.
.

The bells of this church The following occurs in the common council books.

"April 1st, 1695, All Saints parish humbly request the metal of the statue (of
King James H. on Sand Hill) toward the repair of their bells." -- St. Andrew's
parish made a similar request. -- "Ordered, That All Saints have the metal
belonging to the horse of the said statue, except a leg thereof, which must go
toward the casting a new bell for St. Andrew's parish." -- It appears by the
old register book that the treble bell was sent over to Durham to be recast, A.
D. 1639.

A. D. 1646 mention occurs of a bell being customarily rung every morning at
four o'clock, at this church. -- Also 1691.

Inscription on the great bell: "I found King William's deliverance from Popish
conspiracy in the year 1695-6. Christopher Hodshon made me."

Inscription on the fourth bell: "Christopher Hodgson me fecit 1696. Nathanael
Ellison, vicar, Michael Hall, Thomas Turner, churchwardens."

On the fifth bell: "Christopher Hodgson made me 1696. Nathanael Ellison,
vicar^ Mark Browell, Ralph Forster, churchwardens."


were founded anew, or increased in number, A. D. 1696.

The clock was made in 1691 Old parish book -- made by Mr. Deodatus Thirkeld --
cost 22l. 3s.
.

GALLERIES AND PEWS See Bourne's account.
.
THE ancient gallery, which divided the chancel from the nave of the church, on
the site of which the butcher's gallery lately stood, and which had been the
rood-loft in the times of popery, appears to have been taken down, by the
chancellor's special directions, A. D. 1639, although great interest had been
made with the bishop to suffer it to remain. There were two other galleries in
the late church, one belonged to the Trinity-House, the other held the organ
seats for the children of the charity-schools, etc.

Pews or stalls are mentioned to have been in All Saints church A. D. 1488 Old
parish book, 3 Henry VII.
.

CHANCEL See Bourne's account.
.
THE chancel of this church stood upon a large vault or crypt "The chancel
stands upon a large vault, of a square ligate, and spacious. ^ strong pillar in
it, the support of eight large stone arches. The entrance on the north side of
the churchyard." Wallis' Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 228.

June 2d, 1783, I examined this crypt underneath the chancel. -- The pillar was
in the center. There were very observable windows in it, which had been built
up, greatly below the level of the floor of the late church, which, perhaps,
might have been raised by the great number of burials in it during a long
course of time.


.

Old Foul in the late Church of All Saints.

The Temporary Bridge as it stood on the 25th. of Octr. 1772.

To Mr. DAVID STEPHENSON Architect, this Plate engraved at his expense, is
respectfully inscribed by his obliged humble servant J Brand.



It had been beautified some time before Bourne wrote his history.

The communion table was of marble, presented February 6th, 1684, by John
Otway, merchant. There was a prothesis, or side altar They had assistant
officers here to the churchwardens, called sidesmen. See Cowel's Interpreter.
-- "Latera, sidesmen, companions, assistants."

Staveley on Churches, p. 280, thinks that our questmen, who are to be aiding
and assisting to the churchwardens, are called sidemen, quasi synod-men. But
see the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical.

For account of the communion-plate, see Bourne's account.


. In the year 1776 a miserable painting, which represented the discovery by the
breaking of bread, was put upon the altar-piece. -- It was a copy from a print
in Ryder's Bible.

FONT.
THERE was a very observable font, with eight shields of arms on it, in this
church 1. "Argent, a fess gules inter 3 popinjays vert, collared or, by Lord
Lumley. There is impaled with Lord Lumley's coat, sable, a chevron plain and a
chief indented or rather dancette, argent, by the name of Thornton, whose
daughter he married." Dr. Ellison's MSS.

2. "Sable, a bend ermine charged with three cinquefoils of the first, and in
the sinister chief an annulet argent, signifying the difference of fifth
brother, by Roddam of Little Houghton in Northumberland." Ibid.

3. "Argent, a bend fable charged with 3 lozenges ermine, by Dent of
Newcastle." Ibid.

4. "A chevron sable between 3 water-budgets gules." Ibid.

5. "A chevron sable inter 3 pellets." Ibid.

6. "Gules, 3 oak trees erazed argent, acorned or. The coat of the Andersons of
Bradley." Ibid.

7. "Argent, an orle sable on a chief azure 3 martlets of the second: a mullet
for difference." Ibid.

8. "Shield with a skin mark." Ibid.


.

WINDOWS See Bourne's account.
.
SEVERAL curious fragments of painted glass, that had survived the Reformation,
remained dispersed about in the several windows of the late church.

There was a figure of St. Barbara in one of the south ones. There were also
several skin-marks.

ORGAN.
THE organ of this church is mentioned to have been repaired A. D. 1631 Trinity
House books, February 27th, 1631.

July 13th, 1713, William Gre^^rs appointed organist. -- Common Council books.

Janu^ry 17th, 1715, Francis de Prendcourt, on the death of the above. -- Ibid.

Sept. 3^th, 1725, Solomon Strologer, on the death of F. Prendcourt. -- Ibid.

Dec. 24, 1779, Chatier Avison, on the death of S. Strologer.

In 1781 a new swell made to this organ, by Mr. Donaldson.


.

LIBRARY.
A. D. 1631, mention occurs of books chained in the choir of this church, where
they were placed undoubtedly for the general use of the parishioners Inventory
in old parish book. -- By this it appears, that a "branch candlestick of brass,
cont^ining twelve lights, was given by Mr. Samuel Cock, master and mariner, A.
D. 16^3.... The following occur in an inventory of all the goods and implements
belonging to the church of All Saints, about 1632: "One s^e for carrying water"
-- "one little box with two (...) of counters in it" -- "one whole hour
glass" -- "one half hour glass" -- "five coffins for corpse, two for the
eldest sort, one for the middle sort, and two for the younger sort" "one iron
gavelock, and one swea^ tree with two rolls for taking and laying down
lairstones."
.

LEGACIES LEFT TO THE POOR OF ALL SAINTS.
BENEFACTIONS to a very considerable amount appear to have been given, at
different periods, to the poor of this very extensive and populous parish.

Mr. Thomas Smith, shipwright, by his will, dated Dec. 22d, 1585, lest the sum
of 4l. 18s. 10d. to the poor of this parish, payable out of several houses
yearly, at Easter for ever Bourne.
.

Mr. Cuthbert Woodman, weaver, by his will, dated August 22d, 1636, left the
sum of 12 shillings, to be paid out of a house in Pilgrim-Street, yearly, for
ever Ibid.
.

A. D. 1640, Henry Hilton, Esquire. left to this parish as to St. Nicholas Ibid.
. -- See St. Nicholas.

Robert Anderson, Esquire. left, by deed, 5l. per annum. See St. Nicholas Ibid.
.

A. D. 1644, Sir Alexander Davison left to the poor of this, as to the poor of
St. Nicholas' parish, 2l. per annum Ibid.
.

A. D. 1644, Sir Thomas Davison left to the poor of this, as to St. Nicholas'
parish, 1l. per annum.

November 16th, 1648, Mr. Andrew Aldworth left, as to St. Nicholas Ibid.
, 1l. per annum.

April 11th, 1660, Mr. William Carr, merchant-adventurer, left to the poor of
All Saints, several rent charges, amounting in all to 1l. 6s. 6d. per annum
From a copy of his will in the old parish book.
.

Mr Mark Milbank, 1677, as to St. Nicholas, 3l. per annum Bourne.
.

Mr. William Carr, 1675, as to St. Nicholas, 1l. 10s. per annum Ibid.
.

July 17th, 1661, Mr. John Cosyns, draper, left to be distributed in bread, at
two shillings worth per week, to the poor of this parish, 5l. 4s. per annum. --
Also 5l. per annum for the repairs of the church Ibid.
.

Mr. William Gibson, merchant, left a rentcharge of 1l. per annum, out of a
house in Cowgate, October 2^th, 1662 Ibid
.

March 23d, 1673, Mr. David Shevil, barber surgeon, left 4l. per annum out of
several houses Ibid.
.

Left by Mr. Leonard Carr, out of several houses in the Butcher-Bank, 5l.
Bourne.
.

November 25th, 1675, Thomas Davison, Esquire. alderman, left 1l. 10s. to be
distributed yearly for ever Ibid.
.

March 9th, 1679, Sir William Blackett, Bart. left 2l. per annum out of a house
at the end of Tyne Bridge Ibid.
.

A. D. 1680, Sir Mark Milbank left, as to St. Nicholas, 6l. per annum Ibid.
.

A. D. 1690, Mr. John Collier, shipwright, left 3l. per annum Ibid.
.

May 12th, 1693, Mr. Richard Hutchinson, roper, left 5l. per annum Ibid.
.

February 7th, 1694, Mr. Timothy Davison left 1l. 10s. to be paid to poor
freemen or freemen's widows of this parish Ibid.
.

A. D. 1694, Mr. John Rumney left 2l. 10s. per annum Ibid.
.

A. D. School, Mr. George Collingwood, carpenter, left 2l. to be given annually
to two poor widows, who are to have it but once, so that all the poor widows in
the parish may enjoy the same Ibid. and a copy of the will in the box of the
house-carpenters company.
.

In the year 1707, Henry Holme, Esquire. left 6l. per annum Bourne.
.

A. D. 1710, Nicholas Ridley, Esquire. 1l. per annum Ibid.
.

A. D. 1711, March 14th, Robert Fenwick, Esquire. 4l. per annum Ibid.
.

June 5th, 1711, Mr. John Be, master and mariner, left 6l. per annum Ibid.
.

A. D. 1716, Matthew White, Esquire. 1l. 10s. per annum Ibid.
.

A. D. 1717, Mrs Isabel Wrightson, 2l. 10s. per annum Ibid.
.

Mr. William Harrison, hoastman, -- 150l. interest to be distributed yearly on
St. Andrew's day Ibid.
.

Mrs. Margaret Ramsay, 20l. -- Interest to be distributed yearly Ibid.
.

Mr. Edward Ports, shipwright, 20l. interest to be divided yearly Ibid.
.

Mrs. Ann Handcock, 50l. interest to be distributed by the churchwardens to
such poor people as were constant frequenters of divine worship Bourne.
.

John Scaife, slater, about 1764, left 20l. the interest to be given annually
to the poor of the parish of All Saints. (Common Council books, Sept. 24, 1764.)

The corporation of Newcastle gave a bond for the money, to pay at the rate of
4l. per cent.

Thomas Leamon, of Newcastle upon Tyne, Gent. Sept. 20th, 1779, bequeathed 3l.
a year for ever to the poor of All Saints. (From a copy of the will
communicated by Mr. Davison, of High-Bridge.)

"Mrs. Mary Buck, who died 21st of May, 1781, left to the poor of the parish
the interest of 100l. now lent to the corporation of Newcastle, at four per
cent. to be distributed by the curates, churchwardens and overseers, at
Christmas, yearly, for ever." (On a compartment on a pillar near the organ.)

CHARITY SCHOOL OF ALL SAINTS.
THE charity-school of this parish for 41 boys and 17 girls, the former of whom
are taught to read and write and cast accounts; the latter, to read, knit, few,
etc. both of them being provided with clothes, was founded by a voluntary
subscription, A. D. 1709, by which, with the addition of several accidental
contributions, it has been supported ever since See Bourne's account.
.

The corporation of Newcastle contributed a piece of ground in the Manors,
whereon to build a school-house "May 2d, 1709, charity-school. Ordered, and
liberty is hereby granted accordingly, that there be a convenient piece of
waste ground in the artillery ground set forth for that purpose." --
Common-c^uncil books.

"Just published, price 6d. a Sermon on the religious education of children,
preached at All Saints church in Newcastle, for the benefit of the
charity-school of that parish, by the Reverend W. Nowell, M. A. Rector of
Wolsingham, and chaplain to her Royal Highness the Princess Dowager of Wales."
-- Newcastle Courant, January 29th, 1757.


.

PARISH REGISTERS.
THE register of baptisms, marriages, and burials, belonging to this church,
begins in the year 1600.

There is an hiatus in the register of baptisms from March 1635 to March 1637,
as also from March 1643 to January 1644.

There are supposed to be buried communibus annis, at the Ballast-Hills burying
ground, about 350 persons, two-thirds of whom belong to this parish
Communicated by Mr. Stevenson, minister of All Saints.
.

From 1688 to 1707, there were baptized at this church 6818 children --
married, 1311 persons, and buried, 6046 Communicated by the same.
.

From 1730 to 1749, there were baptized ibid. 6953 -- married, 1358 -- buried,
5913.

From 1760 to 1779, baptized 6470 -- married 2305 -- buried 3480 persons.

Quota, furnished to the triennial service of the national militia, from
All Saints parish, 23 men Communicated ut supra.

I found the following in Dr. Ellison's MSS.

"Total of baptisms in All Saints parish, from March 25th, 1670, to March 25th,
17^^, inclusive -- for 33 years -- 11572; -- males, 5801 -- females, 5711.

Total of burials in All Saints, for the same 33 years -- 10367; -- males, 4748
-- females, 5619. -- Increase in 33 years, 1205."

In the year 1785 there were 192 males and 187 females christened and 95 males
and 111 females buried at All Saints. -- Newcastle Courant.

October 29th, 1782, the number of poor upon the books of this parish, paid
twice every month, were 622 -- wives and children of militia men paid every
week, 43 -- poor belonging to All Saints in the General Hospital 3^ -- in all,
697. Communic' by parish officers.

The following names of forgotten clergymen occur in the old registers of this
church^ they are supposed to have be^n dissenters.

"John Knaisdayle, minister, buried May 27th, 1604."

"Mr. William A^der, minister," occurs April, 1616.

"Henry Tunstall, pi^^ her of God's w^^le," buried August 14th, 1619.

Mr. Alexander Lighton, minister," occurs November 13th, 1610

"William Swan, preacher," occurs June, 1623.

"William Alder, preacher," occurs July, 1623.

"Mr. John Jackson, preacher of God's work" occurs June, 1603."


.

MONUMENTS AND MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTIONS IN THE LATE CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS.
East end, on a mural monument: "To the memory of Maria Henrietta Airey, of
Benwall, near this place, who died June 10th, A. D. 1779, aged 31, whose
character in all the important relations of daughter, sister, wife and parent,
made her life truly valuable, her loss irreparable; whose manners in social
intercourse were amiable and elegant; whose religion was piety and charity,
directed by good sense. But, after all, her best encomium is engraven on the
hearts of all who knew her."

"Henry Rawlin, merchant-adventurer, alderman, and sometime mayor of this town,
May 8th, 1666."

"Sepulchrum Richardi Burdus. Obiit 20 Dec. 1719."

"Jesus be merciful to the souls of Richard Borrel, his wife and children. He
obiit 20 Nov. 1508. This is also the burial place of Mr. Abraham Dixon, master
and mariner, who dyed Nov. 11th, 1700."

"Thomas Andrew, 5 Oct. 1708."

"Thomas Wallis' burial place, shipwright."

"Matthew White, Esquire. twice mayor of this town, governor of the merchants' and
hostmen's companies. He had issue 10 children, Nicholas, Margaret, Elizabeth,
Martha, Nicholas, Matthew, Mary, Isabel, Robert and Jane. He departed October
10th, 1716."

"William Aubone, Esquire. merchant-adventurer, alderman, and sometime mayor of
this town, Sept. 20th, 1700."

On marble on the wall:

"Under the adjacent marble is interred the body of Thomas Wrangham, the famous
and beloved ship-builder of this town: he married Jane the daughter of Mr.
Robert Carr, by whom he left issue two sons and one daughter, Thomas, William
and Jane. He built five and forty sail of ships, and died of a fever in the 42d
year of his age, May 26th, 1689. He was a man of a most generous temper, of a
plain and unaffected conversation, and a sincere and hearty lover of his
friend. Statutum est omnibus semel mori."

This stone of the Wranghams belonged formerly to the family of Mr. Robert
Babington, and had his arms on it.

About a blue stone was inscribed: "All worldly pomp away does pass
Like fading flowers and withered grass,
George Borne, cooper, and his wives
When death does end all mortal strifes
Trust by the precious death and bloodshedding
Of Christ to have life everlasting."


The date worn off, but Bourne met with him in the quality of churchwarden of
All-Hallows, in the year 1578.

Thomson. Escutcheons: White, Davison, Malabar, Milbanke, Romney, Dame Jane
Clavering and Wrightson, as in St. Nicholas' church. Arms on grave stones:
Forster -- Baxter -- Gray -- Jefferson -- Whiney -- Anderson.

In the chancel of All Saints.
"Ralph Fell, merchant-adventurer, 11th Feb. 1680."

"John Simpson, hoastman, and Jane his wife, their burial place. In this grave
of theirs was buried their eldest son, Anderson, so called as being a
descendant of the worthy and loyal family of the Andersons of Braidley, who
suffered so much in the time of the civil wars in defense of their king and
country. He died May 17th, anno 1730, in the 21st year of his age. He was a
youth of fine parts, and good learning, a great deal of sweetness of temper and
strict religion."

"There is," says Bourne, "in this part of the church a very large stone,
insculped with brass, of which several years ago no more could be read than hic
tumulatus dono Dei datus mitis clero -- promotor ecclesiarum. My authority
imagines this to be the burial place of Robert Rhodes. He says the picture upon
the stone was very like that of Roger Thornton; all the difference is, that the
gown of this picture is not so deep as that of Thornton's. -- He conjectures it
to be the burial place of Robert Rhodes, because of the words promotor
ecclesiarum. Lib. All Hall. The words promotor ecclesiarum are not now to be
found. However," continues Bourne, "had they been there still, I think they are
but a weak argument to prove that Robert Rhodes was buried here, when it is
considered that he founded a chantry in St. Nicholas', that his own soul and
his wife's might be prayed for. For people were generally buried in the same
church, and near the very place, where they erected a chantry or an altar. But
whoever it is, this, I think, may be safely concluded from the grandeur of the
gravestone, that he was some wealthy person, and, from his being promotor
ecclesiarum, that he was also religious.

"The effigies is very tall, and is surrounded with very curious pictures of
the saints and some other things: but the brass is now tearing off, and going
very fast into ruin. It is a pity (he adds) there should not be more care taken
of it, as it is an ornament to the church, and the monument of its benefactor.
The promotors of churches should be always remembered with the most grateful
respect, that they may be shining lights to the most distant ages."

Bourne gives an epitaph, said to have been made upon Robert Wallas, formerly
clerk of this church.

"Here lies Robin Wallas,
The king of good fellows,
Clark of All-Hallows,
And a maker of bellows:
He bellows did make till the day of his death,
But he that made bellows could never make breath."
South isle.
Nigh the church porch a large blue stone, the burial place of Mr. William
Milbourne, hoastman, who died in the year 1662. This stone formerly belonged to
St. Austin's Fryery, and was removed from thence by Thomas Ledger, when he was
mayor, in the time of the civil wars. He brought it to St. Nicholas' church,
and ordered one Milbourne, a mason, to erase the ancient inscription.

But finding no room to lay it where his father was buried, in St. Nicholas',
he sold it to the mason, who sold it again to the person whose name it still
bears.

"Henry Milbourne, hoastman, School."

"John Binks, master and mariner. Dorothy his wife departed March 11th, 1722."

"Marcus Browellus, generos' attornat' de Banco, Soc' Hospit' Furnival Lond'
hoc sibi et suis posuit et coelis parata aeterna mansio. Ipse obiit secundo die
Novembris, anno Domini 1729 The following note is in Gyll's interleaved Bourne,
p. 93: "It is said Mr. Browell was a whimsical man. -- In his will he has this
remarkable expression: "I give rings to nobody." On Browell's stone: "Here lies
the body of the Reverend John Mills, vicar of Jarrow, in the county of Durham.
He departed this life Nov. 12th, 1775, aged 49 years."
."

"Stephen Coulson, merchant-adventurer, married Mary, daughter of Mr. Henry
Waters, hoastman. She departed July 6th, 1728. He, the abovenamed Stephen
Coulson, Esquire. alderman, and sometime mayor of this town, departed this life
October 25th, 1730."

"Sepulchrum Wolstani Paston."

"William Harrison, hoastman, July 10th, 1721."

"As you go," says Bourne, "from the south isle into the body of the church,
there is a large blue stone, which was the stone of Christopher Elmer, as
appears from the beginning of the present inscription."

"Another authority in this church calls the stone an ancient stone, and says
the ancient inscription was, "Jesus have mercy on the souls of Christopher
Elmer, his wife and children, and of all souls mercy Lord."

"There were on it the Elmers' arms, the merchants' arms, and his skin mark."

"John Henzell, 1725."

"The burial place of John Morris, hoastman."

"Sub hoc marmore tumulantur exuviae Edwardi Collingwood de Byker Armigeri
Northumbriae vicecomitis anno 1699. Qui obiit 11o Aprilis 1701, annoque aetatis
71, una cum uxoris Annae exuviis, quae obiit 3o Novembris 1694, per quam hos
habuit liberos Radulphum and Martinum mortuos Edvardum and Dorotheam
superstites.

"Dorothea Collingwood vita decessit duodecimo die Decembris 1701, et hic
sepulta. Gulielmus filius secundus dicti Edwardi filii obiit secundo die Martii
1709. Edvardus filius obiit primo die Martii, 1720. Maria filia natu prior
dicti Edvardi filii obiit decimo die Junii 1724. Maria filia Gulielmi Bigg,
generosi, uxor dicti Edvardi filii obiit duodecimo die Octobris 1727. Quinque
enixa liberos, viz. Edvardum, Mariam, Annam, Isabellam and Gulielmum. Isabella
filia natu minima dicti Edvardi filii obiit nono die Octobris 1728."

(Additions to the monument of the Collingwoods.)

"Edwardus Collingwood de Byker Armiger hoc sibi suisque posuit 1726. Gulielmus
filius natu minimus dicti Edwardi nepotis obiit 29 die Novembris 1740. Maria
filia and cohaeres Johannis Roddam de Roddam et Chirton Armigeri, uxor dicti
Edwardi nepotis obiit 4to die Decembris 1766. Quatuor enixa liberos, viz.
Gulielmum mortuum; Edwardum, Johannem and Winifridam superstites."

Near the vestry door:

"John Gybson, merchant-adventurer, 1594."

"Edward Nixon, master and mariner."

"Thomas Wetherall, merchant-adventurer, 1640."

"Edward Perkinson, merchant-adventurer, School."

"At the east end of the tomb of the family of the Collingwoods (says Bourne),
under a stone, with a Latin inscription on it, which formerly belonged to one
Blount, lies interred the body of Margaret Bourne, wife of Henry Bourne, curate
of this church of All-Hallows. She died August 8th, 1727, in the 30th year of
her age. "(...)." "D. O. M. M. S. Thomae Hockin Gen' et Rogeri Clarke
Pronepotis ejus Devonia nati. Una Eademque die Sept' scil' octava, salutis Anno
MDCLVIII. aetatis autem Thomae LXX. Rogeri XIX. Novo Castro super Tynam invicem
moriere necnon sepulti. Johannes Clarke Priori nepos et Posteriori patruus
Utrique charus H. M. M. L. P. Hic cecidere duo queis non separavit amata Sors
eadem vivis thalamo, morientibus urna."

Near to this monument of Thomas Hockin was an old stone, with this inscription
upon it: "Here lies buried under this stone,
The Right Worshipful Mr. Robert Ellison,
Merchant-adventurer of this town, twice
Right mayor he was.
All worldly pomp for ever thus must pass.
Elisa his wife, his children and friends him by,
With all shall rise at the last cry;
One thousand five hundred seventy and seven,
The last of January he went to heaven."


"Several years ago (says Bourne) the churchwardens were desired by one
Matthew Blount to sell this stone, but they loathed the request, because it
bore the name of a mayor of Newcastle, which they knew, after the sale of it,
would not be long there."

"John Armorer, hoastman."

"Christian Bulman, Oct. 8, 1723."

"Ralph Soursby, merchant-adventurer."

Near the quire door an old stone, which formerly belonged to Mr. Robert
Brandling: upon which was the Brandlings arms, with this inscription: "Here
lies, under this place,
Robert Brandling, merchant-adventurer, by God's grace;
Margaret his wife, and children dear,
In fear of God they lived here.
Like as the brand does flame and burn,
So we from death to life must turn."


"Mr. Nicholas Fenwick (says Bourne) had this stone given him by one Mr.
Brandling, who lived at Ipswich, and caused the said inscription to be
obliterated: after that he set upon it the arms of the Fenwicks."

"Nigh to this was another stone belonging to the same family of the Fenwicks."

"Charles Atkinson, hoastman."

"There was (says Bourne) an old stone which lay between the vestry and
quire-door, with its inscription erased: it belonged to alderman Leonard Carr,
who gave 5l. yearly for ever to the poor of this parish, and appointed it out
of diverse houses in the Butcher-Bank. He was an alderman of the town before the
rebellion, and turned out by the rebels. He deserves a better monument."

Opposite to the vestry, on the south side of the altar, was a large stone of
that kind called touchstone, raised above the level of the church. It was
covered with brass on the top of it, which has cut on it the effigies of Roger
Thornton and his wife, and also the figures of the apostles, and other saints,
with the family arms; one of the coats, Bourne says, was the arms of Lumley;
sed quaere.

Upon the brass plate as follows: "Hic jacet Domicella Agnes quondam uxor
Rogeri Thornton que obiit in vigilia Sancte Katerine anno Domini 1411.
Propitietur Deus amen. Hic jacet Rogerus Thornton mercator Novi Castri super
Tinam qui obiit anno Domini 1429, et 3 die Januarii."

As he was in his lifetime a great benefactor The following occurs in Wallis'
History of Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 522, notes: "Anno Domini 1429, in
crastino Circumcisionis obiit Rogerus de Thornton burgensis villae Novi Castri
et Dominus de Witton qui castrum ibidem construxit et dedit nobis plumbum quo
operitur navis ecclesiae nostrae: pro quo Rogero et Agnete uxore ejusdem et
liberis dicimus quotidianam missam pro defunctis; et jacent in ecclesia Omnium
Sanctorum in Novo Castro.

"Anno Domini 1440, in vigilia S. Kath' virginis obiit Elizab' uxor Rogeri
Thornton, Armigeri, quae fuit filia Domini Johannis Baronis de Graystocke." --
Ex martyrologia novi monasterii de fundatore and praecipuis benefactoribus
ejusdem; citat' Monast' Angl' p. 916-17-18.

By the above it is evinced, that the daughter of the Baron of Greystock was
Roger Thornton's second wife, and survived him several years.


to churches, religious houses, the poor, etc. so he forgot them not in his
last moments, as appears by his last will and testament. -- Vide annals A. D.
1429.

On taking down this monument in 1786, the groundwork of the plate appeared to
have been originally filled with differently colored wax, or paint.

There is a query concerning the arms on this monument in Dr. Ellison's MSS.
whether Thornton's coat and his wife's are not misplaced, the man for the
woman? I stand indebted for the information to the Somerset Herald, that it was
not an unusual thing in ancient times for a son to adopt his mother's coat of
arms in preference to his father's It appears by the pedigree in an ancient
visitation of Northumberland, copied among the Harleian MSS. 1554, p. 90, b.
that one Hodgkin Thornton was the father of the first Roger Thornton, who
married to his first wife (there is a transposal in the MS. which the
inscription on the plate enables us to correct) the daughter of -- Law, by whom
he had issue John, Roger, and Gyles Thornton: John married the daughter of --
Midford, and had issue Nicholas Thornton, who married Catharine, daughter of --
Gray, and had issue Roger Thornton, his first son, who married Margaret D. and
widow of Lawson -- also Laurence, his second son, who married Elizabeth,
daughter of Collingwood. The above Roger had by the above Lawson, Roger
Thornton, his first son, contracted to Sir Reginald Carnabye's eldest daughter
and heir, but he died before marriage. -- The first Roger Thornton, to his
second wife, married Elizabeth, daughter of the Baron of Greystock, by whom he
had a daughter, married to Ogle, who died fine pro^^, and another married to
Lumley, who had issue Thomas.

The Thorntons' crest is a tower.

There is preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, the
original of a general release, from Roger Thornton, Esquire. son, heir, and
executor of Roger Thornton, to the mayor and burgesses of that town, dated 6th
of October, 34 Hen. VI. A. D. 1456.

I have rejected Bourne's note, and account from Dugdale's Barona^^^, both of
them being extremely erroneous.


. -- See annexed the representation of this beautiful plate, and To Walter
Trenelyan Esquire. this REPRESENTATION ^ the very (...) PLATE of BRASS, inlaid on
the Table Monument of Roger Thornton the^^^brased Patron of NEWCASTLE upon
TYNE, in the (...) Henry ^. and still prescribe in the Church of All Saints in
that TOWN, (...) ^xpence is most respectfully inscribed by his (...) and (...)
humble Servant John Brand.
in that entitled "Monuments in the churches of St. Nicholas and All Saints," a
view of the whole monument, No 3.

"William Robinson, goldsmith, 1652."

"William Ramsey, sometime mayor of this town, 1653."

"William Ramsey, jun. sometime mayor of this town, 1716. Vivimus et vitae mors
mala fausta subit."

"George Bulman, baker and brewer, 1710.

Naught can exempt from death's imperial hand,
When it arrests the soul at God's command;
Each state and sex, as well the high as low,
Must once salute the grave, and thither go."
"Ralph Gray, merchant-adventurer, sometimes sheriff of this town, May 30th,
1666, aged 82."

Escutcheons in the south isle: Collier -- Collingwood -- Fenwick -- Harrison
-- Carr -- Aldworth. -- Arms and inscriptions, ibid. -- Atkinson -- Ramsay --
Wilkinson -- Blakiston -- Huntley -- Varey -- Forster -- Stewart -- Rand.

In the north isle.
"John Cosyn, draper and alderman, died 21st March, anno Dom. 1661."

"Here lies interred the body of George Morton, draper, alderman, and twice
mayor of this town. He departed this life 26th November, anno Dom' 1693."

"This John Cosyn," says Bourne, "as well as Mr. Rawlin (whose monument is over
against his in the south corner), was an alderman in the time of the rebellion,
of whom Sir George Baker said, they were not truly justices, though in the
place of justices. This Cosyn was the first exciseman that ever was in this
town, and a captain against the King: yet upon his stone, Mr. Pringle, as they
say, caused this to be written: "A conscience pure, unstained with sin,
Is brass without and gold within."
But some took offense, and said thus: "A conscience free he never had,
His brass was naught, his gold was bad." -- Milbank.


"The burial-place of Henry Waters, hoastman, and Dorothy his wife. She
departed 24th February, 1719."

"Here lies the body of Garrat Cock, gentleman, Isabell his wife, and their
children. He departed 1st day of August, 1637. She departed the 22d day of
September, anno Domini 1642. And also John Cock his son,
marchant-adventurer, and Mary his wife, and their children. He departed this
life the 2d of October, 1648. Isabell, his daughter, departed this life the
16th of November, 1639. Cathren departed the 3d of October, 1642."

"Thomas Fletewood, infant, departed ye 22d August, 1666."

"Robert Young, merchant-adventurer, 1670. Post mortem aeternitas."

"John Johnson, hoastman."

"Robert Cook, master and mariner, Nov. 1673."

"Sepulchrum Thomae Potts, gent. et Margaretae uxoris."

"William Liddell, 1580."

"Thomas Brown. Non mortuus sed dormio."

"William Dawson, 1707."

"Thomas Crawforth, 1690."

"Michael Clerk."

"Thomas Dawson, rope-maker."

"The burial-place of Thomas Monkhouse, tin-plate-worker."

"John Colvill, baker and brewer, 1689."

"Timothy Rawlett, hoastman."

"Jesus have mercy on the souls of John Hodshon, tailor, Margaret his wife,
and their children. He departed the 11th of November, 1505."

"John Colepitts, hoastman, 27th May, 1729, aged 41 years."

"Robert Watson, 1724."

"Cuthbert Snow, 16 Aug. 1694."

Seamen's Porch.

"James Brankstone, 23d November, 1727."

"Willoughby Hall, shipwright."

"Jacobus Metham generosus vitam pro aeternitate mutavit 23 April, 1684."

"Willielmus Bigg, generosus, and Johannes Hindmarch, Armig' humanae sortis et
fragilitatis memores hoc sibi suisque Deo volente supremum in terris posuerunt
domicilium usque festum resurrectionis mortuorum alta pace gaudendum.

Maxima noscere mori vitae est sapientia, vivit
Qui moritur, si vis vivere, disce mori. -- 23d April, 1684."
"The burial-place of Thomas Airey, hoastman."

"The burial-place of Richard Hinkster, and Jane his wife."

"John Green, consectioner, 13th May, 1681."

"Ann Colvil, October 12th, 1681."

"Thomas Pattison, mason, died 19th April, 1686. His wife Sept. 6th, 1691."

"Near this place lies interred the remains of William Cooper, Esquire. doctor of
physic, who departed this life on the 5th day of May, in the year of our Lord
1758, and in the 60th year of his age: whose memory will be revered by his
family, honored by his friends, and valued by all men who knew the able
physician, the polite gentleman, and the honest man." (He was killed by a fall
from his horse. -- The father of Sir Gray Cooper, Bart. and the late Rev. Dr.
Cooper.)

Insignia of Sir Matthew White, Bart. "June 18th, 1750, Matthew White, Esquire. of
Blagdon, com. Northumb. died there, and was buried in All Saints church. He was
son to Alderman Matthew White, and was succeeded by his son Matthew White, whom
he had by --, the eldest daughter and one of the coheirs of John Johnson, Esquire.
of Bebside. He left also one daughter, the wife of Matthew Ridley, Esquire. Matthew
White, the son, was created a baronet by his majesty King George the Second,
April or May 1756, and, in default of heirs male, to the heirs male of his
sister, now wife of Matthew Ridley, of Heaton, com. Northumb. Esquire. alderman of
Newcastle, and one of the representatives in parliament for that town, 1758.
And his eldest son, Sir Matthew White Ridley, was chosen one of the members of
parliamen^ for Morpeth in 1768." -- Gyll's interleaved Bourne, p. 96.


West end of the church.

"Hic jacet corpus Esther Starkin quae obiit 22 Oct. 1681."

"John Addison, fuller and dyer."

"George Graham, 28th December, 1727, aged 82."

There was a stone near the font, which had long been thought to be very
ancient. There was nothing to be seen upon it but the four evangelists, one at
each corner. It was the blue stone at the east side of the font. It had on it
lately the name of Ridley.

In the middle isle.

"William Stephenson, rope-maker's burial-place."

"Thomas Allison's burial-place."

"George Mitford, barber-surgeon, and Jane his wife."

"Henry Towart, master and mariner, his burial-place."

LECTURERS OF ALL SAINTS.
ROBERT JENNISON, S. T. P. occurs about A. D. 1622 He occurs, as a surety, in
St. Nicholas' register of baptisms, November 1617.

See Prynne's Canterbury's Doom, p. 381-2.


. He was suspended in 1639 for nonconformity. There had been a subscription
set on foot for his better encouragement, December 26th, 1631 Old parish books.
-- He was afterward vicar of Newcastle.
.

October 18th, 1639, Dr. Wiseheart was appointed lecturer of All Saints, upon
Sundays, by order of the King, in place of Dr. Jennison By a letter, dated
October 9th, 1639, signed Fran. Windebancke, one of the secretaries of state.
-- Enrolled in the common council book.
.

July 5th, 1641, Mr. William Morton was invited to be pastor of this church Old
parish book.

He is mentioned thus in the MS. Life of Barnes, p. 47: "In the beginning of
the war, Mr. Morton, a very worthy man, left Newcastle, went into the
parliament's army, and was one of the divines in the assembly at Westminster."


.

Dec. 17th, 1643, Mr. John Shawe occurs as afternoon lecturer Old parish book.
-- He was ejected from this church, as also from his rectory at Whalton in
Northumberland, and with difficulty kept his living at Bolton in Craven. -- Dr.
Ellison's MSS.
.

July 5th, 1647, Mr. Richard Prideaux was appointed afternoon lecturer, and Mr.
William Durant morning lecturer, at All Saints Common Council books. --
February 20th, 1645, there is an order of common council for a Friday afternoon
lecture at All-Hallows. -- Mr. Ha^^i, Mr. Sheffield, Mr. Sydenham, and Mr.
Durant were the ministers appointed to it. -- To begin at three o'clock in
winter, and five o'clock in summer.

Mr. John Durant dedicated the Woman of Canaan, being the sum of certain
sermons on Matthew xv. 22, to the magistrates, ministers, and inhabitants of
Newcastle upon Tyne, thanking them for their singular respect to his dear
brother William Durant, who was ca^rying on the work of the gospel among them
in that town. 1660, 8v^. -- See Gra^ger, Biog. Hist. vol. ii. p. 27.

William Durant married the sister of Sir James Clavering, Bart.

I found the following inscription on a flat gravestone, under a staircase,
in one of the stables of the late Sir Walter Blackett's house in
Pilgrim-Street. -- The stable appears to have been built over it. -- The place
was long known among the servants by the name of "The Dead Man's Hole."

"Parentis venerandi
Gulielmi Durant, A. M.
Ecclesiae Christi
D. V. hac in urbe
Pastoris vigilantissimi,
Officii pietatis ergo,
Funeri subjacenti
Sepulchrale hocce marmor
Lu. more. posuit
Johannes Durant F.
Josh. cap. ult. ver. 29, 30, 32, 33, 1681."

.

March 20th, 1656, by an order of common council, Mr. Richard Prideaux was
appointed morning lecturer, and Mr. William Durant afternoon lecturer of this
church Common Council books.

It appears that this Prideaux conformed; for, August 27th, 1662, we find him
settled here, to preach both forenoon and afternoon. -- He was of the
persuasion then called "The Congregational Judgment."


.

August 9th, 1663, Mr. Thomas Davison was appointed lecturer of All Saints,
with a salary of 150l. per annum Common Council books. -- See Wood's Fasti
Oxon. Thomas Davison, A. M. of St. John's, Cambridge, is supposed to have been
the same person who published the Fall of Angels laid open, etc. a sermon
preached before the mayor, etc. of Newcastle upon Tyne. London, 1685, 4to. --
Fasti Oxon. p. 153.
.

March 23d, 1664, Mr. William Cock Common Council books.
was appointed on the resignation of T. Davison.

January 26th, 1666, Mr. William Bickerton was appointed, with a salary of
100l. on the resignation of W. Cock Cosins' Reg. p. 85. He had been pastor of
Wolsingham during the usurpation. Kennett's Reg. 922.
.

May 8th, 1671, Leonard Shaftoe, A. M. was appointed, on the death of W.
Bickerton, both forenoon and afternoon lecturer, with a salary of 70l. per
annum Ibid. p. 89.
.

August 30th, 1676, William Mayer, A. M. was removed from St. Nicholas'
lectureship to All Saints, where he was to preach both forenoon and afternoon;
salary 90l. Common Council books.


November, 1686, on the death of W. Mayer, Mr. Nathanael Ellison was appointed,
with a salary of 130l. to preach both forenoons and afternoons, and in his turn
on Thursday's lecture. -- To allow 20l. per annum out of his salary for an
assistant By John March, vicar of Newcastle. -- Extract from the original
certificate in Hunter's MSS. vol. ii. No. 157 -- he is styled "son of the late
Robert Ellison, merchant."
.

Dec. 2d, 1687, Mr. Thomas Knaggs Common Council books. -- Thomas Knaggs, A. M.
of Emanuel-College, Cambridge, chaplain to Ford, Lord Gray, published a sermon
preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at Bow-Church, Nov. 5,
1693, on Psalm lxiv. 9. dedicated to Sir William Asharst, Knt. Lord Mayor. --
He died May 12, 1724.

I find Thomas Knaggs, A. B. presented to Merrington vicarage, April 6th, 1682.

Wood, in his Athenae Oxon. vol. ii. p. 1080, says, but certainly is mistaken,
that Knaggs was of Trinity-College, Oxford.

A sermon, quarto, London, 1700, lies before me, preached at Trinity chapel, in
the parish of St. Martin's in the Fields, Feb. 4, 17^^, dedicated to Lady Sarah
Brook, "by Thomas Knaggs, A. M. and chaplain to the Right Hon^urable Ford,
Earl of Tankerville." -- The above sermon, in 1693, is "by Thomas Knagg^, M. A.
lecturer in Newcastle, and chaplain to the Right Honorable Ford, Lord Gray."
-- "At All-Hallows," says the MS. ^ase of Barnes, p. 52, "was Mr. Knag^^, who,
(...) with Dr. Atherton, a strong passive obedience man, got himself many
potent on (...), removed to the rectory of St. Giles', London."


appointed afternoon lecturer; salary 70l.

About April 30th, 1695, Nathanael Chilton, A. M. morning-lecturer, on the
removal of N. Ellison to the vicarage He was recommended by the Bishop of
Carlisle.
.

July 14th, School, on the death of N. Chilton, Mr. Leonard Shaftoe, son of the
above morning lecturer of the same name; salary 100l. and 10l. for Thursday's
lecture He died August 27th, 1731, recto^ of Gateshead.
.

Sept. 21st, 1697, on the removal of T. Knaggs, Ralph Emmerson, A. M. afternoon
lecturer; salary 80l. Common council books.


Charles Ward, A. M. occurs as afternoon lecturer. He died A. D. 1715 Bourne
says, he was an excellent preacher. -- Mr. Ward published the Duty of Charity
to the Souls of Men, a sermon preached before the mayor and aldermen of
Newcastle at All Saints church, on All Saints day, 1711, at the anniversary
public examination o^ a charity-school there.
.

A. D. 1715, Hugh Farrington, A. M. afternoon lecturer; afterward forenoon
lecturer. -- He died September 3d, 1739 Common Council books.
.

September, 1731, on the removal of H. Farrington to the morning lecture, Henry
Fetherstonhaugh, B. D. late fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, was
appointed afternoon lecturer Licensed July 1st, 1732, published a sermon
preached at St. Nicholas', Newcastl^ 3^th January, 17^4.
.

September 24th, 1739, Robert Swinburne, A. M. morning lecturer, on the death
of H. Farrington; salary 100l. Of University-College, Oxford. -- He died April
17th, 1761.


April 24th, 1761, Hugh Moises, A. M. morning lecturer, on the death of R.
Swinburne The order of common council, whereby Mr. Moises was appointed to this
lectureship, acknowledges his good services to the grammar school of the town,
and mentions this ecclesiastical preferment as a small reward for his eminent
industry, and the exertion of his very distinguished abilities.
.

June 14th, 1779, Henry Ridley, A. M. on the death of H. Fetherstonhaugh,
afternoon lecturer Common Council books.
.

December 17th, 1783, Cuthbert Wilson, A. M. afternoon lecturer, on the removal
of H. Ridley to St. Nicholas' Ibid.
.

CURATES OF ALL SAINTS See Bourne's account. -- The King pays to the curate 4l.
6s. 11d. -- This is reputed one of the largest cures in the kingdom.
.
JOHN DE HARPHAM occurs in the year 1380 Randall's MSS.
.

Robert Croft, in the year 1407 Ibid.
.

William Daggett, 1424 Randall's MSS.
.

Robert Heart, 1558 and 1562 Ibid.
.

George Gray, clerk, occurs Dec. 4th, 1576 Book of wills cited ibid. either
removed from, or to, St. John's curacy.
.

Cuthbert, alias Robert Ewbank occurs February 1st, 1577, when, also, William
Brown is mentioned as his assistant or sub-curate Ibid. p. 9. He occurs as a
witness, by the title of Curate of All Hallows, January 19th, 1582. He was
ordained deacon, October 10th, 1573. In Gyll's interleaved Bourne, p. 107,
"Cuthbert Ewbanke" occurs, 1580.
.

Edward Cleton occurs March 8th, 1585, and July 7th, 1586 Randall's MSS.
.

Thomas Edgar, A. D. 1596 Ibid.
.

John Wood occurs A. D. 1605, in the parish register. -- Also A. D. 1610 Ibid.
.

Samuel Barker, clerk, A. D. 1617. He occurs also August 22d, 1633 Occurs, as
curate here, in a deed dated April 20th, 1662.
.

Robert Bonner, A. B. licensed December 17th, 1639. He was sequestered and
imprisoned for his loyalty in the civil wars Randall's MSS.
.

Roland Salkeld, A. D. 1660 Ibid.
.

John Wolfall, A. B. ordained priest March 15th, 1662 Cosins' Register, p. 30.
.

Stephen Hegg, A. D. 1664 Ibid. p. 39.
.

Reynold Horsley, A. D. 1665 Ibid. p. 39.
.

Timothy Fenwick, A. D. 1672 Ibid. p. 44.
.

Ralph Gray occurs as curate here, A. D. 1683 Randall's MSS.
.

Joseph Bonner, A. D. 1688. Afterward vicar of Bolam Ibid.
.

Peter Straughan, A. D. 1695, on the resignation of Bonner Ibid.
.

Anthony Procter, A. D. 1697 Randall's MSS. say 1699.
.

Richard Musgrave, A. B. in 1703 Randall's MSS.
.

Cuthbert Ellison, M. A. of Lincoln-College, Oxford, 1708. Removed to the
vicarage of Stannington. -- He died February 13th, 1744 Author of "The Babbler,
in two Sermons on Acts, xvii. xviii. preached in St. Nicholas' church, before
the corporation of Newcastle, May 15th, and Nov. 27th, 1726, by Cuthbert
Ellison, A. M. vicar of Stannington, in Northumberland" -- published 1745, pr.
6d. 8vo. -- also of "A Pastoral between Corydon and Thyrsis;" -- also of a most
pleasant description of Benwell village, called, "A Trip to Benwell," 1726, 8vo.
.

Henry Bourne, A. M. of Christ's College, Cambridge, licensed 1722. He wrote
"Antiquitates Vulgares," and "The History of Newcastle." He died February 16th,
1733 The following note is extracted from Gyll's interleaved Bourne -- "Henry
Bourne, the son of a tailor, after some time spent in school, was bound an
apprentice to a glazier in the Side, in Newcastle; and, discovering a
disposition toward letters, was, after he had lived two or three years with
his master, emancipated from his service, and again sent to school, and from
thence he was transplanted by the aid of some persons who knew him, and
admitted a Sizar, about the year 1719, or 172^, in Christ's College, in
Cambridge, under the tuition of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Atherton, a fellow of
that society, and his countryman, where he continued till he commenced Bachelor
of Arts, and quitting the college, returned to Newcastle, and was appointed
curate of All-Hallow^, where he officiated till his death."

He published in February 1727, dedicated to Granville Wh^ler, Esquire. a Treatise
upon the Collects, Epistles and Gospels of the Book of Common Prayer. --
Printed at Newcastle, by John White.


.

Thomas Maddison, A. M. succeeded Bourne, licensed Sept. 7th, 1733.

William Alderson, clerk -- head curate, 1758.

George Stephenson, clerk, head curate, December 1774 Mr. Stephenson was
presented in 1769, by ^ton-College, to the living of Cottisford in Oxfordshire,
worth 120l. per annum, which he exchanged with a fellow of Baliol-College,
Oxford, for Long Benton in the county of Northumberland, to which the said
Baliol-College had appointed the latter.
.

One of the two clerks of this parish dying in 1708, it was thought more
convenient for the parishioners, as also for the minister, who had a very
laborious cure, to have an assistant curate: whereupon Abraham Wilcox, A. M.
was appointed. He was succeeded by Ambrose Fenwick, A. M. afterward vicar of
Stamfordham.

William, alias George Hall was appointed April 30th, 1722. He died in 1741.

Thomas Gatis, A. M. of St. John's College, Cambridge. He was found dead in the
Shield Field.

William Alderson, clerk, occurs at the Bishop's visitation, July 18th, 1754.

George Stephenson, clerk.

John Hogarth, clerk, curate at Middleton in Teesdale, Dec. 1774. Afterward
vicar of Kirknewton.

PREACHERS AT ST. ANN'S, A CHAPEL OF EASE TO ALL SAINTS.
MR. JOHN RAWLETT occurs, March 30th, 1682, with a salary of 30l. See Bourne's
account. The list of preachers is collected from the common counc^l books, etc.
.

October 4th, 1686, Mr. Andrew Bates, on the death of the above, with the same
salary.

April 17th, 1710, a new gallery was ordered to be erected in Sand-Gate chapel.

At the same time John Metcalf, A. M. was appointed to preach here once every
Sunday, and to read prayers every Sunday, both forenoon and afternoon.

March 6th, 1716, John Chilton, A. M. -- Dec. 16th, 1723, his salary was
ordered to be stopped.

April 3d, 1717, Mr. Robert Thomlinson to preach here on Sunday forenoons.

March 7th, 1724, order of common council that 15l. per annum be added to the
Reverend John Ellison's salary of 35l. per annum, for St. Ann's chapel, and on
the death or removal of J. Chilton, the said J. Ellison to be forenoon lecturer.

Michaelmas, 1725, Mr. Joseph Carr appointed to Sand-Gate chapel.

Sept. 21st, 1726, Mr. Thomas Maddison, on the removal of J. Carr -- salary 50l.

June 26th, 1727, Mr. Henry Bourne, Mr. William Hall, curates of All Saints,
and Mr. John Thompson, to preach by turns, on Sunday mornings at St. Ann's --
10s. for each sermon.

Sept. 5th, 1727, Mr. Richard Cuthbert, morning preacher.

June 15th, 1732, Mr. Nathanael Clayton appointed to St. Ann's -- salary 40l.

May 6th, 1736, Mr. T. Maddison appointed forenoon lecturer -- salary 50l.

Mr. John Thompson appointed at the same time to preach in the afternoons --
40l.

Dec. 21st, 1761, Mr. R. Brewster appointed afternoon preacher, on the death of
J. Thompson.

The present elegant new chapel was consecrated by Bishop Trevor, on Friday
Sept. 2d, 1768, having been rebuilt and endowed by the corporation See account
of Town-Walls.
. Salary for morning preacher, 50l. -- afternoon ditto, 40l.

Dr. Fawcett preached and published the consecration sermon.

June 15th, 1772, Cuthbert Wilson, A. M. morning lecturer.

At the same time Cuthbert Wilson, curate of Gateshead, was chosen afternoon
preacher. -- He died May 8th, 1773.

June 17th, 1773, William Hall, A. M. afternoon lecturer, on the death of C.
Wilson.

A. D. 1781, Robert Thorp, A. M. afternoon lecturer, on the removal of W. Hall
to Heydon-Bridge school.

Dec. 17th, 1783, Thomas Hornby, A. M. of University-College, Oxford, morning
lecturer, on the removal of C. Wilson, A. M. to the afternoon lectureship of
All Saints.

Sept. 21st, 1786, Moses Manners, A. M. of Lincoln-College, Oxford, morning
lecturer, on the removal of T. Hornby to St. John's.

ST. LAURENCE'S CHAPEL, IN ALL SAINTS PARISH.
THERE was a chapel or chantry in this parish, dedicated to St. Laurence, said
to have been founded by one of the earls of Northumberland, and to have been
dependant on the priory of St. John of Jerusalem See Bourne's account.
.

March 4th, 1549, King Edward the Sixth granted to the mayor and burgesses of
Newcastle upon Tyne, "all that late chapel or chantry of St. Laurence, within
the lordship of Byker, and in the parish of All Saints, in Newcastle upon Tyne,
with little St. Ann's Close, lands and tenements in Byker, a tenement in
Killingworth, a fishery in the river Tyne, with an annual rent of four
shillings out of lands at Heaton -- all belonging to the said chapel or chantry
From the original remaining in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle.
."

Leonard Myers was the last incumbent, and had in 1553 a pension of 2l. 14s.
Brown Willis, vol. ii. p. 165.

On a visit to the remains of this chapel, Sept. 5th, 1782, I found it
converted into a lumber-room to an adjoining glass-house. I traced where the
eastern window had been. -- It is now built up with brick, except where there
is an entrance to a lost. The western door too may be seen from within. --
Rubbish thrown around it has filled up the south wall on the outside, almost to
the roof, so that it resembles a cellar. The neighboring work people talk of
treasure as being buried in a vault somewhere near it, and, with their usual
superstition, suppose it to be haunted by apparitions. It stands nearly
opposite to the south shore.


.

The following account of this place occurs in the certificate of colleges and
chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in the
Augmentation-Office.

"No. 14. The fre chapel of Saint Laurence in the lordshippe of Bycar within
the parish of Saint Nicholas in the town of Newcastell upon Tyne. The said
fre chapel was founded by the auncesters of the late earl of Northumberland
toward the fyndyng of a priest to pray for their sowles and all christen sowls
and also to herbour such Quaere sick?
persons and wayfayryng men in time of need as it is reported.

"The yearly value 60s. -- value by this survey the same, as appears by ^
rentall, whereof is paid to the Kinge's majesty for the yerelie tenths thereof
6s. and remains clearly 54s. which one Leonarde Myers has to his own use
for the term of his life by force of a grant to him made by the late earl of
Northumberland by his letters patent under his seal of arms bering date the
12th day of Auguste in the 25th year of the Kings majesty's reign in
consideracion of the good service done by the said Leonard heretofore which
grant is confirmed by a decree under the seal of the Kings court of
augmentations bearing date the 12 day of February in the 33d year of the
reign of our sovereign lord King Henry the 8th. The said fre chapel is
within the parish of Saint Nicholas aforsaid and about half a mile distant
from the parish church by report.

"Ornaments, etc. nil. For there be neither goods catalls ne ornaments
belongyng to the same by report. There were no other lands nor yerelie profitts
apperteyning to the said fre chapel since the 4 day of February in the 27
year of the K. majesty's reign more than is before mentioned."

DOG-BANK.
DOG-BANK is a street that communicates between the head of Butcher-Bank and
the head of the Broad-Chare, down a very steep hill.

Jews who dealt in silver wares have probably lived here formerly, for this
also is called Silver-Street, in some ancient writings Bourne -- of the dates
of 1582, 1639, 1697, 1738, 1759, concerning property there ^oundering on the
Trinity-House -- belonging in 1777 to Robert Gibson, of N. Shield^, tailor.
.

PANDON.
PANDON, or Pampedon, anciently a distinct town from Newcastle, was united
thereto by a charter of King Edward I. A. D. 1299 See History of Newcastle as a
corporate town.
.

Horseley, the learned author of the Britannia Romana Britannia Romana, p. 131.

"This place of Pandon," says Gray, in his Chorographia, p. 12, "is of such
antiquity, that if a man would express any ancient thing, it is a common
proverb, "as old as Pandon."

Since Grey's time, the proverb has been corrupted into "as old as Pandon Gate."


, has conjectured, with great probability, that the latter syllable of Pandon
was deen, a hollow or a brook. No one has hazarded a probable etymon of the
first syllable. That the Romans called it Pampedon or Pantheon, from some
building like the Pantheon at Rome having stood in it, is an assertion too
ridiculous to deserve refutation. I shall mention, in a note, some other
conjectures which have been made on this subject, with equal felicity Bourne
says, that "there is some doubt about the reason of the name, some imagining it
came from Pandana, one of the gates of Rome, which was so called, "quia semper
pateret," because it stood always open. But I dare say, this could never give
name to the town of Pandon, which being in all probability a Roman place of
defense, was rather obliged to be always shut."

Others have imagined that it came from one Pandara, a Scottish virgin saint,
but for what reason they know best.

In a deed preserved in All Saints vestry, dated 1541, the name is spelled
"Pampdene." And in another, ibid. dat. 4 Ed. VI. "Pampden."


.

The kings of Northumberland, after the departure of the Romans, are said to
have had one of their palaces in Pandon. A very ancient house, now almost
entirely rebuilt, but which retained till very lately the name of Pandon-Hall
Bourne tells us, that, in his time, this was "rebuilt in some measure:" but he
adds, "There are still remaining many ancient walls and parts of this building:
it was of considerable bigness, having been, according to tradition, on its
north front, in length, from Stock Bridge to Cow-Gate; and on its west front,
in length, from its west corner, beyond that lane that leads into Blyth's Nook.
It was built in the times of the he p^a^^hy."

In a probate of the will of Henry Brandling, of Newcastle, merchant, preserved
in the archives of the corporation of that town, and dated July 1^th, 1578,
there i^ mentioned "a great house called Pandon-Hall."

In St. Andrew's register of burial, 1695, a person is mentioned a^ having
lived in "Pandon Hall."

I have some suspicion that Pandon-Hall was anciently called King John's House.
The MS. Lase of Alderman Barn, p. 25, tells u^, "King John's house has nothing
of it left, the ground whereon it stood being covered with new buildings." --
"By what fatality," says Mr. Wyndham, speaking of an ancient building at
Wa^nford, Archaeologia, vol. v. p. 357, "so many ancient edifices came to be
attributed to King John, and to bear his name, I am more disposed to wonder at,
than to attempt to investigate."


, has been handed down by tradition, if not as the very mansion, yet as erected
on the site of their palace. "A safe bulwark," says Gray, "having the Picts'
Wall on the north side, and the river Tyne on the south."

Near Pandon-Hall, says Dr. Stukeley, in his Iter Boreale, p. 64, was found a
seal ring, now in Mr. Warburton's possession, who has engraved it in his Map of
Northumberland. -- See a fac-simile copy in plate of Miscellaneous Antiquities,
No. 5.

There was anciently a street in Pandon, called Honey-Lane. I know not where to
six the site of it In a deed preserved in All Saints vestry, dated Pentecost,
1541, a tenement is described as extending "a via regia in Pampdene ex part
australi usque ad viam nuncupat' Honylayn retro ex part boreali."
.

Mention occurs of a water-mill near Pandon-Gate, 38 Hen. VI. The mill-dam was
on the outside of the town's wall, in the King's dikes In a deed that lies
before me.

"July 10th, 38 Hen. VI. John Richardson, mayor of Newcastle, and the community
of that town, demise to John Ward, "quandam parcellam soli vasti infra muros
Domini Regis ville predicte juxta portam vocat' Pampden-Yate prout jacet ibidem
contigue dicto muro continendo 17 ulnas in longitud' ab eodem muro versus
austrum et 14 ulnas et dimid' in latitud' etc." They grant also to the said J.
Ward "quamdam aliam parcellam soli vasti de fossatis vocat' les King Dikes
extra (murum) et soli infra dictum murum ad quantitatem 42 ulnarum in
longitudine a porta predicta oblonge per murum predictum et in latitudine sicut
fossata vocata les King Dikes ibidem continere consueverunt et debent ad
edificand' and construend' super dictam parcellam soli infra dictum murum
quoddam molendinum bladosum aquaticum et super et in dicta parcella soli extra
dictum murum unum stagnum pro eodem molendino, etc."

In a deed dated October 18th, 35 Eliz. mention occurs of "Le Patten-Deane,"
for Pandon-Dene -- near is "venella vocat' le Blinde-Chaire," which must have
been not far from Pandon-Gate.


.

The arch that crosses Pandon-Burn is called Stock-Bridge It occurs in Grey's
Chorographia, A. D. 1649 -- also 1584, with this name. -- Quaere if it be
derived from the circumstance of selling stock fish at it? Stock Fish are
mentioned in the Wardrobe account, 28 Ed. I. published by the Society of
Antiquaries.
, which Bourne supposes was anciently made of wood. It appears to have been of
stone about the time of Edward I. Formerly the river flowed up to it every
tide, and there was a fish-market near it.

An almshouse at Stock-Bridge is mentioned in a will, dated August 21, 1584;
but it is alike unknown by whom, or at what time, it was founded "Lib. Testam.
No 75, in Consist. Dunelm. p. 98. William Copland, pully-maker, by will, dated
August 21st, 1584, bequeathed to the poor of Stock-Bridge almshouse 4d."
.

A pile of buildings, taken down lately to widen the street hereabouts, was
formerly called Alvey's Island "A place," Bourne tells us, "which was formerly
called the Island, as says tradition, because in former times, when the tide
flowed up to the Stock-Bridge, there was thereabout a hill of sand, which at
the tide's leaving it appeared like an island. They call it at present Alvey's
Island, because it belonged to one of that name. It is the very place in which
stand the house, cellars, and malting of Mr. George Hinkster, which are bounded
on the west, north, and south, by the King's Street, and on the east by a waste
piece of ground of the Lady Goldsburgh, which was formerly called the Stones."
. These buildings, the site of which was anciently a hill of sand, were
situated between the foot of Manor-Chare, the foot of Silver-Street and
Stock-Bridge.

The street near this place, extending from the foot of Silver-Street to the
head of the Broad-Chare, still retains the name of Cow-Gate, the ancient
appellation of Manor-Chare See before account of Manor-Chare. Bourne informs
us, that some eminent men lived formerly in Cow-Gate, such as Gilbert de
Cowgate, Walter de Cowgate, etc.

In Corbridge's Plan of the town, 1723, the continuation of Cow-Gate to the
foot of the Manor-Chare is called "Duck-Hill," alias "Stoney-Hill." In Bourne's
Plan, "Duck-Hill" in Broad-Chare is that passage of communication between
Broad-Chare and Spicer-Lane.

Near the foot of the Manor-Chare, alias Cow-Gate, was a street or place called
Ew-Gate, as appears by a deed dated March 5th, 1652, and an indenture dated
20th March, 1719, both relating to the same property, and communicated by Mr.
John Stokoe: the last was made between Wolslan Paston, gentleman, and John
Sherwood, mason, and describes the premises as follows: "All that message,
burgage, or tenement and garth, with the appurtenances, situate, standing and
being within the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, in a certain street or
place there called Ewe-Gate, boundering upon a message belonging to Mr.
Anderson toward the east, a parcel of ground belonging to the mayor and
burgesses, called the Midden-Stead, upon the west part, and extends itself from
the said street called Ewe-Gate on the south, to the town's walls backward on
the north."


.

The street into which we enter, when we have passed Stock-Bridge ^^ the way to
Wall-Knoll, was anciently called Fisher-Gate Bourne tells us, that, in a
writing drawn when Henry le Scott was mayor of Newcastle, about the year 1287,
some land is described as extending itself, "in longitudine a commum via super
le Wall-Knoll in australem partem domus fratrum de Monte Carmel usque ad
communem viam que solebat ducere versus Fisher-Gate." This monastery was at the
top of Wall-Knoll. He supposes the common way here spoken of to have been those
stairs beside Mr. Green's house, at the Stock-Bridge, which lead up to the
gardens there, and which, were it not for a wall, would directly lead from this
street to the remains of this monastery.

In an inquisition taken at Newcastle, Tuesday in Easter week, in the 5th of
King Henry V. or VI. preserved in the Murray MSS. the foll^wing occurs: "Omnes
illi qui^d antiquo a portu ville predicte usque mare causa piscandi transi^runt
in eadem villa Novi Castri videlicet in quodam vico eis adtune assignato
vulgariter Fisher-Gate nuncupa^o morari solebant pro eo quod idem piscatores
nulla regrataria de hujusmodi piscibus per ipsos capt' uti deberent antequam
ipsi usque candem villam una cum eisdem piscibus integraliter provennent in
antiq' commetuda^is et p^^s' Regis inde salvationem."


.

A street that winds up an high hill from the ancient Fisher-Gate, still
retains the name of Wall-Knoll, which it has, no doubt, derived from the
circumstance of the Roman Wall's having gone over the top of it Knoll signi^ies
hill.

"It seems to me," says Bourne, "to have this name from the Roman Wall going
along it: for the word knoll signifies an hill or eminence, as I gather from
the Lord Bishop of London's note in Cambden upon Sevenoke, in Kent, who says,
on the east side of it stands Knowlle, so called because it is seated upon a
hill. And Gray says also, positively, that it was part of the Picts' Wall."


.

A few years ago a meeting house for protestant dissenters was erected on the
Wall-Knoll, of which Mr. Richardson was minister.

Not far from this, in the descent toward Love-Lane, is a place of worship
used by the sect of dissenters called Independents, of which Mr. William
Leighton was minister.

Upon Wall-Knoll stood anciently the house of the Carmelites, or White-Friars,
which was deserted by that order, and afterward inhabited by the Trinitarians.

The Trinitarians, or Maturines, styled of the order of the Holy Trinity for
the Redemption of Captives, also of the order of Ingham, from their house at a
place of that name in the county of Norfolk, were brought into England A. D.
1224, and had the lands, etc. of the canons of the Holy Sepulcher allotted them.

Their rule was that of St. Austin, with some peculiar constitutions; and they
wore white robes, with a red and blue cross upon their breasts. Their revenues
were divided into three parts; the first was for their own maintenance; the
second for that of the poor, and the third for the redemption of Christians
taken captives by the Infidels. There were ten or twelve houses of this order
in England and Wales.

The foundation charter of this house Leland, in his Itinerary, vol. viii. p.
23, 24, new edition, tells u^, that "there was a house in Barwike ordinis S.
Trinitatis: but Antony Beke, Byshope of Dur^sme, destroyed it, and then one
William Wakefelde, master of the house in Barwyke, at the defacing of it came to
Newcastell, and by the aid of Gul' and Laurence Acton, brethren, both
marchaunts of Newcastell, builded within the town of Newcastell a house o^ the
religion S Trinitatis, where Wakefeld himself was first master."
is dated the Wednesday before Pentecost, A. D. 1360. It was confirmed by the
Bishop of Durham, October 2d, 1361, and by the dean and chapter there, April
20th, 1363. The founder was William de Acton, burgess of Newcastle. This house
was dedicated to St. Michael In a deed now lying before me, of the date of
1459, (...) property situated on the Key-Side is described as lying, "inter
tenementum ministri et fratrium dom^^s Sancti Michaelis de la Wall-Knoull ex
part orientati, etc."

In a record preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon
Tyne, dat^d July 9th, 1733, mention occurs of "two-third par^^^^^ W^^ Knowle^^
alias St Michael's Mount."


, and the place where it stood was called, from its high situation, St.
Michael's Mount.

William de Wackefeld was appointed the first warden: the society were to
consist of three chaplains of this order, one whereof to be warden; three poor
and infirm persons, and three clerks to teach school, and instruct in the
chapel of the house. The property, by which they were to be supported,
consisted of a tenement that belonged to Hugh de Haldenby, two cellars opposite
to Cale-Crosse, a piece of ground near the town-wall, a rent of 33s. 4d. from a
house near Lorteburn, a rent of 57s. 4d. from a tenement in the Flesher-Rawe,
and another of 10s. out of a tenement opposite Cale-Crosse; all given by the
founder in frankalmoigne. The master of St. Robert's, at Knaresburgh in
Yorkshire, was to be visitor, to visit them annually about Trinity Sunday, on
which occasion the master of this house was to present him with an horse-load
of fish, and make other proper recompense for his trouble: failing him the
mayor and bailiffs of Newcastle were to be visitors.

Three beds were always to be kept prepared for accidental guests Bourne's
History, Appendix -- at full length -- "confirmatio hospitalis de Wall-Knoll
infra villam Novi Castri."
.

February 24th, 1361, King Edward III. after an inquisition made by John del
Strother, mayor and eschaetor of Newcastle, granted a license of mortmain to
the Carmelites of that place, to enable them to grant the Wall-Knoll, in which
they themselves had formerly resided, to William de Acton, to found thereon
this hospital of St. Trinity anew, and to enable the said William to assign to
it a message that once belonged to Hugh de Haldenby, two cellars, and a piece
of ground lying between the land of John de Stanhope, and that of Thomas
Milson, and 6l. 3s. 4d. of his annual rents, all in that town, in part of their
support, and for the maintenance of their successors for ever. These were all
held of the King in burgage of the town of Newcastle by the service of 7d. per
annum, and therefore the said William de Acton paid the King a fine of 20l.
"Prima pars paten' de anno regni Regis Edwardi tercii tricesimo quarto, m. 28,
pro fratribus hospitalis Sancte Trinitatis de Novo Castro super Tynam. Rex
omnibus ad quos etc. salutem. Quia accepimus per inquisitionem quam per
dilectum nobis Willielmum del Strother majorem ville Novi Castri super Tynam et
escaetorem nostrum in eadem villa fieri fecimus quod non est ad dampnum vel
prejudicium nostrum aut aliorum si concedamus priori and fratribus de ordine
beat Marie de Monte Carmeli dicte ville Novi Castri quod ipsi quandam placeam
terre vocatam le Walkenoll in eadem villa, quam quidem placeam quondam fratres
de ordine predicto de Johanne de Byker tempore Domini H. quondam Regis Anglie
proavi nostri de licentia ejusdem proavi nostri dictis fratribus et
successoribus suis in feodo adquisiverunt dare possint et concedere dilecto
nobis Willielmo de Acton de Novo Castro super Tynam ad quoddam hospitale in
honor Sancte Trinitatis pro fratribus pauperibus et infirmis in eodem
hospitali moratur' de novo fundand' et construend' pro inhabitatione cujusdam
custodis fratrum pauperum et infirmorum and successorum suorum imperpetuum Et
similiter quod non est ad dampnum vel prejudicium nostrum aut aliorum si
concedamus prefato Willielmo de Acton quod ipse unum messuag' quod quondam fuit
Hugonis de Haldenby et duo celaria et unam aliam placeam terre jacentem in
predicta villa Novi Castri inter terram Johannis de Stanop ex una part and
terram quondam Thome Milson ex part altera et sex libratas tres solidatas et
quatuor denaratas annui redditus in eadem villa Novi Castri quem quidem annuum
redditum prefatus Willielmus de Acton de quibusdam ten' in dicta villa Novi
Castri percipere solebat and percipit hiis diebus, dare possit et assignare
prefatis custodi fratribus pauperibus and infirmis in dicto hospitali moratur'
habend' et tenend' sibi and successoribus suis una cum dicta placea vocata le
Walkenoll in partem sustentacionis sue et successorum suorum predictorum
imperpetuum Et quod predicte placee and alia tenementa predicta tenentur de
nobis in burgagio dicte ville Novi Castri per servicium 7 denar' per annum pro
omni servicio. Nos pro viginti libris quas predictus Willielmus de Acton nobis
solvet concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro nobis et hered' nostris quantum in
nobis est prefatis priori and fratribus de ordine beat Marie de Monte Carmeli
quod ipsi predictam placeam vocatam le Walkenoll cum pertinen' dare possit and
concedere predicto Willielmo de Acton ad dictum hospitale in honor Sancte
Trinitatis pro fratribus pauperibus et infirmis in eodem hospitali moratur' de
novo fundand' and construend' pro inhabitacione unius custodis ac fratrum
pauperum et infirmorum predictorum ac successoribus suorum imperpetuum Et eidem
Willielmo de Acton quod ipse dictam placeam vocatam le Walkenolle a prefatis
priore and fratribus de ordine beat Marie recipere possit et dictum hospitale
fundare in forma predicta and habita per ipsum Willielmum de Acton inde plena
and pacifica seisina eandem placeam et dictam aliam placeam nec non messuagium
celaria and reditum predicta cum pertinen' dare possit et assignare predictis
custodi fratribus pauperibus et infirmis in predicto hospitali moratur' habend'
et tenend' sibi and successoribus suis juxta ordinationem etc. In cujus etc.
Test custode predicto apod Westm' 24 die Februar'." -- From the original in
the Tower of London.


November 30th, 1370, King Edward III. granted a license of mortmain to Thomas
Bentele, chaplain, to enable him to assign a certain void place, and 13s. 4d.
of rent in Newcastle, held of the King in free burgage to William de Wakefeld,
keeper, and minister of the Holy Trinity, for the redemption of captives of the
Wall-Knoll there, and the brethren of that house, in aid of the support of a
chaplain to perform divine service, for the souls of the said Thomas and of
William Thorald, their fathers, mothers, and ancestors, and all the faithful
departed, daily, in St. Nicholas' church in that town "Secunda pars paten' de
anno regni Regis Edwardi tercii quadragesimo tertio, m. 7, de lic' dand' ad
manum mortuam.

"Rex omnibus ad quos etc. salutem. Licet etc. Tamen pro sex marcis quas Thomas
de Bentele capellanus nobis solvit concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro nobis
and heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est eidem Thome quod ipse quandam vacuam
placeam et tresdecim solidatas and quatuor denaratas redditus cum pertinen' in
villa Novi Castri super Tynam qui de nobis tenentur in liberum burgagium dare
possit et assignare Willielmo de Wakefeld custodi and ministro hospitalis
Sancte Trinitatis de redempcione captivorum de la Walkenoll in eadem villa et
confratribus ejusdem hospitalis habend' and tenend' eisdem custodi ministro and
confratribus hospitalis predicti in auxilium sustentacionis ejusdem capellani
divina pro anima ipsius Thome Willielmi Thorald et animabus patrum et matrum ac
antecessorum suorum and omnium fidelium defunctorum in ecclesia parochiali
beati Nicholai in eadem villa singulis diebus celebratur' imperpetuum et iisdem
custodi ministro and confratribus quod ipsi terram and reditum predict' cum
pertinen' a prefato Thoma recipere possint and tenere etc. In cujus etc. T. R.
apud Westm' 30 die Novembris." -- From the original in the Tower of London.


.

A. D. 1378, there was a patent, probably a license of mortmain, to this house,
for tenements in Gallewey-Croft, in Shelefeld, and Byker Harleian MSS. No 744.
"Novum Castrum super Tynam. Hospit' Sancte Trinit' super le Walleknowle pro
ten' in Gallewey-Croft in Sheleseld in Bykere. Pat. Ric. II. anno 1, pars 4, m.
27."

See also Tanner's Notitia Monastica.


.

May 26th, 1394, King Richard II. granted a license of mortmain to John de
Bamburgh, chaplain, and John de Refham of Newcastle upon Tyne, to empower them
to grant three messuages, fourteen cottages, one toft, three gardens, and
thirteen shillings of rent in that town, held of the King in free burgage, and
by Agnes de Ripon for her life, and which would have reverted to the said John
and John and their heirs, at her death, to support for ever certain charges,
according to the ordering of the said John and John on this behalf Secunda pars
paten' de anno R. R. Ricardi 2d^ decimo septimo, m. 12, de ter^is datis ad
manum mortuam. Rex omnibus etc. salutem. Licet etc. De gratia tamen nostra
speciali and pro sex decim marcis quas dilecti nobis in Christo magister and
fraties hospitalis Sancte Trinitatis super le Walknoll in villa de Novo Castro
super Tynam nobis solverunt concessimus and licenciam dedimus pro nobis et
heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est Johanni de Bamburgh capellano and
Johanni de Refham de Novo Castro super Tynam quod ipsi concedere possint tria
messuagia quatuordecim cotagia unum toftum tria gardina et tresdecim solidat'
reditus cum pertinen' in villa de Novo Castro super Tynam que de nobis tenentur
in libero burgagio et que Agnes de Ripon tenet ad vitam suam, et que post
mortem ipsius Agnetis ad prefatos Johannem and Johannem et heredes suos reverti
deberent post mortem ejusdem Agnetis remaneant prefatis magistro and fratribus
habend' and tenend' eisdem magistro and fratribus and successoribus suis ad
certa onera juxta ordinacionem ipsorum Johannis and Johannis in hac part
faciend' et supportand' imperpetuum etc. In cujus etc. T. Rege apud Westm' 26
die Maii." -- From the original in the Tower of London.
.

June 25th, 1397, King Richard II. granted a license of mortmain to John Gaudes
and Robert de Alnewyk, chaplains, to enable them to assign a message, with its
appurtenances, in Newcastle, held in burgage of the King, to the master and
brethren of this hospital, and their successors, in aid of their support for
ever "Prima pars paten' de anno R. R. Ricardi 2d^ vicesimo, m. 32, de licencia
dandi ad manum mortuam.

"Rex omnibus etc. salutem. Licet etc. De gratia tamen nostra speciali and pro
una marca quam magister sive custos hospitalis Sancte Trinitatis de Walknoll in
villa Novi Castri super Tynam nobis solvit concessimus et licenciam dedimus pr^
nobis and heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est Johanni Gaudes capellano and
Roberto de Alnewyke capellano quod ipsi unum messuagium cum pertinen' in villa
Novi Castri super Tynam quod de nobis tenetur in burgagio dare possint et
a^lignare eidem magistro sive custodi et fratribus hospitalis predicti habend'
et tenend' eisdem magistro sive custodi et fratribus and successoribus suis in
auxilium sustentacionis sue imperpetuum etc. In cujus etc. Test Re^, apud
Westm' 25 die Junii." -- From the original in the Tower of London.


.

Roger de Thornton the elder, by his will, dated 1429, bequeathed two fothers
of lead to the reparation of this house See Bourne under that year.
.

A. D. 1466, this place is mentioned with the title of "the house of St.
Michael of Wall-Knoll," in a grant from the master of St. Thomas's chapel on
Tyne-Bridge See account of St. Thomas's Hospital.
.

John Preston, of Crosgate, in Durham, by his last will, dated September 12th,
1485, gave 3s. 4d. to the brethren of this house Randall's MSS. "Item d^ et
lego fratribus de Walknoll, 3s. 4d." -- Ex original c^papyro consect' penes T.
Randall, A. M.
.

March 11th, 1496, Stephen Sheraton and Cuthbert Young were ordained priests on
the title of this hospital.

As were also Robert Wales, etc. September 23d, 1497 Fox's Regist. p. 12.

"Steph' Sheraton ad titulum domus Sancti Mich' de Walknoll ord. presbyteri
Mar. 11, 1496.

Cuthb. Young ad titulum domus Sancti Mich' de Walknoll ord. presbyteri Mar.
11, 1496.

Rob. Wales, etc. -- ord. presbyteri Sept. 23, 1497."




Before the dissolution, John Fell, of this house, was convicted of
incontinence with a married woman and a single woman Bibl. Cotton. Cleopatra E.
iv. p. 144, Plut. V. C. dorso. "Comperta -- i. e. crimina in variis
monasteriis. Walkenoll. Fundator Christopherus Thirkyld. Redditus annuus ix
lib. Incontinen' -- Johannes Fell cum una conjugata et altera soluta."
.

Thomas Wayde was the last ma^ter or warden of this house, and surrendered it
on the 10th of January, 1539 "Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens
scriptum pervenerit Thomas Wayde magister sive custos celle sive domus de
Walleknolle infra villam de Novo Castro super Tynam et in com' ejusdem, ordinis
Sancte Trinitatis salutem in Domino sempiternam et fidem indubiam presentibus
adhiberi Noveritis me prefatum magistrum sive custodem. (See form under
White-Friars.) Et ego prefatus magister sive custos and successores mei dictam
domum sive cellam meum scitum fundum circuitum and precinctum ejusdem et
premissa omnia and singula cum suis jutibus and pertinentiis universis prefato
domino nostro Regi heredibus and assignatis suis contra omnes gentes
warrantizabimus et defendemus imperpetuum per presents sigillo and
subscriptione meis propriis communitas. Dat' decimo die mensis Januar' anno
regni Regis Henrici octavi tricesimo. Thomas Wayde magister." -- Rymer's
Foedera, and original in the Augme^tation Office.

A fragment of the seal remains affixed to the original surrender. -- A figure
with both hands lifted up -- at his right hand the cross of the order --
nothing of the inscription remains but "it," part of "hospit.' and "Walknoll."
Red wax. -- See Seals, ^^ to II. No 6.


.

Thomas Wayde had a pension assigned him, one account says of 3l. Harleian MSS.
6^4. "A brese certificate made upon the dissolucions of diverse monaster' etc.
30 Hen. VIII. Newcastell -- Wallknolle there -- James Rokesby, keep^r, clear
value etc. 6l. 4s. 4d. -- The nombre and pensions, prior 60s. confrat' nil. --
^he clear money, etc. 64s. 4d. -- The stok etc. 45s. 4d. -- Rewards etc. nil.
-- The remaner etc. 45s. 4d. -- Lead and bells, lead nil. bells 2. -- Woods
etc. nil. -- Playte etc. 8 unc. -- Detts owyng unto the house, nil. gratia
assign' prior pro solut' debit'. -- Detts owyng by the house nil. eadem causa."
but another of 5l. per annum There is preserved in a book of pensions,
remaining in the Augmentation-Office, a grant of a pension from the King, of
five pounds sterling per annum, to Thomas Wade, minister of the house or priory
of Walleknolle (said to be) in the county of York. It is dated April 8th, 30
Hen. VIII.
.

It appears from the bailiffs' or ministers' accounts from Michaelmas, 30 Hen.
VIII. to that term the year following, remaining in the Augmentation-Office,
that this place was granted for a term of twenty-one years, from Michaelmas, 31
Hen. VIII. to William Brakenbury of Bislete, in Surrey, at the annual rent of
20s. 2d. "Hec indentura facta inter excellentissimum Principem and Dominum
Dominum He^ricum octavum Dei gratia Angl' and Franc' Regem Fidei Defensorem
Dominum Hibernie et in terra supremum caput ecclesie Anglicane ex una part et
Willielmum Brakenbury de Bislete in com' Surrey ex altera part testatur quod
idem Dominus Rex per advisiament' and consensum consilii curie augmentationum
corone sue tradidit concessit et ad firmam dimisit prefato Willielmo domum and
scitum nuper priorat' de Wallknowle in com' ville Novi Castri super Tynam una
cum omnibus domibus edificiis otreis columbarii^ otris pomariis gardinis terr'
et solo infra scitum precinctum and circuitum ejusdem nuper prioratus necnon
unum pomar' et unum gardin' continen' per estimacionem unam acram et unam
parvam clausam continen' per estimacion' quatu^r acras jacen' extra muros dic^e
ville et unam parcellam......nuper in tenura Jacobi Style eidem nuper priorat'
pertinen' sive spectan' habend' et tenend' etc. a festo Sancti Michaelis
proxim' futur' etc." -- For the term of 21 years. -- Annual rent to the King
20s. 2d. Dated at Westminster, 2d June, 31 Hen. VIII. -- From the above cited
ministers' or bailiffs' accounts -- thus introduced: "Sed reddit de 20s. 2d. de
firma scitus nuper prio^tus de Wallknowle infra villam Novi Castri super Tynam
una cum omnibus domibus edificiis, or^eis, columbatiis, ortis, poma^iis,
gardinis et omnibus aliis p^at' pasc' and pastur' que dicte nuper dom^i
protinebat sic dimiss' dicto Willielmo Bra^enbury per indenturam pro termino
annotum cujus quidem tenor sequitur in hec verba." Title, "Domus sive nuper
hospital Sancti Michaelis infra villam Novi Castri voc' Walleknowle -- Computus
Willielmi Brakenbury sirmarii ibidem per tempus predictum."


.

There occurs in the above a particular account "Redditus et firm. in Novo
Castro predict. Et de 10. de ^ima unius burga^ii in tenura Richardi Lawson
ibidem cum pertinen' ad voluntatem Domini Regis ibidem per. no^m solvend' ad
terminos Sancti Martini et Pent' per equales porciones -- Et de 12d. de firma
unius burgagii in tenura Radulphi Lawson ibidem cum pertinen' ad voluntat'
Domini Regis jacen' in Sandgate solvend' etc. -- Et de 5s. de firma unius
burgagii in tenura Johannis Tailor ibidem jacen' in vico predict' ad volunt'
Domini Regis per annum solvend' etc. -- Et de 4s. de firma unius burgagii in
Sandgate predict' in tenura Roberti Leighton cum pertinen' solvend' etc. -- Et
de 4s. de firma unius burgagii in vico predict' in tenura Georgii Kycheng cum
pertinen' solvend' etc. -- Et de 2s. de firma unius burgagii in vico pred' in
tenura Andrei Bewek ad volunt' Domini Regis per annum solvend' etc. -- Et
precio 1 lb. piperis solut' annuatim per Johannem Tailor hic non reddit eo quod
etc. sed reddit de 8s. de firma unius burgagii jacen' in Kaysyd in tenura
Johannis Blakeston cum pertinen' ad volunt' Domini Regis solvend' etc. -- Et de
12s. de firma unius burgagii in vico predict' in tenura relict' David Arnold
cum pertinen' solvend' etc. -- Et de 5s. de firma unius tenementi jacen' in le
Kaysyd in tenura Thome Betts cum pertinen' per indentur' etc. -- Et de 3s. 4d.
de firma 1 burgagii in vico predicto in tenura Matthei Baxter cum pertinen'
solvend' etc. -- Et de 6s. de firma unius burgagii jacen' in Bikar-Chare in
tenura Willielmi Gibson cum pertinen' per indent' solvend' -- Et de 6s. de
firma unius burgagii in vico pred' in tenura Edwardi Dalton cum pertinen' per
indent' solvend' etc. -- Et de 5s. de firma unius burgagii in le Byker-Chare in
tenura Johan' Jakeford cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 4s. de firma unius cotagii
sive burgagii in vico predicto in tenura Alexandri Burrell cum pertinen'
solvend' etc. -- Et de 4s. de firma unius burgag' in vico pred' in ten' Roberti
Dowson per indent' etc. -- Et de 2s. de firma unius tenementi in tenura
Anthonii Bird cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 2s. de firma unius burgagii in vico
voc' Bikar-Chare in ten' Edwardi Brynketon cum pertinen' per indent' etc. -- Et
de 3s. 4d. de firma unius burgagii in vico pred' in ten' Briani Jakeley cum
pertinen' etc. -- Et de 4s. de firma unius ten' in vico pred' in ten' Thome
Ratte cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 3s. de firma unius ten' in vico pred' in ten'
Thome Shalfort cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 4s. de firma unius burgag' in tenur'
Johan' Stole cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 16d. de firma unius gardini in ten'
pred' J. S^ele cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 10d. de firma unius burgagii jacen'
in Bicher-Chare in ten' Willielmi Diconford cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 16d. de
firma unius burgag' in vico pred' in tenura Radulsi Suall cum pertinen' etc. --
Et de 12d. de firma unius gardini in vico pred' in tenura Richardi Fyle
capellani solvend' etc. -- Et de 4s. de firma unius burgagii infra cimeterium
Sancti Nicholai in ten' Johannis Sowlby cum pertinen' solvend' etc. -- Et de
4s. de firma unius burgagii in cimeterio pred' in tenura Thome Smith cum
pertinen' solvend' etc. -- Et de 4s. de firma unius burgagii in cimeterio
predicto in tenura Marie Lang cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 3s. de firma unius
ten' in cimeterio pred' in tenura Johannis Yowse cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de
6s. de firma unius tenem' cum pertinen' in cim' pred' in ten' Ricardi Anderson
per indent' etc. -- Et de 6s. 8d. de firma unius burgagii jacen' in
Flesher-Rawe in tenura Edwardi Peyrson cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 8s. de firma
unius burgagii jacen' in vico pred' in ten' Richardi Kyrkehouse cum pertinen'
etc. -- Et de 10s. de firma uniu burgag' in ten' Margarete Tailor cum pertinen'
in vico pred' etc. -- Et de 8s. de firma unius burgag' in tenura Willielmi
Mylner in vico pred' etc. -- Et de 8s. de firma unius burgag' jacen' in vico
pred' in ten' Roberti Wyneyerd etc. -- Et de 13s. 4d. de firma I burgag' inten'
Christopheri Smith per indent' etc. -- Et de 3s. 4d. de firma 1 clausur' in
tenura Gerard Fenwyk cum pertinen' etc. -- Et de 6s. 8d. de firma divers' leys
terr' jacen' in le Shelefeld in tenura predicti Gerardi solvend' etc. -- Et de
5s. de firma unius clausur' ibidem in tenura Georgii Waller cum' pertinen'
solvend' etc. -- Et de 5s. 3d. de firm' unius clausur' voc' Coleriggs cum uno
molendino ventricio ac 4 riggs terr' jacen' in Shelefeld in tenura Matthei
Baxter solvend' etc. -- Et de 17s. 3d. de firma 3 cotagior' in tenura
diversarum personarum jacen' in villa Barwici super Twedam solvend' etc. -- Et
de 18s. de firma 1 tenem' in Pilgrame-strete in tenura Willielmi Wylkynson
carnif' etc. -- Et de 3s. de firma 1 burgag' jacen' in vico pred' in tenura
Thome Fresel etc. -- Et de 15s. de firma unius burgagii in le Side in ten'
Willielmi Whytfeld per indent' etc. -- Summa 12l. 10s. 10d. -- Summa totalis
recepte 13l. 11s.

"Exoneracio redditus -- Idem computat in exoneracione reddit' in firm' tam
terr' dominical' quam aliorum tenement' and burgag' predictor' villat' predict'
superius onerat' ad 13l. 11s. per annum solvend' ad term' S. Martini et Pent'
per equales porciones, viz. in allocatione hujusmodi reddit' debit' in festo S.
Martini in ieme eo quod dictum festum accidebat ante quartam diem Januar' quo
die dictus nuper prioratus sursum redd' fuit et in manus Domini Regis
deveniebat et denar' inde provenien' recept' fuerunt per nuper priorem ut jus
eorum proprium et sic in exoneracione pro term' pred. 6l. 15s. 6d.

"Resolutio redd. Ei in reddit' resoluto hered' Boode pro parcell' terr' jacen'
apud Ka^e-Crosse infra tenem' ibidem solvend' ad fest' Pent' tantum. Et sic in
allocatione per tempus hujus comput' 3s. 4d. -- Ei in reddit' resoluto
cantarist' capelle super pontem ad 3s. per annum viz. in allocatione hujusmodi
per tempus hujus computi 3s. -- Ei in reddit' resoluto magistro et confratribus
de le West-Spetell ad 3s. per annum, viz. in allocatione hujusmodi per tempus
hujus computi 3s. Summa 9s. 4d.

"Feod. computantis cum regardo Ei in feodo Thome Wayde ballivi and collectoris
ibidem ad 13s. 4d. per annum viz. in allocat' hujusmodi pro medietate ejusdem
feod' per tempus hujus computi 6s. 8d. -- Ei in regard' dat' clerico Andr' pro
scriptura computi hujus et particula ejusdem ad 2s. viz. in allocat' hujusmodi
ut computis precedentibu^ 2s. Summa 8s. 8d.

"Liberacio denar' -- Ei in denar' liberat' ad manus Willielmi G^^n. recept'
Domini Re^^ ibidem de exit' officii sui hujus anniper' manus collecto^rs ibidem
sine ^illa cum 12s. 4d. pro reparationibus diversor' burgag' ut patet per bill'
inde ^act' 117s. 6d. Summa 117s. 6d."


of the property of this hospital of the Holy Trinity.

In the year 1546 this house, with its revenues, was granted to Sir Richard
Gresham, and Richard Billingford, Gent. who conveyed them to William Dent,
February 21st, 1548 Bourne says, "Sir John Gresham, alderman of London."
.

The property is described as consisting of the house, or priory, of St.
Michael de Wall-Knoll, with a garden and orchard of about an acre of ground; an
enclosure, or close, near the town-wall, of about four acres, thirty-four
messuages, three gardens and a close: also a close called Colerigges, and four
ridges in the Shield-Field Bourne.
.

A. D. 1582, William Dent, alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne, with his son
William, conveyed this priory, with an house, orchard and garden, consisting of
an acre of ground, to William Jennison, then mayor of that town, and Richard
Hodshon, alderman, in trust for the corporation, in whose possession it has
continued ever since Ibid. In the Rolls, 25 Eliz. there is a grant, etc. of the
Holy Trinity, Newcastle.
. A rent appears to have been reserved to the crown Common Council books, May
7, 1668, where is mentioned, "his Majesty's rent for the Walknowle."

Among the fee-farm rents, received by John Widdrington, Esquire. 1783, for the
representatives of Edward Pauncefort, Esquire. occurs the following:

"2s. 0d. the site of the Walknowle hospital recd of mayor and burgesses of
Newcastle."


.

This building is marked in Speed's Plan of Newcastle, A. D. 1610.

Bourne tells us, that, in his time, the east end of the church of this priory
was standing. Some vestiges of the old buildings, door-ways, etc. still remain.

Leaving Fisher-Gate Bourne.

In an inrolment in the books of the corporation of Newcastle, dated Dec. 20th,
1655, "Croswell-Gate, a certain street in Pandon," occurs.

"Many houses," says Bourne, "in this street, pay an annual rent to Lord
Searborough to this day, into whose family the daughter of Roger Thornton was
married.


, we enter Croswell-Gate, a place the name of which often occurs in ancient
writings. The house of Roger de Thornton is said to have been in this street.
Several lanes, or alleys, branch out from it: the first is called Blyth's Nook
Nook signifies a corner, or "out-of-the-way place." Blyth was probably a
surname of the owner.
, and communicates with the present Cow-Gate, near the foot of the Dog-Bank,
and is built over Pandon-Burn.

The next is a narrow lane leading to the Burn-Bank See Historical Events.
"This place," says Bourne, "lies very low, and before the heightening of the
ground with ballast, and the building of the wall or key, was often of great
hazard to the inhabitants; once in particular a most melancholy accident
happened in this place, in the year 1320, 13 Ed. III. the river Tyne overflowed
so much, that one hundred and twenty laymen, and several priests, besides
women, were drowned: and, as Gray says, an hundred and forty houses were
destroyed." Complete History of England, vol. i. p. 235.
, where Pandon-Burn runs into the river Tyne. There follow Byker-Chare, Cock's
Chare, and Love-Lane. -- See before in the account of the Key, or Quay.

SUBURBS OF NEWCASTLE.
IN the street that leads from Close-Gate to Skinner-Burn are several
glass-houses: one of these was formerly a meeting house of protestant
dissenters This dissenting meeting house at the Close-Gate is marked in
Corbridge's Plan of Newcastle, 1723. It is advertised to be sold in the
Newcastle Courant, April 6th, 1728.
. This was removed to a place within the walls at the foot of West-Gate.

Timothy Manlove, preacher at Close-Gate, was buried in St. Nicholas' church,
August 6th, 1699 St. Nicholas' register.
.

Names of ministers since the removal.

Benjamin Bennet He published several discourses against popery, etc. London,
and for Jos. Button, bookseller on Tyne-Bridge, 1714, 8vo, 516 pages. -- Also 2
vols. of Meditations, as I have heard.
, who christened the famous Dr. Akenside. There is a portrait of Mr. Bennet
prefixed to his Christian Oratory, in two volumes.

Dr. Laurence.

W. Wilson He published "Charity as a Rule of Conduct in the Affairs of a
Religious Society, explained and recommended. A sermon preached to a
congregation of protestant dissenters in Newcastle upon Tyne, Nov. 22d, 1733, a
day religiously kept, previous to their consultation about the choice of a
pastor." London, 1734, 8vo. 1 Cor. xvi. 14.

Also, "A Sermon preached to a congregation of protestant dissenters in
Newcastle upon Tyne, Feb. 12th, 1749, on the occasion of the death of Mr.
Joseph Ai^ey, who died Feb. 2d, 1749, in the 57th year of his age." London,
1749, 8vo. Acts xiii. 36.


.

Richard Rogerson Mr. R. Rogerson died Sept. 6th, 1760.
.

Samuel Lowthion Mr. Lowthion was a popular preacher, and published several
sermons. He died of the gout in his head, Nov. 17th, 1780. Aetat. 57.
.

Dr. Hood Dr. Hood died June 17th, 1782. A collection of sermons of his were
published for the benefit of his widow and children, price 5s. in boards.

The following names of dissenting ministers occur in St. Nicholas' register.

October 1, 1612, "Mr. Alexander Leighton, preacher of Gods word."

Feb. 24, 1614, "Mr. Thomas Nutton, preacher of God's word."

February, 1581, "Mr. Heugh Broughton, preacher," occurs. -- See his Life by
John Lightfoot.

June, 1619, "Mr. Steven Jerrom, precher," occurs.

The MS. Life of Barnes says, that "before the breaking out of the civil wars,
Mr. Love, who was beheaded, preached occasionally in Newcastle. His text was in
Isaiah xlii. 'Ye have feared the sword, and the sword shall come upon you.' Sir
John Marley, the governor of the town, being informed of it, swore the text was
worse than the sermon, and magnified the present security of the nation. -- But
Mr. Love proved more of a prophet than he." P. 47. In an order of the Lords and
Commons, May 26, 1645, Mr. Christopher Love, if he can conveniently go thither,
is directed to be sent to preach the word of God at Newcastle upon Tyne: as
also Mr. William Streuther. -- See Granger's Biographical History -- "Love."


.

Mr. Turner -- the present.

There is a charity-school belonging to this meeting house.

At Skinner-Burn, the boundary of the corporation of Newcastle toward the
west, a foundry, and several factories for making nails, etc. have been
established.

A wide and convenient road conducts from hence, by a gradual ascent, to the
Infirmary and the Firth, etc.

INFIRMARY.
A SUBSCRIPTION for the infirmary, a highly beneficial institution to the
northern counties, which appears to have been first projected by Mr. Richard
Lambert On the authority of a memoir communicated by himself. -- The earliest
patrons and benefactors were Mr. Joseph Airey, Mr. George Headlam, Mr. Ralph
Headlam, and Mr. Richard Burdus.

A sermon, which had been preached before the governors of the London Infirmary
at St. Lawrence Jewry, March 31, 1748, by Joseph (Butler) then Bishop of
Bristol, was, at the request of the president and governors of this charity,
re-published for the purpose of encouraging subscriptions. "Newcastle upon
Tyne, for M. Bryson and Co. and J. Fleming, pr. 6d."

March 7th, 1751, there was published, addressed to the public, on a sheet in
folio, with the list of the subscribers, a short dissertation, containing
motives for establishing public infirmaries.

In a few months the subscription-money, to be paid annually, amounted to above
1200l.


, an eminent surgeon at Newcastle, was opened on the 9th of February, 1751.

To the MEMORY of S^ JOSEPH SAINT. ^a^^ TREASURER of the INFIRMARY ^^ NEWCASTLE
(...) TYNE. St. (...) of that Edifice (...) ordered (...) taken (...)


At a general meeting of the subscribers on the 21st of April following,
statutes, etc. were confirmed, and it was resolved to carry the charity into
immediate execution. For this purpose a temporary house, situated in
Gallow-Gate, in the suburbs of Newcastle, capable of containing 23 beds, was
hired, and application directed to be made to the corporation of that town, for
a piece of ground on the Firth-Banks, on which the projected infirmary was to
be erected There is an order of the common council at Newcastle, for a grant to
be made under the common seal of that corporation, of a "part of the
Firth-Banks, boundering on a burn on or toward the west; the north boundary to
be in a direct line from the gate, or road, that leads to the Maidens' Walk, to
the road that leads from the Firth to the Skinner-Burn, the said line to
terminate not less than thirty yards from the south-west corner of the
Firth-Wall: boundering on the east on the road that leads from the Firth to the
Skinner-Burn, leaving the said road not less than twelve yards broad: bounded
on the south, on a part of the said Banks, ninety yards, or thereabouts,
distant from their north-wall, under an annual rent of two shillings and
sixpence." -- Common Council books.

Thursday, May 23d, 1751, Dr. Thomas Sharp, archdeacon of Northumberland, and
prebendary of Durham, preached before the governors at St. Nicholas' church, on
Luke x. ver. 36 and part of 37. And on this day the temporary house was opened,
when seven in-patients and four out-patients were received.


.

April 13th, 1751, subscriptions for the new infirmary were opened, and at the
same time the physicians, surgeons, apothecary, secretary, matron and servants
were chosen.

Between August 16th, 1751, and the finishing of the new building, thirty or
forty patients were kept in the Gallow-Gate house, and some additional
apartments in the neighborhood, and supplied with proper advice, medicine, and
diet,

June 20th, 1751, the corporation of Newcastle subscribed 100l. per annum to
the infirmary, and directed that it should be supplied with water from the pipe
that feeds their pant, or public fountain, near Newgate Common Council books.
At the same time they lessened the salary of the town's surgeon, from 80l. to
40l. per annum. Sir Walter Blackett gave 200l. toward the building. -- His
annual subscription was 5^l.
.

September 5th, 1751, the first stone of the new building was laid by the
Bishop of Durham, grand visitor, attended by a great number of gentlemen who
were assembled at the anniversary meeting of the Sons of the Clergy at
Newcastle. A plate of copper was fixed on the stone, with the following
inscription: "The foundation of this infirmary was laid on the 5th day of
September, in the 25th year of the reign of King George the Second, 1751, by
the Right Revd Joseph, Lord Bishop of Durham, grand visitor." -- On the
reverse, "The ground was given by the corporation of Newcastle, Ralph Sowerby,
Esquire. mayor, William Clayton, Esquire. sheriff Newcastle Courant.
."

This building was opened for the reception of patients, October 8th, 1752 Ibid.

The statutes, etc. of this infirmary were published, 1751, in 44 pages, by J.
White. Also in 1752, in 56 pages, 8vo, by J. Thompson and Co.

Wednesday, June 24th, 175^, John Sharp, A. M. vicar of Hartburn, in
Northumberland, and chaplain to the late Bishop of Durham, preached before the
governors at St. Nicholas' church, at their first anniversary meeting, on John
v. ver. 6 and part of 7. There was collected in church and hall, on this
occasion, 374l. 1s. 2d.

Saturday, February 10th, 1753, was published, price 5s. a Perspective View of
the Infirmary at Newcastle upon Tyne, from an original drawing taken on the
spot.


.

It was computed to have cost above three thousand pounds.

The receipt for the first year, ending April 6th, 1752, amounted to 2643l. 1s.
2d. when it appeared that 133 patients had been cured Printed account.
.

June 27th, 1753, was held the anniversary meeting of the subscribers to this
charity: the Earl of Northumberland, Lord Ravensworth, Sir Walter Blackett,
Bart. George Bows, Esquire. and Henry Partis, Esquire. mayor of Newcastle, presidents;
Sir Thomas Clavering, Bart. Sir Henry Gray, Bart. Matthew Ridley, Esquire. and
Matthew White, Esquire. vice-presidents, with a great number of governors and
contributors, met at the Exchange in Newcastle, and proceeded from thence with
the stewards to St. Nicholas' church, where a sermon The bishop, with the
nobility and gentlemen, were entertained at dinner by the mayor, on which
occasion a turtle was served up, which had been sent from London as a present,
and is said to have been the first of its kind exhibited at an entertainment in
the north of England.
was preached on the occasion by the Rev. Dr. Parker, vicar of Elwick, in the
county of Durham From Matthew ix. 11 and 12. This sermon was published, price
6d.

There lies before me a sermon, preached at St. Nicholas' church in Newcastle,
before the governors of the infirmary, etc. on Wednesday, June 25th, 1755, by
William Lamb, A. M. rector of Gateshead in the bishopric of Durham, and
chaplain to Lord Ravensworth, on Acts iii. 6. 4to. Newcastle, printed by J.
Thompson and Co.


.

Friday, October 18th, 1754, being St. Luke's day, the chapel of this
infirmary, dedicated to that Evangelist, and the burying-ground adjoining, were
consecrated by the Bishop of Durham.

A sermon was preached on this occasion by the Rev. Mr. Dockwray, fellow of St.
John's College, Cambridge, and lecturer of St. Nicholas' in Newcastle.

Mrs. Byne presented a silver flaggon, and Lady Musgrave two pieces of
silver-plate, being a legacy left by Mrs. Hilton, for the use of the chapel
Newcastle Courant.

August 13th, 1757, was published a sermon, preached at St. Nicholas' church in
Newcastle, before the governors of the infirmary, June 23d, 1757, by Robert
Lowth, D. D prebendary of Durham.

July 29th, 1758, was published a sermon preached ut supra, June 21, 1758, by
Olive Naylor, A. M. rector of Morpeth, and chaplain to the Earl of Carlisle, on
Matthew xxv. 36.


.

About the year 1758 Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. gave a thousand pounds to this
charity, and appropriated ten pounds per annum, part of the interest of that
sum, to a chaplain, to perform divine service, and visit the sick in this house
The chaplain's salary has since been augmented to 20l. per annum; ten pounds o^
which are paid out of the subscription-money. The worthy b^ronet left a legacy
of 100l. to this charity. His nephew and executor, Sir John Trevelyan, Bart.
presented a site whole length picture of him by Sir Joshua Reynolds, which,
with those of some other principal benefactors, is now hung up in the
governors' room.

January 10th, 1760, the Reverend John Ellison, curate of St. Nicholas, was
appointed chaplain.


.

April 3d, 1760, the number of surgeons to this infirmary was augmented from
two to four Newcastle Courant.
.

A. D. 1761, a design was in agitation to build an Inoculation-Hospital, as an
appendage to this infirmary; but this generous intention, by whatever means,
was frustrated Ibid.
.

February 19th, 1763, mention occurs of a benefaction in the will of the late
Mrs. Elizabeth Davison of Durham, for the relief of such miserable persons as
should be dismissed as incurable from this infirmary Ibid.
.

A. D. 1770, Mr. Joseph Saint was appointed treasurer of this infirmary, on the
death of Mr. Joseph Airey Ibid.
.

In the year 1778 there was a benefaction of 100l. given by Mr. John Pemberton
to the infirmary of Newcastle Ibid. paid by his brother, Dr. Stephen Pemberton.
.

A. D. 1782, a legacy of 100l. to this hospital, by the late Mrs. Mary Buck
Ibid.
.

The same year a legacy of 50l. to this charity by the late Mrs. Pulleine Ibid.
paid by Edward Collingwood, junior, Esquire.
.

A. D. 1783, Aubone Surtees, junior, Esquire. was appointed treasurer, on the death
of Mr. Joseph Saint Ibid.
.

October 5th, 1786, the Duke of Northumberland was chosen president in the
place of the late Duke his father.

FIRTH II.
NEAR the infirmary is the Firth or Forth Bourne has given us some conjectures
concerning the etymon of the name, which perhaps will not be thought very
satisfactory. -- "The word forth or frith," says he, citing Blount's Law
Dictionary, in verbo Frith, "as it is anciently called, comes from the Saxon
word frith, which signifies peace; for the English Saxons held several woods to
be sacred, and made them sanctuaries. From this definition of the word, it may
be no improbable conjecture, that the ancient Saxons inhabiting about the parts
of the wall (Roman Wall) where the town now is, gave the name of Frith to this
place, as it was perhaps endowed with gloomier shades and darker recesses, the
awful exciters of heathen superstition, than other places about the town were."
, which is said to have been anciently a fort belonging to the castle Bourne --
yet he adds, "without any just authority." Grey's Chorographia, p. 15.
, and to have been given to the townsmen of Newcastle, for their good services,
by King Edward III.

The corporation of Newcastle occur as paying rent for it soon after the
restoration of King Charles II. In a list of old salaries paid by the
corporation of Newcastle, dated Dec. 23d, 1669, and preserved in the books of
the common council, occurs the following: "The rent of the Firth paid for him (
i. e. the sheriff), due at Michaelmas, 4l. 6s. 8d."


King Henry III. is said to have given license, in the 23d year of his reign,
to dig coals and stones in the Forth Gardiner's England's Grievance of the Coal
Trade.
.

The boundaries of this place are described in an inquisition taken in the
castle of Newcastle concerning the possessions thereof, August 18th, in the
18th year of the reign of King James I. "Et quod quedam parcell' terre vocat'
le Fryth jacens extra muros ville Novi Castri predict' abuttat austral' super
quandam parvam claus' vocat' Goosegreen-Close modo vel nuper in tenur' sive
occupatione Georgii Wilkinson et sic extendit se usque ad claus' vocat'
Dove-Cote-Close et abinde austral' per extrem' fossat' claus' contigue adjacen'
ad angulum sepis prox' ad communem viam transeun' per eas terras vocat' le
Fryth et sic per et trans dictam communem viam usque ad parvum rivolum Anglice
a little syke in imo vallis ibidem et sic transeuns dict' le syke sursum usque
ad dictam claus' vocat' Goose-green-Close. Ac dicta parcella terre vocat' le
Fryth continet december acr' terre per mensurationem." (Ex inquis. capt. (ut
supra) coram Episcopo Dunelmensi et aliis commissionar'.)

Bourne describes it as abutting "on the south on a certain little close called
Goosegreen-Close; then it extends itself to a close called Dove-Cote-Close, and
from thence westward to the furthest ditch of the close, contiguous to the
corner of the hedge, which is next to the common way which leads into the Forth
-- then by and over the common way, to the little rivulet or syke of water, in
the bottom of the valley, and so passing the syke, you go upwards to the close
called Goose-green-Close." -- "The Forth," he adds, "contains 11 acres of land.
It was surveyed, by order of the parliament, in the year 1649, and valued at
12l. per annum." It was valued tithe free.




Mention occurs of the Forth in an old rental of the sheriff of Newcastle,
which appears about the age of King Charles I. "Item the Forth and the
Gooden-Deane letten to Thomas Cook." The sum increased. -- Sheriff's rentall
preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne.


It is mentioned also, in a survey of crown lands, etc. in and about Newcastle
upon Tyne, taken in the year 1649 "Item one parcel of pasture ground, called
by the name of the Frith, lyeing on the weste part of Newcastle, conteynyng by
estim' 4 acres and one rood, and worth per annum 42s. 6d. -- Both this (and
Castle-Leases or Castle-Fields) has been time out of mind in the possession of
diverse persons residing in or near unto Newcastle, and (as we are informed)
holds the same of the crown in fee-farme. Therefore we have not valued the
same, but leave them to better judgments." -- From the original survey, dated
October 29th, 1649, remaining in the Augmentation-Office.
.

September 25th, 1657 Common Council books.

"It seems," says Bourne, "to have been all along a place of pleasure and
recreation; for it was an ancient custom for the mayor, aldermen, and sheriff
of the town, accompanied with great numbers of the burgesses, to go every year,
at the feasts of Easter and Whitsuntide, to the Forth, with the maces, sword
and cap of maintenance, carried before them.

"Undoubtedly the vast concourse of both young and old at this place, at these
seasons of the year, rather than at any other about this town, is the remains
of this ancient custom."


, there was an order of common council to lease out the Firth and paddock
adjoining, under the common seal of the town, for 21 years, at a rent not
exceeding 20l. per annum, the lessee to let it to none but the green keeper,
and permit all the liberties, privileges, and enjoyments, formerly used there:
among these occur, "lawful recreations and drying clothes." -- There is
mentioned also "a yearly rent of four pounds, payable by the town as an
out-rent due to the state."

About this time a bowling-green and house for the keeper were made in part of
the Forth, by contributions.

July 19th, 1680, there was an order of common council to build a wall and
plant trees round the Firth Common Council books. -- Trees to be sent for for
this purpose from Holland.
.

September 25th, 1682, there was an order of the same body, "to make the
Firth-House suitable for entertainment, with a cellar convenient, and a
handsome room, etc. Ibid. -- Inscription on a stone formerly at the west end of
the Forth-House: "Nicholas Fenwicke, Esquire. mayor,
Nicholas Ridley, sheriff, anno Domini 1682."


There is an order of common council, March 26th, 1716, appointing Robert
Pain, merchant, keeper of the bowling-green at the Firth, instead of James
Quincey, lately deceased. -- Thomas Armstrong occurs October 4th, 1731; Thomas
Burrell, October 11th, 1731; John Russell, before June 20th, 1743, when John
Hudson was appointed "to enjoy the perquisites thereunto belonging; and also
the houses, gardens, grounds, and other appurtenances therewith held and
enjoyed. -- Yearly rent 20l."

A lease was granted, Sept. 22d, 1746, of the Firth-House and grounds, to Mr.
George Ord, at the yearly rent of 20l. for 15 year, from Lady Day, 1747. -- A
Mr. Sadler succeeded. -- Mr. Harrison the present.


"

The following account of this place occurs in the surveyor-general's report,
dated December 22d, 1735. Speaking of the Castle-Garth, he says, "As to the
parcells mentioned in this grant, I find several things inserted therein, that
were never enjoyed by virtue of any of the grants above mentioned
(Stephenson's, Lord Macclesfield's, and that of the town of Newcastle. -- See
account of the castle). The Castle-Fields and the Frith In the grant of the
Castle and Castle-Garth to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, June 17th, 1
James II. Castle-Fields and Fryth are included. -- See account of the castle.
-- Neither of these are mentioned in the grant to George Liddell, Esquire. July 2d,
1736.

The Forth is bounded on the east and south by the ground of St. Mary's
Hospital, except toward the north-east corner, where it is bounded by
Dove-Cote-Close; on the north-east by the King's Dikes; then on the north-west
a little by Mr. Shaftoe's freehold, and a little piece of the land of St.
Mary's Hospital; and on the west and southwest by the grounds of Mr. George
Anderson and the Insumary.


are entirely distinct parcells, of considerable extent and value, and are
enjoyed by the corporation or their assigns, as fee-farm."

SUBURBS OF WEST-GATE.
A SMALL runner of water intersecting the road to Carlisle, a few yards
westward of the West-Gate, divides the county of Northumberland from the county
of Newcastle upon Tyne. A gallows stood lately on the Northumberland side of
this runner, where a temporary one is occasionally erected on the same site,
for the execution of criminals belonging to that county.

The owners of houses in the street without the West-Gate have votes in the
election of members of parliament for the county of Northumberland. A road
branches off here, on the left hand, leading into the Close by the Firth and
Infirmary, and another road, turning upon the right hand, conducts to the
Town-Moor, etc. past the Warden's Close, which belonged to the monastery of
Black-Friars. Bourne, after Gray, tells us, it seems to be called the Warden's
Close "For," says he, "Gray tells us the warden of Tinmouth had his house,
garden, fishpond, etc. here;" and adds, "this indeed is not improbable, for the
monastery of the Black-Friars was dependant upon the priory of Tinmouth;" and,
"there are still the seeming remains of fish ponds, gardens, etc." -- I have to
observe upon the above, that, at the entrance to Warden's Close, one may easily
discover the remains of a small fort -- the other inequalities seem to have
been formed by throwing up earth for breast-works, by the Scots, at the siege
of the town in 1644. Yet there occurs in Madox's Formulare Anglicanum, a
record, dated July 13th, 1466, which mentions fish ponds at that time in this
place. -- It is a lease from John Rokesburgh, prior of the Black-Friars in
Newcastle, and the brethren thereof, to William Hays, of a certain great close
of theirs, built round with a stone wall, for the term of his life, at the
yearly rent of 25 shillings, and allowing him to fix a small leaden pipe, of a
bore large enough to admit a wheaten straw, to their aqueduct, running in and
through that close, to their monastery, in order to supply his fish ponds with
water, etc.

It appears by the common council books, July 5th, 1647, that certain referees,
for bringing water to Sand-Gate, were appointed to view the conduit at Warden's
Close, and take some washers with them to view the water, and report. There is
an order ibid. dated July 30th, 1647, to bring water into the town of
Newcastle, from the Warden's Close, "there having been formerly time out of the
memory of man a conduit of water at the north end of the Warden's Close, which
water had its course and passage into the Warden's Close, and from thence through
the Black-Friars, and so came into this town." -- " Of late years the free
passage and conduit has been stopped." --

Bourne, speaking of Shoulder of Mutton Close, which he supposes anciently to
have been part of the Warden's Close, says, "There is in it a cistern of water
which a friend of his imagined supplied the Black Friars;" and adds, "the well
belonging to this monastery may proceed from it." -- Mr. Bertram Anderson and
Mr. Fawcus, senior, informed me that they remembered a reservoir in the
Shoulder of Mutton Close, from whence a pipe conducted through the Town-Wall to
the Friars, etc.

The public fountains, which at Newcastle are of a particular construction,
having each a small square reservoir before them for retaining the water for
the use of horses, or for common domestic purposes, are called pants.

Dr. Thomas Henshaw, in Skinner's Etymology, in verbo, tells us that pond was
anciently pronounced pand, which Skinner derives, with great probability, from
the Anglo-Saxon, pyndan, to enclose or shut up. I am inclined to suppose that
pant is no more than pand, by a very small corruption, meaning a little
reservoir or pond. In a deed, dated 1450, relative to the public fountain in
the marketplace of Durham, which is of construction similar to those at
Newcastle, I find this word used: "Ejusdem fontis caput vulgariter nuncupat' le
Pant Head."

The earliest account I have found of aqueducts bringing water into the town of
Newcastle, is dated 1349. "Novum Castrum super Tynam -- confirmatio pro fabric'
piporum ducentium aquam ibidem." Pat. 22 Ed. III. p. 3, m. 16. -- (Murray and
Aubone MSS.)

Leland tells us, in his Itinerary, vol. viii. p. 40, 41, speaking of Newcastle
upon Tyne, when he visited that place, "there be three hedds of condutes for
f^esch water to the town."


, because it belonged to the wardens of the priory of Tinmouth. -- I am rather
inclined to think it a corruption of Wardell's Close Amongst the writings in
the town's hutch, A. D. 1565, was "a lease of Wardell's Close made to
Christopher Blunt."
, the surname of some former lessee. Before we come to the Warden's Close, on
the left hand is the entrance to the new medical baths, of which a plan and
elevation have been published, inscribed to John Erasmus Blackett, Esquire. mayor
of Newcastle, "W. Craneson, archt. R. Beilby sculpsit." See plan of the town.

Higher up on the right hand, and near St. John's Workhouse, is the entrance
to the Lunatic Hospital.

October 7th, 1765, it having been represented to the corporation of Newcastle
upon Tyne, that a piece of ground In 1765 the workmen, employed in digging the
foundation of the Lunatic Hospital in the Warden's Close, found an old brass
seal, which was given by Mr. Newton, the architect, to Mr. Wardell, then vicar
of Corbridge. I read the inscription "Vis et Deus noster." See a representation
of the impression it gives, Plate II. (of seals) No. 10. Can it have been the
first seal of the Black Friars? However that may be, I should think it has
certainly belonged to some religious house in Newcastle.
was wanted for the site of an hospital intended to be erected in or near to
that town, for lunaticks belonging to the counties of Northumberland, Durham,
and Newcastle upon Tyne, and the Warden's Close, a field without the walls of
that town, between Newgate and West-Gate, having been judged the properest
situation for it, they had appointed a committee of the common council to
portion off a part thereof for that purpose; upon whose report that they had
measured and staked out a plot of ground for the site of the intended hospital,
the common council aforesaid ordered that a lease should be granted in trust
for the use abovementioned, from the Christmas day following for the term of
ninety-nine years, under an annual rent of two shillings and sixpence
Common Council books.

"Containing in length from the north-west corner to the south-east corner,
about ninety yards; from the south-west corner to the south-east corner, about
an hundred yards; and in breadth from the north west corner to the south-east
corner, about sixty yards."


.

Dec. 4th, 1768, the corporation of Newcastle granted leave for a passage to be
made into the street called Gallow-Gate, for the additional convenience of this
hospital Ibid.

In the Newcastle Courant for September 19th, 1767, was advertised as that day
published, price 6d. -- "A Narrative of the Proceedings relative to the
establishing, etc. of St. Luke's House (a smaller private house for lunaticks,
on the edge of the Town Moor), by John Hall, M. D.

As also ibid. Sept. 26, with an answer to Dr. Rotheram's letter.

Notice was given to the public, ibid. October 3d. following, that Dr. Hall's
house for lunaticks, known by the name of St. Luke's House, would become
entirely his own property on St. Luke's day following; the terms of which were
20l. per annum, for each patient.

The four surgeons of the Infirmary advertised, at the same time, a house
pleasantly situated in the neighborhood of Newcastle, for the same purpose.


.

THE SUBURBS OF NEWGATE.
THE suburbs of Newgate appear to have been ruined at the time of the grand
rebellion Grey's Chorographia. -- It appears, by Speed's Plan of Newcastle,
that, about the year 1610, there was a continued row of buildings on the east
side of Sid-Gate.
.

The street turning to the left hand on the outside of Newgate has the name of
Gallow-Gate I find this street called "Galogate," in a deed belonging to St.
Andrew's church, bearing date 15th of Edward IV.
, because the malefactors for the town of Newcastle pass along it on their way
to the gallows, which stands on the entrance to the Town-Moor, in a place
called Gallows-Hole.

A lane at the head of this street, intersecting the road from West-Gate to the
Town-Moor, joins the Carlisle road at Quarry-House.

The street proceeding straight on from Newgate to Barras-Bridge is called
Sid-Gate i. e. The way leading straight on to the street called "The Side."
, by the common people that live in it, and of late, by its politer
inhabitants, Percy-Street.

The lane that leads from Sid-Gate or Percy-Street to the Leazes, anciently
styled "Myln-Chare In a deed belonging to St. Andrew's church, dated 14 Hen.
VIII. a tenement is described as situated "in vico vocat' le Sidegate extra
muros dicte ville Novi Castri inter venellam vocat' Myln Chare ex part
occidentali et viam regiam ex part orientali, etc." It has evidently had this
name from its leading to the mills upon the Leazes.
," has at present the name of "Blind-man's Loaning." Probably some old blind
beggar In an inrolment preserved in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle, and dated 1659, "Blind-man's Loaneing" occurs. "Loaning" signifies
lane in the vulgar dialect of the North.

Some old houses that stood near the burying-ground of the dissenters, and
which were lately purchased by the corporation, and pulled down, were called
"The Swirle Houses," from their situation near the swirl or runner which at
this place empties itself into Sid-Gate or Percy-Street.


has sat in it formerly to solicit alms. On the same side of the street, but a
little nearer to Barras-Bridge, is a burying-ground for dissenters On a table
monument in this burying-ground: "Enoch Hudson de Brunton generosus obiit Sept.
12, 1715, aetatis 56."

On a table monument of blue stone, ibid. -- arms a cross crosset in the field
-- crest a griffin with expanded wings passant.

"Mors Christi est vita mea. Johannes Durant, M. D. obiit....2o anno 1683,
aetatis 35 Vixi dum volui, volui dum, Christ, volebas, Christ mihi spes es
vita corona salus."

On an upright stone: "Here lie the remains of William Leighton, bootmaker, who
departed this life August 1st, 177^, aged 66 years.

"Also the remains of Margaret his wife, and Alexander and Ralph, two of their
children."

On an upright stone ibid. "Here h^th the body of the Rev. Mr. Robert Mar,
late pastor of the Garth Heads Meeting House."

On an upright stone ibid. "Here lies the Revd. Mr. Geo. Ogilvie, leat min^. in
Silver-Street, who departed this life ye 21 April, 1765, aged 57."

In St. Andrew's Register, November 1708, this is called "the Quigs
buring-place, near the Swirll in Sidgatt."

In the Newcastle Courant for January 14th, 1786, occurs the following: "The
dissenters' burial-ground in Sid-Gate having lately been purchased, levelled,
and enclosed with a good wall: notice is hereby given, that the proprietors are
ready to treat for the disposal of buryal-places, etc."


.

THE SUBURBS OF PILGRIM-STREET.
THESE also were ruined in the grand rebellion under Charles I. Grey's
Chorographia. -- In Speed's Plan buildings are marked all the way on the west
side of this street, and joining with the east row of Sid-Gate or Percy-Street.
A wide and well built street at present conducts from Pilgrim-Street-Gate to
the Barras-Bridge, which with great propriety is called
"Northumberland-Street." A range of houses just above the gate have the name of
"Northumberland-Place."

On the right hand, a little way out of the gate, a row of good houses has
lately been erected: it branches off to the east, and is called, in honor of
the late Sir George Savile, Bart. "Savile-Row." Near this there is a little
opening, denominated "Lisle-Street."

Opposite to Savile-Row stands a large building, wherein the very numerous sect
called methodists assemble for divine worship, called the Orphan-House It was
founded by the Reverend John Wesley, A. M. formerly of Lincoln College, Oxford.
-- It is a capacious building, containing apartments for the priests, etc.
.

A little nearer to Pilgrim-Street-Gate, on the other side, was some years ago
a conventicle, called "The Tabernacle," but was deserted of its pastor, and has
since been converted into dwelling-houses A fanatic of the name of Mackdonald
erected a building, called the Tabernacle, down an entry, almost opposite to
the Orphan-House; but meeting with little or no encouragement, he left the
town, and went to Manchester.
.

Northumberland-Street, passing a lane going eastward, called Vine-Lane I know
not the meaning of this name. -- There was formerly a great inn at Newcastle,
called "The Vine."
, the Pinfold October 3d, 1645, the following order occurs in the
common council books of Newcastle: "Ordered upon the humble petition of Alice
Forster, that 13s. 4d. be paid her for a year's pension, for the keeping of
"Maudlen Fould."

Among the Harleian MSS. 708, eschaets, 14 Ric. II. mention occurs of a grange
here "ex opposito le Maudlyns."


, and Magdalen Hospital, is united with Sid-Gate, a little on this side of the
Barras-Bridge.

The hospital of St. Mary Magdalen Vulgarly called "Maudlin," a common
corruption of "Magdalen."

Speed says, erroneously, that this was a house of nuns.


, some parts of which, converted into dwelling-houses, still remain, is said to
have been founded by King Henry I. It was a priory, or hospital, for a master,
brethren and sisters, to receive persons afflicted with the leprosy The leprosy
was hereditary and infectious; it might have been caught by the saliva of a
leper -- if a found person drank after him -- by the touch -- by lying in the
same bed, and by coition. Hospitals for lepers erected in almost every town,
prove that it raged here in former times with great virulence.
, a dreadful contagious disease, which anciently, from whatever cause, appears
to have been very common in this kingdom.

A bull was granted to this house by Pope Alexander, the third or fourth of
that name, the original of which I have seen. It confirmed to the master and
brethren the possession of their house, gardens, rents, woods and other
property, and favored them with an exemption from tithes "Alexander Episcopus
servus servorum Dei dilectis filiis magistro et fratribus hospitalis leprosorum
Sancte Marie Magdalene Novi Castri super Tynam Dunelmensi diocesi salutem and
apostolicam benedictionem. Sacrosan i^ Romana ecclesia devotos et humiles
filios ex assuete pietatis officio propensius diligere consuevit et ne pr^vo^^^
hominum molestiis agitentur eos tanquam pia matter sue protectionis min^i^^ne
consovere ea propter dilecti in Domino filii vestris justis postulationibus
grato concurrentes asiensu persona^ vestras et hospitale Sancte Marie Magdalene
in quo sub communi vita degitis cum omnibus bonis que impres^ntiarum
rationabiliter possidetis aut in futurum justis modis pr^stant^ Domino
poteritis adipisci sub beati Petri et nostra protectione suscip^^mus,
specialiter autem terras domos ortos redditus nemora et alia bona vestra sicut
ea omnia just et pacifice possidetis vobis et per vos eidem hospitali
auctoritate apostolica confirmamus and presentis scripti patro^inio communimus
districtius inhibentes ne quis de ortis virgultis et vestrorum animalium
nutrimentis a vobis decimas exigere vel extorque^e presum^^. Nulli ergo omnino
hominum liceat hanc pa^inam nostre protectionis confirmationis et inhibitionis
infringe^^ vel ei ausu temerario contraire Siquis autem hoc attemptare
presumpserit indignationem omnipotentis Dei et beatorum Petri et Pauli
apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum Datum Anagnie 4 non. Marcii pontificatus
nostri anno sexto. Bo. Pomen. (Filis sericis rubicundis flavis bulla avulsa.)

In the Bullarium Romanum it appears that both the Popes Alexander III. and IV.
dated from Anagnia -- but no bulls occur dated from thence by the 1st, 2d, 5th,
or 6th of that name.


.

November 2d, 1291, King Edward I. granted a license of mortmain to the master
and brethren of this hospital of the blessed Mary Magdalen, to hold a house in
Newcastle upon Tyne, which John de Hercelaw had bequeathed to them by his last
will "Paten' de anno regni Regis Edwardi primi decimo nono, m. 2.

"Pro magistro et fratribus hosp. beat Marie Magdalene in villa Novi Castri
super Tynam. R. omnibus, etc. Licet, etc. Volentes tamen dilectis nobis in
Christo magistro and fratribus hospitalis beat Marie Magdalene in villa Novi
Castri super Tynam gratiam facere specialem dedimus eis licenciam quantum in
nobis est quod ipsi domum illam cum pertinentiis que fuit Johannis de Hercelawe
in predicta villa Novi Castri quam idem Johannes in ultima voluntate sua eisdem
magistro and fratribus legavit, habere possint and tenere sibi and
successoribus suis imperpetuum, etc. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Hereford 2 die
Nov." -- From the original in the Tower of London.


.

A. D. 1369, John Bland, a great benefactor to this hospital, occurs as the
master thereof. He died on the day before the feast of St. Michael, Sept. 28,
1374, and was buried in the chapel of this house See Bourne's account.
.

Tanner, in his Notitia Monastica, mentions a patent for the advowson of this
place, of the date of 1382 "Pat. 5 Ric. II. p. 2, m. 35, pro advocatione ejus."
.

Roger Thornton the elder, by his will, dated in 1429, left to the "lepremen"
of Newcastle, two pounds See Bourne sub anno.
.

Speed informs us that this house was valued at 9l. 11s. 4d. per annum, in the
year 1535 See also "Bibl. Cotton. Cleopatra, E. IV. p. 144. Plut. V. C. (Dorso)
page 384. "Hospit' Sancte Marie Magdalene ibidem 9l. 11s. 4d."
.

It was dissolved by the statute of the 31st of King Henry VIII. but is said
never to have come in charge before the King's auditors of the county, nor to
have paid rent to the King's receiver. Yet see afterward.

January 20th, 1542, Edward Burrell, clerk, and master of this house, by the
title of "Master of the hospital of St. Mary Magdelayne without Pilgrimstreate
yett within the subberbs of the town of Newcastell upon Tyne, and previsour of
the chapel of St. Jaymes and of the lazer-house neighe adjoyneing to the said
hospital;" and the brethren and sisters of the same lazar-house granted to
Robert Brandling, merchant, a lease of the lands belonging thereto, for a term
of eighty-five years From a copy of the lease in the archives of the
corporation of Newcastle. -- The lessee was afterward knighted.

In this lease occur the words "Laith or Barn and Stack Garth." -- "A place
called Spitell-Tongs, adjoining to Castle-Fields," occurs.

The lessee has liberty "to sink coll pit or pits within the said close called
Spittel-Tongs, and the Loncing and Jesmond-Felds."

They let to the said Robert Brandling "all that their wholl mine or mines of
colls lyeinge or being within the close called St. James' Close belonging to
the said hospital or lazar-house or either of them with way leve etc." -- The
rent 3l. 6s. 8d. per annum: "and for the colls yss any coll mine or mines can
be found in the said close, the said master brethren and sisters and their
successors to have yearly the third part of the profitt of the said colls
bearing the thride part of the charges of the same or else 3l. 6s. 8d. of money
yearly." -- "Robertus Lewen, major and burgenses ville predicte Novi Castri
very patroni hospitalis beat Marie Magdalene and domus leprosorum extra muros
ejusdem ville" confirmed the above lease February 10th, 34 of Hen. VIII. -- At
the bottom, "concordat cum rentale test' Hun^frido Waren in hac part auditor'
Domini Regis." -- Copia vera concordans cum originali et exam' per Hen. Anthone
not. public. 27 August, 1604." On the back is mentioned "Barras Price," valued
to be some eleven acres.


.

The following account of this place is preserved in the certificate of
colleges and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. A. D. 1546,
remaining in the Augmentation-Office: "The hospitalle of Mary Magdalen in the
suburbs of the town of Newcastell upon Tyne within the parish of St. Andrewe
was founded by report to the intent there should be a master brethren and
systers to receyve all such leprose folks as should fortune to be diseased of
that kind of sickeness and with the revennues of the same the said lepers were
relievyd and syns that kind of sickeness is abated it is used for the comfort
and help of the poor folks of the town that chances to fall sick in time
of pestilence. -- Yearly value 9l. 11s. 4d. -- value according to this survey
9l. 18s. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid to the Kinge's majesty for the
tenthes 19s. 1d. ob. quad. and remains 8l. 18s. 10d. quad. which ben
employed to the sustentacion and relief of Gilbert Lewen priest, master of the
said hospital who is not there resident for the aid and comfort of poor people
and impotent persons thither resortyng according to the tenor of the said
foundation -- within the parish of St. Andrews about a furlong from the
parish church. -- Value of ornaments etc. 9s. 2d. as apereth by a particular
inventory of the same. There were no other lands nor yearly profitts, etc."

A. D. 1564, Edmund Wiseman, a servant of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight, and
keeper of the great seal of England, obtained a presentation, from the Queen,
of this hospital, the true patrons whereof were the mayor and burgesses of
Newcastle upon Tyne, who had presented thereto from time immemorial. By virtue
of the presentation by Queen Elizabeth, the Bishop of Durham would have
inducted "Institucio officii five custody hosp. beat Marie Magdalene in
suburbiis ville Novi Castri super Tynam Reg. Pilkington, p. 60. Jacobus divina
miseratione episc' Dunelm' etc. Edm' Wyseman etc. ad officium magistri five
custodis hospit. b. v. M. Magdalene in suburbiis ville Novi Castri super Tynam
in co. N. etc. post mort' ult' incumbentis seu aliter vacans ad quod per Eliz.
Dei gratia etc. patronam presentat' existis te admittinius etc. Datum apud
manerium nostrum de Awkland etc. Oct. 5, 1564, et nostre consecrationis quarto."
the said E. Wiseman, but was prevented by the mayor and aldermen of Newcastle,
the hospital being a donative, and not a benefice inductible by any bishop
Bourne -- he says it was obtained "by the procurement of one Cuthbert Bewicke,
a burgess and merchant of this town of Newcastle."
.

February 15th, 1569, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle granted the next
presentation of this hospital to Henry Anderson, Robert Mitford, and
Christopher From the original, preserved in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne, "Februar' 15th, 1569, Christopher Mitford mayor."
Mitford.

February 14th, 1582, and July 7th, 1586, Robert Mydforthe occurs as master of
this place Bishop Barnes' Visitation.
.

Tanner informs us, that this hospital was granted away by Queen Elizabeth, A.
D. 1582 Pat. 24 year of her reign, 431.
, though it was afterward re-established in the year 1611, when the chapel of
St. Thomas the Martyr, on Tyne-Bridge, was annexed thereto, by a charter of
King James I.

Fourteen persons, says Bourne, residing in the house, were each allowed a
room, coals, and eight shillings per month; and fifteen others were a sort of
out-patients, with different allowances, some of eight shillings, some of five
shillings, and others of two shillings and sixpence per month Bourne's History.
. This place appears to have paid, till very lately, three shillings and
four-pence for episcopal procuration Randall's MSS. Bishop of Durham's
Visitation, A. D. 1740, "Hospit. of S. Magdalen, 3s. 4d."
.

By a charter of King James I. dated June 12th, 1611, the chapel on Tyne-Bridge
was incorporated with this hospital: The preamble sets forth, that because the
ancient deeds of endowment, etc. of these two places had either been lost or
destroyed by time, and some persons were attempting to appropriate their
several possessions to their own use, the King therefore united them, and
decreed that the hospital of St. Mary Magdalen, and the chapel on Tyne-Bridge,
so incorporated, should consist of a master, who was at least to be a master of
arts, and three old poor and unmarried burgesses of the town, who should be a
body politic in law, have a common seal The matrices of two seals belonging to
this hospital, the one very badly executed, the other of better workmanship
considering its antiquity, are still preserved in the archives of the
corporation. -- See seals, Plate I. No. 5 and 12.
, power to sue and be sued, let leases, etc. the mayor and the rest of the
common council of Newcastle upon Tyne to be patrons, have the presentation of
the mastership, and power to review and alter the statutes. The King gave them,
at the same time, the hospital of St. Mary Magdalene, and the chapel on
Tyne-Bridge, with all the possessions of each of them, for which they were to
render and pay such rents and services as had before been accustomed to be
rendered and paid. The master, after the death of the first named in the
charter, to have a third part of the rents, and the other two parts to be
divided amongst the three brethren From a copy of the charter in Grey's MSS.
See Appendix.

Robert Jennison, A. M. (afterward D. D.) was declared the first master by the
charter -- during his life each brother to have 3l. 6s. 8d.

A. D. 1721, a case was stated, and the opinions of Sergeant Common and Mr.
Lulwich were taken thereupon, whether the above charter had power to restrain
the term of leases granted by the master and brethren here to ten years or
three lives. -- They both were of opinion that such usage was an evidence that
by the endowment they had such right: of which original right this charter
could not deprive them. -- But Sergeant Cuthbert was of another opinion.


.

Cuthbert Sydenham was appointed master, November 22d, 1652, on the death of
Dr. Robert Jennison, named in the charter abovementioned Common Council books.
.

Samuel Hammond succeeded, February 24th, 1653 Ibid.
.

Robert Bonner, A. M. August 27th, 1662, on the removal of S. Hammond Ibid.
.

Thomas Davison, A. M. October 2d, 1676, on the death of R. Bonner Ibid.
.

John Chilton, A. M. March 6th, 1716, on the death of T. Davison Ibid.
.

Robert Thomlinson, A. M. (afterward D. D.) April 3, 1717, on the removal of
J. Chilton Ibid.
.

Henry Featherstonehalgh, B. D. January 18th, 1748, on the resignation of Dr.
Thomlinson Ibid.
.

Nathanael Clayton, B. D. June 14th, 1779, on the death of H. Featherstonehalgh
Ibid.
.

Henry Ridley, A. M. September 21st, 1786, on the death of N. Clayton Newcastle
Courant.
.

Bourne supposes that Barras-Bridge was so called from its conducting to the
Barrows, or burying-ground of the Magdalen hospital See account of
Ficket-Tower-Ward, where the same word occurs, seeming plainly to mean a
burying-ground. Bourne supposes the Maudlin-Barrows to be the present "Sick
Man's Close;" barrows signifying tumuli, graves and sepulchers.

Bourne tells us, also, that "some have imagined it to be called so from a
person of that name, who was its builder, or a benefactor to it." Other
accounts, he adds, derive its appellation from the word barracado. -- "St.
Andrew's church," says the Milbank MS. "is the oldest church in town, because
it is next the Barras, which has been the ancient barracado of the town." It
appears by the following quotation from Hearne's edition of the Chronicon of
Whethamstede, vol. ii. p. 532, that barriers for the defense of a town were
erected in different parts of it: and indeed what would it avail to have it
barricaded only in one place? "John de Cella," says that writer, "made abbot of
St. Albans A. D. 1195, and who died A. D. 1214, did as follows, amongst other
good works: Item barreras illas quas predecessor suus pro defensione ville
(Sancti Albani) in diversis illius partibus suis in temporibus erigi jusserat."
There is a reference from the word barreras, explaining it by repagula,
barriers. There were such erections also about Newcastle. -- See Froisart's
Chronicle -- Battle of Otterbourn. -- See also before in the account of
Ever-Tower-Ward, where mention occurs of the barriers beyond Gallow-Gate,
without Newgate, "as men go to the gallows."


.

On the north side of Barras-Bridge, before the chapel of St. James, a great
cross appears to have stood in ancient times: it was destroyed as a piece of
idolatry at the grand rebellion By the fanatical John Pig, town's surveyor. --
See Bourne's History.
.

From hence we enter upon the Town-Moor.

This large track of ground appears to have been called anciently "Castle-More."

Bourne Page 148 et seq.
, on I know not what authority, tells us, that it was originally a wood very
famous for oaks, out of which have been built many hundreds of ships, and all
the houses of the old town of Newcastle, to the burgesses of whom it is said to
have been given by Adam of Jesmond The MS. Life of Alderman Barnes, so often
cited, speaking of Castle-Field and Castle-Moor, says, "There was a wood given
to the town by Adam of Jesmond, lying on the north, and now called the
Town-Moor, to which, for the benefit of freemen, they have added the
Castle-Leeses, purchased of our author (Barnes) amongst other proptietors."
, about the reign of King Henry III. More probably it has been originally one
of the appurtenances of the corporate town of Newcastle, for which the
burgesses paid their fee-farm rent to the crown See History of Newcastle as a
corporate town -- charter of Ed. III. dated 10th May, 1357, where the following
clause occurs: "The burgesses and their predecessors, ever since they farmed
the said town with its appurtenances, have held the same moor and land called
Castle-Field and Castle-Moor, as belonging to the said town."
.

In the 31st Ed. III. the Town-Moor is mentioned as having, from time
immemorial, belonged to the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, as it appeared by an
inquisition returned into Chancery See charter, ut supra, 10th May, 31 Ed. III.
. It was then described as extending from a certain place called "the
Thorn-Bush This Thorn-Bush must have been on the north side of Barras-Bridge,
near a cross that was erect^d there before St. James's chapel.
, near the cross," and then by certain divisions and boundaries set up toward
the said town of Newcastle, as far as the gallows, and so between the posts of
the gallows: one of which stood on the boundary between the land of the prior
of Tinmouth, and that of the town of Newcastle, and so on by the Quarrel ( i.
e. Quarry) Dyke, and then by the King's way to the said town.

By an inquisition taken at the castle of Newcastle upon Tyne, August 13th, in
the 18th year of the reign of King James I. "Et quod qu^dam mora que vocatur le
Castle-More incipit a quadam domo vocat' le Sick Man's House, etc.

Bourne says, it contains 1037 acres, 1 rood, and 2 perches


Castle-Moor appears to have contained 848 acres, and the boundaries of it are
described at that time as beginning at a certain house called Sick Man's House
on the south, and so extending to the fields of Jesmond on the east, to a
certain corner there, and from thence turning westward to the gate leading from
Newcastle to Morpeth, and so on westward near the limits of Coxlodge on the
north to the corner of the Nun-Moor: on the west to a certain corner where a
hedge was anciently, near the Cow-Gate, leading from Newcastle to Hexham; by
the boundaries of the fields of Elswick on the south to the gallows, and from
thence turning westward and north, by the bounds and territories of East-Field
on the west, to a certain corner of the Castle-Field, and turning south and
east by the boundaries of the Castle-Field on the south, to the said house
called Sick Man's House.

A colliery occurs as working on the Town-Moor at the time of the grand
rebellion "In the survey made of the Town-Moor," says Bourne, "in the
troublesome times, it was reported that the coal-mine, or colliery, in the
Town-Moor extends itself under the superficies of the Town-Moor one hundred
acres, and that the value of it was to the town 35l. per annum."

An advertisement occurs in the Newcastle Courant to let the Town-Moor
colliery, December 2^d, 1739.


.

March 22d, 1647, grass men, to take care of the Town-Moor, occur in the
common council hooks Archives of the corporation of Newcastle.
.

By an article of agreement, preserved in the act-book of the common council,
dated April 1st, 1653, between the mayor and burgesses, and Robert Hunter their
neateherd, it was stipulated, that the four servants of the latter, every
morning, from Lady Day to Michaelmas betwixt four and five o'clock, and from
Michaelmas to Lady Day between seven and eight o'clock, should enter the
several gates of the town, and blow their horns along the streets, as a signal
for the owners of cows to bring them out, in order to drive them to the
Town-Moor.

October 28th, 1657, there was a petition from Humphry Gill and John Cook, to
the common council of Newcastle, for leave to make a way, and bring coals out
of Fenham-Fields, over the Town-Moor, at the distance of about sixty yards from
the highway leading over the said moor; and on the 8th of December following,
leave was given them by that body to cause a gate to be hung, and the way to be
paved from the gate to the said highway Common Council books.

There is an order of common council, April 4th, 1704, that "Slayty-Gate,
leading out of the Town-Moor into Fenham ground, and all other new erected
gates there, without leave of the common council, be immediately stopped up,
and noe passage there for the future."

There lies before me a pamphlet, entitled "The Proceedings of the Stewards of
the several Companies of the Corporation of Newcastle, respecting an Enquiry
into the Right by which any Roads over the Town-Moor, etc. are enjoyed, with
the Report of the Committee by them appointed for that Purpose." Printed by J.
Thompson, Esquire. 8vo, 16 pages. No date. But it must have been printed toward
the latter end of the year 1771.


.

July 18th, 1747, an advertisement appeared in the Newcastle Courant, for
proposals to be sent in for making a carriage-way, at the expense of the
corporation, in the high road leading from Barras-Bridge through the Town-Moor,
to the north end of the Cow-Causeway, in that part of the road where the
causeway then lay, to be eleven yards in breadth, and ballasted in the same
manner as a turnpike road There lies before me a tract, entitled, "Heads of a
Bill to be proposed to Parliament for erecting Turnpikes, for repairing the
High-road between Cow-Causeway-End, adjoining the Town-Moor, etc. to
Buckton-Burn in Northumberland." Newcastle, printed by John White, 1746, 8vo.
15 pages.

In the year 1748 the corporation of Newcastle began, at their own expense, a
large causeway in the manner of the turnpike-roads, eleven yards in breadth,
across the moor of that town, by the way leading to Morpeth in Northumberland.
This was completely finished in 1749, under the direction of William Joyce,
surveyor.


.

A. D. 1753, a turnpike-road was made, by order of common council, over the
Town-Moor, from the west end of the Broad Causeway, leading from Gallow-Gate to
the West Cow-Gate, there to join the turnpike-road leading from the said West
Cow-Gate to the river Wanspeck Common Council books.
.

Newcastle races, which at present are annually run upon the Town-Moor, appear
formerly to have been run upon Killingworth-Moor, in the vicinity of that town
There is an order of common council, "August 6th, 1695, that for the future it
be inserted in the Gazette, that noe horses shall run for the plate of this
town, that ever run at any course on the south side of Trent."

The following occurs in the common council books, August 25th, 1707: "Horse
course -- Ordered, that for the future no cords be used or paid for at
Killingworth-Moore, etc." -- Ibid. June 20th, 1715, "Ordered, that the plate
given yearly by the town to be run for on the Thursday after Trinity-Sunday,
should not for the future exceed the value of 25l." -- Ibid. April 6th, 1742,
"The prize on Thursday next after Trinity-Sunday was ordered to be changed to a
gold cup, of fifty pounds value, excluding the fashion and making."


.

June 5th, 1753, the first royal purse of an hundred guineas was run for upon
the Town-Moor, and won by a horse called Cato, the property of George Bows,
Esquire. See account of the mansion house in the Close.
.

January 19th, 1756, there was an order of common council to give 75l. toward
putting the race-ground upon the Town-Moor into good condition Common Council
books.
.

September 24th, 1764, by order of common council, a way-leave from Fenham to
the turnpike on the Town-Moor was granted for 99 years, on the petition of
William Ord, Esquire. of Fenham, at the annual rent of one shilling, on condition
that Mr. Ord should keep the road in repair, which was to be made in a straight
line from the end of his own lane to the turnpike-road, at his own expense Ibid.
.

January 14th, 1765, by an order of the same body, Mr. Ord was permitted, on
his petition, to set up gate-posts, and to hang two gates thereon, in the hedge
between the Town-Moor and his estate at Fenham, on his paying an annual rent of
a shilling for each gate Ibid.
.

Dec. 31st, 1771, that part of the Town-Moor lying on the west side of the
western turnpike-road, from Gallow-Gate-Quarry to the West Cow-Gate, containing
about eighty-nine acres, was, in pursuance of an order of common council,
advertised to be let, for the purpose of being cultivated and improved
Newcastle Courant.
.

A similar design appears to have been in agitation some time before, but the
scheme was then set aside as impracticable by the magistrates and
common council.

This matter occasioned a violent dispute between the mayor and common council,
and some of the burgesses: Sergeant Glynn, recorder of London, was invited down
to Newcastle on behalf of the burgesses in this affair; and by his mediation at
the assizes, August 10th, 1773 "Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and county of the
same town. At the assizes held at the guild hall of the said town, in and for
the said town and county of the same, on Saturday, 7th day of August, 13 Geo.
III. etc. before the Honorable Sir Henry Gould, Knight, one of the justices of
his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and the Honorable Sir William Blackstone,
Knight, one other of the justices of the same court, two of his Majesty's
justices assigned to take the assizes, according to the statute, etc.

"Hopper versus Bayles and alios. It is ordered, by the consent of the said
parties, their counsel and attorneys, that the last juror of the jury
impannelled and sworn in this cause, shall be withdrawn from the panel; and by
the like consent, and by the consent of William Gibson, Esquire, town clerk of
Newcastle aforesaid, on behalf of the common council of Newcastle aforesaid,
etc. it is agreed and ordered, that an application shall be made for an act of
parliament, to establish for ever, to resident freemen, and the resident widows
of deceased freemen, of the town of Newcastle aforesaid, the full right and
benefit to the herbage of the Town-Moor, for two milk cows, in the manner which
has been used, subject to such restrictions and regulations as shall be judged
necessary for the culture and improvement of the common, and shall be
prescribed in the act, which are to be settled and agreed upon by two persons,
one to be named by the common council, and the other by the stewards of the
companies, or the major part of them, such two persons to be named before the
1st day of November next. And in case they cannot agree, they two are to choose
a third person for the purpose aforesaid, by agreement or ballot. And it is
further ordered, that the rents to arise from the leases of parts of the
Town-Moor aforesaid (which may be made for the purpose of improving the common)
shall be applied to the use of the poor freemen, and poor widows of freemen, in
the manner to be prescribed by the said act. And it is also ordered, that the
quantity to be enclosed for improvement at any one period shall not exceed 100
acres; and that such rights shall be reserved to the corporation of Newcastle,
as owners of the soil, as they are entitled unto. And it is also ordered, that
the expenses of the said act, and also the costs in this action of the
plaintiff, and the costs, not exceeding 30^l. of the defendants, shall be paid
out of the public revenue of the said corporation. And lastly, it is ordered,
that all parties perform this order, and that this order shall be made a rule
of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, if the justices of the said court shall
so please. By the court, RIGGE."


, it was agreed that the leasing of the Town-Moor should be settled by act of
parliament.

The burgesses in the opposition called the agreement made on this occasion a
victory In commemoration of this event, and as a reward to the above committee,
the members thereof were unanimously presented with the freedom of several of
the companies That of the tailors presented each of the committee with a gold
ring, in the signet of each of which, under a crystal, was represented Liberty
stepping out of her temple, with a label proceeding from her mouth, inscribed,
"Town-Moor saved, August 10, 1773." -- On the inside, "Concordia parvae res
crescunt." -- Round the inner verge, "Taylor's company to...... (naming each
member), and round the outer verge this motto: "Vox populi vox Dei."
, and appointed a committee, composed of delegates from each company, to carry
on the heads of a bill to be presented to parliament, in the adjusting of which
they had no small altercation There lie before me four different pamphlets
concerning the heads of this bill. -- One in quarto, 7 pages. -- Another in
octavo, 10 pages. -- Another in octavo, 10 pages, beginning, "Heads of a bill
proposed," etc. and ending, "The clause may be struck out." -- The fourth is in
octavo, 9 pages, ending "can be pointed out."
with the magistrates. The act passed for this purpose A. D. 1774, 14 Geo. III.

Two annual fairs are kept upon the Town-Moor, on a part thereof called
Cow-Hill, one on the first of August, and the other on the 18th of October, "of
which," says Bourne, "the tolls, booths, stallage, pickage, and courts of
pie-powder to each, were reckoned in Oliver Cromwell's time, communibus annis,
worth twelve pounds Notice was given in the Newcastle Courant, August 29, 1752,
on the alteration of the style, that the annual fair of that town, commonly
called St. Luke's Fair, should be h^ld on St. Luke's Day, 18th of October next:
and all the other fairs on the nominal days, without any alteration. Signed
Cuthbertson.
."

I have not been able to discover the limits of Castle-Field, or whether any
part of it composes that division of the Town-Moor, now called "Castle-Leazes
Saxon, laerpa -- plural, laerpe; pastora, pascua.

There is preserved in the archives of the corporation, dated April 6th, 1471,
the counterpart of a gr^nt from William Bl^xton, mayor, and the town of
Newcastle, to John Pen^ith and Peter Bledy, and their heirs for ever, of a
close called the Whyn-Close, "sicut jacet in le Castell-Felle ex boreali part
ejusdem." The annual rent 13s. 4d.


."

Gray informs us, that there was a tradition, that Castle-Field was given to
the townsmen of Newcastle by King John: however that may be, Castle-Field is
mentioned with Castle-Moor, as having, from time immemorial See before under
Town-Moor.
, belonged to that town, in a charter cited before, 31 Ed. III. and which
confirmed to them the possession of both these commons.

But how are we to reconcile the above with Bourne's account of this place? His
words are, "This place was formerly the inheritance of diverse persons, owners
thereof, who were accustomed from ancient time to take the fore-crop thereof
yearly, at or before Lammas-Day; and after that, by an ancient custom, all the
burgesses of this town used to put in their kine, and used the same in
pasturing of them till Lady Day in Lent, yearly, and then to lay the same for
meadow again till Lammas."

In an inquisition, dated August 13th, 18th of James I. the jurors acknowledge
themselves entirely at a loss how to present the certain number of the acres of
Castle-Field, as the certain boundaries and limits thereof neither appeared to
them by record, nor any other testimony "Et quod parcell' terre que vocatur le
Castle-Field eo quod tot' limit' et bund' ejusdem non apparent dictis
juratoribus neque per record' neque per aliquod testimonium prorsus ignorant
presentare certum numerum acrarum."

Bourne says, "This piece of ground contains 141 acres and 12 perches." But in
"An exact plan of the Castle-Leases, belonging to the corporation of Newcastle
upon Tyne, 1731," framed and glazed, and preserved in their archives, the
contents are said to be "127 acres, 2 roods, and 17 perches."

"The grounds of it," says Bourne, "abut on the Castle-Moor on the east and
north parts, upon the highway leading to Kenton on the west, and on the other
way leading to the said Castle-Moor on the south. -- It was always valued tithe
free."


.

The following account of Castle-Fields, alias Castle-Leeses, occurs in an
original survey of the Castle-Garth, dated October 29, 1649, remaining in the
Augmentation-Office:

"Item, one parcel of pasture-ground commonly called and known by the name of
the Castle-Fields alias Castle-Leeses containing by estimacion 40 acres worth
20l. per annum, but we could not receave information of the bounds of it, and
although this be leased (as we conceive) by the crown to the said Alexander
Stephenson, yet he never had possession thereof, but both this and the other
parcel of ground called the Frith has been time out of mind in the
possession of diverse persons residing in or near unto Newcastle and (as we are
informed) holds the same of the crown in fee-farme. Therefore we have not
valued the same but leave them to better judgments." -- In the margin, "This
and the last parcel to be cleared "When the parliament," says Bourne, "took an
inquisition of Castle-Field, the Forth, and Town-Moor, in 1649, they were
valued at 27l. per annum. The mill in the Castle-Leases, commonly called
Chimley-Mill, upon the syke or rivulet called Bailiff-Burn, and the other mill
called Little-Mill, were at the same time valued at 10l. per ann. each."
."

There is preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, a grant to
the mayor and burgesses of that town, to purchase the sweepage of the
Castle-Leazes -- dated August 12th, in the 33d year of the reign of King
Charles II Sweepage signifies the crop of hay got in a meadow. Blount in verbo.

This grant is signed "Pigott."


.

Mr. Thomas Davison, by his will, dated November 25th, 1675, gave to the
company of merchant-adventurers in Newcastle certain lands in the Leazes there
for ever, of the yearly value of 10l. 10s. upon certain conditions.

August 10th, 1681, the above merchant-adventurers, in consideration of an
annual rent of 13l. payable for ever out of the town-chamber of Newcastle, at
Michaelmas, sold the above lands to the corporation of that place.

They are described, on this occasion, as consisting of "ninety-four ridges of
land in the Castle-Field See account of merchant-adventurers.

In a schedule of deeds, etc. belonging to that society, is one, No 19,
entitled, "Lease, release, and conveyance of lands in the Castle-Leazes,
formerly belonging to Mr. Thomas Davison geren' dat' 9, 10, and 11 of August,
1681."

Sept. 22d, 1701, mention occurs in the common council books of the town's
having purchased the lands of Charles Clarke, draper, in the Castle-Leazes.

It appears also, by the MS. Life of Alderman Barnes, that the corporation
bought some property there of that magistrate.


."

There is an order of common council, September 21st, 1710, for "haining the
Castle-Leazes, from the 25th of March to and with the 17th of May following."
This, no doubt, was intended for the benefit of the herbage Common Council
books.
.

In the surveyor-general's report concerning the castle lands, dated December
22d, 1735, this place is mentioned as follows:

"The Castle-Fields and the Frith are entirely distinct parcels, of
considerable extent and value."

There was an order of common council, September 28th, 1775, to pay ten guineas
a year to each of the herds of the Moor and Castle-Leazes, in lieu of the five
stints allowed to each of them before that time Common Council books.
.

NUN-MOOR.
THIS was once the property of, and took its name from, the nuns of Newcastle,
to whom, and to St. Mary's hospital in that town, it is said to have been given
by Aselack, the founder of that hospital, and confirmed to them by a charter of
King Richard I. See Bourne's History.

He describes Nun-Moor as being "That large piece of ground that lies on the
west of the Town-Moor, between the Thorn-bush and the hedge that separates it
from the grounds of Kenton."




April 5th, 4th of Henry VII. Dame Joan, prioress of the monastery of St.
Bartholomew in Newcastle, and the convent of the same, granted a lease of the
Nun-Moor for an hundred years, at the annual rent of 23s. 4d. to the mayor and
commonalty of that town From a deed in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle, dated April 5th, 4 Hen. VII. wherein Nun-Moor is described to be
"That parcel of ground called the Nun-More, as it lies betwixt the f^lds
called the Castle-More on the est and south parts, and the feld of Fenham on
the west party, and the felds of Kynton on the north party."
.

The Nun-Moor, after the dissolution of religious houses, was granted, in the
36th of Henry VIII. August 22d, to John Broxholm, for 1122l. 15s. 6d. Record
preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, taken out of the
Rolls, 1620.

There occurs ibid. an award 11 Hen. VIII. between the prioress and convent of
Nuns of St. Bartholomew in Newcastle, and William Bennett, Esquire. that the
Nun-Moor, as boundered in the award, belongs to the prioress and convent, and
that they shall release all claims to any other lands in Kenton. -- A note is
added in a more modern hand: "Nun-Moore belongs to the town of Newcastle, which
they purchased from Brandling."

William Bennett, Esquire. was owner of Kenton.




There is preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle, dated
September 1st, 36 Hen. VIII. a conveyance of the Nun-Moor from John Broxholme,
of the Inner Temple, gentleman, to Robert Brandling, of Newcastle upon Tyne,
merchant, in consideration of the sum of 21l. "In the 37 Hen. VIII." says
Bourne, "upon an inquisition then taken and returned into the Exchequer, of
lands belonging to religious houses, Nun-Moor is certified to be within the
county of Northumberland."
.

There is preserved, ibid. dated January 6th, 1604, a feofment with livery and
seizin, whereby Robert Brandling, of Felling, Esquire. settled the Nun-Moor, and a
house on the Sand-Hill, called the Custom-House, on himself for life, and
afterward on his son Richard Brandling, for his life.

About the year 1650 Common Council books, June 17th, 1650 -- May 17th, 1650.
, or 1651 October 13, 1651, ibid. -- Also August 19th, 1659.
, Nun-Moor appears to have been purchased of Mr. Charles Brandling, of
Gateshead, by the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, who have annexed it to
the Town-Moor.

SUBURBS OF PANDON.
A ROAD from Pandon-Gate leads to Shield-Field, and Ouse, or Use-Burn.

Shield-Field was in ancient times a place where the army used to muster In
Burleigh's State Papers, p. 41, mention occurs in a letter, dated June 7th,
1544, of "the moster at Newcastle at a place callide Shellfelde."
. Later accounts represent it as a place of public recreation It appears from
the MS. Life of Barnes, so often cited, that during the time that King Charles
I. was a prisoner at Newcastle, before he attempted to escape, he was permitted
to go out every day, with his retinue, and play at goff in the Shield-Field.

In the common council books, March 24th, 1658, there occurs a "prohibition of
horse-courses in the Shield-Field."

Ibid. March 3d, 1738, and April 10th, 1738, complaints occur that some parts
of Shield-Field had lately been enclosed, and that the inhabitants could not
recreate themselves therein as usual -- upon which complaints the recorder is
ordered to be consulted.


: It is at present become private property In the Newcastle Courant, February
18th, 1738, and several weeks afterward, there appeared the following
advertisement: "Whereas the ground called Shield-Field has of late been very
much damaged, and the hedges thereof broken down, by several persons presuming
to trespass upon the same, by riding horses, and using other exercises there:
the owners of the said estate do therefore hereby give notice that they intend
to prosecute any person or persons who shall for the future presume to commit
any trespass upon the said grounds."
.

Near the entrance to Shield-Field are the visible remains of a great fort,
which was erected here in the time of the grand rebellion See Historical Events.

A windmill stands at present upon part of it. Warburton's MSS. (penes h. v.
Hugonem Ducem Northumbriae) say that "Sheilfield-Fort is in length 67 yards, in
breadth 67. Bastion 20 yards each way."


.

Ouse-Burn is a pretty considerable village, situated on a burn of that name
that runs through it, and falls into the Tyne a little below.

The banks of this burn in many places, especially near the village of Heaton
There appears to have been a chapel anciently at Heaton, which in the year 1299
was honored with the presence of King Edward I. to hear a boy bishop perform
the vespers of St. Nicholas therein, on the 7th day of December that year.
"Episcopus puerorum. Septimo die Decembr' cuidam episcopo puerorum dicenti
vesperas de Sancto Nicholao coram Rege in capella sua apud Heton juxta Novum
Castrum super Tynam et quibusdam pueris venientibus et cantantibus cum Episcopo
predicto de elemosina ipsius Regis per manus Domini Henrici elemosinar'
participant' denar' inter pueros predictos 40s." -- Wardrobe account of 28
Edward I. published by the Society of Antiquaries.
, are very beautiful and romantic.

The top of Pandon-Bank is commonly called "Conduit-Head." A reservoir still
remains It stands upon ground which is the property of the Reverend Mr.
Nathanael Ellison.
behind the houses there, which supplies Sand-Gate Pant with water. There are
many fine springs about this hill, and I am much inclined to be of opinion that
there has been a reservoir here in the most ancient times, for supplying the
palace of the Saxon kings, and after that the house of Carmelites, with water.
If I might hazard a conjecture on the true etymon of Pandon, I would define it
to mean "the hill of the pand, or pond, or reservoir." See etymology of the
word "pant," in the account of Warden's Close in the suburbs of West-Gate.

I shall throw together in this place the several notices I have been able to
collect concerning the means used at various periods for supplying the town of
Newcastle with one of the chief necessaries of life.

November 24th, 1645, there is an order of common council for cutting off a
vein of water which had lately been discovered and brought into the town, but
is said to have been found "hurtful and dangerous to be used for food and
dressinge of meat Common Council books.
."

July 26th, 1647, an agreement occurs between the corporation of Newcastle, and
Mr. William Gray, concerning water to be conveyed from his conduit in
Pandon-Bank, to Sand-Gate. It appears, that part of the waste called the King's
Dikes had been granted to him by way of recompense. The mayor and burgesses are
mentioned at the same time as having a right to bring part of that water to the
Manors, "according to its ancient and accustomed course Ibid. I suspect this
Mr. William Gray to be the author of the Chorographia.

Mention occurs in the common council books, Sept. 23d, 17^8, of liberty
reserved to the mayor, etc. to dig and delve for water, and take what part of
Mr. Nichol's lands and grounds at the Red Barnes shall seem meet for the
advantage of water for the pants in Sand-Gate and Keelmen's Hospital.


."

February 4th, 1654, there is an order of common council for conveying the
water from Cow-Gate that came under ground from All-Hallows church end, and had
become a nuisance to that street Ibid.
.

March 2d, 1656, there was an order of common council to treat concerning some
water in Gallow-Gate, which was intended to be brought in, and to supply the
pants in Newcastle Ibid.
.

June 3d, 1657, there was a complaint before the common council, against Mr.
Ralph Jennison and Mr. William Wallis, coal-owners, for having diverted a third
part of the water usually coming to the pants in Newcastle, by sinking below
the level of the watercourse. Mr. Jennison was threatened with a prosecution
on this occasion; but, on his submission, and staying the workings, the
common council put a stop to their proceedings against him Common Council books.
.

A similar complaint occurs before the same body, July 20th, 1657, against the
above Mr. Wallis, for working in the Quarry-Close, to the prejudice of the
water supplying the several pants in Newcastle Ibid. October 28th, 1657, ibid.
Mr. Ralph Jennison in common council gave leave to the town to make a trench to
hinder the rainwater that came off the ridges and fell into the watercourse
in the Quarry-Close to the great prejudice of the water.

Mention occurs ibid. January 1681, of the conduit-hole or pit in the
Quarry-Field as out of repair.


-- as also October 11th, 1658, against Mr. Wallis and others for working a
coal-pit in the Gallow-Flatt, that would divert the town's water as above Ibid.
.

Dec. 16th, 1675, urgent complaints occur of a great scarcity of water at that
time in Newcastle, whereupon there was an order of common council, that all
private cocks should either be stopped or cut off Ibid.
.

January 17th, 1675, there was a committee of the common council appointed to
consider about placing another pant "at the Swirle," or elsewhere in Sand-Gate
Ibid. There is a pant at present at the east end of Sand-Gate.
.

August 8th, 1677, there was an order of common council, for the town's
surveyor to adorn a well at Gallow-Gate, for the benefit of the burgesses and
other inhabitants Ibid. The following inscription is almost defaced on the
north-side of Gallow-Gate Pant: "Robert Roddam, 1677."

There was also an order to repair the pants in the Close which were out of
repair.


.

October 4th, 1680, a proposal was laid before the common council by a "Mr.
Cuthbert Dikes," to erect a water-engine for supplying the town of Newcastle
with water, from the river Tyne, for the convenience of brew-houses,
victualling-houses, etc. -- A committee appointed for this business fixed a
place for it without Sandgate-Gate, where it was afterward erected. -- A
covenant between the corporation and the proprietors of this work occurs in the
common council books, June 27th, 1693 Common Council books -- "The committee
reported that they had viewed a place without Sandgate-Gate (a usual pleonasm)
for erecting a water-engine, and found a convenient piece of ground of forty
yards north and south, and twenty yards east and west, reserving a common lane
from the north-east, about 8 or 9 feet broad from Sand-Gate to the water side."
This building was afterward called "the Folly."

January 20th, 1689, mention occurs ibid. of a pant in the Close.


.

September 24th, 1694, there was an order of common council to treat with Mr.
William Soulsby about bringing new water from the spring of the Castle-Leazes,
into the town of Newcastle: there appear to have been great complaints about
this time concerning the scarcity of water Ibid. Ibid. September 15th, 1702,
the building committee were ordered to take care to bring water into the town
from the Castle-Leazes. -- Ibid. it appears that in the year 1704 this water
was brought to a pant at the head of the Side, on condition that what water
could be spared there should be carried down to the cock on the Sand-Hill. This
water was also ordered to Newgate-Pant.

June 29th, 1709, ibid. a committee was ordered to erect a cistern at the end
of the Castle-Leazes, to renew and keep the water coming from thence to the
pants of Newcastle.


.

October 11th, 1697, there was an order of common council for a lease to be
granted to Mr. William Yarnold Ibid. There was an inquisition taken at
Gateshead, 28th December, 1699, before Charles Montague, sheriff of Durham --
in consequence of a private act passed 9 and 10 Will. III. for the better
supplying the town of Newcastle with fresh water. By this it appears, that the
water came from three springs in Great-Usworth-Moor. -- There was another
inquisition on the same subject, taken at Chester-in-the-Street, 16th January,
1699.

See Lords' Journals, vol. xvi. 30 March, School -- 18 May -- 5 July.

March 20th, 1700, the common council granted leave to William Yarnold, Gent.
to erect a cistern on the top of the Cale-Cross, carrying a pillar up in the
middle, and laying on it a new roof of lead at his own expense. Permission was
given him at the same time to remove the cross in the Flesh-Market, and erect
there, on columns, a convenient place for a cistern of water, to be 30 feet
square, beginning at the distance of about twelve feet from the Weigh-House.

He was allowed at the same time to erect a cistern at the White-Cross, on
columns, removing the then pillar and dial.

July 29, 1700, the new water was ordered to be brought out at a new pillar to
be set at the head of the Side-Pant, where three spouts were to be placed. --
Common Council books.


, according to the covenants then viewed and agreed on for erecting cisterns,
and laying pipes in the town's liberties and grounds, in order to bring good
and wholesome water to the inhabitants of Newcastle. This was called the new
water, and came from Gateshead-Fell.

June 30th, 1703, there was an order of common council for the building
committee to erect a pant in West-Gate, which had been petitioned for by the
inhabitants of that street Common Council books. -- There appears to have been
a pant or cock adjoining to the West-Gate. The date, 1706, may still be made
out upon a stone there, though it is pretty much defaced.
.

June 17th, 1714, also Dec. 18th, 1717, complaints occur in the common council
books, of a great scarcity of water in the town of Newcastle Ibid.
.

April 5th, 1737, there was an order of common council, that the public water
should not be conveyed into the houses of any inhabitants of Newcastle, except
those of the mayor, recorder, aldermen, sheriff and town clerk Ibid.
.

October 6th, 1746, there was an order of the common council for a committee to
view a spring of water in the grounds of Coxlodge, belonging to John Stephenson
Esquire. This was in consequence of a great want of water, repeatedly complained
of, for the supply of the inhabitants of Newcastle at the common pants Ibid.
June 20th, 1743, there was an order of common council, to cut off the public
water that ought to supply the pant, near the house of Sir Walter Blackett,
Bart. in Pilgrim-Street, from the house and brewery of Mr. Christopher Rutter,
and from the house of Mr. John Dawson.
.

By an advertisement in the Newcastle Courant for June 25th, 1748, John
Hodgson, Esquire. of Elswick, informed the public of his intentions to begin
immediately to work his colliery at Quarry-House, by which the greatest part of
the water coming to the pants in Newcastle would be taken off, or at least
rendered useless: taking it for granted that the public were to be supplied
more easily some other way, as he had never had the offer of any terms for the
continuance of that supply of water, notwithstanding he had given notice twelve
months before of such his intention, and, by a public advertisement of the
14th of the preceding November, had given the town a proffer of it on equitable
conditions.

December 17th, 1767, a committee was appointed by the common council, to
consider how the town of Newcastle might be better and more properly supplied
with good and wholesome water Common Council books.
.

September 19th, 1770, the common council ordered a lease, under their common
seal, to be granted to Mr. Ralph Lodge, and the other proprietors of the
undertaking, to supply the town of Newcastle with good water, of a piece of
ground at the foot or south end of the Town-Moor, with liberty to dig and make
a reservoir there, and to erect, set up, and make one hundred fire-plugs, or
such further number as should be wanted, in convenient and proper parts of the
town, within or without the walls, at the direction of the common council, to
be used for extinguishing casual fires: as also to make a proper pipe trench,
and lay and keep pipes therein, for bringing water from Coxlodge grounds,
through the Town-Moor to the said reservoir, and from thence into the town, for
the term of two hundred and twenty-seven years, from the 11th day of October
following, at the annual rent of 13s. 4d. on condition also, that the mayor and
burgesses should pay 50l. per annum to the said proprietors for the above
hundred fire-plugs, and 10 shillings a-piece, yearly, for any others that might
be wanted Ibid.

About September 22d, 1770, was published Dr. Rotheram's Philosophical Enquiry,
etc. concerning the waters in or near Newcastle, 8vo, 132 pages, with a
copper-plate -- Printed by J. Thompson, Esquire. price 2s. 6d. -- Newcastle Courant
for Sept. 22, 1770.

Dr. Wilson's and Dr Hall's pamphlet on the same subject is first advertised in
the Newcastle Courant, August 18th, 1770, price one shilling.

Their joint lecture on the subject was delivered at Parker's long room, July
30th, 1770.

Experiments made in the month of December, 1769, on waters in or near
Newcastle upon Tyne, were published, with observations thereon, by James
Tytler, chemist, in Gateshead, in the county of Durham. -- Gough's Topography.

A severe letter, addressed to Dr. Rotheram by James Tytler, Gateshead,
November 29th, 1770, in favor of Coxlodge water, is preserved in the Newcastle
Courant for Saturday, Dec. 1st, 1770. -- The same writer had addressed the
Doctor in that paper for September 29, 1770, in a letter dated on the preceding
27th, with the same severity. In this he charges the Doctor with having
prejudiced the public against Coxlodge water, what had, on a memorable
occasion at Bath, been called "throwing a toad into the spring."

Mr Richard Lambert, surgeon, at the desire of the mayor and magistrates,
published in the Newcastle Courant for November 3d, 1770, dated October 30th,
1770, the sentiments of Dr. Black, professor of chemistry at Edinburgh, on
Coxlodge water -- and at the same time the observations of Dr. Saunders,
lecturer on chemistry, at London, on the same water.


.

December 18th, 1777, there was an order of common council to empower Mr.
Richard Brown, colliery-viewer, and Mr. John Fenwick, town's surveyor, to
proceed in the necessary works for conveying the water in Spring-Gardens, at
the head of Gallow-Gate, into the town of Newcastle, for the use of the public
at large, agreeable to the particulars and estimate that had been laid before
them Common Council books.
. This water had been generously proffered to the public, by George
Stephenson, Esquire. of Elswick, in a letter addressed to the common council, who
accepted his kind offer, and are said to have expended about 500l. in preparing
aqueducts for conveying it into the town.

SUBURBS OF SAND-GATE.
THE suburbs of Sand-Gate, except some houses near the walls of the town,
appear to have escaped the fury of the civil wars Bourne's History.

In deeds of the dates of 1485, 1487 and 1491, remaining in All Saints vestry,
the name of "Sand-Gate" occurs, with mention of property in that street,
belonging to the widow of John Carlell, Esquire. who had married to her second
husband, Ralph Percy, knight: -- of a tenement also belonging to Roger
Thornton, etc.

In the book of inrolments, in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle,
"Sutton's Chair in Sand-Gate" occurs.

Ibid. 1666, "Errington's alias Maugham's Chair in Sand-Gate" occurs.

Ibid. August 30, 1 Queen Ann, "Pearson's Chair in Sand-Gate" is mentioned.

Ibid. October 15th, 1720, "Foxton's Chair in Sand-Gate" occurs.


.

In Speed's Plan of Newcastle, dated 1610, no buildings occur on the site of
Sand-Gate. This street has evidently had its name from its situation on the
sand by the river's side -- it is more crowded with inhabitants than any other
place within or without the walls of Newcastle, containing many thousand souls.
Sand-Gate is principally inhabited by those who work in the keels or lighters,
an hardy and laborious race of men, but by no means so mutinous as some writers
have too hastily chosen to style them.

On the Garth-Heads, behind Sand-Gate, is a meeting house for dissenters, of
which Mr. Robert Mar See inscriptions in the burying-ground in Sid-Gate.
and Mr. Thomas Somerville See inscriptions in the burying-ground on the
Ballast-Hills.
were ministers. The latter died January 8th, 1778.

Between the Keelmen's Hospital, above Sand-Gate and the Town's Wall, stands
the Sally-Port meeting house for dissenters, of which Mr. James Robinson, or
Robertson Ibid.

Mr. James Robinson, or Robertson, obtained a lease for 21 years, of the
corporation of Newcastle, of a piece of vacant ground to build a meeting house
upon, ne^ Sally-Port Gate, between the Keelmen's Hospital and the Town's Wall,
behind the north-west end of Sand-Gate. -- Rent annually 10 shillings. --
Common Council book.


, and after him, Mr. Baillie, were ministers.

A runner of water, called anciently the Swerle See grant to the town of
Newcastle of a ballast-shore, by Edmund Lawson, by act of parliament, 2, 3, Ed.
VI.
, at present, by corruption, "The Squirrel In the common council books, March
18th, 1657, is mentioned the "cleancing the three graites upon the Squirrell in
Sand-Gate."

Bourne, p. 154, tells us, that "about the middle of this street is an open
place, called the Squirrell, from a little brook of that name, which (...)
through it into the river Tyne, which was the ancient bounds of the town of
Newcastle."


" divides Sand-Gate, near the middle thereof, from St. Ann's, which, in
appearance, is only a continuation of one and the same street.

At the entrance into Sand-Gate is a milk-market "The Milk-Markett in Sandgate"
occurs in the common council books, April 3d, 1717. The corporation appoint a
keeper to this market. -- Ibid. March 20th, 1777, Andrew Anderson, weaver,
appointed to this office on the death of Lionel Robson.
.

St. Ann's Street has evidently had its name from a neighboring chapel,
dedicated to that Saint. See account of this as a chapel of ease to All Saints
church.
Beyond this is a ropery upon a ballast-hill, which is said to have been the
first ballast-shore without the town of Newcastle; for which purpose, and that
of erecting lime-kilns upon it, it appears to have been purchased by the mayor
and burgesses' of the lord of the manor of Byker. See in the account of the
river Tyne.


A. D. 1776, a new road for carriages, etc. leading past the Keelmen's
Hospital, and behind the streets of Sand-Gate and St. Ann's, toward the north,
was made by the commissioners and trustees of the turnpike-road leading from
Newcastle to North-Shields, having obtained a lease of the ground necessary for
that purpose, at the yearly rent of one shilling, from the common council of
Newcastle Common Council books, April 15th, 1776.
.

Before I speak of the Keelmen's Hospital, it will be necessary to give some
account of this very useful body of watermen, who work the lighters or keels on
the river Tyne, as a preface to the history of this charitable institution.

They occur as a fraternity in Newcastle, A. D. 1539 See Inspeximus of a decree
in the Star Chamber, dated May 28th, 30 Hen. VIII. where they are called "The
Craft of Keelmen." -- See also another Inspeximus of a decree, dated June 23d,
3d and 4th of Philip and Mary.
, also about the year 1556, when they appear to have been an independent
society See Inspeximus of a decree in the Star Chamber, dated May 28th, 30 Hen.
VIII. where they are called "The Craft of Keelmen." -- See also another
Inspeximus of a decree, dated June 23d, 3d and 4th of Philip and Mary.
.

A. D. 1649 Hostmen's books.
they occur as dependant upon the hostmen, and petitioning that fraternity to
provide them with a chapel and minister. Whether or not their request was
complied with does not appear; but their desire on this occasion evinces that
the religious spirit of those times had spread itself as far as this
thoughtless and hardy race, the bulk of whom do not, I fear, at present, spend
much of their time in acts of devotion.

January 4th, 1697 Hostmen's books.
, I find mention of a charitable fund belonging to this body, and for which
there was collected, January 1st, 1699, the sum of 233l. 3s. 11d.

February 17th, 1699 Ibid.
, a draught of an act for regulating the charity of the skippers and keelmen
was read, and approved by the society of hostmen.

There is an order of the hostmen's company, dated May 19th, 1699, for the
payment of four-pence each tide by every trading brother of the fraternity, to
this charitable institution, to be stopped off every keelman. This order
appears to have been made at their own request Ibid.
.

January 4th, 1700, the keelmen complained to the hostmen, that the money
collected for their charity was improperly applied Ibid.
.

July 29th, 1700, the keelmen petitioned the common council of Newcastle for a
piece of ground, whereon to erect themselves an hospital.

August 23d, 1700, the hostmen made an order that the lease for the above
ground, which was scaled and executed on the 4th of October From the lease in
the book of inrolments in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle.
following, should be taken in the name of the governor, wardens, and
fraternity of hostmen, for the use and benefit of the keelmen Common Council
books and hostmen's books.
.

The charge of this hospital, which was finished A. D. 1701 Dr. Ellison's MSS.
, amounted to above two thousand pounds: each keelman paid fourpence a tide,
and twenty persons, five for each quarter, were approved by the hostmen to be
stewards or overseers of the keelmen Hostmen's books. The following is Bourne's
account of this hospital: "Before we come to the suburbs of Sand-Gate, we must
not omit to mention the Keelmen's Hospital: it is situated some distance of the
town's wall, between the Carpenters' Town and Sand-Gate. It is a square
building, done in the form of monasteries and colleges, having its low walk
round it in imitation of cloisters. The area, in the middle of it, is about 83
feet broad, and about 97 feet long. There are upwards of fifty chambers in it.
Who it was built by, may be learned from the inscription above the entrance of
it, which is as follows: "The Keelmen's Hospital, built at their own charge,
anno Domini, 1701; Matthew White, Esquire. governor, Mr. Edward Gray, Mr. Edward
Carr, stewards of the hostmen's company for the time being, and trustees for
this hospital." I have been told that Dr. Moor, late Bishop of Ely, upon going
down the river in the town's barge, with the magistrates, observed it, and made
inquiry about it: and being told that it was built by the keelmen themselves
(every one allowing toward it a penny a tide), he said, that he had heard of
and seen many hospitals the works of rich men, but that was the first he ever
saw or heard of, which had been built by the poor. It Is a pity that the design
of its building is not thoroughly answered, but there are some miscreants who
would rather starve in sickness or old age, than not guzzle a penny in their
health and youth."
.

January 16th, 1706, there occurs before the House of Commons, a petition from
the skippers and keelmen of Newcastle upon Tyne, for leave to bring in a bill
for confirming their voluntary agreement, and for constituting the mayor of
Newcastle, for the time being, governor of their hospital Journals of the
Commons, vol. xv.
.

February 4th, 1706, the hostmen made an order to cancel the former agreement
for paying in their four-pences per tide, and to detain the money in their own
hand, till a steward should be appointed to collect them by their governor and
the mayor of Newcastle Hostmen's books.
.

July 3d, 1707, a mutiny occurs among the skippers, or keelmen, some of whom
had procured an instrument to be drawn up, in contradiction to the above
petition to parliament, subscribed by others for obtaining an act for
establishing their hospital Ibid.
.

January 4th, 1710, a petition was signed by upwards of an hundred skippers,
and presented to the hostmen, complaining that the money collected for the
hospital was partly detained, and partly wasted and misapplied Ibid.
.

May 5th, 1710, the keelmen petitioned the hostmen to apply, on their behalf,
to obtain an act of parliament for their better regulation Ibid.
.

This request was not complied with, the hostmen being of opinion that an act
of parliament for their incorporation, or the establishing of the charity
formerly paid by their consent, for the relief of such of them as were past
their labor, unless it were under "due regulation, or the government thereof
in proper hands, with sufficient power rightly to manage and apply the same,
would be an entire ruin, not only to them, the hostmen, but also to the
corporation of Newcastle, and to the coal trade in general Hostmen's books.
."

January 26th, 1712, the hostmen repealed their former order of the 19th of
May, 1699, because the money collected in pursuance thereof had not been
applied to the purposes for which it had been originally designed, but had
lately been spent in encouraging mutinies and disorders among the keelmen, to
the great prejudice of trade; and on the 13th of May, 1713, this repeal was
confirmed and signed by all the brethren Ibid.
.

March 20th, 1723, the hostmen made an order that the keelmen's charity should
be solely under their management and direction Ibid.
.

December 4th, 1728, there was an order of the same fraternity, on petition of
the keelmen, that no brother should bind any skipper, or keelman, who refused
to suffer one penny per tide to be deducted from his wages, toward the support
of their own poor Ibid.
.

May 16th, 1729, an attestation occurs in the hostmen's books, under the hands
of those who inspected the treasurer's accounts for this hospital, when a
balance appeared of 200l. 10s. 8d. The keelmen's charity was then, by common
consent, laid aside Ibid.
.

A. D. 1742, the hostmen paid the rent for the ground upon which the keelmen's
hospital is erected, to the corporation of Newcastle for forty-two years,
amounting to 2l. 2s. Ibid.
.

November 7th, 1758, the governor of the hostmen's company acquainted that
fraternity with the alarming increase of the poor-rate in All Saints parish,
said to be occasioned by the great number of poor in Sand-Gate, employed in
working the keels on the river, whereupon a committee was chosen to inquire
into the matter.

This committee, on their report, did not admit that the increase of the rate
was owing chiefly to those poor, for that since the 16th of May, 1729, no
collections had been made among the keelmen for the support of their own poor,
except some occasional ones in their societies and box-meetings.

This committee farther gave it as their opinion, that if the former practice
of collecting four-pence a tide for every keel in the river, obtained by the
consent of the skippers and keelmen, were revised and put under proper
regulations, justly divided, and consigned to honest hands, a constant and
sufficient provision might be raised Hostmen's books.
.

December 19th, 1758, the hostmen recommended it to the keelmen to make some
agreement for the better support of their own poor, and to pay one halfpenny
per chalder for each tide. And February 3d, 1759, a committee of hostmen was
chosen to consider the proper heads of a bill, after they had collected the
sense of the greatest part of the skippers and keelmen on the subject.

Nothing however appears to have been finally agreed upon on this occasion.

February 16th, 1765, the above matter was revived, and the hostmen sent
instructions to a lawyer to prepare a proper plan for the future establishment
of an hospital for the relief of the keelmen: but this design also came to
nothing Ibid.
.

November 26th, 1768, there was a meeting of persons chosen by the keelmen for
the above purposes, at which it was resolved to raise a fund, and re-establish
the hospital, for the better provision in future of their needy, impotent, and
lame poor, by deducting from the wages of every keel's crew one halfpenny for
every chaldron of coals Ibid.
.

"They say, but do not," may be applied again to these vain resolutions, for
nothing more occurs in the books of the hostmen, or appears to have been done
in this matter Newcastle Courant, November 2^th, 1768. Yet see in the Appendix
an act which was made for this good purpose, A. D. 1788.
.

Below St. Ann's chapel, and the new row of buildings called St. Ann's, after
passing by the dock-yards of several ship-builders, we cross the rivulet of
Ouse-Burn by an arch of stone, called the Glass-House-Bridge See account of
"Glass-Works."
, from the glass-houses that are near it. This bridge appears formerly to have
been made of wood There is an order of common council, March 25th, 1650,
commanding John Pigg, town's surveyor (to do something) "at the west end of the
wooden Glass-House-Bridge, to prevent cattle from going over."

"In the year 1669," says Bourne, "it was made of stone by Thomas Wrangham,
shipwright, on account of lands which the town let him." -- The passage over it
was made level and commodious, both for horse and foot, in the year 1729. --
Common Council books.


, as was also the other a little higher up the burn, where it is at present
crossed by the turnpike-road leading from Newcastle to North-Shields. Between
these, a little to the east, is a very large burying-ground, called the
Ballast-Hills burying-ground.

On a table monument at Ballast-Hills In the Newcastle Courant for January
14th, 1786, occurs the following: "In consequence of a grant given by this
corporation for enclosing the burial-ground, a committee being formed, we hear
a public subscription will be opened soon for the purpose." -- Ibid. "Burials
this year at Ballast-Hills reckoned above 400." -- Ibid. "In the several
meeting houses in this town, there appear to have been (in 1785) 120 males and
140 females baptized."

I find the following notices concerning dissenting ministers at Newcastle,
during the time of the commonwealth, etc. in the MS. Life of Barnes, p. 52.

"Dissenting ministers in Newcastle. Mr. Durant, brother to John Durant of
Canterbury, married the sister of Sir James Clavering, Bart. -- then Dr.
Pringle, a pastor for some time of a congregation there. -- Mr. Thompson was
cast out of the pa^sonage of Bottle, came to Newcastle, married a great
fortune, and kept his coach. -- There was also Mr. Owens, Mr. Wilson, and Mr.
Loma^. -- A Mr. Gilpin was also at Newcastle, where he practiced physic, and
raised a considerable estate. He afterward took the degree of M. D. at Leyden.
-- There was a design to banish the Doctor from Newcastle, but Barnes, by
persuading the magistrates of his usefulness as a physician, procured him
quietness to the end of Charles's reign. He claimed to be of Bernard Gilpin's
line, and had his scutcheon pinned at his coffin." The same authority mentions
"Mr. Pleasance as a preacher at Newcastle," also "Mr. Pell," who married Mrs.
Ellison, of a great and wealthy family, and died at Newcastle (it appears, by
St. Nicholas' register, that he was buried December 6th, School). -- The above
MS. Life of Barnes mentions also the "Bold Mr. Rothwell, commonly called the
Apostle of the North." The Lady Bows, being apprehensive of danger to him from
so surly and fierce a people, as he was going to preach amongst: Mr. Rothwell
unconcernedly replied: "If I thought I should not meet the devil there, I would
not come there. -- He and I have been at odds in other places, and I hope we
shall not agree there." Such another warrior was this gentleman, who could say
with Mr. Alderman Jurdan, who whilst he was in some trouble in the
Star Chamber, and one told him the Lord Keeper was against him, answered, "He
had a greater Lord Keeper than he -- The Lord is my Keeper, I will not be
afraid."

The following passage occurs, ibid. p. 39: "Mr. Bowls, son of Oliver Bowls,
a presbyterian divine, had been one evening visiting Sir Henry Vane: at his
taking leave, Sir Henry followed with a candle in his hand to the head of the
stairs: Mr. Bowls desired him not to give himself that trouble: Nay, says Sir
Henry, I will see you down: Indeed, Sir Henry, says Mr. Bowls, I believe you
would see us down, merrily intending that if Sir Henry Vane might hold the
candle, all ordinances, orders, and forms of worship should go down."

As does the subsequent, ibid. p. 35: "On the King's side there was roaring,
swearing, and de boist behavior, wherever their armies took up their quarters.
On the Parliament's side there was continual praying, preaching, and singing of
psalms, and many had their liv^^ saved by bullets hitting upon little pocket
bibles they carried about with them. The cavaliers, who had but few bibles
amongst them, laughed at this, but serious Christians were affected with it."
-- The following occurs ibid. p. 68: "Colonel T^tus complains of the King's
(Charles the Second's) shyness to him, for no other reason, says the Colonel,
that I can think of, but that his majesty has sometimes found a bible lying in
my chamber."


.

"In memory of the Rev. Mr. Alexander Nimmo, late minister in the Close. Obiit
Februar' 5th, 1770, in the 18th year of his ministry, aged 44.

"How vain the attempt to celebrate on stone
His character: his hearers hearts alone
Are monuments which longer shall proclaim
His praise, than marble rock or short-lived fame.
"Here also are deposited the remains of four of his children, viz. Christian,
ob. Oct. 1, 1759, aetatis 3. Margaret, ob. July 4, 1769, aetat. 8. Helen, ob.
Oct. 19, 1769, aetatis 3. Alexander, ob. Dec. 14, 1778, aetatis 16.

"Lo here mix in one grave the dust
Of father, son, and fire:
Their kindred souls, adorned with crowns,
To heavenly songs conspire."
N. B. This Mr. Nimmo was one of the seceding brethren, who declare against the
lawfulness of the burgess oath.

On an upright stone, ibid. "The burying-place of the Rev. W. Graham, minister
in the Close.

(...);"
On an upright stone, ibid.
"Here lies the body of the Rev. Mr. James Robertson, late minister of the
gospel in Sally-Port meeting house, Newcastle, who departed this life 23d
September, 1767, aged 39 years.

"Modest, yet resolute in virtue's cause,
Ambitious not of man's, but God's applause;
Swift was his race, with health and vigor blessed,
Soft was his passage to the land of rest;
His work concluded ever the day was done,
Sudden the Savior stooped, and caught him to his throne.
"Also George, his son, who died August 18th, 1767, aged sixteen weeks.

"Erected by the congregation, as a testimony of their esteem for his memory."

There are to be found, in this place, many of those "frail memorials, with
uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture decked," mentioned in Grey's celebrated
Elegy.

The subsequent may truly be said to have been "spelled by the unlettered Muse."

"When I enjoyed this mortal life,
This stone I ordered from Scotland's Fife,
To ornament the burial-place
Of me, and all my human race."
"Here lies James, of tender affection,
Here lies Isabel, of suett complexion,
Here lies Katherine, a pleasant child,
Here lies Mary, of all most mild,
Here lies Alexander, a babe most sweet,
Here lies Jannet, as the Lord saw meet."
"J. Steel, 1757.
Here lies, avarice to strife, (...) for averse.
A loving and a faithful wife."
The property which was added to the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, by
act of parliament, 2d and 3d of Edward the Sixth, c. 19, is thus described:
"All that ground, commonly called the Ballast-Shoars, i. e. the uttermost part
of the said ground and houses, at or on the river of Tyne upon the south, where
a runnel, or a little running water there called the Swerle, comes from the
north, and runs through the street of Sand-Gate, into the said river of Tine:
which runnel, or water, is the division or separation of the said county and
liberty of the town of Newcastle aforesaid, from the manor of Bykar "Nycolaus
Byker tenet duas parts de Byker et Pampdenum unum vicum junct' Novocastro in
capite de Domino Rege per serjanciam et debet recipere et custodire namia capt'
pro debit' Domini Regis in parco suo. Et cum deliberat' sunt ad vendend'
predictus Nycholaus debet esse unus eorum qui debent ea vendere ad precium
Domini Regis: et debet portare brevia Domini Regis inter Tynam et Cokett. Et
debet attach' loquelas spectant' ad coronam Domini Regis ubi serviens Domini
Regis presens not fuerit et debet esse serviens ad placit' justiciar'
itinerant' apud Novum Castrum." -- Tinmouth Chartulary at Northumberland-House.
, and from thence does extend or lead along by the said river of Tyne toward
the east, just by the said river of Tyne, stretching strait forward unto
another small river, running also into the said river of Tyne, called Owesburn,
and so over the same river of Owes, along by the said river of Tyne to the end
of the south-east dike of the ground there, commonly called St.
Lawrence-Ground, and so stretches northward along by the said dyke unto the
north end of St. Lawrence-Dyke aforesaid, and so along the north dyke of St.
Lawrence aforesaid, unto the north-west end of the same dyke of St. Lawrence,
and so along by Bykar-Hill toward the north, unto the south side of Stonyford,
and from thence extends straight toward the north-east end of a close called
Great St. Ann's Close, joining to the King's Street there, and from thence so
along by the hedge of the same Great St. Ann's Close southward, unto the hedge
of a close called Little St. Anne's Close, and so along by the same hedge
westward, upon the south part of the hedge of the closes called Durham-Close,
Baxter's Close, and Lumley-Close, every one joining one to another unto the
north end of the said little swerle, or runnell, first mentioned, and from
thence as the said little swerle runs toward the south through Sand-Gate, and
so down unto the said river of Tyne, in the same very place where the first
bounds has his first beginning."

Sir Peter's Key In a book of inrolments in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne, p. 4, there is a copy of a "lease from the mayor and
burgesses of Newcastle, to Sir Peter Riddell, Knight, of all that their
message or tenement, with the appurtenances, commonly called or known by the
name of St. Laurence, in the parish of All Saints, adjoining to the river Tyne
on the south part, on the manor or lordship of Biker on the east and north
parts, and on a certain parcel of ground called the Ballast-Shoares on the
west part -- and also the Ballast-Hills -- for 21 years -- Rent 20l. per
annum." -- Dated March 20, 5 Car. I.
, a wharf or quay so called, from having formerly been leased by the
corporation of Newcastle to Sir Peter Riddell, Knt. is by an easy corruption
commonly called "Saint Peter's Key."

A. D. 1774, a gunpowder magazine, duly licensed, according to the statute 12
George III. was erected by the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, at
Wincomb-Lee-Quay, a few miles below that town, on the north side of the river
There lies before me a tract, in 8vo, 9 pages -- entitled, "Rules for managing
the Gunpowder Magazine at Wincomb-Lee-Quay, on the north side of the river
Tyne, etc."
.

OF THE BOUNDARIES In a MS. dated 4 Car. I. I find the boundaries thus
described, viz. "by land from the runnell called the Sworle, in the east of the
town by the shore of Tine to the fields of Elswicke, and along the fields of
Elswicke to the fields of Fenham, and so in the south (quaere?) to the fields
of Kenton, and along those fields to the fields of Coxelodge, and foe toward
the east to the fields of Jesmond, and along those fields toward the south to
Barras-Bridge on the south, and from that bridge by a vennell leading toward
the east to Sandiver-Bridge, and from that bridge toward the south in and
through Sheele-Feeld to a vennell leading to Tyne on the south."
OF THE TOWN AND COUNTY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE.
THE boundaries of this town by land, which were undoubtedly fixed A set of
march, or bounder stones appear to have been put up in the year 1648. The
following order occurs in the common council books, June 21st, 1648: "Thomas
Taylor's petition for the march stones was read, and ordered that he have fifty
shillings more paid him, which in all is 7l. 10s."

It was ordered by the same body, June 20th, 1751, that in future "the bounders
of the corporation be rode in every three years," in order to preserve the
rights and property of the corporation.


when it first was made a county by itself, are described by Bourne as follows:

"From a small brook, or course of water called the Swerle, in time past in the
county of Northumberland, and now in the county of the town of Newcastle on the
east, and on the west side of the aforesaid town, along by the shore of the
water of Tyne, unto the fields of the town of Elswick in the aforesaid county
of Northumberland, by and along the fields of the town of Elswick aforesaid,
unto the fields of the town of Fenham, in the aforesaid county of
Northumberland, and so toward the north, unto the fields of the town of
Kenton, in the aforesaid county of Northumberland, and along by those fields
unto the town of Coxlodge, in the aforesaid county of Northumberland, and so
toward the east of the fields of Jesmond in the aforesaid county, and by and
along the same fields of Jesmond toward the south, unto a certain bridge
called Barras-Bridge, in the aforesaid county of Newcastle upon Tyne, and from
the same bridge, in and through a certain lane in the aforesaid counties of
Northumberland and Newcastle leading toward the east, to another bridge called
Sandiver-Bridge, in the aforesaid county of Northumberland, and from the same
bridge toward the south, in and through a certain field called Sheild-Field,
in the aforesaid counties of Northumberland and Newcastle, unto a certain lane
or street in the same county, leading to the aforesaid water or river of Tyne."

For an account of the additional boundaries by the purchase of certain lands
on the east of Newcastle, tempore Ed. VI. see before under "Suburbs of
Sand-Gate."

The boundaries of the jurisdiction, and of the property of the town of
Newcastle, are two distinct considerations. It is observable, that round the
moor the march-stones, i. e. boundary-stones, are placed a little within the
hedge that separates the grounds of other proprietors from those of the town of
Newcastle.

GATESHEAD IN THE COUNTY OF DURHAM.
BID, in his Church History, mentions a place which he calls "Caprae Caput,"
which has generally been supposed to mean Gateshead -- quasi the goat's head,
from the Romans having an inn Hearne, in the preface to his Collection of
curious Discourses, p. 28, 29, speaking of Antoninus' "ad Ansam," has these
words: "Though this place grew to be eminent and large at last, yet at first it
was only one diversorium, or inn, on which there was the sign of the Ansa, by
which name, for that reason, the whole station itself was called afterward, a
thing not uncommon to several other places, both in ancient as well as more
modern times."

Dr. Stukeley, in his Iter Boreale, p. 69, speaking of Gateshead, says, "I
guess this was a fortified town in the times of the Romans, where a ferry was
for passage northward; but by reason of the buildings no traces of it are left.
I saw several Roman stones here, the recipient parts of their hand-mills."

The doctor supposed that Gateshead was the Gabrocentum of the Notitia, where
the second cohort of the Thracians were in garrison, as its name in British
imports "goat's head, I suppose, from the sign of some inn." He adds, "A goat's
head still stands upon the sign of the Golden Lion."

"Caput loci," according to Kennet's Glossary to his Parochial Antiquities,
signifies the end of a place -- "ad caput villae," at the end of the town.
Quaere, May not "Gatesheved" mean barely "the end of the road?" there having
been discovered no traces of a Roman road carried northwards from Newcastle.

If Bid confounded "gate," via, with "goat," capra, which was anciently, and
is still, in the vulgar language of the north, pronounced "gate," he would
naturally latinize it by "caprae caput," instead of "viae caput." It is
observable, that in the dialect of the common people in the north of England,
the way leading through a town is still called "the Town-Gate."


at this place with such a sign, one of the great military roads ending here
before the Emperor Hadrian had erected his bridge, and connected it with the
station of Pons Aelii, on the opposite bank of the Tyne.

In the year 1068 a battle was fought between William the Conqueror in person,
and Edgar Etheling, heir to the crown of Scotland, in conjunction with Malcolm,
King of Scots, and some Danish pirates, upon the common adjoining to this
place, called Gateshead Fell. In this conflict the latter were overthrown: the
Conqueror having afterward recovered the town, now called Newcastle, laid it
almost level with the ground, to prevent in future its becoming a place of
refuge to his enemies Historical Events. -- From Warburton's MS. Collections,
in the possession of his Grace the Duke of Northumberland.

In a charter of confirmation by King Henry the Second to the nuns of
Newcastle, they occur as having two shillings (of annual rent) out of Gateshead.


.

Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, appears to have granted, in the year 1164,
liberty of forestage to the burgesses of Gateshead The substance of this grant
is, that from Whitsunday to Martinmas they shall pay 2d for each cart that
shall go to the forest, and 2d for each horse, and for a man fishing one
farthing. Forbidden things to be reserved. -- No forester, within the limits
appointed between the bishop's forest and the borough, to lay hands upon any
burgess or inhabitant, or upon his cart or cattle, to stop him, whether with
wood, timber, or any other thing. Contentions between the forester and
burgesses to be determined, if possible, in the borough, if not, to be referred
to the bishop. The cattle of a burgess not to be taken out of the borough, but
to be replevied there, if the owners choose. The burgesses to have grass,
rushes, fellger (I suppose, "gear, or stuff, from the fell"), and heath for
their own use, but not to sell any to others. Any burgess digging turf for his
own fire, if he have no cart of his own, to pay 2d for each borrowed one. Any
burgess to give his wood to whom he pleases, provided the person to whom he
gives it lives on this (the Durham) side of Tyne, and it be done with no unfair
view; but he is not to sell any without the forester's license. The goods of
none coming within the limits aforesaid, are to be disturbed by the forester.
Each burgess of Gateshead to have the same liberty of his burgage, that the
burgesses of Newcastle have. A burgess of Gateshead, or his goods, going into
any part of the bishop's land, to have the peace of God and St. Cuthbert, and
all persons are forbidden to hurt or exact any thing of them. There was granted
to them at the same time common pasturage, common portory to their houses, and
all the usual customs which they could have of Saltwell-Meadows."
.

The Boldon-Book, the Doomsday-Book of the diocese of Durham, which was begun
by the above Hugh Pudsey, A. D. 1183, mentions possessions of the Bishop of
Durham in Gateshead "Gatesheved, cum burg' molendin' piscar' et furn' et cum
tribus partibus terre arabilis de eadem villa, reddit 60 marc' Quarta pars
arabilis cum essarto que Dominus Episcopus fieri fecit et prata sunt in manu
Domini Episcopi cum incremento 2 carrucarum. Terra Osmundi reddit 22s. 6d." --
Gutch's Collectanea Curiosa, vol. ii. p. 89.
.

In the year 1226 mention occurs of an hospital There is said to have been a
monastery at Gateshead, A. D. 653, if the place called in Bede's Church History
"Caprae Caput," must be understood to mean Gateshead, of which one Uttanus was
then abbot: but of the foundation, continuance, and destruction of this very
ancient house, no other memorials have been preserved. Tanner, in his Notitia
Monastica, cites on this occasion Bid, lib. iii. cap. 21. See also Leland's
Collectanea, vol. ii. p. 140. "Uttan presbyter' inlustris et abbatis monasterii
quod vocatur ad Caprae Caput." Sic Beda scribit: addit autem annotator ejus
Doctor Smith in loco: "Caprae Caput hodie Gateshead ubi nulla remanent antiqui
monasterii Uttani vestigia. Recentioris quidem pulcherrimam videmus capellam,
vix adhuc ruinis succumbentem. Traditio est cellam fuisse sanctimonialium
Novocastrensium, licet ejus historiam apud auctores vix inveneris." The place
which Dr. Smith alludes to, and which still remains, I take to have been the
chapel of the hospital of the Trinity, if it was not the original chapel of
that of St. Edmund. The present chapel of St. Edmund's hospital See Plate,
entitled "Statues of the (...) Charles II. and Jame^ (...).
, which is situated half a mile farther to the south, is of the very poorest
style of architecture, and probably was erected after the obtaining of King
James's charter to refound the hospital. St. Edmund's hospital, as shown
before, was among the possessions of the nuns of Newcastle, and thence the
tradition mentioned by Doctor Smith may have had its rise. This beautiful old
chapel, from the style of its architecture, cannot, I should suppose, be older
than the reign of King Henry the Third: and it is observable, that the long
^lips of windows are similar to those at the end of the church of Tinmouth
monastery, and those in the Temple church in London.

"It stands," says Gross, who has given ^^view of it, "on the east, or right
hand side of the High Street, leading to Newcastle-Bridge, from which it is
distant about half a mile. The west end of it is handsomely ornamented with a
number of pointed arche^ and niches, though the inside seems remarkably plain.
It consists of a single aisle, 21 paces broad by 26 long. Some steps at the
east end, leading to the altar, are still remaining: near them is a grave
stone, on which is cut a cross, similar to that in the jamb of the church door
at Jarrow: it has also the marks of an inlaid border about it, but the brass is
gone. The arches of the windows (except those of the east and west ends, which
are entirely pointed) are round within, and pointed on the outside. A
remarkable ornament is mounted on its east end, on a slender rod, being a small
circle chequered by several bars crossing each other at right angles."

This author is mistaken in the account he gives of this place having been set
on fire. The Catholic chapel, which, out of a misguided zeal, was set on fire
on that occasion, was in a mansion house adjoining to this ruinous chapel, the
ruins of which mansion house are seen in his view. -- He very justly observes,
that the entrance, which is through a low, square, stone gate, decorated with
pilasters, is seemingly of modern construction. -- The site of the house, he
adds, with its offices and gardens, occupied about two acres and a half of
land. -- Toward the east end of it are the ruins of a mansion, which, from the
style of its architecture, seems to have been built since the dissolution of
the monastery, perhaps out of its materials. This probably was Mr. Riddle's
house, alluded to by Bourne. -- The gateway is probably of the same age. Gross
also confounds the very ancient monastery of Uttan and St. Edmund's hospital
with this ruin. The former undoubtedly perished in those depredations of the
Barbarians, when all the religious houses in Northumberland were destroyed.


at Gateshead, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, for the maintenance of a chaplain
and three poor men, to which one Henry de Ferlington gave a farm at Kyhoe, in
the county of Durham, in frankalmoigne See Madox's Formulare Anglicanum, p. 58,
number. 113.
. Gerard, son of Geve "Universis sancte matris ecclesie filiis hoc scriptum
visuris aut audituris Baldewinus cum capite salutem. Noverit universitas vestra
me caritatis intuitu concessisse and dedisse et hac presenti carta confirmasie
pro salvacione anime me and pro salvatione animarum heredum meorum Deo et
hospitali Sancte Trinitatis de Gatesheved et Gerardo filio Geve procuratori
ipsius hospitalis et ceteris fratribus ibidem Deo servientibus and servituris
in liberam puram et perpetuam elemosinam septemdecim acras terre simul jacentes
in australi part in illa cultura que vocatur Alrisburne habendas and tenendas
cum communi pastura et omnibus aliis ayframentis et libertatibus ad ipsam
terram pertinentibus libere et quiet reddendo annuatim ponti de Tyne octo
denat' imperpetuum scilicet quatuor denar' ad festum Sancti Martini et quatuor
denat' ad Pentecosten pro omnibus serviciis et secularibus exactionibus et ego
Baldewinus and heredes mei hanc nostram elemosinam Deo et hospitali Sancte
Trinitatis de Gatesheved and fratribus ibidem Deo servientibus et servituris
imperpetuum contra omnes gentes defendemus et warrantizabimus Hiis testibus
Osmundo filio Hamonis Roberto de Yolton, Ricardo de Akeselet Ada de Merleye
Philippo de Geldeford Gerardo de Quikeham Willielmo filio ejus, Springaldo,
Edmundo Taliatore Lamberto, Regin' de Len' Rogero de London Simone fil' Uctred^
Damele sil' Nichol' Malgero Clerico Johanne Clerico et multis aliis." From the
original -- Seal remaining -- green wax -- Inscript. "Bald' Sigil." --
, occurs as procurator of this hospital, as Baldwin cum capite, Alice de
Quickham Universis Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit Alic'
de Quicham salutem. Noverit universitas vestra me in viduitate et libera
potestate mea dedisse, concessisse et presenti carta confirmasse hospitali
Sancte Trinitatis in burgo de Gateshd. totam terram in territorio de Quicham
que me contingebat jure hereditario de tenemento quod fuit Baldwini cum capite
quondam patris mei exceptis tribus acris terre ejusdem tenementi quas prius
dederit Alienor' sorori me et eadem Alienor in viduitate sua per assensum meum
prenominato hospitali de Gatesh. -- per cartam suam dederat et confirmaverat.
Istam autem donacionem and concessionem and confirmacionem feci predicto
hospitali pro quatuor marc' argenti quas executores Ade de Merley mihi dederunt
de testamento ejusdem Ade in necessitate mea. Habend' et tenend' capellano
capelle Sancte Trinitatis deservienti et family in hospitali predicto
existenti in liberam puram et perpetuam elemosinam et quietam ab omni servicio
et demanda seculari et sciend' est quod ego et Alienor soror mea prenominat'
unum toftum juxta cimeterium de Quicham quod pertinere solebat ad predictam
terram penes nos et heredes nostros retinuimus imperpetuum pro quo reddemus et
acquietabimus terram predictam de una libra piperis singulis annis versus
episcopos Durelm' ad festum Sancti Cuthberti in Septembri et ut hec mea donacio
and concessio firma and stabil' sit imperpetuum presentem cartam figilli mei
appositione roboravi Hiis testibus Reginald' vicar' de Quicham Ada de Bradel
Laur' de Ponthope Rob' et Johan' de Merley Phil' de Geldeford Willielmo de
Birthley Rob' de Coggishall Johanne de Ravenesworth Johanne de Coquina Elgi
Locker Hen' Gathegang Gilb' Gathegang Willie^mo Belle de Gat^^h' et aliis." --
Seal green wax, representing a flower -- Inscription, "S. Alicie de......" From
the original.
and Eleanor "Omnibus Christi fidelibus, etc. Alienor quondam uxor Symonis de
Lamford salutem in Domino Noverit universitas vestra me in vi^uitate et libera
potestate mea dedisle concessisse et pres^nti carta confirmasse hospitali
Sancte Trinitatis in Gatesh' totam terram in territorio de Quicham que me
contingebat jure hereditario de tenemento quod fuit Baldwini cum capite quendam
patris mei et preterea tres acras ibidem quas h^bui de dono Ali^i^ ^orotis me
de medietate ejusdem tenementi ipsam jure hereditario contingente pro quinque
marc' argenti quas executores Ade de Merley mihi in magna necessitate mea
dederunt de testamento ipsius Ade habend' et tenend' capellano capelle Sancte
Trinitatis deservienti et family in hospitali predicto existenti in liberam
pu^am et perpetuam elemosinam et quietam ab omnio servicio et demanda seculari
et sciendum est quod ego et Alicia so^o^ mea prenominat' unum t^stum juxta
cimete^ium de Quicham quod pertinere solebat ad terram prenominatam penes no^
et heredes nostros retinuimus imperpetuum pro quo reddemus et acquietabimus
terram predictam de una libra piperis singulis annis versus episcopos Dunelm'
ad festum Sancti Cuthberti in Septembri et ut hec mea donacio and concessio
firma et stabil' sit in perpetuum presens scriptum sigilli mei appositione
roboravi. Hiis testibus Reginaldo vicar' de Quicham Ada de Bradel Laur' de
Ponthope Rob' et Johanne de Merley Phil' de Geldeford Willielmo de Birthley
Rob' de Cogeshall Johanne de Ravenesworth Johanne de Coquina Elgi Loker Henr'
Gathegang Gilb' Gatheg' Willielmo Belle de Gatesh' et aliis." -- Seal -- a star
-- Inscription, "Sig. Alienor' de......." From the original.
, widow of Simon de Lamford, do as ancient benefactors.

On the foundation of St. Edmund's hospital, in Gateshead, it appeared that so
slender provision had been made for the brethren of this hospital of the
Trinity, that they lived neither like seculars nor religious, for which reason,
Nicholas Farnham, Bishop of Durham, to evince how good and agreeable it was for
brethren to dwell together, united them with those of St. Edmund, having first
obtained their own consent, with that of the prior and convent of Durham. The
hospital dedicated to St. Edmund and St. Cuthbert, in Gateshead, was founded in
the year 1248 See Bourne's History of Newcastle.
, by Nicholas Farnham, Bishop of Durham "Omnibus presens scriptum visuris vel
audituris Bertramus prior and conventus Dunelmensis ecclesie salutem eternam in
Domino Noveritis nos cartam venerabilis patris nostri Domini Nicholai Dei
gratia Dunelmensis Episcopi in hec verba inspexisse: omnibus sancte matris
ecclesie filiis ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit Nicholaus Dei gratia
Dunelmensis Episcopus salutem in Domino sempiternam Etsi ascripti obsequiis
Creatoris ipsius proferre lauds in pace deberent et quiet inimicus tamen qui
huic adversatur nomini Zizaniam non cessans seminare per ministros suos et
excrescentem malitiam secularem ad hoc sedule sui vires exponit ingenii ut quod
ad laudem Dei et divini nominis cultum fidelium devotio ordinavit ad nichilum
redigat and irremediabili confusione perfundat. Hujus nos astute calliditati
occurrere cupientes remedio salutari ne incertus aut inordinatus vivendi modus
sempiternum inducat horrorem statuimus et ordinavimus ut in capella quam apud
Gatesheved ad honorem Domini nostri Jesu Christi in nomine beati Edmundi
confessoris et gloriosi pontificis Cuthberti fundavimus dedicavimus et
dotavimus pro salute animo nostre predecessorum and successorum nostrorum
quatuor sacerdotes bone vite et conversationis honest sint perpetuis
temporibus ministrantes, viz. Gilbertus cui custodiam contulimus capelle
antedicte et omnium spectantium ad eandem quamdiu vixit cum tribus aliis
sacerdotibus eidem Gilberto associandis tali videlicet adjuncto tenore ut
diebus singulis in perpetuum matutinas et ceteras horas canonicas simul cantent
ac per unum sacerdotem "de die" per alium "de beata Virgin" per quartum vero
pro anima nostra predecessorum et successorum nostrorum et omnium fidelium
defunctorum "quatuor miss" quotidie celebrentur cum "commendatione, placebo et
dirige" predicti vero quatuor sacerdotes in eadem mensa comedent et in eadem
camera quiescent nisi alicujus infirmitas ad tempus inter alios egrotum manner
non permittat predicti vero tres sacerdotes predicto Gilberto magistro domus et
suis successoribus erunt obedientes et ab eo singillatim viginti solidos
sterlingorum una cum mensa honorabili percipient annuatim ad providendum sibi
in vestibus et aliis necessariis. Si quis illorum diabolico instinctu
incontinens vagabundus aut alias vivens inordinate et per magistrum qui pro
tempore fuerit monitus in sua militia perduraverit per eundem magistrum absque
requisitione superioris amoveatur quo amoto sine more dispendio alius sacerdos
substituatur. Ad hec quoniam capelle Sancte Trinitatis et ad sustentationem
ibidem neque seculariter neque religiose viventium assignata suit sustentacio
modica et exilis, ut intelligatur quam bonum sit et jucundum habitare fratres
in unum de consensu prioris and conventus Dunelmensis et illorum qui ibidem
habitare consueverunt, capellam predictam cum suis pertinentiis capelle
prenominate quam fundavimus pontificali auctoritate consolidavimus. Ordinavimus
etiam et statuimus ut Episcopi Dunelmenses qui pro tempore fuerint sint patroni
advocati and defensores predicti loci et omnium spectantium ad eundem et quod
per ipsos magistri perpetuis temporibus instituantur presbyteri tamen et suo
perpetuo in loco predicto residentes. Si tamen magister aliquis sive custos
institutus in regimine domus negligens fuerit aut alias inutilis inveniatur,
per Episcopum Dunelmensem qui pro tempore fuerit amoveatur et idoneus sine mora
regimini domus preficiatur. Si vero custodum aliquis qui predicte domui
laudabiliter prefuerit tantam debilitatem morbo incidat vel etate quod propter
ipsius impotentiam alius ibidem preficiatur: amotus a regimine ex causa honesta
de bonis domus in vitae necessariis sustentetur dum tamen aliunde non habeat
unde possit sustentari: et hoc idem de sacerdotibus observetur qui casus
inciderint antedictos. Si autem bona ad sustentacionem prelibatam a nobis
assignata aut pia fidelium consideratione predicto loco assignanda ad uberiora
bona facienda suffecerint in elemosinis et operibus misericordie, qui regimini
domus deputatus fuerit talit^^ studeat erogare quod in districti judicii
examine ut fidelis dispensator a judice supremo cum electis ex fructu bonorum
operum vitam capiat sempiternam. Nulli ergo hominum liceat hanc ordinationem
nostram infringere vel ei ausu temerario contraire Siquis autem hoc attemptare
presumpserit indignationem omnipotentis Dei et sancte genetricis ejusdem et
sanctorum confessorum Eadmundi and Cuthberti et omnium sanctorum noverit se
in^ursurum et ad majorem hujus rei securitatem presens scriptum ^igilli nostri
impressione fecimus, roborari. Hiis testibus Dominis Johanne de Rumesey
Willielmo de Blockleye Philippo de Sancta Elena Magistris Odone de Kylkim Petro
de Depham Willielmo de Manfeld Johanne le Gras Roberto de Glascu Martino de
Sancta Cruce Roberto de Sancto Albano Ricardo de Farnham Rogero de Wynton
capellano Johanne Gyllet, Waltero de S^l^by Willielmo de Sadberg Ricardo Basset
et aliis Dat' apud Kyppeyar tricesimo die Januarii anno Domini millesimo
ducentesimo quadragesimo octavo pontificis autem nostri anno octavo. Nos igitur
dictam cartam dicti venerabilis patris nostri domini N.... Dei gratia
Dunelmensis Episcopi gratam et ratam habentes ipsam sigilli nostri munimine
duximus confirmandam Test capitulo nostro." -- From the original ordination
remaining in the Augmentation-Office -- part of the bishop's seal remaining,
that of the prior and chapter almost entire.

Foundation charter of St. Edmund's hospital, by N. Farnham, bishop, confirmed
by the prior and chapter.

"Omnibus presens scriptum visuris vel audituris Bertramus prior et conventus
Dunelmensis ecclesiae aeternam in Domino salutem: Noveritis nos cartam
venerabilis patris nostri D. Nicholai Dei gratia Dunelmensis Episcopi in hec
verba inspexisse: omnibus Christi fidelibus presentem cartam inspecturis vel
audituris Nicholaus Dei gratia Dunelmensis Episcopus aeternam in Domino
salutem. Sciatis nos de assensu capituli nostri concessisse dedisse et hac
carta nostra confirmasse Deo et beato Edmundo confessori et quatuor capellanis
in capella quam construximus apud Gatesheved in honorem ejusdem, Deo ibidem in
perpetuum servituris totam villam de Ulkistan tam in dominicis quam in
servitiis villanis et eorum sequelis cum bosco et molendino cum secta et soca
et cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis sine aliquo retinemento. Dedimus autem
et concessimus eisdem capellanis et successoribus suis in perpetuum totum vetus
dominium de Gatesheved cum omnibus pertinentiis suis et cum boskello quod
vocatur Benchelm continente quadraginta et tres acras per istas divisas (viz.)
inter terram arabilem S. Trinitatis et viam quae ducit usque Farnacres
tendentem ad pratum Dedimus et concessimus eisdem capellanis et eorum
successoribus in perpetuum viginti et novem acras terrae de eschaeta nostra cum
pertinentiis suis in Aluresacyres habendas and tenendas Deo and beato Edmundo
confessori et dictis capellanis et eorum successoribus in perpetuum de nobis et
successoribus nostris in liberam puram et perpetuam elemosinam sicut aliqua
elemosina liberius vel quietius dari potest vel teneri: sed ne ista nostra
collatio in tam pios usus facta speciem alienationis continere videatur in
compensationem tam modici damni subscriptae ecclesiae Dunelmensi reversu^^ quae
quidem propriis facultatibus et industriis adquisivimus eidem ecclesiae nostrae
in perpetuum adsig^avimus, viz. sexdecim acras terrae cum pertinentiis in
Steindrop una cum advocatione ecclesiae ejusdem et sexdecim acras terrae cum
pertinentiis in Winston una cum advocatione ecclesiae ejusdem. Item quinque
bovatas terrae cum pertinentiis in Thymelby cum bosco et cum homagio and
servitio Willielmi de Kolevile et heredum suorum in eadem in perpetuum. Item
triginta et quinque acras terrae cum pertinentiis in Creyk emptas de Roberto de
Raskelf. Item totam villam de Herdwyck juxta Stockton quam emerimus de G^lfrido
de Herdwyck excepto valor excambii quod ei fecimus in dominio nostro de
Bradewood. Item quadraginta marcas annuas de ecclesiis venerabilis fratris
Domini Sylvestri Karleolensis Episcopi et prioris ejusdem in Northumbria toto
tempore ipsius episcopi et post ejus cessionem vel decessum sexaginta marcas.
Item advocationem ecclesiae de Stamfordham in Northumbria. Quare volumus et
firmiter precipimus quod praedicti capellani et eorum successores qui pro
tempore fuerint totam predictam villam de Ulkistan tam in dominicis quam in
servitiis villanis et eorum sequelis cum bosco et cum molendino cum secta et
soka, et cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis et totum vetus dominium de
Gatesheved cum omnibus pertinentiis suis et cum praefato boskello quod vocatur
Benchelm et etiam praedictas viginti et novem acras terrae cum pertinentiis in
Alursacress habeant et retineant in liberam puram et perpetuam elemosinam in
omnibus et per omnia sicut praedictum est in perpetuum. In cujus rei
testimonium presenti scripto sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi. Testibus Dominis
et Magistris Johanne de Rumesby, Philippo de S. Helena Willielmo de Blokelepo
Odone de Kyllenny Willielmo de Hurtheworth Johanne Forti Galfrido de Forseth
Marco de Sancta Cruce Ricardo de Farnham Roberto de Sancto Albano Johanne le
Grass, Roberto de Bokynham, Rogero de Ponte Curvo Johanne Cilet Waltero Seilby
Rogero de Winton capellano Henrico de Sumero Willielmo de Sadberge Ricardo
Basseth Willielmo de Karlawe Radulpho Fermin clerico et multis aliis.

Nos ergo dictam cartam dicti venerabilis patris nostri Domini Nicholai Dei
gratia Dunelmensis Episcopi ratam et gratam in omnibus habentes ipsam sigilli
nostri munimine duximus confirmandum. (Test capitulo nostro.) From a printed
copy in Allan's Collections.


.

It was originally intended for four chaplains or priests, who were to eat at
the same table, and sleep in the same chamber, one whereof was to be master,
from whom the other three were to receive 20 shillings annually. One Gilbert
was the first master. The bishop gave them the whole village of Ulkistan, the
old lordship of Gateshead, with the wood of Bencham and twenty-nine acres of
land, that had eschaeted to the founder at a place called Alluresacyres, alias
Huseacyers, in frankalmoigne, in lieu of all which he granted other places to
the church of Durham, the bishops whereof he appointed to be perpetual patrons.

Hugh de Segrave occurs as a very early master or keeper In a very old deed
remaining in the Augmentation-Office, witnessed among others by "Laurentio de
Linze tunc vicecomite Dunelm." -- "Johannes dictus de Coquina burgensis de
Gatisheved" gives land "Deo et beato Eadmundo confessori de Gatisheved et
Hugoni de Segrave capelle dicti beati Eadmundi confessori custodi." -- The
property is described as being situated opposite "venelle que dicitur
Waldeschere," in Gateshead.
.

In the year 1292, St. Edmund's hospital, after the deduction of necessary
expenses, appears to have had a clear yearly revenue of 18l. "Taxatio bonorum
temporalium Domini Dunelm' Episcopi et religios' omni' ejusdem Dunelm' dioc'
fact' anno Domini 12^^ per m^gist^' etc. -- Hospital de Gatisheved in omnibus
bonis temporalibus ultra expens' necessar^^^ 18l." -- From a MS. in the
Exchequer.

I found the following also ibid. "Nova taxatio bo^o^' temporal' et spiritual'
cleri Episc' Dunolm' facta anno regni Regis E. fil' Regis ^. undecimo per breve
Regis. -- Hospit^l' Sancti Edmundi archiepiscopi de Gatesheved in temporal' 5
mat^'."




A. D. 1316, John de Denton occurs as master of St. Edmund's hospital A deed
lies before me with one seal remaining. -- "Memorandum quod undecimo kalend'
Octobris anno Domini millesimo tricentesimo sextodecimo (1316) in capella
Sancti Edmundi confessoris de Gatesheved probato testamento Domini Johannis de
Coquina capellani defuncti coram nobis officiali Domini Dunolm' Episcopi etc.
quaedam clausula tenoris subsequentis. -- Item do et lego domui Sancte
Trinitatis and Sancti Edmundi confessoris dimidiam marcam annui redditus," etc.
-- Joh. de Denton magister dicti hospitalis occurs -- "Testibus Johanne
Gategang Thom' Vau' Thom' de Bowys Willielmo Brunesward Willielmo de Alverton
Ricardo Pykering burgensibus de Gatesheved et aliis."
.

August 20th, 1353, John de Apilby, a lawyer, was appointed master of this
hospital Bourne's History.

There is an original bull of Pope Urban to this hospital, of which Adam de
Fenrother was then rector, remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"Urbanus Episcopus servus servorum Dei dilecto filio archidiacono Northumbrie
in ecclesia Dunelm' salutem et apostolicam benedictionem. Significavit nobis
dilectus filius Adam de Fenrother rector capelle Sancti Edmundi de Gatesheved
Dunelm' dioc' quod nonnulli iniquitatis filii quos prorsus ignorant decimas
redditus census legata terra domos prata nemora stagna molendinorum et nonnulla
alia bona ad ipsam capellam spectancia temere et maliciose occultare et occulte
detinere presumunt non curantes ea prefato rectori exhibere in animarum suarum
grave periculum et ipsorum rectoris et capelle non modicum detrimentum super
quo idem rector apostolice sedis remedium imploravit Quocirca discretioni
vestre per apostolica scripta mandamus omnes hujusmodi occultos detentores
decimar' reddituum censuum et aliorum bonorum predictorum ex part nostra
public in ecclesiis coram populo per te vel alium moneas ut infra competentem
terminum quem eis prefixeris ea prefato rectori a se debita restituant and
revelent ac de ipsis plenam et debitam satisfaccionem impendant et si id non
adimpleverint infra alium terminum competentem quem eis ad hoc peremptory
duxeris prefigendum extunc in eos generalem excommunicationis sententiam
proferas et eam facias ubi et quomodo expediti videris usque ad satisfaccionem
condignam solemniter publicari. Dat' Viterbii 2 id. Maii pontificatus nostri
anno septimo." Bulla avulsa.


.

On the Saturday next after St. Andrew's day, 1361, at the Halmot Pleas at
Chester-le-street, John Apilby, master of this hospital, occurs, as paying the
sum of ten shillings for a certain road through the bishop's park, at
Gateshead, from the manor of Frere-Goose to the said hospital, while he should
continue master Randall's MSS.
.

October 6th, 1378, Skirlaw, Bishop of Durham, granted to William de
Brantyngham, then master, three cottages, which had eschaeted to the sea of
Durham. "Brethren, sisters and paupers" are mentioned as being at that time in
this hospital Randall's MSS.
.

At an inquisition held on the Monday after the feast of St. George, 1391, at
Durham, before Marmaduke de Lomley, the bishop's eschaetor, it appeared that
Isabel, relict of John de Birtley, had died seized, amongst other things, of a
message, and sixty acres of land, at Kyoleche, held of the master of this
hospital, by the service of a rose, on the nativity of St. John Baptist,
annually, which was worth besides, 14 shillings per annum Ibid.
.

December 3d, 1399, Reginald Porter, vicar of Pittington, was appointed by
Walter Skirlaw, Bishop of Durham, to the mastership of this hospital Ibid.
.

July 8th, 1391, William Bower of Gateshead, and John Bower, chaplain,
acknowledged, in the chancery court of Durham, that they were indebted in the
sum of 20l. to the bishop of that see, to be paid on the Christmas day
following, on failure of which payment, the bishop to make seizure of their
lands, etc. upon condition that, if the bishop would have his whole rent, and
the other profits of the chantry of Saint Trinity, within the hospital of St.
Edmund of Gateshead, since the sequestration made by John Coker, the said
William and John should pay it to the bishop within eight days after the
receipt of a monition, and that then this resignation should be null and void,
but otherwise to remain in full effect Ibid. There was an inquisition taken at
Durham on Monday June 1^th, 143^, concerning an acre of land in Gateshead, held
under the chantry of the Holy Trinity, in St Edmund's chapel. This (...) called
Belesacre, and lay between the land of John King, chaplain, and keeper of the
chantry aforesaid, and butted toward the west end upon the king's highway,
toward a certain cross standing on that way, at the head of Gateshead. --
Randall's MSS.
.

George Radclyfe was master here before the year 1435 Bourne sub anno. On the
day of the purification of the Virgin Mary, 1436, an indenture was made between
John Heyworth, master of this hospital, and the burgesses of the town of
Gateshead, concerning the meadows of the said hospital, called Quicking-Croft
and Milne-Flat, and the Leys on each side of Bencham, Langflatt, South-Felde,
Wind-Myln-Hill, and Stany-Flat. -- Communicated by Mr. Thorp, master, October
17th, 1782.
.

March 12th, 1435, the mastership of this hospital was granted to John
Heyworth, vicar of St. Nicholas in Newcastle, on the resignation of G. Radclyfe
Bourne sub anno. On the day of the purification of the Virgin Mary, 1436, an
indenture was made between John Heyworth, master of this hospital, and the
burgesses of the town of Gateshead, concerning the meadows of the said
hospital, called Quicking-Croft and Milne-Flat, and the Leys on each side of
Bencham, Langflatt, South-Felde, Wind-Myln-Hill, and Stany-Flat. --
Communicated by Mr. Thorp, master, October 17th, 1782.
.

May, 1441, Thomas Kirkeby occurs as master of this hospital Randall's MSS. --
May, 1441, Bishop Neville granted a way-leave to Thomas Kirkeby, master of this
hospital, for the purpose of carrying sea-coals, wrought out of the hospital
lands, to the river Tyne.
.

October 7th, 1448, Bishop Neville appropriated this hospital, with all its
revenues, to the prioress and convent of St. Bartholomew in Newcastle, on
account of their poverty; they finding two priests to officiate in the chapel
of the hospital.

May 1st, 1449, William Hilderskelfe, master of this hospital, granted it as
above, and the bishop aforesaid confirmed the master's grant October 7th, 1449.
See the history of that nunnery.

A recognition preserved in the rolls of Bishop Booth sets forth, that,
February 10th, 1468, J. Blenkinsop, of Chester, yeoman, and William Billy, of
the same, yeoman, came before the bishop and acknowledged they owed him 20l.
etc. The condition of this recognition was such, that if John Hylton, of
Gateshead, chaplain, should without fraud enter his body in Durham gaol, under
the custody of the jailer, and remain there for ten pounds (owing to the
bishop), for a certain way held for carrying sea-coals from the hospital of St.
Edmund at Gateshead, to the bishop's staith there, with a certain part of the
same staith, etc. then the present recognition to be null and void, but
otherwise to remain in full force and virtue Ibid.
.

March 9th, 1543, John Hochonson, clerk, was instituted chaplain of the chantry
of the Holy Trinity in the chapel of this hospital ibid.

It appears from the old court-rolls remaining in the Augmentation-Office,
(dates 18 Ed. IV. -- 17 Hen. VIII. etc.) that the courts of the prioress and
nuns of St. Bartholomew, in Newcastle upon Tyne, were held by their steward (I
suppose for their property in Gateshead), in the chapel of St. Edmund's
hospital. Thomas Tempest occurs as their steward tempore Hen. VIII.


.

January 16th, 1544, Anthony Bellasis occurs as master of St. Edmund's hospital
Allan's account of Sherbourn hospital.
. The following account of this hospital is taken from a certificate of
colleges and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. A. D. 1546,
remaining in the Augmentation-Office:

"The hospitalle of St. Edmund in the parish of Gatishedde was founded by the
predecessors of the bushoppes of Durham by report but to what intent or
purpose we know not for we have not seen the foundation thereof. Yearly value
109s. 4d. It appears from the title page or blank leaf of Bishop Tunstal's
Register, A. D. 1530, that Gateshead hospital was then valued at 3l. true
value. -- Allan's MSS.

A. D. 1535, this house was valued as having in yearly revenues 109l. 4s. 4d.
according to Speed. -- Dugdale makes its annual income 5l. 9s. 4d. and the MS.
valorum 6l. 2s. 4d. Tanner tells us that the only way he knows to reconcile the
great difference between these two valuations, is to suppose it written
originally 109s. 4d. and that Speed's transcriber mistook and put pounds for
shillings.


-- value according to this survey 8l. as apereth by a rentall whereof is paid
out for the Kinge's majesty's tenthes 12s. 3d. and remains clerly 7l. 7s. 9d.
which Doctor Bellases now master of the same has toward his lyvyng and
gives out of the same four marks by the year to a priest to say mass there
twyse in the weke for the commodity and easement of the parishioners that do
dwell far from the parish church. -- It stands about half a mile distant
from the parish church of Gatishedde aforsaid -- value of ornaments etc. nil.
-- for there be neither goods catalls ne ornaments appertaining to the same to
our knowledge. -- There were no other lands nor yearly profitts etc."

August 15th, 1552, Robert Claxton was collated to the mastership of this
hospital, vacant by the death of Anthony Bellasis, L. L. D. Randall's MSS.


A. D. 1553, the 7th of Edward VI. the A. D. 1553, 7 Ed. VI. an act passed for
the uniting and annexing of the town of Gateshead to the town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, but nothing is mentioned therein relating to this hospital. Tanner, in
his Notitia Monastica, p. 115, says, that the patronage of this hospital seems
to have been granted 7 Ed. VI. to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle. "It is
supposed," says Allan, in his Collections, "that all the hospital lands and
revenues of St. Edmund in Gateshead were comprised in Agnes Lawson's surrender,
in 1540, of St. Bartholomew's nunnery in Newcastle, and that they continued in
the hands of the crown, from that time till the year 1610, or 1611, 8 of James
I. when he by letters patent refounded the hospital in Gateshead.
patronage of this place, according to Tanner, was granted to the mayor and
burgesses of Newcastle There is an order of common council, dated March 28th,
1611, in which these words occur: "The hospital of Saint Edmonds in
Gateshead in the county of Durham belonging this town, i. e. Newcastle."
. There is a collation to it of a subsequent date, by Richard Barnes, Bishop of
Durham. See afterward under 1579.

In an article dated March 28th, 1561, between Thomas Tempest of Lanchester,
and his wife, and the bailiff and burgesses of Gateshead, mention occurs of
parcel of the lands that lately belonged to this hospital From the original.
.

May 6th, 1579, John Woodfall, clerk, was collated to the mastership of this
house, vacant by the death of R. Claxton, by Barnes, then bishop of Durham
Randall's MSS. e Registr' Barnes, p. 5.
.

June 4th, 1587, Clement Colmore, L. L. D. was instituted to the mastership of
this place, on the presentation of Henry Anderson and William Selby, Esqrs.
patrons for that turn only Ibid.
.

January 4th, 1611, King James I. refounded this hospital and granted to it a
charter by the new name of "King James's hospital in Gateshead." The preamble
whereof sets forth that, through the negligence of former masters, and length
of time, the charters of foundation and endowment of this house had been lost,
and that some persons were endeavoring to convert the property thereof to
their own use, and that therefore the King founded it anew, and decreed that it
should consist of a master, the rector of Gateshead for the time being, and
three poor, old, and unmarried men, to be called brethren, who should be a body
politic in law, have a common seal For a representation of their common seal
see "Miscellaneous Antiquities;" (plate o^) No 4.
, power to sue and be sued, let leases, etc. The bishops of Durham to be the
patrons thereof, present masters, revise the statutes, etc. The King gave them
all the hospital of St. Edmund aforesaid, with the mansion house and gardens of
the same, also 40 acres of arable land, and five carrects of hay, from ten
acres of meadow; forty acres of pasture for beasts, and a close at
Shotley-Bridge, the possessions of the hospital, for which they are to render
to the King such rents and services as had been paid and performed before. Each
brother to receive 3l. 6s. 8d. per annum, while John Hutton, then master,
should continue to preside there, and after his death the succeeding masters to
have a third part of the revenues of the house, and the brethren the other two
thirds From a copy of the charter in Allan's Collections. See Appendix.

There was an order of common council, March 28th, 1611, to empower the mayor
of Newcastle and five aldermen, to settle and establish the foundations of the
several hospitals, in which this of St. Edmund is included in the number of
those belonging to that town.

In the year 1731, there were standing in the Chapel-Garth a chapel wherein
duty was performed by the master, a mansion house for the master, with a
dove-cote, stables and other conveniences, and three houses for the bedemen,
wherein they lived at that time. -- They have now an allowance to procure
themselves lodgings. -- Grass at present covers the sites of the houses of the
master and brethren.

Among the procurations due to Edward, Bishop of Durham, A. D. 174^, Gateshead
hospital to pay 13s. 4d. -- Allan's MSS.

In a list of the persons who pay to the county rate (which is framed and
glazed, and hangs in the vestry of Gateshead church), the following occurs:
"Gateshead hospital 5s. 4d." -- and "ditto ecclesiastical 5s. 7d."


.

For an account of the masters of this hospital since the charter of
refoundation, granted as above by King James I. see List of the Rectors of
Gateshead.

The chapel of this hospital, situated on the east side, and almost close to
the road leading from Newcastle to Durham, a little before we arrive at the
first mile stone, was disused as to public service being performed in it while
Mr. Lamb was master: this rector compromised a matter in dispute between
himself and some of his parishioners, who did not acquiesce in the above
cessation of duty, by preaching in lieu thereof a sermon every Sunday afternoon
at the parish church.

The same rector, after allowing a small yearly income to the brethren to find
them lodgings, pulled down their respective houses which stood very near the
chapel.

Mr. Wood, the succeeding rector, obliged his predecessor's widow and
administratrix to pay him 300l. for the dilapidations of this hospital, on
which he executed to her a general release.

Dr. Fawcett, in 1780, put the chapel into repair, and covered it with red
tiles, but it still remains in disuse as to religious purposes On a late visit
to this desecrated place, I found cocks and hens roosting on the sides of the
pulpit. On the north wall there was a board put up, inscribed, "the
shipwright's pew in Newcastle." One of the ornaments of the altar-piece has
been converted to a very whimsical purpose: the present tenant's wife makes use
of the truly frightful figure of a mutilated cherub to frighten her unruly
children into order and good behavior; the sight of this piece of sculpture,
which she calls "the awd angel," never failing to procure an instantaneous
silence.

The little arch, by way of steeple, which still remains upon the chapel, is of
the model, and probably of the same date, with that on the present
grammar school of Newcastle.


.

A. D. 1278, it appears to have been customary for the King of Scotland, the
Archbishop of York, the Prior of Tinmouth, the Bishop of Durham, and Gilbert de
Umfranville (by their bailiffs), to meet the justices coming to Newcastle to
hold pleas, and ask their liberties of them, when they came from the parts of
Yorkshire, at the head of Gateshead, at a certain well there called Chille-Well
Tinmouth Chartulary at Northumberland-House, fol. 205. "Apud Tynemuth die Lunae
in crastino clausi Pasch' anno regni Regis Edwardi septimo jur' coram J. de
Vall^^^^s anno suprascripto present' quod Rex Scocie Archiepiscopus Ebor' Prior
de Tynemuth, Episcopus Dunelm' and Gilbertus de Umfranville, vel little ballivi
in adventu ju^tic' ^d omnia placita ad Novum Castrum debent obviare dictis
justic' ad caput ville de Gatesheved ad quendam fonte^ qui vocatur Chille et
petere ab ei^ libertates suas si veniant de partibus Ebor' ^t si forte
contigerit quod veniant de partibus Cumbrie tunc debent obviate ^^ apud
Faustances vel^^^ta in ingressu comitatus et predicti justic' debent deliberare
eis ^^pitula super quibus corona Regis est placitand' in libertatibus suis per
visum unius fidel^s Domini Regis assignat' per predictos justic' et tantum
liberate prioris de Tynmuth et Gilberti de Umfranvyl et non alibi."
.

On the Friday before Pentecost, A. D. 1322, an inquisition was taken at
Gateshead before the sheriff of Durham, concerning fisheries, gardens, and
multure, from the demesnes and lands in Gateshead, and vigils and aids from
Pipewell-Gate: when the jurors, on their oaths, declared that a moiety of the
water of Tyne, from Stanley-Burn to Tinmouth and the sea, belonged to St.
Cuthbert and the Bishop of Durham, another moiety to the county of
Northumberland, and that the third part, in the middle, was common and free:
that the bishop had built three fisheries on his part, called Greneyard, which
certain persons had broken down and destroyed, to the length of twenty-four
perches: that the men of Pipewell-Gate, in the time of Anthony and Richard (de
Kellowe), former bishops of Durham, used to be in vigils and aids with the men
of Gateshead. And lastly, that the demesnes and lands ought not to give multure
From a MS. in the bishop's library at Durham.
.

In a deed dated at Gateshead, May 20th, 1324, remaining in the
Augmentation-Office, some property is described as bounded on one side by a
runner of water in St. Elen's Street, "per rivulum currentem in vico Sancte
Elene."

On the last day of February, 1348, Thomas, Bishop of Durham, granted to Roger
de Tickhill, by letter of privy seal, the office of keeper of his park at
Gateshead, with an allowance of three halfpence per diem Randall's MSS. from
Rot. Hatfeld, A. Sch. 4, No. 7, in dorso.
.

A. D. 1364, mention occurs of a mine of coals in the fields of Gateshead From
an account "de antiquis possessionibus, libertatibus, etc. episcopatus
Dunelmensis, pat. 38 Ed. III. p. 2, m. 26, pro minera carbonum in campo de
Gateshead." -- Tanner^s Notitia Monast. p. 113.

"Dunelm' Episcopus de miner' carbonum per ipsum dimiss' ad sirmam in villa de
Gatesheved, pat. Ed. III. Ao 38, p. 2, m. 26." -- Harle^an MSS. No. 744.


.

April 20th, 1369, Thomas, Bishop of Durham, granted to William Forest, of
Gateshead, the office of keeper of his park there, with an allowance of three
halfpence per diem Randall's MSS. from Rot. Hatfeld, A. Sched. 15, No. 5.
.

November 28th, 1399, Walter, Bishop of Durham, by writ of privy seal, granted
to John Kempe the custody of his park at Gateshead, with a fee of three
halfpence per diem Ibid. from Rot. Skitlaw, No. 66.

August 28th, 1380, Katherine Fossour, widow of John de Bishopdale, released to
John de Lanchester, vicar of St. Oswald's, Durham, and William de Graystanes,
chaplain, all her right and claim to the lands that belonged to William Sire,
in Gateshead, Whickham, and Hebern. -- Bourne, p. 203.


.

July 24th, 1403, Walter, Bishop of Durham, granted the office of keeper of his
park at Gateshead, to Hugh Attehalle, with an allowance of three halfpence a
day, to be paid him by the hands of the head forester for the time being
Randall's MSS. ^ Rot. Skirlaw, in dorso, No. 4.
.

October 25th, 1415, Thomas, Bishop of Durham, appointed John Boterell, bailiff
of his manor and villa of Gateshead, to hold courts there, and levy rents for
his several fisheries in the Tyne and elsewhere, belonging to that manor, from
Michaelmas last past to the same term next ensuing Randall's MSS. -- from Rolls
of Bishop Langley, B. No. 11.
.

April 8th, 1438, Robert, Bishop of Durham, granted to Robert Preston, the
office of keeper of his park at Gateshead, and the custody of the tower there,
to receive three halfpence a day for the keeping of the park, to be paid him by
the bishop's master forester, and a halfpenny per diem for the custody of the
tower, to be paid him by the bailiffs, or others, of the demesne of Gateshead,
with other profits, and a robe, or eight shillings in lieu thereof, every
Christmas Day Bourne's History. -- The tower mentioned in this place was no
doubt that which had been built by the corporation of Newcastle, at the south
end of the bridge, and which had been recovered from that corporation by Bishop
Langley, A. D. 1416. -- See the account of Tyne-Bridge.
.

December 16th, 1495, John Boner, of Gateshead, labourer, went to the cathedral
church of Durham, and having struck the bell there, supplicated, with great
earnestness, the immunity and liberty of St. Cuthbert, for that fourteen years
before he had assaulted one Alexander Stevenson, near Doteland-Park, in
Hexhamshire, and feloniously struck him on the breast with a dagger, or
whinyard, of which stroke he instantly died Bourne's History.
.

October 1st, 1529, Thomas, Bishop of Durham, constituted William Thomlyngson,
then keeper of Gateshead-Park, and Thomas Thomlyngson, his son, clerk of the
mines belonging to that see Bourne's History.
.

In the year 1553 the town of Gateshead was, by act of parliament, severed from
the bishopric of Durham and annexed to Newcastle upon Tyne: the inhabitants
were to continue their common in that bishopric, and have wood in
Gateshead-Park for their reparations, and the bishop's liberties were to
continue in Newcastle Gardiner's England's Grievance, p. 169.
.

April 2d, 1554, the town of Gateshead, with all its inhabitants, a parcel of
ground called the Salt-Meadows, the waters and bridge, were taken back from
Newcastle and restored to the county of Durham Ibid.
.

March 17th, 1555, Cuthbert Tunstal, Bishop of Durham, demised the Salt-Meadows
in Gateshead to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, for 450 years,
at an annual rent of 2l. 4s. As also the toll there at 4l. 6s. per annum. This
lease was confirmed by the dean and chapter of Durham, March 22d, 1555 Dr.
Ellison's MSS. say, "The Salt-Meadows, and the river and shore over against it
(the fishery excepted) with way-leave to Gateshead."

There is preserved in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne,
"an exact survey of the Salt-Meadows in the county palatine of Durham,
belonging to the mayor and burgesses of the town and county of the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, taken 1724. In all 83 acres and 6 perches."

The subsequent extract, relating to Gateshead, i^ taken from the ministers' or
bailiffs' accounts of the possessions of the late monastery of Durham, dated
the 4th of February, 32 Hen. VIII. remaining in the Augmentation-Office: "Burg'
de Gateside -- firma 6 tenementorum sive burgagiorum una cum pecia prati jacen'
in Wykeham ac cum duobus particulis claus' jacen' juxta sinem austral' ville
predicte ac una cum 2s. de libero redditu cantarist' beat Marie Virginis in
ecclesia de Gatesyde in tenemento jacen' vac' pro defect' tenent' ad 8s. ut
patet per ^entale -- 1^9^. 4d."


.

March 28th, 1561, on an original deed of that date occurs an impression,
though a good deal mutilated, of the common seal of Gateshead as a borough
town, representing a lady and child on a tower See Seals, Plate II. No. 11.
.

July 12th, 1565, Henry Lord Scroop, warden of the West-Marches, granted a
protection to two pedlars, John and Jenkin Brown, of Gateshead, who had been
slanderously called Scots, and put in fear of imprisonment and loss of goods
(but who, upon examination, were found to be, in reality, the Queen's subjects,
born at a place called the Moote of Lyddal, and the sons of one David Brown),
commanding all persons, without molestation, to suffer them to exercise their
craft of pedlars, according to the laws and statutes made on that behalf. This
instance exhibits a striking proof of the violent hatred that subsisted between
the borderers of the then two hostile kingdoms of England and Scotland. At
Newcastle the title of Scot is still used opprobriously by the vulgar, and
perhaps another century must elapse before this spirit of national animosity
shall entirely subside Randall's MSS. Ex autog' penes T. Gyll.
.

February 1st, 1578, a lease of the manors of Gateshead and Whickham, which had
been granted to Queen Elizabeth for 79 years, by Richard Barnes, Bishop of
Durham, was confirmed by the dean and chapter of that church From the original,
in the archives of the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle.
.

June 20th, 1581, the above Bishop Barnes granted a lease of the manors
aforesaid to Robert, Earl of Leicester: this must have been done by permission
of the Queen, who is said to have given this lease to her favorite courtier. A
declaration from the bishop, upon what terms he had granted the lease, occurs,
dated June 23d following From the original, ibid.

The following notices occur in Grey's MSS. No. I. p. 300: "A. D. 1561, letters
patent recite, that Queen Elizabeth had taken from the bishopric of Durham
(among others) the manor of Gateshead, A. D. 1559 and 1560, and so had excepted
them all out of the restitution to Bishop Pilkington, test 25 March. But in
the year 1566, test June 13, on a new restitution of the temporalities, all
were restored, except Norham and Norhamshire."

Upon Bishop Barnes' first coming to Durham, he had a great contest with Bishop
Pilkington's widow for dilapidations: being a little settled he began to
plunder his se^, by alienating all that he could from it, and granting long
leases to Queen Elizabeth, of several manors, amongst which was Gateshead, with
all the manors, coal-pits, and coal-mines in Gateshead and Whickham, with the
commons, wastes, parks, etc. These the Queen gave to the Earl of Leicester, who
sold his right to Thomas Sutton, founder of the Charter House in London, and he
conveyed his interest therein to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne
for 12,000l. -- Strype's Annals, vol. ii. p. 432. Biog. Britan. vol. vi. p.
3851. Allan's Collections concerning Sherborn Hospital.


.

January 4th, 1582, Richard, Bishop of Durham, granted a lease of the manors of
Gateshead and Whickham to Queen Elizabeth for 79 years: this term must have
been thought too short, for we find, on the 26th of April following, the same
bishop granting a lease of the above manors, confirmed also by the dean and
chapter, to the said Queen for 99 years, from the day of the date, under an
annual rent of 117l. 15s. 8d. This grant included all the coal-pits and
coal-mines, and all the common wastes and parks belonging to the said manors
From the original in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle.
.

November 12th, 1583, Queen Elizabeth made an assignment to Henry Anderson and
William Selby, magistrates of Newcastle, of two terms of the above manors,
which had been granted to her by the Bishop of Durham Ibid. See also Appendix
to third volume of Strype's Annals, No. 30, p. 182.

Gardener, in his England's Grievance, etc. p. 12, says, that the Earl of
Leicester procured the bishop's lease from his royal mistress, and sold or gave
it to the famous Sutton of the Charter House, who in his turn, he adds, sold it
to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle for 12,000l. This angry declaimer
farther relates, that Doctor Cradock, archdeacon of Northumberland, attested
that it was worth 50,000l. per annum. This grand lease expired April 26th, 1681.

Gardener maliciously insinuates that this lease was voided (at the time he
wrote), and that the corporation had forfeited it, being garrisoned against the
parliament. His book is dedicated to Oliver Cromwell. -- His account indeed of
the whole matter seems as erroneous as it is insidious, for he says that the
rent of this lease was 90l. per annum, or thereabouts.


.

August 4th, 1591, the above Henry Anderson and William Selby granted to
thirteen of the principal burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, in trust, the
reversion of the above manors of Gateshead and Whickham, which had been demised
as aforesaid to the Queen, and assigned by the Queen to them as before related
From the original in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne.
.

A. D. 1594, Toby Matthew, Bishop of Durham, granted a charter for the
incorporation of several trades in Gateshead Spearman's Enquiry -- Durham, p.
18. "Anciently, and time out of mind, the bishops of Durham have had, and still
enjoy, diverse boroughs, pro markets, and fairs; and granted charters in their
own names, and under their own seals, for erecting such boroughs, markets,
fairs, and incorporating trades therein, and to make bylaws to exclude
foreigners, and other suchlike franchises, viz. the boroughs of Durham and
Framwellgate, Gateside, Sunderland by the Sea, Stockton, Darlington, Bishop
Aukland, -- Tobiae Matthew Episc. anno 37 Eliz. Reginae. -- The like charter for
several trades in Gateside (Rotuli A.) -- The like for Cordiners there, No. 27."
.

September 8th, 1599, Henry Chapman, George Farnaby, William Hodgshon, George
Selby, Lyonell Maddison, Ralph Jennison, and Nicholas Hedley, assigned their
right and title to the manors of Gateshead and Whickham, to the mayor and
burgesses of Newcastle From the original in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle.
.

May 5th, 1614, an head-court of the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle was held
in the borough of Gateshead, before Thomas Riddell, Esquire. bailiff, and George
Nicholson, steward: a place in Gateshead is mentioned on this occasion, with
the appellation of "Pallace-Place," probably where the bishops of Durham had
anciently an house or hotel From a copy of the borough books on parchment,
communicated by Mr. Ca^^, ^ooper.

Mr. Hervey, senior, of Gateshead, informed me that he had often heard a
traditionary account, that there had been anciently a well, with an oak hanging
over it, at the head of the street called Oakwell-Gate, in which three strata
of pavement have been discovered, and that he had often conversed with an old
gentleman, who remembered when there were several pants in Gateshead.


.

May 4th, 1620, an head-court of the said mayor and burgesses was held at
Gateshead, before the abovementioned bailiff, then Sir Thomas Riddell, Knight. and
George Nicholson, steward From a record communicated by John Davidson, Esquire.
clerk of the peace for Northumberland.
.

March 14th, 1626, a grant for life was made to Henrietta Maria, Queen consort
of King Charles I. A fee-farm of eighty pounds is mentioned in it, payable from
several places therein enumerated, one of which was Gateshead in the bishopric
of Durham Rymer's Foedera, vol. xviii. pat. 2 Ca^. l. p. 4, n. 3.
.

July 28th, 1637, a lease held of the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon
Tyne, of the bailiwick of Gateshead, and two parcels of ground called the
Salt-Meadows and the East-Field, was renewed for 21 years, to Sir Thomas
Riddell, Knight. recorder of Newcastle Common Council books.
.

February 20th, 1645, there was an order of common council for granting a lease
of the bailiwick of Gateshead to Alderman Ledgard, for the term of twenty-one
years Ibid.
.

December 23d, 1646, mention occurs in the common council books of a design
then in agitation, to annex Gateshead a second time to Newcastle.

An order passed in January following to acquaint Mr. Blakiston, then member of
parliament for Newcastle, that the inhabitants of Gateshead were using their
endeavors to make that borough a corporation Ibid
.

February 27th, 1647, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle petitioned the House
of Commons concerning the manors of Gateshead and Whickham, of which they had a
term remaining of about thirty-three years.

These manors appear to have been comprised in a survey of bishop's lands, by
an ordinance of parliament, and the mayor and burgesses aforesaid were desirous
of purchasing the reversion of them, but were prevented by the erroneous
estimate made of them, and the excessive price set upon them. They therefore
desired a new survey, and that the sale might be suspended till a fresh survey,
and a just valuation could be returned Ibid
.

January 27th, 1648, there was an order of common council to proceed in the
purchase of the manors of Gateshead and Whickham, provided they could be
procured for a sum less than four thousand pounds Ibid
.

February 28th, 1649, there was another order of common council to go on in the
purchase of the aforesaid manors Common-council-books.
.

August 24th, 1649, there was an order of common council to draw up a petition
to be sent to parliament, concerning the Salt-Meadows and the tolls of
Gateshead Ibid.
.

January 7th, 1650, there was an order of that body, that twelve men out of the
companies of the town, viz. six out of the twelve mysteries, and six out of the
fifteen trades, should be named as feoffees in trust for the Salt-Meadows Ibid.
.

September 30th, 1653, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle granted to Thomas
Bonner, Esquire. Book of Inrolments, lib. ii. fol. 1.
the office of steward of the manor of Whickham, making him, at the same time,
bailiff of their borough, manor, and lordship of Gateshead, with a salary of
20l. per annum for this last office, and 3l. 6s. 8d. yearly, with other fees,
for Whickham Ibid.
.

May 1st, 1654, Thomas Ledgard, George Dawson, Henry Rawling and Robert Young,
in consideration of 100l. conveyed to Mark Shaftoe, Esquire. and others, their
heirs and assigns for ever, the Salt-Meadows and the toll of Gateshead, which
had been sold to them, the said Thomas Ledgard, etc. by the trustees appointed
by ordinance of parliament, for sale of the lands in possession of the late
archbishops and bishops, September 21st, 1649 From the original conveyance in
the archives of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne.
.

June 8th, 1658, the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle demised all their lands
and coal-mines in Gateshead and Whickham, to George Dawson, mayor, Thomas
Bonner, Mark Milbank, and Henry Rawling, aldermen, to procure the sum of two
thousand pounds, to prosecute the building of the new town-court Common Council
books.
.

September 16th, 1661, John Cosins, Bishop of Durham, incorporated, at their
own request, the drapers, tailors, mercers, hardwaremen, coopers and chandlers
of Gateshead: their charter of incorporation obliged them to sell any person
the freedom of their community, who should produce an indenture that he had
served an apprenticeship in any other part, and on the payment of ten pounds to
the society; with a like sum to the Bishop of Durham.

They were to choose three wardens annually, keep a clerk, a chest with two
keys, and a common seal, called the seal of the wardens and commonalty of
drapers, tailors, etc. within the borough of Gateshead From an authenticated
copy of the charter.
.

In the royal aids, A. D. 1663 and 1664, the town of Newcastle upon Tyne
appears to have been assessed 7l. 10s. for their property at Whickham Grey's
MSS.
.

June 17th, 1675, a complaint occurs in the common council books of Newcastle,
that the Salt-Meadows are charged and assessed in the book of rates at 100l.
per annum Common Council books.
.

October 8th, 1679, an head-court of the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle was
held at Gateshead, before Robert Shafto, sergeant at law, bailiff From an
original record.
.

March 14th, 1699, a petition of the stewards and company of pewterers,
inhabiting in the ancient borough of Gateshead, concerning the adulteration of
pewter, occurs before the House of Commons Journals of the House of Commons,
vol. xii.
.

Between the years 1690 and 1700, the inhabitants of Gateshead, men, women, and
children, were computed to be about seven thousand Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

By a computation of the burials in Gateshead, A. D. 1710, that place appeared
to compose about a third part of Newcastle; two hundred and sixty persons
having died there that year Dr. Ellison's MSS.
.

May 21, 1716, Lord Crewe, Bishop of Durham, to which see the manors of
Gateshead and Whickham had reverted, demised to William Coatsworth, of
Gateshead, Esquire. all these two manors, "except so much of Tyne-Bridge as is
situate in the precincts of Gateshead, and the soil and ground of the same, and
houses and edifices thereon erected, and the tolls used to be taken there; and
except the right of collating, or presenting to the two parsonages of Gateshead
and Whickham," with a court commonly called Halmote-Court, etc. for the term of
twenty-one years, and at the annual rent of 235l. 11s. 4d. From a copy of the
lease.


A. D. 1731, an almshouse was built in Gateshead, opposite to the Toll-Booth
there, by trustees appointed in the last will of Mr. Thomas Powell of
Newcastle, who bequeathed all his estate, real and personal, for that purpose
The following inscription is cut on a stone over the door: "This almshouse was
built at the charge of Mr. Thomas Powell, late of Newcastle, who by his last
will and testament did leave and bequeath all his estate, real and personal,
toward the purchasing and building the said house, and appointed Charles
Jurdon, George Surtees, William Stephenson, trustees, 1731." -- Arms, a lion
rampant -- crest, a demi lion rampant.

I have been informed that where the almshouse stands at present, there was
formerly a quaker's meeting house.


.

June, 1734, some disputes arose in this borough, the burghers and freemen
whereof, by custom immemorial, have had right of common of pasturage on
Gateshead-Fell: the stewards, and before them the churchwardens of Gateshead,
had for several years past granted leases to erect cottages on the said fell,
reserving to themselves an annual rent for damage of the soil. The lord of the
manor, who claimed the royalty of the said fell, received in right thereof from
the cottagers the same sums as they paid to the borough, and had also granted
similar leases for the erection of the like buildings. It was at last agreed
upon by both parties, to refer the matter to council, how they might best
ascertain and preserve their respective rights for the future Grey's MSS.
.

A. D. 1762, mention occurs of a woollen manufactory established at Gateshead
Newcastle Courant -- "June 26, 1762. Wednesday the woollen manufactory made
their annual procession from Gateshead, and was a pleasing sight to all
well-wishers to the valuable and important staple of this kingdom."
.

In the year 1772 a temporary post office (as it was originally intended to
have been) was set up at Gateshead, till Tyne-Bridge could be rebuilt, but it
was afterward thought expedient to suffer this office to be continued From a
printed hand-bill, dated General Post Office, January 29th, 1772, signed
Anthony Todd, secretary.
.

A. D. 1772, the borough of Gateshead petitioned the Bishop of Durham to
appoint them a new bailiff; an officer that had been discontinued at that place
since the death of Robert Delavall, whose patent was dated August 30th, 1681.
They set forth in this petition, that they had in their possession a seal See
plate of arms of the corporation of Newcastle, etc. No. 4.
, inscribed "Sigillum burgi de Gateshead." The bishop referred the matter to
his attorney general: as yet, however, no bailiff has been appointed Lambert's
MSS. -- It is added, that the church-books run back to the year 1627, and that
the business of the borough has, since that time, been conducted by stewards
and grassmen -- but evidently by mistake, for we have shown, from the
unquestionable authority of records, that the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle
appointed bailiffs of Gateshead long after the year 1627.
.

A new chapel for dissenters was opened in Gateshead, January 1st, 1786
Newcastle Courant. -- A sermon was preached on the occasion by the Rev. Mr.
Matthews, from Morpeth in Northumberland.

The steep ascent in Gateshead is called ^ottle Bank, not by corruption from
Battle-Bank (from I know not what battle said to have been fought the^), but
evidently from botle, Anglo-Saxon, a villag^ -- i. e. the Bank of the Village^^
Thus occur in the vicinity of Newcastle, New-Bottle, Wall-Bottle, Bottle, etc.
An ignorance of, or inattention to, the Anglo-Saxon language, has occasioned
among the learned themselves many ridiculous errors in etymology.

"Acquel-Gate" -- "Battle-Bank" -- "Hell-Gaite, alias St. Mary-Gate," occur in
old writings concerning this place. -- Hell-Gaite is a corruption of Hill-Gate.


.

GATESHEAD-CHURCH.
MENTION occurs of a church at Gateshead in the year 1080, in which Walcher,
Bishop of Durham, was assassinated See Bedford's Simeon Dunelm. p. 213.

In the best edition of Godwin de Presulibus Angliae, there is prefixed to the
Account of the Bishops of Durham, a print from a copper-plate, representing
Walcher's assassination.

See Bourne's account.


: It is said to have stood lower down the river than the present does, in a
field once called Lawless-Close, and afterward the Miller's Field "According
to tradition," says Bourne, "it stood before in the field below where
brick-kilns now are."
.

I have found no account at what time the present edifice, dedicated to St.
Mary, was erected.

In a valuation of livings in the diocese of Durham, A. D. 1291, the church of
Gateshead is rated at 13l. 6s. 8d. annual value See account of St. Nicholas'
church under that year.
.

In another valuation of the same, of the date of 1318, it is only rated at 6l.
13s. 4d. See account of St. Nicholas' under A. D. 1318.

The following are copied from MSS. in the possession of G. Allan, Esquire. of
Darlington. "Nomina archidiaconatuum, decanatuum, hospitalium, prebendar',
rectoriar', vicariar', cantariar' quae spectant ad collacionem Episcopi Dunelmi
et eorum verus valor.

Rector de Gateshed 12l. (From the title page, or blank leaf, of Bishop
Tunstal's Register.)

Procurations due to Edward, Bishop of Durham, at his visitation, 1740.

Chester Deanery. Gateshead 0l. 10s. 0d. Procurations payable to the Archdeacon
of Durham at Easter and Michaelmas.

Gateshead 2s. 0d." In the beginning of the year 1719, an old b^ass seal was
dug up from under a third pavement, in sinking a well at Carlisle, with the
following legend: "S.' Beat Marie de Gathesevid." Bishop Nicholson sent the
seal to Doctor Ellison, with his opinion, that it belonged to the church of St.
Mary in Gateshead, and an observation, that if the rector and churchwardens had
a common-seal, the case was extraordinary. -- Yet, say Dr. Ellison's MSS. "I
find an account that St. John's church in Newcastle had a common-seal."

There is affixed to a will remaining in the Augmentation-Office, dated at
Gateshead, on Monday before Martinmas-Day, 1427, a beautiful fragment of a seal
of this church, representing the salutation of the Virgin Mary. See Seals,
Plate II. No. 1.




The foundation and endowment of Gateshead rectory were preserved in a MS. in
the Cotton library, which was damaged and rendered illegible at the fire which
happened in Westminster, by which so many valuable records in that collection
were either mutilated or destroyed From a letter from Mr. Lee to Doctor
Ellison, vicar of Newcastle, dated January 22d, School. Sub Effigy Vitellii, A.
9.

In the common council books, July 5th, 1652, mention occurs of "sessing all
the lands in Gateshead, for the building of the minister's house," and leave
asked "to sesse the town lands ( i. e. those of Newcastle) in Gateshead for
that purpose."


.

CHANTRIES.
THERE are said to have been four chantries in this church -- one of the Virgin
Mary -- one of St. Loy -- one of St. John the Apostle and Evangelist, and of
St. John the Baptist -- and the last of the Holy Trinity.

(1) ST. MARY'S CHANTRY.
ON the feast of St. Matthew, 1330 See Bourne, sub anno 1403. "St. Mary's Well"
-- also "Pipewel-Gate" -- "Hell-Gate" -- "Hengle-Dyk" -- and "St. Helen's Well"
occur.
, Alan, son of Roger Prester, and Alan Prester, of Gateshead, confirmed to
Roger de Thorington, chaplain to the chantry of the blessed Virgin Mary, in the
north porch of Gateshead church, ten messuages situated in Gateshead, with an
annual rentcharge of 6s. 8d. arising from another in the same place. After
their deaths the commonalty of Gateshead were to be the patrons of this
chantry, and each successive chaplain was to be sworn before the rector of
Gateshead.

This grant of endowment was confirmed to William de Norham, chaplain, by
Walter, Bishop of Durham, Nov. 2d, 1402, and by the prior and chapter of that
church, August 8th, 1403.

February 19th, 1496, Sir John Turpyne was collated to this chantry, vacant by
the death of Sir John Bell, the last chaplain, and there was a mandate to
William Baker, parochial chaplain there, to induct him Register of Bishop Fox,
p. 12.
.

February 6th, 1519, William Gotten occurs as chaplain From an original lease
communicated by Thomas Davidson, Esquire. "Le Blend Chair" occurs in this lease as
the name of a lane or alley.
.

March 10th, 1544, William Friend, chaplain, was instituted to the chantry of
St. Mary the Virgin in Gateshead, on the presentation of the bailiff and
community of that place Register of Bishop Tunstal, p. 35.
.

In 1553 a pension of 6l. per annum appears to have been paid to Thomas Worthy,
incumbent of our Lady's chantry. -- Brown Willis's Abbeys, vol. ii. p. 75 He
says also, ibid. "William Blenkinsope was incumbent of St. Mary's chantry."
.

The following account of this chantry is taken from the certificate of
colleges and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in
the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of our Lady in Gatishedd was founded by one Alan Prestore to
find a priest for the mayntenaunce of Godd's service and to pray for his soul
and all Christian sowles by report but there is no deed of any foundation thereof
to be showed -- Yerly value 75s. 4d. -- value according to this survey 8l. 2s.
as apere by a rentall whereof is paid out for rent resolut' 29s. 4d. and for the
Kings Majesty's tenthes 7s. 6d. ob. as appear by the said rentall -- 36s. 10d.
ob. and remains clearly 6l. 3s. 3d. ob. which ben employed to the
sustentacion and relief of Willyam Blynkynsope priest incumbent there --
within the parish church of Gatishede aforesaid -- Ornaments etc. 4l. 13s.
11d. as appears by a particular inventory of the same -- There were no other
lands etc."

(2) ST. LOY'S CHANTRY.
JOHN Dolphamby, of Gateshead, was the founder of this chantry about 1442 Rolls
of Bishop Baynbr^g, Rot. A. in dorso, No. 2, wherein the said John Dolphamby
grants to Richard Dolphamby (and to his heirs for ever), son of his daughter
Alice Dolphamby, the presentation to this chantry by him newly founded, at the
altar of St. Loy, in Gateshead church. It is dated at Gateshead, on the feast
of the Holy Cross, 1442.
.

September 28th, 1532, Cuthbert, Bishop of Durham, instituted Sir Robert Galele
to the chantry of St. Loy in Gateshead church, vacant by the death of Sir
Richard Rande, on the joint presentation of Anthony Lumley, Esquire. (one of the
patrons for that turn, on account of the minority of Conand Barton) and John
Brown, rector of Gateshead. The presentation was dated September 27th, 1532
Register Tunstal, p. 9.
.

Richard Jackson appears to have been the last incumbent, and had in 1553 a
pension of 3l. per annum Willis's Abbeys, vol. ii. p. 75. In giving an account
of the pensions paid to incumbents of chantries in Gateshead church, he
mentions our Lady's, Trinity, and St. John's chantry -- there is a blank after
Jackson's name, where that of the chantry ought to have been.
.

It is observable that no mention occurs of this chantry of St. Loy in
Gateshead church, in the certificate of colleges and chantries for
Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in the Augmentation-Office.

(3) ST. JOHN'S CHANTRY.
THIS appears to have been founded by John Dolphamby, of Gateshead, about the
year 1421.

On the feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, 1421, John Dolphamby, of Gateshead,
granted to John Vesci, chaplain of the chantry of St. John the Baptist and St.
John the Evangelist, which he had lately founded in the church of St. Mary in
that place, and to his successors, chaplains of the same for ever, fourteen
tenements, situated in Gateshead aforesaid, and held in burgage of the Bishop
of Durham, who confirmed this grant, June 1st, 1421, as did the dean and
chapter there, October 7th, 1424 Bourne, sub anno. -- "Akewel-Gate" --
"Hol-Chare" -- "Overkirk-Chare," etc. occur in this grant.
.

June 14th, 1496, the Bishop of Durham admitted Sir Robert Best, chaplain, to
the chantry of St. John in Gateshead church, vacant by the resignation of
Thomas Hochinson, on the presentation of the true patron, Conane Barton, Esquire.
Register of Bishop Fox, p. 7.


Thomas Hochinson was the last incumbent, and in 1553 enjoyed a pension of 6l.
per annum Willis's Abbeys, vol. ii. p. 75.
.

The following account of this chantry occurs in the certificate of colleges
and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in the
Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of Saint John Baptist and Saint John Evangeliste in Gatishedde
aforesaid was founded by report by John Dolphinbye and William Johnson to find
a priest for ever for the mayntenance of Godd's service and to pray for their
sowles and all Christian sowles and to keep one obitt yearly but there is no deed
of foundation to be showed -- Yerlie value 6l. 12s. 8d. ob. -- value according
to this survey 7l. 16s. 8d. whereof is paid out for one yerlie obit 6s. 8d. and
for the Kings Majesty's tenthes 13s. 3d. quad. as apereth by the rentall 19s.
11d. quad. and remains clerly 6l. 16s. 8d. ob. quad. which ben employed to
the sustentacion and relief of Thomas Hochison clarke incumbent there -- within
the parish church of Gatishedde -- Ornaments etc. 47s. as apereth by a
particular inventory of the same -- There were no other lands etc."

(4) TRINITY CHANTRY.
THE following account of this chantry is taken from the certificate of
colleges and chantries in Northumberland and Durham, 37 Hen. VIII. remaining in
the Augmentation-Office:

"The chauntrie of the Trinity in Gatished was founded by one Alan Prestore to
find a priest for the mayntenance of Godd's service and to pray for his soul
and all Christian sowles by report but there is no deed of foundation to be
showed -- Yerelie value 4l. 4s. 2d. -- value according to this survey 6l. 18d.
whereof is paid out for a rent resolut' 2s. 6d. and for the Kings Majesty's
tenthes 8s. 5d. as apereth by the rental 10s. 11d. -- and remains clearly
110s. 7d. which are employed to the sustentacion and relief of John Huchynson,
clarke, incumbent of the same. -- Within the parish church of Gatishedde
aforesaid -- Ornaments etc. 79s. 1d. as apere by a particular inventory of the
same -- There were no other lands etc."

John Huchynson had a pension of 5l. per annum, in the year 1553 Willis's
Abbeys, vol. ii. p. 75.

It should seem to appear from Allan's Collections, that there were two
chantries of our Lady in Gateshead church -- sed quaere?


.

STEEPLE.
THE present steeple of this church was built about the year 1740 On the inside
of the steeple, behind the organ, is the following inscription on a compartment
of stone -- "This steeple was rebuilt Anno Domini, 1740.

Martin Huntley Thomas Jackson Martin Pattison Bartholomew Spain,
churchwardens."

. The old steeple being then ruinous, it was found necessary to take it down.
The present had at first four fanes mounted on spires, one at each corner. --
These spires, being thought too weak for the fanes, were taken down in 1764,
and the roof altered. The builder's name was Camfield. -- In the year 1773, in
November, the bells On three of the bells are the following inscriptions: "Te
Deum laudamus 1730" -- "Vos jubilate 1730" -- "Festa decoro 1730." -- "T.
Seller, Eborae," is upon each.

Robert Coatsworth The Corporation of Newcastle Principal benefactors.

Nic' Ridley Trinity House, Newcastle Principal benefactors.


of this steeple were taken out, in order to be hung upon a new frame.

GALLERIES, PEWS, AND ORGAN.
IN the year 1763, a new gallery was erected at the west end of the church,
with this inscription: "This gallery was built anno Domini 1763.

"Thomas Emerson Headlam, Robert Carr, Tailor Ansell, Benjamin Ord,
churchwardens."

All the pews in this church are of oak, curiously carved. -- The pulpit is of
the same.

It is observable, that the rose and badge of the Prince of Wales is on each
pew.

On some of the pews are the arms of Cole, Liddell impaling Tempest, Hall,
Bishop Crew -- Riddell and the royal arms within the garter.

On the rector's pew, J. S. in a cipher, and the date 1695.

The organ is placed at the west end of the church. -- The following
inscriptions on front: "Gloria in excelsis Deo," and "Let every thing that has
breath praise the Lord."

THE CHANCEL.
THERE is nothing remarkable in the chancel or choir of this church. On the
south side of the communion table Plate belonging to Gateshead church.

No 1. A large silver salver: "Honor et gloria soli Deo, 1732."

2. One less salver of the same form -- Arms of "C^le" engraved thereon

3. One silver cup with the same arms, and the following inscription: "The free
gift of James Cole to St. Maryes church in the parish of Gateshead."

4. One other silver cup -- round the ed^^ "Soli Deo gloria."

5. One silver flaggron -- the arms of Collinson thereon, with the following
inscription: "The gift of Elizabeth Collinson in m^^ner^^ of her daughter J^^^
W^^ngham deceased, to the church of St. Mary's in Gateshead, 1672."

6. One other silver flaggon of the same form -- thereon as follows: "The gift
of William Collinson, late of Gateshead, deceased, to the church of St. Mary's
in Gateshead, 1672;" with the arms of Collinson.

7. A silver dish with the following inscription "The gift of Richard Faweett,
D. D. rector, to the church of St. Mary's in Gateshead, May 13th, 178^."


, which is a large slab of common stone, supported by two figures of angels,
holding chalices in their hands, is a niche for the holy water, and a recess in
the wall, terminated at the top by three pointed arches. On the wainscot above
the communion table are the letters I. H. S. The side windows on both sides
seem ancient, but the east window of the chancel is modern, and in a poor
style. The following inscription, which is on the outside, seems to indicate
that it was built at the charge of a former rector: "Richard Werge, rector of
Gateshead, anno 1682."

REGISTER -- VESTRY -- CHURCHYARD.
THE oldest register of Gateshead, entitled "The Regester Book of Geatsyde of
all christninges marriages and burialls beginning this year of our Lord God
1559 and so yearlye aftere according to the Queen's majestes injunctions in
that behalf provided," is in fine preservation: There is an hiatus in the
latter end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and at the beginning of that of King
James I.

Parochial registers were first appointed in 1538.

A. D. 1710, by a computation of the burials at this church, which were in
number 260 that year, Gateshead appeared to be above a third part of Newcastle
Dr. Ellison's MSS. -- In the year 1785 there were 1^5 males, and 114 females
christened; 138 males, and 111 females buried at Gateshead. -- Newcastle
Courant.
.

There is an observable old chair in the vestry of this church, with arms,
probably meant for these of the borough of Gateshead, carved upon it, i. e. in
the field a goat's head erazed. Crest a goat's head. -- The following initials
probably were those of the then churchwardens' names: " L. A. J. W. P. B. P. T."

In the churchyard On the south side of the church, near the vestry door, a
neat table monument belonging to the family of Ord of Oakwellgate -- Another to
the memory of -- wife of John Warburton of Newcastle -- Near the same, close to
the flags, on the south side thereof: "In hoc tumulo corpus Camillae Johannis
Lambert uxoris Et Gulielmi Bradley filiae conditum est: Quae obiit Septembris
die tricesimo, aetatis suae 29."

There were two brothers buried in this churchyard of the name of Bailey; the
one a clergyman, the other a painter: upon whom was put a fulsome epitaph: but
one Moody a Quaker coming past, and reading the same, is said to have written
underneath with chalk, Here lies a painter and a priest,
And all the rest is but a jest."
Lambert's MS. Notes of Epitaphs, Arms, etc.


, at the east end, stands an old monument, said to have been built by Robert
Trollop, who was the architect of the exchange, and town-court in Newcastle,
for the place of his interment. There is a faint traditionary account, which I
do not much credit, that there stood formerly a statue of the said Trollop, on
the north side of it, pointing to the town-court of Newcastle, and underneath
the following lines: "Here lies Robert Trollop
Who made yon stones roll up
When death took his soul up
His body filled this hole up."


It is now, or was lately, the burial place of the family of Harris. There are
texts of scripture on every side of this monument.

CHARITY-SCHOOL.
THE school The deed of gift is dated January 9th, 1701, a copy whereof,
examined and compared with the original by Ralph Trotter, registrar, lies
before me. By this Dr. Pickering l^st the sum of 300l. to purchase some
rent-cha^^e, or to be laid out in the purchase of land for the perpetual
maintenance of a free school in the parish of Gateshead, at the Anchorage
adjoining to Gateshead church; the master to be chosen by the rector of that
church, and to teach all the children of the parish of Gateshead the Latin and
Greek tongues; as also to write and cast up accounts, and also the art of
navigation or plain sailing, etc.
at the Anchorage Perhaps anchorage is a corruption of anchoretage of
hermitage, one of which may have been formerly at this place. -- There was
certainly a hermitage upon Tyne bridge. See account of that bridge.
, in Gateshead churchyard, was founded by Theophilus Pickering, S. T. P.
rector of Gateshead, January 9th, 1701.

Thomas Stephenson left to the use of the charity founded by Dr. Pickering,
forty shillings per annum; also other forty shillings per annum, both payable
out of a shop on Tyne bridge: The last was intended to have been given by
Hauxley Stephenson, brother of the said Thomas, but Hauxley dying first, the
above Thomas left it also. This must have been soon after the foundation, as
Mr. Hauxley Stephenson was appointed one of the trustees in the deed of gift.

Benefactions to the poor.

An escutcheon of Henry Hilton, Esquire. -- For an account of his benefaction see
churches in Newcastle.

An escutcheon of Dr. Aldworth, M. D. who left 1l. per annum. See ibid.

On two escutcheons in the north porch: "James Cole, Esquire. deceased 21st
October, 1660; at his death gave to the poor of St. Mary's in Gateshead, forty
shillings yearly for ever."

"Ralph Cole, Esquire. deceased 16 Nov. 1655; at his death gave to the poor of St.
Mary's in Gateshead, forty shillings yearly for ever."

Escutcheon for "Matthew Bates of Gateshead, who left twenty shillinges yearly
for ever."

Escutcheon for "Collinson." -- See account of the plate.

Escutcheon inscribed "Isabel formerly widow of Mr. Edmund Sutton of Gateshead,
and late of George Watson of Goswick in com. Dunelm. left to poor widows of
Gateshead 50l. to be paid by her executor to such a number of widows, as that
none of them should receive less than 5 shillings, payable at Midsummer yearly."

Escutcheon for "Jo......... pipe-maker, who died October..... 1689. By his
last will he gave to the poor of the parish of St. Mary's in Gateshead -- a
house in Hillgate let at 6l. per annum."

Escutcheon for "Mr. Thomas Reed, shipwright, who left 20 shillings yearly for
ever."

Escutcheon for "Mr. Andrew Hibson, parish-clerk of Gateshead, who left 20
shillings yearly for ever."

Escutcheon for Mr. Ralph Harrison, of Bryan's Leap, who left 100l. to the poor
of Gateshead parish.

Escutcheon for Sir William Blackett, Bart. who left 40 shillings yearly out of
a house at Bridge-End. This house was burnt down by the fire in 1751. It has
since been rebuilt -- an inn at present with the sign of Charles XII. of Sweden.

Escutcheon for Mr. Thomas Rawling, of Newcastle, hostman, who left half of his
house in Oakwell-Gate, and since his death, his executrix gave the other half
of the said house, the rent of which to be distributed to the poor of this
parish for ever.

It appears by a list of legacies framed and glazed in the vestry of Gateshead
church, dated February 25th, 1736, that "Henry Smith, Esquire. left a legacy of 5l.
paid by Lord Lumley's steward, due at Michaelmas;" -- that a piece of land,
with a dwelling house at Easington, was left by Mr. Collinson, let at 6l. 5s.
per annum; -- a legacy of 6l. 13s. 4d. by Mrs. Isable Glover; -- a legacy of
20l. by Mrs. Margaret Ramsay; and a legacy of 50l. by William Coatsworth, Esquire.

MONUMENTS AND MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTIONS IN GATESHEAD CHURCH. In the choir.
"Here lies interred the body of Christopher Sanderson, late of Gateshead,
mercer, who exchanged this life 22d Dec. A. D. 1660. Likewise here lies
interred with him his brother Charles Sanderson."

"Here lie interred the remains of the Rev. Ambrose Fenwick, and Elizabeth his
wife. He departed February 1st, 1732. She departed June 2d, 1738. Jane wife of
William Dixon died April 20th, 1761."

"Here lies the body of Ann Reed, wife of Matthew Reed. She died January 8th,
1769, aged 71 years."

"Deposited under this stone the Rev. William Lamb, cl. A. M. rector of this
parish 33 years -- Died 29 May, 1769, aged 63."

"Here lies interred the body of Elizabeth, eldest daughter of George Gray, of
the bishopric of Durham, Esquire. late wife to John Clifton, citizen and mercer of
London, who departed this life the 6th of May, 1651, near 32 years of age."

"Here lies interred the body of Timothy Tizacke, merchant-adventurer, and
Elizabeth his wife, who had issue by him 7 children: two survived them, viz.
Timothy and George. She departed this life the 13th day of October, an. 1659.
He departed this life the 6th day of February, 1684." Motto to the arms,
"Seigneur je te pry guard ma vie."

"Here sleeps Mrs. Judith Weld, who was to three godly ministers a good wife,
to Christ a faithful servant, to the church an affectionate member, for piety,
prudence and patience eminent. She departed this life the -- 1656. In Jesu
dormio, splendide resurgam."

In the nave.

"John Emerson, smith, 1707." -- On the same stone "Philip Thompson, merchant,
1714." "Edmund Sutton, 1713." "John Gascoigne, 1720." "Isable Hallen, 1753."

"Francis Rudston." "The burial-place of Robert Akenhead." "Robert Proctor,
master and mariner." -- "James Burrell, 1763." -- "The burial-place of John
Hall, mariner, 1739." "Jonathan Bell." "Charles Newton, mariner, 1703." "John
Headlam, shipbuilder, 1761."

Near the font.

"The burial-place of Joseph Lambert, mercer."
"The burial-place of Lancelot Turnbull, 1714."
"The burial-place of William Lake."
Against the wall under the belfry.
"Reader in that piece of earth
In peace rests Thomas Arrowsmith.
In peace he lived, in peace went hence
With God and man and conscience.
Peace for other men he sought,
And peace with pieces sometimes bought.
Pacifici may others be,
But ex pace factus he.
Peace, reader, then do not molest
That peace whereof he is now possessed,
That God of peace for him in store
Has joy and peace for evermore.
Pangit plangit
Amore et dolor Robertus Arrowsmith,"
Over the south door a compartment with the following:

"Near this place lies Martha the wife of Thomas Richardson, late of Lyn
Regis, master and mariner, who having discharged the duties of a true Christian
and a good wife, mother, friend and benefactor to the poor, changed this life
for a better upon the 24th of July 1731, in the 50th year of her age. Her
husband raises this monument sacred to her memory."

Against the wall, on a square marble compartment: "To the memory of Andrew
Wood, M. A. Rector of this church. Born 29 May, 1715. Inducted 9 September,
1770. Interred amidst the tears of his parishioners 15 March, 1772. This
monument of their esteem, affection and gratitude was erected by the people of
Gateshead."

Mr. Wood was buried in the choir where his achievement still remains.

"Sub hoc marmore jacet corpus Briani Borrett Mercatoris filii Milonis Borrett
de Dowbiggin in parochia Sadbergiensi in comitatu Eboracensi, viri integritate
vitae et morum probitate vere prediti. Decessit pace et spe beatae
resurrectionis septimo die Februarii anno Domini 1695, et aetatis suae
trigesimo sexto. Ex Isabella uxore ejus dilectissima unam filiam Dorotheam
suscepit. Abi lector et aeternitatem cogita. Dorothea filia obiit 5 Octobris
1704, aetatis suae 19." A coat of arms cut in stone on the side of one of the
windows in the south isle. A chevron between three hearts.

Besides the achievement of Rector Wood abovementioned, there are those also
of Rectors Shaftoe and Lamb remaining in the choir.

RECTORS AND CURATES OF GATESHEAD.
IN the King's books this rectory is valued at 27l. 13s. 4d. Yearly tenths 2l.
15s. 4d. -- Synodals 2s. A pension of 2l. 13s. 4d. is paid yearly out of this
parsonage to the school of Houghton-le-Spring, granted by J. Heath of Kepyer,
Esquire. -- Church dedicated to St. Mary -- Patron the Bishop of Durham. One
"Robertus" occurs in the year 1275 Randall's MSS.
. Henricus Maunselot, 1322 Ibid.
. Ricardus de Kilwington, A. D. 1344, obiit 1366 Ibid. "Ricardus de Kilvington
persona de Gatesheved" occurs April 4, anno pontific' Episcopi Bury 12o. Rot.
Bury Sch. 18.
. Johannes de Castro Bernardi, 1370, resigned Randall's MSS. Occurs Sept. 5,
anno pontific' Hatfeld, 32o. Rot' Hatfeld, B. Sched. 12. No 1.
. Adam de Fenrother by exchange -- resigned -- alive at the feast of St. John
Baptist, 1391 Randall's MSS.
. Johannes de Castro Bernardi again Ibid.
. Johannes Bathre, 1379, resigned Ibid.
. Thomas Everard, 1380 Ibid.
. Willielmus de Darlington, 1389 Ibid.
. Johannes de Longley, 1408, resigned Ibid.
. Willielmus Malberthorp, resigned Ibid.
. Willielmus Wandesford, 1410, resigned Ibid.
. Johannes de Thoralby, 1419, resigned Ibid.
. Henricus Eton, 1421 Ibid.
. Johannes Bonour, 1427 Ibid.
. Johannes Lethom, 1435, resigned Ibid.
. Thomas Tanfeld, 1436 Ibid.
. Robertus Mason, L. L. D. Quaere whether or not he resigned Ibid.
. October 9th, 1439, Robert, Bishop of Durham, made a grant of the nomination
to the parish church of Gateshead for one turn only to University-College,
Oxford See Bourne's History sub anno.
. Charles Mann, 1493 Randall's MSS.
. William Baker occurs as curate here February 19th, 1496 Ibid.
. John Brown, 1532, resigned Register of Bishop Tunstal.
. William Bell, S. T. P. January 1557 Ibid. p. 50.
. William Byrtch, 1559, resigned Randall's MSS.
. Laurence Doddisworthe, minister, July 19th, 1564 Register Pilkington, p. 53.
. William Hodgeson, preacher, October 5th, 1571 Randall's MSS. "Mr. William
Hodgson of Gatesyde, parson and preacher," occurs in St. Nicholas' Register,
Newcastle, August 1581. "Mr. Richard Hodgson, parson of Gatesyde, preacher,"
occurs ibid. August 1585. Quaere whether or not by mistake of the Christian
name for the same person?
. Clement Colmore, 1587, instituted master of St. Edmund's hospital, June 4th,
1587 Randall's MSS. -- Allan's Collections.
. John Hutton, 1595 Randall's MSS.
. Thomas (alias James) Hook, A. M. May 25th, 1612; occurs also 2d August, 1613
Register Neile, p. 26. Collacio R. de Gateside.
. Joseph Brown, A. M. July 18th, 1620, ejected -- alive in 1632 Ibid.
.
An ordinance occurs in the Journals of the House of Commons, July 18th, 1645,
for instituting and inducting Mr. Jonathan Devereux, clerk, into the rectory of
Gateside, alias Gateshead, in the county of Durham Vol. iv. He appears (from
St. Nicholas' Register in Newcastle) to have been buried there March 2d, 1663.
Rushworth, in his Collections, part iv. vol. vii. p. 787, tells us, "1647, the
well-affected in Newcastle are much cast down that a malignant party in that
town are so prevalent, domineering it over the honest party, as they have
lately done in putting a minister into the parish of Gateside, and a cl^th of
the same stamp, who wa^ once a master-gunner in the Earl of Newcastle's army."
.

Thomas Weld put in by the sequestrators Randall's MSS.
.

Sept. 8th, 1652, there is an order of the common council of Newcastle,
appointing 20l. to be given to Mr. Wells, minister of Gateshead, for his good
services to the town of Newcastle Common Council books.
.

John Laidler institut. 16th March 1660 -- on the 18th to St. Edmund's
hospital: King Charles II. patron this turn, sede vacant Register Neile, p.
105. In the assessment for the two last of the four subsidies granted 15
Charles II. 1663, John Laidler had his good valued at 3l. and paid 16s.
.

John Cave, A. M. resigned -- having exchanged with Richard Werge for Nailston
in Leicestershire See Wood's Athenae, vol. ii. p. 854.
.

Richard Werge -- he died about Michaelmas 1685 See Fasti Oxon. Wood -- p. 65.
Kennett's Register, p. 926.
.

John Cock, 1687, deprived Randall's MSS.
.

Robert Brograve, resigned Vide Fasti Oxon. p. 211.
.

George Tullie, A. M. 1691; died April 24th, 1695 "In Gateshead," says the MS.
Life of Barnes, p. 52, "was Mr. Tully, an eloquent man -- he published a book
concerning the government of the tongue -- he was lecturer of St. Nicholas,
Newcastle."
.

John Smith, A. M. collated June 12th, 1695 -- resigned Wilford's Memorials, p.
256.
.

Theophilus Pickering, S. T. P. -- December 5th, 1695 -- resigned He occurs in
St. Andrew's Register, March 4th, 1703, as minister of Gateshead. He died at
Durham (but was buried at Sedgefield) 20th March 1710.
.

Mr. Samuel Simpson occurs as curate of Gateshead, May 11th, 1699 St. Andrew's
Register.
.

Leonard Shaftoe, A. M. 1705. He died August 27th, 1731, and was interred in
the choir He was morning lecturer at All Saints.
.

Robert Stillingfleet, A. M. was inducted 1731; removed to Ryton in 1733
Bourne's History.

There is preserved in the collection of the Society of Antiquaries of London,
a print of Gateshead church, entitled "The South Prospect of Gateshead Church,
humbly dedicated to the Reverend L. Shafto, rector thereof, by his obedient
servant, R. B. ( i. e. Robert Bailey) 1723."

N. B. The chapel of St. Edmund's hospital has been called, but very
improperly, a chapel of case to Gateshead church. -- See account of that
hospital.


.

Mr. Gatis, curate, removed to All Saints.

Mr. Alderson, curate, removed to All Saints.

William Lamb, A. M. rector, 1733, vicar of Chester-le-Street -- died at
Gateshead May 29th, 1769, and was buried in the choir.

Mr. George Stevenson, curate, removed to St. Andrews.

Mr. Pool, curate, removed to Chester-le-Street, where he died.

Mr. Spooner, curate.

Mr. Wilson, curate, died 8 May, 1773.

Mr. Busby, curate and schoolmaster -- removed to Hexham.

Andrew Wood, A. M. rector, 1769 -- of Baliol-College, Oxford, rector of
Darlington, and chaplain in ordinary to the King. -- He died of a fever,
Thursday, 13th March, 1772, and was buried in the choir.

Richard Fawcett, D. D. rector -- vicar of Newcastle -- collated, in 1772, to
the rectory of Gateshead.

-- Denton, curate.

John Falcon, A. B. curate and schoolmaster.

Mr. Frederick Farren, curate and surrogate -- resigned in 1776.

Mr. Farrier, curate -- resigned.

Robert Wilson, A. B. resigned.

August 13th, 1782, Robert Thorp, A. M. was inducted to this rectory, vacant by
the death of Doctor Fawcett. -- He resigned for this promotion the vicarage of
Chillingham, and the perpetual curacy of Doddington, -- chaplain to the
garrison of Berwick upon Tweed, and afternoon lecturer of St. Ann's in
Newcastle upon Tyne.

APPENDIX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.
APPENDIX.
APPENDIX, P. 20. (No. 1.) Anno tertio Georgii III. Regis. An Act for lighting
the streets and other places, and maintaining a regular and nightly watch
within the town and county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne; and for
regulating the hackney coachmen and chairmen, cartmen, porters, and watermen,
within the same.
WHEREAS the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the county of the town of
Newcastle, is very large and populous; and it would greatly tend to the benefit
and safety of the inhabitants of the said town, and all other persons resorting
thereto, if provision was made for enlightening the streets of the said town,
and for establishing, keeping, maintaining, and governing, an able and regular
watch in the nightime there; and for regulating the chairmen, hackney
coachmen, carmen, common porters, and watermen, within the said town and county
of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the liberties thereof: may it please your Majesty,
that it may be enacted, and be it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that the mayor, recorder, aldermen, and sheriff, of the town and county
of Newcastle upon Tyne, for the time being; and Percival Clennell, esquire,
Richard Lambert, surgeon, George Stephenson, master and mariner, John
Langlands, goldsmith, Banister Bayles, apothecary, Thomas Davidson, gentleman,
Joseph Whitby, glazier, John Smith, gentleman, Peter Russell, merchant, Thomas
Aubone, gentleman, Joseph Barber, stationer, and Thomas Barker, merchant, being
twelve of the principal inhabitants of the parish of St. Nicholas, in the said
town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Sir Matthew White, Baronet, George Colpits,
esquire, Rowland Burdon, esquire, Snow Clayton, merchant, John Baker, hostman,
Ogle Wallis, merchant, James Atkinson, merchant, Thomas Airey, hostman, Joseph
Airey, gentleman, William Monkhouse, merchant, Richard Burdus, gentleman, and
William Cramlington, rope-maker; being twelve of the principal inhabitants of
the chapelry of All Saints, in the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne; and John
Swinburne, esquire, Robert Ellison, esquire, William Lowes, esquire, Henry
Askew, esquire, Joseph Reay, esquire, Matthew Stephenson, esquire, Langdale
Sunderland, esquire, Thomas Dixon, gentleman, Thomas Robinson, gentleman,
George Cuthbertson, esquire, Robert Rich, coachmaker, and George Anderson,
bricklayer, being twelve of the principal inhabitants of the chapelry of St.
John, in the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne; and Ralph Bates, esquire, Giles
Alcock, esquire, John Erasmus Blackett, esquire, Christopher Fawcett, esquire,
William Wilkinson, esquire, Cuthbert Lambert, esquire, William Gibson, esquire,
Isaac Thompson, esquire, Peregrine Tyzack, gentleman, Thomas Gunn, mason,
George Ord, gentleman, and William Newton, architect, being twelve of the
principal inhabitants of the chapelry of Saint Andrew, in the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne; shall be and they are hereby constituted and appointed
commissioners to and for the intents and purposes herein after mentioned and
declared: and in case of the death or removal of any of the abovenamed
inhabitants out of the parish or chapelry wherein he or they do now inhabit,
the place and places of such of them so dying or removing as aforesaid, shall,
on Tuesday in Easter week in every year next after every such death or removal
as aforesaid, be filled up and supplied by the choice and election of the four
and twenty of the respective parish or chapelry where every such vacancy shall
happen.

And it is hereby enacted, that such of the four and twenty of each of the said
parish or chapelries respectively, as do actually reside in such parish or
chapelries, shall assemble in their respective vestries on Easter Tuesday in
every year for that purpose, and then and there nominate and choose such and so
many of the principal inhabitants of the respective parish or chapelry where
such death or removal as aforesaid shall happen, not being the mayor, recorder,
aldermen, or sheriff, of the said town, as shall be equal to the number of
those who shall be then dead, or shall have removed as aforesaid, to be from
time to time joined with the mayor, recorder, aldermen, and sheriff, of the
said town and county for the time being, for putting this act, and the powers
and authorities hereby given, into execution: and in case any default shall
happen in such nomination and choice by the four and twenty of any of the said
parish or chapelries respectively, then and so often it shall and may be lawful
to and for the surviving or remaining commissioners of such parish or
chapelries respectively where such default shall happen, or the major part of
them, who shall be assembled at the then next meeting of the commissioners, to
nominate and choose such and so many of the principal inhabitants of the
respective parish or chapelry where such default shall happen; and not being
the mayor, recorder, aldermen, or sheriff, of the said town; as shall be equal
to the number of those who shall be then dead, or shall have removed as
aforesaid, to be joined with the mayor, recorder, aldermen, and sheriff, of the
town as aforesaid: and such person or persons as shall from time to time be so
elected and appointed according to the intent and meaning of this act, shall
from thenceforth have the same power and authority to act in all things
relating to the matters in this act contained, as if he or they had been
expressly named in, and appointed a commissioner or commissioners by this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
commissioners, or any seven or more of them, are hereby authorized and required
to meet and assemble together in the guildhall of the said town on the
twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand seven hundred and sixty-three, between
the hours of nine and twelve of the clock in the sorenoon of the same day, in
order to put this act in execution; and from and after that time to meet by
adjournment from time to time at the same place (but so as not to interfere
with the business of the magistracy and common council of the said town) or at
any other convenient place within the said town, as they, or any seven or more
of them shall appoint: and in case there shall nor appear, at any meeting which
shall be appointed to be held, a sufficient number of commissioners to act at
such meeting, and to adjourn to another day, then, and in such case, the clerk
to the said commissioners shall, by public notice in writing to be left at the
several vestry rooms of each of the said church or chapels the Sunday then next
ensuing, appoint the said commissioners to meet on that day seven-night after
the day on which such last meeting was appointed to be held; and that the
commissioners shall, at all their meetings, defray their own charges and
expenses.

Provided always, that the said commissioners appointed, or to be appointed as
aforesaid, or any seven or more of them, shall, and they are hereby required to
meet and assemble themselves together quarterly on the first Thursday after the
first day of August, the eleventh day of November, the second day of February,
and the first day of May, in every year, for the purposes of putting this act
in execution.

And be it further enacted, that from and after the twenty-ninth day of
September, one thousand seven hundred and sixty-three, there shall be a
sufficient number of able-bodied men, not exceeding fifty in the whole,
appointed from time to time, as the said commissioners, or any seven or more of
them, assembled as aforesaid, shall think proper, to watch within the walls of
the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne every night, from the twenty-ninth day of
September to the twenty-fifth day of March in every year, and for and during
such other times in every year as the said commissioners, or any seven or more
of them, assembled as aforesaid, shall, from time to time, direct and appoint;
and also there shall be appointed such number of night constables as the said
commissioners, or any seven or more of them, shall think necessary; and also
one or more person or persons to be keeper and lighter, or keepers and
lighters, of the lamps within the said town; and that all such persons shall be
chosen and appointed by the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them,
assembled as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, that the said commissioners, or any seven or more
of them, so assembled as aforesaid, shall order, direct, and appoint, what
number and sort of lamps, and how and where they shall be set up, or to what
house or houses, building or buildings, within the walls of the said town, they
shall be fixed, and how long a time the same shall be and continue lighted; and
also to order and appoint for what time, and at what places, the said watchmen
and night constables shall respectively be stationed, and in what manner, and
how often, they shall go the rounds, and how they shall be armed, and how long
they shall continue upon their duty, and what wages and allowances shall be
paid and given to such watchmen, night constables, and keepers and lighters of
lamps respectively; and shall and may from time to time make such other orders
and regulations as the nature of each particular service shall seem to them to
require.

And, for the better direction and government of the watchmen and night
constables so to be appointed as aforesaid, be it further enacted, that the
said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, so assembled as aforesaid,
shall, with all convenient speed, cause a true copy or transcript of all such
orders and regulations, as shall be made from time to time concerning the said
watchmen and night constables, to be delivered to all the constables for the
time being of the said town; and that from and after the said twenty-ninth day
of September, one thousand seven hundred and sixty-three, one or more of the
said constables for the time being of the said town shall attend every night by
turns, as the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, shall appoint,
and shall keep watch and ward within the walls of the said town, at the places
to be appointed as aforesaid, and during such time and times as shall be
ordered and directed by the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them,
assembled as aforesaid, and so yearly and every year afterward; and that as
well the said constables, as the said watchmen, shall use their best endeavors
to prevent as well all mischiefs happening by fires, as all murders,
burglaries, robberies, and other outrages and disorders; and shall, and they
are hereby empowered and required, to arrest and apprehend all night-walkers,
malefactors, and suspected persons, who shall be found wandering and
misbehaving themselves, in any place or places within the said town; and shall
carry the persons, who shall be so apprehended, to the tower on the Tyne-Bridge
in the said town, to be there safely kept until they can be conveniently
carried before one or more justice or justices of the peace for the said town,
to be examined and dealt with according to law.

And be it further enacted, that one of the said constables, to be appointed by
the said commissioners as aforesaid, shall once or oftener, at convenient times
in every night, go about the said town within the walls thereof, and visit the
several watch-houses, stands, and stations of the watchmen, and take notice
whether all the said watchmen perform their duty in their respective places and
stations, according to such orders and regulations as shall be made for that
purpose as aforesaid: and in case any such watchman shall misbehave, or neglect
his duty, the said constable shall, as soon as conveniently may be, give notice
to any one or more justice or justices of the peace for the said town, who is
and are hereby empowered and required to summon every such watchman immediately
before him or them, and, upon hearing the party or parties, may, if such
justice or justices see good cause, displace every such watchman so offending,
and appoint another in his stead, till the next meeting of the said
commissioners, or any seven or more of them; and also fine such offender in any
sum not exceeding twenty shillings for every such offense.

And be it further enacted, that if any of the said constables shall wilfully
neglect to attend in his turn to keep watch and ward, or shall not come to keep
watch or ward at the respective hours to be appointed as aforesaid, or shall
depart from or discontinue watch and ward, during the respective hours to be
appointed as aforesaid, or shall otherwise misbehave himself or themselves in
the execution of the duty prescribed to them as aforesaid, then, and in every
of the said cases, every such constable so offending, shall respectively
forfeit twenty shillings for every such offense.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that no person, who shall be
appointed or employed as a watchman by virtue of or in pursuance of this act,
shall, by means or on account of his being employed and acting in that duty and
service, gain or be entitled to any settlement in the said town of Newcastle
upon Tyne, or in any parish or chapelry within the same town.

And whereas the mayor, aldermen, sheriff, and common council, of the said town
of Newcastle upon Tyne, in order to promote the good ends and purposes proposed
by this act, have consented and agreed that the charge and expense of obtaining
this act, and of purchasing and setting up a sufficient number of lamps to
enlighten the streets, and of providing and erecting a sufficient number of
watch-houses for the accommodation of the said constables and watchmen, shall
be paid and defrayed by and out of the public moneys belonging to the
corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid; be it therefore further enacted,
that the charge and expense of obtaining this act, and the charge and expense
of purchasing, setting up, and fixing such and so many lamps, and at such
places, as by the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, assembled
as aforesaid, shall be directed and appointed by virtue of this act; and also
the charge and expense of providing and erecting such and so many watch houses,
and at such places, for the accommodation of the said constables and watchmen,
as by the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, assembled as
aforesaid, shall be directed and appointed, shall respectively be paid and
defrayed by the said corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the said
corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne is hereby made liable and answerable for
such respective charges and expenses as aforesaid.

And, for defraying the charges and expenses of maintaining and repairing all
the said lamps erected and set up, or to be erected and set up, by virtue of
this act, and lighting and supplying the same with all proper materials, and
keeping such nightly watch within the said town as aforesaid, be it further
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the said twenty-fourth
day of June, one thousand seven hundred and sixty-three, the several and
respective commissioners, inhabitants within the said parish of Saint Nicholas,
or any two or more of them, and the several and respective commissioners,
inhabitants within the said several and respective chapelries of All Saints,
Saint John, and St. Andrew, or any two or more of such respective
commissioners, being assembled at such their respective quarterly meetings as
aforesaid, shall and may, and they are hereby respectively required, when and
so often as there shall be occasion, to nominate and appoint two or more able
and sufficient inhabitants of each of the said parish of Saint Nicholas, and
chapelries of All Saints, Saint John, and Saint Andrew (being inhabitants
within the walls of the said town and liable to be rated by this act) to be
assessors and collectors within the said parish and chapelries respectively,
but within the walls of the said town, in order to raise money for the purposes
aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that in case it shall happen that
at any of such general quarterly meetings as aforesaid, there shall not be
present two or more of the said respective commissioners, inhabitants within
the said parish of Saint Nicholas, and two or more of the said respective
commissioners, inhabitants within the said several chapelries of All Saints,
Saint John, and Saint Andrew respectively, or such number, being present, shall
refuse or neglect to nominate and appoint such assessors and collectors as
aforesaid; then, and in every such case, it shall and may be lawful to and for
the commissioners assembled at such general quarterly meeting, or any seven or
more of them, to nominate and appoint assessors and collectors for such parish
and chapelries respectively, for which no assessors and collectors shall happen
to be nominated and appointed by the respective commissioners of such parish or
chapelries respectively.

And be it further enacted, that the commissioners assembled at any such
general quarterly meeting as aforesaid, shall take care that summons be issued,
under the hands of two or more of them, to the several assessors and collectors
appointed by virtue of this act, thereby requiring them respectively to appear
before them, and the other commissioners, at a certain day, time, and place, in
such summons to be mentioned, not exceeding six days from the date of such
summons; and on their appearing, the said commissioners, or such of them as
shall be then present, shall order and direct them how and in what manner they
are to make their assessments, and how they ought to proceed in the execution
of this act; and shall then appoint another day for the said assessors and
collectors to appear before the said commissioners, and bring in their
assessments in writing, under their hands, to be verified upon oath or
affirmation, as herein after is directed.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every of
the said assessors shall and they are hereby empowered and required
respectively to make and settle an equal yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly
pound rate or rates, assessment or assessments, as by the said commissioners,
or any seven or more of them, assembled at such general meetings as aforesaid,
shall be ordered and directed, upon all and every occupier or occupiers of any
land, house, shop, wharf, warehouse, loft, cellar, malting, brewhouse, or other
tenement, or any part of any house, shop, wharf, warehouse, loft, cellar,
malting, brewhouse, or other tenement, situate within the walls of the said
town of Newcastle upon Tyne, within the respective parish or chapelry for which
such assessors respectively shall be appointed to act, whether such occupier or
occupiers do or shall reside within such parish or chapelry, or elsewhere, such
rate or rates, assessment or assessments, not to exceed in the whole in any one
year sixpence in the pound, of the improved yearly value of any lands, houses,
shops, wharfs, warehouses, lofts, cellars, maltings, brewhouses, or other
tenements, to be assessed and charged as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, that the said assessors shall respectively sign
their said assessments, and also, at the time of bringing in their said
assessments to the said commissioners, shall make oath, or, being of the people
called Quakers, a solemn affirmation (which oath or affirmation the said
commissioners, or any two or more of them, are hereby authorized and required
to administer) that the said assessment or assessments, so brought in by the
said assessors respectively, is and are, according to the best of their
respective skill, knowledge, and information, a true, fair, and just, yearly,
half-yearly, or quarterly rate or assessment, as the case shall be, upon all
and every occupier or occupiers of any land, house, shop, wharf, warehouse,
loft, cellar, malting, brewhouse, or other tenement, or any part of any land,
house, shop, wharf, warehouse, loft, cellar, malting, brewhouse, or other
tenement, situate within the walls of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne,
within the parish or chapelry for which such assessment shall be made: and the
said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, shall then also diligently
examine into the rate or assessment made upon the said several assessors by the
said assessors themselves; and shall and may, if they see cause to suspect the
said rate or assessment made upon the said assessors, rate and assess every
such assessor, for all and singular the matters and things for which, by this
act, he ought to be rated and assessed; and all sums assessed upon every the
said assessors; and the assessments made and set by the assessors aforesaid,
shall be collected and levied according to the true intent and meaning of this
act: and all such rates and assessments respectively so to be made as
aforesaid, shall be allowed and signed by the said commissioners, or any seven
or more of them, so assembled as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the respective
collectors of the aforesaid rates and assessments in the respective parish and
chapelries aforesaid, for gathering the respective sums to be comprised in or
charged by such rates and assessments respectively, and for giving receipts to
the person or persons of whom they shall receive the same, shall have and
receive for their pains and trouble in collecting and paying the money,
threepence for every pound to be by them so collected and paid, which the said
collectors are hereby empowered to detain out of the last payment of their
several and respective collections.

And be it further enacted, that if any person appointed an assessor or
collector as aforesaid, shall wilfully refuse or neglect to perform his duty in
the due and speedy execution of this act, the said commissioners, or any seven
or more of them, may and shall by virtue of this act impose on such person or
persons so refusing or neglecting, any fine not exceeding the sum of ten
pounds, nor less than five pounds, for every offense; the same to be inserted
in and made a part of the assessment for the parish or chapelry where such
person or persons, so refusing or neglecting, shall inhabit, and be levied in
the same manner, and applied for the same purposes, as the rates and
assessments made in pursuance of this act are directed to be levied and applied.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said rates and
assessments, being allowed and confirmed as aforesaid, and all arrears becoming
due upon the same, shall be collected from the several occupiers so to be
assessed by such person or persons as shall be appointed by the said
commissioners, or any seven or more of them as aforesaid, to collect and
receive the same respectively: and in case any person or persons, so assessed,
shall refuse or neglect to pay such rate or assessment by the space of three
days next after demand thereof made by the person or persons to be appointed
collector or collectors in pursuance of this act, it shall and may be lawful to
and for such collector or collectors respectively, by warrant under the hands
and seals of two or more of the said commissioners, and which warrant they are
hereby empowered and required to grant to the collector applying for the same,
to levy the same by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the party so
neglecting or refusing to pay the same, wheresoever the same may be found,
rendering to the party or parties whose goods shall have been so distrained and
sold, the overplus (if any), the reasonable charges of making such distress and
sale being first deducted.

And it is hereby declared and enacted, that the form of such warrant shall be
in the words following; that is to say, TO A. B. collector of the watch and
lamp assessments within the parish or chapelry of (...) You are hereby
commanded to make distress of the goods and chattels of C. D. of (...)
wheresoever you can find the same, for the sum of (...) assessed upon him or
her by virtue of the Newcastle watch and lamp act; and such distress you are to
detain and keep for the space of five days, next after making and taking
thereof for the said sum of (...) together with the charges of making and
keeping such distress, unless the said sum of (...) and the reasonable charges
of making such distress, shall be sooner paid: and if the same shall not be
paid before the end of the said five days, then you are hereby further
commanded, as soon as may be, to sell the said goods and chattels which shall
be by you distrained; and, out of the money arising by such sale, to detain the
said sum of (...) rendering the overplus (if any), the reasonable charges of
making such distress and sale being first deducted, to the said C. D. upon
demand.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that if any person or persons
shall find him, her, or themselves aggrieved by any such rates or rates,
assessment or assessments, or if any dispute or difference shall arise between
the several occupiers of any message, house, shop, warehouse, malthouse,
granary, building, yard, or other thing whatsoever, rated or assessed for the
purposes aforesaid, touching or concerning their respective proportions of any
such rates or assessments made by virtue of this act, it shall and may be
lawful for such person or persons to appeal to the said commissioners at their
next general meeting for hearing appeals; and the said commissioners, or any
seven or more of them, or the major part of them at such meeting assembled, are
hereby empowered to summon and examine witnesses upon oath, and to hear and
determine the matter of the said appeal, and to make order therein as to them
shall seem meet; and such determination and order shall be final.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
commissioners, or any seven or more of them, shall, and they are hereby
required to give the collectors of the said rates or assessments notice at what
time and place the appeals of any person or persons who shall think themselves
aggrieved by being over-rated by the said assessors, may be heard and
determined; which day of appeal, so to be appointed by the said commissioners,
shall be within twenty days, and not sooner than fourteen days, after the said
assessments shall be signed and allowed by the said commissioners as aforesaid;
and every such collector is hereby also required, on the Sunday next after he
shall have received such notice as aforesaid from the commissioners, to cause
public notice thereof to be given in the church or chapel belonging to the
parish or chapelry for which he shall be collector, immediately after divine
service, of the time and place so appointed by the said commissioners for
hearing and determining appeals as aforesaid, which the clerk of such parish or
chapelry is hereby required to do at the request of such collector or
collectors; and such collectors shall also cause the like notice in writing to
be affixed upon the door of each church and chapel in the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, on the same Sunday, that all persons who shall think
themselves over-rated may know when and where to make their appeal to the said
commissioners; and every person, so intending to appeal to the said
commissioners, shall and is hereby required to give notice thereof in writing
to one or both of the assessors of the parish or chapelry wherein he is so
rated, of such his intention to appeal, at least four days before the day
appointed for hearing and determining appeals, that such assessor or assessors
may then and there attend to justify the said assessment; and such assessor or
assessors are hereby required then and there to attend for that purpose.

And it is hereby declared, that all appeals once heard and determined by the
said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, or the major part of them
then present on the day and days by them appointed for hearing appeals as
aforesaid, and all assessments not appealed against and prosecuted as
aforesaid, shall be final, without any further appeal upon any pretense
whatsoever: and in case of any controversy arising concerning any rate or
assessment upon any of the said commissioners, or concerning any matter or
thing wherein any of the said commissioners shall be any ways interested or
concerned, the commissioners that shall be interested or concerned therein
shall have no vote, but shall withdraw during the debate of such controversy,
until it be determined by the rest of the commissioners then present.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, that in case at any time seven of
the said commissioners shall not attend upon the day appointed for hearing and
determining appeals, so that the appeals, of which notice shall be given as
aforesaid, cannot be heard and determined by the said commissioners as
aforesaid, then, and so often as the case shall so happen, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the mayor of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and any
two of the aldermen of the same town, or, in the absence of the mayor, any
three of the aldermen, to appoint a future day within fourteen days then next
following for the hearing of such appeals; of which day public notice shall be
given in the same manner as herein before directed by the commissioners: and in
case seven commissioners shall not attend at such day to be appointed as
aforesaid, that then the said mayor and aldermen, or aldermen as aforesaid,
shall and may, and they are hereby empowered to summon and examine witnesses
upon oath, and to hear and determine the matter of such appeals, and to make
order therein, as to them shall seem meet; and such determination and order
shall be final.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, that if any person liable to pay the
said rates and assessments by virtue of this act, shall remove from the house,
tenement, or premises, in respect of which such rate or assessment is made,
before the assessment due from such person shall be paid, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said collector, by warrant as aforesaid, to levy the same
by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the person who ought to pay
the same, in case such person shall reside within the said town of Newcastle
upon Tyne, and a sufficient distress can be found; or otherwise the mayor of
the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne for the time being, shall and may sue for
and recover the same by action of debt, bill, plaint, or information, in any of
his majesty's courts of record at Westminster, with full costs of suit.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, that no person or persons, who shall
be charged with, or pay to, any rate or rates, assessment or assessments, to be
made by virtue of or in pursuance of this act, shall thereby gain, or be deemed
or construed to gain, any settlement in the parish or place wherein such rate
or assessment, or payment, shall be made.

Provided also, that nothing in this act contained shall empower the said
commissioners, or any of them, to charge any halls or meeting houses belonging
to the several fraternities or societies, or any hospitals or public buildings,
or places used for divine worship, within the walls of the said town, or any
lands, houses, or buildings whatsoever, without the walls of the said town,
with the payment of any rate or assessment for the purposes aforesaid, or any
of them.

And be it further enacted, that all and every person and persons, who shall
receive any money by virtue of this act for the purposes aforesaid, shall, from
time to time, and as often as the said commissioners, or any seven or more of
them, at any time assembled shall require, make and render in writing to such
commissioners, or unto such other person or persons as they shall appoint, a
true and perfect account upon oath (which said oath may be taken in writing
without any stamp thereupon, before the said commissioners, or any seven or
more of them, who are hereby empowered and required to administer the same) of
all sums of money by such person or persons collected or received, or which
shall have been rated and assessed as aforesaid, and not received, and all
other matters and things committed to their charge by virtue of and under the
authority of this act, and pay and deliver unto such person or persons as the
said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, shall direct and appoint, all
and every such sum and sums of money as shall remain in his or their hands at
the time of such account: and if such collector or collectors shall refuse or
neglect to account for and pay such sum and sums of money accordingly, any two
or more of the said commissioners shall and may, by warrant under their hands
and seals, cause the same to be levied by distress and sale of the goods and
chattels of such collector or collectors, rendering the overplus (if any be),
the reasonable charges of making such distress and sale being first deducted,
to the owner; and if sufficient distress cannot be found, then the mayor of the
said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or, in his absence, any two of the aldermen,
shall and may by virtue of this act, by warrant under his or their hand and
seal, or hands and seals, commit such person or persons to the common gaol of
the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, there to remain without bail or mainprize
until he or they shall have made a true and perfect account, and satisfied and
paid so much money as, upon the said account, shall be remaining in his or
their hands, or shall have compounded for the same with the said commissioners,
or any seven or more of them; which composition the said commissioners, or any
seven or more of them, are hereby empowered to make and receive.

And be it further enacted, that all moneys arising by the rates and
assessments by this act directed to be made and levied, shall be applied to and
for the defraying the expenses of enlightening the said streets, and in
establishing, regulating, supporting, and maintaining such nightly watch as is
hereby directed, and for other the uses and purposes herein before mentioned
and declared, and to and for no other use, intent or purpose, whatsoever.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, that in case there shall be a
deficiency in any rate or rates, assessment or assessments, so to be made as
aforesaid, either by lands, houses, shops, wharfs, warehouses, lofts, cellars,
maltings, brewhouses, or other tenements, being unoccupied, or by the
insolvency or removal of any of the occupiers, for which or upon whom the said
rates or assessments are respectively charged, so that the charges of
enlightening the said streets, the wages or allowances to the watchmen, and
other incident charges in any one year, cannot be fully satisfied, paid, and
discharged in that year, then such deficiency shall be supplied by the
assessment for the next succeeding year; but so as such assessment shall not
exceed in any one year the rate of six pence in the pound as aforesaid: and if
at the end of any one year, and the closing the accounts of the said year, any
surplus money shall happen to be collected by such rate or rates, assessment or
assessments as aforesaid, such surplus shall be carried on to the next year's
credit, and shall be applied for such uses, and in such manner, as the rate or
rates, assessment or assessments, therein collected, are by this act directed
to be laid out and applied.

And be it further enacted, that an account of the total sums assessed and
collected, and of all the moneys paid for all or any of the purposes in this
act mentioned, and all orders, regulations, contracts, and other proceedings of
the said commissioners, shall be fairly entered in a book or books to be
provided for that purpose; and shall be examined, adjusted, and signed, at a
meeting of the said commissioners, to be held yearly on Thursday in Easter week
for that purpose; which said book or books and accounts shall be deposited in
the hands of the clerk to the said commissioners, and shall and may, at all
seasonable times, be inspected and perused by any person or persons
contributing to the charge of the lamps and watch, without fee or reward: and
any person or persons, so contributing as aforesaid, may take copies of any
entries in such book or books, paying for every copy of an entry, not
containing more than one hundred words, two pence; and so in proportion for any
greater or less number of words.

And it is hereby enacted, that the said book and books, so signed by the said
commissioners, or any seven or more of them, shall be good and sufficient
evidence in all courts whatsoever, of all and singular the matters and
transactions in such book and books entered and contained.

And be it further enacted, that the said commissioners, or any seven or more
of them, present at the first or any succeeding meeting, by any writing under
their hands and seals, shall and may elect and appoint a fit person to be clerk
and treasurer, and from time to time remove such clerk and treasurer, as they
shall see occasion, and appoint another in case of such removal or death; and
out of the money arising by the said rates or assessments, make such allowance
or allowances to such clerk and treasurer, for his care and pains in the
execution of his office, as to them shall seem meet, not exceeding ten pounds a
year, so as such clerk and treasurer do give security to the satisfaction of
the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them, for the due performance
of his trust and office.

And be it further enacted, that the said commissioners, or any seven or more
of them, shall and may contract with any person or persons, not being a
commissioner or commissioners, for finding and providing the said lamps with
all requisite and necessary materials, and for lighting, attending, dressing
and repairing the same, so as fourteen days notice at least be given by
advertisement in a Newcastle weekly newspaper, for all persons willing to
undertake the enlightening the streets according to the tenor and true intent
and meaning of this act, to make proposals for that purpose, to be offered and
presented to the said commissioners, at a certain time and place in such
advertisement to be mentioned.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons shall wilfully or maliciously take away, break, throw down, or
extinguish any lamp that shall be hung out or set up to light the streets, or
other places within the liberties of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or
wilfully damage the posts, irons, or other furniture thereof, every person so
offending therein, and being thereof convicted by the oath of one or more
credible witness or witnesses, before any one or more justice or justices of
the peace for the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, shall, for every such
offense, forfeit and pay the sum of ten pounds for every lamp, or furniture
thereof, so broken, taken away, thrown down, extinguished, or otherwise
wilfully damaged, to be levied and recovered in such manner as in this act is
hereafter mentioned.

And be it further enacted, that in case any person or persons shall
carelessly, negligently, or accidentally, break, throw down, or otherwise
damage any of the said lamps so to be hung out or set up as aforesaid, or the
irons, posts, or other furniture thereof, or extinguish the lights thereof, and
shall not, immediately upon demand, make satisfaction for the damage done
thereto, then, and in such case it shall and may be lawful to and for any one
or more of the said justices, upon complaint thereof to him or them made, by
any one or more credible person or persons, to summon before such justice or
justices the person or persons who shall be complained of for doing such damage
as aforesaid; and upon hearing the allegations and proofs of both parties, or
nonappearance of the person or persons so complained of, to award such sum or
sums of money, by way of satisfaction for such damage, as such justice or
justices shall think reasonable: and in case of refusal or neglect to pay any
sum of money so awarded, within three days after demand thereof made, the same
shall be levied and recovered in manner herein after mentioned.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that no person or persons who
shall be rated, assessed, and pay to any rate or rates, assessment or
assessments, to be made in pursuance of this act, shall be liable to keep watch
or ward within the said town, by virtue of the statute of Winchester, made in
the thirteenth year of King Edward the First, or any subsequent statute
relating thereto; but all such persons shall be discharged of and from the
same, except in cases of public calamity or disturbances.

And be it further enacted, that the mayor for the time being, or any one or
more justice or justices of the peace for the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne,
shall and may hear and determine any of the offenses, which are herein before
or herein after made subject to, and punishable by, any pecuniary penalties
directed to be levied by this act, and not herein before directed to be levied
by the commissioners; and such mayor, justice or justices, are hereby
authorized and required, upon any information exhibited, or complaint made in
that behalf, within three months after such offense committed, to summon the
party or parties accused, and the witnesses on each side; and after oath made
of the commitment of either of the facts abovementioned, by one or more
credible witness or witnesses, to issue a warrant or warrants for the
apprehending the party or parties so offending, and upon the appearance, or
contempt of the party accused in not appearing (upon proof or notice given) to
proceed to the examination of the witness or witnesses upon oath (which said
oath such mayor, or justice or justices is and are hereby authorized and
required to administer) and to give judgment, sentence, and determination, as
shall be just and conformable to the true intent and meaning of this act; and
where the party accused shall be convicted of such offense upon such
information as aforesaid, or confession or nonappearance of the party accused,
such mayor or justice or justices, shall and may issue a warrant or warrants
for levying the pecuniary penalties and forfeitures so adjudged by distress of
the goods and chattels of the offender or offenders, and to cause sale to be
made thereof (in case they shall not be redeemed in five days), returning to
the party the overplus, if any be, after deducting the said penalty or
penalties, and the charges of such distress and sale: and in case any person or
persons shall be convicted, in pursuance of this act, of breaking, throwing
down, or extinguishing any lamp to be hung out or set up as aforesaid, or
wilfully damaging the posts, irons, or other furniture thereof, and no goods or
chattels of any person so offending can at the time of such conviction be found
within the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, then, and in such case, the said
mayor, or the justice or justices of the peace before whom such person or
persons shall be convicted as aforesaid, shall and may commit such offender to
the house of correction of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, there to be
kept to hard labor for any time not exceeding the space of three months, or
until such penalty or penalties shall be paid: and in case any person or
persons, who shall be awarded to pay any sum or sums of money by way of
satisfaction for damage, in carelessly, negligently, or accidentally, breaking,
throwing down, or otherwise damaging any of the said lamps, shall neglect or
refuse to pay the sum or sums of money so awarded within three days after
demand thereof made, then, and in such case, the said mayor, or justice or
justices, who shall have awarded satisfaction as aforesaid, shall and may cause
the same by warrant under his or their hand and seal, or hands and seals, to be
levied by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the person or persons
who shall have so done such damage, rendering to him, her, or them, the
overplus (if any) after deducting the costs and charges of such distress and
sale when demanded; and in case no sufficient distress can be found, such
mayor, or justice or justices, shall and may, by like warrant, commit the
person or persons so neglecting or refusing to pay the sum or sums so awarded,
to the gaol of the said town, for any time not exceeding the space of ten days,
or until he, she, or they, shall make such satisfaction as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the property of the
said lamps, and of the posts, irons, and other furniture thereof, and of the
watch-houses, and of the commissioners books, shall be vested in the mayor of
Newcastle upon Tyne for the time being, and he is hereby authorized and
empowered to prefer and prosecute indictments against any person or persons for
stealing, taking away, breaking, extinguishing, damaging, or spoiling the same,
or any of them, or otherwise to sue for and recover all and every or any of the
penalty or penalties, or satisfaction, for taking away, breaking,
extinguishing, damaging, or spoiling the said lamps, or any of them, or any of
the posts, irons, or other furniture thereof, by action of debt, bill, plaint,
or information, in any of the courts of record at Westminster, with full costs
of suit.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all the penalties
and forfeitures herein before mentioned to be recoverable before the said
justices of the peace, when recovered, shall be paid and applied as follows;
that is to say, one moiety thereof to the informer, and the other moiety
thereof into the hands of the treasurer, to be laid out and applied to and for
such uses and purposes as the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them,
shall, under their hands, direct and appoint.

And be it further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
commissioners, or any seven or more of them, assembled as aforesaid, to make
and give such rules, orders, directions and provisions, with reasonable
penalties for the better regulation and government of the night constables,
watchmen, and lamplighters, to be employed pursuant to and for the purposes of
this act, according to the general tenor, purport, true intent and meaning
hereof, as to the said commissioners, or any seven or more of them assembled as
aforesaid, shall seem requisite and expedient, so as such rules, orders, and
directions, be not repugnant to this present act, and so as the same be not
contrary to law.

And it is hereby enacted and declared, that such rules, orders and directions,
so made and published as aforesaid, shall be as good and effectual to all
intents and purposes, as if the same were expressed, inserted, contained, and
enacted in the body of this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons shall wilfully and maliciously take away, break, throw down, or
extinguish, any lamp that shall be hung out or set up by any private person,
within the liberties of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or wilfully
damage the posts, iron, or other furniture thereof, every person so offending
therein, and being thereof convicted by the oath of one or more credible
witness or witnesses, before one or more justice or justices of the peace for
the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne (which oath the said justice or justices
is and are hereby empowered to administer) shall, for every such offense,
forfeit and pay to the owner or proprietor of every such lamp the sum of ten
pounds for every lamp or furniture thereof so broken, taken away, thrown down,
extinguished, or otherwise wilfully damaged, to be recovered and levied in such
manner as herein before is directed concerning the wilfully and maliciously
taking away, breaking, throwing down, or extinguishing, any lamp that shall be
hung out or set up to enlighten the streets or other places of the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne by virtue of this act: and in case any person or persons
shall be convicted, in pursuance of this act, of taking away, breaking,
throwing down, or extinguishing, any lamp to be hung out or set up as above is
mentioned, or wilfully damaging the posts, irons, or other furniture thereof,
and no goods or chattels of any person so offending can at the time of such
conviction be found within the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne,
then, and in such case, the justice or justices of the peace before whom such
person or persons shall be convicted as aforesaid, shall and may commit such
offender to the house of correction of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne,
there to be kept to hard labor for any time not exceeding the space of three
months, or until the penalty aforesaid shall be paid.

And whereas it may be convenient and beneficial not only to the inhabitants of
the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, but also to all other persons resorting
thereto, that provision should be made for enlightening and keeping a watch in
the nightime in the several streets herein after mentioned, without the
walls, but within the liberties of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne; that
is to say, the street leading from Pilgrim-Street-Gate to the Barras-Bridge,
the street leading from Newgate to the Barras-Bridge aforesaid, the street
leading from Newgate to Gallow-Gate-Pant, the street leading from the
Close-Gate to Skinner-Burn, and the street leading from Sand-Gate to the east
end of St. Ann's street; be it therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that if at any time or times hereafter the major part in value of the occupiers
of houses, shops, wharfs, warehouses, lofts, cellars, maltings, brewhouses, or
other tenements, situate in any of the said last-mentioned streets, shall and
do, by writing under their hands, apply to the said commissioners authorized by
this act, at any meeting of the said commissioners had in pursuance of this
act, and shall and do, by such writing, request that the street or streets in
which such persons so applying are occupiers as aforesaid may be enlightened
and watched, pursuant to the intent and meaning of this act, then, and in every
such case, this act, and all and every the clauses, powers, provisoes,
restrictions, matters, and things, herein contained, of and concerning any
matter or thing happening, arising, or to be done within the walls of the said
town of Newcastle upon Tyne, shall, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, be
construed, deemed, and taken to extend to such street and streets respectively
for and in behalf of which such application shall be made, as fully as if such
streets had been, at the time of the passing this act, situate within the walls
of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

Provided always nevertheless, and it is hereby further enacted and declared,
that no money to be raised by any rate or assessment in any one of the said
streets situate without the walls of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne,
shall be applied to any other of the said streets situate within or without the
walls of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

And, for the better regulating and governing the chairmen of the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, it is hereby further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that from and after the twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand seven hundred
and sixty-three, the mayor and aldermen of the said town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, or any three or more of them, whereof the mayor for the time being to be
one, shall and may, and they are hereby empowered, authorized, and required,
under their hands and seals, to license all or any person or persons who shall
keep any glass chair after the said twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand
seven hundred and sixty-three, to be let out to hire within the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, or the liberties or precincts thereof; the charge of every
such license, to be paid or borne by every respective chairman, not to exceed
the sum of one shilling; and that the number of glass chairs so to be licensed
shall not be under the number of ten, if so many be requested by any person or
persons fitly qualified; and the said licenses, and every of them, shall be
granted to continue for and during the term of one year, from the date of each
respective license, and no longer.

And be it further enacted, that from and after the said twenty-fourth day of
June, one thousand seven hundred and sixty-three, no person or persons shall
presume to let or carry for hire, by the hour or day, or otherwise, any chair
within the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or the liberties or precincts thereof,
without such leave or license first had from the said mayor and aldermen, or
any three or more of them, as aforesaid, according to the true intent and
meaning of this act, upon pain to forfeit, for every such offense, the sum of
thirteen shillings and four-pence.

And be it further enacted, that every chair shall have a mark of distinction,
by figure, or otherwise, as the said mayor and aldermen shall think fit and
direct; and the said mark shall be placed on the back or side of every such
chair.

And, for the better discovering and convicting any chairman offending against
this act, it is hereby further enacted, that no chairman shall carry or make
use of any other chair for hire than what shall be so marked, and that no
person shall blot out, obliterate, alter, or deface, the mark or figure of
distinction, appointed by the said mayor and aldermen for his chair, under the
forfeiture of forty shillings for every such offense.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the
said twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand seven hundred and sixty three, all
chairmen that shall from time to time be licensed, shall keep such stands or
places with their chairs, as the said mayor and aldermen, or any three of them,
whereof the mayor shall be one, shall, by any writing under their hands, order,
direct, or appoint: and if any chairman shall, after notice, neglect or refuse
to conform to such orders or directions as aforesaid, every chairman so
offending shall, for every such offense, forfeit and pay the sum of ten
shillings, to be levied by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the
person so offending, by warrant of any one justice of the peace for the said
town, to be applied and disposed of for the use of the poor of the parish or
chapelry where the offense was committed: and if such distress cannot be had,
it shall and may be lawful to and for any two or more justices of the peace for
the said town to commit the person offending to gaol, there to remain without
bail or mainprize, until he shall have paid such penalty or forfeiture as
aforesaid.

And be it enacted, that such person as the said chairmen shall at any time
carry, may cause the said chairmen to stop as often as he or she shall require,
so as such person do not detain such chairmen above the space of ten minutes in
every six-penny fare, or twenty minutes in every twelvepenny fare: and in case
any chairman shall refuse to carry any such fare, or shall exact, demand, or
take more for his fare or hire than the several rates to be settled and allowed
in pursuance of this act, or shall utter any abusive language, or offer any
other insult to the person he so carries, such chairman so offending, and being
thereof convicted by the oath of one or more credible witness or witnesses,
before any one justice of the peace for the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne
(which oath such justice is hereby empowered to administer) shall, for every
such offense, forfeit and pay the sum of ten shillings, to be levied and
recovered in the manner and for the purposes herein before last mentioned.

And be it further enacted, that in case any chairman or chairmen shall in any
wise offend against this act, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
justice or justices of the peace, before whom complaint shall be made, to
summon the person or persons to whom the license for keeping such chair or
chairs is granted; and in case such person or persons shall not forthwith
produce to such justice or justices the person or persons complained of, the
said justice or justices shall and may proceed against such person or persons
licensed as if he or they had been the person or persons complained of.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall, from and after the said twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand
seven hundred and sixty-three, refuse or neglect to pay any chairman or
chairmen the money justly due to him or them for carrying in his or their
chair, or shall wilfully cut, deface, or break any such chair, it shall and may
be lawful to and for any one justice of the peace for the said town, upon
complaint thereof made to him, to grant a summons to bring before him the
person or persons against whom such complaint shall be made, and, upon proof
thereof made by one or more credible witness or witnesses upon oath (which oath
such justice of the peace is hereby empowered to administer) to award
reasonable satisfaction to the party aggrieved for his damage and costs; and
upon refusal to pay and make such satisfaction, to issue a warrant or warrants
of distress to levy the same on the goods and chattels of the offender or
offenders; and for want of such distress to commit the person or persons so
offending to prison for one month, or until satisfaction be made.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the justices of the peace of the said town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, and they are hereby enjoined and required at the general quarter sessions
of the peace to be held for the said town and county, to assess and rate, from
time to time, the several fares to be demanded and taken by, and paid to, the
chairmen of the said town, for carrying from any part or parts within the
liberties of the said town, to any other part or parts within the liberties of
the same town; and such fares, so rated and assessed from time to time by the
said justices, shall be caused by them to be hung up in some public place in
the said town, to which all persons may resort for their information.

Provided always, that nothing in this act contained shall extend to oblige any
chairman to carry any chair beyond the Barras-Bridge, Gallow-Gate-Pant, the
Infirmary, the Firth-House, the Skinner-Burn, or the Rope-Walk at the end of
Sand-Gate, or extend to hinder any person from employing any chairmen or others
to carry his or her own private sedan chair.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the justices of the
peace for the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne shall have power and
authority, and they are hereby required at the next general quarter sessions of
the peace after the said twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand seven hundred
and sixty-three, and afterward at the next general quarter sessions of the
peace after Easter in every year, to set down and ascertain the rates, fares
and prices which shall from time to time be paid to hackney coachmen, cartmen,
common porters, or watermen, for the carriage of any person or persons, goods,
or other things whatsoever, from any part of the said town and liberties
thereof, to any other part of the same; and the rates and prices so fixed, to
cause to be hung up in some public place in the said town, to which all
persons may resort for their information; and that no hackney-coachman,
cartman, common porter, or waterman, shall take for carriage of persons, goods,
or other things, above the rates and prices so set, upon pain to forfeit, for
every such offense, the sum of ten shillings, to be levied by distress and sale
of the goods and chattels of the offender or offenders, by warrant of any one
or more justice or justices of the peace for the said town of Newcastle upon
Tyne.

And be it further enacted, that all forfeitures incurred by this act, and not
herein before otherwise directed, shall be disposed of, one moiety to the
informer, and the other moiety to such charitable purposes as the justice or
justices, by whom any conviction shall be made, shall, in his or their
discretion, think fit to direct.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any action or
suit shall be commenced against any person or persons for any thing done in
pursuance of this act, such action or suit shall be commenced within six months
next after the fact committed, and not afterward; and shall be laid in the
town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, and not elsewhere; and the defendant or
defendants, in such actions or suits, may either plead the general issue, or
otherwise make avowry, cognizance or justification, that the thing or things
for which such action or suit shall be brought, was of were done in pursuance
of this act; and upon issue joined, and trial had thereupon, may give this act,
and the special matter, in evidence, and that the same was done in pursuance of
and by the authority of this act; and if it shall appear so to have been done,
or that such action or suit shall be brought after the time before limited, or
shall be laid in any other county or place than as aforesaid, then the jury
shall find a verdict for the defendant or defendants; and upon such verdict, or
if the plaintiff or plaintiffs shall be nonsuited, or discontinue his, her, or
their action or suit, after the defendant shall have appeared; or if, upon
demurrer, judgment shall be given against the plaintiff or plaintiffs, the
defendant or defendants shall and may recover treble costs, and have the like
remedy for the same, as any defendant or defendants has or have in other cases
at law.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act shall be
deemed, adjudged, and taken to be, a public act; and shall be judicially taken
notice of as such, by all judges, justices, and other persons whatsoever,
without specially pleading the same.

APPENDIX, P. 20. (No. 2.) Anno vicesimo sexto Georgii III. Regis. An Act for
widening, enlarging, and cleansing the streets, lanes, and other public
places, and for opening new streets, markets, and passages, within the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, and the liberties thereof, and for removing and preventing
annoyances therein; and for regulating the public markets, and common stage
wagons, drays, and carts, carrying goods for hire.
WHEREAS the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the county of the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, is very large and populous, and a place of great resort:
and whereas the streets, lanes, public ways, and market places, within the
said town, and the liberties thereof, which have heretofore, and of right ought
to be maintained and repaired at the sole expense and charge of the corporation
of the said town of Newcastle, are not sufficiently cleansed, and are moreover
subject to various encroachments, obstructions, nuisances, and annoyances, and
are in many places so narrow and steep as to be incommodious and unsafe for the
inhabitants of the said town, and travelers, passengers, and others resorting
thereto: and whereas several of the said market places are inconveniently
situated, and are small, and insufficient for vending the goods, victuals, and
merchandises exposed to sale therein: and whereas it would tend greatly to the
benefit, convenience, and safety of the inhabitants of the said town, and all
persons resorting to, and traveling through the same, if the said several
streets, lanes, public ways, and market places, were well and sufficiently
cleansed, and also kept free from encroachments, obstructions, nuisances, and
annoyances; and if the mayor, aldermen, and common council of the said town,
for the time being, were enabled, at the co^s and charges of the said
corporation, to widen and enlarge the said streets, lanes, public ways, and
market places, and to make and open new streets, lanes, public ways, and
market places, and proper communications therewith, where it may be necessary
or expedient, and from time to time, when in common council assembled, to make
and ordain orders, rules, and regulations, relating to the said markets, and
the carrying and conveying of goods, victuals, and merchandises to, and
exposing the same to sale in such markets; and also to direct and appoint
proper and convenient places for the standing, loading, and unloading of common
stage wagons, drays, and carts, carrying goods, wares, and merchandises for
hire, and for depositing the soil, manure, rubbish, and compost to be made or
occasioned in the said streets, lanes, public ways, and market places; and if,
for all or any of these purposes, the said mayor, aldermen, and common council
of the said town, for the time being, were further enabled, out of the funds
and revenues of the said corporation, to purchase lands, houses, or tenements
within the said town, or the liberties thereof: may it therefore please your
Majesty that it may be enacted; and be it enacted by the King's most excellent
Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, in this present parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that all and every person and persons, inhabiting within
the said town, or the liberties thereof, shall, from and after the second
Sunday next after the passing of this act, sweep, and effectually cleanse, or
cause to be swept and effectually cleansed, the foot-paths or footways in the
whole length of the front of their respective houses, buildings, and walls,
thrice in every week throughout the year; (that is to say) on every Tuesday and
Thursday, before the hour of nine o'clock in the forenoon of each day, and in
the afternoon of every Saturday between one hour before sunset and sunset, or
upon such other days, and at such other times in the day, as the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council for the time being shall, by public notice to be
given by the bellman, or public crier of the said town, appoint; and collect
and put together the dirt and soil arising from such sweeping and cleansing,
without obstructing the way or road in the said streets, lanes, public ways,
and market places, that the same may be ready to be carried away in manner
aftermentioned, upon pain of forfeiting and paying the sum of five shillings
for every neglect therein.

II. And be it further enacted, that the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council for the time being, shall, twice in every week, or oftener,
throughout the year, cause to be raked, swept, and cleansed, all the said
streets, lanes, public ways, and market places (except the foot-paths or
foot-ways thereof, herein-before directed to be swept and cleansed by the
inhabitants), and also the foot-paths or foot-ways before all unoccupied
houses, void or waste grounds, churches, churchyards, chapels, meeting houses,
hospitals, and other public buildings, within the said town; and cause to be
brought proper carts or other carriages into all streets and places within the
said town or the liberties thereof, where such carts or carriages can pass, for
the purpose of receiving and collecting the ashes, cinders, dirt, dust, soil,
manure, and filth of the inhabitants (except any filth from any privy or
necessary house); and shall cause all such ashes, dirt, dust, soil, manure, and
filth (except as aforesaid), brought forth by the inhabitants from their
respective houses, yards and premises for that purpose, and also the dirt,
soil, and manure arising in and out of the said streets, lanes, public ways,
and market places, to be led and carried away, and laid and deposited in such
places, middensteads, or repositories, as shall be appointed for that purpose,
in manner herein after mentioned; and the driver or drivers of such carts or
carriages shall, and they are hereby required to give notice to the inhabitants
of the streets or places where such carts or carriages our pass, by bell, loud
voice, or otherwise, of the approach of their carts or carriages, and, at the
entrance of courts, passages, or places, where the same cannot pass, shall
abide and stay a reasonable time, and till after they shall have given notice,
in manner aforesaid, to all the inhabitants there of their so abiding, in order
that all the inhabitants and persons concerned, respectively, may bring forth
from their respective houses, yards, and premises, their ashes, cinders, dirt,
dust, soil, manure, and filth (except as aforesaid), to be led and carried away
in such carts or carriages, upon pain of every such driver forfeiting five
shillings for every neglect herein.

III. And be it further enacted, that from and after the passing of this act,
all the dirt, soil, and manure, which shall arise or be made in any of the said
streets, lanes, public ways, and market places; and also all ashes, cinders,
dirt, dust, soil, manure, and filth, brought forth by the inhabitant, from
their respective houses, yards, and premises, and led and carried away as
aforesaid, shall belong to, and be the property of the said mayor, aldermen,
and common council for the time being, who shall have full power and authority
to sell and dispose of the same, and the money arising therefrom shall be paid
into the town's chamber of the said town, for the use of the said corporation;
and that no person or persons shall take or carry away, or cause to be taken or
carried away, any dirt, soil, or manure, out of the said streets, lanes,
public ways, and market places, other than the person or persons to be
appointed for that purpose by the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for
the time being, upon pain of forfeiting the sum of twenty shillings for every
such offense.

IV. Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that nothing herein contained shall extend, or be construed to extend, to
prevent any of the inhabitants of the said town, or the liberties thereof, from
preserving and keeping any ashes, dust, dirt, dung, manure, or rubbish, within
their own respective houses, yards, or premises, for their own use, so as the
same be not laid or placed in any of the said streets, lanes, public ways, or
market places, for any longer time than shall be necessary for the loading and
carrying away the same, nor be suffered to annoy any of the said inhabitants;
but in case the person or persons so reserving such ashes, dust, dirt, dung,
manure, or rubbish within his, her, or their respective houses, yards, and
premises, shall thereby annoy any of the said inhabitants, and shall not remove
the same, within the space of two days after notice in writing given to him,
her, or them, under the hand of the town marshal of the said town for the time
being, or left at his, her, or their dwelling house, to remove the same, such
person and persons shall forfeit and pay the sum of ten shillings per day, for
every day such ashes, dirt, dust, dung, manure, or rubbish, shall continue
unremoved after such notice as aforesaid.

V. Provided always, that no person shall be subject to any penalty, by virtue
of this act, on account of any rubbish or dirt, in the said streets, lanes,
public ways, and market places, before the house or tenement of such person,
occasioned by the building or pulling down, rebuilding or repairing any such
house or tenement, so as there be convenient room left for carriages to pass
and repass, and a sufficient way kept clean and open for foot passengers, by
the persons laying or occasioning such dirt or rubbish; nor for the making up
of any lime into mortar, so as sufficient room be left for ^oot passengers and
carriages; and so as the owner or owners of such house or tenement, before
which such lime or rubbish shall lie, shall cause the same to be removed and
taken away, at his, her, or their own costs and charges, within a reasonable
time after such building, pulling down, rebuilding, or repairing shall be
completed, or upon notice to be given to him, her, or them, or left at his,
her, or their said house or tenement where such rubbish or lime shall lie, for
that purpose, in writing, under the hand of the town marshal of the said town,
for the time being; and so as whilst the same shall be lying in the said
streets, lanes, public ways, or market places, such owner or owners shall set
up and maintain a sufficient light upon or against the same every night, during
the whole night, from the time it becomes dark, to prevent any mischief
happening to passengers.

VI. And be it further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful for the said
mayor, aldermen and common council for the time being, when they shall think
proper or expedient, to compound with any of the inhabitants within the said
town, or the liberties thereof, for such sum or sums of money as they shall
think proper, for the sweeping and cleansing of the foot ways or foot paths to
be done by such inhabitants respectively before the fronts of their respective
houses, buildings, or walls, by virtue of this act, provided such composition
money be always paid in advance into the town's chamber, for the use of the
said corporation, and the sweeping and cleansing so compounded for be properly
and effectually done, by persons to be employed by the said mayor, aldermen,
and common council for the time being, for that purpose.

VII. And be it further enacted, that if any person or persons shall run,
drive, carry, or place, on any of the foot-paths or foot-ways in any of the
said streets, lanes, public ways, or market places, any wheel, sledge,
wheelbarrow, hand-barrow, or carriage, or roll any cask for the space of ten
yards; or wilfully ride, drive, or lead any horse, or other beast or cattle, on
such foot-paths or foot-ways; or shall kill, slaughter, singe, scald, or dress
any beast, swine, calf, sheep, lamb, or other cattle, in any open or public
street, lane, way, or marketplace within the said town or the liberties
thereof; or if any person shall make, hoop, cleanse, burn, wash, or scald any
cask; or hew or saw, or cause to be hewed or sawn, any stone, wood, or timber;
or bind, make, or repair the wheel of any carriage; or shoe, bleed, dress, or
farry, or turn or drive loose any horse, mare or gelding; or shall bait or
cause to be baited any bull; or permit or suffer any bull dog or mastiff dog,
unmuzzled, to be at liberty and go at large; or cause, or wilfully permit or
suffer any swine or other cattle (except swine or other cattle at the time of
fairs or market days for live cattle) to wander or stray; or shall show or
expose to view any stone-horse or stallion in any of the said streets, lanes,
public ways, or market places; or shall throw, lay, or place any wood, ashes,
rubbish, dirt, dung, manure, or filth, or any other nuisance or annoyance
whatsoever, into any of the said streets, lanes, public ways, or market
places; or shall make, or assist in making, any fire or fires, commonly called
bonfires; or shall burn any cork wood; or shall set fire to, let off, or throw
any squib, serpent, rocket, cracker, fire balloon, or other fire-work
whatsoever, within the said town or the liberties thereof, every person
offending in any of the cases aforesaid shall, for every such offense, forfeit
and pay the sum of ten shillings, over and above such penalties as are
inflicted on persons committing any of the aforesaid offenses by any law or
statute now in force.

VIII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and
after the passing of this act, no person or persons shall, on any pretense
whatsoever, set, place, or keep, or cause, or wilfully suffer to be set,
placed, or kept, any booth, stall, shed, table, shamble, bench, or seat, or any
vessel or basket, in any of the said streets, lanes, public ways, or market
places, for the sale of any goods, wares, or merchandises (except only on fair
days; and also except booths, stalls, sheds, tables, shambles, benches or
seats, vessels or baskets, in the public market places in the said town, for
the sale of corn and other grain, fish, butcher's meat, poultry, butter, eggs,
cheese, vegetables, and other viands and provisions; and except also such
booths, stalls, sheds, tables, shambles, benches, or seats, vessels or baskets,
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandises, in such place or places within
the said town, or the liberties thereof, as shall be set out or appointed for
that purpose by the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the time
being, in manner herein mentioned); nor shall hang up or expose to sale, any
goods, wares, or merchandises, or any other matter or thing, upon any slap,
board, crooks, window, or otherwise, so as to obstruct or incommode any of the
foot-ways or carriage-ways within the said town, or the liberties thereof, upon
pain of forfeiting, for every such offense, the sum of twenty shillings.

IX. And be it further enacted, that the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being, shall and may, at any time after the passing of
this act, cause notice to be given to the respective owners and occupiers of
the several houses and buildings within the said town, or the liberties
thereof, to take down, fill up, remove, alter, or regulate all gutters, show
boards, sign-posts or sign-irons, penthouses, shutes, and spouts, standing,
being, or projecting in, upon, or into any of the streets, lanes, public ways,
and market places aforesaid, of whatever breadth the said streets, lanes,
public ways, and market places may happen to be: and also all porches, posts,
pales, rails, and steps, standing or being in any of the said streets, lanes,
public ways, and market places, of less breadth than twenty-one feet from
house to house; and to cause such shewboards, sign-posts, sign-irons,
penthouses, shutes, spouts, porches, posts, pales, rails, and steps, to be
taken down, removed, and carried away, altered or regulated; or to cause such
shewboards, signs, and sign-irons, to be fixed or placed against the fronts of
the houses, shops, or buildings to which they belong, and also such spouts and
shutes, so as to convey, by means of such spo^ts and shutes, the water down the
sides of each house or building, and so into the common venel or drain; and in
case the respective owners or occupiers shall refuse or neglect so to do, for
the space of twenty-eight days next after such notice shall be given to them
respectively (which notice shall be given in writing under the hand of the
mayor of the said town for the time being, and left at the dwelling house or
usual place of abode of such owners or occupiers respectively), it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council of the
said town in the time being, to cause such gutters, shewboards, signs, sign
posts, sign-irons, porches, penthouses, shutes, spouts, pales, rails, and
steps, to be taken down, carried away, altered, regulated, and fixed in manner
aforesaid; and the costs and charges attending the same shall and may be levied
and recovered, of the said respective owners or occupiers, in like manner as
the penalties in this act enacted or ordained are directed to be levied and
recovered.

X. Provided always, that so much of such shewboards, signs, sign-posts,
sign-irons, porches, penthouses, shutes, spouts, pales, rails, and steps, as
shall not be made use of in the alterations directed by this act, shall be
returned to the respective owners, or be left on the spot, or as near as
conveniently may be, or in any other convenient place, to be taken away by such
owners; and if any person or persons shall, at any time or times after the
passing of this act, hang, place, erect, build, or make any gutter, shewboard,
sign, sign-post, sign-iron, penthouse, shutes, spouts, porches, pales, rails,
or steps, or any bulk, bow window, or projecting window, in any of the said
streets, lanes, public ways, or market places, or cause the same to be done,
every person so offending shall, for every such offense, forfeit and pay the
sum of five pounds; and it shall and may be lawful to and for the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council of the said town for the time being, to cause the
same to be taken down, removed, altered, or regulated, in such manner as they
shall think proper, without any notice to be given to the person offending
therein, who shall pay the expense and charge attending the same, which shall
be levied and recovered of him, her, or them, as the penalties and forfeitures
are by this act directed to be recovered.

XI. Provided nevertheless, that all such occupiers of the said houses, shops,
and buildings, as are tenants at ^ackrent, and who shall have paid any of the
charges or expenses of removing or altering any such projections, annoyances,
or encroachments, pursuant to the directions of the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council for the time being, are hereby respectively authorized to deduct
the same out of the rents payable by them for or in respect of such houses,
shops, or buildings; and the respective landlords shall be liable, and are
hereby required to allow such deductions accordingly, upon the receipt of the
remainder of their rents; any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

XII. And be it further enacted, that from and after the passing of this act,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being, to remove, or cause to be removed, all shop or
other windows proj^cting above six inches from the front of the buildings to
which they belong, which shall, in the judgment of the said mayor, aldermen,
and common council for the time being, occasion any obstruction or annoyance in
any part of the said streets, lanes, public ways, or market places, and the
same to alter in such manner as they shall think proper and convenient:
provided always, that in case any such window, already placed or erected, shall
be found to project above the space of six inches as aforesaid, and shall be
adjudged to be an obstruction or annoyance by the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council for the time being, the charge and expense of removing and
altering the same, shall be defrayed out of the funds and revenues of the said
corporation; but in case any person or persons shall hereafter place or erect
any such window, so as to project above the aforesaid space of six inches, and
the same shall be adjudged to be an obstruction or annoyance by the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council for the time being, the charge and expense of
altering and removing the same shall be defrayed by the owner or owners,
occupier or occupiers of the building or buildings in which such obstruction or
annoyance shall be made, and he, she, or they making such obstruction or
annoyance, shall moreover forfeit and pay the sum of five pounds.

XIII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
wagon, coach, chaise, cart, dray, or other carriage (except common stage
wagons, drays, or carts, carrying goods, wares, or merchandises for hire), be
suffered to stand or continue in any of the said streets, lanes, public ways,
or market places, for the purpose of loading or unloading, or any other purpose
whatsoever, more than the space of one hour at any one time; or if any wagon,
coach, chaise, cart, dray, or other carriage, be suffered to stand across any
of the said streets, lanes, public ways, or market places; or if any timber,
bricks, stones, slates, hay, straw, wood, faggots, coals, boards, goods, wares,
merchandises, or other materials or things whatsoever, be laid or placed, and
left to remain in any of the said streets, lanes, public ways, or market
places, for any longer time than shall be necessary for putting the same into
the houses, yards, or private places of the owners thereof (except for
building, taking down, or repairing any houses or tenements); or if any ashes,
rubbish, dung, manure, or filth, or any other nuisance or annoyance whatsoever,
shall be thrown, cast, or laid, and suffered to remain in the said streets,
lanes, public ways, or market places, longer than shall be necessary for the
loading and carrying away the same, then, and in every such case, the owner or
driver of every such wagon, coach, chaise, cart, dray, or other carriage
(except common stage wagons, drays, or carts, carrying goods, wares, or
merchandises for hire), or the owner of any such timber, bricks, stones,
slates, hay, straw, wood, faggots, coals, boards, goods, wares, merchandises,
materials, or things, and the person or persons so throwing, casting, or
laying, or causing to be thrown, cast, or laid, any such ashes, rubbish,
manure, dung, dirt, or filth, nuisance, or annoyance, shall, for every offense,
in any of the cases aforesaid, forfeit and pay the sum of ten shillings.

XIV. Provided always, that nothing herein contained shall extend to subject
any person or persons to the last-mentioned penalty or forfeiture, for laying
or depositing any timber, or other goods, wares, or merchandises, in such part
or parts of the public quay in the said town as is or are appropriated to or
for landing goods, wares, and merchandises from on board ships or vessels lying
at the said quay.

XV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council of the said town for the time being, for the
general benefit of the inhabitants of the said town and the liberties thereof,
and of all others resorting to or traveling through the same, shall, from and
after the passing of this act, have full power and authority, and they are
hereby enabled, at the costs and charges of the said corporation of Newcastle,
to widen and enlarge the street called the Side, by pulling down the houses and
buildings fronting the Water-pant there, bounded by the Side on the south and
west, by the Painterheugh on the east, and by a narrow lane leading from the
Side to the Painterheugh on the north, and by laying the sites of such houses
and buildings into the said street; and to make and open, from the area to be
formed thereby, a street of such breadth as they the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council for the time being, shall think necessary and convenient, not
exceeding seventy feet, to extend in a line northwards to Mosley-Street; and
also to make and open a street of such breadth as aforesaid, not exceeding
seventy feet, from the west side of the Flesh-Market, opposite to the west end
of Mosley-Street, and in a line from thence to Westgate-Street; and also to
widen and enlarge the area or street on the west side of Saint Nicholas'
churchyard, by pulling down the houses and buildings there, now or late
severally belonging to the company of masons, James Gordon, gentleman; John
Bulman, sadler; Robert Horseley, esquire; and Roger Hall, woollen-draper; and
by laying the sites of such houses and buildings into the street there; and
also to make and render more commodious the communication between the said
street called the Side, and the Butcher Bank, by cutting off the corner or
angle of the house and shop now or late belonging to Mr. Banister Bayles, and
laying the site thereof into the street there; and to make and render more
commodious the communication between the Quayside and Sandhill, by cutting off
the corner or angle formed by the houses and shops now or late belonging to
John Hall, doctor of physic, and the representatives of (...) Hilcoat, potter,
deceased, and laying the site thereof into the street there; and also to make
and render more commodious the communication between the Back-Row and the head
of the Side, by cutting off the corner or angle of the house now or late
belonging to the representatives of Mr. Walter Smith, deceased, and laying the
site thereof into the street there: and, in order to complete and effect such
alterations and improvements, they the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council, for the time being, shall, and they are hereby authorized and
empowered, at the like costs and charges of the said corporation, to treat,
contract, and agree with all and every person and persons seized of, or
interested in, the said several houses and buildings, bounded by the Side on
the south and west, by the Painterheugh on the east; and by the narrow lane
leading from the Side to the Painterheugh on the north; the said house and
buildings now or late severally belonging to the company of masons, James
Gordon, John Bulman, Robert Horseley, and Roger Hall; the said house and shop
now or late belonging to Mr. Banister Bayles; the said houses or shops now or
late belonging to the said John Hall, and the representatives of the said (...)
Hilcoat; and the said house, now or late belonging to the representatives of
the said Walter Smith, for the absolute purchase of the said several houses,
shops, and buildings, or any of them; and also to treat, contract, and agree
with all and every person or persons seized of, or interested in, any lands,
messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, within the said town or the liberties
thereof, which shall be necessary to be purchased and taken down in making and
opening the said intended street from the aforesaid area in the Side, to
Mosley-Street, and the said intended street from the present Flesh or
Butcher-Market, to Westgate-Street, for the absolute purchase of such lands,
messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, and of their respective interests
therein; and that it shall be lawful for all bodies politic or corporate,
feoffees, committees, guardians, or other trustees, for and on the behalf of
themselves, their heirs and successors, or of any infants, feme-coverts,
idiots, lunaticks, or other cestuique trusts, and for all other persons
whomsoever, who are or shall be seized of, or interested in, any of the said
lands, messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, to treat, contract, and agree
with the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the time being, for the
absolute sale thereof, and to convey and assure the same; and all such
contracts, agreements, sales, and conveyances, shall be good, valid, and
effectual, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, any law or statute to the
contrary notwithstanding; and all such bodies politic or corporate, feoffees,
committees, guardians, trustees, and other persons so conveying and assuring,
shall be, and are hereby indemnified for what they shall do in pursuance of
this act: but in case any such body politic or corporate, or other person or
persons seized of, or interested in any such lands, messuages, shops, or
tenements, as aforesaid, shall, for the space of three calendar months after
notice in writing (to be signed by the said mayor for the time being) given to
or left at the dwelling house or houses, or usual place or places of abode of
such person or persons, or of the head officer of any such body politic or
corporate, or at the house of the tenant in possession of any such lands,
messuages, shops, or tenements, neglect or refuse to treat, contract, or agree,
or by reason of absence, or otherwise, be prevented from treating, contracting,
or agreeing for the sale and conveyance thereof, or shall not produce or make
out a clear title thereto, or to his, her, or their estate or interest therein,
then, and in any such case, it shall be lawful for the said mayor, aldermen,
and common council for the time being, to issue a warrant, under the common
seal of the said corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, to the sheriff of the said
town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, thereby requiring and commanding him to
impannel a jury of twenty-four persons qualified to serve on juries, to appear
before the recorder, for the time being, of the said town, at such time and
place, in the said town, as shall in such warrant be mentioned; and the said
sheriff is hereby required to impannel such jury accordingly; and out of the
number of jurymen so impannelled, and appearing at the time and place
aforesaid, the said recorder for the time being is hereby empowered and
required to draw, by ballot, and to swear, or cause to be sworn, twelve men, to
be the jury for ascertaining the value of the said lands, messuages, shops,
houses, or tenements; and in default of a sufficient number of the jurymen so
returned appearing, the said sheriff shall take other honest and indifferent
men of the standers-by, or that can speedily be procured to attend that
service, and be sworn as aforesaid, to make up the said jury to the number of
twelve; and all parties concerned shall have their lawful challenges against
any of the said jurymen, when they come to be sworn, but shall not challenge
the array; and the said recorder for the time being is hereby authorized and
empowered to order, and cause the said jury to view the premises in question
(in case there shall be occasion), and shall and may use such other lawful ways
and means, as well for his own as for the said jury's better information in the
premises, as he shall think fit; and he is hereby empowered and authorized, by
precept under his hand, to summon and call before him, and the said jury, any
person or persons, in order to be examined as a witness or witnesses upon oath
touching the premises, and which oath the said recorder for the time being is
hereby authorized and required to administer; and the said jury, upon their
oaths, after such information had as aforesaid, shall assess and find the value
of the said lands, messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, and the sum or sums
to be paid to the owner or owners thereof, or person or persons interested
therein, according to his, her, and their respective estates and interests, and
shall give in their verdict to the said recorder for the time being, who shall
thereupon give judgment for the money so assessed by such jury to be paid to
the owner or owners, or person or persons interested as aforesaid, according to
the verdict of such jury; which verdict and judgment shall be binding and
conclusive, to all intents and purposes, against all bodies politic and
corporate, and other persons whomsoever, and shall be fairly transcribed on
parchment, and signed by the said recorder for the time being, and enrolled and
kept amongst the records of the said town; and the same, or a true copy
thereof, to be attested by the town clerk of the said town for the time being,
under his hand, shall be deemed to be, and shall be received as good and legal
evidence in any court of law or equity; and all persons shall and may have
recourse to and inspect the same gratis, and may take copies thereof, or
extracts therefrom, paying for the same after the rate of twopence for every
seventy words contained in each copy or extract.

XVI. Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, that fourteen days previous
notice of the day, hour, and place of every such impannelling of such jury or
juries, shall be given in writing, under the hand of the mayor for the time
being, to the owner or owners of, or other person or persons interested in,
such lands, messuages, houses, shops, or tenements, or left at his, her, or
their place or places of abode, or by public advertisement in one of the
public newspapers published at Newcastle.

XVII. And be it further enacted, that, upon payment of the money to be agreed
upon, or to be assessed and adjudged, for the purchase of any such lands,
messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, and of the interests of the owner or
owners, or other person or persons to or for whom the same shall be paid, such
owner or owners, or other person or persons to or for whom such money shall be
so paid, shall, and is and are hereby required to make and execute good and
sufficient conveyances and assurances in the law of such lands, messuages,
shops, houses, or tenements, to the said mayor, aldermen, and common council
for the time being, at the costs and charges of the said corporation; but in
case any body politic or corporate, or other person or persons to or for whom
any such money shall be so assessed and adjudged as aforesaid, shall refuse,
neglect, or omit to make and execute such conveyance and assurance as
aforesaid, being thereunto required by the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being, by writing under the common seal of the said
corporation, such money being tendered to be paid to him, her, or them; or in
case any body politic or corporate, or other person or persons to whom any
such money shall be so adjudged, shall not be able to evince his, her, or their
title to the premises in question, or cannot be found, or by reason of any
dispute depending in any court of law or equity, or for defect of evidence, or
otherwise, it shall not appear to the said recorder for the time being, what
person or persons is or are entitled to the lands, messuages, shops, houses or
tenements in question, then, and in any such case, it shall be lawful for the
said mayor, aldermen, and common council, to retain in their hands the money so
assessed and adjudged, for the use of the party or parties entitled thereto,
and to be paid to him or them, on the execution of proper conveyances, or the
evincing of the title, as the case shall be; and in every such case of retainer
of money as aforesaid, the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the
time being, are hereby required to acknowledge, by writing under their common
seal, the money so retained, and for what premises, and for whose use such
money shall be so retained; which acknowledgment as aforesaid shall be entered
and kept amongst the records of the said town, in such manner as the verdict of
the jury, and the judgment of the said recorder for the time being, is
herein-before directed to be kept; and immediately upon such acknowledgment
being entered as aforesaid, all the estate, right, title, and interest of the
body politic or corporate, or person or persons for whose use such money shall
be retained as aforesaid, in or to the messuages, lands, shops, houses, or
tenements, in respect whereof the same shall be so retained, shall be vested in
the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the time being, as fully and
effectually as if all persons, having any estate or interest therein, had
conveyed the same by any proper and legal conveyance whatsoever.

XVIII. Provided always, that the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for
the time being, shall be accountable for, and shall duly and regularly pay,
during so long as such money shall be so retained by them as aforesaid, out of
the funds of the said corporation, by equal half-yearly portions, interest for
the money so retained, at the rate of four pounds per centum per annum, unto
such person or persons as would have been entitled to receive the rents and
profits of the said lands, messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, on account
of which such money is so retained, in case the same had not been, by this act,
vested in the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the time being, as
aforesaid: and provided also, that in case of retainer of money for want of
title, or from it not otherwise appearing to whom such money shall properly
belong, but not in any other case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
justices of the peace of the said town and county, at any general quarter
sessions of the peace to be holden in and for the said town and county, or at
any adjournment or adjournments thereof, on the application of any person or
persons interested in any such money so retained by the said mayor, aldermen,
and common council for the time being, as aforesaid, to require payment
thereof, or of any part thereof, and to place out and invest the same in some
of the public funds, or on government securities, in the name or names of any
person or persons to be by them named and appointed for that purpose, in trust
for such person or persons as shall afterward appear to be legally entitled
thereto.

XIX. And be it further enacted, that all money to be paid to any body politic
or corporate, feoffees, committees, guardians, or other trustees, for or on the
behalf of any infants, lunaticks, idiots, feme-coverts, or other cestuique
trusts, for or in respect of their several interests in any such lands,
messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, as aforesaid, shall be, by such body
politic or corporate, feoffees, committees, guardians, or other trustees as
aforesaid, receiving the same, laid out, as soon as conveniently may be, in the
purchase of any messuages, lands, or tenements, in fee-simple, to be conveyed
and assured to them respectively, or to such other person or persons as they
shall respectively appoint on their behalf, to, for, upon, and subject to such
and the same uses, trusts, and limitations, as the lands, messuages, shops,
houses, or tenements so to be purchased, shall, at the time when the same shall
be so purchased, stand limited, settled, and assured; and in the mean time, and
until such purchases or purchase shall be made, such money shall be placed out
by such body politic or corporate, feoffees, committees, guardians, or other
trustees, in some of the public funds, or on government security; and the
interest arising or to be produced from such funds or security, shall be paid
to such person or persons, or applied to and for such uses, intents, and
purposes respectively, as the rents and profits of such messuages, lands, or
tenements, to be purchased as last mentioned, in case the same were actually
purchased and settled pursuant to the tenor and true meaning of this act, ought
to be paid and applied.

XX. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
houses and other buildings, to be erected and built in the said intended
streets, or in the place or places to be found and provided for the public
markets, and the standing, loading, and unloading of common stage wagons,
drays, and carts carrying goods for hire, in manner herein-after mentioned,
shall be erected and built with a party wall of bricks or stone, of the
thickness of fourteen inches, and in such uniform fashion and form, and
according to such plan or plans as the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council, for the time being, shall direct or appoint.

XXI. And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said recorder for
the time being shall have power to impose any reasonable fine or fines on the
sheriff of the said town, his deputy or deputies, bailiffs, or agents,
respectively, making default in the duty by this act required to be performed
by the said sheriff, and on any of the persons who shall be summoned and
returned on any such jury or juries, and shall not appear, or appearing, shall
refuse to be sworn on the said jury or juries, or being so sworn, shall not
give his or their verdict, or shall in any other manner wilfully neglect his or
their duty in the premises, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
act; and likewise upon such person or persons summoned as aforesaid to give
evidence, who shall neglect or refuse to appear at such time or times, place or
places, as shall be appointed for that purpose as aforesaid, or appearing,
shall refuse to be sworn, give evidence, or be examined by or before the said
recorder for the time being, and jury or juries, and from time to time to levy
such fine or fines by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the
offender or offenders, by warrant or warrants under the hand and seal of the
said recorder for the time being, to be directed to any one or more of the
sergeants at mace, or constables of the said town, and which sergeant at mace
or constable, sergeants at mace or constables, is and are hereby required and
authorized to execute the same.

XXII. Provided always, that no such fine do exceed the sum of five pounds, and
that such fine or fines shall be forthwith paid into the hand or hands of the
overseer or overseers of the poor of the respective parishes where the offender
or offenders shall reside, for the use of the poor of such respective parishes.

XXIII. Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
such jury shall assess the said lands, messuages, shops, houses, or tenements,
at a greater value than the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the
time being, shall have offered for the same, then the costs and charges of
every kind, attending the obtaining such assessment by a jury, shall be paid
out of the funds and revenues of the said corporation; and if the said jury
shall not assess the said premises at a greater value than the sum or sums
offered for the same by the mayor, aldermen, and common council, that then the
said costs and charges shall be paid by the party or parties refusing to treat,
or to accept the price so offered by the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being, as aforesaid.

XXIV. And whereas, by means of the purchases which the said mayor, aldermen,
and common council for the time being, are by this act empowered to make, they
will or may become possessed of grounds or buildings more than may be necessary
for effecting the several purposes in this act declared; be it therefore
further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council for the time being, and they are hereby authorized
and empowered, from time to time, when any such case shall happen, either by
private contract or public auction, at their discretion, to let, sell, or
dispose of such ground and buildings, either together or in parcels, to any
person or persons willing to take or purchase the same; and to design and
direct in what manner any new houses or buildings to be built thereon shall be
erected.

XXV. Provided always, that the moneys to arise by the letting or sale of such
grounds and buildings, or by the sale of any materials of the purchased
buildings, which shall be pulled down for the purpose aforesaid, shall be paid
into the town's chamber, for the use of the said corporation of Newcastle.

XXVI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the
time being, to find and provide a proper and convenient place, or proper and
convenient places, within the said town, or the liberties thereof, for holding
and keeping public markets for the sale of corn and other grain, fish,
butchers meat, poultry, milk, butter, eggs, vegetables, and other viands and
provisions, goods, wares, and merchandises; and to make and open proper and
convenient communications with, and passages and avenues to the same; and, when
in common council assembled, by acts or orders of common council, to order and
direct such place or places so found and provided as aforesaid, to be used as
public market places accordingly; and also, when in common council assembled,
from time to time, by acts or orders of common council, to ascertain, set out,
and appoint, such particular part or parts of the streets, lanes, public ways,
and market places, within the said town, or the liberties thereof, as they
shall judge proper and convenient, for holding and keeping such market or
markets as aforesaid; and also to ascertain, set out, and appoint such
particular place or places in the said markets, or any of them, for the
erecting any stalls or standings for vending or exposing to sale corn and other
grain, fish, butchers meat, poultry, milk, butter, eggs, vegetables, and other
viands and provisions, goods, wares, and merchandises; and also to make and
ordain such orders, rules, and regulations as to them shall from time to time
seem requisite and necessary for the ordering, directing, and regulating the
said markets, and for fixing and ascertaining the time or times when the said
respective commodities shall respectively be begun to be offered and exposed to
sale, and how long the same may continue exposed to sale, and also the mode and
manner of carrying and conveying the said several commodities to and from such
markets, and also the time or times when any such stalls or standings as
aforesaid shall be erected and set up, and taken down or removed; all which
orders, acts of common council, rules, and regulations shall be printed or
written in legible characters, and affixed in some conspicuous place or places
within the said town, and shall also be advertised two successive times in one
of the weekly newspapers published in the said town, and further made known, to
those whom it may concern, in such manner as to the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council, for the time being, shall seem meet; and in case any person or
persons shall offend against or disobey any of the said orders, rules, and
regulations, so to be made and published as aforesaid, every such person shall,
for every such offense, forfeit and pay the sum of twenty shillings.

XXVII. And be it further enacted, that from and after the making and
publishing any such acts or orders of common council, which shall direct or
appoint, ascertain or set out, any particular place or places for holding and
keeping any market or markets for the sale of corn and other grain, fish,
butchers meat, poultry, milk, butter, eggs, vegetables, and other viands and
provisions, goods, wares, and merchandises, or any of them, no person or
persons shall hold any market in any other part or place of the said town, or
the liberties thereof, for the sale of the said commodities, or such of them
for the sale whereof any place or places shall be so directed or appointed,
ascertained or set out, as aforesaid (except on fair days); nor shall any
person or persons (except on such fair days) erect or set up any stall, booth,
or standing whatsoever, or expose to sale or vend (except in any shop or
warehouse) any such corn or grain, fish, butchers meat, poultry, milk, butter,
eggs, vegetables, or other viands or provisions, goods, wares, or merchandises,
of any sort whatsoever, in any place or places not so directed or appointed,
ascertained or set out, for those respective purposes, by act or order of
common council as aforesaid.

XXVIII. Provided always, that nothing herein contained shall extend to or
affect the fairs or markets held within the said town, or the liberties
thereof, for the sale of horses, sheep, swine, or other live cattle, but that
the same shall be held in the usual places within the said town, or the
liberties thereof; nor shall any thing herein contained extend to affect,
impeach, or prejudice the right or title of the mayor and burgesses of the said
town to the tolls, stallage, free customs, and other profits, which now are, or
at any time heretofore have been, held, enjoyed, received, or taken by the said
mayor and burgesses, or by any other person or persons whomsoever, in or upon
the ancient or other market places within the said town, or the liberties
thereof, or any of them; but that the same tolls, stallage, free customs, and
other profits, shall be received and taken by the said mayor and burgesses, or
such other person or persons as shall be entitled thereto, as the same shall
arise, accrue, or become due, in or upon the said ancient or other market
places, or in or upon any of the new market places to be directed or appointed,
ascertained, or set out by virtue of this act.

XXIX. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the
time being, and they are hereby authorized and empowered to find and provide a
proper and convenient place, or proper and convenient places, within the said
town, or the liberties thereof, for the standing, loading, and unloading, of
common stage wagons, drays, or carts, carrying goods, wares, or merchandises
for hire, with proper and convenient avenues and passages to the same, and,
when in common council assembled, by act or order of common council, to direct,
require, and appoint, that all such common stage wagons, drays, or carts, as
shall be in, or come into the said town, shall stand, and shall load and
unload, in the place or places so to be found and provided or appointed by the
said mayor, aldermen, and common council for that purpose, or in any place or
places in the streets, lanes, public ways, or market places in the said town,
or the liberties thereof, as shall seem to them the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council, for the time being, most proper and convenient; and in case any
such common stage wagon, dray, or cart, shall be suffered to stand, or shall
be loaded or unloaded in any other place or places, within the said town, or
the liberties thereof, save such as shall be so found and provided, or
appointed for the standing, loading, and unloading of such wagons, drays, and
carts as aforesaid, then the owner or driver of every such wagon, dray, or
cart, shall for every offense forfeit and pay the sum of twenty shillings.

XXX. Provided always, that nothing herein contained shall prevent or hinder
the owner or driver of any such last-mentioned wagon, dray, or cart, from
delivering from such wagon, dray, or cart, any goods, wares, or merchandises
at the doors, houses, shops, warehouses, yards, or premises of such of the
inhabitants of the said town, or the liberties thereof, to whom the same goods,
wares, and merchandises shall belong, or be intended to be delivered, provided
the same be done with all convenient dispatch, and with as little annoyance to
the public passage as possible; nor to hinder or prevent any such wagon,
dray, or cart, from standing, or being loaded or unloaded in the private
grounds, yards, areas, or premises, of any of the inhabitants of the said town,
or the liberties thereof.

XXXI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be
lawful to and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the time
being, to find and provide a proper and convenient place, or proper and
convenient places, without the walls, but within the liberties of the said
town, for the laying and depositing of the dirt, dust, ashes, filth, dung, and
manure, arising in and out of the said streets, lanes, public ways, and market
places, and brought forth by the inhabitants of the said town, and the
liberties thereof, from their houses, yards, or other premises, to be carried
away by the person or persons appointed by the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being, for that purpose, with proper and convenient
avenues and passages to the same; or, when in common council assembled, by
order or act of common council, to set out and appoint any place or places, in
any of the said streets, lanes, or public ways, or the waste grounds thereto
adjoining, which they shall deem most proper and convenient for the purpose,
and of the least annoyance or obstruction to the inhabitants of the said town
and the liberties thereof, and of travelers and others resorting thereto, as
middensteads or repositories for the laying and depositing of all such dirt,
dust, ashes, filth, dung, and manure, and to and in which place or places all
such dirt, dust, ashes, filth, dung, and manure, shall be carried and laid; any
thing in this act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

XXXII. And, for the more effectually enabling the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council for the time being, to find and provide proper and convenient
places within the said town, or the liberties thereof, for such market or
markets; for the standing, loading, and unloading of common stage wagons,
drays, and carts, carrying goods, wares, or merchandises for hire; and for
laying and depositing of all the dirt, dust, ashes, filth, dung, and manure,
arising in and out of the said streets, lanes, public ways, and market places,
and brought forth by the inhabitants of the said town, and the liberties
thereof, from their houses, yards, or other premises, to be carried away by the
person or persons to be appointed by the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being for that purpose, with proper and convenient avenues
and passages to the same respectively; be it enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that they the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the time
being, shall have full power and authority to treat, contract, and agree with
any person or persons, for the absolute purchase of any houses, buildings, or
grounds, within the said town, or the liberties thereof, which shall, in their
judgment, be fit or convenient for all or any of such purposes, and to apply
and employ the said purchased premises accordingly.

XXXIII. And it is hereby further enacted, that all and every the clauses,
powers, authorities, rules, regulations, payments, penalties, matters, and
things herein-before contained, in respect to the purchasing and obtaining the
said lands, messuages, shops, houses, or tenements, for making and forming the
said intended streets, and summoning of juries, shall extend, and are hereby
extended to, and shall take effect, operate, and be put in execution for the
purchasing and obtaining any houses or buildings, lands or grounds, for the
purpose of making proper and convenient places for such market or markets, and
for the standing, loading, and unloading of common stage wagons, drays, or
carts, carrying goods, wares, or merchandises for hire; and also proper and
convenient middensteads or repositories for laying and depositing the dirt,
dust, ashes, filth, dung, and manure arising in and out of the said streets,
lanes, public ways, and market places, and brought forth by the inhabitants of
the said town, and the liberties thereof, from their houses, yards, and other
premises, to be carried away by the person or persons appointed by the said
mayor, aldermen, and common council, for the time being, for that purpose, with
proper and convenient avenues and passages to the same, respectively, in such
and the same manner, and as effectually, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, as if all the said clauses, powers, authorities, regulations,
payments, penalties, matters, and things were herein repeated, re-enacted, and
applied to the purchasing and obtaining such last-mentioned houses or
buildings, lands or grounds.

XXXIV. And whereas it may happen, that the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being, may hereafter think it necessary, for enlarging,
widening, or rendering more commodious, the streets, lanes, public ways, and
passages now o^ hereafter to be made in the said town or the liberties thereof,
or for making new streets, lanes, public ways, and passages there, to pull
down houses or other buildings, and to lay the sites thereof, and also pieces
or parcels of land or ground, into such streets, lanes, public ways, and
passages, which they may not be able to effect under the powers and authorities
herein-before contained; be it therefore further enacted, that it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council for the time
being, to contract and agree with any person or persons seized of or interested
in any houses or buildings, lands or grounds, within the said town, or the
liberties thereof, for the purchase of all or any such houses or buildings,
lands or grounds, and to pay the expense of such purchase or purchases out of
the funds and revenues of the said corporation; and to take and pull down all
or any of such houses or buildings, and to apply the sites thereof, or of any
part thereof, and also such purchased lands or grounds, of any part thereof, in
enlarging or rendering more commodious the said streets, lanes, public ways,
and passages, or in making new streets, lanes, public ways, and passages; and
also to dispose of such part or parts of the said purchased premises, as shall
not be applied as aforesaid, to such person or persons, and for such uses and
purposes, as they shall think proper.

XXXV. And whereas it may happen, that some bodies politic or corporate,
feoffees in trust, of others, are of may be seized or possessed of, or
interested in, the said houses, buildings, lands, and grounds, necessary to be
purchased for the purposes aforesaid; and such person or persons, bodies
politic or corporate, feoffees in trust, or others, may be willing to treat
and agree for the sale of such houses, buildings, lands, and grounds, but may
be incapable of granting or conveying the same, by reason of infancy, or other
disability; be it therefore further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for all bodies politic or corporate, and all feoffees in trust, executors,
administrators, husbands, guardians, committees, trustees, or other persons
whomsoever, for or on the behalf of any infants, feme-coverts, cestuique
trusts, and for all and every person and persons who are or shall be seized,
possessed of, or interested in, any such houses, buildings, lands, and grounds,
to treat, contract, and agree with the said mayor, aldermen, and common council
for the time being, for the purchase of such houses, buildings, lands, and
grounds, or any part thereof, and to sell and convey the same accordingly; and
all contracts, agreements, sales, and conveyances, which shall be so made,
shall be valid and effectual, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, any law
or statute to the contrary notwithstanding; and all such bodies politic or
corporate, feoffees in trust, executors, administrators, husbands, guardians,
committees, or trustees, and other person or persons so conveying, shall be,
and are hereby indemnified for what they shall do by virtue or in pursuance of
this act.

XXXVI. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that all money to be paid
to any body politic or corporate, feoffees in trust, executors,
administrators, husbands, guardians, committees, or trustees, for or on the
behalf of any infants, feme-coverts, or cestuique trusts, shall be by them
respectively laid out, as soon as conveniently may be, in the purchase of any
messuages, lands, or tenements, in fee simple, which, when purchased, shall be
subject to such and the same uses, trusts, and limitations as the houses or
buildings, lands and grounds, so to be purchased shall, at the time when the
same shall be so purchased, stand limited, settled, and assured; and in the
mean time, and until such purchase or purchases shall be made, the said money
shall be placed out in some of the public funds, or on government security,
and the interest arising from the same shall be paid to such persons, and
applied to such purposes, as the rents and profits of the premises to be
purchased, as last mentioned, in case the same were purchased and settled,
ought to be paid and applied.

XXXVII. And be it further enacted, that all penalties and forfeitures by this
act imposed (the manner of levying and recovering whereof is not hereby
otherwise particularly directed) shall, after conviction, if not paid upon
demand, be levied and recovered by distress and sale of the offender's goods
and chattels, by warrant under the hand and seal of any one of the magistrates
or justices of the peace in and for the said town and county of Newcastle;
which warrant such justice is hereby empowered and required to grant, upon the
conviction of the party or parties offending, by his, her, or their confession,
or by the oath or oaths of one or more credible witness or witnesses; and the
penalties and forfeitures, when levied or recovered, after rendering the
overplus of the money arising from such distress and sale (if any be), on
demand, to the party or parties whose goods and chattels shall be so distrained
and sold (the charges of conviction, and of such distress and sale, being first
deducted), shall be paid into the town's chamber of the said town, for the use
of the said corporation of Newcastle; and in case sufficient distress shall not
be found, or such penalties and forfeitures shall not be forthwith paid, it
shall and may be lawful to and for such justice or justices, and he and they is
and are hereby authorized and required, by warrant under his or their hand and
seal, or hands and seals, to cause such offender or offenders to be committed
to the common gaol or house of correction in and for the said town, there to
remain, without bail or mainprize, for any time not exceeding two calendar
months, nor less than seven days, unless such penalties and forfeitures, and
all reasonable charges as aforesaid, shall be sooner paid and satisfied.

XXXVIII. And be it further enacted, that the justice or justices of the peace
before whom any person or persons shall be convicted of any offense against
this act, shall cause the conviction to be drawn up in the following form of
words, or in any other words to the same effect; (videlicet) BE it remembered,
that on the (...) day of (...) A. B. is convicted before me C. D. esquire, one
of his Majesty's justices of the peace in and for the town and county of the
town of Newcastle upon Tyne [specifying the offense, and time and place when
and where the same was committed, as the case shall be], contrary to the form
of the statute in that case made.

Given under my hand and seal, the day and year first above written.



XXXIX. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for
the justice or justices of the peace, before whom any offender or offenders
shall have been convicted, to mitigate or lessen any of the forfeitures and
penalties incurred under this act, so as the mitigation of such forfeitures and
penalties do not extend to remit more than three-fourths of the said
forfeitures and penalties respectively.

XL. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for
the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, for the time being, to reward any
informer or informers as they shall think proper, out of the penalties and
forfeitures incurred by this act, so as such reward does not exceed one half of
the forfeitures and penalties arising from the informations of such informer or
informers; any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

XLI. And be it further enacted, that no proceedings to be had touching the
conviction of any offender or offenders against this act, or any order made, or
other matter or thing to be done or transacted in or relating to the execution
of this act, shall be vacated or quashed for want of form only; any law or
statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

XLII. And be it further enacted, that where any distress shall be made for any
penalties or forfeitures to be levied by virtue of this act, the distress
itself shall not be deemed unlawful, nor the party or parties making the same
be deemed a trespasser or trespassers, on account of any default or want of
form in any proceedings relating thereto; nor shall the party or parties
distraining be deemed a trespasser or trespassers ab initio, on account of any
irregularity which shall be afterward done by the party or parties
distraining; but the person or persons aggrieved by such irregularity may
recover full satisfaction for the special damage in an action on the case.

XLIII. Provided always, that no plaintiff or plaintiffs shall recover, in any
action for any such irregularity, trespass, or other proceeding, if tender of
sufficient amends shall be made, by or on behalf of the party or parties who
shall have committed, or caused to be committed, any such irregularity,
trespass, or wrongful proceeding, before such action brought; and in case no
such tender shall have been made, it shall be lawful for the defendant or
defendants in any such action, by leave of the court where such action shall
depend, at any time before issue joined, to pay into court such sum of money as
he or they shall see sit, whereupon such proceedings or orders and judgment
shall be had, made, and given, in and by such court, as in other actions where
the defendant is allowed to pay money into court.

XLIV. And be it further enacted, that no action or suit shall be commenced
against any person, for any thing done in pursuance of this act, until fourteen
days notice thereof in writing shall be given to the town clerk for the time
being of the said corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, or after three calendar
months next after the fact committed for which such action or actions, suit or
suits, shall be so brought; and every such action shall be brought, laid, and
tried in the county of Northumberland, and not elsewhere; and the defendant and
defendants in such actions or suits, and every of them, may plead the general
issue, and give this act, and the special matter, in evidence, at any trial or
trials which may be had thereupon, and that the matter or thing for which such
action or actions, suit or suits, shall be so brought, was done in pursuance
and by the authority of this act: and if the said matter or thing shall appear
to have been so done, or if it shall appear that such action or suit was
brought before fourteen days notice, in writing, was given as aforesaid, or
that sufficient satisfaction was made or tendered as aforesaid, or if any such
action or suit shall not be commenced within the time before for that purpose
limited, or shall be laid in any other county or place than as aforesaid, that
then the jury or juries shall find for the defendant or defendants therein; or
if the plaintiff or plaintiffs in such action or actions, suit or suits, shall
become nonsuited, or suffer a discontinuance of such action or actions, or if
judgment shall be given for the defendant or defendants therein, then, and in
any of the cases aforesaid, such defendant or defendants shall have double
costs, and shall have such remedy for recovering the same as any defendant or
defendants may have for his, her, or their costs in any other cases by law.

XLV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that nothing in
this act contained shall extend, or be construed to extend, to prevent the
mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, or any other person or persons,
from having or taking any legal remedy against any person or persons, for any
encroachments or nuisances that are or shall be made within the said
corporation or town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or the liberties thereof, or for
any of the annoyances or obstructions hereby intended to be avoided and
prevented, or in any other manner to prejudice, lessen, or defeat any legal
power, privilege, franchise, or authority of the said mayor and burgesses, or
any of the juries or officers of their court (save and except the power of
punishing any person or persons who shall have been before punished by
authority of this act for the same offense); but that the said mayor and
burgesses, juries, and officers respectively, for the time being, shall and may
exercise and enjoy all and every such powers, privileges, franchises, and
authorities (save and except only as before is saved and excepted), in as full
and ample a manner, to all intents and purposes, as they have heretofore used
to do, and of right could or might have done in case this act had not been made.

XLVI. And be it further enacted, that this act shall be deemed, adjudged, and
taken to be a public act; and shall be judicially taken notice of as such, by
all judges, justices, and other persons whomsoever, without specially pleading
the same.

APPENDIX, P. 25. Hospitale Novi Castri super Tynam in comitatu Northumbriae
vocatum Thornton's Hospital. Licentia Henrici Regis Quarti Rogero de Thornton
concessa pro fundatione ejusdem.
REX etc. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali et consideratione cujusdam
summae pecuniae nobis in camera nostra per dilectum nobis Rogerum nuper solutae
concessimus et licentiam dedimus etc. praefato Rogero quod ipse quoddam
hospitale in honor Sanctae Katherinae in quodam messuagio suo per ipsum
Rogerum in part nuper edificato in quodam loco vocato se Sandhill, in villa
nostra Novi Castri super Tynam, continente C^pedes in longitudine, XL pedes in
latitudine de uno capellano divina infra hospitale praedictum pro salubri statu
ipsius Rogeri dum vixerit et pro anima sua cum ab hac luce migraverit ac
animabus patris et matris ipsius Rogeri et Agnetis nuper uxoris ejus: nec non
antecessorum and liberorum suorum ac omnium fidelium defunctorum singulis
diebus celebraturo; ac de novem viris et quatuor foeminis pauperibus in eodem
hospitale continue residentibus juxta ordinationem ipsius Rogeri vel executorum
suorum in hac part faciendam, de novo facere creare fundare and stabilire
possit in perpetuum: Et quod hospitale illud hospitale per se privatum and
incorporatum existat in perpetuum, ac etiam quod capellanus hospitalis
predicti, qui pro tempore fuerit, sit custos ejusdem hospitalis; ac quod idem
capellanus, custos, et predicti viri et foeminae, fratres and sorores
hospitalis Sanctae Katherinae, vocati Thornton's Hospital, in Novo Castro super
Tynam nuncupentur. Quodque custos, fratres and sorores et eorum successores per
nomen custodis fratrum et sororum hospitalis Sanctae Katherinae vocati
Thornton's Hopital in Novo Castro super Tinam, sint personae capaces and
habiles ad omnimoda terras, tenementa, redditus and servicia ac alias
possessiones quascunque de quibusdam personis adquirendas capiendas and
recipiendas, tenendas sibi et successoribus suis, custodibus, fratribus and
sororibus hospitalis predicti in perpetuum, licentia Regis inde primitus
optenta. Nec non quod idem custos etc. sint personae habiles ad alios
implacitandos et ab aliis implacitari et ad defendendum in quibuscunque
placitis and querelis per nomen custodis fratrum et sororum hospitalis Sanctae
Katherinae vocati Thornton's Hospital in Novo Castro super Tynam. Et quod licet
(habere) unum commune sigillum pro negotiis et agendis ejusdem hospitalis
deserviturum in perpetuum. Et ulterius etc. licentiam dedimus etc. prefato
Rogero quod ipse quandam cantariam de uno capellano divina ad altar beati
Petri in capella Omnium Sanctorum in villa predicta pro statu et animabus
praedictis singulis diebus celebratur' juxta ordinationem ipsius Rogeri vel
executorum suorum in hac part faciendam, scilicet facere sundare et stabilite
possit in perpetuum. Concessimus etiam etc. prefato Rogero quod ipse messuagium
suum predictum cum pertin' quod de nobis teneat in burgagio, postquam hospitale
predictum, sic factum fundatum et stabilitum fuerit, dare possit et assignare
prefatis custodi fratribus and sororibus hospitalis predicti habend' et tenend'
sibi et successoribus suis, tam pro inhabitatione sua quam in auxilium
sustentationis suae in perpetuum. Concessimus insuper etc. eidem Rogero quod
ipse haeredes assignati vel executores sui terras tenementa and redditus cum
pertinen' ad valorem 10 lib. per annum tam ea que de nobis tenentur in burgagio
quam ea que de nobis non tenentur acquirere and prefatis custodi fratribus and
sororibus hospitalis predicti ac capellano cantariae predictae cum sic facta
fundata and stabilita fuerit, juxta discretionem and limitationem suam divisam
et proportionabiliter dare assignare and concedere possint habend' etc. in
perpetuum etc. T. Rege apud Westm' 10 Junii. -- Bourne, p. 124, note.

N. B. No 1, in the plate entitled "Statues of Kings Charles II. and James II.
etc." represents the famous equestrian one of James II. which stood on the
Sandhill, and was destroyed by the mob at the revolution.

No 2, a statue of Charles II. in a Roman habit, which formerly stood (as
represented in No 4) over the entrance to the late Magazine-Gate on
Tyne-Bridge, now under the clock on the front of the Exchange, Sandhill.

No 3 represents the present appearance of the desecrated chapel of St. James's
Hospital in Gateshead.

APPENDIX, P. 50. Anno duodecimo Georgii III. Regis. An Act to enable the Lord
Bishop of Durham, and his successors, to raise a competent sum of money, to be
applied for the repairing, improving, or rebuilding, such part of Tyne-Bridge,
as belongs to the sea of Durham.
WHEREAS the Right Reverend Father in God John Lord Bishop of Durham is
entitled, in right of his see, to one-third part of an ancient bridge extending
across the river Tyne, between the town of Gateshead, in the county palatine of
Durham, and the town and county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne: and
whereas, by the violence and rapidity of a most extraordinary flood, which
happened on the seventeenth day of November, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy one, in the river of Tyne, the said bridge was very much damaged,
broken down in several places, and rendered utterly impassable: and whereas, in
order to restore an easy and safe communication between the counties of Durham
and Northumberland, it is highly expedient that the said bridge should be
rebuilt, or effectually repaired, with all possible expedition: and inasmuch as
the necessary repairs of the one-third part of the said bridge, belonging to
the said Lord Bishop of Durham in right of his see, and extending from two blue
marble or boundary stones, on the south side of the said bridge, to the said
town of Gateshead, will be attended with a great expense; and however
reasonable or proper it may be, that the entire sum necessary to be
appropriated for, and employed in, that useful and necessary work, ought to be
raised out of, or secured upon, the revenues and possessions of the said see of
Durham, and that the Lord Bishop of Durham for the time being, ought not to
bear any greater burden than shall arise from the interest or annual charge to
be paid in respect of the principal money to be raised for the purpose
aforesaid; yet the said John Lord Bishop of Durham is consenting that a
reasonable and adequate sum of money may be raised by the authority of
parliament, by granting annuities for lives, which will not only be speedy and
effectual, but may be a method less burdensome to the successors in the said
see than to the said John now Lord Bishop of Durham, by the eventual dropping
of lives, and the decrease of such temporary charge: wherefore, may it
therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted, and be it enacted by the
King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons, in this present parliament assembled, and
by the authority of the same, that the chancellor of the bishopric and county
palatine of Durham and Sadberge, the sheriff of the county palatine of Durham
and Sadberge, the vicar general and principal official of the diocese of
Durham, the attorney and solicitor-general to the Lord Bishop of Durham, the
principal register or registrar of the diocese of Durham, the auditor to the
Lord Bishop of Durham, the keeper of Auckland-castle, the steward of the
halmote courts of the Lord Bishop of Durham, the clerk of the halmote courts of
the Lord Bishop of Durham, the clerk of the great receipt of the exchequer of
Durham, the register of the court of chancery of Durham, the clerk of the
chancery of Durham, and the keeper of the rolls of the chancery aforesaid, the
clerk of the itinerant justices, and other justices whomsoever in the county
palatine of Durham and Sadberge, and the bailiff of the borough of Auckland for
the time being, shall be, and they are hereby appointed trustees for putting
this act in execution, by and under the direction of the said John Lord Bishop
of Durham, and his successors.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that no person shall be capable of acting
as a trustee in the execution of this act, during the time he shall hold any
office or appointment, to which any salary or pecuniary profit shall be
annexed, by virtue or in pursuance of this act; nor shall any such trustee, on
his own private account, enter into any contract, or have any share or interest
in any contract, relating to the execution of any of the powers contained in
this act.

And whereas it may be necessary to open a more convenient avenue and passage
to that part of the said bridge which belongs to the said see of Durham, and to
remove the erections and buildings on the same, be it therefore enacted, that
the said trustees, or any three or more of them, shall, and they are hereby
authorized, by and under such direction of the said Lord Bishop of Durham, and
his successors, as aforesaid, to treat, contract, and agree with any person or
persons, for the absolute purchase of any estate or interest in any buildings
or ground, which shall be deemed necessary to be appropriated, for the better
and more effectually repairing, rebuilding, or improving, such part of the said
bridge as belongs to the said see of Durham, and for making more convenient the
avenue and passage leading on the same, or to appropriate any building or
ground which the said bishop is entitled unto in right of his see, for the
purposes aforesaid.

And, forasmuch as the raising an adequate sum of money upon the credit of this
act, by granting annuities for lives, will be a speedy and effectual method of
carrying the intentions of the said John Lord Bishop of Durham into complete
execution; be it therefore further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for any person or persons to contribute,
advance, and pay, to such treasurer or treasurers as the said John Lord Bishop
of Durham, or his successors, shall, in manner hereinafter mentioned, authorize
and empower to receive the same, for the uses herein-after expressed, any sum
or sums of money, not exceeding in the whole the sum of twelve thousand pounds,
for the absolute purchase of twelve or more annuities for lives, to be paid and
payable, and the same are hereby directed to continue and be paid, during the
full term of the natural life of each such contributor respectively, or the
natural life of such other person as shall be nominated by or on the behalf of
each contributor respectively, at the time of payment of their respective
purchase or contribution-money; which annuity or annuities shall not
respectively exceed the rate of ten pounds per annum for every one hundred
pounds advanced and actually paid, and so in proportion for any greater or less
sum so to be advanced and paid as aforesaid; and the said several annuities, so
to be purchased, shall be charged upon, and be paid and payable out of the
rents, revenues, and profits, of the said see, which from time to time, during
the continuance of the said annuities, or any of them, shall be received by the
said John Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, or shall come to the hands
of, or be received by the receiver-general for the time being of the said John
Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, by such receiver-general, or his
successors, at such place in the city of Durham, by equal half-yearly payments,
as in the order or orders herein-after mentioned for payment thereof shall be
respectively expressed; and such receiver-general for the time being shall be
credited, or have an allowance in his accounts of or for all such sums of
money, as he shall actually pay by virtue or in pursuance of this act, as fully
and effectually, to all intents and purposes, as if such payments had
respectively been really and bona fide made to the said John Lord Bishop of
Durham, or his successors; and the said several annuities shall commence from
the receipt of any sum or sums of money respectively; and such annuity or
annuities shall not be subject or liable to any deduction or abatement for or
in respect of any tax, charge, or assessment, imposed or to be imposed by
authority of parliament, or otherwise howsoever, upon the lands, tenements, or
persons, by this act charged therewith, or by whom, or out of which the same
are to be answered and paid; nor shall any such annuitant or annuitants, their
executors, administrators, or assigns, or any of them, be answerable or
accountable for the misapplication or nonapplication of, or liable to make good
any loss that shall or may happen in, or of any such purchase or
consideration-money that shall be so advanced or paid as aforesaid, or any part
thereof; and the receipt or receipts of the said several annuitants, their
respective executors, administrators, or assigns for all and every such sum and
sums of money as shall be paid to them, or any of them respectively, by the
said receiver-general for the time being, in pursuance of this act, shall be as
good and effectual discharges to such receiver-general, as if the same sum and
sums had been actually paid to the said John Lord Bishop of Durham, or his
successors.

Provided always, and it is hereby further enacted and declared, that, previous
to the sale of such annuities, in order to raise the said sum of twelve
thousand pounds, or any part thereof, one calendar month's notice at the least
shall, four or more different days, be given in the London Gazette, expressing
the intention of the sale of such annuity or annuities, so as to raise the said
sum of twelve thousand pounds, or any part thereof, in order that any person
may have an opportunity to deliver in proposals for what annual income or
payment per centum they are willing to advance their money; and the said
trustees, or any three or more of them, shall (if the said Lord Bishop of
Durham, or his successors, shall think any such proposals reasonable) give the
preference to the lowest proposer, regard being had to the circumstances of age
and health; and the said annuities shall be sold by the said trustees, or any
three or more of them, subject to the approbation of the said Lord Bishop of
Durham, to be signified by any writing under his hand, to the best advantage
they can.

And, for the more effectual securing to the said annuitants the regular and
full payment of their respective annuities, be it further enacted, that the
said several annuities shall be also charged upon and issuing out of, and the
same are hereby charged upon and directed to be issued out of all or any such
part of the temporalities and possessions belonging to the said see of Durham,
as shall, from time to time, and at any time hereafter, during the life or
lives of any such annuitant or annuitants, be held in demesne, or be in the
immediate possession or holding of the said John Lord Bishop of Durham, or his
successors: and if it shall happen that the said several annuities, or any of
them, or any part thereof respectively, shall be behind and unpaid for
twenty-one days after any of the feasts or days which shall be limited and
appointed for payment thereof; then, and so often, and from time to time as it
shall so happen, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said annuitants, or
persons entitled to such annuities respectively, and his and their respective
executors, administrators, and assigns, into and upon the premises so hereby
charged, for more effectually securing the payment of the said annuity or
annuities, or into and upon any part thereof, to enter and distrain; and the
distress and distresses then and there found to take, lead, drive, carry away,
and impound, or otherwise dispose of, according to law, until the said annuity
or annuities, and all arrears thereof, and all costs and charges attending such
entry and distress, and all damages to be sustained by reason of the nonpayment
thereof, shall be fully satisfied and paid; and moreover, that if the said
annuity or annuities, or any part thereof, shall be behind or unpaid for forty
days after any of the feasts or days which shall be limited or appointed for
payment thereof; then, and so often, from time to time, as it shall so happen,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said annuitants, or persons entitled
to such annuities respectively, and his and their respective executors,
administrators, and assigns, into the same premises to enter, and to take and
receive the rents, issues, and profits thereof to his, her, and their own use
and benefit, until thereby or therewith, or otherwise, all arrears of the said
annuity or annuities then grown due, or that during such possession shall grow
due, and all costs and charges attending such entry upon, and perception of the
rents and profits of the same premises, and all damages that he, she, or they
shall then have sustained by reason of the nonpayment of the said annuity or
annuities, or yearly sums, shall be fully satisfied and paid.

And, to the intent that some proper person or persons may be appointed to
receive the price or consideration-money to be paid for the said annuities, and
to apply and dispose of the money so received, for the purposes of this act, be
it further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said John
Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, by any writing or writings under his
or their hand, or respective hands, to appoint a treasurer, who shall give such
security for the due and faithful execution of his office, as the said Lord
Bishop of Durham, or his successors, shall think reasonable; and also to
appoint such one or more fit and skilful person or persons (if he or they shall
think proper so to do) as may be necessary and proper, either to inspect the
works, or to execute any rules, orders, or regulations, to be made or done in
pursuance of this act, with such allowances to the treasurer for the time
being, and such other person or persons as aforesaid, as by the said John Lord
Bishop of Durham, or his successors, and the said trustees, or any three or
more of them, shall be judged reasonable, for, and in consideration of his and
their employment and service respectively; and likewise, that it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said Lord Bishop of Durham, and his successors, from
time to time, to remove or discontinue such treasurer, or other person or
persons, and appoint another or others in the place of such of them as shall be
so removed, or as shall happen to die before the several intents and purposes
mentioned in, or intended by this act, shall be completely performed and
carried into execution.

And be it further enacted, that every purchaser of such annuity or annuities
as aforesaid, his, her, or their assign, upon payment of the consideration or
purchase-money for the same, or any part or proportion thereof, into the hands
of such treasurer so to be appointed as aforesaid, shall have one or more
receipt or receipts, importing the receipt of so much purchase-money as shall
be so paid; and upon payment of all the purchase-money for any such annuity or
annuities, every contributor, his, her, or their assigns respectively, shall
have an order, fairly written upon parchment, for payment of the said annuity
or annuities, which order shall be signed by the said trustees, or any three or
more of them; and, after signing thereof, the same shall be good, valid, and
effectual in the law, according to the purport and true meaning thereof, and of
this act.

And be it further enacted, that there shall be provided by the treasurer a
book or books, wherein shall be fairly written, in words at length, the names,
proper additions, ages, and places of abode, of all persons who shall be
purchasers of any of the said annuities, and the names and places of abode of
all persons, by whose hands the said purchasers shall pay in any sum or sums of
money upon the credit of this act; and also the sum and sums actually paid for
the purchase of such annuities, and the respective days of payment thereof; a
duplicate of which said book or books shall be delivered to the said
receiver-general of the said Lord Bishop of Durham for the time being, who
shall enter therein the several payments, from time to time, to the said
annuitants, of their assigns, and the respective days when any of the said
annuitants shall happen to die; to which book or books it shall and may be
lawful, as well to and for the said John Lord Bishop of Durham, and his
successors, and the said trustees, as to and for the said respective
annuitants, and their assigns, from time to time, and at all seasonable times,
to have recourse and inspect the same, without see or reward.

And be it further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful to and for any
purchaser or purchasers of any such annuity or annuities as aforesaid, and his,
her, and their executors, administrators, and assigns, at any time or times, by
any writing under their respective hands and seals, or by indorsement on the
said order, to assign such annuity or annuities to any person or persons
whomsoever, and so toties quoties; and a memorandum or entry of all such
assignments shall be made in a book, which is hereby required to be kept for
that purpose by the said receiver for the time being, at the charge of the said
Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors; which entry or memorandum shall be
made gratis.

Provided always, that no assignment shall be deemed good and effectual, until
the same shall be left at the office, in Durham, of the receiver-general for
the time being of the said Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, in order
that such entry or memorandum may be made of every assignment, in such book as
aforesaid.

And, to the end that all and every the sum and sums of money, so to be raised
in pursuance of, and upon the credit of this act, may, with all possible
expedition, be applied in or toward the rebuilding, improving, or effectually
repairing of such part of the said bridge over the river Tyne, as belongs to
the sea of Durham, and other the purposes of this act, be it further enacted
and declared, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said trustees, or
any three or more of them, to receive proposals from, and contract with any
person or persons, surveyor, architect, builder, or builders, or with workmen,
for the rebuilding, improving, or otherwise effectually repairing of such part
of the said bridge over the river Tyne as belongs to the sea of Durham; and to
make contracts for, or purchase or provide any materials, matters, or things,
necessary and proper for the rebuilding, improving, or effectually repairing
the same: All which contract or contracts shall be signed and approved of by
the said John Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, or by such surveyor as
the said Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, shall appoint; and shall
specify the several works to be done, the prices to be paid for the same, and
the time or times when the said works shall be completed, and the quantity and
quality of the materials to be delivered, and the penalties to be suffered or
sustained in case of nonperformance of such contract or contracts; and that all
and every contract and contracts, so to be made, shall be signed by the said
trustees, or any three or more of them, and also by the person or persons so
respectively contracting; and all such contracts so to be made, as aforesaid,
shall be entered in a book or books, to be kept for that purpose by the
treasurer or his clerks; but previous to the making any such contract,
twenty-one days notice, at least, shall be given in the London Gazette,
expressing the intention of making such contract, in order that any person or
persons may, at their election, have an opportunity of sending proposals, under
seal, to any of the said trustees, or to any other person to be named in such
public notice for that purpose, or of making such proposals, at a certain time
and place in such notice to be mentioned; and it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said trustees, to take such security in the name of the treasurer to be
from time to time appointed in pursuance of this act, from any person or
persons, for the performance of any contract or contracts for the purposes
aforesaid, as to the said trustees shall seem necessary.

And be it further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
trustees, or any three or more of them, and they are hereby directed to cause
all and every the works to be done in pursuance of this act to be inspected by
such surveyor, or by such other skilful person or persons as the said Lord
Bishop of Durham, or his successors, shall, by any writing, direct or appoint:
and in case the same shall not be well and sufficiently performed, according to
the true intent and meaning of such contract or contracts, or shall not be
finished or completed at or within the time or times that the same is or are
agreed to be completed; such surveyor, or other person or persons, shall report
the same to the said John Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, and to the
said trustees, or any three or more of them, who shall and may, in their own
name or names, or in the names of any two or more of them, or in the name of
the treasurer for the time being, to be appointed by the said Lord Bishop of
Durham, or his successors, bring an action of debt, or upon the case, in any of
his Majesty's courts of record at Westminster, or in the court of pleas at
Durham, against any person or persons so contracting and neglecting to perform
the same, in the manner, or in the time, set forth in any such contract, for
the penalty or penalties which shall be contained in any such contract or
security, or for any breach of the covenants or agreements therein respectively
to be contained; and the said trustees or treasurer shall be entitled to, and
shall recover such penalty or penalties, or damages sustained or occasioned by
such breach of covenants or agreements; and the same, when recovered, shall be
applied for the purposes of this act.

And be it further enacted and declared, that it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said trustees, or any three or more of them, with the approbation, in
writing, of the said Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, from time to
time, according to the best of their judgment, and without partiality, to
compound for and agree with any such person or persons so contracting, and who
shall so neglect to perform the contract in manner, or within the time, therein
expressed, for any penalty or penalties contained in any contract or contracts,
security or securities, or damages, for such sum or sums of money as the said
John Lord Bishop of Durham, or his successors, and the said trustees, or any
three or more of them, shall think reasonable.

And be it further enacted, that the treasurer for the time being, so to be
appointed as aforesaid, shall, from time to time, by and out of the money which
shall come to his or their hands, or be received by him or them in pursuance of
this act, pay, by instalments, or otherwise, as in any such contract or
contracts shall be expressed, all such sum and sums of money as shall therein
respectively be stipulated or agreed to be paid for the due performance, or in
respect of any of the works or repairs to be made or done in pursuance of this
act, or in anywise relating thereto; and all such other charges and expenses as
shall be necessarily incurred by, or anyways relate to the execution of the
trusts reposed, or to be reposed in the said trustees, by or in pursuance of
this act; and in case any surplus shall remain in the hands of the said
treasurer for the time being, after the said one-third part of the said bridge,
so belonging to the said see of Durham as aforesaid, shall be rebuilt,
improved, or effectually repaired, the same shall be charged with, and shall be
applied in and toward the payment of the said annuities.

And be it further enacted, that all the costs, charges, and expenses incident
to, or attending the obtaining and passing this act, shall be paid and
discharged out of the first moneys which shall be received by the treasurer so
to be appointed as aforesaid, and by virtue or in pursuance of this act.

And be it further enacted, that this act shall be deemed and taken to be a
public act; and shall be judicially taken notice of as such by all judges and
justices, and other persons whomsoever, without specially pleading the same.

APPENDIX, P. 51. Anno duodecimo Georgii III. Regis. An Act for building a
temporary bridge over the river Tyne, between the town of Newcastle upon Tyne
and Gateshead, in the county of Durham.
WHEREAS great part of the stone bridge over the river Tyne, at Newcastle upon
Tyne, was destroyed by the violence of a most extraordinary flood on the
seventeenth day of November, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-one, and
thereby the principal passage from the northern to the southern parts of this
kingdom is in a great measure obstructed: and whereas it will be of great
public utility that a temporary bridge be erected over the river Tyne, between
the town of Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead, in the county of Durham, to have
continuance as herein-after is mentioned: and whereas the mayor, aldermen, and
common council of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the county of the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, in common council assembled, have proposed, and
are willing to expend and lay out the sum of two thousand four hundred pounds
of the moneys of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, in, or
toward the expense of building such temporary bridge, and purchasing houses
and ground in the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and in the parish of Gateshead
aforesaid, for making a road to such temporary bridge, and for more
conveniently building the same; may it therefore please your Majesty that it
may be enacted; and be it enacted, by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and commons,
in this present parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that
the mayor, aldermen, and common council of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in
the county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in common council assembled,
shall have full power and authority, and they are hereby authorized and
empowered, to design, direct, order, and build the said temporary bridge, and
maintain, preserve, and support the same, when built; and for that purpose to
appoint a committee, from time to time, to manage and transact such matters as
they may find necessary; which committee so to be appointed shall have such
powers and authorities as shall, from time to time, be delegated or given to
them by the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common council
assembled, or such general powers as by this act are given and granted to the
said committee.

Provided nevertheless, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that no person concerned in building, or dealing in any materials for building,
shall be eligible, or capable of acting as a member of any committee that shall
or may be appointed or thought necessary to manage or conduct the work of the
said intended temporary bridge, or any part thereof; neither shall any person
be eligible or capable of acting as a member of such committee during such time
as he shall have or execute any office or place of profit by or under the
authority of this act, or during such time as he shall have any share or
interest in any contract or agreement for effecting the purposes aforesaid, or
have or hold any place or employment under the mayor or burgesses of the said
town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said temporary
bridge shall be built contiguous to, or as near to the late stone bridge as the
same can conveniently be done, without prejudice to the building of a new
bridge, or the repairing the said late bridge; and the same shall be so
constructed and built as that there shall remain a free and open passage for
the water through the arches thereof, or passages under the same, corresponding
with, and in all respects equal to the several passages for the water through
the several arches of the late stone bridge.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall not be
lawful to erect any house or building upon the said temporary bridge, other
than such gates and toll-houses as by the said mayor, aldermen, and common
council, in common council assembled, shall be ordered or directed.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said temporary
bridge shall continue only for, and during, and unto the full end and term of
seven years, from the twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-two.

Provided always nevertheless, that in case a new stone bridge shall be built,
or the old stone bridge shall be effectually repaired, before the end and
expiration of the said term, that then, and from thenceforth, and as soon as
conveniently may be after such new stone bridge shall be built, or the old
stone bridge effectually repaired, the said temporary bridge shall be taken
away, and the remainder of the said term shall cease, determine, and be void;
any thing in this act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And, for the preventing wilful and malicious damaging or destroying the said
temporary bridge, or any part thereof, or hindering or interrupting the
building of the same, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
any person or persons shall wilfully and maliciously blow up, pull down, or
destroy the said temporary bridge, or any part thereof; or unlawfully, and
without authority from the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common
council assembled, remove or take away any works thereto belonging, or in
anywise direct, or procure the same to be done, whereby the said temporary
bridge, or the works thereof, may be damaged, or the lives of the passengers
over or under the same endangered, such offender or offenders, being thereof
lawfully convicted, shall be adjudged guilty of felony, and be transported as a
felon.

And whereas, in order to make a way or passage to and from the said temporary
bridge on both sides of the said river Tyne, and also in order to construct the
said temporary bridge conveniently, it may be necessary to purchase certain
houses, buildings, and ground, adjoining on each side of the said river Tyne,
and also on the north side of a street, called Pipewell-Gate, near to or
adjoining the site of the old stone bridge, in the said parish of Gateshead,
and also one or more houses or shops now remaining upon part of the late stone
bridge, and to pull down and remove such houses and shops respectively; be it
therefore further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council, in common council assembled, shall have full
power and authority to treat, contract, and agree with the owners, proprietors
and occupiers of, and other persons interested in, such of the said houses or
shops as they shall judge sit to be purchased, removed, or pulled down, for the
purchase thereof, or of any part thereof, or for their interest therein, and,
upon the payment of such sum or sums of money a^ shall be agreed upon for such
purchase, are hereby authorized to appoint workmen to pull down such houses for
the purposes aforesaid; and this act shall be sufficient to indemnify the said
mayor, aldermen, and common council, and all persons authorized by them,
against the heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, of any of the said
owners, proprietors, or occupiers, as if the same had been sold by deed of
feoffment, bargain and sale enrolled, assignment, or other assurance in the law
whatsoever.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the justices of the
peace and commissioners of the land tax for the county of Durham, and the
justices of the peace and commissioners of the land tax for the said town and
county of Newcastle upon Tyne, or any five or more of such justices of the
peace and commissioners together assembled, in such manner as is herein-after
mentioned, shall be, and they are hereby constituted and appointed
commissioners respectively for settling, determining, and adjusting all
differences which shall happen to arise in each of their respective counties
between the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, and all and every person
or persons, touching and concerning the recompense and satisfaction to be made
to them, or any of them, for any ground, houses, buildings, or shops; and to
adjust and settle what satisfaction every tenant or other person, having a term
or interest in any of the said premises, shall have or receive for his, her, or
their respective interest, and any damages, he, she, or they shall sustain by,
or upon account of giving up to the said mayor, aldermen, and common council,
the possession of any part of the said premises before the expiration of his,
her, or their term therein.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any such owner,
proprietor, or occupier, or other person or persons interested in any such
ground, houses, buildings or shops, upon fourteen days notice to him, her, or
them given, or left in writing, at the dwelling house or houses, or place or
places of abode of such person or persons, shall neglect or refuse to treat, or
shall not agree with the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common
council assembled, or with the person or persons so authorized by them, for the
purchase of any ground, houses, buildings, or shops, or for their interest
therein, or through disability, by reason of nonage, coverture, estate tail, or
other impediment whatsoever, cannot make an effectual or valid agreement, or by
reason of absence shall be prevented from treating as aforesaid; then, and in
every or any such case, the said respective commissioners hereby appointed, or
any five or more of them, shall cause it to be inquired into and ascertained by
and upon the oaths of a jury of twelve indifferent men, what damages will be
sustained by, and what recompense and satisfaction shall be made to such
owners, occupiers, or proprietors of, or other person or persons respectively
interested in any such houses, buildings, shops, or ground; and in order
thereto, the said respective commissioners, or any five or more of them, are
hereby empowered, authorized, and required, from time to time, to issue their
warrant or warrants, precept or precepts, directed to the sheriff of the
county, or town and county respectively, in which the matter in dispute shall
lie, thereby requiring him to impanel, summon, and return a number of
substantial and disinterested persons, inhabitants of such respective county,
or town and county, qualified to serve on juries, not less than forty-eight,
nor more than seventy-two, which persons such sheriff, or his deputy or
deputies, is and are hereby required to impanel, summon, and return
accordingly; and out of such persons so to be impanelled, summoned and
returned, or out of such of them as shall appear according to, or upon such
summons, a jury of twelve shall be drawn by such commissioners, or any five or
more of them, or some person to be by them, or any five or more of them,
appointed, in such manner as juries for the trial of issues joined in his
majesty's courts at Westminster, by an act passed in the third year of his late
majesty, entitled, An Act for the better Regulation of Juries, are directed to
be drawn; which persons so to be impanelled, summoned, and returned, are hereby
required to appear before the said respective commissioners, or any five or
more of them, at such time and place as in such warrant or warrants, precept or
precepts, shall be directed and appointed (of which time and place all parties
interested shall have fourteen days notice given or left as aforesaid), and to
attend them from day to day, till they shall be discharged by such
commissioners, or any five or more of them; and all parties concerned shall and
may have their lawful challenges against any of the said jurymen, but shall not
be at liberty to challenge the array for affinity, or any other cause
whatsoever: and the said respective commissioners, or any five or more of them,
are hereby authorized and empowered, by precept or precepts, under their hands,
from time to time, as occasion shall require, to call before them any person or
persons, in order to be examined as a witness or witnesses, upon oath, before
the said commissioners, or any five or more of them, or such jury, touching and
concerning the premises; and such commissioners, or any five or more of them,
if they shall think fit, shall and may cause the said jury to view the place or
places in question, and shall have power to adjourn such meeting, from day to
day as occasion shall require, and to require such jury, witnesses and parties,
to attend until all the matters for which they were summoned shall be
concluded; and the said jury upon their oaths (which oaths, as also the oaths
to such person or persons as shall be called upon to give evidence, the said
respective commissioners, or any one or more of them, is and are hereby
empowered and required to administer) shall inquire touching the value of such
houses, shops, buildings, and ground, and of the respective estate and interest
of all persons seized or possessed of, or interested therein, or of or in any
part thereof, and of the damages which shall or may be sustained by any tenant
or tenants, occupier or occupiers thereof, by reason or on account of giving up
to the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, the possession thereof; and
shall assess the sum or sums to be paid to every such person or persons for
such their estates and interests, and as a recompense and satisfaction for the
damages they shall sustain as aforesaid; and the said respective commissioners,
or any five or more of them, shall give judgment for such sum or sums of money
so to be assessed; and the verdicts or inquisitions of such respective juries,
and the judgments, orders, or decrees thereupon, shall be final, binding and
conclusive, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, against all parties or
persons whomsoever claiming any estate, right, title, trust, use, or interest
in, to, or out of such houses, shops, buildings, or ground, either in
possession, reversion, remainder, expectancy, or otherwise; and all and every
person and persons interested in such houses, shops, buildings, and ground,
shall thereby, after payment, or tender, and refusal or neglect, in manner as
herein-after mentioned, be from thenceforth, to all intents and purposes,
divested of all right, claim, interest, or property of, in, to, or out of the
same; and a transcript of all such verdicts or inquisitions, and judgments,
orders, or decrees, and all other proceedings of the said respective
commissioners and juries so to be made, given, and pronounced as aforesaid,
shall be fairly written on parchment, signed and sealed by five or more of the
commissioners making and pronouncing the same, and shall be forthwith
transmitted to the clerk of the peace of the county of Durham, in case such
judgment or decree shall be made in the county of Durham, or to the town clerk
of the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, in case such judgment or
decree shall be made in the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, to be
carefully preserved amongst the records of the said county, or town and county;
and the said transcripts, or true copies thereof, signed, and proved to be
signed, by the said clerk of the peace, or town clerk, shall be deemed good and
effectual evidence in any court of law or equity whatsoever; and all persons
may have recourse to the same gratis, and take copies thereof, paying for every
copy not exceeding the sum of sixpence for every two hundred words, and so
proportionably for any greater number of words: and upon payment of the sum or
sums of money so assessed by such juries, and adjudged or decreed by such
respective commissioners, to the party or parties concerned and entitled
thereto as aforesaid, or to their agents, or legal tender thereof made to him,
her, or them, and refusal to accept the same, or in case any such person or
persons, after fourteen days notice given to him, her, or them, or left at the
house of the occupier of the premises, shall refuse or neglect to receive the
same, then, upon payment thereof into the hands of such person or persons as
the said respective commissioners, or any five or more of them, shall by any
writing under their hands appoint, for the use of the party or parties
interested as aforesaid, and to be paid upon demand to him, her, or them, or to
his, her, or their agent or agents, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said mayor, aldermen, and common council, their successors and assigns, to
enter into and upon, and to have, hold, use, and enjoy such houses, shops,
buildings, and ground, to and for their own use and benefit, and to and for
their agents, workmen, and servants, to pull down and remove such houses,
buildings, and shops, and to make use of the place where the same stood, and
also the ground so to be purchased, for the purposes of this act: and this act
shall be sufficient to indemnify, as well the said commissioners as the said
mayor, aldermen, and common council, their successors, and assigns, and all and
every person and persons by them, or any of them, authorized and empowered
therein, or acting under them respectively, against such owners, proprietors,
occupiers, and persons interested, their heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns, to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

And be it further enacted, that in case of any default of a sufficient number
of jurymen to be sworn for the purposes of this act, the said respective
sheriff or his deputy shall return other honest and indifferent men of the
standers-by, or that can be speedily procured, to attend that service, as shall
be necessary to make up the number of twelve to serve on such jury; and that
all persons concerned shall, from time to time, have their lawful challenges as
aforesaid, against any such jurymen when they come to be sworn; and that the
said respective commissioners, or any five or more of them, acting in the
premises, shall have full power, from time to time, to impose any reasonable
fine or fines on such sheriff, his and their deputy or deputies, bailiffs or
agents respectively, making default in the premises, or upon any person or
persons who shall be summoned and returned on any such juries, and shall not
appear, or who shall refuse to be sworn on the said jury or juries, or being so
sworn, shall not give his or their verdict, or in any other manner wilfully
neglect his or their duty in the premises, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of this act; and likewise upon such person or persons summoned as
aforesaid to give evidence, who shall neglect or refuse to appear at such time
or times, place or places, as shall be appointed for that purpose as aforesaid,
or appearing, shall refuse to be sworn, or to give evidence, or to be examined
by or before the said respective commissioners, or any five or more of them;
and from time to time to levy such fine or fines by distress and sale of the
goods and chattels of any person or person offending in any of the matters or
things aforesaid, by warrant or warrants under the hands and seals of such five
or more of the acting commissioners, to be directed to the constable or other
peace officer of the township, parish, or place where such off^nder or
offenders shall live; which constable or other peace officer is hereby required
to execute the same, so as that no such fine exceed the sum of forty shillings;
which fine or fines shall be forthwith paid into the hand or hands of the
overseer or overseers of the poor of the respective parish where such fine or
fines shall be imposed, to and for the use of the poor thereof.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the ground to be
purchased in pursuance of this act, on the north side of the said street,
called Pipewell-Gate, in the parish of Gateshead aforesaid, for the making a
way or passage to and from the said temporary bridge on the south side of the
said river Tyne, or so much and such part and parts of such ground as shall be
necessary for the purpose of making a commodious, free, and open passage to a
new stone bridge, when the same bridge shall be built, shall, for ever after
the building of such new stone bridge, remain, continue, and be for the use of
the public, for the purpose aforesaid.

Provided always, that no person or persons whomsoever shall sit or act as a
commissioner or commissioners, in any case where he or they is or are in
anywise directly or indirectly interested or concerned, of or in the matter or
matters in question; n^^ shall any person whomsoever be sworn to serve on any
jury, or be examined as a witness, where he or she is in any wise directly or
indirectly interested in any matter in question.

And be it further enacted, that no meeting shall be held by the said
commissioners for the said county of Durham, or any five or more of them, at
any place but in the town or borough of Gateshead, and no meeting shall be held
by the said commissioners for the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne,
at any place but in the town of Newcastle aforesaid.

And forasmuch as the erecting and building the temporary bridge
beforementioned, and repairing, preserving, and supporting the same, and
making roads thereto on each side of the said river Tyne, and particularly from
the east end of the said street, called Pipewell-Gate in Gateshead aforesaid,
and the purchasing such ground, houses, and shops respectively, as aforesaid,
and the obtaining and passing of this act, may be attended with a considerable
charge and expense more than the said sum of two thousand four hundred pounds;
be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for reimbursing the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council, all such sum and sums as by them shall be laid
out and expended for the purpose aforesaid, over and above the said sum of two
thousand four hundred pounds, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
mayor, aldermen, and common council, and they are hereby authorized and
empowered to take and receive, or cause to be taken and received, in the nature
of a toll, for passage over the said temporary bridge, any sum which, by the
justices of the peace and commissioners of the land tax herein-after mentioned,
assembled as herein-after mentioned, shall be directed to be taken, not
exceeding the whole, nor less than one-half of the following rates, that is to
say,

For every coach, chariot, landau, berlin, chaise, calash, or hearse, drawn by
six horses, mares, or geldings, the sum of two shillings:

For every coach, chariot, landau, berlin, chaise, calash, or hearse, drawn by
four horses, mares, or geldings, the sum of one shilling and sixpence:

For every coach, chariot, landau, berlin, chaise, calash, chair, or hearse,
drawn by two horses, mares, or geldings, the sum of one shilling:

For every coach, calash, chaise or chair, drawn by one horse, mare, or
gelding, the ^um of sixpence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by four horses, oxen, or beasts
of draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals), the sum of
eight-pence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by three horses, oxen, or
beasts of draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals), the sum of
sixpence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by two horses, oxen, or beasts
of draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals), the sum of
four-pence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by one horse, ox, or beast of
draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals), the sum of twopence:

For every empty wagon, drawn by any number of horses, the sum of sixpence.

For every loaded barrow or fledge, drawn by men, the sum of one penny:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by four horses, oxen, or beasts of
draught, and laden with coals, the sum of four-pence:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by three horses, oxen, or beasts of
draught, and laden with coals, the sum of threepence:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by two horses, oxen, or beasts of
draught, and laden with coals, the sum of twopence:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by one horse or beast of draught, and
laden with coals, the sum of one penny:

For every horse, mare, gelding, mule, or ass, laden with any kind of goods
(except coals), or unladen and not drawing, the sum of one penny:

For every horse, mare, gelding, mule, or ass, laden with coals, the sum of one
halfpenny:

For every drove of oxen, cows, or neat cattle, the sum of five-pence per
score, and so in proportion for any greater or lesser number:

For every drove of calves, swine, sheep, or lambs, the sum of twopence
halfpenny per score, and so in proportion for any greater or less number.

And the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common council assembled,
are hereby empowered, by any person or persons by them thereto authorized as
herein-after mentioned, to levy the tolls or duties hereby required to be paid
upon any person or persons who shall, after demand thereof made, neglect or
refuse to pay the same, as aforesaid, or to deny or hinder any passage over the
said bridge, until payment thereof; which said tolls or duties shall and may be
levied by distress of any horse or horses, or other cattle or goods, upon which
such tolls or duties are by this act imposed, or upon any other of the goods
and chattels of such person or persons as ought to pay the same; and all such
horses or other cattle or goods may be detained until such tolls or duties,
with the reasonable charges of such distress, shall be paid; and it shall be
lawful for the person or persons so distraining, after the space of four days
after such distress made or taken, to sell the cattle or other goods or
chattels so distrained, for payment of the said tolls or duties, rendering to
the owner or owners thereof the overplus, upon demand, after satisfaction of
the said tolls or duties, and the reasonable charges in and about making and
keeping such distress and sale: but when any person or persons shall have paid
the toll by this act granted for the passage of any cattle, beast, or carriage,
over the said temporary bridge, the same person or persons, upon producing a
ticket denoting such payment, shall be permitted to pass over the said bridge
with the same cattle, beast, or carriage, toll-free, at any time or times
during the same day, to be computed from twelve of the clock in one night, to
twelve of the clock in the next night; which said ticket the collector of the
tolls is hereby required to give gratis, upon receipt of the toll.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said mayor, aldermen,
and common council, in common council assembled, shall, twice in every year,
that is to say, in the first week of January and the first week of July, cause
just and fair accounts, in writing, to be made and lodged in the office of the
town clerk of Newcastle upon Tyne, of all and every sum and sums of money by
them expended, and from time to time paid in the building of the said temporary
bridge, and repairing, preserving, and supporting the same, and making roads
thereto, as herein-before is mentioned, and making such purchases in the parish
of Gateshead as aforesaid, and obtaining and passing this act; and that before
any tell shall be taken for passage over the said temporary bridge, the said
mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common council assembled, shall cause
fourteen days notice at least to be given, in one of the Newcastle news papers,
of a meeting to be held in the mayor's chamber in Newcastle upon Tyne
aforesaid, of the justices of the peace and commissioners of the land tax for
the said county of Durham, and town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the
county of Northumberland respectively, for the purpose of examining the
accounts of the expenses of the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, as
aforesaid; at which meeting all and every the accounts herein-before directed
to be lodged in the town-clerk's office as aforesaid, shall be laid before the
said justices of the peace and commissioners of the land tax, present at such
meeting, and such tolls only as by the majority of the said justices of the
peace and commissioners of the land tax, present at such meeting, shall be
ordered and directed, shall be taken and received for passage over the said
temporary bridge, not exceeding the whole, nor less than one-half of the rates
herein-before mentioned; and during such there as any such tolls shall be
taken, the said mayor, aldermen, and common council shall, twice in every year
(that is to say), in the first week of January, and the first week of July, as
aforesaid, cause just and fair accounts in writing, to be made out and lodged
in the said town-clerk's office, of all and every sum and sums of money which
shall have been taken and received for passage over the said temporary bridge,
to the time of making out every such account, and of all disbursements and
expenses attending the taking, receiving, and collecting the said tolls; and
the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common council assembled,
shall cause fourteen days notice at least to be given, in one of the Newcastle
newspapers, of a meeting to be held in the mayor's chamber, in Newcastle upon
Tyne aforesaid, of the justices of the peace and commissioners of the land tax
for the said county of Durham and town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, and
the county of Northumberland respectively, for the purpose of examining the
said last-mentioned accounts.

And to the end the said tolls and duties may be duly accounted for, be it
further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common council
assembled, to nominate and appoint such person or persons to be receiver or
receivers, collector or collectors, of the said tolls and duties, as they shall
think fit; and all persons by this act liable to pay the said tolls or duties,
or any of them, are hereby required to pay the same after the rates aforesaid
to such receiver or receivers, collector or collectors aforesaid; and all such
receivers and collectors shall respectively pay the same into the hands of the
chamber-clerk of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and shall also upon
oath, if thereunto required by the said mayor, aldermen, and common council
(which ^ath any justice of the peace for the said town and county of Newcastle
upon Tyne is hereby empowered to administer), from time to time give in a true,
exa^t, and perfect account in writing, under their respective hands, of all
moneys which they and every or any of them shall to such time have received,
paid, and disbursed by virtue of this (...), or by reason of their respective
offices, for which oath no see or re^^ard shall be taken, and the same may be
taken without any stamp; and in case any such receiver or receivers, collector
or collectors, of the said tolls and duties, or any of them, shall not make
such account and payment as by this act is directed, then any justice or
justices of the peace for the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne shall
commit such party or parties ^^^^ing or neglecting so to do, to his Majesty's
gaol for the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, there to remain till
he or they shall have made a true account and payment as aforesaid, or
compounded for the same with the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, and
paid the money by every such composition stipulated to (...) paid; which
composition the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, are (...) authorized,
from time to time, to make and receive, if they shall so think fit, a full
satisfaction for all money that shall be then due from such person or persons
respectively.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that no loaded wagon, wa^^, dray,
or cart, drawn by more than four horses or other cattle, shall at any time be
permitted to pass over the said temporary bridge.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the tolls and
duties which shall be payable by virtue of this act, shall be payable and have
continuance only until the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, shall have
been reimbursed all such sum and sums of money as shall from time to time be by
them laid out and expended for the purposes aforesaid, over and above the said
sum of two thousand four hundred pounds.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council, shall not be allowed any recompense or satisfaction whatsoever
for any sum or sums of money to be by them laid out or expended in the
purchasing of any houses or shops situate within the town and county of
Newcastle upon Tyne, or the liberties thereof.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, that if at any time or times, after
discontinuing the tolls and duties payable by this act, the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council, shall be put to any further charge and expense in
maintaining, preserving, supporting, and repairing the said temporary bridge,
then, and in every such case, and from time to time as it shall so happen, the
said mayor, aldermen, and common council, shall cause fourteen days notice at
least to be given in one of the Newcastle newspapers of a meeting of the
justices of the peace and commissioners of the land tax for the said county of
Durham and town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, and county of Northumberland
respectively, to be held in the mayor's chamber in Newcastle upon Tyne
aforesaid, for the purposes of examining the accounts of the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council, concerning the said temporary bridge, and the
maintaining, preserving, supporting, and repairing the same; at which meeting
all and every the accounts herein-before directed to be lodged in the said
town-clerk's office shall be laid before the said justices of the peace and
commissioners of the land tax present at such meeting, who, or the majority of
them, shall then order and direct such tolls to be again received and taken for
passage over the said temporary bridge as they shall think fit or deem
necessary for the reimbursing such further charges and expenses, not exceeding
the whole nor less than half of the rates aforesaid; and thereupon it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, again to
take and receive, or cause to be taken and received, the said tolls and duties
to be ordered and directed as last mentioned, until they shall have been
reimbursed all ^uch sums of money as they shall expend and lay out in such
further charges and expenses, as last mentioned.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
it shall be found necessary at any time or times to raise or lower the tolls so
as aforesaid to be ordered or directed to be taken, in order to answer the
purposes of this act, then and in every such case it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said mayor, aldermen, and common council, in common council
assembled, to cause fourteen days notice to be given as aforesaid of a meeting
to be held in the said mayor's chamber in Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, of the
justices of the peace and commissioners of the land tax for the said county of
Durham and the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, and county of
Northumberland, for the purpose of raising or lowering the said tolls; and in
every such case the said tolls shall and may be raised or lowered according to
the direction of the majority of the said justices of the peace and
commissioners of the land tax, assembled at such meeting, so as not to exceed
the whole, nor less than one-half, of the respective sums first herein-before
mentioned, as toll for passing over the said temporary bridge.

Provided always, and it is hereby further enacted, that nothing in this act
contains shall extend, or be construed to extend, to prejudice, or take away
any right, toll, or duty whatsoever, which the mayor and burgesses of the town
and county of Newcastle upon Tyne have, or are entitled to take and receive at
the several entrances into the said town, or any toll or duty which the said
mayor and burgesses hold by lease or grant under the Lord Bishop of Durham.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any action shall be
brought, or suit commenced, against any person or persons for any thing done in
pursuance of this act, or in relation to the premises, or any of them, every
such actions or suits shall be laid or brought within six calendar months next
after the fact done, and shall be laid or brought in the town and county of
Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of Durham, where the matter shall arise, and not
elsewhere; and the defendant or defendants in such action may plead the general
issue, and give this act, and the special matter, in evidence, at any trial to
be had thereupon, and that the same was done in pursuance and by authority of
this act: and if the same shall appear to have been so done, or if any such
action or suit shall not be brought within the time before limited, or shall be
brought in any other city, county, or place, than as aforesaid; then the jury
shall find for the defendant or defendants; or if the plaintiff or plaintiffs
shall become nonsuited, or suffer a discontinuance of his, her, or their action
or actions; or if a verdict shall pass against the plaintiff or plaintiffs; or
if, upon demurrer, judgment shall be given against the plaintiff or plaintiffs;
the said defendants shall have treble costs, and shall have such remedy for
recovering the same as any defendant or defendants has or have for costs in
other cases by law.

And it is hereby declared, that this act shall be a public act; and shall be
deemed and taken notice of as such by all judges, justices, and others, in all
courts and places, without specially pleading the same.

APPENDIX, P. 52. (No. 1.) Anno decimo nono Georgii III. Regis. An Act for
enlarging the term of an act, passed in the twelfth year of his present
Majesty's reign, for building a temporary bridge over the river Tyne, between
the town of New castle upon Tyne and Gateshead, in the county of Durham; for
completing the new stone bridge over the said river; and for making the avenues
to, and the passage over the same more commodious.
WHEREAS the ancient stone bridge extending across the river Tyne, between the
town and county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the town of Gateshead,
in the county of Durham, wa^, in November, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-one, by the violence and rapidity of a most extraordinary stood, very
much damaged, broken down in several places, and rendered utterly impassable:
and there^^ one third part of the bridge between the said towns belong to the
se^ of Durham, and the other two third parts to the corporation of Ne^castle:
and whereas, in the twelfth year of the reign of his present (...) ^n act was
passed for building a temporary bridge over the said river; and (...) Newcastle
having proposed to exp^nd the sum of two thousand four hundred pounds of their
own money toward the expense of building such temporary bridge, and purchasing
houses and ground in Newcastle and Gateshead aforesaid, for making a road to
such temporary bridge, power was given to the mayor, aldermen, and common
council, of the said town and county to build the said bridge, and maintain and
support the same when built, and for that purpose to appoint a committee to
transact such matters as they might find necessary: and whereas by the said act
it was enacted, that the said temporary bridge should continue only for the
term of seven years, from the twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-two; and that for reimbursing the said mayor, aldermen, and
common council, all such sums as by them should be laid out for the purposes in
the said act mentioned, over and above the said sum of two thousand four
hundred pounds, it should be lawful for them to take certain tolls for passage
over the said temporary bridge: and whereas it was apprehended, at the time of
passing the said act, that a new stone bridge might be built, or the old stone
bridge effectually repaired, in less time than seven years from the said
twenty-fourth day of June; but it having since been sound necessary to take
down four arches of that part of the said bridge which belongs to the said
corporation (which at the time of passing the said act were deemed sit to be
left standing), the building of the new stone bridge has been retarded, and the
same cannot be completed in less than three years from this time: and whereas,
when the old stone bridge was destroyed by a flood as before mentioned, there
were standing on that part thereof which belongs to the corporation of
Newcastle, diverse houses, shops, and other buildings, which greatly incommoded
the passage along the said bridge; all which have been purchased by the said
corporation at a very considerable expense, in order to prevent the public
being incommoded thereby; and whereas the Lord Bishop of Durham, and the said
corporation, have respectively proceeded to build a new stone bridge in the
place where the old bridge stood; and the said corporation had, on the
twenty-ninth day of December, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight,
expended of their own proper money in building their part of the same, the sum
of twenty-one thousand and forty-two pounds, sixteen shillings, and
eleven-pence, including one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight pounds,
nine shillings, and eight-pence, the price of the buildings on the old bridge;
and have, since that time, incurred further expenses in carrying on the same:
and whereas, upon a moderate computation, the said corporation must expend the
further sum of ten thousand pounds in completing that part of the said bridge
which belongs to them: and whereas the said corporation had expended, on the
said twenty-ninth day of December, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight, over and above the said sum of two thousand four hundred pounds,
in and about the purposes of the said recited act, for building a temporary
bridge, the sum of three hundred and twenty-one pounds, eighteen shillings, and
nine-pence, more than the tolls taken upon the said temporary bridge had
produced; and it is apprehended that the tolls taken, and to be taken
thereupon, from the twenty-seventh day of December, one thousand seven hundred
and seventy eight, to the twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-nine, and not produce so much money a will be sufficient to
reimburse the said corporation the said sum of three hundred and twenty-one
pounds, eighteen shillings, and nine-pence, and the necessary expenses of
repairing, preserving, and supporting, the said temporary bridge to the said
twenty-fourth day of June: and whereas the said temporary bridge is liable to
great damage from floods and ice in the river, and also from keels loaded with
coals passing through the same; and it will be of public utility that the same
temporary bridge should be supported till the said new stone bridge shall be
built: and whereas, at the time the said bridge was destroyed by a flood, there
were standing on that part thereof which belong, to the sea of Durham, diverse
houses, shops, and other buildings, which greatly incommoded the passage over
the same: and whereas the avenue and passage to the said new bridge, at both
ends thereof, are the same as were to the old bridge, and are very narrow; and
it would be of public utility to open more convenient avenues and passages
thereto; and also if the sea of Durham was restrained from erecting, or
permitting to be erected, any houses, shops, or other buildings, on that part
of the said new-bridge which belongs to the said see: may it therefore please
your Majesty that it may be enacted; and be it enacted by the King's most
excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual
and temporal, and commons, in this present parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that, from and after the twenty-fourth day of June, one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine, Sir Lancelot All-good, James Allgood,
Gawen Aynsley, Andrew Armstrong, clerk, R Alnwick, William Atkinson, John
Askew, Henry Atkinson, John Atkinson, John Atkinson of Gateshead, Joseph
Addison, Ralph Atkinson, Giles Alcock, Alexander Adams, Thomas Adams, Edward
Anderson of Newcastle, Charles Atkinson, William Anderson, Bartholomew
Anderson, George Anderson, John Anderson, John Andrew, Henry Askew, David
Akenhead, Thomas Anderson, Cuthbert Adamson, William Ambler, William Archer,
James Allan, Jonathan Airey, Henry Airey, Michael Atkinson, Joseph Airey, James
Atkinson, William Ainsley, the honorable George Bennett, the honorable
William Byron, clerk, Sir Edward Blackett, baronet, Sir Thomas Blackett,
baronet, Sir Francis Blake, baronet, Andrew Robinson Bows, Ralph Bates, George
Baker, William Bainbridge of Riding, John Brand, William Barnup, Thomas Bonner,
Bryan Burrell of Broom-Park, George Baker, John Baker of West-Denton, Matthew
Bell of Wissington, Matthew Bell, junior, John Bell, Martin Barber, J. Barber,
Wilson Bewick, clerk, John Blacket of Wytam, Calverly Bewick of Close-House,
Thomas Charles Big of Benton, Francis Blake, John Bate of Whitehouse, Charles
Brandling of Gasforth-House, the reverend Thomas Bates, D. D. Charles Bayles,
Christopher Blackett, John Bigg, Bannister Bayles of Steel-Hall, Christopher
Bell of Hexham, the reverend George Busby, clerk, Richard Brown of Corbridge,
John Beckwith of Snows-Green, John Erasmus Blacket, Henry Blackett, clerk,
Richard Burdon, John Boulby, Richard Blenkinsopp, Ralph Brown, Smith Burke,
Rowland Burdon, Job Bulman, Thomas Bowker, Samuel Brewster, Thomas Brewster,
Rowland Burdon, junior, James Brack, William Boak, William Bacon, Thomas
Barkire, James Barras, William Beckinson, Joseph Bulman, John Burdon, the
rector of Bowden for the time being, Jonathan Branfoot, clerk, Thomas Byres of
Newbattle, Peter Bawlby, Charles Brown, M. D. Thomas Big, Sir Thomas
Clavering, baronet, Sir Blackston Convers, baronet, Percival Clennell of
Harbottle, Edward Collingwood of Chirton, Edward Collingwood, junior, Henry
Collingwood, John Colville, John Blenkinsop Coulson of Jesmond, the reverend
Slaughter Clarke, William Charlton of Lee-Hall, Nathaniel Clayton, Nathaniel
Clayton, junior, Nathaniel Clayton, clerk, John Chicken of Alnwick, George
Colpitts of Killingworth, Ralph Clarke of North-Shields, George Clavering,
William Chapman, William Charnley, John Campbell, Thomas Carr of ^shott, John
Creswell of Creswell, Daniel Craister of Craister, John Craister of Craister,
N. Cla^ton, Snow Clayton, John Clutterbuck, George Cuthbertson of Benwell,
William Cuthbert, John Collingwood, William Clukson, clerk, Shaftoe Coulter,
Fenwick Coulter, John Coulter, Ralph Carr, Edward Clarke, Ralph Carr, clerk,
Ralph Carr of Cocken, Nicholas Chilton, William Comforth, John Cookson, Isaac
Cookson, William C^^nlington, Thomas Charleton, Robert Clayton, Isaac Cookson,
George Charlton, Cornelius Charlton, Ralph Carr of Dimstone Bank, John Cuthbert
of Whitton Castle, John Cachside, John Coulson, John Coat, Robert Cummin, John
Cross, Sir John Hussy Delaval, baronet, George Delaval of Bavington, Thomas
^^^son, William Durnell, Abraham Dixon of Belford, Willaim Dr^^n of Hawkwell,
Michael Doubleday of Alnwick-Abbey, Joseph Dunn of Shilford, Thomas Dockwray of
Stamfordham, D. D. John Dawson, Michael Dobson, Thomas Dixon, Alexander Davison
of Lanton, John Dent of Short Flatt, Charles James Douglas, Evan Deer, James
Deason, clerk, Thomas Dent, clerk, Thomas Drake, clerk, Thomas Dunn of Durham,
Jonathan Davison, Thomas Dawson of Tanfield, James Douglas, D. D. Samuel
Dickens, D. D. George Dickinson, Edward Dale, Robert Durham, the Dean of Durham
for the time being, Sir John Eden, baronet, Sir Robert Eden, Henry Ellison of
Park-House, Robert Ellison, Nathaniel Ellison, clerk, Henry Ellison of
Otterburn, John Errington of Chesters, John Errington of Beaufront, Henry
Errington of Sandoe, Edward Elliott of The Strother, William Ellison, Thomas
Air of Stella-Hall, George Errington, William Ettricke, Sir Harry
Featherstonhaugh, baronet, William Fenwick of Bywell, Robert Fenwick of
Lemington, Thomas Fenwick of Gartden, Francis Forster of Buston, George
Farquhar of Halystone, Matthew Forster of Bolton, Henry Forster, John Fenwick
of Framlington, James Forster of Bickerton, John Fenwick of Bywell, William
Fenwick, junior, of Bywell, John Featherstone, Thomas Farquhar of Rothbury,
Henry French, George Fife, Richard Fleming, clerk, Christopher Fawcett, Richard
Fawcett, D. D. Edward Fairless, John Farrer, clerk, William Fenton, Sir Henry
Gray, baronet, Edward Gallan of Alnwick, Ralph William Gray, Davidson Richard
Grieve of Swarland, Edward Gray of Overgrass, George Gibson of Westwood,
William Gibson of Unthank, Reginald Gibson of Coobridge, Henry Gibson,
Nathaniel Green of Preston, John Gibson of Great-Whittington, Robert
Greenwollers, Charles Gray of Falloden, Ralph Gray of Preston, Thomas Gibson,
Ralph William Gray, junior, Allan Greenwell, Charles Gray of Morrick, George
Grieve of Swansfield, Jasper Gibson of Hexham, Thomas Gaul, George Gray, Edward
Gibbons, Thomas Gyll, John Goodchild, John Gates, Thomas Gunn, Bows Gray,
Robert Gray, John Green, the rector of Gateshead for the time being, Gabriel
Hall of Moncridge-Hall, John Hall, M. D. Roger Hall, William Hargrave, Henry
Hudson of Whitley, John Heron of Lee-Hall, Daniel Harle of West-Harle, Robert
Horsley of Bolam, John Hodgson of Elswick, John Hunter, John Harrison, Jasper
Harrison, John Hepburn, Thomas Hopper of Shotley-Field, John Hopper of
Shotley-Field, Cuthbert Hopper of Summerfield, Francis Hurry, Edward Humble,
Edward Humble, junior, Anthony Humble, John Hunter, Cuthbert Hunter, John
Huntley, John Hopper, Hendry Hopper, Ralph Hopper, William Hopper, George
Humble, Stephen Handcock, Thomas Emmerson Headlam, Samuel Huthwaite, Thomas
Hunt, William Hawks, John Hunter of Medomsley, Timothy Hutchinson, Middleton
Hewitson, Thomas Hayes, clerk, Edmund Hannay, John Hogg, Ralph Harrison, John
Harrison of Whitburn, Luke Harrison, Robert Harrison, Thomas Harvey of
Gateshead, Thomas Harvey, junior, of Gateshead, Thomas Haggerston, John Hall of
Durham, Anthony Hall, William Hilton, James Hume, William Hall, the rector of
Houghton for the time being, Thomas Harbottle, Robert Hedley, John Hawks,
James Hodgson, Hugh Hornby, John Hedley, Robert Ilderson of Flint-Hill, Thomas
Ismay of Shilford, Thomas James, Fewster Johnson, John Johnson, William
Johnson, Thomas Johnson, Jonathan Jefferson, clerk, Philip Jackson, Christopher
Johnson, William ^^onside, clerk, Francis Jenison, John Strother Kerr, Robert
Keppell, William Keenlyside, John Kirsopp, Thomas Kirsopp, William Keppell,
Charles Kirton, William Kent, James King, the right honorable William Earl of
Lisburne in the kingdom of Ireland, the honorable James Lumley commonly called
Lord Lumley, the honorable Thomas Lion, Sir William Loraine, baronet, Lambton
Loraine, William Lowes of Radley Hall, Robert Lowes of Hexham, George Lake of
Long-Benton, Henry George Liddell, Ralph Lambton, General John Lambton, Richard
Lambert, Richard Lambert, surgeon, Francis Laidman, Thomas Lewin, John Lamb,
Joseph Lamb, George Lake, Addison Langhorn, Joseph Liddell of Saltwellside,
James Liddell, Robert Lynn, Brain Luke, clerk, John Jews of Ridley-Hall,
Anthony Leaton, George Longstaffe, Robert Lisle, Thomas Labourn, Thomas Mather.
Sir William Middleton, baronet, Sir Ralph Milbanke, baronet, Sir Thomas Heron
Middleton, baronet, Ralph Milbanke, Thomas Middleton of River-Green, Henry
Major, Bert Mitford, Robert Mitford of Mitford, Jonathan Martin, John
Mitchison, Simon Meaburn of Acombe, James Moncaster of Walts-End, Christopher
Thompson Maling, Thomas Megginson of Whalton, Thomas Milburn, Thomas Maddison,
Hugh Moises, clerk, Thomas Martindale, clerk, Martin Mordue, Robert Mitchell,
Teasdale Mowbray, George Mowbray, Edward Mosley, William Monkhouse, William
March, John Marley, Henry Mills, Mark Milbanke, John Marley, Thomas Menham,
William Methuen, John Morrison, Richard Newton of Eltington, the mayor,
aldermen, common council, and recorder of Newcastle upon Tyne for the time
being, Samuel Newton, John Nesham, Christopher Nesham, John Ord of Prudhoe,
William Ord of Fenham, Christopher Ord, Ralph Ord of The Sands, Jonathan
Ormston, Newton Ogle, D. D. the right honorable Algernon Percy commonly called
Lord Algernon Percy, Michael Pearson of East-Matfin, William Pearson, Francis
Peacock, Robert Pattison, William Peareth of Newcastle, Richard Pemberton, M.
D. Nathaniel Punshon, Robert Punton, William Pollard, Thomas Philipson, John
Potts, Richard Pemberton, Sir Matthew White Ridley, baronet, Nicholas Ridley,
Henry Ridley, clerk, Joseph Reay, Henry Reay, Henry Utrick Reay, Thomas
Rotherham, clerk, Ralph Reedhead, Robert Reedhead, John Reed of Aydon, Henry
Reed, Robert Rain, Thomas Rotherford, William Rudd, William Raisbeck, John
Richardson, John Robinson, clerk, Christopher Robinson, Thomas Robinson, Hawden
Philipson Row, Christopher Soulsby, Gabriel Selby of Paston, Robert Shaftoe of
Benwell, Henry Scott, William Smith, Thomas Shaftoe of Dunston, John Simpson of
Bradley, Charles Stoddart, clerk, Edward Surtees, Anthony Surtees of Apperley,
Aubone Surtees, William Surtees, Henry Surtees, William Swinburne, George
Silvertop of Minster-Acres, John Silvertop of Benwell, Ralph Spark, Ralph
Smith of Riding, Crozier Surtees, Robert Surtees of Stobby-Lee, Robert Salmon,
Anthony Surtees, Cuthbert Shaftoe of Hunshugh, Robert Shaftoe of Whitworth,
William Scourfield, George Scurfield, clerk, John Stokoe, William Stalker,
George Strickett, John Snowden, Thomas Shaftoe, Richard Shuttleworth, Edward
Shipperdson, Ralph Shippardson, Anthony Salvin, George Stephenson, Langdale
Sunderland, Henry Shadforth, Bernard Shaw, William Spearman, Robert Stephenson,
John Stephenson, David Stephenson, Anthony Storey, Luke Salkeld, William Scott,
Robert Sadler, James Slater, Matthew Stephenson, William Suggitt, Joseph Saint,
Thomas Saint, William Scurfield, M. D. John Summers, George Sparrow, Matthew
Scafe, William Scafe, Richard Swarley, Richard Stonehewer, Thomas Smart,
junior, William Scourfield, Simon Scourfield, Jonathan Sorsbie, junior, Sir
John Trevelyan, baronet, Henry Tulip of Fallowfield, William Tulip of
Fallowfield, John Tweedell, Middleton Teasedale of Newbrough, Francis Tweddell,
Walter Trevelyan, Thomas Tailor of Fleetham, John Tempest, Fewster Teasdale,
Nicholas Tyzack, John Thompson of Heworth, John Thompson of South-Shields,
William Thompson, John Thornhill, Elias Thornhill, Ralph Tunstall, Thomas Tate,
the honorable Frederick Vane, Henry Vane, LL. D. Samuel Vinci, clerk, Sir
Hedworth Williamson, baronet, Edward Ward of Nunnykirk, Matthew Waters, Stephen
Watson of North-Seaton, John Widdrington, Anthony Wilkinson, Te^sdale White,
Cuthbert Wilson, clerk, Michael Wilson, Bacon William Wastell, Edward Wilson of
Hepscott, William Walface, John Walker of Cotbridge, William Battie Wrightson,
Emanuel Walton, Nicholas Walton, Nicholas Walton, junior, Stephen Wright, John
Westgarth, John Wibbersley, clerk, George Weatherby, William Williamson,
William Wilkinson, Christopher Wilkinson, Farrer Wren, Thomas Wharton, Robert
Wharton, William Williamson of Whitburn, William Williamson of Whickham, Henry
Wilkinson, Thomas Wilkinson, James Wilkinson, John Widdrington, James Wharton,
George Wood, Christopher Wardell, Robert Walker, Thomas Walker, Emanuel Walton,
Matthew Waters, Joseph Wilson, John Wheeler, clerk, Edward Wilson, clerk,
rector of Washington, Robert Wilson, William Wilson, John Wilson, (...) Wilson
of Picktier, Robert Wade the younger, James Wilson, Joseph Whitby, Ogle Wallis,
John Ward, John Wright, the rector of Walsingham for the time being, John
Warwick, and Robert Young, shall be trustees for putting this act in execution;
and when any trustee, appointed in or by virtue of this act, shall die, or by
writing under his hand, delivered to the clerk of the said trustees, shall
refuse to act, it shall be lawful for the surviving or remaining trustees, by
writing under their hands, to elect and appoint one other person to be a
trustee in the room of the trustee so dying or refusing to act; and every
person so elected, shall be a trustee for putting this act in execution, and
shall have full power and authority, and are hereby required, to build, and
from time to time, as often as occasion shall require, during the continuance
of this act, to repair the parapet wall of that part of the said new bridge
which belongs to the sea of Durham; to support and maintain the said temporary
bridge, until such time as the said new stone bridge shall be completed and
finished, and opened for the passage of cattle, carts, carriages, and foot
passengers; and to make and open such avenues and passages to such new bridge,
and to do all such other works as they shall adjudge necessary relative
thereto, for the safety and accommodation of the public; provided that the
improvement of the north avenue to the said bridge shall begin with the
messuages and premises belonging to or in the occupation of James Hume and Mary
Davis, on the west side, and Saint Thomas's chapel on the east side of the said
north avenue, and end with the messuages and premises late Oliphant's, at the
south abutment of the said bridge, and not otherwise.

And be it further enacted, that the said trustees, or any five or more of
them, shall meet together in the mayor's chamber of the said town of Newcastle
upon Tyne, upon Saturday, the nineteenth day of June, one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-nine, and proceed to put this act in execution, and shall
then, and from time to time afterward, adjourn themselves to meet in the said
chamber, at such time as they shall think proper for the purposes of this act;
and that if there shall not appear at any meeting a sufficient number of
trustees to act or to adjourn to another day, or in case the trustees at any
time assembled shall not adjourn themselves, the clerk to the said trustees
shall adjourn the meeting to such time as he shall think fit, not exceeding the
distance of twenty-one days from the time of the last default, and shall give
notice thereof by advertising the same in the Newcastle newspapers; and in
case no adjournment, notice, or appointment for meeting, shall be made or given
by the clerk, then it shall be lawful for any five of the trustees to cause
notice to be given in manner aforesaid, appointing the trustees to meet at such
time as they the said five trustees shall think proper, not exceeding as to the
time twenty-one days, nor being less than eight days, from the time of
advertising such notice.

Provided always, that no meeting of trustees for putting this act in
execution, shall be held at any place but in the said mayor's chamber of the
said town of Newcastle upon Tyne; and all orders and determinations of the
trustees in the execution of this act, shall be made at meetings to be held in
pursuance of this act, and not otherwise, and shall be made by the major part
of the trustees then present, the number present not being less than five.

Provided also, that no order made by the major part of five trustees as
aforesaid, shall be revoked or altered unless fifteen trustees shall be
present, and the major part of them concur therein, at a meeting to be held for
that purpose; of which intended alteration notice shall be given at a previous
meeting of the said trustees, and entered in their book of proceedings; and
that such trustees as are justices of the peace may act as justices in the
execution of this act, notwithstanding their being trustees, except in such
cases where they shall be personally interested; and in all cases where the
trustees are authorized to examine any person or persons on oath, it shall be
lawful for such trustees to administer such oath.

And be it further enacted, that the said trustees shall and may appoint one or
more clerk or clerks, treasurer or treasurers, collector or collectors, and
other officers, and from time to time afterward, when they shall think fit,
remove any such clerks, treasurers, collectors, and other officers, or when any
of them shall die, or resign their office, they the said trustees may, by
writing under their hands, appoint one or more fit person or persons to be
their clerk or clerks, treasurer or treasurers, collector or collectors, in the
room of such of the said officers as they shall think proper to remove, or
shall die, or resign their office, and shall take such security for the due
execution of their respective offices, as they the said trustees shall think
proper; and may, by and out of the money to arise by virtue of this act, allow
and pay to such clerks, treasurers, and collectors, and to such other persons
as shall be aiding or assisting them in their respective offices, or that shall
be anyways employed in the execution of this act, such salaries, rewards, and
allowances for their respective attendance, care, and service, as to the said
trustees shall seem reasonable: and all such officers and persons shall, from
time to time, when thereunto required by the said trustees, deliver to such
trustees, or to such person or persons as the said trustees shall for that
purpose appoint, a true and perfect account in writing, under their respective
hands, of all moneys which shall have been by them respectively had, collected,
or received, and how and to whom, and for what purposes, the same, and every
part thereof, has been disposed of, together with proper vouchers and receipts
for such payments, and shall verify the accounts upon oath, it thereunto
required by the said trustees; and all such officers and persons shall, and
they are hereby respectively required to pay all such moneys, as upon the
balance of such account or accounts shall appear to be in their hands, to such
person or persons as the said trustees shall appoint to receive the same: and
if any of the said officers or persons shall refuse or neglect to render and
give such accounts as aforesaid, or produce and deliver up the vouchers and
receipts relating to the same, or to verify the articles thereof upon oath, or
to pay the balance remaining in their hands, when thereunto required in manner
aforesaid, and complaint shall be made of any such neglect or refusal to any
justice of the peace for the county or place where the officer or officers,
person or persons, so neglecting or refusing shall live and reside, such
justice may, and is hereby authorized and required, by a warrant or warrants
under his hand and seal, to cause such officer or officers, person or persons,
to be brought before him, and upon his or their appearing, or not being to be
found, to hear and determine the matter of such complaint in a summary way, and
to settle the said account or accounts, if produced, in such manner as the said
trustees might have done; and if upon confession of the officer or officers,
person or persons, against whom any such complaint shall be made, or by the
oath or oaths of any witness or witnesses, it shall appear to such justice that
any of the moneys which shall have been collected or received, shall be in the
hands of such officer or officers, person or persons, such justice may, and he
is hereby authorized and required, upon nonpayment thereof, by a warrant or
warrants under his hand and seal, to cause such money to be levied by distress
and sale of the goods and chattels of such officer or officers, person or
persons, respectively; and if no goods and chattels can be found sufficient to
answer and satisfy the said money, and the charges of distraining and selling
the same, or if such officer or officers, person or persons, shall not appear
before the said justice at the time and place appointed by him for that
purpose, or if appearing, shall refuse or neglect to give and deliver to the
said justice an account or accounts of receipts and payments as aforesaid, or
to verify the truth of such accounts, and of the articles thereof, on oath, as
aforesaid, or to produce and deliver up to the said justice the several
vouchers and receipts relating to such accounts respectively, then, and in
either of the cases aforesaid, the said justice may and is hereby authorized
and required, by a warrant or warrants under his hand and seal, to commit such
officer or officers, person or persons, to the common gaol or house of
correction of the county, riding, division, or district, where he or they shall
live and reside, there to remain, without bail or mainprize, until he or they
shall have delivered in and settled his or their accounts, and have verified
the same on oath, and shall have delivered up the vouchers and receipts
relating thereto, and shall have paid all the money which shall appear to be in
their respective hands, and the reasonable charges of such distress and sale as
shall in that respect have been made, or until he or they shall have compounded
with the said trustees for the same, and paid the composition money to the said
trustees, or to such person or persons as they shall appoint to receive the
same; and which composition tho said trustees are hereby empowered to make.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said temporary
bridge, which was to have continued for the term of seven years, from the 24th
day of June, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-two, shall be continued for
the further term of three years, and no longer.

Provided nevertheless, that in case the said new stone bridge shall be built,
and made fit and opened for the passage of cattle, carts, carriages, and foot
passengers, and proper avenues made thereto, before the end and expiration of
the said term, that then, and from thenceforth, or as soon as conveniently may
be after such new stone bridge shall be built and made fit and opened, and
avenues made as aforesaid, the said temporary bridge shall be taken away, and
the remainder of the said term shall cease, determine, and be void, any thing
in the said former act or this act contained to the contrary notwithstanding;
and all moneys, which at the expiration of the term hereby granted and
continued, and after payment of all debts contracted on account of the said
temporary bridge, and then unpaid, shall remain of the tolls taken on the said
temporary bridge, or that shall have been borrowed on the credit thereof, and
likewise the materials of which such bridge shall then consist, shall be, and
are hereby declared to be, vested in the said trustees, and may and shall be
applied and disposed of by them to the purposes of this act; and the several
punishments inflicted by the said former act, on persons damaging, destroying,
or injuring the said temporary bridge, shall be, and be construed to be in full
force for and during the said further term of three years, or such part thereof
as the said temporary bridge shall be continued and kept up, as fully and
effectually, to all intents and purposes, as if the same were repeated and
re-enacted in this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be lawful
for the said trustees to treat, contract, and agree with the several owners,
proprietors, and occupiers of, and persons entitled to or interested in, any
messuages, shops, cellars, lands, tenements or hereditaments, for the same, or
so much of the ground thereof as shall be necessary for making and opening
avenues and passages, and doing other works for the purposes of this act, and
particularly with the owner or owners, proprietors and occupiers, of seven
messuages, shops, cellars, or tenements, situate on the west side of the
present street or avenue in Newcastle aforesaid, leading to the intended new
bridge, and which are now, or late were, in the tenure or occupation of William
Hill, William Robson, Abraham Henderson, Robert Salmon, David Akenhead, James
Hume, and others, or for so much of the ground whereon the said messuages,
shops, cellars, or tenements, now stand, as shall be necessary for the purposes
aforesaid; and also for all damage occasioned by taking down any such
buildings, and laying the ground into the street or avenue, to widen the same;
and also with the owner or owners, proprietors, lessees, and occupiers, of two
houses now standing on the abutments of the stone bridge, at the south end
thereof, in order that the same may be taken down and removed, for the purpose
of widening that avenue; and likewise with the Lord Bishop of Durham, and his
several and respective lessees, for the purchase of his and their right and
claim to the privilege of erecting houses, shops, and other buildings, on that
part of the new stone bridge which belongs to the sea of Durham; and in case of
any difference with respect to the several and respective premises
herein-before particularly described and mentioned, or with respect to any
other rights or claims between such owners, proprietors, lessees, or occupiers,
and the said trustees, such difference shall be adjudged, settled and
determined, and such recompense and damage ascertained, by a jury, in such
manner, and under the same rules and orders, as are in and by the said act of
the twelfth year of his present majesty's reign prescribed for settling and
ascertaining damages and recompense to persons incapable or unwilling to treat
or contract; and that upon payment of such sum or sums of money as shall be
agreed to be paid for such respective houses, premises, rights, claims, and
privilege, to be contracted for as aforesaid, or, where no agreement or
contract shall be made, on making satisfaction in manner herein after
mentioned, the said trustees are hereby authorized and required, with all
convenient speed, afterward, to cause to be taken down all such houses,
tenements, edifices, erections, and buildings, or any part thereof, and to
cause the materials thereof to be removed and taken away, and disposed of as
they shall think proper; and this act shall be sufficient authority to
indemnify them, and all persons to be authorized by them, for so doing, against
all and every the owners of, and all other persons interested in, any such
houses, buildings, ground, rights, and claims, or any part thereof, and the
lessees and occupiers thereof, their successors, heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, as if the same premises had been sold and conveyed
by deed of feoffment, bargain and sale, or other assurance in law whatsoever.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after
payment or satisfaction shall be made to the said Lord Bishop of Durham and his
lessees, respectively, in respect of his and their respective rights and
interests, no house or building whatsoever (toll-houses excepted) shall be
erected upon the said new stone bridge, but that the same shall be open, and be
deemed and used as a common and public highway, for ever.

And whereas it may happen that some persons, or bodies politic, corporate, or
ecclesiastical, feoffees in trust, femes-covert, or others, who are seized of,
entitled unto, or interested in, some leases, houses, edifices, tenements, or
ground, rights or claims, or some part or share thereof, which may be necessary
to be taken down and set out, for widening and enlarging the passage over the
said bridge, or the passages leading thereto as aforesaid, and may be willing
to treat and agree to sell such leases, houses, edifices, and premises, but are
incapable of selling, granting, or conveying the same; be it therefore further
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be lawful for all bodies
politic, corporate or ecclesiastical, corporations aggregate or sole, and all
feoffees in trust, executors, administrators, guardians, or other trustees
whomsoever, and for all femes-covert, and every person and persons whomsoever,
who are or shall be seized or possessed of, or interested in, any such leases,
houses, edifices, tenements, ground, premises, rights, or claims, or any part
thereof, to sell and convey all or any such leases, houses, edifices,
tenements, ground, premises, rights, and claims, or any part thereof, and all
their estate, right, title, and interest whatsoever, of, in, or to the same, to
the said trustees, or to such person or persons, and their heirs, for ever, as
the said trustees shall direct, in trust for the said trustees, for the
purposes in this act contained; and that all contracts, agreements, sales, and
conveyances, which shall be so made by virtue and in pursuance of this act, as
aforesaid, shall, without any fine or fines, recovery or recoveries, or other
conveyances or assurances in the law whatsoever, be good, valid, and effectual,
to all intents and purposes, any law, statute, usage, or any other matter or
thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding; and that
all such persons are and shall be hereby indemnified for what they shall do by
virtue and in pursuance of this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any such owner,
proprietor, or occupier, or other person or persons interested in any such
leases, ground, houses, buildings, shops, rights, or claims, upon fourteen days
notice to him, her, or them given, or left in writing at the dwelling house or
houses, or place or places of abode, of such person or persons, shall neglect
or refuse to treat, or shall not agree with the said trustees, or with the
person or persons authorized by them, for the purchase of any leases, ground,
houses, buildings, shops, rights, or claims, or for their interest therein, or
through disability by reason of nonage, coverture, estate tail, or other
impediment whatsoever, cannot make an effectual or valid agreement, or by
reason of absence shall be prevented from treating as aforesaid, then, and in
every or any such case, the said trustees shall cause it to be inquired into
and ascertained, by and upon the oaths of a jury, what damages will be
sustained by, and what recompense and satisfaction shall be made to such
owners, occupiers, or proprietors of, or other person or persons respectively
interested in, any such leases, houses, buildings, shops, ground, rights, or
claims, in such manner, and under the same rules and orders, as are, in and by
the said recited act of the twelfth year of his present majesty's reign,
prescribed for settling and ascertaining damage and recompense to persons
incapable or unwilling to treat or contract.

And it is hereby further enacted and declared, that upon payment of such sum
or sums of money which shall be assessed and decreed by a jury as aforesaid,
the person or persons to whom the same shall be so assessed and decreed, for
the purchase of the leases, houses, tenements, hereditaments, rights, and
claims, or for the purchase of any estate or interest therein, shall make and
execute, or procure to be made and executed, good, valid, and legal conveyances
and assurances in the law, to the said trustees, or to such person or persons
as they shall nominate or appoint, and their heirs, in trust for the said
trustees, of such houses, ground, tenements, edifices, erections, buildings,
premises, rights, and claims, or any part thereof, or of such estate or
interest for which such sum or sums of money shall be so awarded, and shall
procure all necessary parties to execute such conveyances, assignments, and
assurances, and shall do all acts, matters, and things, requisite and necessary
to make a clear, good, and perfect title to the premises, to the said trustees,
or to such person or persons as they shall appoint as aforesaid; and such
conveyances, assignments, and assurances, shall contain all such reasonable and
usual covenants as shall on the part of the said trustees be required: and in
case such person or persons, to whom any such sum or sums shall be so awarded
or due as aforesaid, shall not be able to evince their title to the premises to
the said trustees, and to make, or procure to be made, good, valid, and legal
conveyances thereof to the said trustees, or to such person or persons as they
shall appoint, or shall refuse so to do, being thereto required, and such sum
or sums so assessed and awarded, and due as aforesaid, being produced and
tendered to be paid to them on their making such title, and executing and
procuring to be executed such conveyances, assignments, or assurances as
aforesaid; or in case such person or persons, to whom such sum or sums of money
shall be so assessed or due as aforesaid, cannot be found in the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne; or if by reason of disputes depending in any court of law
or equity, or for defect of evidence, or otherwise, it shall not appear to the
said trustees what person or persons is or are entitled; or if any mortgagee or
mortgagees shall refuse to take in his, her, or their mortgage money due on the
premises, after notice given to him, her, or them for that purpose, as
herein-after is provided; then, and in all and every such case and cases, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said trustees to order the sum or sums
so assessed and awarded as aforesaid, as the value or purchase money for such
leases, houses, ground, tenements, edifices, erections, buildings, and
premises, or as shall be due on such mortgage, to remain in the hands of their
treasurer, for the use of the parties interested in the said premises, to be
paid to them, and every of them, according to their respective estates and
interests in the said premises; and immediately upon such order, all the
estate, right, title, interest, use, trust, property, claim, and demand, in law
and equity, of the person or persons respectively for whose use the same was
ordered to remain in the treasurer's hands, in, to, or out of such leases,
houses, ground, tenements, edifices, erections, buildings, and premises, shall
vest in the said trustees for the uses and purposes of this act, and they shall
be deemed in law to be in the actual possession thereof, to all intents and
purposes, as fully and effectually as if every person having any estate in the
said premises had actually conveyed the same by lease and release, bargain and
sale enrolled, feoffment with livery and seisin, fine and recovery, or any
other legal conveyance whatsoever; and such payments shall not only bar all
right, title, interest, claim, and demand, of the person or persons to whose
use such payment was made, but also shall extend to, and be deemed and
construed to bar the dower and dowers of the wife or wives of such person or
persons, and all estates tail, in reversion or remainder, against the issue and
issues of such person and persons, and every person claiming under them, to all
intents and purposes whatsoever.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said trustees,
on the application of any person or persons interested in any, or any part of
such leases, houses, ground, tenements, edifices, erections, buildings, or
premises, or the moneys so ordered to remain in the treasurer's hands for the
purchase thereof, or in respect of any right or interest therein, to place out
and invest, or cause to be placed out and invested, such sum or sums of money,
or any part thereof, in some of the public funds, or on government securities,
at interest, in the name of any person or persons authorized and appointed by
the said trustees for that purpose, in trust to transfer and assign the same to
such person or persons to whom the money so paid shall belong, on their
executing proper conveyances as aforesaid, and in the mean time, in trust to
pay the interest and dividends arising therefrom to such person or persons who
shall be from time to time entitled to receive the same.

Provided also, and it is hereby enacted, that all and every person and persons
who would be entitled to recover the mesne profits of the premises against the
person or persons in possession, in case the same had not been so conveyed to
the said trustees, or by their directions, as aforesaid, shall be entitled to
recover the sum or sums to arise from such interest and dividends as aforesaid,
by action of debt against the person or persons who shall receive the same; and
the said trustees are hereby empowered and authorized to make such order as
aforesaid, on the treasurer, for the payment of such sum or sums of money, or
any part thereof, as shall be necessary, in order to their being invested in
the funds or government securities; and the said trustees shall be quieted in
the possession of the leases, houses, ground, tenements, edifices, erections,
buildings and premises, for which such moneys shall be so paid as aforesaid,
and shall not be answerable or accountable, in any court of law or equity, for
the money to be so deposited and placed out as aforesaid, any otherwise than
according to the tenor, purport and true meaning of this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
mortgagee or mortgagees of any leases, houses, lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, which shall be purchased in pursuance of this act, his, her, or
their heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, respectively, on having
six calendar months notice in writing given to him, her, or them, from the said
trustees, or any person authorized by them, that they will pay off and
discharge the principal and interest money which at the expiration of the said
six months shall be due on such mortgage, shall at the end of the said six
months after every such notice, on payment or tender of the principal and
interest money which shall be then due, convey and assign his, her, and their
respective estates and interests in and to the said mortgaged premises, to the
said trustees, or to such person or persons as they shall nominate or appoint,
in trust for the said trustees, to the uses and purposes of this act; and if
any such mortgagee or mortgagees, his, her, or their heirs, executors,
administrators, or assigns, shall refuse so to do, then all interest on every
such mortgage, from the expiration of the said six months after any such notice
given as aforesaid, shall cease and determine.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in case the said
trustees, or any person authorized by them, shall, after any houses, edifices,
or premises, shall be purchased by them in pursuance of this act, give six
calendar months notice in writing to all and every the tenants or occupiers of
any such leases, houses, edifices, or premises, which shall be so purchased, to
quit or deliver up the possession of such leases, houses, edifices, or
premises, at the expiration of such six months, then all and every such tenants
or occupiers shall, at the end of such six months after every such notice,
peaceably and quietly deliver up the possession of the premises so by him, her,
or them, respectively occupied, whether upon lease or otherwise, to the person
or persons who shall be appointed by the said trustees to take possession
thereof; and if any person or persons so in possession shall refuse to give up
such possession, at the expiration of such six months after every such notice
as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful for the said trustees, from time to
time, to issue a precept or precepts to the sheriff of the said town and county
of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or to the sheriff of the county of Durham
respectively, wherein the premises are situate, to cause possession thereof to
be delivered to such person or persons who shall be in such precept or precepts
nominated to receive the same; and the sheriffs of the said town and county of
the town, or of the said county of Durham, as the case may be, are hereby
respectively required to deliver possession, according to such precept or
precepts, of the premises therein mentioned, and to levy such costs as shall
accrue by means of the issuing and execution of every such precept or precepts,
by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of any person or persons who
shall have refused to give up such possession as aforesaid, and shall refuse or
neglect to pay the same costs.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful for the said trustees from time to time to impose any reasonable fine,
not exceeding the sum of five pounds, on any sheriff or sheriffs, or his or
their deputy or deputies, bailiffs, or agents respectively, who shall make any
default in the premises; and on any person or persons who, after being duly
summoned, shall not attend, or attending, shall refuse to be sworn, or who
being sworn, shall refuse to give evidence; and on any person or persons
summoned and returned on such jury or juries, who shall refuse to be sworn on
any such jury or juries, or being sworn thereon, shall not give his or their
verdict, or shall in any other manner wilfully neglect his or their duty in or
touching the premises, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this act; and
from time to time to levy such fine or fines, by order of the said trustees, by
distress and sale of the offender's goods, together with the reasonable charges
of every such distress and sale, returning the overplus of any) to the owner;
and all such fines which shall be so recovered and received shall be accounted
for and applied toward the purposes of this act.

And it is hereby further enacted, that the principal money to arise from the
sale of any leases, houses, edifices, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, which
shall be purchased for the purposes intended by this act, of any body corporate
or ecclesiastical, corporation aggregate or sole, feoffees in trust, guardians,
committees, or other trustees, or from any feme or femes-covert, shall be paid
to such persons as they shall respectively nominate to receive the same, in
trust, with all convenient speed, to be reinvested in the purchase of other
messuages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments; which shall be conveyed and
settled to and upon, and subject to the like uses, trusts, limitations,
remainders, and contingencies, as the leases, houses, edifices, lands,
tenements, and hereditaments, which shall be purchased from them respectively
by the said trustees as aforesaid, were respectively settled, limited, or
assured, at the time of such the purchasing of the same, or so many thereof as
at the time of making such conveyances and settlements shall be existing and
capable of taking effect.

And whereas, by reason of the purchases which the said trustees are hereby
empowered to make by virtue of this act, they may happen to be possessed of
some piece or pieces of ground, over and above what may be necessary for the
opening and widening of the respective avenues and passages to and from the
said new bridge, and for other the purposes of this act; be it therefore
further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful for
the said trustees to sell and dispose of such piece or pieces of ground for
building, either together or in parcels, as they shall find most advantageous
and convenient, to such person or persons as shall be willing to contract for
and purchase the same, giving preference to the person or persons of whom the
same shall have been purchased; and it shall and may be lawful for the said
trustees to design, assign, and lay out, in what manner the new houses or
edifices, to be erected upon such piece or pieces of ground so to be purchased,
shall be built.

Provided always, that the moneys to arise by sale of such piece or pieces of
ground shall be applied for the respective purposes of this act, and to and for
no other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person
whomsoever shall sit or act as a trustee in the execution of this act, in any
case where he is in anywise, directly or indirectly, interested or concerned of
or in the matter or matters in question; nor shall any person whomsoever be
sworn to serve on any jury, or be examined as a witness, where he or she is in
anywise, directly or indirectly, interested in the matter in question.

And whereas the mayor, aldermen, and common council, of the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, in the county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne
aforesaid, have proposed and are willing to expend and lay out the sum of one
thousand pounds of the moneys of the corporation of the town of Newcastle upon
Tyne aforesaid, in and toward the expenses of purchasing the said several
messuages, tenements, and premises, situate on the west side of the street or
avenue in Newcastle, leading to the new bridge: and forasmuch as the
maintaining and supporting of the said temporary bridge, until the said new
stone bridge shall be completed; and the purchasing of such leases, houses,
edifices, ground, premises, rights, and claims, as may be necessary for keeping
the passage over the said new bridge open, commodious, and free from buildings;
and for widening the passages as aforesaid, and building the said parapet wall
of that part of the said new bridge which belongs to the sea of Durham; and the
obtaining and passing of this act; over and above the one thousand pounds
proposed to be to contributed by the said corporation as aforesaid, will be
attended with very considerable charge and expenses: be ^^ therefore enacted,
that, for and toward raising money for those purpose, it shall and may be
lawful for the said trustees, and they are hereby authorized and empowered to
continue the present toll-gate on the said temporary bridge, and to appoint and
order such toll-gates or toll-houses to be erected upon, across, or near the
said new stone bridge, when finished, as they shall think fit, and to take and
receive at the said toll-gate and toll-houses respectively, such and the same
tolls, for the passage of cattle, carriages, and other things, as by the said
act of the twelfth year of his present Majesty are authorized to be taken on
the said temporary bridge, under the same limitations, regulations, and
restrictions, subject to the same provisions, and with the same remedies for
the recovery thereof, as are in the said act contained with respect to the
tolls thereby made payable on the said temporary bridge.

And whereas the said corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne are possessed of
certain buildings and shops situate on the east side of the present street or
avenue in Newcastle leading to the said new bridge: and whereas it will be
necessary to lay a part of the ground, whereon such buildings and shops stand,
into the said street or avenue, for the accommodation of passengers over the
said bridge: be it therefore further enacted, that the said trustees shall, and
they are hereby empowered and required to cause the said houses to be set back,
in such manner that six feet and an half in width, at a medium, of the ground
whereon the said houses and buildings stand, may be laid into the said street
or avenue for the length of seventy-eight feet from the said bridge, and from
the end of the said seventy-eight feet to continue at a medium of four feet and
an half in width, for the space of about fifty feet on the west end of St.
Thomas's chapel; in consideration whereof, and previous to the setting back any
such houses and buildings in manner aforesaid, it shall be lawful for the said
trustees, and they are hereby empowered and required to pay into the chamber of
the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, for the use and benefit of the said
corporation, the sum of six hundred pounds, out of the tolls hereby authorized
to be continued and taken, or out of any money which shall be borrowed on the
credit thereof.

And forasmuch as it may be necessary to borrow money upon the credit of this
act, for the more speedy and effectual carrying into execution the purposes
thereof; be it therefore further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the trustees from time to time, and they are
hereby empowered, by any deed or deeds, writing or writings, under their hands
and seals, to assign over or mortgage the tolls hereby continued and granted,
or any part or parts thereof, for securing the repayment of any sum or sums of
money so by them to be borrowed, with interest, for the ends and purposes
aforesaid; and that the said trustees shall, in the first place, pay and
discharge all expenses incurred in and about procuring and passing this act,
and the remainder of the money so raised shall be applied according to the true
intent and meaning of this act, and not otherwise.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said trustees
shall, twice in every year, (that is to say) in the first week in January, and
in the first week in July, cause just and fair accounts in writing to be made,
and lodged in such place as shall be adjudged and determined upon to be most
fitting and proper, by an order to be made by any fifteen or more trustees at
any public meeting, and to be removed, if occasion shall require, to any other
place, at the discretion of any fifteen or more trustees, in manner aforesaid,
of all and every sum and sums of money by them expended by virtue of this act,
in continuing to maintain and support the said temporary bridge, in improving
the passage over, and avenues to the said new stone bridge, and all other the
expenses relating to the procuring and executing of this present act; and that
before any toll shall be taken for passage over the said new bridge, when
finished, the said trustees shall cause fourteen days notice, at least, to be
given in one of the Newcastle newspapers, of a meeting to be held in the
mayor's chamber in Newcastle upon Tyne, for the purpose of examining the
accounts of the expenses of the said trustees; at which meeting all and every
the accounts herein before directed to be made, shall be laid before the
trustees present at such meeting; and such tolls only as by the majority of the
said trustees present at such meeting, shall be ordered and directed, shall be
taken and received for passage over the said new bridge, not exceeding the
whole, nor less than one half, of the rates mentioned in the said act of the
twelfth year of his present Majesty's reign; and during such time as any such
tolls shall be taken, the said trustees shall, twice in every year, (that is to
say) in the first week in January, and in the first week in July, as aforesaid,
cause just and fair accounts in writing to be made out, and lodged in manner
aforesaid, of all and every sum and sums of money which shall have been taken
and received for passage over the said new bridge, to the time of making out
every such account, and of all disbursements and expenses attending the taking,
receiving, and collecting the said tolls; and the said trustees shall cause
fourteen days notice at least to be given in one of the Newcastle newspapers,
of a meeting to be held in the mayor's chamber in Newcastle upon Tyne
aforesaid, of the trustees, for the purpose of examining the said
last-mentioned accounts.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
it shall be found necessary at any time or times to lower the tolls so as
aforesaid to be ordered or directed to be taken, or to raise the same again, in
order to answer the purposes of this act, then and in every such case it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said trustees to cause fourteen days notice to
be given as aforesaid, of a meeting to be held in the said mayor's chamber in
Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, of the trustees, for the purpose of lowering or
raising the said tolls; and in every such case the said tolls shall and may be
lowered or raised according to the direction of the majority of the said
trustees assembled at such meeting, so as not to exceed the whole, nor be less
than half, of the respective sums first granted for passing over the said
temporary bridge.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful for the said trustees, from time to time, by writing under their hands
and seals, to lease the tolls arising by virtue of this act, unto any person or
persons, for any term not exceeding three years, for the best rent that can be
got for the same, payable at such times, and under such conditions, and unto
such person or persons, as the said trustees shall direct or appoint; and the
money arising thereby shall be applied in such manner as the tolls so leased
are directed to be applied.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that at the expiration
of twelve years, to be computed from the twenty-fourth day of June, one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine, or at such sooner time as the several
purposes of this act shall be carried into execution, and the money borrowed
upon the credit thereof be repaid, with interest for the same, all the tolls
hereby continued and granted shall absolutely cease and determine.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the tolls continued
and made payable by this act, shall not be rated or assessed for or toward the
land tax, church, or poor rates, or any other rates or taxes, ward or
parochial; and that all and singular the said tolls, and all other moneys which
shall be levied or received by virtue hereof, and the right, interest, and
property of all and every the gates and toll-houses to be continued or erected
by virtue of this act, and the materials of the said temporary bridge, shall,
from and after the passing of this act, be, and the same are hereby vested in
the said trustees; and the money to arise therefrom shall be recovered,
accounted for, paid, and applied to and for the purposes of this act.

And, for the better support and security of the toll-houses and toll-gates to
be continued o^ ^^t up by virtue of this act, be it further enacted, that if
any person or persons shall unlawfully, and wilfully or maliciously, either by
day or night, burn, or set fire to, remove, pull down, cut down, pluck up,
throw down, or otherwise destroy or level, any toll-gate or toll-house, or any
part thereof, which shall be erected or set up, or continued, by the authority
of this act, for preventing the passage through any of the toll-gates as
aforesaid, without paying the tolls hereby continued and charged, or shall in
anywise direct or procure the same to be done, then, and in every such case or
cases, every person who shall so offend, and be thereof lawfully convicted,
shall be adjudged guilty of felony, and shall suffer death as in cases of
felony, without benefit of clergy, and the necessary charges to be incurred in
and about the prosecution of such offender shall be paid out of the moneys to
be raised by virtue of this act.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, that if any person or persons shall
assault any person or persons who shall be duly appointed a collector or
collectors of any of the tolls continued or charged by this act; or shall
threaten them, or any or either of them, in the execution of such his, her, or
their office; or shall at any time or times forcibly ride, drive, lead, or pass
through any toll-gate or toll-gates that shall be erected or set up, or
continued, by authority of this act, any wagon, cart, or other carriage, or
any horse or other beast, chargeable with toll, without paying such toll for
the same; or shall by menaces, threats, or violence, or by force or terror,
drive or remove any such collector or collectors from his, her, or their
station or stations respectively, at such their respective toll-gate or
toll-gates, so as to prevent or interrupt them, or any or either of them, from
duly attending to the collection or receipt of such tolls; then, and in every
or any of such cases, the party or parties who shall so offend, shall, for
every such offense, upon conviction thereof, either by his or their own
confession, or upon oath of one or more credible witness or witnesses, before
any justice or justices of the peace for the said town and county of the town
of Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of Durham, as the case shall be, forfeit and
pay the sum of five pounds; one moiety whereof shall go to the use of the
informer, and the other moiety to the said trustees, for the purposes of this
act; and the whole shall be levied by distress and sale of the goods and
chattels of such offender or offenders, or any or either of them, by warrant or
warrants from such justice or justices respectively, rendering the overplus (if
any), after deducting the reasonable charges, to the owner or owners, on
demand; and for want of such distress, such justice or justices shall, by his
or their warrant, commit every such offender to his Majesty's gaol for the said
town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of Durham, as the case may be, there to
remain without bail or mainprize, for the space of six calendar months, unless
sooner discharged by order of the court of general quarter sessions of the
peace for the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of Durham, as the
case may be; and if any such party or parties so once convicted shall in any
the like manner offend a second or third time, or oftener, and be in like
manner convicted thereof, he, she, or they shall, for every such other offense,
forfeit and pay ten pounds, to be levied and applied in like manner, and for
want of sufficient distress shall be committed in like manner, by warrant from
one or more such justice or justices, to the common gaol of the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of Durham, as the case may be, there to remain,
without bail or mainprize, for one whole year, and until he, she, or they shall
have entered into recognizance, with sureties, to the satisfaction of the
justices of the general quarter sessions of the peace for the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of Durham, as the case may be, for their good
behavior, respectively, for three years; all which offenses such justice or
justices is and are hereby authorized and required, from time to time, to hear
and determine in a summary way, and on conviction of the respective offenders
to grant such warrants respectively as aforesaid: and if any constable,
officer, or other person who shall be authorized or entrusted to levy or
receive any penalty or penalties inflicted by this act, after the levying or
receipt thereof, shall refuse to account for and pay over the same to the uses
directed by this act, then it shall and may be lawful to and for any justice or
justices of the peace of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of
Durham, as the case may be, on oath made before him or them, by a credible
witness, of such refusal, to commit every such constable, officer, or other
person, who shall so refuse or neglect to account, to one of the said gaols, as
the case may be, there to remain until he shall have accounted for and
satisfied the same.

And be it further enacted, that no order which shall be made by any justice of
the peace, by virtue or in pursuance of this act, or any other proceedings to
be had touching the conviction or convictions of any offender or offenders
against this act, shall be quashed or vacated for want of form only, or be
removed or removeable by certiorari, or any other writ or process, into any of
his Majesty's courts of record at Westminster.

Provided always, and it is hereby further enacted, that nothing in this act
contained shall extend, or be construed to extend, to prejudice or take away
any right, toll, or duty whatsoever, which the mayor and burgesses of the town
and county of Newcastle upon Tyne have, or are entitled to take and receive at
the several entrances into the said town, or any toll or duty which the said
mayor and burgesses hold by lease or grant under the Lord Bishop of Durham.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any action shall
be brought, or suit commenced, against any person or persons, for any thing
done in pursuance of this act, or in relation to the premises, or any of them,
every such action or suit shall be laid or brought within six calendar months
next after the fact done, and shall be laid or brought in the town and county
of Newcastle upon Tyne, or county of Durham, where the matter shall arise, and
not elsewhere; and the defendant or defendants in such action may plead the
general issue, and give this act and the special matter in evidence at any
trial to be had thereupon, and that the same was done in pursuance and by
authority of this act: and if the same shall appear to have been so done, or if
any such action or suit shall not be brought within the time before limited, or
shall be brought in any other city, county, or place, than as aforesaid, then
the jury shall find for the defendant or defendants; or if the plaintiff or
plaintiffs shall become nonsuited, or suffer a discontinuance of his, her, or
their action or actions, or if a verdict shall pass against the plaintiff or
plaintiffs, or if, upon demurrer, judgment shall be given against the plaintiff
or plaintiffs, the said defendant or defendants shall have treble costs, and
shall have such remedy for recovering the same, as any defendant or defendants
has or have for costs in other cases by law.

And it is hereby declared, that this act shall be a public act; and shall be
deemed and taken notice of as such, by all judges, justices, and others, in all
courts and places, without specially pleading the same.

APPENDIX, P. 52. (No. 2.) An Act for enlarging the terms and powers of two
acts of the twelfth and nineteenth years of his present Majesty's reign, made
for building a temporary bridge, and completing a new stone bridge, over the
river Tyne, between the town of Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead, in the
county of Durham, and making the avenues to and the passages over the same more
commodious; and for removing and preventing nuisances and annoyances in the
streets, lanes, or avenues leading to the said new stone bridge, within the
town of Gateshead, in the county of Durham.
WHEREAS an act of parliament passed in the twelfth year of his present
Majesty's reign, for building a temporary bridge over the river Tyne, between
the town of Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead, in the county of Durham, which
temporary bridge was to have continuance from the twenty-fourth day of June one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-two, for the term of seven years; and in the
nineteenth year of his present Majesty's reign, another act of parliament
passed, whereby the said temporary bridge was continued for the further term of
three years, and diverse persons therein named were appointed trustees for
putting the said last-mentioned act into execution, and were enabled to
complete the new stone bridge over the said river, and to make the avenues to,
and the passage over, the said new stone bridge more commodious; and it was
thereby enacted, that for and toward raising money for the purposes of the
said act, it should be lawful for the said trustees to take and receive such
and the same tolls for the passage of cattle, carriages, and other things over
the said new stone bridge, as by the said first-mentioned act were authorized
to be taken on the said temporary bridge, until the expiration of twelve years,
to be computed from the twenty-fourth day of June one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-nine, or until such sooner time as the several purposes of the said
act of the nineteenth year of his present Majesty's reign should be carried
into execution, and the money borrowed upon the credit thereof, with interest,
should be repayed; and it was provided and declared, by the said last-mentioned
act, that the improvement of the avenues to the said new stone bridge should
end at the messuages and premises, then late Oliphant's, at the south abutment
of the said new stone bridge:

And whereas the said trustees have duly put the said act in execution, and
have, by the money arising from the said tolls and borrowed on the credit
thereof, made and opened such avenues, and completed such other works within
the limits prescribed by the said last-mentioned act, as were adjudged
necessary for the safety and accommodation of the public; but the south avenue
to the said new stone bridge, beyond the premises late Oliphant's, in the town
of Gateshead aforesaid, is inconvenient and dangerous to passengers, by reason
of the great declivity of the street there, called the Bottlebank, over which
the high road leading from the city of Durham to the said bridge lies, though
the same is capable of being rendered both safe and commodious:

And whereas it will be of great public utility to effect the improvement of
the said south avenue to the said bridge; but in regard that the said trustees
appointed by the said act of the nineteenth year of his present Majesty's
reign, are thereby restrained from making any improvement beyond the said
premises late Oliphant's, and such intended improvements of the said south
avenue cannot be effectually made, unless the said tolls are further continued,
and the terms and powers of both the said acts enlarged: May it therefore
please your Majesty, that it may be enacted, and be it enacted, by the King's
most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons, in this present parliament assembled, and
by the authority of the same, that the term of twelve years granted by the said
last-mentioned act shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, enlarged
and continued for the further term of twelve years, to be reckoned and computed
from the expiration of the said term of twelve years.

And, in order that the several powers and authorities, necessary to be
exercised in effecting the several purposes herein mentioned, may be the better
understood and more easily executed, be it further enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that instead of the several clauses, provisions, powers, tolls,
penalties, forfeitures, matters, and things, which are contained in the said
former acts of the twelfth and nineteenth years of his present Majesty's reign,
this present act of parliament and the several clauses, provisions, powers,
tolls, penalties, forfeitures, matters, and things herein contained, shall
commence and take place, and shall be put in execution immediately after
passing this act; and the same shall from thenceforth be and continue in force
for and during the residue and remainder of the said term of twelve years,
granted by the said act of the nineteenth year of his present Majesty's reign;
and from and after the expiration thereof, for and during the further term of
twelve years, for the purpose of improving the said south avenue to the said
new stone bridge, according to the true intent and meaning of this act.

And, in order to secure the money now due and owing on the credit of the said
former acts, or either of them, be it further enacted and declared by the
authority aforesaid, that from and after the passing of this act, this act and
the several tolls hereinafter granted and made payable, shall, for and during
the residue of the said term of twelve years already granted as aforesaid, and
also for and during the said additional term of twelve years hereby granted and
continued, be and remain subject and liable to the payment of all sums of
money, which at the time of passing this act shall be due and owing on the
credit of the said former acts, or either of them, and to the payment of all
sums of money which shall or may hereafter be borrowed on the credit of this
present act, together with all interest then due, and which shall or may from
time to time hereafter become due and payable for the same respectively.

And, in order to carry the purposes of this act into execution, be it further
enacted, that the several persons named and appointed in and by the said act of
the nineteenth year of his present Majesty's reign, trustees for putting the
same act in execution, and also every other person elected or appointed trustee
under the power in the same act contained for that purpose, and also the
several persons named and appointed in and by an act of parliament made and
passed in the thirteenth year of the reign of his present Majesty, entitled,
An Act for enlarging the term and powers of two acts of the twentieth and
twenty-sixth years of the reign of his late Majesty, for repairing the high
road leading from the city of Durham, in the county of Durham, to Tyne Bridge
in the said county; and also every other person elected or appointed trustee
under the power in the same last mentioned act contained, shall be, and they
and their successors to be elected in manner hereinafter prescribed, are hereby
appointed trustees for effecting the purposes of this act, and shall have full
power and authority, and are hereby enabled to widen and enlarge the said
street called The Bottlebank, by pulling down so much of the houses and
buildings on the east side of the said street, and laying the scites thereof
into the said street, as will make the said Bottlebank there full forty feet
wide from house to house, as far southwards from the said new stone bridge as
the street or lane called Hillgate; and from thence to make and open a new
street fifty feet wide to extend to the west corner of Gateshead churchyard,
and then along by the west side of Gateshead church yard wall to a street or
lane called High Church Chair; and from the (...) toward the Bottlebank
aforesaid, to within eighty feet from the said Bottlebank; and from thence to
extend in a line on the north side of the said intended street to the
north-west angle of the said High Church Chair, where the same communicates
with the said Bottlebank, and on the south side of the said street in a
straight line from the point where the said eighty feet begin, to a point
seventy-eight feet south of the said north-west corner of the High Church
Chair, so that the said street where it terminates in the Bottlebank may be
full seventy-eight feet wide, and also to render the communication between
Pipewell Gate and the said Bottlebank, more commmodious by cutting off the
corner or angle formed by the houses now or late belonging to Mr. John Marley
and Mr. Henry Smith, and laying the scites thereof into the street there; and
in order to complete and effect such alterations and improvements, they the
said trustees, or any five or more of them, shall, and they are hereby
authorized and empowered to treat, contract, and agree with all and every
person and persons seized of or interested in any lands, messuages, shops,
burgages, houses, or tenements which shall be necessary to be purchased and
taken down in enlarging and widening the said Bottlebank, from the south end of
the said bridge to Hillgate aforesaid, and in forming and opening the said
intended street, for the absolute purchase of so much of such lands, messuages,
shops, houses, burgages, or tenements, as shall be thought necessary for the
purposes aforesaid, and of their respective interests therein, and also with
the said John Marley and Henry Smith, for the absolute purchase of so much of
their said respective houses and premises as shall be thought necessary by the
said trustees for cutting off the corner or angle thereof as aforesaid, and of
their respective interests therein: and that it shall be lawful for all bodies
politic or corporate, feoffees, committees, guardians, or other trustees, for
and on the behalf of themselves, their heirs and successors, or of any infants,
feme-coverts, idiots, lunatics, or other cestuique trusts, and for all other
persons whomsoever, who are or shall be seized of or interested in any of the
said lands, messuages, shops, burgages, houses or tenements, to treat,
contract, and agree with the said trustees, or any five or more of them, for
the absolute sale thereof, and to convey and assure the same accordingly; and
all such contracts, agreements, sales, and conveyances, shall be good, valid,
and effectual to all intents and purposes whatsoever, any law or statute to the
contrary notwithstanding: and all such bodies politic or corporate, feoffees,
committees, guardians, trustees, and other persons so conveying and assuring,
shall be and are hereby indemnified for what they shall do in pursuance of this
act; but in case any such body politic or corporate, or other person or persons
seized of or interested in any such lands, messuages, shops, burgages, houses,
or tenements as aforesaid, shall for the space of one calendar month after
notice in writing to be signed by any five or more of the said trustees, and
given to or left at the dwelling house or houses, or usual place or places of
abode, of such person or persons, or of the head officer of any such body
politic or corporate, or at the house of the tenant in possession of any such
lands, messuages, shops, burgages, houses, or tenements, neglect or refuse to
treat, contract, or agree, or by reason of absence or otherwise be prevented
from treating, contracting, or agreeing for the sale and conveyance thereof, or
shall not produce or make out a clear title thereto, or to his, her, or their
estate, or interest therein; then, and in any such case, it shall be lawful for
the said trustees, or any five or more of them, to issue a warrant under their
hands to the sheriff of the county of Durham, thereby requiring and commanding
him to impannel a jury of twenty-four persons, qualified to serve on juries, to
appear before the said trustees, or any five or more of them, at such time and
place in the said county as shall in such warrant be mentioned; and the said
sheriff is hereby required to impannel such jury accordingly; and out of the
number of jurymen so impannelled, and appearing at the time and place
aforesaid, the said trustees, or any five or more of them, are hereby empowered
and required to draw by ballot, and to swear, or cause to be sworn, twelve men,
to be the jury for ascertaining the value of the said lands, messuages, shops,
burgages, houses, or tenements; and in default of a sufficient number of the
jurymen so returned appearing, the said sheriff shall take other honest and
indifferent men of the standers by, or that can speedily be procured, to attend
that service, and be sworn as aforesaid, to make up the said jury to the number
of twelve; and all parties concerned shall have their lawful challenges against
any of the said jurymen when they come to be sworn, but shall not challenge the
array; and the said trustees, or any five or more of them, are hereby
authorized and empowered to order or cause the said jury to view the premises
in question, in case there shall be occasion, and shall and may use such other
lawful ways and means, as well for their own, as for the said jury's better
information in the premises, as they shall think fit; and the said trustees are
hereby empowered and authorized, by precept under their hands, or the hands of
any five or more of them, to summon and call before them and the said jury, any
person or persons, in order to be examined as a witness or witnesses upon oath
touching the premises; and which oath the said trustees, or any five or more of
them, are hereby authorized and required to administer: and the said jury, upon
their oaths, after such information had as aforesaid, shall assess and find the
value of the said lands, messuages, shops, burgages, houses, or tenements, and
the sum or sums to be paid to the owner or owners thereof, or person or persons
interested therein, according to his, her, and their respective estates and
interests; and shall give in their verdict to the said trustees, or any five or
more of them, who shall thereupon give judgment for the money so assessed by
such jury to be paid to the owner or owners, or person or persons interested as
aforesaid, according to the verdict of such jury; which verdict and judgment
shall be binding and conclusive, to all intents and purposes, against all
bodies politic and corporate, and other persons whomsoever; and shall be fairly
transcribed on parchment, and signed by the said trustees, or any five or more
of them, and shall be forthwith transmitted to the clerk of the peace for the
county of Durham, to be carefully preserved amongst the records of the said
county; and the same, or a true copy thereof, to be attested by the clerk of
the peace of the said county for the time being, under his hand, shall be
deemed to be, and shall be received as good and legal evidence in any court of
law or equity, and all persons shall and may have recourse to and inspect the
same gratis, and may take copies thereof, or extracts therefrom, paying for the
same after the rate of twopence for every seventy-two words contained in each
copy or extract.

Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, that fourteen days previous notice
of the day, hour, and place of every such impannelling of such jury or juries
shall be given, in writing, under the hands of the said trustees, or any five
or more of them, to the owner or owners of, or other person or persons
interested in, such lands, messuages, shops, burgages, houses, or tenements, or
left at his, her, or their place or places of abode, or by public advertisement
in one or more of the public newspapers published at Newcastle aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, that upon payment of the money to be agreed upon,
or to be assessed and adjudged for the purchase of any such lands, messuages,
shops, burgages, houses, or tenements, and of the interest of the owner or
owners, or other person or persons to or for whom the same shall be paid, such
owner or owners, or other person or persons to or for whom such money shall be
so paid, shall and is, and are hereby required to make and execute good and
sufficient conveyances and assurances in the law of such lands, messuages,
shops, burgages, houses, or tenements, to the said trustees, at the costs and
charges of the said trustees; but in case any body politic or corporate, or
other person or persons to or for whom any such money shall be so assessed and
adjudged as aforesaid, shall refuse, neglect, or omit to make and execute such
conveyance or assurance as aforesaid, being thereunto required by the said
trustees, or any five or more of them, by writing under their hands, such money
being tendered to be paid to him, her, or them; or in case any body politic or
corporate, or other person or persons to whom any such money shall be so
adjudged, shall not be able to evince his, her, or their title to the premises
in question, or cannot be found; or by reason of any dispute depending in any
court of law or equity; or for defect of evidence, or otherwise, it shall not
appear to the said trustees what person or persons is or are entitled to the
lands, messuages, shops, burgages, houses, or tenements in question; then and
in any such case it shall be lawful for the said trustees, or any five or more
of them, to order the money so assessed and adjudged to remain in the hands of
their treasurer, for the use of the party or parties entitled thereto, and to
be paid to him, her, or them, on the execution of proper conveyances, or the
evincing of the title as the case shall be; and in every such case, and
immediately upon such order being made, all the estate, right, title, and
interest of the body politic or corporate, or person or persons for whose use
such money shall be so ordered to remain in the hands of the said treasurer, in
or to the several messuages, lands, shops, burgages, houses, or tenements, in
respect whereof such money shall have been so assessed and adjudged, shall be
vested in the said trustees as fully and effectually as if all persons having
any estate or interest therein had conveyed the same by any proper and legal
conveyances whatsoever: provided always, that in case of retainer of money for
want of a proper title to the purchased property being evinced, or from it not
otherwise appearing to whom such money shall properly belong, but not in any
other case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said trustees, or any
five or more of them, on the application of any person or persons interested in
any such money so ordered to remain in the hands of the treasurer as aforesaid,
to place out and invest the same in some of the public funds, or on government
securities, in the name or names of any person or persons to be by them named
or appointed for that purpose, in trust for such person or persons as shall
afterward appear to be legally entitled thereto.

And be it further enacted, that all money to be paid to any body politic or
corporate, feoffees, committees, guardians, or other trustees, for or on the
behalf of any infants, lunatics, idiots, feme-coverts, or other cestuique
trusts, for or in respect of their several interests in any such lands,
messuages, burgages, houses, or tenements as aforesaid, shall be by such body
politic or corporate, feoffees, committees, guardians, or other trustees as
aforesaid receiving the same, laid out as soon as conveniently may be in the
purchase of messuages, lands, or tenements, in fee simple, to be conveyed and
assured to them respectively, or to such other person or persons as they shall
respectively appoint on their behalf, to, for, upon, and subject to such and
the same uses, trusts, and limitations, as the lands, messuages, burgages,
houses, or tenements, so to be purchased, shall, at the time when the same
shall be so purchased, stand limited, settled, and assured; and in the mean
time, and until such purchases or purchase shall be made, such money shall be
placed out by such body politic or corporate, feoffees, committees, guardians,
or other trustees, in some of the public funds, or on government security; and
the interest arising, or to be produced from such funds or security, shall be
paid to such person or persons, or applied to and for such uses, intents, and
purposes respectively, as the rents and profits of such messuages, lands,
burgages, houses, or tenements to be purchased as last-mentioned, in case the
same were actually purchased and settled, pursuant to the tenor and true intent
and meaning of this act, ought to be paid and applied.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if such
jury shall assess the said lands, messuages, burgages, houses or tenements, at
a greater value than the said trustees shall have offered for the same, then
the costs and charges of every kind attending the obtaining such assessment by
a jury, shall be paid out of the tolls hereby continued and granted; and if the
said jury shall not assess the said premises at a greater value than the sum or
sums offered for the same by the said trustees, that then the said costs and
charges shall be paid by the party or parties refusing to treat or to accept
the price ^o offered by the said trustees as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that conveyances of any
estate or interest of a feme-covert to the said trustees, or any person or
persons in trust for them, by bargain and sale, acknowledged by such
feme-covert, and to be duly enrolled in the high court of chancery within six
calendar months after the making thereof, shall as effectually and absolutely
convey the estate and interest of such feme-covert in the premises, as any fine
or fines, recovery or recoveries, would or could do if levied or suffered
thereof in due form of law; and further, that all bargains and sales whatsoever
to be made of any such lands, messuages, shops, burgages, houses, or tenements,
as shall be purchased by the said trustees as aforesaid, and to be enrolled as
aforesaid, shall have the force, effect, and operation in law, to all intents
and purposes, which any fine or fines, recovery or recoveries whatsoever, would
have, if levied or suffered by the bargainer or bargainers, or any person or
persons seized of any estate in the premises, in trust for, or to the use of,
such bargainer or bargainers, in any manner or form whatsoever.

Provided also, and it is hereby further enacted, that nothing herein contained
shall extend, or be construed to extend, to enable or authorize the said
trustees to purchase any right of common, or stints upon any common, moor, or
tract of waste land, or any town or common fields, which may be appurtenant to
any messuages, lands, burgages, or tenements, situate within the said town of
Gateshead; nor shall any such right of common or stints pass or be conveyed to
the said trustees, or any of them, by any assurance or conveyance to be made
and executed in pursuance of this act; and in case the whole of any such
messuages, lands, burgages, or tenements, to which any such right of common or
stints is appurtenant, shall be purchased by and conveyed to the said trustees
for the purposes of this act, then, and in such case, such right of common or
stints shall immediately, on the execution of such conveyances respectively,
become a right of common in gross, and shall remain to the vendors or former
owners of such respective messuages, lands, burgages, or tenements, in as full
and ample a manner as if such conveyances had never been made; and in case a
part or parts only of any such messuages, lands, burgages, or tenements, shall
be so purchased and conveyed as aforesaid, then such right of common or stints
shall remain appurtenant to the residue of the said respective messuages,
lands, burgages, houses, or tenements, and be held and enjoyed by the
respective owners and proprietors thereof, in as full and ample a manner as
they respectively would have held and enjoyed the same, in case no such
purchases or conveyances of any part or parts thereof respectively had been
made.

And be it further enacted, that the said trustees, or any five or more of
them, shall and do, and they are hereby authorized and empowered, by and out of
the tolls hereby granted, or the money to be borrowed on the credit thereof, to
form and make convenient for passage, by paving or otherwise, all such ground
as shall be added to the said south avenues as aforesaid, or as shall be laid
into the said intended street; and the same, when so added to the said south
avenue, and laid into the said intended street, and made convenient for passage
as aforesaid, shall be deemed and taken as parts of the said public highway or
high road leading from the city of Durham aforesaid to Tyne Bridge, and shall
be amended and kept in repair as such, and by such ways, and in such manner, as
other highways are amended and kept in repair by the laws now in being.

Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, that where it shall be necessary
for the purposes of this act, that a part or parts of any messuages, lands,
burgages, houses, or tenements, shall be purchased by and conveyed to the said
trustees, and the owners (...) proprietors, owner or proprietor of any such
messuages, lands, languages, houses, or tenements, shall be aminded or desirous
to sell, dispose, and convey to the said trustees, for the purposes of this
act, the whole of such premises, whereof a part or parts only shall be so
required as aforesaid, and of such his, her, or their mind or desire, shall
give notice in writing, under his, her, or their hand or hands, or under the
hand or hands of his, her, or their attorney or agent, to any five or more of
the said trustees; then and in such case the said trustees shall purchase and
buy the whole of the same premises, and not any part or distinct parts thereof;
and the value of the whole shall be ascertained or assessed as aforesaid, and
duly paid or tendered, or ordered to remain in the hands of the treasurer, in
manner aforesaid, as the case may happen to require.

And whereas, by reason of the purchases which the said trustees are hereby
empowered and required to make by virtue of this act, they may happen to be
possessed of some piece or pieces of ground and premises over and above what
may be necessary for effecting the improvements hereby directed to be made, or
for other the purposes of this act; be it therefore further enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful for the said trustees, or
any five or more of them, to sell and dispose of such piece or pieces of ground
and premises, either together or in parcels, as they shall find most
advantageous and convenient, to such person or persons as shall be willing to
contract for and purchase the same; and it shall and may be lawful for the said
trustees, or any five or more of them, to design, assign, and lay out in what
manner any new houses or edifices, to be erected upon such piece or pieces of
ground so to be purchased, shall be built: provided always, that the moneys to
arise by sale of such piece or pieces of ground and premises, shall be applied
for the respective purposes of this act, and to and for no other use, intent,
or purpose whatsoever.

And, forasmuch as it may be necessary to borrow money upon the credit of this
act, for the more speedy and effectual carrying into execution the purposes
thereof, be it therefore further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the trustees, or any five or more of them,
from time to time, and they are hereby empowered by any deed or deeds, writing
or writings, under their hands and seals, to assign over or mortgage the tolls
hereby continued and granted, or any part or parts thereof, for securing the
repayment of any sum or sums of money so by them to be borrowed, with interest;
and that the said trustees shall, in the first place, pay and discharge all
expenses incurred in and about procuring and passing this act; and the
remainder of the money so raised, shall be applied according to the true intent
and meaning of this act, and not otherwise.

And be it further enacted, that the said trustees, or any five or more of
them, shall meet at the house known by the sign of the George and Dragon, in
the town of Gateshead aforesaid, on the third Monday next after the passing of
this act, and proceed to put the same in execution; and shall then, and from
time to time afterward, adjourn themselves to meet at the same place, or at
such other place or places in the said town of Gateshead, as they the said
trustees, or any five or more of them, shall think proper, for the purposes of
this act; and if there shall not appear, at any meeting, a sufficient number of
trustees to act, or to adjourn to another day, or in case the trustees at any
time assembled shall not adjourn themselves, the clerk to the said trustees
shall adjourn the meeting to such time as he shall think fit, not exceeding
twenty-one days from the time of the last default, and shall give notice
thereof, by advertising the same in some or one of the Newcastle papers; and in
case no adjournment, notice, or appointment for meeting, shall be made or given
by the clerk, then it shall be lawful for any five or more of the said trustees
to cause notice to be given in manner aforesaid, appointing the trustees to
meet at such time as the said five or more trustees shall think proper, not
exceeding twenty-one days, nor less than eight days from the time of
advertising such notice.

Provided always, that no meeting of trustees for putting this act in execution
shall be held any where but at some place or places within the said town of
Gateshead; and all orders and determinations of the trustees in the execution
of this act shall be made at meetings to be held in pursuance of this act, and
not otherwise, and shall be made by the major part of the trustees then
present, the number present and concurring no being less than five.

Provided always, that no order made by the major part of the said trustees so
met as aforesaid, shall be revoked or altered, unless twenty-one trustees shall
be present, and the major part of them concur therein at a meeting to be held
for that purpose; and that such trustees as are justices of the peace may act
as justices in the execution of this act, notwithstanding their being trustees,
except in cases where they shall be personally interested; and in all cases
where the trustees are authorized to examine any person or persons on oath, it
shall be lawful for such trustees to administer such oath.

And be it further enacted, that the said trustees, or any five or more of
them, shall and may appoint one or more clerk or clerks, treasurer or
treasurers, collector or collectors, and other officers; and from time to time
afterward, when they shall think fit, remove any such clerks, treasurers,
collectors, and other officers; or when any of them shall die, or resign their
office, they the said trustees, or any five or more of them, shall and may, by
writing under their hands, appoint one or more fit person or persons to be
their clerk or clerks, treasurer or treasurers, collector or collectors, in the
room of such of the said officers as they shall think proper to remove, or
shall die or resign their office, and shall take such security for the due
execution of their respective offices as they the said trustees, or any five or
more of them, shall think proper; and may, by and out of the money to arise by
virtue of this act, allow and pay to such clerks, treasurers, and collectors,
and to such other person or persons as shall be aiding or assisting them in
their respective offices, or shall be anyways employed in the execution of this
act, such salaries, rewards, and allowances for their respective attendance,
care, and service, as to the said trustees, or any five or more of them, shall
seem reasonable; and all such officers and persons shall, from time to time,
when thereunto required by the said trustees, deliver to such trustees, or to
such person or persons as the said trustees, or any five or more of them, shall
for that purpose appoint, a true and perfect account, in writing, under their
respective hands, of all moneys which shall have been by them respectively had,
collected, or received, and how and to whom and for what purposes the same and
every part thereof have been disposed of, together with proper vouchers and
receipts for such payments; and all such officers and persons shall, and they
are hereby respectively required, to pay all such moneys as upon the balance of
such account or accounts shall appear to be in their hands, to such person or
persons as the said trustees, or any five or more of them, shall appoint to
receive the same.

And be it further enacted, that no person, who now is or shall hereafter be
nominated, elected, or appointed a trustee for the execution of this act, shall
be capable of voting upon a vacancy of any office or place of trust held under
the said trustees, unless such person shall have attended and been present at
some public meeting of the said trustees, and have acted there as a trustee,
within the space of twelve calendar months next preceding such vacancy.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said trustees
shall, twice in every year during the continuance of this act, (that is to say)
on some day in the first week in January, and on some day in the first week in
July, to be appointed, from time to time, by the said trustees, or any five or
more of them, at their discretion, cause just and fair accounts, in writing, to
be made out and stated, of all and every sum and sums of money received and
paid by them or their clerks or officers in the execution of this act, and
shall, at each such settlement, state and ascertain the balance due on such
accounts; and after the same shall be so made out and adjusted, shall direct
such accounts to be lodged in such place or places as they, or any five or more
of them, shall think proper, in order that the same may be safely preserved and
forthcoming whenever any trustee or trustees shall be desirous of inspecting
the same, and that fourteen days notice shall be given, in some or one of the
Newcastle papers, of every such half-yearly day for exhibiting and adjusting
the accounts aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in case the said
trustees, or any five or more of them, or any person authorized by them, shall,
after any lands, houses, edifices, or premises, shall be purchased by them in
pursuance of this act, give four calendar months notice in writing to all and
every the tenants or occupiers of any such lands, houses, edifices, or
premises, which shall be so purchased, to quit or deliver up the possession of
such lands, houses, edifices, or premises, at the expiration of such four
months, then all and every such tenants or occupiers shall, at the end of such
four months after every such notice, peaceably and quietly deliver up the
possession of the premises so by him, her, or them respectively occupied,
whether upon leases or otherwise, to the person or persons who shall be
appointed by the said trustees to take possession thereof; and if any person or
persons so in possession, shall refuse to give up such possession at the
expiration of such four months after every such notice as aforesaid, it shall
and may be lawful for the said trustees, or any five or more of them, from time
to time, to issue a precept or precepts to the sheriff of the county of Durham,
to cause possession thereof to be delivered to such person or persons who shall
be in such precept or precepts nominated to receive the same; and the sheriff
of the said county of Durham is hereby required to deliver possession,
according to such precept or precepts, of the premises therein mentioned, and
to levy such costs as shall accrue by means of the issuing and execution of
every such precept or precepts, by distress and sale of the goods and chattels
of any such person or persons who shall have refused to give up such possession
as aforesaid, and shall refuse or neglect to pay the same costs.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful for the said trustees, or any five or more of them, from time to time,
to impose any reasonable fine, not exceeding the sum of five pounds, on the
sheriff of the said county of Durham, or his deputy or deputies, bailiffs or
agents, who shall make any default in the premises; and on any person or
persons who, after being duly summoned, shall not attend, or attending shall
refuse to be sworn, or being sworn shall refuse to give evidence; and on any
person or persons, summoned and returned on such jury or juries, who shall
refuse to be sworn on any such jury or juries, or being sworn thereon shall not
give his or their verdict, or shall in any other manner wilfully neglect his or
their duty in or touching the premises, contrary to the true intent and meaning
of this act; and from time to time to levy such fine or fines, by order of the
said trustees, by distress and sale of the offenders goods, together with the
reasonable charges of every such distress and sale, returning the overplus (if
any) to the owner; and all such sines, which shall be so recovered and
received, shall be accounted for and applied toward the purposes of this act.

And be it further enacted, that upon the death or refusal to act of any of the
said trustees hereby appointed, or hereafter to be chosen by virtue of this
act, it shall and may be lawful to and for the surviving or remaining trustees,
or any five or more of them, from time to time, to elect one other person to be
a trustee in the room of every trustee so deceased or refusing to act; but
notice of the time and place of meeting for such election shall be given in
some or one of the Newcastle newspapers, at least fourteen days before every
such meeting; and all persons who shall be so elected, are hereby vested with
the same powers for putting this act in execution, as the persons in whose
places they shall be respectively chosen were vested with; but no person or
persons shall be capable of being elected a trustee or trustees, unless such
person or persons shall actually reside within the county of Durham, or within
the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for and toward
raising money for the purposes of this act, it shall and may be lawful for the
said trustees, or any five or more of them, and they are hereby authorized and
empowered, to continue the present toll-gate on the said new stone bridge, and
to demand and take at the same, for passage over the said bridge, the tolls
following: that is to say,

For every coach, chariot, landau, berlin, chaise, calash, or hearse, drawn by
six horses, mares, or geldings, the sum of two shillings:

For every coach, chariot, landau, berlin, chaise, calash, or hearse, drawn by
four horses, mares, or geldings, the sum of one shilling and sixpence:

For every coach, chariot, landau, berlin, chaise, calash, chair, or hearse,
drawn by two horses, mares, or geldings, the sum of one shilling:

For every coach, calash, chaise, or chair, drawn by one horse, mare, or
gelding, the sum of sixpence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by four horses, oxen, or beasts
of draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals) the sum of
eight-pence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by three horses, oxen, or
beasts of draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals) the sum of
sixpence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by two horses, oxen, or beasts
of draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals) the sum of
four-pence:

For every wain, dray, cart, or carriage, drawn by one horse, ox, or beast of
draught, and laden with any kind of goods (except coals) the sum of twopence:

For every empty wagon drawn by any number of horses, the sum of sixpence:

For every loaded barrow or sledge drawn by men, the sum of one penny:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by four horses, oxen, or beasts of
draught, and laden with coals, the sum of four-pence:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by three horses, oxen, or beasts of
draught, and laden with coals, the sum of threepence:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by two horses, oxen, or beasts of
draught, and laden with coals, the sum of twopence:

For every wain, cart, or carriage, drawn by one horse, or beast of draught,
and laden with coals, the sum of one penny:

For every horse, mare, gelding, mule, or ass, laden with any kind of goods
(except coals), or unladen and not drawing, the sum of one penny:

For every horse, mare, gelding, mule, or ass, laden with coals, the sum of one
halfpenny:

For every drove of oxen, cows, or neat cattle, the sum of five-pence per
score, and so in proportion for any greater or less number:

For every drove of calves, swine, sheep, or lambs, the sum of twopence
halfpenny per score, and so in proportion for any greater or less number.

And the said trustees, or any five or more of them, are hereby empowered, by
any person or persons by them thereto authorized, to levy the tolls or duties
hereby required to be paid, upon any person or persons who shall, after demand
thereof made, neglect or refuse to pay the same as aforesaid, or to deny or
hinder any passage over the said bridge until payment thereof; which said tolls
and duties shall and may be levied by distress of any horse or horse, or other
cattle or goods, upon which such tolls or duties are by this act imposed, or
upon any other of the goods and chattels of such person or persons as ought to
pay the same; and all such horses, or other cattle or goods, may be detained
until such tolls or duties, with the reasonable changes of such distress, shall
be paid; and it shall be lawful for the person or persons so distraining, after
the space of four days after such distress made, or taken, to sell the cattle,
or other goods or chattels so distrained, for payment of the said tolls or
duties, rendering to the owner or owners thereof the overplus upon demand,
after satisfaction of the said tolls or duties, and the reasonable charges in
and about making and keeping such distress and sale; but when any person or
persons shall have paid the toll by this act granted for the passage of any
cattle, beast, or carriage over the said bridge, the same person or persons,
upon producing a ticket denoting such payment, shall be permitted to pass over
the said bridge with the same cattle, beast, or carriage, toll free, at any
time or times during the same day, to be computed from twelve of the clock in
one night, to twelve of the clock in the next night; which said ticket, the
collector of the tolls is hereby required to give gratis, upon receipt of the
toll.

Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, that at the expiration of twelve
years, to be computed from the expiration of the said term of twelve years
granted and continued by the said act of the nineteenth year of his present
Majesty's reign, or at such sooner time as the several purposes of this act
shall be carried into execution, and the money borrowed on the credit thereof
be repaid, with interest for the same, all the said tolls hereby granted and
continued, shall absolutely cease and determine.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful for the said trustees, or any five or more of them, from time to time by
writing under their hands and seals, to lease the tolls arising by virtue of
this act unto any person or persons, for any term not exceeding three years,
for the best rent that can be got for the same, payable at such times, and
under such conditions, and unto such person or persons, as the said trustees,
or any five or more of them, shall direct or appoint; and the money arising
thereby shall be applied in such manner as the tolls so leased are directed to
be applied.

And be it further enacted, that the said tolls hereby granted and continued,
or any part thereof, shall not be subject or liable to be assessed to the
relief of the poor, or to any other parochial tax, charge, or assessment
whatever, any law, statute, or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas it will greatly conduce to the public convenience, and to the ease
and safety of travelers, if all nuisances and annoyances on such part of the
said new stone bridge as is situate in the said county of Durham, and in the
several streets, lanes, or avenues leading to the same, and situate within the
town of Gateshead, are removed, and for ever in future prevented; be it
therefore further enacted, that every person who shall at any time hereafter
run, drive, carry, or place on any of the footpaths or footways of the said
part of the said bridge, or of the said streets, lanes, or avenues leading to
the same bridge, and situate within the said town of Gateshead, or any of them,
any wheel, sledge, wheel-barrow, hand-barrow, or carriage, or wilfully ride,
drive, or lead any horse or other beast or cattle on such footpaths or
footways, or shall kill, singe, scald, or dress any beast, swine, calf, sheep,
lamb, or other cattle, on the said part of the said bridge, or in any of the
said streets, lanes, or avenues, or if any persons shall make, hoop, cleanse,
burn, wash, or scald any cask, or hew or saw, or cause to be hewed or sawn, any
stone, wood, or timber, or bind, make, or repair the wheel of any carriage or
shoe, bleed, dress, or farry, or turn or drive loose any horse, mare, or
gelding, ^^ shall bait or cause to be baited, any bull, or permit or suffer any
bull-dog or masti^^ dog, unmuzzled, to be at liberty and go at large, or cause
or wilfully permit or suffer any swine or other cattle to wander or stray, or
shall show or expose to view any stone horse or stallion on the said part of
the said bridge, or in any of the said streets, lanes, or avenues, or shall
throw, lay, or place any wood, ashes, rubbist, dirt, du^^g, manure, or filth,
or any other nuisance or annoyance whatsoever, upon the said part of the said
bridge, or into any of the said streets, lanes, or avenues, or shall make or at
l^st in making any fire or fires, commonly called bonfires, or shall burn any
cork, wood, or shall set fire to, let off, or throw any squib, serpent, rocket,
cracker, fire balloon or other fire work whatsoever, on the said part of the
said bridge, or in any of the said streets, lanes or avenues; every person
offending in any of the cases aforesaid, shall for every such offense forfeit
and pay the sum of ten shillings, over and above such penalties as are
inflicted on persons committing any of the aforesaid offenses, by any law or
statute now in force.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the
passing of this act, no person or persons shall, on any pretense whatsoever,
set, place, or keep, or cause or wilfully suffer to be set, placed, or kept,
any booth, shed, stall, table, shamble, bench, or seat, or any vessel or
basket, on the said part of the said bridge, or in any of the said streets,
lanes, or avenues, for the sale of any goods, wares, or merchandises, or any
other matter or thing, nor shall hang up or expose to sale any goods, wares, or
merchandises, or any other matter or thing, upon any flap, board, crooks,
window, or otherwise, so as to obstruct, or incommode any of the foot ways or
carriage ways upon the said part of the said bridge, or in any of the said
streets, lanes, or avenues, upon pain of forfeiting, for every such offense,
the sum of twenty shillings.

And be it further enacted, that any two or more justices of the peace for the
said county of Durham, shall and may, at any time after the passing of this
act, cause notice to be given to the respective owners and occupiers of the
several houses and buildings situate in any of the said streets, lanes, or
avenues, to take down, fill up, remove, alter, or regulate all gutters, show
boards, sign posts, or sign irons, penthouses, shutes, and spouts, standing,
being, or projecting in, upon, or into any of the said streets, lanes, or
avenues, and to cause such show boards, sign posts, sign irons, penthouses,
shutes, spouts, porches, posts, pales, rails, and steps, to be taken down,
removed, and carried away, altered, or regulated, or to cause such show boards,
signs, and sign irons, to be fixed or placed against the fronts of the houses,
shops, or buildings to which they belong; and also such spouts and shutes, so
as to convey by means of such spouts and shutes the water down the side of each
house or building, and so into the common vennel or drain; and in case the
respective owners or occupiers shall refuse or neglect so to do, for the space
of twenty-eight days next after such notice shall be given to them
respectively, which notice shall be given in writing under the hands of any two
or more of the said justices, and left at the dwelling house or usual place of
abode of such owners or occupiers respectively, it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said justices, or any two or more of them, to cause such gutters,
show boards, signs, sign posts, sign irons, porches, penthouses, shutes,
spouts, pales, rails, and steps, to be taken down, carried away, altered,
regulated, and fixed in manner aforesaid; and the costs and charges attending
the same shall and may be levied and recovered of the said respective owners or
occupiers, in like manner as the penalties in this act enacted or ordained, are
directed to be levied and recovered.

Provided always, that so much of such show boards, signs, sign posts, sign
irons, porches, penthouses, shutes, spouts, pales, rails, and steps, as shall
not be made use of in the alterations directed by this act, shall be returned
to their respective owners, or be left on the spot, or as near as conveniently
may be, or in any other convenient place, to be taken away by such owners; and
if any person or persons shall, at any time or times after the passing of this
act, hang, place, erect, build, or make any gutter, show board, sign, sign
post, sign iron, penthouse, shutes, spouts, porches, pales, rails, or steps, or
any bulk, bow window, or projecting window, in any of the said streets, lanes,
or avenues, or cause the same to be done, every person so offending shall, for
every such offense, forfeit and pay the sum of five pounds.

Provided nevertheless, that all such occupiers of the said houses, shops, and
buildings, as are tenants at rack-rent, and who shall have paid any of the
charges or expenses of removing or altering any such projections, annoyances,
or encroachments, pursuant to the directions of the said justices, or any two
or more of them, are hereby respectively authorized to deduct the same out of
the rents payable by them for or in respect of such houses, shops, or
buildings; and the respective landlords shall be liable, and are hereby
required to allow such deductions accordingly, upon the receipt of the
remainder of their rents, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, that from and after the passing of this act, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said justices, or any two of them, to
remove, or cause to be removed, all shop windows, or other windows, projecting
above six inches from the front of the buildings to which they belong, which
shall in their judgment occasion any obstruction or annoyance in any of the
said streets, lanes, or avenues, and the same to alter in any manner they shall
think proper and convenient: provided always, that in case any such window
already placed or erected, shall be found to project above the space of six
inches as aforesaid, and shall be adjudged to be an obstruction or annoyance by
the said justices, or any two of them, the charge and expense of removing and
altering the same shall be detrayed by and out of the tolls hereby granted and
continued, and the said trustees are hereby directed and required to pay the
same accordingly; but in case any person or persons shall hereafter place or
erect any such window, so as to project above the aforesaid space of six
inches, and the same shall be adjudged an obstruction or annoyance by the said
justices, or any two of them, the charge and expense of altering and removing
the same shall be defrayed by the owner or owners, occupier or occupiers, of
the building or buildings in which such obstruction or annoyance shall be made;
and he, she, or they, making such obstruction or annoyance, shall moreover
forfeit and pay the sum of five pounds.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any wagon,
coach, chaise, cart, dray, or other carriage (except common stage wagons,
drays, or carts, carrying goods, wares, or merchandises for hire), be suffered
to stand or continue in the said part of the said bridge, or any of the said
streets, lanes, or avenues, for the purpose of loading or unloading, or any
other purpose whatsoever, more than the space of one hour at any one time; or
if any wagon, coach, chaise, cart, dray, or other carriage, be suffered to
stand across the said part of the said bridge, or any of the said streets,
lanes, or avenues; or if any timber, bricks, stones, slates, hay, straw, wood,
faggots, coals, boards, goods, wares, merchandises, or other materials or
things whatsoever, be laid or placed, and left to remain in the said part of
the said bridge, or in any of the said streets, lanes, or avenues, for any
longer time than shall be necessary for putting the same into the houses,
yards, or private places of the owners thereof (except for building, taking
down, or repairing any houses or tenements); or if any ashes, rubbish, dung,
manure, or filth, or any other ^^^sance or annoyance whatsoever, shall be
thrown, cast, or laid, and suffered to remain into or in the said part of the
said bridge, or any of the said streets, lanes, or avenues, longer than shall
be necessary for the loading and carrying away the s^^e^ then, and in every
such case, the owner or driver of every such wagon, coach, cha^^e, cart, dray,
or other carriage (except common stage wagons, dray^^, or ^art^, carrying
goods, wares, or merchandises for hire^; or the owner of any such (...),
bricks, stones, s^ates, hay, straw, wo^d, faggots, coals, boards, goods, wares,
merchandises, materials, or things; and the person or persons so throwing,
casting, or laying, or causing to be thrown, cast, or laid, any such ashes,
rubbish, manu^e, dung, d^rt or filth, nuisance, or annoyance, shall, for every
offense in any of the cases aforesaid, for^^^^ and pay the sum of ten shillings.

And be^n further enacted, that all penalties and forfeitures by this act
imposed, shall, after conv^ction, if not paid upon de^^and, be l^v^ed and
recovered by distress and sale of the offenders goods and chattels, be warrant
unders the hands and seals of any two or more of the justices of the peace in
and for the said county of Durham; which warrant such justices are hereby
empowered and required to grant upon the conviction of the party or parties
offending, by his, her, or their confession, or by the oath or oaths of one or
more credible witness or witnesses; and the penalties and forfeitures, when
levied or recovered (after rendering the overplus of the money arising from
such distress and sale (if any be) on demand, to the party or parties whose
goods and chattels shall be so distrained and sold, the charges of conviction
and of such distress and sale being first deducted) shall, during the
continuance of the tolls hereby granted and continued, be paid to the said
trustees, and be applied by them in part execution of the powers hereby vested
in them; and after the said tolls shall have ceased, then such penalties or
forfeitures shall be paid (except so much thereof as shall be by the said
justices ordered to be paid to the informer or informers) to or for the use of
the poor of the parish of Gateshead, in the said county of Durham; and in case
sufficient distress shall not be found, or such penalties and forfeitures shall
not be forthwith paid, it shall and may be lawful to and for such justices, and
they are hereby authorized and required, by warrant under their hands and
s^als, to cause such offender or offenders to be committed to the common gaol
or house of correction, in and for the said county, there to remain without
bail or mainprize, for any time not exceeding two calendar months, nor less
than seven days, unless such penalties and forfeitures, and all reasonable
charges as aforesaid, shall be sooner paid and satisfied.

And be it further enacted, that the justices of the peace before whom any
person or persons shall be convicted of any offense against this act, shall
cause the conviction to be drawn up in the following form of words, or in any
other words to the same effect; (videlicet)

BE it remembered, that on the day (...) of (...) A. B. is convicted before us,
C. D. and E. F. esquires, two of his Majesty's justices of the peace in and for
the county of Durham [specifying the offense, and time and place when and where
the same was committed, as the case shall be], contrary to the form of the
statute in that case made. Given under our hands and seals, the day and year
first above written.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful
for the justices of the peace, before whom any offender or offenders shall have
been convicted, to mitigate or lessen any of the forfeitures and penalties
incurred under this act, so as the mitigation of such forfeitures and penalties
do not extend to remit more than one moiety of the said forfeitures and
penalties respectively; and that it shall be lawful for the said justices to
reward any informer or informers as they shall think proper, out of the
penalties and forfeitures incurred by this act, so as each reward does not
exceed one third of any forfeiture or penalty arising from the respective
informations of such informer or informers, any thing herein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, that any inhabitant of the said parish of Gateshead
shall be deemed and admitted to be a competent witness for the purpose of
proving the commission of any offense under this act, notwithstanding the
penalty incurred by such offense, or a part thereof, is herein before given to
the poor of the said parish of Gateshead.

And be it further en^^ted, that no proceeding^ to be had fo^^^^ng the
conviction of any offender or offenders against this act, or any order made, or
other matter or thing to be done or transacted in or relating to the execution
of this act, shall be vacated or quashed for want of form only any law of
s^at^te to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, that where any distress shall be made for any
penalties or forfeitures to be levied by virtue of this act, (...) itself shall
not be deemed unlawful, nor the party or parties making the same be deemed a
trespasser or trespassers, on account of any default or want of form in any
proceedings relating thereto; nor shall the party or parties distraining be
deemed a trespasser or trespassers is ab initio, on account of any irregularity
which shall be afterward done by the party or parties distraining; but the
person or persons aggrieved by such irregularity, may recover full satisfaction
for the special damage in any action or actions on the case.

Provided always, that no plaintiff or plaintiffs shall recover in any action
for any such irregularity, trespass, or other proceeding, if tender of
sufficient amends shall be made, by or on behalf of the party or parties who
shall have committed, or caused to be committed, any such irregularity,
trespass, or wrongful proceeding, before action brought; and in case no such
tender shall have been made, it shall be lawful for the defendant or
defendants, in any such action, by leave of the court where such action shall
depend, at any time before issue joined, to pay into court such sum of money as
he or they shall see fit, whereupon such proceedings, or orders and judgment,
shall be had, made, and given, in and by such court, as in other actions where
the defendant is allowed to pay money into court.

And be it further enacted, that no action or suit shall be commenced against
any person for any thing done in pursuance of this act, until fourteen days
notice thereof in writing shall be given to the person or persons against whom
such action or suit shall be intended to be commenced, or after three calendar
months next after the fact committed, for which such action or actions, suit or
suits, shall be so brought; and every such action shall be brought, laid, and
tried in the county of Durham, and not elsewhere; and the defendant and
defendants in such actions or suits, and every of them, may plead the general
issue, and give this act and the special matter in evidence, at any trial or
trials which may be had thereupon, and that the matter or thing for which such
action or actions, suit or suits, shall be so brought, was done in pursuance
and by the authority of this act; and if such matter or thing shall appear to
have been so done, or if the plaintiff shall not prove, upon the trial of such
action, that such fourteen days notice in writing was given as aforesaid, or if
it shall appear that sufficient satisfaction was made or tendered as aforesaid,
or if any such action or suit shall not be commenced within the time before for
that purpose limited, or shall be laid in any other county than as aforesaid,
that then the jury or juries shall find for the defendant or defendants
therein; and if the plaintiff or plaintiffs, in such action or actions, suit or
suits, shall become nonsuited, or suffer a discontinuance of such action or
actions, or if judgment shall be given for the defendant or defendants therein,
then, and in any of the cases aforesaid, such defendant or defendants shall
have double costs, and shall have such remedy for recovering the same, as any
defendant or defendants may have for his, her, or their costs in any other
cases by law.

And be it further enacted, that no evidence shall be permitted to be given by
the plaintiff, on the trial of any such action as aforesaid, of any cause of
action, except such as is contained in the notice hereby directed to be given.

And be it further enacted, that this act shall be deemed, adjudged, and taken
to be a public act, and shall be judicially taken notice of as such by all
judges, justices, and other persons whomsoever, without specially pleading the
same.

(28 Geo. III. 1788.) APPENDIX, P. 83.
JACOBUS Dei gratia Anglie Scotie Francie and Hibernie Rex Fidei Defensor etc.
omnibus ad quos presents litere pervenerint salutem. Cum in villa Novi Castri
super Tinam in vico de le Westgate vulgariter vocato The West Spitle ibidem
quoddam hospitale a diu extitit vulgariter nuncupat' Hospitale Sancte Marie
Virginis de cujus fundatore certo non constat. Quod quidem hospitale per idem
tempus constitit de uno magistro et sex fratribus pauperibus Qui quidem
magister et fratres hospitalis predicti diversas terras tenementa prata
pasturas libertates et privilegia ad sustentacionem pauperum ibidem in puram et
perpetuam elemosinam habuerunt et tenuerunt. Cumque quidam Johannes Raynes
nuper magister hospitalis predicti nuper in rebellione illa in partibus
borealibus hujus regni Anglie jail sive prisone de Dunelm' commissus erat
(ratione cujus) carte concessiones and litere patentes concernantes fundationem
et dotationem hospitalis predicti amiss sunt aut senio aut aetate corrupt
consumpte et putrefacte sunt et existunt. Cumque quedam person nuper conat'
sunt statum dicti hospitalis prorsus divertere aut saltem labefactari ac terras
tenementa et possessiones ejusdem vel eorum aliqua ad relevamen pauperum in
eodem hospitali pro tempore existent' religiose et pie dat' et concessa ad
privatum suum commodum transfer. Ac quo magis predictos conatus et
intentiones suas ad effectum producere possint dicti hospitalis terras
tenementa et hereditamenta pred' sub titulo et jure nostro sibi ipsis acquirere
laboravere. Nos charistiva et pia opera bonorum et piorum hominum favere et
manutenere cupientes et nolentes quod per nos aut in nostro jure vel sub
obtentu nominis nostri damnum vel detrimentum pauperibus et egenis inferetur ac
penitus detestantes ex redditu aut aliis quibuscumque ad hujusmodi usus
destinatis ditari Volentes insuper et ex abundantiori gratia jus titulum et
demand' nostra quecunque que habemus aut habere poterimus in premissis libere
et gratiose confer et extendere ad fortificationem munimentum and
stabilimentum hospitalis predicti de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa
scientia et mero motu nostris voluimus ac per presents pro nobis et
successoribus nostris concedimus quod predict' nospitale sive domus scituata et
existens in vico de le Westgate vulgariter vocat' The West Spittle in villa
Novi Castri super Tinam predict' de cetero in perpetuum sit erit et permaneat
hospitale pauperum pro sustentacione relevamine et manutencione pauperum et
quod dict' hospital' de cetero in perpetuum erit aut esse possit et consistet
de uno magistro et sex viris pauperibus in eodem hospitale imperpetuum
inveniendis et sustentandis Et quod dict' hospital' deinceps in perpetuum
vocabitur Hospitale Sancte Marie Virginis in villa Novi Castri super Tinam et
quod de cetero in perpetuum sit et erit in dicto hospitali unus homo qui erit
ad minus in artibus magister qui erit et vocabitur Magister Hospitalis Sancte
Marie Virgins in villa Novi Castri super Tinam ac omnium terrarum tenementorum
reddituum hereditamentorum bonorum et catellorum ejusdem hospitalis. Quodque de
cetero perpetuis futuris temporibus sint et erunt in eodem hospitali sex
pauperes et egeni viri celebes aut innupti provec^e aetatis ibidem sustentandi
manutenendi et relevandi qui similiter vocabuntur Fratres Hospitalis Sancte
Marie Virginis in villa Novi Castri super Tinam. Ac pro meliori performatione
concessionis nostre in hac part elegimus nominamus assignamus and constituimus
ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris eligimus
nominamus assignamus and constituimus dilectum nobis in Christo Henricum
Ewbancke sancte theology professorem capellanum nostrum et subdecanum
Dunelmensem sore et este primum et modernum magistrum dicti hospitalis ac
terrarum tenementorum reddituum possessionum reventionum bonorum et cattallorum
ejusdem hospitalis ibidem remansurum durante vita naturali. Et ulterius de
uberiori gratia nostra speciali et ex certa scientia et mero motu nostris
eligimus nominamus assignamus et constituimus dilectos nobis Ni^holaum Cheator
Ricardum Wouldhave Johannem Young Alexandrum Cowtherd Laurentium Jameson et
Petrum Richardson fore et esse primos et modernos fratres ejusdem hospitalis
ibidem remansuros sustinendos et relevandos durantibus vitis su^s naturalibus.
Et ut hec pia et charistiva intencio nostra meliorem capiat effectum ac ut
terre tenementa bona catella et hereditamenta ad manutencionem hospitalis
predicti ac magistri ac fratrum in eodem hospitali de tempore in tempus
relevand' et sustentand' melius dari conceci perqui^i et posside^i possint
voluimus ac pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris de consimili gratia
nostra speciali certa scientia et mero motu nostris concedimus ordinamus and
constituimus quod idem magister et fratres hospitalis predicti et successores
sui sint et erunt de cetero in perpetuum unum corpus corporatum et politicum de
se in re facto et nomine per nomen Magistri et Fratrum Hospitalis Sancte Marie
Virginis in villa Novi Castri super Tynam et ipsos magistrum et fratres et
successores suos per nomen Magistri et Fratrum Hospitalis Sancte Marie Virginis
in villa Novi Castri super Tynam incorporamus unum corpus corporatum et
politicum per idem nomen in perpetuum duraturum realiter et ad plenum pro nobis
heredibus and successoribus nostris erigimus facimus ordinamus constituimus et
stabilimus firmiter per presents quod per idem nomen Magistri et Fratrum
Hospitalis Sancte Marie Virginis in villa Novi Castri super Tynam perpetuis
futuribus temporibus vocabuntur appellabuntur et nominabuntur Et quod per idem
nomen Magistri et Fratrum Hospitalis Sancte Marie Virginis in villa Novi Castri
super Tynam sint et erunt perpetuis futuris temporibus person habiles et in
lege capaces ad habendum perquirendum recipiendum et possidendum maneria
messuagia terras tenementa prata pascua pasturas redditus reverciones et
remaneria et alia hereditamenta sibi et successoribus suis in perpetuum tam de
nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris quam de aliqua alia persona seu de
aliquibus aliis personis quibuscunque quam etiam bona et catalla ad
sustentationem manutentionem et relevamen hospitalis predicti ac magistri ac
fratrum ibidem de tempore in tempus degentium et sustentandorum. Volumus etiam
ac per presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris concedimus
prefatis magistro et fratribus hospitalis predicti et successoribus suis quod
ipsi et successores sui in perpetuum habeant commune sigillum pro causis et
negotiis suis et successorum suorum concernen' hospital' predict' et quod been
liceat et licebit iisdem magistro et fratribus hospitalis predicti et
successoribus suis sigillum illud ad libitum suum de tempore in tempus frangere
immutare et de novo facere prout iis melius fieri et fore videbitur et quod
predicti magister et fratres hospitalis et successores nomine Magistri et
Fratrum Hospitalis Sancte Marie Virginis in villa Novi Castri super Tynam
placitare et implacitari respondere et responderi prosequi defendere et defendi
possint et valiant in quibuscunque singulis causis querelis sectis et
actionibus quibuscunque cujuscunque nature seu generis fuerint in quibuscunque
curiis locis aut placeis nostris et heredum et successorum nostrum ac in curiis
locis aut placeis aliorum quorumcunque coram quibuscunque judicibus
justiciariis and commissionaribus nostris heredum and successorum nostrum et
aliorum quorumcunque infra hoc regnum nostrum Anglie et alibi. Et ad ea omnia
et singula alia quecunque facienda agenda et consequenda per nomen predictum in
tam amplis modo et forma prout alii person legei nostri person habiles et in
lege capaces infra regnum nostrum Anglie faciant et facere valiant aut possint
in curiis locis and placeis predictis ac coram judicibus justiciariis and
commissionariis predictis. Et ulterius volumus et concessimus et ordinamus ac
per presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris volumus concedimus
et ordinamus quod cum et quoties in posterum contingat magistrum hospitais
predicti pro tempore existentem obire vel ab officio magistri hospitalis
predicti pro aliqua causa ob quam juxta ordinationem provisionem and
constitutionem pro regimine and gubernatione et directione hospitalis predicti
ante hec fact' seu in posterum fiend' seu aliquo alio quocunque modo ab eodem
hospitali amoveri vel ab inde totaliter sponte recedere quod tunc et totiens
major et burgenses ville Novi Castri super Tinam pro tempore existentes aliam
idoneam personam ad minus in artibus magistrum in loco hujusmodi magistri sic
discedentis amoti seu totaliter recedentis infra tempus conveniens proximum
post decessum amotionem seu recessionem istius sequens nominabit constituet
admittet et in realem possessionem inde ponet. Et preterea volumus quod cum et
quotiens contingat in posterum aliquem vel aliquos eorundem fratrum hospitalis
predicti obire vel ab hospitali predicto amotum fore pro aliqua causa ob quam
juxta ordinationem provisionem et constitutionem pro regimine gubernatione et
directione hospitalis predicti ante hec factas seu in posterum faciendas seu
aliquo alio quocunque modo ab eodem hospitali amoveri vel ab inde sponte
totaliter recedere quod tunc et totiens magister hospitalis predicti pro
tempore existen' alium sive alios idoneas person is sive personam in locum five
loca hujusmodi fratris vel hujusmodi fratrum sic decedentium amotorum seu
totaliter recedentium infra quatuordecem dies proxime sequentes post decessum
amotionem seu recessum illius nominabit constituet admittet et in realem
possessionem inde ponet. Ac ulterius declaramus et significamus per presents
quod ma^or et burgenses ville Novi Castri super Tynam pro tempore existenti et
successores sui sint et erunt very et indubitati patroni ejusdem hospitalis et
quod habebunt de tempore in tempus presentationem nominationem et institutionem
magistri hospitalis predicti toties quoties officium five locum magistri
hospitalis predicti vacaverit per mortem sessionem resignationem deprivationem
vel aliter in tam amplis modo et forma prout major et burgenses ville predicte
antehac habuerunt usi et gavisi fuerunt sive debuerunt Volumus etiam ac per
presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris concedimus quod major et
burgenses ville Novi Castri super Tynam pro tempore existenti et successores
sui de tempore in tempus revisent examinabunt et perscrutabunt antiqua statuta
jura ordinaciones et constitutiones hospitalis predicti ac tot ac talia
eorundem antiquorum staturorum ordinationun and constitutionum quot qualia
quatenus eadem sunt repugnantia aut contraria legibus and statutis hujus regni
nostri Anglie solumodo penitus expurgare delere et obliterare ea intention ut
posthac in usu et executione non ponantur, ac etiam fac re et const^tuere tot
tanta talia hujusmodi alia bona idonea et salubria statura jura ordinationes et
constitutiones scripto tam concernentes divina servicia de die in diem in
predicto hospitali in honorem Dei celebranda quam concernentes gubernationem
magistri et fratrum in hospitali predicto relevand' quot quanta qualia et que
per predictum majorem and burgenses Novi Castri super Tynam pro tempore
existen' bona utilia idonea and salubria videbuntur non existentia contraria
repugnantia seu derogantia antiquis statutis ordinationibus and
constitutionibus dicti hospitalis ante hec factis quatenus hujusmodi antiqua
statuta ordinationes and constitutiones non sint vel erunt contraria nec
repugnantia legibus vel statutis hujus regni nostri Anglie eadem omnia et
singula sive eorum al quot vel aliqua sic de novo facta vel facienda secundum
veram intentionem harum literarum patentium revocare mutare determinare
augmentare altera^e vel de novo facere prout iis de tempore in tempus melius
videbitur expedire. Que quidem statuta jura ordinationes ^e constitu^^ones sic
in posterum ut prefertur facienda volumus conced mus ac per pres^^tes (...)
^er^di^^, et successoribus nostris firmiter precipimus et manda^us inviolab^^
(...) ^^ri t^neri et performati de tempore in tempus in futurum, ita tamen quod
ejusmodi sta^uta jura ordinationes et constitutiones sicut prefertur facienda
cons^^^nda et ord^na^^^a aut little aliquod vel aliqua non sint contraria aut
^epugnantia legibus aut stat^^tis (...) regni nostri An^lie vel antiquis
statutis ordinationibus and const^u^tionbus (...) quatenus cad^m antiqua
statuta ordinaciones and constitutiones (...) hosp^^^^ non ^int constatia ne^
repugnantia legibus aut statut^^ hujus reg^^^ (...) a^^conc^ls^^us et per
presents pro nobis heredibus (...) nostris (...) et conceci^^^s presatis
magistro et fratribus hospit' S. M^^^^ (...) villa Novi Castri super Tynam
predict' et successoribus suis ^nperpe^^^^ totum (...) sp^^ale five rep^^^tum
hospitale ante hec communiter vocatum (...) in villa Novi Castri super T^nam in
vico de le Westgate vulg^^^^ (...)' The West Sp^le sive per quodcunque aliud
nomen sive nomina quecunque art hac vo^^tum five co^^^tum suit necnon omnia
maneria rectorias messuagia (...) is tenementa prat^ pasc^^^ pastures redd^^^^
reventiones remaneria et heredita^^^^^a qu^^cunque cum (...) and singulis little
^^^tumentus universis de quibus reputatus magister hospitalis predicta ^^
predecessore^^ vel little aliquis vel aliqui per spatium sexaginta annorum
ultimum elapsorum ante datum harum literarum patentium de facto saltem si non
jure habuerunt perciperunt vel gavisi fuerunt annuales redditus reventiones seu
proficu' quiet et absque disturbatione. Ac etiam omnia et singula messuagia
molendina domos edeficia structuras horrea stabulum columbaria hortos pomaria
terras tenementa prata pascua pasturas campos brueria moriscos boscos suboscos
decimas fructus proficua comoditates advantagia emolumenta hereditamenta
redditus reversiones servicia pensiones portiones jura jurisdictiones
libertates privilegia proficua commoditates et advantagia emolumenta and
hereditamenta nostra quecunque cum suis juribus membris et pertinentiis
universis cujuscunque sunt generis nature seu speciei seu quibuscunque
nominibus sciantur seu censeantur nuncupantur seu cognoscantur scituat' jacen'
et existen' provenien' crescen' renovan' contingen' emergen' infra villam
campos locos parocos sive hamletos predict' vel alibi ubicunque predict' nuper
hospitale vel reputat' hospital' ob aliquod tempus ante hec spectan' pertinen'
inciden' vel appenden' aut ut membr' part' vel parcellum ejusdem nuper
hospitalis unquam ante hac cognitum habitum acceptum occupatum usitatum
demissum locatum seu gavisum existen' Nec non revertionem et revertiones
remaneria quecunque omnium et singulorum premissorum et cujuslibet inde
percelle dependen' vel expertan' de in vel super aliquam dimissionem vel
concessionem pro termino vel terminis vite vel vitarum vel annorum aut aliter
de premissis superius per presents per concessionem seu de aliqua inde
parcella fact' existen' de recordo vel non de recordo ac reddit' and annualia
proficua quecunque omnium and singulorum eorundem premissorum et cujuslibet
inde parcelle. Volumus etiam ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and
successoribus nostris concedimus prefatis magistro and fratribus hospitalis
predicti et successoribus quod ipsi et successores sui de cetero in perpetuum
habeant teneant gaudeant ac habere tenere et gaudere valiant et possint infra
omnia et singula premissa superius per presents preconcessa et infra quamlibet
inde parcellam deinceps nuperrime tot tanta talia eadem hujusmodi and
consimilia jura jurisdictiones franches' consuetudines privilegia libertates
proficua commoditates advantagia possessiones emolumenta et hereditamenta
quecunque quot quanta qualia et que ac adeo plene libere et integre ac in tam
amplis modo et forma prout aliqui magistri et fratres dicti nuper hospitalis
aut aliquis alius aut aliqui alii premissa superius per presents preconcessa
unquam antehac habentes possidentes aut seisiti inde existentes habent aut
possident aut seisitus inde existens habuit tenuit vel gavisus fuit aut unquam
tenuerunt habuerent vel gavisi fuerunt seu habere tenere uti vel gaudere
debuerunt aut debuit in premissis superius per presents preconcess' aut in
aliqua inde parcella ratione vel pretextu alicujus charte doni vel concessionis
vel confirmationis per nos seu per aliquem progenitorum nostrum nuper regum vel
reginarum Anglie antehac habit' fact' concess' seu confirmat' aut ratione vel
pretextu alicujus legitime proscriptionis usus seu consuetudinis antehac habit'
seu usitat' aut alio quocunque legali modo jure seu titulo ac adeo plene libere
et integre ac in tam amplis modo et forma prout nos aut aliquis progenitorum
nostrorum predict' terras et tenementa et cetera omnia et singula premissa
superius per presents preconcessa aut aliquam inde parcellam habuimus et
gavisi fuimus aut habuerunt tenuerunt vel gavisi fuerunt aut habere debuerunt
aut debuit ac adeo plene libere integre ac in tam amplis modo et forma prout ea
omnia et singula premissa superius per presents preconcess' aut aliqua inde
parcella ad manus nostras seu ad manus aliquorum progenitorum sive antecessorum
nostrum nuper regum vel reginarum Anglie ratione vel praetextu dissolut' sursum
reddit' alicujus nuper monasterii abbie vel prioratus aut ratione vel pretextu
alicujus actus parliamenti vel aliquorum actuum parliamentorum aut ratione
escheat' seu quocunque alio legali modi jure seu titulo devenerunt seu devenire
debuerunt habendum tenendum et gaudendum predicta hospital' terras tenementa
pascua pasturas redditus revertiones remaneria ac cetera omnia et singula
premissa superius per presents preconcessa cum eorum pertinentiis universis
prefatis magistro and fratribus Hospitalis Sancte Marie Virginis in villa Novi
Castri super Tinam and successoribus suis in perpetuum ad solum et proprium
usus et usum eorundem magistri et fratrum Hospitalis Sancte Marie Virginis in
villa Novi Castri super Tinam predict' et successorum suorum in perpetuum
tenendum de nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris in liberam puram et
perpetuam elemosinam in perpetuum reddendum inde annuatim nobis heredibus and
successoribus nostris tresdecim solidos et quatuor denarios legalis monete
Anglie ad manus generalis receptoris nostri comitatus palatini Dunelmensis pro
tempore existenti ad festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli annuatim in perpetuum
prout antea nobis et progenitoribus nostris pro iisdem premissis preantea
reddit' et solut' fuit pro omnibus aliis redditibus serviciis exactionibus et
demandis quibuscunque proinde nobis heredibus vel successoribus nostris
quoquomodo reddend' solvend' vel faciend'. Et ulterius de ampliori gratia
nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia et mero motu nostris pro nobis heredibus
and successoribus nostris dedimus concessimus perdonavimus remisimus
relaxavimus exoneravimus et confirmavimus ac per presents damus concedimus
perdonamus et remittimus relaxamus exoneramus et confirmamus prefatis magistro
et fratribus hospitalis predicti et successoribus suis et omnibus aliis
tenentibus et occupatoribus premissorum superius per presents preconcessa et
cujussibet inde parcell' omnes intrusiones intrationes and ingressus de in et
super premissa seu aliqua inde part seu parcella antehac habit' vel fact' ac
etiam omnia et singula exitus fines redditus reventiones fructus annuatim
proficue et arrearagia quecunque omnium et singulorum premissorum superius per
presents preconcessa et cujuslibet inde parcelle quoquomodo ante datum harum
literarum nostrarum patentium hucusque proveniend' crescend' accedend'
incursant' sive solubilia ac omnia arrearagia inde. Et ulterius de ampliori
gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia et mero motu nostris volumus ac per
presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris concedimus prefatis
magistro and fratribus hospitalis predicti et successoribus suis dimittere
locare et ad firmam tradere omnia et singula messuagia firmas terras et
tenementa cum pertinentiis eidem hospitali sive reput' hospitali antehac
spectantia sive pertinentia que antehac usualiter dimissa fuerunt pro termino
viginti unius annorum vel trium vitarum in possessione et non pro ulteriori
statu vel termino et hoc pro et sub meliori rationabili redditu pro inde
reservando et reddendo Et ulterius de ampliori gratia nostra speciali ac ex
certa scientia et mero motu nostris volumus and per presents concedimus
prefatis magistro and fratribus hospitalis predicti and successoribus suis quod
nos heredes and successores nostri in perpetuum annuatim et de tempore in
tempus exonerabimus acquietabimus and indempnes conservabimus tam dictum
magistrum and fratres suos and successores suos quam omnia et singula predicta
terras tenementa and hereditamenta superius per presents preconcessa et
quamlibet inde parcellam cum little pertinentiis universis versus nos heredes
and successores nostros de et ab omnibus and omnimodis corrodiis redditibus
annuitatibus pentionibus porcionibus denarior' summis ac oneribus quibuscunque
de premissis superius per presents preconcessis seu aliqua inde parcella nobis
heredibus and successoribus nostris quoquomodo excuntibus seu solvendis vel
super inde versus nos heredes and successores nostros oneratos seu onerandos
preterquam de predicto annuali redditu superius per presents reservato
Volentes insuper et per presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris
sirmiter injungentes and precipientes tam thesaur' cancellar' baronibus
scaccarii nostri quam omnibus and singulis receptoribus et aliis ossiciar' and
ministris nostris here dum et successorum nostrorum quibuscunque pro tempore
existen' quod ipsi et little quilibet super solam demonstrationem harum
literarum nostrarum patentium vel irrotula ment' earundem absque aliquo alio
brevi seu warranto a nobis heredibus vel successoribus nostris quoquomodo
impetrand' seu prosequend' plenam integram debitamque allocationem and
exoneracionem manifest' de et ab omnibus and singulis hujusmodi corrodii,
reddit' annuitatibus pencionibus porcionibus and denariorum summis ac oneribus
quibuscunque preter predict' annual' redditum reservatum presatis magistro and
fratribus hospitalis pred' et successoribus suis facient et de tempore in
tempus fieri causabunt Et he litere nostre patentes vel irrotulamen' earundem
erunt annuatim et de tempore in tempus tam dict' thesaurar' chancellar' and
baronibus dicti scaccarii nostri heredum and successorum nostrum quam omnibus
and singulis receptor' auditor' et aliis officiariis et ministris nostris
heredum et successorum nostrorum quibuscunque pro tempore existenti sufficien'
warrentum et exoneracio in hac part Volumus etiam ac per presents concedimus
prefatis magistro et fratribus hospitalis predict' et successoribus suis quod
he litere nostre presents vel irrotulament' earundem erunt in omnibus et per
omnia firm valide bone sufficientes et effectuales in lege et contra nos
heredes and successores nostros tam in omnibus curiis nostris quam alibi infra
regnum nostrum Anglie absque aliquibus confirmationibulicentii and
tolerantionibus de nobis heredibus vel successoribus nostris quoquomodo in
posterum procurandis aut obtinendis Non obstante male nominand' vel male
recitand' aut non recitand' predictas terras tenementa et cetera premissa
superius per presents preco^^cessa aut aliquam inde parcellam Et non obstante
inveniendis officiis and inquisitationibus premissorum aut alicujus inde
parcelle per que titulus noster invenire debuit ante confectionem harum
literarum nostrarum patentium Et non obstante male recitand' m^^ nominand' seu
non nominand' aliquam dimissionem sive concessionem de premissis vel de aliqua
inde parcella factam et existentem de recordo aut non de recordo Et non
obstante male nominand' vel non nominand' aliquam villam hamlet parochiam locum
vel comitatum quibus premissa vel aliqua inde parcella existunt vel existit Et
non obstante quod de nominibus tenentium firmariorum five occupatorum
premissorum aut alicujus inde parcelle plena vera et certa non sit mentio Et
non obstante aliquibus defectibus de certitudine vel computatione aut
declaratione very annui valoris premissorum aut alicujus inde parcelle aut
annualis redditus reservati de et super premissis vel de et super aliqua inde
parcella in hisce literis nostris patentibus expressis et content' Et non
obstante statuto in parliamento Domini Henrici nuper Regis Anglie sexti
antecessoris nostri anno regni sui decimo octavo facto et edito Et non obstante
statuto de terris et tenement' ad manum mortuam non ponendis Et non obstante
statuto in parliamento Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Anglie sexti antecessoris
nostri anno regni sui primo facto et edito Et non obstantibus aliquibus
defectibus in non recte nominando naturam genera species et quantitates
premissorum aut alicujus inde parcelle co quod expressa mentio de vero valor
aut de aliquo alio valor vel de certitudine premissorum five little alicujus
aut de aliis donis five concessionibus per nos five per aliquem progenitorum
five antecessorum nostrorum prefatis magistro and fratribus hospitalis predicti
ante hec tempora factis in presentibus minime fact' existit aut aliquo statuto
actu ordinatione promissiore proclamatione five restrictione in contrarium ante
hec habit' fact' edit' ordinat' five provi^ aut aliqua alia re causa vel
materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus ^e^^^l timonium has literas
nostras fieri patentes ^^cimus. Test merpso apud Westmo^^^stetium vicesimo
septimo die Maii anno regni nostri Anglie Fran^^e et Hibernie no^^^^ Scotie
quadragesimo quarto." -- (From a copy in Grey'^ MS. Collections.)

APPENDIX, P. 122. An Act to enable the Vicar of the parish church of St.
Nicholas, in the town and county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, to demise
or lease part of the land belonging to the said vicarage, to William Lowes,
Esquire, for the purposes, and upon the conditions in such lease to be
mentioned. A. D. 1774.
WHEREAS the Reverend Richard Fawcett, doctor in divinity, is vicar of the
vicarage and parish church of St. Nicholas, in the town and county of the town
of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the diocese of Durham; and the right Reverend Edmund
Lord Bishop of Carlisle, in right of his church and see of Carlisle, is patron
of the said vicarage:

And whereas the said Richard Fawcett, in right of his said vicarage, is seized
of a parcel of ground situate in the said town, bounding upon a street there
called Westgate-Street, on or toward the south; upon a parcel of ground
belonging to John Ward, Esquire, on or toward the west; and upon certain yards
or gardens belonging to diverse other persons, on or toward the north:

And whereas the western part of the said ground belonging to the said vicar,
is, in its present state, of little or no use to the said vicarage; but is
conveniently situated for building upon:

And whereas William Lowes, of the town and county of the town of Newcastle
upon Tyne aforesaid, Esquire, is willing and desirous to take a lease of part
of the said vicarage ground; that is to say, forty-two yards thereof in
breadth, eastward from the said ground belonging to the said John Ward,
Esquire; and seventy-nine yards thereof in length, northwards from the said
street called Westgate-Street, for the purpose of building upon:

And whereas the leasing of the said quantity of vicarage land for such
purpose, will be a manifest advantage to the said vicarage; and the Right
Reverend John Lord Bishop of Durham, the ordinary of the same vicarage, and the
said Lord Bishop of Carlisle, the patron of the said vicarage, are consenting
thereto; but as such lease cannot be made effectual without the authority of
parliament, May it please your Majesty, that it may be enacted; and be it
enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and commons, in this present
parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that from and after the
passing of this act it shall be lawful for the vicar of the said vicarage and
parish church of Saint Nicholas, in the town and county of the town of
Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, for the time being, by indenture duly executed,
with the consent and approbation of the Lord Bishop of Durham for the time
being, and the Lord Bishop of Carlisle for the time being, testified by their
being parties to and executing such indenture, at the costs and charges of the
said William Lowes, his executors or administrators, to grant, bargain, sell,
and demise a part of the said vicarage ground; that is to say, forty-two yards
thereof in breadth, eastward from the ground of the said John Ward, Esquire and
twenty-nine yards thereof in length, northwards from the said street called
Westgate-Street, to the said William Lowes, his executors, administrator, and
assigns, for a (...) of nine hundred and ninety-nine years, to commence from
the feast of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy four, with full and free liberty to
the said William Lowes, his executors, administrators, and assigns, to (...)
and build a house or houses, or other edifices, thereon; so as the said
indenture of demise be, within six months from the date thereof, in^^lle^ in
his Majesty's high court of Chancery, and there be thereby reserved a
groundrent of twenty pounds per annum, of lawful money of Great Britain, free
and clear of and from all and all manner of parliamentary, parochial, and other
taxes, rates, charges, assessments, and deductions whatsoever, imposed, or
hereafter to be imposed upon the said piece or parcel of ground, or the house
or houses, or other edifices thereupon to be erected and built, or upon the
said rent so to be reserved for the same, as aforesaid, by authority of
parliament, or otherwise howsoever, for the benefit of the said vicar and his
successors, to be paid to the vicar of the said vicarage for the time being, at
or within the south porch of the parish church of Saint Nicholas aforesaid, by
equal half yearly payments, on the feast of the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and of Saint Michael the Archangel, in every year; the first
payment thereof to begin and be made at and upon such of the said feasts as
shall next happen after the day of the date of the said indenture of demise; so
as the said William Lowes, or his executors or administrators, or the lessee to
be named in such indenture of demise, thereby covenant with the said vicar and
his successors, with all convenient speed, at his or their own proper costs and
charges, to erect and build a good and substantial boundary wall, of brick, of
the height of nine feet at least, at the east extremity of the said ground to
be so granted and demised, which boundary wall shall extend from the said
street called Westgate-Street, in a direct line, to the north boundary of the
said vicarage ground; and also, during the said term of nine hundred and
ninety-nine years, to keep in good and sufficient repair the said boundary wall
so to be erected and built, and likewise all or so much of the walls adjoining
to the ground of the said John Ward, and the grounds of the several other
persons adjoining to the premises so to be demised, as the vicar of the said
vicarage for the time being is bound to keep in repair; and so as in such
indenture of demise there be contained a power of entry for non-payment of the
said rent thereby to be reserved, and for the nonperformance of all or any of
the covenants therein to be contained, and also all such other powers and
remedies, covenants, provisoes, and agreements as shall be thought necessary
and proper by the Lord Bishop of Durham and the Lord Bishop of Carlisle,
parties consenting to such demise as aforesaid.

And it is hereby declared and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
said lease, to be made in pursuance of this act, shall be good, valid, and
effectual in law to all intents and purposes.

Saving always to the King's most excellent Majesty, his heirs and successors,
and to all and every person and persons, bodies politic and corporate, his,
her, or their heirs, successors, executors, or administrators, other than and
except the said Lord Bishop of Durham, the ordinary of the said vicarage, and
his successors, and the said Lord Bishop of Carlisle, as patron of the said
vicarage, and his successors, and the said Richard Fawcett and his successors,
vicars of the said vicarage, all such estate, right, title, inrerest, claim,
and demand, of, in, and out of the said part of the said vicarage ground so to
be demised as aforesaid, as they, every or any of them respectively had before
the passing of this act, or could or might have had, held, and enjoyed in case
this act had not been made.

APPENDIX, P. 132. From the original in the archives of the corporation of
Newcastle. -- The great seal lost. -- It is in bad preservation. Dorso -- 10o
Marcii 35 Hen. 8. Grant to the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne of
the Black Friars with the houses and ground thereunto belonging, which was of
the yearly value of 2l. 19s. 6d. in consideration of 53l. 7s. 6d.
HENRICUS OCTAVUS Dei gratia Anglie Francie et Hibernie Rex Fidei Defensor et
in terra ecclesiae Anglicane and Hibernice supremum caput omnibus ad quos
presents littere pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod nos pro summa quinquaginta
trium librarum, septem solidorum et sex denariorum legalis monete Anglie ad
manus thesaurarii nostri curie nostre augmentationum revencionum corone nostre
ad usum nostrum per dilectos nobis majorem and burgenses ville nostre Novi
Castri super Tynam solut' De qua quidem summa quinquaginta trium librarum
septem solidorum et sex denariorum fatemur nos plenarie fore contentat'
satisfact' and persolutos eosdemque majorem et burgenses ac successores suos
inde esse quietos et exoneratos per presents de gratia nostra speciali et ex
certa scientia et mero motu nostris dedimus and concessimus ac per presents
damus et concedimus prefatis majori et burgensibus dicte ville nostre Novi
Castri super Tynam totum domum and scitum nuper prioratus sive domus dudum
Fratrum Predicatorum vulgariter nuncupat' lez Black Freres infra dictam villam
Novi Castri super Tynam modo dissolut' ac totam ecclesiam campanile et
cimiterium ejusdem nuper prioratus ac omnia and singula messuagia domos
edificia gardina pomeria terr' et solum nostra tam infra quam extra ac juxta et
prope scitum septum ambitum circuitum et precinctum dict' nuper prioratus sive
domus dudum Fratrum Predicaterum existen' in villa predicta ac unam aulam et
duas cameras unam cameram vocat' le Cross Chamber et omnes alios domos et
edificia ac duo gardina nostra cum suis pertinenciis universis modo vel nuper
in tenura Roberti Davell clerici vel assignator' suor' scituat' and existen' in
dicta villa Novi Castri super Tynam ac totum illud clausum terre nostrum cum
pertinenciis modo vel nuper in tenura Andree Bewyke aut assignator' suor'
jacen' and existen' infra portam occidentalem ville predicte ac totum illud
clausum terre nostrum cum pertinenciis modo vel nuper in tenura dicti Andree
Bewyke aut assignator' suor' jacen' and existen' in villa predicta videlicet
juxta scitum dicti nuper prioratus ac etiam unum pomerium nostrum modo vel
nuper in tenura Johannis Noble vel assignator' suor' jacen' and existen' in
villa predicta videlicet ex p^rte boreali scitus dicti nuper prioratus ac unum
clausum terre nostrum cum pertinentiis continen' per estimacionem tres acras ac
unam domum in eodem clauso edificat' modo vel nuper in tenura Jacobi Lawson aut
assignator' suor' scituat' jacen' and existen' extra et juxta muros ville
predicte ac unam domum nostram vocat' le Yate-house scituat' et existen' juxta
Regiam Stratam in villa predicta ac omnia illa tria burgagia nostra eidem domui
vocat' le Yate-house ^djaceu' in villa predicta que omnia et singula premissa
dicto nuper prioratui sive domui dudum Fratrum Predicatorum dudum spectabant et
pertinebant ac parcell' possessionum ejusdem nuper prioratus extiterunt. Damus
etiam et pro consideratione predicta per presents concedimus prefatis majori
et burgensibus omnes et omnimod' boscos subboscos de et super omnibus et
singulis premissis crescen' et existen' necnon reversionem et reversiones
quascumque omnium and singulorum premissorum et cujuslibet inde percelle ac
omnes and omnimod' redditus et annualia prosicua reservat' super quibuscunque
dimissionibus seu concessionibus premissorum seu alicujus inde parcell' sact'
Damus enim and per presents concedimus presatis majori and burgensibus omnia
of singula premissa superius expressa and specisicata cum pertinenciis. Adeo
plene and integre and in tam ampli^ modo et firma prout ultimus prior dicti
nuper prioratus dudum Fratrum Predicatorum a ^ aliquis vel aliqui predecessorum
suorum in jure ejusdem nuper prioratus aliquo tempore ante dissolutionem
ejusdem nuper prioratus vel antequam nuper prioratus ille ad manus nostras
devenit predict' scitum messuagia terras tenementa et cetera omnia et singula
premissa cum pertinentiis vel aliquam inde parcellam habuerunt tenuerunt vel
gavisi fuerunt habuit tenuit vel gavisus ^uit seu quoquomodo habere tenere vel
gaudere debuerunt aut debuit. Et adeo plene et integre ac in tam amplis modo et
forma prout ea omnia et singula ad manus nostras ratione vel pretextu
dissolutionis dicti nuper prioratus aut ratione vel pretextu alicujus carte
doni concessionis vel confirmationis per dictum nuper priorem et nuper
conventum dicti nuper prioratus sub sigillo suo conventuali nobis confect' aut
ratione vel pretextu alicujus actus parliamenti vel aliter quocunque modo
devenerunt seu devenire debuerunt ac in manibus nostris jam existunt seu
existere debent vel deberunt Exceptis tamen semper et nobis heredibus et
successoribus nostris omnino reservat' omnibus campanis et toto plumbo de in et
super ecclesia et aliis edificiis dicte nuper domus dudum Fratrum Predicatorum
existen' preter plumbum in gutture and fenest^is ibidem Ac etiam exceptis and
similiter nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris omnino reservat' omnibus
lapidibus et toto ferro et maeremio de in and super ecclesia dicte domus du^^um
Fratrum Predicatorum existen' Que quidem domus and scitus dicti nuper prioratus
ac predict' terr' tenement' et cetera premissa superius per presents dat' and
concess' cum pertinentiis modo extenduntur ad clarum annuum valorem
quinquaginta novem solidorum and quatuor denariorum habend' tenend' and
gaudend' dict' scitum dicti nuper prioratus dudum Fratrum Predicatorum ac omnia
et singula predict' terr' domos, edificia, tenementa et cetera omnia and
singula premissa superius expressa and specificata cum suis pertinentiis
universis exceptis preexceptis prefatis majori and burgensibus dicte ville Novi
Castri super Tynam ac little successoribus and assignatis imperpetuum tenend' de
nobis heredi^^^ and successoribus nostris in capite per servicium vicesime
partis unius feodi militis ac reddent' inde annuatim nobis and heredibus and
successoribus nostris quinque solidos undecim denarios and unum obolum sterling
orum ad curiam nostram augmentationum reventionum corone nostre ad festum
Sancti Michaelis Archangeli singulis annis........ pro omnibus redditibus
serviciis et demandis quibuscunque proinde nobis heredibus and successoribus
nostris quoquomodo reddend' solvend' vel faciend' Et ulterius de uberiori
gratia nostra damus et per presents concedimus prefatis majori and burgentibus
omnia e^^^tus redditus revenciones and profic^ta omnium et singulorum
predictorum scitus terrarum tenementorum et ^ete^orum omnium et singulorum
premissorum superius memorat' et specificatorum cum suis pertinenciis
universi^^^ a festo Annunciationis Beat Marie Virginis ultimo prete^^to
hu^usque provenien' sive crescen' habend' eisdem ma^oti and burgensibus ex dono
nostro absque comp' aliquo alio proinde nobis heredibus vel successoribus
nostris quoquomodo reddend' solvend' vel faciend' Et ulterius de ampliori
gratia nostra vol^^nus et per presente^ pro nobis heredibus and successoribus
nostris concessimus prefatis majori and bragensibus (...) successoribus et
assignatis quod nor h^r^des et ^ucc^ss^^^^ nostri imp^^petuum annuatim et de
tempore in temp^^ exo^^ert^mus acquietabimus ac ind^mp^^^ conservabim^s cosdem
majorem and burgenses ac little successores (...) ve^sus nos heredes et
successores nostros quam versus alias persona^ quascumque de omnibus and
omnimodis redditibus feodis annuitatibus, pentio^^bus portionibus and
denariorum summi^ quibuscunque de predicti scit' terris tenementis et cete^^^
premissi... seu... de aliqua inde parcella quoquomodo excun' seu solvend' super
eisdem onerat' f^^^one^^ad' preterquam de redditu and servicio superius per
presents nobis heredibu and successoribus nobis reservat' Volentes enim et per
present firmiter injungend' precipientes tam can cellario and consilio nostro
dicte curie nostre augmentationum ^eventionum cotone quam omnibus receptoribus
auditoribus and aliis officiarris et ministris nostris et hered' and successor'
nostror' quibuscunque protempore existen' quod ipsi et little quilibet super
solun demonstrationem harum literarum nostrarum patentium vel irrotulament'
(...) absque aliquo alio brevi seu warranto a nobis hered' vel successor'
nostris quoquomodo impetrand' seu prosequend' super solutionem dicti annui
redditus superius per presents nobis hered' and successoribus nostris ut
prefertur reservat' plenam integram debitamque allocationem..........
deductionem and exonerationem manifestam prefatis majori and burgensibus ac
eorum successoribus and assignatis de omnibus and omnimodis hujusmodi corrodiis
redditibus feodis annuitatibus et denariorum summis de premissis ut prefertur
exeun' seu solvend'.... vel super inde onerat' seu onerand' facient et de
tempore in tempus fieri causabunt Et he littere nostre patentes vel
irrotulamentum earundem erunt annuatim et de tempore in tempus..... dict'
cancellario et consilio nostro dicte curie nostre augmentation' reventionum
corone nostre qui omnibus receptoribus auditoribus and aliis officiariis et
ministris nostris and heredum nostrorum et successor' nostrorum quibuscunque
pro tempore existen' sufficiens warrant' et exoneratio in hac part Volumus
etiam et per presents concedimus prefatis majori and burgensibus quod habeant
and habebunt has literas nostras patentes sub magno sigillo nostro Anglie
debito modo fact' et sigillat' absque fine seu feodo magno vel parvo nobis in
Hanaperio seu alibi ad usum nostrum proinde quovismodo reddend' solvend' vel
faciend' Eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo aut de certitudine
premissorum vel eorum alicujus....... aut de aliis donis five concessionibus
per nos prefatis majori and burgensibus ante hec tempora fact' in presentibus
minime fact' existit aut aliquo statuto actu ordinacione provisione five
restrictione inde in contrarium fact' edit' ordinat' five provis' aut aliqua
alia re causa vel materia quacumque in aliquo non obstante In cujus rei
testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes Test meipso apud
Westmonasterium decimo die Marcii anno regni nostri tricesimo quinto.

Per breve de privato sigillo et de data predicta auctoritate parliamenti.

MYSSENT. APPENDIX, P. 133. From the original, much defaced, in the possession
of the Tanners company -- By favor of Mr. Storey, steward.
THIS indenture maid the thryde day....... a thousand fyve hundrethe fyftie
a...... betwein Ni^olas Carr...... Berleye and Wyllm Carr of the town of
N........ countye of Newcastell upon Tyne.... is and wardens of that th......
of Tanners on th^one party and Gerrerd Armestronge... tie tanner on the other
pertye. W^te^^^^^ that (...) Robert L^^.... town of Newcastell upon Tyne (...)
and..... (...), made sealled and delyvd...... dymyse grant and let to ferme
unto (...).... (...) of the same occupation John.... Thomas Brown (...).....
let of the said town sadlers and wardens of...... William D^^^^ ^^ John
H^pkir^^sh (...)...... and Willm Forster, bochers and ^^ardens of........
Thomas Pott^ and Christopher Don sho^^thers..... Robert Draver bakers ^^^ardens
of the..... Johnson and Robert Bo^tflower of the...... Nicholson and Thomas
Nicholson...... sadlers and wardens of the same craft......... appurtenances
comod^ties......... led the Blakfreers within the said town....... prymisses
and there appurtenances to........ Richard John Thomas Gylbert Buttain.......
Robert, Willm, Robert, Richard and....... their successors wardens of the said
occupations....... of King Edward syxt during the term...... and nynetene years
from thence furthe....... yearly to the said mayor and burgesses and the....
majors and burgesses of the said town before the..... oresaid term the some
of two and fourtye shillin.... lawful money of England with a clause of
die...... indenture of a lease more at large it may..... date is the foresaid
10th day of November in the...... Which sa^^ house buylding orcherds gardings
the premysses and there appurtenances late called the Fre^^s...... operated,
parted and dyvydet emongst themselfes By force where..... to the foresaid
Nicholas Carr Wyllm Derbey...... wardens of the said occupations by th^^ assent
and cousent....... hole felyshype of Tanners of the said town of N^^^c.....
demysed granted and to ferme let..... by these presents demyse gr..... ferme
lett^ unto the foresaid Gerrerd Armestronge..... all that there close
bowndynge..... or stret called the Shodfr..... toward th'est to the wall of a
gardyng parcel of..... the tenor of Doct. Davall toward th.... cynyng eight
and twenty.... and a quarter in breadth and in length from the..... called
Westgate on the south party.... clo^e p^rteyning to the occup^^..... talors on
the north conteynyng..... and fourtye ye^^^....... have and to hold the said
close with.... singler.... comodyties and (...).... the same belongyng or
in.... wife.... perteynyng.... the said Gerrard Armestrong.... and assigns
during all the foresaid.... fourscore and nynetene years then next
^^^^^yng.... to be complet. Yelding and paying therefore ye c^e to the said
Nicholas... Be^ly and Wllm Carr..... and wardens of the same craft and there
successors.... before the fell of Saint Mich..... angel the sum of four
sh..... eight p^^t^e A^^^ on the morn next after Corpus...... eight pence
during the said... and if it happen the said yer.... in part or in all not to
be paid at the foresaid days.... and not paid. that then and as often it shall
be lawful for the said.... Willm and Willm Carr and there successors.......
with thappurtenances to enter... destrene and the destress...... so taken to
lead dryve and carye away and toward.... with tharre^ages if on^^ be fully
fulf^^d contented..... And if it happen the said yearly rent in part o^^.....
in which it ought to be paid by the space of a year.... day and no sufficient
dy^tresse then there can.... the said wardens and there successors into the
said close..... appurtenance to reentre and repossesse as in the..... to the
contrary notwithstanding Also (...)..... and agreed between the said parties
that in case the..... aforesaid hereafter be expulsed erected or..... lawful
state or act of parlyament or other (...)..... Here through the forenamed
wardens and..... successors wardens of the said occupation of tan..... the
benefyte and fruytyon of there...... of the said fice^^e That then the said
Gerrard..... theymselfs that he and they can..... of the said close and
ot^^^wyse the............ successors wardens of the said...... (...) (...) the
said close............. th term abovesaid....... wise (...) the said
(...)........ shall to the foresaid....... lease (...) (...)....... performance
of all (...)......... de^^se^ and (...) on (...)..... (...) Carr, William
B^^le^^^rad...... (...) the occupation (...)...... stands bound to the said
Gerrard (...)..... his assigns (...)...... stands bound to the said (...)
Willm...... (...) successors wardens of the said....... (...) (...)......
be^^ng date of these present. In (...) (...)..... (...) seals the date (...)
and...... (...), John ^^.. older, George Jobson, Willm... (...) Dodd (...)
Willm Ellyson...... Edward Robson..... stron^ (...) Willeron... (...), Willm
Th^^^^on...... James Wallm John (...) (...). -- (...)

APPENDIX, P. 135. From a Book of Inrolments in the Archives of the Corporation
of Newcastle upon Tyne. License to Sarah Hudson, Widow, to keep the Lying-in
Hospital in Rosemary-Lane, Newcastle upon Tyne.
TOWN AND COUNTY OF THE TOWN OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE. AT the general quarter
sessions of the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King held in and for the said
town and county at the Mansion House in the said town on Wednesday the 12th day
of January in the 14th year of the reign of our S. Lord George the 3d of Great
Britain etc. King, etc, 1774.

We his Majesty's justices of the peace at the said sessions assembled who have
hereunto set our hands and seals by virtue and in pursuance of an act of
parliament made in the 13th year of the reign of his present Majesty (entitled
an Act for the better Regulation of Lying-in Hospitals and other places
appropriated for the charitable reception of pregnant women and also to provide
for the settlement of bastard children born in such hospitals and places) do
hereby allow and license Sarah Hudson of the said town widow (who has applied
to us for this license) to keep an hospital in the house where she now dwells
called the Lying-in Hospital situate in or near Rosemary Lane in the parish or
parochial chapelry of Saint John in the town and county aforesaid for the
public or charitable reception of pregnant women for the purposes of their
delivery and lying-in there. Provided and upon condition that there shall from
henceforth be fixed and kept up over the door or public entrance of the said
hospital an inscription in large letters in the following words videlicet
"Licensed for the public reception of pregnant women pursuant to an act of
parliament passed in the 13th year of the reign of King George the 3d." And in
case such inscription shall not be so fixed and kept over the door or public
entrance of the said hospital this license shall become null and void: Provided
also and upon condition that the said Sarah Hudson or the owner keeper governor
master secretary clerk or other person who shall have or to whom shall be
entrusted the care conduct or management of the said hospital, shall and do at
all times duly conform to and observe and pursue the directions of the
aforesaid act of parliament. Given under our hands and seals at the sessions
aforesaid the day and year first above written. Signed Matthew Scafe, mayor.
Wm. Peareth. John E. Blackett. Edwd. Mosley.

APPENDIX, P. 142. ROMAN WALL.
QUA prisci circum apparent vestigia Martis,
Excubiaeque cavae et veteris munimina valli.
Mons Catherinae, p. 1. Hinc atque hinc extat vetus urbs, olim inclyta bello,
Et muri disjecti et propugnacula lapsa.
Ibid. p. 10.
Draiton, in the 29th song of his Polyolbion, thus introduces a poetical
description of the Roman Wall: "But Picts-Wall all this while, as though he had
been lost,
Not mentioned by the muse, began to fret and fume,
That every petty brook thus proudly should presume
To talk: and he whom first the Romans did invent,
And of their greatness yet, the long'st-liv'd monument,
Should thus be over-trod; wherefore his wrong to wreake,
In their proud presence thus, does aged Picts-Wall speak.
He thinks that Offa's ditch in Cambria should not dare
To think himself my match, who with such cost and care
The Romans did erect, and for my safeguard set
Their legions, from my spoil the proling Pict to let,
That often inroads made, our earth from them to win,
By Adrian beaten back, so he to keep them in,
To sea from east to west, begun me first a wall
Of eighty miles in length, 'twixt Tyne and Eden's fall;
Long making me they were and long did me maintain.
Nor yet that trench which tracts the western Wiltshire plain
Of Woden, Wansdyke called, should parallel with me,
Comparing our descents, which shall appear to be
Mere upstarts, basely borne; for when I was in hand,
The Saxon had not then set foot upon the land,
Till my declining age and after many a year
Of whose poor petty Kings those the small labors were,
That on Newmarket Heath, made up as though but now,
Who for the Devil's work the vulgar dare avow,
Tradition telling none, who truly it began,
Where many a reverent book can tell you of my man,
And when I first decayed, Severus going on
What Adrian built of turfe, he builded new of stone;
And after many a time, the Britans me repayr'd,
To keep me still in plight, nor cost they ever spared.
Towns stood upon my length, where garrisons were laid,
Their limits to defend; and for my greater aid,
With turrets I was built, where sentinels were placed,
To watch upon the Pict; so me my makers graced,
With hollow pipes of brass, along me still they went,
By which they in one fort still to another sent,
By speaking in the same, to tell them what to do,
And so from sea to sea could I be whispered through:
Upon my thickness three marched easily breast to breast,
Twelve foot was I in height, such glory I possessed.
Old Picts-Wall with much pride thus finishing his plea,
Had in his utmost course attained the eastern sea."


During my residence at Newcastle upon Tyne, prompted by an ardour of curiosity
bordering on enthusiasm, I occasionally made several excursions to examine the
still remaining vestiges of those stupendous works, raised here by a people who
were justly styled the conquerors of the world, for the great purpose of
protecting in their possessions their civilized subjects, and to ward off the
attacks of the more northern and unconquered barbarians.

Agricola appears to have suggested the first idea of building these, by
erecting A. D. 79 See Horsley's Britannia Romana.
a row of sorts across the island from Tinmouth The late discovery of a Roman
altar and tablet in the foundations of the ancient Christian church there seems
clearly to evince that Tinmouth has been one of their stations. -- See vol. ii.
p. 65, of this work -- And ibid. p. 90, that there has been anoth^r at East
Chirton, called "Blake Chestres" in the year 13^0. -- It is still, however,
certain, that neith^r of the walls extended as far as Tinmouth; Hadrian's
having terminated at Newcastle upon Tyne, and that of Severu^ at the old
village of Wall's End, about three miles to the east of Newcastle.
on the German Ocean to the Irish Sea.

To connect these, the emperor Hadrian That Hadrian was the first that built a
wal^ here, we have the express testimony of a Roman historian in the following
words: "Britanniam petrit in qua multa correxit, m^ru^ que per o toginta millia
passuum (...), qui barbaros Romanosque divideret." -- Spartiani Vita Hadriani,
Script. Hist. August. p. 51.

Hadrian's Vallum, as it is also called, appears to have been a turf wall, with
a deep fosse or ditch accompanying it on the north side. There was another,
called by Horsley the South Agger, at the distance of about five paces to the
south of it, as also another and larger agger on the north side of the ditch,
which the same writer supposes to have been the military way to this work, as
it had been before to the pretentura of stations. These four works, it is very
observable, keep all the way a constant regular parallelism one to another. The
same writer acknowledges, that there is no determining with certainty what was
the original height of this mud wall and its aggers; of which he conjectures
the southern one to have been for an inner defense in case they should be
beaten from the principal work, or to protect the soldiers against any sudden
attack from the provincial Britons. -- See Britannia Romana, p. 117.

Though ^arus and vallum are sometimes promiscuously used, yet vallum rather
signifies an agger of earth, in which sense it plainly occurs in Caesar's Comm^
in the following passage:

"Valio pedum 11 et fossa pedum 15 hiberna cin runt." -- De B^lio Gallico, lib.
v. c. 31.


first in the year 120, and afterward Severus Severus' Wall, built of square
stones, and every where ex^^^p^^^on the edges of precipices accompanied by a
deep ditch or fosse, was, according to Bid, who mur^ have ^^en it in
perfection, eight feet in breadth and twelve in height. -- The breadth of it
appears to vary a little in several places of the present remain. It is no
where preserved in its original height.

To this work belongs a paved military way, which every where has attended this
w^ll on the south side, though not alw^ys parallel to it, for in so^e plac^^s
it m^kes a short ^^ble the s^^ing to a bow.

Mr. Hor^^^y ^^pposed too that there was a smaller military way (...) the wall,
for the convenience of parties of soldier ^^^ing from one turret to another.
There was no north agger, though the earth thrown out of the ditch, form^ in
different places something like a ^lacis.

Upon this wall, which generally runs on the top or ri^^^ of the higher ground,
both keeping a des^^^ o^ the north or enemies' side, and having thereby a
greater strength and a better prospect for the like of (...) it often forms an
angle, certain castles and (...) have be^n ^^^^larly plac^d, (...) each other.
See Rauthmell's Draug^t of (...)' Wall^ at the end of Antiquitat^^' (...).

The sounding trumpets or pipes (...) ha^^ (...) th^^ ^all, and (...) ac^ompany
it (...) sea to sea, owe their existence to (...) of the (...) I (...)

(...) is to be sounded What form (...) the (...) never (...) the expe^^^ at
(...) might be preserved We find two estat^ (...) (...)." -- S^^mon's New
Survey, Cumberland, Vol. II. p 625


.

This wall also occurs in the ancient (...) under both nam^^ of mur^^ and
vallum, (...) where the least intimation that it was (...) of turf only. Or
(...), the punish (...) beginning of the fifth century, has left a descr^ption
of it, which clearly intimat^^^ that it wa^ of (...) words are; "magnam fossam
(...) -- (...) Britan. Romans p. 117, etc.


A. D. 207, raised their separate walls along the same tract of country,
running from station to station, till an unfordable frith on one side, and a
wide and deep river on the other, rendered it unnecessary to extend them any
farther.

SEGEDUNUM The etymon, given by Wallis, of Segedunum, "from the Roman seges,
corn, and the British dunum, a hill, i. e. the fort or station on a high
ground, furnished with magazines of corn, brought by sea from the more southern
provinces and landed here," is, I think, erroneous; for seges signifies
corn-land, soil where corn grows. May not the first syllable be derived with
greater probability from sedge, a narrow flag so called, i. e. the hill of
sedge?
.
SEGEDUNUM, where the Notitia stations the first cohort of the Lergi, is
supposed to have stood at a small distance from the present An old woman (still
living) remembers when the site of the present Wall's End was an empty field.
village of Wall's End, and a little to the east of a gentleman's seat house,
called at present Carville, but in Horsley's time Cousin's House, in two fields
or closes known by the name of Well-Lawes, perhaps by corruption for
Wall-Lawes. The fire engines and workings of a new colliery adjoining to
Segedunum The area of this station is described by Horsley as having been on a
plain; "the south rampart has run along the brow of the hill, or at the head of
the descent toward the r^ver; and the out-buildings or town (as appears by the
hillocks of stones and rubbish) has stood upon the descent open to the southern
sun, and reached to the side of the river. All which is exactly agreeable to
the rules the Romans seem to have almost inviolably observed in building their
stations." -- Britan. Romans p. 131.

I have in my possession the original stones found here, and marked No. 1. 4.
and 6. in Horsley's Britannia Romana, Northumberland. What that writer calls
F^AR on one of them is plainly FLOR. for Florus, a common name, on a close
inspection of the stone.

The altar No. 6. the inscription of which is now wholly defaced, has a
remarkable focus, and has been of elegant design and execution.

The following, which I suspected at first sight to be an imposition, was
published in the Newcastle Journal, August 6th, 1775. "To the Printer. Some
workmen digging near Wallsend have this morning discovered a broken stone, on
which is the following inscription: HADR.... MVR. COND.... HOC MAR.... POS.
COSS. D.... If any of your curious readers can give any explanation through
your paper, they will oblige many of y^^^ readers, and among the rest your
humble servant,

T. M. Walter, Aug. 3d, 177^." Mr. Pennant has unfortunately adopted this
supposititious inscription, in which the ignorance of the writer is no less
discernible than what it is too soft an appellation to call his folly.


, will soon, it is probable, deface every vestige of this station, so that
future antiquaries will search for the foundations of it in vain The house
built for the viewer of the colliery stands parallel to the west rampart of the
station, and near the south-west angle.

The present the engine stands about six yards to the north of the wall, the
foundations of which were found here six feet beneath the level of the ground.

In sinking the shaft of a pit, very large teeth were found, and a conduit
discovered, which has, no doubt, remained there since it was a Roman town. The
viewer crept a good way along it, and described (...) built of great stones of
course wo^k^^anship.

January 14th, 1783, I found two new waggon-ways in the field where the
easternmost part of the (...) has been. They have laid open the c^st^rn
foundation stones, and show them running down to the (...) intersecting those
of the southe^^ rampart. Many fragments of very beautiful (...) up. Th^re is a
very curious p^^^^ in the possession of Hugh Hornby, Esquire. alderman of
Newcastle. (...) taken up part of a wall composed of Roman bricks cemented
closely together with (...). I found a (...), some Roman ^egula and coin, a
ring, etc. Immense quantities of bones, horns, and teeth of animal th^^ had
been sacrificed, are continually turning up. Stones with inscriptions were
found, but the (...) masons built them up again in the new works of the
colliery. I have in my possession two Roman hand millstones, by which the
soldiers ground their corn, which came from this station. -- See in the plate
(...) "Views and Section of the Roman Wall, etc." a representation, No. 6. of a
beautiful (...) pottery found here, and in my possession, whereon is delineated
a Roman horseman striking at a naked Part.


.

It has been a fort about six chains square, from the south end of the eastern
rampart of which Gordon supposed that the wall itself formed almost a right
angle, and then was continued down to the side of the river. -- Mr. Horsley
says, p. 135, that it is the western rampart of the station which makes that
angle with the wall. On the contrary, I traced the eastern rampart of this
station to the very edge of the Tyne, April 3d, 1783, in company with the
ingenious Mr. Chapman, where we caused many square stones, bedded in lime, to
be dug out in several parts of it, and close to the brink of that river.

The old or original village of Walsend stood close to this station, and is
thus described by Leland: "Walsend pagul^^ in^^^quens a fine (...)." -- There
i^ thought to have been anciently a cross in the village, for a stone marked
for a sun-dial wa^ discovered on the site of it -- as was a cannon-ball -- a
co^^ of Queen Elizabeth 1561, old tobacco pipes, etc. The Roman remains are all
found at a good depth i^ the e^^th.

It appears that the Mr. Cousins, who built the house near thi^ place, and gave
name to it, which i^ no^ called Carville, as observed before, was Mr. Hor^l^y's
great (...) -- Brit. Romans p. 2^7.


a wall appears to have been continued to the very margin of the river, where
the work of Severus has certainly ended; for to the east of this station no
trace of either wall or fosse can be found.

BEES-HOUSES. -- WALKER.
THE fosse of Severus' Wall is still faintly yet plainly discernible, as it runs
westward from this station of Segedunum, through the offices or outhouses of
Carville to Bees-Houses, now called Stotes-Houses, almost adjoining on that
mansion. The tenant at this place showed me, January 14th, 1783, a stone, with
a mutilated inscription, built up at the end of his stable. -- I could make out
IMP. and CO. but no other letters. A large but mutilated statue of Mercury I
found the top-part of the caduceus lying (...) door of Bees-Houses: two snakes
are represented twisting round a rod. This is my only authority for calling
(...) st^^ue of Mercury. -- (...).
was found a few years before, in the field lying between his house and the
river. This was broken in pieces by his maid servant, and converted into sand.
A little bust too was found some time after, but that also was destroyed A
lettered sto^^, broken into two or three pi^^^^, (...) ou^ of the earth a (...)
before, in making the waggon-way that intersects the wall a little to the w^st
of th^^e houses. I endeavored without (...) recover these perhaps valuable
fragment^. I procured at this place an antiqu^ stone (...) and s^ppo^^d to have
been used by the Ro^^^^.
.

A little to the west of Bees-Houses or Stotes-Houses, there has been a
castellum. -- Of the present state of the wall from Walker "A quo (viz.
Wal^end) Walker oppidulum (...) aut eo ampliu^ distat, (...) etiam nunc sunt
vessig^^ (...). Leland.

The remains of a religious house were discovered not long ago at Walker, on
rebuilding the farm house there which belongs to the corporation of Newcastle
upon Tyne. I saw here a Roman hand millstone, and have in my possession a
rosary found in the old buildin^ (...).


, and so on through Newcastle upon Tyne Dr. (...), in his (...), p. ^8, on I
know not what grounds or shadow of probability, supposes the ancient (...) of
the Roman station at (...).

"(...) workmen," says he, p. (...) by Malborough, found a piece of (...)


, see before, p. 138 et seq.

CONDERCUM The station of (...) to have been older than (...) an inscription
found in it. See Baxter's Glossary in (...)

"Benwell quod vitiosum est pro Pen^^^al quod quidem veteri Britanniae est
"Caput Muri." -- Certe anno a nato Christo 16^9 e ruderibus veteris muti non
ita long ab isto viculo, qui ultra Tinnam est, ad orienta^valli caput, in
Ottodmis, ve^us ara effossa est sub hec titulo: VICTORIAE XV C. GAL. F. E. NO.
SENECIONE. COS. FELIX. ALA. I. AST. M. PR. Quae nos ita legenda conjecimus:
"Victoriae quindecimae cohortis Gallorum fecerunt erigi, Nonio Senecione
Consule, felix Ala. 1. astorum multis praehis," Fa^ta est igitur dedicatio ista
sub Domitiani principatu, ipso J^lio Agricola prop^aetore; quo tempore Senecio
et Palma consul^tu sancti sunt. Atque hinc quidem constat Brigantica Castella
jam ante Hadriani tempora (...) ab ipso Agricola communit^."


-- BENWELL or BENWALL.
I SUSPECT the etymon of the name of this station is "Penwall," the head of the
wall -- as it is situated on very high ground.

It is with great probability supposed to have been the Condercum of the
Notitia.

The annexed plan of this fort, drawn by its late very respectable owner,
Robert Shafto, Esquire. about the time when the military road leading to Carlisle
was made, will give a better idea of it than can be conveyed by any verbal
description. The above Mr. Shafto discovered a Roman hypocaust or sudatory, at
the distance of about three hundred yards south-west of the station. Of this
also he has left an accurate plan illustrated with written descriptions. The
annexed copper-plate representation is a fac simile of Mr. Shafto's plan. This
station was on the top of the first eminence beyond Fenham Lodge, and before we
arrive at the second mile-stone from Newcastle.

Mr. Gordon by mistake calls it Benwell-Hill; but that eminence is beyond the
second mile-stone, where Mr. Shafto discovered the remains of an exploratory
tower.

That part of the station of Benwell, which lies on the north side of the
turnpike road, is at present a plantation, the property of William Ord, Esquire. of
Fenham.

In trenching this ground for planting many coins Denalm of Tragen, Hadrian,
Faustina senior, Domitian. Brass coins of Valentinian, Gratianus, Dioc^esian,
Faustina and Maxenti^. -- Many others not legible.
were found, most of which were defaced. Great conduits or sewers were
discovered at the depth of about a yard and a hal^: they were composed of large
wrought stones. Several little altars No. 1. near eight inches in height --
five and a quarter in breadth at its base.

"Deo Marti Jem^a^ius ^orum solvit." See plate of Roman Altars, etc. No. 8.

No. 2. (...), and (...) base about five in breadth.

"VITIR. B. VOTUM SOLVIT." I know not what figure is meant to be represented on
this altar. (...) plate of. (...) Altars, No. 7. Horsl^y tells us that a number
of altars are found inscribed to the local ^^d Vitires. He gives a
representation of one No. 6, Durham that has a boar on one side and a toad on
the other. This country, it is thought, may have ancient^, been infested with
boars and toads, and this god Vitires might have been applied to ^n that
account. Brit. Romans p. ^8.

No. 3. This altar is ten inches and a quarter in height, and about five inches
and a half broad at its base.

"Deo Vetri Sancto." See plate of Roman Altars, No. 6.

No. 4. This stone is an oblong square -- about 15 inches by ^ and ^

"LEG HAVG" a Roman vexillum, with a Pegasu on ^^e side, and a sea goat on the
other. -- In the vexillum part of the inscription repeated in very small
letters. See plate of Roman Altar^, etc. No. ^. Vegetius tells us that it was
the ancient custom of the Romans to put the number of the co^ort of century
upon the vexillum, which was a square piece of cloth fastened upon a transverse
piece of wood. This, after Constantine, had the name of Labatum. The sea goat
and Pegasus are not uncommon, and seem to denote the maritime situation of the
country on the one hand, and the swiftness of the Roman victory on the other.
Brit. Roman. p. 21^, 13.

No. ^. "DEO MARTI VICTORI VIMS." With this were found two (...) ^^sembling
pine apple, and (...) the figure of a Roman soldier.


and fragments of inscriptions were turned out on this occasion.

Roman Altars, etc.


Views and Section of the Roman Wall* etc


A remarkable altar See plate of Roman Altars, etc. No. 2.
, dedicated to the three Lamiae, was discovered at this station. We have no
clear accounts of these infernal goddesses called Lamiae, in the Roman
mythology Tooke's Pantheon informs us that the Lamiae were the three Gorgons.

"Lamiae," as we read in Bailey's Dictionary, ^d vol. Land. 1737, 8vo." among
the Romans, were (as some say) the three Harpies, called Aello, Ocypite and
Celaeno, a strange sort of birds, with women's faces, dragon's tails, and
eagle's talons."

"Lamie -- Les poets en font une femme ailee comme les Harpies." Dictionnaire
Etymologique, par M. Menage, tom. second.

The Harpies were the attendants of Pluto.

Servius, and after him Cerdanu, says, that amongst the infernals those Harpies
were called Furiae; among the Gods "Dirae," and on earth "Harpiae." Note,
Delphine Earl. of Virgil's Aeneid, lib. iii. lin^ 211.

Montfaucon, that great antiquary, observes, that the ancients usually made
three of those goddesses that were worshipped, in the plural number, whether
good or bad; as the Gorgons, the Gra^ae, the daughters of Phorcus, as also the
P^^cae, the Sirenes, the Harpyres, the Hosp^rides, the Stymphalides, the Gra^^,
may even the Sibyl^, and the Muses according to the most ancient authors. See
Horsley's Britan. Romans p. 2^^.


. Some think they were the three Harpies, Aello, Ocypite and Celaeno; while
others are of opinion that they were the three Gorgons. This inscription
appears to me to be unique; -- there occurs no altar dedicated to the Lamiae in
the immense collection of P^re Montfaucon. This altar has a focus which is
still red with the action of the fire: it was found at a considerable depth
below the surface of the ground. They sacrificed to the infernals in
subt^raneous temples.

There was discovered also in this station a very curious table See plate of
Roman Altars, etc. No. 1.
, which appears to have been put up anciently in the front of a temple, built
here by Titus Agrippa, a prefect, and dedicated to the Matres Campestres The
Deae Campestres or Matres Campestres were, according to Horsley, supposed to
have been loo^^ deities, to have had the care of corn and of country affairs,
and to have given plenty. They occur on No. 29. Inscriptions in Scotland. --
See Britannia Romana, p. 220, 22^, also 205.
and Genius of the First Wing of the Spanish Astures "The Asti," says Horsley,
p. 212, "who according to Pancirollus were the inhabitants of Asta, a colony in
Liguria, no doubt were distinct from the Astures, a people of Spain."

In the Notitia Imp. Occident. by Pancirollus, p. 141, we read "Pra^fectus Alae
primae Ascorum Condereo."


. Some part of this inscription has been designedly erased, and the stone
broken in two by an accident.

DENTON-BURN.
IN the deep hollow below Benwell-Hill, a little to the south of the
turnpike-road near Denton-Burn, is preserved a curious fragment of Severus'
Wall. It measures about nine feet in breadth: an apple tree grows out of the
middle of it; five courses of the facing stones on both sides are preserved
There is the letter N. cut on a Roman stone lying near this fragment.

I have in my possession a centurial stone that was found near Wallbottle. It
is inscribed "Centuria Justiana," and was built up in the free of Severus' Wall.

There is a piece of Severus' Stone Wall, with the facing stones on the north
side, still remaining, about a stone throw to the east of H^ddon on the Wall
opposite to a gateway. A little farther to the east Hadrian's two (...) may be
clearly distinguished at a very small distance to the south.

A. D. 1^52, the workmen, employed in making the military road to Carlisle,
found a great number of curious Roman coins and medals in the sums of the old
wall near H^ddon. They had been deposited in wooden boxes, which were almost
decay (...), yet several of the medals are (...) fresh and fair as (...) but
newly struck. Some were of silver, but the most part of copper, and a mixture
of a coarser metal.


.

Hadrian's work, passing down the hill near Benwell-Lodge, may be plainly
traced as you go down southwards a little on the waggon-way, on the west side
of Denton-Bridge.

RUTCHESTER I saw at Rutchester some coins that had been turned up by the
plough -- The reverse of one, Romulus and Remus sucking the she wolf. Inscrip.
Urbs Roma. -- Another was of Gallienus, who reigned from A. D. 253 to 259. On
the reverse a centaur. See Vaillant, tom. ii. p. 371. The tenant would not part
with them.

I found here also the fragment of a lettered stone inscribed LE VI. Legio
sexta, and two Roman hand millstones, one of which is of that kind of stone
which is called plum-pudding stone.

N. B. No. 9. in the plate entitled "Roman Altars, etc." represents the silver
vessel found in the river Tyne, and described in Wallis' Northumberland, vol.
ii. p. 15^. It is in height 4 inches; diameter in width at the broadest part, 2
inches (...); diameter of the bottom, 1 inch ^. "Desideri" is the vocative case
of "Desiderius;" so that the inscription may be englished, "Health to you, O
Desiderius!" It was discovered by an angle^^^^ at Bywell.


.
AT Rutchester, where there has been a large station and Roman town, there is
still remaining a very remarkable coffin, or sepulcher, hewn out of the living
rock. This, if I mistake not, is a most interesting memorial of the change
which took place among the Romans on the introduction of Christianity, when
they ceased to burn the corpse on a funeral pile, and, in hopes of a
resurrection, deposited the body entire in the earth.

A large altar was found here, without a focus, and on which is plainly
inscribed the monogram of Christ. It was brought from thence to Gateshead by
the late Rev. Andrew Wood, rector, and is at present built up in the wall of
the rectory-garden at that place See No. ^. Plate of Roman Altars, etc. The
other letters, probably initials of names, are after-insertion.
.

A mutilated statue of Hercules, also an immense quantity of gold coins, etc.
were discovered at this station not many years ago, and claimed by the Duke of
Northumberland as lord of the manor.

HARLOW-HILL.
THE pass of the fosse or ditch of Hadrian's Vallum through a limestone quarry,
a little to the south of Harlow, is very worthy of observation. -- You see the
two aggers of that emperor's work conducting to this place from the east I saw
at Hallow-hill, March 25th, 1783, the pass of Hadrian's ditch through a
limestone quarry, (...) the evident remains of the vallum of the same ^^mp for,
(...) to the east, and leading to it. About forty yards to the south of
Severus' Wall are the (...) of the ^^nt^ry (...) of it have been taken up
lately hereabouts, to (...) to plough in (...) 6d. per yard for cleaning the
ground of it (...) two yard (...) yard deep. Thomas Shell, an old weaver of the
place, (...) Mr. Horsley's (...) al^^ so of one of the watch tower, wherein
th^^ sound (...) on the castellum. He recollect this having (...) found it
eight feet broad, (...).
.

HALTON.
JUNE 4th, 1783, in searching among the ruinous heaps at the station of Halton,
I discovered a part of the shaft and capital of a column, which, no doubt, has
anciently supported some Roman temple there.

Column and Capital now at Halton Chesters -- 5 feet 3 inches long -- 16 inches
diameter.


Between the seventeenth and eighteenth mile-stones on the road to Carlisle,
Severus' Wall is plainly discernible for a good space, sunk in the center of
the turnpike road. -- It has a singular appearance, for the facing-stones on
both sides thereof have resisted the action of wheels, etc. longer than the
battered materials that surround them, and rise a little above the level of the
road.

Near Brunton was discovered some years ago a Roman stone, having "Legio
secunda" inscribed on it. This stone is at present in my possession.



The fosse of Severus' Wall, running down a pretty steep descent, from Brunton
to the North Tine, conducts us to the very curious remains of a Roman bridge,
which has anciently spanned that river at this place: innumerable large square
stones with holes in them, wherein iron rivets have been fixed, but catch away
by rust many ages ago, still lie bedded on the spot, and defy the violence of
the rapid stoods. It was a remarkably dry summer when I visited this place, and
the water was so low and clear, that on wading into it, I discovered the
foundation of one of the piers; one end of it was defaced, but it seemed to
have originally resembled the modern ones.

The Roman bridge has stood a little to the south of the present one at
Chollerford.

WALWICK. CARRAWBRUGH. HOUSE-STEEDS.
JULY 15th, 1779, I visited the station of Walwick-Chesters I brought away with
(...) had (...) found on the wall), the following inscribed Roman stone:
CO^T... ^^
BA^^^ HA^P.

, the Cilurnum of the Notitia Imperii, the ramparts of which, with the
entrance, notwithstanding the changes that have taken place in a succession of
ages, are still very discernible. Five sculptured and inscribed Roman stones,
which have been removed from this station, are preserved at present at
Walwick-Grange.

From Walwick-Chesters to Carrawbrugh, which is the next station, and distant
three measured miles and a quarter, the Wall of Severus, accompanied by the
works of Hadrian, is in very great perfection.

There is little at present very observable about the fort of Carrawbrugh. At
Carraw, a little farther west, in the gable end of a stable, in the inside,
there is built up a Roman stone, on which the figure of a man is sculptured, in
something like the same attitude in which the river gods are usually depicted.

From Carrawbrugh to House-Steeds, called by Dr. Stukeley, with great
propriety, the Tadmor of Britain, the distance is somewhat more than four miles
and five furlongs. An immense quantity of ruins denote the site of this once
famous station, the Borcovicus of the Notitia. The streets of the Roman town
Part of the Roman houses are remaining in many places: in the corner of one of
them I discovered what must once have been an oven, of curious masonry, and in
its form not unlike the ovens of the present day. The action of fire is plainly
discernible on many of the stones.
are still pointed out, and several terrace-like appearances, running westward,
are marked along the gently-sloping hill. The altar, No. 36, in Horsley's
Britannia Romana, is at present built up in the chimney-piece of the farmer's
house there. A very large stone, on which is sculptured the figure of a Roman
soldier, holding a spear in his hand, was discovered not many years ago, and is
still preserved. I found the fragment of a column, of which Dr. Stukeley saw
several in his time. Altars still lie scattered about in great abundance on
Chapel-Hill and the adjacent meadow. Mr. Magnay, the tenant, showed me a large
brass coin of Aelius that was found there.

From House-Steeds to the station of Little Chesters, which is considerably to
the south of both the walls, it measures about a mile and three quarters. It
stands close to the military way, which proceeds like the string of a bow, in a
straight course from Walwick-Chesters to Caervorran.

I was at Little Chesters, October 8th, 1783, and found the ramparts and
pretorium still distinguishable. A stone, with an inscription, which I could
not make out, is built up in the western gable end of a cottage a little
westward of this fort A remarkable pillar or milliary stone stands a little to
the east of this station, adjoining to the military way of Severus. I was
informed of another to the west of the station. I procured here a small stone,
with the rude sculpture of a Roman soldier, holding a spear in one hand and a
patera in the other, with some fragments of Roman pottery. I saw here also
several ornamented fragments of stones -- one in the form of a pine apple, and
heard of No. XI. mentioned in Warburton, p. ^7, line 7th.
.

From Little Chesters to Great Chesters, the distance is three miles three
quarters. -- This station is still very entire, and the pretorium plainly
distinguishable. Near this and at the door of the tenant's (Mr. Smith's) house,
I saw No. 63 of Horsley's Britannia Romana, and also a curious sepulchral stone
built up as the side of a gateway at the adjoining mill, a little to the south
of it, where there are some remarkable barrows. -- I was shown the graves in
some of these that had been opened out -- in one of them was found a skull.
They consisted of side stones set down into the earth, and covered at top with
other larger stones. I suppose these to have been very early Christian
sepulchers.

This, no doubt, has been the cemetery of the station in the lower ages of the
empire. Some curious inscriptions have been lately found here, and removed to
Wall-Town.

From Great Chesters, the Wall of Severus See section of Severus' Wall upon
Wall-Town Crag, as it appeared on the 8th of October, 1783, No. 4, in plate of
"Views and Section of the Roman Wall."
, going along a ridge of mountains, conducts us to Wall-Town The following
inscription is on a very large stone, found at Great Chesters, and brought from
thence to Wall-Town -- which must be dated between A. D. 22^, and 237.



I have in my possession a fragment of a stone brought also from (...) to
Wall-Town -- inscribed "AVG. I. CAEI. VIC. S."


, and from thence to Carrvorran. On the edge of a steep precipice about half a
mile east of Carrvorran, there remains a piece of Severus' Wall, 8 feet 3
inches and an half high, consisting in all of thirteen courses of square stones
-- one course of the masonry however is hidden by the earth or rubbish that has
fallen from the top See No. ^, in (...) of "Views and (...) the south side
there (...) but eight, nine, and (...)

July 16th, 1779, at Wall Town I saw the w^ll (...). It has evidently been
enclosed, which indicate^ something remarkable (...) country. ^ome wrought
stones lay (...). The water is very cool and (...)


.

There is also a very curious and picturesque part of the same great work,
rising, in its whole original breadth, up a steep crag about half a mile to the
west of Wall-Town See No. 3, in plate of "Views and Section of the Roman Wall."
. At Wall-Town I saw a large stone, with a human figure in a nich, of barbarous
execution -- underneath it an imperfect inscription -- VICAE^T....

CARRVORRAN.
FROM Great Chesters to the fort or station of Carrvorran the distance measures
about two miles and a quarter. This station lies about thirteen chains south of
both the works of Severus and Hadrian. Its ramparts and fosse are yet plainly
distinguishable. The Roman town has been situated on the south side of the
station, and appears to have been called the city of Dumnum There i^ a stone at
Glenwhelt, but which was found near Carrvorran, inscribed CIVITAS DVMNI -- I
suppose the etymon of this to be "the city of the hill" -- as the Roman city
here has stood on very high ground.

Found at Carrvorran, now at Glenwhelt, Oct. 1783.


. I saw here, October 7th, 1783, five square bases of columns See
, and some curious gutter stones See section of one of these gutter stones.
. On opening a tumulus on the east of this station, there was discovered a
remarkable hollow sepulchral stone, which contained a small quantity of a black
liquid and two gold rings Now used as a swine-trough at the inn at Glenwhelt.



July 16th, 1779, I found at Carrvorran several parts of a round column -- also
^ Roman millstone. That day I was present at the making of a transverse
section of a (...), on the west^^^ of the T^^, (...) opposite to Thirlwall
Castle: nothing was found in it but some pieces of bl^^sh clay. On whatever
(...) ^^^s had been thrown up, it was most certainly (...).

There is built up near the inn at Glenwhelt, a most (...) head, which i^
^^^^^inly not Roman. It came from Thirlwall Castle, and has, no doubt, belonged
to some of those (...), made use of anciently in such castles, to frighten the
distant (...).




.

Near the house of Mr. Carrick at this place, there are several circular
stones, hollow a^ the top, but not so much to as that found at Lanchester,
which Mr. Horsley supposed to have been used in the lustrations.

I broug^^ from thence, and have in my possession, two Roman stones, with
inscriptions; on (...) w^^ch I su^^^se to have been placed on the front of some
templ^ See
, as the other man have been a fixed to some hotel or public inn on the maiden
way which passes her, erected by the century of Marcus Ant^ninus, at their own
expense, for the convenience of travelers (...)
.

See
May be translated, "To the god Mars and the deities.... Julius the acta^ius of
the cohort, and Aoti^s the centurion, and Servius Valer^^s, Graech^rs, a^^^^d
this from the ground, performing a vow." The actarius was an officer that used
to provide corn for the forces.

(...)
May be read, "Centuria Marci Anton' viatoribus gratia sua fecit."

BURDOSWALD STATION.
FROM Carrvorran to Burdoswal^ station, near which the Roman Wall has crossed
the Irthing (the bank of which has fallen in, and exhibits at present a most
curious se^^ion of this great work), the distance is exactly two miles and
three quarters. I visited (...) fort October 5th, 1785, and ^ound the ramparts
remarkably high and entire. An ^^mense quantity of square stones are scattered
about this place. I copied an inscription on the Milk-House There is another
altar built up in thi^ milk house, of which the (...) built up in the house at
the place, No. 6 and 7, Horsley's Brit. Romans Cumberland; also a curi^^sly
ormented stone.

I found at Underhaugh, where, in ford^ng the I^^hing, in a post chaise, we
were in great danger of being carried away by the very violent stream o^ that
river, suddenly swollen by rains, a broken altar with a mutila^^d inscription,
made use of to set the (...) of the fire place upon, and for what is called in
that (...) ^ had-stone.

This is (^).Translation.

"To the Dii Manes of Aurelius Con^didus -- he lived one year and ten days --
the son of Aurelianus Justianus the tribune."




, undescribed in Horsley's Romans Brit. and brought away from thence, as a
memorial, the fragment of an inscription on a monumental stone.

CAM^^CK FORT.
FROM Burdoswald to Cambeck Fort, which has been about six chains square, and
is now entirely overgrown with wood, the distance is six miles and a quarter. I
saw, October 5th, 17^3, in the garden of the adjoining mansion of House-Steeds
or Castle-Steeds, a very large altar See
with a mutilated inscription, and some very observable ornaments: and found
also, built up over the door of a necessary house, a Roman funeral monument See

We found an English translation of this in the house at Cambeck Fort, running
thus "To ^^av^^s H^larius hi^ twin so^^^ ^^sed this monument to be erected."

October 7th, 1^^^, I visited Naworth Castle, well worthy the attention of the
English traveller, tho^^^h it has been plundered at different times of its
Roman stones, by Sir Thomas Robinson and Dr. Graham of Netherby. Two ^^ll
remain built up in the garden-wall, but the inscriptions are nearly defaced by
the weather.


, with an inscription. In the outhouses of this mansion there are built up --
part of a column with its capital, like that which I discovered at
Halton-Chesters -- a sculptured stone, representing a man holding something in
his hand, not unlike the implement used by the tailors, and called a goose (see
Horsley's Brit. Romans Scotland, No. 11.); with several other ornamented
fragments.

WATCH CROSS.
FROM Cambeck to the station of Watch-Cross I saw also built up in the wall of
an out-house at Bleatern near Watch-Cross, what has plainly been a centurial
stone, though much obliterated. It is reddish, as all the stones dug out of
Severus' Wall hereabouts are. The church and castle at Carlisle too are built
of the same fort of stone.

Near Bleate^^ I traced clearly both the agg^^^ o^ Hadrian and the track of the
wall of ^everus.


, which is a good way to the south both from the works of Hadrian and Severus,
and stands in two different fields, a little way north of the turnpike-road,
the distance is about three miles.

October 5th, 1783, I walked ^ound the ramparts of this fort, which is about
four chains and a half square, and discovered in some parts the hollow of the
^oss.

STANWICKS.
FROM Watch-Cross to the station of Stanwicks, the ramparts of which are still
visible, over against the castle of Carlisle, and which I traced pretty
distinctly, October 5th, 1783, the distance is more than five miles. The fosse
is clearly discernible, running toward the steep bank of the river, which
probably in a course of ages has undergone great alterations at this place At
Drawdikes, a gentleman's seat near the turnpike-road, not far from St^nwick^, I
saw built up in the front of the house, Horsley's No ^9, Cumberland: but that
writer, a^ the ingenious a^sist that accompanied me in this pleasant ex^^rsion,
Mr. Ralph B^lby, of Newcastle upon Tyne, agreed with me in thinking, has by no
means done justice, in his representation, to the sculpture of the lions, etc.
upon it. The other stone with an inscription, which he mentions also a^^ing
there, is at present built up in the inside of the house, and covered over by
the paper with which the ^oo^^^ i^ hung.
.

BRUGH.
FROM Stanwicks to the fort or station of Brugh, the ramparts of which are
still plainly distinguishable, the distance is four measured miles and an half.
I visited this place, October 6th, 1783. An old farmer in the village
remembered and pointed out to me the course of Severus' Wall. I could find none
of the stones In Hutchinson's Durham, Introd^^t. p. 8, mention occur^ of a
Roman altar lately dug up in the vicar's garden at Brugh, on the land^ in
C^mberland. "The inscription," says he, "is compl^^^, but the letters very rude
and meanly (...), though very le^^i^^^^^, consisting but of two words, viz. ^^o
B^l^^^^a, which certainly stands for B^lata^^^^^o, and I think the f^^th
inscription, which ha^ been discovered in Great Britain, addressed to the lo^
Id^r^y* for such (...) to pronounce ^t with Cam^^n, o^ ^t ^^ast another name
for Apollo, with Dr. Ward, and not a co^^nom^n of Ma^^, o^ another appellation
of him, as has been con^^tured."
which Mr. Horsley saw here. The stone chest which that author mentions, and
which has perhaps been one of the earliest Christian coffins to deposit the
corpse entire in, has been removed to Boulness.

DRUMBRUGH.
FROM Brugh to the station of Drumbrugh At Easton near Drumbrugh, great
quantite of the stones of Severus' Wall have been dug up, so that in conducting
that great work, in order to (...) marsh, they (...) have (...) a (...)
hereabouts, by the ^^^ng ground. I owe this information to a ^^tleman who lives
and has property at Easton, where he has had the stones of the wall taken up in
his fields.

A centurial stone was found, not long ago, at Glass^n, a mile west of
Drumbrugh. I saw it at B^^l^^^.

Found at Glass^n near Boulness, drawn at Boulness, Oct. 4th, 1783.


, where the ramparts of the Roman station are very conspicuous, and the fosse
around it still remarkably deep, the distance is little more than four measured
miles.

October 6th, 1783, I sa^ a Roman altar, but without any inscription remaining,
built up in the ga^^^n-wall of Sir James Lowther's castle there, a curious old
mansion, in which some tap^^^y h^^^i^es remain, of no contemptible execution. I
was i^^or^^^^ that a remarkable (...) had been found there, and removed by that
baronet (now Lord Lo^f^^^^) to Lowther-Hall. A curious draw-well has lately
been discovered at (...) opened out: its present depth is seventeen feet,
twelve of which are water (...) and an half diameter, built in the inside of
circularly-wrought stones. A (...) one is also in the same place, at some
little distance. I brought away from thence a curious lettered stone found
there, and which the owner of the house, where it was built up, with great
politeness suffered to be taken out of the wall of it It is of a red color.
Inscription, COH. VIII.
.

BOULNESS About three quarters of a mi^^ to the ^^^t of Boulness, some
fragments of Severus' Wall remain, of a great ^^^ght: on m^^a^^ing one of
(...), w^ found it to be about eight feet high; it was bound and overgrown with
ivy in a most p^^tute^^^ (...). The facing stones on both side^ have been taken
away. (...) No. 1, in plate of "View^ and (...) of the Roman Wall," for a view
of a piece of it, six feet in h^^ght, si^wing the internal masonry.

A mil^^ (...) of Boulness (...) som^thing like a very large tumulus, on the
top of which remain^s a st^^^d fragment of a column: it is called "^uh^^ Cross."


.
FROM Drumbrugh to the east station of Boulness, where its ramparts and fosse
are still very discerned^, the distance is three miles and an half.

I vinted this fort, where Severus' Wall terminated, October 6th, 1783, and saw
a very curious Roman altar It^ represent built up over the a^ch^ (...) to a
barn in the village.

It was for ^^at Boulness, in a ^^ld a (...) to the south-^ast of the Roman
station there ^^th person that erected it is styled "Tribunus Cohortis,"
without any number of the cohort being specified. This (...) n^ w^^^ Horsley's
Romans Brit. p. ^^, where Ca^^ Corn hi^ Pe^e^^inus st^led Trib^nus Cohor^^ ^^o.
"The^^ (...)," adds that m^mo^^^ visited, "besides the inscriptions in which
express mention is made (...) particular cohort, others that mention some
officers without telling us to what body they belonged." (...).


, that some time ago was found in a field a little to the south, where it
should seem there has been a Roman town. It is very probable that the ^^^^h ^^
a course of centuries has made encroachments on the banks of this promontory.

The following places, situated between the eastern and the western extremity
of Severus' Wall, still retain the names which they have derived from the
circumstance of their lying contiguous to that great work.

Walls-End, a village at the eastern extremity in Northumberland.

Walker, Northumberland. Wallknoll, in Newcastle upon Tyne. -- See another of
the same in Cumberland. Benwall, alias Benwell in Northumberland. Wall-Bottl in
Northumberland. Heddon on the Wall in Northumberland. Wall-Houses in
Northumberland. Wall-Fell, near Bywell in Northumberland. Wallside in
Northumberland. Wall in Northumberland. Walwick-Chesters in Northumberland.
Walwick-Grange in Northumberland. Walwick in Northumberland. Walwick New Houses
in Northumberland. Wall-Shiels in Northumberland. Walton-Mill in
Northumberland. Wall-Town in Northumberland. Thirlwal-Castle in Northumberland.
Burnt-Wall in Northumberland. Wallbours in Cumberland. Walhome in Cumberland.
Wall in Cumberland. Wall-Town in Cumberland. Walton-Ridge in Cumberland. Old
Wall in Cumberland. Wall-Head in Cumberland. Wallby in Cumberland. Wallhouse in
Cumberland. Wallknow in Cumberland.
The above are collected from Horsley's Maps, etc.

This inscription may be translated thus: "To Jupiter, best and greatest, for
the safety (or health) of our august emperors Gallus and Volusianus, Sulpicius
Secundianu^, tribune of the cohort, erected this."

This altar must have been made between A. D. 251 and 253.



An inscription on a Roman altar, found lately at Risingham in the parish of
Elsdon, Northumberland, of which I received a drawing from Mr. Saint of
Newcastle upon Tyne, June 3d, 1788. See plate of Roman Altars, No. 5.

"Matribus tramarinis Julius Victor votum solvit libens merito." Mention occurs
in Horsley's Britannia Romana of the " deae matres tramarinae or transmarinae,"
p. 274 -- the "matres domesticae" occur on an altar at Scaleby-castle. The deae
matres, as Dr. Gale observes, were very much worshipped in Germany; and these
matres transmarinae seem to be either the same with them, or the matres
Gallicae mentioned by Montfaucon in an inscription found in Spain. They are
supposed to have been local goddesses. Spon's account of them is, that they
were deified women, who while living were thought to have the gift of prophecy,
and after their death seem to have been worshipped as a sort of genii or
tutelar deities of the places where they resided. The Germans paid much regard
to this sort of women; and it seems plain from a passage in Tacitus, that the
Britons had also these female enthusiasts. -- See Horsley, ut supra, p. 201.

APPENDIX, P. 178. ST. ANDREW's CHURCH.
Licentia concessa ad aedificand' in Coemeterio Capellae S. Andreae Villae Novi
Castri. Reg. Hatfeld, p. 119.
THOMAS permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus, dilectis filiis parochianis
capellae S. Andreae villae Novi Castri salutem, gratiam et benedictionem. Quia
asseritis dictam capellam plus solito tam de capellanis, cantariar' et
ornamentis destitutam, defectusque diversos faisse et esse in eadem, qui de
facili reparari non poterunt, nisi aliunde vobis de congruo remedio consulatur,
ac prout intelleximus in promptu estis et fuistis aedificare and adificia
construere in solo dictae capellae and cemeterii ejusdem, quo in magnum dicti
loci cederet relevamen, dum tamen super hoc consensum nostrum habueritis et
licentiam specialem: Tam pium vestrum propositum commendantes petitionibus
vestris favorabiliter inclinamus and vobis et quibuscunque Christi fidelibus de
vestro consensu, in augmentum divini cultus in capella supradicta ampliand' et
aedificia honesta in solo dictae capellae sive cemeterii ejusdem erigendi et
erecta reparandi, ita tamen quod redditus et proventus in utilitatem dictae
capellae, et pios usus in eadem continuandos omni modo convertatur, et post
hujusmodi aedificationem eadem aedificia per personas honestas duntaxat
inhabitata fuerint, ac etiam quod locus sufficiens et honestus ibidem pro
caemeterio dimittatur, licentiam concedimus specialem, dignitate et juribus
nostris aut nostrae Dunolmensis ecclesiae, ac ecclesiae parochialis beati
Nicholai dictae villae, ac cujuscunque alterius in omnibus semper salvis. In
cujus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum praesentibus apponi fecimus. Dat' apud
Aukland duodecimo die mensis Januarii anno Domini 1376.

Commissio ad restituend' Parochianum Capellae S. Andreae Villae Novi Castri
super Tynam dissamatum. Reg. Hatfeld, p. 135.
THOMAS perm' divin' Dun' Episcopus venerabili in Christo patri fratri Philippo
Dei gratia Lechlinen' Episcopo suffraganeo nostro ac dilecto silio Domino
Williemo Hydewin capellano parochiali ecclesiae S. Andreae villae Novi Castri
super Tynam salutem gratiam et benedictionem. Ex part Johannis Careaway moram
trahentis in villa Novi Castri praedicta nobis extitit intimatum, quod per
offic' archidiaconi nostri Northumbriae inhibitio facta fuerat ne eidem Johanni
sacramenta seu sacramentalia administrata fuissent in ecclesia parochiali
supradicta, et licet praedictus Johannes paratus sit et fuerit ad praestand'
juramentum corporale de parendo mandatis ecclesiae in his quae concernunt
animae suae salutem in denigrationem famae dicti Johannis et grave periculum
dicti official' ac ejusdem Johannis praejudicium non modicum et gravamen,
sacramentum Eucharistiae in sancto festo Paschae eidem dictum sacramentum
humiliter postulanti dictus offic' fecerat public denegari. Quocirca vobis et
cuilibet vestrum conjunctim et divisim committimus vices nostras, si ita fuerit
ad inquirend' de causa seu causis quare per dictum offic' praefata inhibitio
manavit et si ipsam illegitimam et minus justam inveneritis et praefatum
Johannem humiliter beneficium absolutionis seu status sui restitutionis
integrum ab eodem archidiacono seu ejus vices gerente patere noveritis cum
effectu aut in ejus absentia petere velle praestito cum juramento coram vobis
aut altero vestrum corporali de parendo mandatis ecclesiae et ad satisfaciend'
si propter manifestam offensam excommunicatus fuerit praefatus Johannes
postquam vobis aut alteri vestrum constiterit, quoth praed' offic' seu ejus vices
gerens congrue requisitus et nihilominus negligens a sua cura absens et nimis
differens fuerit praefatum Johannem in integrum restitutis et beneficium
absolutionis impendatis, restituat seu impendat alter vestrum; ministrantes seu
ministrari facientes eidem Johanni sacramentum Eucharistiae, caeteraque
sacramenta et sacramentalia quoties et quando opus fuerit, dum tamen aliud
canonicum impedimentum eidem non obstiterit in ea part. In cujus rei
testimonium signum nostrum praesent' apponi fecimus. Dat' apud Aukland decimo
sexto die Aprilis anno Domini 1378.

Officium Domini Cancellarii contra Thomam Akenside et Janetam ejus Uxorem, et
Robertum Akenside Parochiae S. Andreae Villae Novi Castri detect. They are
presented of Witchcrafte and Sorcerie. Die Sabbati, viz. 23 die Men's. Junii, A.
D. 1582. -- Acta Curiae Consist. Decanatus Novi Castri.
AD purgand' se dicti detecti habent, viz. Thomas Akenside et ejus uxor quarta
manu, et Robertus Akenside quarta manu praeter se honestorum vicinorum fuorum
etc. Quo die dictus Thomas Akenside et ejus uxor produxerunt in compurgatores
suos Johannem Chanlye, Walterum Robeson, Jerardum Burn et Oswaldum Chater, et
Robertus Akenside produxit in compurgatores suos Willielmum Hall, Ricardum
Readot, Edwardum Harcas et Thomam Foggart, in quorum praesentiis dicti detecti
virtute juramentorum suorum tunc ibidem praestitorum negaverunt detectionem
esse veram: unde dicti compurgatores dixerunt et deposuerunt quod credebant
dictos Thomam Akenside et Janetam ejus uxorem et Robertum Akenside veritatem
jurasse, unde Dominus pronuntiavit ipsos detectos legitime et canonice sese
purgasse, ipsosque et eorum quemlibet ad pristinum statum fore restituendos
decrevit et decrevit literas testimoniales.

And furthermore ye said judge has abjured the foresaid Thomas Akenside and
Jennet his wife and Robert Akenside, that they never use any sorcerie or
witchcrafte hereafter.

Curious Extracts from the Register of St. Andrew's.
"MARCH 19, 1645, Kudbart Welsh, a blind man bured -- the Lapton of the
beggars."

"May 20, 1652, Mary Dun buried, which was kounted for a witch."

"May 13, 1697, Mary D. of James Brown lume sweeper buried." ( i. e.
chimney-sweeper.)

"May 6, 1645, Richd. S. to Rd. Bewick buried which was drowned in the trench
at Newgate."

"October. 25, 1640, one of the Redshankes buried 25 day of the Skottes arm."

"May 1640, -- 2 sogers for denying the King's pay was by a counsel of war
appointed to be shot at and a pare of gallos set up before Those. Malaber's
door in the Byg-market, they kust lotes which should die and the lotes did fall
of one Mr. Anthone Viccars and he was set against a wall and shot at by 6
light horsemen and was buried in our churchyard the sam day, May 16 day."

"Feb. 9, 1640, Thomas Karr and Jane Lanton married -- one of the Skotes army
and would pay nothing to the church."

"Feb. 22, 1640, Andrew supposed son to Rande Atkinson, workman, baptized the
22d day -- very base begote for he is the 4th bastor that he has by this
woman."

"July 17th, 1641, James Fylder bured which fell of the walls and braned
(brained) himself one of the Skotes arm being of the watch at Pilgrim-Stret
gate."

"1642, Matthew Bell bured which was killed by a sogar going out at the Newgate
the 9th day."

"1644, Oct. 4, Arthur Herron buried which was killed with a granado."

"1644, Oct. 23, -- 2 killed by the Scotts at the Spitle the skrimes"
(skirmish).

On an upright stone in St. Andrew's Churchyard.
"IN all our marriage vows, she did fulfill
And fondly sought her husband, through the dead over Bunker's Hill;
At many actions more, and at the Brandy-wine,
She loved her husband so, she would not stay behind
Till now by cruel Death's dread dart,
She is left behind and forced to part
Till the last trump, when Gabriel sounds amain
She Will rise embrace and join again.
In memory of the best of wifes lies here interred the body of Mary the wife of
Robert M'Cutchin, sergeant in the 11. grenadiers, died the 11 May 1781, in the
27 year of her age."

APPENDIX. P. 198. JESMOND -- BOURNE'S ACCOUNT OF.
"PILGRIM-STREET," says Bourne, p. 81, "got its name from the pilgrims, who
came from all parts of this kingdom to worship at our Lady's chapel at Gesmond."

"Gesmond or Jesumunde," he adds, "or as it is called in some ancient writings,
Jesumuth, is a pleasant village, on the north-east of Newcastle, distant from
it about two miles; it appertained to the barony of Robert de Gaugy, as appears
by a certificate given in the 3d of Hen. III. of such manours as his barony did
consist of, for which he was obliged to the service of three knights' fees. --
Mag. Brit. vol. iii. Adamus de Athol, who lies buried in the chapel of the Holy
Trinity, in St. Andrew's church, lived in this village, and is called Dominus
de Jesmond: the Orde's family was also in possession of it.

"There are still to be seen the ruins of the chapel and hospital of our Lady
in this village. The hospital is now a dwelling house; but the chapel is
changed into something worse, being turned into a stable.

"I am told, and it is very probable, that this chapel and hospital are at
present the property of Mr. Robert Andrew of Gateshead.

"In the year 1351, Sir Alexander of Hilton "In the 23d, 24th, and 25th of
Edward the First, Robert de Hilton of Hilton, in the county palatine of Durham,
had summons to parliament amongst the barons of this realm; and in the 4th of
Edward II. was in that expedition then made into Scotland. This Robert married
Margaret, one of the three to heires^e^ to Marmaduke de Thwenge, and left issue
two daughters his heirs, viz. Isabel, married to Walter de Penwardyn, and Maud
to Hotham.

"After this there is mention made of Alexander de Hilton, who in the 7th of
Edward III. served in the Scottish wa^s with Ralph Lord Nevil, and had summons
to parliament in the 6th and 9th of Edward III. but no longer. This is in all
probability the same Alexander with him above mentioned. The present gentleman,
John Hilton, Esquire. a regular of (...) of this ancient ^am^^y, lives in the place
of (...), which he has adorned and beautified beyond what was done in past age;
in particular the chapel, (...) in this country for its Irish wood, is so
furnished with plate and book^, and other necessaries, that (...) character of
a very beautiful chapel. This family is the ancientest in England that (...) a
coat of (...)."


, and Matilda his wife, the two patrons of the chapel of Gesmonde, presented to
it one Sir William of Heighington to be chaplain, who was accordingly
instituted by Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, and after that inducted, as
was attested at Auckland, June the 12th, 1351. But on the 27th of the month
following he gave it up, declaring he had no right or title to it. The copy of
the original of this account I had from Dr. Hunter of Durham, and is as
follows: Universis S. matris filiis, ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint,
Thomas permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus salutem in amplexibus Salvatoris.
Noverit universitas vestra quod nos dilectum nobis in Christo Dom' Wilielmum de
Heighyngton capellanum ad liberam capellam de Jesmuth infra parochiam
Novocastri Dunelm' dioces' situatam, ad quam per Dom' Alexandrum de Hilton
militem et Matildam uxorem ejus veros patronos ejusdem nobis presentatus
existit, admisimus et ipsum in capellanum perpetuum ejusdem canonice
instituimus in eadem, ipsumque in corporalem possessionem ejusdem induci
fecimus, cum suis juribus et pertinentiis universis. In cujus rei testimonium
sigillum nostrum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat' apud Auckland 12o die mensis Junii
Ao. Dom' 1351, et nostrae consecrationis septimo. Memorand' quod 27 die mensis
Julii anno Dom' 1351, infra manerium de Auckland, dictus Dominus Willielmus
renunciavit omni juri et omnimodi auctoritati quod et quam in praedicta capella
vel ad eam habuit, feu quovis modo habere poterit in futurum, asserens se
nullum habuisse unquam nec habere titulum in hac part.

"To this village (Jesmond) it was that a great number of the people of
Newcastle, headed by some of the aldermen and principal men of the town, came
to kill the prior of Tinmouth, in the first of the reign of King Henry the
Eighth.

"In the 3d of Edw. VI. the town got a grant of the chapel of the blessed Mary
of Jesmond, and some messuages and lands in Jesmond, under an annual rent of
3s. 4d. payable out of some lands in Old Heaton, and the chapel or chantry of
St. Laurence, with the messuages called St. Laurence and Little St. Anne's
Close, and lands in Byker, then in the possession of Henry Winklive, and lands
in Killingworth, then in the possession of John Huntley, an annual rent of 4s.
payable out of the lands of the then Christopher Mitford, in Old Heaton.

"These were granted in consideration of 144l. 13s. 4d.

"In the same year the mayor and burgesses granted the hospital of the blessed
Mary of Jesmond, with the lands and grounds belonging to it, to Sir John
Brandling, his heirs and assigns for ever.

"The gentleman of this place at present is William Coulson, Esquire. who lately
built a very pretty house, and accommodated it with gardens.

"St. Mary's Well in this village, which is said to have had as many steps down
to it as there are articles in the Creed, was lately enclosed by Mr. Coulson
for a bathing place, which was no sooner done than the water left it. This
occasioned strange whispers in the village and the adjacent places. The well
was always esteemed of more sanctity than common wells, and therefore the
failing of the water could be looked upon as nothing less than a just revenge
for so great a profanation. But alas! the miracle's at an end, for the water
returned a while ago in as great abundance as ever." Thus far Bourne.

In the plate of coins, etc. struck at Newcastle upon Tyne (in this work),
there is engraved, between the tradesmen's tokens (B), an exact representation
of a religious medal, which was lately found in pulling down an old wall,
supposed to have belonged to the chapel of St. Mary at this place: one side
plainly gives the heads of Christ and the Virgin Mary in profile; on the other
side the emblems of the Eucharist, with this inscription: LA. SI. IL. S. S.
SAG. and at the bottom, ROMA. for "Laudato sia il sacrissimo sagramento,
"Italian; which may be englished thus: "Praised be the most holy sacrament."

N. B. In the plate entitled "Monuments in the churches of St. Nicholas and All
Saints," No. 1 represents the late remains of Sir George Selby's magnificent
monument, and No. 2, the curious old one of George Carr; both described as
having stood at the east end of St. Nicholas' church.

N. B. No. 5, in the plate entitled "Views and Section of the Roman Wall, etc."
represents a front view of a curious old house in the High Friar Chare, drawn
at the desire of Lord Montstuart, by Mr. R. Beilby.

APPENDIX, P. 236. CORRECTIONS, AFTER-INSERTIONS, etc. MADE IN ST. NICHOLAS'
CHURCH, JUNE 24, 1788.
ON a small mural monument near the east end.

"Near this place lies the body of Mary Furye who died March 17th 1782, aged 24
years." Hall's monument and that of Wrightson remain.

In St. Mary's porch those of Hamilton and Davison.

On a monument in St. Mary's porch. "Near this place Lies the body of Hannah,
wife of Edward Mosley Esquire. Alderman: She was the daughter of Henry Campleshon
of the city of York merchant and died 15th of January 1784."

On a close inspection (after cleaning) of Man's monument, I was enabled to
discover some corrections that had originally been made in the inscription
"Haud nosse fas est titulum
Cognominis, aliquii
Qui sic quadranter convenit."
"Quid sibi vult Edvardus, hoc
Vocalis Camden referat
Nomen utcunque conspicis
Unum si viro proxima
Constituant epitheton."
-- "Vir publici propositi."
-- "Vir vere pater famulis."
-- "non amasset hunc
Si quis, hoc esset, etc." P. 285. BENNET'S INSCRIPTION.


"INFORMATION was someways brought that certain pieces of ordnance were
delivered by John Bennet, late master of the ordnance in the North, and were
concealed by certain inhabitants of Newcastle; and that they had caused the
Queen's arms and mark to be defaced and taken out of the said ordnance:
whereupon a letter was sent from the council to the mayor of Newcastle, to
Bartram Anderson and to the said Tho. Gower (master of the ordnance in the
North) to examine diligently where and in whose hands any of those pieces
remained, and to cause the same to be returned to the office of the ordnance;
and to signify what they found therein."

Strype's Annals, vol. i. p. 24. APPENDIX, P. 328. An Act to enable his Majesty
to license a Playhouse in the Town and County of the Town of Newcastle upon
Tyne.
WHEREAS a licensed playhouse in the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the
county of the same town, would be of convenience to the said town, and to
persons resorting there; may it therefore please your Majesty that it may be
enacted; and be it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons, in
this present parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That so
much of an act of parliament, made in the tenth year of the reign of his late
Majesty King George the Second, entitled, An Act to explain and amend so much
of an act made in the twelfth year of the reign of Queen Anne, entitled, 'An
act for reducing the laws relating to rogues, vagabonds, sturdy beggars, and
vagrants, into one act of parliament; and for the more effectual punishing such
rogues, vagabonds, sturdy beggars, and vagrants, and sending them whither they
ought to be sent,' as relates to common players of interludes; whereby all
persons are discharged to represent any entertainment of the stage whatever, in
virtue of letters patent from his Majesty, or by license of the Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's household for the time being, except within the
liberties of Westminster, or where his Majesty is residing for the time being
be, and the same is hereby repealed, with respect to the said town of Newcastle
upon Tyne: And that it shall and may be lawful for his Majesty, his heirs and
successors, to grant letters patent for establishing a theater or playhouse
within the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, which shall be entitled to all the
privileges and subjected to all the regulations, to which any theater or
playhouse in Great Britain is entitled and subjected.

APPENDIX, P. 360. ALL SAINTS CHURCH. An Act for pulling down and rebuilding
the Church of All Saints, in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and for enlarging
the Churchyard, and making convenient Avenues and Passages thereto.
WHEREAS the church or parochial chapel of the parish or parochial chapelry of
All Saints in the town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, and which parish
extends into the county of Northumberland, is a very ancient building, and is
become so decayed and ruinous, that it is unsafe for the parishioners to attend
divine service therein; and it is necessary the same should be taken down, and
a new church built, and also that the cemetery or church, or parochial chapel
yard, which is too small, should be enlarged, and proper avenues made thereto:
And whereas, for the purposes aforesaid, it will be necessary to purchase the
whole or a part of certain lands, tenements, and hereditaments, adjoining to
the said cemetery or churchyard, and extending from the same unto a street
called Pilgrim-street on the west, and to a street called Silver-street on the
north: May it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted; and be it
enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons, in this present
parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that the Rev. John
Sharp, D. D. archdeacon of the county of Northumberland; the Rev. James Stephen
Lushington, A. M. vicar of Newcastle upon Tyne; the Rev. George Stephenson
minister, the Rev. John Hogarth curate, the Rev. Hugh Moises lecturer, the Rev.
Cuthbert Wilson lecturer, and the ministers, curates, and lecturers of the said
parish or parochial chapelry for the time being; Peter Wilson, John James,
Malin Sorsbie, Robert Yelloley, churchwardens, and the churchwardens of the
said parish or parochial chapelry for the time being; William Yeilder, Esquire.
mayor, and the mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne for the time being; the recorder of
Newcastle upon Tyne for the time being, and their several and respective
successors; Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. George Colpitts, William Peareth,
John Hall, William Cramlington, James Rudman, Hugh Hornby, and William Kent,
Esqrs. Henry Shadford junior, Thomas Curry, Robert Cram, Samuel Lawton, Snow
Clayton, and William Lloyd, Gentlemen; being owners of land, or parishioners of
the said parish or parochial chapelry of All Saints, shall be, and they are
hereby appointed trustees for putting this act in execution; and all and every
the powers, authorities, directions, matters, and things, by this act given to
and directed to be done by or before the said trustees, shall and may be
exercised, had, and done by or before any five or more of them, and shall be of
as full force and effect as if done or executed by or before all the trustees.

II. And be it further enacted, that when any trustee appointed by, or to be
appointed in pursuance of this act (except such persons as are declared to be
trustees by virtue of their situation or office, shall die, or refuse to act,
it shall be lawful for the remaining trustees, by writing under their hands,
to nominate and appoint another person (not being one of the people called
Quakers), being owner of land, or a parishioner in the said parish or parochial
chapelry, to be a trustee in the room of the trustee so dying or refusing to
act, and the person so to be nominated and appointed shall be, and is hereby
invested with the several powers by this act granted to the trustees herein and
hereby nominated and appointed.

III. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that if any trustee shall
enter into any contract, or have any share or interest in any contract made for
the purposes of this act, or, being a land owner in the said parish or
parochial chapelry, shall sell and dispose of his property therein, or being a
parishioner therein, shall leave the said parish or parochial chapelry, and
reside elsewhere, every such person shall, during the time of his being so
interested in the premises, or selling his said property, or leaving the said
parish or parochial chapelry as aforesaid, be utterly disabled from acting in
the said trust; any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in anywise
notwithstanding.

IV. And be it further enacted, that the said trustees shall and may meet
together in the vestry-room of the said parish or parochial chapelry, within
one calendar month next after the passing of this act, or as soon after as
conveniently may be, between the hour, of nine of the clock in the forenoon and
two of the clock in the afternoon, and proceed to put this act in execution,
and then, and from time to time afterward, adjourn themselves to meet, or meet
according to such notice as is herein after directed to be given, within the
same hours, and at such place or places within the said parish or chapelry, as
such trustees shall think proper and convenient; but no act of the said
trustees shall be valid, unless made or done at some public meeting to be held
by virtue of this act.

V. Provided always, and it is hereby enacted and declared, that it shall be
lawful for the said trustees to order a meeting of trustees as often as they
shall find it necessary; and that of all meetings to be held in pursuance of
this act (unless by adjournment) previous notice shall be given in the said old
church or chapel, or in one of the Newcastle newspapers, signed by the clerk to
be appointed to the said trustees as hereby directed, until the said intended
new church or chapel shall be built or completed, and used for the celebration
of divine service, and then such notice shall be given in such new church of
parochial chapel, on the Sunday next before such meetings respectively, by the
minister or curate of the said parish or chapelry for the time being, or some
other person to be appointed by him to give the same, and also by writing to be
affixed on the door or doors of such churches or parochial chapels
respectively, thereby setting forth the day, hour, and place of such meeting;
and the said trustees shall, at all their meetings, pay their own expenses; and
that all such trustees as are justices of the peace may act as justices,
notwithstanding their being trustees, except only in such cases where they
shall be immediately and personally interested; and that in all cases where the
trustees, or any justice or justices of the peace, are authorized to examine
any person or persons on oath or affirmation, it shall be lawful for such
trustees and justices, and they are hereby required to administer such oath, or
take such affirmation.

VI. And be it further enacted, that the said trustees shall sue and be sued in
the name of their clerk, and that no action that may be brought or commenced by
or against the said trustees, or any of them, by virtue or on account of this
act, in the name of their clerk, shall abate or be discontinued by the death or
removal of such clerk, or by the act of such clerk, without the consent of the
trustees; but the clerk to the said trustees for the time being shall always be
deemed plaintiff or defendant in such action, as the ca^e may be: Provided
always, that every such clerk, in whose name any action or (...) shall be
commenced, prosecuted, or defended, in pursuance of this act, shall always be
reimbursed and paid, out of the mo^^^ to be raised by virtue of this act, all
such cost, and charges as by the event of any such proceedings he shall be put
to or become chargeable with by reason of his being so made plaintiff or
defendant therein.

VII. And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the said trustees,
by any writing under their hands, to appoint a treasurer or treasurers, and
clerk, and one or more fit and able person or persons, if necessary, to
superintend and inspect the buildings and works intended to be carried on under
or by virtue and in pursuance of this act; and also to appoint such other
person or persons as may be necessary and proper for any of the purposes of
this act, or to execute any rules, orders, and regulations, to be made in
pursuance of the same, and shall and may take such security as they the said
trustees shall think proper, from such treasurer and clerk, or any other person
or persons so to be employed and appointed as aforesaid, or any of them; and
shall and may, from time to time, remove such treasurer and clerk, or other
person or persons, and appoint others in the room and stead of such of them as
shall be so removed, or that shall die, or may discontinue any such office or
offices, when they the said trustees shall think proper so to do; (...) shall
and may, out of the moneys arising by virtue of this act, pay, or (...) to be
paid, to all such treasurers, clerks, and other persons, such salaries or other
allowances as they the said trustees shall judge reasonable, for and in
consideration of their employment respectively.

VIII. And be it further enacted, that the said trustees shall have full power
and authority, from time to time, to treat, contract, and agree with the owners
and occupiers, and all other persons interested in the lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, with their and every of their appurtenances, adjoining the said
cemetery, or church or parochial chapel yard, and extending from the same to
Pilgrim-street on the west, and to Silver-street on the north, and to purchase
the same, or such part thereof respectively as the said trustees shall think
fit, and upon payment of such sum and sums of money as shall be agreed upon for
such purchases, or as shall be assessed in manner herein after provided, to
cause such houses and buildings, or so much thereof as shall be necessary, to
be taken down, and the same, with the land thereto appertaining, to be annexed
to, and the same shall for ever after remain as part and parcel of, the said
church or parochial chapel, and church or parochial chapel yard thereof, for
the enlarging thereof, and interment of the dead; and this act shall be
sufficient to indemnify the said trustees, their agents, workmen, officers, and
servants, and all persons acting by or under their authority, or under the
authority of the said trustees, against the heirs, executors, administrators,
or assigns, of any of the said owners or occupiers of the said premises, or any
part thereof, as effectually as if the same had been sold and conveyed by deed
of feoffment, bargain and sale, or other assurance in the law whatsoever; and
it shall be lawful for all bodies politic, corporate, or collegiate,
corporations aggregate or sole, trustees, feoffees in trust, guardians, and
committees for lunatics and idiots, executors, administrators, and guardians
whatsoever, not only for and on behalf of themselves, their heirs and
successors, but also for and on behalf of their cestuique trusts, whether
infants or issue unborn, lunatics, idiots, femes-covert, or other persons
whomsoever, and to and for all femes-covert who are or shall be seized in their
own right, and to and for all other person and persons whomsoever who are or
shall be seized or possessed of, or interested in the said several houses,
messuages, tenements, and hereditaments, and the appurtenances thereunto
belonging, intended to be purchased for the purposes of this act, to sell to
the said trustees all and every the said lands, tenements, hereditaments,
estates, and interests, or any part thereof, and the same shall be conveyed to
the vicar of the said town and county, and his successors, vicars of the said
town for the time being, in trust for the land owners and parishioners of the
said parish or parochial chapelry, for the purposes of this act; and that all
contracts, agreements, bargains, sales, and conveyances, which shall be made by
such persons as aforesaid, shall be good and valid in law to all intents and
purposes, not only to convey the estate and interest of the person or persons
conveying, but also to convey all right, estate, interest, use, property,
claim, and demand whatsoever of their several and respective cestuique trusts,
whether infants or issue unborn, lunaticks, idiots, femes-covert, or other
persons whomsoever, and all claiming or to claim by, from, or under them, any
law, statute, usage, or any other matter or thing whatsoever, to the contrary
thereof in anywise notwithstanding; and all such persons so conveying shall be,
and are hereby indemnified for what they shall do by virtue of, or in pursuance
of this act, notwithstanding any omission or mistake of matter or form
whatsoever: And if any bodies politic, corporate, or collegiate, or other
person or persons seized or possessed of, or interested in, any such lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, as aforesaid, shall refuse to treat or agree, or
by reason of any disability cannot treat or agree for the sale of their
respective estates and interests therein, or shall not produce and evince a
clear title to the premises they are in possession of, or to the interest they
claim, to the satisfaction of the said trustees, then, and in every such case,
it shall be lawful for the sheriff of the said town and county of Newcastle
upon Tyne, and he is hereby required (upon a warrant or warrants, precept or
precepts, to be issued and directed to him for this purpose by the said
trustees, under their hands and seals, and which warrants or precepts the said
trustees are hereby authorized and empowered to issue) to impannel and return a
jury of twenty-four persons (not being land owners, tenants, or occupiers of
lands or tenements, or inhabitants of the said parish) qualified to serve on
juries, to appear before the recorder for the time being of the said town and
county, at such time and place, in the said town, as shall in such warrant or
precept be mentioned or contained; which persons, so impannelled, summoned, and
returned as aforesaid, are hereby required to come to and appear at such said
time and place as in such warrant or warrants, precept or precepts, shall be
directed and appointed, and then and there to attend from day to day, until
therefrom discharged; and out of the number of persons so to be impannelled,
summoned, and returned, and appearing at such said time and place, a jury of
twelve persons (for the ascertaining of the value of the said lands, tenements,
or hereditaments in question) shall be drawn by the said recorder, or such
other person as he shall direct and appoint, in such manner as juries for the
trial of issues joined in his Majesty's courts at Westminster, by an act made
in the third year of the reign of his late Majesty King George the Second,
entitled, "An Act for the better regulation of juries," are directed to be
drawn; and in default of a sufficient number of the jurymen so returned
appearing, the sheriff shall take other honest, indifferent, and disinterested
men of the bye-standers (not being owners of land, or tenants, or inhabitants
in the said parish) or that can be speedily procured to attend that service, to
make up the number of twelve: and all persons concerned shall have their lawful
challenges against any of the said jurymen when they come to be sworn, but
shall not challenge the array; and the said recorder is hereby authorized and
required, upon request of the party or parties concerned or interested in the
matters and things in question, to authority the said jury to view the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments in question, and shall and may use all (...) other
lawful ways and means, as well for his own as for the said jury's better
information in the premises, as he shall think fit; and the said recorder (...)
hereby authorized and empowered, by precept under his hand, to summon and call
before him and the said jury any person or persons, in order to be examined as
a witness or witnesses upon oath, touching or concerning the matters and things
in question, and such witness or witnesses shall attend at such time and place
until such affairs for which (...) were summoned shall be concluded; and the
said party or parties concerned in (...) matters and thin^^ shall and may (if
he or they shall think fit) have and allowed a solicitor or solicitors, and one
or more counsel learned in the law, upon the hea^^^, investigating, and
adjusting the said matters and things, at the time and place aforesaid, before
the said recorder and jury, to plead, and then and there examine the witness
(...) witnesses produced, in the same manner as before juries in his Majesty's
courts at Westminster; and the said jury, upon their oaths (which oaths, as
also the oaths to such person or persons as shall be called upon to give
evidence, the said recorder, or any person whom he shall direct or appoint, is
hereby empowered and required to administer) shall, at (...) and place, inquire
into, assess, and find the value of such lands, tenements, and here ^^taments,
and the sum or sums of money to be paid to the owner or owners thereof, or
person or persons interested therein, according to his, her, or their
respective estates or interests therein, and shall give in their verdict
accordingly to the said recorder, who shall thereupon give judgment for such
sum or sums of money, so to be assessed by the said jury; which said verdict or
verdicts, and the said judgment, decree, or determination thereupon, shall be
binding and conclusive to all intents and purposes whatsoever, against all
person or persons, bodies politic and corporate, claiming or to claim any
estate, right, title, trust, use, or interest, in, to, or out of the said
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or premises, either in possession,
reversion, remainder, or expectancy, against all infants and issue unborn,
lunaticks, idiots, and femes covert, and persons under any other legal
incapacity or disability, and all trustees and cestuique trusts, his, her, and
their heirs, successors, executors, and administrators, and against all other
persons whomsoever; and the said verdict or verdicts, and the said judgment,
decree, or determination, so to be made, given, and pronounced as aforesaid,
shall be fairly written on parchment, and signed by the recorder for the time
being, and enrolled and kept among the records of the said town and county of
Newcastle upon Tyne.

IX. Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, that notice in writing, under
the hand of the said recorder, shall be given to the owner or owners, or other
person or persons interested in such lands, tenements, or hereditaments, and
premises, at least three calendar months before the time of such said
assessment, for the purchase of the said lands, tenements, hereditaments and
premises, declaring the time and place of the meeting of the said recorder and
jury, or leaving such said notice at the dwelling house of the said owner or
owners, person or persons so interested as aforesaid, or at his or their place
of abode, or with some tenant or occupier of some of the said lands, tenements,
or hereditaments, or premises intended to be valued or assessed, or inserted in
one or more of the newspapers published at Newcastle upon Tyne, in case such
party cannot otherwise be found out to be served with such notice, within the
liberties of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

X. And be it further enacted, that upon payment or tender of such sum or sums
of money to be agreed upon, or as shall be so awarded, assessed, adjudged, or
determined, to the owner or owners, or other the person or persons interested
in the said lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or other the premises, or any
estate or interest therein, for and as the purchase thereof, such owner or
owners, or other person or persons, to or for whom the said purchase-money
shall be paid or tendered, shall, and is and are hereby required to make and
execute good, valid, and legal conveyances, assignments, surrenders, or
assurances in the law, to the said vicar and his successors, vicars of
Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, for the time being, in trust as aforesaid, of
the said lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, or any estate or
interest therein, for which such sum or sums of money shall be agreed or
awarded for the purchase thereof, and shall procure all proper and necessary
parties to execute such conveyances, assignments, surrenders, and assurances,
and shall do all acts, matters, and things necessary and requisite to make a
good, clear, and perfect title to the said vicar and his successors, for the
time being, in trust as aforesaid; and such conveyances, assignments,
surrenders, and assurances, shall contain all reasonable and usual covenants,
by all parties interested and concerned, as shall be reasonably required by the
said trustees, or their counsel learned in the law; and in case such person or
persons, to whom such sum or sums shall be so awarded as aforesaid, shall not
be able to evince a title to the premises, and to make, or procure to be made,
such good, valid, and legal conveyances thereof as aforesaid, or shall refuse
to to do, being thereto required by the said trustees, in writing under their
hands, and such sum or sums so assessed and awarded as aforesaid, being
tendered to be paid to him, her, or them, on their making such title, and
executing or procuring to be executed, such conveyances, assignments,
surrenders, or assurances as aforesaid; or in case such person or persons to
whom such sum or sums of money shall be so awarded as aforesaid, cannot be
found within the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, or the liberties
thereof, or in case, by reason of disputes depending in any court of law or
equity, or for defect of evidence, it shall not appear what person or persons
is or are entitled to the premises in question, then, and in every such case,
it shall be lawful for the said trustees to order the said sum or sums, so
assessed and awarded, as aforesaid, as and for the value of and purchase-money
for such said lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, to be paid into
the Bank of England, for the use of the parties interested in the said
premises, to be paid to him, her, or them, according to their respective
estates and interests therein, at such time as the said r^corder for the time
being shall direct, upon his approving of a proper, valid, and legal title to
the same premises; and the cashier or cashiers of the Bank of England, who
shall receive such sum and sums, is and are hereby required to give a receipt
or receipts for such sum or sums, mentioning and specifying for whole premises,
and for whose use the same is and are received, to the said trustees, or such
other person or persons as shall pay any such sum or sums into the Bank as
aforesaid, which said receipt or receipts shall be entered and kept along with
the said verdicts, judgments, and determinations, among the records of the said
town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne; all which said verdicts, judgments,
determinations, and receipts shall be deemed and taken to be records, to all
intents and purposes whatsoever, and the same, or any of them, and a true copy
or copies thereof, or any of them, to be attested by the town clerk of the said
town for the time being, under his hand, shall be deemed, taken, and received
to be good, legal, and effectual evidence and proof in any court or courts of
law or equity whatsoever; and all persons shall and may have recourse to, and
inspect the same, gratis, and may take copies thereof, or extracts therefrom,
paying for every copy or extract twopence for every seventy-two words
contained in such copy or extract; and immediately on payment and entry of such
receipt or receipts of the said cashier or cashiers as aforesaid, all the
estate, right, title, interest, use, trust, property, claim, and demand, in law
and equity, of the person or persons for whose use such money shall be paid,
into or out of the said lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, shall
vest in the said vicar and his successors, vicars for the time being, in trust
as aforesaid, and he and they shall respectively be deemed in law to be in the
actual seisin or possession thereof, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as
fully and effectually as if every person, having any estate in the premises,
had actually conveyed the same to them by lease and release, bargain and sale
enrolled, feoffment with lively and seisin, fine and recovery, or any other
legal conveyance whatsoever; and such payment shall not only ba^ all right,
title, interest, claim, and demand of the person or persons to whose use such
payment was made, but also extend to, and be deemed to bar the dower and dowers
of the wife and wives of such person and persons, and all estates tail, in
reversion or remainder, against the issue and issues of such person and
persons, and every other person or persons claiming or to claim by, from, or
under them, or any of their, as (...) a fine and recovery, or either of them,
would, if levied or suffered by the prop^^ (...) in due form of law.

XI. Provided always, and it is hereby further enacted, that it shall be lawful
for the said trustees, after such payments into the Bank, and entry as
aforesaid, to put out or invest, or cause to be placed out and invested, such
said sum or sums of money so to be paid into the said Bank, or any part
thereof, in some of the public funds, or on government security at interest, in
the names of any five of the said trustees, in trust to transfer and assign the
same to such person or persons to whom the said premises shall belong, on their
executing proper conveyances thereof, and in the mean time in trust to receive
the interests and dividends arising therefrom, and pay the same to such said
person or persons having right and title to such premises: Provided always,
that in case of payi^^ money into the Bank for want of title, or from it not
otherwise appearing to whom such money shall properly belong, it shall be
lawful for the said trustees, on the application of any person or persons
interested in any such money, to require payment thereof, or of any part
thereof, and to place out and invest the same in some of the public funds, or
on government security, in the name or names of any person or persons to be by
him, her, or them named and appointed for that purpose, in trust for such
person or persons as shall afterward appear to be legally entitled thereto.

XII. And be it further enacted, that in case any feme-covert is or shall be
seized in fee simple, or in tail general or special, or for life, of such
lands, tenements, and hereditaments so to be purchased by the said trustees, or
other person or persons as aforesaid, or of any interest in the same, to her
separate use, free from the control or intermeddling of her husband, the
purchase-money arising from the sale of such estate or interest of such
feme-covert, on the conveyance of such estate or interest to the said trustees
or other person or persons as aforesaid, shall be paid to such person or
persons as she shall, by writing under her hand, nominate to receive the same,
in trust with all convenient speed then afterward to be re-invested in the
purchase of other lands, tenements, or hereditaments, to be conveyed and
settled to and upon, and subject to the like uses, trusts, limitations,
remainders, and contingencies, estate and interest, as the feme-covert had in
the premises so purchased, and as the same premises which shall be so purchased
were respectively settled, limited, or assured at the time of such purchasing
the same, or so many thereof as at the time of making such conveyance and
settlement shall be existing and capable of taking effect.

XIII. And be it further enacted, that the principal money arising from the
sale of any lands, tenements, and hereditaments so to be purchased by the said
trustees, or other person or persons as aforesaid, of any body corporate or
collegiate, corporation aggregate or sole, feoffees in trust, guardians,
committees, or other trustees, shall be paid to such persons as they shall
respectively nominate to receive the same, in trust with all convenient speed
then afterward to be re-invested in the purchase of other lands, tenements,
and hereditaments, to be conveyed and settled to and upon, and subject to the
like uses, trusts, limitations, remainders, and contingencies, estate and
interest, as they or any of them had in the premises so purchased, and as the
same premises were respectively settled, limited, or assured, at the time of
such the purchasing of the same, or so many thereof as at the time of making
such conveyances and settlements shall be existing and capable of taking effect.

XIV. And be it further enacted, that the said recorder for the time being
shall have power to impose any reasonable fine or fines on the sheriff of the
said town, his deputy or deputies, bailiffs or agents respectively making
default in the duty by this act required to be performed by the said sheriff;
and on any of the persons who shall be summoned and returned on any such jury
or juries, who shall not appear, or appearing shall refuse to be sworn on the
said jury or juries, or being so sworn shall not give his or their verdict, or
shall in any other manner wilfully neglect his or their duty in the premises,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of this act; and likewise upon such
person or persons summoned as aforesaid to give evidence, who shall neglect or
refuse to appear at such time or times, place or places, as shall be appointed
for that purpose as aforesaid, or appearing shall refuse to be sworn to give
evidence or be examined by or before the said recorder and jury or juries, so
as no such fine shall exceed the sum of five pounds; and that such fine or
fines, when recovered, shall be forthwith paid into the hand or hands of the
overseer or overseers of the poor of the respective parishes where the offender
or offenders shall reside, for the use of the poor of such respective parishes.

XV. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that if any such jury shall
assess the said lands, tenements, or hereditaments, at a greater value than the
said trustees, or any other person or persons authorized by them, shall have
offered for the same, then the costs and charges of every kind attending the
obtaining such assessment by a jury shall be paid out of the rates and
assessments hereby directed to be raised; and if the said jury shall not assess
the said premises at a greater value than the sum or sums offered for the same
by the said trustees, or other person or persons authorized by them as
aforesaid, that then the said costs and charges shall be paid by the party or
parties refusing to treat, or to accept the price so offered by the said
trustees, or other person or persons.

XVI. And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the said trustees,
and they are hereby authorized and required, to cause the whole of the said old
church or parochial chapel, and the said messuages, tenements, and
hereditaments, so to be purchased as aforesaid, to be taken down, and the
materials thereof to be sold, or otherwise disposed of for the purposes of this
act, and the lands thereunto appertaining, or such part thereof as the said
trustees shall think fit, to be taken in, walled, fenced, and enclosed, for the
purposes aforesaid, at such time or times, and with such materials, and in such
manner as they shall think fit; and also to cause a church, or parochial
chapel, and a steeple to be erected and built thereon or upon the same, and the
said church or chapel yard, or such part thereof as they shall think fit, after
such model, and of such dimensions and materials, and in such manner, as they
the said trustees shall agree upon or direct; and also to cause p^ws, s^ats,
and galleries, and such bells, ornaments, and conveniences, to be made,
erected, and set up, in the said intended church or parochial chapel, as they
the said trustees shall or may deem proper or necessary, in order that the said
church or parochial chapel, and church or chapel yard, enlarged as aforesaid,
may be consecrated and set apart, and completely finished, furnished, and
enclosed, for the celebration of divine service, according to the rites and
ceremonies of the church of England; all which works, matters, and things,
shall be done by contract, or otherwise, subject to the inspection and control
of a surveyor or surveyors on the part of the said trustees, as the said
trustees shall, from time to time, think proper and most expedient to fulfill
the intentions of this act.

XVII. And be it further enacted, that all contracts and agreements made or
entered into by or between the said trustees and any person or persons
whomsoever, relating to any act, matter, or thing to be done or performed in
execution of any of the powers hereby granted, shall be reduced or put into
writing, and signed by the parties thereto, and shall be good, valid, and
b^^^ling, as well upon the said trustees as upon all other parties thereto,
his, her, and their executors, administrators, successors, and assigns; and in
case of brea^h thereof, actions may be brought and maintained, and damages and
costs recovered thereon, against the party or parties not performing the same,
or specific performance thereof may be decreed as in any other case of
contracts or agreements between any other person who^soever.

XVIII. And be it further enacted, that the site of the said old church or
parochial chapel, and the said tenements, hereditaments, and premises, so to be
purchased as aforesaid, when taken down as aforesaid, and the same, and the
lands and grounds appertaining thereto, laid to the said church or chapel yard
as aforesaid, shall be, and the same are hereby added to the said church or
parochial chapel yard, or cemetery, for the purpose of enlarging the same; and
that the said new church or parochial chapel, when the same shall be completed,
finished, consecrated, and rendered fit for the celebration of divine service,
and also the said church or parochial chapel yard, or cemetery thereof, so to
be enlarged as aforesaid, shall from the thenceforth for ever be called or
known by the name of, and to all intents and purposes be, the parish church, or
parochial chapel, and church or parochial chapel yard of the parish or
parochial chapelry of All Saints, and that the same shall be consecrated, and
that divine service, the solemnization of matrimony, baptisms, and all other
matters and things which were and of right have been used to be celebrated,
solemnized, administered, had, done, and performed by the vicar, minister or
ministers, and curate or curates, for the time being, in the said old church or
parochial chapel and cemetery, shall and may be celebrated, solemnized,
administered, had, done, and performed in such and the like manner, by the
present vicar, minister or ministers, and curate or curates, and his and their
successors, vicars, ministers, and curates of the said parish or parochial
chapelry for the time being, in the said new church or parochial chapel, and
the said church or parochial chapel yard, or cemetery, so to be enlarged as
aforesaid; and that the church or chapel wardens for the time being of the said
parish or parochial chapelry, shall be invested with the bells, ornaments,
furniture, seats (except such seats as the said trustees shall or may sell),
books, plate, goods, and chattels of the said new church or parochial chapel,
and shall have the same power and authority in the said new church or parochial
chapel, and church or parochial chapel yard thereof, so to be enlarged as
aforesaid, as they now have in the said old church or parochial chapel, and
church or chapel yard.

XIX. And be it further enacted, that the said Reverend James Stephen
Lushington, the present vicar, or the minister or ministers, curate or curates
of the said parish or parochial chapelry, and his and their successors, vicar,
minister or ministers, curate or curates for the time being, shall, and they
are hereby respectively declared to be the vicar, minister or ministers, and
curate or curates of the said parish or parochial chapelry in the said new
church or parochial chapel, and church or parochial chapel yard, enlarged as
aforesaid, as in the said old church or parochial chapel, and yard; and that
the person or persons who for the time would have a right of presenting,
nominating or appointing a vicar or vicars, minister or ministers, curate or
curates to the said old church or parochial chapel, in case the same was not
taken down or disused as aforesaid, shall, from and after the said new church
or parochial chapel shall be so completed or finished, and rendered fit for the
celebration of divine service, have such and the like estate and estates,
right, title and titles of and in the said new church or parochial chapel, and
church or parochial chapel yard thereof, so to be enlarged as aforesaid, as he
or they respectively now have, or might or should have had to the presentation,
nomination, and appointment of a vicar or vicars, minister or ministers, curate
or curates to the said old church or parochial chapel, and according to his or
their rights and interests respectively, from thenceforth for ever; and shall
and may, from and after the death or avoidance of the present vicar, minister
or ministers, and curate or curates of the said parish, or parochial chapelry,
and on every other future vacancy, present, nominate, and appoint a fit person
to be vicar, minister or ministers, and curate or curates of the said new
church or parochial chapel, and that such person and persons, and his and their
successors, so to be presented or nominated as aforesaid, shall, after such
presentation, or nomination and appointment, be the vicar or vicars, minister
or ministers, and curate or curates respectively and successively of such new
church or parochial chapel, and shall have and enjoy such and the same glebes,
tithes, oblations, mortuaries, Easter offerings, profits, commodities, and
other ecclesiastical dues and duties arising within the said parish or
parochial chapelry, as the present vicar, minister or ministers, and curate or
curates of the said parish or parochial chapelry have, or ought to have and
enjoy, or that any of his or their predecessors, vicars, ministers, or curates
of the said parish or parochial chapelry of right had or ought to have had and
enjoyed.

XX. And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the said trustees,
and they are hereby required to set out and allot unto or for the vicar,
minister or ministers, and curate or curates of the said parish church or
parochial chapel, for the time being, one of the pews to be built or made in
the said intended church or parochial chapel, and one other pew for the said
church or chapel wardens for the time being, without paying any compensation or
satisfaction for the same, such new pews not being inferior, in point of
goodness and convenience, to the pews in the said old church or parochial
chapel now occupied by the present vicar, minister, or curate, and church or
chapel wardens of the said parish or parochial chapelry; and that all the other
of the said pews and seats in the said intended church or parochial chapel
shall be sold to the land-holders of the said parish or parochial chapelry, or
let and disposed of to the parishioners therein, by the said trustees, and be
subject and liable to such annual rents, and to such rules, orders, and
regulations, and for such time, and for such number of years, life or lives,
and in such manner, with respect to the selling, letting, or disposing thereof,
to or amongst the said land-owners and parishioners of the said parish or
parochial chapelry, as the said trustees shall order and direct.

XXI. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that with respect to the
selling, letting, or disposing of the said pews or seats, to or in favor of
any of the said trustees, such trustee or trustees shall be, and he and they is
and are hereby excluded from interfering or giving any vote or voice therein;
and that no such sale, letting, or disposing of, or rents for pews or seats, as
aforesaid, shall be in force until confirmed by the said trustees, not being
interested as aforesaid, at the next or some subsequent public meeting or
meetings to be had in pursuance of this act as aforesaid.

XXII. And be it further enacted, that the said trustees shall, and they are
hereby required to cause the several pews and seats so to be built or set up in
the said intended church or parochial chapel, to be numbered, and the several
numbers thereof, and the purchase-money and annual rents at which the same or
any of them shall be sold, let, or disposed of, to be entered in a book to be
provided for that purpose, and to be preserved or kept in the vestry-room of
such church or parochial chapel, and to be open to the inspection of all
persons interested therein, at all seasonable times, without fee or reward.

XXIII. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that in taking down of the
said old church or parochial chapel as aforesaid, as little damage shall be
done to the graves, grave stones, monuments, and monumental inscriptions, in
and about the same, as reasonably may be, and that such of the said grave
stones, monuments, and monumental inscriptions, as shall be necessarily removed
on account thereof, shall be fixed or placed on such other part or parts of the
site of the said old church or parochial chapel, or in the said new church, for
answering, as far as may be, the purpose or purposes for which the same were
originally laid, fixed, placed, or put up, as the said trustees shall, in their
discretion, think fit, and that such grave stones, monuments, and monumental
inscriptions, and also all and every the vaults, grave stones, monuments, and
monumental inscriptions, and right of burial, in such part of the site of the
said old church or parochial chapel, except such part of the site of the old
church or parochial chapel, or church or parochial chapel yard, as shall be
part and parcel of the intended new church or parochial chapel, being the
particular property of any person or persons now living, or belonging to the
families buried in or under the said old church or parochial chapel, or church
or parochial chapel yard, shall continue to belong to such persons or families
respectively, in like manner as before and at the time of passing thi^ act
except as aforesaid.

XXIV. And be it further enacted, that no burials, or interment of dead, shall
at any time be allowed or permitted, by any person or persons whomsoever, in or
under the site of the said intended new church or parochial chapel, nor any
grave or vaul^ made therein for that purpose.

XXV. And be it further enacted, that as the sale and rents of the pew^ and
seats of the said intended new church or parochial chapel will not be
sufficient to answer all the purposes of this act, it shall be lawful for the
said trustees, or any five or more of them, being owners of lands, or
parishioners in the said parish or parochial chapelry, and they are hereby
directed and required, twice, or oftener, in every year, ^f thought needful by
them, by any writing under their hands and seals, to make an assessment or
assessments, rate or rates, upon all and every the lands, houses, mills, shops,
warehouses, vaults, or other tenements and hereditaments whatsoever, within the
said parish or parochial chapelry, in any sum of money not exceeding two
shillings in the pound in any one year, of the yearly rent or yearly value of
such lands, houses, mills, shops, warehouses, or other tenements or
hereditaments, all which assessments or rates shall be collected or recovered
half-yearly by the church or chapel wardens for the time being of the said
parish or parochial chapelry, or any one or more of them, after the same shall
be allowed by two or more justices of the peace acting for the said town and
county of Newcastle upon Tyne, who shall and are hereby authorized to allow the
same, and by warrant under their hands and seals to authorize and appoint the
said church or chapel wardens, so appointed receivers and collectors of such
assessments or rates (and they are respectively hereby empowered and enabled,
by virtue of such warrant only), to levy the said assessments or rates upon any
person or persons liable to pay the same, who (after demand made thereof) shall
neglect or refuse to pay such assessments or rates, according to the true
intent and meaning of this act, by distress of their goods and chattels, and to
retain and keep the same until such assessments or rates, with the reasonable
charges of such distress, shall be paid; and it shall be lawful for the person
or persons so distraining, after the space of three days next after such
distress taken, to sell the goods and chattels so distrained, returning the
overplus (if any) to the owner or owners thereof, after the respective
assessment or rate, and the reasonable charges of distraining, keeping, and
selling the distress, shall be deducted; one moiety or half part of which said
assessment or assessments, rate or rates, shall be sustained, borne, and paid,
by the respective landlords and owners of the said lands, houses, mills, shops,
warehouses, tenements, and hereditaments respectively, and the remaining moiety
or half part by the respective inhabitants, tenants, or occupiers thereof; but
in case any such inhabitants, tenants, or occupiers, shall not be rated to the
poors rate of the said parish or parochial chapelry, then and in such case the
whole of the said assessment or assessments, rate or rates, shall be sustained,
borne, and paid by the said landlords and owners; and the said tenants or
occupiers rated to the poors rate shall and may deduct and detain, out of the
rents payable to their respective landlords and owners of the said premises*
the said one moiety or half part, and if not rated to the said poors rate, then
the whole of such rate or assessment shall be allowed, and the landlords and
owners, mediate or immediate, according to their respective interests, are
hereby required to allow to such tenants such deductions and payments
accordingly; and every such tenant paying, or having levied upon him or her,
such rate or rates, assessment or assessments, for and upon the landlord's
account, shall be acquitted and discharged of and from so much money as the
same shall amount unto, as fully and effectually as if the same had been
actually paid to any such landlord or landlords, or other person or persons, to
whom his, her, or their rent was or should be paid or payable; and when any
person or persons shall refuse or omit to pay the sum or sums of money rated or
assessed upon him, her, or them, on or for or in respect of the houses, lands,
tenements, hereditaments, or premises, held or occupied by him, her, or them,
by virtue of this act, the same shall be levied and recovered as directed by
this act, not only in the said parish or chapelry of All Saints, but in any
other parish or place, the warrant or warrants for recovering and levying the
same being first countersigned by some justice of the peace for the county or
place where any goods or chattels of the respective person or persons shall be
found; and that the moneys to arise by the sale or letting of the said pews,
and by such assessment or assessments, so to be made as aforesaid, and all
other sum or sums of money to be received on account of the said church or
parochial chapel, and the yard thereof, shall be, and the same are hereby
vested in the said trustees, and shall be applied or appropriated by them for
the purposes of this act.

XXVI. And be it further enacted, that the said church or chapel wardens for
the time being, and each and every of them, shall, once in every six calendar
months at least, and from time to time, as often as he or they shall be
thereunto required by the said trustees, deliver in writing under his or their
hand or hands, upon oath, if so required, to the said trustees, or unto such
person or persons as they shall appoint, a true, faithful, and perfect account
of all such sum and sums of money as they, or any of them, have or has
collected or received for or on account of the said sale or rents of the said
pews or seats, rates or assessments, and of all and every other sum and sums of
money to be received, or which shall have been rated or assessed as aforesaid,
and not received, and of all other matters and things done and performed by
them, or any of them, by virtue of this act, for the purposes aforesaid; and
shall deliver in all accounts, books, papers, and vouchers, relating thereto,
and shall duly account and pay unto the said trustees, or to the treasurer or
treasurers to be appointed by the said trustees as aforesaid, all sum and sums
of money remaining in the hands of the said church or chapel wardens, or any of
them; and in case such said church or chapel wardens shall refuse or neglect to
account for and pay any sum or sums of money collected or received by them
respectively by virtue of this act, and which shall remain in his or their
hands respectively as aforesaid, or to deliver in such accounts, books, papers,
and other vouchers, it shall be lawful for any two or more justices of the
peace of and for the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne, upon
complaint thereof made to them, to make inquiry of and concerning such neglect
or refusal, as well by confession of the party as by the oath or oaths of any
credible witness or witnesses; and if any such church or chapel warden shall be
convicted of such neglect or refusal before such justices, the said justices
shall thereupon commit the person so offending to the common gaol of the said
town and county, there to remain, without bail or mainprize, until he shall
have made a true and perfect account and payment as aforesaid, or shall have
compounded for the same with the said trustees; which composition the said
trustees are hereby authorized and empowered to make and receive.

XXVII. And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the said
trustees, and they are hereby authorized and empowered to borrow and take up at
interest, on the credit of the assessments and rates to be laid and raised by
virtue of this act, such sum or sums of money, to be applied to the purposes of
this act, as they shall think expedient, so as the same do not exceed the sum
of one thousand pounds; and they are hereby empowered to demise or mortgage the
said assessments and rates, or any part or parts thereof, as a security to any
person or persons, or to their trustee or trustees, for such sum or sums of
money so to be borrowed, and for the interest thereof.

XXVIII. And be it further enacted, that the said trustees shall cause entries
to be made in a book or books of all such sums of money as shall be received
from or on account of the said sale of pews, rents, rates, or assessments, and
from the said materials, and otherwise, under this act, and also of, from, or
on account of the voluntary contributions or subscriptions of any person or
persons disposed to promote the said pious undertaking, and all other receipts
of money whatsoever to be received on account of this act; and also of all
payments, debts, and credits to be made, or caused to be made, by the said
trustees, or which shall arise from, or be occasioned by, the carrying of the
powers of this act into execution, or any other matter or thing relating
thereto; and also of all other their proceedings under this act; which book or
books shall, from time to time, and at all convenient times, be open to the
inspection and perusal of any person or persons paying, or liable to pay any
sum or sums of money for or on account of the sale of pews, or any of the said
rents, rates, or assessments, or voluntarily contributing or subscribing any
sum or sums of money for or toward the purposes of this act.

XXIX. And be it further enacted, that when the said intended church or
parochial chapel, and the steeple, bells, and seats, with the appurtenances,
shall be finished and completed, and the works, with respect to the old church
or parochial chapel, and the said houses, lands, hereditaments, and premises,
and the said church or parochial chapel yard, and all other matters and things,
shall be done and performed in pursuance of this act, and all debts contracted
on account of carrying the powers of this act into execution be paid, the
powers granted to the aforesaid trustees by this act shall cease and determine,
the said rates shall also cease, and the said pews and seats in the said
intended church shall from thenceforth at all times afterward be sold, let, or
disposed of, except such pews as shall be sold or let by the said trustees in
pursuance of this act, subject to the contracts then existing with respect
thereto (if any) by the parishioners and inhabitants of the said parish in
vestry assembled, or the major part of them then present; and that the money
and rents from thenceforth to arise from the sale, letting, or disposing of the
said pews, and also such sum or sums of money received under this act, from the
sale and rents of the said pews and seats, and the said rates or assessments,
and otherwise, as shall remain unapplied after the purposes of this act shall
be satisfied, shall be applied in such manner as they the said parishioners and
inhabitants in vestry assembled, or the major part of them then present, shall
think fit.

XXX. And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that all costs,
charges, and expenses of passing this act, and all other charges incident to
the obtaining thereof, shall be borne, paid, and defrayed out of the first
moneys arising by virtue thereof, or from such voluntary contributions as
aforesaid.

XXXI. Provided always, and be it further enacted, that, during the time of
taking down the said old church or parochial chapel, and building and finishing
the said intended new church or parochial chapel as aforesaid, banns of
marriage shall and may be published, solemnization of marriage, baptisms, and
divine service, and all other matters and things which were, and of right have
been used to be celebrated, solemnized, administered, had, done, and performed
by the vicar, minister or ministers, and curate or curates for the time being,
in the said old church or parochial chapel, shall and may be celebrated,
solemnized, administered, had, done, and performed in such and the like manner,
by the present vicar, minister or ministers, and curate or curates, and his and
their successors, vicars, ministers, and curates of the said parish or
parochial chapelry for the time being, in the chapel called St. Ann's; and that
Trinity chapel shall be open for divine service, on Sundays and holidays, in
the said parish or parochial chapelry.

XXXII. And be it further enacted, that all penalties and forfeitures by this
act imposed shall and may be levied and recovered in like manner as the
assessments or rates hereby authorized to be made and collected can or may be
levied and recovered.

XXXIII. And be it further enacted, that if any person or persons shall find
him or themselves aggrieved by any order, direction, or appointment of the said
trustees, or by means of the said rate or rates, assessment or assessments, or
any other matter or thing to be made, done, or committed in pursuance or under
color of this act, it shall be lawful for such person or persons to appeal to
the next quarter sessions of the peace to be held in and for the said town and
county of Newcastle upon Tyne, before the mayor and aldermen for the time being
of the said town and county, or the greater number of them, then and there
assembled, and they are hereby authorized to summon and examine witnesses upon
oath, and to hear and determine the matter of the said appeal, and make such
order therein as to them shall seem meet, which order shall be final and
conclusive to all parties; but so as that such appeal shall be made within two
calendar months next after the cause of complaint shall have arisen, and that
the person or persons so appealing shall first give, or cause to be given, ten
days notice at the least in writing, of his or her intention of appealing as
aforesaid, and of the matter or cause thereof, to the churchwardens for the
time being of the said parish, or to the clerk to the said trustees, and within
two days next after such notice entering into a recognizance before the said
mayor, or some or one of the said aldermen, with two sufficient sureties,
conditioned to try such appeal, and abide by the order, and pay such costs as
shall be made and awarded thereon; and that such mayor and aldermen, upon
hearing and finally determining the matter of such appeal, shall and may, and
they are hereby directed or required to award such costs to the party or
parties appealing, or appealed against, as they shall think proper.

XXXIV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no action or
suit shall be commenced against any person or persons, for any thing done in
pursuance of this act, until twenty-one days notice shall be given thereof, in
writing, to the clerk to the said trustees, or after sufficient satisfaction,
or tender thereof, has been made to the party or parties aggrieved, or after
two calendar months next after the fact committed for which such action or
actions, suit or suits shall be so brought; and every such action shall be
brought, laid, and tried in the said town and county of Newcastle upon Tyne,
and not in any other town, county, or place; and the defendant or defendants in
such actions and suits, and every of them, may plead the general issue, and
give this act and every special matter in evidence at any trial or trials which
shall be had thereupon; and if the matter or thing shall appear to have been so
done, or if it shall appear that such action or suit was brought before
twenty-one days notice thereof given as aforesaid, or that sufficient
satisfaction was made or tendered as aforesaid, or if any such action or suit
shall not be commenced within the time before for that purpose limited, or
shall be laid in any other county or place than as aforesaid, then the jury or
juries shall find for the defendant or defendants therein; and if a verdict or
verdicts shall be found for such defendant or defendants, or if the plaintiff
or plaintiffs in such action or actions, suit or suits, shall become nonsuited,
or suffer a discontinuance of such action or actions, or if upon any demurrer
or demurrers in such action or actions, judgment shall be given for the
defendant or defendants therein, then and in either or any of the cases
aforesaid, such defendant or defendants shall have treble costs, and shall have
such remedy for recovering the same as any defendant or defendants may have for
his, her, or their costs in any other cases by law.

XXXV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that where any
distress shall be made for any sum or sums of money to be levied by virtue of
this act, the distress itself shall not be deemed unlawful, nor the party or
parties making the same be deemed a trespasser or trespassers, on account of
any default or want of form in any proceedings relating thereto, nor shall the
party or parties distraining be deemed a trespasser or trespassers ab initio,
on account of any irregularity which shall afterward be done by the party or
parties distraining; but the person or persons aggrieved by such irregularity
may recover full satisfaction for the special damage in an action on the case:
Provided always, that no plaintiff or plaintiffs shall recover in any action or
actions for any such irregularity, trespass, or other proceedings, if tender of
sufficient amends shall be made by or on the behalf of the party or parties who
shall have committed or caused to be committed any such irregularity, trespass,
or other wrongful proceedings, before such action brought; and in case no such
tender shall have been made, it shall be lawful for the defendant or defendants
in any such action, by leave of the court where such action shall depend, at
any time before issue joined, to pay into court such sum of money as he or they
shall see fit, whereupon such proceedings, order, and judgments shall be made,
had, and given, in and by such court, as in other actions where the defendant
is allowed to pay money into court.

XXXVI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no
proceedings to be had touching the conviction of any offender or offenders
against this act, or any order made, or other matter or thing to be done or
transacted in or relating to the execution of this act, shall be vacated or
quashed for want of form, or be removed or removable by certiorari, or any
other writ or process whatsoever, into any of his Majesty's courts of record at
Westminster, any law or statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

XXXVII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act
shall be taken and allowed, in all courts of justice, as a public act; and all
judges, justices, and others, are hereby required to take notice thereof as
such, without the same being specially pleaded.

APPENDIX, P. 364. ALL SAINTS CHURCH. FOUNDATION OF ST. CATHERINE'S CHANTRY.
(From a Parchment in All Saints Vestry.) (Dorso) "The Copy of the Fondacion of
Saint Katreyn's Chauntre in Allhallows Church."
UNIVERSIS Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit Robertus de
Chirton burgens' ville Novi Castri super Tynam et Mariota ux' ejus filia et
here is Hugonis Hankyn quondam burgensis ville Novi Castri predict' salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Cum Dominus noster Rex per cartam suam nobis dederit et
concesserit licenciam quod dare possumus cuidam capellano divina singulis
diebus in ecclesia Omnium Sanctorum ville Novi Castri predict' celebratur' pro
anima dicti Hugonis -- pro salubri statu nostro Beatrieis que fuit ux' predici'
Hug' Gilberti Hankeyn patris predict' Hug' et liberorum nostrorum dum vitam
duxerimus in humanis et pro animabus nostris et liberorum nostrorum predictorum
Beatricis et Gilberti et liberorum suorum cum de hac luce migraverimus ac eciam
pro animabus omnium antecessorum nostrorum et animabus omnium fidelium
defunctorum Nos ob devocionem quam erga Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum
gloriosamque Virginem Mariam matrem suam et beatam virginem Katerinam habemus
ac eciam pro salute animarum nostrarum et ammarum predict' unanimi consensu and
voluntate dedimus concessimus et hac presenti carta nostra confirmavimus Domino
Ade Nynepenys capellano divina in ecclesia Omnium Sanctorum predict' ad altar
beat Katerine virginis pro anima predict' Hugonis et pro nobis et liberis
nostris predict' Beatrice Gilberto et liberis suis et pro animabus omnium
fidelium defunctorum ut supradictum est singulis diebus celebratur' centum
solidat' annui reddit' in villa Novi Castri predict' exeuntis de terris et
tenement' subscript' videlicet de capit' messuag' in quo predict' Hugo
inhabitavi^ juxta aquam de Tyne tempore mortis sue tresdecim solid' et octo
denar' argenti de tota terra nostra cum pertinentis jacente in Russelchare
inter terram Sibille de la Gore and terram Thome de Scothowe duodecim solid'
argenti de terra quam Ricardus Vans et Matild' ux' ejus in vito Cernisicum
juxta le Ollecrosse de nobis tenet in feod' quadraginta et tres solid' et
quatuor denar' argenti et de terra quam Nigellus Carter et Inecta ux' ejus de
nobis tenet in feod' in vico qui vocatur Senedgate septem solid' argenti
percipiend' predict' annuum reddit' per manus quorumcunque tenentium dictorum
tenementorum ad festa Pentecost' et Sancti Martini in hyeme per equales
porciones et tota' illa' terra' cum pertinenciis quam Stephanus Hacter et
Isolid' uxor ejus de nobis tenet in feod' in Roskelschare juxta aquam de Tyne
viginti et quatuor solid' argenti percipiend' per manus quorumcumque vere
tenencium predicte terre ad festa Pasche et Sancti Michaelis Archiangeli per
equales porciones habend' et tenend' predict' annuum reddit' centum solidorum
predict' Domino Ade ad totam vitam suam et successor' suis capellanis divina in
ecclesia predict' ad predictum altar ut supradictum est singulis diebus
celebratur' in forma que subsequitur ita viz. quod si predict' annuus redditus
centum solidorum ad aliquem terminum a retro fuerit non solut' quod been liceat
predicto Domino Ade et successoribus suis capellanis in omnibus terris et ten'
supradictis ad quorumcumque manus devenerint distringere et districciones
asportare et retinere quousque de predict' annuo reddit' cent' solid' et
arrerag' si que fuerint plenum fuerit satisfactum. Volumus eciam et concedimus
per presents pro nobis et hered' nostris quod post decessum predict' Dom' Ade
unus honestus et idoneus capellanus per nos vel heredes nostros et per
predictum Gilbertum et heredes suos et hoc per consilium et auxilium proborum
hominum de predicta parochia Omnium Sanctorum ad hoc per eosdem vocatorum ad
predictum cantariam eligatur et in eadem instituatur habend' et tenend' ad
totam vitam suam dum been et honest se gesserit ita quod idem capellanus
interfit omnibus horis canonicis in dicta ecclesia singulis diebus celebratur'
nisi ex causa rationabili impediat' quod si voluerit vel eciam si idem
capellanus vel successor' sui aliquo enormi et notorio crimine fuerint
inquietati vel..... vel si a celebracione predicta per duos dies in ebdomeda
cessaverint sine rationabili causa nisi alium idoneum capellanum loco suo ad
voluntatem nostram vel hered' nostrorum assignaverit infra eand' septimana'
quod statim de cantaria illa amoveatur and alius idoneus et honest' capellan'
loco suo ad cantariam predictam ut predictum est eligatur et in eadem
instituatur habend' et tenend' ad terminum vite sue in forma predicta et quod
sic fiat electio and remocio de singulis capellanis successive ad dictam
cantariam imperpetuum eligend' Volumus eciam et concedimus pro nobis et
heredibus nostris quod si contingat nos vel heredes nostros predictum Gilbertum
vel hered' suos absque hered' in fata decedere quod absit quod quidam idoneus
et honestus capellanus per majorem ville Novi Castri predicti et per ballives
Bai^^ (...) so that thi^ d^^d must be of a date prior to (...), when sheriff
were first appointed. Bo^rne (...) of the (...) of Edward III.
qui pro tempore fuerint per auxilium et consilium dictorum december proborum
hominum ex parochia Omnium Sanctorum antedicta ad dictam cantariam eligatur et
in eadem instituatur habend' et tenend' sibi et successoribus suis in forma
predicta imperpetuum Et ego Mariota non coacta nec viant metu predicti Roberti
viri mei ducta set mea voluntate spontanca compar^i in plena curia ville Novi
Castri predicte et ibidem infra quatuor bane^s ejusdem curi^ tactis
sacrosanctis Dei Evangelus juravi coram majore et ballivis ejusdem ville quod
quicquid de predicto Roberto vito meo de cetero evenire contigerit quod istud
factum nunquam contia^^o nec aliqu^liter contra^e presumam set volo et concedo
pro me et heredibus meis quod ego et heredes mei ab omni jure et accione qu^ in
predicto annuo reddit' de cetero al^quinter facere pote^^mus per istud factum
imperpetuum simus exclusi F^^no^ Robertus et Mariota et heredes mei Mariote
predict' annum' reddit' centum solidorum predicto Domino ^ide et successoribus
suis capellanis divina in ecclesia predicta ut prerominatur celebratur' in
forma prevocata contra omnes gentes warantiza^imus et imperpetuum defendemus In
cujus ^ei testimonium etc. Dat' etc.

APPENDIX, P. 366. From an original old Deed, a little mutilated in some
Places, which had been used as a Wrapper to some old Writings, the Property of
the Brandling Family, communicated by N. Clayton, Esquire. (Dorso) "Gosforth old
Writings."
THIS indenture tripertite indentid maid the first day of December the 20 year
of the reign of our sovereign Lord King Henre the 7th witnesses that this is
the last will of me John Esyngton of the town of Newcastell upon Tyne merchaunt
one of the executors of the last will and testament of John Ward late of the
said town of Newcastell merchaunt decesed concerning the use disposicion and
ordryng of such lands and tenementes in the said town of Newcastell which I
aforsaid John Esyngton with John Eltham late of the said town merchaunt decesed
and Sir John Swardlan pressed as executors of the said John Ward hade by the
gift and legacy of the said John Ward as in the said testament of the said
John Ward dated the 24th day of Juyn the year of our Lord God a thousand four
hundredth threescore and one it does appear whereof I the said John Esyngton by
my deed indentyd tripartite beering date the 20th day of November the year of
our sovereign Lord aforehersed have in feoffett William Esyngton Cristofor
Brigham John Snow Robert Baxter John Penreth John Pasheley Thomas Horseley
Robert Watson Rauff Byker William Hayrbred Edward Hogeson and George Houghill
to have to them there heirs and assigns for evyr to thuse and intent of
performyng of this my present last will and testament concerning the said
lands and tenementes with thappurtenaunce as by the said deed indentid
tripartite mor plainly it apperyth as the ord^yng fyndyng and sustentacion of a
pressed yearly herwith to be sustained in perpetuitee in manner and form herafter
ensewyng First I will that with the said lands and tenementes with
thappurtenaunce and with thissues and profits thereof there shall be ane honest
and able pressed foundyn yearly for evyr to sing divyn service in ^he parish
chirch of Alhalows in the town of Newcastell aforsaid at the alter of Saint
Eloy for the souls of the said John Ward and Margret his wyff there ancesters
benefactors and my soul and all christian souls which pressed shall be named
appointed and assigned to the same service by me the said John Esyngton at my
pleasure during the lyff of me the said John Esyngton and after my decesse than
whanevyr their shall lak a pressed to do the said divyn service that then and all
times when the said service shall be void and no priest ordained ne appointed by
reason of and according to this my last will thereof maid to sing and say the
said divyn service in manner and form on thies presents herafter to be.......
clared that then and so often within three days next after such avoydance the
said feossees and there heirs for tym being togedir with the mayor of the said
town of Newcastell for the tym being and the vicar of the said town of
Newcastell for the tym being or his deputy there for the tym being shall name
ordeyn appoint and assign a pr^st convenient and honest in conversacion and
also able to sing and to help to sing all manner of divyn services daily that is
to say Matyns Mass Evynsong Placelo and Dirige and all other divyn services
daily and at such times and in such wise as has been or shall be accustomed in
the said parish church And if the said scoffees or their hears at any such
time of appointement and assignment of any such prestes to the said service
happen to vary and no^ to be of one agreement that thassent of the said feoff^es
or there heirs within the space of the said three days next after any such
avoydance of the said service by does o^ ^mo^ion fro the same or for any other
cause in thies presents declared and expressed that then the mayor of the said
town of Newcastell and the vicar of the said town of Newcastell or his deputy
in his absence for the tym being shall without thassent of the said feoffes or
there heirs name ordeyne assign and appoint a pressed convenient in conversacion
and also able to sing and help to sing all divyn services in the said church in
the form aforsaid which pressed and every pressed so named ordained appointed and
assigned to the said service shall have and enjoye the said lands and
tenementes for term of there lyffs. Provided always that if it happen any of the
said prestes so to be named and assigned after that he have and be in the said
service to be of vicious disposicion of his body and to be notoriously
misguyded and not of prestly lyvyng ne of honest conversacion and disposicion
than if any such pressed for the tym being being of any such disposicion or
conversation be warned thereof and required to reform the same the said feoffes
or there heirs or by the mayor of the said town of Newcastell for the tym being
and by the said vicar in his absens by his deputy in his said chirch for the
same tym being and so warned and required do not amend and reform himself of
the same unto such good virtuous and honest conversation and disposicion as by
the same feoffes and there heirs or by the said mayor and vicar or his deputy
in his absens shall be thought convenient and prestly that than any such pressed
for the tym being so mysguyded after warnyng thereof gyffen in form aforsaid
not reformed shall be amovin and put from the same service and another able and
honest pressed to serve and have the said service be named ordained and assigned
to have the same service the same namyng appointment and assignment to be
within such space of the same amovings by such persons and in such wisse in
every thing as is above expressed and declared of namyng ordryng appointyng and
assignyng of a pressed to the said service at the times of the avoidaunce of the
same And in lykwisse if any pressed hereafter in form aforsaid to be named and
appointed havyng the said service happen to be promoted to any personage
vicarage or any other benefice or chantry or to any other annual service or
else will of his own fre will depart fro the said service and no longer have
the same or else if he be absent fro the said service and do not his
attendaunce to the same by the space of 28 days in a holl year without cause
reasonable so to do that than and so offt another honest and able pressed shall be
ordained named appointed and assigned to the same service in such wisse as is
aforsaid by the said persons thereto appointed and expressid and within the
said space of three days after havyng of any such benefice chantry or other
service of such cesyng or departing fro the same service and of lak of
convenient attendaunce of the same without cause reasonable so to do The said
manner and form of namyng ordryng appointyng and assignyng of evry pressed to the
said service to be admitted and to have the same and the advodyng amoving and
cesyng of evry such pressed on form aforsaid to be kept and performed in evry
thing fro tym to tym as offt as the case shall require according to this my
present will in that behalf and according to the true and best intent of
performyng and keeping of the same in perpetuite and for ever to be
continued...... that evry pressed hencef^rth to be named appointed and assigned
to the said service as long as he shall happen to have the same service shall be
in the qwere of the said church of Alhalows in his surples present at and
helpyng to sing all divyn service that shall be done in the said church......
matyns pryme...... mass evyn-song and (complyn) and all other divyn service
that shall be songyn or said there in such wisse and at such times as has been
and shall be accustomyd to sing and say and do the same divyn services in the
same church And over this that ev^y such pressed so havyng the said service shall
daylay say mass at the said awter of Saint Eloy in the said church for the
souls aforsaid as the time of the year shall require in that behalf and every
wek one tym to say mass of requiem or in such wysse as the same pressed shall
think convenient And in evry mass to say the colett of Deus cui proprium est
miserere semper and parcere, propiciaris anime ^amuli tui Johannis Ward and
Margarate uxoris sue with the secret and postcom of the same thereto belongyng
And three days evry wek that is to say Monday Weddynnysday and Friday to say
afor the said alter in the said porch of Saint Eloy Placebo and Dirige with the
orisons and versicles thereunto belongyng all the said divyn services to be
songyn and helpen to sing in form aforsaid by the pressed havyng the said service
and also the said masses daily with colletts at evry of the said masses and
also the said wekly Placebo and Dirige to be don and said by evry pressed havyng
the said service in form aforsaid except that he be sek or so diseased that he
may not conveniently so to do or else that he have such reasonable cause that
he may not so do And that evry pressed that hereafter shall be admitted assigned
and appointed to the said service shall at the tym of his dimission and entryng
to the same be sworn upon the holy Evangelistes before the said feoffes or there
heirs the maier of the said town of Newcastell and the vicar of the said
church or in his absence before his deputy there for the tym being that he
shall to his knowleg and power perform observe and keep all and evry ordenaunce
in these presents ordained and declared to be don and performed by evry pressed
that shall have the said service And for the sure performaunce of all the
premises and for the said pressed to observe and keep the said dyvyn services
and other premises and the same to continue in perpetuite I will and declar by
this my present will and testament concerning the premises that whenever so
many of the said persons whom I have infeoffyd of the lands and tenements with
thappurtenaunce afor rehearsed shall happen to decesse that there shall not be of
them past four persons livyng than the said persons so livyng shall by thar
sufficient deed tripartit indentid of the said lands and tenementes and other
premises with thappurtenaunce afor rehearsed enfeoff twelve other persons by
the maier of the said town of Newcastell for the tym being and the vicar of
the said town or else by the same maier and in absens of the said vicar by his
deputy there for the tym being to be named to have to them and there heirs and
assigns for ever with a clause in the same feoffament that tha^ shall have the
same lands and tenementes with thappurtenaunce aforsaid to thuse and intent
thereof to perform the last will of me the said John Esyngton in thies presents
indenturs expressid and declarid and under this form I will that the said
lands and tenements with thappurtenaunce afor rehearsed shall continue and be
for ever in the possession and season of certain persons to thuse above
rehearsed And always whenever there shall be but four persons that shall have
thastat of the said lands and tenements with thappurtenaunce aforsaid from tym
to tym by them that than shall have thastat of and in the same to other twelff
persons to be named as is aforsaid and so to continue by feoffament to be
maid as often as the cas shall require to twelff persons in fee simple fro tym
to tym in perpetuite evyry of the said feoffament to be mad by his deed
tripartite indentid to such twelff personns as shall be thereunto named and
appointed by the said four persons of the said twelff so survyvyng in fee
simple to thuse and intent abovesaid. Provided also that if the said pressed
after the form afor rehearsed so appointed named deputed and assigned to the
said service in his negligence and oversight suffer the lands and tenements
specified and expressed in the said feoffament maid by me to thuse and intent
of performaunce of this my last will of the same to decay and be in ruin so
that thissues profittes and revenues of the same wol not be in amount to the
full...... of his salarye expressed in this my last will over and above the
reparacions of the sam lands and tenements according to this my last will of
the same that then I will the said lands and tenements with thappurtenaunce
afor reherced shall continue and be for ever in the possession and seassyng
of..... thuse and intent of and for thupholdyng of the almousehouse called John
Wards Almousehouse stondyng in Cow^ate nigh the Fire Augustyns in the said town
of Newcastell lately edified and belded by the said John Ward and for relevyng
of almouse bedefolks inhabytyng in the said almoushouse.......... shall inhabyt
and dwell in the said almousehouse for ever and so by feoffament to continue to
thuse and intent afor reherced in perpetuite Of every of which deds tripartit
indentyd I will that one party of them shall remayn with them to whom the said
londs and tenements with thappurtenaunce aforsaid shall be yeven...... of every
of the same indentures shall remayn and be in the keeping of the pressed that
shall have the said service to thentent that he may take perceive and have
every year clear of the profyttes issues of the said londs and tenements eight
mares to his salarie and of the resideu of the profittes and issues of the said
londs above the reparacions thereof.... account unto the said feoffes and there
heirs so that the overplus thereof be yeven to the almous folks in Wards
almoushouse aforsaid for ever And the third part of every of the same
indentures shall remayn and be putt in a chist in the revestry within the said
church of Alhalows there to remayn and be under the keeping of the wardens of the
said church for the tym being there to remayn in perpetuite for surte of the
continuance of the said feoffament of and in the said lands and tenements with
the appurtenaunces to be continued and stond in effect according to the true
intent of thies presents and that evry of the said prests which shall have the
said service at such times as any part of the said deds of feoffament of the
said londs and tenements with thappurtenaunces aforsaid shall be delyvered to him
that he shall be sworn upon the holy Evangelistes that whenever he shall be
amoven fro or shall cesse of being in the said service that he shall...... said
feoffes that so shall be enfeoffed of and in the said londs and tenements with
thappurtenaunces to thentent that thai shall cause the same to be delyvered to
the next pressed that shall have the said service upon lyk oath to be mad and that
whenever any such pressed havyng the said service shall...... of the said
lands and tenements with thappurtenaunce aforesaid that than he shall delyver
the old feoffament that he had before to the said feoffes for the tym being to
be kept in manner and form as is afor reherced in perpetuite In witness whereof
to every part of this my last will I have set to my seall and because my
seall to many men is unknowen the seall of the office of mairaltie of the said
town of Newcastell I have procured to be set to every part of thies indenturs
tripartit Their witness the said Cristofor Brigham then being mayor of the said
town of Newcastell....... Robert Harden Bertram Younghusband Thomas Riddall
Willm Haynyng aldremen of the said town and John Blaxton sheriff of the said
town with other more Yeven day and yer afor reherced.

(Part of a slip remaining -- seals lost.)

APPENDIX, P. 402. Confirmatio Ordinationis Hospitalis de Walknoll, infra
Villam Novi Castri.
UNIVERSIS sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos presents literae
pervenerint Thomas permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus, salutem in eo quem
peperit uterus virginalis. Universitati vestrae innotescimus per praesentes
quod quandam cartam quatripartitam Willielmi de Acketon burgensis villae Novi
Castri super Tynam nostrae dioces' super ordinatione cujusdam hospitalis
ordinis sanctae Trinitatis super le Walknoll infra dictam villam Novi Castri
per ipsum factam, sigillo ejusdem Willielmi, ac sigillo communi dictae villae
Novi Castri sigillatam, sanam, and integram, ac omni suspicionis vitio carentem
recipimus and inspeximus in haec verba:

In nomine sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, Patris and Filii and Spiritus
Sancti, per hanc cartam quatripartitam pateat universis quod ego Willielmus de
Acketon burgens' villae Novi Castri super Tynam Dunelm' dioces' inter opera
pietatis Deo grata reputans and acceptum, per augmentum cultus divini and
pietatis, praecipue ministerio sacerdotum, and per exhibitionem sustentationis
pauperum, infirmorum, and clericorum terrena and transitoria in aeterna and
coelestia felici commercio commutare, auctoritate and consensu venerabilis
patris Domini Thomae Dunelm' episcopi, loci diocesani, and sui capituli
ecclesiae cathedralis Dunelm' dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti carta mea
quatripartita confirmavi, intuitu caritatis, and pro salubri statu dicti
venerabilis patris, and serenissimi principis, Domini Edvardi Dei gratia Regis
Angliae and Franciae illustris, progenitorum and haeredum suorum, pro salute
corporum and animarum mei, Mariae uxoris meae, Roberti de Oggell, Willielmi del
Strother, and Roberti de Angerton, and pro salute animarum Willielmi de
Thorald, Dionisiae uxoris suae, Willielmi de Acketon patris mei, Isoldae uxoris
suae matris meae, Johannis, Thomae, Walteri, Edae, Adae, Edmundi, Willielmi,
Petri, and omnium antecessorum, benefactorum, amicorum meorum and successorum
eorum, and omnium fidelium defunctorum, licentia dicti Domini Regis super hoc
concessa and optenta, Deo and sanctae Trinitati, quae est Pater and Filius and
Spiritus Sanctus, and hi tres unum sunt, and Willielmo de Wackefeld fratri
ordinis sanctae Trinitatis and confratribus dicti ordinis, pauperibus, and
infirmis, sive clericis, totam illam terram vocatam le Walknoll in predicta
villa Novi Castri cum suis pertinentiis, super quam terram edificavi unum
hospitale in honor sanctae Trinitatis, pro inhabitatione unius custodis
perpetui, confratrum, pauperum, infirmorum, and clericorum, qui in eodem
hospitali morabuntur, and successorum suorum, in perpetuum, dedi and concessi
Deo and sanctae Trinitati, ac praedictis fratri Willielmo de Wackefeld,
confratribus, pauperibus, infirmis, and clericis supradictis in dicto hospitali
morantibus, and in perpetuum moraturis, in puram and perpetuam elemosinam, and
sustentationem eorundem and successorum fuorum, unum messuagium, cum
pertinentiis suis quod quondam fuit Hugonis de Haldenby, sicut jacet per suas
rectas and antiquas divisas, in predicta villa Novi Castri, inter tenementum in
quo Robertus de Norrays inhabitat ex part una and venellum in quo Johannes
Graper inhabitat ex part altera. Dedi etiam and concessi Deo and sanctae
Trinitati and predicto Willielmo de Wackefeld, confratribus, pauperibus,
infirmis, sive clericis supradictis duo celaria in anteriore part messuagii in
quo Robertus Elward inhabitat, sicut jacent in longitudine inter terram Thomae
de Kelson ex una part ex opposito del Calecross ejusdem villae, and venellum
Johannis Abell ex altera, and extendit se in latitudine a via regia usque ad
celarium dicti Roberti dicti messuagii, excepto introitu dicti Roberti. Dedi
etiam and concessi Deo and sanctae Trinitati, and praedicto Willielmo de
Wakefeld, confratribus, pauperibus, infirmis, sive clericis supradictis unam
placeam terrae cum suis pertinentiis ja^entem in villa predicta Novi Castri,
sicut jacet per suas rectas and antiquas divisas, in latitudine inter terram
Johannis de Stanhoppe ex part una, and terram quondam Thomae Milson ex part
altera, and extendit se in longitudine a via juxta murum Domini Regis usque ad
gardinum meum de tentorio. Concessi etiam Deo and sanctae Trinitati and
praedicto Willielmo de Wackefelde, confratribus, pauperibus, sive clericis
supradictis unum annuum redditum triginta and trium solidorum and quatuor
denatiorum exeuntem de quodam tenemento meo in villa predicta Novi Castri juxta
Lorteburne, quod Adam Market quondam tenuit. Concessi etiam Deo and sanctae
Trinitati, and Willielmo de Wackefeld, confratribus, pauperibus, and clericis
supradictis unum annuum redditum triginta and sex solidorum and octo denariorum
exeuntem de toto tenemento meo in villa predicta juxta Lo^teburne, quod Alicia
de Brandon quondam tenuit; quae quidem tenementa jacent inter terram David de
Rodam ex part boriali and tenementum Roberti de Angerton ex part australi.
Concesti etiam Deo and sanctae Trinitati, and Willielmo de Wackefelde,
confratribus, paup^ribus, and clericis supradictis unum annuum redditum
quinquaginta and septem solidorum and quatuor denariorum exeuntem de toto illo
tenemento quod Robertus Elward de me tenet in villa predicta in vico vocato le
Flesshewer Raw, sicut jacet inter terram Thomae de Kelson ex part una, and
terram Johannis Abell ex altera. Concessi etiam Deo and sanctae Trinitati, and
Willielmo de Wakefeld, confratribus, pauperibus, and clericis supradictis unum
annuum redditum december solidorum exeuntem de tenemento Thomae de Kelson ex
opposito le Calecrosse in villa predicta in puram and perpetuam elemosinam, ad
inveniend' and sustinend' tres fratres capellanos dicti ordinis vel aptos
ordinibus, ita quod sint infra duos annos capellani canonice ordinati; quorum
unus sit custos perpetuus dicti hospitalis tres pauperes and infirmos, tres
clericos scolatizantes and addiscentes in dicto hospitali moraturi and in
capella dicti hospitalis instructuri. Ut custos and confratres sui predicti,
capellani, pauperes, and clerici supradicti, in dicto hospitali, and infra
mansum ejusdem hospitalis habitabunt, and de bonis communibus dicti hospitalis
in esculentis, and potulentis, and lectis, sustentationem suam percipiant and
habebunt, secundum posse dicti hospitalis, ac tres lectos competentes pro
hospitibus ibidem accedentes habebunt and invenient paratos. Volo etiam and
dispono, quod praedicti custos and confratres singulis diebus horas suas
canonicas in capella dicti hospitalis dicant vel psallent tempore competenti,
and cessante impedimento, singulis diebus missas suas celebrent sive dicant in
capella dicti hospitalis, prout ab commoditatem peregrinorum and aliorum
extraneorum ad dictam villam accedentium and ab eadem redeuntium melius
videbitur expedire. Dictique pauperes, infirmi sive clerici orationes and
preces suas faciant pro salubri statu viventium, and pro salubri statu corporum
et animarum praedictorum: Ita viz. quod eorum quilibet dicat singulis diebus
viginti Pater Noster and totidem Ave, vice and horae nomine matuticinalis, ac
vice and horae nomine primae quinque Pater Noster and Ave, and pro singulis
horis diei totidem, viz. tertiae, sextae, nonae, vesperarum and completo^i: and
quod praedicti clerici in omnibus festis duplicibus per totum annum and in
vigiliis eorundem, in capella dicti hospitalis ministrent and deservient, and
ad ista facienda and complenda onerentur singuli, custos, sacerdotes, pauperes,
infirmi sive clerici, in periculum animarum eorundem. Dicti custos, fratres,
pauperes, infirmi, sive clerici, qui pro tempore fuerint, singulis diebus in
noctis crepusculo, in capella dicti hospitalis simul conveniant, and facta
pulsatione aliquali, ut est moris antiphoniam de gloriosa Virgin Maria, scil'
salve regina, vel aliam antiphoniam, de Domina decantent devotius qua poterunt
alta voce, and quali sexta feria, vel semel in qualibet hebdomade dicant sive
psallent dicti custos and confratres, qui pro tempore fuerint, Placebo and
Dirige pro personis and ammabus supradictis, quorum nomina in dicta capella
specialiter recitantur, ut sic dicti custos and confratres ad sanctam regulam
and disciplinam dicti ordinis simul viventes, ac dicti pauperes, infirmi, and
clerici ibidem pacificae and modestae conversationis, salubrius orationibus et
praecibus vacare, and Domino valiant deservire. Volo insuper and dispono, quod
omnes redditus, tenementa, messuagia, celaria, and placeae supradictae ad usum
and sustentationem dictorum custodis, fratrum, pauperum, infirmorum, and
clericorum and successorum suorum in dicto hospitali commorantium integraliter
and inviolabiliter conserventur, and in nullos alios ulus quomodolibet
convertantur: ad quorum conservationem et fidelem custodiam quilibet custos ad
reg^men dicti hospitalis ordinandus in admissione sua vinculo juramenti
corporaliter praes^^ti specialiter oneretur. Ita quod non liceat dictis
custodi, confratribus, pauperibus, mirmis, sive clericis, nec eorum
successoribus dictum hospitale, redditus, tenementa, messuagia, c^laria, vel
placeas supradicta, seu aliquam partem eorundem alicui alienare, impignorare,
seu dimmuere, and si aliquid factum vel acceptum fuerit in contrarium, de jure
non valeat quovismodo. Si vero praedicti redditus, seu aliqua pars eorundem, a
retro fuerint ad aliquem terminum, viz. ad festum Pentecost' and S. Marunt in
hyeme non soluti, quod tunc been liceat dicto custodi qui pro tempore fuerit,
per se vel per alium, in praedictis tenementis intrare and quolibet tenemento
praedictorum, pro red situ a retro existente, unde praedicta tenementa
onerantur intrare, distringere, and districtiones capere, asportare, and
retinere, quousque de praedicto annuo redditu a retro existente, cum
arreragiis, si quae sint, plenarie eis fuerit satisfactum. Cum autem custos
dicti hospitalis qui pro tempore fuerit in fata decedat, cesserit, seu
renunciaverit regimen dicti hospitalis, sive propter crimen vel defectum, seu
aliam causam notabilem, amotus fuerit a regimine praedicto, tunc in omni casu
praedicto per me quamdiu vixero, and post mortem meam volo, quod tunc been
liceat dictis confratribus, in dicto hospitali qui pro tempore fuerint
commorantibus infra quindenam, post mortem alicujus custodis, cessionem, seu
renunciationem, idoneam personam de seipsis, vel de conventu de Knaresburgh
ordinis praedicti eligere, and ipsum sic electum ministro de Knaresburgh
praesentare, and ipse sic electus and praesentatus per ipsum ministrum
praedictum recipiatur, and in custodia dicti hospitalis instituatur secundum
ordinationes and fundationes meas supradictas: Quod si contingat quod praedicti
fratres in praedicto hospitali morantes concordare non possunt super electionem
praedictam, volo quod minister de Knaresburgh and conventus ejusdem domus,
infra tres septimanas tunc proxime sequentes, idoneam personam de ordine
praedicto praesentant, and ille sic praesentatus sit custos perpetuus dicti
hospitalis secundum ordinationem and fundationem meas supradictas: Et si
praedicti minister and conventus dictae domus de Knaresburgh non
praesentaverint idoneam personam, ut praefertur, volo quod minister dictus
provincialis ordinis praedicti in Anglia idoneam personam ordinis praedicti ad
custodiam dicti hospitalis infra quindenam extunc proxime sequentem praesentet,
and ille sic praesentatus sit custos dicti hospitalis secundum ordinationem and
fundationem supradictas: Et quod si praedictus minister dictus provincialis non
praesentaverit idoneam personam ad custodiam dicti hospitalis, ut praefertur,
volo and concedo quod tunc been liceat majori and ballivis villae Novi Castri
super Tynam qui pro tempore fuerint, idoneam personam de ordine praedicto ad
ministrum de Knaresburgh, qui pro tempore fuerit praesentare, and ipse sic
praesentatus per praedictum ministrum in custodia dicti hospitalis instituatur
secundum fundationem and ordinationem supradictas. Item ordino and dispono de
voluntate and assensu ministri and conventus domus praedictae S. Roberti de
Knaresburgh, quod minister ejusdem domus vel ejus vicarius ejusdem ordinis cum
uno suo confratre and aliis duobus per equos ad dictum hospitale singulis annis
post mortem Willielmi de Wakefeld custodis hospitalis praedicti, infra
quindenam proximam post festum S. Trinitatis personaliter accedat, and sumptus
moderatos dicti hospitalis per sex dies veniendo, morando, and redeundo
percipiat per manus custodis persolvendos: Idemque minister, quem solum
ordinarium and dicti hospitalis praesidentem esse volo, adeo quod nullus alius
judex seu ordinarius de statu dicti hospitalis, seu personis and rebus ejusdem
se nullatenus intromittat, inquisitionem diligentem, and visitationem plenam,
de personis and rebus dicti hospitalis faciat ac exerceat, ac defectus ibidem
compertos corrigat and emendet, prout secundum Deum and equitatem melius
videbitur expedire. Et minister dictus and conventus de Knaresburgh, qui pro
tempore fuerint, habebunt annuatim pro labor suo visitationis dicti hospitalis
pondus unius equi piscium per manus custodis dicti hospitalis apud villam Novi
Castri super Tynam recipiendum, decenter persolvendum: Et quod dictus custos,
nec hospitale praedictum ulterius oneretur pro labor praedicto. Et volo quod
quandocunque and quotiescunque aliqui fratres, pauperes sive clerici dicti
hospitalis decesserint, recesserint, vel aliis causis rationabilibus, sive ex
causa rationabili amoti fuerint ab hospitali praedicto, quod per me, dum
vixero, and post mortem meam per praedictos custodem and confratres dicti
hospitalis, alii fratres idonei, pauperes, infirmi, and clerici loco
decedentium, recedentium, and amotorum, infra tres septimanas, ut praemittitur,
assumantur, and in eodem hospitali ponantur: Quod si contingat quod praedicti
custos and confratres dicti hospitalis infra tres septimanas supradictas, o^
praemittitur, praedictam assumptionem fratrum pauperum, infirmorum and
clericorum non adimpleverint, quod tunc been liceat majori and ballivis dictae
villae Novi Castri, qui pro tempore fuerint, alios fratres idoneos, pauperes,
infirmos, and clericos assumere, and in eodem hospitali ponere moraturos,
secundum ordinationem meam and fundationem supradictam.

Et in assumptione and praefixione fratrum, pauperum, infirmorum, and
clericorum, in dicto hospitali ponendorum, volo quod personae de
consanguinitate and affinitate mea, si quae fuerint, alioquin de originariis
and oriundis de dicta villa Novi Castri, vel de aliis praeferantur. Caeterum
inter dictum ministrum and confratres dictae domus de Knaresburgh and me
concorditer est conventum, quod si minister dictae domus, qui erit pro tempore,
ad dictum hospitale causa visitationis, inquisitionis, and correctionis
faciendarum, temporibus statutis supradictis, personaliter, vel ejus vicarius
accedere, and ea, quae in hac causa requiruntur, non curaverit seu neglexerit,
absque impedimento, legitime adimplere singulis annis, quibus adimplere
neglexerit, dicti minister and confratres domus de Knaresburgh omni commodo and
jurisdictione omnino careant and perdent: Et volo quod tunc been liceat priori
Dunelm' qui pro tempore fuerit, post quindenam postquam dictus minister domus
de Knaresburgh a visitatione dicti hospitalis defecerit contra formam
praenominatam, infra quindenam proxime sequentem faciat, and quae concernunt ad
visitationem dicti hospitalis adimpleat modo and forma fundationis antedictae.
Et quod si dictus prior ea, quae concernunt ad visitationem supradictam,
neglexerit, quod tunc been liceat vicario villae Novi Castri super Tynam, qui
pro tempore fuerit, dictam visitationem dicti hospitalis facere, ut
praemittitur. Et volo insuper and dispono quod neque minister domus de
Knaresburgh, quem presidentem dicti hospitalis ordinamus, ut est dictum, nec
major nec ballivi dictae villae Novi Castri, nullam potestatem habeant aliqua
bona dicti hospitalis minuendi, sibi vel domui de Knaresburgh, vel alteri
cuicunque applicandi vel transferendi, sed quod ipsa bona omnia et singula in
usus dicti custodis, fratrum, pauperum, infirmorum, clericorum and successorum
suorum totaliter convertantur, habenda and tenenda dictam terram, hospitale
praedictum, messuagia, celaria and placeas supradictas, ac redditus praedictos,
percipienda cum omnibus suis pertinentiis praedicto fratri Willielmo de
Wackefeld, confratribus, pauperibus, infirmis, and clericis in dicto hospitali
morantibus and in futurum moraturis, ibidem Deo servituris, and successoribus
suis in perpetuum, in puram and perpetuam elemosinam, ad inveniendum,
sustentandum, and perficiendum omnia antedicta modo et forma praenominatis in
eodem hospitali, ita quod quandocunque and quotiescunque praedicti custos,
confratres, pauperes, in^^r^i, clerici vel successores sui defecerit vel
defecerint in aliquo articulo praemissorum, and debita correctio dicti defectus
infra quadraginta dies proxime sequentes post visitationem fa^tum, per
praedictum ministrum de Knaresburgh vel ejus vicarium per priorem Dunelm' vel
per vicarium de Novo Castro super Tynam, qui pro tempore fuerit, non fa^t^ quod
tunc been liceat mihi in tota vita mea, and post decessum meum majori and
ballivis, qui pro tempore fuerint, in omnibus meis celar^is, placeis, and
redditibus supradictis terrare, distringere, and ea in manu mea, dum vixero,
and post mortem meam in manibus dicti majoris and ballivorum, qui pro tempore
fuerint, retinere, quousque debita correctio fiet de defectu invento aliquorum
articulorum supradictorum contra ordinationem and fundationem supradictas.
Salvo tamen quod omnes redditus and prosicu^ inde provenientes in usum
inhabitantium, viz. custodis, fratrum, pauperum, infirmorum, and clericorum in
dicto hospitali, and non in alios usus convertantur quomodolibet. Et ego vero
Willielmus de Acketo^burgensis villae Novi Castri super Tynam and haeredes mei
praedictam terram, hospitale praedi^tum, messuagia, celaria, and placeas
supradictas, ac redditus supradictos cum omnibus suis pertinentus praedicto
Willielmo de Wackefelde, confratribus, pauperibus, infir^^s et clericis in
dicto hospitali morantibus, and in futurum mora^^^^s, and successoribus suis,
modo and forma praenominatis contra omnes gentes waranti^abi^us and defendemus
in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium parti hujus indenturae quadripartitae
penes me remanenti sigillum Willielmi de Wackefeld, and sigillum capituli domus
de Knaresburgh sunt apposita: Alteri vero parti penes dictum Willielmum and
hospitale praedictum remanenti sigillum meum and sigillum commune dictae villae
Novi Castri sunt appensa: Tertiae vero parti penes majorem and ballivos villae
Novi Castri super Tynam, and in communi cista ejusdem villae remanenti sigilla
dicti Willielmi de Wackefeld and dicti capituli de Knaresburgh and sigillum
meum sunt appensa: Quartae vero parti penes magistrum and conventum domus de
Knaresburgh remanenti sigillum meum and sigillum Willielmi de Wackefelde
custodis dicti hospitalis, una cum sigillo communi Novi Castri sunt apposita.
His testibus, Willielmo de la Strother tunc majore villae Novi Castri super
Tynam, Johanne de Emeldon, Nicholao Bagot, and Johanne de Camera tunc ballivis,
Roberto de Angerton, Thoma de Hett, Roberto Qware, Johanne de Bikere, Ada Ord,
Johanne Plumber, Nicholao Soco and aliis. Datum apud villam Novi Castri super
Tynam die Mercur' proximo ante festum Pentecost' anno Domini millesimo,
trecentesimo, sexagesimo.

Nos igitur Thomas permissione divina Dunelm' episcopus antedictus attentis,
pensatis, and diligenter consideratis praemissis omnibus and singulis and eorum
causis, nec non laudabili opere hujusmodi and proposito dicti Willielmi de
Acketon, quae omnia pia, utilia, and necessaria reputamus, praefatam cartam, ac
omnia and singula in eadem contenta, tanquam rite and legitime facta, quatenus
ad nos attinet, pro nobis and successoribus nostris Dunelm' episcopis
acceptamus, approbamus, ratificamus, and tenore praesentium confirmamus, jure,
jurisdictione, dignitate, and honor nostris and ecclesiae nostrae Dunelm' in
omnibus and per omnia semper salvis. In cujus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum
praesentibus est appensum. Datum in manerio nostro de Aukland secundo die
mensis Octob' anno Domini milles' trecent' sexag' primo, and consecrationis
nostrae decimo septimo.

Et nos prior et capitulum ecclesiae Dunelm' praemissa omnia et singula per
dictum venerabilem patrem facta rata habentes, and quatenus in nobis est, and
ad nos pertinet, approbantes, sigillum nostrum commune ad majorem securitatem
and evidentiam praesentium duximus apponendum. Datum ergo, quod ad nos in
capitulari domo nostra Dunelm' vicesimo die mensis Aprilis anno Domini milles'
trecentes' sexages' tertio.

(BOURNE.) APPENDIX, P. 430. 28o die Martii anno R. Regis Jacobi nunc Angliae
Franc' et Hiberniae etc. nono et Scotiae 43o annoque Domini 1611.
WHEREAS diverse and sundry buissinesses of importance concerning the general
state of this corporation especially the establishinge and setlinge of the
foundacions of the several hospitalls of the blessed Virgin Mary called the
West Spittle in Westgate, Saint Mary Magdalene at the Barras, the hospital or
chappall at the Tyne-bridge end, and the hospital of Saint Edmonds in
Gateshead in the county of Durham belonginge this said town, ar to be
performed and effected at London with all convenient speed of which and of the
manner and orderly proceedinges whereof consideration haith benne in some
measure had and taken by us, yett not so fully concluded as is requisitt, and
therefore thought fit and so ordered by us, the mayor aldermen and sheriff and
rest of the common council of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne for and in the
name stead and place of the mayor and burgesses of the same town, that the
further handlinge and proceedinge in the same shall be in the consideration and
poor of the present mayor and aldermen or the most part of them as in there
discretions shall be thought fytt, whose act and doeings therein we do and will
by this our present order approve and ratyfie to be as effectual as if the same
were done by us all.

Willm Jenison Lionel Maddison Rob' Dudley Franc' Anderson Willm Warmouth Thom'
Riddell James Claveringe Robt Anderson Franc' Burrell John Selby Christopher
I Will Willm Sherwoode James Rochester James Bilton Alexander Davison Thom' Swann
Anthon' Rowmaine Willm Pacocke Stephen Bowdon Thom' Duglas.

Concordat' cum original' examinat' per me Willmu' Jackson Comm' cler' ibidem.
Dorso -- "Order of counsel for the mayor and six aldermen to dispose of the
hospitals."



APPENDIX, P. 437. Anno decimo quarto Georgii Tertii Regis.
An Act for confirming to the resident Freemen or Burgesses and resident Widows
of deceased Freemen or Burgesses of the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne their full
Right and B^nefit to the Herbage of the Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's
Moor, within the Liberties of the said Town, for two M^^ch Cows each, in such
Manner as has been used; and for improving the Herbage of the said Town Moor,
Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor respectively.
WHEREAS some differences and controversies have arisen between the mayor,
aldermen, sheriff, and the rest of the common council of the town of Newcastle
upon Tyne, in the county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the freemen or
burgesses of the said town, touching the Town Moor, situate within the
liberties of the said town and county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne:

And whereas at the last assizes held in and for the town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, in the county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne, an action of trespass
then depending in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster came on to
be tried between Joshua Hopper, who claimed part of the said Town Moor under a
lease to which the common seal of the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne
aforesaid had been put by the mayor, aldermen, sheriff, and the rest of the
common council, or the major part of them, in common council assembled,
plaintiff, and Nathaniel Bayles and Henry Gibson, two of the freemen and
burgesses of the said town, and resident within the said town, defendants, an
order of assize was made in the words following; that is to say, Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne and county of the same town: At the assizes held at the
Guildhall of the said town in and for the said town and county of the same, on
Saturday the seventh day of August in the thirteenth year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord George the Third by the grace of God now King of Great Britain,
etc. before the Honorable Sir Henry Gould, Knight, one of the justices of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Sir William Blackstone, Knight, one other
of the justices of the same court, two of his Majesty's justices assigned to
take the assizes according to the statute, etc. Hopper against Bayles and
another, it is ordered by the consent of the said parties, their counsel and
attorneys, that the last juror of the jury impanelled and sworn in this cause
shall be withdrawn from the panel, and by the consent o^ William Gibson,
Esquire, town clerk of Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, on behalf of the common
council of Newcastle aforesaid, who being present here in court agrees to
become a party to this order, it is agreed and ordered that an application
shall be made for an act of parliament to establish for ever to the resident
freemen and the resident widows of deceased freemen of the town of Newcastle
aforesaid, the full right and benefit to the herbage of the Town Moor for two
milch cows in the manner which has been used, subject to such restrictions and
regulations as shall be adjudged necessary for the culture and improvement of
the common, and shall be prescribed in the act, and which are to be settled and
agreed upon by two proper persons, one to be named by the common council, and
the other by the stewards of the companies, or the major part of them, such two
persons to be named before the first day of November next; and in case they
cannot agree, they two are to choose a third person for the purpose aforesaid,
by agreement or ballot: And it is further ordered, that the rents to arise from
the leases of parts of the Town Moor aforesaid (which may be made for the
purpose of improving the common) shall be applied to the use of the poor
freemen and poor widows of freemen in the manner to be prescribed by the said
act: And it is also ordered, that the quantity to be enclosed for improvement
at any one period shall not exceed one hundred acres; and that such rights
shall be reserved to the corporation of Newcastle, as owners of the soil, as
they are entitled unto: And it is also ordered, that the expenses of the said
act, and also the costs in this action of the plaintiff, and the costs (not
exceeding three hundred pounds) of the defendants, shall be paid out of the
public revenues of the said corporation: And lastly it is ordered, that all
parties perform this order, and that this order shall be made a rule of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, if the justices of the said court shall so
please.

By the Court, RIGGE.




And whereas, in pursuance of the said agreement and order of assize before the
first day of November now last past, the mayor, aldermen, sheriff, and the rest
of the common council in common council assembled, named Henry Atkinson,
hoastman, and the stewards of the companies of the said town, or the major part
of them, named John Coulter of Newcastle upon Tyne, merchant, to settle and
agree upon proper restrictions and regulations necessary for the culture and
improvement of the said Town Moor; and although the said Henry Atkinson and
John Coulter have not settled and agreed upon any restrictions and regulations
necessary for the culture and improvement of the said Town Moor, nor chose a
third person for the purpose aforesaid by agreement or ballot, as directed by
the said order of assize; yet the said agreement and order of assize, and the
culture and improvement of the said Town Moor, and also certain other tracts or
parcels of ground called the Castle Leazes and Nun's Moor adjoining to the said
Town Moor, under proper regulations would be for the benefit of the resident
freemen or burgesses and resident widows of deceased freemen or burgesses of
the said town and county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne:

But the same cannot be effectually carried into execution without the aid of
parliament;

Wherefore may it please your Majesty, That it may be enacted, and be it
enacted, by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons, in this present
parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the full right and
benefit to the herbage of the said parcels of ground called the Town Moor,
Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor, for two milch cows respectively, in such manner
as has been used, shall be and is hereby confirmed and established to the
resident freemen or burgesses of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne and
resident widows of deceased freemen or burgesses of the same town for ever; but
that such right and been it shall be subject to such demises, restrictions, and
regulations for the culture and improvement of the said Town Moor, Castle
Leazes, and Nun's Moor as herein after mentioned.

And for preventing fraud and imposition in the grazing of cows on the said
Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor, and to such savings and reservations
as are hereafter contained, be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid,
that no resident freeman or burgess or resident widow of any deceased freeman
or burgess of the said town shall be permitted to put any cow on the said Town
Moor, Castle Leazes, or Nun's Moor, without first making oath, or being one of
the people called Quakers affirmation, before some justice of the peace for the
said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the county of the town of Newcastle upon
Tyne (which oath or affirmation such justice is hereby empowered to administer)
that such cow is his or her own property really and ^ona fide, and is actually
in milk or with calf, and intended to be kept a milch cow for his or her own
use and benefit, and not intended to be fattened for sale or slaughter; and
that a book or books shall be kept in the town clerk's office, in which shall
be inserted from time to time the name of every person making oath or
affirmation as aforesaid, and the marks and descriptions of their respective
cows, and the name of the herd under whose care they are respectively to be
put, and a transcript of which book or books shall be given to and kept by the
respective herds of the said Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor, for the
inspection of the freemen or burgesses of the said town.

And be it also enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that for the purpose of
improving the said Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor, leases shall and
may from time to time and at all times for ever hereafter be made of different
parts thereof in manner herein after mentioned, so as the quantity to be
enclosed for such improvement do not at any one time exceed one hundred acres.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that the stewards and
wardens of the several companies of the said town of Newcastle upon Tyne, or
the major part of them assembled, whenever they shall be desirous to have any
part of the said Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor enclosed for
improvement, shall signify the same in writing to the mayor for the time being
of the said corporation, and shall specify in such writing the particular part
or parts thereof respectively, not exceeding one hundred acres, proposed to be
enclosed for such improvement, and thereupon the part or parcel of ground so
proposed to be enclosed for improvement, together with the terms, conditions,
regulations, and restrictions in every leas^ thereof, to be made as herein
after mentioned, shall be thrice advertised by the town clerk, and at the
expense of the said corporation, in all the public newspapers published at
Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, and in such advertisements a day in the first
week of the month of September preceding the commencement of any lease to be
made as herein after mentioned shall be fixed upon for letting the same by the
said town clerk, in the Guildhall of Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid, to the
highest bidder or bidders; and in case no bidder or bidders shall appear upon
the said day appointed for letting the same as aforesaid, or being such, the
highest bidder shall not be able to give the security herein after mentioned,
the same shall be forthwith again advertised for letting in manner as
aforesaid, on some day in the third week of the same month of September in the
Guildhall aforesaid, to the highest bidder or bidders, and the highest bidder
or bidders shall give security to be approved of by the stewards and wardens of
the companies of the said town who shall be present at the time of such
letting, or the major part of them, for payment of the rent to be reserved by,
and performance of the covenants to be contained in the lease or leases of the
said pieces or parcels of ground to be demised, in which lease or leases shall
be inserted and contained the following provisoes, clauses, conditions, and
agreements: that is to say, every such lease shall be for a term of seven years
only and no longer, and shall commence from the eleventh day of November next
after the part or parcel of ground so to be demised shall be put up to be let
as aforesaid, and that the lessee or lessees in every lease so to be made shall
covenant to summer fallow the whole of the demised premises in the third year
and sixth year of the said term, to lay four fothers of clod lime upon each
acre thereof the third year, and four fothers of clod lime and fifteen fothers
of good manure on each acre thereof the sixth year, and in each of the said
third and sixth year of the said term to plough and harrow the fallow ground
five times at the most proper seasons; also to give the lands sufficient
ploughings at other times during the lease, and otherwise to manage and
cultivate the same according to the most improved course of husbandry in that
neighborhood; also to make cuts and trenches in such parts of the demised
premises where the same shall be necessary for draining and carrying off the
standing water; also to sow the premises with barley the last year of the said
term, and then also to sow ten bushels of good hay seeds and seven pounds of
white clover seeds on every acre thereof in the proper manner for laying land
down to grass, and not to eat the stubble, or put any cattle thereon after the
last crop; also to enclose the demised premises with sufficient fences, and to
keep the same in repair until the thirtieth day of July next after the
expiration of the said term; also to enter into all such other covenants,
proviso^s, and agreements as are usual on the lessees part, and in case any
such lease shall be made and executed before the feast day of Saint Michael the
Archangel next after the putting up any such part or parcel of ground to be let
as aforesaid, there shall be contained in every such lease liberty for the
lessee or lessees to enter upon the demised premises upon the said feast day of
Saint Michael the Archangel preceding the commencement of every such lease, in
order to make ^^nces and prepare the ground for the first year's crop, in which
said leases respectively shall be contained a proviso, reserving to the
corporation, as owners of the soil of the said parcels of ground so to be
demised, all such rights as they are entitled unto, making a satisfaction to
the tenants thereof for any damage they may sustain by the exercise o^ such
rights.

Provided always, that in every case where no lease shall be made and executed
after any part or parcel of ground shall be put up to be let as aforesaid
within the time aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for the person or
persons who shall be the highest bidder as aforesaid, and shall have given
security as aforesaid, his, her, or their assignee or assigns, to enter into
and upon the said part or parcel of ground upon the said leas^ day of Saint
Michael the Archangel then next and before the commencement of the term for
which any such part or parcel of ground shall be put up to be let in manner and
for the purposes aforesaid; and that after such lease or leases shall be
prepared (which the town clerk for the time being of the said corporation is
hereby required to do within the space of three months from the time of every
such letting) the said town clerk shall give notice thereof in writing to the
mayor of the said corporation, who shall within ten days, or as soon after as
conveniently may be, summon a common council to meet; and that the said common
council shall thereupon assemble and affix the common seal of the said
corporation to such lease or leases, the lessee or lessees at the same time
executing a counterpart or counterparts thereof.

And be it further enacted, that at the end of the seventh year next after the
commencement of the first of the said leases, and at the end of every
successive seventh year afterward, another lot or parcel of the said Town
Moor, Castle Leazes, or Nun's Moor, shall and may be pointed out by the
stewards and wardens of the said companies, or the major part of them assembled
(whether such part or parcel of ground shall have been before in a state of
cultivation and improvement by letting the same as aforesaid or not), and shall
and may in like manner be let to any person or persons on such terms and
conditions as aforesaid, and so successively for ever: Provided that no part of
the Castle Leazes shall be let or broke up, or any part of the said Town Moor,
Castle Leazes, or Nun's Moor, let or demised a second time until the whole of
the said Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor capable of being cultivated,
and intended to be demised by this act, shall have been let and put into a
state of improvement or cultivation as aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that no demise shall be made by virtue of
this act of certain parcel of the said Town Moor called the Cowhill, and such
part of the Town Moor adjoining the same as shall be necessary for holding the
fairs commonly called the Cowhill Fairs, nor of another parcel of the said Town
Moor called the Race Ground, nor of any part of the Town Moor lying within the
inner ditches of the said Race Ground, nor of any part thereof lying within
forty yards of the outer ditches of the Race Ground, nor on any part of the
said Town Moor where a^^ booth or booths, stall or stalls, stand or stands, hut
or huts, or other temporary e^ections have been usually made or set up during
the holding of any of the said fairs or horse races respectively, but the same
shall be preserved for fairs and horse-races as heretofore; any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstand^ng.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, tha^ the rents to b^
reserved in or by every lease to be made as aforesaid shall be paid to the
chamber clerk of the said corporation; and that when the same shall amount to
the sum of one hundred pounds or upwards, the said chamber clerk shall signify
the same in writing to the tow^ (...) of the said corporation, and the said
town clerk shall thereupon give notice thereof in writing to the stewards and
wardens of the several companies of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne aforesaid;
and the said stewards and wardens are hereby required, within one calendar
month then next following, to meet and assemble themselves together; and the
said stewards and wardens, or the major part of them, shall at such (...)* fix
upon an apportionment and distribution of such sum of money in the ^^^^ls of
the chamber clerk to and amongst the poor resident freemen or burgesses and the
poor resident widows of deceased freemen or burgesses of the said town, not
having any cow upon the said Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor, or any
of them, (...) rates or proportions as to the said stewards and wardens, of the
major part of them, shall seem meet; and shall then and there make or cause to
be made out a list or schedule in writing containing the names of such poor
resident freemen or bur^esses, a^^ poor resident widows of deceased freemen or
burgesses to whom such d^t^^^^^on shall be made, together with the names of the
streets or places in wh^^ they respectively reside, and the sums to be paid to
each of them respectively, and also (...) the companies (if any) to which such
poor freemen or burgesses belong, and also the companies (if any) to which the
husbands of such poor widows belonged; and which said list or schedule shall be
then signed by the stewards or wardens present at such meeting, or the major
part of them, with their respective names; and the said stewards and wardens,
or the major part of them, shall then, in writing under their hands, appoint a
proper person or persons to receive the said money from the chamber clerk, and
distribute the same according to such apportionment or distribution; a
duplicate of which said list or schedule, signed as aforesaid, shall be then or
within three days next following delivered to such person or persons who shall
and is hereby required to pay and distribute the said money accordingly within
one calendar month after he shall receive the same; and the said chamber clerk
shall and is hereby required, upon such list or schedule and such apportionment
being delivered to him, to pay such money to the person or persons authorized
to receive the same for the purpose aforesaid, taking a receipt for the said
money; and the said chamber clerk shall and is hereby required, within one week
afterward, to deliver such list or schedule, signed as aforesaid, to the town
clerk to be kept amongst the records and muniments of the said corporation.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that on the expiration
of every lease to be granted of any of the said lots or parcels of ground in
manner aforesaid, the lands and hereditaments to be granted by and comprised in
every such lease shall be laid open again to the Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and
Nun's Moor respectively, as the case shall happen; but nevertheless subject to
such regulations and restrictions for the culture and improvement of the said
Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor as are herein before mentioned.

And be it further enacted, that nothing in this act contained shall extend or
be construed to extend to take away, annul, or alter any of the rights which
the corporation of Newcastle upon Tyne, as owners of the soil of the said Town
Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor, are entitled unto, or to give to them any
new or other rights than they are now entitled to.

Saving always to the King's most excellent Majesty, his heirs and successors,
and to all and every other person or persons, bodies politic and corporate,
his, her, and their heirs, successors, executors, and administrators, all such
estate, right, title, and interest, use, trust, liberty, power, authority,
privilege, and benefit of, in, to, upon, or out of the said pieces or parcels
of ground called the Town Moor, Castle Leazes, and Nun's Moor, and every of
them, and every part and parcel thereof respectively, as they or any of them
had before the passing of this act, or could or might have had, held, or
enjoyed, or been entitled to if this act had not been made.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that this act shall be
adjudged, deemed, and taken to be a public act, and shall be judicially taken
notice of as such by all judges, justices, and other persons whomsoever,
without specially pleading the same.

APPENDIX, P. 454. An Act for establishing a permanent Fund for the Relief and
Support of Skippers and Keelmen employed on the River Tyne, who by Sickness, or
other accidental Misfortunes, or by Old Age, shall not be able to maintain
themselves and their Families; and also for the Relief of the Widows and
Children of such Skippers and Keelmen.
WHEREAS the skippers and keelmen employed in navigating keels upon the river
Tyne are very numerous, and from the nature of their employment are obliged to
reside in two or three parishes or townships near the said river; so that when
they or their families become objects of parochial relief, either the parishes
or townships in which they are settled are grievously burdened, or sufficient
provision is not made for their support:

And whereas great benefit will result to the said skippers and keelmen, and
their families, and a reduction of the poor rates in the parishes or townships
where they are settled will be effected, by forming such skippers and keelmen
into a society, and establishing a permanent and, by the allowance of a small
sum out of their respective wages, which they are willing to make, to be
applied for the relief and support of themselves and their families, in case of
sickness, old age, or infirmity, and of their widows and children.

May it therefore please your Majesty, That it may be enacted, and (...) it
enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons, in this present
parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that from and after the
first day of July next after the passing of this act, all and every the
skippers and keelmen navigating keels upon the said river Tyne shall be and are
hereby formed into a society for the purpose of raising and establishing a
permanent fund in manner hereinafter mentioned, to be applied in maintaining
and supporting themselves and their families in cases of sickness, old age, or
infirmity, and their widows and children, which shall be called and denominated
"The society of keelmen on the river Tyne."

And, to the end that the affairs of the said society may be orderly managed
and conducted, and the funds thereof faithfully administered and applied, be it
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that Sir Matthew White Ridley, Baronet, and
Charles Brandling, Esquire, members now serving in parliament for the town and
county of Newcastle upon Tyne, William Cra^^lington, Esquire, now mayor of the
said town and county, Christopher Fawcett, Esquire, now recorder of the said
town and county, Aubon^ Surtees, Esquire, Edward Mos^ey, Esquire, John Hedley,
Esquire, and Hugh Hornby, Esquire, now aldermen of the said town and county,
Joseph Forster, Esquire, now sheriff of the said town and county, John Fra^^^s
Blackett, Esquire, now governor of the company of hoastmen within the said town
and county, Jonathan A^^ey, and John Widd^ington, Esquires, now stewards of the
said company of hoastmen, and George Colpitts, Robert Rain, Anthony Hood,
Richard B^ll, Thomas ^may, Henry Scott, Ralph Atkinson, Henry A^^ey, and Robert
L^^^e, now members and trading brethren of the said company of hoastmen, being
in number twenty-one, shall be and they are hereby constituted and appointed
guardians of the said society, called "The society of keelmen on the river
Tyne, "from and after the said first day of July next ensuing, for one whole
year, and until a new election of guardians shall take place, as hereinafter is
directed, and shall have the order, disposition, and management of the affairs
and funds thereof.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said guardians,
so hereby constructed and appointed, and their successors, to be elected and
appointed in manner hereinafter mentioned, shall be, and they are hereby
declared to be a body politic and corporate under the name and description of
"The guardians of the society of keelmen on the river Tyne," and shall have
perpetual succession, and shall have, enjoy, and possess all the powers,
privileges, and capacities to take and transmit property, to sue and be sued,
and to do other acts competent to bodies politic and corporate to do and
perform, and they shall have, and from time to time use a corporate seal; and
that they and their successors, by the name aforesaid, shall and may, at any
time hereafter, without license in mortmain, purchase, take, or receive any
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or any estate or interest derived out of
the same, so as such lands, tenements, or hereditaments be only for the site
of, or be to be converted into an hospital, with offices and appurtenances
necessary thereunto.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said guardians
and their successors, to be elected as hereinafter directed, shall and may and
they are hereby authorized and empowered to provide an hospital for the
reception and maintenance of such skippers and keelmen, employed or to be
employed on the river Tyne, as shall by sickness or other accidental
misfortunes, or by becoming decrepit or worn out with age, be rendered
incapable of maintaining themselves or their families, or shall provide for
such skippers and keelmen by allowing them certain pensions, or otherwise, as
to the said guardians and their successors shall seem meet, and most for the
advantage of the intended charity; and also to relieve the widows and children
of such skippers and keelmen, provided such children are not of the age of
fourteen years, or if of that age or upwards, not capable of getting a
livelihood by reason of lameness, blindness, or other infirmities, so far forth
as the income and revenues which are, shall, or may be vested in the said
guardians and their successors, will extend for the purposes aforesaid:
Provided always, that no skipper or keelman shall be entitled to any of the
benefits of this act, unless he shall produce, or cause to be produced, to the
said guardians or their successors, a certificate from the stewards of the said
society of keelmen hereinafter named, and their successors, to be elected as
hereinafter is directed, or any five of them, in writing under their hands or
marks, declaring such skipper or keelman to be a fit object of the charity, and
entitled to the benefit thereof; and that no widow, child, or children of any
skipper or keelman shall be relieved, or entitled to any allowance under this
act, unless she or they, or some person on her or their behalf, shall produce a
certificate to the said guardians or their successors, from the said stewards
or their successors, or any five of them, in writing under their hands or
marks, signifying that such widow was the lawful wife and real widow, and that
such child or children was or were the lawful child or children of such
skippers or keelmen, and is or are under the age of fourteen years, or if of
that age or upwards, in^apable of getting a l^velihood, by reason of lameness,
blindness, or other infirmity, and that such widow, or child or children
respectively, is or are proper objects of the charity: And provided also, that
no skipper or keelman, nor widow or children of any skipper or keelman, shall
have, receive, or enjoy any benefit or provision under this act, unless such
skipper or keelman shall have contributed his quota toward the fund hereby
directed to be raised for the space of one entire year without wilful or
intentional interruption: And provided also, that no skipper or keelman, nor
the widow or children of any skipper or keelman, who shall have contributed his
quota toward the fund aforesaid for the space of one entire year, but shall
afterward cease to be employed as a skipper or keelman on the said river Tyne,
shall be entitled to any relief whatsoever from the said fund, unless such
skipper or keelman respectively shall, from the time of his ceasing to be so
employed, pay or contribute toward the said fund such sum or sums of money as
the said guardians or their successors, or the major part of them, shall direct
or appoint, not exceeding in the whole sixpence per week, weekly, and every
week during the time he shall continue unemployed, except where the cessation
of employment shall be occasioned by his being impressed into his Majesty's
service, or by old age, sickness, or other infirmity.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any three or more
of the said guardians for the time being shall be a committee, and shall meet
from time to time, upon the first Thursday in every month, in the Guildhall of
the said town and county, and at such other time or times as they shall think
fit to appoint, and such committee shall have power, when assembled as
aforesaid, in the name of the said corporation, and on their account, to apply
the moneys arising and to be received by virtue of this act, and vested in the
said corporation, for the relief and support of such skippers and keelmen, and
their widows and children, as are before described, and to appoint and choose,
and at their pleasure to remove, displace, and supply any officers, servants,
and other person or persons to be employed in the business of the said
corporation, other than and except the stewards of the said society hereinafter
appointed, and such officers and persons as shall be appointed by the guardians
of the said society, and to direct and appoint such salaries, perquisites, or
other rewards, for their labor or service therein, as the said committee shall
approve or think proper, and to do, manage, transact, and determine all such
other matters and things, as to them shall appear necessary and convenient for
effecting the purposes of this act.

Provided always, that the management, transactions, and accounts of such
committee shall be from time to time, and at all times hereafter, subject and
liable to such audit and inspection, allowance, disallowance, and control of
all or such of the guardians of the said hereby erected corporation, as by any
bye laws or ordinances of the same corporation shall be for that purpose
directed and appointed.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that each respective
hoastman or fitter, or copartnership of hoastmen or fitters upon the river
Tyne, shall on the first day of July next after the passing of this act, or
within five days before the said first day of July, appoint a place and time,
and duly give notice thereof to the several skippers and keelmen then bound or
belonging to him or them, or employed in his or their work, for a general
meeting of all his or their skippers and keelmen, who shall, at the time and
place so to be appointed, meet and assemble together, and after having chosen a
chairman of such meeting, they, or the greater number of them so assembled,
shall proceed to name or elect one skipper or keelman belonging to such work,
who shall be and become a steward of the said society of keelmen until the
first day of July then next following, and on the first day of July in every
year, yearly for ever thereafter, o^ within five days before such first day of
July, a new choice or election of a steward for each work shall in like manner
be had and taken by the said skippers and keelmen of each respective work, or
the greater part of them present at such meeting to be appointed as aforesaid,
for the year then next following, each which steward shall continue and remain
a steward for the work for which he shall be so elected until the next annual
election of stewards shall take place in manner aforesaid; and in case of an
equality of votes, such chairman shall have and exercise a double or casting
vote.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said stewards,
so to be elected and appointed as last mentioned, shall on the second day of
July, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine, and
on the second day of July in every year for ever thereafter, except in any year
when the second day of July shall fall on a Sunday, and then on the day next
following, meet and assemble together in the Guildhall of the said town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, at ten of the clock in the forenoon, and after having
appointed a chairman of such meeting, they, or the greater number of them then
assembled, shall proceed to name and elect twenty-one persons to be the
guardians of the said society for the year ensuing, of which number the members
serving in parliament for Newcastle aforesaid for the time being, the mayor,
the recorder, the four senior aldermen, and the sheriff of Newcastle aforesaid
for the time being, and the governor and stewards of the company or fraternity
of hoastmen within the said town, shall be twelve, and the remaining nine of
which number shall be trading or meeting brethren of the said company of
hoastmen, which said twenty-one persons so to be elected shall be and continue
guardians of the said society until the next annual election shall take place
in manner aforesaid; and in case of an equality of votes, such chairman shall
have and exercise a double or casting vote.

Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, that in case of the death of the
members serving in parliament for the said town, the mayor, recorder, four
senior aldermen, and sheriff of the said town, and of the governors and
stewards of the said company or fraternity of hoastmen, or any of them, or in
case they or any of them shall quit or depart from their respective offices,
the successors or successor of them, or any of them, so dying, or quitting or
departing from their offices as aforesaid, shall be and become guardians or
guardian of the said society of keelmen immediately upon his or their being
elected to parliament, or to any of the said offices in the room of the person
or persons so dying, or quitting or departing from his or their offices as
aforesaid, and shall be and continue guardians or guardian until a new election
of guardians shall be made in manner aforesaid; and in case of the death of any
other or others of the said guardians so to be elected as aforesaid, the
vacancy or vacancies thereby occasioned shall not be supplied until the next
annual day of election, and the corporation hereby established shall be and be
deemed full and complete, notwithstanding such vacancy or vacancies: Provided
also, that if it shall happen at the time of any such election of guardians as
aforesaid that there shall not be a sufficient number of meeting or trading
brethren of the company or fraternity of hoastmen to supply the number herein
before directed to be elected from that body, it shall and may be lawful for
the stewards for the time being to name and elect in manner aforesaid a
sufficient number of guardians from the common council of the said town of
Newcastle for the time being to supply such deficiency.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful for the said guardians for the time being, or any eleven of them, to
make, ordain, and constitute such and so many bye laws, orders, ordinances, and
constitutions as to them, or any eleven of them, shall seem necessary and
convenient for the establishing the said hereby-erected corporation, and
carrying on the affairs thereof, and for appointing the officers, servants, and
others to be employed therein, and for the better applying the money hereby
directed to be raised and received, and providing for the persons entitled to
the benefits of this act, and for auditing the accounts, and controlling,
allowing, or disallowing the transactions of the said committee; and the same
bye laws, orders, ordinances, and constitutions so made to put in use
accordingly, and at their will and pleasure to revoke, change, and alter the
same, so always as such bye laws, orders, ordinances, and constitutions be
reasonable, and not repugnant to the laws, customs, and statutes of this realm,
or any of the express provisions or regulations of this act.

And, for raising a fund for effecting the good ends and purposes aforesaid, be
it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the crew of every keel which shall
be employed by any hoastman or fitter, or any copartnership of hoastmen or
fitters, or other person or persons upon the said river Tyne, shall, during
such their employment, pay, contribute, or allow weekly such sum or sums of
money as the said guardians or their successors, or the major part of them,
shall from time to time direct or appoint, not exceeding in the whole the sum
of one penny, for each and every chaldron of coals, lead, stones, ballast,
chalk, ashes, manure, and rubbish (reckoning fifty-three hundred weight to a
chaldron) which shall be respectively carried in each such keel; which said
weekly sum or sums of money such hoastman or fitter, or copartnership of
hoastmen or fitters, or other person employing each such keel crew, shall be at
liberty and is hereby authorized and required to deduct and retain out of the
wages due to such keel crew respectively, and to pay over the same to such
officer or officers as shall be appointed under this act for the collecting and
receiving the same.

And it is hereby further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
weekly stoppages or allowances shall be paid to and collected by the person or
persons to be appointed to receive the same as aforesaid, on Monday in every
week, the first payment thereof to be made on Monday the seventh day of July
next after the passing of this act, for the week then immediately preceding,
according to a written muster roll or particular to be kept by each hoastman or
fitter, or copartnership of hoastmen or fitters, or other person, by whom such
skippers and keelmen are respectively employed, containing the number of keels
employed by each respectively, and also the number of skippers and keelmen
belonging thereto, and what number of tides have been gone or performed by such
keels respectively, and such other particulars as shall be sufficient to
ascertain with accuracy what stoppages or allowances ought to be kept or
retained by such hoastman or fitter, or copartnership of hoastmen or fitters,
or other person respectively, and paid over, according to the directions of
this act; and that the person or persons so employed to collect such stoppages
or allowances as aforesaid shall be furnished or supplied with a duplicate of
such muster roll or particular, properly authenticated under their hands, by
such hoastmen or fitters, or other persons respectively, or their respective
clerks or agents.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for the better
ascertaining what shall from time to time be due from the said skippers and
keelmen respectively, and what shall come to the hands of the person or persons
so to be employed to collect the same, it shall and may be lawful to and for
the mayor, or any two of the aldermen of Newcastle aforesaid for the time
being, and he and they is and are hereby required, by warrant under his or
their hand or hands, at the request of the guardians of the said society for
the time being, or any three or more of them, to summon such hoastmen or
fitters and collectors respectively before him or them, and to examine them
upon oath respectively as to the truth of the copy or duplicate of the said
^^ster roll or particular, and as to the sums of money paid and received for or
on account of the stoppages or allowances so to be made as aforesaid; and in
case of any embezzlement or misapplication of the money so received, then by
warrant under his or their hand or hands to levy such sum or sums of money, as
shall appear to have been so embezzled or misapplied by distress and sale of
the goods or chattels of the person or persons offending, together with the
charges or expenses necessarily incident thereto, and to pay the money so to be
levied, after ded^^^ting thereout such necessary charges and expenses as
aforesaid, to the guardians of the said society for the time being, or any
three of them, to be by them applied to the purposes of this act; and if such
hoastmen or fitters, or collectors, or any of them, shall refuse or neglect,
when so summoned, to appear before the person or persons hereby empowered to
examine them as aforesaid, or if they shall appear, and refuse to make a full
and true discovery of the matters aforesaid upon their several oath^, then and
in every such case all and every such offender or offenders, for every such
refusal, shall forfeit and p^^ the sum of ten pounds.

And it is hereby further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the charges
in and about procuring and obtaining this act shall be paid out of the first
moneys to be raised by virtue of this act, and all such moneys as shall be
there after raised (after paying the salaries of officers) until the first day
of July, which will be in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety, shall accumulate and be a fund for purchasing or building an hospital,
and for other the purposes of this act, it being the true intent and meaning of
this act that no allowance or provision shall be made to any skippers or
keelmen, or the widows or children of any skippers or keelmen, out of the funds
to be raised by this act, until after the said first day of July one thousand
seven hundred and ninety.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that whenever the money
remaining in the hands of the said guardians, or their proper officer or
officers, and not immediately required to be applied to the purposes of this
act, shall amount to one hundred pounds, then and in every such case such
guardians, or any three of them, shall forthwith direct such money to be
invested in some of the public funds, in the name of the corporation hereby
established, which shall be forthwith invested, and, together with the interest
accruing thereon, shall be and become part of the funds of the said society,
and shall be applied by such guardians, or any three or more of them, when
occasion shall require, to the purposes of this act, and to no other use or
purpose whatsoever.

And be it further enacted, that it shall and may be lawful for the said
guardians, or any three of them, and they are hereby required to lay out and
expend, from the fund hereby established, such reasonable sum or sums as they
shall think proper for and toward the expense of the funerals of such of the
said skippers or keelmen, or of their widows or children, as shall die after
the said first day of July which will be in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and ninety, and as shall at the time of his, her, or their death
or deaths be entitled to any provision or allowance out of the said fund hereby
established.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
all such person or persons as shall apply for relief out of the fund hereby
established, shall, if required by the said guardians, or any three of them,
besides the certificate herein before directed to be given, produce, or cause
to be produced, before such guardians, one or more affidavit or affidavits, to
be duly sworn before one of his Majesty's justices of the peace, in support of
his, her, or their claim or claims to relief, or such other proof as to the
said guardians, or any three of them, shall seem reasonable or necessary in
that behalf.

And provided also, and be it further enacted, that if any of the said skippers
or keelmen, their widows or children, shall by deceit, covin,
misrepresentation, or other fraudulent means, procure any provision or relief
from the fund established by this act, he, she, or they, so offending, shall be
for ever thereafter incapable of receiving any of the benefits of this act.

And, in order that the keels used on the river Tyne may be fairly and justly
loaded, after the due and accustomed rate of eight chaldrons to each keel, be
it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or persons shall, from
and after the first day of July next after the passing of this act, be capable
of acting as an off-putter or off-putters at any coal staith upon the said
river, until he or they respectively shall have taken and subscribed an oath to
the effect following; that is to say: I A. B. do swear, that I will faithfully
and according to the best of my skill, knowledge, and judgment, execute and
perform the duty of off-putter at the staith at (...) where I am now employed [
or, to which I have been appointed, as the case may be] and that I will to the
utmost of my power cause the keels using the said staith to be fairly and
justly loaded, after the due and accustomed rate of eight chaldrons to each
keel, without favor, partiality, malice, or prejudice to any person or persons
whomsoever.

So help me GOD.


Which oath the mayor, or any of the aldermen of the said town of Newcastle, is
hereby authorized and required to administer when thereunto requested; and the
same oath, so taken and subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the town
clerk of the said town for the time being, and shall remain open to the
inspection of any skipper or keelman employed on the said river at all
seasonable times.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act shall be
deemed and taken to be a public act, and shall be judicially taken notice of as
such by all judges, justices, and other persons whomsoever, without specially
pleading the same.

APPENDIX, P. 475. The refoundation Charter of the Hospital at Gateside in the
County of Durham, formerly called St. Edmund's, now King James's Hospital. 4th
January, 1610.
JACOBUS Dei gratia Anglie Scotie Francie et Hibernie Rex Fidei Defensor etc.
omnibus ad quos presents litere pervenerint salutem. Cum in villa de Gateside
infra episcopatum Dunelm' quoddam hospitale a diu extitit vulgariter nuncupat'
Hospital' sive liber' Capell' Sancti Edmundi Regis et Martyris de cujus
fundatore certo non constat. Quod quidem hospital' per idem tempus constitit de
uno magistro et tribus fratribus. Qui quidem magister et fratres hospital'
predict' et successores sui divers' terr' tenement' prat' pastur' libertat' et
privileg' ad sustentacionem pauperum ibidem in pur' et perpet' eleemosin'
habuere et tenuere.

Cumque charte concession' et litere paten' concernen' fundacion' et dotation'
hospital' predict' casu vel negligenc' aliquorum magistrorum ejusdem hospital'
amiss' sunt aut senio et etate corrupt' consumpt' et putrefact' sunt et
existunt. Cumque quedam person' nuper conat' sunt statum dict' hospital'
prorsus evertere aut saltem labefactare ac terr' tenement' et possession'
ejusdem vel eorum aliqua ad relevamen pauperum in eodem hospital' pro tempore
existen' religiose et pie dat' et concess' ad privatum suum commodum
transfer. Ac quo magis predict' conat' et intentiones suas ad effectum
perducere possent dict' hospital' terr' tenement' et hereditament' predict' sub
jure et titul' nostr' sibi ipsis acquirere laboravere.

Nos pia et charitativa opera bonorum et piorum hominum savere et manutenere
cupientes et volentes, quod per nos et in nostro jure vel sub obtentu nominum
nostror' aliquod dampnum vel detrimen' pauper' et egenis inferetur ac penitus
detestantes ex ^eddit' aut al' quibuscunque ad hujusmodi usus destinat' ditari.
Volentes insuper ex abundantiori gratia nostra jus titul' et demand' nostr'
quecunque que habemus aut habere potuimus in premiss' libere et gratiose
confer et extendere ad fortificationem muniment' et stabiliment' hospital'
predict' ac revencion' ejusdem de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia
et mero motu nostris volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus et
successoribus nostris concedimus quod predict' hospital' sive dom' situat' et
existen' in Gateside in com' sive episcopat' Dunelm' predict' modo vulgariter
nuncupat' The Hospital or free Chapel of St. Edmund King and Martyr within the
town of Gateside de ceter' imperpetuum sit (...) et permaneat hospital'
pauperum in Gateside predict' in com' palatin' Dunelm' pro sustentatione
relevamine et manutentione pauperum.

Et quod dict' hospital' de cetero imperpetuum erit aut esse possit et
consistit de uno magistro et tribus viris pauper' in eodem hospital'
imperpetuum inveniend' et sustentand' Et quod dict' hospital' deinceps
imperpetuum vocabitur Hospital' Regis Jacobi in Gateside in com' palatin'
Dunelm'.

Et quod de ceter' imperpetuum rector ecclesie parochial' de Gateside predict'
pro tempore existen' erit et vocabitur Magister Hospital' Regis Jacobi in
Gateside predict' ac omn' terr' tenement' reddit' hereditament' bon' et catall'
ejusdem hospital'.

Quodque de cetero perpet' futur' tempor' sint et erunt in eodem hospital' tres
pauperes et egeni viri celibes aut innupti provecte etatis ibidem sustentand'
manutenend' et relevand' qui similiter vocabuntur Fratres Hospital' Regis
Jacobi in Gateside predict'.

Ac pro meliore performacion' concession' nostr' in hac part elegimus
nominavimus assignavimus et constituimus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus
et successoribus nostris elegimus nominamus assignamus et constituimus dilect'
nobis Johannem Sutton modo rector' ecclesie paroch' de Gateside predict' fore
primum and modernum magistrum dict' hospital' ac terr' tenement' reddit'
possession' revencion' bon' et catali' ejusdem hospital' ibidem remansur'
duran' vita sua natural'.

Et ulterius de uberiore gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia et mero
motu nostris eligimus nominavimus assignavimus et constituimus ac per presents
pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris eligimus nominamus assignamus et
constituimus dilect' nobis Cuthbertum Young Thomam Pereson et Willielmum
Gowland fore et esse primos et modernos fratres ejusdem hospital' ibidem
reman^ur' sustinend' and relevand' duran' vita sua natural'.

Et ut hec pia et charitativa intentio nostra melior' capiat effect' ac ut
terr' tenement' bon' catall' et hereditament' ad manutention' hospital'
predict' ac magistr' et fratres in eodem hospital' de tempore in tempus
relevand' et sustentand' melius dari concedi perquiri et possideri possint,
volumus ac pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris de consimil' gratia
nostra speciali certa scientia et mero motu nostris concedimus ordinamus et
constituimus quod iidem magister et fratres hospital' predict' et successores
sui sint et erunt de ceter' imperpetuum unum corpus corporat' et politicum de
se in re facto et nomine per nomen Magistri et Fratrum Hospital' Regis Jacobi
in Gateside in com' palatin' Dunelm' et ipsos magistrum et fratres et
successores suos per nomen Magistri et Fratrum Hospital' Regis Jacobi in
Gateside in com' palatin' Dunelm' incorporamus et unum corpus corporat' and
politicum per idem nomen imperpetuum duratur' realiter et ad plenum pro nobis
heredibus et successoribus nostris erigimus facimus ordinamus constituimus and
stabilimus firmiter per presents. Quodque per idem nomen Magistri and Fratrum
Hospital' Regis Jacobi in Gateside in com' palatin' Dunelm' perpetuis futur'
temporibus vocabuntur appellabuntur et nominabuntur. Et quod per idem nomen
Magistri et Fratrum Hospital' Regis Jacobi in Gateside in com' palatin' Dunelm'
sint et erunt perpetuis futur' temporibus person habiles et in lege capaces ad
habend' perquirend' recipiend' et possidend' maner' messuag' terr' tenement'
prat' pasc' pastur' revercion' remaner' et al' hereditament' sibi et
successoribus suis imperpetuum tam de nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris
quam de aliqua alia persona sive de aliquibus aliis personis quibuscunque... am
etiam bon' et catall' ad sustentacion' manutention' et relevamen hospital'
predict' ac predict' magistri et fratrum ibidem de tempore in tempus degen' et
sustentand'.

Volumus etiam ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and success' nostris
concedimus predict' magistro et fratribus hospital' predict' et successoribus
suis quod ipsi et successores sui imperpetuum habeant commune sigillum pro
causis et negotiis suis et successorum suorum concerne^' hospital predict'.

Et quod predict' magister et fratres hospital' predict' et successores sui per
nomen Magistri et Fratrum Hospital' Regis Jacobi in Gateside in com' palatin'
Danelm' placitare et implacitari respondere et responderi prosequi defendere et
defendi possint et valiant in quibuscunque et singulis causis querelis sect'
and actionibus quibuscunque cujuscunque natur' seu gener' fuer' in quibuscunque
cur' locis et plac' nostr' heredum and successor' nostror' ac in cur' locis et
plac' al' quorumcunque coram quibusdam judicibus justiciariis et
commissionariis nostris heredum et successorum nostror' et al' quorumcunque
infra hoc regnum nostrum Anglie et alibi et ad ea omnia et singula al'
quecunque faciend' agend' et exequend' per nomen predict' in tam amplis modo et
forma prout al' person' lig' nostr' person' habiles et in lege capaces infra
regnum nostrum Anglie faciant and facere valiant aut possint in cur' loc' et
plac' predict' ac coram judicibus justiciariis et commissionariis predict'.

Et ulterius volumus concessimus et ordinavimus et per presents pro nobis
heredibus et successoribus nostris volumus concedimus et ordinamus quod cum et
quoties imposterum contingat rector' ecclesie parochial' de Gateside predict'
existen' magistrum hospital' predict' obire vel ab rector' predict' et officio
suo magistri hospital' predict' pro aliqua causa ob quam juxta ordinacion'
provision' et constitution' pro regimine gubernatione et direction' hospital'
predict' antehac fact' seu imposterum fiend' seu aliquo alio quocunque modo ab
eodem hospital' amoveri vel ab inde totaliter sponte recedere quod tunc et
toties episcopus Dunelm' pro tempore existen' al' idon' person' existen'
rector' dicte rector' de Gateside in magistrum sive custod' dicte hospital' in
loco hujusmodi magistri sic deceden' amot' seu totaliter receden' infra tempus
convenien' prox' post decess' amocion' seu recess' ill' sequen' nominabit
constituet admittet et in real' possession' inde ponet.

Et preterea volumus quod cum et quoties conting' imposterum aliquem vel
aliquos eorundem fratrum hospital' predict' obire vel ab hospital' predict'
amot' fore pro aliqua causa ob quam juxta ordinacion' provision' et
constitution' pro regimine gubernation' et direction' hospital' predict'
antehac fact' seu imposterum fiend' seu aliquo alio quocunque modo ab eodem
hospital' amoveri vel ab inde totaliter sponte recedere quod tunc et tocies
magister hospital' predict' pro tempore existen' aliam sive al' idoneam
personam sive person' sic deceden' amot' seu totaliter receden' infra
quatuordecim dies prox' decess' amocion' seu recess' ill' sequen' nominabit
constituet admittet et in real' possession' inde ponet.

Ac ulterius declaramus and significamus per presents quod episcopus Dunelm'
pro tempore existen' et successores sui pro tempore existen' sit et erit sint
et erunt verus et indubitat' patron' ejusdem hospital' et quod habeant de
tempore in tempus presentation' nomination' et institution' predict' magistri
toties quoties idem hospital' vacaver' per mort' cession' resignation'
deprivation' vel aliter in tam amplis modo et forma prout fundator dict' nuper
hospital' sive reputat' hospital' aut aliquis episcopus Dunelm' antehac habuit
aut gavisus fuit aut habuer' usi et gavis' fuer' sive debuer'.

Volumus etiam per presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris
concedimus quod episcopus Dunelm' pro tempore existen' et successores sui de
tempore' in tempus revisent examinabunt et perscrutabunt antiqua statut' jur'
ordinacion' et constitution' hospital' predict' ac tot' et tal' eorundem
antiquorum statut' ordination' et constitution' quot' qual' et quatenus eadem
sint repugnan' aut contrar' legibus et statut' hujus regni nostri Anglie
solummodo penitus expurgare delere et obliterare ea intention ut posthac in
usu aut execution' non ponantur ac etiam facere et constituere tot' tant' tal'
et hujusmodi al' bon' idon' et salubria statut' jur' ordination' et
constitution' in script' tam concernen' divin' servic' de die in diem predict'
hospital' in honor' Dei celebrand' quam concernen' gubernation' et direction'
magistri et fratr' in hospital' predict' relevand' quot' quant' qual' et que
per predict' episcopum Dunelm' pro tempore existen' bon' util' idon' et
salubria videbuntur non existen' contra repugnan' seu derogan' antiquis statut'
ordination' et constitution' dict' hospital' ante hac fact' quatenus hujusmodi
antiqua statut' ordination' and constitution' non sint vel erunt contrar nec
repugnan' legibus vel statut' hujus regni nostri Anglie Eademque omnia et
singula sive eorum aliquod vel aliqua sic de novo fact' vel fiend' secundum
veram intentionem harum literarum nostrarum patentium revocare mutare
determinare augmentare alterare vel de novo facere prout ei de tempore in
tempus melius videbitur expedire. Que quidem statut' jur' ordination' et
constitution' sicut prefertur fiend' et constituend' volumus et concedimus ac
per presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris firmiter precipimus
et mandamus inviolabiliter observari teneri et performari de tempore in tempus
in futur' ita tamen quod ejusmodi statut' jur' ordination' sicut prefertur
fiend' constituend' et ordinand' aut eorum aliquod vel aliqua non sint contrar'
aut repugnan' legibus aut statut' hujus regni nostri Anglie vel antiqu' statut'
ordination' et constitution' dict' hospital' quatenus eadem antiqua statut'
ordination' ejusdem hospital' non sint contrar' nec repugnan' legibus aut
statut' hujus regni nostri Anglie.

Dedimus etiam et concessimus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and
successoribus nostris damus et concedimus prefat' magistro et fratribus
hospital' Regis Jacobi in Gateside in com' palatin' Dunelm' predict' et
successoribus suis imperpetuum totum illud hospitale sive reputat' hospital'
antehac communiter vocat' sive cognit' per nomen Hospital' sive liber' Capell'
Sancti Edmundi Regis et Martyris infra vill' de Gateside sive per nomen
Hospital Sancti Edmundi Episcopi in Gateside sive per quodcunque al' nomen sive
nomina quecunque antehac vocat' sive cognit' suit. Ac tot' scit' mansion' et
gardin' eorundem necnon quadraginta acras terre arabil' quinque carect' feni de
december acr' prat' quadraginta acr' pastur' ad sustentation' bestiar' et unum
clausum apud Shotleybrigge in predict' com' palatin' Dunelm' cum omnibus et
singulis eorum juribus membris libertatibus et pertinen' universis de quibus
reputat' magister et fratres hospital' predict' et predecessores sui vel eorum
aliquis vel aliqui per spacium sexaginta annorum ultim' elaps' ante dat' harum
literarum nostrarum patentium de facto saltem si non de jure habuer' perceper'
vel gavis' fuer' annual' reddit' exit' revencion' seu profic' quiet et absque
disturbatione.

Ac etiam omnia et singula messuag' molendin' domos edific' structur' horr'
stabula columbar' hort' pomar' gardin' terr' tenement' prat' pasc' pastur'
vast' jampn' bruer' mor' marisc' bosc' subbosc' december fructus profic'
commoditat' advantag' emolument' et hereditament' reddit' revercion' servic'
pension' portion' jur' jurisdiction' libertat' privileg' profic' commoditat'
advantag' emolument' et hereditamenta nostra quecunque cum suis juribus membris
et pertinenciis universis cujuscunque sint generis natur' seu speciei seu
quibuscunque nominibus sciantur censeantur nuncupantur seu cognoscantur
scituat' jacen' et existen' crescen' provenien' renovan' contingen' sive
emergen' infra vill' camp' loc' paroch' sive hamlet predict' vel alibi
ubicunque in dicto com' palatin' Dunelm' predict' nuper hospital' vel reputat'
hospital' ad aliquod tempus antehac spectan' pertinen' inciden' vel appenden'
aut ut membr' part' vel parcell' ejusdem nuper hospital' unquam antehac habit'
cognit' accept' occupat' usitat' dimiss' locat' reputat' sive gavis' existen'
necnon revercionem et reverciones remaner' et remaneria nostra quecunque omnium
et singulorum premisssorum et cujuslibet inde parcell' dependen' vel expectan'
de in vel super aliquam dimissionem vel concessionem pro termino vite vitarum
vel annorum aut aliter de premiss' superius per presents preconcess' seu de
aliqua inde parcell' fact' existen' de recordo ac reddit' et annual' profic'
quecunque omnium et singulorum eorundem premissorum et cujuslibet inde parcell'.

Volumus etiam ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris
concedimus prefat' magistro et fratribus hospital' predict' et successoribus
suis quod ipsi et successores sui de cetero imperpetuum habeant teneant et
gaudeant ac habere tenure et gaudere valiant et possint infra omnia et singula
premiss' superius per presents precon cess' ac infra quamlibet inde parcell'
deinceps imperpetuum tot' tant' talia eadem hujusmodi et consimilia jur'
jurisdictiones franchesias consuetud' libertat' privileg' profic' commoditat'
advantag' possession' emolument' et hereditament' quecunque quot' quant' qual'
et que ac adeo plene libere et integre ac in tam amplis modo et forma prout
aliquis magister et fratres dict' nuper hospital' aut aliquis alius sive aliqui
alii premiss' superius per presents preconcess' unquam antehac habentes
possidentes aut sesiti inde existentes habens possidens aut sesitus inde
existens habuit tenuit vel gavisus fuit aut unquam habuer' et gavisi suer' seu
haber' tenere uti vel gaudere debuerunt aut debuit in premiss' superius per
presents preconcess' aut in aliqua inde parcell' ratione vel pretextu alicujus
charte doni concess' vel confirmacionis per nos seu per aliquem progenitor'
nostror' nuper regum vel reginarum Angl' antehac habit' fact' concess' seu
confirmat' aut ratione vel pretextu alicujus act' parliament' vel aliquor' act'
parliamentor' aut ratione vel pretextu alicujus legitime prescriptionis usus
seu consuetud' antehac habit' seu usitat' aut al' quocunque legali modo jure
seu titulo ac adeo plene libere et integre ac in tam amplis modo et forma prout
nos aut aliquis progenitor' nostr' predict' terr' tenement' et cetera omnia et
singula premissa superius per presents preconcess' aut aliqua inde parcell' ad
manus nostras seu ad manus aliquorum progenitorum sive antecessorum nostrorum
nuper regum vel reginarum Anglie ratione vel pretextu alicujus dissolutionis
vel sursum redditionis alicujus nuper monaster' abbathie vel priorat' aut
ratione vel pretextu alicujus actus parliamenti vel aliquorum actuum
parliamentorum aut ratione eschaet' seu quocunque alio legali modo jure seu
titulo devenerunt seu devenire debuerunt ac in manibus nostris jam existunt seu
existere debent vel deberent, habend' tenend' et gaudend' predict' hospital'
terr' tenement' prat' pasc' pastur' ac cetera omnia et singula premiss'
superius per presents preconcess' cum eorum pertinenciis universis prefat'
magistro et fratribus hospital' Regis Jacobi in Gateside in com' palatin'
Dunelm' et successoribus suis imperpetuum ad solum et proprium opus et usum
eorundem magistri et fratr' hospital' Regis Jacobi in Gateside in com' palatin'
Dunelm' predict' et successorum suorum imperpetuum tenend' de nobis heredibus
and successoribus nostris in liber' pur' et perpet' eleemosin' in perpetuum pro
omnibus al' redditibus serviciis exactionibus et demand' quibuscunque proinde
nobis heredibus vel successoribus nostris quoquomodo reddend' solvend' vel
faciend'

Et alterius de ampliori gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia et mero
motu nostris pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris dedimus concessimus
pardonavimus remisimus relaxavimus et confirmavimus ac per presents damus
concedimus pardonamus remittimus relaxamus exoneramus et confirmamus prefat'
magistro et fratribus hospital' predict' and successoribus suis et omnibus
aliis tenen' et occupator' premiss' superius per presents preconcess' et
cujuslibet inde parcell' omnes intrusiones intraciones and ingressus de in et
super premiss' seu aliqua inde part' vel parcell' antehac habit' fact' ac etiam
omnia et singula exit' fines redditus revencion' fruct' annual' profic' et
arrerag' quecunque omnium et singul' premiss' superius per presents
preconcess' et cujuslibet inde parcell' quoquemodo ante datum harum litterarum
nostrarum patentium hucusque provenien' crescen' acciden' incurs' sive solubil'
ac omnia arrerag' inde.

Et ulterius de amplio^^ gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia et mero
motu nostris volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus
nostris concedimus prefat' (...) et fratribus hospital' predict' et
successoribus suis quod been liceat abh^^c prefat' magistro et fratribus
hospital' predict' et successoribus suis dimittere ^on^ et ad s^^m' (...) omnia
and singula messuag' s^^m' teri' et tenement' cum pertinentiis eide^ hospital'
seu ^ putat' hospital' antehac spectan' s^^ pertinen' que antehac usualiter
dimiss' facr' pro termino (...) annorum in possession' et non pro ulterter'
etat' vel termtu' et hoc pro et sub m^lior' ra t^^nalit' reddit' pro.... re^^r
^end' et solvend'.

Ac ulterrus declaramus et significan^us per presents quod duren' vit'
natural' predict' Johannis Hutton modo magistri hospital' predict' et quamdiu
idem Johannes Hutton in offic' magistri hospital' predict' continuaver'
quilibet predict' trium pauperum in eodem ho^pital' de tempore in tempus
relevand' et sustentand' habebit et percipret de et ex reddit' revencion'
profic' emelument' ejusdem hospital' tres libras sex solidos et octo denarios
bone et legalis monete Anglie annuatim pro relevamine et sustentatione eorundem
pauperum per manus dicti Johannis Hutton annuatim solvend'.

Et ulterius volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus
nostris concedimus et declaramus quod immediate post mortem dicti Johannis
Hutton magister hospital' predict' qui pro tempore fuerit et successores sui
magistri hospital' predict' habebit et gaudebit habebunt and gaudebunt ad eorum
proprium usum et commodum pro manutention' hujusmodi magistr' hospital'
predict' plenam tertiam part' in tres parts dividend' omn' et singul' exit'
redait' revencion' et profic' omn' and singul' terr' tenement' and
hereditament' superius per presents preconcess' et eidem hospital' antehac
spectan' sive de jure pertinen'.

Et quod similiter immediate post mortem dicti Johannis Hutton fratres
hospital' predict' qui pro tempore fuer' et successores sui habebunt and
gaudebunt ad eorum proprium opus usum et commodum pro manutention' dictorum
fratrum hospital' predict' per manus dict' magistri hospital' predict' pro
tempore existen' et successorum suorum percipiend' alter' duas parts in tres
parts dividend' omnium and singul' exit' reddit' revencion' and profic' omnium
et singul' terr' tenement' et hereditament' superius per presents preconcess'
et eidem hospital' spectan' sive de jure pertinen'.

Et ulterius de ampliori gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia et mero
motu nostris volumus ac per presents concedimus prefat' magistro et fratribus
hospital' predict' et successoribus suis quod nos heredes et successores nostri
imperpetuum et de tempore in tempus exonerabimus acquietabimus et indempn'
conservabimus tam dictum magistrum et fratres and successores suos quam omnia
et singula predict' terr' tenement' et hereditament' superius per presents
preconcess' et quamlibet inde parcell' cum eorum perti^enciis universis versus
nos heredes and successores nostros de et ab omnibus corrodiis reddit' feod'
annuitat' pencionibus portionibus et denariorum summis ac oneribus quibuscunque
de premiss' superius per presents preconcess' seu de aliqua inde parcell'
nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris quoquomodo exeun' seu solven' vel
super inde versus nos heredes et successores nostros onerat' seu onerand'.

Volentes insuper et per presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus nostris
firmiter injungend' et precipiend' tam thesaurar' cancellar' and baron'
scaccarii nostri quam omnibus et singulis receptoribus auditoribus et aliis
officiariis et ministris nostris heredum and successorum quibuscunque pro
tempore existen' quod ipsi et eorum quilibet super solam (...) monstrationem
harum literaram nostrarum patentium vel irrotulament' eorundem absque aliquo
al' brevi seu warranto nobis heredibus vel successoribus nostris quoquomodo
impetrand' seu prosequend' plenam integram debitamque allocationem et
exonerationem manifestam de et ab omnibus and singulis hujusmodi corrodiis
redditibus annuitatibus pentionibus portionibus et denariorum summis ac
oneribus quibuscunque prefat' magistro et fratribus hospital' predict' and
successoribus suis facient vel de temp^re in tempus fieri causabunt Et he
littere nostre patentes vel irrotulament' earundem ^^unt annuatim et de tempore
in tempus tam dict' thesaurar' cancellar' and baron' dicti ^acca^^i nostri
heredum et successorum nostrorum quam omnibus et singulis receptoribus
auditoribus et aliis officiariis and ministris nostris heredum et successorum
nostrorum qui ^^scunque pro tempore existen' sufficien' warrant' et exoneratio
in hac part.

Volumus etiam ac per presents concedimus prefat' magistro and fratribus
hospital' predict' et successoribus suis quod he littere nostre patentes vel
irrotulamenta earundem ^runt in omnibus et per omnia firm valide bone
sufficien' et effectual' in lege et contra nos heredes and successores nostros
tam in omnibus curiis nostris quam alibi infra regnum nostrum Anglie absque
aliquibus confirmationibus licentiis vel tollerationibus de nobis heredibus vel
successoribus nostris quoquomodo imposterum procurand' aut obti nend' Non
obstante male nominand' vel male recitand' aut non recitand' predict' terr'
tenoment' ac ceter' premiss' superius per presents preconcess' aut aliquam
inde parcell' Et non obstan' non inveniend' offic' aut inquisitionem premiss'
aut alicujus inde parcell' per que titulus noster inveniri debuit ante
confectionem harum literarum nostrarum parentium Et non obstan' male recitand'
male nominand' vel non recitand' seu non nominand' aliquam dimissionem sive
concessionem de premiss' vel de aliqua inde parcell' fact' existen' de recordo
vel non de recordo Et non obstan' male nominand' vel non nominand' aliquam
villam hamlett paroch' loc' vel comitat' in quibus premiss' vel aliqua inde
parcell' existunt vel existit Et non obstan' quod de nominibus tenentium
firmariorum sive occupatorum premissorum aut alicujus inde parcell' plena vera
et certa non sit mentio Et non obstan' aliquibus defectibus de certitudine vel
computatione aut declaratione very annui valoris premissorum aut alicujus inde
parcell' aut annuitat' redd' reservat' de et super permiss' vel de et super
aliquam inde parcell' in hiis litteris nostris patentibus express' et content'
Et non obstan' statut' in parliament' Domini Henrici nuper Regis sexti
antecessor' nostri anno regni sui decimo octavo fact' et edit' Et non obstan'
statut' de terr' et tenement' ad manum mortuam non ponend' Et non obstan'
statut' in parliament' Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Anglie sexti antecessoris
nostri anno regni sui primo fact' et edit' Et non obstan' aliquibus defect' in
non recte nominand' natur' genera species quantitat' aut qualitat' premissorum
aut alicujus inde parcell' Eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo aut de
certitudine premissor' sive eorum alicujus aut de aliis donis sive
concessionibus per nos seu per aliquem progenitorum sive predeccessorum
nostrorum prefat' magistro et fratribus hospital' pred' ante hec tempora fact'
in presentibus minime fact' extitit aut aliquo statuto actu ordinatione
provisione proclamatione sive restrictione in contrariam inde antehac habit
edit' ordinat' seu provis' aut aliqua alia re causa vel materia quacunque in
aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras nostras fieri
fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium quarto die Jeruarti anno
regni nostri Anglie Francie et Hibernie octavo et Scoti^ quadragesimo quarto.

Per breve de privato sigillos CARTWRIGHT. (From a copy in Allan's privately
printed collections.)

APPENDIX, P. 473 and 479. An Act for the writing and (...) the Town of
Gateside to the Town of Newcastell upon Ti^^.
WHERE the quiet order, (...), and governance of the corporation, and body
politic of the town of Newcastell upon Tine, has been not a little
disturbed, and hindered to a (...) great, and manifest impouerishment, ruin,
and decaie of the said corporation: (...) reason as well that in the town of
Gateside parcel both of the possessions of the bishoprike of Durham, and also
of the liberties, and county palantine of Durham aforesaid, next a l^^ming
unto the said haven town of Newcastell on the southside of the said river of
Tine, do inhabit, and been from time to time a great number of carpenter,
collars, fishers, manners, and other handicrafts men, which by their handiworks
gain, and have their chief, and in manner whole living in the said town of
Newcastell, where they daily commit manifold inormities, and disorders, which
escape unpunished, to a very evil example in the hinderance of justice, by
reason that such offenders by repairing into the said town of Gateside, being
without the jurisdiction of the said haven town of Newcastell, find euasions,
and means to escape the condign correction, and punishment of their said
misbehaviors: as also for that no small number of the inhabitants of Gateside
without any respect to the conservation of the haven of the said port town of
Newcastell being the chief maintenance, and uphold of the same, do cast into
the said haven rubbish, with all the refuse of their buildings, besides the
other clensing of their houses, and streets, without any correction, or
punishment extended unto them for the same, by reason that the said town of
Gateside is parcel of the said county palantine of Durham, and without the
liberties of the said haven town, as is aforesaid, without remedy whereof,
the said haven should perish, and thereby the town should be in great
ieopardie of ruin, and decaie.

And furthermore, forasmuch also as a part of the bridge over the said river of
Tine perteining to the said town of Gateside, is so far in ruin, and decaie
for lack of reparation, that no carts, or cariages may be suffered to pass
over the same: for remedy whereof, and sundry other inormities here not
recited, be it by the king's majesty our sovereign lord, with the assents of
the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, ordained, established, and
enacted, that the town of Gateside aforesaid, and all the inhabitants of the
same town that now be, or hereafter shall be, and a parcel of ground called
the Salt Medows ioining to the town of Gateside aforesaid and hard upon the
river there, and the whole water, and bridge belonging, or apperteining to the
same town of Gateside, shall be from hensefoorth severed, and divided from the
bishoprike of Durham, and from the liberties, and county palantine of the
same. And from hensefoorth shall be united, and annexed to the said town of
Newcastell upon Tine, and to be taken, deemed, and adjudged to be within the
county, and shire of the same town of Newcastell upon Tine, and be reputed,
and taken as part, parcel, and member of the same town of Newcastell. And the
inhabitants of the same town of Gateside shall be under the rule, government,
and correction of the mayor, and burgesses, as other of the inhabitants of the
same town of Newcastell, now been, or of right ought to be, to all intents,
constructions, and purposes, and that the said mayor of Newcastell, and
burgesses of the same town, and their successors from hensefoorth ever shall
have the same, and like liberties, franchises, privileges, jurisdictions,
punishments, obedience, and corrections in the said town of Gateside
aforesaid, and the meadow called the Salt Meadow, and the waters, and bridge
belonging to the same town of Gateside, and of the inhabiters, dwellers, and
occupiers of the same, as the said now mayor, and burgesses has, or may
lawfully do in all things, and to all intents in the said town of Newcastell.

Provided alwaie, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act,
ne any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to take away
any such title of common from the inhabitants of the said town of Gateside,
which they have, or of right ought to have within the bishoprike of Durham
aforesaid, but that they, and every of them, their heirs, and successors, may
have, use, and occupy the same, as they might have done before the making of
this act, and as if this act had never been had, he made, any thing contained
in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
mayor and burgesses of Newcastell, and their successors for ever, shall have
toward the reparations of the south side of the bridge, their sufficient wood
for the reparations of the same bridge, and also for the reparations of the
houses of Gateside aforesaid to be taken, and had out of the woods of the park
of Gateside, in like manner and form as the said town of Gateside, and the
inhabitants of the same, has aforetime had the same to the same intent, and to
be delivered unto them by the assignement of the lord, or owner, or his
sufficient deputy, or deputies of the said manor, and park of Gateside
aforesaid, for the time being, as often as need shall require the said bridge
to be repaired by the said mayor, and burgesses, and their successors at the
costs, and charges of the said mayor, and burgesses, and their successors for
ever.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Bishop
of Durham, and his successors for ever, for all such things as he or they shall
buie, bring, or carry into the said town of Newcastell or Gateside, or buie in
them, or in any of them for the maintenance of their household, or family,
shall go free without paieng any toll, picage, stallage, wharfage, or other
duty, or custom for the same, in the same town of Newcastell, and Gateside:
saving to all, and every person and persons, bodies politic, and corporat,
their heirs, and successors, and to the heirs and successors of every of
them, all such right, title, interest, possession, leases, annuities, rents,
services, reuersions, remainders, offices, fees, commons, commodities, profits,
entrees, conditions, petitions, suit, or action, which they now have, or
hereafter ought to have, of, in, or to any manors, mesuages, lands, tenements,
or hereditaments, lieing, and being within the said town of Gateside, other
then the liberties, franchises, privileges, jurisdictions, vnitings and
annexions, punishments, obediences, corrections, interests belonging to the
said bishoprike of Durham, or of the county palantine aforesaid, heretofore
claimed, and used within the said town of Gateside, and in the Salt Meadow,
bridge, and waters aforesaid, and the timberwood from time to time necessary
to be taken, and had in Gateside park for the reparations as well of the said
bridge, as also of the houses in Gateside aforesaid, in form before rehearsed,
which said town of Gateside, the Salt Meadow, bridge, and waters aforesaid,
together with the abouesaid timber, for the reparations of the said bridge and
houses, to be taken in Gateside park aforesaid, are united and annexed to the
said town of Newcastell upon Tine, as aforementioned, in such like manner and
form, as they, or any of them have had, should, or might have had, if this
act had never been had ne made: any thing in this present act contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

APPENDIX, P. 497. (From an attested Copy, communicated by the Rev. Mr. Thorp,
Rector of Gateshead.)
I Theophilus Pickering of Gateshead in the bishopric of Durham do hereby
entrust my rever^nd and worthy friends Mr. Nathaniel Ellison, vicar of
Newcastle, Mr. Samuel Hampton, cura^^ of Gateshead, and my worthy friends Mr.
Michael Tailor, Mr. ^^urxi^^ Stephenson, Mr. Robert Sutton and Mr. William
Coatsworth, merchants in Gateshead aforesaid and Mr. Charles Newton and Mr.
Matthew Newton, masters and manners of the said parish of Gateshead, with the
whole profits that shall accrue to me for all the (...) or (...) of coal that
shall at any time be wrought out of a parcel of ground contrarily called o^
known by the name of Bulis Acre in the said parish of Gateshead, which they are
hereby empowered to receive of my tenants for the said col^^^, and their
acquittances for every such sum or sums of money by them received shall by my
said tenants be allowed of and accepted as my own: and in case of my decease
before the said colliery be fully wrought out, so that the sum or sums of money
arising from thence shall not in all amount to the full sum of three hundred
pounds of good and lawful money of England, I do hereby oblige my executors and
administrators, out of what estate real or personal it shall please God I leave
behind, to add so much money thereto, as shall complete to my said trustees the
reverend Nathaniel Ellison, vicar of Newcastle, Mr. Samuel Simpson, curate of
Gateshead, Mr. Michael Tailor, Mr. Haux^ey Stephenson, Mr. Robert Sutton and
Mr. William Coatsworth, merchants in Gateshead, and Mr. Charles Newton and Mr.
Matthew Newton, masters and mariners of Gateshead, the said sum of three
hundred pounds -- which said sum of three hundred pounds shall be laid out by
these my trustees in the purchase of some rent charge if it may be had, or in
the purchase of land for the perpetual maintenance of a free school in the
parish of Gateshead the yearly revenue of which rent charge or land (excepting
what is paid to the lord of the manor of Gateshead for the use of the tollbooth
in the said parish as a school) shall be the standing salary for the master of
the said free school -- and if the said tollbooth in the parish of Gateshead
cannot be obtained or continued as a school for this purpose, though I have a
grant of it ^^^ing my time, and no other building be obtained or erected by any
person or persons in ^is convenient a part of the town for this end and
purpose, I do hereby settle this my gift of three hundred pounds upon the
anchorage adjoining to the parish church of Gateshead, the yearly revenue of
which sum shall be the perpetual maintenance of a schoolmaster there, which
said master, whether he be settled in the tollbooth or anchorage or any other
convenient place in Gateshead aforesaid, shall be chosen by the rector of
Gateshead for the time being, with the consent of the trustees above mentioned,
and after their decease solely by the rector of Gateside for the time being.
And my desire is, that if any poor clergiman be found in all respects qualified
for the said school, he may be chosen master thereof before any other, as he
may be useful on occasion in assisting the rector either in his parish church
or in his chapel belonging to the hospital when ever that shall regain again
its original design and institution. Though in the first place I do hereby
appoint and declare Mr. George Hudson now schoolmaster in the parish of
Gateshead aforesaid to be the master of the said free school during the term of
his life and continuance in the said parish, provided he shall from time to
time and at all times diligently and faithfully execute the trust and duty
reposed and incumbent upon him as master of the said school, which is as
follows: Imprin^^, That the master of the said free school, for and in
consideration of the yearly salary above mentioned, shall teach or be ready to
teach all the children of the parish of Gateshead, the Latin and Greek tongues:
as also to write and cast up accounts and also the art of navigation or plain
sailing. And I do desire my trustees, that they or some of them, with the
rector of Gateshead for the time being, do once at least in the year inspect
the said free school and examine in every particular what proficiency is made
there according to my design and order now re^^t^d -- and that all this may be
begun and ended in the faith and fear of almighty God and to the glory of his
great and holy name, and the procuring his favorable protection and blessi^^,
^o hereby most strictly require and enjoin the said master and every respective
(...) ^very morning before he begins to teach school, to read or cause to be
read to hi^ (...), a charter out of the holy Bible and then such a prayer or
form of prayer as (...) be appointed him for that purpose, and every night
before he gives over school, to (...) began, with a chapter again and prayer,
and also with a psalm which the said (...) shall teach all his scholars to
sing, and that at other times also he shall teach (...) all the (...) tunes,
especially such as are sung at Gateshead church. And that (...) Sunday both
morning and afternoon the said master do cause all his scholars to repair first
to the five school, and from thence to attend him constantly to church,
behaving themselves there attentively and reverently, and that after evening
prayer he shall return again with his scholars to the said free school, where
he shall hear them say the church catechism and sing a psalm together with
them, and then exhorting them to a diligent and frequent reading of the
scriptures, to a religious use of God's holy name, a devout observation of the
Sabbath day, a constant offering of their prayers to almighty God every day,
dismiss them in his faith and fear to their several homes. -- In witness of
this my trust, gift, will and desire I do hereunto set my hand and seal this
ninth day of January, in the year of our Lord God 1700-1.

THEOPHIL. PICKERING.
Signed, sealed and delivered (being writ upon paper stamped as the law directs)
in the presence of Richard Man, James Middleton and James Brown. Examined and
compared with the original by me RALPH TROTTER, Register.

ADDENDA.
ADDENDA, P. 21.
CHARES ON THE KEY-SIDE.

PALESTER'S CHARE now goes by the name of the Black-Boy-Chare, from the sign of
a black boy.

Colvin's Chare is now called Armourers Chare.

"The Park" is known at present by the names of "the Dark Entry," or "Back
Lane." It has been omitted in Hutton's Plan.

ADDENDA TO THE ACCOUNT OF THE CASTLE. P. 168.

JOHN CHRICHLOE TURNER, Esquire. lessee of the Castle-Garth, was afterward sheriff
of Huntingdon and Cambridge shires, and received the honor of knighthood.

ADDENDA, P. 106. ST. JOHN's CHURCH.
On a Bross Plate in the Front of the O^^^n Gallery.

"THIS ^^^llery was erected and repaired A. D. 17^^. Jno Gale, Edward Smith,
T^^^ ^^own, Wm Potter, wardens."

Small mural Monument, (...) the ^ent, North Wall.

"N^^^ (...) place he the remains of Frances wife of James Wharton, who died
Novemb^^ (...), aged 4^ years. Fre^^ed by her son Francis Wharton 1785"

(...) ^ural Monument of white and black Mar^h near the Vestry D^o^

"SACRED to the memory of Nathaniel Clayton, B. D. ^^^merly follow of St.
John's College, Cambridge, ^or of Ingram and vicar of Whelpington in the county
of Northumberland; rector of Aberdaron in North Wales: Master of the hospital
of St. Mary Magdalen in Newcastle upon Tyne; and fifty years lecturer of this
church. He resigned his spirit to him that gave it August 10th 1786. His
earthly remains were interred without the walls of this church near the south
aisle. He married Grace, one of the daughters and coheiresses of Nicholas
Fenwick, of London, merchant, by whom he had issue three sons and one daughter
-- Nathaniel who died an infant, and Robert, Nathaniel and Sarah, now
surviving." Arms, Clayton and Fenwick on a scutcheon of pretense. ST. JOHN'S
REGISTER.
Februarij 1588-9, "John Car gentleman and postmaster" occurs.

September 1589, "Elswicke Stathe" occurs.

March 1589-90, "Mr. Bowlande entering to be curat at St. John's."

"The 22 day of August entered Mr. John Murra to be minister of St. John's
church." (1590)

"May 1589, Alice Stokoe the 13 May buried. She was servant to Thomas Hodgsson
butcher and did put down herself in her maister's house in her own belt," i.
e. hanged herself, a north country idiom.

"August 1589, Edward Erington the towns fooll buried the 23 of August died in
the peste."

October 1589.

"Died this month of October on hundred 208 persons three score and 3 children
32 young men and maids and 33 of marid folks being householders 1589."

December 1589.

"Died in this monethe December Mr. Willm Selbye mayor and John Gibson sheriff
11 persons in the plage so that in all which has died beffor this day being
the first of Januarij in this town it is counted by all the records in number
to be in all 1727 persons wheroff 3 hundrede and 40 persons in St. John's 5
hundred and 9 persons at the chapel 3 hundred at Alhalows 4 hundred 9 persons
at St Andrews on hundred" and... (Caetera desunt.)

Mandatum ad recipiend' purgationem clerici incarcerati, faciend' in ecclesia
S. Johannis (...) ^illa Novi Castri.

Reg. Langley, p. 269. THOMAS LEYS, decanus ecclesiae collegiatae de Aukland,
reverendi in Christo patris Thomae Dunelm' episcopi in remotis agentis vicarius
in spiritualibus generalis, dilectis nobis magistro Willielmo Doncastre in
legibus baccallario, archidiaconi Northumbriae officiali and Domino Johanni
Brigg, vicario ecclesiae parochialis de Corbrigg sequestratori Northumbriae,
salutem in Domino sempiternam. Ex part Willielmi Medcalfe de Morpath in com'
Northumbriae trunpett reverendo in Christo patri and Domino Domino Thomae Dei
gratia Dun' episc' de mense Septemb' ultimo praeterito gravite^ cum querela
extitit intimatum, quod idem Willielmus de and super eo quod ipse felonice
furatus fuisset unum equum and unam sellam pretii 20s. and de bonis et catallis
Johannis Rauchif de Morpath apud Morpath die Jovis proximo post festum Corp'
Christi anno regni Regis Henrici quinti post conquestum Angliae primo olim
impetitus, et ab hoc per ministros Domini nostri Regis captus et custodi^
carcerali mancipatus, ac super eodem crimine in judicio seculari coram non suo
judice in ea part per laicos falso et maliciofe convictus, et quia clericus
fuit inventus eidem reverendo patri suo diocesano, locique ordinario
custodiendus extitit liberatus, propter quod ex part ejusdem Willielmi fuit
praedicto reverendo patri humiliter supplicatum, quatenus ipsius in ea part
purgationem suam quam se praestiturum existimabat, in forma juris recipere
dignaretur. Dictus quoque reverendus pater volens eidem Willielmo, prout ex
officio suo tenebatur, justitiam exhibere, nobis vivae vocis oraculo si tunc
mandabat, ut sibi pro purgatione sua facienda, si eam facere posset, providere
faceremus, cum ad hoc per partem ejusdem Willielmi sumus instanter pulsati, ut
sibi juxta mandatum nobis factum, providendus de remedio opportuno. Vobis
firmiter injungentes committimus et mandamus, quatenus in singulis ecclesiis
parochial' villae Novi Castri super Tynam et praecipue in ecclesia parochiali
de Morpath et aliis locis convicinis, ubi expedire videritis, public et
solemniter proponatis and proclamatis, proponive et proclamari faciatis ut si
quis vel qui in specie vel in genere contra purgationem ipsius Willielmi
Medcalf opponere se voluerit aut voluerint, seu eidem contradicere quovis modo
coram vobis commissariis nostris aliquo termino competenti peremptorio per vos
ad hoc assignando in ecclesia S. Johannis dictae villae Novi Castri sup' Tynam
compareat vel compareant causam rationabilem, si quam pro se habeant, quare ad
purgationem hujusmodi procedi non debeat in forma juris proposituri et
probaturi, ulteriusque facturi et recepturi in praemissis quod natura ejusdem
negotii et ratio juris de se exigunt and requirunt. Praemuniatis etiam
praefatum Johannem Rouclif, si ipse superstes fuerit, vel ipsius executores, si
ab hac luce migraverit, quod dictis die and loco in hujusmodi purgatione
recipienda intersit vel intersint, ad proponend' quicquid proponere vel
opponere voluerit vel voluerint in hac part, si qua putaverint interesse:
Quibus omnino non comparentibus, aut in suis probationibus defecientibus, ad
recipiend' in forma juris purgationem ipsius Willielmi Medcalf de praemissis
per viros ecclesiasticos and laicos fide dignos, ac omnia alia et singula
faciend' exercend' et expediend' quae in praemissis et circa ea necessaria
fuerint vel etiam opportuna. Vobis de quorum fidelitate and circumspectionis
industria plenam in Domino fiduciam gerimus, committimus vices nostras cum
cujuslibet coercionis canonicae potestate, mandantes quatenus hujusmodi negotio
expedito nos de omni eo quod feceritis et inveneritis in praemissis distinct
et aperte certificetis per literas vestras patentes harum seriem continentes
officiorum vestrorum sigillis fideliter consignatas. Datum apud Aulkand sub
sigillo vicariatus nostri decimo nono die Martii an' Domini 1419.

M. S. Thomas Wolfallus in agro Lancast' natus Theologus celeberrimus ecclesiae
hujus aliquando pastor vigilantissimus: Postquam Simplicitate cordis
Sinceritate doctrinae Sanctimonia vitae Conscientiam Deo probasset et vineam
Domini sui diligenter excoluisset, mortalitati auream imposuit coronam Octob'
21, annoque Domini 1652. Hac tumultatus humo pro munere amoris ardentiss'
extremo hoc monumentum ponendum curavit superstes Vidua ejus E. W. Clausa
cubant hic ossa Thomae sub marmore parvo
Wolfalli: fidus de grege pastor erat
Grata Deo fecit, fecit mortalibus apta
Dum licuit nutu vivere (Christ) tuo
Ocia non carpsit fluitantis mollia vitae
Dulcia nec mundi gaudia mente tulit
Sed potius very meditatus mistica Christi
Mortuus e mundi transit ad astra malis.
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...) Proverbs x. 7. (The memory of the just is blessed.)

Apocalypse xiv. 13. (...). (Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord.)

ADDENDA, P. 120.
"HERE lies buried The Reverend Richard Cuthbert, S. T. B. vicar of Kirkby in
Kendale: In whose character the Christian, the scholar, and the gentleman
rendered each other more illustrious. His zeal was happily tempered with
knowledge and moderation. His public labors and private conduct agreed to
demonstrate the integrity of his life. Stranger, suspect not this epitaph of
flattery; his praises are more fully inscribed on the hearts of all who knew
him, and his Master's presence will reward and perfect his virtues, by a more
intimate converse with the great Exemplar. Ob. Nov. 7, A. D. 1744, aetat. 48.
cur. huj. par. 11. INDEX TO VOL. I.
A.
ANDERSON'S ring, wonderful event concerning, page 45, 46. Arms of the
commonwealth ordered to be put up on Tyne-bridge, 48. Assembly-house, 121. St.
Andrew's church, 178 to 196. Austin or Augustine Friars, 344, 350.
Artillery-ground, 351. Austin-chare, 344. Allhallow gate, 359. All Saints
church, from 359 to 393. St. Ann's chapel, from 393 to 395, including account
of the lecturers. Alvey's island, 399. Almshouse at Stockbridge, 399. St. Ann's
street, 450. St. Ann's, 455. Almshouse in Gateshead, 486. Appendix, Vol. I. Act
of 3d Geo. III. for lighting the streets, etc. of Newcastle, 509. Ditto, Act
26th Geo. III. for widening the streets, etc. 524. Ditto, Act 12th George III.
to enable the Bishop of Durham to rebuild part of Tyne-bridge, 542. Ditto, Act
12th Geo. III. for building a temporary bridge over the river Tyne, 548. Ditto,
Act for enlarging the term of the above act, 557. Ditto, Act for enlarging the
term of the two above acts, 574. St. Andrew's church, Appendix concerning, 618.
All Saints church, act for rebuilding, 624 to 638. All Saints church, Appendix
concerning, from 638 to 643.
B.
BREAKNECK-STAIRS, 7. Bridge, Tyne, fall of, 49. -- acts for rebuilding, 50.
Bolbeck-hall, alias Westmoreland place, 66. Benwell, chapel and burying-ground
of, 111. Black-friars, from 122 to 133. Back-row, 136. -- anciently called
Gallow-gate, ibid. Bayly-gate, 137. Bankside, ibid. Bridge-end chapel, from 318
to 319. Blackett's, Sir Walter, house, 341. Brigham's almshouses, 342.
Blackett's hospital, 357. Blind-chare, 398. Blyth's nook, 410. Byker-chare,
411. Blind man's loaning, 423. Burying-ground for dissenters in Sid-gate, 423.
Barias-bridge, 431. Ballast hills burying-ground, 155 to 458. Boundaries of the
town of Newcastle, 4^^. Bottle-bank, Gateshead, 487. Black-friars, grant of,
from King Henry VIII. to mayor, etc. of Newcastle, 597. Ditto, grant of, from
the mayor, etc. to the nine trades, 599.
C.
CLOSE-GATE, 7. Chares, 21. Crow's nest, most remarkable site of one, 30. Coin
supposed to have been struck on the building of Tyne-bridge, 37. Coins found on
pulling it down, 38. Close-street, so called, 53 et seq. Charity-school, St.
John's, 112. Chantries, St. John's, from 106 to 108. Clergy of St. Andrew's,
191, 196 Clergy of St. John's, from 117 to 121. Castle of Newcastle, from 143
to 177. Survey of the castle in 1649, 160. Crewe's (Lord) exhibitions,
Lincoln-college, Oxford, 99. Chantries in St. Nicholas' church, from 247 to
259. Chancel of St. Nicholas, 266. Charity-school, ibid. 274. Curates of St.
Nicholas, 316 to 318. Cramlington-chapel, 322, 323. Clergy, sons of, charity,
from 323 to 326. Ditto, for widows, etc. of dissenting clergymen, 326.
Cloth-market, alias Flesh-market, 327. Cordiner-row, 33^. Cale-cross, 331.
Carliol-croft, 342. Cow-gate, 344. Chantries in All Saints, from 361 to 367.
Charity-school of All Saints, 373. Curates of All Saints, 390, 393.
Crosswell-street, 410. Cock's chare, 411. Close-gate, suburbs of, ibid.
Castle-moor, or Town-moor, 431 to 437. Castle-field, 437. Castle-leazes, ibid.
Condurt head, 442. Cistern or reservoir in Castle leazes, 445. Castle, Addenda
to account of, 673.
D.
DURHAM Fellowships, University College, Oxford, 1^1. Darne crook, 178. D^^^
^^^y at Newcastle upon Tyne, 340. D^^^son's hospitals, 35^, 356, 357. Dog bank,
396. Duck-hill, 399. Dissenting ministers, anecdote of, 455, 456.
E.
EQUESTRIAN statue of J^mes II. on Sa^d. hill, 3^. Exchange, 29. Earl's inn,
54. Execution-dock, 199. Ew-gate, 399. St. Edmund's hospital in Gateshead, from
466 to 476. St. Elen's street, Gateshead, 477.
F.
FOSSE or ditch of the town's wall, 6. Font of St. Nicholas, 267. Flesh-market,
327. Font, All Saints, 369. Fisher-gate, 400. Farth, or Forth, 416 to 419.
Fairs at Newcastle, 437. Folly near Sandgate-gate, 445, notes.
G.
GAOL -- Gaolers, 14. -- chaplains of, ibid. Gogo-burn, 17. Grammar School,
from 85 to 104. Groat or meal market, 234. Gosforth chapels, south and north,
320, 321. Glover-gate, 327. Grey-friars, alias Minors, 331 to 337. Galleries
and pews, All Saints, 368. Gooden-dean, 418, notes. Gallow-gate, 422.
Garth-heads, meeting house there, 449. Glass-house bridge, 455. Gunpowder
magazine, 459. Gateshead, 461. -- severed from the bishopric of Durham, 479.
-- companies incorporated at, 485. -- woollen manufactory at, 487. --
post office at, ibid. -- chapel for dissenters at, ibid. Gateshead church, from
488 to 501. -- chantries in, from 489 to 493. -- steeple, 493. -- galleries,
pews and organ, 494. -- chancel, ibid. -- register, vestry, churchyard, 495.
Gateshead charity-school, 496. Gateshead church, plate belonging to, 494.
Gateshead, benefactions to the poor there, 497. Gateshead church, monumental
inscriptions in, from 498 to 501. Gateshead, rectors and curates of, from 501
to 505. Gateshead, Appendix concerning, from 661 to 671.
H.
HOUSES, number of, in Newcastle, 19. Hadrian's Vallum, 137. Hartwell's
(Doctor) exhibitions to each university, from Durham and Newcastle schools,
102. Horsemarket-gate, 178. Hucksters' booths, 199. High-friar-chare, 331.
High-bridge, 337. Honey-lane, 398. Heaton, chapel at, 442, notes.
I.
INHABITANTS, supposed number of, in Newcastle and Gateshead, 19. Javil-groop,
55. St. John's church, from 106 to 121. -- addenda to, 673. James's (St.)
chapel, 196. Iron-market, 235. Jesus' hospital, 352 to 355. Jew-gate, 359.
Infirmary, from 412 to 416. James's (St.) chapel, 427. Jesmond, Appendix
concerning, 620.
K.
KEY, or Quay side, 20. Keelmen's hospital, 450 to 454. Key-side, chares on,
Addenda to account of, 673.
L.
LATITUDE and longitude of Newcastle, 2. Lamps, act concerning, in the streets
of Newcastle, 20. Lork-burn, 29. Lady's (our) chapel on Tyne-bridge, 46.
Long-stairs, 55. Low-friar-chare, 134. Lying-in hospital, 135. Lying-in
charity, 135. Library in St. Nicholas' church, 269. Legacies left to the poor
of St. Nicholas, 271. Lecturers, afternoon, at St. Nicholas, 312 to 316. Lort
or Lork burn, 331. Low-bridge, 330, 337. Legacies left to the poor of All
Saints, 370, 373. Lecturers, morning and afternoon, at All Saints, from 387 to
390. St. Laurence's chapel, 395. Love-lane, 400. Lunatic hospital, 421. Luke's
(St.) house, 422, notes. Lisle street, 424. Lying-in hospital, license to Sarah
Hudson to keep, 601. Lamiae, remarkable altar dedicated to, Appendix, 607.
M.
MAISON de Dieu, 23. -- appendix concerning, 541. -- rental of, 79. Mansion
house, 56. St. Mary's hospital, 67 to 85. Monuments and monumental inscriptions
in St. John's, 113 to 116. Monuments, etc. in St. Andrew's, 189, 191. Meal or
groat market, 234. Middle-street, 235. Monuments, etc. St. Nicholas, from 276
to 301. Mosley-street, 328. Monuments and monumental inscriptions in (late) All
Saints, from 375 to 386. Michael, St. of Wallknoll, 405. -- seal of, 406.
Mary's (St.) hospital, King James's charter concerning, 588. Monogram of Christ
upon a Roman altar, Appendix, 608. Mary's (St.) chapel at Jesmont, 197.
Middle-street, 327. Manor-chare, 344. Myln-chare, 423. Magdalen hospital, 424
to 430. Milk-market in Sand-gate, 450, notes. Magdalen hospital, Appendix
concerning, 648.
N.
NEWGATE, 13, 14. Newcastle under Line, or Lyme, 144. New-gate-street, 177.
Nolt-market, 178. Nunnery of Newcastle, 200, to 235. Nicholas' (St.) church,
236 to 301. Nether Dean-bridge, 330, also 337. Nykson's almshouse, 343. New
meeting house, 411. Newgate, suburbs of, 422. Northumberland-street, and
Northumberland-place, 424. Nun-moor, 440, 441. New water, 445. St. Nicholas'
church, Appendix concerning, 622.
O.
ORGAN in St. Nicholas' church, 268. Orphan-house, 424. Ouse, or Use burn, 442.
Oak well-gate (Gateshead), 482.
P.
PLAN, oldest, of Newcastle upon Tyne, 1. Corbridge's ditto, 2. Hutton^s ditto,
ibid. Perspective views of Newcastle, ibid Postern-gate, 8. Way through to the
Forth, ibid. Pilgrim-street-gate, 15. Pandon-gate, 17. Postern-gate at
Carpenters (...) 18. Pons Aelii, 37. Pudding-char^, 134. Postern, 136. Percy
fellowships, University College, Oxford, (...) Northumberland fellowships, 1^1.
Pold-hall in the Meal market, 231. Papists, places of worship, 328, 329.
Painter-hugh, 339, 338. Pencher-place, 330. Pilgrim-street, 338. Pilgrims' inn,
339. Pandon, 396. Pandon-hall, 397. Pant, etymology of the word, 421,
Percy-street, 423. Pilgrim-street, suburbs of, 424. Pinfold, ibid. Pandon,
suburbs of, 441. Peter's (St. or Sir) key, 459. Park (Gateshead), 477.
Palace-place, in Gateshead, 482. Playhouse at Newcastle, act for licensing
one, 623.
Q.
QUAKERS' meeting house, 340.
R.
RECLUSE on Tyne-bridge, 43. Ring dropped over Tyne-bridge, and recovered in a
wonderful manner, 45. Rosemary-lane, 135. Rents and revenues arising to the
castle of Newcastle from several baronies, 169, 171. Races, Newcastle, 434.
Reservoir on Town-moor, 447. Roman walls, Appendix concerning the present state
of, from 601 to 617.
S.
SAND-GATE, 18. Sand-hill, 23. Sac, Friars of, alias of the penance of Jesus
Christ, 58. Spit^l almshouse, 105. Severus' wall, 137. Sheep^s-head alley, 137.
Smith^s (Dr.) exhibition, Durham and Newcastle s^hool, 1^^. Scotch inn, 199.
Shrine in St. Nicholas' church, Earl of Northumberlands, 276. Skinner and
Spurtier gate, 327. Side, street so called, 329. Swinburn-place, 330.
Silver-street, 359. Steeple of All Saints, 3^7. Stock-bridge, 398. Stoney hall,
3^^. Semner (...), 412. (...) in close, 420, notes (...). Small (...) 424.
S^^^^d (...), 441. (...), suburbs of, 448. S^^erle, 449. Sa^^^s port meeting
house, ibid. Sandsgate, chares in, 449. Salt meadows, Gateshead, 479. Skippers
and ^eelmen's act, 6^5.
T.
TOWERS in the town's wall, 6. White-friar-tower, 8. Denton or Nevil tower,
ibid. West-spital-tower, 9. Stank-tower, 10. Gunner-tower, ibid. Pink-tower,
ibid. Durham-tower, 11. Herber-tower, 12. Mordon-tower, ibid. Ever-tower, ibid.
Andrew-tower, 13. Bertram-Momboucher-tower, 15. Fickett-tower, ibid. Carlel or
Weavers tower, 16. Waits tower, ibid. Carlel-croft-tower, or Plummer-tower,
ibid. Austin-tower, ibid. Corner-tower, 17. Wallknoll-tower, ibid.
Habkyn-tower, ibid. Town-court, 29. St. Thomas's chapel, 31. -- chantries in,
32. Tyne-bridge, 35. Tyne-bridge, third part of it recovered by the Bishop of
Durham, 42. Tower on the bridge, a prison, 47. Temporary bridge, 51.
Tuthill-stairs, 55. Tuthill-street, 121. Tallow-house, 351. Temple-gate, 359.
Trinitarians, from 401 to 410. Town-moor, from 431 to 437. Trinity-hospital at
Gateshead, 463. Trinity-hospital on Wallknoll, Appendix concerning, 643.
Town-moor act, 649.
U.
UNIVERSITY College, Oxford, possessions of, in West-gate, 105.
V.
VICARAGE-HOUSE, 105. Vicars of St. Nicholas, from 301 to 312. Upper Dean, or
High-bridge, 337. Vine-lane, 424. Vicar of St. Nicholas, act to enable him to
devise some land, 595.
W.
WALL, Newcastle said to have been surrounded with one, temp. Will. Rufus, 1.
vid. 3, 4, 5. Wards of the town, 6. West-gate, 10, 11. West-gate (street so
called), 58, 66, 104, 121. White-friars, or Carmelites, 60. -- surrender of,
63. White-cross, 199. Windows in St. Nicholas' church, 267. Wallknowl, 400.
West-gate, suburbs of, 419. Warden's close, 420. Workhouse, St. John's, 421.
West Cow-gate, 434. Wheat-market, 343. Workhouse, or general hospital, 351.
Ward's almshouse, 358. Water to supply the town of Newcastle, 443 to 448.
ERRATA.
Page 3, line 7 from bottom, "circumdedit," sic in MS. but ought to be
"circumdederunt" 10, line 7 from bottom, the asterisk ought to refer to
"north," It is so in the MS. but ought to be "south." 63, line 15 from bottom,
pro "Dominica," lege "Dominia." -- also line 23, the same. line 3^ from bottom,
ibid. pro "adhibere," lege "adhiberi." 295, line 13 from top, for "lie," read
"lay^" 297, line 6 from top, for "ut omnibus desideratus," etc. read "ut
omnibus esset in viti carus, post mortem desideratus" 515, line 21 from top,
for "rates," read "rate." 542, line ^ from top for "St James" read "King James'
hospital." 556, line 17 from bottom, for "uch," read "such." 559, line 28 from
bottom, for "Wytam," read "Wylam." 6^4, line 6 from bottom, for "reg^la," read
"regulae." 614, line 8 from bottom, for "Aurelianus," read "Aurelius." 382,
line 12 from top, for "vide annals, etc" read "vide Bourne sub A. D. 1429."
Directions to the Binder for placing the Cuts.
P^^t^^^t of Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. to face the engraved Title Page P^^t of
Newcastle upon Tyne page 1 Inside view of Town Wall 2 View of West-Gate 10 --
New Gate 1^ -- Pilgrim-Gate 15 View of Newcastle upon Tyne from Sl^^^ld Field
17 Statues of King Charles II. etc. 30 Ruins of Tyne Bridge 49 St. Mary's
Hospital 67 Assembly Rooms 121 Monastery of Black (...) 122 Old Castle 141 St.
Nicholas Church 230 Steeple of St. Nicholas' Church 2^^ Monuments in the
Churches 2^7 ^ont in All Satats, and Temporary Bridge 369 View of the Infirmary
412 Plan of Conde^^um 6^6 Plan of Hypocanst, ibid. ibid. Roman Altars, etc.
ibid Views and Section of the Roman Wall ibid

