PROSE ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS; ACCOMPANIED WITH SOME PIECES IN VERSE.

PROSE ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS; ACCOMPANIED WITH SOME PIECES IN VERSE.

BY GEORGE COLMAN.

VOL. II.

-- Seu me tranquilla senectus
Expectat, seu Mors atris circumvolat alis,
Dives, inops, Romae, seu fors ita jusserit, exul,
Quisquis erit vitae, scribam, color. --
HOR.IMITATED. Whether Old Age a tranquil evening brings,
Or Death sails round me with his Raven Wings;
Rich, poor; at Rome, or London; well, or ill;
Whatever my fortunes, write I must and will.


LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADEL, IN THE STRAND. MDCCLXXXVII.

SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. VOL. II.
The Articles distinguished by an Asterisk * were never before Printed.

Page 2. Intelligence Extraordinary of the GHOST IN COCK-LANE from Foreign
Parts, Ireland, and Scotland, with Home News, and an Extract from the Ghost's
Catechism, containing Mr. M's. Belief, with an Epigram on the delay of the Poem
called The Author. P. 7. Letter on the INFLUENZA prevailing in the year 1762,
concluding with a PANACAEA for that and all other distempers, attested by a
MEDICAL CASE. P. 14. A hasty sketch of the POLITICS of the year 1762. P. 18. A
NORTH BRITAIN EXTRAORDINARY, June 4, 1762, the Birthday of His Majesty. P. 26.
THE AUDITOR EXTRAORDINARY, October, 30, 1762. P. 33. THE NORTH BRITAIN and
AUDITOR COMPARED. Separate lists of Great Persons praised or abused in each
Paper, concluding with a PEEP INTO FUTURITY, distinguishing the several
characters by CHALK or CHARCOAL. Page 42. Letter dated April, 19, 1762, from a
Member of Parliament, on the BILL FOR REGULATING FRANKS. P. 47. Letter from
CRISPINUS SCRIBLERUS, on the Poems of a Journeyman Shoemaker. P. 50. Letter on
the BOTTLE CONJURER, occasioned by a passage in -- quand l'heure prefixe
Changea MADAME a MONSIEUR Conculix.
Voltaire's PUCELLE.
M. D'Eon's Letters to the Duc de Nivernois. P. 53. Letter from AY and NO. P.
55. INTELLIGENCE EXTRAORDINARY of the first performance of Mr. Lloyd's Comic
Opera of The Capricious Lovers, with specimens of the Airs. P. 59. Notes on,
the Preface to Johnson's Shakespeare. P. 65. Notes continued. P. 69. Letter
from CHRISTOPHER DENNIS, containing Observations on some of Johnson's Notes on
the Play of HENRY THE FIFTH. P. 77. Letter from CAPTAIN NOSE, concluding with a
List of Passengers by Hyde-Park Corner, Thursday, March 19, 1767. P. 80. Letter
controverting Dr. Browne's Fstimate of the Manners and Principles of the Times,
substituting PRODIGALITY for EFFEMINACY. Original Letter from the Earl of P --
h. Page 86. Letter on the TRANSPOSITION OF MALE AND FEMALE FOLLIES AND VICES,
Anno Dom. 1770. Paragraphs in futuro. P. 92. Letter from LEXIPHANES, containing
Proposals for a Glossary or Vocabulary of the VULGAR TONGUE, intended as a
SUPPLEMENT to a larger DICTIONARY. P. 97. Sketch of Dr. Johnson in Chiaro
Obscuro. P. 100. Letter on the Disuse of the Letter K. from Blac and All Blac.
P. 102. Letter from K's. FRIEND, occasioned by the Letter from Blac and All
Blac. P. 107. CRITICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE OLD ENGLISH DRAMATICK WRITERS, in a
Letter to David Garrick, Esquire. first published as a separate pamphlet, and
afterward prefixed to the remaining sets of Coxeter's Edition of Massinger. P.
151. Preface to the Edition of the Plays of Beaumont and Fletcher, 1778. P.
173. APPENDIX TO THE SECOND EDITION of the Translation of the Comedies of
Terence, 1768. * P. 179. POSTSCRIPT TO THE APPENDIX in Answer to the
Prologomena and Notes to the Variorum Shakespeare. * P. 189. REMARKS ON
SHYLOCK'S REPLY TO THE SENATE OF VENICE. * Page 203. ORTHOPAEDIA, OR Thoughts
on PUBLIC EDUCATION. P. 263. Scene from THE DEATH OF ADAM, a Tragedy written
in German, by Mr. KLOPSTOCK. P. 273. ODE TO OBSCURITY. P. 280. ODE TO OBLIVION.
P. 284. The LAW STUDENT. * P. 291. The ROLLIAD, An Heroic Poem. P. 298. The
FABLE OF THE TREES. P. 301. The COBBLER OF CRIPPLEGATE's Letter to Robert Lloyd.
P. 308. Ode to ANY MINISTER OR GREAT MAN. P. 310. FRAGMENT OF A LOVE ELEGY. P.
311. MOTHER SHIPTON, an Halfpenny Ballad, 1771. P. 314. EPITAPH ON WILLIAM
POWELL. P. 316. The CONTENTED CUCKOLD, An Epigram. P. 317. The GAME AT LOO. An
Epigram. P. 318. The THREE WITCHES AT THE JUBILEE MASQUERADE, 1769. An Epigram.
PROSE ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
THE GHOST IN COCK-LANE.
Saturday, February 13, 1762.
INTELLIGENCE EXTRAORDINARY.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS.
Paris. THERE have been lately held, in the Rue de Coq, several extraordinary
lits de justice, at which some of the chief persons in the nation have
assisted; and what is extremely remarkable, a Protestant Clergyman has
voluntarily administered more than Extreme Unction to a Ghost. -- [ From the
Paris A-la-main.

Lishon. Several of the Jesuits who were exiled from this country have gone
over to England in disguise. The effects of their horrible machinations begin
to discover themselves already in the mysterious affair of the Spirit in
Cock-Lane, which engrosses the attention of the whole British Nation. We are
assured by some gentlemen of the English Factory, that the absolute laws
against witchcraft, etc. will speedily be revived in Great Britain!

IRELAND.
Dublin. We hear from London, that the Apparition in Cock-Lane, has never been
seen by nobody. -- [ Faulkner's Journal.

SCOTLAND.
Glasgow. The seventh son of a seventh son is just set out on a walk to London,
in order to visit the Spirit in Cock-Lane; and as this gentletleman is blessed
with the faculty of second sight, it is thought that he will be able to see her.

The spirit's great propensity to scratching, makes it generally supposed here,
that Miss Fanny died of the itch rather than the smallpox, and that the Ghost
is certainly mangy.

LONDON.
Yesterday the Committee of Enquiry on the Ghost in Cock-Lane, met at the
Jerusalem Tavern in Clerkenwell; when Miss P. was put to bed by one of the
maids of honor, in the room where the Cockney's Feast is generally held, in
the presence of the Right Hon. the Earls of -- and -- and --; the Right Rev.
the Bishops of -- and -- and above fifty more of the nobility.

The knockings and scratchings began about midnight, and the examination was in
the following manner:

Q. Will you go into that pint bottle? (pointing to a pint bottle that stood on
the table.) -- One knock.

From the time of this preliminary answer in the affirmative, all the
subsequent noises issued as from the bottle.

Q. (From the Right Rev. -- looking roguishly at Betty P. in bed.) Pray, Miss
Fanny, is not your real name Miss Betty? -- Much scratching, as if angry.

Q. (From a lord of the treasury.) What is the amount of the national debt? --
Above a hundred and thirty million knocks.

Q. How many years since the creation of the world? -- Above five thousand
knocks.

Q. What is the number of the present Anno Domini? -- One thousand seven
hundred and sixty two knocks.

Q. How many people are there in this room? Fifty-eight knocks. -- Right.

Q. How many women? Twelve knocks. Wrong: there was another lady in man's
clothes.

Q. How many maids? -- One knock. Certainly wrong; for there were five
unmarried ladies in the room, besides the girl in bed.

Q. Will you have prayers read to you? -- One knock.

Q. Shall they be read by any of the archbishops, bishops, or other regular
clergy? -- Two knocks.

Q. Shall they be read by Doctor Wh -- d? -- One knock.

Q. Or Dr. To -- ne? -- One knock.

Q. Or Mr. M -- n? -- One knock.

Q. Or Mr. M -- re? -- One knock.

Q. Or Mr. B -- g -- n? -- One knock.

Q. Or Mr. S -- n? -- One knock.

Q. Can you say the Lord's Prayer backwards? -- Much scratching, as if angry;
after which the bottle suddenly cracked, and flew into ten thousand pieces, and
no more answers were given.

We hear that the above Committee propose to fit out a privateer to cruise in
the Red Sea.

We hear that the Rev. Mr. M. is preparing a new work for the use of families,
especially children, to be published in weekly numbers, called The Ghost's
Catechism. We have been favored with a transcript of the Creed, which is as
follows:

Mr. M -- 's BELIEF.
I BELIEVE, in signs, omens, tokens, dreams, visions, spirits, ghosts,
specter, and apparitions.

And in Mary Tofts, who conceived and was brought to bed of a couple of rabbits.

And in Elizabeth Canning, who lived a whole month without performing, any of
the usual offices of nature, on six crusts of dry bread and half a jug of water.

And in A -- d B -- r who made his escape from the Inq -- n at M -- c -- r --
ta.

And in all the miracles of the Holy Roman Catholic Church.

I believe in fairies; I believe in witches; I believe in hobgoblins; I believe
in the shrieking woman; I believe in the death-watch; I believe in the
death-howl; I believe in raw-head-and-bloody-bones; I believe in all stories,
tales, legends, etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc, etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.

We are assured that the Ghost will continue her rout in Cock-Lane, and her
drum at the two Theaters.

MISS FANNY's THEATER IN COCK-LANE.

By particular Desire of several persons of Quality, Tomorrow Evening, being
the 14th Instant will be performed, AN ENTERTAINMENT OF SCRATCHING AND
KNOCKING, OF THREE ACTS. EACH ACT TO CONCLUDE WITH A FLUTTER.

Bed 10s. 6d. Chairs 5s. Standing 2s. 6d.

To begin precisely at Twelve o'Clock.

No Money to be returned after the first Scratch, and nothing under the Full
Price will be taken.

Vivant, etc.

EPIGRAM.
On the long Delay of a promised Poem called THE AUTHOR.
BUT where is this Author, was promised so long
From Churchill, that giant so stout and so strong?
He Is sick, Sir, says one, -- He Is burnt out cries another,
And the high flame of genius sinks down into smother.
Like the Ghost in Cock-lane, he has frightened us all,
And knocked us, and scratched us, -- the great and the small;
But now of his Spirit no more we are afraid,
For Parson and Fanny together are laid.
To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Thursday, May 20, 1762. Mr. Baldwin,
YOUR true-born Englishmen, your bold Britons, who are lions in the field, and
sea lions on the ocean, are, with all their courage, the most remarkable of any
nation in the world, for being seized with a Panick. A battle lost, or an
island taken, brings down their high spirits in an instant, and the nation is
undone. An eclipse, or a comet with the help of some profound philosopher in
the magazines, or two or three terrifying paragraphs in the Newspapers, shall
fill the imagination of all the old women, of both sexes, with horrible
apprehensions of the immediate destruction of the world; and groaning
proselytes pour in, without number, to Tottenham-Court and Moorfields. It is
still fresh in our memories, that two slight shocks of an earthquake, the most
violent of which never shook the pewter off the kitchen-shelves in
Grosvenor-Square, turned the minds of the bold Britons topsy-turvy, and all
London itself seemed going out of town. In short, the spirits rise and fall, in
the barometer of English imaginations, with most incredible revolutions. Their
hopes, unless perpetually buoyed up by prosperous circumstances, are sure to
sink. Public Opinions are as delicate as Public Credit; and it seems as
impossible for Englishmen to preserve a manly evenness of temper, as to keep
the stocks at par.

These reflections occurred on observing the terror, that has diffused itself
through most families, on account of the present Epidemical Distemper; for so,
Mr. Baldwin, you, and the rest of your brother newsmongers, have taught us to
call it. They, into whose hands our journals may fall in foreign countries,
must suppose that a plague is raging amongst us. The bills of mortality, say
they, are considerably swelled in their number; ten are buried in one grave:
four or five in a family are carried off in one day; with other particulars,
which every body believes though nobody knows to be true. It is supposed that
there must be some noxious quality in the air, and pieces of beef are sent up
from Highgate Hill, at the tail of schoolboys kites; though it is the received
doctrine of writers on all plagues, that any pestilential quality in the air
affects dogs, horses, and other animals, before it reaches men, and would
consequently show itself on the live ox, as well as the dead piece of beef. For
my part, as a true Briton, I cannot help being most sensibly offended, that
Beef, the staple food of old England, Beef, the glory of our country, should be
prostituted to such purposes. In a time of war, when provisions of all kinds
grow dearer and dearer every day, when the price is artfully raised on meat,
and fish is obliged to be brought to town in the machine of Arts and Sciences,
I am alarmed, lest this prodigality should be the means, or at least serve the
butchers as a pretense, for raising the price of meat still higher; and my
apprehensions are redoubled, when my maid assures me, on coming from market,
that broth being universally prescribed in the present reigning disorder,
scraigs of mutton are grown so much in request, that the worst end sells for
sixpence and seven-pence per pound.

In the mean time, to keep our terrors alive, and to prevent the Panick from
subsiding in the minds of the people, all the Doctors who are authors, begin to
tell us from the press, that colds caught at this season are extremely
dangerous; and all the booksellers who are venders of the medicines, recommend
their nostrums by fifty different artifices, inserted in advertisements,
letters, paragraphs, etc. -- And here, Mr. Baldwin, I cannot but observe by the
bye what you, who are a printer, must often have observed yourself, and know to
be true, that the connection between author and bookseller, is as inseparable
as that between whore and bawd, a justice and his clerk, a counselor and
attorney, or (according to Congreve) a curate and a tobacco-stopper; -- that
this connection, I say, has of late years, begun to display itself in a new
light: for since the doctors have pretty generally become authors, booksellers
and printers have acted as a kind of bastard species of apothecaries. In the
natural course of trade and shop-keeping, one would as soon think of sending
for a pot of porter to the grocer's, or a leg of mutton to the
tallow-chandler's, as for a pill, drop, or an electuary, to the
printing-office; or for a powder, a balsam, or an elixir, to the bookseller's.
Yet so it is, medicines and pamphlets are prepared and written by one and the
same hand, and both published (for that I find is the phrase in each case) at
one and the same shop. Two such ranks of men in combination, who are each of
them perpetually addressing the public, have opportunities, like
mountebank-practisers, to hawk their own medicines. It is their interest in the
first place, to persuade you that you are sick, or that you will be sick; and
in the next place, to persuade you that nothing but their nostrum will insure
your recovery, or prevent your taking the distemper.

Now, Mr. Baldwin, having myself a new discovery in medicine to recommend to
the public, a preparation that will be of the most infinite service in the
present reigning distemper, and in all other distempers that ever have
affected, or ever will, or can affect human nature, I beg leave to make it
known to the world through the channel of your most useful, most excellent,
most entertaining, most instructive, paper. Those, you know, are the phrases
which the correspondents of all public journals, from your own down to the
Farthing Post, when there was one, have always made use of. I cannot boast a
patent for my medicine. But as I shall plainly appear to have only the public
good at heart, by declaring its virtues in your Chronicle, I will answer for it
that the Stamp-Office shall demand no duty, as for an advertisement, though you
insert it ever so often.

To the GOOD PEOPLE of GREAT BRITAIN.
-- Venienti occurrite morbo!
THE PANACAEA,
Or the celebrated Drop and Pill of Temperance and Exercise, a sovereign remedy
for persons of every age, sex, or condition. The first may be taken in two or
three glasses of wine after dinner, white or red port, claret, burgundy, or
tokay -- but not so well in champaigne. Poor folks may take it in small-beer or
porter; and though it does not mix well with spirituous liquors, yet it may be
taken in punch, in small quantities. It is so far from offending the taste,
that it gives the highest relish to roast beef, or any English dishes, and has
an admirable effect in plumb-pudding. Faithfully prepared after the receipts of
a lady eminent in kitchen physic. The second is a finer diaphoretick than
James's powder, or any preparation of antimony. -- To be taken fasting, or any
hour of the day, without loss of time, or hindrance of business, in the Park,
at Ranelagh, on foot, or on horseback, or in quovis vehiculo. Its virtues, its
healing qualities, etc. etc. etc. etc. are infallible. Thousands have been
relieved by it. The afflicted may depend on its effects.

MEDICAL CASE.
A gentleman who had long been complaining and complaining, and ailing and
ailing, and who had taken all the medicines in and out of the dispensatory, at
length applied to the celebrated Doctor for Radcliffe. The Doctor soon
perceiving the nature of his case, told him, that he was in possession of a
secret, which was infallible for his distemper; but that unluckily it was at
that time in the hands of Doctor Pitcairne at Edinburgh, to whom he would write
to apply it in favor of the patient, if he himself thought it worth while to
go so far in quest of it. The patient readily undertook the journey, and
traveled to Edinburgh: but when he arrived there, he had the mortification to
find that just before Doctor Radcliffe's letter reached Edinburgh, Doctor
Pitcairne had sent them edicine to Doctor Musgrave of Exeter. The patient
however had resolution enough on Doctor Pitcairne's advice, to go across the
country to Exeter, in further pursuit of it: but as ill luck would have it,
Doctor Musgrave told him, that he had, but the day before, transmitted it back
again to Doctor Radcliffe in London, where the patient naturally returned, to
take the benefit of it at home. He could not help laughing with the Doctor at
the tour he had taken, and at his strange disappointments. I went after the
medicine, said the patient, to no purpose; and yet I cannot tell how it
happens, but I am much better than I was when I sat out. I know it, cries the
Doctor, I know it. You have got the medicine. The journey was the secret. And
do but live temperately and keep yourself in Exercise, you will have no
occasion for any physic in the world.

I am, Mr. Baldwin, Your admirer, to be sure, Your constant reader, And
sometimes your writer, RHAPSODISTA.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Thursday, Sept. 30, 1762.
AND so, Mr. Baldwin, nothing but Politics will go down with you at present!
Your old correspondents, the Laughers and the Jokers, and the Wits and the
Critics, and the Poets, are all vanished; and in come the Patriots, and the
Statesmen, the Advocates of Liberty, and the Quellers of Sedition. Not a man
but writes as if his country was at stake; not a pen that is not drawn, as it
were, pro aris and focis; not a drop of ink, that is not shed in the cause of
Liberty, Property, and Religion. Party has divided the whole town, and Pro and
Con takes up every page of your Chronicle. -- You call yourself impartial, that
is, you give both parties a fair opportunity to abuse each other. Audi alteram
partem, is your maxim; that is (in your free translation) Hear both sides! and
indeed they are well worth hearing, and what infinite delight must a Scotchman
receive, after reading a certain portion of abuse on his country and
countrymen, how charmingly must his indignation be soothed and appeased, to
find his opponents equally bespattered in the next column! But as this kind of
impartiality abuses all parties, the consequence is that all parties abuse you,
and each in their turn consider you as the tool of their adversaries. Last
week, in a coffee-house near St. James's, I saw a Scotch Colonel, who longs for
the next regiment that falls, throw your paper into the fire, provoked by the
severity of a letter against Lord Bute; and the very next morning I saw the
same paper almost as hardly dealt with in the Alley, on account of an extract
from the Auditor, which reflected on the brokers and Mr. Pit. Let me tell you,
Mr. Baldwin, it is very lucky that you are not obliged to follow your paper,
wherever it goes; and that your figure is not as universally known as the face
of your paper. I knew a country printer that ventured to insert letters on both
sides of the question in his journal, during the county election: and I can
assure you, Mr. Baldwin, that though he was one of the lustiest men in that
country, and above six feet high, he could scarce put his head out of doors in
the course of the whole controversy. You, I am told, are a tight built little
black man, but by no means such an able-bodied printer as my friend in the
country. If you cannot weild the quarter-staff of party with ease, and have not
power fairly to cudgel your enemies into good humor, believe me, Sir, it is
dangerous to hobble along on the unequal and unsteady crutches of two opposite
factions. Your fugitive scribblers are unknown, and leave you to stand buff to
the Public for their labors. On the contrary, the authors of the several
political papers now extant, keep the names of their printers as secret as
those of their surgeons: and as to themselves, they are a match for any thing.
The club of the Monitor, is, I am told, more formidable than his pen; the
Briton, they say, is a rawboned Scotsman; the Auditor a tall Irishman; and the
North Briton, or the world hugely belies him, has a broader pair of shoulders
than any author militant in this great metropolis.

After all, Mr. Baldwin, I believe you are a mighty good sort of man, and mean
no harm. If the people of this town will write nothing but Politics, and read
nothing but Politics, you are reduced of necessity to print nothing but
Politics: because your stationer must be paid, your hawkers must be fee'd, nay
you must give your very devil his due, and have an hot joint every day and a
pudding on Sunday. Yet cannot I forbear admiring the public spirit of our
authors; who while, their all is at stake, while the very nature of literary
property is in question, neglecting to refute the strange and unnatural
doctrine, that "an author has no right to his own work," are all up in arms on
another occasion, settling the Ministry and agitating the Preliminaries of
Peace. For my own part, though I have been equally solicited by both parties,
and though you are ready to insert my arguments on either side of the question,
yet I am resolved, like Scrub, to say nothing, Pro nor Con, till we have a
Peace. -- In the mean time as nothing but Politics will go down, to comply in
some measure with the humor of the town, suppose I oblige you and your
readers, with a critical review of our political writers. I do not mean to give
a weekly detail of their arguments, to scrutinize their characters, or
criticize particular parts of their productions. Heaven forbid! -- all I intend
is to draw their general characters; and perhaps, if I happen to be in the
right vein for such a whim, to give a short sketch of the style and manner of
each of them. And so, Master Baldwin till you hear from me again I am,

Your humble servant, RHAPSODISTA.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Tuesday, Oct. 19, 1762. Mr. Baldwin,
GOING along the streets the other day, meditating on the subject I opened to
you in my last, and considering into what form I should throw my reflections on
the present race of polical writers, I stumbled by mere accident on the
following M. S. which I must beg you to commit to the press, just as I found
it, under the title of THE NORTH BRITON EXRTAORDINARY,
June 4, 1762.
AN extraordinary circumstance is a sufficient apology for a paper
extraordinary. The date of this essay will immediately denote the subject of
it, and show that I mean to congratulate the Public in general, and my
countrymen in particular, on the occasion of his Majesty's Birthday. The
North-Briton is not one of those low scribblers, who like that slave the
Briton, or that prostitute the Auditor, mean to write themselves into a place
or a pension; nor will he be restrained from delivering his sentiments by the
fear of fire, pillory, or imprisonment. The Law shall be his protection; and
while Lord Mansfield shall preside as Lord Chief Justice in the Court of King's
Bench, the North Briton shall dread no oppression.

On this occasion, as well as on every other, I shall study to speak out. I
have not been used to be a respecter of persons. I do not, after the manner of
the old patriots in the Craftsman, make use of nicknames. The ingenious
devices of Lord Gawkee, Colonel Catiline, and Colonel Squintum, Lord
Gothamstow, Captain Iago Anniseed, and Parson Bruin, and Parson Brawn, I leave
to the Briton and Auditor. I use no asterisks; the names of Dukes, and Lords,
and Ministers, are written at full length, for I am above all evasion.
Wherefore, without further preface or preamble, I gladly seize the opportunity
of this great anniversary, to congratulate those of our inclining, that we have
now a Prince upon the throne, who is an absolute Jacobite.

However paradoxical such an assertion may appear, I have no doubt of being
able to demonstrate it as clearly as any proposition in Euclid. Imprimis, the
groundwork and first principle of Jacobitism, is to cherish the warmest
sentiments for the family of Stuart. Lord Bute (I dare venture to assert it) is
of the Stuart family. He is himself a Stuart. He cannot deny it. It is a
circumstance which ministerial advocates may palliate, but which, like that of
his being a true Scot, they cannot dissemble. Yet, Scot and Stuart as he is, we
have seen him Secretary of State, and we now see him at the head of the
Treasury: I say, we see a Scotsman (the reader may recollect I have written a
whole paper on this subject) at the head of the Treasury. There is a passage in
Archbishop Spotswood, p. 180 by which it appears, that during the troubles of
that condemned Stuart, Charles I. there was at one time in his Majesty's
Treasury, the immense sum of seven shillings and sixpence. -- A sum that might
almost rival the contents of the Bank of Edinburgh, which sometimes discounts
bills to nearly that amount Yet Lord Bute is at the head of a treasury, drawing
schemes to raise at one time millions of English pounds (I might say hundreds
of millions, did I mean Scotch pounds) double the number of the above
shillings. How then can we doubt his Majesty's attachment to the family of
Stuart? Demosthenes said of the Pythian oracle, that it Philipised: we do not
want an English Demosthenes, who might say, that his Majesty Stuartiseth, that
is, being interpreted, He is a Jacobite.

To prove this still further, let us consider, that during the two former
reigns of the present family, every Scotsman was kept at as great a distance
from court, as Edinburgh is from London; and all country-gentlemen (commonly
called Tories) were doomed to remain for ever in the country, never receiving
the least encouragement to come to St. James's. How is all this reversed at
present? It is held no crime to be born on the other side of the Tweed; nay,
the immense sum of four thousand pounds is allowed by parliament toward
building a bridge over that stream, to facilitate the communication between the
two united kingdoms, or rather to pave the way for Scotsmen to come over into
England. And here I would humbly submit to the commissioners, appointed by the
legislature, that the bridge may contain only a foot-way! for alas! we too well
know that their maxim is, Vestigia nulla retrorsum; and when they have once
walked hither, not one of them will drive their carriages back again. Had Cain
been Scot, etc. The passage is as well known as any in Fingal, or John Hume's
tragedies. Add to all this, that known Tories, men, who during the several
loyal administrations, were marked for Jacobites, whom Kings were taught to
call so, are now daily seen at St. James's. The rage of party has entirely
subsided: places of power and profit are bestowed on gentlemen of Oxfordshire,
and members of the Cocoa-tree. The University of Oxford itself, which was
declared in the House of Commons "to be paved with Disaffection and
Jacobitism," begins to receive encouragement; their addresses engage attention,
and we hear of Oxford Bishops and Prebendaries: in a word, how could all these
things be? How could it come to pass, unless his Majesty were a Jacobite, that
Tories should be in place; that Lord Bute should have power; that knights of
the Thistle should be created knights of the Garter; and Scotsmen be seen in
broad-cloth and breeches?

The Pretender is now said to be at Avignon. Now in case we should send an
ambassador extraordinary to Paris, it may be fairly presumed, that his Majesty
--



Here, Mr. Baldwin, here ends, imperfect and unfinished, this curious
manuscript. The Public will easily recognize the style, manner, and
sentitiments of their old friend, and will undoubtedly regret, as well as you
and I, that such a subject, so happily begun, should be left incomplete. The
loss of this first part of the copy, and the subject being temporary, I suppose
were the reasons of this essay's not making its appearance, in due season,
beautifully printed on a sheet and half of fine writing paper. Be it your care
to preserve this precious portion of it! and to make some amends for the loss
of the rest, I have subjoined the following letter, originally designed to be
sent to the same paper.

TO THE NORTH BRITON.
SIR,
NOTHING was ever more evident, than the present partiality to Scotsmen. To
enumerate all the particulars of it would be endless. I shall confine myself to
one single instance. You were one of the first to cry out against the ministry
on the loss of Newfoundland. Give me leave to point out some scandalous
instances of partiality that attend the retaking that island. Imprimis, Who
commanded that expedition? -- Lord Colvill, -- a Scotsman. -- Who brought home
the French colors? -- Captain Campbell, -- a Scotsman. -- Who came home with
the news, greatly praised for his spirit and activity, in the Siren? -- Captain
Douglas, -- a Scotsman. -- But above all, who were the only three officers
wounded, and consequently placed (like the English by Prince Ferdinand) in the
post of Honor? Capt. M'Donnell, Capt. Bailie, and Capt. M'Kenzie. -- All three
Scotsmen.

I will not dwell on the mean national reflection, so injurious to the Irish,
in the first part of his Lordship's letter, where he writes, these Irishmen
said, that if I would go into the Bay of Bulls, numbers of their countrymen
would resort to me, etc.

I am, Sir, Your humble servannt, PATRICK KELLY.
Oct. 14, 1762.

And now, Mr. Baldwin, I shall take my leave of you, though perhaps I may soon
send you some strictures, on other political writers. In the mean time I am, as
before, yours,

RHAPSODISTA.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Saturday, Oct. 30, 1762. Mr. Baldwin,
I Have been in much pain on your account since the publication of the NORTH
BRITON EXTRAORDINARY, which I enclosed to you in my last. I was at first very
glad to find that nobody questioned its authenticity, but soon began to tremble
for its consequences. Some said that the messengers had seized you, your
compositors, press-men, devils, etc. Some foretold motions in the King's Bench
provoking vengeance and letting all the terrors of the law loose upon you.
Others prognosticated your being called up to the bar of both Houses: while
those who were your most sanguine admirers, heartily wished, that for the
convenience of carrying on your paper, you had, like the Gazetteer, an house
adjoining to Newgate. At length, however, I begin to hope that you are quite
out of danger, and that in this season of the general massacre of characters,
some license will be allowed to you, as well as your brethren. I would advise
you, at all events, to give the world fresh proofs of your impartiality, and to
balance the account fairly between both parties. Expel one poison by another!
or, to speak more respectfully of our controversial writers, let diamond cut
diamond! Publish in your next, to make amends, the enclosed Auditor, which (to
use the words of the Auditor) the Public may depend on as authentic; full as
authentic as the last paper I sent you.

THE AUDITOR EXTRAORDINARY.
-- I Will be an AUDITOR,
AN ACTOR too perhaps, if I see cause.
MIDSUM. NIGHT'S DREAM. Audire est Operae Pretium illorum Impudentiam.
TER. Hear, for each hearer must applaud it,
Of their vile impudence MY AUDIT!

IT is a disagreeable circumstance to be stationed on guard, like the out-posts
of an army, just on the confines of the enemy's camp. Yet are there some
considerable advantages resulting from such a situation: for in such a
situation the earliest intelligence may be obtained, and while "the hum of
either army stilly sounds," anecdotes of the most curious nature may be
collected, as has already more than once been experienced and manifested by
the Auditor. Nor can I think that the performing this kind of duty is, in the
phrase of Bobadil, service of danger; as it is well known, my antagonist,
fierce and furious as he is, can take the field, and come even within pistol
shot of his adversary, without the least ill consequence to one party or the
other.

For my own part, I am possessed of such a sovereign contempt for him, or, if
you please, them, be he or they of the singular, plural, or (according to the
Grecians) of the dual number, that it is not without the utmost disdain, that I
thus descend, into the Arena, with such paltry opponents. The late Mr.
Fielding, of humourous memory, in one of his Covent Garden Journals (though I
do not know whether that paper be extant in the elegant edition of his works,
lately published by Arthur Murphy, Esquire.) has I remember, comically proved,
that the most contemptuous animal in the creation is a Louse; and has described
one of those animalcules overflowing with a true quality-contempt of the mean
creature, whose head he inhabited.

I am, I must confess, the Louse to the North Briton. I sit weekly in judgment
on his head; on the produce whereof he perhaps may live, but I cannot: for the
deplorable sterility of that spot feeds nothing but my contempt. I run over the
barren region, more barren than the country he continually reviles, with all
the avidity of the little human blood-sucker. Here, perhaps, I discover an
abortive vein of Prosaick Poetry; there branches out many a Ramification of
Political Virulence; and there, in a remote corner of the Pia Matter, is lodged
a small portion of Bayes's Spirit of Brains, which (like the Spirit of Laws)
would require the pen of a Montesquieu to describe its qualities at large, but
it is in fact no other than the Spirit of Dullness, which serves "the lively
dunce" instead of Wit and Humor, and produces that airy nothingness, that
vivacious stupidity, so evident in all his publications.

It has, however, been discovered by microscopical observers, that a Louse is
a very lousy animal; in consequence whereof, while I am thus banqueting on the
North Briton, sundry lesser lice are preying upon me. The engineers of
Grub-street, to change the allusion, like the garretteers in the ingenious new
print of the ingenious Mr. Hogarth, are daily squirting upon me: to all these,
as well as to the Arch-Enemy, I oppose nothing but Contempt. I indulge myself
in a warrantable pride, and the virtuous consciousness of my own superiority. I
exert all my adroitness and dexterity to turn their own arms against them, and
they have at length instructed me, as Charles the Twelfth did the Russians, to
be their conqueror. Complaining eternally of the lamentable dullness and
scurrility of factious scribblers, I stop the tide of political slander, and
open afterward at pleasure the sources for my own use and benefit. I silence
with a tone of authority, the clamours of the malcontent against a noble Lord
and his coadjutors in employment; and then I immediately raise my voice to its
highest pitch, and cry out lustily against the Grand Pensioner and Lord Gawkee.
I reprobate the bold practice of licentiously printing names at full length,
without so much as modestly embowelling, or rather emvowelling them, or
pleasantly holding their owners in greater derision, by a contemptuous
alteration of them; after which doctrine, the next paragraph in my Aylesbury
Journal, recites the names of Wilkes and Churchill, and several others without
the least disguise, while poor Hodges and Beardmore, and Charles Say, run
glibly into almost every sentence.

Contempt then, sovereign contempt, is plainly the best weapon, offensive or
defensive, in the hands of a writer of controversy. And what objects can be
more worthy to excite that passion, than those on which I have exercised my
own? What is Lord Gawkee? that noun-adjective Lord, joining his false
consequence, like an idle epithet, to that proud substantive, the Grand
Pensioner? His Temple of Worthies, the collection of Worthies of Stowe-Temple,
is not, I am told, yet complete. Let him fill the vacant niches with his
friends! Let him put up his own bust! and by way of supporters, let him place
Colonel Catiline on one hand, and his Reverend Co-adjutor on the other! What is
the Grand Pensioner? that sold slave for ever bellowing about liberty; that
hireling who receives his regular wages, without doing the service for which he
is paid. I may perhaps some time or other, by the assistance of Cocker's
Arithmetic, show my knowledge in fractions, and strike the balance between him
and the nation. Such a political ledger may perhaps prove that he is indebted
to the Public for more than three thousand per ann. and their gold boxes. What
are the city of London? A mob, a foolish crew with furs and chains huzzaing
their idol, their king in stilts, as Mr. Hogarth has pictured him, in vain
endeavoring to set the world on fire, and holding the bellows to blow the dead
coal of sedition. They say, I am an advocate for Aristocracy. I have turned
over Sidney and Puffendorf, and fifty other writers in the course of my little
reading, and find no form of government so dangerous as a Mobocracy. The
clenched fists are indeed the patriot arms of such a state: their only law is
club law; and their chief logic is the Argumentum Baculinum, which is with
them the knock down argument. Such is the custom of the city of London. What
are all the political writers of the present times, except the Briton and
myself? The scum of Grub-street, the dregs of the church, and the refuse of the
legislature. I have convicted the apostate Monitor, as well as his patron, the
Grand Pensioner, of political tergiversation. I have put to rebuke the petulant
flippancy of the North Briton, and have proved him to be a haberdasher of small
literature, the publisher of a Chronique Scandaleuse, the conductor of a weekly
libel. The reverend half of him I have shown to be a mere Oldmixon in
politics, diving among the Naiads of Fleet-ditch, in the mud of Scurrility.
The other half of him, half military and half legislative, I have shown to be a
downright Catiline, hatching a conspiracy or assassination plot against the
characters of the first persons in the kingdom, and like Lord Shaftesbury in
Hudibras, So politic, as if one eye
Upon the other were a spy;
That to trapan the one to think
The other blind, both strove to blink.


Sometimes I content myself with calling him contemptuously an impudent fellow;
and sometimes I find that he wrote his paper when exceedingly drunk, and
therefore I disdain to give him a sober reply. Contempt is the only tribute
proper to be paid by men of veracity and honor, to wretches of their
character; base slanderers who have reviled and still continue to revile, all
orders of men, the Commonalty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Royal
Family, and Me.

I shall add nothing, Mr. Baldwin, to this long essay, which I am quite
fatigued with transcribing, though perhaps you may hear from me once more on
this subject, when I shall send you a Catalogue, which may serve as a corollary
to this short view of the present state of politics in Great Britain.

Yours, as before, RHAPSODISTA.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
-- CRETA, an CARBONE notandi.
HOR. Crayon'd in purest CHALK, or etch'd
From a rough draught in CHARCOAL sketch'd.

Saturday, Feb. 19, 1763. Mr. Baldwin,
THE following Columns contain nothing more than two separate lists of the
celebrated personages, who have at any time been honored with notice, by the
AUDITOR or NORTH BRITON. These lists I know must necessarily be imperfect,
because they are taken down merely upon memory; and because such keen Satirists
cannot so grossly have misspent their time, as to have lashed so few people; yet
I have been the less curious to render these lists complete, because I know
that the writers in question are such stirring spirits, that they will each be
continually swelling their several catalogues, for which reason I have
contented myself with leaving certain vacant spaces, for the insertion of such
names already distinguished as I must without doubt have omitted, or to be
filled up as time shall serve, and the AUDITOR or NORTH BRITON, shall hereafter
please to direct.

Let us, however, do justice to the candor, as well as acrimony of our
Political Writers. They deal in Panegyric, as well as Satire. If they throw
dirt with the scavenger's shovel, they also lay on Praise with a trowel. Every
modern controversial writer in Politics sits down with Encomium on the right,
and Obloquy on the left, like Jupiter between the tubs of Good and Evil; or to
lower my simile, like brother Pamphlet in the Upholsterer with white-wash in
one hand and blackball in the other. All their characters, or rather
caricatures, may be considered as the Rough Draughts of the masters in the
modern school of crayons, who sometimes draw in Chalk, but most commonly in
Charcoal. It was my first intention to have given both the Chalk and Charcoal
Portraits of each of the great masters in question; but I soon reflected that I
might save that trouble, by desiring your readers to take it for a general
rule, that such as are blackened in the NORTH BRITON are, by Act of Grace,
white-washed in the AUDITOR, and so vice versa. Every great character, like a
post or a wainscot, is destined to be painted, in different colors, at least
twice over: and in this various light, we may at pleasure, consider the Two
Following Columns either as the two principal pillars of the Temple of Slander,
or the two tables in the Temple of Fame. As we are now, however, at the very
opening of Lent, I would have the noble lords and gentlemen, whose names appear
in these lists, to regard the perusal of them, as an act of humiliation and
mortification; and to remember that they have been told their own by the great
writers, under whose aweful names they are here arranged.

It must, however, be premised, as our fixed opinion, that the AUDITOR is by far
the most respectable character, and the most polite and learned writer of the
two. The NORTH BRITON sounded the Nether Trump of Fame at the very first onset,
and furiously charged the Scots and the Ministry at once. The AUDITOR set out
with professions of moderation and impartiality: he did not seek for
Defamation, but it lay in his way, and he found it: mark his candid
declarations in his first number! "The malevolent are not to expect to be
gratified with Slander, the illiberal with Scurrility, or the inconsiderate
with Buffoonery. Ingredients like these can have no admission into a paper,
which is undertaken upon principles laudable in themselves; which is intended
to reconcile the minds of men to their own good, and to one another; to refute
or laugh out of countenance all party-distinctions; to extinguish national
prejudices, and to recommend that spirit of concord, which alone can make us a
successful and preserve us an happy people. In short it is intended in the
conduct of this plan, to try whether it is possible to talk Politics with
temper; to delineate characters with Decency; to treat of factions with Good
Humor; and to love our Country without hating Individuals." Here are mild
words; and yet in the second number, he serves up no less than six or seven
individuals, and some of them no inconsiderable personages neither: and yet
even this trifling inconsistency may be accounted for, if we recollect that the
AUDITOR himself begins his ninth number with this reflection: "It is a curse
entailed upon the retainers to despairing faction, that they are not only
Miserable Men, and Wretched Writers, but they must be Liars into the bargain;
they must forge Crimes to affright the people, they must scatter abroad the
words of prevarication, etc. etc."

AUDITOR. NORTH BRITON. Duke of Cumberland P. D. of W. Duke of Newcastle Duke
of Bedford Duke of Devonshire Earl Temple Earl of Bute Earl of Loudon Earl of
Litchfield Earl of Talbot Earl of Talbot's Horse Lord Barrington Lord Mansfield
Lord Eglinton Rt. Hon. Mr. Pit Rt. Hon. Mr. Fox Rt. Hon. Mr. Leg Rt. Hon.
Mr. G. Grenville Lord Mayor of London Rt. Hon. Mr. Rigby Sir James Hodges, Knt.
Town Clerk to the City London Hon. Horace Walpole The King of Prussia Sir John
Philips Bart. Author of the addrefs to the Cocoa-Tree Sir Francis Dashwood,
Bart. Thomas Nuttall, attorney Samuel Touchet Mr. Beardmore, ditto Samuel
Martin Charles Churchill Samuel Johnson Charles Say John Home Charles Macklin,
alias Mac-lochlin David Mallet, alias Malloch Dr. Shebbeare Arthur Murphy John
Wilkes Dr. Burton David Garrick William Hogarth The Toast-Master at Guildford
The Poet Laureat Col. Lamb, fishmonger Capt. Lamb, auctioneer Mr. Hoyle Mr.
Pond Mr. Arthur Counselor Jones The Monitor The Briton The Whigs The Tories
The Minority The Majority Against War Peace

The above lists not only show who have been the Butts of Satire to each
writer, but may also with due attention to the turnings and windings in the
Court Calendar, serve as unerring guide-posts to point out such as seem to be
in the high road to abuse from either paper. Being made acquainted with the
Color of the heroes of both parties, we know that if a great officer of the
court should be turned out, or to use the more courtly phrase resign, the
AUDITOR will immediately tear out the white leaf wherein he so lately sang his
praises, and, like another Peachum, set his name down in his black book, and
call on him to exercise the full powers of the Christian virtue of resignation.
We know too, that if a noble Member of one House should call for an able
Commoner to lead the business of the other, the NORTH BRITON will immediately
open his deep mouth on that leader, and maul a Manager with as great alacrity
as Mr. Thady Fitzpatrick. But as rules and precepts are never clearly enforced,
unless illustrated by example, I will submit a small Peep into Futurity to your
readers; and as I have in some places above, rather made extraordinary
distinctions in favor of the AUDITOR, I shall here pay my particular
compliments to the NORTH BRITON. We have already seen whom that writer has
abused (craving his pardon for the grossness of the expression;) and the
AUDITOR's list of Scandal (craving his pardon also) is a pretty exact catalogue
of those, whom the NORTH BRITON has praised. I shall now therefore, Mr.
Baldwin, take upon me to predict, with as much sagacity as Partridge or even
Bickerstaff, whom he will praise, whom he will abuse, and whom he may possibly
praise or abuse: and for the fulfilling these my predictions I refer to time,
or even appeal to the Second Sight of the NORTH BRITON himself. Some that are
turned out, I know he will take every opportunity to praise, and that class I
shall distinguish by Chalk; some that are put in, I know he cannot resist the
temptation of dispraising, and that class I shall distinguish by Charcoal. But
there are another class of a dubious indeterminate twilight character, whose
conduct will not suffer us to speak precisely of the color of their
intentions; a kind of heterogeneous or amphibious animals, Hermaphrodites or
Otters in Politics, neither in nor out, Pro nor Con, Court nor Country, Whig
nor Tory, Scotch nor English; who are, like Sir Anthony Branville, in a State
of Fluctuation, and hang, like Mahomet's coffin, in suspense; who seem ready to
veer and turn, like approved weather-cocks, with every gust of politics; who
stand between Ay and No, like the ass of the schoolmen between two bundles of
hay; or like Prince Volscius in love, hip-hop, hip-hop, one boot on, and the
other boot off. These Statesmen of the neuter gender, we can place in neither
list; and yet they seem to bid fair for a place in both. Where then can we
station these lovers of the Golden Mean, but in the Middle? In the Middle
therefore, upon stilts between both, one foot on one list, the other foot on
the other list, I have placed one Right Hon. Gentleman, as the grand archetype
of political skepticism. Far be it from me to arraign such commendable Prudence
and Moderation! but as the NORTH BRITON, is not such an admirer of
impartiality, I have reason to think, that he will not long permit this
gentleman to remain in a state of indifferency; he will not be content to say
of him ALBUS an ATER homo sit, nescio! but having once brought himself to
imagine, that he has discovered the gentleman's biass, he will soon be induced
to favor us with a portrait of so distinguished a personage either in Chalk or
in Charcoal.

A PEEP into FUTURITY.
From the NORTH BRITON.
CHALK. CHARCOAL. The Right Honorable CHARLES TOWNSHEND. Duke of Grafton Lord
Mayor of London Duke of Portland Earl of Powis Thomas Prowse, Esquire. Lord
Grosvenor Edward Popham, Esquire. Lord Strange Sir Arm. Woodhouse Sir Cha. Mordaunt
Welbore Ellis James Oswald Bamber Gascoyne Paul Whitehead


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Thursday, April 19, 1764. SIR,
I Remember to have seen many Letters in your Chronicle, and other of the
Public Papers, against the Bill for regulating Franks, which Letters I suppose
were written by persons, whose interest or convenience was in some measure
likely to be affected by the proposed regulation. I, Mr. Baldwin, with due
reverence to the Hon. House I declare it, am a Member of Parliament, one of
those members who most heartily concurred in passing the bill: first of all in
a patriot view, being persuaded it would make a yearly addition of seventy
thousand pounds to the revenue of the Post Office, which is now public
property; and secondly in a private light, imagining it would save myself a
great deal of trouble in Franking Letters for relations, friends, acquaintance,
constituents, etc. etc. But, alas, Mr. Baldwin, I find the first of these
benefits expected to result from the new limitations, very uncertain, and the
last, merely ideal: and though I have but little of the leaven of opposition in
my temper, yet I now most sincerely repent of the concessions I have made, and
wish that many others, as well as myself, had insisted more steadily on the
preservation of our Privilege, and not have resigned it almost entirely to the
Clerks of the Post Office, who will perhaps be as great gainers by these new
regulations as the members of both Houses will be losers. As to the advantage
resulting to the revenue from these restrictions, I shall leave them to be
determined by Fact and Experience: and I shall also show by Fact and woeful
Experience, that the trouble usually given to Members of Parliament, in the
article of Franking, instead of being the least diminished will be considerably
increased.

Coming home from the House, a few days ago, I found, lying on my
writing-table, a large packet with the following superscription: "Mr. L's.
compliments to Mr. M. and begs the favor of him to Frank and Direct the
enclosed covers: a dozen with the following address: -- To Mrs. L. at Sir Hugh
Llanvilly's, at Llanvilly Park, near Llanvilly, Merionethshire, Wales. -- Half
a dozen -- To Mr. Latitat, Attorney at Law at Bewdly, near Worcester. -- Half a
dozen -- To G. L. Esquire. of Trinity College, Cambridge. -- A dozen -- To Mr. L.
himself, in Sackville-Street, Piccadilly, to be used by his son, when he writes
to him from Cambridge; and one dozen more -- To Miss Trippit, at Sir William
Trippit's, Grove-Park, Berkshire, a constant correspondent of Mr. L's eldest
daughter." -- Such, Mr. Balwin, was the substance of this polite card, and give
me leave to say that, considering Mr. L. is but a common acquaintance, with
whom I sometimes take a turn in the Queen's walk, or whom I now and then join
in a morning's ride in Hyde-Park, or meet in an evening at the Mount
coffee-house, I never saw a more consummate piece of assurance. The cool
impudence of it startled me at first, but on recollection, I determined to take
no farther notice of it, than to order it, as we do idle papers in the House,
to lie upon the table.

A very short period since has, however, convinced me, that I am to expect many
such applications. Several other equally modest persons have taken occasion to
hint to me, that they shall expect the like favor; some of whom are people,
whom I by no means choose to offend, and others are such whom I am under some
kind of necessity to oblige. My wife, Mr. Baldwin, if you are a married man,
you will easily conceive that I cannot refuse: all the fiddle-faddle
correspondence of my four daughters, my nieces, and some other Misses of their
particular acquaintance, must also pass under my Franks and Direction. As to my
constituents, as I represent the inhabitants of a most respectable city in the
West of England, where I am brought in for Nothing -- that is, where no Bribery
prevails, and it only costs me about 1500l. in treating, etc. -- How, I say,
Mr. Baldwin, can I forbear to comply with the demands of my constituents?

Some of my friends, to avoid the trouble of writing their names over and over,
provided themselves formerly with a stamp; but if they could not away with the
single trouble of Franking, how will they digest the additional one of
Directing? Another inconvenience is, that when the Frank and Address are both
in one hand, the enclosed letter must also naturally be supposed to come from
the same person. It is easy to conceive situations wherein this circumstance
must be particularly disagreeable, especially to grave old gentlemen, like
myself; whereas before, all letters, however directed, passed without the least
imputation on the characters of the lords or gentlemen, who franked them. I
have known a letter to Grub-Street pass, without astonishment, under the
sanction of the Earl of Chesterfield; and have seen a cover franked by an
Archbishop, filled up, without scandalising even the post-man, with a direction
to Haddock's Bagnio.

Such, and many more, are the inconveniences likely to arise on this occasion
to members of parliament. But we have brought them on ourselves, and must take
them for our pains. For my part, my chief concern is the trouble, which I shall
endeavor to save by all the means I am able to devise, or which you, Mr. B. or
any of the ingenious correspondents in your Chronicle are able to suggest. My
present intention is, to send to the fellow whom we committed to Newgate for
forging Franks, and who will necessarily be enlarged at the rising of the
parliament, offering to take him into pay, in case he wants employment, and
promising to recommend him to several lords and gentlemen of my acquaintance.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, L. M.
Dover-street.

To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Saturday, April 28, 1764. SIR,
I Have seen in your paper, the preface to Poems by a Journeyman Shoemaker, and
have also perused several of the Poems themselves with a singular pleasure,
though I must own with much less surprise than the generality of his readers.
That Stephen Duck, the thresher, should leave the barn for the garret; or that
Jones, the bricklayer, should attempt to Build the Lofty Rhyme, were indeed
circumstances somewhat extraordinary; unless the first had been contented
merely to wield the Flail of Satire, and the last, to use the Trowel of
Panegyric, neither of which were the case: But that James Woodhouse, the
journeyman Shoemaker, should, as the preface tells us, "sit at his work with a
pen and ink by him, and when he has made a couplet write it down on his knee,"
is not, I think, altogether so miraculous as the other two instances, since
there always appeared to me to be a very strict analogy between Verse-making
and Shoe-making. Almost every Crispin sings at his work; why may not our
Crispinus also compose? He may surely, by no unnatural association of ideas,
think at one and the same time of the Feet of his Verses and the Feet of his
Customers; or Hammer out a line, while he is Hammering out the sole of a shoe.
It is easy also for him to adapt his poetical exercises to the various
circumstances of his Sandalian Employments. He may turn his mind to familiar
comic subjects, privatis and prope Socco carminibus, while he is manually
operating on a pair of leathern socks: and he may with the same kind of
sympathy between head and hand, rise to all the heights of the tragic sublime,
Carmina digna Cothurno, while he is making a pair of buskins, which you know,
Mr. Baldwin, are now very much in fashion. If our author's ambition inspires
him too soon to Epick, and to sing with Homer ((...)) the well-booted Grecians,
he may work on boots. He would, I doubt not, dispatch a book, with every pair;
especially if he throws in a pair or two of shoes, now and then, as he goes
along, by way of Episode. Pindarick Odes, which are often on Equestrian
subjects, may be dispatched with Spatterdashes; light airy Verses, with Pumps;
and all easy, careless, Gentleman-like Compositions with Slippers.

Scholars, Mr. Baldwin, who want to engross all the provinces of literature, do
not care that any body should write but themselves; and though the Muses
themselves are females, yet if a lady makes verses they are arrogant enough to
bid her learn to make a pudding. Verse-making is in the present age, generally
speaking, as mechanical as Shoe-making. Why then should not a poor mechanic
show his industry both ways, especially a Shoemaker, whose profession as I
have endeavored to show, is so consistent with that of a Poet, and who can
write verses without neglecting his other business, or rendering himself liable
to the censure contained in the old adage of ne suitor ultra crepidam!

I am, Sir, Your most humble servant, CRISPINUS SCRIBLERUS


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Saturday, July 7, 1764. SIR,
IN a note to one of M. D'Eon's famous letters, written from London, to the
Duke of Nivernois is the following remarkable passage:

After the earthquakes which happened here in 1750, a Lifeguard Man took it
into his head to foretell a third, which was to overthrow London. He called
himself inspired, and with an enthusiastical air fixed the day, the hour, and
the minute. London being already in a consternation at the remembrance of two
shocks, at the exact distance of a month from each other, and still more
terrified at the expected approach of a third more terrible earthquake, which
the enthusiastical soldier had announced for the 5th of April, the Town showed
itself susceptible of all kinds of impressions. More than 50,000 inhabitants on
the faith of this oracle, had that day betaken themselves to flight. The
greater part of those whom the arguments or railleries of their friends had
detained, waited with trembling the critical instant, and showed no kind of
courage till it was over. When the day arrived, the prophecy, like most other
predictions, was not accomplished; the false Samuel was sent somewhat too late
to Bedlam, and the heads of these fierce islanders, so wise and so
philosophical, were not proof against the prophecy of a madman. Such, Mr.
Baldwin, are the pictures, which Frenchmen who come among us, frequently draw
of our nation. Taking a hearsay story for fact, and passing off
misrepresentations for truth, they pretend to decide from thence, on the
manners and character of the people, commonly founding their opinions on vague
reports, idle pamphlets and papers, rather than on their own observations on
real life. Thus the story of the Bottle-Conjurer, first ridiculed in pamphlets
at home, gave us among foreigners the character of a credulous people; and
Bielfield mentions it in his letters as an instance of our rage for Spectacles:
as if the whole town had been crammed into the Little Theater in the Haymarket;
and as if every body, there present on that occasion, really expected to see a
man get into a Quart Bottle. This is the opinion that foreigners generally
entertain of that affair; and in compliment to their own wisdom they conclude
that the English are Fools.

The subject of M. D'Eon's note gives them also, as they imagine, another
specimen of our characters; and M. D'Eon himself having, I suppose, picked up
this story among other table-talk, since his arrival in England, puts it into
French, and flourishes away upon it most triumphantly. But did M. D'on see the
50,000 who ran out of town? No. Was he in London? No. In England? No. But he
has heard that a lifeguardman foretold a third earthquake, and that some weak
people were frightened at it, These he calls the Town, and multiplies them into
fifty thousand emigrants, and lays on the remaining thousands, no other
restraint than shame and the fear of ridicule. It is easy for a lively
Frenchman, to draw the severest conclusions from such false premises. But let
me ask him, where is that wise and philosophical metropolis, among which there
are no weak persons? and are they the proper persons to fit for the true
portrait of a nation? Suppose exactly the same circumstances had happened at
Paris, would not the Bois de Boulogne have been as full of coaches as Hyde-Park
was on that occasion? Would it be candid in an Englishman residing at Paris
fourteen years after not only to multiply 500 to 50,000, but to throw also the
same ridicule, which they had drawn on themselves, on all the rest of the town?
And yet would it not be very easy for such an Englishman to give himself an
insolent air, and to say "The faith of this bigoted nation was pinned on a
prophecy, perhaps not half so ridiculous as many other articles of their
belief: and volatile understandings, like chaff before the wind, were blown to
and fro by the breath of a madman."

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, F. G.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Tuesday, Oct. 30, 1764. Mr. Baldwin,
WE Two, who have now determined to become your joint correspondents, and like
the two hands to pull together on this occasion, although like them, We are
always on different sides; We, Sir, We say, and Our ancestors, have been
members of parliament time out of mind; We, as well as Our respective
predecessors, have, it is true, very often changed Our sides, but then like
partners in a country dance, We have each of us crossed over and now and then
in case of a coalition of parties, joined hands, for the sake of figuring in.
We are in general not a very talkative family, delighting chiefly in
monosyllables; and thinking a word from the wise, as well as a word to the
wise, fully sufficient. The truth is, We are like sheep, a gregarious kind of
animal, and if one leaps over a hedge or into a ditch, all the rest follow; but
though We have little or no cause, at least no ostensible one, for Our conduct;
yet We think ourselves infinitely obliged to those ingenious gentlemen, who,
after all is over, are so kind as to assign a plausible reason for what We have
done. The principal end of this letter, therefore, Mr. Baldwin, is to return
thanks in both Our names, to all political writers Pro and Con, AUDITOR and
NORTH BRITON, Defenders of Minority or Majority, for taking the trouble to
investigate the motives of Our parliamentary behavior, and enabling Us to
defend Our several causes with arguments We never heard, nor ever thought of
before. We are both prepared to enter the scene of business again, soon after
Christmas, We know Our cues, and Our parts are but short; but when We have
performed them, We shall be obliged to those gentlemen who will again undertake
to show that We seemed to follow nature, and that they could not perceive that
We were moved like Puppets; or like live actors, stood in need of a Prompter.
We are, Sir, and We are not,

Your humble servants AY AND NO.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Thursday, Nov. 29, 1764.
INTELLIGENCE EXTRAORDINARY.
Drury Lane. LAST night was performed at this theater, for the first time, a
new comic opera, called the Capricious Lovers, written by Mr. Lloyd, and
founded, as the author informs us, on a French piece of Monsieur Favart, called
Les Caprices d' Amor; ou, Ninette a la Cour. Being no great admirers of
Operas, serious, or comic, we cannot help saying that we think Mr. Robert
Lloyd deserves much censure on this occasion, for these two reasons, first for
linking his theatrical labors with those of a composer; and secondly for
entering the field of Opera with the arms of Sense and Poetry. There are charms
enough in this piece to seduce us into a liking of this Species of the Drama;
and Mr. Lloyd is unwarily sacrificing to a Castrato Apollo, instead of that
manly vigorous God of Poetry for whom he and his lamented friend Churchill have
always professed so sincere an adoration. And yet after all, Mr. Lloyd has
entirely mistaken the matter, in writing elegant words in order to be adapted
to music; for it is a fact founded on experience that nothing is so harmonious
as nonsense; as a recent proof of which maxim we will venture to say, that Mr.
Rush's composition in the serious Opera of the Royal Shepherd, in which Opera
there was scarce one line of sense, was infinitely superior to his musical
labors in the Capricious Lovers: in which last entertainment we assigned to
the author the first place; to the performers, who were most excellent, the
second; and to the composer, but not without an interval betwixt them, the
third. Not that we mean to depreciate the talents of Mr. Rush, or that we do
not readily allow his having exerted them in the composition of several elegant
airs in this Opera, but merely to observe that (perhaps for want of use) sense
is not so pliant under his hands as nonsense, and that he lavished much
excellent music, on many a melodious For, or The, or And, in the Royal
Shepherd last year, which would have been better bestowed, had he reserved it
for the excellent poetry of the airs in this Opera. -- The dialogue also has
much merit, as well as the airs, for which the author is partly indebted to the
original French; though we cannot but observe that much of the part of Lisetta,
and all the comic scenes between Hobbinol and Damon, together with their
lively appearance in the catastrophe, with all which circumstances the audience
were so highly entertained, are entirely new. -- The performers did great
justice to their characters. It would be great injustice not to confess the
merit and uncommon excellence of Mrs. Clive, Mr. Yates, and Mr. Vernon. Indeed
the execution of the whole Opera afforded us much entertainment, and we liked
it but too well.

In order to give our country readers a specimen of the words, we shall subjoin
two songs, though indeed they may rather be called elegant little poems, than
mere airs in the Opera. There are several others of equal merit.

AIR V.
When the head of poor Tummas was broke
By Roger who played at the wake,
And Kate was alarmed at the stroke
And wept for poor Tummas's sake;
When his worship gave noggins of ale,
And the liquor was charming and stout,
O those were the times to regale,
And we footed it rarely about.
Then our partners were buxom as Does,
And we all were as happy as kings,
Each lad in his holiday clothes,
And the lasses in all their best things.
What merriment all the day long!
May the feast of our Colin prove such!
Odzooks but I Will join in the song,
And I Will hobble about with my crutch.
AIR XVII.
For various purpose serves the fan,
As thus -- a decent blind,
Between the sticks to peep at man,
Nor yet betray your mind.
Each action has a meaning plain;
Resentment's in the snap;
A flirt expresses strong disdain,
Consent a gentle tap.
All passions will the fan disclose,
All modes of female art,
And to advantage sweetly shows,
The hand, if not the heart.
It Is folly's scepter first designed
By love's capricious boy,
Who knows how lightly all mankind
Are governed by a toy.

To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Thursday, Oct. 10, 1765.
NOTES on the PREFACE to Mr. Johnson's Edition of Shakespeare (published this
morning.)
JOHNSON's Shakespeare! published! when? this morning -- what at last! -- vix
tandem, 'egad! he has observed Horace's rule of nonum in annum. Keep the Piece
nine years, as Pope says -- I know a friend of mine that subscribed in
fifty-six -- etc. etc. etc.

Such perhaps is the language of some little witling, who thinks his satirical
sallies extremely poignant and severe; but the appearance of any production of
Mr. Johnson cannot fail of being grateful to the literary world; and, come when
they will, like an agreeable guest, we are sure to give them a hearty welcome,
though perhaps we may have betrayed some little impatience at their not coming
sooner. Nor have the public in general been deceived. None but subscribers
have a right to complain: and they I suppose, in general, meant to show their
respect for Mr. Johnson, rather than to give themselves a title of becoming
clamorous creditors.

But granting our editor to be naturally indolent -- and naturally indolent we
believe him to be -- we cannot help wondering at the number, vastness, and
excellence of his productions. A Dictionary of our language; a series of
admirable essays in the Rambler, as well as, if we are not misinformed, several
excellent ones in the Adventurer; an edition of Shakespeare; besides some less
considerable works, all in the space of no very great number of years! and all
these the productions of a mere Idler! We could wish there were a few more of
such indolent men in these kingdoms.

Of the general merit of this new edition of Shakespeare we cannot now be
expected to give any account. It was published but this morning, but as we
obtained a sight of the editor's valuable preface a few days ago, we shall now
oblige our readers with a few extracts from it, together with some remarks
which we have taken the liberty to subjoin; for the freedom of which we make no
apology, as Mr. Johnson need not now be told, that notwithstanding "the
tenderness due to living reputation and veneration to genius and learning, he
cannot be justly offended at that liberty, of which he has himself so
frequently given an example."

After some introductory matter concerning the degree of merit, which we may
suppose to be stamped on works by the suffrage of antiquity, the writer
proceeds thus:

SHAKESPEARE is above all writers, at least above all modern writers, the Poet
of Nature: the Poet that holds up to his readers a faithful Mirror of Manners
and of Life. His characters are not modified by the customs of particular
places, unpractised by the rest of the world, by the peculiarities of studies
or professions, which can operate but upon small numbers; or by the accidents
of transient fashions or temporary opinions: they are the genuine progeny of
common humanity, such as the world will always supply, and observation will
always find. His persons act and speak by the influence of those general
passions and principles by which all minds are agitated, and the whole system
of life is continued in motion. In the writings of other poets a character is
too often an individual; in those of Shakespeare it is commonly a species.
Having given some further illustration of this argument, the editor proceeds in
the following terms:

His adherence to general nature has exposed him to the Censure of Critics,
who form their judgments upon narrower principles. Dennis and Rhymer think his
Romans not sufficiently Roman; and Voltaire censures his Kings as not
completely Royal. Dennis is offended, that Menenius, a Senator of Rome, should
play the buffoon; and Voltaire perhaps, thinks decency violated when the Danish
usurper is represented as a drunkard. But Shakespeare always makes nature
predominant over accident; and if he preserves the essential character, is not
very careful of distinctions super-induced and adventitious. His story requires
Romans or Kings, but he thinks only on Men. He knew that Rome, like every other
city, had men of all dispositions: and wanting a buffoon, he went into the
Senate House for that which the Senate House would certainly have afforded him.

He was inclined to show an usurper, and a murderer, not only odious but
despicable, he therefore added drunkenness to his other qualities, knowing that
Kings love wine, like other men, and that wine exerts its natural power upon
Kings. These are the petty cavils of petty minds; a poet overlooks the casual
distinction of country and condition, as a painter, satisfied with the figure,
neglects the drapery.

Has not Mr. Johnson here made too liberal a concession to Dennis? and on an
examination of the play of Coriolanus, would it not appear that the character
of Menenius, though marked with the peculiarities of an hearty old gentleman,
is by no means that of a buffoon? Many have defended Polonius, who is much less
respectable than Menenius.

The editor then enters into a very sensible and spirited vindication of the
mingled drama of Shakespeare, and the interchange of serious and comic scenes
in the same play. His reflections on this subject he closes in the following
terms:

When Shakespeare's plan is understood, most of the criticisms of Rhymer and
Voltaire vanish away. The play of Hamlet is opened, without impropriety, by two
Sentinels; Iago bellows at Brabantio's window, without injury to the scheme of
the play, though in terms which a modern audience would not easily endure; the
character of Polonius is seasonable and useful; and the Grave Diggers
themselves may be heard with applause.

Shakespeare engaged in Dramatick Poetry with the world open before him; the
rules of the ancients were yet known to few; the public judgment was unformed;
he had no example of such fame as might force him upon imitation, nor critics
of such authority as might restrain his extravagance: He therefore indulged his
natural disposition, and his disposition, as Rhymer has remarked, led him to
Comedy. In Tragedy he often writes with great appearance of toil and study,
what is written at last with little facility; but in his comic scenes, he
seems to produce without labor, what no labor can improve. In Tragedy he is
always struggling after some occasion to be comic, but in Comedy he seems to
repose, or to luxuriate, as in a mode of thinking congenial to his nature. In
his tragic scenes there is always something wanting, but his Comedy often
surpasses expectation or desire. His Comedy pleases by the thoughts and the
language, and his Tragedy for the greater part by incident and action. His
Tragedy seems to be skill, his comedy instinct.

This opinion in which Mr. J. concurs with the Arch Zoilus of our author, is
however very disputable; and we cannot help thinking that what is said in this
place, as well as what is afterward thrown out on this head, in speaking of
his faults, is infinitely too strong. A good comment on parts of Othello,
Hamlet, Lear, Macbeth, and other tragic scenes of Shakespeare, or perhaps a
mere perusal of them, would be the best method of confuting these assertions.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Saturday, Oct. 12, 1763.
NOTES on the PREFACE to Mr. Johnson's Edition of Shakespeare continued.
IN his comic scenes he is seldom very successful, when he engages his
characters in Reciprocations of Smartness and Contests of Sarcasm; Anglice,
Repartee. Dryden in one of his prefaces calls it "a Quick Chase of Wit;" but so
many writers, so many styles!

But the admirers of this great poet have most reason to complain, when he
approaches nearest to his highest excellence, and seems fully resolved to sink
them into dejection and mollify them with tender emotions by the Fall of
Greatness, the Danger of Innocence, or the Crosses of Love. Does Mr. J. mean to
refer his readers to the Fall of Wolsey, the Distresses of Lear, the Murders of
Duncan and Desdemona, etc. etc. or was his mind wholly occupied by some
quibbling scenes in Romeo and Juliet, and the Midsummer's Night's Dream?

A quibble was to him the fatal Cleopatra for which he lost the world, and was
content to lose it. Has not Mr. J. been as culpably fond of writing upon
Quibble, as Shakespeare in persuing it? and is not his labored paragraph upon
quibble as puerile as a remnant of a school-boy's declamation? Besides, was it
not a vice common to all the writers of that age?

Familiar Comedy is often more powerful on the Theater, than in the page;
Imperial Tragedy is always less. Imperial Tragedy, such at least as is attended
with these effects, is of all others the coldest; and that Tragic Writer has
but very ill effected the purposes of that species of Drama, whose productions
are more powerful in the Page, than on the Theater. Cato, perhaps, may possess
more dignity and force in the closet; but we know that Richard, Lear, Othello,
etc. have most power on the stage.

Those whom my arguments cannot persuade to give their approbation to the
judgment of Shakespeare, will easily, if they consider the condition of his
life, make some allowance for his ignorance. There is much good sense, sound
criticism, and fine writing in these observations on the Unities; and it is
certain that a strict observation of the Unities of Time and Place have not
only "given more trouble to the poet than pleasure to the Auditor," but have
perhaps created as many absurdities as they have prevented: yet it were to have
been wished, that Mr. J. had in this, as in all other instances, rather
maintained the character of a reasoner, than assumed that of a pleader. All
liberties may be carried to an excess, and the violation of these Unities may
be so gross as to become unpardonable. Shakespeare himself seems to have been
sensible of this; and therefore introduced the Chorus into Henry the Fifth to
waft us from shore to shore; and for the same reason he brings in the personage
of Time in the character of Chorus in the Winter's Tale, to apologize for the
lapse of sixteen years, the distance between the supposed birth of Perdita, and
her appearance as the nymph beloved by Florizel. It might have been worth while
therefore to have endeavored in some measure to ascertain how far these
Unities may allowably be transgressed. Such an investigation by Mr. J. would
have still enhanced the value of this excellent Preface, and must have been
agreeable to all readers.

There has always prevailed a tradition, that Shakespeare wanted learning, that
he had no regular education, nor much skill in the dead languages. Jonson his
friend, affirms, that he had small Latin and no Greek. Mr. J. certainly quotes
from memory in this place. The affirmation of Ben Jonson is, that Shakespeare
"had small Latin, and less Greek," which implies his having some share of both.
Even in our times, a man who has some Greek, has commonly a pretty competent
knowledge of Latin.

Such verse we make when we are writing prose; we make such verse in common
conversation. It is remarkable that Dennis, though perhaps undesignedly, has
here exemplified his own observation.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Thursday, Nov. 7, 1765. SIR,
I Have seen and read the Remarks which you were pleased to subjoin to the
Extracts from Mr. Johnson's Preface to his Edition of Shakespeare, and hope
that the same Remarker, having concluded his comments on the Preface, will
proceed to examine the work itself. In the mean time, if the following
observations on some of our new editor's notes, on the play of Henry the Fifth,
appear to be worth your notice, you are welcome to publish them in your
Chronicle. I had no particular reason for singling out this play: but when my
books, for which I had long since subscribed, came home, the fourth volume
happened to be the first that I cut open, and Harry V. the first play that I
perused. Hereafter, perhaps, if some abler critic does not take the task out
of my hands, I may send you my observations on some others.

FIRST.
For it is your thoughts that now must deck our Kings
Carry them here and there.
We should (says Mr. J.) read King for Kings. The prologue relates only to this
play. The mistake was made by referring Them to Kings which belongs to
Thoughts. Not to mention the harshness of referring Them to Thoughts instead of
Kings, to which it naturally and obviously belongs, Kings is proper in relation
only to this play. The Kings of France and England are those here intended by
Shakespeare, who says in the same spirit but a few lines before, Suppose,
within the girdle of these walls,
Are now confined two mighty monarchies.


SECOND.
Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown
Of Charles the Duke of Lorrain, sole heir male
Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
To fine his title with some shows of truth,
Though in pure truth it was corrupt, etc.
This is the reading of the old quarto; and Dr. W. very properly explains, "to
fine his title," to signify "to refine or improve it," which interpretation the
Poet's pursuing the allusion by the word Corrupt in the next line confirms. But
Dr. J. would read, to Line his Title, which he endeavors to support by a
passage from Macbeth. But besides that the word Line occurs in the verse
immediately preceding, and would therefore have been probably rejected by the
most hasty writer, had it presented itself, the metaphor used in the old
reading is more easy and natural.

THIRD.
Exeter. But there is a saying very old and true,
If that you will France win, then with Scotland first begin.
For once the eagle England being in prey,
To her unguarded nest the weazel, Scot,
Comes sneaking, and so sucks her princely eggs;
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
To taint and havoc more than she can eat.

Ely. It follows then the cat must stay at home,
Yet that is but a Crushed Necessity;
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
And Pretty Traps, to catch the Petty Thieves.

Crushed Necessity (the reading here retained in this passage) is that of the
folios. The old quarto has it Cursed Necessity. Sir T. Hanmer reads, Yet that
is not o'Course a Necessity,


Dr. W. contends for 'Scus'd Necessity, meaning Excused; and Mr. J. says we
might read a Crude Necessity. All the critics concur in supplying a word of
the same signification, supposing that Ely would show that there is not an
Absolute Necessity, which indeed is the sense that the whole context, taken
together, seems to point out. It appears to me that the old quarto, with a very
slight emendation, would give the true reading. Omit the single letter (S) and
for Cursed Necessity (which is an error of the press) read Cured Necessity, and
that small alteration produces the meaning that the context requires, and the
critics have endeavored to strike out. A very ingenious gentleman of my
acquaintance, proposes to read, a Cur's Necessity, in allusion to the fable of
the dog in the manger. But I think it does not fall in with the rest of the
passage.

Not having any other edition by me at present, I cannot tell whether the word
Pretty in the last line be not an error of the press in Mr. Johnson's, if not,
I should suppose that Shakespeare wrote, And Petty Traps to catch the Petty
Thieves.


FOURTH.
On part of the Second Chorus, Mr. Johnson has the following note: And by their
hands this grace of kings must die,
If Hell and Treason hold their promises,
Ere he takes ship for France: and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on, and well digest
The abuse of distance, while we force a play,
The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed,
The king is set from London, and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton:
There is the playhouse now.


I suppose every one (says Mr. J.) that reads these lines looks about for a
meaning which he cannot find. There is no connection of Sense, nor regularity
of Transition from one thought to the other. It may be suspected that some
lines are lost, and in that sense the case is irretrievable. I rather think the
meaning is obscured by an accidental transposition, which I would reform thus:
And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
If Hell and Treason hold their promises.
The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed,
The king is set from London, and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton
Ere he takes ship for France. And in Southampton
Linger your patience on, and well digest
The abuse of distance, while we force a play,
There is the playhouse now.


This alteration (continues Mr. Johnson) restores sense, and probably the true
sense. The lines might be otherwise ranged, but this order pleases me best.

But the original order pleases Me best, Mr. Baldwin, nor can I conceive how
any reader of the lines can look about for a meaning without finding it; or
indeed how he can miss finding it under his nose, without looking about at all.
Where lies the difficulty? In the three first lines? Let us examine them, And
by their hands this grace of kings must die
If Hell and Treason hold their promises,
Ere he takes ship for France; and in Southampton.
The meaning of this is, that there was a plot to kill the King in Southampton
before he could embark on his French expedition. This the King himself
explains, -- this man
Has for a few light crowns lightly conspired,
And sworn unto the practices of France,
To kill us here in Hampton.


Surely the words "And in Southampton" did not puzzle Mr. Johnson. Can an
editor of Shakespeare be confounded by an Elleipsis so frequent in that author,
and all other poets? "The King must die ere he take ship for France, and must
die in Southampton." What can be clearer? Besides, the arrangement proposed is
much more confused and inelegant than that in which the lines stand at present.
For instance, And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
If Hell and Treason hold their promises.
By placing a full stop in this place, instead of a comma, and by omitting the
third line, Ere he takes ship for France; and in Southampton -- -- By these
injudicious alterations you are only generally informed of a plot, without the
alarming particulars given in the original reading. And only mark how very
aukwardly this poor transposed line is squeezed into another corner! The sum is
paid, the traitors are agreed,
The king is set from London, and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton
Ere he take ship for France. And in Southampton
Linger your patience on, and well digest
The abuse of distance, while we force a play.
There is the playhouse now.
Here I think comes out, that the unfortunate words "and in Southampton" were
the stumbling blocks to our editor. But is not this new disposition of the
lines much for the worse? and would one not almost be tempted to suppose from
the great distance between the King and the relative pronoun He, that the Scene
was to "take ship for France?" -- The proposed alteration therefore introduces
confusion, instead of restoring sense; and the old reading, in this case as in
most others, gives the true sense. The lines indeed might perhaps be otherwise
ranged, but this order is the most natural and the best.



Fearing that I may have already trespassed too far on your paper, I shall
reserve the continuation of these remarks till you hear from me again; perhaps,
Mr. Baldwin, you may hear from me again and again, and again. In the mean time
I remain,

Your constant reader, And humble servant, CHRISTOPHER DENNIS.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Hyde-Park-Corner, Saturday, March 21, 1767. SIR,
IF you ever, on Sundays or Holydays, bestow eighteenpence a side on a horse,
and turn his head toward the West, you may probably have beheld me, your
present correspondent, placed close against Hyde-Park Wall, a little beyond St.
George's Hospital. My traveling name, or rather the name which travelers on
the Western road have given me, is CAPTAIN NOSE, a kind of Cognomen, derived,
after the Roman custom, from the most remarkable prominence of a certain
feature of my face. Tully, from a similar reason, was surnamed CICERO; and Ovid
was called NASO, from the very same cause that I have been christened CAPTAIN
NOSE. The poet, on account of some illicit amors, was driven into exile. I,
who am a veteran in the military service, am rewarded as handsomely as many
other veterans; and while the soldiers of the three regiments of Foot Guards
are put into wooden boxes to watch the ducks in St. James's Park, I am
stationed a perpetual centry against Hyde-Park Wall, to observe the motions of
all the goers and comers in and out of this extensive metropolis.

If you ever were at Paris, Mr. Baldwin, you must know that it is impossible to
pass any of the barriers, without an impertinent fellow of an officer tearing
open your coach door, to see that you do not export or import so much as a
bottle of sour wine, without defraying the duties on it. Were I to take the
same liberty with every coach that passes by my station, such is the jealousy
of military establishments in this free country, that I might probably in less
than a week, fall into the hands of the civil power, be seized by Fielding's
runners, be carried to give an account of myself before the Bow-Street Police,
and perhaps ultimately be conveyed out of town again toward the North-West,
when I might be allotted a more disagreeable station, than that which I occupy
at present. To say the truth, I do not want to take so near an inspection of
passengers as an highwayman's horse, for it is easy enough to see how the world
goes, even with half an eye; and though you may perceive that I only glance at
them in profile, yet they do not drive so hastily along, but I am able to give
a tolerable account of them. Such an account, if you think it will be of
service to your Chronicle, is occasionally at your service. The Tatler
pretended to maintain an intercourse with a Spirit, called Pacolet. Do not you
then disdain a correspondent in crayons! for perhaps, even the notified
Connoisseur, Mr. Town, did not collect more intelligence from his cousin
Village, than you may receive from me; nor did even the Spectator reap more
advantages from his inquisitive short face, than you may derive from my long
nose, master Baldwin.

At present writing, Mr. Baldwin, I have only time to send you the following
hasty advices. However, if they prove agreeable, you shall soon receive another
packet from

Your humble servant, CAPTAIN NOSE.

Hyde-Park-Corner. Thursday, March 19, 1767.
JUST passed by, in a post-chaise for Bath, two Irish fortune-hunters, from
Park-Gate. Two ditto from the Hercules Pillars. -- A lady of the town, with a
young Oxford Scholar, in a machine. Another ditto, with another ditto, in a
Vis-a-vis. Dr. H -- in a Sulky. Two Monthly Reviewers, in a Hack, on a party of
pleasure to the Pack-horse at Turnham Green. Bumphrey Moreace, Esquire. for
Kew-Bridge. A new married couple, to Maidenhead. Lady V. and an old friend, for
Salt-Hill. A single gentleman on horseback, for Hounslow. Another ditto for
Bagshot. E. of Chapter with Seven Coaches and Seven, from Marlborough. His M. in a
post-chaise, from Richmond.


To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Saturday, May 9, 1767. SIR,
A Reverend Estimator of the Manners and Principles of the Times, lately
deceased, pronounced EFFEMINACY to be the characteristick of the Britons of the
present age; how unjustly, Voltaire, no friend to this country, has taken
notice, observing that the English answered the charge, by carrying their
conquests into every quarter of the globe.

Were I to attempt to assign the reigning principle, that governs all ranks and
orders of men in this kingdom, I should not hesitate to mention the Spirit of
Prodigality and Extravagance, which may now be said to be epidemical, raging
with equal violence in court and city, town and country, and confounding high
and low, rich and poor, one with another.

Set a beggar on horseback, says the old English proverb, and he will ride to
the Devil: though the devil himself, as Sir Francis Wronghead observes, would
scarce imagine that he would ride post to him: and yet at present, every beggar
has got on horseback, and seems resolved to run a race with his superiors.

That he, who has nothing, or perhaps is worse than nothing, should not be
afraid of being ruined, is not very wonderful; but that they, who are as happy
as a good fortune can make them, should take the greatest pains to divest
themselves of the means of that happiness, I have ever thought very
extraordinary. That a Frog should swell with envy, and burst itself in order to
become a Bull, is a fable whose moral one may readily comprehend; but what
Aesop of antiquity would have described the noble Bull tormented with the same
mean pride, and roaring, and tossing, and bellowing, till it reduced itself
even below the state of the wretched animal it might-trample on?

Great goings-out, to quote another old saying, must have great comings in. He
who now lives to the extent of his fortune, if he multiplies his expenses, must
multiply his resources, or see ruin before him. Some minds are apt not to be
very scrupuloussy delicate in the choice of those resources. A shopkeeper's
apprentice, perhaps, commits violence on the Till; an attorney's clerk takes to
the Gaming-Table; a tradesman makes a break of it, and cheats his honest
creditors of eighteen shillings in the pound; a genteel buck takes to the Turf;
and a true blood to the Heath. As to superior orders, the gentry and nobility,
they are above committing these petty larcenies on society. If a great
commoner, a lord or a duke, run out, they need not descend to these mean
shifts. They need not attack individuals, but realise the wish of Caligula, and
cut off the head of a nation at one blow. They need not be guilty of
burglaries, turn Rooks and Sharpers, commit fraudulent bankruptcies, or put
travelers into bodily fear on the king's highway. They have an opportunity of
prostituting their votes, selling boroughs, etc. -- In short they may unite all
the abovementioned glorious characters in one. They may turn robbers of their
country.

One of the chief schools, or rather academies, of Modern Extravagance, is the
Gaming-House. The pupils and students are the Rich; the professors they who
want to get their Riches. Gamesters, say the French, begin by being dupes and
end by being sharpers: and perhaps it is impossible even in this country, to
become an adept in the science without going through the degrees. The several
colleges of Arthur's, Almack's, Boodle's, Saunder's, etc. etc. in the two
parishes of St. James, and St. George, have a numerous list of scholars and
disciples on their books; and should one venture to point out those, whom every
body acknowledges to be as well read in the mystical parts of the art as Lookup
himself, who knows but one might incur the danger of a Praemunire or Scandalum
Magnatum?

I beg your pardon, Ladies! I have not said a syllable about you in particular
yet awhile, it is true: but when Extravagance is mentioned as a
characteristick of the Manners of the present age, You must be allowed to have
your share of it. Many an honest gentleman has been ruined by his wife's
inordinate desire to outvie the wife of his neighbor. A violent passion for
Dress, Equipage, and Company, are avowedly female failings; but Gaming, that
fiend, which is too hot even for masculine souls, has usurped a dominion over
the minds of our country-women. Conversation, and fireside society, is almost
quite lost among us. Family-visits, Blindman's-buff, and Hot-cockles are no
more. Every evening assembly is a route; and cards the occupation of every
meeting; at which every body who plays, play higher than they can afford, from
the Penny-Quadrille of Blackfriars, to the unlimited Lu in the liberties of
Westminster.

Extravagance, however, like many other vices, commonly counter-acts itself,
and defeats its own ends. Prodigals, even during the short period of their
splendour, rather render themselves ridiculous, than important in the eyes of
the multitude. The world is commonly furnished with materials to judge pretty
accurately of the income of particulars; and they who seem palpably to exceed
the measure of their circumstances, instead of creating admiration excite pity
or contempt. It would seem almost incredible therefore, did not experience
confute all speculation, that any persons should be so mad as to forfeit all
the future happiness of their lives, for the sake of exposing themselves to
public derision for a few short months, or at most for a very few years. The
patience of creditors is soon exhausted, and a distressed gentleman, who is
often put upon Ways and Means, will soon find it very difficult, and at last
quite impossible to raise the Supplies. He that will not take up in good time,
and put himself under a proper regimen for the evils incurred by his
extravagance, may be assured, that the disease will at last cure itself. An
acquaintance of mine, who loves a pun, often compares a prodigal to a clock: he
can go, says he, as long as he can tick; but when he can tick no longer, he
must stand. I would recommend it therefore to every man, who is about to
contract debts, to consider whether he shall be able to pay them; and before he
adopts a new system of living, to ask himself seriously whether he shall be
able to support it.

I cannot better wind up this rambling dissertation, than by annexing to it a
copy of a manuscript now in my possession. The original, I am told, was written
by that famous military character, so celebrated by Pope, Swift, and Voltaire,
the E. of P -- h. The personage to whom it was addressed, as a familiar
Epistle, is still living, and was then in the height of his career of youth
and pleasure. The letter itself is conceived in the true laconick spirit, and
runs thus:

A house in town! A house in the country! Hounds in Norfolk! Horses at
Newmarket! A Whore at W -- bl -- n! and G -- d d -- n you, where is your Estate?

Your affectionate grandfather, P --.



TO THE PRINTER.
-- Genus sibi masculeumque cooptat. BUSBY'S GRAMMAR.
Saturday, June 9, 1770.
MATTER, say some naturalists, never perishes: the form indeed is eternally
varying, but the essence remains. The face of whole countries may change,
animals die, plants decay, and palaces fall to ruin; dust returns to dust, but
the several atoms are not lost. We may, with Hamlet trace Alexander to the
stopping a Beer-Barrel; or follow the eminent botanist, Dr. Hill, till we leave
him among the Compost of a Hot-bed of Cucumbers.

The moral world, in the opinion of some Speculatists, resembles the material.
They imagine that the certain portion of virtue and vice, good and ill
qualities, which originally actuated mankind, is neither increased nor
diminished. Forms of Government, and Modes of Politeness, may indeed have turned
them to different shapes, tinged them with different colors and transferred
them to different possessors; but they have a permanent existence: and it would
be as absurd to maintain that they are annihilated, because they no longer
reside in the same persons, or retain their old names, as to contend that
Montague-House is pulled down because it is rendered the British Museum, or
that Sir Hans Sloane's curiosities are all lost, because they are all lodged in
Montague-House.

To what region the Virtues that have left this island are flown, it is
difficult to discover; but in the moral system there seems at present to be
going on a kind of Country-Dance between the Male and Female Follies and Vices,
in which they have severally crossed over, and taken each other's places. The
men are growing delicate and refined, and the women free and easy. There is
indeed a kind of animal neither male nor female, a thing of the neuter gender,
lately started up amongst us. It is called a Macaroni. It talks without
Meaning, it smiles without Pleasantry, it eats without Appetite, it rides
without Exercise, it wenches without Passion.

I may perhaps, on some future occasion, be ample in animadversion on those
Lady-like Gentlemen, who, despairing to be thought men, are ambitious of
resembling women. At present I shall rather confine my observations to those
adventurous and spirited females, who seem resolved to break though the
whalebone and buckram fences of Modesty and Decorum, and would no more endure
starch in their manners than in a pair of laced ruffles. A certain masculine
air now distinguishes the ladies; and if you see a female enter a public place
with a bold knock-me-down freedom, set her down for a person of quality!

Bath and Tunbridge, Cheltenham and Scarborough, the Theaters, Vauxhall,
Ranelagh, and of late years Soho and Almack's, were supposed to be the only
Shew-Glasses for youth and beauty. Taverns and coffee-houses were appropriated
entirely to the men; and a woman, out of the purlieus of Covent Garden, or the
hundreds of Drury, would have fainted away at the thoughts of entering such
places of public entertainment: but in the year 1770 the ladies of the first
quality, the mungoes, the superiors of the times, have abrogated the old Salick
laws of libertinism, and openly set up a tavern in professed rivalry of Boodle's,
Arthur's, and Almack's.

Such a convulsion in the moral world is surely as extraordinary as any former
change or revolution in the natural or political system: but being once
effected, who can foretell how far it will proceed, or how rapid will be its
progress? In a few years the common occurrences of a woman's life may more
nearly resemble those of a man's, than her riding-habit now approaches to his
dress. A lady may soon perhaps intrigue, and game, and swear, and drink, and
smoke tobacco, more openly than her husband does at present; and some future
papers may perhaps authenticate the following paragraphs:

Yesterday a duel was fought behind Montague-House between two ladies at the
West end of the town. One of the combatants was dangerously wounded, and the
other having absconded, is supposed to have gained the Continent.

Last week a lady of the Coterie lost 3000 guineas at Faro at one sitting, to
some other females of that society.

Last Saturday was run for, on the Beacon Course at Newmarket, the Ladies
Subscription Purse, which was won by Miss Charlotte Hayes's Eclipse. The
knowing-ones were taken in; and a gentlewoman who has this meeting been
convicted of Foul-Play, has been expelled the Side-Saddle Club by the unanimous
suffrage of that honorable society.

Yesterday twenty-one female prisoners were tried at the Old Bailey, when five
were capitally convicted, viz. Mary Wharton for breaking and entering the house
of Mr. Jenkins, with intent to steal the goods; Margaret Boldboy for a rape on
the body of Joseph Andrews; Rachel Stephens, Susan Hodges, and Sarah Hughes for
the wilful murder of Thomas Simple, by shooting him with a blunderbuss. Seven
were cast for transportation, and nine acquitted.

It is said that great interest is making by some ladies of the highest
quality, to obtain a pardon for Mary Flannagan, now lying in Newgate under
sentence of death, her brother, Patrick Flanagan, being in keeping with two or
three dutchesses.

A gang of footpads, in Straw Hats and Red Cloaks, have infested the New Road
near Islington for some time past. Two of them, very desperate viragoes, were
taken by Mrs. Justice Foolding's women last night, and by her worship's warrant
committed to New Prison.

We hear that Mrs. Catherine Macaulay will certainly be the Middlesex member.

Last night a street-walker in the Strand, who has long been known among his
fellow prostitutes by the name of Black Tom, was very much maltreated by some
young ladies who had been spending the evening at the Shakespeare tavern. The
poor wretch now lies dangerously ill, and it is thought will not long survive.
One of the young ladies is said to be the eldest daughter of a popular countess.

Last week Miss Theodosia Forrester, being on a party of shooting near her
mama's seat in Dorsetshire, had the misfortune of losing her right breast by
the stock of the barrel of the gun bursting at the time of her firing.

The same day Miss Styles put out her collarbone by a fall from her horse in
jumping over a five-bar-gate.

One of the capital figures at the last masquerade was a lady in the character
of Eve, in a suit of Flesh-coloured silk, with an apron of Fig Leaves.


TO THE PRINTER.
Tuesday, Dec. 4, 1770. SIR,
THERE are in every language, ancient and modern, certain heterogeneous words
and anomalous expressions, which render it more difficult to be acquired by
students and foreigners than even the most licentious idiomatick phrases, or
the most irregular combination of sentences. In vain may the laborious
Lexicographer boast of having traced every radical word through a collateral
series of Parallel Ramifications. The Philologist still toils with hopeless
investigation, and finds himself bewildered in the maze of petty Familiarity
and entangled in Colloquial Barbarisms. The Ebullitions of Convivial or
Epistolary Humor, and the Sallies of Dramatick Hilarity, the Lucubrations of
the Periodical Essayist, the Sportive Vein and Dry Intelligence of our Diurnal,
Nocturnal, and Hebdomadal Historians, are almost totally unintelligible for
want of an adequate interpretation. To remedy this defect in English
Literature, I have, with infinite labor, compiled a Vocabulary or Glossary,
intended as a Supplement to a larger and more solemn Dictionary. It is easy to
foresee that the idle and illiterate will complain that I have increased their
labors by endeavoring to diminish them, and that I have explained what is
more easy by what is more difficult -- Ignotum per ignotius. I expect, on the
other hand, the liberal acknowledgments of the learned. He who is buried in
Sholastick Retirement, secluded from the assemblies of the Gay, and remote from
the circles of the Polite, will at once comprehend the definitions, and be
grateful for such a seasonable and necessary Elucidation of his Mother Tongue.
Annexed to this letter is a short specimen of the Work, thrown together in a
vague and desultory manner, not even adhering to alphabetical concatenation.
The whole will be comprised in two Folio Volumes, and will appear some time
within the ensuing twenty years. In the mean while, subscriptions are taken in
at all the most eminent booksellers in London and Westminster; of whom may be
learnt all further particulars relative to this arduous and important
undertaking.

SPECIMEN.
Higgledy-piggledy, -- Conglomeration and Confusion. Hurly-Burly, -- Extreme
Tumult and Uproar. Scribble-Scrabble, -- Pages of Inanity. See-Saw, --
Alternate Preponderation. Tittle-Tattle, -- Futile Conversation. Mum Chance, --
Mental Torpidity. Fee! Fau! Fum! -- Gigantick Intonations. Arsy-varsy, An
Inversion of Capitals and Fundamentals. Topsy-turvy, An Inversion of Capitals
and Fundamentals. Hobble-de-boy, -- Adolescence, between the period of Puberty
and Virility. Tit for Tat, -- Adequate Retaliation. Shilly-Shally, --
Hesitation and Irresolution. Willy-nilly, -- The Execution of an Act maugre the
consent of another. Dingle-dangle, -- Aerial Suspension. Hurry-scurry, --
Inordinate Precipitation. Ridlemeree, -- An Aenigmatick Exordium. Ding-dong, --
Tintinnabulory Chimes, used metaphorically to signify Dispatch and Vehemence.
Tag-rag, The lowest Plebeians. See Base-born, and Scum-of-the-Earth. Riff-raff,
The lowest Plebeians. See Base-born, and Scum-of-the-Earth. Nincompoop, Asinine
Wretches. Ninnyhammer, Asinine Wretches. Hocus-pocus, -- Pseudo-necromancy.
Jemminy-criminy, -- An emasculate Obtestation. Rigmarole, -- Discourse,
incoherent and rhapsodical. Zig-zag, -- Transverse Angles: Crincum-crancum, --
Lines of Irregularity and Involution. Helter-skelter, -- Quasi Hilariter and
Celeriter, signifying Motion of equal Jocundity and Velocity. Hodge-podge, -- A
culinary Mixture of heterogeneous Ingredients, applied metaphorically to all
discordant Combinations.
Philological Disquisitions are but ill adapted to the readers of a fugacious
paper. Having, therefore already given a sufficient indication of my purpose to
the Philosopher, the Academick, and the Scholar, I shall at present add no
further interpretations; but in order to convince the learned of the Necessity
and Importance of the work announced to them, I shall somewhat enlarge the
catalogue of terms that demand explication; which like base metal among
legitimate coin, have, by long usage, become current in our language; and
without which the commerce of the world, or even the traffic of letters, can
with difficulty be maintained either with profit or delectation. To explain
them may be some glory: it would be more substantial fame to contribute to
their extirpation.

CATALOGUE.
Wishy-washy, Mess-medly, Fiddle-faddle, Slap-dash, Slap-bang, Hum-drum,
Harum-scarum, Rantum-scantum, Pit-pat, Chit-chat, Prittle-prattle, Hoity-toity,
Tip-top, Hubble-bubble, Humpty-dumptdy, Hugger-mugger, Hiccius-doccius,
Hurdy-gurdy, Shiddlecum-sh-e, Knick-knack, Pell-mell, Whipper-snapper,
Hoddy-doddy, Niddy-noddy, Huff-bluff, Tory-rory, Whisky-frisky, Snickersnee,
Tuzzy-muzzy, Gimminy-gomminy, Wig-wam, Flim-flam, Namby-pamby, Hob or Nob,
Bamboozle, Snip-snap, Hum-strum, Diddle-daddle, Hum-bug Full-but, Fal-lal,
Roly-poly, etc. etc.
It is easy from this Specimen to suppose Extension and Amplification. Printed
authorities will be subjoined as vouchers for the existence of every term and
word that shall be cited, and its various significations, where there are more
than one, properly explained. He who writes the Dictionary of any Tongue, may
be considered as laboring in a coalmine; but he who collects the Refuse of a
Language, claims more than ordinary commiseration, and may be said to sift the
cinders.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. LEXIPHANES.


A SKETCH OF DR. JOHNSON.
DR. JOHNSON is certainly a genius, but of a particular stamp. He is an
excellent classical scholar, perhaps one of the best Latinists in Europe. He
has combined in himself two talents which seldom meet: he is both a good
English and Latin poet. Had his inclination led him to have mixed with the
fashionable world (where he was warmly invited) and had he been a nearer
inspector of the follies, and vices of high life, he would certainly have been
called by the election of the best critics to the Poetical Chair, where Pope
sat without a rival till his death; and then the Laurel, like the kingdom of
Macedonia, at the death of Alexander, was divided among many. It must be owned
that Dr. Johnson's two Satires in imitation of Juvenal, are among the best
titles that have been produced for the poetical inheritance.

Indeed his morals and manners are so ill suited with loose opinions, and
thoughtless dissipation, that it is no wonder he was soon disgusted with what
he saw and heard, and which he so well painted and felt in his LONDON. -- His
second Satire (the tenth of Juvenal) though written with great force and
energy, yet seems more the fruit of study than observation. His sagacity is
wonderful: though near-sighted, he can discover and describe with great humor
the nice discriminations, and almost imperceptible touches of the various
characters of both sexes: his " mind's eye" has a keenness and certainty that
seldom misses the mark; and did his pen convey his discoveries in
characteristick language, he would be equal to the best writers -- but here he
fails. -- In his Ramblers and Idlers, whenever he introduces characters, their
actions, deportment, and thoughts, have a most accurate, and minute resemblance
to nature, but they all talk one language, and that language is Dr. Johnson's.
Words are the vehicle of our thoughts, as coaches are of our persons; the
state-equipage should not be drawn forth but upon solemn occasions. His
peculiarity of diction has given the Public a suspicion that he could not
succeed in Dramatick Composition. His Tragedy of Irene is a work of great and
just sentiment, of Poetical, though not Dramatick Language, fine imagery, and
of the Osmagna Sonaturum; but the very soul of Tragedy, Pathos, is wanting; and
without that, though we may admire, our hearts will sleep in our bosoms. -- Dr.
Johnson has wit, humor, and a strong imagination, which are often exerted with
great effect in conversation. I will give, in a few words, the best advice I
can to young readers. Let them admire and study his Strength of Argument,
Richness of Imagery, and Variety of Sentiment, without being dazzled with the
splendour of his diction. Let them listen with attention and delight to his
entertaining and improving conversation, without imitating his dress or manner!

The Simplex Munditiis of Horace may, perhaps for the first time, be as
properly applied to the dress of the mind as of the body -- the best taste will
be ever shown where ease, elegance, and simplicity are united.

CHIARO OSCURO.
London Packet, Dec. 22, 1775.
To the PRINTER of the PUBLIC ADVERTISER.
Wednesday, Feb. 8, 1775. SIR,
IN my boyish days I remember reading in Busby's English Grammar of the Latin
Tongue, that "K was out of fashion." That poor unfortunate Letter is now almost
equally unfashionable in our own language; and unless you, or some other
popular writer as universally read, will interpose in its favor, this old
member of the Alphabet will perhaps soon be entirely cut off. The good offices
of a Printer, however, are not much to be expected; for though we formerly
heard of such a respectable Substantive as the PUBLIC, we daily see one of
your fraternity rejecting this old servant, and giving us a Paper entitled The
PUBLIC Advertiser.

To reconcile orthography to strict pronunciation is fantastical, ridiculous,
and illiterate. It originally relished of etymology, and in written speech some
etymological traces ever should remain. Honest K has long stood in our language
as a memorial of its origin; and as the Greek ch is represented in English by
the letters ch, so the final que of the French was formerly signified by the
English k. But fashion, fearful of pedantry, gives no quarter to etymology. The
Public are invited by your advertisements to performances tragi c and comi c,
and concerts of musi c; and to our utter astonishment, a modern dramatick poet
has announced The Choleric Man, under the auspices of Mr. Garri c, whose Gal
lick genealogy and Gal lick patrony mick are universally known, and who has
himself so largely contributed to render immortal the name of Garricque.

Tamely to follow fashions is poor and servile: to run before them argues a
great and lively genius. Content not yourself therefore, Mr. Woodfall, with the
present partial detruncation of the final k, but boldly lop it off from every
word wherein it now occurs, and do equal justice to the quic and the dead. The
tric is easily played; let ambition pric the sides of your intent; the
multitude will floc after you: the critics cannot find fault with you for
following their own example, and the whole Republic of Letters will crac of
your exploits in bringing this King Log to the bloc.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, BLAC AND ALL BLAC.
Berwic-street.

The above Letter was productive of the following from another hand, which
appeared in the same paper the succeeding Saturday, Feb. 11, 1775.

To the PRINTER of the PUBLIC ADVERTISER.
Smyrna Coffee-house, Wednesday Morning. SIR,
YOUR ingenious Correspondent BLAC and all BLAC has very humourously exposed
the affectation of some modern Writers, who are attempting to kic the letter k
out of the alphabet. This ridiculous innovation I hope will be crushed in the
bud; and your Correspondent certainly deserves well of the REPUBLIC OF LETTERS,
by endeavoring to save an useful member.

There is a very whimsical friend of mine who has long conceived so great an
aversion to poor k, that at last he has totally proscribed him; -- he contrives
to omit him in words where one would have thought it impossible to do without
him, such as knife and fork, corkscrew, wig-block, etc. which he writes nife
and for c, cor cs crew, wig-blo c, etc. In order to place his antipathy to k in
the most stri king light, permit me to lay before your Readers the following
Epistle, which I received from him a few days ago:

My dear Friend,
One misfortune they say generally comes on the ba c of another, I have had an
atta c of my old disorder, which has confined me these three we cs to a si c
bed. I have swallowed amazing quantities of physi c, and yet could seldom get a
win c of sleep for whole nights. Indeed it was partly my own fault, for instead
of proceeding in the regular tra c, I have been playing tri cs with my
constitution, by purchasing Qua c Medicines from a damned Mounteban c in our
neighborhood: however, by good lu c, and just in the ni c when I was on the
point of splitting on a to c, in stepped Dr. A --. He went upon the other ta c,
obliged the empiri c to pa c off, and instead of physi c, ordered me to drin c
plenty of sa c whey, or Old Ho c and water. Though I feel a considerable wea
cness, and some reli cs of the disorder, yet already I begin to pi c up a
little. I am forbid to eat por c, but can easily manage the wing of a chi c or
young co c. Tomorrow I begin with the Jesuit's Bar c; and though my
constitution has received a pretty smart sho c, the Doctor assures me I shall
very soon be as hearty as a bu c.

Too c's-Court, Tuesday Evening, Six o'Clo c.

I do not mean, Mr. Woodfall, to take up too much of your Paper, which is
better employed in coaxing the Colonies, or mauling the Minister. I hope that
enough has aleady been said to prevent the innocent k from arbitrary and unjust
proscription.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, K's FRIEND.


CRITICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE OLD ENGLISH DRAMATICK WRITERS.
CRITICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE OLD ENGLISH DRAMATICK WRITERS.
To DAVID GARRICK, Esquire.
SIR,
IT is not unnatural to imagine that, on the first glance of your eye over the
advertisement of a new pamphlet, addressed to yourself, you are apt to feel
some little emotion; that you bestow more than ordinary attention on the title,
as it stands in the news-paper, and take notice of the name of the publisher.
-- Is it Compliment or Abuse? -- One of these being determined, you are perhaps
eager to be satisfied, whether some coarse hand has laid on encomiums with a
trowel, or some more elegant writer (such as the author of The Actor for
instance) has done credit to himself and you by his panegyric; or, on the
other hand, whether any offended Genius has employed those talents against you,
which he is ambitious of exercising in the service of your Theater; or some
common Scribe has taken your character, as he would that of any other Man or
Woman, or Minister, or the King, if he durst, as a popular topic of scandal.

Be not alarmed on the present occasion; nor, with that consciousness of your
own merit, so natural to the Celebrated and Eminent, indulge yourself in an
acquiescence with the justice of ten thousand fine things, which you may
suppose ready to be said to you. No private Satire or Panegyric, but the
general good of the Republic of Letters, and of the Drama in particular, is
intended. Though Praise and Dispraise stand ready on each side, like the
vessels of Good and Evil on the right and left hand of Jupiter, I do not mean
to dip into either: or, if I do, it shall be, like the Pagan Godhead himself,
to mingle a due proportion of each. Sometimes, perhaps, I may find fault, and
sometimes bestow commendation: but you must not expect to hear of the Quickness
of your Conception, the Justice of your Execution, the Expression of your Eye,
the Harmony of your Voice, or the Variety and Excellency of your Deportment;
nor shall you be maliciously informed, that you are shorter than Barry, leaner
than Quin, and less a favorite of the Upper Gallery than Woodward or Shuter.

The following pages are destined to contain a Vindication of the Works of
Massinger, one of our Old Dramatick Writers, who very seldom falls much beneath
Shakespeare himself, and sometimes almost rises to a proud rivalship of his
chiefest excellencies. They are meant too as a laudable, though faint, Attempt
to rescue these admirable Pieces from the too general neglect which they now
labor under, and to recommend them to the Notice of the Public. To whom then
can such an Essay be more properly inscribed than to You, whom that Public
seems to have appointed, as its chief Arbiter Deliciarum, to preside over the
Amusements of the Theater? -- But there is also, by the bye, a private reason
for addressing you. Your honest friend Davies, who, as is said of the provident
Comedians in Holland, spends his hours of vacation from the theater in his
shop, is too well acquainted with the Efficacy of your Name at the top of a
Play-bill, to omit an opportunity of prefixing it to a new Publication, hoping
it may prove a charm to draw in purchasers, like the head of Shakespeare on his
sign. My Letter too being anonymous, your name at the head, will more than
compensate for the want of mine at the end of it: and our abovementioned friend
is, no doubt, too well versed in both his occupations, not to know the
consequence of Secrecy in a Bookseller, as well as the Necessity of concealing
from the Public many Things that pass behind the Curtain.

There is perhaps no country in the world more subordinate to the power of
fashion than our own. Every Whim, every Word, every Vice, every Virtue, in its
turn becomes the mode, and is followed with a certain rage of approbation for a
time. The favorite style in all the polite Arts, and the reigning taste in
Letters, are as notoriously objects of caprice as Architecture and Dress. A new
Poem, or Novel, or Farce, are as inconsiderately extolled or decried as a Ruff
or a Chinese Rail, a Hoop or a Bow Window. Hence it happens, that the public
taste is often vitiated: or if, by chance, it has made a proper choice, becomes
partially attached to one Species of Excellence, and remains dead to the Sense
of all other Merit, however equal, or superior.

I think I may venture to assert, with a confidence, that on reflection it will
appear to be true, that the eminent Class of Writers, who flourished at the
beginning of this century, have almost entirely superseded their illustrious
Predecessors. The Works of Congreve, Vanbrugh, Steel, Addison, Pope, Swift,
Gay, etc. etc. are the chief study of the Million: I say, of the Million; for
as to those few, who are not only familiar with all our own Authors, but are
also conversant with the Ancients, they are not to be circumscribed by the
narrow limits of the Fashion. Shakespeare and Milton seem to stand alone, like
first-rate Authors, amid the general wreck of Old English Literature. Milton
perhaps owes much of his present fame to the generous Labors and good Taste of
Addison. Shakespeare has been transmitted down to us with successive Glories;
and you, Sir, have continued, or rather increased, his Reputation. You have, in
no fulsome strain of compliment, been styled the Best Commentator on his Works:
But have you not, like other Commentators, contracted a narrow, exclusive,
Veneration of your Author? Has not the Contemplation of Shakespeare's
Excellencies almost dazzled and extinguished your Judgment, when directed to
other objects, and made you blind to the Merit of his Cotemporaries? Under your
dominion, have not Beaumont and Fletcher, nay even Johnson, suffered a kind of
Theatrical Disgrace? And has not poor Massinger, whose cause I have now
undertaken, been permitted to languish in Obscurity, and remained almost
entirely unknown?

To this perhaps it may be plausibly answered, nor indeed without some
foundation, that many of our Old Plays, though they abound with Beauties, and
are raised much above the humble level of later Writers, are yet, on several
accounts, unfit to be exhibited on the modern Stage; that the Fable, instead of
being raised on probable incidents in real Life, is generally built on some
foreign Novel, and attended with Romantic Circumstances; that the Conduct of
these Extravagant Stories is frequently uncouth, and infinitely offensive to
that Dramatick correctness prescribed by late Critics, and practiced, as they
pretend, by the French Writers; and that the Characters, exhibited in our Old
Plays, can have no pleasing effect on a modern Audience, as they are so totally
different from the manners of the present age.

These, and such as these, might once have appeared reasonable objections: but
You, Sir, of all persons, can urge them with the least grace, since your
Practice has so fully proved their insufficiency. Your Experience must have
taught you, that when a Piece has any striking Beauties, they will cover a
multitude of Inaccuracies; and that a Play need not be written on the severest
plan, to please in the representation. The mind is soon familiarized to
Irregularities, which do not sin against the Truth of Nature, but are merely
Violations of that strict Decorum of late so earnestly insisted on. What
patient Spectators are we of the Inconsistencies that confessedly prevail in
our darling Shakespeare! What critical Catcall ever proclaimed the indecency of
introducing the Stocks in the Tragedy of Lear? How quietly do we see Gloucester
take his imaginary Leap from Dover Cliff! Or to give a stronger instance of
Patience, with what a Philosophical Calmness do the audience dose over the
tedious, and uninteresting, Love-Scenes, with which the bungling hand of Tate
has coarsely pieced and patched that rich Work of Shakespeare! -- To instance
further from Shakespeare himself, the Grave-diggers in Hamlet (not to mention
Polonius) are not only endured, but applauded; the very Nurse in Romeo and
Juliet is allowed to be Nature; the Transactions of a whole History are,
without offense, begun and completed in less than three hours; and we are
agreeably wafted by the Chorus, or oftener without so much ceremony, from one
end of the world to another.

It is very true, that it was the general Practice of our old Writers, to found
their Pieces on some foreign Novel; and it seemed to be their chief aim to take
the story, as it stood, with all its appendant incidents of every complexion,
and throw it into Scenes. This method was, to be sure, rather inartificial, as
it at once overloaded and embarrassed the Fable, leaving it destitute of that
beautiful Dramatick Connection, which enables the mind to take in all its
Circumstances with Facility and Delight. But I am still in doubt, whether many
Writers, who come nearer to our own times, have much mended the matter. What
with their Plots, and Double-Plots, and Counter-Plots, and Under-Plots, the
Mind is as much perplexed to piece out the story, as to put together the
disjointed Parts of our Ancient Drama. The Comedies of Congreve have, in my
mind, as little to boast of accuracy in their construction, as the Plays of
Shakespeare; nay, perhaps, it might be proved that, amidst the most open
violation of the lesser critical Unities, one Point is more steadily pursued,
one Character more uniformly shown, and one grand Purpose of the Fable more
evidently accomplished in the productions of Shakespeare than of Congreve.

These Fables (it may be further objected) founded on romantic Novels, are
unpardonably wild and extravagant in their Circumstances, and exhibit too
little even of the Manners of the Age in which they were written. The Plays too
are in themselves a kind of heterogeneous composition; scarce any of them
being, strictly speaking, a Tragedy, Comedy, or even Tragi-Comedy, but rather
an indigested jumble of every species thrown together.

This charge must be confessed to be true: but upon examination it will,
perhaps, be found of less consequence than is generally imagined. These
Dramatick Tales, for so we may best style such Plays, have often occasioned
much pleasure to the Reader and Spectator, which could not possibly have been
conveyed to them by any other vehicle. Many an interesting Story, which, from
the diversity of its circumstances, cannot be regularly reduced either to
Tragedy or Comedy, yet abounds with Character, and contains several affecting
situations: and why such a Story should lose its force, dramatically related
and assisted by representation, when it pleases, under the colder form of a
Novel, is difficult to conceive. Experience has proved the effect of such
fictions on our minds; and convinced us, that the Theater is not that barren
ground, wherein the Plants of Imagination will not flourish. The Tempest, The
Midsummer Night's Dream, The Merchant of Venice, As you like it, Twelfth Night,
The Faithful Shepherdess of Fletcher, (with a much longer list that might be
added from Shakespeare, Beaumont and Fletcher, and their cotemporaries, or
immediate successors) have most of them, within all our memories, been ranked
among the most popular Entertainments of the Stage. Yet none of these can be
denominated Tragedy, Comedy, or Tragi-Comedy. The Play Bills, I have observed,
cautiously style them Plays: and Plays indeed they are, truly such, if it be
the end of Plays to delight and instruct, to captivate at once the Ear, the
Eye, and the Mind, by Situations forcibly conceived, and Characters truly
delineated.

There is one circumstance in Dramatick Poetry, which, I think, the chastised
notions of our modern Critics do not permit them sufficiently to consider.
Dramatick Nature is of a more large and liberal quality than they are willing
to allow. It does not consist merely in the representation of real Characters,
Characters acknowledged to abound in common life; but may be extended also to
the exhibition of imaginary Beings. To create, is to be a Poet indeed; to draw
down Beings from another sphere, and endue them with suitable Passions,
Affections, Dispositions, allotting them at the same time proper employment;
"to body forth, by the Powers of Imagination, the forms of things unknown, and
to give to airy Nothing a local Habitation and a Name," surely requires a
Genius for the Drama equal, if not superior, to the delineation of personages,
in the ordinary course of Nature. Shakespeare, in particular, is universally
acknowledged never to have soared so far above the reach of all other writers,
as in those instances, where he seems purposely to have transgressed the Laws
of Criticism. "He appears to have disdained to put his Free Soul into
circumscription and confine," which denied his extraordinary talents their full
play, nor gave scope to the Boundlesness of his Imagination. His Witches,
Ghosts, Fairies, and other Imaginary Beings, scattered through his plays, are
so many glaring violations of the common table of Dramatick Laws. What then
shall we say? Shall we confess their Force and Power over the Soul, shall we
allow them to be Beauties of the most exquisite kind, and yet insist on their
being expunged? And why? except it be to reduce the Flights of an exalted
Genius, by fixing the Standard of Excellence on the practice of Inferior
Writers, who wanted parts to execute such great designs; or to accommodate them
to the narrow ideas of small Critics, who want souls large enough to
comprehend them?

Our Old Writers thought no personage whatever, unworthy a place in the Drama,
to which they could annex what may be called a Seity; that is, to which they
could allot Manners and Employment peculiar to itself. The severest of the
Ancients cannot be more eminent for the constant Preservation of Uniformity of
Character, than Shakespeare; and Shakespeare, in no instance, support his
Characters with more exactness, than in the conduct of his Ideal Beings. The
Ghost in Hamlet is a shining proof of this excellence.

But, in consequence of the custom of tracing the Events of a Play minutely
from a Novel, the authors were sometimes led to represent a mere human creature
in circumstances not quite consonant to Nature, of a disposition rather wild
and extravagant, and in both cases more especially repugnant to modern ideas.
This indeed required particular indulgence from the spectator, but it was an
indulgence, which seldom missed of being amply repaid. Let the writer but once
be allowed, as a necessary Datum, the possibility of any Character's being
placed in such a situation, or possessed of so peculiar a turn of mind, the
behavior of the Character is perfectly natural. Shakespeare, though the Child
of Fancy, seldom or never dressed up a common mortal in any other than the modest
dress of Nature: But many shining Characters in the Plays of Beaumont and
Fletcher are not so well grounded on the Principles of the human Heart; and
yet, as they were supported by Spirit, they were received with Applause.
Shylock's Contract, with the Penalty of the Pound of Flesh, though not
Shakespeare's own fiction, is perhaps rather improbable; at least it would not
be regarded as a happy Dramatick Incident in a modern Play; and yet, having
once taken it for granted, how beautifully, nay, how naturally, is the
Character sustained! -- Even this objection therefore, of a deviation from
Nature, great as it may seem, will be found a plea insufficient to excuse the
total exclusion of our ancient Dramatists from the Theater. Shakespeare, you
will readily allow, possessed Beauties more than necessary to redeem his Faults;
Beauties, that excite our admiration, and obliterate his errors. True, but did
no portion of that Divine Spirit fall to the share of our other old Writers?
And can their works be suppressed, or concealed, without injustice to their
merit?

One of the best and most pleasing Plays in Massinger, and which, we are told,
was originally received with general approbation, is called, The Picture. The
fiction, whence it takes its title, and on which the story of the Play is
grounded, may be collected from the following short scene. Mathias, a gentleman
of Bohemia, having taken an affecting leave of his wife Sophia, with a
resolution of serving in the King of Hungary's army against the Turks, is left
alone on the stage, and the play goes on, as follows:

Math. I am strangely troubled: Yet why should I nourish
A fury here, and with imagined food?
Having no real grounds on which to raise
A building of suspicion she ever was,
Or can be false hereafter? I in this
But foolishly inquire the knowledge of
A future sorrow, which, if I find out,
My present ignorance were a cheap purchase,
Though with my loss of being. I have already
Dealt with a friend of mine, a general scholar,
One deeply read in Nature's hidden secrets,
And (though with much unwillingness) have won him,
To do as much as art can to resolve me
My fate that follows -- To my wish he is come.
Enter Baptista. Julio Baptista, now I may affirm
Your promise and performance walk together;
And therefore, without circumstance, to the point,
Instruct me what I am.

Bapt. I could wish you had
Made trial of my love some other way.

Math. Nay, this is from the purpose.

Bapt. If you can,
Proportion your desire to any mean,
I do pronounce you happy: I have found,
By certain rules of art, your matchless wife
Is to this present hour from all pollution
Free and untainted.

Math. Good.

Bapt. In reason therefore
You should fix here, and make no farther search
Of what may fall hereafter.

Math. O Baptista!
It Is not in me to master so my passions;
I must know farther, or you have made good
But half your promise. -- While my love stood by,
Holding her upright, and my presence was
A watch upon her, her desires being met too
With equal ardour from me, what one proof
Could she give of her constancy, being untempted?
But when I am absent, and my coming back
Uncertain, and those wanton heats in women
Not to be quenched by lawful means, and she
The absolute disposer of herself,
Without control or curb; nay more, invited
By opportunity and all strong temptations,
If then she hold out --

Bapt. As no doubt she will.

Math. Those doubts must be made certainties, Baptista,
By your assurance, or your boasted art
Deserves no admiration. How you trifle
And play with my affliction! I Am on
The Rack, till you confirm me.

Bapt. Sure, Mathias,
I am no God, nor can I dive into
Her hidden thoughts, or know what her intents are;
That is denied to art, and kept concealed
Even from the devils themselves: They can but guess,
Out of long observation, what is likely;
But positively to fortell that this shall be,
You may conclude impossible; all I can,
I will do for you. When you are distant from her
A thousand leagues, as if you then were with her,
You shall know truly when she is solicited,
And how far wrought on.

Math. I desire no more.

Bapt. Take then this little model of Sophia,
With more than human skill limn'd to the life;
Each line and lineament of it in the drawing
So punctually observed, that, had it motion,
In so much 'twere herself.

Math. It is, indeed,
An admirable piece; but if it have not
Some hidden virtue that I cannot guess at,
In what can it advantage me?

Bapt. I Will instruct you.
Carry it still about you, and as often
As you desire to know how she is affected,
With curious eyes peruse it: While it keeps
The figure it now has, entire and perfect,
She is not only innocent in fact,
But unattempted; but if once it vary
From the true form, and what is now white and red
Incline to yellow, rest most confident
She Is with all violence courted, but unconquered.
But if it turn all black, it is an assurance
The fort, by composition or surprise,
Is forced, or with her free consent, surrendered.

Nothing can be more fantastic, or more in the extravagant strain of the
Italian Novels, than this Fiction: And yet the Play raised on it is extremely
beautiful, abounds with affecting Situations, true Character, and a faithful
Representation of Nature. The story, thus opened, proceeds as follows: Mathias
departs, accompanied by his friend, and serves as a volunteer in the Hungarian
army against the Turks. A complete victory being obtained, chiefly by means of
his valor, he is brought by the General to the Hungarian court, where he not
only receives many honors from the King, but captivates the heart of the
Queen; whose passion is not so much excited by his known valor, or personal
attractions, as by his avowed constancy to his wife, and his firm assurance of
her reciprocal affection and fidelity to him. These circumstances touch the
pride, and raise the envy of the Queen. She resolves therefore to destroy his
conjugal faith by giving up her own, and determines to make him a desperate
offer of her person; and, at the same time under pretense of notice of
Mathias's being detained for a month at Court, she dispatches two young
noblemen to tempt the virtue of Sophia. These incidents occasion several
affecting Scenes both on the part of the Husband and Wife. Mathias (not with an
unnatural and untheatrical Stoism, but with the liveliest Sensibility) nobly
withstands the temptations of the Queen. Sophia, though most virtuously
attached to her husband, becomes uneasy at the feigned stories which the young
lords recount to her of his various gallantries at court, and in a fit of
jealousy, rage, and resentment, makes a momentry resolution to give up her
honor. While she is supposed to be yet under the dominion of this resolution,
occurs the following Scene between the Husband and his Friend.

MATHIAS and BAPTISTA. Bapt. We are in a desperate straight; there is no evasion,
Nor hope left to come off, but by your yielding
To the necessity; you must feign a grant
To her violent passion, or --

Math. What, my Baptista?

Bapt. We are but dead else.

Math. Were the sword now heaved up,
And my neck upon the block, I would not buy
An hour's reprieve with the loss of Faith and Virtue,
To be made immortal here. Art thou a scholar,
Nay, almost without a parallel, and yet fear
To die, which is inevitable? You may urge
The many years that by the course of nature
We may travel in this tedious pilgrimage,
And hold it as a blessing, as it is,
When innocence is our guide; yet know, Baptista,
Our virtues are preferred before our years,
By the Great Judge. To die untainted in
Our fame and reputation is the greatest;
And to lose that, can we desire to live?
Or shall I, for a momentary pleasure,
Which soon comes to a period, to all times
Have breach of faith and perjury remembered
In a still living epitaph? No, Baptista,
Since my Sophia will go to her grave
Unspotted in her faith, I Will follow her
With equal loyalty: But look on this,
Your own great work, your masterpiece, and then
She being still the same, teach me to alter.
Ha! sure I do not sleep! Or, if I dream,
[The picture altered. This is a terrible vision! I will clear
My eyesight, perhaps melancholy makes me
See that which is not.

Bapt. It is too apparent.
I grieve to look upon it; besides the yellow,
That does assure she is tempted, there are lines
Of a dark color, that disperse themselves
Over every miniature of her face, and those
Confirm --

Math. She is turned whore.

Bapt. I must not say so,
Yet as a friend to truth, if you will have me
Interpret it, in her consent, and wishes
She Is false, but not in fact yet.

Math. Fact! Baptista?
Make not yourself a pander to her looseness,
In laboring to palliate what a vizard
Of impudence cannot cover. Did ever woman
In her will decline from chastity, but found means
To give her hot lust full scope? It is more
Possible in nature for gross bodies
Descending of themselves, to hang in air,
Or with my single arm to underprop
A falling tower; nay, in its violent course
To stop the lightning, than to stay a woman
Hurried by those two furies, Lust and Falsehood,
In her full career to wickedness.

Bapt. Pray you temper
The violence of your passion.

Math. In extremes
Of this condition, can it be in man
To use a moderation? I am thrown
From a steep rock headlong into a gulf
Of misery, and find myself past hope,
In the same moment that I apprehend
That I am falling. And this, the figure of
My idol, few hours since, while she continued
In her perfection, that was late a mirror,
In which I saw miraculous shapes of duty,
Staid manners, with all excellency a husband
Could wish in a chaste wife, is on the sudden
Turned to a magical gla^, and does present
Nothing but horns and ^ror.

Bapt. You may yet.
(And it is the best foundation) build up comfort
On your own goodness.

Math. No, that has undone me,
For now I hold my temperance a sin
Worse than excess, and what was a vice a virtue.
Have I refused a queen, and such a queen
(Whose ravishing beauties at the first sight had tempted
A hermit from his beads, and changed his prayers
To amorous sonnets) to preserve my faith
Inviolate to thee, with the hazard of
My death with torture, since she could inflict
No less for my contempt, and have I met
Such a return from thee? I will not curse thee,
Nor for thy falsehood rail against the sex;
It Is poor, and common; I Will only with wise men
Whisper unto myself, however they seem,
Nor present, nor past times, nor the age to come
Has heretofore, can now, or ever shall
Produce one constant woman.

Bapt. This is more
Than the satyrists wrote against 'em.

Math. There Is no language
That can express the poison of these aspicks,
These weeping crocodiles, and all too little
That has been said against 'em. But I Will mould
My thoughts into another form, and if
She can outlive the report of what I have done,
This hand, when next she comes within my reach,
Shall be her Executioner.

The fiction of the PICTURE being first allowed, the most rigid Critic will, I
doubt not, confess, that the workings of the human heart are accurately set
down in the above scene. The play is not without many others, equally
excellent, both before and after it; nor in those days, when the Power of
Magic was so generally believed, that the severest laws were solemnly enacted
against Witches and Witchcraft, was the fiction so bold and extravagant, as it
may seem at present. Hoping that the reader may, by this time, be somewhat
reconciled to the story, or even interested in it, I will venture to subjoin to
the long extracts I have already made from this play one more speech, where the
PICTURE is mentioned very beautifully. Mathias addresses himself to the Queen
in these words.

Math. To slip once
I^ incident, and excused by human frailty;
But to fall ever, damnable. We were both
Guilty, I grant, in tendering our affection,
But, as I hope you will do, I repented.
When we are grown up to ripeness, our life is
Like to this Picture. While we run
A constant race in goodness, it retains
The just proportion. But the journey being
Tedious, and sweet temptations in the way,
That may in some degree divert us from
The road that we put forth in, ever we end
Our pilgrimage, it may, like this, turn yellow,
Or be with blackness clouded. But when we
Find we have gone astray, and labor to
Return unto our never-failing guide
Virtue, contrition (with unfeigned tears,
The spots of vice washed off) will soon restore it
To the first pureness.

The several passages will, I hope, be thought by the judicious Reader to be
written in the free vein of a true Poet, as well as by the exact hand of a
faithful Disciple of Nature. If any of the above arguments, or, rather, the
uncommon excellence of the great Writers themselves, can induce the Critic to
allow the Excursions of Fancy on the Theater, let him not suppose that he is
here advised to submit to the Perversion of Nature, or to admire those who
over-leap the modest bounds, which she has prescribed to the Drama. I will
agree with him, that Plays, wherein the truth of Dramatick Character is
violated, can convey neither Instruction nor Delight. Shakespeare, Jonson,
Beaumont and Fletcher, Massinger, etc. are guilty of no such violation. Indeed
the heroic nonsense, which overruns the Theatrical Productions of Dryden
Nobody can have a truer veneration for the Poetical Genius of Dryden, than the
Writer of these Reflections; but surely that Genius is no where so much
obscured, notwithstanding some transient gleams, as in his Plays; of which he
had himself no great opinion, since the only plea he ever urged in their
favor, was, that the town had ever received with applause Plays equally bad.
Nothing, perhaps, but the notion of Heroic Plays, could have carried the
immediate successors to the Old Class of Writers into such ridiculous
contradictions to nature. That I may not appear singular in my opinion of
Dryden's Dramatick Pieces, I must beg leave to refer the Reader to the Rambler,
No. 125, where that judicious Writer has produced diverse instances from
Dryden's Plays, sufficient (to use the Rambler's own language) to awaken the
most torpid risibility.
, Howard, and the other illustrious Prototypes of Bays in the Rehearsal, must
nauseate the most indulgent spectator. The temporary rage of false taste may
perhaps betray the injudicious into a foolish admiration of such extravagance
for a short period: But how will these Plays stand the blunt of critical
indignation, when the personages of the Drama are found to resemble no
character in nature, except, perhaps, the disordered inhabitants of Bedlam?

If then it must be confessed, both from reason and experience, that we cannot
only endure, but attend with pleasure to Plays, which are almost merely
Dramatick Representations of romantic Novels; it will surely be a further
inducement to recur to the works of our Old Writers, when we find among them
many pieces written on a severer plan; a plan more accommodated to real life,
and approaching more nearly to the modern usage. The Merry Wives of Windsor, of
Shakespeare; the Fox, the Alchymist, the Silent Woman, Every Man in his Humor,
of Jonson; the New Way to pay Old Debts, the City Madam, of Massinger, etc.
etc. all urge their claim for a rank in the ordinary course of our
Winter-Evening Entertainments, not only clear of every objection made to the
abovementioned species of Dramatick Composition, but adhering more strictly to
ancient rules, than most of our later comedies.

In point of character (perhaps the most essential part of the Drama) our Old
Writers far transcend the Moderns. It is surely needless, in support of this
opinion, to recite a long list of names, when the memory of every reader must
suggest them to himself. The manners of many of them, it is true, do not
prevail at present. What then? Is it displeasing or uninstructive to see the
manners of a former age pass in review before us? Or is the mind undelighted at
recalling the Characters of our Ancestors, while the eye is confessedly
gratified at the sight of the Actors dressed in their Antique Habits? Moreover,
Fashion and Custom are so perpetually fluctuating, that it must be a very
accurate piece indeed, and one quite new and warm from the anvil, that catches
the Damon or Cynthia of this minute. Some Plays of our latest and most
fashionable Authors are grown as obsolete in this particular, as those of the
first Writers; and it may with safety be affirmed, that Bobadil is not more
remote from modern Character, than the ever-admired and
everywhere-to-be-met-with Lord Foppington. It may, also, be further considered,
that most of the best Characters in our old Plays are not merely fugitive and
temporary. They are not the sudden growth of yesterday or today, sure of
fading or withering tomorrow; but they were the delight of past ages, still
continue the admiration of the present, and (to use the language of true
Poetry) -- To ages yet unborn appeal,
And latest time the ETERNAL NATURE feel.
LLOYD'S ACTOR.

There is one circumstance peculiar to the Dramatick Tales, and to many of the
more regular Comedies of our Old Writers, of which it is too little to say,
that it demands no apology. It deserves the highest commendation; since it has
been the means of introducing the most capital beauties into their
compositions, while the same species of excellence could not possibly enter
into those of a later period. I mean the poetical style of their dialogue. Most
nations, except our own, have imagined mere prose, which, with Moliere's
Bourgeois Gentilhomme, the meanest of us have talked from our cradle, too
little elevated for the language of the Theater. Our neighbors the French, at
this day write most of their Plays, Comedies as well as Tragedies, in rhyme; a
Gothic practice, which our own stage once admitted, but long ago wisely
rejected. The Grecian Iambick was more happily conceived in the true spirit of
that elegant and magnificent simplicity, which characterized the taste of that
nation. Such a measure was well accommodated to the expressions of the mind;
and though it refined indeed on nature, it did not contradict it. In this, as
well as in all other matters of literature, the usage of Greece was religiously
observed at Rome. Plautus^ in his richest vein of humor, is numerous and
poetical. The Comedies of Terence, though we cannot agree to read them after
Bishop Hare, were evidently not written without regard to measure; which is the
invincible reason, why all attempts to render them into downright prose have
always proved, and ever must prove, unsuccessful; and if a faint effort, now
under contemplation, to give a version of them in familiar blank verse (after
the manner of our Old Writers, but without a servile imitation of them) should
fail, it must, I am confident, be owing to the lameness of the execution. The
English heroic measure, or, as it is commonly called, blank verse, is perhaps
of a more happy construction than even the Grecian Iambick; elevated equally,
but approaching nearer to the language of nature, and as well adapted to the
expression of Comic Humor, as to the Pathos of Tragedy.

The mere modern Critic, whose idea of blank verse is perhaps attached to that
empty swell of phraseology, so frequent in our late Tragedies, may consider
these notions as the effect of bigotry to our old authors, rather than the
result of impartial criticism. Let such an one carefully read over the works of
those writers, for whom I am an advocate. There he will seldom or ever find
that tumor of blank verse, to which he has been so much accustomed. He will be
surprised with a familiar dignity, which, though it rises somewhat above
ordinary conversation, is rather an improvement than perversion of it. He will
soon be convinced that blank verse is by no men's appropriated solely to the
buskin, but that the hand of a master may mould it to whatever purposes he
pleases; and that in comedy it will not only admit humor, but heighten and
embellish it. Instances might be produced without number. It must however be
lamented, that the modern Tragic Style, free, indeed, from the mad flights of
Dryden, and his cotemporaries, yet departs equally from nature. I am apt to
think it is in great measure owing to the almost total exclusion of blank verse
from all modern compositions, Tragedy excepted. The common use of an elevated
diction in comedy, where the writer was often, of necessity, put upon
expressing the most ordinary matters, and where the subject demanded him to
paint the most ridiculous emotions of the mind, was perhaps one of the chief
causes of that easy vigor, so conspicuous in the style of the old tragedies.
Habituated to poetical dialogue in those compositions, wherein they were
obliged to adhere more strictly to the simplicity of the language of nature,
the Poets learnt, in those of a more raised species, not to depart from it too
wantonly. They were well acquainted also with the force as well as elegance of
their mother tongue, and chose to use such words as may be called natives of
the language, rather than to harmonise their verses, and agonise the audience
with Latin terminations. Whether the refined style of Addison's Cato, and the
flowing versification of Row, first occasioned this departure from ancient
simplicity, it is difficult to determine: But it is too true, that Southern was
the last of our Dramatick Writers, who was, in any degree, possessed of that
magnificent plainness, which is the genuine dress of nature; though indeed the
plays even of Row are more simple in their style, than those which have been
produced by his successors. It must not, however, be dissembled in this place,
that the style of our Old Writers is not without faults; that they were apt to
give too much into conceits; that they often pursued an allegorical train of
thought too far; and were sometimes betrayed into forced, unnatural, quaint, or
gigantick expressions. In the works of Shakespeare himself, every one of these
errors may be found; yet it may be safely asserted, that no other Author,
ancient or modern, has expressed himself on such a variety of subjects with
more ease, and in a vein more truly poetical, unless, perhaps, we should except
Homer: Of which, by the bye, the deepest Critic, most conversant with idioms
and dialects, is not quite a competent judge.

I would not be understood, by what I have here said of Poetical Dialogue, to
object to the use of Prose, or to insinuate that our modern Comedies are the
worse for being written in that style. It is enough for me, to have vindicated
the use of a more elevated manner among our Old Writers. I am well aware that
most parts of Falstaff, Ford, Benedick, Malvolio, etc. are written in prose;
nor indeed would I counsel a modern Writer to attempt the use of Poetical
Dialogue in a mere Comedy: A Dramatick Tale, indeed, chequered, like life
itself, with various incidents, ludicrous and affecting, if written by a
masterly hand, and somewhat more severely than those abovementioned, would, I
doubt not, still be received with candor and applause. The Public would be
agreeably surprised with the revival of Poetry on the Theater, and the
opportunity of employing all the best performers, serious as well as comic, in
one piece, would render it still more likely to make a favorable impression on
the audience. There is a gentleman, not unequal to such a task, who was once
tempted to begin a piece of this sort; but, I fear, he has too much love of
ease and indolence, and too little ambition of literary fame, ever to complete
it.

But to conclude:

Have I, Sir, been wasting all this ink and time in vain? Or may it be hoped
that you will extend some of that care to the rest of our Old Authors, which
you have so long bestowed on Shakespeare, and which you have so often lavished
on many a worse Writer, than the most inferior of those here recommended to
you? It is certainly your interest to give variety to the Public Taste, and to
diversify the color of our Dramatick Entertainments. Encourage new attempts;
but do justice to the old! The Theater is a wide field. Let not one or two
walks of it alone be beaten, but lay open the whole to the Excursions of
Genius! This, perhaps, might kindle a spirit of originality in our modern
Writers for the Stage; who might be tempted to aim at more novelty in their
compositions, when the liberality of the popular taste rendered it less
hazardous. That the narrowness of Theatrical Criticism might be enlarged, I
have no doubt. Reflect, for a moment, on the uncommon success of Romeo and
Juliet, and Every Man in his Humor! and then tell me, whether there are not
many other Pieces of as ancient a date, which, with the like proper
curtailments and alterations, would produce the same effect? Has an industrious
hand been at the pains to scratch up the dunghill of Dryden's Amphitryon for
the few pearls that are buried in it, and shall the rich treasures of Beaumont
and Fletcher, Jonson and Massinger, lie (as it were) in the ore, untouched and
disregarded? Reform your List of Plays! In the name of Burbage, Tailor, and
Betterton, I conjure you to it! Let the veteran Critics once more have the
satisfaction of seeing The Maid's Tragedy, Philaster, King and no King, etc. on
the Stage! -- Restore Fletcher's Elder Brother to the rank unjustly usurped by
Cibber's Love Makes a Man! and since you have wisely desisted from giving an
annual affront to the City by acting The London Cuckolds on Lord-Mayor's Day,
why will you not pay them a compliment, by exhibiting The City Madam of
Massinger on the same occasion?

If after all, sir, these remonstances should prove without effect, and the
merit of these great Authors should plead with you in vain, I will here fairly
turn my back upon you, and address myself to the Lovers of Dramatick
Compositions in general. They, I am sure, will peruse those Works with pleasure
in the closet, though they lose the satisfaction of seeing them represented on
the stage: Nay, should they, together with you, concur in determining that such
Pieces are unfit to be acted, you, as well as they, will, I am confident,
agree, that such Pieces are, at least, very worthy to be read. There are many
modern Compositions, seen with delight at the Theater, which sicken on the
taste in the perusal; and the honest Country Gentleman, who has not been
present at the representation, wonders with what his London friends have been
so highly entertained, and is as much perplexed at the Town-manner of writing
as Mr. Smith in The Rehearsal. The Excellencies of our Old Writers are, on the
contrary, not confined to Time and Place, but always bear about them the
Evidences of true Genius.

Massinger is perhaps the least known, but not the least meritorious of any of
the old class of Writers. His Works declare him to be no mean proficient in the
same school. He possesses all the beauties and blemishes common to the Writers
of that age. He has, like the rest of them, in compliance with the Custom of
the Times, admitted Scenes of a low and gross nature, which might be omitted
with no more prejudice to the Fable, than the Buffoonry in Venice Preserved.
For his few faults he makes ample atonement. His Fables, are, most of them
affecting; his Characters well conceived, and strongly supported; and his
Diction, flowing, various, elegant, and manly. His two Plays, revived by
Betterton, The Bondsman, and the Roman Actor, are not, I think, among the number
of the best. The Duke of Milan, The Renegado, The Picture, The Fatal Dowry, The
Maid of Honor, A New Way to pay Old Debts, The Unnatural Combat, The Guardian,
The City Madam, are each of them, in my mind, more excellent. He was a very
popular Writer in his own times, but so unaccountably, as well as unjustly,
neglected at present, that the accurate Compilers of a Work, called, The Lives
of the Poets, published under the learned name of the late Mr. Theophilus
Cibber, have not so much as mentioned him. He is, however, take him for all in
all, an Author, whose Works the intelligent Reader will peruse with Admiration:
And that I may not be supposed to withdraw my plea for his admission to the
modern Stage, I shall conclude these Reflections with one more Specimen of his
Abilities; submitting it to all Judges of Theatrical Exhibitions, whether the
most masterly Actor would not here have an opportunity of displaying his Powers
to Advantage.

The Extract I mean to subjoin is from the last scene of the first act of The
Duke of Milan. -- Sforsa, having espoused the cause of the King of France
against the Emperor, on the King's defeat, is advised by a friend, to yield
himself up to the Emperor's discretion. He consents to this measure, but
provides for his departure in the following manner.

Sfor. -- Stay you, Francisco.
-- You see how things stand with me?

Fran. To my grief:
And if the loss of my poor life could be
A sacrifice, to restore them as they were,
I willingly would lay it down.

Sfor. I think so;
For I have ever found you true and thankful,
Which makes me love the building I have raised,
In your advancement; and repent no grace
I have conferred upon you: And, believe me,
Though now I should repeat my favors to you,
The titles I have given you, and the means
Suitable to your honors; that I thought you
Worthy my sister, and my family,
And in my dukedom made you next myself;
It is not to upbraid you; but to tell you
I find you're worthy of them, in your love
And service to me.

Fran. Sir, I am your creature;
And any shape that you would have me wear,
I gladly will put on.

Sfor. Thus, then, Francisco:
I now am to deliver to your trust
A weighty secret, of so strange a nature,
And 'twill, I know, appear so monstrous to you,
That you will tremble in the execution,
As much as I am tortured to command it:
For it is a deed so horrid, that, but to hear it,
Would strike into a ruffian fleshed in murders,
Or an obdurate hangman, soft compassion;
And yet, Francisco (of all men the dearest,
And from me most deserving) such my state
And strange condition is, that thou alone
Must know the fatal service, and perform it.

Fran. These preparations, sir, to work a stranger,
Or to one unacquainted with your bounties,
Might appear useful; but, to me, they are
Needless impertinencies: For I dare do
Whatever you dare command.

Sfor. But thou must swear it,
And put into thy oath, all joys, or torments
That fright the wicked, or confirm the good:
Not to conceal it only (that is nothing)
But, whensoe'er my will shall speak, strike now!
To fall upon it like thunder.

Fran. Minister
The oath in any way, or form you please,
I stand resolved to take it.

Sfor. Thou must do, then,
What no benevolent star will dare to look on,
It is so wicked: For which, men will curse thee
For being the instrument; and the angels
Forsake me at my need, for being the author;
For it is a deed of night, of night, Francisco,
In which the memory of all good actions,
We can pretend to, shall be buried quick:
Or, if we be remembered, it shall be
To fright posterity by our example,
That have outgone all precedents of villains
That were before us; and such as succeeded,
Though taught in hell's black school, shall never come near us.
-- Art thou not shaken yet!

Fran. I grant you move me:
But to a man confirmed --

Sfor. I Will try your temper:
What think you of my wife?

Fran. As a thing sacred;
To whose fair name and memory I pay gladly
These signs of duty.
[Kneels.
Sfor. Is she not the abstract
Of all that is rare, or to be wished in woman?

Fran. It were a kind of blasphemy to dispute it:
-- But to the purpose, sir.

Sfor. Add to her goodness,
Her tenderness of me, her care to please me,
Her unsuspected chastity, never equaled,
Her innocence, her honor -- O I am lost
In the ocean of her virtues, and her graces,
When I think of them.

Fran. Now I find the end
Of all your conjurations: There Is some service
To be done for this sweet lady. If she have enemies
That she would have removed --

Sfor. Alas! Francisco,
Her greatest enemy is her greatest lover;
Yet, in that hatred, her idolater.
One smile of here is would make a savage tame;
One accent of that tongue would calm the seas,
Though all the winds at once strove there for empire.
Yet I, for whom she thinks all this too little,
Should I miscarry in this present journey,
(From whence it is all number to a cipher,
I never return with honor) by thy hand
Must have her murdered.

Fran. Murdered! -- She that loves so,
And so deserves to be beloved again?
And I, who sometimes you were pleased to favor,
Picked out the instrument?

Sfor. Do not fly off:
What is decreed, can never be recalled.
It Is more than love to her, that marks her out
A wished companion to me, in both fortunes:
And strong assurance of thy zealous faith,
That gives up to thy trust a secret, that
Racks should not have forced from me. -- O Francisco,
There is no heaven without her; nor a hell,
Where she resides. I ask from her but justice,
And what I would have paid to her, had sickness,
Or any other accident, divorced
Her purer soul from her unspotted body.
The slavish Indian princes, when they die,
Are cheerfully attended to the fire
By the wife and slave, that living they loved best,
To do them service in another world:
Nor will I be less honored, that love more.
And therefore trifle not, but in thy looks
Express a ready purpose to perform
What I command; or, by Marcelia's soul,
This is thy latest minute.

Fran. It Is not fear
Of death, but love to you, makes me embrace it.
But, for mine own security, when it is done,
What warrant have I? If you please to sign one,
I shall, though with unwillingness and horror,
Perform your dreadful charge.

Sfor. I will, Francisco:
But still remember, that a prince's secrets
Are balm, concealed; but poison, if discovered.
I may come back; then this is but a trial,
To purchase thee, if it were possible,
A nearer place in my affection -- but
I know thee honest.

Fran. It Is a character
I will not part with.

Sfor. I may live to reward it.
[Exeunt.
By a mistake at the Press, owing in great measure to the absence of the Author
while this part of the work was printing, the running title of " Prose on
several Occasions" intended only for the miscellaneous Letters and Papers, has
been continued to these " Critical Reflections on our Old English Writers."

PREFACE TO THE WORKS OF BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER,
PUBLISHED IN THE YEAR 1778.
PREFACE TO THE WORKS OF BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.
CONSIDERING the acknowledged excellence of our Authors, loudly acknowledged by
the most eminent of their contemporaries and successors, it appears at first
sight rather wonderful, that in the space of a hundred and fifty years, which
have elapsed since the death of these Poets, no more than three complete
editions of their Works have been published; we say three, because the first
folio professedly included no more of their Plays, than those which had not
before been singly printed in quarto.

To what causes are we to attribute this amazing disparity between the
reputation of the Writers, and the public demand for their productions? Are
libraries furnished with books, as apartments with furniture, according to the
fashion? or is it necessary, because plays were originally written to be acted,
that they must continue to be perpetually represented, or cease to be read?

Truth, we fear, obliges us to confess that these questions must, without much
qualification, be answered in the affirmative. Shakespeare, admirable as he is,
certainly owes some part of his present popularity, and the extraordinary
preference given to his plays beyond those of all our other dramatists, to the
mode adopted by the literary world to extol him. By the changes of fashion,
Nature and right reason sometimes come into vogue; but the multitude take them,
like coin, because they are in currency, while men of sense and letters alone
appreciate them according to their intrinsic value, and receive merit,
wherever they find it, as bullion, though it has not the stamp of fashion
impressed on it. To such men, the genius of Shakespeare, instead of obscuring,
illustrates the kindred talents of Beaumont and Fletcher: Yet such men are but
rare; and one of the most acute and learned editors of Shakespeare speaking of
his own notes "concerned in a critical explanation of the author's beauties and
defects; but chiefly of his beauties, whether in style, thought, sentiment,
character, or composition," adds, that "the public judgment has less need to
be assisted in what it shall reject, than in what it ought to PRIZE: Nor is the
value they set upon a work, a certain proof that they understand it. For it is
ever seen, THAT HALF A DOZEN VOICES OF CREDIT GIVE THE LEAD, and if the public
chance to be in good humor, or the author much in their favor, THE PEOPLE ARE
SURE TO FOLLOW."

To the popularity of a Dramatick Writer, nothing more immediately contributes
than the frequency of theatrical representation. Common readers, like barren
spectators, know little more of an author than what the actor, not always his
happiest commentator, presents to them. Mutilations of Shakespeare have been
recited, and even quoted, as his genuine text; and many of his dramas, not in
the course of exhibition, are by the multitude not honored with a perusal. On
the stage, indeed, our Authors formerly took the lead, Dryden having informed
us, that in his day two of their plays were performed to one of Shakespeare.
The stage, however, owes its attraction to the actor as well as author; and if
the able performer will not contribute to give a polish and brilliancy to the
work, it will lie, like the rough diamond, obscured and disregarded. The
artists of former days worked the rich mine of Beaumont and Fletcher; and
Betterton, the Roscius of his age, enriched his catalogue of characters from
their Dramas, as well as those of Shakespeare. Unfortunately for our Authors,
the Roscius of our day confined his round of characters in old plays, too
closely to Shakespeare. We may almost say of him indeed, in this respect, as
Dryden says of Shakespeare's scenes of magic, Within that circle none durst
walk but he;
but surely we must lament, that those extraordinary powers, which have so
successfully been exerted in the illustration of Shakespeare, and sometimes
prostituted to the support of the meanest writers, should not more frequently
have been employed to throw a light upon Beaumont and Fletcher. Their Plays, we
will be bold to say, have the same excellencies, as well as the same defects,
each perhaps in an inferior degree, with the Dramas of their great master. Like
his, they are built on histories or novels, pursuing in the same manner the
story through its various circumstances; like his, but not always with equal
truth and nature, their characters are boldly drawn and warmly colored; like
his, their dialogue, containing every beauty of style, and licentiousness of
construction, is thick sown with moral sentiments, interchanged with ludicrous
and serious, ribaldry and sublime, and sometimes enlivened with wit in a richer
vein than even the immortal dramas of Shakespeare. In Comedy, the critics of
their own days, and those immediately succeeding, gave Beaumont and Fletcher
the preference to Shakespeare; and although the slow award of time has at
length justly decreed the superior excellence of the glorious father of our
drama beyond all further appeal, yet these his illustrious followers ought not
surely to be cast so far behind him, as to fall into contemptuous neglect,
while the most careless works of Shakespeare are studiously brought forward.
The Maid's Tragedy, King and No King, Love's Pilgrimage, Monsieur Thomas, etc.
etc. etc. would hardly disgrace that stage which has exhibited The Two
Gentlemen of Verona.

Mr. Seward has employed great part of his Preface in citing similar passages
from Shakespeare and our Authors, and though we do not entirely agree with him
in the comparisons he has drawn, we cannot resist the temptation of adducing
one instance, in our opinion, more to the advantage of our Authors than any
mentioned in that Preface. It is the entire character of the boy HENGO, in the
Tragedy of Bonduca; a character whch is, we think (taken altogether) better
sustained, and more beautifully natural and pathetick, than the Prince Arthur
of Shakespeare. The scene in King John between Arthur and Hubert, excellent as
it is, almost passes the bounds of pity and terror, and becomes horrible;
besides which, Shakespeare, to whom "a quibble," as Dr. Johnson says, "was the
fatal Cleopatra for which he lost the world, and was content to lose it," has
enervated the dialogue with many frigid conceits, which he has, with more than
usual impropriety, put into the mouth of the innocent Arthur, while he is
pleading most affectingly for mercy.

As for example: -- Will you put out mine eyes;
These eyes, that never did, nor never shall,
So much as frown on you?

Hub. I Have sworn to do it;
And with hot irons must I burn them out.

Arth. Ah, none but in this iron age would do it!
The iron of itself, though heat red hot,
Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears,
And quench its fiery indignation,
Even in the matter of mine innocence:
Nay, after that, consume away in rust,
But for containing fire to harm mine eye.
Are you more stubborn-hard than hammered iron?
Oh, if an angel should have come to me,
And told me, Hubert should put out mine eyes,
I would not have believed him; no tongue, but Hubert's.



And again: -- Go to! hold your tongue!

Arth. Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes:
Let me not hold my tongue; let me not, Hubert!
Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue
So I may keep mine eyes. Oh, spare mine eyes;
Though to no use, but still to look on you!
Lo, by my troth, the instrument is cold,
And would not harm me.

Hub. I can heat it, boy.

Arth. No, in good sooth; the fire is dead with grief.
Being create for comfort, to be used
In undeserved extremes: see else yourself;
There is no malice in this burning coal;
The breath of Heaven has blown its spirit out,
And strewn repentant ashes on its head.

Hub. But with my breath I can revive it, boy.

Arth. And if you do, you will but make it blush,
And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert:
Nay, it, perchance, will sparkle in your eyes;
And, like a dog, that is compelled to fight,
Snatch at his master that does tar him on.
All things, that you should use do me wrong,
Deny their office: only you do lack
That mercy, which fierce fire and iron extend,
Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.



The Reader, we imagine, will concur in our disapprobation of the passages
printed in Italicks. Between Caratach and Hengo we do not remember that a line
occurs, affected or unnatural; and nothing can be more exquisitely tender than
the several scenes between them. The whole play abounds with Dramatick and
Poetic Excellence.

Allowing, however, freely allowing, the general superiority of Shakespeare to
Beaumont and Fletcher (and indeed to all other poets, Homer perhaps only
excepted) yet we cannot so far degrade our Authors, as to reduce the most
excellent of their pieces to a level with the meanest effusions of Shakespeare;
nor can we believe that there are not many of their long-neglected Dramas that
might not, with very inconsiderable variations, be accommodated to the taste of
a modern audience. The Public have been long habituated to the phraseology of
Shakespeare, whose language, in the opinion of Dryden, is a little obsolete in
comparison of that of our Authors; and irregularities of fable have been not
only pardoned, but defended. When the great English Actor, of whom we have been
speaking, first undertook the direction of the stage, his friend (the present
Laureat) boldly told him, A nation's taste depends on you.
The national taste, under his happy influence, acquired from day to day, from
year to year, an increased relish for Shakespeare; and it is almost matter of
amazement, as well as concern, that so little of his attention was directed to
those Dramatick Writers, whose poetical character bore so great an affinity to
the just object of his admiration. A deceased actor, of great merit, and still
greater promise, very successfully opened his theatrical career by appearing in
the tragedy of Philaster. At the same time, the same tragedy contributed not a
little to the growing fame of one of our principal actresses. That play, the
Two Noble Kinsmen, and some other pieces of Beaumont and Fletcher, besides
those we have already enumerated, would undoubtedly become favorite
entertainments for the stage, if the theatrical talents of the performers bore
any kind of proportion to the dramatick abilities of the writers. Since the
directors of our theaters in some sort hold the keys of the Temple of Dramatick
Fame, let them do honor to themselves by throwing open their doors to Beaumont
and Fletcher! Seeing there are at present but small hopes of emulating the
transcendent actor, who so long and so effectually impressed on our minds the
excellence of Shakespeare, let them at least rescue their performers from an
immediate comparison, so much to their disadvantage, by trying their force on
the characters of our Authors! The Two Noble Kinsmen indeed, has been ascribed
(falsely, as we think) to Shakespeare. "The Two Noble Kinsmen, (says Pope) if
that play be his, as there goes a tradition it was, and indeed it has little
resemblance of Fletcher, and more of our author, than some of those which have
been received as genuine." Unhappy Poets! whose very excellence is turned
against them. Shakespeare's claim to any share in the Two Noble Kinsmen we have
considered at the end of that piece, to which we refer the Reader. In this
place we shall only enter our protest against the authority of Pope, who
appears to have felt himself mortified and ashamed, when he, "discharged the
dull duty of an Editor." He surely must be allowed to discharge his duty with
reluctance, and most probably with neglect, who speaks of it in such terms. In
his Preface indeed he has, with a most masterly hand, drawn the outline of the
poetical character of Shakespeare; but in that very Preface, by a strange
perversion of taste, he proposes to throw out of the list of Shakespeare's
plays The Winter's Tale, which he considers as spurious! On no better
foundation, we think, has he asserted, that the play of the Two Noble Kinsmen
has little resemblance of Fletcher. "There goes a tradition," that Garth did
not write his own Dispensary; "there goes a tradition," that the admirable
translator of Homer, like Shakespeare himself, had little Latin, and less
Greek; but what candid critic would countenance such a tradition? And is such
a vague, blind, playhouse tradition a sufficient warrant for one great poet to
tear the laurel from the brows of another?

The modern editors of Shakespeare contemplate with admiration that
indifference to future fame, which suffered him to behold with uncommon apathy
some of his pieces incorrectly printed during his life, without attempting to
rescue them from the hands of barbarous editors, or preparing for posterity a
genuine collection of his Works, supervised and corrected by himself. In our
opinion, the Dedication and Preface of Heminge and Condell more than insinuate
the intention of Shakespeare, had he survived, to have published such a
collection We hope, that they outliving him, and he not having the fate common
with some, to be Exequutor to his own writings, etc. [Dedication of
Shakespeare's Works by Heminge and Condell. It had been a thing, we confess,
worthy to have been wished that the Author himself had lived to have set forth,
and overseene his own writings; but since it has been ordained otherwise, and
he by death departed from that right, we pray you do not envy his friends, the
office of their care and pain, to have collected and published them. [Preface
of Heminge and Condell.
. But, be that as it may, his supposed carelessness concerning the fate of his
pieces after they had been represented, is not so very singular; many of the
plays of Beaumont and Fletcher also having been inaccurately printed from
stolen copies during the lives of the Authors, and the remainder collected some
years after their deaths, like the Works of Shakespeare, by the players. Ben
Jonson appears to have been the only dramatick Poet of that age, who paid any
attention to the publication of his own Compositions.

The old quarto copies of Beaumont and Fletcher have come down to us exactly in
the same state with the old quartos of Shakespeare. The printers of those times
not only copied, but multiplied the errors of the transcriber. An Editor, nay
even a corrector of the press, seems to have been a character of which they had
not the smallest conception. Even the title-pages appear to exhibit the very
names of the Authors at random, sometimes announcing the play as the work of
one Poet, sometimes of another, and sometimes as the joint production of both.
A Bookseller is somewhere introduced as reprehending the saving ways of an
Ode-writer, who, he supposed, merely to lengthen his work, would often put no
more than three or four words into a line. The old printers seem to have
conceived the same idea of the parsimony of Poets, and therefore often without
scruple run verse into prose, not adverting to measure or harmony, but solely
governed by the dimensions of the page, whether divided into columns, or
carried all across from one scanty margin to another. Their orthography Their
orthography, etc.] To this article our ancestors seem to have afforded very
little attention: Ingenions for ingenuous, alter for altar, cozen for cousin,
desert for defart, talents for talons, then for than, etc. etc. continually
occur in the old books. Nor does there seem to have been any greater regard
paid to proper names; one of our Poets, for instance, we find called Fleatcher,
Flecher, and Fletcher; and the other, Beamont, Beamount, and Beaumont. The name
of Shakespeare is spelt at least a dozen ways. We are told, in the first note
on the Dunciad of "an autograph of Shakespeare himself, whereby it appeared
that he spelt his own name without the first e." Yet even this autograph is not
decisive. In the Register-book at Stratford upon Avon, the name of the family
is regularly entered Shakspere. In the Poet's own will, which now lies in the
Prerogative-Office, Doctor's Commons, his name is spelt THREE different ways.
In the body of the will it is always written Shackspere: This, however, may be
ascribed to the Lawyer. The will consists of three sheets, the first of which
is legibly subscribed Shackspere; the two others Shakspeare. It must be
acknowledged that the handwriting, as well as situation of the first
signature, is different from that of the two following; but it appears
extraordinary that a stranger should attempt to falsify a signature, which is
usually ascribed to each sheet for the sake of giving authenticity to so solemn
an instrument, and is, therefore, always taken to be the handwriting of the
testator. Mr. Garrick, however, had in his possession the lease of a house
formerly situated in Black-Friars, and but lately taken down on account of the
new bridge, which belonged to that Poet. As a party to that lease he signs his
name Shakspeare; and the first syllable of his name is now pronounced in his
native county, Warwickshire, with the short a, Sh^ak- and not Sh^akespeare. On
the other hand, it must be confessed, that the dialect of that county is more
provincial than classical, and we believe that all the families, who are now
known by the Poet's name, both spell and pronounce it Sh^akespeare; which
indeed seems most reconcilable to etimology, if etimology be at all concerned
in so capricious a circumstance. Many of the quartos published in his
lifetime, not only followed this mode of spelling, but seemed nicely to mark
the proper pronunciation, by printing his name in the title page with a Hyphen
between the two syllables that compose it, thus, SHAKE-SPEARE. His cotemporary
Jonson, as well as Milton and Dryden his successors, adhered to the same
orthography. Every thing, however trivial, interests an English reader, from
the relation it bears to that Great Poet; which is the only excuse we have to
offer for so long a note on a point of so little importance.
is so generally vicious and unsettled, and their punctuation so totally
defective, that the regulation of either rarely merits the triumphs that have
so often been derived from it. On the whole, however, these old copies of our
Poets may by an intelligent Reader be perused with satisfaction. The
typographical errors are indeed gross and numerous; but their very number and
grossness keeps the reader awake to the genuine text, and commonly renders such
palpable inaccuracies not prejudicial. The genuine work of the Author is there
extant, though the lines are often, like a confused multitude, huddled on one
another, and not marshalled and arrayed by the discipline of a modern Editor.

The First Folio, containing thirty-four of our Author's pieces, never till
then collected or printed, was published by the Players, obviously transcribed
from the prompter's books, commonly the most inaccurate and barbarous of all
manuscripts, or made out piecemeal from the detached parts copied for the use
of the performers. Hence it happens, that the stage-direction has sometimes
crept into the text, and the name of the Actor is now and then substituted for
that of the Character. The transcribers, knowing perhaps no Language perfectly,
corrupted all Languages; and vitiated the dialogue with false Latin, false
French, false Italian, and false Spanish; nay, as Pope says of the old copies
of Shakespeare, "their very Welsh is false."

The Players, however, notwithstanding the censure of Pope, "yet from Cibber
sore," seem to have been, at least with regard to our Poets, as faithful and
able editors as others of that period. It is most natural to suppose that the
Playhouse Manuscript contained the real Work of the Author, though perhaps
ignorantly copied, and accommodated to the use of the Theater. A writer in his
closet often silently acquiesces in the excellence of a continued Declamation;
but if at any time the Audience, like Polonius, cry out "This is too long,"
such passages are afterward naturally curtailed or omitted in the
representation; but the curious Reader, being less fastidious "than the proud
Spectator" (for in such terms Horace speaks of the Spectator) is pleased with
the restoration of these passages in print. "Players, says Pope, "are just such
judges of what is right, as tailors are of what is graceful." The comparison is
more ludicrous and sarcastick than it is just. The Poet himself, who makes the
Clothes, may rather be called the Tailor: Actors are at most but the empty
beaux that wear them, and the Spectators censure or admire them. A Tailor,
however, if players must be the Tailors, though not equal in science to a
Statuary or an Anatomist, must yet be conceived to have a more intimate
knowledge of the human form than a Blacksmith or a Capenter; and if many of the
actors know but little of the Drama, they would probably have known still less
of it, had they not been retainers to the stage. Some Improvements, as well as
Corruptions of the Drama, may undoubtedly be derived from the Theater. Cibber,
idle Cibber, wrote for the stage with more success than Pope. Aeschylus,
Sophocles, Plautus, and Terence, were soldiers and freedmen; Shakespeare and
Moliere were Actors.

The Second Folio contained the first complete collection of the Works of
Beaumont and Fletcher. Concerning that edition we have nothing to add to what
has been said by other Editors.

The Octavo Editors of 1711 seemed to aim at little more than reprinting our
Authors' Plays, and giving a collection of them more portable and convenient
than the Folios. Their text, however, is more corrupt than that of either the
quartos or folios, the errors of which they religiously preserved, adding many
vicious readings of their own, some of which have been combated in very long
notes by their successors.

In the year 1742, Theobald, on the success and reputation of his Shakespeare,
projected an edition of the Works of Ben Jonson. What he had executed of it,
fell into the hands of Mr. Whalley, and is inserted in that learned and
ingenious gentleman's edition. At the same time he exhibited proposals for a
publication of the Plays of Beaumont and Fletcher; in which he was afterward
assisted by Mr. Seward and Mr. Sympson: but Theobald dying before he had
committed more than the first and about half the second volume to the press,
the undertaking was continued by the two last-mentioned gentlemen; and the
edition thus jointly, or rather severally, executed by Theobald, Mr. Seward,
and Mr. Sympson, at length appeared in the year 1750. These gentlemen were the
first Editors of our Poets who professed to collate the old copies, to reform
the punctuation, and to amend the corruptions of the text. Some attempts also
were made to elucidate the obscurities, and enforce the excellencies of their
Authors. How far we disagree or coincide with them will appear on inspection of
the particular passages to which their several observations refer. At present
it will be sufficient to declare, that we should have been inclined to
entertain a more respectful opinion of their labors, if they had not very
early betrayed that confidence which every Reader is tempted to repose in an
Editor, not only by their carelessness, but by the more unpardonable faults of
faithlessness and misrepresentation. Their reports of the state of the old
copies can never safely be taken on trust, and on examination many of those
copies will appear to be both negligently collated, and untruly quoted. Their
punctuation also, notwithstanding their occasional self-approbation, is almost
as inaccurate as that of the most ancient and rude editions; and their critical
remarks have, in our opinion, oftener been well intended, than conceived. Their
work, however, has in the main conduced to the illustration of our Authors, and
we have seized every fair occasion to applaud the display of their diligence,
as well as the efforts of their critical acuteness and sagacity. Such of their
notes as appeared incontestible, or even plausible, we have adopted without
remark; to those more dubious we have subjoined additional annotations; those
of less consequence we have abridged; and those of no importance we have
omitted.

In the present Edition, it has been our chief aim to give the old text as it
lies in the old books, with no other variations, but such as the Writers
themselves, had they superintended an impression of their Works, or even a
corrector of the press, would have made. Yet even these variations, if at all
important, have not been made in silence. Notes, however, have been subjoined
to the text as briefly and as sparingly as possible; but the lapse of time, and
fluctuation of language, have rendered some Notes necessary for the purpose of
explaining obsolete words, unusual phrases, old customs, and obscure or distant
allusions. Critical remarks, and conjectural emendations, have been seldom
hazarded, nor has any ridicule been wantonly thrown on former Editors, who have
only sometimes been reprehended for pompous affectation, and more frequently
for want of care and fidelity. Every material comment on these Plays has been
retained in this Edition, though often without the long and ostentatious notes
that first introduced those comments to the public. At the same time, we have
religiously attributed every observation, critical or philological, to its due
author, not wishing to claim any praise as Editors, but by industriously
endeavoring, as an act of duty, to collect from all quarters every thing that
might contribute to illustrate the Works of Beaumont and Fletcher.

To conclude, we have beheld with pity and indignation the mean parade of many
modern Editors, and we have endeavored to fulfill their duties without imbibing
their arrogance. We are perhaps too proud to indulge so poor a vanity; at
least, we are too much occupied to litigate readings we think of small
importance, and too honest to claim restorations not our own, or to propose
readings as corrections that are no more than restorations. The Stationer has
not disgraced our Authors with Tobacco-Paper; the Press, we trust, has done its
duty; and the Rolling-Press, at a very considerable expense, has added its
assistance. The Cuts, if we are not deceived, are for the most part happily
designed, and well executed, and will probably be deemed an agreeable addition
to the Work: at least, we may with truth assert, that no authors in the English
language, published at the same price, have so many and so valuable engravings.

The province of a Painter and an Editor are directly opposite. In the first
instance the canvas receives its chief value from the artist, and in the second
the artist derives almost all his consequence from the canvas. The Editor, if
he lives, is carried down the stream of time by his Author; and if the Author
be excellent, and his commentary judicious, Still shall his little bark
attendant sail,
Pursue the triumph and partake the gale.
For our parts we have been incited to this undertaking from a real admiration
of these Poets, grounded, as we apprehend, on their genuine excellencies, and a
thorough persuasion that the Works of Beaumont and Fletcher may proudly claim a
second place in the English Drama, nearer to the first than the third, to those
of Shakespeare; some of their Plays being so much in his manner, that they can
scarcely be distingushed to be the work of another hand.

APPENDIX TO THE SECOND EDITION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE COMEDIES OF TERENCE,
PUBLISHED IN THE YEAR 1768.
APPENDIX TO THE SECOND EDITION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE COMEDIES OF TERENCE.
THE reverend and ingenious Mr. Farmer, in his curious and entertaining Essay
on the Learning of Shakespeare, having done me the honor to animadvert on some
passages in the preface to this translation, I cannot dismiss this edition
without declaring how far I coincide with that gentleman; although what I then
threw out carelessly on the subject of his pamphlet was merely incidental, nor
did I mean to enter the lists as a champion to defend either side of the
question.

It is most true, as Mr. Farmer takes for granted, that I had never met with
the old comedy called The Supposes, nor has it even yet fallen into my hands;
yet I am willing to grant, on Mr. Farmer's authority, that Shakespeare borrowed
part of the plot of The Taming of the Shrew, from that old translation of
Ariosto's play, by George Gascoign, and had no obligations to Plautus. I will
accede also to the truth of Dr. Johnson's and Mr. Farmer's observation, that
the line from Terence, exactly as it stands in Shakespeare, is extant in Lilly
and Udall's Flowers for Latin Speaking. Still, however, Shakespeare's total
ignorance of the learned languages remains to be proved; for it must be
granted, that such books are put into the hands of those who are learning those
languages, in which class we must necessarily rank Shakespeare, or he could not
even have quoted Terence from Udall or Lilly; nor is it likely, that so rapid a
genius should not have made some further progress. "Our author (says Dr.
Johnson, as quoted by Mr. Farmer) had this line from Lilly; which I mention,
that it may not be brought as an argument of his learning." It is, however, an
argument that he read Lilly; and a few pages further it seems pretty certain,
that the author of The Taming of the Shrew, had at least read Ovid; from whose
epistles we find these lines: Hac ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
And what does Dr. Johnson say on this occasion? Nothing. And what does Mr.
Farmer say on this occasion? Nothing.

In Love's Labor's Lost, which, bad as it is, is ascribed by Dr. Johnson
himself to Shakespeare, there occurs the word thrasonical; another argument
which seems to show that he was not unacquainted with the comedies of Terence;
not to mention, that the character of the Schoolmaster in the same play could
not possibly be written by a man who had traveled no further in Latin than
hic, haec, hoc.

In Henry the Sixth we meet with a quotation from Virgil, Tantaene animis
coelestibus irae?
But this, it seems, proves nothing, any more than the lines from Terence and
Ovid, in the Taming of the Shrew; for Mr. Farmer looks on Shakespeare's
property in the comedy to be extremely disputable; and he has no doubt but
Henry the Sixth had the same author with Edward the Third, which has been
recovered to the world in Mr. Capell's Prolusions.

If any play in the collection bears internal evidence of Shakespeare's hand,
we may fairly give him Timon of Athens. In this play we have a familiar
quotation from Horace, Ira furor brevis est.


I will not maintain but this hemistich may be found in Lilly or Udall; or that
it is not in the Palace of Pleasure, or the English Plutarch; or that it was
not originally foisted in by the players: I^ stands, however, in the play of
Timon of Athens.

The world in general, and those who purpose to comment on Shakespeare in
particular, will owe much to Mr. Farmer, whose researches into our old authors
throw a luster on many passages, the obscurity of which must else have been
impenetrable. No future Upton or Gildon will go further than North's
translation for Shakespeare's acquaintance with Plutarch, or balance between
Dares Phrygius, and the Troy book of Lydgate. The History of Hamblet, in
black letter, will for ever supersede Saxo Grammaticus; translated novels and
ballads will, perhaps, be allowed the sources of Romeo, Lear, and the Merchant
of Venice; and Shakespeare himself, however unlike Bays in other particulars,
will stand convicted of having transversed the prose of Holingshead; and at the
same time, to prove "that his studies lay in his own language," the
translations of Ovid are determined to be the production of Heywood.

"That his studies were most demonstratively confined to nature, and his own
language," I readily allow: but does it hence follow that he was so deplorably
ignorant of every other tongue, living or dead, that he only "remembered,
perhaps, enough of his schoolboy learning to put the hig, hag, hog, into the
mouth of Sir H. Evans; and might pick up in the writers of the time, or the
course of his conversation, a familiar phrase or two of French or Italian?" In
Shakespeare's plays both these last languages are plentifully scattered: but
then, we are told, they might be impertinent additions of the players.
Undoubtedly they might: but there they are, and, perhaps, few of the players
had much more learning than Shakespeare.

Mr. Farmer himself will allow that Shakespeare began to learn Latin: I will
allow that his studies lay in English: but why insist that he neither made any
progress at school; nor improved his acquisitions there? The general encomiums
of Suckling, Denham, Milton, etc. on his native genius Mr. Farmer closes these
general testimonies of Shakespeare's have been only indebted to nature, by
saying, "He came out of her hand, ^ some one else expresses it, like Pallas out
of Jove's head, at full gro^ and mature." It is whimsical enough, that this
some one else, wh^ expression is here quoted to countenance the general notion
of Shakespeare's want of literature, should be no other than myself. Mr. Farmer
does (...) choose to mention where he met with this expression of some one else;
(...) some one else does not choose to mention where he dropped it.
, prove nothing; and Ben Jonson's celebrated charge of Shakespeare's small
Latin, and less Greek In defense of the various reading of this passage, given
in the preface to the last edition of Shakespeare, "small Latin, and no Greek,"
Mr. Farmer tells us, that "it was adopted above a century ago by W. Towers, in
a panegyric on Cartwright." Surely, Towers having said that Cartwright had no
Greek, is no proof that Been Jonson said so of Shakespeare.
, seem; absolutely to decide that he had some knowledge of both; and if we may
judge by our own time, a man, who has any Greek, is seldom without a very
competent share of Latin; and yet such a man is very likely to study Plutarch
in English, and to read translations of Ovid.

POSTSCRIPT.
THIS Appendix to the second Edition of the translation of Terence would not
have had a place in this collection, if it had not repeatedly appeared among
the numerous Prolegomena to the late Variorum Editions of Shakespeare,
accompanied with Annotations which seem to require some notice.

Mr. Steevens in a Preface subjoined to that of Dr. Johnson having first
declared that "the dispute about the learning of Shakespeare is now finally
settled," the reader is, at the close of the copy of this Appendix, referred to
Dr. Farmer's reply in a Note on Love's Labor's Lost, Act II. Sc. ii. p. 435.
Edit. of 1778.

The Note in question, according to the custom of the Editors, is rather long;
but I trust I shall do no injustice to Dr. Farmer's argument, by selecting only
his part of it.

Dr. Warburton is certainly right in his supposition that Florio is meant by
the character of Holofernes. Florio had given the first affront. "The plays,
says he, that they play in England, are neither right comedies, nor right
tragedies; but representations of histories without any decorum." -- The scraps
of Latin and Italian are transcribed from his works, particularly the proverb
about Venice, which has been corrupted so much. The affectation of the letter,
which argues facility, is likewise a copy of his manner. We meet with much of
it in the sonnets to his patrons.

In Italy your lordship well has seen
Their manners, monuments, magnificence,
Their language learnt, in sound, in style, in sense,
Proving by profiting where you have been,
To add to fore-learn'd faculty facility!
We see then the character of the Schoolmaster might be written with less
learning than Mr. Colman conjectured: nor is the use of the word thrasonical,
any argument that the author had read Terence. It was introduced to our
language long before Shakespeare's time. Stanyhurst writes, in a translation of
one of Sir Thomas More's epigrams, Lynckt was in wedlock a lofty thrasonical
hufsnuffe.


It can scarcely be necessary to animadvert any further upon what Mr. Colman
has advanced in the Appendix to his Terence. If this gentleman at his leisure
from modern plays, will condescend to open a few old ones, he will soon be
satisfied that Shakespeare was obliged to learn and repeat in the course of his
profession such Latin Fragments, as are met with in his works. The formidable
one, ira furor brevis est, which is quoted from Timon, may be found, not in
plays only, but in every tritical essay from that of king James to that of dean
Swift inclusive. I will only add that if Mr. Colman had previously looked at
the panegyric on Cartwright, he could not so strangely have misrepresented my
argument from it: but thus it must ever be with the most ingenious men, when
they talk without book. Let me however take this opportunity of acknowledging
the very genteel language which he has been pleased to use on this occasion.

Mr. Warton informs us in his Life of Sir Thomas Pope, that there was an old
play of Holophernes, acted before the princess Elizabeth in the Year 1556.

FARMER.

In the Edition of Shakespeare, published in 1785, this Appendix again appears
with the same reference to Dr. Farmer's reply, and the addition of the
following Annotation on the last note in the Appendix.

It will appear still more whimsical that this some one else, whose expression
is here quoted, may have his claim to it superseded by that of the late Dr.
Young, who in his Conjectures on Original Composition, (p. 100, vol. V. Edit.
1773) has the following sentence. "An adult genius comes out of Nature's hands,
as Pallas out of Jove's head, at full growth and mature. Shakespeare's genius
was of this kind." Where some one else the first may have intermediately
dropped the contested expression, I cannot ascertain: but some one else the
second trancribed it from the author already mentioned.

ANON.

I flatter myself that my remarks on the subject of the Learning of
Shakespeare, and my idea of the extent of his literature, were not extravagant;
and that I expressed myself in such terms as were not calculated to provoke
censure, or ridicule. For my own part, though I took no decided part in the
question, I must confess that the wit and pleasantry of the replies and
annotations have not materially altered my opinion, which the Editors would
have more fairly submitted to their readers, if Dr. Farmer's reply had been
given with the Appendix, instead of being transferred to another volume,
because some part of his observations related to a character of the play
contained in it. I must own too that I was rather surprised to see the Reverend
Essayist, whose remarks I had treated so respectfully, making his reply as a
flippant Annotator on another publication, and rising from the bottom of the
page of Love's Labor's Lost, under the wing of that Editor, whom in the second
impression of his Essay he had styled " one of the first Critics of the Age,
who was pleased to declare on reading the former edition, that THE QUESTION IS
now FOR EVER DECIDED!" With what complacency these acute Critics interchange
flatteries and compliments, and how freely do they throw out censures and
sarcasms upon others; giving currency to each by annexing them to the popular
text of Shakespeare!

The Note of Dr. Farmer referred to in the Appendix concerning Shakespeare's
small Latin and LESS Greek in the first Edition of his Essay, 1767, stands thus.

This passage of Ben Jonson, so often quoted, is given us in the admirable
preface to the late Edition, with a various reading, "small Latin and no
Greek," which has been held up to the Public for a modern sophistication: yet
whether an error or not, it was adopted above a Century ago by a Panegyrist on
Cartwright.

On reading the above note I confess that I did not think it necessary to
consult Towers's Panegyric on Cartwright, taking it for granted, on the
Essayist's note, that Towers had applied the line to the subject of his
panegyric, as Jonson had done before him; and yet I cannot even after this
frank concession account for Dr. Farmer's triumph on so slight a
misapprehension, that does not at all affect the main question, or establish
the authority of the various reading. The passage in the verses of Towers
prefixed to the works of Cartwright printed in 1651, runs thus Thy skill in Wit
was not so poorly meek,
As theirs whose LITTLE Latin and NO Greek;
Confined their whole discourse to a street phrase,
Such dialect as their next neighbors was.


From this quotation it will not only appear that I have at length consulted
the panegyric on Cartwright, but that when talking without book, I had not so
strangely misrepresented the Doctor's argument from it. His own note to the
first edition of his Essay certainly tended to countenance the various reading
of " small Latin and no Greek," by the adoption of the line by Towers. His
Comment on the Appendix implies, either from my wilfulness or carelessness, a
misrepresentation of his argument; but surely, whether Towers applied the
disputed line to Cartwright, or his supposed Rivals in the Drama, was of no
real consequence: though by the by his adoption contains more various readings
than one; and yet the testimony of Ben Jonson, on which I grounded my opinion,
remains unimpeached. On the whole then have not the Critics strangely
misrepresented MY argument?

I give due praise to the ingenious but anonymous Annotator in the last edition
of Shakespeare, who has clearly proved that Dr. Farmer transcribed his allusion
to Pallas from Dr. Young, and not from some one else. The thought is obvious,
and might without improbability occur to different writers; but the similarity
of expression, " at full growth and mature," proves beyond controversy from
whence, in the present instance, the allusion was taken. But after all, what is
that matter to the Learning of Shakespeare?

On that subject I never engaged myself as a champion on either side of the
question, but having been in some sort forced into the dispute, I cannot but
seize every occasion to applaud the ingenuity as well as indefatigable industry
of the Variorum Editors, who in the same vein of argument may hereafter proceed
to prove that Shakespeare could neither read nor write. The almost illegible
plate, engraved after his handwriting, will not, perhaps, convince every
inspector that the poet did not write his name as his cotemporaries on the
stage have handed it down to us; though it differs not only from the recent
orthography of the Editors, "those new tuners of accents," as well as from the
Stratford Parish Register, to which Mr. Bell, in the impression from his Apollo
Press has religiously adhered. The Latin in his plays is still allowed to hold
its place; but we are told, lest the reader should be dazzled by it, that
Shakespeare was obliged to "read and repeat in the course of his profession
such Latin Fragments as are found in his works." And we are expected to embrace
this opinion.

Before his Poems, inscribed in his own name to his noble Patron, Southampton,
stand, as a Motto, two lines from Ovid, as palpable as those in the Taming of
the Shrew. But perhaps it will at length be discovered, that those Poems were
not written by Shakespeare; or, if they were, that the lines had before been
prefixed to some other black lettered pamphlet of that age; or at least that Been Jonson, in compassion to his illiterate friend, suggested the Motto, which
the Shake-scene of the times, for so the witlings of the day, favoring the old
orthography, called Shake-speare, could not himself supply.

In return for the civilities of the Variorum Editors I beg leave to propose a
small emendation in their LIST OF PLAYS altered from SHAKESPEARE, in which they
have done me the honor of attributing to me, without any authority, two
alterations of the Midsummer Night's Dream. Of the first, it is true, I
attended the rehearsals, at the express desire of Mr. Garrick, on his going
abroad; but the revival, as I foretold, failing of success, the piece was, by
my advice, reduced to two acts under the title of A Fairy Tale, so that I was
little more than a Godfather on the occasion, and the Alterations, like some of
the Variorum Annotations, should have been subscribed ANON.

When Critics make a lucky hit,
Proud of a note of Sterling worth
Each gives his name as Sponsor;
But when mean malice aims at Wit,
Like Francis in King Hal the Fourth,
Each cries -- Anon, Anon, Sir!
REMARKS OR SHYLOCK's REPLY TO THE SENATE OF VENICE.
THERE are few passages in the plays of Shakespeare, that have been more
repeatedly the subject of critical animadversion than a part of Shylock's reply
to the Duke and the Magnificos in the Merchant of Venice.

The lines in question in the second folio, which now lies before me, run thus:
and the second folio is, I believe, in this instance, an exact transcript of
the first. Some men there are love not a gaping pigge;
Some that are mad, if they behold a cat:
And others, when the bagpipe sings in the nose,
Cannot contain their urine for Affection.
Masters of passion swayes it to the mood,
Of what it likes or loathes. --


Row, the first modern Editor, himself a Poet, willing I suppose to preserve
the poetical expression with no more violation of the text, than what was
necessary to reconcile it to sense and grammar, gives, as was his manner,
without quoting any authority, the fifth and part of the sixth line thus.
Masterless passion sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes.


This reading, conveying a clear idea without any great violence to the first
impressions, was received and adopted by Pope, Theobald, and Hanmer.

Theobald however willing to support a proposed emendation of his ingenious
assistant Dr. Thirlby, and at the same time to introduce a Comment of
Warburton, starts a difficulty concerning the relative it (sways it) which,
according to Rowe's reading, easily and necessarily refers to the word
Affection in the line immediately preceding.

Dr. Thirlby's emendation consisted in a new mode of punctuation, by which he
thus adjusted the doubtful lines in the passage. And others, when the bagpipe
sings in the nose,
Cannot contain their urine. For Affection,
Master of passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes.


Warburton, with a refined commentary, rejects the reading of Row, preserves
the old pointing, but changes the number of the verb, reading sway for sways.
Affection, he interprets to be used for sympathy; and we learn from the second
edition of Dr. Farmer's Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare, that Affection,
in the sense of sympathy, was formerly technical, and so used by Lord Bacon,
Sir Kenelm Digby, and many other writers.

Mr. Steevens, in his republication in 1760, of the twenty plays of Shakespeare
first printed in quarto, from a professed collation of four different copies of
this play, entitles the Drama "The Comical History of The Merchant of Venice,"
and exhibits the passage in question, thus Some men there are love not a gaping
pig:
Some that are mad if they behold a cat;
And others when the bagpipe sings in the nose
Cannot contain their urine for Affection,
Masters of passion swayes it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes.


Here the old pointing is preserved, but the spelling is in general more modern
than even that of the second folio, which was indeed an earlier publication
than two of the collated quartos.

The word Masters is exactly conformable to our present orthography; and this
noun, governing the verb that follows, is the most material in the whole
sentence: so material indeed that in order to preserve it, the Modern Editors,
while they embrace the punctuation of Thirlby, make a still further deviation
from the old copies, and, changing the number of both noun and verb, give the
passage thus, For Affections,
Masters of passion, sway it to the mood
Of what it likes OF loathes.


This reading seems to have been suggested by Sir John Hawkins.

Mr. Malone converting the noun Masters into a verb, and changing it into our
reads thus, For Affection
Masters our passion, sways it to the mood
Of what, etc.


The patient and laborious Capel, who commenced his researches long before all
the Editors since Hanmer, and yet suffered those Editors to anticipate, and
almost supersede his own publication, the diligent but tardy Capel adopts the
punctuation of Thirlby, and regulates the passage thus, For Affection,
Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes.


Capel, with his usual fidelity, gives the rejected reading " Masters of" at
the bottom of the page, and as it should seem, from the principle established
in his Introduction, from the oldest quarto. Of Capel the Variorum Editors take
no notice.

It is remarkable also that Theobald in his note reporting Thirlby's proposed
emendation, joins an asterisk to the word Master referring to another various
reading or conjecture, -- Or MISTRESS; but whether this was the original
suggestion of Thirlby, or of himself, it is not easy to determine. In old books
the mode of spelling the word Mistress often approaches very near to the word
Masters in the text; and Mr. Steevens, who reads Masters, and for the sake of
Grammatical Concordance changes Affection to Affections, yet quotes a passage
from Othello, which though produced with another intention, yet countenances in
this instance the reading of Capel.

And though we have there a Substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet
Opinion, a Sovereign MISTRESS of Effects, throws a more safe voice on you. I
must confess that I cannot discover on what principle all the Editors, since
Theobald and Hanmer, have followed the punctuation of Thirlby. It is
impossible, I think, for any reader, accustomed to the manner of our old
writers, not to feel a certain harshness in the new regulation of the text, or
indeed to doubt for a moment, that the old books gave the second line
correctly, as at that time spoken on the stage, and originally written by the
Author. Cannot contain their urine for Affection. I never heard, excellent and
very Shylock as he is, Macklin's full stop in the middle of this verse without
a shock; and the following words of the line, not only soften the expression,
but are most easy and natural. We still apply the verb affect in the same sense
that Shylock here uses the noun derived from it, and the simple meaning of the
line is, that "Others are so affected by the sound of the bagpipe that they
cannot contain themselves."

The mode of Affection here signified, granting the old text to be genuine,
must be Sympathy, illustrated by an example opposed to those before enumerated;
and the opposition marked, like the hic and ille of the Latin, by the words
some and others; though without the two last words of the line the contrast is
less clear, and the effect of the bappipe might be a third instance of
Antipathy. Thirlby's punctuation, and Rowe's reading, each suppose Affection to
signify both Sympathy and Antipathy. Each Critic must be allowed to be
ingenious: some word, or phrase, or line, expressive of an irresistible
influence over our likings and loathings, (for Shylock speaks of both) as well
as governing the verb sways, is most certainly the grand Desideratum, the one
thing requisite to regulate and explain this difficult passage.

The passage, as it stands in the old books, is evidently defective or corrupt,
or both, and though the reading Mistress for Masters may remedy the corruption,
and bring the noun and verb, according to the rules of Syntax, to accord with
each other, still there remains an imperfection in the context, which has
driven the commentators, as their last resource, to a new mode of punctuation.
My own method may, perhaps, appear still more desperate; but desperate diseases
require desperate remedies, and without some topical applications the case
under consideration is confessedly incurable: and I cannot well explain myself
without some dissection. I must beg leave therefore to give a brief analysis of
Shylock's reply to the Duke, who tells him that the court recommend lenity to
Anthonio, and expect a gentle answer from the prosecutor. -- His answer is to
this effect.

I have taken a solemn oath to exact the penalty on the Bond, and deny me
justice at your peril! If you demand why I prefer a pound of flesh to three
thousand ducats, I answer, it is my humor. Or, if that answer be
unsatisfactory; I add that there is an uncontrollable and unaccountable
influence, affecting the mind, predominating so absolutely over the passions,
as to impell them, in spite of reason, and of will, acting in some men by
Antipathy, and in others by Sympathy. There are instances of both. I am an
instance of Antipathy. I abhor, I hate Anthonio: and this Hatred, this
Antipathy, is the only answer that I will, or can give, why I prefer a losing
suit to a lucrative composition. This I take to be a fair abstract of Shylock's
answer, who, waving the sic volo with which he follows up his oath, proceeds to
defend his conduct by the example of other men, subject, like himself, to the
irresistible dominion of Sympathy and Antipathy.

On the whole therefore I conceive that the original punctuation should be
maintained, that the word Masters in the old copies should be read Mistress,
and that the imperfection in the sense, according to that reading, arises from
a line or two lost or dropped at the press, in which the words Sympathy and
Antipathy, so congenial to the argument, had most probably a place.

To submit this opinion, and the whole of my comment, fairly to the reader, I
shall conclude these observations with a transscript of the whole speech from
the second folio, only introducing in another character the variation of
Mistress for Masters, together with one intercalary line, meant (like the day
in Leap-year) to complete the system, and to convey the real meaning of the
author. His real words are now irrecoverable.

The Duke concludes the address to Shylock, in behalf of the Senate and
himself, with these words. We do expect a gentle answer, Jew.


Shylock's answer is as follows: I have possesst your Grace with what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfet of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your Charter, and your Cities freedom.
You Will ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh, then to receive
Three thousand Ducats, I Will not answer that;
But say it is my humor; Is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a Rat
And I be pleased to give ten thousand Ducates
To have it bain'd? What, are you answered yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pigge:
Some that are mad, if they behold a cat:
And others, when the bagpipe sings in the nose,
Cannot contain their urine for affection.
Sovereign Antipathy, or Sympathy,
Mistress of passion, swayes it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes, now for your answer --
As there is no firm reason to be rendered
Why he cannot abide a gaping pigge?
Why he a harmless necessary cat?
Why he a woollen bagpipe? but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame,
As to offend himself being offended:
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More than a lodged hate, and a certain loathing
I bear Anthonio, that I follow thus
A loosing suit against him? Are you answered?


If this exposition is not convincing and conclusive, it were in vain to add
more arguments to enforce it. Valeat, quantum valere potest! The few faults in
the punctuation of the old copy are so ob^ious, that they cannot mislead the
attentive reader; but the defect in the construction, without addition or
alteration, is irremoveable. The last expedient having, in my humble opinion,
proved unsuccessful, a close consideration of the whole passage suggested the
former. With what propriety the reader will determine.

Some difficulties, for Critics will create difficulties, have arisen from
other lines in this speech. Johnson never saw a woollen bagpipe, and therefore
proposes to read wooden. A wooden reading, which Sir John Hawkins converts into
swelling or swollen; but though Johnson never saw a woollen bagpipe,
Shakespeare might have seen one, nor is it difficult to conceive. I think I
have seen one: the bag I mean, for the pipe, as he supposes, was of wood.

The edition also of 1778, now under my eye, reads, As to offend himself, being
offended.


The twenty plays published by Mr. Steevens in the year 1760, from a collation
of the quartos, exhibit, printing more elegantly, As to offend, himself being
offended.


In these matters of critical nicety such trifles are not unworthy of
observation, though perhaps the slight variation might not have the sanction of
the ingenious Editor, but be only an error of the press.

Since the foregoing article was prepared for the press, looking into the
Variorum edition of Shakespeare published in the year 1785 for the purpose of
transcribing the anonymous Annotation on my Note to the Appendix, I find that
Mr. Malone professes to have altered his opinion on this much contested
passage, and now believes, as I do, the old reading of the line " Cannot
contain, etc." to be genuine, deriving the noun affection, as I have done, from
the verb affect, but applying it, like Theobald, and Thirlby, and the Modern
Editors, to both Sympathy and Antipathy. In consequence of this interpretation
he now reads, for the sake of concord, Masters of passion SWAY, etc.


A subsequent note, subscribed EDITOR, gives the old reading from the Author of
the REMARKS with a similar explanation of Affection, but with no alteration or
explanation of the false concord.

The reading of the line, supposed to be a possible erratum in the edition of
1778 is continued, as well as the reading of the passage in question,
unsupported by plausible conjecture, taste, or authority.

ORTHOPAEDIA: OR, THOUGHTS ON PUBLIC EDUCATION.
-- velocius and citius nos
Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica, magnis
Cum subeunt animos auctoribus. Unus and alter
Forsitan hoc spernant juvenes, quibus art benigna,
Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.
Sed reliquos fugienda patrum vestigia ducant,
Et monstrata diu veteris trahet orbita culpae.
Gratum est, quod patria civem populoque dedisti,
Si facis, ut patriae sit idoneus, utilis agris,
Utilis and bellorum, et pacis rebus agendis.
Plurimum enim intererit quibus artibus, and quibus hunc tu
Moribus instituas.
Juvenal, Sat. xiv.
THOUGHTS ON PUBLIC EDUCATION.
LOCK, who by his intellectual researches has made his name as memorable in
the annals of English Literature as those of Bacon or Newton, has among other
smaller works bequeathed to posterity a short tract entitled "Some Thoughts
concerning Education." In this tract, containing many excellent remarks, many
instances of shrewd penetration, and much valuable information, he has avowed
himself a declared enemy to Public Education, which he considers as a
sacrifice of innocence to confidence, concluding "that it is impossible to keep
a lad from the spreading contagion, if you will venture him abroad IN THE HERD,
and trust to chance or his own inclination, for the choice of his company at
school."

Who would not shrink at the thoughts of encountering so formidable an
adversary, armed at all points with strong natural Sense, keen Observation,
Satire, Humor, and Argument? for such weapons he has wielded, and with such
armor has he defended himself, on the subject now under consideration,
directing all his attacks against the principle I have undertaken to defend.
Yet exercising that freedom, of which he has himself given both the precept and
example, I venture to think for myself, and in my turn to submit my thoughts to
the Public.

Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri. Locke's Thoughts on Education,
though published in one continued series, and split into sections, according to
the custom of the times, is yet, as the dedication declares, the mere substance
of a correspondence with a private friend, and indeed may now fairly be
resolved into three separate letters: for the writer, at three distinct
periods, reverts to the state of infancy; and twice leads the babe through
childhood to youth and manhood: this may escape the observation of a cursory
reader, but to a fair and strict examiner is plain and obvious.

The following remarks are, like the tract on which they are founded, somewhat
loose and desultory. It is indeed very difficult to follow a writer, who often
resumes a subject that he seems to have dismissed: yet order and method have
been endeavored to be preserved, as far as was possible under such
circumstances. No material part of the question, it is hoped, remains
unnoticed: and it may be added with confidence, that no argument has been
intentionally misrepresented.

Virtue, Virtue and Wisdom, Lock justly considers as the basis of all good
education. They are indeed as necessary to the operations of the mind, as
health and vigor to the exertions of the body. We will not therefore dispute
on a self-evident proposition; but rather endeavor to prove, on the very
principles of the tract now before us, that Public Education is more conducive
to the improvement of the understanding, and less dangerous to the morals, than
Domestic Tuition.

It must be obvious to every reader that Lock himself enters on the comparison
with difficulty and diffidence. "I confess (says he with great candor) both
sides have their inconveniences." He then proceeds to a labored invective
against Grammar Schools, as unfavourable to the practice of virtue; "And
therefore (says he in conclusion) I cannot but prefer breeding of a young
gentleman at home in his father's sight under a governor, as much the best and
safest way to the great and main end of education, where it can be had, and is
ordered as it should be."

Perfection, no doubt, if attainable, were much to be desired: but, alas!
Imperfection is the lot of all human undertakings; and all we can effect is to
follow that course, which is liable to the least objection. The excellence of
Locke's plan is in his own opinion evidently hypothetical; so that he is at
last driven to acknowledge that "what shall be resolved in the case must in a
great measure be left to the parents, to be determined by their circumstances
and conveniences."

All that Lock says of children, while children, that is while in a mere state
of infancy, is in general well worth notice. He seems to enter into all their
little feelings with as much penetration, and much less romance, than Rousseau,
whose EMILE, with all its merit, and all its originality, is in fact an
ingenious amplification of Locke's work, realising in himself the ideal
character of the tutor or governor, and in Emile the person of the pupil, whom
he takes up from his cradle, and carries to his marriage bed, just as Lock
advises, on his return from Late Travel. Rousseau's work however is not merely
the little tract of Lock dilated and personified, but in many instances a
comment; sometimes too labored and refined, and sometimes acute and plausible.
Few will agree with him that instruction must be delayed till the lessons can
be attended with experiment, or think it reasonable to refer their little
students to the open volume of nature, denying them the use of books, maps,
globes, and other helps which Lock recommends. Most parents would think
Locke's method of teaching Geography as prudent as it is simple and easy, by
showing children first the figure and natural parts of the globe, and the
imaginary and artificial lines afterward: but Rousseau despises such
insufficient methods, throws away maps and spheres, and by his own example
exhorts teachers to carry their scholars at different seasons to the top of a
mountain, to see the sun rise at Midsummer and at Christmas. This appears
rather extravagant, but, at the same time, it may be thought that Rousseau
properly censures Locke's maxim of reasoning with children, which he truly says
Lock himself appears so much embarrassed to defend. With equal justice he
reprobates Locke's method of recommending and encouraging LIBERALITY,
"constantly taking care that the child loses nothing by it." Let all the
instances he gives of "such freeness (continues Lock) be always repaid and
with interest, and let him sensibly perceive that the kindness he shows to
others, is no bad husbandry for himself; but that it brings a return of
kindness both from those who receive it, and those who look on!" This, says
Rousseau, is to teach a child to be generous to appearance, and in reality
avaricious. He reprehends also Locke's opinion that "the consideration of
spirits ought to go before that of matter and body:" for what idea, says he,
can a child entertain of a being incorporeal and immaterial?

But the management of infants is not the chief object of these remarks. Of the
treatment of children Lock speaks with fairness and candor; but when they
advance to maturer age, his evident prejudice against Public Education
obscures that precision, and depraves that liberality so remarkable in his
other works.

Lock, while he so openly and severely censures Public Education, slurs over
the defects of domestic tuition, yet his subject unavoidably leads him to
point out some imperfections; and particularly the danger from servants: to
which might be added the too frequent hereditary taint of the mind from the
master and mistress, and the contagion of their friends and acquaintance. The
mischiefs of domestic indulgence cannot indeed be more strongly delineated
than in the words of Lock himself. " He that is not used to submit his will to
the reason of others, WHEN he is YOUNG, will scarce hearken or submit to his
own reason, when he is of an age to make use of it. And what a kind of a man
such an one is like to prove is easy to foresee."

" These are oversights usually committed, by those who seem to take the
greatest care of their children's education. But if we look into the common
management of children, we shall have reason to wonder, in the great
dissoluteness of manners which the world complains of, that there an any
footsteps at all left of virtue. I desire to know what vice can be named, which
PARENTS AND THOSE ABOUT CHILDREN, do not season them with, and drop into them
the seeds of, as soon as they are capable to receive them? I do not mean by the
examples they give, and the patterns they set before them, which is
encouragement enough, but that which I would take notice of here, is the
downright teaching them vice, and actually putting them out of the way of
virtue." He then proceeds to show that they principle them with violence,
revenge, and cruelty; that lying and equivocation are put into their mouths and
commended; that the little ones are taught to be proud of their clothes, before
they can put them on; and tempted and encouraged to intemperance and luxury.
The section concludes with the following paragraph. " I shall not dwell any
longer on this subject, much less run over all the particulars, that would show
what pains are used to corrupt children, and instill principles of vice into
them: But I desire parents soberly to consider what irregularity or vice there
is, which children are not visibly taught, and whether it be not their duty and
wisdom to provide them other instructions."

The chief officer in Locke's household of private education is a Governor, or
Tutor; "and if you find it difficult (says he) to meet with such a tutor, you
are not to wonder."

His description of a Tutor is indeed chimerical. Wisdom, temperance,
tenderness, diligence, and discretion, are the lead essential requisites in the
character of Locke's governor. Such a man as he delineates is scarce to be
found; and if found, would hardly undertake the task assigned him.

His learning however, much or little, is no great recommendation. "That a
tutor should have Latin and learning, with the reputation of sobriety, every
one expects: and this generally is thought enough, and is all parents look for.
But when such an one has emptied out into his pupil all the Latin and logic he
has brought from the University, will that furniture make him a fine gentleman?
Or can it be expected that he should be better bred, better skilled in the
world, better principled in the grounds and foundations of true virtue and
generosity, than his young Tutor is?"

Such is the derision bestowed by Lock on the scholarship of a tutor; and such
is his constant contempt of literature and erudition, under the sneering
denominations of Latin and learning, a deal of trash, dry systems, etc. which
appears very strange from a learned, or, as Lock styles himself, a bookish
man. He not only gives the first place to virtue, without "which no science,
polite learning, or talents, can be of value, but much prefers breeding to
learning. His encomiums on this accomplishment are equal to any of Lord
Chesterfield's Dissertations on the Graces. It is indeed always difficult to
fix a charge of partiality, or incoherency, on so cautious and ingenious a
writer, because he commonly concludes his remarks with some qualifying
expressions, which however rather seem to bring up the rear as a saving clause,
than to be intended to militate against the main argument. As one instance
among many others, of these principles and this practice, may be produced the
following passage, with which he winds up his recommendation of the first
essential requisite in a Tutor.

The Tutor therefore ought IN THE FIRST PLACE TO BE WELL BRED? And a young
gentleman who gets this ONE qualification from his GOVERNOR, sets out with
great advantage; and will find that THIS ONE ACCOMPLISHMENT will more open his
way to him, get him more friends, and carry him farther in the world, than all
the HARD WORDS, OR REAL KNOWLEDGE he has got from the liberal arts, or his
TUTOR'S learned ENCYCLOPOEDIA. Not that those should be neglected, but by no
means preferred or suffered to thrust out the other. Knowledge of the world
also is deemed preferable to learning and languages, though by the way, he here
inadvertently implies the superior force of Public Education, and is obliged
to confess that the study of the ancients contributes both to that knowledge
and to virtue. The Tutor however, this sage and exemplary monitor, described by
Lock, must enter his pupil into the world, and at the same time preserve him,
like the Four Thieves, Vinegar, from the contagion of society; so that a youth
must, it seems, after all encounter the danger so much dreaded in a Public
Education, the danger of herding with those of his own time of life: and how
ill he may be prepared to hazard his morals, his health, and his fortune, in
such company, the following picture of many a lad mewed up in a private family,
drawn by the masterly hand of Lock himself, will exhibit in the most lively
colors.

The longer he is kept thus hood-winked the less he will see, when he comes
abroad into open daylight, and be the more exposed to be a prey to himself and
others. And an old boy at his first appearance, with all the gravity of his
ivy-bush about him, is sure to draw on him the eyes and chirping of the whole
town volery. Amongst which, there will not be wanting some birds of prey that
will presently be on the wing for him. The Tutor however is not to neglect our
young master's learning, but is to teach him Latin, like French, by talking it
into him in constant conversation; for he must be constantly with his pupil,
talk nothing else to him, and make him still answer in the same language;
though perhaps the comparison is not quite fair and apposite, French being a
living language and Latin a dead one. Grammar however is strictly forbidden by
Lock, as well as Rousseau: And if the well bred tutor should be incapable, a
more agreeable teacher may be found, and the following method is recommended to
all private families.

Whatever stir there is made about getting of LATIN, as the great and difficult
business, his mother may teach it him herself, if she will but spend two or
three hours in a day with him, and make him read the Evangelists in LATIN to
her. For she need but buy a LATIN Testament, and having got somebody to mark
the last syllable but one where it is long, in words above two syllables (which
is enough to regulate her pronunciation and accenting the words) read daily in
the GOSPELS, and then let her avoid understanding them in LATIN if she can! And
when she understands the Evangelists in LATIN, let her in the same manner, read
AESOP's FABLES, and so proceed on to EUTROPIUS, JUSTIN, and other such books. I
do not mention this as an imagination of what I fancy may do, but as of a
thing I have known done, and the LATIN Tongue with ease got this way. Supposing
the Governor to be intelligent, able, and competent to the instruction of his
pupil, still the mother is not to lie idle: for "Care is to be taken whilst he
is learning Foreign languages, by speaking and reading nothing else with his
tutor, that he do not forget to read English, which may be preserved by his
mother, or somebody else, hearing him read some chosen parts of scripture, or
other English book every day."

"Languages, says Lock, being to be learnt by rote, custom, and memory, are
then spoken in the greatest perfection, when all rules of Grammar are utterly
forsaken." Languages may be spoken by rote, but surely (dead languages
especially) are not, as Lock supposes, to be learnt so; and though an adept
may throw away his Grammar, and Dictionary too if he pleases, it is strange
advice to a student. In the lower classes of Public Schools most of the boys
are, during the intervals of the school hours, under the care of one of the
assistants retained, at a very moderate cost, as a private tutor. His method of
teaching them to render English into Latin, and so vice versa, is excellent,
though directly opposite to that recommended by Lock; and in my opinion so
much more excellent, in proportion as it is more opposite. To translate a
portion of one of the gospels for the current week is a common exercise, and to
fit them for the execution of their task, they are made to parse every word in
the sentence, and by thus having learnt to what part of speech every one
belongs, together with the number, case, mood, tense, etc. their task is made
easy, and they acquire by degrees a radical knowledge of the two languages at
once. Locke's proposal of talking children into a language, which he frequently
contends that nobody talks and should pretend to write, is as little eligible
as it is feasible; and his substituted method of interlining Latin and English,
while it requires, according to his own confession, a previous explanation of
the various terminations of nouns and verbs, their several genders, cases,
numbers and persons, proves the necessity of the rules of Grammar, while it
deprives the little students of the use of them. The result must be perpetual
confusion, arising from superficial instructions, and a total impossibility of
cultivating even their mother tongue, as he afterward very properly, though
inconsistently with his own doctrine, recommends. English itself should be
taught by Grammar, though by natives first acquired by rote, custom, and
memory. The mother tongue is almost sucked in with the mother's milk.

Take a boy from the top of a Grammar school, says Lock, and one of the same
age bred, as he should be, in his father's family, and bring them into good
company together, and then see which of the two will have the more manly
carriage, and address himself with the more becoming assurance to strangers.
Here I imagine, the school boy's confidence will either fail or discredit him:
and if it be such as fits him only for the conversation of boys, he were better
be without it. This passage is quite of a piece with every other in which Lock
mentions Public Education, on which occasion he not only, as he himself
confesses, loses his temper, but also drops his usual liberality and candor.
"I cannot with patience think, (he cries in another place) that a young
gentleman should be put into the herd, and be driven with a whip and scourge,
as if he were to run the gantlet through the different classes ad capiendum
ingenii cultum." At other times he terms such youths ill bred and vicious boys,
a mixed herd of unruly boys, learning to wrangle at trap, or rook at
shun-farthing, practicing wagferies and cheats, and concerting well laid plots
of robbing an orchard.

The best and perhaps the most direct way of confuting these commonplace
invectives were to produce from the same tract, in which they have gained a
place, as evidences of the partiality of the writer, other passages, written
when off his guard, that directly contradict these assertions.

There is often (says Lock on one of these occasions) in people, especially
children, a clownish shame facedness before strangers, or those above them.
They are confounded in their thoughts, words, and looks and so lose themselves
in that confusion, as (...) to be able to do any thing, or at least to do it
with freedom and gracefulness, which pleases, and makes them acceptable.
Plainness of manners is, to a certain age, perhaps the most ingenuous feature
of youth. A polish is the last stage of education, as well as of arts and
manufactures, and when given too soon the varnish only hides a defect. A boy
should not have the manners, nor the dress, of a man. Lock himself, under the
article of manners, strongly reprobates the parents and tutors, who teize their
children about putting off hats and making of legs; and justly concludes that,
"if their minds are well disposed, and principled with inward civility, a great
part of the roughness which sticks to the outside for want of better teaching,
time and observation will rub off as they grow up, if they are bred in good
company." To say the truth, much of the security, as well as improvement of
youth, depends on their not having attained the finished breeding of men. And
the raw diffidence of a school boy would be ill exchanged for the pert
confidence of many a homebred fopling. The words of Rousseau on this head will
better express my meaning, and are an excellent contrast to the above passage
from Lock.

As there is an age proper for the study of the sciences, there is also a sit
age to catch the manners of the world. Comme il y a un age propre a l'etude des
sciences, il y en a un pour bien saisir l'usage du monde.
Bring a young man of twenty into good company: Bred as he should be, he will
in a year's time be more amiable, and more truly polite, than he who has been
brought up with that view from his infancy: for the first being capable of
perceiving the reasons, with respect to age, condition, or sex, on which good
manners are founded, will easily reduce them to their true principles, and
accommodate them to every occasion; while the other going only in the beaten
road, will be at a loss whenever he is put out of it Introduisez une jeune
homme de vingt ans dans le Monde: bien conduit, il sera dans un an plus aimable
and plus judicieusement poli, que celui qu'on y aura nourri des son enfance:
car le premier etant capable de sentir les raisons de tous les precedes
relatifs a l'age, a l'etat, au sex, qui constituent cet usage, les peut
reduire en principes, et les etendre au cas non prevus, au lieu que l'autre
n'ayant que sa routine pour toute regle est embarassesi tot qu'on l'y sort.
. Lock himself in another place says that "Carelessness is allowed to that
age, and becomes them as well as compliments do grown people. Or at least, if
some very nice people will think it a fault, I am sure it is a fault that
should be overlooked, and left to time, a tutor, and conversation, to cure."

As for their quarrels at chuck or ball, their tricks and truantries, he who
breeds his son in his own family will in vain expect to see him a man before
his time. Boys will be boys at home or abroad. Every age has its follies and
infirmities; and those of youth and childhood, though the most innocent, are
perhaps the most ungovernable.

Lock, talking in his usual style of the malapertness, tricking and violence
learnt amongst school boys, and therefore prefering Private Education,
endeavors to strengthen his argument by instancing the retirement and
bashfulness which daughters are brought up in. But surely daughters are not an
apposite example. The chief duties of female life are domestic, those of a man
are public. An officer, physician, lawyer, or divine, bred with his sister,
would not, I conceive, derive due benefit from his Education. Sometimes,
however, her society, as well as that of the rest of his family, might be of
advantage both to his morals and understanding. It is not necessary at present
to deliver any opinion concerning the proper education of daughters. Home seems
to be their natural province; yet that home is often so exceptionable, that
perhaps even they would in general be in less danger abroad. Schools,
exhibiting bills that "Young ladies are there educated and may be boarded," are
indeed sometimes dangerous seminaries: yet perhaps there are few private
families, where the minds of daughters are likely to receive so much moral and
intellectual improvement, as at the respectable Recess of the Miss Lees at
Bath, or the no less wholesome and improving nursery of the Miss Moors at
Bristol.

Lock, in his Thoughts on Education, often confounds the idea of educating a
single scholar with that of training a number of scholars: in the first
instance he imposes on fathers and tutors such a task, as none but a Scriblerus
or an Old Shandy will ever perform; and such characters have in common life
been long obsolete. Rousseau and his Emile are a Young Quixote and an Old
Sancho, or as Rousseau himself rather chooses to style them, a Robinson Crusoe
and his man Friday.

The forming of their minds and manners ( says Lock, requiring a constant
attention, and particular application to every single boy, which is impossible
in a numerous flock; and would be wholly in vain (could he [the schoolmaster]
have time to study and correct every one's particular defects, and wrong
inclinations) when the lad was to be left to himself, or the prevailing
infection of his fellows, the greatest part of the four and twenty hours.
Having in the place just quoted shown the impossibility of paying proper
attention to pupils in a public school, in the following passages are
exhibited the methods to be pursued in a private family, both in regard to a
single scholar, or a set of boys.

Since he prefers this or that (whatever play he delights in) to his book, that
only he shall do; and so in earnest set him on work on his beloved play, and
keep him steadily and in earnest to it morning and afternoon, till he be fully
surfeited, and would at any rate change it for some hours at his book again.
But when you thus set him a task of his play, you must be sure to look after
him yourself, or set some body else to do it, that may constantly see him
employed in it, and that he be not permitted to be idle at that too. This I
think is sufficiently evident, that children generally hate to be idle. All the
care then is, that their busy humor should be constantly employed in
something of use to them, which, if you will attain, you must make what you
would have them do a recreation to them, and not a business. The way to do
this, so that they may not perceive you have any hand in it is this proposed
here; viz. To make them weary of that which you would not have them do, by
enjoining, and making them, under some pretense or other do it, till they are
surfeited. For example: does your son play at top or scourge too much? Enjoin
him to play so many hours every day, and look that he do it; and you shall see
he will quickly be sick of it, and willing to leave it. By this means making
the recreations you dislike a business to him, he will of himself with delight
betake himself to those things you would have him do; especially if they be
proposed as rewards for having performed his task in that play is commanded
him. For if he be ordered every day to whip his top so long as to make him
sufficiently weary, do you not think he will apply himself with eagerness to
his book, and wish for it, if you promise it him as a reward for having whipped
his top lustily, quite out all the time that is set him? Children, in the
things they do, if they comport with their age, find little difference so they
may be doing. The esteem they have for one thing above another they borrow from
others. So that what those about them make to be a reward to them, will really
be so. By this art it is in their governor's choice; whether Scotch-hoppers
shall reward their dancing, or dancing their Scotch-hoppers; whether peg-top,
or reading, playing at trap, or studying the globes, shall be more acceptable
and pleasing to them. All that they desire being to be busy and busy, as they
imagine, in things of their own choice, and which they receive as favors from
their parents, or others for whom they have respect, and with whom they would
be in credit. A set of children thus ordered, and kept from the ill example of
others, would all of them, I suppose, with as much earnestness and delight,
learn to read, write, and what else one would have them, as others do their
ordinary plays. And the eldest being thus entered, and this made the fashion of
the place, it would be as impossible to hinder them from learning the one, as
it is ordinarily to keep them from the other. These extracts will perhaps
convince most readers of the visionary prospects presented to parental
imaginations in many a practical treatise on Private Education. Several
passages of the same nature occur in the tract now under consideration.

One of the ready topics of Locke's censure and raillery of Public Schools is
the correction occasionally bestowed on idle, irregular, or obstinate pupils.
But say what he will of the use of the rod to lash dull boys into nouns and
pronouns, verbs, gerunds, and supines, it is rarely exercised by a good
Schoolmaster but when wilfulness or ill example demands it: on which occasions
the continued severities enjoined by Lock much exceed the utmost rigours of
Public Education. As for example!

I would have a father seldom strike his child, but upon very urgent necessity
and as the last remedy; and then perhaps it will be fit to do it so, that the
child should not quickly forget it. And again.

Whenever you come to that extremity, it is not enough to whip or beat them,
you must do it, till you find you have subdued their minds, till with
submission and patience they yield to the correction; which you shall best
discover by their crying and their ceasing from it upon your bidding. Without
this the beating of children is but a passionate tyranny over them; and it is
mere cruelty and not correction to put their bodies in pain without doing their
minds any good. As this gives us a reason why children should seldom be
corrected, so it also prevents their being so. For if whenever they are
chastised it were done thus without passion, soberly and yet essentially too,
laying on the blows and smart, not furiously and all at once, but slowly with
reasoning between, and with observation how it wrought, stopping when it had
made them pliant, penitent, and yielding; they would seldom need the like
punishment again, being made careful to avoid the fault, that deserved it.
Besides, by this means as the punishment would not be lost for being too little
and not effectual, so it would be kept from being too much, if we gave off as
soon as we perceived that it reached the mind, and that was bettered. For since
the chiding or beating of children should be always the least that possibly may
be, that which is laid on in the heat of anger, seldom observes that measure,
but is commonly more than it should be, though it proves less than enough. The
circumstance of laying on the blows with reasoning between exhibits a whimsical
picture, and reminds one of the pedagogue of Swift concluding every period with
a lash. And the idea of perceiving the very moment, when the cure on the mind
is effected by the operation on the tail, is still more ludicrous. The young
patient however might perhaps wish to remind the author of another passage in
an early section of this tract, there applied to the regimen of the body, but
not inapplicable on the present occasion.

When such a gentle treatment will not stop the growing mischief, nor hinder it
from turning into a formed disease, it will be time to seek the advice of some
sober and discreet physician. In this part I hope I shall find an easy belief;
and nobody can have a pretense to doubt the advice of one who has spent some
time in the study of Physic when he counsels you, not to be too forward in
making use of PHYSIC OR PHYSICIANS. I am unwilling to load the page with too
many quotations; but as the following is peculiarly interesting and
entertaining, I flatter myself the reader will scarce think it demands an
apology.

A prudent and kind mother of my acquaintance, was on such an occasion, forced
to whip her little daughter, at her first coming home from nurse, eight times
successively the same morning before she could master her stubbornness, and
obtain a compliance in a very easy and indifferent manner. If she had left off
sooner, and stopped at the seventh whipping, she had spoiled the child for
ever; and by her unprevailing blows, only confirmed her refractoriness very
hardly afterward to be cured. But wisely persisting till she had bent her
mind, and suppled her will, the only end of correction and chastisement, she
established her authority thoroughly in the very first occasion, and had ever
after a very ready compliance and obedience in all things from her daughter.
For as this was the first time, so I think it was the last too she ever struck
her. Correction, when necessary; is certainly less painful both to parents and
children, when inflicted abroad than at home. It is better that fathers should
seem unconscious of the knowledge of all their petty trespasses; and Lock,
though he here so much commends the repeated flagellations of a little daughter
by a prudent and kind mother, yet in the section first quoted declares, "I
think it is best the smart should come more immediately from another's hand,
though by the parent's order who should see it done."

In confirmation of the lenity of masters of Public Schools, I shall venture
to mention a little anecdote that came within my own knowledge, during the time
of my education at Westminster. A gentleman, not long since living, was when a
schoolboy more distinguished by the goodness of his disposition, than the
brilliancy of his parts. Many of the forms, usually committed to the care of
assistants, were however now and then visited by the head master. On one of
these occasions, the gentleman I have spoken of was called out by Dr. Nicoll,
to read and construe a part of the lesson to the form; which, being in the
upper school, the lesson of the day was in Greek. The honest lad, conscious of
his inability, obeyed the call: but instead of attempting the lesson, went up
to the master, and muttered indistinctly, Flog me, Sir! -- Speak out, child!
says the master. -- Flog me Sir, if you please! repeats the scholar, dropping
his book and unbuttoning. The master, with a chastised smile, laying his hand
on his young pupil's head, and gently patting him, cried in a mild tone, Go thy
ways, boy! get thee to thy place again! Thou art a very honest fellow, but thou
never wilt be a Scholar as long as thou live.

This story may serve as a companion to Locke's pictures of private correction,
and may serve to show that good hearts may be found in Public Schools as well
as private families; and that the discipline of the rod is not administered
with more judicious discrimination in one system of education than the other.

The rewards also are at Public Schools as well chosen and as appropriated as
the punishments; the latter exhibiting, as Lock enjoins, the disgrace, and the
former adding to the reputation of the young student. The little shining coin
of pennies, two-pences, threepences, and groats in silver, given on any
occasional display of industry or excellence, are as triumphantly prized and
carefully treasured by the young receiver, as a medal by an antiquarian; and
are carefully carried home, with joy and pride, as pledges of their merit in
their class, and tokens of the approbation of their master. A still higher mark
of favor is the seasonable reward of distinguishing the diligence and
abilities of a rising lad by promotion in the school, and anticipating his
remove to a superior form. Places and preferments are often gained at
Westminster.

Emulation, that great spur to improvement, almost unknown in Domestic
Tuition, is greatly encouraged in the field of Public Education. This Lock
himself acknowledges. The custom of challenging, as it is termed by the school
boys, promotes a wonderful desire of excelling amongst young champions for
literary pre-eminence. This challenging is thus ordered, and proves a keen
incitement to diligence and perfection. The boys of the form are called out to
their lesson of the day. The first boy perhaps misconstrues his Aesop or Ovid,
the second corrects his mistake and takes his rank and place; or, the second
failing, the third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, or the sixteenth, in due
order gives the right construction, and supersedes all his school-fellows of
the class under examination; so that a boy is often transported in a moment
from the lower or fag end to the very top of the form. As the young students
advance toward the superior forms, this practice, in respect to their maturer
years and progress in their studies, is judiciously discontinued.

When I speak of the custom of Public Schools, I particularly refer to that of
Westminster, where I was bred, and with whose customs I am best acquainted, not
questioning that other Public Schools have equal advantages.

Verses and Themes, so reprobated by Lock, are intended as exercises to teach
scholars better to understand the poetical and prose compositions of the
ancients, and not meant, as he insinuates, to render every scholar a poet or
declaimer. The various measures of poetry are more easily comprehended, and
more perfectly read, by those who reduce the rules of prosody to practice. For
this purpose metrical centoes, ludicrously styled jointed dolls, fitting the
end of one line to the beginning or middle of another; and even nonsense
verses, have their use. For unless Virgil and Horace are to be prohibited to
English pupils, like the Bible to Roman Catholics, those who study them should
be instructed to read them with propriety, not conceiving that they are to
become Virgils and Horaces themselves. Themes tend to open the mind, and cannot
possibly be prejudicial. To explain the thesis to the young students is no more
ridiculous than the other helps which Lock himself not only allows, but even
prescribes to be given for the improvement of his pupils. Milton, as well as
Lock, objects to themes and verses as school exercises, "forcing the empty
wits of children to acts of ripest judgment, and the final work of a head
filled, by long reading and observing, with elegant maxims, and copious
invention." But surely such objections deny to the improvement and cultivation
of the mind, the means necessarily used and recommended in the exercises of the
body. Nec literas didicit nec natare was, as Lock observes, a proverb to
denote an ill and imperfect education. It were as consistent therefore to say
that a lad must not go into the water till he can swim, as to forbid all
attempts at composition, till he has acquired and formed a style which depends
so much, like personal grace and activity, upon practice. False concords and
false quantities, reproved and amended, guide the learner by degrees to true
prosody and syntax. Barbarizing anglicisms, so offensive to Milton, lead to
pure latinity. "An art, says Busby, is the way of doing a thing surely,
readily, and gracefully," Grammar is the art of speaking and writing: and was
that or any other art ever attained without repeated efforts, leading by
insensible gradations through error to perfection? The Latin pieces of verse
and prose of Milton now extant were derived no doubt from long reading and
observing. His Juvenilia, admirable as they are, were certainly preceded by
more puerile exercises and imperfect compositions.

Didicit prius, extimuitque magistrum. Repetitions by heart are no more than
selecting, as Lock himself directs, the beautiful passages from authors, and
impressing them on the memory of the reciter. They should not it is true (and
they are not) be too long, nor too frequently exacted: yet such exercises
undoubtedly serve to strengthen the memory; for every faculty of the mind, as
well as every limb of the body, acquires vigor from use and exertion. If
players, whom Lock sarcastically instances, have not all of them the best
memories in the world, every player perhaps possesses that faculty in a greater
degree, than if he had not been called upon to the constant exercise of it in
his profession.

Greek ought not to be excluded, as Lock seems to exclude it, from a young
gentleman's education. If languages are to be learnt so easily and so readily,
as Lock asserts, Greek in particular ought not to be omitted; and if those who
have been initiated in that language do generally, as he says, seldom
afterward make any proficiency, how can it be expected that they who have not
learnt even the rudiments as boys, should attain that language, when men? This
however is his method and proposal. Give then rather in the course of their
education the power and possibility of becoming adepts! (for this is all that
can be done by education) and you have discharged your duty. Every scholar, who
makes a very considerable progress in any language, art, or science, is chiefly
his own master. Greek is at least as necessary and ornamental to a gentleman,
as a trade so earnestly recommended by Lock, and full as polite and beneficial
an accomplishment as the art of perfumery, varnishing, graving, working in
iron, brass, or silver, cutting or setting of precious stones, or even grinding
and polishing optical glasses!

Rousseau is particularly partial to the occupation of a joiner, one of the
trades recommended by Lock, and takes notice, with an air of triumph, that the
Czar Peter exercised the employment of a ship's carpenter! As to study, he
denies his pupil all books, except Robinson Crusoe.

Hardiness, so strongly recommended by Lock, is much more likely to be
obtained in a Public School than at home, where the ill-judged tenderness of
the parents, of mamas especially, often produces effeminacy, which exposes the
little master to the ridicule of all his Schoolfellows.

" Sheepish softness (it is allowed by Lock) often enervates those who are
bred like foplings, at home." He owns too on another occasion that "it is not
unusual to observe the children of gentlemen's families treat the servants of
the house with domineering words, names of contempt, and an imperious carriage:
as if they were of another race, and species beneath them."

Other vices and weaknesses may also be learnt in the parlour, the kitchen, and
the stable. Of the contagion from a train of vicious domestics Lock himself
always appears extremely sensible. In one place his words are these. "They
frequently learn from unbred or debauched servants untowardly tricks and vices,
as otherwise they possibly would be ignorant of all their lives."

Lock well observes that "the peculiar physiognomy of the mind is most
discoverable in children, before cunning has taught them to hide deformities
and conceal their ill inclinations under a dissembled outside."

Public Education is infinitely better calculated than Domestic Tuition for
the discovery of the natural features of the mind. If a boy wears a mask, his
Schoolfellows will be sure to tear it off, and betray his real disposition to
general observation; and indeed I scarce remember a single instance of a lad
bred in a great school, who did not retain strong traces of his puerile
character all his life after. The first scenes of his life therefore, to use
Locke's own words, are best acted on a Public Stage, where his predominant
passions and prevailing inclinations being more open and exposed, are most
capable of correction. His very schoolfellows become masters in this instance;
for youth commonly inclines to the benignant and generous side.

In regard to morals and religion, those great and important considerations, if
it is duly weighed that the most nice and dangerous part of human life occurs
between the commencement and conclusion of the period destined to education, it
is not wonderful that public schoolboys, as well as private pupils, should
sometimes be found to be defective or culpable. The sap will rise in the
spring, blights will strike the noblest plant, and frosts will nip the fairest
flower: all that can be suggested by art is wholesome manure, and providently
to fence and guard against the heat or inclemency of the season. In public
schools the duties of religion are by no means neglected. All that Lock
enjoins is duly taught. The exercises of Saturday evening, and the lessons of
Monday morning, are from the Bible and Prayer book. The daily business of the
school begins, like that of the House of Commons, with reading prayers. One of
the senior boys officiates as chaplain, and the prayers are in Latin. Even the
Sacrament is at a proper age administered to the young disciples; and I have
witnessed, amongst those early communicants, a solemnity of preparation and
reception, that would have done them honor at any succeeding period of their
lives.

Lock, with an air of assumed candor toward the master of a school
introduces the following observation.

The difference is great between two or three pupils in the same house, and
three or fourscore boys lodged up and down. For let the master's industry and
skill be never so great, it is impossible he should have fifty or one hundred
scholars under his eye any longer than they are in school together: nor can it
be expected that he should instruct them successfully in any thing but their
books. The forming of their minds and manners, requiring a constant attention
and particular application to every single boy, which is impossible in a
numerous flock, and would be wholly in vain (could he have time to study and
correct every one's particular defects and wrong inclinations) when the lad was
to be left to himself, or the prevailing infection of his fellows, the greatest
part of the four and twenty hours. The absolute impossibility of a constant
application and particular attention to every single boy, and it may be added
the doubt whether such particular attention would not rather injure than
benefit the pupil by encouraging his self-importance, together with many other
obvious difficulties, oblige Lock himself at last to confess, as has before
been noticed, "what shall be resolved in this case must in a great measure be
left to the parents to be determined by their circumstances and conveniences."
But not to take advantage of such a reluctant concession, let us rather
recommend to the master of a great school, to keep a watchful eye on the
conduct of the boys during the intervals of the school hours, and carefully by
himself and his assistants to visit and regulate the boarding houses. The
masters and mistresses of those houses must submit to his directions, or
abandon their employments: for what parent would commit his son to a family
supposed to be adverse to the general discipline of the school; and whose
inmates are indulged in irregularity and dissipation? It is requisite also for
Schoolmasters to be rather backward in granting leave for too frequent visits
at home; for where they too much prevail, it has happened that the home and the
school have each in their turns, been pleaded by the young truant as an apology
for his absence from both. And this is one of the most fatal inroads from
private mismanagement on the beneficial influence of Public Education, where
the wisdom of the institution is counteracted by the indiscretion of
individuals.

Suppose an author equally inclined to depreciate Domestic Tuition, as Lock
has in his little tract shown himself disposed to ridicule and vilify Public
Education, might not such a writer, abandoning the straight path of candor and
impartiality, and assuming the manners of a satirical pleader and declaimer,
express himself to the following purport?

I cannot bear to see the free spirit and generous nature of a youth, that
should look abroad into the world of which he is himself a part, "cabin'd,
cribb'd, confined" in the narrow limits of a private family, a puny fondling
dandled on the lap of his mother, or at best perhaps a tiny sportsman or soaker
in company of his father. If they have a country parson in the house, who
teaches my young master to read, he teaches him to smoke at the same time, and
envelopes in the same cloud his person and his understanding^ The first Latin
that he conveys to him is the old axiom of in vino veritas, and his Greek (if
he has any) is all Anacreontick. It is odds indeed whether his learning extends
so far. He is perhaps a mere Lingo, or at best a Square or a Thwackum in Mr.
Allworthy's splendid mansion. Over the servants of the family the heir apparent
is a little tyrant, and from his subjects he learns, as soon as he can speak,
every species of provincial barbarism; and as soon as he can think, or act,
every kind of vice and meanness. Virtue, wisdom, breeding, and learning, are
seldom to be found under a private roof; but must be sought, like the Deity, in
a solemn temple consecrated to such sacred worship! Waving ridicule and irony,
and adhering as the subject requires, to strict truth, it must be confessed
that Public Education as well as Domestic Tuition, has its faults: but many
of the corruptions of schools are brought by the scholars from home. At home
are the foolish, the idle, and vicious servants, so much dreaded by Lock. At
home indulgence takes the place of discipline, and from home they often bring
sums of money far beyond their little occasions, by which artificial wants are
created and disorders introduced. This last evil, wholly owing to the
indiscretion of friends and parents, has been particularly noxious to Public
Schools. Masters can only control and check its influence. Friends and parents
alone can prevent and extirpate it.

Public Schools ought to cultivate the mathematics, as well as the classicks.
Both might be taught sufficiently, for the initiation of pupils, during their
stay at a Public School; from whence they ought to be sent to the
Universities, equally prepared to pursue their philosophical as their classical
studies.

Public Schools also generally detain their pupils too long. Youths should be
dismissed from schools at the age of sixteen or seventeen at the latest. They
are afterward commencing young men, and will not patiently submit to the
corrections of children. When the boys at Westminster rebelled because a senior
scholar between eighteen and nineteen years of age would not submit to the
discipline of the rod, Dr. Barker, then a prebend, contended that the scholar
was in the right. It was wrong he said, to attempt to scourge a youth at that
age. It was almost sodomy. Pity that Dr. Barker was not a General!

In general it is unadvisable for parents to send their sons to a Great Public
School, sooner than at the period of nine or ten years of age; not that I would
wish the preceding period to be lost and buried in ignorance and idleness. Let
their children in the mean while be sent to some preparatory academy, where
they may be taught to write, to read, to speak French, to dance, to draw, and
the rudiments of Latin according to the grammar of the school for which they
are afterward intended. A master who cannot, by himself and his assistants,
supply his little students with these helps, is unfit to govern such an academy.

One great reason for preference of Public to Private Education is this.
Schoolboys, being at intervals called home, partake occasionally of the
enjoyments and society of a family. Private pupils, constantly confined within
one narrow circle, acquire none of the freedom and spirit of a Public
Education.

Travel, where it can be afforded, cannot be accompanied with the benefit that
ought to attend it from the first stage of life, one of the periods to which
Lock destines it: but being certainly improper at the usual time and in the
usual mode, may be reserved to Locke's last Stage, and therefore properly
succeeding to a removal from the Universities; when the young traveller, if not
fit and able to go alone, had better not go at all.

Milton has given A tractate on Education, containing a plan of a school and
university in one, intended to annihilate all other schools and universities,
by instituting as many of such academies as might be necessary in different
parts of the kingdom. Yet in this plan, romantic as he almost himself seems to
think it, he has proceeded on principles very different from those of Lock,
and shown himself the friend and advocate of Public Education. He rather
follows the principles of Plato and Xenophon, than adopts the system of Lock.

His proposed number of pupils is an hundred and fifty, more or less. He
directs the teaching of languages, not by rote, but by grammar, and those not
only modern but ancient, and of the ancient not only Latin, but Greek and
Hebrew, with the Chaldean and Syrian dialects. So far from objecting to
repetitions, that he enjoins Grammar lessons to be got by heart, and poems, and
orations not merely to be read, but " put to memory and solemnly announced with
right accent and grace." And though, like Lock; he regrets the time thrown
away in learning one or two languages, yet himself appropriates no less time
than nine years, from twelve to twenty one, to education. He also fixes the age
of twenty three or twenty four as the proper time for travel, if travel be
necessary. So that on the whole, though I have been hardy enough to enter the
lists with such a giant antagonist as Lock, I have Milton to support me.

It appears indeed, on the face of Locke's tract, that the present plan of
education is highly preferable to the system that prevailed at the time of his
writing. The medical management of children is so much improved, that many
things which he recommends, as contrary to the practice of those times, are now
in general use: and as to the cultivation of their minds, were he now living,
he would no longer lament the want of a sixpenny History of the Bible, or an
Aesop with pictures to every fable. The booksellers have provided the little
students a Lilliputian library, and every toyshop and Stationer will supply
them with polygons for the vowels, or the whole alphabet in cards or ivory,
unless they should rather choose to swallow it in gingerbread. Geography is
learnt by the dice, like the Game of the Goose; maps are dissected into
kingdoms, and provinces; and perhaps to Lock himself we owe many of those
valuable achievements.

Universities, those dry nurses that succeed to the first feminaries of
education, are also much improved in their principles and practice since the
aeras of Milton and Lock: and if the students do not at their departure make
due progress in their several pursuits and professions, the failure must be
imputed to themselves, who have so ill applied the time they have passed there.
At one university since the time of Milton, a great and transcendent genius has
advanced the career of science as Milton himself carried the flights of poetry,
beyond the visible diurnal sphere. At the other an acute and able jurisprudent,
whose early loss we still lament, instituted a course of lectures of
established authority to the professional reader, as well as affording, in the
most elegant terms, a code of law necessary for the instruction and perusal of
every private gentleman. The students too are now less bewildered in the
labyrinths of logic and metaphysics. To their original resistance to the
principles of Lock perhaps we owe much of his prejudice to Public Education.
His prejudices, were he now a living witness of the cordial reception of his
doctrines, would perhaps vanish: though he might still insist, and not without
justice, according to the Tirocinium The Tirocinium forms part of a collection
of poems by W. Cowper, Esquire. one of which poems is The Task, a most admirable
work in blank verse, which gives a most promising earnest of the author's
intended Translation of Homer in that measure.
of my worthy and ingenious friend Mr. Cowper, that Discipline should stand as
porter at the gate of every college.

The study of Geography, Chronology, History, the Elements of Natural
Philosophy and Geometry, may easily be reconciled to the plan of the early part
of Public Education, and should be incorporated with it. As to dancing,
fencing, and accounts, these are generally taught by separate masters,
according to the direction of the parents without need of particular injunction
or serious dissertation. Painting and music are indeed not in so general
request, and the truth is that gentlemen practitioners either misapply much of
their time, or fall infinitely below the most common artists of either
profession. If a trade is absolutely necessary to a student and a gentleman,
that of a gardener seems to be the most healthy and agreeable, to which in bad
weather may be added the occupation of a joiner or carpenter, as on that
account both Lock and Rousseau recommend it. And a schoolboy is perhaps more
qualified even for such an apprenticeship, as well as for the more honorable
and hazardous avocations of the army or navy, than a young gentleman bred in a
private family.

Lock concludes his tract on education with these words.

Though I am now come to a conclusion of what obvious remarks have suggested to
me concerning Education, I would not have it thought that I look on it as a
just treatise on this subject. There are a thousand other things that may need
consideration, especially if one should take in the various tempers, different
inclinations, and particular defaults that are to be found in children, and
prescribe proper remedies. The variety is so great, that it would require a
volume; nor would that reach it. Each man's mind has some peculiarity, as well
as his face, that distinguishes him from all others, and there are possibly
scarce two children who can be conducted by exactly the same method. Besides
that I think a prince, a nobleman, and an ordinary gentleman's son, should have
different ways of breeding. But having had here only some general views in
reference to the main end, and aims in education, and those designed for a
gentleman's son who being then very little, I considered only as white paper or
wax, to be molded and fashioned as one pleases, I have touched little more
than those heads which I judged necessary for the breeding of a young gentleman
of his condition in general; and have now published these my occasional
thoughts with this hope; that though this be far from being a complete treatise
on this subject, or such as that every one may find what will just fit his
child in it, yet it may give some small light to those whose concern for their
dear little ones makes them so irregularly bold, that they dare venture to
consult their own reason in the education of their children, rather than wholly
to rely upon Old Custom. If Lock could not call his work a complete treatise
on Education, much less can I presume to submit these loose thoughts to the
reader in that light; especially as they are not offered under that idea, but
merely to vindicate Public Establishments from censures that appeared, coming
from whomsoever, unjust and illiberal. If the awful and revered name of Lock
gave a sanction to prejudices, it was but acting with the spirit, though
without the talents, of Lock, to combat them. Almost all the systems of
Private Education appear a romantic theory, not reducible to practice. Lock
himself says "that a prince, a nobleman, and an ordinary gentleman's son should
have a different way of breeding." Yet the attention enjoined to be given to
his pupil, not to dwell on the character of his Tutor, are scarce to be
expected even by a prince, though he confesses that his views and main end were
to suggest hints on those heads, necessary for the education of a gentleman's
son. A Telemachus may obtain a Minerva for a Mentor; an English Prince may
command a Markham or a Hurd: but the son of a gentleman, the son of a nobleman
I will venture to say will at least derive as much benefit from a Public
Education as from Private Tuition. Neither themes nor verses, so dreaded by
Lock, impede their progress to the first offices, and most important duties.
These are facts founded on experience, and the many illustrious characters that
have begun their career on a royal foundation will fully justify my assertion.

How many Ovids, MURRAY, were thy boast,
How many Martials were in PULTENEY lost!

The following short and occasional Dissertation on Tails, having been
accidentally omitted in its proper place, brings up the rear of the Prose in
this volume.

To the PRINTER of the ST. JAMES's CHRONICLE.
Thursday, August 16, 1764. SIR,
CASTING my eye on the London Gazette a few days ago, it gave me infinite
pleasure to see particular Orders issued from the War-Office, "That all His
Majesty's Regiments of Horse and Dragoons, except the Light Horse, shall be
mounted only on such horses, as have their full tails, without the least part
taken from them."

Never surely did the tyrant man exercise a more wanton piece of cruelty over
his subjects of the brute creation, than in clipping the Tails of the horses,
and robbing them of their fair and natural proportion. Castration itself, cruel
as it is, carries to sportsmen and epicures some apology along with it. Fowls
become a plumper and more delicious morsel, after being made capons; and
horses, converted into geldings, are thereby rendered more tractable. But we of
the Yahoo species have nothing to plead in our excuse to the generous Houhnymn
for thus barbarously depriving him of a part of his frame, which nature has
wisely given him for several purposes both of use and ornament.

Custom, it is true, has long authorized this savage practice; yet it has not
been able to reconcile us to it entirely. In sculpture, painting, and tapestry,
horses still wear their full tails, without the least part taken from them. Do
but contemplate the figure of a king on horseback on a pedestal, or of a
general in a battle piece, either on canvas or in the arras; the mane and tail
of the horse is as full and flowing as the periwig of the rider. The tail of
Bucephalus himself has not a bolder sweep than that of the noble beasts who
bear Lewis the Fourteenth, or the duke of Marlborough. What should we say to
Stubbs, were he to put a set of docked geldings to the chariot of Phaeton? Or
how should we consider the very same mutilations, were we to make the
experiments on other quadrupeds? Figure to yourself the view of a pasture
covered with bulls, cows, sheep, and oxen, grazing on a common, or a mountain,
as barebreeched as a highlander!

This practice also, to the shame of our age and nation be it spoken, is both
local and recent. In the ancient times of chivalry what figure would a knight
have made on such a maimed steed! and what damsel would have deigned to mount a
bobtailed palfry? The beginning even of the present century saw our horses
still in possession of their full tails. It was then the Bon Ton. "Foppington's
long tails were known on every road in christendom." At present except Lord
Falmouth's set of duns, and the royal octave of cream-coloured horses, we have,
alas, no long tails in the kingdom. But the year one thousand seven hundred and
sixty four is, I hope, the happy era from whence we may date their
restoration. All the English Cavalry, except the Light Horse, "shall be mounted
only on such horses, as have their full tails without the least part taken from
them." It was indeed, high time for such a reformation. Many centuries elapsed
before our constitution provided a law against attempts to deface and maim the
human body: and it was now become equally necessary to issue the above Orders
from the War-Office, which it is hoped, will operate as a kind of Coventry Act,
against hogging, docking, and nicking, the horses.

As a true patriot, I am equally anxious to wipe off a national reflection, as
to alter the fashion. This cruel practice is one of the stains on our manners,
which has given our enemies occasion to style us The Savages of Europe. In
France neither horse, nor man, nor woman, can have too much hair, but all carry
it unviolated on their heads and their tails, "without the least part taken
from them." In England full-bottoms and full tails vanished at the same period.
Crop-eared coxcombs and docked horses, hogged manes and hogged toupees, came in
together. A wonderful analogy between the treatment of our fellow countrymen's
heads, and their horses tails! From this analogy it is that our neighbors have
imbibed the associated idea of the savageness of our manners; and an Englishman
at Paris is sure to be reproached with the barbarity of our beheading kings,
and docking horses.

A celebrated French writer expresses himself thus on this combination of
inhuman usages in this country. Ah barbare Angleterre! ou le fatale couteau
Trenche les tetes aux rois, and les cues aux chevaux Some curious readers have
in vain searched the Henriade of Voltaire for these lines. It would have been
equally vain to search the rest of his works, or those of any other French
author. It is indeed impossible that such a couplet could have found a place in
the Epick Poem, from which they are pretendedly cited. And if the writer had
not heard them gravely quoted as lines of Voltaire, he should have thought it
needless to mention that the French distich, and the free translation, both owe
their origin to the writer of Hippolitus.
!
Voltaire's Henriade.

With a free translation of the above lines I shall conclude these reflections.
Ah barbarous England, kings and steeds to dock,
To curtail tails, and sentence block to block!


I am, Sir, Your humble servant, HIPPOLITUS.

VERSE ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
That the reader may comprehend the force of the following scene, it will be
necessary to give him briefly the plan and story of the preceding part: Adam
feels a violent and sudden shock of nature within him, which he imagines to be
the forerunner of his death. While his mind is wholly employed in these ideas,
and full of strange apprehensions, the Angel of Death appears before him, and
pronounces his doom; and adds moreover that he shall not die, till he
comprehends the meaning of these words, "Thou shall die the death." Cain, an
outcast and a wanderer, is conducted by Divine Justice to the bower of Adam.

A SCENE from The DEATH of ADAM: A Tragedy written in German, By MR. KLOPSTOCK.
FIRST PRINTED IN The ST. JAMES's MAGAZINE, March 1763.
ACT II. SCENE II.
ADAM, SETH, SELIMA. SELIMA. FATHER, against your orders I return,
Imploring your paternal goodness: list!
Oh, I conjure you, deign to list! -- a man --
His like I never beheld -- prowls round the bower,
Menaces me, and would confer with you.
Even yet I stand dismayed -- beyond a doubt,
In other regions there exists a race
Of men, who are not thy children -- No, it is certain
This is no son of Adam.

ADAM. What Is his air?
And what his features? Say!

SELIMA. His stature's tall;
Dreadful his air; and from his hollow eyes
He rolls confusion and dismay: his limbs
Are covered with a shining speckled hide,
And in his hand he bears a massy club,
Knotted all over: his face is pale and sun burnt;
But ah, his paleness is not like to yours.
Oh father, father!

ADAM. Was his forehead bare?

SELIMA. Scarce durst I cast my fearful looks upon him,
Yet on his forehead I descried a sign --
Such as I cannot describe -- I know not what
Of terrible and dreadful.

ADAM. It is Cain;
O Seth, it is Cain. The Lord has sent him now
To render death more bitter to me. Go!
Go, Seth, and see if God has sent him to me.
Tell him, beseech him, to depart in peace:
Urge him to fly my presence! but if still
He will appear before me, let him come!
It Is God who sends him: I have well deserved it.
Cover the altar, that the guiltless blood
Of his poor brother, whom he massacred,
Wound not his eyes.

SCENE III.
ADAM, SELIMA. SELIMA. My father, wherefore yawns
That horrid pit just dug at the altar's foot?

ADAM. Oh daughter! did thou never see a grave?

SELIMA. A grave? my father!

ADAM, [apart. Oh too bitter day!
Cain will soon come, and Selima is here.

SELIMA. Oh, answer me! Is then my father angry?
Alas! there was a time, when you would deign
To call me your dear Selima.

ADAM. Still most dear,
Still my beloved child.

SELIMA. You said but now,
That Cain was come to render death more bitter.
Alas, I scarce can breathe; my voice too fails:
Ah! my dear father, mean you now to die?

ADAM. Grieve not my daughter! death is due to all;
From dust we came, and shall to dust return.
So God himself has ordered; and you know it.
Long time before those eyes of yours, my child,
Were opened on the light, had hoary age
Whitened my locks. But Cain --

SELIMA. Oh father, father!
[Embracing his knees. By your paternal fondness, by that love
Which once you bore to Abel, and which now
Eman and Seth partake; by those dear babes
Who shall to day take blessings from your hand;
Live, I conjure you! Oh my father, live!
Do not die yet.

ADAM. Oh daughter of my heart,
Arise; -- behold them here!

SCENE IV.
ADAM, CAIN, SETH, SELIMA. CAIN. Is It Adam that I see?
Adam, thou were not wont to turn so pale
At sight of men thy crime had rendered wretched.

ADAM. Hold, I conjure thee! look on that dear maid,
Whose eyes overflow with tears: respect her grief,
Nor stain with blasphemies her innocence.

CAIN. Her innocence! -- has that remained on earth,
Since Adam has had children?

ADAM. Selima,
Retire; and Seth shall soon recall you.

SCENE V.
ADAM, CAIN, SETH. ADAM. Cain!
Why have thou disobeyed me? why returned
To this abode of peace?

CAIN. Inform me first,
Who Is he has brought me now before you.

ADAM. Seth,
My second son.

CAIN. Insult me not with pity!
I ask for none. He is thy third son, Adam!
I am now come to take full vengeance on thee.

SETH. Inhuman! would thou then with thy own hands
Murder thy father?

CAIN, [to SETH. Long ere thou wast born,
I was already wretched. Let us talk! --
Father, I mean not to attempt your life.
[To ADAM.
ADAM. And what is the injury you would revenge?

CAIN. The injury of having given me life.

ADAM. My firstborn child, does that excite your vengeance?

CAIN. Yes; I Will revenge the murder I committed;
I Will revenge Abel's murder; he, whose blood
Goes up to heaven, and cries for vengeance on me.
I will revenge myself, for that I am
The most unhappy of all children born,
And of all such as shall be born hereafter.
Sunk with the weight of guilt and misery,
An outcast and a wanderer, every where
I bear my steps and find no rest on earth,
Without a hope of finding it in heaven.
That, that is my cause of vengeance.

ADAM. Ere I first
Commanded you to come no more before me,
Thy mouth an hundred times has vomited
The same reproaches, which I Have often answered.
But never did your words or ravings strike
So near upon my heart as on this day,
Most cruel and most dreadful of my life.

CAIN. I was never satisfied with those your answers.
But if, perchance today, the force of truth
Strikes deeper on your soul, believe not, Adam,
My vengeance shall stop there. -- O sole amends
For all the woes I suffer, great revenge,
Whose flame consumes me! many an age I Have sworn it,
I Will satiate thee. And now thy hour is come.

SETH. Wretch! if thy fury has not dimmed thine eye,
View those gray hairs!

CAIN. And what are they to me?
Of all his children I Am the most unhappy.
My life's a burden: 'twas he gave that life
Which now I drag in misery, and I Will now
Punish him home for it. Naught I see or feel
But my own wretchedness and my despair.
I will have vengeance.

ADAM, [to Seth. Our High Judge has sent him.
Thou will have vengeance on me?
[to CAIN.
CAIN. I will curse you.

ADAM. O son! this is too much: curse not thy father!
Now in the name of mercy and that pardon
For which you still may hope, I do conjure you
Curse not thy father Adam!

CAIN. I will curse you.

ADAM. Come hither then! and I Will point out the place
Where you may launch your malediction on me.
Come follow me! look there! thy father's grave!
There, curse him there! I am to die to day:
The Angel of Death appeared to tell my fate.

CAIN. And what is that altar?

SETH. O Cain, O most sinful
And most unhappy of mankind! that altar
Is Abel's altar: look upon the blood
Wherewith it is stained. It is thy brother's blood.

CAIN. See, from the bosom of the black abyss,
Vengeance and fury raise their crests against me!
That Altar, oh, my heart! that fatal Altar
Crushes me, like a rock! -- I swim in blood!
Where am I? Where Is my father? -- Hear me, Adam!
This day my Curse begins to fall upon thee,
This day, thy last: oh may thy agonies
Be all made up of fear, despair, and horror,
The agony of agonies! -- the dread image
Of vile corruption still be present --

ADAM. Hold!
My firstborn son, oh hold! -- Appalling Sentence
Of Death denounced! now first I comprehend
Thy awful meaning! -- cease, my son, oh cease
To aggravate my grief and my misfortunes!

CAIN. Ah wretch! what have I done? I Have shed his blood,
The blood of my own Father: ha! still here?
Snatch me some whirlwind from this horrid place!
Hurry me headlong down the dark abyss!
-- But I behold my Father! -- Is it He?
Is it a shadow? Hence, dire phantom, Hence!
My Father, turn, oh turn those looks away!
Ah, who will drag me from thee?
[Exit raving.
SCENE VI.
ADAM, SETH. ADAM. His dread cries
Have struck even to the bottom of my soul.
Follow him, Seth! alas, He too's my son.
Go tell him he has not committed aught
Of violence against me, and his rage
I pardon. -- Above all take special heed
Not to recall it to his memory
That this day is the day whereon I die.

TWO ODES.
(...)
(...)
(...)
PINDAR, OLYMP. II.
FIRST PUBLISHED IN MDCCLIX.
ODE TO OBSCURITY.
I. 1.
DAUGHTER of Chaos and old Night,
Cimmerian Muse, all hail!
That wrapped in never-twinkling gloom can write,
And shadowest meaning with thy dusky veil!
What Poet sings, and strikes the strings?
It was the mighty Theban spoke.
He from the ever-living lyre
With magic hand elicits fire.
Heard ye the din of modern rhimers bray?
It was cool M -- n; or warm G -- y,
Involved in tenfold smoke.
I. 2.
The shallow fop in antic vest
Tired of the beaten road,
Proud to be singularly dressed,
Changes, with every changing moon, the mode.
Say shall not then the heaven born Muses too
Variety pursue?
Shall not applauding critics hail the vogue?
Whether the muse the style of Cambria's sons,
Or the rude gabble of the Huns,
Or the broader dialect
Of Caledonia she affect,
Or take, Hibernia, thy still ranker brogue?
I. 3.
On this terrestrial ball
The tyrant Fashion, governs all.
She, fickle goddess, whom, in days of yore,
The idiot Moria, on the banks of Seine,
Unto an antic fool, hight Andrew, bore.
Long she paid him with disdain,
And long his pangs in silence he concealed;
At length, in happy hour, his lovesick pain
On thy blessed Calends, April, he revealed.
From their embraces sprung,
Ever changing, ever ranging,
Fashion, goddess ever young.
II. 1.
Perched on the dubious height, she loves to ride,
Upon a weathercock, astride:
Each blast that blows, around she goes,
While nodding over her crest,
Emblem of her magic power,
The light Cameleon stands confessed,
Changing it is hues a thousand times an hour.
And in a vest is she arrayed,
Of many a dancing moon-beam made,
Nor zoneless is her waist:
But fair and beautiful, I ween,
As the Cestus-cinctur'd Queen,
Is with the rainbow's shadowy girdle braced.
II. 2.
She bids pursue the favorite road
Of lofty cloud-capt Ode.
Meantime each bard, with eager speed,
Vaults on the Pegasean Steed:
Yet not that Pegasus of yore
Which the illustrious Pindar bore,
But one of nobler breed.
High blood and youth his lusty veins inspire.
(...) From Tottipontimoy he came;
Who knows not, Tottipontimoy, thy name?
The Bloody-shoulder'd Arab was his fire.
The author is either mistaken in this place, or has else indulged himself in a
very unwarrantable poetical license. Whitenose was not the sire but a son of
the Godolphin Arabian. See my Calendar. HE^
His White-nose. He on famed Doncastria's plains
Resigned his fated breath:
In vain for life the struggling courser strains:
Ah! who can run the race with death?
The tyrant's speed, or man or steed,
Strives all in vain to fly:
He leads the chase, he wins the race,
We stumble, fall, and die.
Third from Whitenose springs
Pegasus, with eagle wings;
Light over the plain as dancing cork,
With many a bound he beats the ground,
While all the turf with acclamation rings.
He won Northampton, Lincoln, Oxford, York:
He too Newmarket won!
There Granta's son
Seized on the steed;
And thence him led (so fate decreed)
To where old Came, renowned in poet's song,
With his dark and inky waves,
Either bank in silence laves,
Winding slow his sluggish streams along.
III. 1.
What Stripling neat, of visage sweet,
In trimmest guise arrayed
First the neighing steed assayed?
His hand a taper switch adorns, his heel
Sparkles refulgent with elastick steel:
The whiles he wins his whiffling way,
Prancing, ambling, round and round,
By hill and dale, and mead, and greenswerd gay;
Till sated with the pleasing ride,
From the lofty steed dismounting
He lies along, enwrapt in conscious pride,
By gurgling rill or crystal fountain.
III. 2.
Lo! next a Bard, secure of praise,
His self-complacent countenance displays.
His broad mustachios, tinged with golden die,
Flame, like a meteor, to the troubled air.
Proud his demeanor, and his eagle eye
Over hung with lavish lid, yet shone with glorious glare.
The grizzle grace
Of bushy peruke shadowed over his face.
In large wide boots, whose ponderous weight
Would sink each other wight of modern date,
He rides, well pleased. So large a pair
Not Garangantua's self might wear:
Not He, of nature fierce and cruel,
Who, if we trust to ancient ballad,
Devoured three pilgrims in a fallad;
Not He of fame germane, hight Pantagruel.
III. 3.
Accoutred thus, the adventrous Youth
Seeks not the level lawn, or velvet mead,
Fast by whose side clear streams meandring creep;
But urges on amain the fiery steed
Up Snowdon's shaggy side, or Cambrian rock uncouth;
Where the venerable herd
Of goats, with long and sapient beard,
And wanton kidlings their blithe revels keep.
Now up the mountain see him strain!
Now down the vale he is tossed:
Now flashes on the sight again,
Now in the palpable obscure quite lost.
IV. 1.
Man's feeble race eternal dangers wait,
With high or low, all, all, is woe,
Disease, mischance, pale fear, and dubious fate.
But over every peril bounding,
Ambition views not all the ills surrounding,
And, tiptoe on the mountain's steep,
Reflects not on the yawning deep.
IV. 2.
See see, he soars! with mighty wings outspread,
And long resounding mane,
The Courser quits the plain.
Aloft in air, see, see him bear
The Bard, who shrouds
His lyrick glory in the clouds,
Too fond to strike the stars with lofty head!
He topples headlong from the giddy height,
Deep in the Cambrian gulf immerg'd in endless night.
IV. 3.
O Steed Divine! what daring spirit
Rides thee now? though he inherit
Nor the pride, nor self opinon,
Which elate the Mighty Pair,
Each of taste the favorite minion,
Prancing through the desert air;
By help mechanic of Equestrian block,
Yet shall he mount, with classick housings graced,
And all unheedful of the critic mock,
Drive his light courser over the bounds of taste.
ODE TO OBLIVION.
I.
According to Lillaeus who bestows the parental function on Oblivion. Verba
OBLIVISCENDI regunt GENITIVUM. Lib. xiii. Cap. 8.There is a similar passage in
Busbaeus.
PARENT of Ease! Oblivion old,
Who love thy dwelling place to hold,
Where sceptered Pluto keeps his dreary sway,
Whose sullen pride the shivering ghosts obey!
Thou, who delightest still to dwell
By some hoar and moss-grown cell,
At whose dank foot Cocytus joys to roll,
Or Styx' black streams, which even Jove control!
Or if it suit thy better will
To choose the tinkling weeping rill,
Hard by whose side the seeded poppy red
Heaves high in air his sweeetly-curling head;
While creeping in meanders slow,
Lethe's drowsy waters flow,
And hollow blasts, which never cease to sigh,
Hum to each care-struck mind their lulla-lulla-by!
A prey no longer let me be
To that gossip, Memory,
Who waves her banners trim, and proudly flies,
To spread abroad her bribble-brabble lies!
With thee, Oblivion, let me go,
For Memory's a friend to woe;
With thee, Forgetfulness, fair silent queen,
The solemn stole of grief is never seen.
II.
All, all is thine. Thy powerful sway
The thronged poetic hosts obey.
Though in the van of Memory proud t'appear,
At thy command they darken in the rear.
What though the modern tragic strain
For nine whole days protract thy reign,
Yet through the nine, like whelps of currish kind,
Scarcely it lives, weak, impotent, and blind.
Sacred to thee the crambo rhyme,
The motley forms of pantomime:
For thee from Eunuch's throat still loves to flow
The soothing sadness of his warbled woe:
Each day to thee falls pamphlet clean:
Each month a newborn magazine:
Hear then, O Goddess, hear thy votry's prayer!
And if thou deign'st to take one moment's care,
Attend thy bard! who duly pays
The tribute of his votive lays;
Whose muse still offers at thy sacred shrine; --
Thy bard who calls THEE His, and makes Him THINE.
O, sweet Forgetfulness, supreme
Rule supine over every theme,
Over each sad subject, over each soothing strain,
Of mine, O Goddess, stretch thine awful reign!
Nor let Memory steal one note,
Which this rude hand to thee has wrote!
So shall thou save me from the poet's shame,
Though on the lettered rubric Dodsley post my name.
III.
O come! with opiate poppies crowned,
Shedding slumbers soft around!
O come! Fat Goddess drunk with Laureat sack! --
See where she sits on the benumbed Torpedo's back!
Me, in thy dull Elysium wrapped, O bless
With thy calm forgetfulness!
And gently lull my senses all the while
With placid poems in the sinking style!
Whether the Herring-Poet sing,
Great Laureat of the fishes' king,
Or Lycophron prophetic rave his fill
Wrapped in the darker strains of Johnny --;
Or if HE sing, whose verse affords
A bevy of the choicest words,
Who meets his Lady Muse by moss-grown cell,
Adorned with epithet and tinkling bell:
These, Goddess, let me still forget,
With all the dearth of Modern Wit!
So may thou gently over my youthful breast
Spread, with thy welcome hand, Oblivion's friendly vest.
THE LAW STUDENT.
WRITTEN IN MDCCLVII.
Quid tibi cum Cirrha? quid cum Permessidos unda?
Romanum propius divitiusque forum est.
MART.
NOW Christ-Church left, and fixed at Lincoln's Inn,
The important studies of the Law begin.
Now groan the shelves beneath the unusual charge
Of records, statutes, and reports at large.
Each classick author seeks his peaceful nook,
And modest Virgil yields his place to Coke.
No more, ye bards, for vain precedence hope,
But even Jacob take the lead of Pope!
While the pil'd shelves sink down on one another,
And each huge folio has its cumb'rous brother,
While, armed with these, the student views with awe
His rooms become the magazine of law,
Say whence so few succeed? where thousands aim,
So few ever reach the promised goal of fame?
Say, why Caecilius quits the gainful trade
For regimentals, sword, and smart cockade?
Or Sextus why his first profession leaves
For narrower band, plain shirt, and pudding sleeves?
The depth of Law asks study, thought, and care;
Shall we seek these in rich Alonzo's heir?
Such diligence, alas! is seldom found
In the brisk heir to forty thousand pound.
Wealth, that excuses folly, sloth creates;
Few, who can spend, ever learn to get estates.
What is to him dry case, or dull report,
Who studies fashions at the Inns of Court,
And proves that thing of emptiness and show,
That mungrel, half formed thing, a Temple-Beau?
Observe him daily sauntring up and down,
In purple slippers, and in silken gown;
Last's night's debauch, his morning conversation,
The coming, all his evening preparation.
By Law let others toil to gain renown!
Florio's a gentleman, a man of the town.
He nor courts, clients, or the law regarding,
Hurries from Nando's down to Covent garden.
Yet he is a scholar; -- mark him in the pit
With critic catcall sound the stops of wit!
Supreme at George's he harangues the throng,
Censor of style from tragedy to song:
Him every witling views with secret awe,
Deep in the Drama, shallow in the Law.
Others there are, who, indolent and vain,
Contemn the science, they can never attain:
Who write, and read, but all by fits and starts,
And varnish folly with the name of parts;
Trust on to genius for they scorn to pore,
Till even that little genius is no more.
Knowledge in Law care only can attain,
Where honor's purchased at the price of pain.
If, loit'ring, up the ascent you cease to climb,
No starts of labor can redeem the time.
Industrious study wins by slow degrees;
True sons of Coke can never be sons of ease.
There are, whom Love of Poetry has smit,
Who, blind to interest, arrant dupes to wit,
Have wandered devious in the pleasing road,
With Attick flowers and classick wreaths bestrew'd:
Wedded to verse, embraced the Muse for life,
And taken, like modern bucks, their whores to wife.
Wherever the Muse usurps despotick sway,
All other studies must of force give way.
Interest in vain puts in her prudent claim,
Nonsuited by the powerful plea of fame.
As well you might weigh lead against a feather,
As ever jumble wit and law together.
On Littleton Coke gravely thus remarks,
(Remember this ye rhyming Temple Sparks!)
" In all our author's tenures, be it noted,
" This is the fourth time any verse is quoted."
Which, against the Muse and Verse, may well imply
What lawyers call a noli prosequi.
Well I remember often My Lady said,
(My Lady, whom sure maxims ever led)
Turn Parson, Colman! that is the way to thrive;
Your Parsons are the happiest men alive.
Judges, there are but twelve, and never more,
But Stalls untold, and Bishops twenty four.
Of pride and claret, sloth and ven'son full,
Yon Prelate mark, right reverend and dull!
He never, good man, need pensive vigils keep
To preach his audience once a week to sleep;
On rich preferments battens at his ease,
Nor sweats for tithes, as lawyers toil for fees.
No, cries My Lord: I know thee better far;
And cry stick close; close, Coley, to the Bar!
If Genius warm thee, where can Genius call
For nobler action than in yonder Hall?
It Is not enough each morn, on Term's approach,
To club your legal threepence for a coach;
Then at the Hall to take your silent stand,
With ink-horn and long note-book in your hand,
Marking grave sergeants cite each wise report,
And noting down sage dictums from the Court,
With overwhelming brow, and law-learn'd face,
The Index of your book of Commonplace.
These are mere drudges, that can only plod,
And tread the path their dull forefathers trod,
Doomed through Law's maze, without a clue, to range,
From Second Vernon down to Second Strange.
Do thou uplift thine eyes to happier wits!
Dullness no longer on the Woolpack sits;
No longer on the drawling dronish herd
Are the first honors of the Law conferred;
But they, whose fame reward's dus tribute draws,
Whose active merit challenges applause,
Like glorious beacons, are set high to view,
To mark the paths which Genius should pursue.
O for thy spirit, Mansfield! at thy name
What bosom glows not with an active flame?
Alone from Jargon born to rescue Law,
From Precedent, Grave Hum, and Formal Saw!
To strip Chican'ry of its vain pretense,
And marry Common Law to Common Sense!
Pratt! on thy lips persuasion ever hung!
English falls pure as Manna from thy tongue:
On thy voice Truth may rest, and on thy plea
Unerring Henley found the just decree.
Henley! than whom to Hardwick's well-rais'd fame;
No worthier second Royal George could name:
No lawyer of prerogative; no tool
Fashioned in black Corruption's pliant school;
Formed 'twixt the People and the Crown to stand,
And hold the scales of Right with even hand!
True to our hopes, and equal to his birth,
See, see in York the force of lineal worth!
But why their several merits need I tell?
Why on each honored sage's praises dwell?
Wilmot how well his place, or Foster fills?
Or shrewd sense beaming from the eye of Wills?
Such while thou see the public care engage,
Their fame increasing with increasing age,
Raised by true Genius, bred in Phaebus' school,
Whose warmth of soul sound judgment knew to cool;
-- With such illustrious proofs before your eyes,
Think not, my friend, you have too much wit to rise!
THE ROLLIAD. AN HEROIC POEM.
WRITTEN IN MDCCLIX. Never before printed.
Prodigium canit, and triftes denuntiat iras,
Obscaenamque Famem.
VIRGIL.
CANTO I.
THE Fatal Breakfast and the Cruel Fair
I sing: Calliope, the verse prepare!
Say, why such rage inflamed a Lady's soul
To rob the hungry stomach of it is ROLL?
Now 'gan the Sun the dappled east t'adorn,
And troops of feathered warblers hailed the morn;
Brisk Chanticleer flew crowing from his bed,
And pressed Dame Partlet with the morning tread:
Ducks quack, hogs grunt, dogs howl, and horses neigh,
With Nature's music ush'ring in the day;
Sounds lost, alas! too soon in ruder note
With clamor issuing from Atossa's throat.
Now sounding through the house with dreadful knell
The loud-tongu'd clapper strikes upon the bell.
The maid in haste half huddling on her clothes
The termagant, Sir John's fair partner, rose.
She comes, her clamor strikes all others dumb,
My Lady frowns, and all the house looks glum.
Some furious ravings in the kitchen past
The tardy Breakfast greets our eyes at last:
Three scraps of bread and butter sad we see,
Two lumps of sugar and six grains of tea.
Hunger, they say, through stony walls will break,
As bards write libels for a dinner's sake.
Hunger all arts and sciences can teach,
Makes lawyers plead, quacks kill, and parsons preach.
Hence, Cousin, rose the workings in thy brain,
A better meal by stratagem to gain:
Buttered by stealth, by stealth most slily got,
Smok'd on the board a French Roll, piping hot.
Pale as grim Ghost whose mealy aspect shocks,
And red by turns as twenty Turkey-Cocks,
With eyes inflamed, and leer malign, she viewed
The dear-bought morsel of delicious food.
" And have I then so often, enraged she cried,
My longing soul its foremost wish denied?
So often have grudged a farthing's small expense,
And shall another squander thus my pence?
This prudent proverb have I never forgot,
A penny saved is worth a penny got?
Have I still held it for a maxim clear,
A pin per diem makes a groat per year?
And shall insatiate Cousins shock my soul,
Appalled at Ruin, and a Buttered Roll?
And thou, voracious Sir, my greatest curse,
Whose monstrous lux'ry daily shrinks my purse,
Say, will not then our common fare go down
And must good bread be scorned because it is Brown?"
Cousin, abashed, now raising pert his head,
Looked in My Lady's face, and thus he said.
Tell me, good Madam, where is that moderate man
Who will not mend his lot when ever he can?
Who will not for a palace slight a cot,
Or leave cold mutton for a slice of hot?
Where lofty Highgate haughtily looks down
On all the smoke-girt steeples of the town,
By an old wizard-sage around my head
The branching Antlers of a Stag were spread.
There by those Horns I swore, those sacred Horns,
A solemn oath no Christian trav'ler scorns,
Never with unhallowed tooth Brown Bread to bite,
When kinder fortune should afford me White.
He said, and feasted on the luscious diet,
Eat, says Sir John, Eat, Cousin, and Be Quiet.
CANTO II.
Once more the Sun his daily course began,
Once more shrill noises through the chambers ran,
Once more the scanty Breakfast was prepared,
Once more, O monstrous! a French Roll appeared.
Not Echo from her cave so deep resounds
With the full cry of twenty packs of hounds;
Not cawing rooks, pies chatt'ring, scolding wives,
Cats mewing, grating saws, and grinding knives,
Not all Hell loose, led on by Death and Sin,
Ever rent the ear with such tremendous din!
" It is the Cause, it is the Cause, my Soul!"
Enraged, she cried, and seized the fatal Roll.
" Call! ring the bell! Ned! Thomas! Harry! Jack!
The Roll! Here! Seize it! Burn it! Take it back!"
Now through the streets, like Bedlam fiend she reels,
With all the village rabble at her heels.
So raving through Troy Town of old was seen
Ill fated Hecuba, the Mob-led Queen.
" Cursed be the man that ever eats, she said,
" And doubly cursed be He that gives him Bread!
" Bread, the prime cause whence all our evils flow,
" Which now to Bakers shall work bitter woe!"
Onwards she went, whirled like a schoolboy's top,
Entering with dreadful stride the Baker's shop.
The pliant paste He well could knead and mould,
And better loaves no London Baker sold;
But his old frame now tottering with years,
Deafness had closed the portal of his ears;
With murmurs vague the imperfect sense betrayed,
And sounds uncertain to his ears conveyed.
Him did My Lady with rough questions greet,
And he replied, but never gave answer meet.
Why Traitor! -- Villain! why is this? she said,
Why do thou load me with such heaps of Bread?
Is It not enough to send Brown Bread by Pecks?
And that the White my stately table decks,
But Rolls, vile Rolls, my quiet must perplex?
Madam, he cried, half hearing what she said,
I Am sure no Baker ever sold better Bread.
And as for Rolls, not Brentford sends so white,
Or Uxbridge Bakers make them half so light.
And do thou mock me then? vile slave, she cried;
Madam, You're very welcome. He replied.
As on the kitchen-fire a boiler large
Heats by degrees it is elemental charge;
First from the top a misty steam it flings,
Warms, then ferments, then simmers, and then sings;
Now foaming, raging, boiling, bubbling quick,
Scarce on the brim the rattling lid will stick:
So heated by degrees, inflamed at last,
Full at his head a huge Peck Loaf she cast.
Ah Vixen Lady! as he fell he cried,
And the loose tallies clatter'd at his side.
O for a Muse to sound the trump of war,
And all this dread encounter to declare!
How Bricks, Rolls, Crusts, in thick confusion flew,
Huge Pecks, Half-Pecks, and Quartern Loaves, they threw!
Now from within ran forth the Baker's Wife,
Aghast and trembling for her husband's life.
Revenge! she cried, for sweet Revenge I come:
My poor deaf husband! have they struck thee dumb?
Then greeting first with most uncourteous flap
My Lady's face, she fastened on her cap:
Her own that instant felt my Lady's hand,
And face to face, and cap to cap they stand.
Pulling and rending, pinching, tearing, biting,
Now slap, now scratch, now scolding, and now fighting.
So have I seen in Jack o'Lanthorn quick,
Fierce Battle 'twixt a Baker and Old Nick:
Full closely each engaged in desperate hug,
This way the Baker, that the Devil tug;
Now here, now there, in contest most uncivil,
Pull Tom, pull Nick, pull Baker, and pull Devil.
Caetera Desunt.
THE FABLE OF THE TREES.
-- Arbores loquantur, non tantum ferae. PHAEDRUS.
Tuesday, May 3, 1763.
ONCE on a time, when great Sir Oak
Held all the Trees beneath his yoke,
The Monarch, anxious to maintain
In peaceful state his Sylvan reign,
Saw, to his sorrow and distraction,
His subject trees take root in faction,
And, though late joined in union hearty,
Now branching into shoots of party.
Each sturdy stick of factious wood
Stood stiff and stout for Public Good;
For Patriots ever, it is well known,
Seek other's welfare, not their own,
And all they undertake, you know,
Is meant pro Bono Publico.
The hardy Fir, from northern earth
Who took its name, and drew its birth,
The Oak placed next him, to support
His government, and grace his court.
The Fir, of an uncommon size,
Rearing his head unto the skies,
Over topp'd his fellow-plants: his height
They viewed, and sicken'd at the sight:
With envy every fiber swelled,
While in them the proud sap rebelled.
Shall then, they cried, the Ash, the Elm,
The Beech, no longer rule the helm?
What! shall the ignoble Fir, a plant
In tempest born and nursed in want,
From the black regions of the North,
And native famine, issue forth;
In this our happier soil take root,
And dare our birthright to dispute?
On this the fatal storm began,
Confusion through the Forest ran;
Mischief in each dark shade was brewing,
And all betoken'd general ruin:
While each, to make their party good,
Bribed the vile shrubs and Underwood:
And now, the Bramble and the Thistle
Sent forth Ode, Essay, and Epistle;
To which anon, with equal mettle,
Replied the Thorn, and Stinging-nettle!
What Is to be done? or how oppose
The storm which in the Forest rose?
Grief shook the mighty Monarch's mind,
And his sighs labored in the wind.
At length the tumult, strife and quarrel,
Alarming the sagacious Laurel,
His mind, unto the King he broke,
And thus addressed him: Heart of Oak!
Sedition is on foot; make ready;
And fix your empire firm and steady.
Faction in vain shall shake the wood,
While you pursue the General Good.
Fear not a foe, trust not a friend,
Upon Yourself alone depend!
If not too partially allied
By fear or love to either side,
In vain shall jarring factions strive,
Cabals in vain dark plots contrive.
Slave to no foe, dupe to no minion,
Maintain an equal just dominion:
So shall you stand by storms unbroke,
And all revere the Royal Oak.
THE COBBLER OF CRIPPLEGATE'S LETTER TO ROBERT LLOYD, A. M.
First printed in the St. James's Magazine, May, 1763.
UNUSED to Verse, and tired Heaven knows,
Of drudging on in heavy Prose,
Day after day, year after year,
Which I have sent the Gazetteer;
Now, for the first time, I essay
To write in your own easy way.
And now, O Lloyd, I wish I had
To go that road, your ambling pad;
While you, with all a Poet's pride,
On the Great Horse of Verse might ride.
You leave the road, that is rough and stony,
To pace and whistle, with your Poney;
Sad proof to us you're lazy grown,
And fear to gall your huckle-bone.
For he who rides a nag so small,
Will soon we fear, ride none at all.
There are, and naught gives more offense,
Who have some favorite excellence,
Which evermore they introduce,
And bring it into constant use.
Thus Garrick still in every part
Has Pause, and Attitude, and Start:
The Pause, I will allow, is good,
And so perhaps, the Attitude;
The Starts too fine: but if not scarce,
The Tragedy becomes a Farce.
I have too, pardon me, some quarrel,
With other branches of your Laurel.
I hate the style, that still defends
Yourself, or praises all your friends,
As if the club of wits was met
To make eulogiums on the Set;
Say must the town for ever hear,
And no Reviewer deign to sneer,
Of Thornton's Humor, Garrick's Nature,
And Colman's Wit, and Churchill's Satire?
Churchill who -- let it not offend,
If I make free, though he is your friend;
And sure we cannot want excuse,
When Churchill's named, for Smart Abuse --
Churchill! who ever loves to raise,
On Slander's dung his mushroom bays:
The Priest, I grant, has something clever,
A something that will last for ever.
Let him, in part, be made your pattern,
Whose Muse, now queen, and now a slattern,
Tricked out in Rosciad rules the roast,
Turns trapes and trollops in the Ghost,
By turns, both tickles us, and warms,
And drunk or sober, has her charms.
Garrick, to whom with lath and plaster,
You try to raise a fine pilaster,
And found on Lear and Macbeth,
His monument even after death;
Garrick's a Dealer in grimaces,
A Haberdasher of wry faces,
A Hypocrite, in all his stages,
Who laughs and cries for hire and wages;
As undertaker's men draw grief
From onion in their handkerchief,
Like real mourners cry and sob,
And of their passions make a job.
And Colman too, that little sinner,
That Essay-weaver, Drama-spinner,
Too much the Comic Sock will use,
For it is the Law must find him shoes.
And though he thinks on Fame's wide ocean
He swims, and has a pretty motion,
Inform him, Lloyd, for all his grin,
That Harry Fielding holds his chin.
Now higher soar, my Muse, and higher,
To Bonnel Thornton, hight Esquire!
The only man, to make us laugh,
A very Peter Paragraph;
The grand conductor, and adviser
In Chonicle and Advertiser,
Who still delights to run his rig
On Citizen and Perriwig!
Good sense, I know, though dashed with oddity,
In Thornton is no scarce commodity:
Much learning too I can descry,
Beneath his perriwig does lie. --
-- I beg his pardon, I declare:
His grizzle's gone for greasy hair,
Which now the Wag with ease can screw
With dirty ribband in a queue --
But why neglect (his trade forsaking
For scribbling and for merry-making,)
With Tie to over-shade that brain,
Which might have shone in Warwick Lane?
Why not, with spectacles on nose,
In chariot lazily repose,
A formal, pompous, deep physician,
Himself a Sign-Post Exhibition?
But hold, my Muse! you run ahead:
And where is the clue that shall unthread
The maze, wherein you are entangled?
While out of tune the bells are jangled,
Through rhyme's rough road that serve to deck
My jaded Pegasus his neck.
My Muse with Lloyd alone contends:
Why then fall foul upon his friends?
Unless to show, like Handy-dandy,
Or Churchill's Ghost, or Tristram Shandy,
Now here, now there, with quick progression,
How smartly you can make digression:
Your rambling spirit now confine,
And speak to Lloyd in every line.
Tell me then, Lloyd, what is it you mean
By cobbling up a Magazine?
A Magazine, a wretched olio
Purloin'd from quarto and from folio,
From pamphlet, news-paper, and book,
Which tossed up by a monthly cook,
Borrows fine shapes, and titles new,
Of fricasee, and rich ragout,
Which Dunces dress as well as You.
Say, is it for You, your wit to coop,
And tumble through this narrow hoop?
The body thrives, and so the mind,
When both are free and unconfined;
But harnessed in, like hackney tit,
To run the monthly stage of wit,
The Racer stumbles in the shaft,
And shows he was not meant for draft.
Pot-bellied gluttons, slaves of taste,
Who bind in leathern belt their waist,
Who lick their lips at ham or haunch,
But hate to see the strutting paunch,
Full often rue the pain that is felt
From circumscription of the belt:
Thus women too we idiots call,
Who lace their shapes too close and small.
Tight stays, they find, often end in humps,
And take, too late, alas! to jumps.
The Chinese ladies cramp their feet
Which seem indeed both small and neat,
While the dear creatures laugh and talk,
And can do every thing -- but walk;
Thus you "who trip it as you go
" On the light fantastic toe,"
And in the Ring are ever seen,
Or Rotten-Row of Magazine,
Will cramp your Muse in four-foot verse,
And find at last your ease, your curse.
Clio already humbly begs
You Would give her leave to stretch her legs;
For though sometimes she takes a leap,
Yet on All Fours she can but creep.
While Namby-Pamby thus you scribble,
Your manly turns are merely fribble,
Pinned down, and sickly, cannot vapor,
Nor dare to spring, or cut a caper.
Rouse then, for shame, your ancient spirit!
Write a great work! a work of merit!
The conduct of your Friend examine,
And give a Prophecy of Famine;
Or like Yourself in days of yore,
Write Actors as you did before:
Write what may powerful friends create you,
And make your present friends all hate you.
Learn not a shuffling, shambling, pace,
But go erect with manly grace;
For Ovid says, and pray thee heed it,
Os homini sublime dedit.
But if you still waste all your prime
In spinning Lilliputian Rhyme,
Too long your genius will lie fallow,
And Robert Lloyd prove Robert Shallow.
TO ANY MINISTER OR GREAT MAN.
Saturday, May 4, 1765.
WHETHER you lead the Patriot band,
Or in the class of Courtiers stand,
Or prudently prefer
The Middle Course, with equal zeal
To serve both King and Commonweal,
Your Grace, my Lord, or Sir!
Know Minister! whatever your plan,
Whatever your politics, Great Man!
You must expect detraction:
Though of clean hand and honest heart,
Your greatness must expect to smart
Beneath the rod of faction.
Like blockheads, eager in dispute,
The Mob, that many-headed brute,
All bark and bawl together:
For Continental Measures some,
And some cry, keep your troops at home!
And some are pleased with neither.
Lo! a Militia guards the land;
Thousands applaud your saving hand,
And hail you their protector;
While thousands censure and defame,
And brand you with the hideous name
Of state-quack or projector.
Are active, vigorous means preferred?
Lord! what harangues are hourly heard
Of wasted blood and treasure!
Then all for enterprise and plot:
And pox of this unmeaning Scot!
If cautious be your measure.
Corruption's influence you despise;
These lift your glory to the skies,
Those pluck your glory down;
So strangely different is the note
Of scoundrels that have right to vote,
And scoundrels that have none.
Ye then who guide the Car of State,
Scorning the Rabble's idle prate,
Proceed as ye designed;
In rugged ways, the reins and steeds
Alone the skilful driver heeds,
Nor stays to cut behind.
FRAGMENT OF A LOVE ELEGY.
Saturday, May 11, 1765.
CURSE on those hours, which once I used to bless,
Hours that for ever on my memory press,
When my young heart, awake to honest love,
First caught the infection Time can never remove!
No coxcomb, proud to charm an artless maid;
No rake, that wished her innocence betrayed;
No wordling, whose mean soul, resigned to pelf,
Courted vile gold; but fond of her herself,
To win her heart I made my only care,
And once believed I had an interest there.
Hap'ly I had: and yet, oh sad reverse!
To lose that interest, made it more my curse.
Why did thou, Fortune, throw me in her way,
Just long enough to steal my soul away?
Or why, that done, did adverse fate ordain,
Distant, as North from South, we should remain?
And why, O why, did absence, fickle Fair,
Root from thy heart what Love had planted there?
That day I well remember, when I first
Heard my doom sealed: -- That day be ever cursed!
Long had I thought my soul's first wishes crossed,
Long, long, it is true, had given up all for lost;
Yet still, in spite of Reason's sage control,
Some rays of hope shot faintly through my soul.
MOTHER SHIPTON,
A Halfpenny Ballad to the Tune of NANCY DAWSON.
Tuesday, January 8, 1771.
I.
OF all the pretty Pantomimes,
That have been seen or sung in rhimes,
Since famous Johnny Rich's times,
There Is none like Mother Shipton.
She pleases folks of every class;
She makes her Swans and Ducklings pass;
She shows her Hog, she shows her Ass Exhibited in the Pantomime.
;
Oh charming Mother Shipton!
II.
Near to the famous Dropping Well
She first drew breath, as records tell,
And had good beer and ale to sell,
As ever tongue was tipped on:
Her Dropping Well itself is seen,
Quaint Goblins hobble round their Queen,
And little Fairies tread the Green,
Called forth by Mother Shipton.
III.
Oh London is a charming place!
Yet grumble not, ye Critic Race,
Though Mansion House is seen to grace
The streets in Mother Shipton!
You think a blunder you descry:
Yet you might see with half an eye
It Is Mother Shipton's Prophecy --
Oh charming Mother Shipton!
IV.
Come jolly Tars, and Sailors staunch,
Oh come with us and see the Launch!
'Twill feast your eye, and fill your paunch,
As done by Mother Shipton.
The shores give way the hulk that prop --
Huzza! the ship is launched -- and pop!
It Is turned into a Baker's Shop --
Oh charming Mother Shipton!
V.
Then after several wonders past,
To Yorkshire all return at last,
And in a Coal-pit they are east --
Oh wondrous Mother Shipton!
Yet she redeems them every soul:
And here is the moral of the whole --
It Is Mother Shipton brings the Cole:
Oh charming Mother Shipton!
EPITAPH On WILLIAM POWELL.
Saturday, October 12, 1771.
THE Monument represents Fame holding a Medallion with a Profile of POWELL,
over which is the following Inscription.

WILLIAM POWELL, ESQUIRE. His Widow caused this monument to be erected, as well to
perpetuate his memory, as her own irretrievable loss of the best of Husbands,
Fathers, and Friends.

Beneath the above figure are the following lines, and signature.

BRISTOL! to worth and genius ever just,
To thee our POWELL's dear remains we trust.
Soft as the stream thy sacred springs impart,
The milk of human kindness warmed his heart;
That heart which every tender feeling knew,
The soil where Pity, Love, and Friendship grew.
Oh! let a faithful friend with grief sincere
Inscribe his tomb, and drop the heartfelt tear,
Here rest his Praise, here found his noblest Fame!
-- All else a Bubble, or an empty Name.
G. COLMAN. THE CONTENTED CUCKOLD.
First printed in the St. JAMES's CHRONICLE, Saturday, March 28, 1767.
EPIGRAM.
HARRY with Johnny's wife intrigues,
And all the world perceives it:
John forms with Harry such close leagues,
Who'd think that he believes it?
Contented Cuckold! but, alas,
This is poor Johnny's curse:
If he don't see it, he is an Ass;
And if he does, he is worse.
THE GAME AT LOO.
AN EPIGRAM.
WHAT though I hold of Trumps a Flush,
And boast a friend in PAM?
Yet I can own without a blush,
That I the loser am.
Alas, this happens every day,
And is each night renewed:
For who with H -- rr -- ngt -- n can play,
And fail of being LOO'D?
Tunbridge Wells, August, 1784.
THE THREE WITCHES AT THE JUBILEE MASQUERADE.
AN EPIGRAM.
BEHOLD the Witches Three!
Who Is She? -- Who Is She! -- Who Is She?
It Is Pembroke, Pain, and Crewe.
In every breast they raise strange storms,
More real sorc'ry in those forms,
Than any Shakespeare drew!
Extempore. Stratford upon Avon, Sept. 7, 1769
END OF VOL. II.
SCHOOL LIBRARY, AT DR. CHARLES BURNEY's, GREENWICH, KENT.
I. EVERY SUBSCRIBER shall be allowed the use of one volume, at a time, which
he may change on the days appointed for opening the library. For general
convenience, however, he must not keep it longer than a week; nor must it, on
any pretense, be brought from the subscribers desk or locker, at improper
seasons, nor must it ever be used, in improper places. II. EVERY SUBSCRIBER,
who, on the day appointed for changing the books, comes before his number is
called, or who behaves improperly, shall give his book into the collection; and
will not be allowed another, till the next time of opening the library. III.
EVERY SUBSCRIBER, whose book is not covered, when he receives it, when he uses
it, or when he returns it, shall not be allowed any book, on the two next days,
on which the library is open. IV. EVERY SUBSCRIBER is to be responsible for the
book lent to him. If it be inked, torn, or in any way injured, he must forfeit
ONE SHILLING AND SIX PENCE: If it be left in school, or in any other place, he
must forfeit SIX PENCE; and if it be lost, he must pay such a sum, as will
replace it. V. EVERY SUBSCRIBER, who borrows or lends any volume, belonging to
the library, shall lose the benefit of his subscription, for three months. VI.
EVERY SUBSCRIBER, who reads his book fronting the fire, or leaning on the iron
guard, which must inevitably spoil the binding, shall forfeit ONE SHILLING,
toward discharging the bookbinder's account. VII. EVERY SUBSCRIBER, who
neglects to return his book, when he goes out, provided he stays all night,
shall lose his subscription for one week; and, for a fortnight, if he carries
his book out with him. VIII. EVERY SUBSCRIBER, who incurs the penalty of a
forfeit, if he does not pay it directly, shall have it deducted from his
allowance; and he will not be considered as a subscriber, until the whole sum
is paid, which shall be appropriated to the use of the library. IX. All the
books shall be returned to the library, in the week preceding the holidays. X.
As these REGULATIONS are established, in order to preserve the books, and to
render the COLLECTION of real service. it is hoped, if any of them are
violated, that EVERY SUBSCRIBER will make it a point of honor to mention the
names of those, who infringe them, to some of the Masters.

