A Brief DESCRIPTION OF Orkney, Zetland, Pightland-Firth and Caithness,
WHEREIN, ^^ter a short Journal of the Author's Voyage thither, These Northern
Places are first more Generally Described; Then a Particular View is given of
the several Isles thereto belonging; Together with an Account of what is most
Rare and Remarkable therein: with the Author's Observes thereupon.

EDINBURGH, Printed by George Mosman, An. Dom

M.DCC.I.

To His GRACE, JAMES DUKE Of HAMILTON.
May it please Your Grace,
UPon my Return from Zetland, as bound in Duty, I paid my Respects to Your GR.
Who was pleased to ask, If I had kept a Diary? Which I acknowledged, but could
not show it, till the Remarks therein contained, were Transcribed, which when
done, Y. GR. should have them to glance at, some leisure Hour. Thus Your
Command giving Rise to this Undertaking, I have presumed to make the Dedication
to Y. GR.

The Noble and Illustrious Family of HAMILTON, the first in the Nation,
stands in no need of Panegyricks from me, to set forth it Eminency. His GR.
Your FATHER was ver^ Instrumental in Settling the Peace and Q^ of this Kingdom
at the late Merciful and Wonderful Revolution, as became a Patriot of H^
Country; Under whose Presidency, in the Convention of Estates, the Government
(...) Our Church was Restored, which since ha^ been Confirmed by the subsequent
Parliaments.

In His Surviving Consort, Your Pious MOTHER, these Endowments and
Qualification requisite in the Consort of a Prince, have Em^nently shined
Forth, which will Emba^ Her Name to succeeding Generations: He likewise being
so very Helpful to many Afflicted Ones, both in the former Years of thi^
Churches Distress and Trouble, and in the la^ter of great Scarcity and Dearth,
She knowing how Valuable are the Blessings of those, who were ready to Perish.

Your GR. Honorable Appearance for, and Acknowledgment of Presbyterian
Government, in the last Session of Parliament, wa^ Acceptable to many: And I
hope Y. GR. shall never have Cause to Repent of Your Continuing to Favor the
Ancient Government o^ this Church, which as it is Conform to the
Scripture-Plan, so the Lord has been Graciously Pleased to own and
Countenance it, in the Great Things, he has done for and by the Ministers and
Professors thereof.

Among these things for which You stand Obliged to the Wise Conduct of
Providence, One is, That You have been so well Directed in the Happy Choice of
Your Consorts: Your Present LADY of a Sweet and Gentle Temper, Her Carriage
Obliging and Discreet to all, Her Loving to Entertain Pious and Religious
Discourse, Her Modest and Exemplary Dress: I wish She may prove a Blessing to
Y. Illustrious Family, and be as Rachel or as Leah, which two did Build up the
House of Israel.

Your Noble Brother LORD GEORGE, has been Created by Our Present GRACIOUS
KING, EARL of ORKNEY, for His Heroic Appearances, under the Auspicious Conduct
of Our King, As is evident by the Narrative of his Patent of Honor.
who was pleased to take notice thereof, some of these being under His
Majesty's View; And in Testimony of His Royal Favor, Dignify Him with this
Honorable Title, which in the Years of Ancient Times, has Blazoned the
Escutcheons of Kings.

The Branches of Y. Illustrious Family do Flourish in several Parts of the
Nation, tho God in His Holy Providence, has made lately a Breach thereupon, to
Y. Grief, and the Nations Loss.

Your GR. Relation to the Ancient and Honorable Family of Douglas, gives me
occasion to mention that old Alliance betwixt that House and the Princes of
Orkney. William Lord of Niddesdale, commonly called the Black Douglas, by
Egidia or Giles Daughter of King Rob. 2 had a Daughter of the same Name,
Married to Henry Sinclar usually Styled Knight of the Cockle of the Garter,
Hist. of the House of Douglas and Angus.
and Prince of Orkney. To Him Succeeded his Son William Sinclar, Married to
Elizabeth Douglas, About the end of the 14 and beginning of the 15 Cent.
Daughter to Archibald Earl of Douglas, Sir-Named Tineman; Whose Titles were,
Knight of the Golden Fleece and of the Cockle, Prince of Orkney, Duke of
Holdenburgh, Earl of Caithness, Lord Sinclar, Lord of Niddisdale, Great Admiral
of Scotland etc.

My L. the Knowledge of History, is that which the most of Men are taken with,
as being both Pleasant and Useful; And it cannot but stain the Reputation of
any, tho able to give Account of what is Rare in other Countries, if they be
Ignorant of their own, and Places which Depend thereupon, where things no less
Remarkable do Occur, which may both Exercise the Ingenious, and Edify the
Gracious Inquirers.

But above all, Blessed are they who make a Religious Improvement of Natural
Observes, and use all Arts and Sciences as Handmaids to Religion and Piety;
The Knowledge of Christ is the Queen of Sciences, Hence a Learned Paul
determines to know nothing but Christ and Him Crucified; And those who in all
Ages have been Wise unto Salvation, have preferred Christ's Cross to the Worlds
Crown; And with Moses, reckoned His worst things better then the Worlds best.
The Knowledge of all other things without the Knowledge of Christ, is as a
Shadow without the Substance, and a Body without the Head, as some have
Instituted the Comparison; Yea they are (...) without Mind and Judgment; The
Cardinal Virtues, as they are called, may be Attained in Show, but not in
Truth, Quid enim illis cum Virtutibus qui Dei Virtutem Christum ignorant? All
the Glory and Grandeur of the World, laid in the Balance with this piece of
Saving Knowledge, is but as a Grain Weight to counter-ballance a huge Mountain:
Galeaceus Caracciolus Marquess o^ Vico in the Kingdom of Naples.
Hence a notable saying of a truly Noble Lord, when set upon by the Jesuits, to
change his Religion, Tempting him with Splendid and Rich Offers, Let their
Money, says he, Perish with them, who think all the Glory of the World, worth
one days Communion with Jesus Christ. And truly it is but small Gain, the most
Painful and Able Student does Reap, Indocti rap^ unt caelum and nos cu^
Doctrina nostra in Gehennam trudimur.
if after all his Labor in the Records of Antiquity and Researches of Nature,
and it may be through the Maze of Intricate Disquisition, he lose his Soul, and
notwithstanding of all his Learning be thrust into Hell, being forced to cry
out on Death Bed, as it is report-the Learned Grotius once did, Ah vitam
perdidi, operose nihil agendo,

My Lord, I hope it will not prove Unsavory to Y. GR., that I have a little
Enlarged this Epistle, in Commending of Christ and Religion, which so much
Transcendeth Our Commendation and Praise, whence so many Advantages do Accrue
to Us, and among others, when there are early Impressions of Piety o^ any, the
Conscience for ever after uses to hang about them, notwithstanding the Tenor
of their Lives has been assaulted with manifold Tentations. That Y. GR. may
still continue to be a True Lover of Your Country, and a Zealous Asserter of
Her Rights and Liberties, is and shall be the Desire of him, who is

May it please Your GR. Your GR. most Humble and most Dutiful Servant, John
Brand.

PREFACE To the READER.
I shall not insist on an Apology, why I trouble the Sweating Press, tho I
might use and plead the common Topics taken from the Advice and Importunity of
others, and to prevent the Publishing of some of these Remarks, excerpt from my
Papers, by some, into whose hands, they had fallen, after they had lien by me
several Months.

There are several Grave Persons in these Isles of good and solid Judgment,
both Ministers and Others, who being better acquainted with the Places of their
ordinary Residence, then it can be supposed I had occasion to be, might have
Published something more Valuable on this Head, and set their Remarks in a
clearer Light. As likewise some of my Dear Brethren of the Commission, might
have done it to greater Advantage. Yet the Engagements that lay on me, to
Transcribe the most Remarkable Occurrences, and the Solicitation of some
thereupon, to Publish them, have some way obliged me to make this Appearance.
However if others hereby shall be excited to serve the Public, by giving a
fuller and clearer Description of these Generally little known Places, this
Essay will not prove altogether unuseful. And if I had known that any intended
to have Published something of this nature, the World had not been troubled
with my Scribbling.

I hope none will judge, that I Act without my Line, in giving Descriptions of
this Nature, seeing all are called to Remember the Works of the Lord and Talk
of His Doings, as they have occasion: And all along, I endeavor to keep in
mind the Character I bear, dropping something of a Spiritual Improvement.

Our Historians, such as I have consulted, have given but a very brief and
lame, and in some things a false Account of these places, especially Zetland,
which is unknown to the most of the Nation, if not that they have only heard,
there were such Isles, a^ the Zetlandick. It is true, there is one Mr* Wallace
a late Minister in Orkney, who has gratified the World, by giving a
Description, of the Orkney-Isles; But neither Zetland no^ Caithness does he
meddle with: And as to Orkney, there are several things which deserve their own
Remark, he makes no mention of; And others have fallen out since his time,
which I have noticed So that, on the whole, the Account now given even of
Orkney, will appear almost new to any, who shall be pleased to compare the two
Descriptions together.

No doubt but such as know these Places, will desiderate several things no less
Remarkable, then wha^ are Observed; But still my Reader would remember, That
this is but a Diary Transcribed. Yet thi^ may say, as I have not willingly
suffered my self (...) be imposed on, so neither have I imposed any thing ^n
the Credulous World, but delivered such things which either I was witness to,
or had good ground (...) believe from Persons worthy of Credit. So that (...)
any thing appear Questionable, I have ordinarily ^n general given my Author for
it. Omne tulit punctum qui mi^cuit utile dulci.


I suppose the judicious Reader in perusing the ^ollowing sheets, will find
things borh Curious and ^nstructive, affording matter of Meditation to the Wise
Observers of Providence.

As to any Philosophical or Philological Observes, ^s I am unfit for, so am I
far from a Magisterial ^ictating of them to any, but soberly proposed my ^wn
Sentiments, which if my Reader do not relish, ^e may follow his own.

Although the Style be not Quaint and Elegant, ^mbellishd with the Ornaments of
Art; yet I hope it will be found plain and intelligible; and tho sometimes
obliged to express my self in the Dialect or Idiotism of the Country, yet
ordinarily such Words and Phrases are some way explained. So when I speak of
Orkney or Zetland, as not in Scotland, tho depending thereupon, I express my
self, as the Country do.

As to the Commissions Work I have not meddled therewith, except when the
thread of the History did require me to touch it. However this I may add, Our
weak endeavors, for the Advancement of the Interest of Our LORD JESUS, in
these remote Corners, have not been found, by Superior Judicatories,
altogether unsuccessful; And, I suppose, it repents none of us, of our Voyage
thither; however dangerous it did prove.

THE CONTENTS Of the Chapters.
INtroduction. Page 1 Chap. I. A Journal of our Voyage. 4 Chap. II. A
Description of Orkney in General. 12 Chap. III. A Description of the several
Isles of Orkney in Particular. 28 Chap. IV. Concerning some Remarkable things
in Orkney. 41 Chap. V. An Account of some superstitious Rites, Charms etc. Yet
remaming there. 54 Chap. VI. A Description of Zetland in General. 64 Chap. VII.
A Description of the several Parishes, and most considerable Isles in Zetland.
83 Chap. VIII. An Account of some Remarkable things in Zetland. 98 Chap. IX.
Concerning their Fish-Trade. 128 Chap. X. A Description of Pightland Firth. 137
Chap ^^. A Description of Ca^thness. 146 Appendix. 159
ERRATA.
SOme Typographical Errors have cr^pt into the Press* which the Reader would be
pleased to correct, as page 7. We saw, lege when we saw. page 38. my Lord
D^r^n, lege my Lord Darly or Darnly. p 94. Hilesha, leg Hildesha. Upon the head
of the Pages, 137, till 146, a Description of Zetland, lege a Description of
Pightland Firth. Some other small Errata's there are, which the Candid Reader
will pardon, seeing in so far as I observe, they do not mar the sense.

A Description of Orkney, Zetland and Caithness.
INTRODUCTION.
IT is a Principle generally ackowledged, All Men obliged to promote the
public good.
That all Men in their several Stations, according to their Capacities, are
carefully to study the maintaining and promoting of the good and interest of
^at Kingdom, Nation or Society, whereof they are Members; For if it go not well
with the Public in ^mmon, it cannot reasonably be thought, that the hap^ness
of any in particular can long continue, more than (...) can go well, with the
several Members of a Natural ^ody, when the Body it self is distressed. Non
nobis nati, sed Patriae and Re^publica Cicero. Dulce and decorum est pro Patria
mori.
It was this ^enerous Love and Concern for their Country, that so ^gnalised the
Ancient Romans, and made them in a short ^me, arrive to such a height of Glory
and Honor; unto this did their Philosophers, Poets, and Orators ^armly excite
their Fellow-Citizens, so that the more, (...) the less any laid out themselves
this way, their At^eivements accordingly were reputed Noble and He^ick, and
their Persons renowned.

Yet much more will we find our selves bound to ^dvance one another's good,
Especially Christians bound to this.
if we look on our selves ^ot only as Men and Members of the Body Politic, ^ut
as Christians and Members of that Body, whereof Christ is the Head: Therefore
our Love of, Care for, 7 Romans 12.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.12.27. etc
and Sympathy with one another, is much commended ^n holy Scripture, which the
Apostle well illustrateth in several places by that apposite and elegant
similitud^ of the Members of a natural Body, Phil. 2.4, 20, 21.
their conspiring t^ the mutual good of one another; and expressly commands,
Look not every Man on his own things, but a^ on the things of others: And the
want thereof he do^ heavily regrate in the same Chap. For I have no M^
likeminded, who will naturally care for your state: For (...) seek their own,
not the things which are Jesus Christ. Which selfish and narrow Spirit, as it
has too much prevailed in all Ages of the Christian Church, since the Days of
the Apostles; so in none more, then this o^ ours, Owen on Hebr. 12.15.
As the learned Owen observes, imputing the shame and the almost Ruin of
Christianity thereunto The Lord Christ, says he, has ordained, that the
Members of the same Church and Society, should mutually watch over one another,
and the whole Body over all the Members unto their Edification And that the
practice of it is so much lost as it is, i^ the shame and almost Ruin of
Christianity.

Gubernatores, Metaphora a N^cleris Navem Gubernantibus ducta. More especially
all clothed with Authority Civil or Ecclesiastic.
But more especially these clothed with Authorit^ Civil or Ecclesiastic stand
obliged to this public care Ministers being as Pilots or Governors under
Christ to the Ship of the Church, as Magistrates under God are to that of the
State. And the Charge of Minister having a more immediate respect to the Soul
and better part of Man, they are called the more diligently to take heed
thereto, and so to steer their Course through the boisterous Sea of this World,
as that not only the themselves at length may arrive and rest at the Fa^ Havens
of Immanuels Land, but that also through Grace they may carry alongs many with
them emba^qued on the same bottom of the Covenant, by the Means of Word and
Discipline. Ministers are Stewards Watchmen, Shepherds, Bishops or Overseers
etc. All which do imply a Charge to be discharged by them for the good of
others.

Ministers Considered in a 3 fold Relation.
Ministers may be considered in a threefold Relation. 1. As Christians related
to Christ, which i^ common to them with all believers. 2. As Ministers, (...)
related to that particular Church or portion of the church in general, the
inspection whereof is assigned (...) them, and in which more especially and
immediately they are called to labor. 3. As they stand related to the Church
National, whereof they are Mini^ers; whose good they are to endeavor, as God
in ^s holy and wise Providence shall afford them access. and that in all these
respects Ministers may the more prove themselves unto their great Lord and
Master, ^cording to his Appointment, the Apostles Example, ^d the Practice of
the Church in all Ages, they do ^sociate themselves unto Councils, Meetings or
Assem^ies more or less General, that so by common Coun^ and Consent, they may
consult the interest of the ^urch of Christ, within their respective districts
and ^unds. Which as it has been the laudable practice other Churches, so of
the Church of Scotland, ever ^ce her first Reformation from Popery.

For which end the General Assembly of this National ^urch moved with zeal for
the Glory of God, Assemblies zealous in planting the North of Scotland.
has ^velled much since the late happy Revolution in plan^g the North of
Scotland, and that they might not be ^nting in visiting the utmost bounds
thereof, with the ^es thereto belonging, have deputed several Com^ssions, who
repairing thither might upon the place ^ke under their consideration, the
concerns of the church of Christ in these corners, and determine ^erein as they
should see cause, according to the Word (...) God and Acts of Assemblies of
this Church. Commission sent to Orkney.
Particu^ly one was sent to Caithness and Orkney Anno School. ^ho did God and his
Church good service there.

In like manner the General Assembly Anno 1700. Commission to Zetland.
^on the desire of certain Ministers in Zetland, and Information of the State
of affairs in these remote Islands, and it necessary to depute a Commission
thither, ^onsisting of seven Ministers and one Ruling Elder; ^ith Power not
only to visit and order the Churches there, but likewise to concur with and
assist the Pr^byteries of Orkney and Caithness, as there should be occasion.

The Author's design.
Of this Commission the Author, being one, desig^ a brief description of these
remarkable parts; after short Journal of his Voyage thither, with some cu^sory
Observes thereupon.

CHAP. I. Containing a brief Journal of our Voyage from Leith to Orkney, and
thence to Zetland: (...) likewise of our Return from Zetland by Orkne^ to
Caithness: Together with a Summary A^count of the remarkable Dangers we were in.
We set Sail from Leith.
ON Friday 12. April 1700. about six a Clock ^ the Morning, we set Sail from
Leith for Or^ney, the Wind fair tho faint, which not being a^ to bear us up
against the Tide, we dropped Anchor t^ Miles East of Inch-keith, where we lay
from Ten t^ three in the Afternoon, when a Brisk-gale arising, (...) weighed
Anchor, and Sailed down the Firth, the She making so good way, that before next
Morning at bre^ of Day, we were past Montross.

On Saturday the Wind lessened, yet about St^ set we past Peterhead, Steering
toward the point Kinnaird, leaving the Bridges of Ratray (a ridge of B^ Rocks)
on our Larboard. Next Morning, being (...) Lords Days, with a gentle Wind, we
made the (...) of our way through Murray Firth, Pass Murray Firth.
spending the (...) in Religious Exercises with the Mariners and so Passengers
in company with us. When before Pe^ head we saw the fins of a great Fish, about
an y^ above the Water, which they call a Pricker; Also ab^ Ten at Night, a
Whale was seen by the help of Mo^light, at a little distance from our Ship,
casting for the Water in a hideous manner.

Next Morning about Seven a Clock we got sight (...) Orkney, and the Wind
blowing some what harder, ^en it had done the former Night, in the Afternoon
(...) passed the East end of Pightland Firth, Land in Orkney.
which though ^inarily raging with the impetuous current of a Sea, (...) reason
of the many Tides meeting there, yet we and it not so, but in the midst of that
part we pas^, dined upon Deck, so meeting with least danger, ^ere we feared the
greatest. We put in to Holms^nd and arrived there about Seven at Night, on the
^onday after our setting sail.

The Ship's Crew told us, The Voyage favorable.
that tho they had fre^ently Sailed these Seas to and from Orkney, yet never ^d
they a better or pleasanter Voyage: Which Pro^dential favor was the more
observable, the Wind ^xt Day after we Landed, blowing strong from the ^orth and
lasting several Days. Which if it had come (...), before we had accomplished
our Voyage, we ^ould not only have been blown back to sea, but ^ereby a tempest
arising, we had been in no small ^nger. We desired to look upon this as a
signal Mercy, ^d a token for good.

We would have hired our Bark, to Zetland, but ^e Master being under
Charter-party, We forced to hire an open Boat from Orkney to Zetland.
was obliged to ^turn with a fraught of Victual to Leith, and not ^ving the
occasion of any other Ship or Bark, we ^ere forced to hire one of these open
Boats of about six^ Meils which the Orkney Men use for carrying Victual (...)
Zetland, else we could not go for Zetland this sea^n, tho the Ministers and
others told us our Passage ^ight prove dangerous.

Our stay in Kirkwal, the chief Town in Orkney, assisting that Presbytery in
some of their affairs] was ^om the 16. to the 27. of April, when with 3.
Ministers of this Country on the Commission, we took ^oat for Sanda about 30.
We go for Sanda from Kirkwall
Miles North-East from Kirkwal, and in our way to Zetland, having ordered our
own Boat to follow with the first fair Wind. We put off about two in the
Afternoon, the Men rowing wit^ six Oars about half way, when the Wind rising
something favorable with a little Sail and 4. Oars we go^ over Stronza Firth.
Tho as we came near our landin^ place in Sanda, the increasing Wind raised the
wave so high, that sometimes they intercepted the sight (...) the Island. Yet
we got all safe on shore betwixt (...) and 10. at Night. The Mercy of our
escape was the more remarkable, that our Boat was thronged wit^ Passengers; and
so overloaden that the Water came almost to her brim; so that if the Sea had
not bee^ smooth and calm, when we past throw Stronza Firth we had been probably
all lost: As these who had knowledge of those Seas did afterward declare unto
us.

Go from Sanda to Eda.
We waited in Sanda for a Wind from April 27 till May 9. when the Wind
presenting, we went t^ the Isle of Eda lying a little to the West of Sanda
where our Boat was, but before we could get aboard the Wind shifted to
South-East and then to East an^ by South, which was too scrimp to fetch
Zetland; however the Wind now being very changeable, we judge^ it expedient for
us to ly near our Boat and lay hold o^ the first occasion: So May 11. the Wind
at South-Ea^ we put to Sea, but scarce well were we without t^ Red-Head of Eda,
when the Wind proving contrary we returned to Calf-Sound May 12. being the
Lord's Day we spent in Religious Exercises with the People of the Isle; in the
Evening the Wind turning fair, we resolved next Morning early to get Aboard, if
the Wind held. This last Night, after we returned to Calf-Sound, was terrible
for Wind and Rain from the West, the Wind soon altering, after we had got it
again to Calf-Sound) with which we could not have kept the Sea, in all
probability. A great Mercy the^ it was, that we were determined to return, and
did not keep the Sea, as some advised, for tho within half an hour after we had
got in to the Sound, the Wind turned fair, yet being too strong, the Sea became
foul ^ad tempestuous, which was not for our open Boat.

Monday Morning May 13. about two of the Clock, ^e were called to go Aboard
which we did according^, the Wind at West or West and by North, the ^ale was
brisk, but not very great, which we were ^lad of, thereby expecting a speedy
passage: Putting off from Eda, we in great danger.
So we ^ith two other Boats in Company loosed, but scarce ^ere we a League
without the Heads, we saw a storm ^f Wind and Rain making in the West, whence
the Wind blew, whereupon one of the Boatmasters in com^any, advised us to tack
about, and endeavor to ^etch Calf-Sound again, which counsel we judging to be
^afe, accordingly essayed to follow it, but the Wind and Sea rising more
boisterous and the Current of the ^bb being strong from the Sound, we could not
by any means effectute our design, tho we made several Trips ^ot without
danger; the Sea with its broken and swel^ing waves threatening to swallow us up
every moment: The Mariners stood by their sails, crying, This work was very
dangerous, and at one time, as one of them observed, the Boat had taken in
about 10. Barrels of Water, the Pump was still kept going, we ^udged our selves
to be lost Men, and some expressed ^o much. In these straits we desired the
Boatmaster ^itting by the Helm, to see if he could make any other Harbor or
Bay; He answered, God have Mercy upon ^s, for the Sea we dare not keep, and
there is not another Harbor in Orkney we can make, The Men were fatigued with
the toil of their hard work, and ^lmost at the giving over. We then knew to our
experience the meaning of that Scripture Ps. 107.27. of Seamen in a storm's
being at their wits end. Tho the Wind was fair for Zetland, yet we durst not
hold on our Course, the Sea not only being tempestuous, but we had also several
Rousts or impetuous Tides to pass, and then the Ebb was in the Sea, which made
them so much the more dangerous. Thus streitened, we thought it advisable, to
go down with some Sail before the Wind to the North end of Sanda* and endeavor
to get in to Otterswick or Taphness Bay, Get in to a Bay.
we fir^ attempted Otterswick, and lest we should have been blow^ by the Bay's
mouth, we held so near Land, that the Boat beat several times upon a Rock,
however we go^ in and dropped Anchor on the weatherside of the shore.

Go to Sea again.
We were all much refreshed with this great deliverance from so imminent a
danger. When we had ridden some hours at Anchor, the Wind and Sea calmed About
7, at Night one of the Boatmasters in company who had entered the Bay a little
before us, weighed Anchor and put to Sea again. Some of our number we^ for
lying still, till the Weather was better setteld others thought that seeing God
had commanded a Calm that we had a favorable Wind, that the sky appeared t^ be
well set and promising, and that the other Loadened Boat had gone to Sea before
us, it might seen from these things Providence invited us to Sea again^
Whereupon we put off, but before we had come the length of North Ronalsha,
scarce a League distant from the Bay, we had been in, the Wind became so faint
that the Mariners took them to their Oars, to help them through North Ronalsha
Roust, thence when w^ came to Dennis Roust, we made some way with our Sail
without Oars, the Tide then turning and the Flood beginning to run in the Sea.

Blown back by contrary Winds to Stronza.
Tuesday May 14. about 1. or 2 in the Morning the Wind shifted to East South
East, then to East, an^ our Boatmaster telling us, that he was forced to ste^ a
Northern Course, else he could not bear Sail, an^ so holding on, not a stone in
Zetland he could hit, a^ he expressed himself, we all judged it most prop^ to
return to Orkney: When we had tacked about, the Wind shifted to North East, a
strong Gale together wit^ great Rains, which caused a rolling and a swelling
Se^ (for Rains here without Winds do raise, or canker (as they term it) the
Sea, and much more when Win^ and Rain come on at once) however we got in safely
to Stronza Road, which was the readiest we could make. It was a happy
Providence that we then returned at that nick of time, for the Flood not being
all spent, we were thereby likewise hastened in our way, so that within a few
hours we came to our Port, tho as was reckoned, we were near midway between
Orkney and Fair Isle. The storm increased with the Day, and after our landing
it was so very great, that we were obliged to keep within doors, for several
hours; And if then we had been at Sea, it is terrible for us to think upon the
dismal effects which might have followed thereupon, for without all
peradventure, we had certainly perished, if the Lord by some wonder of mercy
had not rescued us, as indeed he had formerly done. O that we would praise the
Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Children of Men, And
that so long as we live, we may never forget, the 13th. and 14th. Days of May,
wherein the Lord wrought a great deliverance for us.

Thus being discouraged, Tho discouraged with dangers, we yet resolve to go for
Zetland.
we were in great perplexity, not knowing, what to do, Whether to make any
further attempt, or to return home, re infecta, seeing God in his Providence
had so crossed us hitherto, and it might be his mind, we should not go forward.
Upon these fluctuating and perplexing thoughts, we asked God's mind in the
matter, after which more light did arise, and we unaminously resolved yet to
try, what the Lord would do with us.

Friday May 17. between 8. and 9. in the morning, We arrive at Lerwick in
Zetland.
Wind and sky promising well, we put to Sea, and passed the Fair Isle about 5.
Afternoon, keeping it on our Starboard, then our Gale increasing, but
continuing fair, at South-West, we made good way. About Midnight we past
Swinburgh Head, the southern-most point of Land in Zetland, having thence 24.
Miles to Sail up within Land to Lerwick, whether we were bound. The Wind
growing more vehement, we lowed our Mainsail, and took in a Riff; With the
breaking of the Day, there arose a Mist, whereby we could scarce see Land,
however we judged it safest, to keep as near it, as we could, and sailed away
by the Coast; but being to pass through a Sound having the Isle of Musa on our
Starboard and Burra Land on our Larboard, A danger escaped.
our Seamen mistook the point of Musa, taking another point in the Mainland for
it, and the Mist lying on, we were almost engaged in the Land, and so would
have fallen among rocks, which they coming to suspect, held to Sea, resolving
to Sail without the point which they did with difficulty, the Boat being so
close haled, and the blast great, that the Helm-a-lee, was scarce able to
command her and keep her by the Wind: Which when they had done, came to
discover their Error. Hence sailing through Musa Sound, we came to Brassa
Sound, and arrived at Lerwick on Saturday about 4. in the Morning.

Some remarkable Providence by the way.
We had a quick passage, sailing about 100. Miles in 19. or 20. hours time:
Especially considering, that we were not half an hour on shore, when a strong
Wind blew from the North, which if it had come on but a little Soonner* we
would have been driven back to Sea. There is likewise another Providence
remarkable, that we had only an ordinary desirable Gale, when we passed the
Fair Isle, where always there goes a great rolling Sea, but when within the
Heads of the Land of Zetland, we had it very strong, so that scarcely we could
have wrestled and held out against it in the Ocean.

We leave Zetland, and arrives at Kirkwall in Orkney.
We arrived in Zetland May 18. and having brought to some Period and Close our
principal work there, we set Sail for Orkney, June 11. saluting and bidding
heartily farewell to the Ministers, and some Gentlemen of the Country and to
the most considerable Inhabitants of Lerwick, who kindly accompanied us to our
Boat. We left Zetland Teusday June 11. about 5 Afternoon, and having the Wind
at North-West or North West and by North we passed the Start Head of ^anda
about 4. next Morning, and endeavoring to ^et in to Ketteltaft in Sanda, A
danger escaped.
to put one of the Mini^ters of that Isle ashore; our Boat through our
Boat-masters inadvertency struck on a rock, without sustaining any damage, we
knew; But the Wind not permitting to turn up to that Road, we all came to
Kirkval, and arrived there before 9 in the morning. Our ^astage from Zetland to
Orkney, was yet quicker, then ^t was from Orkney to Zetland, we being but 16.
hours ^n running 120. or as some say, 128. Miles. Staying ^n Orkney a few days,
Pass Pightland Firth to Ca^thness, and thence home by Land.
we passed Pightland Firth to Caith^ess, and having dispatched our work in
conjunction with the Presbytery there; we came home by Land, ^epairing with joy
to our several Charges, Where we may set up our EbenEzer, saying, Hitherto has
the Lord helped us.

I think we are called seriously to reflect upon the Man^er of the Lord's
dealing with us, Some Reflections upon the dangers we had been in.
we have been long detained and crossed in our way to Zetland, tho we made
several attempts to go forward; As to our Commission we were appointed by the
General Assembly of this Church, and it being put upon us without any desire of
ours, or inclination that way, we accordingly undetrook our Voyage, and came
with a favorable Gale to Orkney: It is true, that there are natural causes of
Wind and Rain, whereof we are to make a Spiritual improvement, especially when
they do impede or promote our design; Moreover Gods Judgments are a great
depth, and by the course of Nature, in giving greater or lesser Winds at his
pleasure, he may carry on his more General Works of Providence, and yet thereby
more especially intend the punishment of the wicked, or the Chastisement of his
People, which they are called to consider and improve: And as true it is, God
in his Wise Soveraignity may so deal wi^h his People, for the trial of their
Faith and other Graces, that they may be still and know that he is God, ruling
as he pleases among the Children of Men: The Devil also, who is the Prince of
the power of the Air may have an evil and malicious hand in things of this
nature Especially when Men purpose to do good, which tends to the overthrow of
his Kingdom. O that what we have met with may be so blessed, as to render us
more zealous against him and all Sin, whereby his Kingdom is established in the
World, That we may fight with Devil^ and be more then Conquerours through him
who loves us. I say tho these things and the like sometimes may and ought to
be had a regard unto, yet I do humbly judge that upon these so very dreadful
dangers we have in great mercy escaped, we are called to examine ourselves, and
search unto our Sins as we are Christians and as we are Ministers, for which
the Lord may have a controversy with us; Our not being so faithful in our
personal and pastoral work, in working out our oun^ and others Salvation; Our
impatience in not waiting the Lords time, but being too anxious to be in
Zetland at any rate: And it is like in our not being so single in our ends in
goeing, as we ought to be etc. I conclude this Chap. As the Psalmist does Ps.
107. Reflecting on the Wonders of Providence, Who is wise, and will observe
those things: Even they shall understand the loving kindness of the LORD.

CHAP. II. A Description of Orkney, its Situation, Name first Planters,
Language, manners of the People, Wholesomeness of the Air, Corns etc.
THE Isles belonging to Scotland have commonly been divided into three Classes;
The Western, scaattered in the Deucaledonian Ocean, The Isles belonging to
Scotland divided into three Classes
on the West; the Orkney and Zetlandick, both lying to the North of Scotland.
As to the Western Isles, tho in number far exceeding both the Isles of Orkney
and Zetland, yet I take no notice thereof, in the subsequent Descriptione: ^r
Commission not being deputed thither, so only the ^^tter shall I give some
brief account of, not intending (...) advance any thing, but what I have either
found (...) be true from my own observation, or had by good ^^formation from
sensible and grave Persons worthy of ^^edit; And shall begin with Orkney as
order requires, ^e first Landing there.

Orkney lies to the North of Scotland, The Situation of Orkney.
bounded on ^^e West by the Deucaledonian Ocean; on the East, by ^^e German; On
the North, by the Sea, which divides Orkney from Zetland; And on the South, by
Pightland ^^rth, 12 Miles broad, from Dungisbie-Head or John ^rot's House, the
Northermost House in Scotland to ^urwick in South-Ronaldsha, the Southernmost
point of Orkney. It is commonly said to be about the 59th degree of Latitude at
Kirkwal which lies within the Coun^^ey; tho the Southmost point of
South-Ronaldsha, is ^istant from the Northernmost of North-Ronaldsha, ^ear a
degree.

That Orkney or Orcades is the name of these Isles, Concerning the Name
(...) agreed in, by ancient and modern Writers, But of ^he Etymology and
whence the name is derived, none (...) suppose will be found to give a
satisfying account. Some alleging it to come from Orcas, which Ptolomy reckons
to be a Promontory of Caithness, opposite to Orkney; Others from the Greek word
(...) Coerceo, these Isles breaking and restraining the force of the rageing
Waves: Or from Hurricano, because of the boisterous Winds and Hurricanes which
often blow in this Country: Or from Erick or Orkenwald, or some other Pictish
Prince famous there at its first Plantation. Which derivations, some of them at
least cannot but appear far fetched to the thinking Reader: Injuria Temporis
multa in oblivione jacent sepulta.
And indeed many in giving the Reasons of names, do rather please their own
Curiosity, then render a true account of their Original; seeing the Reasons
generally of the Ancient Names of Countries are buried in oblivion, through the
want of Writers, and neglect of the first Inhabitants, especially in these
parts of the World, wherein Learning more slowly advanced.

The 1st Possessors of the Country.
The first Planters, and Possessours of the Country seem to have been the
Picts, there being several old Houses, both here and in Zetland, which to this
Day are called Picts or Pights Houses, and the Firth between Orkney and
Caithness, is still called ^ight-land Firth; Whereupon some of our Historians,
as Boethius, Writing of the Isles of Orkney, does observe,) design Orkney, the
most ancient Kingdom of the Picts; Boeth Hist de orchad.
Orchades insulae, antiquissimum Pictorum Regnum a quibusdam nostrarum rerum
Scriptoribus vocitatae. And we find mention made of the Kings of Orkney,
Buchan. Histo, on Ewen. 2.
at Buchanan tells us of one Belus who having Invaded Scotland, was defeated
and put to Flight by Ewen 2d. King of Scots, Killing most of his Army, upon
which Belus being much discouraged and broken in Spirit, despairing of life,
put hand in himself, Both Hist. Lib. 2.
and became his own Executioner. Boethius calls him Balus; Balus autem Orchadum
Rex fractus animo, desperata Salute, ne in hostium potestatem ventret, manum
fibi intulit. And in the Church of Birsa at the West end of the Mainland in
Orkney, there is a long Stone yet standing erect, with the name Belus inscribed
thereon in ancient Characters; Probably this was the Place of his Interment.
Also the Minister of Sandwick's Manse is said to have been the Residence of one
of the Kings of Picts, and therefore to this Day is called Koning^gar, or the
Kings House; And that part of the Manse, which they say served for the Palace
of a King* is so little, tho now keept in some Repair, that it could not
accommodate a Family of an ordinary rank; The Figure thereof and contrivance of
its two Rooms or Chambers one above and another below, of narrow dimensions,
are antic, and the Building has been but course. Boethius likewayes tells of
another King called Banus, whom Claudius-Caesar having subdued, anno Christi
43. He carried him with his Wife, and Children Captive to Rome, and were led by
him in Triumph: Buch^nan questiones the truth of this History, Buchan Hist. in
vitam Carataci.
Tacitus af^irming that part of Britain then to have been altogether ^nknown to
the Romans, nec temere tamen crediderim quod ^ostri tradunt Scriptores etc.
quod Tacitus affirmet ante ^ulij Agricola adventum, Kenneth. 2. expels the
Picts.

See Buchan. Hist. in vitam Ken. 2. Quietissime vixit promotis finibus ab
Orcadum Insulis usque ad Vallum Adriani. The Norvegians obtain possessione of
the Isles, and are expelled thence by Alexr- 3. King of Scots.

Act. 13. Parlia. 2 Charles 2. anno 1669 the Earl of Mortons Wed set reduced
by Act of Parliament Mr. Wallace his Description of of Orkney;


eam Britannia partem Romanus ^^no incognitum fuisse. But if Boethius his
Relation be ^rue, the vanquishing of Orkney has been reputed something
considerable, seeing not to every Conqueror was ^llowed by the Roman Senate,
the Glory of a Triumph.

It is also probable, the Government of these Isles continued with the Pictish
Princes, till the Days of Kenneth 2d. King of Scots, a Warlick Prince, who
having prevailed with his Nobles contrairy to their own inclin^tion, by a
notable piece of craft, to engage in a War against the Picts, with an undaunted
valor and courage, routed the Pictish Army and wasted their Country with Fire
and Sword, pursueing them to the Orkney Isles which he then annexed to the
Crown of Scotland, reign^ng from Orkney to Adrian's Wall Anno Dom. 854. Thence
Orkney continued in the Possession of the Scots, till the Days of Donald Bane,
about the Year 1099, who that he might secure the Kingdom to himself, promised
the Isles to Magnus King of Norway, if he would assist ^im with a necessary
force; Which offer Magnus accept^ng, the Norvegians became Masters of the
Isles, till Alexander. 3d. about the Year 1263 Recovered them by ^xpelling the
Norvegians; Which ever since were possessed and disposed of by our Kings. To be
brief, at length William Douglas Earl of Mortoun got a Wadset of Orkney and
Zetland from King Charles the first, Which Wadset with all the Rights,
Contracts, Infeftments etc. There^nto appertaining, was reduced by a Decree of
the Lords of Session, obtained at the instance of his Majesty's Advocate
against William Douglas also Earl of Mortoun Grandchild to the foresaid Earl,
February 1669. which Decree was ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament,
^he December following, erecting the Earldom of Orkney and Lordship of Zetland
into a Stewartry to be calle^ in all time comeing the Stewartry of Orkney and
Zetland The reason commonly given, why the Earl of Morto^ lost the Wadset, was
because some Chests of Gol^ were Seized by the Earls Deputs in Zetland, got out
o^ a rich Ship, called the Carmelan of Amsterdam, cast awa^ there Anno 1664;
None of this Gold coming to the Kings Thesaury, tho some of it, as was
alleged, cam^ to the Earls hands.

The Contry of Orkney and Zetland reckoned considerable and the Title honor
able.
From our History we may know, that Orkney an^ Zetland have been reckoned so
great and considerable a part of his Majesty's Ancient Kingdom, that for dive^
ages they occasioned much expense of Blood and Treasure, for the maintaining
thereof against the Invasion ^ Foreiners, and recovering the same out of their
hand by Arms and Treaties. The Title likewayes of the^ Isles has still been
reputed honorable, hence it hat^ pleased Our present King to confer this Title
of Earl (...) Orkney, upon Lord George Hamilton, Brother to his Gra^ the 'Duke
of Hamilton, for good services done by hi^ to his Majesty's Person and
Government.

The state of the Country considered; the People personable and hospitable,
Their Clothes.
I proceed to consider the present state of the Country. The People here are
Personable and comely, an^ many of them, as I observed, are of a Ruddy
complex^on, which may be by reason of the Sea Air and their frequent Fish-diet,
such a color and countenance as o^ Mariners use to have and retain for some
Days afte^ they are come from Sea: They are generally Hospitab^ and civil,
giving kind and humane entertainment t^ Strangers, which we found to our
experience. Bot^ Men and Women are fashionable in their cloths, (...) Men here
use Plaids, as they do in our Highlands; (...) the North Isles of Sanda Westra
etc. Many of the Country People wear a piece of a Skin, as of a Seal, common
called a Selch, Calf or the like, for Shoes, which the fasten to their Feet
with stringes or thongs of Leathe^ Their Houses are in good order, and well
furnish^ according to their qualities.

They generally speak English, neither do I think, Their Language.
^hey have so much of the Northern Accent, as in ma^y places of the North of
Scotland, yet several of the ^sles have some Words and Phrases peculiar to
themselves. There are also some who speak Norse especial^ in the Mainland, as
in the Parish of Hara there are a ^w yet living, who can speak no other thing,
this ^anguage not being quite extinct among them, since ^e Norvegians whose
Language it is, The Air wholesome
had this Country (...) possession. And tho Caithness be near to Orkney, yet
none ^n Orkney can speak Irish, tho the greatest part in Caithness can; Nor any
in Caithness speak Norse, tho some in Orkney yet can do it.

The Air as it is peircing and cold, Hence many old Persons.
so it is free and ^ealthy; Hence many arrive at a good old Age: One (...) Evie
brought forth a Child in the 63 Year of her ^ge, as the Minister who had
enquired thereunto, de^lared: A Man in the Parish of Holm, who died not many
Years since, lived with his Wife in a conjugal ^ate above 80 Years; as the
present Minister of the ^lace informed me: A Gentleman in Stronsa, who died
about two Years since, was begotten of his Father when ^00 Years old, this was
attested by the Ministers who ^new the truth thereof. One William Muir in
Westra lived ^40 Years, and died about 16 Years ago, by a de^ay of Natures
heat and vigor, incident to such an in^ decrepit age, without any ordinary
Sickness, as a Gentleman in these bounds well acquainted with him, old me. They
subject to the Scurvy.
The disease they are most obnoxious unto ^ the Scurvey, occasioned, as is
judged, by the Sea^ir, Fishes, Saltmeats etc. It is observed likewayes that ^
is colder in the Summer time, then it is with us in ^e South, but warmer in the
Winter, the Snow not ^sing to ly long; For (beside other things that might ^e
said on this head, The temperament of their Climate.
which also respect other Countries) ^n the Summer cold breezes come off the
Sea, which ^empers the heat; And in the Winter season the same ^eezes may
qualify the extreme cold and frost, which uses to be greatest, when the Air is
most quiescent, a^ least disturbed with Winds; The great motion also of^ rapid
Tides may contribute not a little thereunto.

Their Corns and Bread.
Their ordinary grains are Oats and Barley, and (...) other grains should be
sown, the product would (...) be great if any at all, they not taking with such
a w^ and cold soil, and the many brinish blasts these Isles exposed unto. As
for Wheat-bread it is rare and sca^ to be had, if not at Kirkwal and some
Gentlemen Houses, who bring the flour from Murray or the So^ of Scotland. As
for their Oats and Barley, the gra^ is less and blacker, then it is with us:
Yea tho the should bring good and fair seed from other Countrey^ within a few
years it would degenerate and beco^ like their own; which is the reason why
their Me^ and Bread are of such a black color. Yet in some pl^ces the Meal is
whiter, and said to be better then others. Their not being so diligent in
winnowi^ their Corns, nor having such good Mills for grind^ as we have, may be
partly the cause thereof. In so^ place also they use not to shear their Corn,
but pluc^ it up by the roots, as we do the Lint, because of t^ scarcity of
fodder to their beasts, which Corns if o^ taken pains upon, will abound with
sand and dul^ Nevertheless for ought I hear or know, their Brea^ and Ale are
wholesome, and the Natives take we with them. I thought; first when we Landed
in Orkne^ their Oat bread and Fleshes also, had some Fish-taste but when we had
tarried some Days there, we we^ not so sensible of it.

The nature of the Soil, and the Product thereof.
Their arable ground is better and more fertile, the^ at first to strangers
appears, whence I heard so^ Gentlemen declare, It was wonderful to think, ho^
great the product of these Isles is considering the man barren mountains and
much waste ground that are i^ them. They dung their Land for the most part wit^
Sea-ware, which having gathered, they suffer to rot^ either on the Coasts, or
by carrying it up to the Lan^ on Horses or on their backs, they lay it in
heaps, the time of laboring approach; Which is the rea^, why the skirts of the
Isles are more ordinarily ^tivated, and do more abound with Corns, then ^ces at
a greater distance from the Sea, where they ^ve not such gooding at hand. Their
Ploughs are ^tle and light, having only one stilt, and but little ^n in them;
hence when at the end of the ridge, (...) who holds it lifts it up and carries
it to the other ^le of the ridge, and if he please may carry it home (...) his
shoulders: The reason they give of this is, that though some of their ground be
strong, yet their ^asts are weak and unable to go through with a plough any
considerable weight.

Their Horses, Kine, Sheep, Concerning their Cattle and their price:
Lambs etc. are of a ^sser size then with us, and are to be bought at an ^s^er
rate, for a good Cow will be had for 5 lib. Scots, ^r 4. ib. 16 ib, at which
price they are obliged to sell ^er at K^kwal about Martinmass. A good Wedder ^r
20 sh. Scots. A Hen for 2 sh. or 2 sh. 6 d. etc. The Sheep here are generally
wild, therefore when ^hey would have them taken, they ordinarily do it by Dogs
trained for the purpose, the Owner of the Sheep giving to the Master of the Dog
2 shill. Scots for each ^me that is taken, and it they be not so wild but 1
shill. Some Husband Men told us, they would rather labor their Land over
again, then take their Sheep when they would have them washen and shorn; I saw
young Man come from the hills wet and weary, hav^ng a long time pursued one to
kill for our use. Their Kine are of diverse colors, some white, others of ^a
pyed, some red, others red and white etc. No Rivers, but some Brooks here,
which cause their Mills to go.
So that (...) think, there are as many of these colors, as are of a black.
They have no Rivers, no place of the Land, being above 2 or 3. Miles distant
from the Sea, therefore they draw water out of wells for their Cattle, or
drives them to Lochs or Lakes, some whereof they have, or to some small brooks
which run from the Lochs: Which Lochs likewise cause their Mills to go.

Plenty of Cattle Butter and Milk.
They have abundance of Cattle in many places whereby is afforded them plenty of
Milk, which yields much Butter, some whereof is very good, yellow and sweet,
but that which is called Orkney Butter* Edinburgh. is only their Farm-Butter,
which they a^ obliged to pay to the Taxmen or Masters, whereof quantity
according to compact and agreement being gathered, they are at little or no
trouble to make a^ keep it clean. Their Sheep also are very fruitful, man of
them having two, and some three at a birth, which as Mr. Wallace lately, Boeth
Hist. de Orcad.
so Boethius of old did observe^ Oves illic pene omnes geminos, immo trigeminos
pleraeq^ partus edunt.

Their Fishes.
Fishes of diverse sorts are taken in great plenty, y^ not so numerous as
formerly, for now before the catch their great fishes as Keelling, Ling etc.
the must put far out into the Sea with their little boats, an^ thereby undergo
great danger, which in former time they used to get nearer the Coasts: However
such^ number is taken, that beside what serves for their own supply, many are
sent abroad to other Countries for sale. Particularly there are gray fishes,
called Silluks scarce half so big as a Herring generally, which swee^ and are
taken in great numbers upon the Coasts, (...) that sometimes they will sell
1000. of them for 6. or still. Scots. This fish is pleasant to the taste, and
also they say very wholesome, which seems to be confirmed by this, that in the
late years of great scarcity the poorer People lived upon them, almost as their
only food, they often not enjoying a crum of Bread so many Weeks. So our good
God, on the shutting o^ one door, opened another in his holy and wise
Providence for the relief of the poor.

Herrings.
Herrings do sweem here in abundance, which formerly occasioned several Ships
frequenting these Isles but since the Battle of Kilsyth, they say, that Trad^
^^th failed; many of the Enster Men, who were ordi^^ry fishers upon these
Coasts, being killed there. ^hen I was in Papa Westra, they pointed out to me a
^olm upon the East side of the Isle, where I saw the ^ines of some Huts or
little Houses, whereunto these ^nster Men sometimes resorted, during the
Herring^hing. A Gentleman living in this Isle told me, that ^^e former Year
1699, there was a great quantity of ^erring Sperm or Spawn driven upon the
shore, and ^y there for some time in heaps; which evidenceth ^^at Herrings in
their season, are yet on these Coasts: ^o means be not used to take them.

Beside the many other excellent fishes, as Keeling, Many other good Fishes.
^^ing, Scate, Turbot, and sometimes they say Stur^eon etc. there are also many
Shell fishes taken; as Lobsters sold for an half penny or 4 pen. Scots; Oisters
^uch bigger then with us, for 4 shill. Scots per 100. ^artens and Mussels; and
Cockles in so great plenty, that they make much good Lime of their shells, Lime
made of Cockle shells.
beside which they have no other Lime in Orkney, save what ^hey bring from the
South.

They have plenty both of Land and Sea Fowls: Plenty of Fowls.
as Eagles, Hawks, Ember-Goose, Claik-Goose, Dun^er-Goose, Solen-Goose, Swans,
Lyres, Scarffs, Keriwaiks, ^lover, Muir-Fowl, Duck and Drake etc. The King's
Falconer uses to go every year to these ^sles, taking the young Hawks and
Falcons to breed, and every House in the Country is obliged to give him a Hen
or a Dog, except such as are exempted. The Eagles do much hurt to the young
store, falling down upon their Lambs and Hens, and taking them away with them
to their Nests, Killing and pulling out the eyes and hearts of their Sheep;
Hence there is an Act standing in the Steward's books, that whoever shall kill
an Eagle, shall have a Hen out of every House of the Parish, where he is
killed; yet notwithstanding of this encouragement, I hear but of few killed,
they fleeing high, and dispatching their prey so quickly: I saw a young one in
the Palace of Birsa, almost twi^ the bigness of a Goose, tho not a month old,
it is ravenous fowl, and would have run upon us, if we h^ not kept it of with
our slaves. As to its color, it (...) for the most part black, and something
of a yellow (...) golden color about the Head, and in some parts o^ the wings.
It is observed of the Eagle, that he do^ more destruction in places at some
distance from honest, then in these that are nearer it. Eagles, Haw^ and such
like fowls have their nests ordinarily, o^ some high, ragged rock, washen by
the Sea beneath some of which we saw as we had occasion to sail b^ them.

An account of the Ember-Goose.
The Ember-Goose tho not altogether so big as ou^ Land-Goose, yet it uses to
weigh a stone weight. I^ has short wings, not able to bear up the body for
fleeing, hence it is never seen flee, neither sit on an^ rock in the sea, as
other Fowls do, but has it is nest wherein it hatcheth its Eggs, one or two at
once under the Water, at the foot of a rock, as they informed me, has been
found. It is of a darkish gray color, and white about the neck, of broad feet
like ou^ Land-Goose, and a long beck and tho ever in the Water, yet has not, I
think, such a strong fish taste, a^ the Solen-Goose. It is more difficult to
get them shot, then other Sea fowls, they being very quick-sighted, and on the
1st. apprehension of danger, get beneath the Water: Yea by reason of their many
feathers, they will receive a shot on their breast, and it not penetrate:
wherefore who would be at them, design for their Heads, or to shoor them
against the feathers. And Lyre
The Lyre is a rare and delicious Sea fowl, so very fat, that you would take it
to be wholly fat; it is somewhat less then a Duck.

Sea-Fowls. numerous
The Sea-fowls are so numerous, that a Gentleman in Westra told his Minister,
that some Years ago, he for his own part killed so many, as afforded him 50,
60. and some Years 100. stone weight of feathers, ^hereby accrues to the Owners
more gain, then by ^e flesh of the fowls) tho for some seasons past, he ^th
taken but few; For it is observed, that these ^wls follow the small Fishes,
which are their ordi^ry food, hence the mo Fishes, the mo Fowls, and ^hen the
Fishes forsake this and the other place, the ^wls likewise do so within a short
time. Because of ^is abundance of Fowls, therefore it is, that the ^entlemen
and some others have the rocks in several ^aces divided among them, as they
have their Land. which Fowls they either kill by small shot our of Boats (...)
the foot of the frequented rocks, or else Men are let own by ropes from the top
of the rocks, who search ^r the Nests, taking the Eggs, and what Fowls they ^n
apprehend. Many kinds of the Sea-Fowls are of a ^yed color, some of which are
not to be found with ^s in the South.

There are here no Partridges, No Partridges, but abundance of Muir-Fowls.
but plenty of Muir-^owls, hence in some Isles they will take 20, 30. or ^o
pair in one day, the hills covered with heather, ^eing by Nature fitted for
their living and accommo^ation. Conies also do abound in most of the Isles, but
^o Hares are to be seen, No Hares, but Rabbets in abundance.
so that if any be brought into ^he Country, as they say, has been tried, they
will ^ot live and propagate as in other places. I hear of ^ew, if any venomous
creatures in these Isles, as Boe^^ius of old did observe, Boeth. Hist. de Orcad.
Serpents aut aliud animal vene^osum nullum, id quod de Hiborma quoque verum
est: No Bees either are here, No venomous Creatures.
there being no provision proper ^or them, beside they would not take well with
this ^old Climate.

No Trees there are in this Country, nor Bushes, No Trees.
^ave a few in the Bishops Garden at Kirkwal, which ^re esteemed as a rarity,
for when planted and taken are of, they sometime grow up the height of their
Garden Wall, but afterward they gradually go back and decay. This several
Gentlemen very desirous of ^aving Trees to grow, declared; Which then must be
imputed to the nature of the Soil, and sharpness the Sea-air, and not to the
sloth of the Inhabitant as our Historian asserts, Nulla usquam Arbor ac ne Fr^
tex quidem praeter Ericam, Buchan. Hist. L. 1.
nec id tam coeli aut so^ v^ quam incolarum ignavia, quod facile ostenditur ex
arbo^ radicibus, quae pluribus in locis eruuntur. For tho ind^ it be true, that
Roots, and sometimes Bodies of Tree^ are found in Mosses; yet this is rare, and
only to be ha^ in some places; whereas Gentlemen say, they brin^ in exotic or
foreign Plants, they sow Seed for Nurseries, which uses to arrive at some
greater growth then what is planted, yet after all their pains and expense in
using such proper means, so conducive, for obtaining their end, no perfection
or bearing of Frui^ can be attained. And that Trees, which yet are b^ small,
and look dry and withered, do grow in the Bishops Garden, may be because of its
enclosure, having the Church on one side, the Town of Kirkwal on another, and
the Bishops house on a third; Which kind of fences, may keep off the cold
breezes, that come from the Sea, and destroy the growth of Tree^ in other
places.

Tho there be no Trees, and so no Fruits for the Table, Good Roots.
yet there is no lack of good Roots for the Kitchen, as Cabbage, Carrots,
Parsnipes, Turnipes, Crummocks, Artichoaks etc. All which uses to be bigger
here then with us ordinarily; especially their Artichoaks excel, hence some
Gentlemen do barrel and send them out of the Country for a present to their
Friends. Beside these, they have likewise variety of Herbs in the field, very
beneficial to such as understand their virtue and use.

Pites and Turff are the ordinary fuel they use, which they have very good and
in great plenty through the Country, Their fuel.
except in some places, which do not so abound therewith, as in Sanda they are
obliged to bring pites from the adjacent Isles, they not having in their own
Isle to suffice them. And the usual ^ner of agreement with the Proprietor of
the ^s, is for so much a day, for so many Peits as a Man (...) cast. And in
such places, where there is scarcity ^ewel, the poorer sort make use of dried
Kine's dung, Tangles, which in Summers heat they prepare for the ^nters cold.
They have a few Salt-Pans, in some ^ces, where plenty of Pites, which are very
useful to (...) Country. At some times, much Timber, the ^ack of Ships cast
away at Sea, or broken on their ^s, is driven ashore, which the Inhabitants
seizing ^p for burnwood, and if good and fresh, (as some^es Ships from Norway
suffer Shipwreck upon or nigh these Isles) they make other uses of it; I saw
seve^ Chimney pieces thereof. The more ignorant People ^nstruct this as a
favorable Providence to them, there^e they call these wracks, God's send, tho
not so favour^e to the poor Mariners and others who suffer there^.

Although the Sea seems to favor them, Dangerous sailing here.
by ^inging such Timber, and sometimes Casks and ^ogsheads of Wine, Brandy etc.
to their doors, yet is turbulent swelling Sea, and strong Current of a ^ide
pays them home sore, for frequently thereby their shall Passage or Fisher-Boats
are cast away, sometimes (...) in them perishing, at other times some saved
with ^fficulty. And at all times it is highly dangerous, ^r any not experienced
with these Seas, to pass ^rough between the Isles, tho with small Boats, be^use
of the many blind Rocks lying there, upon which ^ometimes the Inhabitants
themselves do spleet, what ^rough some mistake, inadvertency, darkness of the
^ight or otherwise.

The Ministers inform us, Even to the Inhabitants.
they are often in great ^anger in going to their Churches from Isle to Isle,
Visiting their Parishes, going to the Presbytry, etc. ^ometimes, pale death,
with its grim countenance, ^resenting it self, and stareing them in the Face,
as ^ne drawn out by the hair of the Head; another escaping on the Keel of the
overwhelmed Boat; Som^times they are arrested by a storm in the Isles, a^ kept
from their own Families for some weeks, eve^ when the passage will be scarce a
Mile or half a mi^ over. They tell us, in the Isle of Westra, there w^ a
Marriage not long since, where about 100 Person were conveened from other
Isles, and were detaine^ for 6 or 7 weeks together, so that tho many of the^
daily saw their own houses, yet they durst not adve^ture to pass over, till the
falling Wind and Sea too^ off their confinement.

In every Isle there is a Wart or Ward-Hill, the highest Hill in the Isle, The
Wart-Hill.
on the top whereof they use to kindle a fire, when they saw an Enemy
approaching, or discerned any danger, that so they mig^ alarm the
Neighborhood, that the dispersed Inhab^tants of the Country having thereby
notice given the^ might conveen for their succor, or be upon the^ own Defense,
which Beacons on the tops of Mountains the Scripture makes mention of, as Isa.
30.1^ And a late Learned Author asserteth, Edward's Scrip. style Vol. 3. Chap.
4.
That great fla^ with smoke rising up out of the City, which was appoint^ as a
sign between the Men of Israel, and the Liars in wa^ Judge. 20 38, 40. seems to
be meant by this.

The Proprietors of the Country.
There are several Gentlemen in Orkney who ha^ considerable Estates, but the
King is the great Proprietor, having about the one half of the Rents of t^
whole Country. Which Rents are let out to Taxme^ for so much per Annum, as is
agreed upon at the public Roup, who by their Deputes gather in the R^venues of
the Crown, and being the Kings Stewar^ they are the principal Judges of the
Country. T^ Rents when Collected, whether paid in Mone^ Meal, Oats, Barley or
Butter are ordinarily sent Sou^ which causes a great grudge among the People,
some (...) them thereby being redacted to great straits, not getti^ Meal,
Barley or the like sometimes to buy, as in t^ late dearth, tho then the product
of these Isles, comparatively, were beyond that of many other places in ^e
Kingdom. The Bishops Rents amounting to 8 or ^00. Merks per Annum, and so more
considerable then ^e Rents of several other Bishoprics in the Kingdom, ^w
since the abolition of Prelacy coming in to the ^ings Treasury and at his
disposal, are also sent ^uth and not consumed within the Isles, as they used
^rmerly to be, when the Bishops resided here, at which ^e People are likewise
dissatisfied, and thereby, as some ^etter acquainted with their humors and
inclinations do ^form me, the Presbyterian Government is made the ^ess
acceptable to many of them.

The People greatly cry out of the Oppression they groan under, The Peopel
complain of oppression
by reason of the frequent change of Stew^rds their Masters, who being Taxmen,
and so only ^o continue for such a definite time, each endeavors ^o gather in
his Rents, and that as soon as may be, which many of the poor People cannot get
so quickly given, whereupon several of them are put to doors, and all taken
from them, which has occasioned much of the King's Land now to be lying waste
and lee; Whereas if they always had one Master, their Circumstances might be
much better, for sometimes it so falls out, that the Husbandman will gain as
much in one year, as will compense the loss of another, the Master likewise
would be more encouraging to them, and concerned in their welfare, and they
having Leasses set them, would more endeavor the improving of their ground,
which now they do not, they not knowing, but the next year they may have a new
Master, whose little Finger may be thicker then his Predecessors Loins. Yet
let not my Reader judge, that I hereby intend the Impeachment of any particular
Person or Persons, who have been Taxmen there, or now are, but my design is to
show, that this is the common complaint of the Country both in Orkney and
Zetland.

The Gentlemen tell us, Their Holding.
they have another kind of Holding here, then is in other places, and the best
right they have to their Lands, is that which they call Udall right, a
Possession which the Natives successively have without either Charter or
Seasin; All their Lands being either such Udall Land^, or Kings Lands, or Fewed
Lands. This Udall right is said to be called from one Ulans King of Norway, who
when he possessed the Country, gave to the Inhabitants a Right to so much
Land, he always retaining to himself the 3d part, and enjoying the increase
thereof.

Measure.
Their measure is not the same with ours, they not useing Peck and Firlot, but
in stead thereof, weigh their Corns on Pismires or Pundlers. The least quantity
is called a Merk, which is 18 Ounces; 24 Merks make a Leispound or Setten,
which with the Danes is that which we call a Stone. Modern Account, of Denmark.
6 Settens, a Meil, which is their Boll; And 18 Meils make a Chalder. Neither
do they use Pocks or Sacks as we do; But carries and keeps their Corns and Meal
in a sort of Vessels made of Straw, bound about with Ropes of the same, called
Cassies.

CHAP. III Wherein the several Isles and Parishes belonging to Orkney, are
enumerated, and briefly described.
HAVING geven some description of Orkney in general, The Number of the Orkney
Isles
I shall now give some more particular account of the several Isles thereunto
belonging. Which are divided into such as are Inhabited, and so are more
commonly called Isles; And such as are not Inhabited, which they call Holms,
only useful for Pasturage. The Isles are said to be 26 in number, viz. Pomona
or the Mainland being much larger then any of the rest Gramsey, Hoy, Swinna,
South-Ronaldsha, Burra, Lambholm, Flotta, Faira, Cava, Copinsha, Shapinsha,
Damsay, Inhallo, Gairsa, Rousa, Eaglesha, Stronsa, Papa-Stronsa, Eda,
North-Faira, Westra, Papa-Westra, Wyre, Sanda, and North-Ronaldsha. To which
may ^e added Poghtland Skerries, it being sometimes inhabited in the Summer
time, and Waes which in a high ^ream is divided from Hoy, whereunto it is
joined by low and narrow neck of Land; As also the Calf of Eda, it having a
Salt Pan in it:. It may be observed that most of the Names of these Isles end
in a or- ey, which in the Teutonick Tongue signifies Water, to show that these
Isles are pieces of Land surrounded with Water.

The first is P^mona or the Mainland, Pomona or the Mainland.

The Town of Kirkwal described.


said to be 24 Miles in length from East to West, and in some places ^ or 8
Miles broad; nigh to the middle whereof is the Town of Kirkwal, about 3 quarters
of a Mile in length from South to North, the only remarkable Town in ^ll this
Country, and beside which there is no other Royal-Burgh in Orkney or Zetland;
The Danes who ^ad the Orcades long in possession, called it Cracoviaca, which
Name Buchanan takes to be the same with Kirkwal but corrupted. "Quod Dani
Cracoviacam appela^ bant, nunc nomine corrupto Kircua Scotis dicitur. It
^^andeth upon the North side of the Isle in a low and moist Ground, hence a
Minister in this Country told me, that in several places of their large
Church, where ^he more respected Burgers ordinarily Bury their Dead, they can
scarce dig two foot of Earth but Water will rise, so that he has seen when
they Interred the Corpse ^hey behoved to press them down in the water till the
Mold or Earth was cast upon them. It is now much ^ecayed as to Trade and Number
of Inhabitants, as many ancient Burghs in this Kingdom are. In it has ^een two
stately Edifices the King's and the Bishops Palace, ^he former is now very
ruinous being the Ancientest ^f the two, built, as is thought, by some of the
Bishops ^f Orkney; It having the vestige, of a Bishops Mitre and Arms
Engraven, upon the Wall that looks to the ^^reet: And in which, it is said, the
Bishops, of old, had their Residence. The other, called the Bishop's Palace,
wherein the Bishops lately lived, was built by Patrick Stewart Earl of Orkney
Anno 1606, son to Robe^ Stewart Natural Son to King James the 5th. This Palace
i^ also goeing to Ruin; Tho, with some expense, i^ could be keept, in good
Repair.

the Church of Kirkwal^
The Church is a very noble and large Structure; Hav^ing, in it, 14 or 15 strong
Pillars, on each side, The ^teeple standing, on 4 bigger and higher Pillars, in
the middle of the Church, wherein there are several old an^ good Bells. In the
Easter part only, of this great Church, is Divine service performed, which is
furnished with good Seats, for accommodating the Inhabitants and other
conveniences, proper for that end. It i^ commonly called St. Magnus Church;
being built, (...) at least, as some say, the foundation laid, by Magnus King
of Norway; Whom they report, to have bee^ Buried here: Tho, others say, he was
Buried in Eagle^ sha, an Isle to the North of Kirkwal. There are many, of this
name, of Magnus, in this Country.

A safe Road at Kirkwal
At Kirkwal, there is a safe Road; But Ships, comin^ from the South, cannot get
so easily into it, by reason that the same Wind which brings them to Orkney,
often will not suffer them to turn up to Kirkwal, the^ being obliged to
encompass a point of Land stretchin^ to the North-East before they can make the
Road, (...) that frequently they ly at Elwick or Deer-Sound tw^ Anchoring
places to the East or North-East of Kirw^ until that the Wind shall favor them.

Goodgrass and Corn, in some places of the Mainland.

The Kings House in E^a


On the Mainland good Corns do grow in several pl^ces, tho likewayes there be
much moorish Ground, b^ the pleasentest part of the Isle I take to be the West
e^ thereof, about Birsa, Hara, Sandwick and Stromness, when there are several
spots well furnished with Grass a^ Corn. In the Parish of Birsa is the Kings
House situat^on a plain Champain Ground on the West end of t^ Mainland, nigh to
the Sea or Deucaledonian Ocean, whi^ ^rmerly when in order has had several
pleasant and di^erting Avenues about it. At a large quarter of a Miles ^istance
to the south, we saw the pleasantest mixture of ^owans so commonly called or
Daisies white and yellow ^n every side of the way growing very thick, and
co^ering a considerable piece of the Ground; that ever ^ve had occasion to see.
The Palace was Built in form ^f a Court by Robert Stewart Earl of Orkney, about
the ^ear 1574, it is two stories high, the upper has been ^rettily decored,
the Ceiling being all Painted, and that for the most part with Schems holding
forth scrip^ure-Histories, as Noah's Flood, Christ's Riding to Jer^salem etc.
And the scripture is set down beside the Fi^ure: It was Inhabited within these
20 Years, but is ^ow fast decaying. When we entered the Palace gate, we ^w
above it, that Inscription so much talk^ of, and re^uted treasonable by "King
James the 6th: Robertus ^ Steuartus Filius Jacobi 5ti Rex Scotorum hoc
Aedifici^um instruxit, which inscription could not but offend ^he lawful Heir
of the Croun, for it cannot well be ^hought that the Earl and all about him,
were such blunderers in the Latin Tongue as to put down Rex in stead of Regis,
if there had been no design in it. Within ^he Palace we saw also the Motto
above his Arms, Sic ^uit, est, and erit. which was a piece of too great
arrogance ^or any Man to assume that unto himself, which properly belongs to
the Son of GOD, whose wise Judgment is not unworthy of our Remark, that now
only ^t can be said of his House and Family, now extinct. Dan. 4.37.
^ic suit: Which that great King Nebuchadnezar knew ^o his experience, That
these who walk in pride, God is able to abase.

Among other pleasant places in this West end of the Mainland we may take
notice of Kirfal-Hill, Kirfal Hill
a little to the East of the House of Brachness in the Parish of Sandwick, which
is very large on the top, and plain almost like a Bowling-Green, so that 9 or
10000 Men could easily be drawn up in order thereupon: It is all over very
green without any Heath or such like growing there neither are there any rising
Hillocks on it, that we could discern, as ordinarily are to be seen on other
Hills; and because of it is being so very pleasant the Inhabitants about call it
Chearful-Hill, Loch of Stennis.
Within a few Miles also of he West End of the Mainland is the Loch of Stenni:
the largest in Orkney, whereon are some Mills; some Trouts, and Salmon-Gilses
are found in it, and the Brooks that run from it.

Several good Harbors on the Mainland.
Beside Kirkwal-Road, there are several other Harbors or Bays on the Mainland,
wherein Ships can safely ly, as one at Kerston a small Village, at the West end
of the Main-land, much frequented by Ships going to the West of Scotland, or
Ireland, or coming therefrom: Another is at Holms-sound toward the South-East
side of the Isle, to which sometimes Barks do resort from the South; several
Ships also going through Land from the South to the West-Sea, drop Anchor here;
and when they pass, they must Sail between Lambholm a little Isle in the Sound,
and the Mainland; for the way on the other side between Lambholm and Burra, tho
it seem more open, yet it is, they say, shallow and dangerous: But none I think
will dare to Sail through these Isles without some measure both of skill and
experience, else it will be to the hazard of their lives, and the loss of Ship
and Cargo; There being several Turnings, Blind-Rocks, and Shallows: Wherefore
many do judge it the safest Course, to keep the Wide-Sea, and so Sail without
the Isles, especially if the Weather be not well set and promising. Another
convenient Road is at Deer-sound to the East of the Mainland where a great Bay
commodious for Navies to ride in. Some other Harbors and Bays also there are
upon the Mainland, but these are the most remarkable.

A Ship cast away.
Nigh to the point of Deer-Ness some Years ago was cast away a Ship transporting
some Prisoners to America, who were for the most part West-Country Men
apprehended, Emprisoned and then Banished for adhering to Presbyterian
Principles; There were, as is said, love 100 who Perished being kept under the
Hatches, ^ed together by pairs, whereas if they had been at li^rty, the
greatest part if not all might have been sav^, as a few were, then upon Deck,
with the Mari^ers. The Country People here did and do think that ^e Captain of
the Ship willingly suffered her to drive ^on this point, and the Men there to
Perish, and if so, is probable that others tho not Aboard, have been ^ncerned
in this mischievous desing, as the Authors ^d Abettours thereof.

In the Mainland are ^ Parishes but 13 Kirks, The Isle of Copinsha.
for ^any Ministers in Orkney have 2 and some 3 Kirks, ^herein they ordinarily
Preach by turns, the first is ^eerness and St Andrews at the East End of the
Isle, ^here two Kirks, one at Deerness and another at St ^ndrews, wherein their
Minister Preaches by turns, ^re live the Lairds of New-work and Tankerness;
Under ^s Ministers inspection also is Copinsha a little Islle to ^e East of the
Main, wherein a few Families, some ^rn-Land and Pasturage: It at a little
distance appears (...) be as an high Rock conspicuous to Sea Men, but it
^clineth and lies low toward the West: To the North ^st of it lies a Holm
called the Horse of Copinsha.

The next Parish is Holm, also on the East of the ^ain to the West of Deerness
and St andrews, The Isle of Lambholm.
wherein is ^t one Kirk; In this Parish lives the Lord of Graham^^ll. To
their Ministers Charge belongs Lambholm ^itle Isle to the South of the Main,
wherein a Family ^ two. North-West from Holm, the Parish and Town Kirkwal
lies, where one Church, but they should ^ve two Ministers. A part of their
Charge is called ^e Parish of St Ola. To the West of Kirkwal is Orph^ where is
but one Kirk. To the North-West of ^kwal lies Firth and Stennis having two
Kirks, where^ their Minister Preaches per vices or by turns. The Isle of
Damsey.
To this ^rish belongs Damsey, a little Isle. To the North of ^th and Stennis,
is Evie and Rendal having two Kirks, ^erein their Minister Preaches per vices,
To this Parish belongs Gairsey a little pleasant Isle, The Isle of Gairsey.
wherein ^eth Sir William Craig of Gairsey

To the West of Evie and Rendal is Hara and B^^ where are two Kirks, in which
the Minister Preache^ per vices; the King's House is in Birsa as abovesa^^ Next
to Birsa to the South-West is Sandwick and Stro^^ness, wherein are two Kirks,
which their Minister go^^ to per vices. To Stromness belongs Kerston, wh^^
the best Harbor in Orkney, and by reason it is daily i^creasing as to Houses
and number of Inhabitants, (w^ are encouraged to dwell here upon the account of
t^^ many Ships that do frequent this Port, and often tarry^ sometime;) the
Minister and Gentlemen concur in suplicating Judicatories competent, that
Kerston wi^^ some of the Country adjacent, may be erected into (...) Parish by
it self, that so the Inhabitants of the pl^^^ and strangers resorting
thereunto, may be served wi^^ Preaching, and other parts of the Pastoral Work;
the present Church at Stromness being 4 Miles distant from them, wherein also
they can have Sermon, but eve^^ other Sabbath. In Sandwick lives the Lord of
Brach^^*

To the South of Stromness and Sandwick lies Hoy^ Waes, which ordinarily make
but one Isle, tho someti^^^ by a high Sream overflowing the low and narrow
pa^^age. The Isle of Hoy, and Waes.
whereby they are joined to one another. they^ divided into two; The Isle is
about 10 or 12 Miles lo^ from West to East. Waes at the East End of the Isle
better inhabited, then Hoy at the West End thereof, lying lower, and so fitter
for Pasturage and labour^^g whereas Hoy is more Mountainous, only having so^^
Houses on the skirts of the Hills, by the Coasts, a^^ some Corn Land about
their Houses. The H^^^^ of Hoy is the highest in Orkney, whence we have a (...)
prospect of all the circumjacent Isles, as also of Caith^^* Stranaver,
Sutherland etc. On the South side of P^g^land Firth, yet tho it be so high, it
cannot hold (...) what some do assert, that from this Hill is to be seen (...)
Sun all the Night over in the Month of June when ^out the Tropic of Cancer,
for seeing the Sun is ^ several hours seen above the Horizon the shortest ^ of
Winter, he must necessarly be so far depressed, shortest Night in Summer, so
that his Body cannot ^ be seen, tho something of a clear light may be ^erned,
as it were accompanying the Sun from his sett^ to his rising point, by reason
of the reflection and action of his Rays upon and through the Sea, he ^ping so
little below their Horizon: For the further ^strating of this, the Ministers of
the Northern-Isles Orkney told me, that in the Month of June they will ^ to
Read small Print or Write at midnight; And in ^cember for some Days they can
neither see to Read (...) Write, unless that they light a Candle, as one of ^m
attested from his experience. To the South of the ^try into the Sound between
Hoy and Kerston in the ^ainland is the Comb of Hoy, the highest Rock in Orkney,
looking to the West or Deucaledeman Ocean much ^quented by Sea-Fouls.

The Minister of Hoy has two Kirks, The Isle of Gramsey.
one in Hoy and other in Gramsey, a little pleasant Isle about a Mile ^ng,
lying to the North of Hoy, between it and Kerston ^ the Mainland, but Ships
that go through this Sound ^e to Sail between Gramsay and the Mainland, the way
^tween Gramsay and Hoy being very dangerous. The ^inister of Waes has two
Kirks, The Isle of Flotta Faira, and Cava.
one in Waes and an^her in Flotta, a pleasant little Isle, and as capable of
^provement as any Isle in Orkney; Faira and Cava also ^o other little Isles are
a part of his Charge, these Isles (...) to tha East of Waes and Hoy.

Nigh to the East of Waes and Hoy lies South-Ronald^a 5 Miles long from North
to South, The Isle of South-Ronaldsha.
and about two ^oad in several places, it is the Southernmost of all the Isles
of Orkney, and very Fertile and populous, at ^he South-end thereof is Burwick,
whence the ordinary ^assage is to Duncansbay in Caithness over Pightland Firth.
Their Minister has three Kirks, two in South-Ronald^ha, one at the South-end
of the Isle, called our Lady's-Kirk, and another at the North-end called St Pe^
Kirk. The Isle of Burra.
He has a 3d Kirk in Burra a pleasant little Isl^ the North of South-Ronaldsha,
wherein much Cornla^ and many Rabbets: in this Isle lives Sir Archb^ Steuart.
The Isle of Swinna.
To this Parish belonges Swinna a little Isle Pightland-Firth, of which more
afterward, when (...) come to discourse of Pightland-Firth.

The Isle of Shapinsha.
To the North of the Mainland lies the Northern Is^ as Shapensha to the
North-East 4 or 5 Miles long, this Parish belongs but one Kirk, It has a safe
Harbor at Elwick on the South of the Isle: Here is t^ House of the Sound which
looks well, and has a plea^ Situation on a rising Ground, lying to the South.

Isles of Stronsa, and Papa Stronsa.
To the North-East, from Shapinsha lies Stronsa^ bout 4 or 5 Miles long, it is
well Inhabited, and t^ Grass and Corns are good: Papa Stronsae is a little I^
over against it toward North-East, wherein but o^ Family, between Papa-Stronsa
and Stronsa is a safe Ha^bour or Bay, well fenced by ^romontories or Capes ^
Land, it is said to be the best North-bound Harbour^ all the Northern Isles.
Opposite to Stronsa to North-West lies Eda about 4 Miles of length from North
t^ South, The Isle of Eda.
it is full of Moss and Moor, and but thinly Inhabited: Some of the Neighouring
Isles get their Pite^ hence. In it a Loch and Mill. To the North-East o^ Eda is
the Ca^f, a Holm so called; between which an^ Eda is Calf-Sound a convenient
and safe Road. The Mini^ter of Stronsa and Eda has two Kirks one in Stronsa
an^ another in Eda where he Preaches every 3d Sabbath To the West of Eda lies
North-Fatra a little pleasant Isl^ wherein a few Families. The Isle of
North-Fatra.


The House of Calf-Sound.
On the East side of Eda, stands a House built b^ John Stewart Earl of Carrick,
An. 1633. Some (...) whose Off spring are yet living in the neighbourin^ Isles,
the occasion of his coming and living in this remote corner, is reported to
have been some disconte^ which tell out between him and his Lady; He built a^ a
great Expense 12 Salt-Pans in the Calf of Eda, ov^ against his house, which for
some time were all at ^ork, he designing to have driven a Foreign Trade ^ith
his Salt, but he dying after a few years abode ^ere, the House and Pans not
being keept in Repair ^ent to ruin, so that now only one Salt-Pan is stand^g.
Thus his Project died with himself.

To the N East of Eda is Sanda^ the pleasantest I ^ink, of the Orkney Isles,
The Isle of Sanda.
9 or 10 Miles long from ^uth to North, in many places a Mile or a mile and ^
half, and in some scarce half a mile broad, having ^veral tongues of Land
washen by the Sea; hence some ^o compare it to the shape of a Lobster: No place
in the ^le is high and Mountainous, and many spots of it are ^ery plain, and
even like a Bowling-Green, every^here it is well furnished with Grass, and much
good ^orn, said to be the best in Orkney; It alone pays to ^e King 42
Chalders of Victual, every one of which ^h^lders is 21 Bolls of our Measure;
The whole Isle ^ but as one rich Cuningar or a Cony Warren, for I ^ever saw a
greater number of Conies running in any ^lace then I did here; Hence the
Heretors kill ^everal hundreds of them yearly for their use. There ^e several
Bays for Ships as Kitletoft, O^terswick and ^aphness Bay. Some Gentlemen also
who have consi^erable Interests as Burgh, Lapness etc: Many Fowls ^equent this
Isle, as Duck and Drake, Plover, etc. ^o that there is good sport for the
Fowler. The Stir^ns or Stares are as numerous I judge, as the Spar^ows are with
us.

In Sanda are two Ministers, one having one Kirk ^alled Lady-Kirk, on the East
side of the Isle toward ^he North end thereof, in this Isle are some sober,
^nowing, and good People; particularly in this Lady Parish in the former
Presbyterian times, there was a Godly Zealous Minister, Mr. Arthur Murray, who
went South after the Revolution An. 1660 and died ^here, some of the old people
yet alive, who were un^er his Ministry cannot speak of him without Tears The
Righteous shall he had in everlasting rememberance. The other Minister has
under his inspection three Kirks, two in Sanda, Cross Kirk, and Burness, and
one in North-Ronaldsha, an Isle to the North of Sanda two or three Miles long.
Both these Isles of Sanda and North-Ronalsha ly low, The Isle of North Ronalsha.
and dangerous for Seamen, who cannot discover them at any distance especially
in a misty day or dark night, till close upon them, and so are ready to suffer
Ship wrack, as many do:

The Isle of Westra.
To the West of Sanda lies, Westra seven Miles long it is well Inhabited, having
much Corn in it; here is F^tta Hill where they say the Fairies are frequently
seen, it is the highest hill in all the Northern Isles of Orkney. In the North
end of this Isle is the Castle of Noutland, built by Gilbert Balfour for the
use o^ James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, The Castle of Noutland.
Married to Queen Mary the 27 of May An. 1567 in the Abbey of Holy Roodhouse
who fearing he should not always retain and enjoy his present Grandeur, which
the Nobles envied him for, he likewise being suspected guilty of the Murder of
my Lord Darli^ her former Husband caused build this strong Castle, which upon a
change of the Scene, he might betake himself unto, situated upon a Rock nigh to
the Deucaledonian Ocean, having plain Champain ground about it; It is 4 Stories
high and the lowest is strongly Vaulted, above, which i^ a large Hall, having
two Air-holes through the Arch, so to give a vent to the Powder, if at any time
they showld be surprised with a blast, the walls ar^ very thick, and all the
free stone for the building was brought from the South: The Roof is flat and
fenced with Rayls of Stone, whence we have a sai^ view of the circumjacent
Country, There are severa^ hols or slits in the Building, not only to let in
the light, but to gall an approaching Enemy with small shot, if at any time they
should be attacked: But the Lord often taking the Sinner in his own craftiness
^uffered him not so to escape, by sheltering himself in this Nest; This Castle
was never completed, for in one part thereof, the Walls are but half the
height in^ended, and never hitherto covered with a Roof, and ^e being pursued
by the Lords of the Congregation, never possessed it, or so much as saw it, if
not at a distance, for he taking himself to Sea with two or three Ships came to
Kirkwal in Orkney, and being driven thence by William Kircaldy of Grange, he
fled to Zetland, where the Pursuer had almost overtaken him, if the Pilots
skill in these Seas had not made a way to escape, in holding down by the side
of a blind Rock well enough known to the Pilot, which the Pursuer ignorant of
spleet upon; which Rock to this day is called the Unicorn, from the Name of the
Ship that perished upon it. Bothwel escaped to Norway where being apprehended,
he was taken to Denmark, and cast into a filthy Prison, where he died after 10
years Imprisonment: His wicked life having this miserable end: Tho hand join in
hand the wicked shall not go unpunished; and ordinarily Murder, (whereof he was
suspected to be guilty,) so cries from the ground, that it brings down
remarkable and often tremendous Judgments in time. There are several Gentlemen's
Houses in Westra.

The Minister of Westra has three Churches wherein he Preaches per vices, two
in Westra, one at the west end of the Isle called the West-Kirk, and another
nigh to the North end called the North-Kirk, the third Church is in Papa-Westra
a little Isle of 3 Miles long from South to North; The Isle of Papa-Westra.
Betwixt it and Westra there is a convenient Harbor for Ships at Piriwa; As
also in the same Sound a little to the North of this Harbor lies a holm
wherein there has been a little Chapel, whereof some of the ruinous Walls are
yet to be seen. Papa-Westra abounds with Rabbets, and has some Corn Land,
but not so much as some other Isles, it being hard and stonny ground; It
belongs to a Gentleman called Holland, and has been reputed famous for St.
Trodwells Chapel and Loch or Lake. To the Ea^ of this Isle lies the Holm,
where the Easter Men had their Hutts as above.

The Isle of Rousa.
To the South of Westra lies Rousa an Isle 6 Miles long, full of heathy Hills,
abounding with Moor Fowls, there is not much corn in it, and but thinly
inhabited. There is a Loch and Mill thereon that goes ordinarily all the
Summer over, which is rare in these Isles. The Minister of Rousa has two
Kirks, one in Rousa and another in Eglesha, The Isle of Eglesha.
a pleasant Isle two Mil^s long, where a Church much frequented by
superstitious People with a high Steeple seen at a great distance, where, (as
some would have it,) St. Magnus was buried. To his Charge also belongs Inhallo,
The Isle of Inhallo.
a little Isle to the West of Rousa, also Wyre a small Isle.

The Number of Parishes.
Thus I have glanced at the Description of the Orcades; most of which I have had
occasion to see, wherein we see there are 17. Parishes, 8. in the Mainland,
Viz. Kirkwall, Holm, Deerness and St. Andrews, Evie and Rendat, Firth and
Stennis, Orphir, B^rsa and Hara, Sandwick and Stromness, and 9. in the other
Isles, Sciz. South Ronalsha and Burra, Waes and Flotta, Hoy and Gramsey,
Shapinsha, Stronsa and Eda, Lady Kirk in Sanda, Cross Kirk and Burness in
Sanda, and North Ronalsha, Westra and Papa Westra, Rousa and Eglesha; But there
are 31. Kirks; And these Ministers look upon themselves as more happily posted,
who have only one Kirk, especially if they have not more Kirks in several
Isles, this tending more to the Edification of the People under their Charge,
and consequently to their peace and encouragement, they every Lords Day
dispensing Ordinances in the same place, to the same People, whereas these who
have more Kirks committed to them are sometimes obliged to preach in one place
and sometimes in another, and the People generally frequent but their ou^ Kirk,
especially if they be in different Isles, hence ordinarily they enjoy the
Ordinances only every other Sabbath, and in some places ^t one of three, which
cannot but obstruct the pro^ss of the Gospel, among them. Besides it is uneasy,
^ensive and dangerous for them to travel from Isle to ^e, and sometimes a storm
arising they are necessarily ^ained there. The stipends here are small, and for
(...) most part paid by the Stewart or his Depute, the ^ng being the principal
Proprietour, yet they can ^e very well upon them, Victuals being had at an ^ie
rate.

The People are generally tractable, People respectful of their Ministers.
submissive and ^pectful to their Ministers, which is very desirable ^d
encouraging to these who labor among them, ^hen true Zeal enlarges the
desires, and puts an ^ge upon the Spirits of Pastors in the discharge of the
^rd's Work for the good of Souls.

CHAP. IV. ^ome things remarkable in Orkney, as Ancient Monuments, strange
Providence etc. are represented.
HAving taken a view of the Country in general, Things remarkable in Orkney.
and the several Isles in particular, I shall now di^ert my Reader with some
things remarkable, not together unworthy of our Observation, such as some
^ncient Monuments, strange Accidents, and some ^her things not only curious and
delectable, but also ^ofitable to the Judicious; affording matter "of
meditation to the wise Observers of these things, who regard the Works of the
Lord, and duly ponder the operation of his hands, in the years of Ancient and
Latter times.

The first we take notice of is the Stone, The Dw^rfie Stone.
called the ^warfie Stone, lying in a Valley between two Hills, to ^e North of
the Hill of Hoy, it is about 34. foot long, ^6. or 17. broad and 8. thick,
hollowed by the hand of some Mason, as the Print of the Mason-Irons do (...)
show, it has a square hole for the Entry, looking^ the East, 2. foot high,
with a stone proportionab^ standing before this Entry at 2. foot distance, with
at one end is hewn out a bed with a pillow, where two Persons may ly almost at
their full length, opp^site to this at the other end, is something also hew^
out like a Couch, between which Bed and Couch the^ is a large Hole above about
the bigness of the Entry through which a Person may come up to the top (...)
the Stone, and might serve, for a Vent to the smok^ if so be they had put any
fire upon a Hearth betwe^ the two Beds. Beneath this stone runs to the South^
cold and pleasant spring which might afford drink^ the Inhabitant. Who hewed
this stone, or for wh^ use it was we could not learn, the Common Traditi^ among
the People is, That a Giant with his Wi^ lived in this Isle of Hoy, who had
this stone for the^ Castle. But I would rather think, seeing it could (...)
accomodate any of a Gigantick stature, that it mig^ be for the use of some
Dwarf, as the Name seems import, or it being remote from any House might the
retired Cell of some Melancholic Hermit. T^ stone also may be called the
Dwarfie Stone, per A^phrasin or by way of Opposition it being so (...) great.

Something shines wonderfully on the Wart-Hill of Hoy.
To the North-West of this Stone is an high Mo^tain of a steep Ascent called the
Wart-Hill of Hoy, loo^ing to the North; Nigh to the top of which Hill ab^
Midday, is seen something and that at a good ^stance, which glitters and
shines wonderfully, a^ tho some have climbed up and searched for it, ^ could
find nothing: It shines most in the summer ti^ The People talk of it as some
enchanted Carb^cle: Others take it to be a Water that reflecteth (...) Sun's
Rays, and so causes such a sparkling and spl^dour; But a Gentleman who lives
nigh to (...) Rock told us, that is shines most in the greatest Drought, ^hen
no Water is near it.

At the West end of the Mainland, A street of stones of different figures.
about a Mile ^d an half to the West of the House of Skeal, on the ^p of high
Rocks, there is something like a street, ^ear to a Quarter of a Mile in length,
and between (...), and 30. foot in breadth, all laid with Stones of ^fferent
Figures and Magnitudes, of a Reddish co^ur: some of which stones bear the Image
and Repre^ntation of a Heart, others of a Crown, others of a ^hoe, a Leg, a
Last, a Weavers Shuttle etc. And that which renders it yet the more strange is,
when these ^ones are raised many of them have the same figure and ^ape below on
the one side, that they have above on ^e other; which street all beholders look
on as very wonderful. I saw a part of the Garden Wall of the House of Skeal,
decored in the forepart thereof with ^hese stones, we intended to have sent a
parcel of them ^outh to our Friends as a rarity, if they had not been ^orgot at
our return from Zetland. Whether these ^tones be so laid and figured by Art or
by Nature will ^e hard to determine. For there is no House nigh to ^his street,
neither are the ruins of any which former^y have been there, to be seen. So
puzling are the Works of God to the most ingenious and accurate observers of
Providence.

At the Loch of Stennis in the Mainland, A Circle of stones;
in that part thereof, where the Loch is Narrowest, both on the West and East
side of the Loch, there is a Ditch; within which there is a Circle, of large
and high stones ^erected: The larger Round is on the West Side, above ^00 paces
Diameter: the Stones set about in form of (...) Circle within a large Ditch,
are not all of a like quantity and Size, tho some of them, I think, are upwards
of 20. foot high above ground, 4 or 5. foot broad, and a foot or two thick,
some of which stones are fallen, but many of them are yet standing, between
which there is not an equal distance, but many of them are about 10. or 12.
foot distant from (...) other. On the other side of the Loch over which (...)
pass by a Bridge laid with stones after the manner of street, the Loch there
being shallow, are two ston^ standing, of a like bigness with the rest, whereof
o^ has a round hole in the midst of it, at a little distan^ from which stones,
there is another Ditch, about ha^ a Mile from the former, but of a far less
Circumferenc^ within which also there are some stones standing something bigger
then the other stones on the We^ side of the Loch, in form of a Semicircle, I
think rather then of a Circle, opening to the East, for I s^ no stones that
have fallen there save one, which wh^ standing, did complete but the
Semicircle. Both (...) the East and West end of the bigger Round, are tw^ green
Mounts, which appear to be Artificial: In on^ of which Mounts were found, Mr
Wallace Desc^iption of Orkney.
says Mr. Wallace^ 9. Fibulae of silver, round, but opening in one plac^ like
to a Horse-shoe.

It is most probably thought that, these were the High Places in times of Pagan
Idolatry, whereon sacrifice were offered, and that the two Artificial Mounts o^
Earth, served for the same purpose, or were the places where the Ashes of the
Sacrifices were cast, as some w^ I have (...) Bo^thius in the Life of Ma^nu^
King o^ Scot^ observes, That the People called these hug^ stones drawn
together in the form of a Circle, the Ancient Temples of the Gods, Beeth in
vitam Mains.
Vt Populus ad Religionem mov^entur priscis sacris novas quasdam and solenne^
Ce^en on^as superaddidit (Rex nimi^um Mainus) Du^ Im^mo ta^ibus peragendas, ut
immensis saxis varus in Regionu^ locis (ut res exposcebat) in coronidem
admotis, eorumqu^ maximo ad Meridiem porrecto, cujus pro ara foret usus^
Victimae ibi Diis immortalibus sacrificium cremarentur. Ex^ tantum ^i fidem,
vel hoc nostro avo ingentia ea saxa auct^ in Circo, prisca Deorum Phana Vulgus
appellar. Many o^ the Country do say, That in the larger Round the Sun, and in
the lesser the Moon was Worshipped by ^e old Pagan Inhabitants of these Isles.

And indeed to build their Altars of earth or unpo^hed stones seems to have
been the custom of Ancient ^mes, and even of the first Ages of the Rom: Empire,
Apologet Chap. 25.
(...) the Learned Spencer endeavors to prove from "Tertullian, Etsi a Numa
concepta est curi^sitas superstitiosa, nondum tamen aut Simulacris aut Templis
res Divina apud Romanos constabat. Frugi Religio and pauperes ritus, and nulla
Capitolia certantia coelo; Spencer. de Legihus Hebraeorum.
sed temeraria de cespite Altaria, and vasa adhuc Samia, and ^nidor ex illis,
and Deus ipse nusquam. And further confirming the same from Cluverius writing
of the German Antiquities. And concludes with giving the Rea^n why the Gentiles
of old were so taken with rude, ^digested, artless and unpolished Altars and
places of ^orship, because they Judged them more holy and ^ore acceptable to
the Gods: "Gentes antiquae, says ^he, Natura vel Traditione doctae, naturalia
omnia ^rudia licet and impolita, sanctiora and Diis suis gratiom crediderunt,
And here in these Monuments nothing ^ke Art or Form: the Stones are not
polished nor all of (...) like thickness, height or breadth, nor of an equal
di^tance from each other.

In the Isle of Sanda there is a Chapel called the Chapel of C^et, wherein
there is a Grave 19. foot long, Great bones found in Sanda.
which when opened some years ago, there was nothing ^ound in it save the piece
of a Backbone of a Man, ^reater then the Backbone of any Horse. This the
Minister of the place declared unto me, who saw the Grave opened, and measured
it from the Head to the ^oot stone thereof, who also for some time had the ^one
in his Custody. The vulgar Tradition is that ^here was a Giant there, who was
of so tall a stature that he could have stood upon the ground and put the
Copstone upon the Chapel, which no Man now liv^ng by far could do. And in
Westra.


There are also Bones found in Westra between Tukey and the West Church, as
great as Horse-bones, as the Minister of Westra informed me. And some there
have been lately of a Gigantick stature in these Isles: A^ that Man who died
not long since, whom for hi^ height they commonly called the Meikle Man of Waes.

Several Obelisks through the Country.
Through this Country we find several Obelsiks o^ very high and great stones
set up, as one in the Isle o^ Eda, another on the Mainland within a Mile of B^
etc. they appear to be much worn, by the washing o^ Wind and Rain, which shows
they are of a long standing, and it is very strange to think how in these
place^ and times they got such large stones carried and erected Mirabile
profecto quisquis ea spectaverit, Boeth. in vitam Ma^us.
qua art^ quibus Corporis viribus lapides tanta mole in unu^ locum fuerint
congesti. The Reason and End of their setting up cannot be certainly known,
however we may conjecture, that probably it was in remembrance of some famous
Battle, or has been the Ancient Funeral Monuments of some renouned Persons,
who have fallen i^ Battle or been buried there. Several of which stone and
Monuments are to be seen in many places through Scotland; and in Norway they
are very common, a^ our Travelers who have seen them, inform me. An^ it is
like these stones have been set up by the Norvegians, when they possessed this
Country.

The Bishops of Orkney at their, 1st. Landing used to be presented with a large
Cup full of strong drink.
In Scapha about a Mile from Kirkwal to South-We^ it is said there was kept a
large and ancient Cup, which they say, belonged to St Magnus King of Norway,
wh^ first instructed them in the Principles of the Christian Religion and
founded the Church of Kirkwal, with which fu^ of some strong drink their
Bishops at their first Landin^ were presented; which if he drank out, they
highly prai^ed him, and made themselves to believe, that the^ should have many
good and fruitful Years in his tim^ This Buchannan relates, and as Mr. Wallace
observet^ is still believed there, and talked of as a truth. Scyphu^ habent
antiquum, says Buchannan, quem Divi Magn^ qui primus ad eos Christi doctrinam
attulit, fuisse praed cant; Is cum ita superet communium Poculorum
amplitudinem, ut e Lapitharum Convivio reservatus videri possit, eo suos
Episcopos initio ad se adventantes explorant: Qui plenum uno haustu ebiberit
(quod admodum raro evenit) miris cum laudibus prosequuntur, atque hinc velut
laeto Augurio sequentium Annorum proventum animis praecipiunt. The Country ^o
this Day have the Tradition of this, but we did not ^e the Cup; Nor could we
learn where it was. And ^deed that which renders this the more credible, is ^at
the Norvegians at present as Merchants and Mari^ers inform us, have a custom
like unto this, that if any ^ome to pay them a visit, especially if they be
strangers, ^hey use to present them with a large Cup full of drink which they
take not well, if their guests drink not out. They say, some of these Cups will
contain three Mutchkins, others a Pint, and some a Quart of our Measure.

The Wind, and Sea, The Sea in a storm beats most vehemently on the Rocks.
in any storm beats most tempestuously and vehemently, here upon the Rocks: a
^ittle to the West of Kerston in the Mainland, there is a Rock called the Black
Craig of Stromness, about 70 Fathoms high; Upon which in a Storm the Sea from
the Deucaledonian Ocean does beat with such violence and force, that the Waves
breaking thereupon, cause the Water to rise to the top of the Rock like Snow
and flee like a whit Sheet before the Wind. blasting the Corns for 3 or 4 Miles
behind the Rock, if it fall out In, or a little before Harvest; And this it
does likewise in several other places of the Country, as some Gentlemen who
knew it to their experience, did declare. Yea so great is the violence of these
Tempestuous Seas, that thereby some great Stones are cast out, and others are
worn, so that large Caves in some places run from the Sea within the Rock,
beneath the Ground for some considerable way, I saw one of these at the
East End of the Mainland in the Parish of Holm, it is all covered above with
the Rock and Earth, save that within these few Years, some of the Rock and Earh
fell in, or was blown up (as they ca^ it) in one night, by a violent Storm
blowing from Sou^ East, hence now there is a hole in the Hill above, lik^ the
Eye of a Coal-pit, which is terrible to look do^ into: There is another,
something like this in Sou^-Ronalsha. In these Caves, Doves and Sea Fowls in
gre^ numbers use to Nestle.

Several strange Fishes sometimes seen here; and little Whales etc.
Several strange Fishes are here taken, or cast ashor^ sometimes, which are,
they say, very beautiful to loo^ upon, but we never had occasion to see any of
them There are likewise a great number of little Whales, which sweem through
these Isles, which they call spout-Whale or Pellacks, some of which I have
seen; and they tel^ us it is dangerous for Boats to fall in among them, le^
they be overturned by them: The former Year Anno 1699. There were 13 of these
Whales driven ashor^ upon Gairsay's Land, and 11 upon Eglesha's, about on^
time, as the Gentlemen themselves did inform me, o^ which Oil is made, very
benificial to the Masters of the Ground. The Ottars also, Seals or Selchs, and
other such Sea-Creatures are very numerous, but now their number is so much
diminished, that not one o^ Twenty is to be seen, and they have found severa^
of them lying dead upon the Shore; some hence observing that the Judgments of
GOD as to scarcity of suitable Provisions to these Creatures, are upon the
Waters also.

The Tides Rapid,
The Tides here are so rapid that they will carry (...) Ship alongs with them,
tho the Wind be contrary, (...) not very strong, and in going among these
Isles, scarc^ are they out of one Tide, when they are engaged in an^ other; and
in going from place to place they will find sonetimes the same Flood for them,
and at other times against them, and so with the Ebb. Especially there are some
impetuous Tides which they call Rousts, caused by the strong current of a Tide
meeting with a narrow passage; the quickness and rapidity, of the Tide,
compensing the narrowness of the passage, as it is in Lanes, which ^tens the
blowing Wind, and makes the Wind, to ^w so much the harder, in a proportion to
the pres^e it suffers by the straits of the Lane; So may we ^on concerning the
Rousts which run among the Isles. ^ave seen some of these Rousts boil like unto
a seeth^ot, with their high, white, and broken Waves and ^t in a calm Summer
Day, when there was no Wind ^wing. At one time Sailing by the side of Lasha
Roust ^ween Sanda and the Calf of Eda, the Roust getting ^ne hold of us, turned
about the head of our Boat ^y quickly, and tho there were 4 able young Men
^ing, beside the help we had by the Sail, we could (...) without great
difficulty make our way through it: ^hey tell us, that if the greatest Ship in
Britain fell into ^s Roust, where it is strongest, it would turn her ab^ at its
pleasure, and detain her till the Tide fell weak, ^n tho she had a right
favorable Gale. These Rousts (...) more dangerous in an Ebb then in a Flood,
the Ebb ^ng observed still, taeteris paribus, to make the foulest ^t most
Tempestuous Sea, and especially they will Foam and ^g, if the Tide be running in
the Winds eye: And when ^re is any storm, they will cause any Ship or Boat to
stand end and be ready to sink her in the fall. Several of which ^usts we had
occasion to meet with, but the Lord ^ought us safe through.

Tho the General Current of the Tide be still the ^e, from West to East in a
Flood, Some strange Rema^ks about the Tides.
and from East to ^est in an Ebb, yet running with violence upon the and, they
cause a contrary motion in the Sea next to (...) which they call Easter or
Wester Birth, according to Course. And there are some things which have been
^served as very strange in the running of the Tides, (...) that it flows two
hours sooner on the West side of ^nda then it does on the East: And at
Hammoness in ^e same ^sle, both Ebb and Flood runns one way ex^pt at the
b^ginning of a quick stream, when for 2 or 3 ^ures the Flood runs South; in
North Faira the Sea Ebbs 9 hours, and Flows but 3 But the reasons of (...)
Phenomena will not be so intricate or hard to res^ if we consider the situation
of these Isles, when Tide see^s to alter his Course, for the Flood co^ from the
West, to the West side of San^a, it t^ some time before it can get about the
point (...) the Isle to the South side thereof, so in North (...) the Sea is
more open whence the Flood comes, the Ebb runeth through several Isles,
turning m^ points of Land before it come to North Faira, w^ cannot but retard
its motion: So at Hammoness Sanda, the Situation of the place much determines
running of the Tide.

The rapid motion of these Tides makes sailing dangerous.
The rapid motion of these Tides among the Isle^ and their meeting with one
another makes it very d^gerous, and sometimes more especially in a Calm, a
Minister there told us, that he was never near death in his Life, then in a
de^d Calm, when night Westra, for they saw the Sea coming, which the thought
should swallow them up, and there being (...) Wind they could not get out of
the way, but God so ^dered it in his wise Providence, that the Sea or sw^ of
the Sea which they feared, broke on the fore-pa^ of the Boat, and so they
escaped.

There are frequently F^n-men seen here upon t^ Coasts, Finmen frequently seen
here.
as one about a year ago on S^onsa, and another within these few Months on
Westra, a Gentleman with many others in the Isle looking on him nig^ to the
shore, but when any endeavor to apprehen^ them, they flee away most swiftly;
Which is ver^ strange, that one Man sitting in his little Boat, shou^ come some
hundred of Leagues, from their ow^ Coasts, as they reckon Finland to be from
Orkney; (...) may be thought wonderful how they live all the time, and are
able to keep the Sea so long. His Bo^ is made of Seal skins, or some kind of
Leather, (...) also has a Coat of Leather upon him, and he sitte^ in the
middle of his Boat, with a little Oar in h^ (...), Fishing with his Lines: And
when in a storm he the high surge of a wave approaching, he has ^y of sinking
his Boat, till the wave pass over, least ^by he should be overturned. The
Fishers here ^rve that these Finmen or Finland-Men, by their ^ing drive away
the Fishes from the Coasts One ^e^r Boats is kept as a Rarity in the Physicians
^l at Edinburgh.

On the West side of Papa Westra, Some men appearing on a Holm before a boat
was cast away.
between it and ^ra there is an Holm, wherein once there was a ^e Chapel,
whereof some of the side-walls are only ^w standing, in which they say, there
were seven Si^s buried, who were Nuns, and desired to ly in this ^lm, about
whose Graves this Chapel was built: ^out a Year ago, there were seen several
times at mid^y, about 20. Men walking on that Holm, among whom there was one
higher and greater then the ^, who sometimes stood and looked unto the Chap^,
this my Informer with a hundred People in the ^e of Papa saw, who could attest
the same: After which appearance there was a Boat cast away on that ^olm with 4
Men in her, who were all lost.

In the Links of Tranaby in Westra, Old burying places.
and of Skeal in the Mainland, washen from the West by the Deucaledonian ^cean,
some places are discovered when the Sea wash^h away the sand, Mr. Wallaces
description of Orkney.
which shows that such places have ^en Cemeteries or burying places for their
dead of ^d, of a square figure, and the stones are joined to^ether by some
cement, when opened Earth and some^imes Bones are found in them, The reason
some do give of this is because the way of interring dead bodies among many of
the Ancients, (as among the Saxons ^n the Isle of Britain) was not in deep
Graves, but under Clods or Turfs of Earth made into Hillocks. But none of these
we had occasion to see, Concerning that Rock called Less, surrounded with the
Sea, nigh to the Noup-head in Westra, upon which some say, if any Man go having
Iron on him, the Sea will instantly rage, so that no Boat can come nigh to take
him (...) nor the sea be settled till the piece of Iron be cast^ to it; when in
Westra we enquired about it, (...) found no ground for the truth thereof.

A remarkable provibence.
Mr. Wallace narrates a remarkable Providence, wh^ the Ministers here confirmed
to us, as a truth; C^cerning four Men in Stronsa who u^ed to ^ish togeth^ in
one Boat, among whom there was one John^ ^ne whole Wife being desirous he
should inter^it ^ Fishing for a time, he having purchassed a great plen^ of
Fish, which he not being so willing to do, on a d^ she rising before him
stopped the windows and o^ (...) places in the House* whereby light was let in*
and (...) went to the fields; the other three Men after their usual manner went
to Sea, whose Boat she saw overturned and themselves perish; upon which she
returned home to her Husband: and no doubt would have given the sad News of his
Neighbors perishing, no^ without Joy congratulating, that he was not this d^
in company with them: But upon her coming into her house she had yet a more
melancholic fight; her Husband lying dead, choked in that vessel, wherein
they used to make Urine.

An honest Man in Orkney told me, that some years ago, Instance of God's mercy.
when he was coming home with Timber and some other things in his B^at, from
Innern^ss and was almost the length of the Isle of Eda, where he lived, the
Boat turned and lay upon her side, but the Sails being spread in the water
hindered the Mast to go down, and her altogether to overturn, much of what they
had in went to the Sea, and he with the other Seamen in Company sat upon the
side of the Boat, and so were for some hours tossed up and down, whither the
Tide did drive them, they in the mean time comforting and refreshing one
another with places of Scripture and notes of Sermons, which lately they had
heard, and sometimes putting up earnest Prayers to God whom the Wind and Seas do
obey; At length God not turning away his Mercy from them, nor their Prayer from
^im, graciously gave ear unto their cry, and ^rought them all safe ashore
together with the Boat on ^he west side of Sanda, much of the Timber and what
^hey had in being driven ashore to that same very place before them. A great
Mercy when not only they, but their Boat, and most of their Loadening, were
saved, ^ome of these Men whom I am acquainted with, and ^o judge Godly, cannot
speak of this deliverance but ^ith great concernedness and affec^ion, which
makes ^e to think this Mercy not to have been a cast of ^ommon Providence, but
a gracious Return of their ^rayer.

The Effects of Thunder in this Country are very ^urprising; 1670, The effects
of thunderstrange
The Steeple of Kirkwal was brunt with Lightening: And A^ 1680 there was a
Gen^leman in Stromness in the west end of the Mainland and a stall, wherein
there were 12. Kine, the Thun^r killed every other one, killing one and passing
(...) other, so that there were 6. killed, and 6. alive; ^his the Ministers
confirmed as a certain truth to their ^nowledge.

There was a Man that died not many years ago, An Eagle takes up a Child.
^ho when a Child being left in the Field, (the Mother, as some say, shearing
at a little distance from ^im) was taken up by an Eagle, and carried from ^he
Parish of Orphir in the Mainland, to the Isle of Waes ^ver 3 or 4 Miles of Sea,
but in God's good Pro^idence, the Eagle being quickly pursued to his Nest
^hither the Child was taken, he was recovered without any hurt.

It was observed that in these Isles before the late earth, there were several
strange Birds seen, Several strange birds seen.
such as ^hey have not seen formerly nor since. One of the Ministers told me,
that one Bird frequented his House about that time for a quarter of an Year,
which was ^f a black, white, red and green Color: As also he saw another, all
stripped or sprainged on the back, which Birds were beautiful to behold.

There was a Monster about 7 Years ago born of one Helen Thomson Spouse to
David Martin Weaver in North Ronalsha, A monster born.
having its Neck between Head and Shoulders a quarter and an half of an yard
long, with a Face, Nose, Eyes, Mouth etc. to the Back, as well as before, so
that it was two Faced, which Monster, came living into the World: This the
Minister declared unto us, having taken the Attestation of the Women present at
the Birth, he not being on the place at the time: And it is said that a certain
Woman should have wished this unto the Mother, whom she alleged had lied upon
her, in her wrath wishing, that if she spoke a lie she might bring forth a
Monster, which accordingly came to pass in God's Holy and Will Providence.

Concerning mines, shells etc.
Some say there are several Mines of Silver, Tin Lead etc. Also some Veins of
Marble and Alabaster Buchanan commends this Country for white and black Lead,
Buchan. Hist. L. 1.
of which there is to be had as good as in Britain Sex diversis in locis hujus
Insula, Metalla su^ plumbi albi and nigri tam probi quam usquam in Britan^
reperiatur, As also several kinds of fine Shells to b^ found on the shore and
Rocks, but we had occasion t^ see none of them, save some of these Nuts, where^
they make Snuff-Boxes.

CHAP. V. Some Heathenish and Popish Rites, Charm etc. yet remaining in the
Orkney-Isles, are glanced at.
Concerning their superstitious ^e,
BEfore that I bring to a close my Discourse concerning Orkney, I shall give an
Account of some C^stoms yet prevailing among them, which can be constructed to
be nothing else save the sour dregs of Pa^an and Popish Superstition and
Idolatry, yea and ma^y of them such as the Charms practiced by them ^o be the
mere and woeful effects of pure Devilry, and ^ot the product of Natures
Operation.

But least I should be mistaken I judge it not amiss ^o premise, A caution
given.
That not all nay nor the generality of Orkney ^re hereby impeached, as guilty
of these evils, for I know there are many judicious and wise Men, and I hope
some real Christians among them, who abhor and detest such things as much as
any, but hereby some ^oolish and silly ones are intended, whom deceiving and
being deceived, Satan leads Captive at his will; Nor yet that all the Isles
are alike lying under the Charge, for there are some of them, whose Inhabitants
^re generally more Moral and Discreet: Neither is it ^lledged, that such sinful
and corrupt Customs prevail as much now as formerly, for they are much away ^y
what they were, and that even of late: Nor is ^t denied but that honest and
faithful Ministers will ^abour to have them abolished every where, seeing alas!
There is much horrid wickedness and manifest Devilry ^oo, with us in the South,
as well as with them in the North, so that no part of the Kingdom can plead,
not guilty.

But my principal Scope and Design, My design in this chap.
is to manifest ^he Works of Darkness, and to show how busy the God of this
World is in deluding and blinding poor Souls, and now ready we are to be his
drudges and slaves; that so these things being wisely and seriously considered,
all may be induced to make a Christian improvement thereof, both with respect
to themselves and others, whom they are called to pity and pray for, If
peradventure God will give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth,
that they may be recovered out of the snare of the Devil; And more especially
that the General Assemblies and other Judicatories of this Church as they are
called, may be pleased to continue their Fatherly Care over these Northern
Isles, that tho they be remo^ from them as to Situation, yet they may be near
unto them, as to a warm and kindly affection, which o^ Church has not been
wanting in hitherto.

Some things proper to be premised.
And 1st. we would take notice, that the old Maxim Ignorance is the mother of
Devotion, so much crye^ up by the Papists and their judicially blinded Clergy,
i^ so far from being the Mother of Devotion, that it i^ both the Mother and
Nurse of the most damnable Errors, Superstitions and Delusions, as these Isles
kno^ to their sad Experience; for Ignorance of the Principles of our Holy
Religion, does greatly prevail among the Commonalty, so that as one of their
Ministers no^ without some concern and grief for the same, told me* Not one of
a hundred in some of their Parishes can read. How this comes to pass, that the
People should be so grossly Ignorant I shall not undertake to determine, it is
commonly imputed to their want o^ Schools, through the Country, which indeed I
will not say, but is one great cause thereof, and therefore that this so very
dreadful an evil may be effectually remedied, care should be taken by all
concerned, that Schools be Erected in every Parish, and a competen^ Salary
provided for the Masters Maintenance and Encouragement; and that also in every
Isle where there is any number of inhabitants, some Person should be appointed
for the Instruction and Education of their Children; and until that such a
course be taken, the People generally will be Ignorant still, and the Ministers
as to the Preaching part, may complain in the words of the Prophet, Isa. 28 9.
Whom shall we teach knowledge and whom shall we make to understand doctrine?
then that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts For it is much
about one to Preach to Auditors besoted with Stupidity and Ignorance, as it is
to give Exhortation unto Babes, Therefore it is that our Church in her
Assemblies has so frequently and seriously pressed the Learning of Children to
Read, and the providing o^ Schools for that end, Pastors to be diligent in
that ^itiating and necessary Work of Examination and ^eaching Catechetick
Doctrine, and the Concurrence ^arents with both in laying out themselves for
the ^struction of their Children, as well by themselves by others; Godly
Ministers well knowing that the ^ccess of Ordinances and Edification of their
People, ^pendeth much thereupon, Isa. 53.11. Jo. 17.3. etc.
as the means which the ^rd uses to bless for the bringing in of his Elect;
^nowledge being so necessary to the Being of Faith, at the latter is sometimes
expressed by the Name of ^e former.

And seeing they retain not God in their knowledge, ^is no wonder they be given
over to a Reprobate find, to do things which are not convenient; God's judgment
upon the ignorant
No ^onder they frequent their old Chapels for Super^tious Ends, of which the
corrupt and purblind Rea^n of Man has been always very fond: No wonder ^t
being in the dark without the Lanthorn of the ^owledge of Scripture Revelation,
they mistake their ^y, and by the using of Charms and consulting of ^armers,
they run to Beelzebub in stead of having re^se to the God of Israel. Which
Ignorance to be the ^use of these Evils, will appear the more evidently, ^ we
consider, that in these Isles, where there is a ^eater measure of the knowledge
of God, there is not ^th a following of these horrid and hellish Practices.

There are several old Chapels in these Isles, which ^e People resort unto,
but that which I heard of, as ^ost famous is St. Tredwels Chapel in Papa
Westra, Several old chapels through the Isles.
^ich they have such a Veneration for, that they will ^me from other Isles in
considerable numbers to it, ^me of us having occassion to be on that Isle, we
saw ^s Chapel, situated on a small low Rock, within a Loch ^mmonly called St.
Tredwels Loch, St. Tredwels chapel.
to which we ^ssed by stepping-stones, before this Chapel door there ^s a heap
of small stones, into which the Superstious People when they come, do cast a
small stone or two for their offering, and some will cast in Money; the Ch^pel
has been but little, and is now Ruinous, only so^ of the Walls are standing,
which the People are so (...) from suffering to be demolished, that they
labour^ keep them up, and tho the Proprietour of the grou^ has some way
enclosed it, yet this proves not effect^ to prevent the frequenting thereof. At
the North E^ side of the Loch nigh to the Chapel there is a (...) stone
standing, behind which there is another stone ^ing hollowed in the form of a
Manger, and nigh to (...) there is another high stone standing with a round
(...) through it, for what use these stones served, (...) could not learn;
whether for binding the Horses (...) such to them as came to the Chapel, and
giving the^ meat in the hollow stone; or for tying the Sacrific^ to, as some
say, in times of Pagan Idolatry; is uncert^

St. Tredwels Loch held Medicinal.
This St Tredwel's Loch nigh to the East end of whi^ this Chapel is, is held by
the People as Medici^ whereupon many diseased and infirm Persons resort to some
saying that thereby they have got good; A^ certain Gentleman's Sister upon the
Isle, who was (...) able to go to this Loch without help, yet return without
it, as likewise a Gentleman in the Country who was much distressed, with sore
Eyes, went to the Loch and Washing there became sound and whole, (...) he had
been at much pains and expense to cure t^ formerly. With both which Persons, he
who was Minister of the place for many Years, was well acquai^ed, and told us
that he saw them both before and al^ the Cure: The present Minister of Westra
told me, t^ such as are able to walk, use to go so many times ab^ the Loch, as
they think will perfect the Cure, bef^ they make any use of the Water, and that
without spe^ing to any, for they believe, that if they speak, (...) will mar
the Cure: Also he told that on a cer^ Morning not long since, he went to this
Loch, (...) found six so making their circuit, whom with s^ difficulty he
obliging to speak, said to him, they ^me there for their Cure.

How it comes to pass, that this Loch should accomplish the cure of any. I
leave to my Reader to judge, How the water of this Loch should accomplish the
cure of any examined.
whether it be by any Medicinal or healing Virtue in the Water, which I incline
not to think, the Cure being (...) circumstantiated; or if the force and
strength of the ^agination of the Persons afflicted, may have any ten^ncy that
way; which, some judge, has its own in^ence, in some such like cases: Or,
rather, by the ^d and assistance of Satan, whom God in his Holy and ^se
Providence may permit so to do for the further ^dicial blinding and hardening of
these who follow ^ch unwarrantable and unlawful courses: God so punish^g them,
by giving them up to such strong delusions. ^et I hear, that when they have
done all, that is usual for them to do; as going about the Loch, washing their
Bodies or any part thereof, leaving something (...) the Loch, as old Clouts and
the like etc. It is but few, in whom the effect of healing is produced. As ^r
this Loch's appearing like Blood, before any dis^ure befall the Royal Family, as
some do report, we ^uld find no ground, to believe any such thing.

These Chapels the People frequent, These Chapels frequented also for Prayer,
and paying of Vows.
as for other ^ds, so for Prayer, they placing a kind of Merit there^, when
performed in such places, and this they observe more than private Retirements;
And if they be under any Sickness, or in any danger, as at Sea, they ^ill vow
so to do. And when they go to the Chapels (...) pay the Vows taken on, they
use to lay several ^tones, one above another, according to the number (...)
Vows which they made; some of which heaps we ^w in St. Tredwells Chapel. And
none must go empty ^anded, but leave behind them something, either a piece of
Money, or of Bread, or a Stone, which they judge will be sufficient.

As at all times, when occasion offers, Especially in the time of Lent.
they observe these Superstitious Practices, so especially during Lent, they
will not neglect their Devotions in such places; a^ on Easter-Sunday several
Boats will be seen going (...) them from other Isles. And though their Ministers
both privately and publicly have spoken to them, yet they cannot get them to
forbear and abandon these Custom^ And the Minister of South-Ro^alsha told us,
that man of the People in that Isle, especially such as live at the south end
thereof nigh to the Kirk, called our Lady Kirk, whereof, tho now the Walls only
be standing without a Roof, yet the very Stones thereof they reverence, and are
not far from adoring; And so ten^cious are they, that when in rough weather, he
has procured the convenience of a Barn to Preach in, ye^ the People obliged
him to come to this ruinous Fabric else many of them would not have heard:
They an^ now about the putting of a Roof on this Church, which the Gentlemen of
the Isle are not inclined to, judging other places more commodious for it to be
built in, but Proposals of this nature do not relish with the People they being
so superstitiously wedded to the place of i^ present Situation: Whereupon the
Heads of Fam^e will rather by themselves contribute to the repairing of this
Old Church than suffer a new one to be built in any other place of the Isle,
tho less to their cost.

In this old Fabric of our Ladys Church, there is a Stone lying about 4 foot
long, Concerning a one lying in Our Ladys Church.
and 2 foot broad, but narrower and round at the two ends, upon the surface of
which Stone, there is the print of two feet, concerning which the Superstitious
People have a Tradition, that St. Magnus, when he could not get a Boat on a
time to carry him over Pightland Firth, took this stone, and setting his Feet
thereupon, passed the Firth safely, and left the Stone in this Church, which
has continued here ever since. But as I think, and some more judicious People
do likewise suggest, it has been a Stone, upon which under Popery, the
Delinquents stood bare footed suffering Penance. It is like when thus St.
Magnus came over the Firth, it has been that time, when he was seen riding
through Aber^e^, giving the first account of the defeat of the English
Bannockburn and afterward was seen going over Pightland Firth. And indeed both
are alike destitute of any ^adow of Truth, credible only by these superstitious
^d silly ones, whom the GOD of this World has ^inded.

Several of the Isles have their Saints Days which ^me do superstitiously
observe. Several of the Isles have their Saints Days.
There is one day in ^arvest, on which, the more ignorant, especially in ^uld,
say, if any work the Ridges will blood. The ^ark some call our Ladys Hen. And
some such Po^sh Dregs are to be found: The Lord preserve this ^and from Poperys
Inundation; for as it is credible ^om what has been said, and some better
acquainted ^ith this Country did inform us, That if Popery get ^oting again,
from the fears of which in the good ^ovidence of GOD, we were lately
delivered,)^n any ^ the Inhabitants of these Isles, would readily embrace (...)
and by retaining some of these old Popish Rites and ^ustoms, seem to be in a
manner prepared for it.

Next to glance at their Charms, Concerning their Charms.
which I shall breif^ do, and not give any Account, how they perform ^em, left
thereby I should seem to point out to any, how ^try the experiment of this
Hellish Art and tremen^us Devilry, which I think I do sufficiently guard
^ainst, not only by barely reciting there are such* but (...) by proper
Precautions adduced in this Chapter.

They have a Charm, whereby they stop excessive ^ooding in any, whatever way
they come by it, A Charm to stop excessive bleeding.
whe^er by or without External Violen^* The name of ^e Patient being sent to
the Charmer, he says over ^me words, (which I heard) upon which the Blood
^tantly stops, tho the blooding Patient were at the ^eatest distance from
the Charmer. Yea upon the say^g of these words, the Blood will stop in the
blooding throats of Oxen or Sheep, to the astonishment of Spe^ators. Which
account we had from the Ministers of ^e Country.

Another for the Toothach.
There is a Charm likewise they make use of for (...) Toothach, whereof I had
the following instance fr^ an Honest Man worthy of Credit. Some years ag^ there
was one who used this Charm, for the ab^ing the pain of one living in Eda,
tormented therewith and tho the Action then was at a distance, the Cha^er not
being present with the Patient, yet according the most exact calculation of the
time, when the Cha^er was performed by the Charmer, there fell a livi^^ Worm
out of the Patients Mouth, when he was at Su^per. This my Informer knew to be a
Truth, (...) the Man from whose Mouth it fell is yet alive in t^ Isle of Sanda.
Whether this Worm was generated the corrupted part, and so fell out by the
Devils mean at the using of the Charm; or the Worm was brought by an evil
Spirit aliunde, to the mouth, and thence ^a^ling down, I shall not determine.

Their Beasts and Boats sprinkled with forespoken Water.
Also when the Beasts as Oxen, Sheep, Horses, etc. are Sick, they sprinkle them
with a Water made (...) by them, which they call Fore-spoken Water; wherewith
likeways they sprinkle their Boats, when they succee^ and prosper not in their
Fishing. And especially o^ Hallow-Even, they use to sein or sign their Boats
an^ put a Cross of Tar upon them, which my Informer ha^ often seen. Their
Houses also some use then to sein.

They have a Charm also whereby they try if person be in a decay or not, and if
they will die thereof; which they call Casting of the Heart. A Charm for any
under a decay.
Of this the Minister ^ Stronza and Eda told us, he had a very remarkable
Passage, in a Process, yet standing in his Session Records.

Several other Charms.
Several other Charms also they have, about their Marriage, when Women in
Travel, when their Co^ is calfing, when Churning their Milk, or when Brewing,
Or when their Children are sick, by taking the^ to a Smith (without
premonishing him) who has ha^ a Smith to his Father, and a Smith to his
Grandfather And of several such like Charms, we had an accou^ from the
Ministers, as likeways, how these Charms ^re performed; but of these enough.

Although these Charms sometimes, yet not always they produce the desired
Effects: These Charms not always effectual.
As in the instance staying of Blood, one of the Charmers Wives fell ^ce a
Blooding, which he by all his Art was not able stop; Whereupon he is said thus
to have expressed ^self, " I have stopped the Blooding of 100, and yet I cannot
do it to my Wife.

That such admirable Effects upon the using of the ^harms are produced by the
Agency of Demons; Acts of Assemblies are standing against such. As by the
Assemb. 1640.
^hink few, if any, will doubt, God so permitting it ^ be in his Holy and Wise
Providence, for the further punishment and judicial blinding of those, who ^low
such unlawful courses, and the Devil thereby engaging his Slaves more in his
Service: Yet not always the effects desired and exspected do follow, ^at all
may know the Devil is a chained one, and can ^ nothing without the permission
of a Sovereign God, ^o is Lord over all. Our Assemblies sensible of the ^eat
Sin and Evil that is in using these Charms, and ^nsulting of Charmers, have
made several Acts both against the one and the other, strictly inhibiting and
discharging all such Hellish Practices, and requiring all ^inisters diligently
to see to the observance and Execution thereof.

Evil Spirits also called Fairies are frequently seen in several of the Isles
dancing and making merry, Fairies frequently seen.
and sometimes seen in Armor; Also I had the account of ^e wild Sentiments of
some of the People concerning ^em; but with such I shall not detain my Reader,
We ^stning our Voyage to Zetland.

CHAP. VI. A Description of Zetland. The Country in General Described; The
Soil, Product, Manners of the People etc. hinted at.
Situation of Zetland.
ZETLAND lies to the N. East from Orkney, betwixt the 60. and 61 Degree of
Latitude, the^ being about 20. or 21. Leagues betwixt the Sta^ Head of Sanda
the Northernmost point thereof, and Sw^burgh-Head the Southern most point of
Land in Zetland over a very rolling and swelling Sea* wherein the constantly
runs the strong Current of a Tide* which causing the Sea to rise with its
swelling waves, the whole passage betwixt Orkney and Zetland, is but (...) one
continued Roust, or strong and impetuous Tide especially about the Fair Isle,
still such a great Sea goet^ even in the greatest Calm, that the Boats are like
(...) sling the masts out of them; and our Boat-maste^ told us, that frequently
when he had been passing t^ Fair Isle in a dead Calm, the Boat has been so
toss by the swelling Sea, that it would have taken in water on every side. And
I have heard Mariners often declare, that there is more hazard in these Seas,
the^ in going to the Eastern or Western Indies. The Fa^ Isle (of which more
afterward) is reckoned to b^ but 8. Leagues from Zetland, whereas it is about
12. or 13. Leagues from Orkney, so that we shall consider it, together with the
Isles belonging to Zetland.

The Isles
Zetland consists of more Isles than Orkney whereof some are more, others less
considerable, beside many Holms serving for Pasturage. Mainland.
The largest of ^em is that which they call the Mainland, 60. Miles ^ng from
South or South and by West, to North or ^orth and by East; as to breadth not
all alike, for ^o in some places it be 16. miles, yet in other it scarce one
Mile broad, it being so intersected with ^es, Sounds or Lochs, that it may be
said to consist (...) a great number of Promontories or Branches of ^and
stretching themselves into the Sea.

All this Country consisting of so many Isles, goes under one common Name,
called by some Hethland, Original of the name Zetland.
(...) others Zetland, and also Schetland. The Etymo^gy of which Names is very
uncertain, as was that of Orkney; some assigning one Reason of the Name, and
others another at their pleasure. That which ^emeth most probable is, that this
Country is called ^ethland, because it is very Mountainous and rises ^igh
above the waters, so a high land in Norse is called Hoghland: It is called
Zeland or Zetland, because of the great Sea wherewith on all hands it is
encompassed, Zee being Sea in that Language. And called Schetland, The
Fortification Schatt or Scat in Denmark levied an. 1691. is a Tax with a
witness or very great, says the modern account of Denmark.
because of a kind of Custom or Tribute called Scat, which they paid to their
Norvegian Masters, when they were in Possession of this Country, and the
Tribute or Custom imposed upon the Inhabitants of Norway to this day is called
Scat, and tho Zetland be now annexed to the Crown of Scotland, yet there is a
certain Rent or due, which the Gentlemen and some others here do pay Yearly to
the King or his Steward, which is still called Scat. I say although we cannot be
positive in determining the reasons of the Name, yet it seems to be of a
Norvegian or Danish Original.

Seeing I have already had under consideration, By whom it was first planted
and possessed.
by whom Orkney was first Planted and Inhabited, and how it has been disposed
of hitherto, I judge it not very needful for me to add any more to that purpose
concerning Zetland, for it is more then probable, that about the same time, by
the same Persons, has Zetland also been Inhabited, seeing there are many mo Pi^
Houses remaining there, and some of them as outward appearance in better case,
then are to found in Orkney, and always our Historians in the Descriptions of
these Northern Isles of Orkney and Z^land have reckoned them as under the
Government the same Masters; Therefore without further premise Preliminaries of
this nature, I come to consider the p^sent state of the Country.

The Country mossey and but thinly Inhabited.
Although the Country be large, yet it is in many places thinly Inhabited, and that
for the most part upon Coasts, and indeed otherwise it cannot well be, there
are few if any places in Zetland, but they are wi^ in two Miles of the Sea,
which they incline to do^ nigh unto, being more convenient for their Fish^ and
for the gooding of their Land, which is ordina^ by Sea-ware, hence it would be
incommodious them upon these accounts to be at any distance from Besides, the
Country is generally Mossey and Mounta^ous, all covered over with Heath, yea
the far gr^est part thereof is as one great Moss or Quagmire m^ up of Water and
Earth blended together, which k^ of ground would require much Labor and Expe^
to bring in either to be Grazing, or Corn-Land, i^ all in many places they
could get it done, for fr^ Scalloway on the West side of the Mainland to Le^ on
the East side thereof, four Miles over land, it is a continued tract of Moss
and Moor, so that the^ not one House all that way, till we come near u^
Lerwick, whereas we would think that this piece ground should be better
Inhabited then many oth^ considering the great resort of Strangers in the Sum^
time thereunto, if Nature had not laid such inconveniences in the way, which
would prove so diffic^ to overcome.

The people discreet and fashionable
The People are generally Discreet and Civil, no^ Rustic and Clounish as would
be expected in such place of the World, which may be much owing ^eir Converse
and Commerce with Strangers, who ^pair to these Isles in the Summer Season,
with whom ^e inhabitants do keep a constant Bartering or Trade; which Trading
as it makes them the better to live, so ^may tend not a little to the
Cultivating of their Man^s. They are also very Fashionable in their Clothes, ^d
the Gentry want not their fine Stuffs, such as Hol^d, Hamburgh etc. do afford,
so that they are to be seen as good an Order and Dress, as with us in the
South: ^he Bowrs, Fishers and other Country People also do (...) honest-like
and decent in their Apparel, as becomes ^eir station.

They also have always been in repute for Hospitality, Hospitable.
^d indeed we have seen no other to contradict that which is spoken, so much to
their Commendation and ^aise. for at any time, when we had occasion to visit
^entlemen, Merchants or others, we were always by ^em kindly Entertained. And
so much they are said ^ be given to this commendable piece of Humanity, ^at if
they do purchase any thing from Foreign Mer^ants, which they put any value
upon, such as Wheat^ead, some strong Liquor etc. Even the Country people will
not use it themselves, but reserve it for the ^tertainment of Strangers; As for
those old Inha^tants of the Danish Blood, of whom it was said, That (...) were
seeming Fair, but really False, and superlatively ^oud, they are much worn out
of this Country; and (...) at any time Ships be driven ashore upon their
Coasts, (...) Inhabitants use very kindly and Humanely to treat (...)
distressed Company, of which Humane Treatment (...) Ship belonging to the Firth
had a late experience, ^ing broke on the Coast there in December last, as ^e of
the Ships Company informed me. Such a kind ^d generous Reception, Merchants and
Mariners meet ^t with in many places, upon which they are unhap^ily cast, from
whom better things would be expected. The body of the people ignorant.
to the matters of God and Religion, the Body of (...) People are said to be
very Ignorant, by these who know them better then we can be supposed to have
ha^ access to do, considering the short time of our stay and abode among them;
Which may be imputed to their want of convenient Schools for the Instruction o^
their Youth in many places of the Country; Which also was assigned as the
reason why ^gnorance does s^ much prevail in the Orkney Isles. Which great
Evil^ the Mother and Leader of many others, all should labor to redress as
they are several called and concerned, Authority also interposeing their
Command, and not denying their Countenance and Encouragement thereunto.

Yet frequent Gospel ordinances.
Yet we must say, that the People do frequent the dispensing of
Gospel Ordinances, and seem to hear with some measure of Attention and
Reverence; and as appeared to us, not without some seriousness, and concern
upon their Spirits, which after hearing continued with some, as we found by our
Converse with them which encouraged us to set and keep up two Week days Sermons
at Lerwick during our stay in the bounds which the People thronged unto,
thereby showing great respect to the Ordinances dispensed by us: S^ that
matters looked far otherwise, then what was expected by our selves and many
others before we cam^ to this Country. And indeed after conference upon this
head, all of us judged, that if things were got pu^ into a better order, and
some evils removed, which forbear to mention, knowing that they will come under
the cognizance and consideration of others, wh^ are in a capacity to redress
them, there might be Harvest through Grace.

No latin school there.
Although there be a Latin School at Kirkwal in Orkney yet there is none in all
this Country, which cannot but be very prejudicial to the Inhabitants, the
Advancement of the Education of their Youth being the eb^ hindered, many
promising and pregnant Ingenys los^ and Letters discouraged; For Gentlemen are
either obliged to keep their Children at home, and so the must want that piece
of Learning, which tends so much to Form and Folish their Minds, and to
complete them as Gentlemen or else send them to other Countries, where
Education is to be had, which many are averse to do, not only because of the
Charge and Expense they will be at, but also of the fear they will be in, in
sending their Children over Sea, and keeping them so long at such a distance
from them. As for Chaplains, tho they could be had, which would be with
difficulty in this corner, yet all Gentlemen who have Children to Educate,
cannot well bear the Charges of bringing them over from Scotland and keeping
them with them for so long a time. Whereupon the Ministers there are very
desirous, that the Government may be Addressed for Encouragment to
Schoolmasters through the Country, and particularly that a Latin School be
set up either at Lerwick or Stalloway.

English is the Common Language among them yet many of the People speak Norse
or corrupt Danish, Their Language.
especially such as live in the more Northern Isles, yea so ordinary it is in
some places, that it is the first Language their Children speak. Several here
also speak good Dutch, even Servants though they never have been out of the
Country, because of the many Dutch Ships which do frequent their Ports. And
there are some who have something of all these three Languages, English, Dutch,
and Norse. The Norse has continued ever since the Norvegians had these Isles
in Possession, and in Orkney (as has been said) it is not quite extinct, tho
there be by far more of it in Zetland, which many do commonly use.

It is observable that the Names of the Descendants of the old Inhabitants,
Names.
differ from the Names of others now numerous among them, for these only have a
Name without a Surname, save what is taken from their Fathers Name, and by
adding Son or Daughter thereunto, Exemp. Gra, Agnes Magnus Daughter, her own
Name is Agnes, her Fathers is Magnus, to which Daughter is added, which is the
whole Denomination or Designation under which such a Woman goes; So M^rion
Peter's Daughter, Laurence John's Son etc. Which they say is yet the Danish way
of Expressing and Distinguishing Names. And for further clearing, if ther^ be
two Men or Women of the same Name, they u^ also to design them by the places
where they ordinarily reside, as Agnes Magnus Daughter in Trebister that so she
may be discriminated from another Woman of the same Name living in another
place. It is probable that hence flowed these Sirnames, such as Williamson,
Robertson, Jamieson, Davidson etc. which d^ abound with us in Scotland. In some
words also their Pronunciation does differ from that of ours, as for Instance,
they often use to leave out the Letter H in the^ Pronunciation, as if it did
not belong to the Word, s^ Three they pronounce as Tree, Thou. as Tou or Tu.
etc. They have also some Norish words which they commonly use, which we
understood not, till they were explained, such as Air which signifies a Sand
Bank Oyse an Inlet of the Sea, Voe a Creek or Bay etc. And these words are much
used both in Zetland and Orkney.

The Country better inhabited then formerly.
It would appear that the Country is now much better Inhabited, than formerly
some ages ago it has been, for we hear but of few who leave this Country,
having once fixed their abode therein, tho there be many who have lately come
to it from Orkney, Caithness, Sutherland. Buchan and other places especially in
the North of Scotland. So that in all Lerwick, the most considerable Town in
the Country, there are but very few whose Grandfathers have lived in those
Isles. And in Lerwick it self about 30 years ago there were only 4 Houses, and
some years before there were none at all, tho now there are between two and
three hundred Families in it. People healthful and many live to a good age.


Tho the ground be generally bad, and the Climate cold, yet it is not
unwholesome living here, as appears from the many vigorous old People, that
abound in the ^sles, whose health I think is rather more firm and ^ound then
with us, neither are they liable to such fre^uent sickness, whither this is to
be imputed to the ^eeness and purity of the Air, or to the quality of their
Diet, or the Sobriety of their living, or to all these and the like I shall not
judge. Yet they tell us they used ^o live much longer in former Ages then now
they do, as of one ^airvile, who lived 180 years, and all his time never drank
Beer or Ale; His Son also and Grandchildren lived to a good old Age, who
seldom or never drank any other thing save Milk, Water and their Country-Bland.
It is said also that this Tairvils Father lived longer then himself: There was
also one Laurentius in the Parish of Waes, whose Heir Oyes do yet live there,
who arrived at a great Age, whom Buchanan mentions, that he lived in his
time, marrying a Wife after the 100. year of his Age, and in the 140. went a
Fishing with his little Boat when the Sea was Tempestuous. Salubritatis
firmitudo in Laurentio quodam nostra atate apparuit, qui post Centisimum annum
uxotum duxit: centesimum quadragesimum annum agens, Buchan. Hist. L. ^
savissimo mari in sua navicula piscatum prodibat: Ac nuper nulla vi gravioris
morbi labefactatus, sed sento solutus decessit. For surely, as all Skilful
Physicians do grant, there is nothing more Conducive to the maintaining of a
Sound and Healthful Constitution, then a sober and regular Diet, whereas they
who live otherwise, to speak with respect to 2d. Causes do impair their Health,
and cuts themselves off, often in the midst of their days; especially such as
feed high, and indulge themselves in drinking strong Liquors, which tends to
the exhausting of that Natural and Innate Heat, the Fountain of our
Animal-Life; whereas it is observed of all these, who arrived at such a great
Age that they seldom if ever drank any strong Liquor.

They obnoxious to the scurvy.
There is no Sickness or Disease this Country i^ more subject unto then the
Scurvey, as is Orkney likewise which is occasioned doubtless by their
Salt-meats, Fishes upon which many for the most part do live, Sea-Air etc. And
sometimes this Scurvey degenerates into a kind of Leprosy, which they call a
Bastard scurvey, and is discerned by hairs falling from the Eye-bree^, the Nose
falling in etc. Which when the People come to know, they separate, and set them
apart for fear of Infection, building Huts or little Houses for them in the
field, I saw the Ruins of one of these Houses about half a mile from Lerwick,
where a Woman was for some Years kept for this Reason. This Bastard Leprosy,
they judge, is caused by the many gray Fishes, such as Sillucks, Piltocks, etc.
which they eat; for Bread failing many of the People in the Summer time, that
often for 4 or 5 Months, they will not taste thereof, these Fishes are almost
their only meat, and especially the Livers of these Fishes, which are thought
to be more unhealthful then the Fishes themselves, and they much incline to
eat, do occasion this: The drinking also of hot Bland (which is a kind of a
Serum of Milk, of which more afterward) together with these Fishes, do beget
such corrupt humors to the distempering of the Body. These Scorbutic Persons
are more ordinarily in Dunrossness and Delton, and more rare in other places;
And that because they have mo Gray Fishes in these two Parishes, then in others*

And it has been observed often by the Inhabitants, that when in Holy
Providence any Sickness comes upon or breaks up in the Country, When any
sickness breaks up in the Country, it quickly spreads. Small pox lately there.
it uses to go through them like a Plague, so that since we came of^ the small
Pox has seized upon many both old and young and was so universal, that upon
one Lord's Day there were 90. Prayed for in the Church of Le^wick all sick of
the same Disease, whereas when we were, there a few weeks before, there was not
one that we knew sick thereof. They say a Gentleman^ Son in the Country who
had lately gone from the ^uth, and was under it when he came home, brought with
him, which very quickly spread among the people, the old as well as the young;
and so sad have ^en the desolating effects thereof, that one told me ^ho
arrived here lately from the place, that he verily ^dgeth the third part of the
People in many of the ^es are dead thereof.

Although many of the Inhabitants have each their particular Trades and
Employments wherein more espe^ally they lay out themselves, and are taken up
about, Their Employment.
^et are they all generally some way acquainted with ^e Sea, and can with some
dexterity and skill attained (...) Experience manage their Boats, not only
because of ^eir frequent passing from Isle to Isle, and going over the ^oes or
Lochs which ly in upon, and cut the Mainland, ^it by Reason of their great
Fishing, not only for their ^n use, but for the use of Merchants, who buy their
^ishes, or give them the Value in foreign Commodi^es: Hence most of the
Inhabitants, not only have some ^asturage for their Cattle, and some Corn Land
about ^eir Houses which they manure, but also their parts (...) Boats for the
end forsaid. Yet there are many who ^llow no Trade but their Fishing.

Beside their Fish-Trade with foreign Merchants, They trade with Orkney.
they ^o likewise drive a great Trade with Orkney, from which ^very Year several
Boats do pass to Zetland Laden with Corns, Meal, Malt, etc. upon the coming
whereof they ^ften wait for Barley seed, tho the last Year they had
Considerable Crop, so that the Barley Seed was sown before the Boats came over.
The Orkney Men also bring sometimes Stockins, Ale, and the like which they know
(...) be vendible here, Hence every Year considerable ^ums of Money go from
Zetland to Orkney, And some ^ave told me that most of the Money they have in
Orkney, is from Zetland. So great is the Advantage that these Isles do reap by
their Neighbourly Commerce with one another, for as Zetland could not well live
without Orkne'ys Corns, so neither could Orkney b^ well without Zetlands Money.

Their Money from foreign Merchants.
As Orkney have much of their Money from Zetla^ so Zetland have all theirs from
foreign Nations Countries whose Merchants traffic with them, as f^ Holland,
Hamburgh, B^eme etc. The Dutch Mo^ does Ordinarily pass among them, as Stivers,
half S^ers, and since the Rates of the Money were raise^ Scotland, many here
have been considerable gainers the Ducket-douns, which is the species of Money
(...) the Hollanders bring more ordinarily with them.

The Kings Rents.
The Kings Rents are but the 3d. part of what t^ are in Orkney, The Bishop had
no Rents from this Country.
For tho this Country be by far gre^ and more spacious then Orkney, yet it is
not so well in bited, neither is the ground so good: These Rents paid to the
Taxmen in Butter, Oil, and Money, T^ Oil is made of the livers of Fishes, and
is sent So for the making of Soap, or is otherwise disposed of, may be most
Advantageous. The Bishops had no Re^ from this Country; And tho it belong to
the Dio^ of Orkney, and is a considerable part of that Charge, we did not hear
that ever any of these sole Pastor their Diocesses, as some are pleased to
call them, visi^ these bounds.

Little Cornland here.
There being so little Corn-Land here, is the ca^ why none of the Revenues of
the Croun are paid Meal or Corns, whereas in Orkney it is far otherwi^ as has
been said; for any Corn-Land they have is ordinarily but a few Ridges nigh to
the Coasts, for any distance from the Sea, and in many places a^ nigh unto it,
there is nothing but a Mossy and Mo^tainous Desert covered with Heather, and
only so^ places plenished with a few Kine, Sheep, or Shelt^ tho in other places
ye will go some Miles and see no^ This Moss and Moor which so much abounds,
r^ders Traveling very dangerous, even to the Nati^ themselves, and so deep is
it in many places and t^ in the Summer and droughty season, that Horses c^ ^t
pass it, and Men on foot not without difficulty and ^zard: As in the Isle of
Yell the Minister in going to the church, from his House is obliged to go on
foot 8. ^iles almost, wading up to the knees. And indeed the ^siest and safest
way of Traveling is by Sea in Boats ^out the skirts of the Isles, which also
is not without ^nger.

And tho the greatest part of this Country be thus ^ossy and Moorish, Some
pleasant Spots through the Country.
yet there are some pleasant Spots ^ it well furnished with Grass and Corn, as
nigh to ^alloway, Vstness etc. in the Mainland, some places in ^e Parishes of
Dunrosness also on the Main, in the ^fle ^f Unst etc. Hence some Years they
will have 20. Fold (...) Increase, but this is more rare, for at other times in
^veral places they will scarce have the double of their ^ed. They make much use
of Barly-Bread, which ^ppears to be fairer then their Oat-Bread, for their ^rly
they take to be the best Grain, it agreeing bet^r with the ground then Oats.
And as it is in Orkney, so is it here, if any white Corn be brought unto ^e
Country for seed, it will soon degenerate and be^me like their oun.

I think the Kine and Sheep are of a greater Size, Concerning their cattle and
harvest.
^en they are in Orkney, tho their Horses be of a less; (...) for the Sheep I
take them to be little less then they ^e in many places of Scotland, they Lamb
not so soon ^s with us, for at the end of May, their Lambs are ^ot come in
Season, their Harvest also is much latter, ^r they Judge it very early if they
get their Corns in against the Middle of October, They observe that our ^easons
will be two months before theirs, but I do ^ot think they differ so much:

If their Sheep were well kept, Their sheep.
it would be very ^easant to behold them in Flocks, they being of di^ers
colors; some of a pyed, others of a broun, others ^f a broun and white, others
of a black color, some ^so have black spraings on their backs, others on their
^reheads; and some say they have as great a number of black Sheep, as they have
of white; which diversity colors would render them very beautiful, if they we^
taken a due Care of; for they neither wash nor c^ their Sheep, nor have they
any shears for that end; b^ pulls the wool off them with their hands, which as
is painful to the beasts, so it makes them look not well favored, but like
these with us, whose w^ is scratched with briars or thorns.

Their ordinary drink.
Their ordinary drink is Milk or Water, or Milk a^ Water together, or a drink
which they call Bland, m^ common in the Country, tho not thought to be ve^
wholesome; which so they make up, having take away the Butter from their
churned Milk, as likewi^ the thicker parts of this Milk which remains after t^
Butter is taken out, they then pour in some hot W^ter upon the Serum, Whey or
the thinner part of t^ Milk in a proportion to the Milk. Which being do^ they
make use of it for their drink, keeping some f^ their Winter provision: And
this drink is so ordina^ with them, that there are many People in the Country
who never saw Ale or Beer all their Lifetim^ The Ale is rare among them, they
making bread much of their Barley grain, but the Hamburgh Be^ both small and
strong is to be had in plenty tho at^ good rate 6 sh. or 8 sh. our pint, which
Beer and oth^ Liquors, as also wheat Bread the Hamburghers bring wi^ them in
the Month of May for Sale, hence sometim^ Liquors as Beer, Ale etc. cannot be
had for money, (...) the Hamburghers bring it.

Victuals ^earer then in Orkney.
The great confluence of strangers makes Kine, Shee^ Hens and almost all
Victuals to sell at a greater rat^ then in Orkney, for often when the Bushes
are her^ they will give Double or Triple for a Sheep, or a He^ then it is to be
bought in Orkney for, for the Holland^ with their Bushes being Numerous on
these Coast they send sometimes a shore to buy fresh meats, whi^ if to be had,
they will not want for the price.

Fowls in plenty.
They have Fowls especially Sea-Fowls in great ple^^y which do frequent the
Rocks, Holms, etc. which they take as they do in Orkney, and are very
beneficial ^o the Proprietours. There are also many Eagles, which do great
prejudice and hurt to the Country; for the Lambs they will lift up in their
Claws, and take whole to their Nests, and falling down upon the Sheep, they fix
one foot on the ground and the other on the Sheep's back, which they having so
apprehended, they 1st. pick but their eyes, and then use the Carcases as they
please. All sorts of Duck and Drake, Dunte, Geese, Cleck-Geese, Ember-Geese
etc, they have as in Orkney.

They have many Crows but neither here nor in Orkney are they of that Color
which they are of with us. Crows.
^or their Head, Wings, and Tail, only are black, but their Back and Breast
from the Neck to the Tail are of a Gray Color, and the Country People look
upon it as a bad Omen, when black Crows come to these Isles, they portending
that a Famine will shortly ensue.

There are many Conies in some places, but no Hares, Many rabbets, no mair
fowls or hares, few rats; no frogs or venomous creatures.
neither are there any Moorfowls which are numerous in Orkney; some say that a
few from Orkney have been brought over for trial, but they could not live
here: No Poddocks or Froggs are to be seen, tho many in Orkney. Neither are
there any Rats to be found, except in some Isles, and these are greater then
ordinary, and thought to come out of Ships, when riding at Anchor nigh to the
shore, but they have Mice in abundance. Neither are there any venomous
Creatures in these Isles. They have many Ottars, one of which was so tamed that
it frequently used to bring Fishes out of the Sea to a Gentleman's House in
Haskashie, as one told me who knew the Truth thereof.

They have a sort of little Horses called Shelties, Concerning their horses
called shelties
then which no other are to be had, if not brought hither: from other places,
they are of a less Size then the Orkney Horses, for some will be but 9 others
10. Nives or Hand-breadths high, and they will be thought big Horses there if
eleven, and although so small yet are they full of vigor and life, and some
not so high as others often prove to be the strongest, yea there are some ^
whom, an able Man can lift up in his arms, yet will they carry him and a Woman
behind him 8 Miles forward and as many back: Summer or Winter they never come
into an House, but run upon the Mountains in some places in flocks, and if at
any time in Winter the storm be so great, that they are straightened, for food,
they will come down from the Hills, when the Ebb is in the Sea, and eat the
Sea-ware (as likewise do the Sheep) which Winter storm and scarcity of fodder
puts them out of Case, and brings them so very low, that they recover not
their strength till about St. Joh'ns Mass-Day, the 24th. of June when they are
at their best: They will live till a Considerable Age as 26, 28. or 30 Years,
and they will be good riding Horses in 24 especially they will be the more
vigorous and live the longer, if they be 4. Years old before they be put to
Work. These of a black Color are Judged to be the most durable, and the pyeds
often prove not so good; they have been more numerous then now they are the
best of them are to be had in Sanston and Eston, also they are good in Waes and
Yell, these of the least Size are in the Northern Isles of Yell and Vnst.

The Coldness of the Air, the Barrenness of the Mountains on which they feed,
and their hard usage may occasion them to keep so little, for if bigger Horses
be brought into the Country, their kind within a little time will degenerate;
And indeed in the present case, we may see the Wisdom of Providence, for their
way being deep and Mossie in Many places, these lighter Horses come through,
when the greater and heavier would sink down: and they leap over ditches very
nimbly, yea up and down rugged Mossy braes or hillocks with heavy riders upon
them, which I could not look upon but with Admiration, yea I have seen them
climb up braes upon their knees, when otherwise they could not get the height
overcome, so that our Horses would be but little if at all servicable there.

The great Fishing which they have upon the Coasts, Their fishes numerous.
makes the place desirable to the Natives, and to be frequented by strangers;
it excelling any other place of the King of Brittan's Dominions for Herring,
White and Gray Fishing: the White Fishing they call the Killin and Ling etc.
their Gray, the Silluks and seths; there are also sometimes very strange Fishes
here to be found, As about 24. Years ago, there came a great number of small
thick Fishes into a Voe on the South side of Neston, they were of a Golden
Color, very pleasant to behold, they were about the bigness of an ordinary
Trout, and all of an equal Size; they being very numerous, the Country made
much use of them, who Judged them very savoury, tasting Like a Turhot: And
never before or since that time were these Fishes seen, in these seas: As my
Informer an old Gentleman could remember. Their Tusk is a rare Fish but more
ordinary with them, of which more when we come to speak of their Fishing. Also
many rare Shells are to be found on the Coasts, but we had not time to enquire
and look after them.

Through the Isles for fuel they have good Pites in abundance; tho, Fuel.
in some places they are at a distance from them, as these who live in the
Skerries are obliged to bring them from other Isles, as from Whalsey, and the
passage being dangerous many boats are cast away with them; some also living in
Dunrossness are at a loss this way, they not having the Moss at hand, as
generally they have in other places on the Main. Much broken Timber also is
driven ashore upon these Isles, so that the Inhabitants of the Skerries trust
the one half of their provision to this driven timber: and broken Ships in
great quantity often cast ashore; partly through the many Ships that spleet on
these Isles, and partly as the wrack of Ships cast away at some distance, which
is brought here by the Ebb from Norway, or other place lying to the East of
Zetland.

No trees.
There are no trees in this Country more then Orkney we saw some old white and
weather bear^ Stocks standing in Scalloway, for whatever Reasons man be
alleged for trees not growing in Orkney, far more (...) I Judge they will hold
in Zetland both with Respect (...) the Air and to the Soil: There are also at
Scatroway son^ Goose and Rizzer-berrie bushes which use every Yea^ to be laden
with fruit, which are a great rarity in the place of the World.

Many excelent herbs, Scurvey grass in abundance.
Many excellent Herbs are found growing here, the little knoun or made use of: A
Certain English Physician and skilled Botanist who was at Lerwick some Year^
ago told our Host, that there were many choice an ra^e Herbs here not to be
found in England, They have much scurvey-Grass; God so ordering it in his wi^
Providence that Juxta venenum, nascitur Antidotum, that seeing the scurvy is
the common Disease of the Country, they should have the Remedy at hand.

Much Limestone.
There is here much Limestone (tho for ought heard not to be found in Orkney)
which in some place they have but lately come to the knowledge of, as i^ Unst
but about 4. Years since; and in other places they know not yet how to use it,
The Parish of T^ngw^ (they say) consists almost of Limestone, they having few
if any other stones then such.

Stones for building, broad.
The Stones wherewith they build are generally broad, and like Flag-stones; by
reason of which figure and shape the stones lying the more easily, the builder^
are at less trouble in fitting them for the wall; and have observed that in
some Houses there is little Lime clay or any such thing for cementing of the
building which renders their dwelling so much the colder, the peircing Air
passing through between the Chinks of the Stones, which they have no need of
under this cold and airish Climate. But some of these Houses they man
designedly so build, that the Wind may have free passage through them, for
drying of their Fishes, which ^ouses some ca^l ^keas.

There are several superstitious Customs and Practi^s, which the more ignorant
People follow, Several Superstition Customs.
some of which we will have occasion to note in the sequel of ^is Discourse,
but not so many did we hear of, as there ^e in Orkney. But I hope the vigilance
and Diligence (...) our Church in inspecting these Isles, and putting all (...)
their Duty, will prove a blessed Mean in the hand (...) God, for the
eradicating and utter abolishing of these ^elicts of Paganism and Idolatry.

Sailing about these Coasts is often very dangerous, Sailing dangerous
^hence the Waters prove Graves to many of the Inha^tants. While we were there
in the Month of May a ^at was cast away going by the shore to Dunressness, ^d a
Man and his Sister therein perished; and another ^an in her was saved by
getting upon the keel of the ^at and sometimes Boats are cast away when not one
^ved: About the Isles are many blind Rocks, which the ^atives sometimes
unhappily fall and break upon, eitheir through a Mistake, or the Tide and Wind
driving them upon them: At other times the Wind rising, ^seth the Sea so to
swell that the Waves breaking upon ^eir small Boats are ready to overset them,
and sometimes do: Also tho the Wind be not so strong, there will ^me Flanns and
Blasts off the Land as to their swift^ess and surprisal something like to
Hurricanes, which ^ting with a great Impetus or force upon their Sails,
^verturns the Boat, and in a moment hurries them into ^ternity: By such a flan
the La^d of Muna^ a Gentleman in this Country is said to have perished the
forther Year 1699. when within sight of his ou^ House, and all that were in the
Boat with him said to be 9. ^10, Persons, save one servant, who escaped upon
the ^eel. I remember, that night we came to the Land of Zetland, our Seamen
thought fit in their prudence not to Sail too nigh the Land for fear of such
flans. O to be as Watchmen on our Towers looking out a waiting for the Lord's
coming.

Little Commerce in the Winter.
For this cause it is, that during the Winter Sea^ they have ordinarily Converse
or Commerce wi^ none, except that Ships be driven in by stress of W^ther; for
the open Boats dare not come, and the clo^ decked not without danger, the Sea
commonly at the time being so tempestuous, the Tides and Rousts rapid, that
they threaten all who come near them, w^ being swallowed up; Therefore it is,
as they tell u^ that from October till April or May, they Ordinar^ see no
strangers, nor know any News, which makes t^ Winter so much the longer and
wearisome unto them An Instance whereof we had, that the late Revolution when
his Highness the Prince of Orange our present King was pleased to come over to
assert our Liberties, a^ deliver us from our fears, falling out in the Winter
it was May thereafter before they heard any thing of (...) And that 1st. they
say from a Fisherman, whom some would have had arraigned before them, and
impeach^ of high Treason because of his News, as some did (...) form us.

They sometimes infested by Pirates.
Their Country lying very open, and in many p^ces but thinly Inhabited,
exposes them to the Host incursions of Pirates in a time of War, as of late
the Frenches did much infest their Coasts, some of their M^ Landing did by shot
Kill their Kine and Sheep, and take them away with them; yea sometimes they
spare not the Churches, but sacrilegiously robbed them, pu^ling down the Timber
thereof as Seats etc. and taking them for burnwood; so they did to a Church in
Nor^ Mevan. But they never came into Brassa Sound, le^ they had been locked up
within Land, Winds turning contrary.

Some light all the Night over in June.
In the Month of June they have a clear light all t^ Night over, for at the
darkest hour thereof, you w^ see clearly to read a Letter, the Sun sets
between 10. and 11. at Night, and rises between 1. and 2. ^e Morning, but for
this they have so much the shor^r Day and longer Night in the Winter.

CHAP. VII. A particular Vien is given of the several Parishes, and most
considerable Isles in Zetland.
THus far having Considered the state of the Country in General, A brief
Description of the several Parishes with the Isles thereunto belonging.
we come next to take some par^cular view of the Isles, which that I may the
better and ^ore methodically do, I shall lay before my Reader ^e several
Parishes with some brief description of the principal Isles thereunto belonging.
For as to the Num^er of the Isles, I never heard an Exact account given ^ereof,
there being many of them small, wherein is ^ly a Family or two, and so but
little noticed.

The 1st. Parish of Dunrossness.
is the Parish of Dunrossness on the Mainland to the South, and is the Parish
which lies next to O^k^ey and Scotland, wherein are 3. Churches, in which ^eir
Minister performs divine service, Cross-Kirk, ^nwich, and Fair Isle; In this
Parish are several very ^ood Voes or Harbors commodious for Ships to ride
(...). In this there is also much Corn-Land, there ground ^aring the Richest
Grain, in many places not so Mossy ^d covered over with Heath, as other
Parishes are, which makes them to have less fuel, tho more corn. Much of the
Land here is sanded, and the Sea almost early gains something on the lower
parts thereof; ^e Land lying so low and sandy in many places, is ^onvenient for
Conics, which abound here about the ^e^s or southern most point of Land. In
this Parish, there is a great Fishing, This southermost point has two Heads,
Swinburgh Head, and Fitwalls Head, Swinburgh and Fitwals-Head
two high ^ocks seen by Mariners coming from the South at a great distance,
which when discovered, they direct their Course toward them.

St Ninians Isle.
To the North-West of the Ness lies St. Ninians Isl^ very pleasant; wherein there
is a Chapel and ane Alt^ in it, where on some superstitious People do burn
Can^les to this Day. Some take this Isle rather to be a ki^ of Peninsula,
joined to the Main by a Bank of San^ by which in an Ebb People may go into the
Isle, t^ sometimes not without danger.

The Fair Isle.
The Fair Isle belongs to this Parish, lying Leagues or 24. Miles to the South
or South and by E^ of Swinburgh Head, by Burhannan it is called Insu^a^b^ the
pleasant or pretty Isle, Tho I do Judge FAIR m^ be as well taken ^roperly as
Appellatively, for the (...) Faira or Fara, there being another Isle lying to
t^ North of this which they call North Faira which rela^ to another Faira by
South; now there is no ^sle lying the South of this North Faira, which has any
nat^ that can be interpreted Faira, but this Fair Isle. Mo^ over I neither did
see, nor was I informed of any thin^ that afford us any Reason, why this Isle
should be appellatively taken and denominated bella or Fa^ This Fair Isle
rises high above the Waters, and is se^ by Mariners at a great distance; it i^
about an Mile a^ a half long from south to North, and nigh to a M^ in breadth,
the side thereof toward the West is a continued ragged rock from one end to
another, alwa^ beat upon by the Impetuous currents of a swelling Se^ above this
West Side is the Craig which they call t^ Sheep-Craig, whereon there are no
Houses nor Co^ Land, but Sheep use to feed: The side, lying to t^ East is
lower, declining toward the Sea; There are it two Harbors, one upon the
Northern-End, looki^ to Zetland, and another toward the Southern poi^ but
Ships or Boats do not ordinarily resort thereunt^ if not put to it, Inh^bitants
and some Corn-Land and Pasture in Fair Isle.
and better cannot do, for so it ha^ been a safe shelter and refuge to many.

There use to be about 10. or 12. Families in it, b^ now they say Death has
almost depopulate the Isl^ the small Pox having lately raged there, and swe^
away two thirds of the Inhabitants, so that there is not (...) sufficient
number spared to Manage their Fish-Boats; that Gentleman's Son abovementioned,
having tou^hed here in his way to Zetland: They have good Pa^turage for Sheep
and Kine, and some Corn-Land, and ^e very hospital and kind. Their Minister
uses to ^isite them once in the Year, in the Summer time, and ^aving with them
about a Month, Preaching, Baptiz^ng their Children and doing other parts of his
^astoral Work; after which he returning to Zetland, they ^re without public
Ordinances till the next Years Revolution.

The Hawks, they say, Good Hawks there.
which are to be had in the Fair Isle, are the best in Britain, which use to
flee to Zetland, or Orkney for their prey, these being the nearest Lands, and
sometimes they will find Moor Fowls in their Nests which they behoved to bring
from Ork^ey, seeing there are none in Zetland, and the nearest Isle they could
have them in, was Stronza or Westra, which is between 40. and 50. Miles of Sea,
over which at one flight they must carry these Fowls to their Nests.

Many Ships use to cruise about this Fair Isle in the Summer time, Ships use
cru^^se thereabout.
and by it the Holland's Fleet going to or coming from the East Indies, use to
pass, tho sometimes as in the late Wars they Sailed by the North of Zetland,
that they might be more free of danger. Ships also going to or coming from
Norway or the East Sea frequently pass this way, when Wind serves them so to
do; and this Fair Isle being seen by them at 14. or 16. leagues distance, in a
clear Day it is as a Myth or Mark for directing their courses.

The 2d, Parish of Tingwal.
is the Parish of Tingwall lying on the East of the Main to the North of
Dunrossness, wherein are 4. Churches, Tingwall, Whiteness, Wisedale and
Lerwick, but the Minister uses not to Preach by turns at Lerwick, as he does
at his other 3. Churches, he not finding himself obliged so to do, it being but
built lately at the expense of the Inhabitants, however som^times he has
Sermon there, and Baptizeth the Children. Lerwick in this Parish is now become
t^ Principal Town in the Country, lying on the East (...) the main at Brassa
Sound, over against the Isle (...) Brass.

Town of Lerwick.
Lerwick is more then half a Mile in length, lyin^ South and North upon the
side of the Sound, and w^ consist of between 2. and 300. Families, it is but
within these few Years, that it has arrived to such a numbe^ of Houses and
Inhabitants. It is become so considerable, because of the many Ships which do
Yearly frequent the Sound, whereby Merchants and Trades-Me^ are encouraged to
come and dwell in this place, an^ not for the pleasantness of its Situation, or
the fertilit^ of the Country about, for it is built upon a Rock^ piece of
Ground, wherein they can have no street, bu^ a kind of a narrow passage before
their doors, betwix^ them and the Sound, which in some places will not admit of
two Men's going in a breast, and at the back o^ the Town there is a Hill of
black Moss, wherein they cast their Pites, which in some places comes to their
very doors, and no Corn-Land is there about it, save a little within the
Castle, for near a Mile of way.

Many of their Houses, are very Commodious to dwell in, most of them being two
stories high, and well furnished within, their Inhabitants consist of Merchants
Tradesmen, and Fishers, who keep up a good Trade with Foreigners, from whom
they buy much of their domestic provision, some of them are Persons of a
Considerable Stock, which they have many ways to improve for their advantage.
They are very Civil and kind, of an obliging temper, which we had the
Experience of, during our abode among them; there are but few begging poor to
be seen here, or in any place of the Country, where we had occasion to be;
there being a great store of small Fishes, for the supply of their necessity.

They have upon their own Charges Built a convenient Church, at the back of the
middle of the Town, A Church built in Lerwick, but no Ministr settled there.
and furnished it with good Seats high and low, they ^re at present a part of
the Parish of Tingwal, but very ^esireous to be disjoined, and erected into a
Parish by themselves, that so they may enjoy a Minister of their own: For the
promoting of which good Work, they are most willing according to their Ability
to Contri^ute for the settling of a Fond for a Stipend to a Minister, but not
being in a Capacity to give all, they ^esolved to make Application to the
Government, for to have some Allowance out of the Revenues of the Bishopric of
Orkney, or otherwise as the Wisdom of the Government should see meet, that so
there may be a Competency made up.

Upon their application to us, Fit this Town be Erected into a Parish.
we judgeing it most convenient, yea necessary, that this Town with some of the
adjacent Country, should be Erected into a Paroch, cherished this their pious
design; Telling them, that we intended, to recommend it, to the Commission of
the General Assembly: That they may interpose, with the Lords, and other
Honorable Members of the respective Judicatories, before whom this affair
shall come, for the better effectuating the same. For the Town it self is
considerable, and the principal one in the Country, much frequented by the
Gentry; As also, by Strangers, in the Summer time. And their Minister Preaching
seldom here, they are ordinarily destitute of Gospel Ordinances; The People
scarce being able, in the Summer season, and all most impossible for them in
the Winter, to travel to the next Church, where their Minister Preaches: It
being about 4 Miles distance from them, of exceeding bad way. As we knew, when
we did perambulate the bounds. Which want of Ordinances, makes their Case very
sad and deplorable; It nurseth ignorance; Occasioneth much Sin, especially
horrid profanation of the Lord's Day, by strangers, as well as by inhabitants:
And does effect^ally obstruct the conversion of Souls; Preaching of t^ Word
being a special mean of convincing and co^verting Sinners and building them up
in Holine^ and comfort through Faith, unto Salvation.

Citidale of Lerwick
At the North end of the Town, is the Castle or Ci^del, of Lerwick, begun to be
built in the time, of t^ Dutch War Anno 1665. By Workmen sent by Autho^ from
Scotland, for that end, but the Work was new perfected, the Work men, returning
home, Anno, 1667. that time also 300 Soldiers were sent over fort^ Defense of
the Country, against the hostile Incu^ons of the Hollanders, and were
quartered in pla^ nigh to the Fort, who likewise returned home a^ out the same
time, with the Wo^kmen: The Gar^son could do much to command the Sound (for the
there was no Town here) so that none durst La^ nigh unto them; The walls are
yet in a good con^tion, high in some places without, but filled up wi^ Earth
within, whereon they raised their Cannon; the weakest part of the Wall toward
the North, the has been a Sally-port, dangerous to Attack, by reas^ of a deep
Ditch before it, fed by a Spring, into whi^ the Garrison by cunning Artifices
might endeavor draw the Enemy, who by the Stratagems of War the being brought
on, and ensnared, did incontinent sink down into the Sound below them at the
foot the Hill, whereupon the Castle is situated: With the Walls is a House of
Guard, which has been t^ Stories high, burnt by the Dutch, after that o^
Soldiers had left the Fort. Upon the Walls towar^ the Sound, are standing 3
Iron Cannons one a 6. another a 7. and a 3d. a 10 Pounder, not left by the^ who
kept Garrison, but since that time within the 30 Years taken out of the Sea
nigh to Wnalsey, a She of Force there being cast away, about 80. Years before:
Which Guns the Inhabitants of Lerwick late mounted upon the Walls of the
Castle, whereby the might be in a Capacity to Defend themselves against the ^th
Privateers, who at any time should come up the and and Assault them.

Between Lerwick and the Isle of Brass^ on the East with a pleasant Bay or
Sound, Brassa-Sound.
commonly called Brassa Sound, Famous for ^s being so safe a Road for Ships
Anchor and Ride in, and that in the greatest Storm, ^ng enclosed with Land on
every side, except the ^try thereunto from the South, which is half a Mile ^ad,
but within the Sound as at Lerwick its a Mile, has another narrow passage at
the North end of (...) but dangerous to go out or in at, because of some and
Rocks therein. This Sound is the ordinary place which the Holland Bushes do
resort in time of ^ring Fishing, who before they put out their Nets, which must
not be, according to a Law they have among themselves, before the 24th. June,)
use to come ^re and put themselves Ships, and Nets in order, ^d the time by
them appointed being come, they all ^ to Sea together Fishing near to this
Land: Some^es there have been seen in the Sound 2000. or 2200. ^d at once, and
every Year some Hundreds as 5. 6. 700. Yea sometimes so thick do the Ships ^y
in (...) Sound, that they say Men might go from one side (...) the Sound to the
other, stepping from Ship to Ship; ^d during their Fishing they will come in to
the and for fresh Water, or other necessary Provision, and return to Sea again.

To this Parish of Tingwal also belongs Scalloway, Scalloway.
^ng on the West side of the Mainland, 4. Miles, which is the breadth of the
Country in that place, ^m Lerwick. It was formerly the chief Town in the
country, and the Seat of the Presbytry, enjoying by ^r a pleas^nter situation
then Lerwick about which is good Grass and Corn and some Meadow, betwixt which
and the Church of Tingwal, is the Strath of Tingwal, two Miles of hard even and
pleasant way; They ^y about Scalloway is as pleasant a spot as is in all this
Country. In all the Town there will be scarce 8^ or 100 Persons, there not
being such Encourageme^ by Trade to live here, as at Lerwick.

At the East or South East end of the Town stan^ the Castle of Scalloway built
An. 1600. Castle of Scalloway.
By Patrick E^ of Orkney Son to Robert Stewart also Earl of Orkney, w^ built
the Palace of B^sa formerly mentioned: Abo^ the Gates as we enter into the
House, there is this I^scription, Patricius Orcha^ia and Zetlandiae Comes, a^
below the Inscription this Distich, Cujus fundamen sax^ est, domus illa
manebit; Lab^is e contra, si sit arena, pe^ That House whose Foundation is on a
Rock shall stan^ But if on the Sand it shall fall. The reason of the
I^scription is reported to be this, The Earl great Oppressed both Orkney and
Zetland; and particular at the building of this House, his hand lay very hea^
on the poor People, by causing them in great numbe^ to be employed about the
Building, which could not b^ divert them from their ordinary Work as Fishing
and^ whereby they provided Sustinance for themselves 21 Families After this,
one Mr. Pitcawn Minister North-Mevan, said to be a Godly and Zealous Man coming
to pay his Respects to the Earl, the Earl d^sired him to Compose a Verse, which
he might p^ upon the Frontis piece of his House; from this the M^nister took
occasion to lay before the Earl his great S^ of Oppression, upon which the
Earls anger was ince^sed, and in his Rage he threatened him with Impriso^ment.
However the Earl afterward coming to so^ Composure of Spirit; Mr. Pitcawn said
unto hi^ well if you will have a Verse, I shall give you o^ from express words
of Holy Scripture Luke 6. whi^ Verse the Earl being pleased with, caused
Inscribe on the Lintle above the Gate, with Luke 6. added the Verse, The
Minister thereby insinuating that t^ House could not stand long, having such a
San^ Foundation as Oppression. As indeed neither did it, (...) shortly after
the Earl being Beheaded, the House was ^t taken care of, and is now become
ruinous.

And herein the Wise Providence of God may be ob^rved, Observe thereupon.
that as the Inscription on the Gate of the ^ace of Birsa in Orkn^y did hold
forth the Ambition of ^e Father, so this Inscription on the Gate of the ^e of
Scalloway in Zetland, did show the Oppression of (...) Son; and tho it be many
Years since the death of ^m both, yet the very Houses built by them, to take
their Honor and Grandour to appear, do yet and to their Dishonor and Infamy,
and in a manner (...) bear Witness against them: So truly verified in ^em, is
that Scripture. Psalm. 49.11. and 20. Psalm. 112.6. Pro. 10.7.
That tho the inward thoughts of ^a^ (...) be that their houses shall continue
for ever, and ^r dwelling places to all generations; Nevertheless they ^to, in
honor and not understandin^, are like the beasts ^at p^ish. And the Right^ous
shall be in everlasting ^memberance: But the Name of the wicked shall rot

This House or Castle is 3 Stories high beside Kitch^nes, and Wa^drobe, A
Description thereof.
and has in it many excellent Cham^ers, and other Apartments with their
several Conve^iences; Also there has been much good painting, ^ome of which is
yet to be seen, tho much defaced; ^e Chambers are high between floors, but
especially ^e Gallery or Dining Room: In the Kitchen there (...) a Well in the
side of the Wall, the water whereof is ^ery good tho little used: The Sclaits
have for the ^ost part fallen from the Roof, and are daily falling ^ith every
Storm, so that the Timber, much of which (...) yet very good and fresh is
beginning to rot and con^me, by the rain falling through the house from ^oor to
floor. The stone Walls are yet in a good Condition, they being considerable
thick; In the build^g are many free-stones as Lintels, Jams etc. which ^hey say
were brought from Scotland. I give a more ^articular account of this House,
because Built in this Country, and to show how Transient, Passing and
Perishing, the Glory and Riches of the World are In this Castle of Scalloway
some English Soldiers for so^ time kept Garrison, when their Army was in
S^land.

The Church of Wisdale, which belongs to t^ Parish is much frequented by the
Superstitious Coun^ People, Church of Wisdale.
who light Candles therein, drop Money in a^ about it, go on their bare knees
round it, and to wh^ in their Straits and Sickness they have their Rec^u^ yea
some are so silly as to think, that if they be in a distress, tho not at this
Church, yet if they turn t^ faces to it, God will hear them. One of the Justi^
told us, that tho they have laid out themselves to (...) these Superstitious
Conceits Eradicated yet they c^not get it altogether effectuated, but still
they contin^ among the People. A Minister also told me, that was much
frequented by Women, who when the desire to Marry, went to this Church making
the Vows and saying their Prayers there, so assuri^ themselves, that God would
cause Men come in (...) of them; But this is not now so much in use as fo^merly

Isle of Trouar.
Before Scalloway lies a little Isle called Trou^ two or three Miles long,
wherein are a few F^milies.

Parish of Neston.
The third Parish is Neston to the East of the Main, which belongs 4 Churches,
two on the Main, another two in Isles; in Neston is good Harboring a^ many
Gray Fishes.

Isle of Whalsey.
To the N. East lies the Isle of Whalsey, wherein a Church, it is about three
Miles long, and as man broad. Here are great Rats and very numero^ which do
infest the Isle, destroying their Corns a^ other Goods.

The Skerries.
From Whalsey to the East lies the Skerries, seve^ broken Isles, wherein is a
Church, here are two go^ Harbors, but dangerous to enter, by reason of Roc^
that ly before them, but when in, Ships will ri^ very safely: There are no
Pites in them, but man ^hips being cast away upon them, the Inhabitants ^ake
use of the Wrack for Burn-wood, and also bring ^me Pites from Whalsey. Here was
cast away that ^eat and Rich Ship, called the Ca^melan of Amsterdam ^n. 1664.
when the War was between us and the ^ollanders, computed to the value of
3000000. of ^ders, wherein were some Che^s of Coined Gold (of which more above
in our Description of Orkney) and one of the Men as they report, were saved but
4 who ^ere on the Top mast, discovering the Land; But ^fore they could give
timeous advertisement to the Captain, the Ship struck on a Rock, and the Mast
^reaking by the Deck, the Top thereof fell on one of ^he skerries, and so these
4 Men perished not with ^he rest of their Company; They say for 20 days after
^he Inhabitants of the Skerries drank liberally of the ^ong Liquors driven on
shore in Casks. It is said ^his Ship to Richly Laden was bound for the
East-^ndies.

In the way from Brassa Sound to Neston, lies the ^lind Rock called the
Unicorn, The Rock called the Unicorn.
the Top whereof is seen at a low Ebb, upon which the Ship called the Unicorn
was cast away, wherein was William Kinca^dy of Grange, who pursuing the Earl of
Bothwel, followed him so ^ose, that they were within Gun shot of one another,
^ut Bothwel coming first through Brassa Sound got in (...) Pilot, which ^range
neglecting to do, they both Sailed through the Northern passage of Brassa
Sound; and Bothwels Pilot having a great Reward promised him, if they should
escape, ^an down by the side of ^his Rock upon which the Unicorn did spl^et,
and so ^othwel got free of the danger he was in, by this ^ot pursuit. It is
most dangerous Sailing among these Isles without a Pilot.

The 4th Parish is Delton on the Main, Parish of Delton.
wherein are ^wo Churches, it lies North East and South East; Here are many
Gray Fishes taken, whereas in the Northern Isles of Vnst and Yell they lay out
themselves m^ for the taking of White Fish as Killing Ling, etc.

Isles of Fishholm, Mikle Rue and little Rue.

The parish of Sansting and Esting.


On the East lies Fisholm, to the North-East L^ Rue, and on the West Meikle Rue,
8 Miles long, a^ two Miles broad, wherein a good Harbor. All the Isles have
their own advantages.

The 5th is Sansting and Esting lying on the Main ^tween Delton and Wars
wherein are two Kirks, one Sansting, and another in Esting. The way in t^
Parish is very bad, and the People are said to be among the poorest and
naughtiest in all the Countre^ Here is good pasture for Sheep, and the best Wo^
As also the best Shelties.

The Isles of Vemantrie Oxney etc.
Nigh to Sansting and Esting ly several small pleas^ Isles, as Vemantrie a
pleasant Isle full of Harbou^ Oxney, Papa little, Hilesha etc.

Paroch of Waes. Isle of Vatla.
The 6th is Waes on the Main to the West, to it ^longes 4 Churches, one in Waes,
another in Sandra the 3d in the Isle of Papa-stour, and the 4th in t^ Isle of
Fowla. To the South of Waes lies the Isle Vatla, wherein a Cat will not live,
of which more af^wardes.

The Isle of Papa Stour
The Isle of Papa-stour is said to be the pleasant little Isle in all this
Country, two Miles long, a well furnished with Fuel, Grass, Corn, Rabbets,
and In it are 4 good Harbors, one to the South, two (...) the North, and one
to the West, nigh to this Isle ly^ the Lyra-Skerries, so called, because the
Lyres (the Fat Fowls, spoken of in our Description of Orkney,) (...) frequent
this Skerrie.

Isle of Foula.
Foula lies about 18 Miles West from the Main, is about 3 Miles long, wherein a
high Rock seen a great distance, I have heard some say, that in a cal^ and
clear Day, they will see it from Orkney: The is only one place in it for
Harboring, which if you (...) not hit, you will be driven to the Sea, what by
Wi^ and Tide. Their Cornland is all in one end of it; A^ the Inhabitants live
most by Fowls and Eggs, which a^ ^y numerous, and they are the best Climbers of
^ks in all the Country.

The 7th is North-Mevan on the Main lying to the ^th, wherein are three Kirks,
Hilswick, Parish of North Mevan.
Oloberry and ^th-Rhac, they Report, the People of this Parish be discreet and
scivilized, beyond their Neighbour^ Parishes; Which, under God, is owing, to
the ^ours of Mr. Hercules Sinclair, sometime Minister ^re, reputed to be
Zealous and faithful: He, in his ^al, against superstition, rased Cross-Kirk,
in this ^sh; Because the People superstitiously frequented (...) And, when
demolished, behind the place where (...) Altar stood, and also beneath the
Pulpit, were and several pieces of Silver in various shapes, brought ^ther as
offerings by afflicted People, some being in (...) form of a Head, others of an
Arm, others of a ^ot, accordingly as the offerers were distressed in these ^ts
of the Body; As a Friend of his a present Minister ^the Country, did inform
me. O that the pains ^d expense these superstitious Souls have been at, ^ght
excite, us the more dutifully to serve and Wor^p our God in Spirit and in
Truth. There are also any mo People in this Parish, who can Write and ^ad, and
give a tolerable account of their profici^cy in the knowledge of the principles
of Religion, then ^re are in others.

Before it lies Lamma a small pleasant Isle; The Isle of Lamma.
As also ^other to the West-North West.

The 8th is Brassa an Isle to the East of Tingmal and ^rwick to which three
Churches do belong, Parish of Brassa, and Burra. Isles of Brassa and the Noss.
two in ^assa, but only in one of them they use to attend Ordi^nces, the other
being built nigh to the Manse, for ^eir late old Ministers Accommodation.
Brassa is a^out 5 Miles long and two broad, all covered with ^eather, except
some Cornland by the Coasts; Before ^rassa to the East, lies the Noss of
Brassa, a small Isle ^herein is one Family, it has a high Rock lying open
(...) the East Sea, and seen by Mariners at a distance.

Isle of Burra.
The Minister of Brassa also has a Church in the (...) of Burra, which he goes
to every 2d Sabbath, it ^eth nigh to the Mainland West South-West from S^loway,
so that the Minister is obliged to travel from the East to the West side of the
Mainland, when (...) goes to this his Church. The Isle will be three Mi^ long
divided in the middle into two small Isles, Isle of Haveroy.
by a Se^break. The Church is very large and has a hi^ Steeple in it. To the
South-South East of Burra ly^ Haveroy a Mile and an half long. Both in Burra a^
Haveroy is good Pasture, and about them good Fishing

The 9th is Yell, an Isle North-East and by the East from the Main 16 Miles
long, Parish of Yell.
and as to breadth, (...) is much like the figure 8 because of the many Cree^
and Voes which divide and cut the Land, Isles of Yell Haskashie Samphrey, B^ggai
yet ^ some places it is 6 or 8 Miles broad. In it are ^ Churches and many old
little Chapels, it is more Moss^ then some other Isles, tho there be in it
some good P^sturage and Cornland; To the East of Yell lies Harkas^ 2 Miles
long, to the South West Samphrey, one Mi^ long, to the West South-West B^gga^,
a Mile and a^ hal^ long, all pleasant, and well grassed, having much Fuel, and
especially excellent for Fishing, for if the Win^ blow from the West, the Boats
can ly on the East if from the East, they can ly on the West side of the^ Isles
and that nigh to the Shore.

Isle of Fetlor
To the E. N. East of Yell lies Fetlor, 5 Miles long and 4 broad, in it some
Chapels and Picts Houses, (...) there are likewise in several other of the
Isles; In the Isle there is a Church, wherein the Minister of Yell preaches
every 4th. Sabbath, it used formerly to ha^ been served by a Preaching Deacon
but the Vicar by h^ Diligence has got the Minister of Yell also obliged (...)
serve in Fetlor, tho Yell be more than sufficient for a^ one Man to have the
charge of.

Parish of Unst.
The 10th. Parish is Vnst, 8 Miles long, and 4 Mil^ broad in many places, in it
3 Churches, it is said to (...) the largest pleasant Isle in all this Country,
In it a^ 3 Harbors, Uzia Sound, Balta Sound, and Burra Fir^ ^re some good
Corn-land and Pasturage, also several (...) Chapels (of which more afterward)
A little Isle ^led Uz^a lies off Unst a Mile and an half long, as ^ewise
several pleasant Holms. Isles of Unst and Uzia.
Unst is the most Nor^n Isle in the King of Britains Dominions, under the (...)
degree of latitude.

Thus I have given some account of the several Pa^hes within the bounds of the
Isles and Country of ^land, and hinted at, if not all, Principal Isles.
yet the greatest part ^ the Isles, the Principal whereof are Unst, Yell,
Fetlor, ^ssa and Burra.

Whence we see there is no Minister here, but has ^least 2 Churches, Ministers
exposed to much trouble and danger.
wherein he dispenses Gospel ^dinances, and some of them have 3, and others 4,
^me of which Churches are at a great distance from ^e another, to travel to
which is not only toilsome and ^ngerous to the Respective Ministers, they also
not ^ving little Manses or Houses for their Accommodation, ^en they come to many
of them; tho often when ^rms do arise, they will be detained in the Isles, for
^e time until they lessen: Not only I say, is this ^ublesome to the Ministers,
but highly prejudicial to (...) People, among whom the Work of the Gospel is
^atly thereby retarded (as we had occasion likewise ^ote concerning Orkney) few
of the People using to ^air to other Churches, when there is not public
^orship at their own, which at most will be but one of (...) Sabbaths, and in
many places but one in three or ^r, and in some not to be had for some Months,
^ich as undoubtedly it occasioneth great Ignorance; many gross Scandals, as
Adulteries, Fornications etc, ^e Faithful preaching of the Gospel doing much if
(...) to convince and convert, yet to moralize a People (...) put a restraint
to these horrid Enormities.

And tho the difficulty would not be small, There could be some more Parishes
here.
if at all could be got done to have Ministers constantly to ^ach in the
several Chuches, even in the most consi^able Isles, yet there might be some more
Ministers here than there are, 4 or 5 at least to whom the Tith^ if rightly
employed could afford a sufficient maintai^ance; As one Minister more in the
parish of Dunrossne^ on the main, and another in the Isle of Yell etc, whi^
Charges at present are very great, and cannot well (...) served by the
Ministers they have. The Tithes a^ farmed to Viccars, a kind of inferior
Tacks-men, w^ in some places do not only oppress the People, but a^ uneasy to
the Ministers, not paying them what the are obliged to pay, till they please,
which often the will not do for some years. The Ministers sufferi^ by this
piece of Injustice, laid it before the Commission, one of their Greivances,
which they craved might ^ redressed, and for that end, Application might be man
to the Government,

CHAP. VIII. An account of the Ancient Monuments, Curi^sities, strange
Providence, etc. most obser^able in the Isles of Zetland.
THE Works of Creation and Providence are all ^ry wonderful, Observable things
in Zetland.
sought out of them who have pl^sure therein, among which some more ordinarily
oc^ and are the subject of our meditation, and others no^ commonly presenting
themselves are the more surprisi^ and amusing, both which are to be had a due
rega^ unto, they being either mediatly or immediately, by without 2d. Causes,
the Work of the Lord, and Operation of his Hands: And seeing there are s^ things
that deserve their own observation, which eit^ I had occasion to see, or to
hear of in Zetland, I (...) give a brief Relation thereof, not denying but t^
there may be other things no less if not more observa^ there, which we came not
to the knowledge of.

The Picts Houses which are frequent through this ^ountrey, Concerning the
Picts Houses.
the Inhabitants take much notice of, as be^g the Ancientest Monuments they
have, some of which ^e more, others less ruinous, they are round in the ^m of
some Dove-coats, or something like un^ an Egg bulging out in the middle, but
narrower at ^e bottom, and yet more narrow at the top, They ^ave a little door
for an entry, at which a man of an ^rdinary stature could not enter without
bowing, with which door, there is a Stair going up between two ^one Walls,
leading to the several Apartments, instead (...) Windows they have Slits or
long narrow Holes in ^e Wall, such as are in many of our old Castles for the
^onveyance of light unto them; they are strongly built, ^t the convenience for
dwelling has been but little, ^or their Diameter is but about 10 or 12 Foot,
and their ^eight scarce 20 or 24, I think these Picts Houses are much like
Arthurs Oven upon the Water of Carron in ^rling-Shire.

These have been the Domiciles or Dwellings of the ^icts, Observe thereupon
the old if not the first Inhabitants of this Coun^ey, who were very numerous
in the North of Scotland, ^ed in Orkney, having their own Kings, as has been
^id in our Description of Orkney. They are convenient^y situated through the
Isles, each one being within the ^ight of another, hence in a few hours,
advertisement could ^e given by Fire, or other signs they might condescend
upon, through the whole Country, signifying unto them any danger, that being
thereby alarmed, they might meet together, or be upon their own defense. These
Houses are also called Burgh^, which in the old T^utonick or Saxon Language,
Rich: Verstegan in his Antiquities of the English Nation and their Saxon Kings.
signifies a Town having a Wall or some kind of an Enclosure about it; as also
a Castle, for as one observes in his Dictionary, or Explanation of our most
ancient English words; All places that in old time had among our Ancestors the
name of Borough, Bury or Burug were places one way or other fenced and
fortifyed. Whence it appears, that these Houses have been Castles, or places of
Defense, to the Pic^ Seeing it is generally acknowledged, that both the Pic^ and
the Saxons, were originally descended, of the sa^ German Nation: and so might
call their Castles by t^ same name. I have also heard it observed, That in
Orkn^ several places, wherein they used of old to bury the Dead were called
Burghs, so likewise these Houses (...) Zetland might serve for the same
purpose, from the Sax^ Word Byring, or Buriging, or Borogeing, which we n^ call
Burying.

No place called Thule here
I enquired if there was any Place or Hill here, whi^ they called Thule or Vle,
if so be we could receive a^ Information or Light from them concerning the The
of the Ancients, but they answered they knew none^ that name, only there was an
Isle, wherein a high (...) called Foula, on the west side of the Mainland, but
suppose that ever the Ancient Romans understood The thereby, beside other
things that might be alleged, (...) would be a manifest streatching of, and an
offering vi^lence to the word: But although what this place is, ha^ been much
controverted, by Ancient and Modern A^thors attempting the Discovery thereof,
yet it is gen^rally agreed upon, that it is toward the North, a^ many take it
to be one of the British Isles, and a late A^thor in an Essay concerning the
Thule of the Ancients, e^deavoureth to prove it to be the North East part of
Br^tain, Conr. Cel. Itinere ^aith.
lying over against the Isles of Orkney, citing some Authors to this purpose,
as Conradus Celtes. Orc^dibus qua cincta suis Tyle and Glacialis Insula and
Claudian, Maduerunt sanguine fuso Orcades incalu^ ^ictorum sanguine Thule;
Scotorum cumulos flev^ glacialis learn. And others who call Thule, Britann
carum Insularum septentriona^ssimam, the most Norther^ of the British Isles.
Island also lays claim to it, and t^ above cited Author supposes Island to be
the Thule, b^ I judge without any shadow of Truth, for beside wh^ is now said,
Rich. Verstegan.
I greatly doubt if ever the Romans had the knowledge of Island, their Eagles
never having com^ and been displayed to the North of Scotland, or Orkney, ^peru
fuerat Romani Scotia limes. Says the great Sca^er. Ptolomey will have it to be
among the Isles of ^tland, and Boeth. our Historian distinguishes be^ween a
1st and a 2d Thule calling Ila the 1st and Leuisa ^e 2d, which are reckoned
among the Isles called He^des: So says Boeth. "Ptolomaeus inter Schethlandi^s
insulas quae ultra Orchades sunt, Hec. Boeth Hist.
aut proxime Norvegiam sitam vult, haud quaquam propter immen^m intercapedinem
intelligi potest. Nos autem Ilam primam Leuisam Hebridum praestantissimam
secundam Thulen vo amus. But I incline to think, that although some ^ight design a
particular place by the Thule, yet gene^lly by a Synecdoche usual with the
Roman Authors, ^ey might denote all these places remote from them (...) the
North, and especially Britain, and the Nothern ^arts thereof, whether their
Arms did come.

In the Parish of North-Mevan is Mons Ronaldi or ^ons Hill, the highest in all
this Country, Mons Ronalds or Rons Hill the highest in the Country.
from which ^ome do say, they will see the Body of the Sun all the ^ight over
in the Month of June; which cannot be ^s the Reason alleged in our
Description of Orkney why ^ could not be seen from the top of the Hill of Hoy;
^o Reason and Experience show they have a clearer ^ight in Zetland, in the
Night time, dureing the Sum^r Season, then they can have in Orkney; Zetland
being more then a degree to the North of Orkney and con^equently ay the farther
North, the shorter Night, till ^t length there be no Night at all, so that if
it were ^ossible to sail holding a Northern Course, till we were under the
Pole, having it for our Zenith or Vertical Point, we would have a continual Day
without any Night for several Months, the Sun all that time de^cribing a
Circle almost parallel to our Horizon, I say, ^lmost parallel, because beside
the Diurnal, there is al^o the Annual Motion of the Sun in the Eclyptick. O now
exact and beautiful an order and symmetrie is to be seen in the Works of God;
they all speaking for the goodness, Wisdom and Power of their Maker.

What a wonderful Creature is the Sun, Coming for as a Bridegroom out of his
Chamber, A Reflection thereupon
and rejoiceing as a str^ Man to run his Race, absolving every day his circ^
round our Terrestrial Globe, from East to West, a^ traveling every year
between his Tropicks (the Lim^ and Boundaries prescribed him of God beyond whi^
he is not to pass) from South to North and from No^ to South, giving shorter
days to those, who inhab^ the middle of the Earth, under the Torrid Zone, ^th^
not being able to bear his longer continuance abo^ their Horizon; because of
his scorching heat, (...) longer to these who can better endure it under (...)
temperate, and yet longest to these who live near to the Frigid Zones or to the
Poles, whom his h^ cannot prejudge, as it does these who live under or n^ to
the Line or middle of the Earth on whom he daeth down his Perpendicular Rays,
wherefore the W^dom of his Maker will have him to stay a shorter the above
their Horizon. How wonderful then in Cou^ and excellent in working is this God,
whereupon not only Saints do bless him for the benefits wherewith they are
lo^en, but all his Works do praise him after their manner.

Caves.
There are several Caves here or hollow places in a^ through the Rocks;
particularly there is one in the (...) of Vnst, entering from the Sea at one
side of the I^ and opposite thereunto on the other side, there is a^ther going
in, as it were meeting the former, unto (...) end of any of which, none will
undertake to go, t^ it has been attempted, the rage of the Sea in the Caverns
of the Earth, the failing of the Light of D^ and the raggedness of the Rocks by
which they m^ pass making it terrible unto them, as also the thick^ of the Air,
something annoying them; but the Ent^ thereunto being opposite one to another,
gives grou^ to judge, that it is an continued cave from the one s^ of the Isle
to the other, tho 4 Miles broad: which c^ ^t be thought to be artificial but
natural washen ^rough by the violence of the Waves; and the less ^onder it is
for it so to be, if we consider, that if ^lla cavat lapidem, much more rapidi
and tumidi fluctus ^abunt, that if in a short time the drop will wear the ^one,
much more in the Tract of some Thousands of ^ears the rageing and tempestuous
Waves daily break^ng on the Rocks will produce this Effect, and that ^ore in
some places than in others, where the Rock will ^e more friable and brittle,
and the force of the Waves ^ess broken by the bounding and swadleing sand.

There is something like unto this yet more surpri^ing in the Isle of Foula, A
hole in Foula.
on the West side of the Main^and, if it be true what is storied of it: In this
Isle on the top of a hill there is a hol the mouth whereof may. ^e (and some
say now is) covered with a Slait-stone going downwards to the bottom of the
Rock, which is said to be of a great depth, particularly a Dutch Ship-^aster is
reported to have made a trial thereof, for the gratifying his curiosity, by
taking up a barrel of lines with him, which he let all down, and yet could not
found the bottom: Some say he let down 2. barrels, which is very wonderful,
considering a barrel of lines is reckoned to be several, some say 9. Miles of
length: What can be the reason of such a Conveyance from the top of the Rock to
the bottom, and further if we may give credit to what is said, I cannot
possibly imagine, for that such a thing should be done by Art, we cannot well
conceive the reason why, nor the Manner how it could be done, and that nature
should have such an operation will be as difficult to unfold.

That this Country is generally Mossy, Dangerous Traveling.
soft and spungey has been formerlie told, as likewise that it is dangerous
for people to travel through it; of which many Instances may be given, I shall
only name two, which I had from the Ministers of the respective bounds, one
Traveling in the Isle of Yell, fell unto such a Mossy and loose piece of
ground, his Horse beneath him, Furniture and all sank down, and was no more
seen, and he himself with great difficulty struggled out and was save^ And
another in the Parish of Tingwal on the Mai^ not long since, walking on foot
not far from his o^ House, fell into such another place, wherein there d^ not
appear to be any hazard and over which several times for^erly he thought he had
passed with safety and sank down to the arm pits, but he by stretching o^ his
Arms, keeping his head above the surface of t^ ground, by the help of his
servant then providential^ with him and a staff fixed in the ground, got
wrestl^ out: So dangerous it is Traveling here even to the inhabitants.

Variation of the Compass remarkable as at Udsta.
On the West side of the Isle of Fetlor, there is a plac^ whereon a Gentleman's
House called Vdsta into which place or House if a Mariners Needle and Compass
b^ brought, the Needle rests not in its Poles, as it does i^ other places,
but has a tremulous undulating motion and sometimes turns round, as some
say, to all the points of the Horizon; And a Gentleman who was inquisitive to
know the truth of this told me, that upon trial he found it to be so, and
further to try the experiment he took the Compass to the top of the House where
it had the same effect. And one of the Minister of the Northern Isles informed
me that if any Ship o^ Boat Sailed by, or came nigh unto that place, the sam^
did befall their Compass. And on a Hill in Whalsey.
Also there is a little Hill nig^ to the Sea on the West Side of the Isle of
Whalsey. t^ which if the Compass be brought, the Flowr de Luce, o^ that point,
which is ordinarily obverted to the North turns about to the South, but if
the Compass be removed the distance of two of three foot from the top o^ the
Hill, there is no such effect produced: This the late Minister of the place
assured me of, having trie^ the experiment.

Observes thereupon.
The many wonderful properties and effects of the Magnes or Lodestone, and of
other things endue^ with, or which do partake of this Magnetic vertue^
discovered in these latter Ages, has deservedly raised ^e Admiration of
Philosophers, and awakened them to ^ake a diligent inquiry and Search, into
the reasons of ^hese strange Phenomena. That the Magnes has two ^oles
answering to the Poles of the World, to which it ^o^eth it self; That the Load
Stone draws Iron unto (...) That Iron brought unto and rubbed upon the
Lodestone receives from it that Attractive, or as some will ^ave it, that
impulsive virtue and power, and other ^alities inherent in it [hence the
invention of the Needle, so useful and necessary to Mariners for directing
their Courses) That if there be two spherical Load-^tones, they will turn to
one another, as each of them ^oth to the ^oles of the Earth, and if they be
detained (...) a contrary position, they will flee from one another: and so is
it with the needle in the compass, when a ^oad Stone or piece of Iron is
brought unto it, the ^eedle either comes to, or flees from it according to ^s
situation, wherefore Mariners are careful that no ^on be in* nor lying near
unto their Light-room where ^e compass stands. Renat Des. Carts in his
Princip. Philos. reckons 34.
That tho you should take the ^eedle from its beloved Pole, yet when let alone
and ^ft to it self, it will incontinently move and take no ^st, until it return
thereunto, These strange and un^uth Properties has the Load Stone, as likewise
^any others, no less astonishing, reckoned up by it is admirers; many of which
are known to the rudest ^d most illiterate Mariner, but to explain the nature
of ^e Lodestone, and to resolve and answer the Propo^ls of Nature upon the
head, by giving the Reasons of ^ese admirable effects, hoc opus, hic labor est,
this is the difficulty, which has vexed many, and taken up the studies of the
sagest and most ingenious Modern Philoso^ers.

I shall not presume to give the reason of this strange ^henomenon, An Essay
concerning the Reason thereof.
the Needles leaving it is rest at the Pole and betaking it self to such a
motion, whether tremu^us and undulating, or circular round the points of the
compass; or the Flower de Luce, turning to the So^ Only I would suggest two
things, which if they t^ not to clear what is proposed, they will furt^ hold
out how wonderful the Lodestone and Properties are. First, upon the ordinary
suppositi^ whereby these Properties are explained, that the Ea^ is as a great
Lodestone, on the surface and exter^ parts whereof a great number of volatile
screw-li^ Particles, called the Magnetic matter, do uncessan^ move,
traveling from Pole to Pole along the surfa^ of the Earth, whereby the Poles
of the Lodestone a^ the point of the Needle affected with its virtue, a^
obverted to the Poles of the World; Which suppositi^ being made, we would know
that this Ma^netick matter may not always have the sa^ motion, but in some
places it may be upward a^ perpendicular to the surface of the Earth; so that
these places where they thus move perpendicularly, t^ Needle will not be
determined to one point, more the to another of the Horizon, this matter alike
affecti^ all the parts of the Needle, by its perpendicular motion which the
Ingenious Rohault alleges as the reason, w^ the Compass serves not the use
of the Hollanders, wh^ they have Sailed far to the North, in order to find o^ a
new and shorter passage to the East Indies, the Needle then not turning to the
Poles as it does in ot^ places, but alike to all the points of the Horiz^ the
motion of the Magnetic matter in these more No^thern places, being in Lines
perpendicular to the surfa^ of the Earth: and so likewise it may fall out in
ot^ places, where a greater quantity of this Magneti^ matter rises from the
Earth.

A 2d. thing that I would take notice of, is that t^ Magnetic matter in it is
passage from Pole to P^ meets with several Iron Mines, into which it go^ aside,
so diverting its straight Course between the Pol^ because it finds an easier
passage through the Pores the Iron, then by passing through other places; he^
^e variation of the Compass is Judged to be, so much ^kt of by Mariners, in
some places greater, and in ^hers less, accordingly as the Magnetic matter is
^t or less determined by the several Iron Mines, into which it turns aside;
Now in some places it may so ^out, that there may be a greater quantity of
Iron, ^ough which the Magnetic matter passing and from ^ich it arising, may
cause such a Motion, whereby (...) needle not only inclines not to one point
more ^n to another in the Horizon, but also by the Mag^ick matters ascending
from and returning to the Iron ^nes, it may produce such an irregular motion in
^e needle: And that there is a great quantity of Iron Zetland, may be knoun by
the remarkable variation the Compass there, for as Mariners inform us when ^y
Sail by the South-End of Zetland, they find the ^ation to be but one point, but
when passing the ^orth end, they find it varies 2 points, and upon this ^iation
in directing their Course to this or the other ^ce, they make their reckoning:
Which is very ob^vable that in less then a degree of latitude (for no ^e will
the length of the Isles of Zetland be) it va^a a point of the Compass, which
must be, according the Reason commonly assigned, because there is ^th Iron in
these Isles, and more especially on the ^st side of the Isle of Fetlor; for
other places of the ^e Isle have no such Influence on the Compass.

That yet much if not the greatest part of the diffi^ty remains I readily
grant, Some difficulty remains.
and leaves it to the study ^he learned and curious, and indeed in many things
acknowledge our Ignorance has been reputed no all part of Wisdom, so hard it
is to solve and unridle ^tures Secrets, wherein the greatest Lights have ^n
benighted, the following often rasing the Foun^ions of the Doctrines of the
Former: How won^ful are the Works of God, that in Wisdom he has ^e them all,
And how narrow and shallow are Capacities, that we cannot find out the Works of
God, even the most sensible and obvious; How tha^ ^ful also should we be to
God; who has vouchsa^ to us the Light of clearly revealed Truth* which taken
heed unto shall make us perfect, and lead u^ Glory.

Little Chapels.
There are in these Isles many little Chapels (...) generally ruinous, as in
the Isle of Vnst there are and upwards, In the Isle of Yell there are 21. many
in other Isles, I saw one of them in the Pa^ of Tingwal, wherein also there are
several m^; would have contained scarce 30. People, as I ju^ and tho so little,
yet very great Stones were in Walls, which was strange to me, how that in
Country, where their Beasts are weak, and they (...) not the help of Machines,
they got them lifted laid. These are said to have been built by Supers^ous
Zealots in the times of ^opery, or as some ra^ think by Ship wrackt Seamen, who
coming safe shore, have Built them according to their Vows m^ by them when in
danger, which they dedicated t^ many several Saints, whom they looked upon as
Patrons of their Respective Chapels. About w^ also Men and Women of Old had
their night walk^ which occasioned much uncleanness, but now (...) walkings are
but little used.

Snails which are medicinal found about the walls.
About the Walls of these old Chapels are for Snails, called Shell-Snails,
which they dry and ^verize, mingling the dust with their drink for the Jadice,
by which means these who labor under this s^ness in 3. or 4. days time will
recover of the sa^ but if they let this dustly for a Year, without mak^ use of
it, it turns into small living Creatures or V^ mine, which they dry and bray
over again, if t^ make any further use of it.

A metal like Gold found in Vzta.
In Vzta an Isle lying nigh to Vnst, there is a N^tal gotten having the color
of Gold, which sev^ of the Dutch Merchants have taken with them to H^burgh, and
tried it there, but by the force of Fire it not become Liquid, but crumbled
into small pieces; It is to be had there in great plenty. This shows there
may be Minerals in these Isles, tho not known nor searched for.

In the Churchyard of Papa-Stour, A gravestone in Papa-Stour.
in the Parish of Waes lies a Stone 5 foot long, at the one end two, and at
the other one foot broad, concave from the one end to the other, of which the
common Tradition goes, that this stone came a shore on that ^sle with a dead
Man tied to it, who lys buried there beside it. It appears to have been the
Grave stone of some Person of Note in the Country, which shows they have also
had that Custom, of laying at least some of their dead in such large Stones
made Concave, and cut out for the purpose, which has been frequent in many
places with us in Scotland.

At a little distance from Papa Stour, A Rock i^ the Sea where the ruins of an
old house.
lies a Rock encompassed with the Sea called Frau-a-Stack, which is a Danish
word, and signifies, our Ladys Rock, upon which are to be seen, the Ruins of
a House, wherein they say, a Gentleman did put his Daughter, that so she might
be shut up and secluded from the company of Men, but tho a Maiden when put in,
yet she was found with Child when brought out, notwithstanding of her being so
closly kept, but whither this came to pass by a Golden Shower (the most
powerful Courtship) or not, the Country has lost the Tradition: However it
seems strange, how a House should be Built on such a bare and small Rock,
when so many large and pleasant Isles were near unto it.

The three Iron-Cannons formerly mentioned now lying in the Citadale of
Lerwick, being rusted by the Sea, Cannons discharge themselves.
wherein they had lien for 80. Years; The Inhabitants of Lerwick to take of the
rust, and so fit them for their use, about 9 Years ago did set a heap of Pites
about them, which they putting Fire unto, the Guns so soon as they were warmed
and hot, did all discharge themselves to the great surprisal of the Spectatours
and the Balls as some observed, went half over Brassa Sound. Which deserves
some remark, that the Powder all that time should retain its Elastick Force,
the water if at all, yet not so insinuating if self with the Powder, as to wash
it away, or much diminish it^ virtue. These who were Eye witnesses gave me this
Relation.

Fishes and Cattle ^ittle or no ^iver.
It is observable that the former Year 1699 the Fishes had little or no Liver,
but something black i^ lieu thereof, which was a great loss to the Fishers,
they making their Oil of those Livers, As also the Oxen Sheep, Swine, etc. had
little or no Fat on their Livers which uses not to be, there being a kind of
Consumption upon the Livers of Creatures both by Sea and Land; which minds me
of Romans 8.22. Man's sins making the Creation to groan, and earnestly long as
with an uplifted head, for a deliverance, So that it the Creatures could speak
with Balaam's Ass, they would reprove the madness and sin of Man.

In Vaila no Cat will live.
There is a little Isle on the West side of Waes called Vaila, wherein there is
no Cat, neither will any stay tho brought in, as has been done for trial, but
will quickly be gone, they either dying, or betaking themselves to Sea, they
endeavor to sweem to the next Isle: Yet about 50. Years ago there was one seen
upon this Isle, about that time when a Gentleman the Proprietor thereof was
Tormented and put to death by the Witches, but never any were seen since, save
what were brought in for trial, as now said. The reason of this I could not
learn from the Ministers, who gave the Information, it is like because of the
Air, or the smell of something upon the Isle, tho not perceivable by the
Inhabitants, which agrees not with the Temper and Constitution of these
Animals.

^nop of ^ebister ^here a ^arlet or ^izard ^ed.
About a Mile from Tingwal to the North, there is a Hill called the Knop of
Kebister or Luggies Know, nigh to which Hill there is a House called Kebister,
where a Varlet or Wizard lived, commonly designed Luggie, concerning whom it was
reported that when the Sea was so Tempestuous, that the Boats durst not go off
to the Fishing, he used to go to that Hill or Know, wherein a hole, into which
he let down his Lines and took up any Fish he pleased, as a Cod or Ling etc.
which no other could do but himself: Also when Fishing at Sea, he would at his
pleasure take up any roasted Fish with his Line, with the Intrals or Guts out of
it, and so ready for his use: This was certainly done by the Agency of evil
Spirits, with whom he was in Compact and Covenant, but the Economy of the
Kingdom of Darkness is very wonderful and little known to us. He being
convicted of Witchcraft was burnt nigh to Scalloway.

As for Witches I did not ^ear much of them, Concerning witches.
as if they abounded more in this, than other Countries, tho I make no
question, but that there are many such here thus deluded by the Devil: There is
not then such ground for what is so commonly talked by many with us anent their
Devilry, which might have affrighted us if given heed unto, as if it were
dangerous going or living there; Tho it is said here, there are many of this
Hellish Stamp in Island, Lapland, and other places to the North of Zetland,
which may occasion the mistake.

We said before that there were but few Rats, Concerning Rats and Mice.
and that only in some of the Isles, and thought to come out of Ships; but that
they had Mice in abundance; yet in the Isles of Burra and Ha^kashy no Mice are
to be found, yea if they take some dust or Earth out of these Isles to other
places where they are, they will forsake such places, where the dust is laid.
When Rats leave the Ships it is looked upon by Mariners as fatal to these Ships.
It may be for the like reason, why no Cats can or will live in Vaila.

Sometimes when the Ships are lying nigh Land, the Rats will come ashore, which
when any of the Hollanders or others see, they look upon it as Fatal to the
Ship out of which they come, portending that her end some way or other will
shortly approach; And likewise it is observed that these Rats will not live
abo^ 3 or 4 Years in that Land to which they come. So^ of our Seamen tell us of
the like as to their Ships; is talked also that these Creatures will leave
Houses, before any dismal accident befall them. What grou^ there is either for
the one or the other I know not, b^ if true it will be hard, I suppose, to give
the reas^ thereof.

Evil Spirits
Not above 40 or 50 Years ago, almost every Family had a Brouny or evil Spirit
so called, which serve^ them, to whom they gave a Sacrifice for his Service^ as
when they Churned their Milk, they took a pa^ thereof and sprinkled every
corner of the House wit^ it for Brounies use, likewise when they Brewed, the^
had a stone which they called Brounies Stone, where^ there was a little hole,
into which they poured some Wort for a Sacrifice to Brouny. My Informer a
Minister in the Country told me, that he had converse^ with an old Man, who
when young used to Brew, an^ sometimes read upon his Bible, to whom an old
Woman in the House said, that Brouny was displeased with that Book he read
upon, which if he continued to do they would get no more service of Brouny; But
h^ being better instructed from that Book, which wa^ Brounies Eyesore and the
object of his wrath, when he Brewed, he would not suffer any Sacrifice to be
given to Brouny, whereupon the 1st. and 2d. Brewings were spilt and for no use,
tho the Wort wrought well yet in a little time it left off working and grew
cold* but of the 3d Browst or Brewing he had Ale very good, tho he would not
give any Sacrifice to Brouny* with whom afterward they were no more troubled I
had also from the same Informer, that a Lady in Vn^^ now deceased told him,
that when she first took up^ House, she refused to give a Sacrifice to Brouny
upon which the 1st. and 2d. Brewings misgave likewise but the 3d. was good; and
Browny not being regarded nor rewarded, as formerly he had been, aban^ed his
wonted service. Which clears that Scrip^re Resist the Devil and he will flee
from you. Ja. 4.7.
They also had ^acks of Corn, which they called Brounies Stacks, which ^o they
were not bound with straw-ropes, or any way ^need, as other Stacks use to be,
yet the greatest storm (...) Wind was not able to blow any straw off them.

Now I do not hear of any such appearances the Devil makes in these sles, Evil
Spirits not now so frequently seen as formerly.
so great and and many are ^e blessings which attend a Gospel dispensation: The
^ounies* Fairies and other evil Spirits that haunted (...) were familiar in our
Houses, were dismissed, and ^ed at the breaking up of our Reformation (if we
^ay except but a few places not yet well reformed ^om Popish Dregs) as the
Heathen Oracles were sil^ced at the coming of our LORD, and the going ^rth of
his Apostles; so that our first noble Reformers ^ight have returned and said to
their Master, Lu: 10.17.
as the 70 ^ce did; Lord even the Devils are subject to us through ^y Name. And
tho this restraint put upon the Devil ^as far latter in these Northern places
then with us, to whom the Light of a Preached Gospel, did more early ^ine, yet
now also do these Northern Isles enjoy the ^uits of this restraint. The
appearance, of an old Man in the Water.


About two Years and an half or three Years ago, ^ere was a Boat passing with
several Gentlemen of the Country in it, and by the way in the Voe of Quarf,
through which they went, ^here appeared something unto them with its Head above
the Water, which as ^hey could discern, had the Face of an old Man, with ^ long
Beard hanging down; first it appeared at some ^istance from them, and then
coming nearer to their ^o^t, they had a clear sight of it; The sight was (...)
very strange and affrighting, that all in the Boat were very desirous to be on
Land, tho the Day was fair and the Sea calm; a Gentleman declaring, as a
Mini^ter in Company with them, and saw this sight in^ormed me,) that he never
saw the like, tho he had tra^elled through many Seas.

And of a Woman.
I heard another remarkable story like unto this, the about 5 Years since, a
Boat at the Fishing drew h^ Lines, and one of them, as the Fishers thought,
having some great Fish upon it, was with greater difficulty the the rest raised
from the Ground, but when raised came more easily to the furface of the Water
upon which a Creature like a Woman presented it self at the side of the Boat,
it had the Face, Arms Breasts, Shou^ders etc. Of a Woman, and long Hair hanging
dot^ the Back, but the nether part from below the Breast was beneath the Water,
so that they could not understand the shape thereof: The two Fishers who were
the Boat being surprised at this strange sight, one (...) them unadvisedly drew
a Knife, and thurst it into h^ Breast, whereupon she cried, as they judged, Al^
and the Hook giving way she fell backward and w^ no more seen: The Hook being
big went in at h^ Chin and out at the upper Lip. The Man who thr^ the Knife
into her is now dead, and, as was observed never prospered after this, but was
still haunted by an evil Spirit, in the appearance of an old Man, who, (...) he
thought, used to say unto him, Will ye do such a thing who Killed the Woman;
the other Man then in the Bo^ is yet alive in the Isle of Burra. This a
Gentleman and his Lady told me, who said they had it from the Baillie of that
place to which the Boat did belong: (...) being so strange I enquired at
severals thereane^ which tho, many were ignorant of, yet some said that they
had heard thereof, and judged it to be very tru^

Creatures in the likeene^ of Men frequently seen at Sea.
That there are Sea-Creatures having the likeness (...) Men and Women seems to
be generally acknowledge^ by all who have enquired thereunto, they having found
it confirmed by the teffimony of many in sever^ Countries, as their Histories
do bear. Hence are a^counts given of those Sea Monsters, the Meermen an^
Meermaids, which have not only been seen but apprehended and keept for some
time. And hence probably the fiction of the Poets concerning the Sirenes, ha^
had its rise; these enchanting Songsters, translated ^eermaids by our
Lexicographers, whose snare Ulysses (...) happily escaped.

They tell us that several such Creatures do appear to fishers at Sea,
particularly such as they call Sea-Trowers, Several such Creatures appear to
Fishers at Sea as Sea Trowes
^eat rolling Creatures, tumbling in the Waters, which (...) they come among
their nets, they break them, and sometimes takes them away with them; if the
Fishers ^e them before they come near, they endeavor to ^eep them off with
their Oars or long Staves, and if ^ey can get them beaten therewith, they will
endeavor to do it: The Fishers both in Orkney and Zetland ^e afraid when they
see them, which panick fear of ^eir's makes them think and sometimes say, that
it is ^e Devil in the shape of such Creatures, whether it be (...) or not as
they apprehend, I cannot determine. ^owever it seems to be more then probable,
that ^il Spirits frequent both Sea and Land.

A Gentleman in the Parish of Dunressness told one (...) the Ministers in this
Country, Fresh Cockles got on the Land.
that about 5 Years ^nce a Plough in this Parish did cast up fresh Cockles, to
the place where the Plough was going, was three ^arters of a Mile from the Sea;
which Cockles the ^entlemen saw made ready and eaten. How these ^ell Fishes
came there, and should be fed at such a ^stance from their ordinary Element I
cannot know, if they have not been cast upon Land by a violent Storm, such of
the Ground of this Parish, especially what ^ey Labor lying very low, and the
Sea has been observed in such Storms both, to cast out Stones and ^ishes; Or
if these Cockels have been found in some ^ep Furrow, from which to the Sea
there has been (...) conveyance by some small stream, upon which the ^a has
flowed in stream Tides, especially when there (...) also some storm blowing. If
only Shells were found, ^ch as of Oysters and the like, the marvel would not ^e
great, seeing such are found upon the tops of high ^ountains, at a greater
distance from the Sea, which in all probability have been there since the
Unive^ deluge; but that any Shellfish should be found some distance from the
Sea and fit for use, is son what wonderful and astonishing.

A Tortoise found in the Sand.
Tho no Tortoises use to be found in all these Northern Seas, yet in V^te-Firth
in the Parish of North^^^ there was one found alive upon the sand in an ebb t^
Shell of it was given me as a present by a Gentlem^^ of the Country, it is
about a Foot length, and a lar^ half Foot in Breadth. The Inhabitants thought
(...) strange, never any such having been found in these (...) formerly, which
ever they came to the knowledge (...) that they could not imagine what to make
of it, son saying that it has fallen out of some East India Ship ^a^ing
along by the Coasts, which looks not so probably.

There is a pl^ce in this Country called the Neip^ the Parish of Neston
looking to the East Sea, The Parson of Orphir killed.
where the Parson of Orphir in Orkney was Killed; the story is thi^ Patrick
Stewart Earl of Orkney, as has been said, w^ a great Oppressor, enacting
several severe and cru^ Acts, whereof complaint was made to King James (...)
And as it is reported some Zetlanders went to the King with their Skin-Coats,
laying the oppressed condition of their Country before him, wherewith the King
was moved, yet although, not only the Earls Honor and Reputation withal was much
stained, and under a cloud by reason of his cruel and oppressive ways but his
person was hated and abhored by the People whose Superior he was, the Parson
of Orphir d^ Zealously stand in the Earls defense, notwithstanding whereof the
Indignation and kindled wrath of the ex^asperated People against the Earl
increasing, the Parson was forced to flee to Zetland for his safety, upon which
the People of Orkney not quieted, some of them pursued him thither, they say
the Pursuers were 4. Brethern of the name of Sinclar, who coming to the Nei^
where the Parson had his ordinary residence, they apprehended and dewitted him,
one of the Brethren taking a sop of his heart-blood; As for the Earl, being
first emprisoned at Dumbartoun, he was thence brought to Edinburgh, where he
was Beheaded. Anno 1614, for Treason and Oppression.

There are also in this Country, as well as in Orkney many Eagles which
destroy their Lambs, Fowls, Concerning Eagles.
etc. For the preventing of which, some when they ^ee the Eagles catching or
fleeing away with their prey, ^se a Charm, by taking a string whereon they cast
some knots, and repeats a form of words, which being done the Eagle lets her
prey fall, tho at a great distance from the Charmer, an instance of which I had
from a Minister, who told me, that about a Month before we came to Zetland,
there was an Eagle that ^ew up with a Cock at Scalloway, which one of these
Charmers seeing, presently took a string, (his garter as was supposed,) and
casting some knots thereupon with the using the ordinary words, the Eagle did
let the Cock fall into the Sea, which was recovered by a Boat that went out for
that end.

They tell a pleasant story of an Eagle and a Turbot. About 6 Years since an
Eagle fell down on a Turbot sleeping on the surface of the Water; Concerning an
Eagle and a Turbot.
on the East side of Brassa, and having fastened his Claws in her, he attempted
to flee up, but the Turbot awakning and being too heavy for him to flee up,
with endeavored to ^raw him down beneath the Water, thus they strugled for
^ome time, the Eagle laboring to go up, and the Turbot to go down till a Boat
that was near to them, and beheld the sport took them both, selling the Eagle
to the Hollanders ^hen in the Country. For they say when the Eagle has
^astned his Claws in any Creature, he cannot loose them this pleasure, but
uses to eat them out, so that the prey sometimes comes to be a snare to this
Rapacious Fowl.

On the West Side of the Mainland, A Holm frequented by Sea Fowls.
there is a Holm belonging to a Gentleman in the Parish of Northern van, (...)
much frequented by Fowl, that when sometimes they go in to it in the Summer
season, Fowls of several kinds will flee so thick above their Heads, that the
will cloud the very Air, yet therein there are few (...) none, during the
Winter, but in February they use (...) begin to come by pairs, and for two or 3
Days aft^ they first come, they will sit so close, that almost they m^ be
taken hold of, which is imputed to their being wearied after a long flight from
some far Country* The Proprietour of this Holm may almost every Day in Summer
take a Basket full of Eggs out of it, and they scarcely be missed, for it is so
well furnished, the none almost can set down a Foot for young Fowls (...) Eggs,
which are very serviceable to this Gentleman^ House, and the Country about.

Noss of Brassa high.
To the East of Brassa is an Isle called the Noss Brassa, wherein a ragged Rock
looking to South East the highest in all this Country, serviceable to Mariners
for directing their course when Sailling to the West from Eastern Countries,
some Gentlemen told (...) that they verily think from the surface of the Water
to the top of the Rock, it will be 300 Fathoms, upon which a great many Fowls
have their Nett^ whose Eggs they take in the Summer time, as also some of the
Fowls, by letting a Man down from the to^ of the Rock by a Rope Tied about his
middle: Before this Isle lies a Rock Raggie On all sides, about 100
Fathomshigh from the surface of the Water, but b^ reason of its Raggedness and
Declivity, and its being surrounded with Sea on all hands, it is scarce
possible t^ climb it. A Holm, dying before it, where Fowls numerous.
Yet the Owners of the Isle being desirous, to be a^ the Fowls and Eggs
numerous upon it, about 10^ Years since there was a Man for the hire of a Co^
undertook to climb the lesser Rock, and to fasten (...) Pales or Stakes
thereupon, which he accordingly did, bu^ in the cominng down, he fell into the
Sea and Perished

The way how they get into this Holm, Remarkable.
The way how they get into this lesser rock is observable, which is thus;
opposite to the two Stakes o^ the lesser, there are also Stakes fastened on the
highe^ Rock, it being but 16. fathoms over between the Rocks; to which Stakes,
ropes are fastened, reaching from Rock to Rock, the Ropes they put through the
^oles of an Engine called a Craddle; all which being so prepared, a Man gets
into the Cradle, and warpeth himself over from the Noss or the greater Rock to
the ^ffer; and so having made a good purchase of Eggs and ^owls bought at the
expense of the danger of his life, (...) returns the same way he went: These
Ropes hang ^ot on all Winter, but in the Summer time, in the Month of June
ordinarily, when the Day is calm, they ^st the Ropes from the greater to the
lesser Rock; Which so they do, they have 1st. some small Rope or ^ordage, to
which there is a stone fastened, and they ^eeping both the ends of this small
Rope in their ^ands, an able Man throws the stone into the lesser ^ock, and
when casten over the stakes, they heave or ^ft up this small Rope with a long
Pole, that so the ^ought of the Rope may be gotten about the stakes; which
being done they draw to them the small rope ^ll a greater tied to it be brought
about also, (...)
and so ^oth ends of the greater Rope they secure by the stakes ^n the top of
the Noss, Industriae nihil Impossible Nil tam difficile est quod non solertia
vincat.
on which strong and greater ^ope the Cradle being put, it runs from Rock to
^ock: Easily a Man in the Cradle goes from the Noss (...) the Holm or Rock, by
reason of its descent, but with greater difficulty do they return, therefore
there is a ^mall Rope tied to the Cradle, whereby Men on the ^loss help to draw
them back. I do not hear that any there such another Cradle is to be found; How
many ^re the Inventions which Man has found out.

This Holm is much frequented by Fowls more than any other place on the East
side of Zetland, This Holm frequented by Fowls.
as the ^ther Holm of North-Mevan is on the West side; the ^owls have their
Nests on the Holms in a very beautiful order, all set in raws in the form of a
Dove-coat, and ^ch kind or sort do Nestle by themselves; as the Scarfs ^y
themselves, so the Cetywaicks, Tominories, Mawes ^c. There is a Fowl there
called the Scutiallan, of a black color, and as big as a Wild Duck, which do^
live upon the Vomit and Excrements of other Fow^ whom they pursue and having
apprehended them, the cause them Vomit up what meat they have lately take not
yet digested: The Lords Works both of Natu^^ and of Grace are wonderful, all
speaking forth H^ Glorious Goodness, Wisdom and Power.

Concerning the dangers the Inhabitants undergo.
Remarkable are the Dangers, which many in the Isles do undergo in climbing the
Rocks for Fowls a^ Eggs, especially in Foula, where the Inhabitants in the
Summer time do most live by this kind of Provision and are judged to be the
best climbers of Rocks in a^ this Country, for some of them will fasten a Stake
o^ Knife, as some say, in the ground on the top of the Rock, to which they ty a
small Rope or Cord, and (...) they will come down the face of the Rock with the
in their hand 60 70. or 80. Fathoms, and do return bringing up Eggs and Fowls
with them; but indeed very many of them lose their lives this way; ye^ it is
observed that few old Men are to be seen ther^ they being so cut off before
they arrive at old Age^ Many of them are weary of the dangers and hazard^ they
daily incur, yet neither will they leave the place nor give over these perilous
attempts, all the sad instances of their Friends and Neighbors Perishing an^
death cannot have this influence to deter and affrigh^ them from undergoing the
like hazards: Labor omnia vincet Improbus and duris urgens in rebus Egestas.
Virg.
At so sma^ a rate do they value their lives, that for a few Fow^ and Eggs they
will endanger them, whereas they might have as good and a much safer living
elsewher^ As this shows both their Folly and their Sin, Impiger extremos
currit Mercator ad Indos, per Ma^e pauperiem fugiens per laxa per Ignes.
(...) what fatigue and danger Men will expose themselves t^ for the avoiding
Poverty and Straits, for the upholding this Clayie Tabernacle, which ere long
will mould^ into the dust, and often not so much for the satisfying the
necessary cravings of Nature, as the superfluous an^ insatiable desires of our
Lusts. Sometimes one Man will stand on the top of the Rock holding the end
(...) the Rope in his hand, and another will go down, which neither is without
danger, as they tell us of one ^o thus holding his Neighbor did let the rope
slip, ^d down fell the Climber into the Sea, but providen^ly there being a Boat
near by, they got hold of him, ^d took him in, and so came home before his
Neighbor, who judged him to have perished: The other ^an at length came home
with great Sorrow and Grief ^grating the Death of his Neighbor, but he hearing
(...) he was already come home, was not a little con^unded and astonished at
the report until that at ^eeting the Man in danger narrated the manner of his
^eliverance, which afforded unto them both, great ^atter of refreshment and joy.

In all this Country there are only three Towred Churches, (i e.) Churches with
Towers on them, Three towred Churches.
to ^t T^ngwal on the Mainland, the Church of Burra on ^e Isle of Burra, and
the Church of Ireland a Promon^^y belonging to the Main, from the top of one of
which Towers you can see another; Built they say, by ^ree Sisters, who from
their several Towers could ^ve advertisement to one another.

The Church of Tingwal stands on a Valley between two Hills lying East and
West, A Holm called the Law-Ting
and is about the ^ddle of the Mainland. It was in this Parish in a ^all Holm,
within a Lake high to this Church, there the Principal Feud or Judge of the
Country; ^el to fit and give Judgment, hence the Holm to this ^ay is called the
Law-Ting (from which probably the ^arish of Tingwal had its name) we go into
this Holm (...) steping stones, where three or four great Stones ^e to be seen,
upon which the Judge, Clerk and other Officers of the Court did sit: All the
Country concerned to be there stood at some distance from the ^olm on the side
of the Loch, and when any of their ^auses was to be Judged or Determined, or
the judge ^ound it necessary that any Person should compear before him, he was
called upon by the Officer, and went in by these steping stones, who when
heard, retur^ the same way he came: And tho now this place be (...) the Seat of
Judgment, there is yet something am^ them to this day, which keeps up the
Memory their old Practice, for at every end of the Loch the is a House, upon
whose Grass the Country Men co^ing to the Court did leave their Horses, and by
rea^ the Masters of these Houses did suffer a loss this w^ they were declared
to be Scat-free, hence at this pres^ time, two places in the Parish of Sanfling
do pay S^ for the one, and Coningsburg in Dunrossness for t^ other: Scat is a
kind of Rent or Due, which is Yea paid to the King or his Taxmen; by the
Gentlem^^^ and several others in the Country. This Court thought to have been
kept by the Danes, when the were in the Possession of the Country. They also
(...) port that when any Person received Sentence of Dea^ upon the Holm, if
afterward he could make his esca^ through the crowd of People standing on the
side the Loch, without being apprehended, and touch (...) Steeple of the Church
of Tingwal, the Sentence of Dea^ was Retrieved and the Condemned obtained an
Inde^nity: For this Steeple in these days was held as Asyl for Malefactors,
Debitors Charged by their C^^ditors etc. to flee into.

An obelisk between Tingwal and Scalloway.
In the way between Tingwal and Scalloway, there an high Stone standing in form
of an Obelisk as so^ Ancient Monument, concerning which the People ha^ various
Traditions, some saying that in the Strath Tingwal, where this Stone is
erected, there was a Bloo^ Fight between the Danes and the old Inhabitants
Natives of this Country, and that the Norvegian Danish General was killed in
this place, where t^ Stone is set up. Others report that one of the Ea^ of
Orkney, had a profligate and prodigal Son, who (...) this cause being
animadverted upon by his Father, fl^ to Zetland, and there built a Castle or a
strong Ho^ for himself within a Loch at Stroma, within two Mi^ Tingwal to the
West, the ruins whereof are yet be seen: His Father not being satisfied with
his ^ape, and the way he took for his Defense, sent from ^kney 4. or 5. Men to
pursue him, to whom he gave ^ders that they should bring his Son to him, either
^d or alive: The Son thereupon not finding him^ safe enough in his Castle, made
his escape from (...) Castle, where the Pursuers lay in Ambush, but was
^ertaken by them in the Strath of Tingwal and killed ^re, whereupon this
Monument was erected. The ^rsuers took off his head, and carried it with them
to (...) Father, but in so doing they were so far from gra^ying of him, that he
caused them all to be put to (...) Death, notwithstanding of the orders given
by (...)

There is in the Parish of Tingwal a little off the way (...) we go from
Lerwick to Scalloway, Concerning a Spring.
a Fountain or ^ing of very pure and pleasant Water, which run^ through a great
Stone in the Rock by the passage of ^ound hole, which if you stop, the Water
forces its ^y through the pores of the Stone in other places, (...) Stone it
seems being very porous and spungy.

One of the Ministers told us of a Monster born the (...) Year in the Parish of
Neston, about 9 or 10. Monsters born.
^les from Lerwick, That one day when he was com^^g to the Presbytry, and
standing at the Ferry-side ^er which he was to pass, two Women came to him
^quainting him with fear and grief, that their Neigh^^ur near by, had been
Traveling in Childbirth under ^d Labor for 3. days past, and had brought
forth Monster, which had upon its Forehead like a Pirwig (...) Flesh and Hair,
raised and towered up, and by ^e sides of the head, there were like wires of
Flesh ^ming down: Moreover it had two raws of Teeth, ^th a Mouth like a Rabbet,
destitute of Arms and ^gs; After the Birth there was some life in it, and (...)
moved a little, but lived not long; the Women ^isting at the Birth for a time
were afraid to touch it, it being such a strange and formidable sight. T^
Minister desired to see it, but it was Buried before came. The same Woman also
formerly had brou^ forth two Monsters, the first whereof was a con^^ and
undigested ^^mp of Flesh; and the second ha^ Mouth in its Breast.

We enquired concerning the Woman, and they t^ us that they knew nothing of
Scandal they could la^ her Charge, but that she had lived soberly all her li^
only one of the Ministers informed us, that after had brought forth the first
Mon^ter, he heard that a Years time thereafter, she used to go bare footed the
Church of Wisdale every Lord's Day, and p^ there according to the Vow she had
made after Birth, thinking thereby, that this might Atone what was past, and
prevent the like for the Future, this be true, God has judicially punished
her, Conceiving and Bringing forth the two follow Monsters, each more wonderful
and preternatural t^ the other.

God's judgments on Adulterers.
Several Adulteries came before the Commission atte^^ed with heinous aggravating
Circumstances. One ^stance we had very remarkable of one James Mo^ in the
Parish of North Mevan who had been lying Adultery with one Clara Tutloch, his
Wi^e being d^ not many Years since. Between which Mowa^ Tulloch; there were
several Children Procreated, (...) were all Idiots and Fools, so that they
could not k^ themselves either from Fire or Water, or put t^ meat in their
Mouths, tho there be one of them of Years, and others of them tho younger, yet
come some considerable Age. Which shows the mani^ Judgment of God against
Adulterers, he often or^ing his Providential Dispensations so toward the^ that
they may read their Sin in their Punishment, this wretched Man was forced by
the power of his so convinced Conscience to confess before the Presbyt^ That he
was sensible the Judgments of God were p^^suing him, whereof he gave the said
sad Instance, as ^et to be seen from the Presbyteries Records. Another
Adulterer also did Compeir before us, who did continue in the Commission of
this his Sin for many Years, and does bear in his Face the shameful reproof
thereof, and the just marks of the Lords Indignation against him for the same.
It is a very sad thing for any to be pining away both in Judgments and Sins.

A Minister here told me a passage not to be passed without a Remark of God's
Righteous Judgment and Holiness. Another instance of God's judgments on
Adulterers.
A certain Woman in his Parish about 10 Years since fell into Adultery with an
old Married Man, he to cover his Villainy, advised her to give way to another
young Man's sinning with her, who then was ^n suit of her and frequented her
Company, that so if there were a Child, she might Father it upon this young and
unmarried Man; Accordingly as was advised it fell out, the young Man sinned
with her, and she being found with Child, is summoned to compeir before the
Session, who having interrogated her concerning her Uncleanness, and who was
the Father of the Child, she answered that she never knew or had Carnal Dealing
with any, save such a young Man. But this covering could not serve the turn in
palliating their Filthiness, God in His Wise Providence so ordering it, that
tho there was the Interval of 5 Months between the old and the young Man's
sinning with her yet when the time of her delivery came, she first brought
forth a perfect Child of 9 Months, and the day after another imperfect of 4
Months, according to the several times of the old Man, and the young Man's
sining with her. She being convinced that this was of the Lord, and that she
could not hide her sins from God, tho she sought to do it from Men, she
ingenuously acknowledged her Guilt with both, and for the Scandal is now giving
Satisfaction in the Parish of Vnst.

Another instance.
We had also the Lamentable Account of the Tragical end of one Mr. Gilbert
Hendry Adulterer, in repute, for his acuteness of wit and the many excellen^
Poems he composed: He being a married Man had carnal converse with another
Woman, at which his Friends and Welwishers being greatly concerned, one o^ them
laid hold of an oppertunity to accost and set upon him, earnestly entreating he
might break off his unclea^ and debauched converse with that Woman holding ou^
unto him his sin and Misery, and using what Arguments he thought might prevail
for that end, but h^ gave a deaf ear unto all that was said, and by no mean
would be dissuaded from haunting her Company, ye^ in contempt of the admonition
and reproof, made as (...) he were going to that Woman's House the same night
and so parting from his friend, went in the evening to Water or Loch side,
where he walked for some tim^ alone, and then appeared a Man in company with
him all in black, and thus they contiuned walking together till Night, as the
People observing did Judge, and the next Morning this miserable wretch was
found dea^ with his brains dashed out (tho there were no stone near to that
place where he lay) on a Hill side at a little distance from the Water, his
head and shoulders lying dounward to the descent of the Hill, his brains wen^
scattered, and the ground about him was all trodden, a^ if there had been (says
my Informer,) 20 Men and Horses for 24, hours upon the Spot. It is not many
Year since this fell out. So bad a recompense does the Devi^ give his Vassals
and Slaves for their service, for Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge,
which Judgment often he begins to inflict in this life, for the punishment
of the guilty, and the terror of all, and to show that he is of purer eyes
then that he can behold such horrid Iniquity; Observe on the Spanish Armado.
tho the pouring out of the full vials of his Wrath he reserveth for the
future, where their worm shall not die, nor the fire for ever be quenched.

The signal defeat and overthrow of the Spanish Armado that supposed and
commonly (tho arrogantly) cal^ed Invincible Navy Anno 1588. is famous in
History, which was especially caused by stormy Winds and Tem^ests, some thereby
sinking at Sea, others spleeting upon ^he Coasts both of England and France and
especially upon the North of Scotland, Orkney and Zetland; and the (...) Isle
had the honor of the Duke of Median's being ^iven ashore upon it, under whose
conduct this Navy ^as, who after his Shipwreck came over to Dunross^ess in
Zetland, as an old Gentlewoman Informed me; ^f whom she heard the Country
People who saw him, ^equently speak, when she was a Child; So the Lord
^ispersed and broke this huge and formidable Navy ^t of an hundred and thirty
ships which set out from ^ain with Provision, Ammunition, and other furniture
exceeding great, scarce 30. returned; The God of Land ^d Sea heard and answered
the Prayers of his People (...) Britain, the Curse of God pursuing that hellish
enter^rise notwithstanding of the Infallible Popish benedict^n on that
Invincible Armado; for as our Historian ^lderwood observes, "The rumor of the
great Spanish Armado being blazed abroad, Called. Hist. on Anno 1588.
fervent were the Prayers of the Godly in Scotland, powerful and peircing were
the Sermons of Preachers, especially in the time of Fast, whereupon the Lord
uttered his voice against his and his Churches enemies, by terrible things
(...) Righteousness; Our Coasts upon which many of that ^leet were cast away,
and some of the Persons in it beged from door to door, proclaiming aloud the
Glory of ^s Justice and Power.

There are no Weasels in all the Northern Isles of Zet^and, as I am informed,
tho numerous in the Mainland, No Weasels formerly, but now numerous on the
Mainland.
which they report thus came to pass: The Falconer ^iving a Power given him, to
get a Hen out of every ^ouse, once in the Year; but one Year they refusing,
(...) not being so willing to give, The Falconer out of ^evenge, brought the
next Year two Weasels with ^m, which did generate and spread, so that now they
are become very destructive to several goods of t^ Inhabitants, whereof a
Gentleman our Informer, to us he had killed severals half an Ell long.

CHAP. IX. The Fish-Trade is most considerable, in Z^^land.
Observes on their Fishtrade.
OF all the things remarkable in Zetland, their F^ Trade is the most
considerable, wherefore I ha^ chosen to speak of it by it sel^. Which I shall
labo^ to do, by showing what Fishing they have in these Se^ and what Fishes
they do most abound in, and have plenty of; And then hold out who are these who
Trade, a^ what advantages do accrue thereby unto the ^n^a^tants, with some
Reflections upon the whole.

The Fishing decayed beside what formerly it has been.
The Fishing here is much decayed by what it wa^ for now neither is there such a
great number of Fish taken, nor so easily can they be had as formerly; (...)
not above 40. or 30. Years since, the Fishers wo^ have taken the great Fishes,
such as Killen, Ling and in the Voes or Lochs, and that in great numbers, a^ so
were not necessitated to underly such danger a^ toil, in going out to the Sea,
but could have lien before their oun doors, and drawn the Fishes, whi^
certainly was more safe, easy, and convenient to the^ in many Respects: Whereas
now they are obliged (...) put out some Leagues unto the Sea, and so far oft^
that they almost sink the Land, else they cannot ^a^ any Fishing, worth their
expense and pains, whi^ cannot but be very toilsome and dangerous, in case
storm should arise and blow off the Land, and so p^ them to Sea, with their
little Boats or Yoals, not ab^ to keep ong out against the violent and swelling
wav^ and so has it fallen o^t unto some, who being toss^ to and fro, whether
tide and Wind did drive the^ have never seen Land any more. And as it is
dang^^s, so it is toilsome and costs them much labor, ^ing often they ly some
Nights and Days at Sea, and (...) come ashore.

The Fishing formerly being greater then what now ^s, occasioned, they say,
Notwithstanding their Fishing yet is great.
some hundreds of mo Ships ^^sort Yearly unto this Country, then what now
(...) to do when Fishes cannot be had for to serve them, (...) indeed neither
now are the Fishes so sought after, ^ometime they have been, when they could be
easily (...), many being willing rather to stay at home and ^ch what they can
about the Coasts which ordinarily (...) but the smaller Fishes, then to undergo
such hazards (...) toil in following the greater, which an Hamburgh^chant
waiting for a lading complained to me of.

Although when we institute the Comparison between (...) former and the latter
times, Fishes taken in great numbers Anno 1700.
their present Fishing ^l appear to be but small, yet if we take it under ^w as
it is in it self without such a respect, we will find ^o be very considerable:
for tho in some Years it be ^ater then in others yet every Year many trading
^os are thereby laded; and this same Year 1700 the ^ing is thought to be very
good; an Instance whereof Merchant gave us, that in one Week in the Month (...)
June, there were taken by some Boats belonging to (...) place, of Northmevan
4000, Ling, all which were ^ught in for the Loadening of that Ship, wherein he
(...) concerned. And another Gentleman added, that ^e other Boats at a little
distance from these, drew ^ut 700. mo^ but this was something exterordinary,
(...) uses not often to fall out, that in one Week they ^e such a number.

The Fishes that do most abound here are Killin, What Fishes abound here.
^g etc. which being salted and dried Foreigners export ^m to other Countries;
of these, as has been said, ^re is a great plenty, but are not ordinarily
taken near (...) Land; as for Haddocks, Whitings and such lesser ^ite Fishes,
they care not so much for the seeking af^ except what is for their oun use, for
strangers use but seldom to buy them: And these greater Fishes the get a
greater quantity of in some places, then in other as off Dunrossness,
Northmevan, Vnst, Yell, etc.

Herring numerous.
Great shoals of Herring do sweem also in these Se^ which are taken in the
Summer season, especially the Month of July, and the beginning of August,
sometimes then they will come within a Pennie-st^ cast of the shore, and be
sweeming so thick, and ta^ so fast, that one Boat will call upon another, to
co^ and help them, and take a part of their Fishes; The Herrings taken here are
reckoned to be very good^ not among the best, that are taken upon the Isles
(...) longing to the King of Britain's Dominions, and as n^ said of the white
Fish, so it is of the Herrings, they f^quent some places more then others, as
off Brassa to t^ East, and between Brassa and Whalsey or the Skerr^ where the
Bushes do commonly ly, within sight of (...) Land of Zetland. And whatever may
be said of Gro^ his Mare Commune or Liberum, yet it holds here, for a^ have or
take liberty to come and Fish in these se^ without any way acknowledging that
Soveraig^ whereunto these Isles do belong.

So Silluks and Seths out of whose Livers good Oil is got.
There are likewise here a great many Gray Fis^ taken, which they call Silluks
and Seths, which (...) Judged to be the same kind of Fish, only the Seths* a
greater and older Silluks; a thick and fat Fish, out of one liver of some Seths
they will get a pint, our measure, of Oil, with which Oil the Inhabita^ pay
part of their Rents, and sells the rest unto M^chents. The Oil they get after
this Manner. They (...) the Liver into a Pot or Pan half full of Water, wh^
when seething, the Oil by the force of the fire or being Water, is drawn from
the Liver, which so be^ separated, and sweeming above, they take or scum^ off,
and puts in vessels for the use. These Seths are be had about all the Coasts,
but more especially ab^ Dunrossness, Delton and some other places. The ^luks as
has been observed, are very numerous in O^, but more rarely are the Seths to
be had there, tho ^e same kind of Fish: but in Zetland there is no scarci^ of
both.

Among the many other excellent Fishes which are ^re for to be had, there are
the Tusk a rare, Tusk a rare Fish.
wholesome ^d delicious Fish, no less pleasant to the taste, then ^ey are to the
eye, some of them are as big as Ling, ^a broun and yellow color, with a broad
tail, when ^aking ready for use they swell in the pan more then ^y other Fish,
when made ready their Fish is very ^hite and clear, when new haled they are
much ^ore pleasant to eat then when salted and dried, for ^n I think they lose
much of their Savor and Re^h; They begin to Fish for them about the end of May
(...) beginning of June, and are taken to the East of the ^e of Brassa, or
between Brassa and Whalsey, opening to ^e Coasts of Norway, and here only are
they to be ^und, and more rarely in other places, except off Dun^^siness, where
also sometimes they are got. The Fi^ers often go out about the beginning of the
Week, ^d not return, home till the end of it, and the further ^ey go off to the
Sea, they will get them the bigger, ^d in greater numbers. They use to sell
them to the ^amburghers for 8. or 10 lib. Scots the 100. or six ^ore, and some
of them also are taken to other places, ^here they are much desired by such as
know them.

Those who commonly frequent this Country and ^ade with the Inhabitants are
Hamburghers, This Country frequented by Hamburgers, Bremers, etc.
and some^^mes Bremers and others, who come here ordinarily (...) the Month of
May or about the beginning of June, ^d in several places set up Booths or
Shops, where ^ey sell Liquours, as Beer, Brandie etc. and wheat^^ead, as that
which they call Cringel Bread, and the ^ke, they also sell several sorts of
Creme-Ware, as Li^n, Muslin etc. And these Merchants seek nothing ^tter in
Exchange for their Commodities, then to tru^k ^ith the Country for their
Fishes, which when the ^shers engage to, the Merchants will give them either
Money or Ware which they please, and so (...) Fishers going to Sea, what they
take, they bring o^ in the Week or oftener, as they have occasion, (...) lays
them down at their Booth Door, or in any o^ place where the Merchant appoints
them to be (...) and they being there numbered, the Merchants acco^ for them
accordingly; these Fishes which are o^arly great white Fishes as Killen, Ling,
and the like, Merchants or their Servants having dried they t^ them Aboard of
their Ships: Several such D^ Booths are to be seen through the Isles, as 6
ord^arily in the Isle of Vnst, two in Yell etc.

Hollanders also repair there unto for Herring-Fishing
The Hollanders also repair to these Isles in J^ as has been said, for their
Herring Fishing, but t^ cannot be said so properly to Trade with the Count^ as
to Fish upon their Coasts, and they use to bring sorts of Provisions necessary
with them, save s^ fresh Victuals, as Sheep, Lambs, Hens, etc. Wh^ they buy on
shore: Stockins also are brought by (...) Country People from all quarters to
Lerwick and s^ to these Fishers, for sometimes many thousands of the^ will be
ashore at one time, and ordinary it is wi^ them to buy Stokins to themselves,
and some likew^ do to their Wives and Children; which is very ber^^ial to the
Inhabitans, for so Money is brought in the Country, there is a Vent for the
Wool and t^ Poor are Employed, Stokins also are brought from Orkney, and sold
there, whereby some gain accrues the Retailers, who wait the coming of the
Dutch Fle^ for a Market.

Much advantage redoundeth to them from their Trade with the Hamburgers.
But especially much advantage does redound (...) them from their Trade with the
Hamburgers, for besides that they are furnished by them with Provision what
necessary what convenient, these Merchants brin^ a considerable Sum of Money
with them, so that (...) one of their Ministers told me, 7 Ships are ordinar^
reckoned to have 3600. Dollars aboard, which the^ leave behind them not only
for Fishes, but also for several other things, which are the product of the
Country, as Butter, Oil etc. And if any please not to take their Commodities,
they presently give them Money upon the receipt of the Goods. The Proprietors
also or Masters of the Ground, upon which these Booths are Built, reap a
considerable Gain, for some of them will get to Dollars per annum for the use
of a House, in the Summer Season to be a Booth; and I think twice or thrice the
Sum will Build them.

Upon the whole of this Chap. we may entertain these following Reflections,
First. Some reflections on this Chap.
Hence we may observe, the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of GOD; His POWER in
that his Hands have made this great and wide Sea, Ps. 104.25.
wherein are things creeping innumerable; how many Millions of great and small
Fishes are every Year taken, yet the next we expect to be served with as great
a number; God giving these Creatures the Sea for their proper Habitation, and
providing suitable Provision for them in that Element, where neither Seed-time
nor Harvest, yet all these wait upon Him, Psalm. 104.27.
and he gives them their Meat in due Season. His WISDOM, in that wise and
beautiful Order to be observed among these Brutal Creatures, the several kinds
knowing their coming and their going time, and their loving to frequent one
place of the Water more than mother, tho both under the same Climate; Their
going forth all of them by Bands, tho they have no King, Overseer or Ruler,
these Squammosae Cobortes, tho ^ot governed by Principles of Reason, yet by
their Natural Instinct being reasonably Acted, each to their proper ends for
the Maintenance and Preservation of their several kinds, give occasion to
reasonable Man to Acknowledge, Admire and Adore, the Infinite Wisdom of his and
their Maker. Here also the GOODNESS of GOD is to be observed in this, that all
these ^e given for the Service of Man, that not only our Tables should be
Furnished with the Creatures that ^reath in the same Element with us, but also
with these that live in another, and seeing all these are, as it we Sacrificed
for our use, Romans 12.1.
should we not Present our selv^ Souls and Bodies living Sacrifices Holy and
Acceptable u^ God, which is our Reasonable Service. Seeing that G^ has made
Man to have Dominion over the Beasts the Field, the Fowls of the Air, and the
Fishes of t^ Sea, should we not gratefully show forth His Prai^ and say with
all the wise Observers of Providence, Psalm. 8.
Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all (...) Earth?

2. It is the Fishing only which makes this Countr^ any way desirable, else it
would be very unpleasant li^ing there, Hec Boeth. Hist.
as Boeth. of old did observe, Quorum o^ universae in piscibus sole arefactis,
quas quotannis ad eos ^cedentes Hollandi, Zelandi ac Germani aliarumque rer^
vulgarium permutatione mercantur. Yea if we abstra^ from their Fishing-Trade,
in many places there cot^ not be any living at all, they not having Fields
eith^ for Corn-Land or Grazing; but they Trading (...) Fishes with Foreign
Merchants, who Import man Goods for the more comfortable living of the Countre^
their coming in the Summer is very refreshful to all t^ Inhabitants, the
thoughts and expectation of which the Winter, does not a little revive them,
when the shall enjoy some better Fare, than what their Countre^ does afford,
when Hamburgh-Liquors and Commod^ties shall be brought to their Doors, which
being e^pected and desired, may occasion sometimes their ta^ing of a larger
Cup, they knowing that the Booths w^ not always stand open.

3. It is to be observed, that still the further Nor^ we go, Non omnis fert
omniae Tellus.
the Fishes are to be had in greater aboundanc^ in Zetland more than in Orkney,
and in Island to the North of Zetland, more than in either, the Inhabitan^
there mostly living upon Fishes; And again we man nottice, as there is not such
a plenty of Fishes in Orkn^ as in Zetland, yet there is a greater of Corn; and
(...) in Zetland there is more Corn, than in Island, for i^ Island they have
little if any Corn as the product of their Country, as some in Zetland did
inform me, who ^ave conversed with these that had been there: Therefor the
Commonalty generally make use of dried ^ishes beaten small in stead of Bread,
as Boeth. ^hinteth ^t, Vltra Schethlandicas aliae quaedam Insulae, Boeth. Hist
quae pisces ^efactos ac sole induratos pistillo contundunt, mox admista qua in
pastillos componunt, atque ad focum torrent, qui illis ^^nis est. Which shows
us the great Wisdom of God ^n His Works of Providence, who bestows not all
Blessings upon every Nation, but when He denies ^r gives less of one Blessing
to one Nation or Coun^rey, He allows them more of another, which is also
often observed with respect to particular Persons. This variety likewise
shows the necessity and advan^age of one Nation or Kingdoms Trading with
another.

4. The Fishing-Trade is very Lucrative and En^iching to these who closely
follow it, it is commonly said, that it is the Fishing which first raised the
Ne^herlands to that pitch of Grandeur and Wealth, which ^ow they have arrived
at, hence some Historians call the Fishery, The Gold-Mine of Holland, and that
by their Fishing especially in the British Seas. And if it were ^ot so very
Gainful what would make them every Year Equip such a numerous Fleet of several
hundreds, of Bushes, under the Guard and Protection of their Convoyes, but that
they know the Zetland Seas makes their Mills to go, therefore they do so warmly
pursue this Trade, and Encourage the U^dertakers thereof. And so it is with the
Hamburgers and other Merchants especially in the Hans Towns, who Trading here
during the Summer Season, return home in August or September, they not only
with Fishes serving their Respective Cities, but by sending them also up the
Country do make a good Market, which engages and Encourages them to return
every Year and follow the same Trade.

5. The Consideration of this great Gain that dot^ redound to the Trading
Merchants, has of late an^mated some Gentlemen and others in Zetland, t^ enter
into a Society or Company for Trading in Fishes that whereas Strangers make
such a good hand wit^ their Fishes, they may as well consult their own Profit
and Gain, by Promoting of that Trade, which tends so much to the Enriching of
others, especiall^ seeing they can do it with far less Trouble and Expense when
here at Home, where the Fishes are to b^ had, which when taken and prepared may
be s^n^ Abroad for Sale to Foreign Markets, whereas the Hamburgers and others
which come here, are obliged to tarry from Home through the Summer, waiting for
their Lading.

6. It has been thought very strange by many that our own Fishing, for which
we have so great and so inviting Advantages beyond others, should yet b^ so
much neglected by our selves, and left to the Improvement of Strangers who reap
vast Gain from it* And as this deserves the consideration of the Government, so
it might be expected that the late disappointment, in the Holy and Wise
Providence, of this Na^ions Noble and Generous Attempt to have Settled (...)
Foreign Plantation, for raising us from the Dunghil^ of Contempt and Poverty,
and Advancing our Wealth and Trade, will excite both these worthy Undertaker^
and others to Employ their Stocks and Endeavors i^ searching after and digging
these Mines of the Ocean nearer Home and Profiting by these Blessings, which
Providence has brought to our very Doors, especially since thereby not only
would a number of able Seame^ be Yearly Trained for the use and service of the
Nation, and the Nation thereby put in a better Capacity for Undertaking and
Supporting greater Projects o^ Trade in the more remote parts of the World, bu^
likewise many poor People would be Employed wh^ are ready to Starve. And it is
more reasonable w^ should Fish in our own Seas, than for Strangers so to (...);
And I do greatly question, if the Hollanders, ^mburgers or others, would so
permit us to Fish in ^y Seas so nigh to their Land, depending on their
^veraignty, as we do them.

And for this end Shiping would be Encouraged (...) the Government, and Trading
Merchants as the ^llanders do, An Instance whereof we had when in ^tland, a
Holland Ship came into Brassa Sound from ^sing about the Fair Isle, waiting for
the East India ^et, having in her Wine, Brandy, Victuals etc. for ^ir use, that
they might be Refreshed, before they ^ived at their Port, and this the Trading
Company ^glect not ordinarily to do, which shows they are ^at Encouragers of
Trade. And for the Encourag^ of Trade, Taxations imposed upon Shiping should
(...) easy, especially now when the Trade is so low, ^t many Merchants and
Ship-Masters, after they ^e hazarded their Lives and their All, do return ^sers
Home; For if otherwise no wonder that all ^ncerned in Trade, be Dispirited and
Discouraged in ^empting any thing that is Noble, which might tend (...) the
Nations Public Good.

CHAP. X. Concerning Pightland Firth, the several Tides which meet there, the
danger of Passage etc.
THE noise that Pightland Firth makes among many who only have heard thereof as
being noted and ^nous for its Danger to Passengers, Concerning Pightland Firth.
and the Causes ^ich concur to render it so, awakened us more par^ularly to
enquire concerning it, which we had op^rtunity to do, in our Return from
Zetland by Orkney to Caithness. And therefore seeing we passed it in Voyage, I
shall not altogether pass it in this Narrati^ but communicate to the
Inquisitive, what I kn^ either from my own or others observation anent i^

Why so called.
This Firth is commonly called Pictland, Pightland Penthland Firth, doubtless
from the Picts whose Ki^dom of old Orkney was, divided by this Firth fr^ the
Continent of Scotland: Blaw in his Atlas or ^graphy tells us of a certain
Tradition, showing how came first to be so Denominated, That the Picts o^ time
being Defeat by the Scots, who pursued Victory unto Caithness and Dungisby
Head, where Vanquished Remnant so hotly Pursued not judg^ themselves safe, were
forced to take Boats and go o^ the Firth to Orkney, but the Orkney Men conveen^
upon the Alarm of their Landing, did so warmly ^ceive them with a sharp
Conflict, that the Picts w^ obliged to Retire, and take themselves to their B^
again, with which they going off, and not acquain^ with the running of the
Tides, they all Perish^ upon which sad Catastrophe so Fatal to the Pictish
^tion, this Firth ever since was called Pictland or Pi^land Firth. Buchanan
calls it Penthland Firth, as it^ commonly pronounced from one PENTHVS, who this
Penthus was, our Historian has not b^ pleased to impart unto us, Buch. Hist.
l. 2.
Nam Penthlandici montes fretum Penthlandicum a Pentho non a Picto composita vt
possunt. Some Historians relate, That the Picts com^ first out of Germany into
Orkney, which they Inhabi^ for a Season, thence they passed over to Caithness
(...) other parts of the North of Scotland, so that he^ this Firth is called
Pictland Firth.

The Firth is commonly said to be 12 Miles bro^ and I think they are but short,
Its breadth and what Coasts it washes.
but this may be ^bundantly compensed by the danger of the passag^ it is
bounded on the North by the Isles of Orkney, (...) on the South by
Dungisby-head in Caithness, to West is the Deucaledonian Ocean, whence the Fl^
comes; and to the East is the German Ocean, whence (...) Ebb runs. The
landing places are Burwick, (...) Southermost point of South-R^nal^sha in
Orkney, ^d Dungisby-head the northernmost in Caithness, John Grot^ House.
called ^o John Grotts House, the Northermost House in ^tland, the Man who now
lives in it and keeps ^nn there is called John Grot, who says this House ^h
been in the possession of his Predecessors of that ^e for some Hundreds of
Years, which na^^e of (...) is frequent in Caithness, Upon the Sand by John
^ots House are found many small pleasant Buckies and ^lls, beautified with
diverse Colors, which some (...) to put upon a string as Beeds, and account
much for their rarity. It is also observed of these shells, Varietates delectat.
^t not one can be found altogether like another; And ^on the review of the
parcel I had, I discerned some ^ference among them; which variety renders them
(...) more beautiful.

In the Firth are the sles of Swinna, Stroma and Pightland-^rries. The Isles of
Swinna, Pightland Skerries and Stroma in the Firth.
From Burwick to the West-North-West lies ^inna, one of the Isles of Orkney, a
little sle where^ are some Inhabitants, who have a good Fishing a^ut the Isle,
but often with great danger, not only cause it is in Pightland-Firth, where
many Tides do (...)* but because of some dangerous Wells or Whirle^ols which
are nigh unto it From Burwick about 5 (...) 6 Miles to South-East lies
Pightland Skerries, danger^ to Seamen, these Skerries being in the mouth of
(...) the Firth to the East, upon which both in Ebb and ^od there goes a great
Sea: therein is some good ^a^re, but not Inhabited, save sometimes in the
Sum^er season. In the Firth also is the Isle of Stroma, little pleasant Isle,
abounding with Corns, about a Mile ^d an half long, and half a Mile broad, and
tho it be in (...) Firth, yet it is not reckoned as one of the Isles of Orkney,
because of its vicinity to Caithness, from which is but about 2 Miles dis^ant,
and this is the only Isle which belongs unto Caithness, and is still under
(...) Jurisdiction of the Lords of that Country.

Besides the Isles some Skerries.
Besides the Isles there are also some Skerries, as ^fore Burwick not half a
Mile from Land there is o^ seen at an Ebb, upon which about 3 Years ago w^ cast
away a Ship belonging to Aberdeen, and all (...) Men in her, as they say, were
lost

Many Tides go here.
Although the Sea in this Firth flows and ebb twice in the 24 Hours, as it does
in other places, (...) there is a meeting of many Tides here, which runni^
contrary one to another, cause that great rage and a^ were a conflict of
Waters, which is terrible to beho^ and dangerous to engage with: What is the
numb^ of these Tides cannot well be con^escended upon some say 13; others 18;
and others 24. Blaw in (...) Geography hinteth at this, and the reason thereof,
she ^ing that the Sea running among the Orkney Isles, (...) thereby restrained,
and made to go through the (...) as so many Water-spouts, which meeting in this
Fi^ render it so formidable and dangerous. But beca^ of the pertinency and
elegancy of the Historian, up^ this head, Geogra. Elavi. de Freto Pent^landiae.
I shall give his own Words: Fret^ hoc Navigantibus formidabile, neque nisi
sta^ temporibus, quanquam positis ventis, trajectui o^ portunum. Causa est cum
aestus maris quotidie a se^ tentrionibus incitetur in his locis Orchadas circu^
fusus iisque imerfusus, hic primum objectu terrar^ coercetur, unde vis illa
immensa aquarum multis (...) nalibus insulas illas permeans, dein reliquo mari
(...) hoc Freto effusa, luctantibus etiam maris Vergivii^ Orientalis undis
formidabiles aquarum Vortices cu^ summo navium periculo creat. And indeed wh^
we see the many impetuous Tides coming out into t^ Firth, from among the Isles
of Orkney, each beari^ that course to which they are determined, by the La^ and
Isles they wash and beat upon, we will not judge^ strange, that there should be
such a meeting of Tides (...) this Firth; for, as some express it, Every
craig-lug^ makes a new Tide, and many Craigs and Lugs are there here.

Hence it is clear that the Tide will run with a greater rapidity and force in
some places then in others, The Tide stronger in some places then in others.
as when we pass that part of the Firth, where we meet with the Tide in the Ebb
running off the sides of Pightland Skerries from South East, down into the
Swelchie of Stroma, then the men most ^ly their Oars and work hard, lest they
be born down into the Swelchie, a dangerous place. When also we are 3 or 4
Miles from Cathnes^; there is another such rapid current, comeing from the
South of Dung-isbay Head out of Murray Firth running upon Stroma, both into the
Swelchie on the North, and into the Merrie-men of Mey on the South end of the
Isle. In our passage through this Current, for half an hour, we made not, as we
could observe, one foot of Way, tho there were 4 Men tugging at the Oars, and
no wind blowing; and in all probability we had been carried down upon Stroma,
if an able man a Passenger: had not taken ane Oar, so that then there were 3
Oars upon our Star-board side. Hence in some places there is a swift and in
others a soft running Tide, which the Boat-men being well acquainted with, they
will sometimes rest from their hard Labor and refresh themselves a little.

In our passage we see the Currents, We see the currents of the Tides.
before we engage with them, running like the Torrents of some great Rivers,
and in some places we will see the Waters smooth, and rough round about; the
Reason whereof I know not, if it be not because of some Tides meeting there,
and as it were for some time quiescent in their Center, something like unto
which I have observed in the meeting of several Rivers in one place.

In the Firth are several places remarkable for their danger; As the Wells of
Swinna, The Wells of Swinna dangerous (...)
whereof some are on the East Side and others on the West Side of the Isle,
they are like unto Whirle-Pooles turning about with such a violence, that if
any Boat come nigh unto them, they will suck or draw it in, The Wells of Swinna
are Trocht adiustar a puero s^age^ agitat^ Geogra. Blaevi.
and then turns it about until it be swallowed up: but these Wells are onl^
dangerous in a Calm, and Seamen or Fishers to pr^vent their danger thereby,
use when they come nea^ them to cast in an Oar, Barrel or such like thing, o^
which the Wells closing, they safely pass over. The Minister of the place told
me, that about 20 years ago there were two Fisher-boats there, who coming nig^
the Wells, the Men in the one Boat seeing their danger, one of these men thus
afraid took hold of the other Boat by them, and both Boats were swallowed up.
One of the Ministers of Zetland told me, ther^ were three of these Boats, it so
falling out, that h^ passed the Firth the very day after they perished: Ye^
notwithstanding of these dangers, the Fishers will no desist from fishing about
these Wells, for they observ^ the nearer they come to them, they have the
Fishe^ both greater, better and more numerous, so the Fishes draw the Men, and
the Wells draw both.

Near to these Skerries, before Barwick formerly mentioned, are also 2 or 3
Wells, called the Wells o^ Tiftala, And of Tiftala
only dangerous in a Flood as the Wells of Swinna are in an Ebb, these Wells,
as some do judge ar^ caused by an Hiatus or Ga^ in the Earth below: Further I
would offer this consideration, that whereas all these Wells are nigh unto
ragged Rocks, constantly beat upon by the Tides, there may be some secre^
conveyances of the Water into Cavernes at the bottom of the Rock, from which
they may pass into some other places, where they rise again, and that even in
the same Firth, tho such places be unknown, as it is storied of many Rivers,
How they come to whirle and be so dangerous.
which fall into, and run many Miles below the Earth and come out again in
other places. But that which I judge to be more simple, is that several Tides
running upon the Rocks, and thence returning and meeting with other Tides cause
such a Whirle, as we see behind Mill-wheels some of the water coming from, and
another part as it were appearing to return upon the Wheel, which cause such a
Whirle, and no more does the whirles in the Firth re^uire a Hiatus in the Earth
or a subterraneous passage, ^h^n the whirles in the Mills water courses: As for
their swallowing up of Boats which are no more seen, this does not prove it,
for these Boats may be broken beneath the water upon Rocks or the like, and the
broken timber go to the Sea, of which there is enough ^ound cast a shore upon
these Isles. But many things of ^his nature are hidden to us, and we can only
give our Conjectures anent them.

There is also in this Firth the Swelchie of Stroma, a very dangerous place at
the North end of the Isle of Stroma, Swelchie of Sroma.
where there is a meeting of several Tides which causes the Water to rage and
make a dreadful noise, heard at some distance; As likewise the Sea-billows are
^raised high, and appear white and frothy very terrible to behold, especially
if any storm be lying on, falling unto which all Passengers carefully labor to
avoid; As a Gentleman related to me, that once he was in great danger, the
Seamen giving themselves over for lost, tho three Miles from the Swelchie, and
that in a dead calm, when within 2 or 3 pair of Butts to Stroma, and tho so
near Land, they had been carried down into and perished by this Swelchie, as
they all laid their accounts; if the Lord had not speedily caused a Northern
wind to blow, whereby they got hold of Stroma.

There is another dangerous place at the South end of this Isle of Stroma,
Merry men of Mey.
where also a great conflict of Waters, called the Merry men of Mey, so called
from the house of Mey a Gentleman's dwelling in Caithness, opposite to this
Isle, and called Merry men because of the leaping and danceing as it were, of
the waters there, tho Mirth and Danceing be far from the minds of the Seamen
and Passengers who shall be so unhappy as to fall in among them, especially
when any Sea is going.

Seeing from what has been said this Firth is sovery dangerous to pass, no
wonder that the Mariners and others be very careful to lay hold on the fittest
occasion for a safe Passage, Seamen observe the Tide in going over.
which they find to be a little before the turning of the Tide, when it is
beginning to E^^ on the Shore, but the Flood is yet running in the Se^ then
they use to go off, that so when they are or nigh unto the middle of the Firth,
the Tide man be upon the turn, which causes for some time, a st^ and quiet
Sea, (as to the running of the Tides) a^ the Seamen are not so put to it, in
wrestling eith^ against Flood or Ebb. Buchanan speaking of the Seas, and the
rapid Tides, elegantly expresses himself, Duae sunt Tempestates quibus hae
angustiae sunt supera^ les, aut cum aestuum relapsu cessante undarum conflictu,
man tranquillatur, aut ub^ pleno alveo aequot ad summum incr^menti pervenit,
languescente utrinque vi illa, quae undas co^ citabat, veluti receptui, canente
Oceano procellis and vo^ cesis pelagi commoti molibus se velut in sua Castra
recipie^ tibus.

What wind most avourable
Any Wind, they observe, will take them over from Burwick to Caithness, if tided
Right, and the Win^ not in S. West, or nigh to that point, and so from
Caithness to Burwick, if not in N. East or nigh to it. B^ the N. West Wind they
call the King of the Firth, n^ only I judge because it will both take them from
Caithness to Orkney, and from Orkney to Caithness, but all because if it blow
any thing, it keeps them up in a Ebb, from falling into the Wells of Swinna,
the Swelchie of Stroma, and the Merry Men of Mey. By Tidin^ right also they can
come over by the help of Oars, the there be no Wind: And at any time tho they
observ^ not the Tide, they can pass from Orkney to Caithness if it blow a good
Gale from N. East, and so from Caithness to Orkney, if the like blow from S.
Wes^ The Boatmen who use to pass the Firth, from their experience know it best,
and can avoid the swell of Sea, when persons of greater skill cannot do it.

No Anchoring.
At no time is there any Anchoring in this Firth, so if any through Ignorance or
otherwise attempt it, with (...) a little time, they must either cut their
Cables, as ^me have done, and be gone, or else if their Anchors (...) Cables
break not, they will be Ridden under: ^he Experience whereof one of our S^ips
lately had, ^h^ casting Anchor even in the Mouth of the Firth, ^ere the Tides
are not so strong, their Anchor with a little time brake, and they behoved to
go to ^a.

In a storm especially if it blow from S, East. (which, The Firth terrible in a
storm.
^ey lay, in the Firth causes the greatest Sea,) and the ^ide be running in
the Winds Eye, the Roaring and ^welling Waves are very Terrible, and mount so
^gh, that they could wash not only the Deck, but ^e Sails and Topmasts of the
biggest Ships.

The House of Mey formerly mentioned is a Myth, ^gn or Mark much observed by
Saillers in their pas^ng through this Firth between Caithness and Stroma, The
house of Mey a myth to Seamen.
^r they carefully fix their Eyes upon the Lums or ^himney Heads of this House,
which if they lose sight (...), then they are too near Caithness, and so ready
to run ^on Sand-Banks, but if they get also sight of the ^oule, then they are
too near Stroma, and so may ^lect upon the Rocks, which ly off the South end of
^^roma.

Hence we see, They who go down to the Sea in ships, Observe.
^d do business in the great waters, these s^^ the works of the ^d, and his
Wonders in the Depths; That He is a God ^or^us in Holiness, Fearful in Praises,
Doing Wonders; ^e causes the Wind to blow, and the Sea to flow, at his
^easure; Bounding the impetuous Tides with the Rocks and and, saying, Hitherto
shall ye come, and no further; and ^e shall your proud Waves be stayed, which
the they roar ^t shall they not prevail. His Goodness, and Power, ^rting a
Restraint upon them; His Wisdom, and ^ounsel, directing their turning and
returning, for his ^wn Glorious Ends. Glory, to His Name.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Caithness, and what we found be most Remarkable there.
MY Discourse upon Orkney and Zetland being e^tended, beyond what either was
intended expected. Concerning Caithness.
I shall therefore study to be the brie^ upon Caithness, as likewise seeing it
is supposable, the it may be better known then any of the former, being upon
the same Continent with us. What the is to be said thereupon, I shall dispatch
and sum up^ this one Chapter.

Caithness is the Northernmost Province or Shire (...) Scotland, Its Situation.
having Pightland Firth, whereby it is divid^ from Orkney on the North, the
Entry to Murray Fir^ on the East, Sutherland and Stranaver on the South, at the
Deucatedonian Ocean on the West. It is from the high Hill called the Ord of
Caithness, toward the South whereby it is divided from Sutherland, to Dungish
Head, about 30 Miles long, and from Thurso on the West side to Wick on the East
side of the Country (...) Miles broad.

As we were much in the dark about the Etymol^gy of Orkney and Zetland, The
reason of the Name.
so no less are we here i^ that of Caithness, upon which Blaw in his Geograph^
gives us this Notandum, "That many Names (...) "places are something strange,
whose Original seem t^ be neither Scottish, Irish, Danish or Norvegian, But u^
"known uncertain, and most Ancient: Such as O^ bister, Loyibster, Robaster,
Trumbuster, and Innumerabl^ others, Blavi. Geogra in Caith.
Caterum Not, Multa locorum Nomina peregrinu^ quid sapere, quorum origo neque
Scoticum, Hibernicum Danicum aut Norvegicum quid referant, sed ignotae, incert^
and vetustissimae originis videntur Qualia sunt Orbiste^ Lovibster, Roboster,
Trumbuster, and innumera ali^ And seeing such Examples of Names which are of a^
unknown Original, as are given by the Historian, d^ (...) end in ster, I would
add that the most of the Names ^ places in this Country do end in ster, or
star, and go. (...) between 20 and 30 in ster or star, and about 20 in ^ as my
Informer, who had been for some time in ^e Country did reckon them. Of old
Sutherland, ^th the same Geographer, was called Cattey, and its ^habitants
Catteigh, and so likewise was Caithness and ^anaver; And in the Irish
Sutherland to this day is ^lled Catey, and its Inhabitants Catigh; So that
Cattey^ss, is no other then the Promontory or Cape of the ^tes or Sutherland,
which Promontory is stretched ^t from the East (or rather the North) side,
says ^t Geographer of the Mountain of the Ord, Blavi. Geogra.
Adeo ut ^tey-ness nihil aliud, sit quam Promontorium Cattae seu ^therlandiae,
quod Promontorium a latere Ortentali montis ^di praetenditur. These Cattaei are
thought to be a Peo^e who arrived thither from Germany. Who would ^ve more of
this may consult the abovementioned ^uthor. Buchanan will have it to be called
Caithness because of its being Mountainous, but I know not if ^s Reason will
hold, for the Countries adjacent of ^herland and Stranaver are more
Mountainous, and ^ere are few high Hills or Mountains in it, except ^t the
South end thereof, where it borders with Suther^nd, but if it should be so
called because it is the Ness ^r Promontory of the Mountains, the Land by North
^ese Mountains falling lower and running out in a ^romontory into the Sea, I
Judge it would hold better, and be said with greater reason. Boethius also
says ^at this Country of old was called Cornana, but the ^eason thereof he
gives not.

The Earls of Caithness were among the Ancientest (...) Scotland, The Earl of
Caithness.
and in former times have been very potent in ^his Corner, as appears by the
several old Castles and ^laces of Strength, which then they were in Possession
^f, but now their Memory is almost extinct. The ^te Earl George dying without
Issue, the Lord of Glen^chy, now Earl of Braid-Atbin Married the Dowager, who
having Purchased the Earl's Estate, the (...) parent Heir judging himself
thereb^ injured, (...) gather together some of the Country People recover his
Right, but was Defeat by G^n^c From the Field they went to the Bar, and Debated
(...) Matter there, whereupon the Lords gave forth t^ Sentence, that Glenorchy
should enjoy the Estate, (...) the Heir should have the Honors, and an Alim^
allowed him by Glenorchy during his Life. The H^ having died about a Year ago,
the Heiress his Sis^ Succeeds to the Honors, and is in a very mean Con^tion;
living in a place where the former Earls used keep their H^ucks. So to this
Ancient and Hono^able Family of the Earls of Caithness there is almo^ put in
Holy Providence a Period and Close: The who had four great Houses in this
Country like P^laces, for Pleasure and Convenience, and Castles f^ Strength,
now in their Heirs enjoy none of them, the are Ruinous, and one is Possessed by
a Stranger: (...) likewise there are several other Ruinous Houses to (...) seen
here, who have spewed out their Possessours, (...) confirming that common
Observation, That s^ committed by the Inhabitants, is as Gunpowder lai^ to the
Foundations of their Houses, which quickl^ overturneth them, when it pleases a
Righteous Go^ to fire the Train.

The late Earls of the Name of Sinclar.
The late Earls of Caithness were of the Name o^ Sinclar, of which Name also are
many Gentlemen o^ the Country, who have bought considerable parts o^ the
Earl's Estate, from the Earl of Braid-Albin: Before the Sinclars, the Earls
were of the Name o^ Shine, and before them were the Haralds, and before the
Haralds were the Ola's, as the Tradition goes (...) concerning which and the
manner of their Succession and the Interruption made therein, the Country talk
several things which I shall not trouble my Reade^ with: Only I shall observe
what is related by Cambden a Judicious Antiquary, That of old the Earls of
Caithness were the same with the Earls of Orkney but at length were divided,
the Eldest Daughter of one Mulisius being given in Marriage to William de S.
Claro vulgo Seincler the Kings Pautler, his Posterity had this Honor conferred
on them, of being Earls of Caithness.

The Country is pleasant and very Fertile, The Country abounds with Grass
Corn, ^attel, Fishes so that here the cheapest Market it the World
abounding with Grass and Corn, hence Yearly there is a great quantity of
Victual Exported, as An. 169^. there were 16000 Bolls Embarked and taken out,
for which end it is much frequented by Barks from the Firth, Clyde and other
places; for ordinarily when there is no scarcity or dearth, the Meal is sold
here at 3 or 4 or at most 5 Merks per Boll. The Cattle and Fishes also are to
be had very cheap, as good Kine often in the Shambles such as the Country does
afford, for 3 or 4 shall. sterling. and sometimes they say, for 2; so that, as I
have heard, some of the more intelligent Inhabitants observe that here is the
cheapest Market in the World: And the Gentlemen can live better upon 1000
Merks, Gentlemen live well.
then they can do in the South upon 4000. per annum. Who may Improve their
Stocks to as great if not a greater Advantage, than in any other place in
Scotland, for they may save their Rents, having within themselves what
Provision is necessary for their Table, and may sell much Store every Year,
what to the Inhabitants in the Country for their own use, or for salting and
sending Abroad, and what to Drovers who take them South: And it is observable
that if any Buy a piece of Land, only what is Arable is Accounted for, as for
what serves for Pasture, they use not to take nottice of, tho upon that
consideration they may value their Acres at a greater Rate. In the way between
Thurso and Dunnot, we saw much low Ground overblown with sand, for two Miles
back from the Sea, which formerly not many Years since was a pleasant Meadow.

Ten Parishes ^here.
There are 10. Parishes in this Country, 5. of which can be served with
Ministers not having the Irish Language, few of the People there speaking it,
but the other five cannot be supplied otherwise then by Ministers understanding
Irish; in some of these Parishe^ there being very few who have any knowledge of
ou^ Language, Many speak Irish.
and some of the Ministers are obliged t^ preach both in English and Irish for
the Edification of all: some of the Parishes are very wide and populous which
tends to the Increase of Ignorance among many, the Ministers not being able to
overtake their Work; some Churches also are ruinous, for when He^ritours are
not friends to the Work of God, or cannot agree among themselves, as to the
concerting of suitable Measures, for putting or keeping things which concern
the Parish, in order; it uses to go ill with Ministers as to their external
Accommodation and with Churches as to their Repair.

The principal Towns.
The two principal Towns in the Country are Wick and Thurso, Wick is a Royal
Burgh, on the East Side of the Country washen by the German Ocean at the Mouth
of Murray Firth, by the side of which runs a small River, at the mouth of
the River there is a Harbor for Boats or Barks to ly in, which they come into
at full Sea, but this Harbor is not so much frequented, as another about a
Mile to the North-East of Wick where they Judge the Boats do ly safer. Opposite
to Wick lies Thurso at 12. Miles distance, on the West Side of the Country,
which tho it enjoy not the privilege of a Royal Burgh, yet it is more populous
then Wick, and has better buildings in it, by the East Side of the Town
runs a small River called the Water of Thurso: In the Water of Thurso many
good Salmond taken and how.
They have the best Church in the Country well furnished and kept in good
order.

In the Water of Thurso there is good Salmond-Fishing, which they take two
ways, one is by Crues or Creels with crossed or barred doors going from the one
side of the Water to the other, so framed that they suffer the Fishes to go in,
but not to go out, out of which sometimes they will take several Horses burdens
of Fish. The other way they take them is by a Net; where with they Fish a Pool,
which lies a little below the Crues, and is about a pair of buts in length:
They having spread the net upon the bank, which is long enough to reach the
breadth of the Water, they go in with it, and one Man on each side drawing it
down the Pool, it is followed with 18. or 20. Men. going in a breast behind it,
with long staves or Poles in their hands; wherewith they keep the net to the
ground, and loose it when any way entangled; the Pool in some places will rise
to the height of the breasts of the waders, but there is no danger. So they
bring down the Net softly and warily to the mouth of an Enclosure, which they
call a Stem, into which the Fishes are driven, where the Fishers standing with
this larger Net, others take a lesser Net and going therewith into the Stem,
catch the Fishes so enclosed, that scarce one can escape, for up the Water they
cannot run, because of the larger Net, and neither down can they go, because of
the Stem, or Stones laid together in form of a Wall, We saw as we could
conjecture at one draught upwards of 300. good Salmonds taken, and these who
have this Fishing told us that 3 Years ago, they took 500. at a draught, and
going through the Pool at the same time with the Net again, they catched other
200, which Salmond for the most part they salt in barrels and sends abroad. It
is also to be observed that the Salmond keep this Water of Thurso all the Year
over, and in the Winter Season in Frost and Snow if you break the ice, they are
to be had. The Pool is but about half a Mile up the Water from Thurso.

There are several Waters or Rivers in the Country as Thurso, Wick, Dumbeth,
Rice, Force, Several Waters here.
and Beradel, but they are all small, and indeed there is no great River all
the way from Caithness till we come to Ness running by Inverness in Murray,
over which is a strong Bridge lately built consisting of 7. Arches, which Rive^
is remarkable for this that it never freezeth, tho the frost be most vehement
yea if then vow bring a Horse unto the River, The River of Ness.
the iceacles will melt at his feet in the space of time that he is drinking,
the River comes from a Loch called Lochness, which also has the same
property, 4. or 5. Miles to the West of Inverness, Thi^ River I make mention of
tho not it Caithness, it being the first considerable one, having any thing of
a strong and regular Bridge, which we passed in our return.

Some Trees.
There are some Trees here, but they are not so big as these which are further
South, even in Sutherland* particularly upon the Water of Beradel there is a
pleasant strath full of small wood. And there is a Garden 3. or 4. Miles to the
South-West of Thurso very pleasant and well furnished with fruit Trees, much
commended by the Inhabitants.

Rocks much frequented by Fowls.
The Rocks by the Coasts are much frequented by Fowls of various kinds, as
Eagles, Hawks etc. such as in Orkney and Zetland, of which Rocks there are long
tracts for whereas in Sutherland, Ros^, and Murray, the Sea for the most part
is bound^d with the sand, here it is bounded with the Rocks, which it washes
and beats on, and that almost round Caithness from the Ord^ to Dungisbey Head
on the East, and so by Dunnot Head, and Hoburn Head to Stranaver on the West,
except a few Creeks or Bays, several of which are very convenient for
Anchoring; especially in Screbister Bay, a little to the North West of Thurso,
there is good Anchoring ground where Ships may safely ride without the fear of
hazard by Wind or Tide, the Capes of Land there making a still Sea, and
defending the Ships, which as it were, flee into their Arms from raging and
angry Pightland Firth: There are here also some Rocks, lying a little off the
Land, from which they are broken and disjoined which they call Clets. the same
with the Holms in Orkney and Zetland, these Clets are almost covered with
Sea-Fowls. One way they take these Fowls is pleasant tho with great danger,
They take a Line, One way they take the Fowls*
^on the end of which they fasten some Fish-Hooks, love the hooks there is also
a Pock fastened, and so from ^^e top of the Rock they let down the Line thus
fur^shed with Pock and hooks, striking the heads of the ^oung Fowls in their
Nests with the Pock, upon which ^e Fowls do all gape and cry; as if it were
their Dame ^oming with meat to them, and so lifting the Line they ^t the hooks
fall into their mouths, which taking hold the Fowls, they become their prey.

There are likewise several Caves going from the ^a within the Rocks, Caves.
in which the waves make a ^eadful noise, such Caves we had occasion to take
no^e of in our discourse upon Orkney and Zetland.

Especially there is a kind of Fowls called Snowflects which resort to this
Country in great numbers in Fe^nary; they are about the bigness of a Sparrow,
Fowls called Snowflects.
but ex^eding fat and delicious; they flee in flocks, thousands (...) them
together, many of which the Inhabitants do ^ll and make use of. They use to go
away in April ^d are thought to come from the West Highlands. ^hey have also a
great plenty of Moorfowls, Plovers, (...) much if not more then in any place of
Scotland.

The industry of the Gentlemen here is to be much ^ommended for although from Wick
to Dumbeth which is (...) Miles long, there be no Harbor or Bay, The
Gentlement's Industry commendable.
but a con^^nued tract of ragged, hard and Iron-like Rocks wash^ by the Sea,
yet there are several Harbors forced ^here by Art, tho denied by Nature, and
passages in many places like steps of stairs made from the top of the ^ock to
the bottom, where their Fish-Boats do ly, and ^y these passages do bring their
Fishes up to the top of ^e Rocks, where they salt and dry them in Houses ^ade
for the purpose, whereby great gain does redound (...) the Owners, some making
as much by their Fishes, (...) they do by their Land-Rent.

As in Orkney and Zetland there were several old ^happels, which the
superstitious Zealots did frequent, Superstitions.
so is it likewise in Caithness, the Ministers told me the is one in Dunnot
Parish, beside which there are abo^ 60. Heaps of Stones, which the People
coming to, ta^ with them a Stone and throw it into the Heap, bo^ing themselves
also thereunto. Nigh to it likewise there is a Loch called St. John's Loch,
concerning which there goes a fabulous Tradition, that on St. Stephen Day there
was a pleasant Meadow in that place, when now the Loch is, and on St. John's
Day thereafter, was turned into this Loch. There is also another i^ the Parish
of Rhae, to which some do take their Children if they be in distress, and make
2 Graves at the side of one another laying the Child between them and so they
try if the Child will recover, but the wa^ how they know; Tales superstitiones
ludicras recitate est refutare.
I forbear to mention. But they sa^ there is a Chapel in the Parish of
Konnesbie the Northermost Parish of all this Country, opposite to Orkney,
which is yet more frequented then any of the former, which some wildly
superstitious frequent on some Day about Candlemass, going about it on their
bar^ knees, and thence going to a Water, they cast some (...) it in handfuls
over their heads, and from the Water t^ an Alehouse, where they use to fill
themselves drunk* And when going to these or at them they can scarce even tho
threatened be prevailed with to speak. T^ which hellish Rites some are so
addicted that the Ministers judge it next to impossible, to get them weane^ and
brought there from: But the vigilance and pains o^ Ministers especially of
late, has through the Blessing o^ God not been altogether without success.
Which ol^ Chapels both here and in Orkney and Zetland, I think the Government
should cause to be rased, which might prove as the taking away of the Nest Egg.

The House of Thurso by East.
The Earls of Caithness, as hinted at before, had several strong and convenient
dwellings. One about a short^ half Mile from Thurso, called Thurso by East, now
ruinous, it has been built in the form of a Court, and the Gates have been
decored with cut stone Work, and the Gardens, Avenues and office Houses have
been ^nform to the splendor of the House. An honest Country Man observing the
many great sins that had been committed about that House, is said to have
pre^cted to one of the late Earls its ruin and desolation, saying, "That the
Cup of sin was filling, and this House would shortly become a den of Dragons
(using the Scripture phrase) and seeing there are no such Creatures among us,
it shall be of Foxes: And according^ it was observed that a Fox haunted it when
ruinous few Years after, which stayed there till about 9. or 10 Years ago, when
a part of the House was repaired. This I had from one of the Ministers of the
Country; and another Minister told me that before he bore this character, he
frequently shot Rabbets there, within the Walls of the House.

There are also other four Castles upon one Bay; Castle Sinclar and Girnego.
on ^e East side of the Country nigh to Wick, which belonged to these Earls.
The Bay is called Rice-Bay, and ^2 or 3 Miles broad, the entry whereof is to
the East, ^t dangerous for Ships to come into, because of the many blind Rocks
that ly therein, upon the South side of the Bay next to Wick have been 2 strong
Castles, ^ined to one another by a Drawbridge, called Castle ^inclar and
Girnego, the former has been the strongest House, but the latter they
ordinarily had their dwelling in; their situation is upon a Rock disjoined from
the Land, ^vironed for the most part with the Sea, to which Castles from the
Land they passed also by a Bridge which was drawn up every night, whence there
was no access to them. I found the year of God upon the Lintel of a window in
Castle-Sinclar to be 1607; which has been ^e year wherein this Castle was
built, or at least repaired. Some account these two Castles to be but one,
because of their vicinity. They say, there was much (...) committed here, as
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. ^or which, a Righteous God has turned them,
into a ^ainous heap. Opposite to Castle Sinclar, and Girnego, on the other side
of the Bay is Kice another Castle, Castles of Kice Beradel. and Hakergil.
also ruinous. On the West side of the Bay is the Ca^ of Hakergil, a strong
house at present possessed by Gentleman, who has a great interest in the
Counti^ but is not descended of the Family of Caithness. The are also the
ruins of the old Castle of Beradel to be se^ situated on a Rock near to the
Sea, at the Mouth of River of that name, to which also they have pass from the
Land by a Drawbridge: Such naturally stro^* Situations for their Houses they
sought out of old, t^ they might be the more secure, and safe from all v^lence,
Nature as well as Art contributing to their fortification.

A Bishop Murdered of old.
About a short half Mile to the West of Thuiso a^ the ruins of an old Castle,
where the Bishop in the times of Popery is said to have had his Residence,
particularly there was one Adam said to b^ the last Bishop who lived in that
house, who having greatly oppre^ed the People by his rigorous exacting of the
Tith^ the People complained thereof to the Earl, who said in passion to have
Answered them, Go and see^ him, and Sup him too if you please, Whereupon they
we^ to the Bishops Lodging, and apprehended him, a^ setting his house on Fire,
they actually boiled hi^ and supped off the Broth: Which being known, ^quiry
was made for the barbarous Actours of this Tragedy; and they being apprehended
were put to death so suffering condign punishment for this horrid Villainy. And
this Earl is not the only great Person who has given forth an inconsiderate
sentence, upon which barbarous and inhumane Actions have ensued. Buchanan
writes this to have been about the year 122^ in the days of Alexand. 2d. King
of Scots; and says only That they having killed the Monk who attended his and
his Servant, Buchan. Hist. in vitam Alex. 2.
they wounded himself, and drawing him to the Kitchen, they set the house on
Fire about him. A little to the West of this, is the house of Screbister the
residence of the late Bishops where I think their Lordships had but a mean
accommodation; The Revenues of the Bishopric here are among the smallest in
Scotland, The Revenues of the Bishopric small.
which they report thus came to pass, One of the Bishops at the Reformation
sold the Churches Revenues far below their value [some say at 13 shill.
Scot^per Boll] to the Earl knowing that but for a short time he could enjoy the
same.

There is a Hill in the Parish of Wick called Stony-hill the Reason of which
denomination is said to be this; Stony Hill.
In the days of William King of Scots 1199, as Buchan: has it, there was one
Harald Earl of Orkney and Caithness who being offended at the Bishop, as having
insinuared something to the King against him, apprehended the Bishop, cutting
out his Tongue and putting out his Eyes, which being represented to the King,
he sent his Forces into Caithness and having defeat the Earl, in several
Engagements, the Earl fleeing was pursued and being apprehended, his eyes were
first put out, and then he was hanged, and all his Male Children were
emasculated upon this Hill, which ever since has been called Stony-hill.

They told us, Several Stones set set up for Monuments.
there are several high great Stones set up through the Country and that
ordinarily on Hills, about which are the Rubbish of other Stones, which have
served for some end there, and probably have been places of Pagan Worship, as
we observed upon Orkney, in the Parish of Bower, as we passed, we saw an
Artificial Mount ditched about of a small circumference, it is like for the
same purpose. They have likewise the Tradition of some Picts houses, which have
been here of old, the rubbish whereof is yet to be seen in the Parish of
Latheran, as a Gentleman well acquainted with the Country did inform me.

In the Parish of Latheran we saw the Foundation of a House said to be laid by
a Bastard Son of the Earl of Caithness, but never perfected; Foundation of a
House laid but not perfected.
it is founded upon a rising ground nigh to the Sea, where there is a fair
prospect of Murray, where it is reported the Gentleman had his Mistress, who
intended to build it there, that so she might have a view of the house from
Mu^ray, and he at the House might see Murray.

Dunnot Head.
Dunnot Head stretching out into Pightland Firt^ is about a Mile in breadth,
and 7 Miles in circumf^rence, in it are several Lochs, and some good pastu^ for
Cattle, but no Inhabitants, in it are to be ha^ good Millstones, and it is
thought there is a Lead Mine there. In several places in the parish of Dunn^
there will no Ratts live, and if Earth be brought ou^ thence to other places
molested by them, they will b^ quickly gone.

The Ord of Caithness.
The Ord which divides Caithness from Sutherland is a high Mountain, as the
name Ord, which in Iris^ signifies an height, does imply; down which ou^ way
from Caithness to Sutherland does ly, the Road i^ but narrow, and the descent
steep, and if any stumble thereupon, they are in hazard of falling down a
precipice into the Sea at the bottom of the Rock which is is very terrible to
behold, but who pass it for the more security use to lead their Horses to the
foot of the Hill, which is about a short Mile in length; and no other way there
is from Sutherland to Caithness, or from Caithness to Sutherland but this,
except we go 12 Miles about, but it might be made broader and safer with small
expense.

Signs of Rain and drought.
It is observed in Caithness as an infallible sign almost when they see a Mist
or Cloud, lying down upon the foot of the Hills, that then a drought will
follow; but if such a Mist or Cloud be on the top thereof, they thence
certainly conclude there will be Rain that day. A Loch, wherein is a House,
built by Robbers.


In the Parish of Halkirk there is a Loch [as there are several Lochs in the
Countrey] within which Loch are the ruins of an old house built, they say, by
Robbers, that they might be the more safe and secure from the fears of being
apprehended. That which is most observable concerning this House, is that there
is not one foot of more ground, then what is within the circumference of the
Foundation, and upon which it stands, hence either the Water of the Loch has
washen away the prominent Rock, if there has been any through wasting time, or
if there was no part of the Rock without the circumference of the Foundation,
it is wonderful to consider, how so nigh to the water the Foundation has been
got laid, the Water about the House being of a considerable depth, and the
Extreme parts of the Rock upon which the Foundation stands, not to give way
and fail under the weight of the building, which those who have seen this
House, are surprised at. Upon the Loch they have Boats which come closs to the
Walls of the House, for the taking of Fowls of diverse kinds, as Maws, Herons
etc. several thousands of which do frequent it, having their Nests in the
ruinous Walls.

APPENDIX.
HAving finished and brought to some Issue this Task, Improvement.
in Communicating my Remarks upon these remote Northern places, I shall now
wind up all in some brief Animadversions upon the whole, in in order to a
practical Improvement.

And 1st. We would seriously consider and ponder the wonderful Mercy and Grace
of our GOD, Is. 66.14.
in sending the Gospel to the Isles afar off, that these Gentiles who have not
formerly heard of His Fame, nor seen his Glory, should have the same declared
among them. That through the tender Mercy of our God, Luke 1.78 79.
the Day 'spring from on high has visited and given light to us, who sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death. He has not dealt so with every Nation,
with every Isle; the greatest part of which are immersed and suffered to ly in
the thick darkness of Paganism. V^ were among the first of the Nations in these
North^ parts of the World, to whom was sent the Word of the Salvation; and
according to the Computation o^^e^ our King Donald was the first Crowned Head
in t^ World, that bowed to him, who has on his thigh the name written, King of
Kings and Lord of Lords. O^ of Zion has gone forth the Law and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, and has traveled some thousands of Miles Northward to
Britain, and the Isle thereto belonging; Hence those places of our highly an^
early favored Isle, unaccessible to the valor of the Roman Legions, Tertull.
became subject to Christ; Britannorum loca Romany inaccessa, Is. 42.10, 12.
Christo subdita sunt O what Reason have we then, to listen to the Evangelica^
Prophets Cali, Sing unto the Lord a new song, and hi^ Praise from the end of
the Earth: Ye that go down to the Sea, and all that is therein, the Isles and
the Inhabitants thereof. Let them give Glory unto the Lord, and declare his
Praise in the Islands.

That which may heighten the sense of this distinguishing Mercy and Love, is
that we enjoy this Gospel in as great, if not greater purity, then any Nation
under Heaven, we have it set forth in its native simplicity, without the
Painting and gaudie dress of humane Inventions; Assembly conveened at Edinb.
An. 159^. Sess 8. Calderw. Hist.
which our King James V^I. in his first and better Days, was not ashamed to
declare in open Assembly. The Ancient Government of our Church is restored, and
her Assemblies allowed to sit under the shadow of lawful Authority: by one of
which, we were appointed to visit those Northern Isles, and report unto them
at their next Annual Meeting, how matters relating to the Kingdom of Christ, do
stand in those remote Corners, that so proper Methods may be concerted and
taken by the delegated Representatives of this National Church, for promoting
the Spiritual and Eternal Welfare of the Inhabitants.

Tho we enjoy the clear Light of the glorious Gospel (...) Christ, yet are
there many evils from which we are ^purged until this Day, For beside the
abounding ^andals, breaking out to the Dishonor of God, the ^eproach of
Religion, and the Grief of the Godly, ^ere are many Superstitious Fopperies,
Charms, Heath^ish and Popish Rites, to which some especially in ^ose Isles, are
so much addicted, that it proves a most difficult piece of Work to the most
zealous Ministers, ^get them reformed.

As all should have it much upon their hearts, that ^ere should be any such
dreadful evils now remaining, (...) all invested with Authority Civil or
Ecclesiastic ^t called to employ their utmost endeavors, for the ^ter
ext^rpation of all Idolatrous Monuments, and rasing (...) old Chapels so much
abused, and that conform to ^ct of Assembly: The Government commanding the
Magistrates of these respective bounds so to do, for un^ that this be,
Ministers endeavors whither by Do^rine or Discipline will be the less
successful.

Which obstinacy of these poor deluded Souls per^ting in their sin and folly,
shows the Malice and ^btilty of that early and grand Enemy of Man's
Sal^tion, laboring to keep some footing in these Isles, so be his deadly wound
might be healed, which the ^eaching of the Gospel, the Rod of Gods Power has
^ven him.

That which gives great advantage to Satan, is the ^ameful Ignorance that
abounds in this Day of Gospel Light, this is to him an useful Handle, whereby
(...) keeps his Subjects under his Empire in his Hellish ^amnable Service, for
while this Vail is on the eye (...) the Soul, poor People are not capable of
discerning that is right or wrong and so are led hood-winkt to ^ell; "Tenebrae
sunt Visus impeditivae. Gressus prohibitivae, Casus inductivae etc. This black
Vail ^aweth the Screen round about the Soul, 1 Cor. 2.14.
whence nei^er Sin, nor Misery are felt or seen: They are dead, ^ the
Pythagoreans and Platonists, used to place a Coffin in the room of their
outcast Scholars; And t^ Jews used to say, A dead Carcass is better than a
Disc^ void of Wisdom and Knowledge. And no wonder it be in such dark Corners,
where there are so few Schools a Seminaries of Learning; No wonder the Enemy
s^ his tares, where there is not sown the seed of Kno^ledge; And where not a
competency of Knowled^ there can be no Obedience to, nor Love of God or (...)
Ways: Ut Lux est vitae Directrix, sic Vehiculum ^ loris.

Blessed are they then who are privileged with t^ Means of Knowledge, Schools
for the Education their Youth, and to whom the doors of the Sanctua^ stand open
from time to time, where God by his M^nisters teaches Knowledge to those who
enquire his Mouth. Happy they who know and improve the Mercy, the joyful Sound
given by the Silver-Trumpe^ of the Gospel every Lord's Day; who do receive t^
Truth in Love; And so must we account for our Me^cy; if from the heart we have
believed and obeyed t^ Gospel.

Beside the Book of Grace, giving light to the Chur^ of Christ, we have also
the large expanded Book (...) the Creation, whose lines are gone out through
all t^ Earth, whence we may spell the Being of a God, (...) Wisdom, Goodness
and Power; The Heavens decla^ his Glory, and the Firmament shows his hand
Work; the various Tides; the Ebbing and the Flowi^ Sea, bounded by the Sand and
Rocks, which it da^ beats on, the Fowls of the Air and Fishes of the S^ each
frequenting their proper habitation, do all Pr^claim aloud the Glory of him who
created them, (...) Almighty Power preserving them in their beautiful a^
wonderful order, and his Infinite Wisdom governi^ and directing them to their
several ends, to which the are by him appointed.

Tho so many objects do occur to the diligent Obse^ers of the Works of Creation
and Providence, yet w^ ^an by the short Cordage of their Reason fathom those
depths, so as to give a satisfying account thereof. Still they may rather be
the subject of our Admiration notwithstanding of all the Essays, the ingenious
and sedulous Enquirers into the Mysteries and Secrets of Nature, have either of
old or of late obliged and gratified the World with: Whereupon the humble Saint
is ready to express himself with the Wise Man I am more brutish then any Man,
Prove 30.2.18.
and have not the understanding of a Man; and say Such things are too wonderful
for me, yea and I know them not.

To conclude, 1 Cor. ^3.9; 10.12.
We see now but through a glass darkly, we know only in part, but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away, And
this also we may apply to the Works of Creation. Most happy we if after all our
Travels, Voyages and Labors of whatever kind, we arrive at that place of
perfection, where the Militant State of the Church, shall be changed into that
of a Triumphant, where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary be at
rest; When tears shall be wiped from the eyes, sorrow and sighing shall flee
away; When that desirable Day shall break, and all shadows be gone; When Satan
shall be bruised under our feet, and Death and all its black Retinue be
swallowed up in Life and Victory; When no more Darkness in the Understanding,
Perverseness in the Will, Disorder in the Aflections, or sense of Guilt in the
Conscience. When our Duty shall be Praise, our Grace a burning Love even to a
bodily present Christ, and our Work shall be to follow the Lamb, whi^hersoever
he goes, and so be for ever with the Lord.

FINIS.

