OBSERVATIONS ON Popular Antiquities: Including the whole of Mr. BOURNE's
Antiquitates Vulgares, With ADDENDA to every Chapter of that Work: As also, An
APPENDIX, Containing such Articles on the Subject, as have been omitted by that
Author.

By JOHN BRAND, A. B. Of LINCOLN COLLEGE, OXFORD.

Multiludo Vulgi, more magis-quam judicio, post alium alius quasi prudentiorem
sequitur. SALLUST. ad. CAES. Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessala rides?
HORAT.

NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE: Printed by T. SAINT, for J. Johnson, No. 72, St Paul's
Churchyard, London, 1777.

THE GENERAL PREFACE.
TRadition has in no Instance so clearly evinced her Faithfulness, as in the
transmitting of vulgar Rites and popular Opinions.

Of these, when we are desirous of tracing them backwards to their Origin, many
lose themselves in Antiquity.

They have indeed traveled down to us through a long Succession of Years, and
the greatest part of them, it is not improbable, will be of perpetual
Observation: for the generality of Men look back with superstitious Veneration
on the Ages of their Forefathers: and Authorities, that are gray with Time,
seldom fail of commanding those filial Honors, claimed even by the Appearance
of hoary old Age.

Many of these it must be confessed are mutilated, and, as in the Remains of
ancient Statuary, the Parts of not a few of them have been awkwardly
transposed: they preserve, however, the principal Traits, that distinguished
them in their origin.

Things, composed of such flimsy Materials as the Fancies of a Multitude, do
not seem calculated for a long Du^^tion; yet have these survived Shocks, by
which even Empires have been overthrown, and preserved at least some Form and
Color of Identity, during a Repetition of Changes, both in religious Opinions,
and in the Polity of States.

But the strongest Proof of their remote Antiquity, is* that they have outlived
the general Knowledge of the very Causes that gave rise to them.

The Reader will find in the subsequent pages an union of Endeavors to rescue
many of these Causes from Oblivion. If, on the Investigation, they appear to
any so frivolous as not to have deserved the Pains of the Search, the humble
Laborers will avoid Censure, by incurring Contempt.

How trivial soever such an Enquiry may seem to some, yet all must be informed
that it is attended with no small share of Difficulty and Toil.

A Passage is to be forced through a Wilderness intricate and entangled: few
Vestiges of former Labors can be found to direct us; we must oftentimes trace
a tedious retrospective Course, perhaps to return at last weary and
unsatisfied, from the making of Researches, fruitless as those of some ancient
enthusiastic Traveller, who ranging the barren African Sands, had in vain
attempted to investigate the hidden Sources of the Nile.

Rugged and narrow as this Walk of Study may seem to many, yet Fancy (who
shares with Hope the pleasing Office of brightening a Passage through every
Route of human Endeavor) opens from hence too Prospects, enriched with the
choicest Beauties of her magic Creation.

The prime Origin of the superstitious Notions and Ceremonies of the People is
absolutely unattainable; we despair of ever being able to reach the Fountain
Head of Streams which have been running and increasing from the Beginning of
Time. All that we aspire to do, is only to trace backwards, as far as possible,
the Courses of them on those Charts, that remain, of the distant Countries from
whence they were first perceived to flow.

Few, who are desirous of investigating the popular Notions and vulgar
Ceremonies in our Nation, can fail of deducing them in their first Direction
from the Times when Popery was our established Religion.

We shall not wonder that these were able to survive the Reformation, when we
consider, that though our sensible and spirited Forefathers were, upon
Conviction, easily induced to forego religious Tenets, which had been weighed
in the Balance, and sound wanting; yet were the People by no means inclined to
annihilate the seemingly innocent Ceremonies of their former superstitious
Faith.

These, consecrated to the Fancies of Men, by a Usage from Time immemorial,
though crazed by public Authority from the written Word, were committed as a
venerable Deposit to the keeping of oral Tradition: like the Penates of another
Troy, recently destroyed, they were religiously brought off, after having been
snatched out of the smoking Ruins of Popery.

It is not improbable that, in the Infancy of Protestantism, the continuance of
many of these was connived at by the State. For Men, who are but Children of a
larger Growth, are not weaned all at once, and the Reformation of Manners, and
of Religion, is always most surely established, when effected by slow Degrees,
and as it were imperceptible Gradations.

Thus also at the first Promulgation of Christianity to the Gentile Nations,
through the Force of Conviction they yielded indeed to Truth; yet they could
not be persuaded to relinquish many of their Superstitions, which, rather than
forego them altogether, they chose to blend and incorporate with their new
Faith.

Christian, or rather Papal Rome, borrowed her Rites, Notions, and Ceremonies,
in the most luxurious Abundance from ancient and Heathen Rome; and much the
greater Number of these flaunting Externals, which Infallibility has adopted,
and used as Feathers to adorn her Triple-Cap, have been stolen out of the Wings
of the dying Eagle.

With regard to the Rites, Sports, etc. of the Common People, I am aware that
the morose and bigoted Part of Mankind I shall quote here the subsequent
curious Thoughts on this Subject: the Puritans are ridiculed in them.

These teach that Dancing is a Jezabell,
And Barley-break the ready Way to Hell:
The Morris Idols, Whitsun-ales can be
But profane Relics of a Jubilee:
These in a Zeal to express how much they do
The Organs hate, have silenced Bagpipes too;
And harmless Maypoles all are railed upon,
As if they were the Towers of Babylon.
Randolph's Poems. 1646.
without distinguishing between the right Use and the Abuse of such
Entertainments, cavil at and malign them. Yet must such be told that Shows and
Sports have been countenanced by the best and wisest of States; and though it
cannot be denied that they have been sometimes prostituted to the Purposes of
Riot and Debauchery, yet were we to reprobate every thing that has been thus
abused, Religion itself could not be retained; perhaps we should be able to
keep nothing.

The Common People, confined by daily Labor, seem to require their proper
Intervals of Relaxation; perhaps it is of the highest political Utility to
encourage innocent Sports and Games among them. The Revival of many of these,
would, I think, be highly pertinent at this particular Season, when the general
Spread of Luxury and Dissipation threatens more than at any preceding Period to
extinguish the Character of our boasted national Bravery. For the Observation
of an honest old Writer, Stow, (who tells us, speaking of the May-games,
Midsummer-Eve I call to mind here the pleasing Account Mr. Stern has left us
in his Sentimental Journey, of the Grace-dance after Supper -- I agree with
that amiable Writer in thinking that Religion may mix herself in the Dance, and
that innocent Cheerfulness is no inconsiderable Part of Devotion; such indeed
as cannot fail of being grateful to the Good Being, -- it is a silent but
eloquent Mode of praising him!
Rejoicings, etc. anciently used in the Streets of London, which open Pastimes
in my Youth being now suppressed, worse Practices within Doors are to be seared),
may be with singular propriety adopted on the most transient Survey of our
present popular Manners.

Mr. Bourne, my Predecessor in this Walk, has not, from whatever Cause, done
Justice to the Subject he undertook to treat of. Far from having the Vanity to
think that I have exhausted it, the utmost of my Pretensions is to the Merit of
having endeavored, by making Additions, to improve it. I think him, however,
deserving of no small Share of Praise for his imperfect Attempt, for "much is
due to those, who first broke the Way to Knowledge, and left only to their
Successors the Task of smoothing it."

New Lights have arisen since his Time. The English Antique has become a
general and fashionable Study; and the Discoveries of the very respectable
Society of Antiquaries have rendered the Recesses of Papal and Heathen
Antiquities easier of access.

I flatter myself I have turned all these Circumstances in some measure to
Advantage. I have gleaned Passages that seemed to throw Light upon the Subject,
from a great Variety of Volumes, and those written too in several Languages; in
the doing of which, if I shall not be found to having deserved the Praise of
Judgment, I must at least make Pretensions to the Merit of Industry,

Elegance of Composition will hardly be expected in a Work of this Kind, which
stands much less in need of Attic Wit, than of Roman Perseverance, and Dutch
Assiduity.

I shall offer some Discoveries, which are peculiarly my own; for there are
Customs yet retained here in the North, of which I am persuaded the learned of
the Southern Part of the Island have not heard, which is, perhaps, the sole
Cause why they have never before been investigated.

In perusing the subsequent Observations, the candid Reader, who has never
before considered this neglected Subject, is requested not to be rash in
passing Sentence, but to suspend his Judgment, at least, till he has carefully
examined all the Evidence; by which Caution I do not wish to have it
understood, that our Determinations are thought to be infallible, or that every
Decision here is not amenable to an higher Authority. In the mean time
Prejudice may be forwarned, and it will apologize for many seemingly trivial
Reasons, assigned for the beginning and transmitting of this or that Notion or
Ceremony, to reflect, that what may appear foolish to the enlightened
Understandings of Men in the Eighteenth Century, wore a very different Aspect
when viewed through the Gloom that prevailed in the seventh or eighth.

I should trespass upon the Patience of my Reader, were I to enumerate all the
Books I have consulted on this Occasion; to which, however, I shall take Care
in their proper Places to refer: but I own myself under particular Obligations
to Durand's Ritual of Divine Offices; a Work inimical to every Idea of rational
Worship, but to the Enquirer into the Origin of our popular Ceremonies, an
invaluable Magazine of the most interesting Intelligence. I would style this
Performance the great Ceremonial Law of the Romanists, in Comparison with which
the Mosaic Code is barren of Rites and Ceremonies. We stand amazed on perusing
it at the enormous Weight of a new Yoke which Holy Church fabricating with her
own Hands has imposed on her servile Devotees.

Yet the Forgers of these Shackles had artfully contrived to make them sit
easy, by twisting Flowers around them. Dark as this Picture, drawn by the
Pencil of gloomy Superstition, appeared upon the whole, yet was its deep Shade
contrasted with pleasing Lights.

The Calendar was crowded with Red-Letter Days, nominally indeed consecrated to
Saints; but which, by the encouragement of Idleness and Dissipation of Manners,
gave every kind of countenance to SINNERS.

A Profusion of childish Rites, Pageants and Ceremonies, diverted the Attention
of the People from the consideration of their real State, and kept them in
humor, if it did not sometimes make them in love with their slavish Modes of
Worship,

To the Credit of our sensible and manly Forefathers, they were among the first
who felt the Weight of this new and unnecessary Yoke, and had Spirit enough to
throw it off.

I have fortunately in my Possession one of those ancient Romish Calendars of
singular Curiosity, which contains under the immovable Feasts and Fasts, (I
regret much its Silence on the moveable ones) a variety of brief Observations,
contributing not a little to the elucidation of many of our popular Customs,
and proving them to have been sent over from Rome, with Bulls, Indulgencies,
and other Baubles, bartered, as it should seem, for our Peter Pence, by those
who trafficked in spiritual Merchandise from the Continent.

These I shall carefully translate (though in some Places it is extremely
difficult to render the very barbarous Latin, of which I fear the Critic will
think I have transfused the Barbarity, Brevity, and Obscurity into my own
English) and lay before my Reader, who will at once see and acknowledge their
Utility.

A learned Performance, by a Doctor Moresin in the Time of James I. and
dedicated to that Monarch, is also luckily in my Possession. It is written in
Latin, and entitled "The Origin and Increase of Depravity in Religion;"
containing a very masterly Parallel between the Rites, Notions, etc. of Heathen
and those of Papal Rome.

The copious Extracts from this Work, with which I shall adorn the subsequent
Pages will be their own Eulogy, and supersede my poor Encomiums.

When I call to remembrance the Poet of The late Mr. Gray.
Humanity, who has transmitted his Name to Immortality, by Reflections written
among the little Tomb-stones of the Vulgar, in a Country Churchyard; I am
urged by no false Shame to apologize for the seeming Unimportance of my Subject.

The Antiquities of the Common People cannot be studied without acquiring some
useful Knowledge of Mankind. By the chemical Process of Philosophy, even Wisdom
may be extracted from the Follies and Superstitions of our Forefathers

The People, of whom Society is chiefly composed, and for whose good,
Superiority of Rank is only a Grant made originally by mutual Concession, is a
respectable Subject to every one who is the Friend of Man.

Pride, which, independent of the Idea arising from the Necessity of civil
Polity, has portioned out the human Genus into such a variety of different and
subordinate Species, must be compelled to own, that the lowest of these derives
itself from an Origin, common to it with the highest of the Kind. The beautiful
Sentiment of Terence: " Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto." may be
adopted therefore in this Place, to persuade us that nothing can be foreign to
our Enquiry, which concerns the smallest of the Vulgar; of those little ones,
who occupy the lowest Place in the political Arrangement of human Beings.

J. B.
Westgate-Street, Newcastle, Nov. 27, 1776.
N. B. Here follow Mr Bourne's Title Page, Dedication, and Preface.
Antiquitates Vulgares; OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE Common People. GIVING An
Account of several of their OPINIONS and CEREMONIES. WITH Proper REFLECTIONS
upon each of them; showing which may be retained, and which ought to be laid
aside.

By HENRY BOURNE, M. A. Curate of the Parochial Chapel of All-Saint's in
Newcastle upon Tyne.

NEWCASTLE, Printed by J. WHITE for the AUTHOR.

MDCCXXV.

TO THE Right Worshipful and Worshipful WILLIAM CARR, Esquire Mayor. John Isaacson,
Esquire Recorder.
Aldermen.
Sir William Blackett, Bar. William Ellison, Esquire Mat. Featherstonhaugh, Esquire
Henry Reay, Esquire Richard Ridley, Esquire Edward Johnson, Esquire Francis Rudston, Esquire
Nicholas Fenwick, Esquire Francis Johnson, Esquire Nathaniel Clayton, Esquire
To James Muncaster, Esquire Sheriff, and to the Rest of the Common Council of the
Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne,
GENTLEMEN,
I Know none so justly entitled to the Effects and Produce of Study, as those
who are the Promoters and Patrons of Learning. They undoubtedly of all Others,
have the best of Claims to a Work of this Nature, whose Generosity and
Benevolence have been conspicuous, in so promoting the Welfare of their
Country, and the Good of Mankind.

AND such, Gentlemen, are you, the Incouragers of Learning, and, the Rewarders
of Merit; there are Numbers to witness the one, and your Clergy may witness the
other.

FOR not to mention you in your private Capacities, as Promoters of Common
Learning, as the Helpers and Supporters of Schools of CHARITY, one great
Blessing of your Community: You in your public Stations uphold a nobler
Literature, and assist a more generous Education: You not only lay the
Ground-works here, but you help to the Top of Arts and Sciences, in the greater
Schools of Learning.

Nor is it less certain that you have always been eminent, and that not only in
your own Country, but in distant Parts, for the support of an Orthodox and
learned Clergy: Your Fame for maintaining them, and your Regard to merit in
choosing them, being every where spoken of.

JUSTLY therefore are you entitled to Performances of this Nature, but in a
more especial Manner to this in particular; it being the genuine Offspring of
your Generosity. As I am sensible that you have blessed me with the most
inestimable Favors, so I am bound in Duty, and by all the Ties of Gratitude,
to lay the First Fruits of my Labors at your Feet; hoping that as you have
been very instrumental in occasioning them, so you will receive them under your
Care and Protection,

AND this I also hope for, not as they are a Work of Merit, or worthy of being
dedicated to such Patrons: For I am justly sensible of the Meanness of their
Desert, and their Unworthiness of that Honor; but as they are an Indication of
the sincerest Thankfulness and Gratitude of,

GENTLEMEN, Your most obliged Most obedient And most humble Servant, HENRY
BOURNE.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Sheets are a few of that vast Number of Ceremonies and Opinions,
which are held by the Common People; such, as they solely or generally observe.
For though some of them have been of National and others perhaps of universal
Observance, yet at present they would have little or no Being, if not observed
among the Vulgar.

I would not be thought a Reviver of old Rites and Ceremonies to the Burdening
of the People, nor an Abolisher of innocent Customs, which are their Pleasures
and Recreations: I aim at nothing, but a Regulation of those which are in Being
amongst them, which they themselves are far from thinking burdensome, and
abolishing such only as are sinful and wicked.

Some of the Customs they hold, have been originally good, though at present they
retain little of their primitive Purity; the true Meaning and Design of them,
being either lost, or very much in the Dark through Folly and Superstition. To
wipe off therefore the Dust they have contracted, to clear them of
Superstition, and make known their End and Design, may turn to some Account,
and be of Advantage; whereas observing them in the present Way, is not only of
no Advantage, but of very great Detriment.

Others they hold, are really sinful, notwithstanding in outward Appearance
they seem very harmless, being a Scandal to Religion, and an encouraging of
Wickedness. And therefore to aim at abolishing these, will I hope be no Crime,
though they be the Diversions of the People.

As to the Opinions they hold, they are almost all superstitious, being
generally either the Produce of Heathenism; or the Inventions of indolent
Monks, who having nothing else to do, were the Forgers of many silly and wicked
Opinions, to keep the World in Awe and Ignorance. And indeed the ignorant Part
of the World, is so still awed, that they follow the idle Traditions of the
one, more than the Word of GOD; and have more Dependence upon the lucky Omens
of the other than his Providence, more Dread of their unlucky ones, than his
Wrath and Punishment.

The regulating therefore of these Opinions and Customs, is what I proposed by
the following Compositions, whatever has been suggested to the contrary: And as
to the Menaces of some, and the Censures of others, I neither fear nor regard
them. I shall be always ready to own any Mistake, and in what I justly may, to
vindicate myself.

The CONTENTS OF THE ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
CHAP. I OF the Soul-Bell; its Antiquity; the Reason of its Institution; the
Benefits and Advantage of it; an Exhortation to the Use of it according to its
first Institution. Page 1 CHAP. II Of Watching with the Dead. 20 CHAP. III. Of
following the Corpse to the Grave; what it is an Emblem of: Of carrying Greens
in our Hand; what it may signify; what Use it may be of: Of Psalmody, its
Antiquity, the Advantage of it. 28 CHAP. IV. Of Garlands in Country Churches:
Of strawing Flowers on the Grave; the Antiquity of these Customs, the Innocence
of them. 39 CHAP. V. Of Bowing toward the Altar at the first coming into the
Church: a Custom generally observed by ignorant People; it Meaning, and
Antiquity. 44 CHAP. VI. Of the Time of Cock-crow: Whether evil Spirits wander
about in the Time of Night; and whether they fly away at the Time of Cock-crow:
Reflections upon this encouraging us to have Faith and Trust in GOD. 54 CHAP.
VII. Of Churchyards; why the Vulgar are generally afraid of passing through
them at Nights: The Original of this Fear; that there is nothing in them now,
more than in other Places to be afraid of. 76 CHAP. VIII. Of visiting Wells and
Fountains: The Original of this Custom: The naming of them of great Antiquity:
The Worship paid them by the Papists, was gross Idolatry. 82 CHAP. IX. Of
Omens: Their Original: The Observation of them sinful. 87 CHAP. X. Of the
Country Conversation in a Winter's Evening: Their Opinions of Spirits and
Apparitions: Of the Devil's appearing with a Cloven Foot: Of Fairies and
Hobgoblins: Of the walking Places of Spirits; And of haunted Houses. 102 CHAP.
XI. The Form of Exorcising an haunted House. 123 CHAP. XII. Of Saturday
Afternoon; how observed of old, by the Ancient Christians, the Church of
Scotland, and the old Church of England: What End we should observe it for: An
Exhortation to the Observation of it. 145 CHAP. XIII. Of the Yule-Clog and
Christmass-Candle; what they may signify; their Antiquity; the like Customs in
other Places. 155 CHAP. XIV. Of adorning the Windows at Christmas with Laurel:
What the Laurel is an Emblem of: An Objection against this Custom taken of. 172
CHAP. XV. Of the Christmass-Carol, an ancient Custom: The common Observation of
it, very unbecoming. 181 CHAP XVI. Of New Year's Days Ceremonies: The
New Year's Gift an harmless Custom: Wishing a good New-Year, no way sinful:
Mumming a Custom, which ought to be laid aside. 187 CHAP. XVII. Of the
Twelfth-Day; how observed: The Wickedness of observing the Twelve Days after
the common Manner. 199 CHAP. XVIII. Of St. Paul's-Day: The Observation of the
Weather, a Custom of the Heathens, and handed down by the Monks: The Apostle
St. Paul, himself is against such Observations: The Opinion of St. Austin upon
them. 208 CHAP. XIX. Of Candlemass-Day; why it is so called: The Blasphemy of
the Church of Rome in consecrating Wax-Candles. 220 CHAP. XX. Of Valentine-Day;
its Ceremonies: What the Council of Trullus thought of such Customs; that they
had better be omitted. 225 CHAP. XXI. Of Shrove-tide; what it signifies: The
Custom of the Papists at this Season: That our present Customs are very
unbecoming. 230 CHAP. XXII. Of Palm Sunday; why so called: How observed in the
Popish Times: What it is truly to carry Palms in our Hands on that Day. 236
CHAP. XXIII. Of rising early on Easter Day: What is meant by the Sun-dancing
that Morn: The Antiquity of rising early on this Day: The End and Design of it:
The great Advantage of it. 241 CHAP. XXIV. Of Easter Holy Days; a Time of
Relaxation from Labor: How observed in the dark Ages of Popery: That our
Customs at this Time, are sprung from theirs. 249 CHAP. XXV. Of May Day; the
Custom of going to the Woods the Night before: This the Practice of other
Nations: The Original of it: The Unlawfulness. 255 CHAP. XXVI. Of Parochial
Perambulations; their Antiquity; the Benefit and Advantage of them. 263 CHAP.
XXVII. Of Midsummer-Eve: Of kindling Fires, their Original: That this Custom
formerly was Superstitious; but now may be used with Innocence. 271 CHAP.
XXVIII. Of the Feast of Sheep-shearing, an ancient Custom. 282 CHAP. XXIX. Of
Michaelmass: Guardian Angels the Discourse of the Country People at this Time:
That it seems rather true, that we are protected by a Number of Angels, than by
one particular Genius. 288 CHAP. XXX. Of the Country Wake: How observed
formerly: A Custom of the Heathens, and regulated by Gregory the Great. 296
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Harvest-Supper: A Custom of the Heathens, taken from the
Jewish Feast of Tabernacles. 303
THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE Common People.
CHAP. I. Of the Soul-Bell, its Antiquity, the Reason of its Institution, the
Benefit and Advantage of it, an Exhortation to the Use of it according to its
first Institution.
THE Ceremony of tolling the Bell at the Time of Death, seems to be as ancient
as the having of Bells themselves; we are told, Bingham's Orig. Eccl. Lib. 3.
it was about the seventh Century when Bells were first in the Church, and that
venerable Bede is the first that mentions them. If this be true, then it is as
true, that the tolling of the Bell was instituted about that Time; for where
our Countryman mentions the Word Campana, or Bell, there it also is, that we
find a Bell made use of for the Dead: Haec, tunc in dormitorio sororum pausans,
exaudivit subito in aere notum campanae sonum, quo ad orationes excitari vel
convocari solebant, cum quis eorum de seculo fuisset evocatus. Bed. Eccl. Hist
Lib. 4. Cap. 23.
For at the Death of the Abbess St. Hilda, he tells us that one of the Sisters
of a distant Monastery, as she was sleeping, thought she heard the well-known
Sound of that Bell, which called them to Prayers, when any of them had departed
this Life. But be that as it will, it is evident that the Bell was tolled upon
this Occasion about Bede's Time, and consequently that the Ceremony is as
ancient as his Days.

The Reason why this custom was instituted, was not, as some seem to imagine,
for no other End than to acquaint the Neighborhood, that such a Person was
dead; but chiefly, that whoever heard the Noise of the Bell, should put up
their Prayers for the Soul: Thus the Father abovementioned tells us again,
Quod cum illa audisset, suscitavit cunctas sorores and in ecclesiam convocatas,
orationibus and psalmis pro anima matris operam dare monuit. Ibid.
That she who presided in this Monastery, had no sooner heard this, than she
raised all the Sisters, and called them into the Church, where she exhorted
them to pray fervently, and sing a Requiem for the Soul of their Mother.
Cassalion also upon this Place of Bid, says, That Et talis ritus etiam de
praesenti servatur in Anglia, ut cum quis decessit, statim campana propriae
illius Parochiae speciali quodam modo sonat per aliquod temporis spatium. --
Quamvis Angli negent modo orationes and suffragia defunctis proficua; non aliam
tamen in hoc ab illis rationem potui percipere, quam quod talis sonus sit ritus
antiquae ecclesiae Anglicanae, Cassali de vet Sac, Christ. Rit. P. 241.
the same Custom is still observed in England, that as soon as any has
departed this Life, the Bell belonging to the Parish he lived in, was
immediately tolled, and for some Time. -- And though (says he) the English now
deny, that Prayers are of any Service to the Dead; yet I could meet with no
other Account of this Ceremony, than that it was a Custom of the old Church of
England.

And for this Reason it is, that this Custom was first observed, and should be
still retained among us, viz. That the Prayers of the Faithful may be assisting
to the Soul; and certainly it might be more profitably retained, were it so
ordered, that the Bell should be tolled before the Person's Departure, as was
undoubtedly designed when this Ceremony was continued, that good men might give
him their Prayers. Was this always so observed, there might be some Moses
amongst the Number of the Faithful, whose Prayers could prevail upon God to
beat back the Amalekites of Darkness; some whose Faith might remove a Mountain
of Sins, and some whose Tears procure a Multitude of Mercies. O the Comfort of
the Forgiveness of Sins! Of being guided safely through the Shadow of Death! Of
arriving securely at the heavenly Country! What is it that Prayer cannot obtain?

But though the Wickedness and Impenitency of the dying Person be such, as that
the Prayers of the Faithful will not be sufficient to avert the Wrath and
Punishment of a justly incensed God; yet as this can be only known to God, it
will not discharge Men from recommending him to the Divine Mercy, in the most
passionate and affectionate Manner. They thereby express the most laudable
Zeal, the most disinterested Charity; and whilst they are so solicitous for the
Happiness and Welfare of other Men's Souls, they cannot but be thereby
influenced to have the greatest Concern for their own, and be both encouraged
and directed to proceed with an holy Emulation from Strength to Strength, and
endeavor as the Heb. vi. 1.
Apostle advises, to go on to Perfection.

But, alas! we are fallen into Times of such Irreligion and Prejudice, such
Contempt of Antiquity, and such too great Reformation, that what with Indolence
on one Hand, and Ignorance on the other; what with no Zeal on this Side, and
too Among the many Objections of the Brownists, it is laid to the Charge of the
Church of England, that though we deny the Doctrine of Purgatory, and teach the
contrary, yet how well our Practice suits with it, may be considered in our
ringing of hallowed Bells for the Soul. Bish. Hall. cont. Brown.
false a one on that; we either neglect the most decent Ceremonies of Religion,
or we think it is Religion to have no Ceremonies at all. No Wonder then, that,
in the Midst of such a crooked and perverse Generation, when the most of Men
are negligent of themselves, they are also negligent of others: No Wonder, that
when there is such a general Contempt of Religion, and Men are careless of
their own Souls, they are not careful for the Souls of their Friends.

But it is called In a Vestry-Book belonging to the Chapel of All Saints, in
Newcastle upon Tyne, it is observable, That the Tolling of the Bell is not
mentioned in the Parish Accounts, from the Year 1643, till 1655, when we find
it ordered to be tolled again. At a Vestry holden January 21st, 1655. Whereas
for some Years past, the collecting of the Duty for Bell and Tolling, has been
forborne and laid aside, which has much lessened the Revenue of the Church, by
which, and suchlike Means, it is brought into Dilapidations; and having now
taken the same into serious Consideration, and fully debated the Objections
made by some against the same, and having had the Judgment of our Ministers
concerning any Superstition that might be in it; which being made clear, it is
this Day ordered, That from henceforth, the Church Officer appointed thereunto,
do collect the same, and bring the Money unto the Churchwardens, and that
those who desire to have the Use of the Bells, may freely have them as
formerly, paying the accustomed Fees. It is certain they laid it aside, because
they thought it superstitious, and it is probable, if they had not wanted
Money, they had not seen the contrary.
Popish and Superstitious; for what true Reason, I know not. Did we indeed
imagine with the Papists, that there is any We call them Soul-Bells, for that
they signify the Departure of the Soul, not for that they help the Passage of
the Soul. Bish. Hall cont. Brown, P. 568.
Virtue or extraordinary Power in a Bell, that it is Item ut Daemones tinnitu
campanarum, Christianos ad preces concitantium, terreantur. Formula vero
baptizandi seu benedicendi campanas antiqua est. Durant. Lib. C. 22. S. 6.
hallowed by Baptism, and drives away the Spirits of Darkness, then it might
justly be called Superstition, and therefore justly abolished. But when we
retain the Custom, only to procure the Prayers of the Faithful for a departing
Soul, it would surely be of Advantage to observe it, if the Prayers of a
righteous Man avail any Thing at all; which, if we may believe an inspired
Apostle, are of very great Efficacy and Validity.

Art thou then attending a Friend in his last Moments? Art thou careful for his
Soul, and solicitous for his Salvation? Do thou wish him safe through the
Valley of Death to the everlasting Hills? Would thou have the good Angels
protect him, and be his Shield against the Powers of Darkness? In short,
would thou have him crowned with the Joys of Paradise? Be assured then, that
the Prayers of good men will very much contribute to the gaining of these
Things. But how shall they then pray for him, if they know not of his
Departure? And how can they know that, without the tolling of the Bell? Do thou
therefore put in Practice this decent and profitable Custom, not as our Age
generally does, after the Death of thy Friend, but before it; before he leave
the World, when the Prayers of good Men can assist him, and facilitate his
Journey into the other Life.

Or, art thou working in the Field, or grinding at the Mill? Remember then,
when thou hear the Sound of the Bell for one departing, that thou put up thy
Prayers for him. Be thy Business what it will, it will always permit thee to
say at least, LORD, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace: Or to use the
Words of St. Oswald, when he and his Soldiers were ready to be slain, Lord,
have Mercy on the Soul of thy Oravit ad dominum pro animabus exercitus sui.
Unde dicunt in proverbio, Deus miserere animabus, dixit Oswaldus cadens in
terram, Bed. Eccl. L. 3. C. 12. It is used (says Bid) even to a Proverb, That
he died praying; for when the Enemy had surrounded him, and he saw himself
about to be slain, he prayed unto the LORD for the Souls of his Army. Hence it
is that the Proverb comes, LORD, have Mercy upon the Soul, as St. Oswald said
when he fell to the Earth. Which Proverb, in all Probability, has been the
Original of this present national Saying, When the Bell begins to toll,
LORD, have Mercy on the Soul.

Servant. It will not be long, till thou thyself shall have Occasion for such
Prayers, till thou come to die, and enter on thy Journey to the other State: If
then thou have been merciful, thou shall obtain Mercy; if by thy Prayers thou
have assisted the Souls of thy Brethren, thou shall either be remembered in the
Prayers of good Men, or surely these thy Prayers for others will be of Service
to thyself also, at that dreadful hour.

But now it may be objected, That as the Bell is seldom tolled till after the
Person's Departure, it is to no Purpose to pray for the Soul; nay to pray for
it, would be praying for the Dead: And since that is repugnant to the Doctrine
of our Church, our Prayers at that Time had much better be omitted.

Indeed it is too true, this Custom is not so common as it should be; but
however, it is so much observed, as will be able to vindicate the putting up of
constant Prayers. I know several religious Families in this Place, and I hope
it is so in other Places too, who always observe it, whenever the melancholy
Season offers; and therefore it will at least sometimes happen, when we put up
our Prayers constantly at the tolling of the Bell, that we shall pray for a
Soul departing. And though it be granted, that it will oftener happen otherwise,
as the regular Custom is so little followed; yet that can be no harmful praying
for the Dead. We believe that the Soul is but departing, and it is charitably
done to offer up our Prayers: And therefore when it proves otherwise, our Psalm
xxxiv. 14.
Prayer shall turn into our own Bosom; and like as that Peace, which the
Disciples wished to an unworthy House, returned to the Disciples again; so,
though our Prayers at that Time may be of no Service to the Soul, yet they will
be of no Disservice to us. They will return to us again, but it will be no
Fault to have misplaced them.

PRAYERS upon this OCCASION from Bishop TAILOR.
I.
O Holy and most Gracious JESU, we humbly recommend the Soul of thy Servant
into thy Hands, thy most merciful Hands: Let thy blessed Angels stand in
Ministry about thy Servant, and defend him from the Violence and Malice of all
his ghostly Enemies: And drive far from him all the Spirits of Darkness. Amen.

II.
LORD, receive the Soul of this thy Servant: Enter not into Judgment with him:
Spare him whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood: And deliver
him, for whose sake thou did suffer Death, from all Evil and Mischief, from
the Crafts and Assaults of the Devil, from the Fear of Death, and from
everlasting Death. Amen.

III.
LORD, impute not unto him the Follies of his Youth, nor any of the Errors and
Miscarriages of his Life: But strengthen him in his Agony, and carry him safely
through his last Distress. Let not his Faith waver, nor his Hope fail, nor his
Charity be disordered: Let him die in Peace, and rest in Hope, and rise in
Glory. Amen.

IV.
LORD, we know and believe assuredly, that whatsoever is under thy Custody,
cannot be taken out of thy Hands, nor by all the Violences of Hell robbed of
thy Protection: Preserve the Work of thy Hands, rescue him from all Evil, and
let his Portion be with the Patriarchs and Prophets, with the Apostles and
Martyrs, and all thy holy Saints, in the Arms of CHRIST, in the Bosom of
Felicity, and in the Kingdom of God for ever. Amen.

V.
O SAVIOR of the World, who by thy Cross, and precious Blood have redeemed us,
save, and help this thy departing Servant, we beseech thee, O LORD. Amen.

VI.
O Almighty LORD, who art a most strong Tower to all them that put their Trust
in thee; to whom all Things in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth, do bow
and obey; be now and evermore his Defense; and make him to know and feel, by a
powerful Sense of thy Goodness, that there is no other Name under Heaven given
to Man, in whom and through whom we may receive Health and Salvation, but only
the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

VII.
O LORD, unto thy gracious Mercy and Protection we commit him. O GOD the
Father, bless him and keep him. O GOD the Son, make thy Face to shine upon him,
and be gracious unto him. O GOD the Holy Ghost, lift up thy Countenance upon
him, and give him thy Peace, both now and evermore. Amen.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER I.
OUR Author seems of Opinion, that the Ceremony of tolling a Bell The
subsequent Etymology of this Word has the Sanction of the learned Sir Henry
Spelman: Bell is derived from Pelvis, a Basin: for before the Invention of
Bells, not only sounding Brass, but Basins also were used instead of them.
(Housewives to this Day try the Soundness of their Earthen or China Vases by
ringing them with a Finger). Vide Lye's Junii Etymolog. in verbo. -- Mr
Wheatley, in his Illustration of the Liturgy, apologizes for our retaining this
Ceremony. Our Church (says he) in Imitation of the Saints in former Ages, calls
in the Minister and others, who are at hand, to assist their Brother in his
last Extremity. In order to this she directs that when any one is passing out
of this Life, a Bell should be tolled, etc. It is called from thence the
Passing Bell.
at the Time of Death, is as ancient as the Use of Bells. This is somewhat
improbable. It has rather been an After-Invention of Superstition. Thus praying
for the Dying was improved upon into praying for the Dead. Bells must have been
first used as Signals to convene the People to their public Devotions.

Mr. Bourne has overlooked a Passage in Durand's Ritual that would have been
much to his Purpose Veruum aliquo moriente, Campanae debent pulsari: ut Populus
hoc audiens, oret pro illo. Pro muliere quidem bis, pro eo quod ipsa invenit
Asperitatem. Primo enim fecit hominem alienum a Deo, quare secunda dies non
habuit Benedictionem. Pro Viro vero ter pulsatur, quia primo inventa est in
Homine Trinitas: Primo enim formatus est Adam de terra, deinde mulier ex Adam,
postea Homo creatus est ab Utroque, et ita est ibi Trinitas.(!!!) Si autem
Clericus sit, tot vicibus compulsatur, quot ordines habuit ipse. Ad ultimum
vero compulsari debet cum omnibus Campanis, ut ita sciat populus pro quo sit
orandum. Debet etiam compulsari quando ducimus ad Ecclesiam, et quando de
Ecclesia ad Tumulum deportatur.

Vide Durandi Rationale, p. 21. 13. Durand flourished about the End of the 12th
Century.

In Ray's Collection of old English Proverbs I find the following Couplet: When
thou do hear a Toll, or Knell,
Then think upon thy passing Bell.



: -- When any one is dying, says that Ritualist, Bells must be tolled, that the
People may put up their Prayers. -- Let this be done twice for a Woman and
thrice for a Man: (The superstitious Reasons he assigns for these Numbers are
too contemptible for Translation) If for a Clergyman, as many Times as he had
Orders, and at the Conclusion a Peal on all the Bells, to distinguish the
Quality of the Person for whom the People are to put up their Prayers. A Bell
too must be rung while we are conducting the Corpse to Church, and during the
bringing it out of the Church to the Grave. I think this a curious and
pertinent Quotation. It seems to account for a Custom still preserved in the
North, of making numeral Distinctions at the Conclusion of this Ceremony --
nine Knells for a Man, six for a Woman, and three for a Child, which are
without Doubt the Vestiges of this ancient Injunction of Popery.

The Quotation our Author gives us from Bid I have examined this Passage in
King Alfred's Saxon Version of Bid: In rendering Campana, I find he has used
Cluggan, which properly signifies a Clock (Bellan is in the Margin). Clock is
the old German Name for a Bell, and hence the French call one une Cloche. There
were no Clocks in England in Alfred's Time. He is said to have measured his
Time by Wax Candles, marked with circular Lines to distinguish the Hours. -- I
would infer from this, that our Clocks have certainly been so called from the
Bells in them. -- Mr. Strutt confesses he has not been able to trace the Date
of the Invention of Clocks in England. -- Stow tells us they were commanded to
be set up in Churches in the Year 612. A gross Mistake! and into which our
honest Historian must have been led by his misunderstanding the Word Cloca, a
Latin Term coined from the old German Name for a Bell. For Clocks therefore
read Bells.
is very apposite, as is that from Cassalion's occasional Comment. The latter
however appears to no great Advantage as an Antiquary, when he tells us he
could meet with no other Account of this Ceremony, than that it was a Custom of
the old Church of England. The Passage above cited from Durand would have
informed him from whence it must have been imported into this Kingdom.

It may gratify the Curiosity of some to peruse the following general
Observations on Bells Spelman in his very learned Glossary, verb. Campana, has
preserved two Monkish Lines, in which all the ancient Offices of Bells seem to
be included.

Laudo Deum verum, Plebem voco, congrego Clerum,
Defunctos ploro, pestem fugo, Festa decoro.
We praise the true God, call the People, convene the Clergy, Lament the Dead,
dispel Pestilence, and grace Festivals.


. -- I have not been able to ascertain precisely the Date of this useful
Invention. The Ancients had some Sort of Bells. I find the Word Tintinnabula,
(which we usually render Bells) in Martial, Juvenal, and Suetonius. The Romans
were summoned by these (of whatever Size or Form they were) to their hot Baths,
and to the Business of public Places.

The large Kind of Bells now in Use are said to have been invented by Paulinus,
Bishop of Nola, in Campania, (whence the Latin Name Campana) about the Year 400
Spelman's Gloss. verb Campana. Truster's Chronology.
, and to have been generally used in Churches about the 600th Year of the
Christian Era. Mr. Bingham Antiquities of Christ. Church, Vol. I. p. 316.
however thinks this a vulgar Error. In short, we are left much in the Dark
concerning the Antiquities of the earlier Ages of the Church. -- Ecclesiastical
Writers frequently clash in their Accounts. Josephus.
The Jews used Trumpets for Bells: The Turks permit not the Use of Bells: The
Greek Church under them still follow their old Custom of using wooden Boards,
or Iron Plates full of holes, which they hold in their Hands, and knock with a
Hammer or Mallet, to call the People together to Church See Dr. Smith's Account
of the Greek Church. He was an Eyewitness of this remarkable Custom, which
Durand tells us is retained in the Romish Church on the three last Days of the
Week preceding Easter. Durandi Rational. p. 331. 3.

Bingham informs us of an Invention before Bells for convening religious
Assemblies in Monasteries: It was going by Turns to every one's Cell, and with
the Knock of a Hammer calling the Monks to Church. The Instrument was called
the Night-Signal and the wakening Mallet. -- In many of the Colleges at Oxford
the Bible Clerk knocks at every Room Door with a Key, to waken the Students in
the Morning, before he begins to ring the Chapel Bell. -- A Vestige it should
seem of the ancient monastic Custom.


: China has been remarkably famous for its Bells -- Father le Compte tells us,
that at Pekin there are seven Bells, each of which weighs one hundred and
twenty thousand Pounds.

Baronius Cum vero post haec Johannes Papa in urbem rediisset, contigit
primariam Lateranensis Ecclesiae Campanam mirae magnitudinis recens aere fusam,
super Campanile elevari, quam prius idem Pontifex sacris ritibus Deo
consecravit atque Johannis nomine nuncupavit. Baronii Annal. a Spondano. AD.
968, p. 871.
informs us, that Pope John XIII. AD. 968, consecrated a very large new-cast
Bell in the Lateran Church, and gave it the Name of John. -- This is the first
Instance I meet with of what has been since called "the baptizing of Bells," a
Superstition which the Reader may find ridiculed in the Romish Romish Beehive,
p. 17.
Beehive. -- The Vestiges of this Custom may be yet traced in England in Tom of
Lincoln, and great Tom ("the mighty Tom") at Christ Church, Oxford.

Egelrick Collier's Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I. p. 198.
, Abbot of Croyland, about the Time of King Edgar, cast a Ring of six Bells, to
all which he gave Names, as Bartholomew, Bethhelm, Turketul, etc. The Historian
tells us, his Predecessor Turketul had led the Way in this Fancy.

The Custom of rejoicing with Bells on high Festivals, Christmas Day, etc. is
derived to us from the Times of Popery Durand tells us, In festis, quae ad
gratiam pertinent, Campanae tumultuosius tinniunt et prolixius concrepant.
Rational. p. 21. 12.
. The ringing of Bells on the Arrival of Emperors, Bishops, Abbots, etc. at
Places under their own Jurisdiction, was also an old Custom Campanarum pulsatio
in adventu Episcoporum et Abbatum in Ecclesias, quae iis subditae sunt,
antiquus mos.

Vide Du Cange. Gloss. verb. Campana. Tradit Continuator Nangii. An. 1378.
Carolum quartum Imperatorem cum in Galliam venit, nullo Campanarum sonitu
exceptum in Urbibus, quod id sit signum dominii: Et est assavoir que en la dite
Ville, et semblablement partoutes les autres Villes, on il a este, tant en
venant a Paris, comme en son retour, il n'a este receu en quelque Eglise a
Procession, ne Cloches sonnees a son venir, ne fait aucun sign de quelque
domination, etc. Ibid.


: Whence we seem to have derived the modern Compliment of welcoming Persons of
Consequence by a cheerful Peal

Durand Ut daemones timentes fugiant -- Timent enim auditis Tubis Ecclesiae
militantis, scilicit campanis; sicut aliquis Tyrannus timet, audiens in Terra
sua tubas alicujus potentis regis inimici sui. Durand. Rational. Lib. 1. c. 4.
, whose Superstition often makes one smile, is of Opinion that Devils are much
afraid of Bells, and fly away at the Sound of them That Ritualist would have
thought it a Prostitution of the sacred Utensils, had he heard them rung, as
they are here with the greatest Impropriety, on winning a long Main at
Cock-fighting. -- He would perhaps have talked in another Strain, and have
represented these aerial Enemies as lending their Assistance to ring them There
is a curious Passage in Fuller's History of Waltham Abbey, A. D. 1542, the 34th
of Henry VIII. relative to the Wages of Bell-ringers. It is preserved from the
Churchwardens Account. "Item, paid for ringing at the Prince his coming a
Penny."
.

In the populous, commercial Town, from whence I date these observations,
Church Bells have not been confined to ecclesiastical Uses; they have also with
great Propriety been adapted to civil Purposes: -- The tolling of the great
Bell of St. Nicholas' Church here, is an ancient Signal for our Burgesses to
convene on Guild-Days, and on the Day of electing Magistrates: -- Our little
Carnival Vide Pancake-Tuesday in the Appendix.
on Pancake Tuesday commences by the same Signal: -- A Bell, usually called the
Thief and Reever, a Robber. To reeve, to spoil or rob. Speght's Glossary to
Chaucer.
Reever Bell, proclaims our two annual Fairs: -- A peculiar Kind of Alarm is
given by a Bell on Accidents of Fire: -- A Bell is rung at six every Morning
(except Sundays and Holidays) with a view it should seem of calling up the
Artisans to their daily Employment; -- and we retain also a Vestige of the old
Norman Curfew William the Conqueror, in the first Year of his Reign, commanded
that in every Town and Village, a Bell should be rung every Night at eight
o'clock, and that all people should then put out their Fire and Candle and go
to Bed. The ringing of this Bell was called in French, Curfew; i. e.
Cover-Fire. Ibid.
at eight in the evening. -- Our Bells are muffled on the 30th of January; for
which I find no precedent of Antiquity; their sound on that occasion is
peculiarly plaintive.

Distinction of Rank is preserved here in the tolling of the Soul-Bell; an high
Fee excludes the common People, and appropriates to the Death of Persons of
Consequence the tolling the great Bell of each Church on this Occasion. -- With
us too (as Durand orders above) a Bell is tolled, and sometimes Chimes are
rung, a little before the Burial, and while they are conducting the Corpse to
Church: They chime or ring too in some places while the grave is filling up.

There seems to be nothing intended by tolling the passing Bell at present, but
to inform the Neighborhood of any Person's Death, and I am much mistaken if
our Author's Mr. Bourne complains in his Preface of the invidious Behavior of
some of his Townsmen: -- It is beneath a Man, conscious of inward Worth, to
complain of that which he ought always to despise. -- Posterity seems to have
done him very ample Justice for their Insults: -- A Copy of the Antiquitates
Vulgares has of late fetched seven or eight Shillings in London. -- Many
perhaps will think the Purchasers mistook an Accident for Merit, and confounded
the Idea of Scarceness with that of intrinsic Value. -- I received this
Information from one of the Society of Antiquaries, who understands the Subject
too well himself to be mistaken in his Opinion of the Merit of those who have
written upon it. On the Weight of that Opinion alone I have been induced to
preserve every Line that our Author has left us in that Work.
very pious Exhortation will ever be able to revive the primitive Use of it.

I know not how the present Generation will relish his Reflections in this and
many subsequent Chapters: Serious Animadversions of this Sort seem by no Means
pleasing to the refined Taste of our Age. We plainly discover an Intention of
uniting Entertainment with Utility in his little Sermons; which, it must be
confessed, are not always delivered in the most agreeable Manner. -- He does
not always stick by his Text: -- His Inferences are often far fetched: -- His
good Meaning, however, must atone for some little Deficiencies of Style, and
Penury of Composition. -- Men, provided with keen Appetites for this Kind of
Entertainment, will content themselves with the homely Manner in which he has
served it up to them. -- Indeed Squeamishness in this Particular would but ill
suit the Study of the English Antique. A great deal of wholesome Meat of this
Sort has been brought on upon wooden Platters. Nice Guests will think our
famous old Cook, Mr. Hearne himself, but a very coarse and greasy Kind of Host.

In fine, I have not presumed to violate my Author's Text, lest I should seem
to play the Empiric, and lay the Foundation of my own little Structure upon the
Ruins of his.

CHAP. II. Of Watching with the Dead.
WATCHING with the Corpse was an ancient Custom of the Church, and every where
practiced. They were wont to sit by it, from the Time of its Death till its
Exportation to the Grave, either in the House it died in, or in the Church
itself. Agreeable to this, we read in St. Austin, That as they watched his
Mother Monica, Psalterium arripuit Fuodius, and cantare caepit psalmum, cui
respondebamus omnes domus: Miserecordiam and judicium cantabo tibi Domine. Aug.
Lib 9. Confess. C. 12.
Euodius took the Psalter, and began to sing a Psalm, which the whole Family
answered with that of the Psalmist David, I will sing of Mercy and Judgment,
unto thee, O LORD, will I sing. And we are told, Ad ecclesiam antelucana hora
qua defunctus est, corpus ipsius portatum est: ibique eadem fuit nocte, quam
vigilavimus in pascha. Greg. Turon. de Gloria, Confess. C. 104.
That at the Death of St. Ambrose, his Body was carried into the Church before
Day, the same Hour he died. It was the Night before Easter, and they watched
with him there.

How unlike to this ancient Custom of watching is the modern one, of locking up
the Corpse in a Room, and leaving it there alone? How unlike to this decent
Manner of watching, is that watching of the Vulgar, which is a Scene of Sport
and Drinking and Lewdness? Watching at that Time with a dear Friend, is the
last Kindness and Respect we can show him; and how unfriendly is it, to change
it into Negligence and too great Resignation? How unchristian, instead of a
becoming Sorrow and decent Gravity, to put on an unbecoming Joy and undecent
Pastime.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER II.
OUR Author, for what Reason I know not, has omitted the vulgar Name given here
to this watching with a Corpse. It is called the Lakewake; a Word plainly
derived from the Anglo-Saxon Lic or Lice, a Corpse, and Waecce, a Wake, Vigil,
or Watching. It is used in this Sense by Chaucer, in his Knight's Tale: --
Shall not be told for me,
How that Arcite is brent to Ashen cold,
Ne how that there the Liche-wake was yhold
All that Night long.
Thus also I read in the Article Walkin, in the learned By the late Mr.
Ruddiman, as is generally supposed.
Glossary to Douglas' Virgil, Properly Like-wakes (Scotch) are the Meetings of
the Friends of the Deceased, a Night, or Nights before the Burial.

I am not satisfied with either of the Quotations he has given us in Proof of
the Antiquity of the Custom: They are indeed something to the Purpose; but in
the last cited Passage, one would be inclined to think from the Words of the
Original, that the Watching was on Account of its being the Vigil of Easter Day.

The subsequent Extract from one of the ancient Councils quoted in Durant,
Porro observandum est, nedum Psalmos cani consuetum, cum funus ducitur, sed
etiam nocte, quoe praecedit funus, veteres vigilasse. nocturnasque vigilias
canendis Psalmis egisse.
p. 232, is, I think, much more apposite: -- Now it must be observed, that
Psalms are wont to be sung not only when the Corpse is conducted to Church, but
that the Ancients watched on the Night before the Burial, and spent the Vigil
in singing Psalms. So also Gregory, in the Epistle that treats of the Death of
his Sister Macrina, has these Words: Cum igitur (inquit) nocturna pervigilatio,
ut in Martyrum celebritate canendis Psalmis perfecta esset and Crepusculum
advenisset, etc. Durant, p. 232.
"Now when the nightly Watching, as is usual" etc.

I could give numerous Passages from the Ancients, were there any Doubt of the
Antiquity of a Custom, which probably owes its Origin to the tenderest
Affections of human Nature, and has perhaps on that Account been used from the
Infancy of Time.

I find in Durant a pretty exact Account of some of the Ceremonies used at
present in what we call laying out or streeking To streek, to expand, or
stretch out, from the Anglo-Saxon strecan, extendere. See Benson's Anglo-Saxon
Vocabulary in verbo. -- A Streeking-Board is that on which they stretch out and
compose the Limbs of the dead Body.
in the North Quinetiam Sanctorum Corpora, manibus erectis supinisque excipere
-- occludere oculos -- ora obturare -- decenter ornare -- lavare accurate and
linteo funebri involvere, etc.

Durant. de Ritibus, p. 224. Mr. Pennant, in his Tour in Scotland, tells us,
that on the Death of a Highlander, the Corpse being stretched on a Board, and
covered with a coarse Linen Wrapper, the Friends lay on the Breast of the
Deceased a wooden Platter, containing a small Quantity of Salt and Earth,
separate and unmixed; the Earth an Emblem of the corruptible Body; the Salt an
Emblem of the immortal Spirit. -- All Fire is extinguished where a Corpse is
kept; and it is reckoned so ominous for a Dog or a Cat to pass over it, that
the poor Animal is killed without Mercy.


: -- Mention is made of the closing the Eyes and Lips -- the decent washing --
dressing -- and wrapping in a Linen Shroud The Face Cloth too is of great
Antiquity. -- Mr Strutt tells us, that after the closing the Eyes, etc. a Linen
Cloth was put over the Face of the Deceased. -- Thus we are told, that Henry
the Fourth, in his last Illness seeming to be dead, his Chamberlain covered his
Face with a Linen Cloth. English Era, p. 105.
: -- Of which Shroud Prudentius, the Christian Poet, has these Words: Candore
nitentia claro
Praetendere lintea mos est.
-- Hymn. ad Exequias Defunct.
The Interests of our Woollen Manufactories have interfered with this ancient
Rite in England.

It is customary at this Day in Northumberland, to set a Pewter Plate,
containing a little Salt Salem abhorrere constat Diabolum, et ratione optima
nititur, quia Sal aeternitatis est et immortalitatis signum, neque putredine
neque corruptione infestatur unquam, sed ipse ab his omnia vendicat.

Deprav. Rel. etc. p. 154. Considered in reference to this symbolical
Explication, how beautiful is that Expression. "Ye are the Salt of the Earth!"


, upon the Corpse; as also a Candle in some Places. -- The learned Moresin tells
us, That Salt is the Emblem of Eternity and Immortality: It is not liable to
Putrefaction itself, and it preserves Things that are seasoned with it from
Decay. -- He gives us also his Conjecture on the Use of a Candle Lucerna, seu
Candela mortuis cadaveribus semper apponitur in domibus et templis, quamdiu
supra terram sunt -- an hinc ducto more, oculo, vel Lucerna incensa veteres
Aegyptii vitam significabant, unde veteres soliti sunt lucernas ardentes
sepulchris imponere, hac saltem ratione significantes se mortuorum quamdiu
possent vitas producturos. Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 89.

Thus Mr. Pope, conversant in papal Antiquities: "Ah hopeless lasting Flames!
like those that burn
"To light the Dead, and warm the unfruitful Urn."
Eloise to Abelard.

Jubet Papa Cadaveris Expiationes fieri, ut quod valde immundum est, aspergatur
aqua benedicta, thurificetur, exorcisetur sacris orationibus, illustretur
sacris luminibus, quousque supra Terram fuerit, etc.

Moresin Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 26.
on this Occasion: It was an Egyptian Hieroglyphic for Life, meant to express
the ardent Desire of having had the Life of the Deceased prolonged.

Our Funeral Entertainments are of old Date. -- Cecrops Convivia funebria
Cecrops primus instituit prudenter, ut amici amicitiam fortasse remissam
renovarent, and pro uno defuncto acquirerent his mediis plures amicos, etc. --
In Anglia ita strenue hanc curam obeunt, ut viliori pretio constet elocatio
Filiae, quam Uxoris moriuae inhumatio Ibid. p. 44.
is said to have instituted them, for the Purposes of renewing decayed
Friendship amongst old Friends, etc. -- Moresin tells us, that in England they
were so profuse on this Occasion, that it cost less to portion off a Daughter,
than to bury a dead Wife. These Burial Feasts are still retained in the North.

We have the very Coffin of the present Age described in Durant Corpus lotum et
sindone obvolutum, ac loculo conditum, veteres in Caenaculis, seu Tricliniis
exponebant. p. 225.

Loculus is a Box or Chest. -- Thus I find Coffins called Kists; i. e. Chests,
in our old Registers.


.

It appears that among the primitive Christians the Corpse was sometimes kept
four Days It was customary in the Christian Burials of the Anglo-Saxons, to
leave the Head and Shoulders of the Corpse uncovered till the Time of Burial,
that Relations, etc. might take a last View of their deceased Friend. To this
day we yet retain (in our Way) this old Custom, leaving the Coffin of the
Deceased unscrewed till the Time of Burial. Strutt, Vol. I. p. 66. Manners, etc.
. Pelagia Postulabat a Filio, ne came, ante diem quartum sepeliret.
, in Gregory of Turon, requests of her Son, that her Corpse may not be interred
till after four Days.

The Payment of Mortuaries is of great Antiquity: It was anciently done by
leading or driving a Horse or Cow, etc. before the Corpse of the Deceased at his
Funeral. It was considered as a Gift left by a Man at his Death, by Way of
Recompense for all Failures in the Payment of Tithes and Oblations, and called
a Corse-present. It is mentioned in the national Council of Engsham, about the
Year 1006. Some Antiquaries have been led into a Mistake by this leading a
Horse before the Corpse, and have erroneously represented it as peculiar to
Military Characters Collier's Ecclesiast. Hist. Vol. I. p. 487.
.

The Abuse of this Vigil, or Lake-wake, is of pretty old standing. -- I find
the following Account of a Canon, made at the provincial Synod held in London
in the Time of Edward III. in Collier's Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I. p. 546,
The 10th Canon endeavors to prevent the Disorders committed at People's
watching a Corpse before Burial. Here the Synod takes Notice, that the Design of
People's meeting together upon such Occasions, was to join their Prayers for
the Benefit of the dead Person; that this ancient and serviceable Usage was
overgrown with Superstition, and turned into a Convenience for Theft and
Debauchery: Therefore for a Remedy against this Disorder, it is decreed, that
upon the Death of any Person, none should be allowed to watch before the Corpse
in a private House, excepting near Relations and Friends of the Deceased, and
such as offered to repeat a set Number of Psalms for the Benefit of his Soul.
The Penalty annexed is Excommunication. -- This is also mentioned in Becon's
Fol. 253.
Relics of Rome, and comprised in the Catalogue of those Crimes that were
anciently cursed with Bell, Book, and Candle.

Mr. Bourne complains of the Sport, Drinking, and Lewdness used at these
Lake-wakes Mr. Pennant, in describing Highland Ceremonies, calls this Meeting
the Late-wake; I suspect he has put a t for a k. Thus, in describing Coken, a
romantic Seat near Chester-le-street, he spells it erroneously Coker. His Words
are, The Late-wake is a Ceremony used at Funerals: The Evening after the Death
of any Person, the Relations or Friends of the Deceased meet at the House,
attended by Bag-pipe or Fiddle; the nearest of Kin, be it Wife, Son, or
Daughter, opens a melancholy Ball, dancing and greeting, i. e. crying violently
at the same Time; and this continues till Daylight, but with such Gambols and
Frolicks among the younger Part of the Company, that the Loss which occasioned
them is often more than supplied by the Consequences of that Night. -- If the
Corpse remains unburied for two Nights, the same Rites are renewed. Thus,
Scythian-like, they rejoice at the Deliverance of their Friends out of this
Life of Misery. -- He tells us in the same Place. that the Coranich, or singing
at Funerals, is still in Use in some Places. The Songs are generally in Praise
of the Deceased; or a Recital of the valiant Deeds of him or Ancestors.

Perhaps Mr. Pennant, in spelling Late-wake, wished to have the Name derived
from watching late: -- None can suppose this, but those who are totally
ignorant of our ancient Language, which is preserved in all its pristine Purity
in the vulgar Dialect of the North.


in his Time. -- They still continue to resemble too much the ancient
Bacchanalian Orgies. -- An Instance of Depravity that highly disgraces human
Nature! It would be treating the serious Subject with two much levity, to say,
that if the inconsiderate Wretches, who abuse such solemn Meetings, think at
all, they think with Epicurean licentiousness, that since Life is so uncertain,
no Opportunity should be neglected of transmitting it, and that the Loss, by
the Death of one Relation, should be made up as soon as possible by the Birth
of another

Our Author uses a remarkable Metaphor in this Passage; he talks, or rather
babbles, concerning "putting on undecent Pastime." -- If one were disposed to
banter, it might be observed, that a Wardrobe of "undecent Pastime" must
consist of very light Habits! It may be questioned also, whether in any
Affliction we can discover too great Resignation?

CHAP. III. Of following the Corpse to the Grave, what it is an Emblem of: Of
carrying Greens in our Hand, what it signifies, what Use it may be of: Of
Psalmody, its Antiquity, the Advantage and Use of it.
IT has been observed among all Nations, both in the Heathen and the Christian
World, as a becoming and profitable Ceremony, to follow the Corpse to the Grave.
The Heathens observed it, Praecedenti pompa funebri, vivi sequuntur, tanquam
handmulto post morituri. Al. ab. Alex. Lib. 3. p. 67. Et Pol. Vir. Lib. 6. C.
10. p. 405.
because it presented to them, what would shortly follow, how they themselves
should be so carried out, and laid down in the Grave. The going of the Corpse
before, showed that their Friend was gone before them to the State of Death;
and their following after, was as much as to say, that they must also in a
short Time follow him thither. For this Reason the Christian also observes the
Custom, and may, if he pleases, as he follows the Body to the Grave, entertain
himself with a pious Meditation upon it, in such like Thoughts as these of the
Psalmist, Psalm. xc.
Thou art GOD from Everlasting, and World without End; Thou turnest Man to
Destruction; again, Thou say, Come again ye Children of Men. For a thousand
Years in thy Sight are but as Yesterday, seeing that is past as a Watch in the
Night. As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a Sleep, and fade away
suddenly like the Grass. In the Morning it is green and grows up, but in the
Evening it is cut down, dried up and withered. Do thou therefore, O LORD, Psalm.
xxxix.
let me know my End, and the Number of my Days, that I may be certified how
long I have to live. Behold thou have made my Days, as it were a Span long, and
mine Age is nothing in respect of Thee; and verily every Man living is
altogether Vanity. And now, LORD, what is my Hope? Truly my Hope is even in
Thee. Deliver me from all mine Offenses, and O spare me a little that I may
recover my Strength, before I go hence and be no more seen. Such Thoughts as
these of our Friend's, and of our own Mortality, would excite us to prepare for
our own Change.

And as this Form of Procession is an Emblem of our dying shortly after our
Friend, so the carrying of Ivy, or Laurel, or Rosemary, or some of those
Ever-Greens, is an Emblem of the Soul's Immortality. It is as much as to say,
That though the Body be dead, yet the Soul is Ever-Green and always in Life: It
is not like the Body, and those other Greens which die and revive again at
their proper Seasons, no Autumn nor Winter can make a Change in it, but it is
unalterably the same, perpetually in Life, and never dying.

The Romans, and other Heathens upon this Occasion, made Use of Cypress, which
being once cut, will never flourish nor grow any more, as an Emblem of their
dying for ever, and being no more in Life. But instead of that, the ancient
Christians used the Things before mentioned; they Haedera quoque vel laurus and
hujusmodi, quae semper servant virorem, in sarchophago corpori substernuntur,
ad significandum quod qui moriuntur in Christo, vivere nec desinunt. Nam licet
mundo moriantur secundum corpus, tamen secundum animam vivunt and reviviscunt
Deo. Durand. Rit. Lib. 7. C. 35. de Offic. Mort.
laid them under the Corpse in the Grave, to signify, that they who die in
CHRIST, do not cease to live. For though, as to the Body they die to the World,
yet, as to their Souls, they live to GOD.

And as the carrying of these Ever-Greens is an Emblem of the Soul's
Immortality, so it is also of the Resurrection of the Body: For as these Herbs
are not entirely plucked up, but only cut down, and will, at the returning
Season, revive and spring up again; so the Body, like them, is but cut down for
a while, and will rise and shoot up again at the Resurrection. For, as the
Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. lxiii. 14.
Our Bones shall flourish like an Herb.

It was customary Greg. C. 26.
among the ancient Jews, as they returned from the Grave, to pluck up the Grass
two or three Times, and then throw it behind them, saying these Words of the
Psalmist, They shall flourish out of the City like Grass upon the Earth: Which
they did, to show, that the Body, though dead, should spring up again as the
Grass. Thus by these two ancient Ceremonies, we have placed before our Eyes,
our Mortality and Immortality; the one speaks the Death of the Body, the other
the Life of the Soul, nay, and the Life of the Body too; for like that Herb we
carry, it is not quite plucked up, but shall one Day be alive again. When it
has laid in the Earth the Winter Season, the Continuance of this World, and
the Warmth and Influence of the Spring is come, the joyful Spring of the
Resurrection, it shall be enlivened, and shoot up, and eternally flourish. Cor.
i. 15.
For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on
Immortality. O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave, where is thy Victory! Thanks
be to GOD, who gives us the Victory through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

There is another Custom used in some Places, at the Procession of Funerals,
which pays a due Honor to the Dead, and gives Comfort and Consolation to the
Living; and that is, the carrying out the Dead with Psalmody. This was an
ancient Custom of the Church; for in some of the earliest Ages, they carried
out their Dead to the Grave with singing of Psalms and Hymns. Thus Socrates
tells us, That when the Body of Babylas the Martyr was removed by the Order of
Julian the Apostate, the Christians Hoi kata, etc. Soc. Lib 3. C. 17. --
with their Women and Children, rejoiced and sung Psalms all the Way, as they
bore the Corpse from Dauphne to Antioch: Thus was Epitaphium Pauli. Hicrom. Ep.
27 -- Ibid. in Vit. Paul.
Paula buried at Bethlehem; thus did St. Anthony bury Paul the Hermit; and
thus were the Generality of Men buried after the three first Centuries, when
Persecution ceased. In Imitation of this, it is still customary in several
Parts of this Nation, to carry out the Dead with singing of Psalms and Hymns of
Triumph; to show that they have ended their spiritual Warfare, that they have
finished their Course with Joy, and are become Conquerors; which surely is a
Matter of no little Consolation for the loosing of our Friend. And how becoming
is it to pay such Honor to the Body! How is it imitating the blessed Angels,
who rejoiced at Meeting of the Soul, and carrying it to Heaven. For as they
rejoice at her Conversion on Earth, so most certainly they rejoice at her going
to Heaven. And as they rejoice at the carrying of the Soul thither, so we, in
Imitation of them, at the carrying out the Body to the Grave. They rejoice that
the Soul has got out of a World of Sin, we that the Body out of a World of
Trouble; they that the Soul can sin no more, we that the Body can no more
suffer; they that the Soul enjoys Glory and Happiness, we that the Body rests
from its Labors.

When therefore we attend the Corpse of a Neighbor or Relation, and this decent
Ceremony is performed, let it also have a Share of our Thoughts, and excite in
us Joy and Comfort, and Thanksgiving and Praise. And when these Customs are so
observed, they will be of great Advantage to us, making us still fitter for the
heavenly Life. And surely a Thing of this Good and Profit, is much to be
preferred to what has in it nothing but Undecency and Irreverence; such is our
laughing and jesting, and telling of News, when we accompany a Neighbor to the
Grave. There is indeed a Mean to be observed, as in all other Things, so in
this; we must neither be too sad, nor too merry; we must not be so merry as to
throw off all the Signs of Affection and Love, all the Tokens of Esteem and
Humanity; nor must we 1 Thessalonians. i. 4, 13.
sorrow even as others, which have no Hope. But we must Jam. v. 15.
be so merry as to be able to sing Psalms, and so afflicted as to be excited to
pray.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER III.
THE ancient Christians testified their Abhorrence of Heathen Rites: They
rejected therefore the Pagan Custom of burning the Dead, depositing the
inanimate Body entire in the Ground. -- The carrying forth to the Church, and
from thence to the Grave, was performed by near Relations, or Persons of such
Dignity as the Circumstances of the Deceased required. -- Singing of Psalms, in
Exultation for the Conquest of the deceased Friend over Hell, Sin, and Death,
was the great Ceremony used in all Funeral Processions among the ancient
Christians. -- Paulam translatam fuisse Episcoporum manibus, cervicem feretro
subjicientibus. Durant, p. 227.
St. Jerome, in the Epitaph of Paula, informs us, that Bishops were what in
modern Language we call Under-bearers at her Funeral. -- The learned Durant
Duranti de Ritibus, p. 227.
gives us many Quotations from the ancient Christian Writers, to prove that
those of the highest Orders of Clergy thought it not a Reproach to their
Dignity to carry the Bier. How different an Idea of this Office prevails in our
Times! -- Something instead of the Pall In Nobilibus, aureum velamentum super
feretrum, quo Corpus obtegeretur, apponi consuetum. Ibid. p. 225.
used at present to cover the Coffin, appears by the same Writer to have been
of great Antiquity. -- He speaks also of black Induebantur atris vestibus,
praesertim apud Gallos -- Hunc tamen lugubrem et atrum amictum videtur
improbare Cyprian. Sermon. de Mortalitate. Ibid.
used in Mourning. -- St Cyprian seemed to inveigh against it, as the
Indication of Sorrow upon an Event which to the Christian was Matter of Joy. --
Mr. Bourne takes no Notice of Torches Dum autem Funus efferebatur, faces
praeferebantur -- Constantii Corpus delatum fuisse nocturins Cantionibus et
cereorum ignibus.

Ibid. p. 228. Gallos funus honorisice curasse et multitudinem Luminum,
splendorem sibi etiam per diem vendicantem, repercusso solis radio, refulsisse.

Ibid. Mr. Strutt tells us the burning of Torches was very honorable. -- To
have a great many was a special Mark of Esteem in the Person, who made the
Funeral, to the Deceased.

Vol. II. p. 108, of his Antiquities. Thus, in the Epitaph of Bude:
Que n'a-t-on plus en Torches dependu,
Suivant la mode accoutumee en Saint?
A fin qu'il soit par l'obscur entendu,
Que des Francois la lumiere, est eteinte.
St. Genevieve, Paris.
, which are still in Use on particular Occasions in Funeral Processions. -- It
appears by Durant, that this Custom has been of a long standing. -- We farther
learn from this Ritualist, that it was customary to invite the Poor Praeterea
convocabantur et invitabantur necdum Sacerdotes et Religiosi, sed et Egeni
Pauperes. Had our famous Poet, Mr. Pope, an eye to this in ordering, by Will,
poor Men to support his Pall?
to Funerals.

I find a beautiful Thought on this Subject Mr. Strutt in his English Era
tells us, that Sir Robert Knolles (in the 8th Year of Henry IV.) died at his
Manor in Norfolk, and his dead Body was brought in a Litter to London with
great Pomp and much Torch Light, and it was buried in the White Friars Church
-- where was done for him a solemn Obsequie, with a great Feast and lyberall
Dole to the Poor. This Custom of giving a Funeral Feast to the Chief Mourners,
was universally practiced all over the Kingdom, as well as giving Alms to the
Poor, in Proportion to the Quality and Finances of the Deceased. Vol. II. p.
109.
, in St. Ambrose's Funeral Oration on Satyrus, cited by Durant, which I flatter
myself will be thought to have deserved a translation: -- The Poor also shed
their Tears -- precious and fruitful Tears! that washed away the Sins of the
Deceased. -- They let fall Floods of redeeming Tears. It should seem to have
been from such figurative Expressions as these in the first Christian Writers,
literally understood, that the Romanists have derived their superstitious
Doctrine of praying for the Dead.


Funeral Sermons also are of great Antiquity Ceterum priusquam Corpus humo
injecta contegatur, defunctus oratione funebri laudabatur. Durant, p. 236.
.

Doles were used at Funerals, as we learn from St. Chrysostom (...). Homilia
xxxii. in Matthei cap. non.
, to procure Rest to the Soul of the Deceased, and that he might find his Judge
propitious.

Dr. Brown, in his Urne Burial, observes, that the Custom of carrying the
Corpse as it were out of the World with its Feet forward, is not inconsonant to
Reason, as contrary to the native Posture of Man, and his Production first into
it.

It may be added to Mr. Bourne's Observations on Ever-greens used at Funerals
Dr. Trusler in his Chronology tells us, that in the Year 1482, Yew Trees were
encouraged in Churchyards (as being fenced from Cattle) for the making of
Bows. Hence their Frequency in Churchyards. -- This seems to me the
Observation of one totally ignorant of ecclesiastical Antiquities. Are not all
Plantation Grounds fenced from Cattle? And whence is it that there is usually
but one Yew Tree in each Churchyard? How much more probable the Conjecture of
the learned Author of the Vulgar Errors!
, that the planting of Yew Trees in Churchyards seems to derive its Origin
from ancient Funeral Rites; in which, (the Doctor conjectures) from its
perpetual Verdure, it was used as an Emblem of the Resurrection. -- He observes
farther, that the christian Custom of decking the Coffin with Bay, is a most
elegant Emblem. It is said that this Tree, when seemingly dead, will revive
from the Root, and its dry Leaves resume their wonted Verdure.

The Custom of laying flat Cicero de legibus. Lapidea Mensa terra operitur
humato Corpore hominis qui aliquo sit numero, quae contineat laudem et nomen
mortui incisum. Mos ritinetur. Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 86.
Stones in our Churches and Churchyards, over the Graves of better Sort of
Persons, on which are inscribed Epitaphs containing the Name, Age, Character,
etc. has been transmitted from very ancient Times, as appears from Cicero and
others. I cannot better close these additional Remarks on the obsolete Custom
of carrying Ever-greens at Funerals, than with a Description of it in the Words
of the elegant Mr. Gay, in his Pastoral Dirge. -- He paints the rustic, vulgar
Ceremonies with great Truth, though his Style is intended for that of affected
Simplicity.

To show their Love, the Neighbors far and near,
Followed with wistful Look the Damsel's Bier:
Sprigg'd Rosemary the Lads and Lasses bore,
While dismally the Parson walked before. I have almost thought it unnecessary
to give any other Proofs than Mr. Bourne has left us, of the Antiquity of
singing Psalms before the Corpse. The learned Reader may not think the
subsequent quotation unworthy his Perusal. Cantilena feralis per Antiphonas in
pompa funebri et Fano debacchata hinc est. Inter Graecos demortui cadavere
deposito in inferiori domus aula ad portam, et peractis caeteris ceremoniis,
Cantores funerales accedunt et (...) canunt, quibus per intervalla respondebant
domesticae servae, cum Assistentium Corona, neque solum domi, sed usque ad
sepulchrum praecedebant feretrum ita canentes.

Guichard. Lib. II. cap. 2. Funer. apud. Moresini, etc. p. 32.

The Reader, conversant in classical Learning, will call to mind here the
beautiful Thought in the Idyllium on Bion, by Moschus (...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
Alas! the meanest Flowers which Gardens yield,
The vilest Weeds that flourish in the Field,
Which dead in wintry Sepulchers appear,
Revive in Spring, and bloom another Year:
But We, the Great, the Brave, the Learned, the Wise,
Soon as the Hand of Death has closed our Eyes,
In Tombs forgotten lie, no Suns restore,
We sleep, for ever sleep, to wake no more. FAWKES.

-- though the fine Spirit in it will perhaps evaporate, when we apply it to
the Christian Doctrine of the Resurrection: The Antithesis will be destroyed.

CHAP. IV. Of Garlands in Country Churches: Of strawing Flowers on the Grave;
the Antiquity of these Customs, the Innocence of them.
IN some Country Churches it is customary, to hang a Garland of Flowers over the
Seats of deceased Virgins, as a Token of Esteem and Love, and an Emblem of
their Reward in the heavenly Church.

This Custom perhaps may be looked upon, as sprung from that ancient Custom of
the Heathens, of crowning their Corpse, with Garlands in Token of Victory. But
Mr. Bingham tells us, That we find not this Custom used by the Ancients in
their Funeral Rites. For as he observes, the Heathen in Minutius makes it one
Topic of Accusation against them, Min. P. 35. Coronas etiam sepulchris
denegatis. Bing. Vol. 10. P. 68.
That they did not crown their Sepulchers.

But if they did not crown them after the Manner of the Heathens, they had a
Custom of using Crowns of Flowers, if we may believe Cassalion, who tells us,
Euit quoque mos ad capita virginum apponendi slorum coronas, etc. Cass. de Vet.
Sacr. Christ. P. 334.
It was a Custom of the ancient Christians to place Crowns of Flowers, at the
Heads of deceased Virgins; for which he quotes Damascen, Gregory Nyssen, St.
Jerome and St. Austin. And this has probably been the Original of this Custom
among the Vulgar.

That other Custom of strawing Flowers upon the Graves of their departed
Friends, is also derived from a Custom of the ancient Church. For it was usual
in those Times for the common Sort of People, to straw the Graves of their
Friends with various Flowers. Of this there are two notable Instances taken
Notice of by Cassalion, and several other Ritualists. The one is that of St.
Ambrose, in his Funeral Oration on the Death of Valentinian, Nec ego floribus
tumulum ejus asperagam, sed spiritum ejus Christi odore perfundam; spargant
alii plenis lilia calathis: Nobis lilium est Christus: Hoc reliquias ejus
sacrabo. Ambros Orat. Funebri. ae obitu Valentin.
I will not sprinkle his Grave with Flowers, but pour on his Spirit the Odor
of CHRIST. Let others scatter Baskets of Flowers: CHRIST is our Lilly, and with
this will I consecrate his Relics.

The other is that of St. Jerome, in his Epistle to Pammachius upon the Death of
his Wife. Caeteri mariti super tumulos conjugum spargunt violas, rosas, lilia,
floresque purpureos, and dolorem pectoris his osficiis consolantur; Pammachius
noster sanctum favillam ossaque veneranda eleemosynae balsamis rigat. Hieron.
Epist. ad Pammachtum de obitu Uxoris.
Whilst other Husbands strawed Violets, and Roses, and Lillies, and purple
Flowers, upon the Graves of their Wives, and comforted themselves with such
like Offices, Pammachius bedewed her Ashes and venerable Bones with the Balsam
of Alms.

Now these Instances, though they justly commend these other Actions, and wisely
prefer them to the Ceremonies of adorning Graves with Flowers, yet they no Way
decry these ancient Customs. These lower Marks of Esteem and Honor, which the
Vulgar paid to the Remains of their Friends, were in themselves harmless and
innocent, and had no Censure; and as they were so, so should the present
Customs be without any, being full as harmless and innocent as the other.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER IV.
I Have seen many of the Garlands our Author here speaks of, in Village
Churches in the South of England: The Custom seems to be entirely laid aside in
the North Not entirely: -- I saw lately, in the Churches of Wolsingham and
Stanhope, in the County of Durham Specimens of these Garlands. The form of a
Woman's Glove, cut in white Paper, hangs in each of them.
. It is undoubtedly of very high Antiquity. -- In the earlier Ages of the
Church, Virginity (out of Deference, it should seem, to the Virgin Mother) was
honored with almost divine Adoration. There is little Doubt but that Nunneries
and this Garlana claim one common Origin.

Durant Condito et curato funere solebant Nonnulli antiquitus tumulum floribus
adspergere. Durant. p. 237.
tells us, the ancient Christians, after the Funeral, used to scatter Flowers
on the Tomb. -- There is a great Deal of Learning in Moresin Sepulchra
funeralibus expletis quandoque storibus, odoramentisque fuisse sparsa legimus.
Idemque mos cum in plerisque Regionibus Italiae, tum maxim in subjectis
Appennino Collibus, Romandiolae alicubi aetate nostra servatur. Adhibita sunt
post funeralia in Templis Ornamenta, Clypei, Coronae, et hujusmodi Donaria,
quod nostra quoque Aetas in nobilibus et honoratis viris servat.

Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 156. Hence our Custom of hanging up over the
Tombs of Knights, etc. Banners, Spurs, and other Insignia of their Order.


above cited, on this Subject. -- It appears from Pliny's Natural History, from
Cicero in his Oration for Lucius Plancius, and from Virgil's sixth Aeneid, that
this was a Funeral Rite among the Heathens Flores et serta, educto cadavere
certatim injiciebant Athenienses. Guichard, lib. 2. cap. 3. Funeral. --
Retinent Papani morem, Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 62.
. They used also to scatter them on the unburied Corpse. -- Gay describes the
strewing on the Grave, Upon her Grave the Rosemary they threw,
The Daisy, Butter-Flow'r, and Endive blue Thus also our Shakespeare: Our bridal
Flowers serve for a buried Coarse. Romans and Juliet.


.


Thus also the Garland: To her sweet Memory flowery Garlands strung,
On her now empty Seat aloft were hung.


The Custom too, still used in the South of England, of fencing the Grave with
Osiers, etc. is added: The Poet glances in the two last Lines at clerical
Economy: With Wicker Rods we fenced her Tomb around,
To ward from Man and Beast the hallowed Ground;
Lest her new Grave the Parson's Cattle raze,
For both his Horse and Cow the Churchyard graze. Mr. Strutt cites the Bishop
of London in his Additions to Camden, telling us, that of old it was usual to
adorn the Graves of the Deceased with Roses and other Flowers (but more
especially those of Lovers, round whose Tombs they often planted Rose Trees):
Some traces (he observes) of this ancient Custom are yet remaining in the
Churchyard of Oakley, in Surry, which is full of Rose Trees, planted round the
Graves. Anglo Saxon Era, Vol. I. p. 69.

Mr. Pennant, in his Tour in Scotland, remarks a singular Custom in many Parts
of North Britain, of painting on the Doors and Window-shutters, white
Tadpole-like Figures, on a black Ground; designed to express the Tears of the
Country for the Loss of any Person of Distinction.

Nothing seems to be wanting to render this Mode of expressing Sorrow
completely ridiculous, but the subjoining of a N. B. "These are Tears."



Gay's Dirge.

CHAP. V. Of Bowing toward the Altar at the first coming into the Church; a
Custom generally observed by ignorant People; its Meaning and Antiquity.
WE may observe the Generality of old People among the Commonalty, as they
enter into the Church, to turn their Faces toward the Altar, and bow or kneel
that Way. This, no Doubt, is the Remains of that ancient Custom of the Church,
of worshipping toward the East: For in the ancient Church they worshipped that
Way upon several Accounts. First, That by so worshipping, they might lift up
their Minds to GOD, who is called the Light and the Creator of Light. And
therefore St. Austin says, Cum ad orationem stamus, ad orientem covertimur,
unde caelum surgit, etc. Ut admoneatur animus ad naturam excellentiorem se
convertere, id est, ad Dominum. Aug. de Sermon. Domini. in Mont. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
When we pray standing, we turn our Faces to the East, from whence the Day
springs, that we might be reminded of turning to a more excellent Nature,
namely, The LORD. Secondly, That for as much as Man was driven out of Paradise,
which is toward the East, he ought to look that Way, which is an Emblem of his
Desire to return thither. St. Damascen therefore tells us, That Ibid.
because the Scripture says, That GOD planted Paradise in Eden toward the
East, where he placed the Man which he had formed, whom he punished with
Banishment upon his Transgression, and made him dwell over against Paradise, in
the western Part; we therefore pray, (says he) being in Quest of our ancient
Country; and as it were panting after it, do worship GOD that Way. Thirdly, It
was used when any were baptized. They first turned their Faces to the West, and
so renounced the Devil; and then to the East, and made their Covenant with
CHRIST. Lastly, They prayed that Way, believing that our SAVIOR would come to
Judgment from that Quarter of the Heavens. For as the Lightning comes out of
the East, and shines unto the West, so shall the Coming of the Son of Man be;
and he is to come in like Manner as he ascended. And that he ascended up
Eastward from Mount Olivet, St. Ibid.
Damascen assures us. For (says he) when he ascended into Heaven, he was taken
up Eastward, and his Disciples worshipped him that Way. And therefore chiefly
it was, that in the ancient Church they prayed with their Faces to the East;
and that many of our own Church at this Day, turn their St. Damasc. Lib. 4. C.
13. Orthod. Fid.
Faces to that Quarter of the World, at the Repetition of the Creed.

What may more confirm this, and speak it to have been the universal Opinion of
the Church, is the ancient Custom of burying the Corpse, with the Feet to the
East, and the Head to the West; which Custom is continued to this Day in the
whole Church of England: This was observed for the same Reason, That, at the
Coming of CHRIST to Judgment from the oriental Part of Heaven, our Bodies might
be found in a praying Posture, with their Faces toward the East.

Our learned Countryman Gregory tells us, That the holy Men of Jerusalem hold a
Tradition generally received from their Ancients, that our SAVIOR himself was
buried with his Face and Feet toward the East. It is affirmed by the
Geographers of the holy Land. And Bid says, Introcuntes ab orient in domum
illam rotundam quae in petra excisa est, viderunt angelum sedentem ad
meridianam partem loci illius, ubi positum fuerat corpus Jesu; hoc enim erat in
dextris, quod nimirum, corpus, quod supinum jacens caput habebat ad occasum,
dexteram necesse est habere ad austrum. Bed. in Dic. Sanct. Paschae, Tom. 7.
That as the Holy Women entered at the Eastern Part into the Round-house, which
is hewn out in the Rock, they saw the Angel sitting at the South Part of the
Place, where the Body of JESUS had lain, that is, at his Right Hand; for
undoubtedly his Body having his Face upwards and its Head to the West, must
have its Right Hand to the South. Cassalion says, Adeo tenaces fuere prisci
illi fideles in hoc ritu respiciendi in orientem, ut non solum ipsi viventes,
hoc in eorum precibus exact servarent, verum etiam mortui eorum corpora supina
in sepulchris facie orientem respicerent. Cass. de Vet. Rit. Christ. P. 30.
The Faithful of old were so observing of this Ceremony of looking toward the
East, that they not only strictly observed it in their Prayers when living; but
even when they were dead, their Bodies were placed with their Faces upwards in
the Sepulcher, looking toward the East.

The learned Dr. Comber, in his Discourse of the solemn Interment, has these
Words upon this subject, We may note the Positure and Position of the Corpse,
which among the Christians has always been to turn the Feet to the East, with
the Head to the West; that so they may be ready to meet the LORD, whom the
Ancients did believe should appear in the oriental Part of Heaven. Durand. Rat.
Lib. 7. Cap. 33. Or as our ingenious Mr Gregory believes, That they might be in
the Posture of Prayer, with their Faces to the East, as soon as they were
raised. There are some ancient Authors tell us, That the old Inhabitants of
Attica buried thus before the Days of Solon, who, as they report, convinced the
Athenians, that the Island of Salamis did of Right belong to them, by showing
them dead Bodies looking that Way, and Sepulchers turned toward the East, as
they used to bury. Diog. Laert. Vit. Solon, etc. And the Scholiast upon
Thucidides says, It was the Manner of all the Greeks to bury their Dead thus:
Though a learned modern Writer supposes these Authors mistaken, and cites
Plutarch and Elian to prove, that the Athenians turned their Dead toward the
West. However it is certain, that all Nations had one certain Way of placing
the Corpse, from which they would not vary; and we Christians have so great
Antiquity for our Custom, that we ought not out of Singularity to alter it.

No Doubt but this learned Man had great Reason for this Conclusion, as well
knowing that this ancient Rite was struck at by the whole Herd of Sectaries, as
a filly Fancy and an idle Dream: Who never would observe it, were it not that
they are sometimes obliged; but would with those who are not obliged, act the
very Reverse, and bury North and South. I wish there were no powerfuller
Enemies to it, than them now a Days; but, as a Man's Enemies are too often
those of his own Household; so, it is to be lamented, that some who pretend to be
of our own Church, are upon all Occasions secret Advocates against this
Ceremony. When therefore there is such Opposition without, and such Treachery
within, it is high Time to be on the Guard against our Enemies; least a Ceremony
so venerable for its Antiquity, and so useful in its Observation, be laid
aside: Was it but for this one Thing, that it speaks the Hope of the whole
Christian Church, since the earliest Times of Christianity, about the
Resurrection of the same Body. It is too true, that there are some at this Time
of the Day, as well as were in the Days of the Apostle, who think it a Thing
incredible that GOD should raise the Dead; some really disbelieving the
Resurrection of any Body, and others that of the same Body. But as long as this
Ceremony is in Being, it will always be a ready Proof, that the whole Christian
Church did not only believe the Resurrection of the Body, but of that very Body
which was laid down in the Grave. For they observed it, that they might be
ready with their Faces to meet their SAVIOR at his coming to Judgment, which
certainly implies that they believed that very Body should rise again.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER V.
WE may add to Mr. Bourne's Remarks, that the Custom is still retained in many
Churches, of turning to the Altar while the Congregation are repeating the
Creed. -- The Forms are both derived to us from the same Origin. We need not
hesitate to pronounce as well the Bowings Aulam regiam, id est. Ecclesiam
ingredientes ad altar inclinamus, quod quasi Regem milites adoramus; eterni
enim Regis milites sumus. Durandi Rational. p. 226.

The learned Mr. Mede tells us, that what reverential Guise, Ceremony, or
Worship they used at their Ingress into Churches, in the Ages next to the
Apostles (and some he believes they did) is wholly buried in Silence and
Oblivion. The Jews used to bow themselves toward the Mercy-Seat; -- the
Christians after them, in the Greek and Oriental Churches, have Time out of
Mind, and without any known Beginning, used to bow in like manner; -- they do
it at this Day. See Bingham's Antiquities.


as the turnings about to the East, or Altar, to be superstitious. -- They are
alike Vestiges of the ancient popish Ceremonial Law.

One who has left a severe Satire on the Retainers of those Forms and
Ceremonies that lean toward popish Superstition, tells us, Hickeringill's
Ceremony Monger. p. 15.
If I were a Papist or Anthropo-morphite, who believes that God is enthroned in
the East, like a grave old King, I profess I would bow and cringe as well as
any Limber-ham of them all, and pay my Adoration to that Point of the Compass
(the East): But if Men believe that the Holy One who inhabits Eternity, is also
omnipresent, why do not they make correspondent Ceremonies of Adoration to
every Point of the Compass?

Concession must be made by every Advocate for manly and rational Worship, that
there is nothing more in the East, than in the Belfry at the West End, or in
the Body of the Church. We wonder therefore how ever this Custom was retained
by Protestants. The Cringes and Bowings of the Roman Catholics to the Altar, is
in Adoration of the corporal I find in a curious Collection of godly Ballads in
the Scotch Language, Edinburgh, 1621, the following Passage, which has been
intended, no Doubt, as an Argument against Transubstantiation: Gif God be
transubstantiall,
In Breid with hoc est Corpus meum;
Why are ye sa unnatural,
To take him in your Teeth and sla him, etc.


The Rev. Mr. Joseph Warton, in his Dying Indian, puts into his Hero's Charge a
similar Thought: -- Tell her I never have worshipped
With those that eat their God. --
Dodsley's Collection, Vol. IV.

Thus has Superstition made the most awful Mysteries of our Faith the Subjects
of Ridicule!


Presence, their Wafer-God, who is by their Fancies, seated there and
enthroned. -- In the Homilies of our Church, this is frequently styled
Idolatry, and the Act of a Fool. -- A Regard for Impartiality obliges me to
own, that I have observed this Practice in College Chapels at Oxford. -- I hope
it is altogether worn out in every other Place in the Kingdom; and for the
Credit of that truly respectable Seminary of Learning and religious Truth, that
it will not be retained there by the rising Generation!

The learned Moresin Orientem in solemn convertitur, qui Deos salutat, aut orat
apud nos, et Apul. ait, 2. Metam. tunc in orientem obversus vel incrementa
solis augusti tacitus imprecatus, etc. Polyd. lib. 5. cap. 9. Invent. Orientem
respicit precaturus et Imagines oriens spectant, ut ingredientes preces
eoversum ferant ad ritum Persarum, qui solemn orientem venerati sunt. Plutarch.
in Numa. Deus interdicit Judaeis orient, prohibet Imagines. Exodus 20. Levit
26, etc. Cael. autem lib. 7. cap. 2. ant. lect. dicit, jam illud veteris fuit
superstitionis, quod in Asclepio Mercurius scribit, Deum adorantes, si medius
affulserit Dies in austrum converti: si vero dies sit occiduus, in occasum: Si
se tunc primum promat Sol, exortiva est spectanda. -- Qui precabantur ad
orientem conversi, erecto vultu, manibus passis, expansis et in coelum sublatis
ac protensis orabant. Virgil 8 Aeneid, Ovid, lib. 4. Fast. etc. etc. Moresini
Deprav. Rel. Orig. and Increm. p. 117.
tells us, that Altars, in papal Rome, were placed toward the East, in
Imitation of the ancient and heathen Rome. -- Thus Virgil's 11th Aeneid: Illi
ad surgentem conversi lumina solemn
Dant fruges manibus salsas.


As to the Position in the Grave, though we decline (says Dr. Brown, in his
Urne-burial) the religious Consideration, yet in coemeterial and narrower
burying Places, to avoid Confusion and cross Position, a certain Posture were
to be admitted. -- The Persians lay North and South; -- the Megarians and
Phoenicians placed their Heads to the East; -- the Athenians, some think,
toward the West, which Christians still retain; -- and Bid will have it to be
the Posture of our Savior. -- (This judicious Observer proceeds) That
Christians buried their Dead on their Backs, or in a supine Position, seems
agreeable to profound Sleep, and the common Posture of dying; contrary also to
the most natural Way of Birth; not unlike our pendulous Posture in the doubtful
State of the Womb. -- Diogenes (he adds) was singular, who preferred a prone
Situation in the Grave; and some Christians like neither, (Russians, etc.) who
decline the Figure of Rest, and make Choice of an erect Posture.

There is a Passage in the Grave-diggers' Scene in Hamlet, Make her Grave
straight, which Dr. Johnson has thus explained. Make her Grave from East to
West, in a direct Line parallel to the Church; not from North to South, athwart
the regular Line. This I think is meant. Johnson in loco.

Moresin -- In Coemeteriis pontificiis, boni, quos putant, ad austrum et
Oriens, reliqui, qui aut supplicio affecti, aut sibi vim fecissent, et id genus
ad Septentrionem sepeliantur, ut frequens olim Scotis fuit Mos. Moresini
Deprav. Rel. Orig. and Increm. p. 157.

If Rain fell during the Funeral Procession, it was vulgarly considered as a
Presage of the Happiness of the Deceased in the other World: -- Happy (says the
old Proverb) is the Bride the Sun shines on, and the Corpse the Rain rains on.


tells us, that in popish Burying Grounds, those who were reputed good
Christians lay toward the South and East, others who had suffered capital
Punishment, laid violent Hands on themselves, or the like, were buried toward
the North; a Custom that had formerly been of frequent Use in Scotland. -- One
of the Grave-diggers supposes Ophelia to have drowned herself. This Quotation
therefore seems to confirm the learned Annotator's Explication.

CHAP. VI. Of the Time of Cock-crow: Whether evil Spirits wander about in the
Time of Night; and whether they fly away at the Time of Cock-crow. Reflections
upon this, encouraging us to have Faith and Trust in God.
IT is a received Tradition among the Vulgar, That at the Time of Cock-crowing,
the Midnight Spirits forsake these lower Regions, and go to their proper
Places. They wander, say they, about the World, from the dead Hour of Night,
when all Things are buried in Sleep and Darkness, till the Time of
Cock-crowing, and then they depart. Hence it is, that in Country-Places, where
the Way of Life requires more early Labor, they always go cheerfully to Work
at that Time; whereas if they are called abroad sooner, they are apt to imagine
every Thing they see or hear, to be a wandering Ghost. Shakespeare has given us
an excellent Account of this vulgar Notion, in his Tragedy of Hamlet.

Ber. It was about to speak, when the Cock crew.

Hor. And then it started like a guilty Thing
Upon a dreadful Summons. I have heard,
The Cock that is the Trumpet to the Day,
Does with his lofty and shrill sounding Throat
Awake the God of Day: And at his Warning
Whether in Sea, or Fire, in Earth or Air,
The extravagant and erring Spirit hyes
To its Confine, and of the Truth herein,
This present Object made Probation.

Mar. It faded at the Crowing of the Cock.
Some say that ever against that Season comes,
Wherein our Savior's Birth is celebrated,
The Bird of Dawning sings all Night long.
And then, they say, No Spirit does walk abroad,
The Nights are wholesome, then no Planet strikes,
No Fairy takes, no Witch has Power to harm,
So gracious and so hallowed is that Time.

Now to show what Truth there is in this vulgar Opinion, I shall consider,
First, What Truth there is in the Roaming of Spirits in the Night. And,
Secondly, Whether they are obliged to go away at Cock-crow.

I believe none who assent to the Truth of Divine Revelation, deny that there
are good and evil Angels attending upon Men; the one to guard and protect them,
and the other to harm and work their Ruin; that the one are those Heb. i. 14.
ministering Spirits, which are sent out to minister to the Heirs of Salvation;
the other the roaring Lion, and his Instruments, Job. ii. 2.
who wander too and fro in the Earth; these Matt. xii. 43.
unclean Spirits who wander through dry Places, seeking Rest and finding none.

NOR, I believe, will it be questioned, that there have been Apparitions of
good and evil Spirits, and that many, with our SAVIOR'S Disciples, have been
affrighted and cried out, not only with supposing they had seen, but really
with seeing a Spirit. Of this the Testimony of all Ages, and Scripture it self
are a sufficient Demonstration.

What then could these have ordinarily been, but the Appearances of some of
those Angels of Light, or Darkness? For I am far from thinking that either the
Ghosts of the Damned or the Happy, either the Soul of a Dives or a Lazarus,
returns here any more. For as St. Athanasius observes, Hai en tois naois, etc.
Athan. Tom. 2. P. 34.
These Visions and Shades of the Saints, which appear in the Temples and at the
Tombs, are not the Souls of the Saints themselves, but the good Angels
appearing in their Shapes. Not that GOD could not remand the Ghost of Samuel,
and order it again to visit the Earth, as he made Moses and Elias to appear at
our SAVIOR'S Transfiguration; but that a Thing of this Nature was very
uncommon, and seldom happened.

Taking it therefore for granted, that there have been Apparitions of Angels, I
believe it will also be owned, that these Apparitions have frequently happened
in the Night. And truly, was there no direct Proof of this, yet the Notion of
their appearing in the Night, being as it were linked and chained to our Idea
of an Apparition, would almost persuade us, that the Night is the most proper
Time for such Appearances. Whether it is, that the Fables of Nurses, Lock, on
Human Underst.
as an ingenious Author imagines, have so associated the Idea of Spirit to the
Night, that the one never appears without the other; or whether there is
something in the Presence of Night, some Awfulness and Horror, which naturally
dispose the Mind of Man to these Reflections. I am indeed very inclinable to
believe, that these Legendary Stories of Nurses and old Women, are the Occasion
of much greater Fears, than People without them, would generally have of these
Things; but I cannot help thinking, that the Presence of Night, would naturally
lead a Man to some Reflection of Spirits, without any such Cause as that
learned Author mentions. There are some particular Times, which will naturally
raise some particular Thoughts: Thus on a bright sunny Day we are naturally
disposed to Mirth and Gaiety; when the Day over-casts, or the Weather is hazy,
we then turn indolent and dull, and sooth our selves in Melancholy; if it
Thunder and Lighten, we think of the Day of Judgment and sudden Death: And thus
also the Night, as it inclines us to grave and serious Thoughts, raises in us
Horror and Dismay, and makes us afraid, even when our Judgment tells us there
is no Fear; so it may of it self be looked upon as a natural Cause of such
Reflections.

But however this be, we must necessarily own, that Spirits have frequently
appeared in the Night, or we must give the Lie to the Traditions of all Ages,
to Historians profane and sacred, and the wisest and best in the Generations
of Men.

In the Heathen World there are many Instances, of which I shall only mention
this one out of Plutarch: In Vit. Mar. Brut. Trans. Duke.
One Night, before Brutus passed out of Asia, he was very late all alone in his
Tent, with a dim Light burning by him, all the Rest of the Army being hushed and
silent; and musing with himself, and very thoughtful, as he turned his Eye to
the Door, he saw a strange and terrible Appearance, of a prodigious and
frightful Body coming toward him without speaking. Brutus boldly asked him,
What art thou? Man, or God? Or upon what Business do thou come to us? The
Spirit answered, I am thy Evil Genius, thou shall see me at Philippi; to which
Brutus not at all disturbed, replied, Then I will see thee there.

In the sacred Writings we have Job Job.
terrified with Visions of the Night, when deep Sleep falls upon Men, Fear
came upon him and Trembling, which made all his Bones to shake; then a Spirit
passed by before his Face, and the Hair of his Flesh stood up. In the Night
Genesis xxxii.
Jacob wrestled with the Angel; in the Night an Angel delivered Acts xii.
Peter out of Prison, etc.

But though it be true from Scripture, that there have been nightly
Apparitions, yet these are chiefly of good Angels; whereas this Opinion
principally means, the Appearances of evil Spirits. It must be owned indeed,
that the Appearances of evil Spirits, if literally, are yet but very seldom
mentioned in the Night in Scripture; but however, that they wander and appear
at Night, is very deducible from, if not literally mentioned in it. Their's is
the Land of Darkness, and the Shadow of Death; They are reserved under Chains
of Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day; and we know that every one that
does Evil naturally hates the Light: They therefore love Darkness rather than
Light, because their Deeds are Evil. The Night therefore, in a more especial
Manner, seems to be their Hour, and the Power of Darkness.

This was the Opinion of the Jews, as may be learned from the Fear of the
Apostles, when they saw our Savior about the fourth Watch of the Night, coming
to them upon the Waters: Matt. xiv. 25.
they were affrighted and cried out, supposing they had seen a Spirit. Doctor
Whitby upon this Place, says, That the Jews had then an Opinion of hurtful
Spirits walking in the Night, is evident from the seventy, who rendered, from
the Pestilence walking in Darkness; Apo pragmatos diaporeuomenou en skotei.
From the Fear of the Devils that walk in the Night.

And that this was also the Opinion of the ancient Christians, is evident, not
only from their dividing the Night into four Watches, the Evening, Midnight,
Cock-crowing, and the Morning; which were the Military Divisions of the Night,
and which they Si quidem and in Nocte Stationes, and Vigiliae Militares in
quatuor parts divisae ternis horarum spatiis secernuntur. Isidore, Lib. 1. de
Eccle. Offici. Cap. 19.
observed to guard their Souls from the silent Incursions of evil Spirits, as
the others did those of the Enemy: but also from their many Relations of such
Appearances. Cassian in giving an Account of the Watching of the ancient Monks,
and their being assaulted with Midnight Spirits, tells us, That at the
Beginning of the Monkish Life, Tanta namque erat eorum feritas, ut vix pauci --
Tolerare habitationem solitudinis possent. -- Ita eorum atrocitas grassabatur,
and frequentes ac visibiles sentiebantur aggressus, ut non auderent omnes
pariter noctibus obdormire, sed vicissim aliis degustantibus somnum, alii
vigilias celebrantes, Psalmis and Orationibus, seu Lectionibus in haerebant.
Cassian. Coll. 7. Cap. 23.
the Rage of the Midnight Spirits was so great, that but few, and these too Men
of Age and unshaken Resolution, were able to endure the Life in the Desert. For
such was their Fierceness, that where Eight or Ten had been together in a
Monastery, they would have made frequent and visible Incursions: Insomuch, that
they never all slept at the same Time, but took it by Turns; some watching the
Rest, and exercising themselves in singing Psalms, in Praying and Reading. And
St. Athanasius in his Life of Anthony the Hermit, tells, Of many Conflicts that
good Man had in the Night with the Powers of Darkness, whilst they endeavored
to batter him from the strong Holds of his Faith. And what can our Church
chiefly mean in the Collect for Aid against Perils; but that GOD would send us
Protection from all the Spirits of Darkness, these Midnight Wanderers of the
World: And for this Reason, every good Man, when he lies down to sleep at
Night, desires the great Keeper of Israel, who never slumbereth nor sleeps,
to send his holy Angels to pitch their Tents round about him, and banish from
him the Spirits of the Night.

So far then this Tradition is just and good, that there are at Midnight
Spirits who wander about the World, going too and fro in the Earth, seeking
whom they may devour. Let us now in the next Place enquire, what Truth there is
in the other Part of it; namely, That they always fly away at Cock-crow.

This Opinion, whatever Truth there may be in it, is certainly very ancient. We
have it mentioned by the Christian Poet Prudentius, who flourished in the
Beginning of the fourth Century, as a Tradition of Common Belief: His Words are
these, Ferunt Vagantes Daemones
Loetos Tenebris Noctium,
Gallo canente exterritos,
Sparsim timere and cedere.
Invisa nam Vicinitas
Lucis, salutis, numinis,
Rupto Tenebrarum situ,
Noctis Fugat satellites,
Hoc esse signum proescii
Norunt repromissoe spei,
Qua Nos soporis Liberi
Speramus adventum Dei.
They say the wandering Powers, that love
The silent Darkness of the Night,
At Cock-crowing give over to rove,
And all in Fear do take their Flight.
The approaching salutary Morn,
The Approach divine of hated Day,
Makes Darkness to its Place return,
And drives the Midnight Ghosts away.
They know that this an Emblem is,
Of what preceeds our lasting Bliss,
That Morn, when Graves give up their Dead,
In certain Hope to meet their GOD.


Cassian also, who lived in the same Century, giving an Account of a Multitude
of Devils, who had been Abroad in the Night, says, Aurora itaque superveniente,
cum omnis haec ab oculis evanisset Daemonum multitudo. Cass. Coll. 8. C. 16.
That as soon as the Morn approached, they all vanished and fled away. By this
we see, that this was a current Opinion at this Time of Day; but what Reason
they had for it, except some Relations of the disappearing of Evil Spirits at
that Hour, I never yet have met with: But there have been produced at that Time
of Night, Things of very memorable Worth, which might perhaps raise the pious
Credulity of some Men to imagine, that there was something more in it, than in
other Times. It was about the Time of Cock-crowing when our Savior was born,
and the Angels sung the first Christmas-Carol to the poor Shepherds, in the
Fields of Bethlehem. Now it may be presumed, that as the Savior of the World
was then born, and the heavenly Host had then descended to proclaim the News,
that the Angels of Darkness would be terrified and confounded, and immediately
fly away: And perhaps this Consideration has partly been the Foundation of this
Opinion; for as this may easily be supposed, so perhaps it has been imagined,
that the Spirits of Darkness, having always in Memory that fatal Hour, are
startled and frighted away as the Cock proclaims it.

It was also about this Time when he rose from the Dead. And when the great Sun
of Righteousness was risen upon the World, no Wonder that all the Clouds of
Darkness and Wickedness were dispelled; no Wonder that the conquered Powers of
Hell were not able to show their Heads: And this perhaps has been another
Reason of their imagining that Spirits go away at that Time.

A third Reason is, that Passage in the Book of Genesis, where Jacob wrestled
with the Angel for a Blessing; where the Angel says unto him, Genesis xxxii.
Let me go, for the Day breaks.

But indeed this Tradition seems more especially to have risen from some
particular Circumstances attending the Time of Cock-crowing; and which, as
Prudentius seems to say above, are an Emblem of the Approach of the Day of the
Resurrection. For when we leave the World, we lie down in our Graves, and Rest
from our Labors: Sleep and Darkness lay hold upon us, and there we abide till
the last Day appear, when the Voice of the Archangel shall awake us, that we
may meet the LORD of Light and Day. And when we leave the common Business and
Care of Life, we lie down in our Beds, as in a Grave, buried as it were in
Sleep and Darkness, till the Cock crow, the welcome Messenger of the News of
Day.

The Circumstances therefore of the Time of Cock-crowing, being so natural a
Figure and Representation of the Morning of the Resurrection; the Night so
shadowing out the Night of the Grave; the third Watch, being as some suppose,
the Time our Savior will come to Judgment at; the Noise of the Cock awakening
sleepy Man, and telling him as it were, the Night is far spent, the Day is at
Hand; representing so naturally the Voice of the Archangel awakening the Dead,
and calling up the Righteous to everlasting Day; so naturally does the Time of
Cock-crowing shadow out these Things, that probably some good well-meaning Men,
have been brought to believe, that the very Devils themselves, when the Cock
crew, and reminded them of them, did fear and tremble, and shun the Light.

Now in Answer to the first of these Conjectures: It Is very likely the Evil
Spirits did fly away in the Morning of the Nativity, and because of our
Savior's Birth and that Company of the heavenly Host, might be afraid and
retire into thick Darkness; yet it will not hence follow, that it always
happens so at the Time of Cock-crowing: For if they did fly away that Morning,
the Circumstances of our Savior's Birth, the heavenly Glory of the Angelick
Quire, their Music and their Presence were the Occasion of it: And why only
the bare Remembrance of what happened at that Time, should always at the Time
of Cock-crowing drive them away, rather than when they remember it at another,
no Reason seems to be given.

As to the second Conjecture, namely, That it was the Time of our Savior's
Rising from the Dead, I answer in the same Manner, That though it be allowed,
that the Evil Spirits might have returned to the Land of Darkness, upon our
Savior's Rising from the Dead; yet why it should occasion them always to do so
at that Time, no Reason can be given.

As to the third Conjecture, it is easy to observe, That this was a good Angel,
whereas they that shun the Light, are bad ones: This was the Angel of the
Covenant, the Creator of Light, and the Lord of the Day: We may therefore as
well imagine, that it was not in his Power, to get out of the Arms of Jacob,
without saying, Let me go; as to suppose he was obliged to go, because he said
the Day breaks. The meaning of which Words, According to Willet, is not that
the Angel was gone to the blessed Company of the Angels, to sing their Morning
Hymn to GOD, as the Hebrews imagine: For the Angels, not only in the Morning,
but at other Times, are exercised in praising GOD. But the Angel thus speaks
according to the Custom of Men, having now taken the Form and Shape of a Man,
as though he had have to other Business, and leaving Jacob also to his Affairs.

The last Conjecture of the Rise of this Tradition, seems to carry greater
Probability than the others: For as these Things are a Representation of the
Circumstances of the Morning of the Resurrection, so they must sure enough
bring that last Day into Remembrance; and they never can do so, but as surely
they must create Terror and Confusion in all the Devils and Ghosts of the
Night: Whilst they assure them they shall never any more enjoy the Realms of
Bliss, but be hurried into that Matt. xxv. 41.
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But that these Things
are the Occasion of their flying away at the Approach of Day, is not to be
supposed. On the contrary, the Devil and his Angels ramble over the World in
Daylight, and are Midday Devils, as well as Midnight ones: For the Devil is
incessant in his Temptations, and therefore he is abroad in the Day as well as
the Night, though perhaps has seldom appeared but in Darkness. Thus St. Austin,
in one of his Meditations, Et ideo Deus meus ad te clamamus, libera nos ab
adversario nostro quotidiano, qui sive dormiamus, sive vigilemus, -- die ac
nocte fraudibus and artibus, nunc palam nunc occulte sagittas venenatas contra
nos dirigens, ut interficiat animas nostras. Aug. Sol. Cap. 16.
We implore thee, O GOD! that thou would deliver us from our daily Enemy,
who by his Wiles and Cunning is always watching us, Day and Night, sleeping and
waking; and both openly and in secret, shooting at us his poisoned Arrows, that
he may destroy our Souls.

And now, what, though this be true, as it most certainly seems to be so, that
at the cheerful Hour of Cock-crowing, the wandering Ghosts are not driven away,
but still continue going too and fro? What, though then their Power be still the
same, and their Intentions as fully bent to do Evil? Consider but that GOD'S
Care and Providence govern the World, and there will be found as much Safety
for us, in the Midst of Evil Spirits, as if they absented at that Time. The
Almighty Power of GOD, is the same then, as at other Times; nothing but that,
preserved us continually, and that, will always be able to preserve us. However
great may be the Malice of Devils; however desirous of working our Ruin; though
they watch all Opportunities, and are unwearied in tempting us; yet the loving
Kindness of the LORD endures for Ever, and his Mercy is over all his Works: He
will not suffer our Foot to be moved; he that keeps us will not sleep: We
shall not be afraid of the Sun by Day, nor the Moon by Night: For the
Pestilence that walks in Darkness, nor for the Sickness that destroys in
the Noonday.

Are we then afraid of Darkness and the Presence of Night? Let us remember the
Creator of them, and have but Faith in him, and we shall find our Night turned
into Day. In his Light shall we see Light: We shall be as secure as if there
was no Darkness about us, as well knowing that that GOD which protects us, sees
through the thickest Mediums, and the darkest Night: For with him the Darkness
is no Darkness, but the Night is as clear as the Day; the Darkness and Light to
him are both alike. Or are we afraid of that old Serpent the Devil, that
nightly Rambler of the World, who is a Lover of Night and Darkness? Let us
trust in GOD, and no Harm shall happen to us. If we will but fear no Evil, his
Rod and his Staff shall comfort us, though we walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death: For GOD has reserved the Devil and his Angels in everlasting
Chains, under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day. Though therefore he
is permitted to wander the World, yet he is so chained up, that without GOD'S
particular Order or Permission, he is not allowed to touch the Sons of Men; and
he is so reserved and kept in Darkness, that it is not in his Power even barely
to appear and be visible to them, without the Permission of GOD: So little
Reason has every good Man to fear the Spite and Malice of all the Devils in
Hell.

When then the Night pours out her Terrors, covers all Things with Darkness,
and strikes thee with Horror; Lift but up thy Eyes to the Hills, from whence
comes thy Help, and thou shall clearly see, that our Lord GOD is a Light and
Defense to thee. -- Quia filiis lucis and in noctibus dies est. Quando enim
sine lumine est, cui lumen in cord est? Aut quando sol ei and dies non est,
cui sol and dies Christus est? Cyprian. de Orat. Dom.
For to those who are the Children of the Light, the Day shines in the Night:
They are never without Light, whose Hearts are illuminated; never without
Sunshine, whose Sun is CHRIST. In short then, if thou fear Darkness, look up
to CHRIST, and thou have eternal Day; if the Angels of Darkness, look but up
with the Eye of Faith, and thou shall see the Mountains full of Chariots and
Horses of Fire: Thou shall see, as did the Servant of the Prophet Elisha, That
they who be with us, are more than they who are against us. No Matter then
whether the Spirits of the Night go away, or only tremble at the Time of
Cock-crowing: For sure we are, that the Angel of the LORD tarrieth round about
them that fear him, and delivers them; nay, That GOD himself will arise and
scatter his Enemies, and make them that hate him to fly before him. And if GOD
be for us, who can be against us?

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER VI.
MR. Bourne might have styled this Chapter, A Sermon on Spirit-walking; and yet
I cannot help thinking, that the Nurse prevails over the Priest in it. The good
Man, it must be allowed, has played the Conjurer so far as to raise us Spirits,
but does not seem to have had so much of the Scholar in him as to have been
able to lay them.

The Gay and the Witty will no doubt laugh at every Thing he has advanced:
Perhaps it will be granted on all Hands, that he has not thrown any new Lights
on the dark Subject. I make no Pretensions to any Abilities for discussing the
Question; and am of Opinion, that as we know so little of the invisible World,
we cannot express ourselves with too much Diffidence in speaking of it. -- It
must however be allowed, that Writers of the highest Character for Probity and
Knowledge have transmitted to us Accounts of Spirits and Apparitions. Fancy,
Imagination, Misinterpretations of the sacred Writings on that Subject, or
Credulity, must have deceived them: For it is impossible to believe them guilty
of the Baseness of an Intention to deceive us. The frequent Impostures (I shall
only instance the Cock-Lane Ghost, in our own Times) that are to be met with of
this Kind, naturally incline us to believe, that all such Relations are either
the Forgeries of cunning Men, or the idle Tales of weak ones. It is impossible
to follow our Author through all the Howbeits, Moreovers, and Neverthelesses,
of his tedious Discourse; but to one Thing in his Peroration we readily
subscribe our most unfeigned Assent; it is, That a good Man has not the least
Reason to fear the Spite and Malice of all the Devils in Hell.

Our Divine discovers every where an Intention of rooting out the old Man from
the Hearts of his Readers: I shall be sparing of my Quotations of Chapter and
Verse, as I do not think this a proper Place to imitate him in, and purpose
only on the present Occasion to eraze the Vestiges of the old Woman, the
Impressions of which are still too visibly to be traced on human Nature.

It was the Fashion when Mr. Bourne wrote, that Clergymen should lard every
Composition with Scripture Phrases, and nothing seems to have been thought
palatable by them, in which every Period was not seasoned with a Spice of
Divinity. -- These great Textuaries overlooked one Passage of holy Writ, "To
every Thing there is a Season." -- Religion is one Thing, and the Entertainment
of innocent Curiosity another. -- If Clergymen take Care not to permit these
Relaxations from severer Studies to engross too much of their Time, none but
narrow-minded Bigots will think the Investigation of ancient Manners an
improper Amusement for them.

The Spectator There is another Passage in the Spectator, where he introduces
the Girls in the Neighborhood and his Landlady's Daughters telling Stories of
Spirits and Apparitions; -- how they stood pale as Ashes at the Foot of a Bed,
and walked over Churchyards by Moon Light; -- of their being conjured to the
Red Sea, etc. -- He wittily observes, that one Spirit raised another, and at
the End of every Story, the whole Company closed their Ranks and crowded about
the Fire.
, accounting for the Rise and Progress of ancient Superstition, tells us, our
Forefathers looked upon Nature with more Reverence and Horror, before the
World was enlightened by Learning and Philosophy, and loved to astonish
themselves with the Apprehensions of Witchcraft, Prodigies, Charms, and
Enchantments. -- There was not a Village in England that had not a Ghost in it
-- the Churchyards were all haunted -- every Common had a Circle of Fairies
belonging to it -- and there was scarce a Shepherd to be met with who had not
seen a Spirit. Hence -- Those Tales of vulgar Sprites,
Which frighted Boys relate on Winter Nights,
How cleanly Milk Maids meet the Fairy Train,
How headless Horses drag the clinking chain:
Night-roaming Ghosts by Saucer Eye Balls known,
The common Specter Mr. Gay has left us too a pretty Tale of an Apparition: --
The golden Mark being found in Bed, is indeed after the indelicate Manner of
Swift, but yet is one of those happy Strokes, that rival the Felicity of that
Dash of the Sponge which (as Pliny tells us) hit off so well the Expression of
the Froth in Protogenes' Dog -- It is impossible not to envy the Author the
Conception of a Thought, which we know not whether to call more comical or more
pointedly satirical.
of each country Town.
Gay.

Our Shakespeare's Ghosts excel all others: -- The Terrible indeed is his Forte:
-- How awful is that Description of the dead Time of Night, the Season of their
Perambulation!

It Is now the very witching Time of Night,
When Church yards yawn, and Hell itself breathes out
Contagion to the World Thus also in Hume's Douglas: In such a Place as this,
at such an Hour,
If Ancestry can be in aught believed,
Descending Spirits have conversed with Man,
And told the Secrets of the World unknown.


In Scotland, Children dying unbaptized (called Tarans) were supposed to wander
in Woods and Solitudes, lamenting their hard Fate, and were said to be often
seen. -- It is thought here very unlucky to go over their Graves. -- It is
vulgarly called going over " unchristened Ground."


.
The Ancients, because the Cock gives Notice of the Approach and Break of Day,
have, with a Propriety equal to any Thing in their Mythology, dedicated this
Bird to Apollo. -- They have also made him the Emblem of Watchfulness Vanes on
the Tops of Steeples were anciently in the Form of a Cock (called from hence
Weather Cocks) and put up in papal Times to remind the Clergy of Watchfulness.
In summitate Crucis, quae Campanario vulgo imponitur, Galli Gallinacei effingi
solet Figura, quae Ecclesiarum Rectores Vigilantiae admoncat.

Du Cange. Gloss.
, from the Circumstance of his summoning Men to their Business by his crowing,
and have therefore dedicated him also to Mercury. With the Lark, he may be
poetically styled "the Herald of the Morn."

The Day civil or political has been divided into thirteen 1. After-midnight.
2. Cock-crow. 3. The Space between the first Cock-crow and Break of Day. 4. The
Dawn of the Morning. 5. Morning. 6. Noon. 7. Afternoon. 8. Sunset. 9. Twilight.
10. Evening. 11. Candle Time. 12. Bed Time. 13. The Dead of the Night. -- The
Church of Rome made four nocturnal Vigils: The Conticinium, Gallicinium or
Cock-crow, Intempestum et Antelucinum.

Durand. de Nocturnis. Dr. Johnson, in his Description of the Buller of Buchan,
in Scotland, pleasantly tells us, If I had any Malice against a walking Spirit,
instead of laying him in the Red Sea, I would condemn him to reside in the
Buller of Buchan.

The Streets of this Northern Metropolis were formerly (so vulgar Tradition has
it) haunted by a nightly Guest, which appeared in the Shape of a Mastiff Dog,
etc. and terrified such as were afraid of Shadows. This Word is a Corruption of
the Anglo-Saxon gast, spiritus, anima. -- I have heard, when a Boy, many
Stories concerning it.


Parts. The After-midnight and the Dead of the Night, are the most solemn of
them all, and have therefore, it should seem, been appropriated by ancient
Superstition to the walking of Spirits.

CHAP. VII. Of Churchyards; why the Vulgar are generally afraid of passing
through them at Night: The Original of this Fear: That there is nothing in them
now, more than in other Places to be afraid of.
THE most of ignorant People are afraid of going through a Churchyard at
Nightime. If they are obliged upon some hasty and urgent Affair, they fear
and tremble, till they are beyond its Bounds, but they generally avoid it, and
go further about. It would, no Question, be better if there were fewer
Path-ways through Churchyards than there are, both as it would prevent several
Abuses committed in them, and also cause the Ashes of the Dead to be in greater
Quiet, and more undisturbed Peace: We should not then see Churchyards changed
into common Dung-hills, nor should we tread so frequently upon the Bones of our
Friends: But when for the Convenience of Neighborhood, or other Reasons, there
are allowed public Ways, it is a very great Weakness to be afraid of passing
through them.

The Reason of this Fear is, a Notion they have imbibed, that in Churchyards
there is a frequent walking of Spirits at the Dead-time of Night. Indeed there
is at that Time something awful and horrible every where, and it must be
confessed something more solemn in a Churchyard, than in the Generality of
other Places; but that it is then more frequented with Apparitions and Ghosts
than other Places are, is at this Time of Day entirely groundless, and without
any Reason.

The Original of this Timorousness may be deduced from the Heathens: For they
believed that the departed Ghosts came out of their Tombs and Sepulchers, and
wandered about the Place where the Body lay buried. Thus Maerin saepe animas
imis excire sepulchris,
-- Vidi -- Bucol. 8. Virg.

Virgil tells us, That Maeris could call the Ghosts out of their Sepulchers:
And Nunc animae tenues. -- Sepulchris. -- Errant. -- Ovid. Fast.
Ovid, that Ghosts came out of the Sepulchers, and wandered about: And Clemens
Alexandrinus, in his Admonitions to the Gentiles, upbraids them with the Gods
they worshipped; which, Poos oun, etc. Admonit. ad Gent. P. 37.
says he, are wont to appear at Tombs and Sepulchers, and which are nothing but
fading Specter and airy Forms. And the learned Mr. Mede observes, from a
Passage of this same ancient Father, Mede, Lib. 3. P. 633. de Cultu Demon.
That the Heathens supposed the Presence and Power of Demons (for so the
Greeks called the Souls of Men departed) at their Coffins and Sepulchers; as
though there always remained some natural Tie between the Deceased and their
Relicts. Agreeable to this, Dr. Scot, Scot, Christ. Life, P. 71. Part 1.
in his Discourse of the Christian Life, speaks of gross and sensual Souls, who
appeared often, after their Separation, in Churchyards or Charnel-Houses,
where their Bodies were laid. The Plat. Phaed. P. 348.
Soul that is infected with a great Lust to the Body, continues so, for a great
while after Death, and suffering many Reluctances, hovers about this visible
Place, and is hardly drawn from thence by Force; by the Demon that has the
Guard and Care of it. By the visible Place, he means P. 386. ibid.
their Monuments and Sepulchers, where the shadowy Fantasms, of such Souls,
have sometimes appeared.

It having therefore been a current Opinion of the Heathens, that Places of
Burial and Churchyards were frequently haunted with Specter and Apparitions,
it is easy to imagine, that the Opinion has been handed from them, among the
Ignorant and unlearned, throughout all the Ages of Christianity to the present
Day. And indeed, though now there may be no such Things, yet that there have
been, need not be disputed; not that they were the real Souls of Men departed:
For I cannot see for what Reason it should be supposed, ( Scot. Christ. ibid.
however unacquainted such Souls might be with the Pleasures of Spirits) that
they are permitted to wander, to hover about, and linger after their Bodies. It
seems rather to be true, what is mentioned of such Apparitions in St.
Athanasius's Questions to Antiochius, that Athan. Tom. 2. P. 340.
these Apparitions of the Saints which appear at Tombs and Temples, are not the
Souls of the Saints themselves, but the good Angels appearing in their
Likeness. And I imagine it must be so too, with the Souls of bad Men, they
appear not themselves, but they are represented by the evil Angels. For the
Soul upon the Departure, returns to GOD that gave it, who allots it its Station
in the World of Spirits, where it is kept till the Day of Judgment in Happiness
or Misery, when it shall receive its Compleation of the one, or the other.
However, whatever these Apparitions were, they are a certain Proof, that such
Appearances have been in such Places; and indeed, to add no more, it is the
whole Voice of Antiquity.

But now with us, GOD be thanked, the Scene is changed, we live not in the
Darkness of Error, but in the Light of Truth; we worship not Demons, but the
GOD of the whole Earth; and our Temples are not the Temples of Idols, but the
Temples of the Holy GOD. If among the Heathens such Delusions were permitted,
it was because GOD had forsaken them: But when he vouchsafes to have his
Residence in his Holy Temple, we are the further from Harm, the nearer we
approach it; Psalm. lxxxiv.
There the Sparrow has found her an House, and the Swallow a Nest, where she
may lay her Young; and there shall no Harm happen to good Men, but they shall
be rather protected, because they are so near their Father's House, the House
of Prayer.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER VII.
WE learn from Moresin Coemeteria hinc sunt. Lycurgus, omni superstitione
sublata, et ut vanae superstitionis omnem evelleret e mentibus suorum
formidinem, inhumari intra Urbem et sepulchra extrui circa Deorum Templa, etc.
Deprav. Rel. Orig. in verbo.

Mr. Strutt tells us, that before the Time of Christianity it was held unlawful
to bury the Dead within the Cities, but they used to carry them out into the
Fields hard by and there deposited them. Toward the End of the sixth Century,
Augustine obtained of King Ethelbert, a Temple of Idols (where the King used to
worship before his Conversion) and made a Burying place of it; but St. Cuthbert
afterward obtained Leave to have Yards made to the Churches, proper for the
Reception of the Dead.

Anglo-Saxon Aeta, Vol. I. p. 69.
, that Churchyards were used for the Purposes of Interment, in order to remove
Superstition. -- Burial was in ancient Times without the Walls of Cities and
Towns. Lycurgus, he tells us, first introduced Grave-stones within the Walls,
and as it were brought home the Ghosts to the very Doors. -- Thus we compel
Horses that are apt to startle, to make the nearest possible Approaches to the
Objects at which they have taken the Alarm.

Our Author is certainly very right, when he tells us that Churchyards are as
little frequented by Apparitions and Ghosts as other Places, and that therefore
it is a Weakness to be afraid of passing through them. Superstition however
will always attend Ignorance; and the Night, as she continues to be the Mother
of Dews, will also never fail of being the fruitful Parent of chimerical Fears
Now it is the Time of Night,
That the Graves all gaping wide,
Every one lets forth his Sprite,
In the Church Way Path to glide.
Shakespeare.
.

When the Sun sets, Shadows, that showed at Noon
But small, appear most long and terrible.
Dryden. The Inconveniences, complained of by our Author in the first Part of
this Chapter, we have had the Pleasure of seeing remedied. With great Decency
and Propriety the Churchyards here are now all enclosed: They are no longer
the Receptacles of Filth, or Haunts of nightly Lewdness; and the Ashes of our
Friends and Ancestors are suffered to remain (as he wished) in greater Quiet,
and more undisturbed Peace.

CHAP. VIII. Of visiting Wells and Fountains: The Original of this Custom: The
naming of them of great Antiquity: The Worship paid them by the Papists, was
gross Idolatry.
IN the dark Ages of Popery, it was a Custom, if any Well had an awful
Situation, and was seated in some lonely melancholy Vale; if its Water was
clear and limpid, and beautifully -- Viridi si margin clauderet undas. --
Herba. -- Juven. Sat. 3.
margin'd with the tender Grass; or if it was looked upon, as having a
Medicinal Quality; to gift it to some Saint, and honor it with his Name. Hence
it is, that we have at this Day Wells and Fountains called, some St. John's,
St. Mary Magdalen's, St. Mary's Well, etc.

To these kind of Wells, the common People are accustomed to go, on a Summer's
Evening, to refresh themselves with a Walk after the Toil of the Day, to drink
the Water of the Fountain, and enjoy the pleasing Prospect of Shade and Stream.

Now this Custom (though at this Time of Day, very commendable, and harmless, and
innocent) seems to be the Remains of that superstitious Practice of the
Papists, of paying Adoration to Wells and Fountains: For they imagined there
was some Holiness and Sanctity in them, and so worshipped them. In the Canons
of St. Anselm, made in the Year 1102, we find this superstitious Practice in
some Measure forbid. Johnson Consti. St. Anselm. Can. 26.
Let no one attribute Reverence or Sanctity to a dead Body, or a Fountain, or
other Things, (as sometimes is to our Knowledge) without the Bishop's
Authority. And in the 16th of the Canons made in the Reign of King Edgar, in
the Year 963, it is ordered, Johnson Consti. 960.
That every Priest industriously advance Christianity, and extinguish
Heathenism, and forbid the Worshipping of Fountains, etc. Mr. Johnson says upon
this Canon, that the Worshipping of Wells and Fountains, was a Superstition,
which prevailed in this Nation, till the Age before the Reformation: Nay, I
cannot say, it is extinguished yet among the Papists. In the Ages of dark
Popery it was thought sufficient to forbid the honoring of Wells and
Fountains, without the Bishop's Approbation.

The giving of Names to Wells, is of great Antiquity: We find it a Custom in
the Days of the old Patriarchs. Abraham observed this Custom; and therefore the
Well, which he recovered from the Servants of Abimeleck, He Genesis xxi. 31.
called Beer-sheba, or the Well of the Oath, because there they swear both of
them. Thus also Isaac, when his Herdsmen had found a Well, and the Herdsmen of
Gerar had a Contest with them about the Right of it, Ibid. 26.
called the Name of the Well Eseck, that is, Strife: because they strove with
him. And he dug another Well, and strove for that also, and he called the
Name of it Sitnah, that is, Hatred. And he removed from thence, and dug
another Well, and for that they strove not; and he called the Name of it
Rehoboth, that is, Room. And he said for now the LORD has made Room for us,
and we shall be fruitful in the Land. And we read it was at Jacob's Well where
JESUS talked with the Woman of Samaria. To give Names therefore to Wells, is of
an ancient Standing; but to pay Homage and Worship to them, was never heard of
among the People of GOD, till they sunk into gross Idolatry, and became
Worshippers of Stocks and Stones: When the creature became worshipped instead
of the Creator, then was this Custom first introduced, in the Ages of Popish
Ignorance and Idolatry.

There need be no Question, but as this Custom is practically Heathenish, so it
is also originally: For the Heathens were wont to worship Streams and
Fountains, and to suppose that the Nymphs, whom they imagined the Goddesses of
the Waters, presided over them. As the Papists have borrowed many of their
silly and superstitious Ceremonies from the Religion of the Heathens, so this
in particular, a sottish, stupid, and abominable Custom, they could borrow no
where else. For we had no such Custom, neither at any Time the Churches of GOD.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER VIII.
I Find little that may be added to our Author's Account of the superstitious
Adoration of Wells and Fountains. There are Interdictions of this Superstition
in the Laws of King Canute also, preserved in Wheloc's Edition of Bede's Church
History. Haedenscype bith. that man peorthige -- oththe flodpaeter. pyllas.
oththe stanas. etc. 5. Leges Canuti Regis. p. 108.


I have frequently observed Shreds, or Bits of Rags, upon the Bushes that
over-hang a Well, in the Road to Benton, a Village in the Neighborhood of
Newcastle. It is called the Rag Well. This Name is undoubtedly of a very long
standing: The Spring has been visited for some Disorder or other, and these
Rag-offerings are the Relics of the then prevailing popular Superstition. --
Thus Mr. Pennant tells us, they visit the Well of Spey, in Scotland, for many
Distempers, and the Well of Drachaldy for as many, offering small Pieces of
Money and Bits of Rags The Custom of affixing Ladles of Iron, etc. by a Chain,
to Wells, is of great Antiquity. Mr. Strutt, in his Anglo-Saxon Era, tells us,
that Edwine caused Ladles or Cups of Brass to be fastened to the clear Springs
and Wells, for the Refreshment of the Passengers. Venerable Bede is his
Authority. -- This Custom is still retained in many Places in the North.
. Pennant's Add. p. 18.

Fitzstephen, Monk of Canterbury, in his Description of the ancient City of
London, has these Words, There are on the North Part of London, principal
Fountains of Water, sweet, wholesome, and clear, streaming from among the
glistering Pebble Stones. -- In this Number, Holy Well, Clerken Well, and St.
Clement's Well, are of most Note, and frequented above the Rest, when Scholars
and the Youth of the City take the Air abroad in the Summer Evenings Mr. Shaw,
in his History of the Province of Moray, tells us, that true rational,
christian Knowledge, which was almost quite lost under Popery, made very slow
Progress after the Reformation; -- that the prevailing Ignorance was attended
with much Superstition and Credulity; Heathenish and Romish Customs were much
practiced; Pilgrimages to Wells and Chapels were frequent, etc. -- We had a
remarkable Well of this Kind at Jesmond, at the Distance of about a Mile from
Newcastle. -- One of our principal Streets is said to have its name from an Inn
that was in it, to which the Pilgrims, that flocked hither for the Benefit of
the supposed holy Water, used to resort.
. Stow. p. 710.

A Well was a most valuable Treasure in those hot and dry Countries which
composed the Scene of the Patriarchal History, and therefore we find in Genesis
that it was a frequent Subject of Contention Fontinalia, in Roman Antiquity,
was a religious Feast, celebrated on the 13th of October, in Honor of the
Nymphs of Wells and Fountains. -- The Ceremony consisted in throwing Nosegays
into the Fountains, and putting Crowns of Flowers upon the Wells.
.

CHAP. IX. Of Omens: Their Original: The Observation of them sinful.
OMENS and Prognostications of Things are still in the Mouths of all, though
only observed by the Vulgar. In Country Places especially, they are in great
Repute, and are the Directors of several Actions of Life; being looked on by
them as Presages of Things future, or the Determiners of present Good or Evil:
If Lepus quoque occurrens in via, infortunatum iter praesagit and ominosum.
Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 5. C. 13. P. 685.
a Hare cross their Way it is an Omen of ill Luck: If Saepe sinistra cava
praedixit ab ilice cornix. Virg. Bucol 1.
a Crow cry, it portends something Evil: If Maxim vero abominatus est bubo
tristis and dira avis, voce funesta and gemitu, qui formidolosa, dirasque
necessitates, and magnos moles instare portendit. Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 5. C. 13.
P. 680.
an Owl, which they reckon a most abominable and unlucky Bird, sends forth its
hoarse and dismal Voice, it is an Omen of the Approach of some terrible Thing;
that some dire Calamity, and some great Misfortune is near at Hand. If Salt
fall toward them, to be sure something has happened to one in the Family, or
is shortly to happen to themselves: Such also is the Chattering of a Mag-pye,
the Cry of Ravens, the Dead-watch, Crickets, etc.

This is a Copy of the Omens of the Heathens, Deinde anguribus and reliqui
reges usi: Et exactis regibus, nihil public sine auspiciis nec domi nec
militiae gerabatur. Cic. de Divin. Lib. 1.
who never went upon any Enterprise, nor undertook any Business of Moment,
without consulting the Augurs and Wisemen, and being guided by Omens and
Presages of Things. Hence it was that they consulted the Intrails of Beasts,
the Flights of Birds, and several other Things: And that the very Things
abovementioned, as the Authorities there declare, have been observed by them;
yea, they have observed them, even in the remotest Ages, beyond the Days of the
oldest Records. The Heathen World therefore was full of them, and without all
doubt they have been handed down to us from these Times.

And as it is not to be questioned, but we had them from the Heathens, so in
all Probability the Heathens have taken them from the People of GOD, and built
many of their Folies and ominous Superstitions on a Custom which they alone
were indulged in. For in the earliest Age of the World, when a Matter of any
great Consequence was depending, and the Servants of GOD would know what the
Event would be, they asked a Sign of GOD, by desiring that such a Thing might
happen, if they were to succeed, and God was sometimes so condescending as to
grant them their Desire. Thus we read, That Sam. i. 14. iii. 20.
Jonathan accompanied only by his Armor Bearer, not fearing the Steepness of
the Rocks, nor Multitudes of Enemies, attempted the Garrison of the Philistines
and conquered, through a Token of this Nature. If they say, says he to his
Armor-bearer, Tarry until we come up, then we will stand still in our Place,
and will not go up unto them; but if they say come up unto us, then we will go
up; for the LORD has delivered them into our Hands, and this shall be a Sign
unto us. And so indeed it came to pass, GOD who had inspired Jonathan with this
Thought, directing the Tongues of the others according to his Wishes. In like
Manner, when the good old Servant of Abraham had arrived at the City of Nahor,
to find a Wife for his Master's Son; we have him desiring of GOD, that the Sign
of the Woman he should pitch upon, might be her saying, Drink, and I will give
thy Camels Drink also. Genesis xxiv. 12.
Ana he said, O Lord GOD of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good Speed
this Day, and show Kindness unto my Master Abraham: Behold, I stand here by the
Well of Water, and the Daughters of the Men of the City came out to draw Water.
And let it come to pass, that the Damsel to whom I shall say, let down thy
Pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will
give thy Camels Drink also: Let the same be she that thou have appointed for
thy Servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou have showed Kindness unto
my Master. This happened according to his Prayer, by which he knew that the
LORD had prospered his Journey. Now this Custom we know the Philistines
imitated, when they would know whether they had been afflicted by the GOD of
Israel for keeping the Ark. Sam. i. 6, 9.
They took the Ark of the LORD, and laid it on a Cart, and sent it away. And
they said, If it goes by the Way of his own Coast to Beth-shemoth, then he
has done us this great Evil.

In these early Ages of the World, GOD permitted such Things upon extraordinary
Occasions, to be asked by his own People. But they were only peculiar to those
Times. We have no Warrant for doing the like: It becomes not us to prescribe
Means to GOD, by which we may judge of our future Success, but to depend on his
Power and Wisdom, his Care and Providence. The Observation of Omens, such as
the falling of Salt, a Hare crossing the Way, of the Dead-Watch, of Crickets,
etc. are sinful and diabolical: They are the Inventions of the Devil, to draw
Men from a due Trust in GOD, and make them his own Vassals. For by such
Observations as these, they are the Slaves of Superstition and Sin, and have
all the While no true Dependence upon GOD, no Trust in his Providence.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER IX.
VArious are the popular Superstitions with regard to Omens -- To these our
Author has hinted at, many more may be added.

The breaking a Looking Glass is accounted a very unlucky Accident. -- Mirrors
were formerly used by Magicians in their superstitious and diabolical
Operations; and there was an ancient Kind of Divination by the Looking Glass:
See the Greek Scholia on the Nubes of Aristophanes, p. 169.
Hence it should seem the present popular Notion.

When our Cheek burns, or Ear tingles, we usually say somebody is talking of us
-- a Conceit of great Antiquity, and ranked among superstitious Opinions by
Pliny Absentes tinnitu aurium praesentire sermones de se receptum est.

Thus also the Distich noted by Dalecampius: Garrula quid totis resonas mihi
noctibus auris?
Nescio quem dicis nunc meminisse mei?


Moresin enumerates some of these superstitious Omens: -- The croaking of
Ravens, the hooting of Owls, the unseasonable meeting with Cocks, the
Hornedness of the Moon, the cloudy rising of the Sun, the shooting of Stars,
the coming in and going out of strange Cats, the sudden Fall of Hens from the
Housetop, etc. -- Corvorum crocitatum super tecto, bubonum bubulatum in
transitu, Gallorum gallinaceorum cucurritum intempestivum -- lunae
corniculationem, Solis nubilum ortum, stellarum trajectiones in Aere -- felium
peregrinarum egressum, ingressum -- Gallinarum subitum e tecto casum stupent,
etc. Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 21.


. -- Dr. Brown supposes this to have proceeded from the Notion of a signifying
Genius, or universal Mercury, that conducted Sounds to their distant Subjects
and taught to hear by Touch.

It is accounted unlucky to destroy Swallows; -- This is probably a Pagan
Relic. We read in Aelian, that these Birds were sacred to the Penates, or
household Gods of the Ancients, and therefore were preserved. They were
honored anciently as the Nuncios of the Spring. -- The Rhodians are said to
have had a solemn anniversary Song, to welcome in the Swallow. See Anacreon's
Ode to that Bird.

I think it is Mr Addison that supposes the popular Ballad of the Babes in the
Wood to have preserved the Lives of many Robin Redbreasts. The subsequent
Stanza places them in a very favorable Point of View: No Burial this pretty
Pair
Of any Man receives,
Till Robin-red-breast painfully
Did cover them with Leaves.
Vide Dr. Percy's Collect. Ballads.

The ancient Augurs foretold Things to come by the chirping or singing of
certain Birds The ancient Britons made Use of the Hare for the Purposes of
Divination. They were never killed for the Table. It Is perhaps from hence that
they have been accounted ominous by the Vulgar. Caesar. p. 89.
-- the Crow, the Pie, the Chough, etc. hence perhaps the old womanish
Observation, that when the Pie chatters, we shall have Strangers Editha
persuaded her Husband to build a Monastery at Osney, upon the chattering of
Pies. Lambarde's Dict. p. 260.
.

It is vulgarly thought unlucky to kill Spiders. -- Can this be in Support of
the Scotch Proverb, "Dirt bodes luck?" However this be, it serves in many
Places for an Apology for the Laziness of Housewives, in not destroying the
Cobwebs This is also transmitted from the Magicians of ancient Rome. See
Pliny's Natural History. -- Presages and Prognostications were made from their
Manner of weaving their Webs.

In the Diary of Elias Ashmole, Esquire 11th April, 1681, he acquaints us, I took
early in the Morning a good Dose of Elixir, and hung three Spiders about my
Neck, and they drove my Ague away -- Deo gratias. Ashmole was a judicial
Astrologer, and the Patron of the renowned Mr. Lilly. Par nobile fratrum!


.

There was an ancient Custom of opening some celebrated Poem, as Homer's or
Virgil's, and whatever Passage presented itself first to the Eye constituted a
Kind of Answer by Oracle: It was called the Sorts Homericae and Sorts
Virgilianae. -- The Superstitious among the ancient Christians practiced a
similar Kind of Divination, by opening the Old or New Testament. Mr Pennant
gives us an Account of another Sort of Divination, used in Scotland, called
reading the Speal Bone, or the Bladebone of a Shoulder of Mutton well scraped
Mr. Shaw says picked: No Iron must touch it. Vide Tacit. Annal. 14.
. When Lord London, he says, was obliged to retreat before the Rebels to the
Isle of Sky, a common Soldier, on the very Moment the Battle of Culloden was
decided, proclaimed the Victory at that Distance, pretending to have discovered
the Event by looking through the Bone. p. 155.

One may add to Mr. Pennant's Account, the strange Qualification many of the
Inhabitants of the western Islands of Scotland are said to have, called Second
Sight. It is a Faculty of seeing Things to come, or at a great Distance,
represented to the Imagination as if actually visible and present. This strange
Thing has been well attested, and that by Authors of Credit. Credat Judaeus
apella! -- See the Appendix, Article Second Sight.

The fungous Parcells (so Brown calls them) about the Wicks of Candles, are
commonly thought to foretell Strangers: With us they are called Letters at the
Candle. He tells us, (in his usual Pedantry of Style, which is well atoned for
by his good Sense and Learning,) they only indicate a moist and pluvious Air,
which hinders the Avolation of the light and favillous Particles, whereupon
they settle upon the Snast. Of this Kind is the present northern Notion of
foretelling Strangers from the black filmy Appendages (so perhaps the Author of
the Vulgar Errors would have called them) on the Bars of our Fire Grates.

It is accounted lucky to throw an old For the ancient religious Use of the
Shoe, vide Antiquitat. Convivial, p. 228.

There was an old Ceremony in Ireland, of electing a Person to any Office by
throwing an old Shoe over his Head. See the Idol of the Clownes, p. 19.

Mr. Shenstone somewhere asks, May not the Custom of scraping when we bow, be
derived from the ancient Custom of throwing their Shoes backwards off their
Feet? In all probability it is.


Shoe after a Person, when we wish him to succeed in what he is going about.

Putting on one Stocking, with the wrong Side outward, without Design; --
getting out of Bed backwards, without Premeditation, are reckoned good Omens.
Stumbling in going down Stairs, and meeting a Weasel, are held to be bad ones
See Congreve's Love for Love.

Rusticanum et forte Ofelli proverbium est -- Qui somniis et Auguriis credit,
nunquam fore securum. Ego sententiam et verissimam et fidelissimam puto. Quid
enim refert ad consequentiam rerum, si quis semel aut amplius sternutaverit?
Quid si oscitaverit? His men's nugis incauta seducitur sed fidelis nequaquam
acquiescit.

Johan. Sarisber. de Nugis Curial. Fol. 27.
. Various and ridiculous are the Superstitions concerning Moles on different
Parts of the Body.

Dr. Brown tells us, that to sit cross-legg'd, or with our Fingers pectinated
or shut together, is accounted bad, and Friends will persuade us from it. --
The same Conceit religiously possessed the Ancients, as is observable from
Pliny, Poplites alternis genibus imponere nefas olim, and also from Athenaeus,
that it was an old veneficious Practice; and Juno is made in this Posture, to
hinder the Delivery of Alcmaena. Vide Vulg. Errors.

The Observation on the falling of Salt, proceeds from the ancient Opinion that
Salt was incorruptible; it had therefore been made the Symbol of Friendship;
and if it fell casually, they thought their Friendship would not be of long
Duration. Bailey's Dictionary, etc.

The witty Dean of St. Patrick's, in his Invective against Wood, gives a fine
philosophical Account of the Death-Watch Pliny, in his Natural History, 29th
Book, mentions the Cricket as much esteemed by the ancient Magicians: No doubt
our Superstitions concerning these little Domestics have been transmitted to us
from his Times.
.

-- A Wood Worm
That lies in old wood, like a Hare in her form:
With Teeth or with Claws it will bite or will scratch,
And Chambermaids christen this Worm a Death-Watch:
Because, like a Watch, it always cries click;
Then Woe be to those in the House who are sick;
For, as sure as a Gun, they will give up the Ghost,
If the Maggot cries click, when it scratches the Post.
But a Kettle of scalding hot Water injected,
Infallibly cures the Timber affected:
The Omen is broken, the Danger is over,
The Maggot will die and the Sick will recover Mr. Gay, in his Pastoral Dirge,
has preserved some of the rural Prognostications of Death. -- The Weather's Bell
Before the drooping Flock tolled forth her Knell;
The solemn Death-Watch click'd the hour she died,
And shrilling Crickets in the Chimney cried.
The boding Raven on her Cottage sat,
And with hoarse croaking warned us of her Fate:
The Lambkin, which her wonted Tendance bred,
Dropped on the Plains that fatal Instant dead;
Swarmed on a rotten Stick the Bees I spied,
Which erst I saw when Goody Dobson died.

.
Various were the Species of Divination Such as Hydromancy, making Conjectures
by Water: -- Libanomancy, Divination by Frankincense: -- Onychomancy or
Onymancy, Divination performed by the Nails of an unpolluted Boy. -- In short,
by Water, Fire, Earth, Air, by the Flight of Birds, by Lots, by Dreams, by the
Wind, etc. etc.

Divination by the Rod or Wand is mentioned in Ezekiel.

Our vulgar Notion of the Hazel's Tendency to a Vein of Lead Ore, Seam of Coal,
etc. seems to be a Vestige of this Rod Divination.


practiced by ancient Superstition. -- The Druids interpreted Omens, and
doubtless both invented and handed down many of them.

No Bondage seems so dreadful as that of Superstition: It has ever imposed the
most abject Kind of Slavery. I have known (says the Spectator) the shooting of
a Star spoil a Night's Rest, and have seen a Man in Love grow pale and lose his
Appetite upon the plucking of a Merrythought. -- A screech Owl at Midnight has
alarmed a Family more than a Band of Robbers, and the Voice of a Cricket has
struck more Terror than the Roaring of a Lion. Nothing, he observes, is so
inconsiderable, which may not appear dreadful to an Imagination that is filled
with Omens and Prognostics: -- A rusty Nail, or a crooked Pin shoots up into
Prodigies.

For when we think Fate hovers over our Heads,
Our Apprehensions shoot beyond all Bounds:
Owls, Ravens, Crickets seem the Watch of Death;
Nature's worst Vermin scare her godlike Sons;
Echoes, the very Leavings of a Voice,
Grow babbling Ghosts, and call us to our Graves.
Each Molehill Thought swells to a huge Olympus,
While we, fantastic Dreamers, heave and puff,
And sweat with an Imagination's Weight.
Dryden's and Lee's Oedipus. The Author of the Vulgar Errors tells us, that
hollow Stones are hung up in Stables to prevent the Night Mare, or Ephialtes.
They are usually called in the North, Holy Stones. -- The Chips of Gallows and
Places of Execution are used for Amulets against Agues. I saw lately some
Saw-Dust, in which Blood was absorbed, taken for some such Purpose from off the
Scaffold on the beheading of one of the rebel Lords, 1746. -- For Warts, we rub
our Hands before the Moon, and commit any maculated Part to the Touch of the
Dead. -- Various are the superstitious Charms for driving away Rats, etc.

Dr. Brown has left several curious Observations on these popular Notions.
That Candles and Lights (says he) burn blue and dim at the Apparition of
Spirits, may be true, if the ambient Air be full of sulphurous Spirits, as it
happens oftentimes in Mines. -- He admits that Conjectures of prevalent Humors
may be collected from the Spots in our Nails, but rejects the sundry
Divinations vulgarly raised upon them; such as, that Spots in the Top of the
Nails signify Things past; in the Middle, Things present; and at the Bottom,
Events to come; -- that white Specks presage our Felicity; blue ones our
Misfortunes; those in the Nail of the Thumb have Significations of Honor; of
the Forefinger, Riches. Palmistry, or Divination by the Lines of the Hand, has
been deservedly exploded, though the Gypsies still make Pretensions to the
Knowledge of it.

Sailors, usually the boldest Men alive, are yet frequently the very abject
Slaves of superstitious Fear. They have various puerile Apprehensions
concerning whistling on Shipboard, carrying a Corpse, etc. all which are
Vestiges of the old Woman in human Nature, and can only be erazed by the united
Efforts of Philosophy and Religion.

Nourishing Hair upon the Moles in the Face (the Doctor tells us) is the
Perpetuation of a very ancient Custom. -- Thus Pliny: Naevos in facie tondere
religiosum habent nunc multi. -- From the like might proceed the Fears of
poling Elf-locks, or complicated Hairs of the Head, and also of Locks longer
than the other Hair, they being votary at first, and dedicated upon Occasion,
preserved with great Care, and accordingly esteemed by others. -- Thus
Apuleius: Adjuro per dulcem Capilli tui Nodulum! The set and statary Times (he
farther observes) of paring of Nails and cutting of Hair, is thought by many a
Point of Consideration, which is perhaps but the Continuation of an ancient
Superstition. -- To the Romans, it was piaculous to pare their Nails upon the
Nundinoe, observed every ninth Day, and was also feared by others in certain
Days of the Week, according to that of Ausonius: Ungues Mercurio, Barbam Jove,
Cypride crines.

Mr. Pennant, in describing the Customs of Highlanders, tells us, that in
certain Places the Death of People is supposed to be foretold by the Cries and
Shrieks of Benshi, or the Fairy's Wife, uttered along the very Path where the
Funeral is to pass, and what in Wales are called Corps' Candles, are often
imagined to appear and foretell Mortality. In the County of Carmarthen, there
is hardly any one that dies, but some one or other sees his Light or Candle. --
There is a similar Superstition among the Vulgar in Northumberland: They call
it seeing the Waff I suspect this northern vulgar Word to be a Corruption of
Whiff, a sudden and vehement Blast, which Davies thinks is derived from the
Welsh, Chwyth, Halitus, Anhelitus, Flatus.

See Lye's Junii Etymolog. in verbo. The Spirit is supposed to glide swiftly
by. -- Thus in the Glossary of Lancashire Words and Phrases, " wap't by" is
explained went swiftly by. See a View of the Lancashire Dialect, etc. published
at Manchester, 1763.


of the Person whose Death it foretells. -- For an Account of the Fetch-lights,
or Dead Men's Candles, vide Athenian Oracle, Vol. I. p. 76.

The Rev. Mr. Shaw, in his History of the Province of Moray, in Scotland, gives
the following Account of some Omens and Superstitions still preserved there:
When a Corpse is lifted, the Bed Straw on which the Deceased lay, is carried
out, and burnt in a Place where no Beast can come near it; and they pretend to
find next Morning it the Ashes, the Print of the Foot of that Person it the
Family who shall first die Dr. Goldsmith, in his Vicar of Wakefield, speaking
of the waking Dreams of his Hero's Daughters, tells us, The Girls had their
Omens too; they felt strange Kisses on their Lips; they saw Rings in the
Candle, Purses bounded from the Fire, and True Love Knots lurked at the Bottom
of every Tea Cup. In the North, the Cinders that bound from the Fire (in this
Manner) are examined by old Women, Chi^dren, etc. and according to their
respective Forms, are called either Coffins or Purses; and consequently thought
to be the Presages of Death or Wealth. Aut Caesar, aut Nullus!
.

In hectic and consumptive Diseases, they pare the Nails of the Fingers and
Toes of the Patient, put these Parings into a Rag cut from his Clothes, then
wave their Hand with the Rag thrice round his Head, crying, Deas Soil; after
which they bury the Rag in some unknown Place. He tells us he has seen this
done; and Pliny, in his Natural History, mentions it as practiced by the
Magicians or Druids of his Time.

When a contagious Disease enters among Cattle, the Fire is extinguished in
some Villages round; then they force Fire with a Wheel, or by rubbing a Piece
of dry Wood upon another, and therewith burn Juniper in the Stalls of the
Cattle, that the Smoke may purify the Air about them: They likewise boil
Juniper in Water, which they sprinkle upon the Cattle; this done, the Fires in
the Houses are rekindled from the forced Fire. All this too (he tells us) he
has seen done, and has no Doubt of its being a Druid Custom.

Mr. Shaw further tells us, that the ancient Scots much regarded Omens upon an
Expedition An armed Man meeting them was a good Omen: -- If a Woman barefoot
crossed the Road before them, they seized her, and fetched Blood from her
Forehead: -- If a Deer, Fox, Hare, or any Beast of Game appeared, and they did
not kill it, it was an unlucky Omen Spitting, according to Pliny, was
superstitiously observed in averting Witchcraft, and in giving a shrewder Blow
to an Enemy. Hence seems to be derived the Custom our Bruisers have, of
spitting in their Hands before they begin their unmanly Barbarity. -- Several
other Vestiges of this Superstition relative to fasting Spittle, (Fascinationes
saliva jejuna repelli, veteri superstitione creditura est. Alex. ab Alex.)
mentioned also in Pliny, may yet be traced among our Vulgar. -- Boys have a
Custom (inter se) of spitting their Faith, or as they also call it here, their
Saul, (Soul) when required to make Asseverations in a Matter of Consequence. --
In Combinations of the Colliers, etc. in the North, for the Purpose of raising
their Wages, they are said to spit upon a Stone together, by Way of cementing
their Confederacy. -- We have too a kind of popular Saying, when Persons are of
the same Party, or agree in Sentiment, "they spit upon the same Stone."
.

A superstitious Opinion vulgarly prevails here, that the howling of a Dog by
Night in a Neighborhood, is the Presage of Death to any that are sick in it. I
know not what has given Rise to this: Dogs have been known to stand and howl
over the Bodies of their Masters, when they have been murdered, or died an
accidental or sudden Death. -- An Instance of great Sensibility in this
faithful Animal!

Shakespeare ranks this among Omens:
"The Owl shrieked at thy Birth; an evil Sight!
"The Night Crow cried forboding luckless Time;
" Dogs howled, and hideous Tempests shook down Trees," etc.
Henry VI. CHAP. X. Of the Country Conversation in a Winter's Evening: Their
Opinions of Spirits and Apparitions; of the Devil's appearing with a cloven
Foot; of Fairies and Hobgoblins; of the walking Places of Spirits; and of
haunted Houses.
NOthing is commoner in Country Places, than for a whole Family in a Winter's
Evening, to sit round the Fire, and tell Stories of Apparitions and Ghosts. And
no Question of it, but this adds to the natural Fearfulness of Men, and makes
them many Times imagine they see Things, which really are nothing but their own
Fancy. From this, and seldom any other Cause, it is, that Herds and Shepherds
have all of them seen frequent Apparitions, and are generally so well stocked
with Stories of their own Knowledge. Some of them have seen Fairies, some
Spirits in the Shapes of Cows and Dogs and Horses; and some have seen even the
Devil himself, with a cloven Foot. All which, is either Hearsay or a strong
Imagination. Not that there have not been, or may not be Apparitions; we know
that there have undoubtedly been such Things, and that there still are, upon
partilar Occasions; but that almost all the Stories of Ghosts and Spirits, are
grounded on no other Bottom, than the Fears and Fancies, and weak Brains of Men.

In their Account of the Apparition of the Devil, they always describe him with
a cloven Foot: That is always his distinguishing Badge, whatever Shape he
appears in; whether it be in Beauty or Deformity, he never appears without it.
Such is the old Tradition they have received of his appearing, and such is
their Belief of it.

Indeed it must be confessed, that this is not so improbable and ridiculous as
many Things they hold. For though perhaps few of them have ought else for this
Opinion, but old Wives Fables, or the Picture of the Devil, which they have
always observed drawn with a cloven Foot, yet there seems to be some Truth in
it. For in the Times of frequent Apparitions, the Devil was wont to appear so,
if we may believe Antiquity; and there is also some Reason for it, considering
the Circumstances of the fallen Angels.

The Brown's Vulg. Err.
Author of the Vulgar Errors upon this same Subject, has these Words. The
Ground of this Opinion at first, might be his frequent appearing in the Shape
of a Goat, which answers this Description. This was the Opinion of the ancient
Christians, concerning the Apparitions of Panites, Fauns and Satyrs; and of
this Form we read of one, that appeared to Anthony in the Wilderness. The same
is also confirmed from Expositions of Holy Scripture. For whereas it is said,
Thou shall not offer unto Devils: The original Word is Seghnirim; that is,
rough and hairy Goats, because in that Shape the Devil most often appeared, as
is expounded by the Rabbis, as Tremellius has also explained, and as the Word
Ascimah, the God of Emath is by some conceived. He observes also, That the Goat
was the Emblem of the Sin Offering, and is the Emblem of Sinful Men at the Day
of Judgment.

And of this Opinion was also the learned Mr. Mede, Dis. 40.
Mede. He says, That when Spirits converse with Men, it is under some visible
Shape, and that there is a Law given them that that Shape they assumed, should
be of something which more or less resembled their Condition. For as in Nature
we see every Thing has a several and suitable Physiognomy or Figure, as a
Badge of their inward Nature, whereby it is known, as by a Habit of
Distinction, so it seems to be in the Shapes and Apparitions of Spirits. And as
in a well governed Common Wealth, every Sort and Condition is known by a
differing Habit, agreeable to his Quality; so it seems it should be in GOD'S
great Common Wealth, concerning the Shapes which Spirits take upon them. And he
that gave the Law, that a Man should not wear the Habit of a Woman, nor a Woman
the Habit of a Man, because that as he had made them diverse, so would he have
them so known by their Habits; so it seems he will not suffer a good and a bad
Spirit, a noble and ignoble one, to appear unto Man after the same Fashion.

Now from this it will follow, that good Angels can take upon them no other
Shape, but the Shape of Man, because their glorious Excellency is resembled
only in the most excellent of all visible Creatures. The Shape of an inferior
Creature would be unsuitable, no other Shape becoming those who are called the
Sons of GOD, but his only, who was created after GOD's own Image. And yet, not
his neither as he now is, but according as he was before his Fall in his
glorious Beauty of his Integrity. Age and Deformity are the Fruits of Sin; and
the Angel in the Gospel appears like a young Man, His Matthew. xxviii.
Countenance like Lightning, and his Raiment white as Snow, as it were
resembling the Beauty of glorified Bodies, in Immutability, Sublimity and
Purity.

Hence also it follows on the contrary, that the Devil could not appear in
humane Shape whilst Man was in his Integrity; because he was a Spirit fallen
from his first glorious Perfection, and therefore must appear in such Shape,
which might argue his Imperfection and Abasement, which was the Shape of a
Beast: Otherwise no Reason can be given, why he should not rather have appeared
to Eve in the Shape of a Woman, than of a Serpent; for so he might have gained
an Opinion with her, both of more Excellency and Knowledge. But since the Fall
of Man, the Case is altered; now we know he can take upon him the Shape of Man;
and no Wonder, since one falling Star may resemble another. And therefore he
appears it seems in the Shape of Man's Imperfection, either for Age or
Deformity, as like an old Man (for so the Witches say:) And perhaps it is not
altogether false, which is vulgarly affirmed, that the Devil appearing in
humane Shape, has always a Deformity of some uncouth Member or other; as though
he could not yet take upon him humane Shape entirely, for that Man himself, is
not entirely and utterly fallen as he is.

Thus far has this great and learned Man given his Opinion of this Matter, and
that with such Strength of Reason and Argument, as leaves at least a
Probability behind it, of the Truth of this Opinion.

Another Part of this Conversation generally turns upon Fairies. These, they
tell you, have frequently been heard and seen, nay that there are some still
living who were stolen away by them, and confined seven Years. According to the
Description they give of them, who pretend to have seen them, they are in the
Shape of Men, exceeding little: They are always clad in Green, and frequent the
Woods and Fields; when they make Cakes (which is a Work they have been often
heard at) they are very noisy; and when they have done, they are full of Mirth
and Pastime. But generally they dance in Moonlight when Mortals are asleep,
and not capable of seeing them, as may be observed on the following Morn; their
dancing Places being very distinguishable. For as they dance Hand in Hand, and
so make a Circle in their Dance, so next Day there will be seen Rings and
Circles on the Grass.

Now in all this there is really nothing, but an old fabulous Story, which has
been handed down even to our Days from the Times of Heathenism, of a certain
Sort of Beings called Lamiae, which were esteemed so mischievous and cruel, as
to take away young Children and slay them. These, together with the the Fauns,
the Gods of the Woods, seem to have formed the Notion of Fairies.

This Opinion, in the benighted Ages of Popery, when Hobgoblins and Sprights
were in every City and Town and Village, by every Water and in every Wood, was
very common. But when that Cloud was dispelled, and the Day sprung up, those
Spirits which wandered in the Night of Ignorance and Error, did really vanish
at the Dawn of Truth and the Light of Knowledge.

Another Tradition they hold, and which is often talked of, is, that there are
particular Places allotted to Spirits to walk in. Thence it was that formerly,
such frequent Reports were abroad of this and that particular Place being
haunted by a Spirit, and that the common People say now and then, such a Place
is dangerous to be passed through at Night, because a Spirit walks there. Nay,
they will further tell you, that some Spirits have lamented the Hardness of their
Condition, in being obliged to walk in cold and uncomfortable Places, and have
therefore desired the Person who was so hardy as to speak to them, to gift them
with a warmer Walk, by some well grown Hedge, or in some shady Vale, where they
might be sheltered from the Rain and Wind.

The Stories, that Apparitions have been seen oftener than once in the same
Place, have no Doubt been the Rise and Spring of the walking Places of Spirits;
but why they are said sometimes to cry out for Places that are more
comfortable, is not so certainly known. It is however highly probable, that
when the Ignorance and Superstition of the Romish Church, had filled the World
with Apparitions and Ghosts, that this also was invented among them. For they
seem to have the most Right to an Invention of this Nature, whose Brains were
so fruitful of Folly, as to invent that Fuller's Chapter Hist. Cen. 10.
Dunstan took the Devil by the Nose, with a Pair of hot Tongs till he roared
again. For if the Devil may be burnt, he may also be starved; if he took such
Pains to get his Nose out of the Pincers, without Doubt in a frosty Night, he
would wish to be as warm as possible. He that believes the one, must
necessarily believe the other. And therefore it very near amounts to a
Demonstration, who were the Authors of this Opinion, viz. The Monks. We are
sure they invented the one, and need little question but they invented the
other.

There is a Story in the Book of Tobit, (which they may believe that will) of
the evil Spirits flying into the utmost Parts of Egypt. Tob. vi.
For as Tobias went in unto his Wife, he remembered the Words of Raphael, and
took the Ashes of the Perfumes, and put the Heart and Liver of the Fish
thereupon, and made a Smoke therewith. The which Smell, when the evil Spirit
had smelled, he fled unto the utmost Parts of Egypt, and the Angel bound him.
Now from this it is evident, that the Spirit was obliged to forsake his good
old Quarters and warm Lodgings, for inhospitable Deserts and open Air: And from
this, perhaps, some of those doting Monks have persuaded themselves into a
Belief of these Things.

When it is proved to us, that this Book of Tobit is the Word of GOD, we may
entertain more Veneration for this vulgar Opinion; but till then, we must be
indulged in wondering, how a Spirit, that is an immaterial Substance, can be
affected with our Heat or Cold, or any Power or Quality of material Beings.

The last Topic of this Conversation I shall take Notice of, shall be the
Tales of haunted Houses. And indeed it is not to be wondered at, that this is
never omitted. For formerly almost every Place had a House of this Kind. If a
House was seated on some melancholy Place, or built in some old romantic
Manner; or if any particular Accident had happened in it, such as Murder,
sudden Death, or the like, to be sure that House had a Mark set on it, and was
afterward esteemed the Habitation of a Ghost. In talking upon this Point, they
generally show the Occasion of the House's being haunted, the merry Pranks of
the Spirit, and how it was laid. Stories of this Kind are infinite, and there
are few Villages which have not either had such an House in it, or near it.

And indeed there are Men of good Learning and Knowledge, who are as far as
others from Superstition, who are inclinable to believe, that such Things have
been upon particular Emergencies; though, among the Stories that are told, they
believe not one in a thousand. They know that Spirits have frequently appeared
to Men out of Houses, and they can see no Reason why they may not have appeared
in them: They know nothing in an House more than in another Place, to prevent
an Apparition, but an equal Help to its Visibility. The Air, which a Ghost is
supposed to be wrapped in, when it becomes visible to Men, is there to be
found, and they know of nothing else that may be an Argument against it. An
Author of good Credit tells us, Cum Romae aegra valetudine oppressus forem,
jaceremque in lectulo, speciem mulieris eleganti forma mihi plane vigilanti
observatam fuisse, quam cum inspicerem, diu cogitabundus, etc. -- Cum meos
sensus vigere, and figuram illam nusquam a me dilabi, etc. Alex. ab Alex. Lib.
2. C. 9.
That when he was at Rome, he was taken with Illness, and obliged to keep his
Bed: As he lay in this Condition, he observed, as he was once awake, a Woman of
a very beautiful Person coming toward him. Upon this he was silent for some
Time, and very thoughtful, weighing all the while with himself, whether it was
not rather a deceptio visus than a real Being. But when he perceived his Senses
sound and entire, and that the Object still continued; he asked, What she was?
In Answer to which, she repeated the very Words he had spoken to her, in a
sneering and disdainful Manner. After she had taken a good View of him, she
departed.

The Commentator upon this Place, says, Sed haec semper mera somnia esse
putavi. ibid.
He looks upon this Story, and the rest which are mentioned along with it, to
be nothing but Dreams and Fancies. And for ought that I know to the contrary,
they may be so; but however it must be confessed, this Story in particular is
well attested, being told by the Man himself, who was a great and a learned
Man, and who, if we may believe himself, seems to be as sure that he had his
Eyes open, as the Commentator can be of the contrary.

But whatever Truth there may be in it, it is certain that in the Church of
Rome they are persuaded of the Truth of it, to a Fault. For they are so sure of
it, that they have particular Forms of exorcising such Houses; which because
they have often been heard of, but seldom seen; and are those very Things which
raised, in the Vulgar formerly, such an Opinion of their ignorant Priests, as
to make them be esteemed Men of the greatest Faith and Learning; and because
also the Opinion has reached even our Days, and it is common for the present
Vulgar to say, none can lay a Spirit but a Popish Priest; it shall be the
Business of the next Chapter, to give one of those Forms of exorcising an
House; not that they are envied for their Art of conjuring, but that it may be
seen, how well they deserve the Character they go under.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER X.
OF such a Winter-Evening's Confabulation as our Author speaks of, Dr. Akenside
(the Boast of our Newcastle Dr. Akenside was born at Newcastle upon Tyne, and
received the first Principles of his Education at the very respectable Grammar
School there; his Father a reputable Butcher of the Town. A Halt in his Gai^*
occasioned when a Boy, by the falling of a Cleaver from his Father's Stall,
must have been a perpetual Remembrancer of his humble Origin. I mention this,
because, from the Biographical Account of him prefixed to the posthumous
Edition of his Works, (an Outline with which he himself must have furnished his
Friends) one is inclined to believe that he was ashamed of his Birth. -- We
regret, on perusing it, the Omission of those pleasing and interesting little
Anecdotes usually given of the first Indications of Genius. -- His Townsmen
have many other Reasons that lead to the Confirmation of this Suspicion. --
Taking this for granted, it was a great and unpardonable Foible in one of so
exalted an Understanding. False Shame was perhaps never more strongly
exemplified. The learned World will forgive me for attempting in this Note to
defeat his very narrow Purpose, (for I can call by no softer Name) the wishing
to conceal from Posterity a Circumstance, that would by no means have lessened
his Fame with them. I flatter myself it is compatible with the Respect we owe
to the Dead, and even to the Memory of him, who on other Accounts deserved so
highly of his Country.

The Distinction of Family is honorable: It is the transmitted Inheritance of
great Deserts. But let it be remembered, that Self-creation by personal Merit
is the pure Fountain, of which that is too often no more than the polluted
Stream. Accidents must always be light, when put in the Scales against
Qualities; and they who pique themselves on the Possession of a few Links, of
what is at best but a broken Chain, must have the Stemmata quid faciunt? of
Juvenal suggested to them, and be told, that the utmost Kings can do is to
confer ^itles, they cannot make Men deserve them!

The Propriety of this Reasoning can only be felt by philosophical Spirits: The
World (wisely, on its own Account) reprobates such Doctrine: Yet while others
are boasting with the Roman Governor of old, that with large Sums they obtained
this Freedom, let those in the same Predicament with our Poet, conscious of
having been honored by the GOOD BEING with the first Distinctions of Nature,
the rare Gifts of Genius and of the Understanding, which they have not abused,
call to Mind, in supporting themselves against the Envy of the great Vulgar and
of the small, a Consideration, which is of the strictest philosophical Truth,
THE AKENSIDES are FREE BORN!


) has left us a fine poetical Description in his Pleasures of Imagination, a
Performance, the greatest Part of which is said to have been written on the
Banks of the Tyne, where perhaps nothing was ever produced before of true
classical Inspiration.

He is speaking of the restless Curiosity of the human Mind -- the Desire of
Objects new and strange: -- Hence (he proceeds) by Night
The Village Matron, round the blazing Hearth,
Suspends the Infant Audience with her Tales,
Breathing Astonishment! Of witching Rhymes,
And evil Spirits: Of the Deathbed Call
To him who robbed the Widow, and devoured
The Orphan's Portion: Of unquiet Souls
Risen from the Grave to ease the heavy Guilt
Of Deeds in Life concealed: Of Shapes that walk
At Dead of Night, and clank their Chains and wave
The Torch of Hell around the Murd'rer's Bed.
At every solemn Pause the Crowd recoil,
Gazing each other speechless, and congealed
With shivering Sighs; till eager for the Event,
Around the Beldame all erect they hang,
Each trembling Heart with grateful Terrors quelled!
Book I.

Little can be added to what our Author has advanced concerning the popular
Notions of the Devil. -- Old Nick is the vulgar Name of this evil Being in the
North, and is of great Antiquity. There is a great deal of Learning concerning
it in Olaus Wormius' Danish Monuments. We borrowed it from the Title of an evil
Genius among the ancient Danes. They say he has often appeared on the Sea and
on deep Rivers in the Shape of a Sea Monster, presaging immediate Shipwreck and
Drowning to Seamen. See Lye's Junii Etymolog. in verbo, Nick. -- I have heard
also the Name of Old Harry on the same Occasion; perhaps from the verb To
harrie to lay waste, destroy, etc.

To the Account of Fairies may be added that of the Brownies, a Kind of Ghosts,
of whom, says the Author of the Glossary to Douglas' Virgil, the ignorant
common People and old Wives in Scotland tell many ridiculous Stories, and
represent to have been not only harmless, but useful -- Spirits possessed of a
Servility of Temper that made them, provided they were civilly used, submit to
do the meanest Offices of Drudgery. They are now extinct as well as the
Fairies. -- It was supposed that from their hard Labor and mean Employment
they became of a swarthy or tawny Color; whence their Name of Brownies Dr
Johnson, in his Journey to the western Islands, observes, that of Browny,
mentioned by Martin, nothing has been heard for many Years. Browny was a sturdy
Fairy, who if he was fed and kindly treated, would, as they said, do a great
deal of Work. They now pay him no Wages, and are content to labor for
themselves. p. 171.

Junius gives the following Etymon of Hobgoblin: Casaubon, he says, derives
Goblin from the Greek (...), a Kind of Spirit that was supposed to lurk about
Houses. The Hobgoblins were a Species of them, so called, because their Motion
was fabled to have been effected not so much by walking as hopping on one Leg!

See Lye's Junii Etymolog. etc. Beggle-Boe is said to be derived from the Welsh
bwgwly, to terrify, and Boe, a frightful Sound invented by Nurses to intimidate
their Children into good Behavior, with the idea of some Monster about to take
them away. Skinner seems to fetch it from Buculus, i. e. Bos boans!

See Lies Junii Etymolog. in verbo, etc. Well has Etymology been called the
Eruditio ad libitum!


, as the other, who moved in a higher Sphere, are called Fairies, from their
Fairness The Account of them by Moresin favors this Etymology: Papatus (says
he) credit albatas mulieres, et id genus larvas, pueros integros auferre,
aliosque suggerere monstruoses and debiles multis partibus: aut ad baptisterium
cum aliis commutare, aut ad Templi Introitum.

Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 139. This Note illustrates Mr. Bourne's Account of
Persons, who were stolen away by the Fairies, and confined seven Years. -- Thus
also Mr. Pennant tells us, that the Notion or Belief of Fairies still prevails
in the Highlands of Scotland, and Children are watched till the Christening is
over, lest they should be stolen or changed.

Tour in Scotland, p. 94.
.

Perhaps Mr. Bourne's Account of the Origin of Fairies may be controverted:
They are rather of Eastern than of Roman Extraction, and are said to have been
invented by the Persians and Arabs, whose Religion and History abound with
Relations concerning them. They have assigned them a peculiar Country to
inhabit, and call it Fairy Land.

A respectable old Woman of our Nation, Mr. Lilly, in his Life and Times, tells
us Fairies love the southern Side of Hills, Mountains, Groves -- Neatness and
Cleanness of Apparel, a strict Diet, an upright Life, fervent Prayers unto God,
conduce much to the Assistance of those who are curious these Ways (!!) He
means, it should seem, those who wish to cultivate an Acquaintance with them.

Chaucer, who was born in a much darker Age, saw clearer into this Matter: He
is very facetious concerning them in his Canterbury Tales: He puts his Creed of
Fairy Mythology into the Mouth of his Wife of Bath, thus: In the old Days of
the King Artour,
All was this Land fulfilled of Fayry,


The The Stone Arrow Heads of the old Inhabitants of this Island (that are
sometimes found) are vulgarly supposed to be Weapons shot by Fairies at Cattle.
They are called Elf-shots. To these are attributed any of the Disorders the
Cattle have. -- In order to effect a Cure, the Cow is to be touched by an
Elf-shot, or made to drink the Water, in which one has been dipped. See
Pennant's Tour.
Elf-Quene with her jolie Company, Some ascribe that Phenomenon of the Circle
or Ring, supposed by the Vulgar to be traced by the Fairies in their Dances, to
the Effects of Lightning, as being frequently produced after Storms of that
Kind, and by the Color and Brittleness of the Grass Roots when first observed.
-- Others maintain that these Circles are made by Ants, which are frequently
found in great Numbers in them.

-- A pleasant Mead,
Where Fairies often did their Measures tread,
Which in the Meadow made such Circles green,
As if with Garlands it had crowned been.
Within one of these Rounds was to be seen
A Hillock rise, where often the Fairy-Queen
At Twilight sat, and did command her Elves
To pinch those Maids that had not swept their Shelves:
And further, if by Maiden's Oversight,
Within Doors Water were not brought at Night;
Or if they spread no Table, set no Bread,
They should have Nips from Toe unto the Head:
And for the Maid that had performed each Thing,
She in the Water Pail bade leave a Ring.
Browne's Britan. Pastorals, p. 41. See also Dr. Percy's Songs on the Subject,
Vol. III. Collect. Ballads.




Daunsed full often in many a grene Mede Sive illic Lemurum populus sub nocte
choreas
Plauserit exiguas, viridesque attriverit herbas. Mons Catherinae. p. 9.

,
This was the old Opinion, as I read.
I speak of many hundred Year ago,
But now can no Man se no Elfes mo.
For now the great Charity and Prayers
Of Limitours and other holy Freres,
That serchen every Land and every Streme,
As thik as Motes in the Sun Beme,
This makes, that there ben now no Faires,
For there as wont to walken was an Elfe,
There walks now the Limitour himself,
And as he goes in his Limitacioune,
Wymen may now go safely up and down,
There nis none other Incubus but he It were invidious not to favor my Reader
here with Dr. Percy's Account of Fairies, in his Observations on the old
Ballads on that Subject. The Reader will observe (says he) that our simple
Ancestors had reduced all these Whimsies to a Kind of System, as regular and
perhaps more consistent than many Parts of classic Mythology: A Proof of the
extensive Influence and vast Antiquity of these Superstitions. Mankind, and
especially the common People, could not every where have been so unanimously
agreed concerning these arbitrary Notions, if they had not prevailed among them
for many Ages. Indeed (he farther observes) a learned Friend in Wales assures
the Editor, that the Existence of Fairies and Goblins is alluded to by the most
ancient British Bards, who mention them under various Names, one of the most
common of which signifies "the Spirits of the Mountains."

The common People of Northumberland call a certain fungous Excrescence, that
is sometimes found about the Roots of old Trees, Fairy Butter. I conjecture
that when a Quantity of Rain falls, it reduces it to a Consistency, which
together with its Color, makes it not unlike Butter: Hence the Name.

I have met with a Man who said he had seen one that had seen Fairies. -- Truth
is hard to come at in most Cases; none I believe ever came nearer to it in
this, than I have done!


: etc.
From the subsequent Passage in Shakespeare, the walking of Spirits seems to
have been enjoined by Way of Penance. The Ghost speaks thus in Hamlet: I am thy
Father's Spirit,
Doomed for a certain Time to walk the Night,
And for the Day confined to fast in Fires,
Till the soul Crimes done in my Days of Nature
Are burnt and purged away.


Mr. Gay, in Imitation of the Style of our old Ennius, gives us a fine
Description of one of these haunted Houses.

Now there spreaden a Rumor that everich Night
The Rooms ihaunted been by many a Sprite,
The Miller avoucheth, and all thereabout,
That they full often hearen the hellish Rout;
Some saine they hear the gingling of Chains,
And some has heard the Psautrie's Strains,
At Midnight some the heedless Horse imeet,
And some espien a Corse in a white Sheet The learned Moresin traces thus to
its Origin the Popish Superstition, relative to the coming again, as it is
commonly called, or walking of Spirits: Animarum ad nos regressus ita est ex
Manilio, lib. 1. astron. cap. 7. de lacteo circulo.

An major densa stellarum tu^ba corona,
Contexit flammas and crasso lumine candet,
Et selgore nitet collato clarior orbis.
An f^rtes animae, dignataque nomina coelo
Corporibus resoluta suis, terrae que remissa.
Huc migrant ex orb, suumque habitantia coelum:
Aethereos vivunt annos, mundoque fruuntur.
Lege Palingenesiam Pythagoricam apud Ovid. in Metam. et est observatum Fabii
Pont. max. disciplina, ut atro die manibus parentare non liceret, ne infesti
manes fierent. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 26.

Haec cum legerent Papani and his alia apud alios similia, voluerunt et suorum
defunctorum animas ad eos reverti and nunc certiores facere rerum earum, quae
tum in Coelis, tum apud Inferos geruntur, nunc autem terrere domesticos insanis
artibus: etc.

Deprav. Relig. Orig. p. 11.
,
And oother Things, Faye, Elfin and Elfe,
And Shapes that Fear createn to itself.
I subjoin here some Parts of a finely-written Conversation between the
Servants in Mr. Addison's Comedy of the Drummer, or the Haunted House. It will
be thought much to our Purpose.

Gardener. I marvel, John, how he (the Spirit) gets into the House when all the
Gates are shut.


Butler. Why look ye, Peter, your Spirit will creep you into an Augre hole; --
he will whisk ye through a Keyhole, without so much as justling against one of
the Wards.


Coachman. I believe I saw him last Night in the Town Close.


Guard. Ay! how did he appear?


Coach. Like a white Horse.


But. Pho, Robin, I tell ye he has never appeared yet but in the Shape of the
Sound of a Drum.


Coach. This makes one almost afraid of one's own Shadow. As I was walking from
the Stable the other Night, without my Lanthorn, I fell across a Beam, -- and
thought I had stumbled over a Spirit.


But. Thou might as well have stumbled over a Straw. Why a Spirit is such a
little, little Thing, that I have heard a Man, who was a great Scholar, say,
that he will dance ye a Lancashire Hornpipe upon the Point of a Needle. -- As I
sat in the Pantry last Night, the Candle methought burnt blue, and the spay'd
Bitch looked as if she saw something.


Guard. Ay, I warrant ye, she hears him many a Time, and often when we don't.


Thus also in another Scene:

Guard. Pr'ythee, John, what Sort of a Creature is a Conjurer?


But. Why he is made much as other Men are, if it was not for his long gray
Beard. -- His Beard is at least Half a Yard long, he is dressed in a strange
dark Cloak, as black as a Coal: -- He has a long white Wand in his Hand.


Coach. I fancy it is made out of Witch Elm.


Guard. I warrant you if the Ghost appears, he will whisk ye that Wand before his
Eyes, and strike you the Drumstick out of his Hand.


But. No; the Wand, look ye, is to make a Circle, and if he once gets the Ghost
in a Circle, then he has him. -- A Circle, you must know, is a Conjurer's Trap.


Coach. But what will he do with him, when he has him there?


But. Why then he will overpower him with his Learning.


Guard. If he can once compass him and get him in Lobs-pound, he will make nothing
of him, but speak a few hard Words to him, and perhaps bind him over to his
good Behavior for a thousand Years.


Coach. Ay, ay, he will send him packing to his Grave again with a Flea in his
Ear, I warrant him.


But. If the Conjurer be but well paid, he will take Pains upon the Ghost, and
lay him, look ye, in the Red Sea -- and then he is laid for ever.


Guard. Why, John, there must be a Power of Spirits in that same Red Sea. -- I
warrant ye they are as plenty as Fish. -- I wish the Spirit may not carry a
Corner of the House off with him.


But. As for that, Peter, you may be sure that the Steward has made his Bargain
with the Cunning Man beforehand, that he shall stand to all Costs and Damages.


The above is a pleasant Comment on the popular Creed concerning Spirits and
haunted Houses.

I am pleased with Mr. Bourne's Zeal for the Honor of his Protestant Brethren,
at the Conclusion of this Chapter. -- The Vulgar (he says) think them no
Conjurers, and say none can lay a Spirit but Popish Priests -- he wishes to
undeceive them however, and to prove at least negatively that our own Clergy
know full as much of the black Art as the others do.

Here follows the tedious Process for the Expulsion of 'Doemons, who, it should
seem, have not been easily ferretted out of their Quarters, if one may judge of
their Unwillingness to depart, by the Prolixity of the subsequent Removal
Warrant, which I suppose the Romish Clerical Bailiffs were not at the Trouble
of serving for nothing!

CHAP. XI. POSTEXERCITATIO SEPTIMA, F. VALERII POLIDORI PATAVINI. Quae ordo
dicitur Domum a Daemone perturbatam liberandi.
The FORM of exorcising an haunted HOUSE.
THE Domus quae dicitur a daemonibus vexari, singulis unius heb domadae, etc.
House which is reported to be vexed with Spirits, shall be visited by the
Priest once every Day, for a whole Week together: And Day after Day he shall
proceed as follows:

The Office for Monday.
ON Monday, when the Priest comes to the Gate of the House, let him stand near
it, whilst it continues shut, and say,

V. O GOD Psalm. lxx.
make speed to save me.

R. O LORD make haste to help me.

V. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

R. As it was in the Beginning is now, and ever shall be, World without End.
Amen.

Psalm xxiv.
THE Psalm. xxiv.
Earth is the LORD'S and all that therein is, the Compass of the World and they
that dwell therein. For he has founded it upon the Seas. Who shall ascend into
the Hill of the LORD? Or who shall stand up in his holy Place? Even he that
has clean Hands and a pure Heart, who has not lift up his Mind to Vanity, nor
sworn to deceive his Neighbor. He shall receive the Blessing from the LORD,
and Righteousness from the GOD of his Salvation. This is the Generation of them
that seek him, even of them that seek thy Face, O Jacob. Lift up your Heads O
ye Gates, and be lift up ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come
in. Who is the King of Glory? It is the LORD strong and mighty, even the LORD
mighty in Battle. Lift up your Heads O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. Who is the King of
Glory? Even the LORD of Hosts he is the King of Glory.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

V. I will enter into thy House.

R. And in thy Fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

The PRAYER.
The Collect for Trinity Sunday.
O Almighty and Everlasting GOD, who have given unto us thy Servants Grace, by
the Confession of a true Faith, to acknowledge the Glory of the eternal
Trinity, and in the Power of the Divine Majesty to worship the Unity; we
beseech thee, that thou would keep us steadfast in this Faith, and evermore
defend us from all Adversities through CHRIST our LORD. And humbly we beseech
thee, that as thou wast willing thy Gates should be opened, and thy House
cleansed, by the Labors of thy holy Priests and Levites, following the Advice
of King Hezekiah; so we humbly beseech thee, that by our Ministry, thou would
be pleased to deliver this House from the Perturbations of Devils. By the same
our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who lives and reigns with thee in the Unity
of the Holy Ghost, GOD for ever and ever. Amen.

The Office on Tuesday.
ON Tuesday, the same Things are observed, and in the same Way and Manner as on
Monday; the Versicle of the Prayer, and the Prayer it self excepted. When the
Priest comes to the End of the last Versicle, viz. As it was in the Beginning,
etc. Of the Psalm, The Earth is the LORD'S, etc. Then the Gate shall be opened,
and he shall stand on the Threshold, and say,

The LESSON. 1. Sam. Chap. v.
AND the Philistines took the Ark of GOD, and brought it from Eben-ezer unto
Ashdod. When the Philistines took the Ark of GOD, they brought it into the
House of Dagon, and set it by Dagon. And when they of Ashdod arose early on the
Morrow; behold, Dagon was fallen upon his Face to the Earth, before the Ark of
the LORD; and they took Dagon, and set him in his Place again. And when they
arose early on the Morrow Morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his Face to
the Ground, before the Ark of the LORD: And the Head of Dagon, and both the
Palms of his Hands were cut off upon the Threshold, only the Stump of Dagon was
left to him. Therefore neither the Priests of Dagon, nor any that come into
Dagon's House, tread on the Threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this Day.

V. Let GOD be my Helper, and the House of my Refuge.

R. That I may be in Safety.

The PRAYER.
The Collect for St. Michael's Day.
O GOD, who have ordained and constituted the Services of Angels and Men in a
wonderful Order; mercifully grant, that as thy Angels always do thee Service in
Heaven, so they may succor and defend us on Earth, through CHRIST our LORD.
And be thou also mercifully present, that as Solomon began to build a House,
for the Use of thy Majesty, on Mount Moria, the Place which was shown to his
Father David, so by the Operation of thy holy Angels, this House may be freed
from the evil Spirit, and be a quiet Habitation for Men. By the same our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, etc.

The Office on Wednesday.
ON Wednesday, all Things which are ordered for Monday and Tuesday being
observed in the same Manner, except the Versicles of the Prayer and the Prayer
for Tuesday: He shall stand in the Entry of the House, and say,

The LESSON. From the History of Bell and the Dragon, Verse 10.
AND the King went with Daniel into the Temple of Bell, so Bel's Priests, said,
Lo, we go out. But thou, O King, set on the Meat, and make ready the Wine, and
shut the Door fast, and seal it with thine own Signet. And to Morrow when thou
come in, if thou find not that Bell has eaten up all, we will suffer
Death, or else Daniel that speaks against us. And they little regarded it:
For under the Table they had made a privy Entrance, whereby they entered in
continually, and consumed those Things. So when they were gone forth, the King
set Meats before Bell. Now Daniel had commanded his Servants to bring Ashes, and
those they strewed throughout all the Temple, in the Presence of the King
alone: Then went they out and shut the Door, and sealed it with the King's
Signet, and so departed. Now in the Night came the Priests, with their Wives
and Children, as they were wont to do, and did eat and drink up all. In the
Morning betime the King arose, and Daniel with him. And the King said, Daniel,
are the Seals whole? And Daniel said, Yea, O King, they be whole. And as soon as
he had opened the Door, the King looked upon the Table, and cried with a loud
Voice, Great art thou, O Bell, and with thee there is no Deceit at all. Then
Daniel laughed, and told the King that he should not go in, and said, Behold
now the Pavement, and mark well whose Footsteps are these. And the King said, I
see the Footsteps of Men, Women and Children. And then the King was angry, and
took the Priests with their Wives and Children, who showed him the privy Doors
where they came in and consumed such Things as were upon the Table. Therefore
the King slew them, and delivered Bell into Daniel's Power, who destroyed him
and his Temple.

V. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House.

R. They will be always praising thee.

The PRAYER.
O GOD, by whose right Hand the holy Peter was lifted up that he perished not
in the Waters, and his Fellow Apostle Paul was thrice delivered from Shipwreck
and the Depth of the Sea, mercifully hear us, and grant that by both their
Merits, we may obtain thy eternal Glory; who live and reignest with GOD the
Father, in the Unity of the Holy Spirit, GOD for ever and ever. And we beseech
thee mercifully to look upon this House, which we know to be infested with the
Devil, that as in Jerusalem, when the Temple was finished, and Solomon had
ended his Prayer, thy Glory filled thy House before the Children of Israel, so
grant that this House may be cleansed before us, by our Ministry, and that thou
would appear in it and in us, in Glory. By thee the same our LORD JESUS
CHRIST, who with the same Father and Holy Spirit, live and reignest for ever.
Amen.

The Office on Thursday.
ON Thursday, when those Things are retained which are to be retained, as may
be seen on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, and also the Versicles and the Prayer
of Wednesday omitted, he shall visit the middle Part of the House, and say,

The LESSON. Job Chap. xl.
THE LORD said unto Job; Behold, how Behemoth which I made with thee, he eats
Grass as an Ox. Lo, now his Strength is in his Loins, and his Force is in the
Navel of his Belly. He moves his Tail like a Cedar; the Sinews of his Stones
are wrapped together. His Bones are as strong as Pieces of Brass, his Bones are
like Bars of Iron. He is the Chief of the Ways of GOD. He that made him can
make his Sword to approach with him. Surely the Mountains bring him forth Food,
where all the Beasts of the Field play. He lies under the shady Trees, in the
Covert of the Reed, and Fens. The shady Trees cover him with their Shadow; the
Willows of the Brook compass him about. Behold he drinks up a River, and
hastes not; he trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his Mouth. He takes
it with his Eyes: His Nose pierces through Snares. Job xli.
Can thou draw out Leviathan with a Hook? Or his Tongue with a Cord which
thou let down? Can thou put a Hook in his Nose? Or bore his Jaw through
with a Thorn? Will he make any Supplications unto thee? Will he speak soft
Words unto thee? Will he make a Covenant with thee? Will thou take him for a
Servant for ever? Will thou play with him as with a Bird? Or will thou bind him
for thy Maidens? Shall the Companion make a Banquet for him? Or shall they part
among the Merchants? Can thou fill his skin with barbed Irons? Or his Head
with Fish Spears? Lay thine Hand upon him, remember the Battle no more. Behold,
the Hope of him is in vain; shall not one be cast down even at the Sight of him?

V. LORD I have loved the Glory of thy House.

R. And the Place where thine Honor dwells.

The PRAYER.
Collect for Whitsunday.
O GOD, who did teach the Hearts of thy faithful People, by the sending to
them the light of thy Holy Spirit, grant us by the same Spirit to have a right
Judgment in all Things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy Comfort, through
CHRIST our LORD. And grant unto us thy Servants, that as thy House whilst thou
sit in thy Lofty Throne, is replenished with the Odor of thy Glory, so by
thy Assistance, this House may be filled with thy Grace, to repel all the Works
of the Devil: By the same our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who lives and
reigns with thee in the Unity of the same Holy Spirit: GOD throughout all
Ages. Amen.

The Office on Friday.
ON Friday, having observed all those Things which are used on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, and omitted others as is there shown; together with the
Versicles of the Prayer, and the Prayer as on other Days; let him go up and
down the whole House, and say,

The LESSON. S. Luke iv. 38.
AND he arose out of the Synagogue, and entered into Simon's House, and Simon's
Wife's Mother was taken with a great Fever: And they besought him for her: And
he stood over her, and rebuked the Fever, and it left her. And immediately she
arose and ministered unto them. Now when the Sun was setting, all they that had
any sick with diverse Diseases, brought them unto him. And he laid his Hands on
every one of them, and healed them. And Devils also came out of many, crying
out, and saying, Thou art CHRIST the Son of GOD. And he rebuking them, suffered
them not to speak: For they knew that he was CHRIST.

V. I would rather be a Door Keeper in the House of my GOD.

R. Then to dwell in the Tents of Ungodliness.

The PRAYER.
O GOD, who by the precious Blood of thy dear Son, have been pleased to
sanctify the Ensign of the enlivening Cross, grant we beseech thee, that thou
would be pleased to protect him, who is pleased with honoring thy Holy
Cross: By the same CHRIST our LORD. And we beseech thee to grant, that thou
would be present in this House in the same merciful Manner, to overturn the
Frauds of the Devil, as thou wast mercifully present with King Solomon in the
House which he built thee: By the same our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who
live and reignest with thee in Unity of the Holy Ghost, GOD for ever and
ever. Amen.

The Office on Saturday.
ON the Sabbath, all Things being done which are ordered on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, and other Things omitted, as is shown by Notes
in those Places, together with the Versicles of the Prayer and the Prayer
itself, let him search through the whole House, and say,

The LESSON. S. Mark iii. 11.
AND unclean Spirits when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried,
saying, Thou art the Son of GOD. And he straightly charged them that they should
not make him known. And he goes up into a Mountain, and calls unto him whom
he would: And they came unto him. And he ordained twelve, that they should be
with him, and that he might send them forth to preach; and to have Power to
heal Sicknesses, and to cast out Devils.

V. The Sparrow has found her an House.

R. And the Turtle a Nest where she may lay her Young.

The PRAYER.
GRANT, O LORD GOD, unto us thy Servants, that we may enjoy perpetual Peace of
Mind and Soundness of Body, and by the Intercession of the glorious and blessed
Mary, always a Virgin, be delivered from our present Sorrow, and obtain thy
everlasting Joy, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. And be thou so present with us
thy humble Servants, that as when the Priests came out of the Tabernacle, the
Cloud of thy Glory filled thy whole House; so let thy Grace illuminate this
House to us that go into it, that it may be delivered from the Workings of the
Devil, and be a Dwelling for Men, replenished with all Benediction, through the
same our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who live and reignest with thee in the
Unity of the Holy Spirit, God, World without End. Amen.

The Office on Sunday.
ON Sunday, after the Priest has placed himself in one of the largest and most
sumptuous Parts of the House, he shall direct this Exorcism to the Demons that
haunt it, saying,

I Exorcise you, O ye Demons, who have thus boldly presumed to invade this
Habitation of Men, and give such Disquietude to its Inhabitants, by the Tri-une
GOD, whose is the Earth, and the fullness thereof, the round World, and they
that dwell therein; by our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who continuing what he was, made
himself Man, conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of a Virgin, and who for our
Sakes, when he had undergone many Sufferings, underwent also the Torment of the
cruel Cross, upon which he bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost, that he might
obtain for us, abundant Grace in the present Life, and in the World to come
Life everlasting. By all the Grace acquired for us; by the Grace of Faith
conferred in Baptism, of Fortitude in Confirmation, of Charity in the
Eucharist, of Justice in Penance, of Hope in extreme Unction, of Temperance in
Matrimony, and of Prudence in holy Orders, and by all holy Men and Women, the
Saints of GOD, who now inherit eternal Glory, and by all their Merits; that you
remove this your presumptuous Power from this House, and continue here no
longer, nor any more vex its Inhabitants.

Then let him exorcise the whole House by saying,

I Exorcise this House, which was built for the Use of humane Kind, by the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the omnipotent GOD, who built the House of the
whole World for Man, and put all Things in it in Subjection under his Feet; and
by CHRIST our LORD, who is the Fountain of all Grace, and the Origin of all
Virtue; by his unparalled Poverty, of which he truly said, The Foxes have
Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where
to lay his Head. By his Meekness, he himself saying of it, Learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in Heart: By his Weeping. when he beheld the City Jerusalem
and wept over it, saying, If thou had known: By the Hunger and Thirst of his
Righteousness, saying, My Meat is to do the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven: By his Mercy which excited him to say, I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice: By his Purity of Heart, of which he could say, Be ye holy, for I am
holy: By the Peace which he always loved, as at the last he showed, when he
said, Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you: And by that Persecution
which he suffered for Righteousness Sake, which he himself attests, saying, If
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: And by the Holy
Apostles, and by the Effusion of their Blood, and by all holy Men and holy
Women; that thou may be blessed, and obtain from GOD above, such Virtue by
our Ministry, that thou may become to the evil Spirits a new Hell, and a
burning Furnace of eternal Horror, so that they may flee from every Corner, and
leave thee entirely free, that thou may become a comfortable Habitation for
Men, and that GOD may ever be glorified.

After that, let him bless the House in the following Manner.

V. O LORD hear my Prayer.

R. And let my Cry come unto thee.

V. He has blessed the House of Israel.

R. He has blessed the House of Aaron.

Mac. B. 2. C. 14.
THOU, O LORD of all Things, who have Need of nothing, wast pleased that the
Temple of thine Habitation should be among us; and therefore now, O Holy LORD
of all Holiness, keep this House ever undefiled, which lately was cleansed. And
grant unto us the Abundance of thy Goodness, that this House may be blessed and
sanctified of thee by our Ministry, that the evil Angels may abdicate it, and
it may be a Protection for the Faithful, a pure Habitation for the Holy Angels,
and a Possession always worthy of thy Care, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy
Son, who lives and reigns with thee in the Unity of the Holy Spirit, GOD,
who shall come to judge the Quick and Dead, and the World by Fire. Amen.

Then let the Image of our SAVIOR upon the Cross, he erected in an open Part
of the principal Room in the House; and let the Priest sprinkle the whole House
with holy Water, from Top even to the Bottom, saying,

The LESSON. St. Luke, Chap. xix.
AND JESUS entered and passed through Jericho. And behold there was a Man named
Zaccheus, which was the Chief among the Publicanes, and he was rich, and he
sought to see JESUS who he was, and he could not for the Press, because he was
little of Stature. And he ran before, and climbed up into a Sycomore Tree to
see him, for he was to pass that Way. And when JESUS came to the Place, he
looked up and saw him, and said unto him, Zaccheus make haste and come down,
for to Day I must abide at thy House. And he made haste and came down, and
received him joyfully. And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, That he
was gone to be a Guest with a Man that is a Sinner. And Zaccheus stood and said
unto the LORD, Behold, LORD, the Half of my Goods I give to the Poor: And if I
have taken any Thing of any Man, by false Accusation, I restore him fourfold.
And JESUS said unto him, This Day is Salvation come to this House, forasmuch as
he also is the Son of Abraham. For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save
that which was lost.

When all these Things are done, let Abyssum, which is a Kind of an Herb, be
procured, and after it is signed with the Sign of the Cross, let it be hung up
at the four Corners of the House.

I suppose the Reason of proceeding after this Manner Day by Day, is that the
Devil may be gradually banished: And to be sure, what is observed on the last
of the Days, viz. The ordering of the Crucifix, the holy Water, the Abyssum
tied to the four Corners of the House, is to keep the Devil out when he is out.

St. Austin tells us a Story of one Vir -- Hesperitius -- Ubi -- Domum suam
spirituum maiignorum vim noxiam perpeti comperisset, rogavit nostros, me
absente, Presbyteros, ut aliquis eorum illo pergeret cujus orationibus
cederent; perrexit unus, obtulit ibi sacrificium corporis Christi, orans
quantum potuit, ut cessaret illa vexatio. Deo protinus miserante cessarit. Aug.
de Civit. Dei, Lib. 22. Cap. 8.
Hesperitius, whose House was troubled with evil Spirits, who came once, in his
Absence, to his Presbyters, and begged their Assistance. Upon which one of them
went along with him; and when he had offered the Sacrifice of the Body of
CHRIST, and prayed in a most fervent Manner, the House, by the Mercy of GOD,
was no longer troubled.

Here is indeed an Account of a House being haunted, but not a Word of any such
Order in the dispossessing it. The Priest goes immediately over the Threshold
into the troubled Apartment, and expells the Spirits by his Prayers. Had such
Forms been customary in the Days of St. Austin, had the Crucifix, holy Water
and Abyssum, been used, no Question but here, or somewhere else, we should have
had some Account of it: But these Ages were unacquainted with such whimsical
Forms of exorcising; and if the Story be true, it was nothing but Prayer that
quieted the House. It Is ridiculous to suppose that the Prince of Darkness will
yield to such feeble Instruments as Water and Herbs and Crucifixes. These
Weapons are not spiritual but carnal: Whereas, in resisting this potent Enemy,
we must put on the whole Armor of GOD, that we may be able to resist him:
Which is such a Composition, as is entirely free from the least Allay or
Mixture of any such Superstitions.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XI.
I Find little that may be added concerning the exorcising haunted Houses, a
Species of the Black Art which is now almost forgotten in this Kingdom. Perhaps
the Form is worth preserving as a Curiosity, as we hang up rusty Pieces of old
Armor: A Proof how much ado there may have been about nothing! (and yet it may
be supposed not altogether for nothing either!)

St. Chrysostom is said to have insulted some African Conjurers of old with
this humiliating and singular Observation: Miserable and woeful Creatures that
we are, we cannot so much as expel Fleas, much less Devils Obsession of the
Devil, is distinguished from Possession in this: In Possession, the Evil One
was said to enter into the Body of the Man: -- In Obsession, without entering
into the Body of the Person, he was thought to besiege and torment him without;
-- to be lifted up into the Air, and afterward to be thrown down on the Ground
violently, without receiving any Hurt; -- to speak strange Languages, that the
Person had never learned; -- not to be able to come near holy Things, or the
Sacraments, but to have an Aversion to them; -- to know and foretell secret
Things; -- to perform Things that exceed the Person's Strength; -- to say or do
Things, that the Person would not or durst not say, if he were not externally
moved to it, were the ancient Marks and Criterions of Obsession.

Calmet in Bailey's Dict. The old vulgar Ceremonies used in raising the Devil,
such as making a Circle with Chalk, setting an old Hat in the Center of it,
repeating the Lord's Prayer backwards, etc. etc. are now altogether obsolete,
and seem to be forgotten even amongst our boys. -- None will desire to see them
revived amongst them, yet it were to be wished that many of these little Gentry
had not substituted the doing Things really bad for this seemingly profane, but
truly ridiculous Mode, or rather Mockery of the ancient magical Incantation!


.

The learned Seldom observes on this Occasion, that there was never a merry
World since the Fairies left dancing, and the Parson left conjuring I subjoin a
very pertinent Quotation from the learned Author of the Origin and Increase of
Depravity in Religion.

Apud tum Poetas, tum Historiographos de magicis incantationibus, Exorcismis et
Curatione tum hominum quam belluarum per Carmina haud pauca habentur, sed horum
Impietatem omnium superat long hac in re Papismus -- Hic enim supra Dei
potestatem posse Carmina, posse Exorcismos affirmat -- ita ut nihil sit tam
obstrusum in coelis, quod Exorcismis non pateat, nihil tam abditum in inferno,
quod non eruatur -- Nihil in Terrarum silentio inclusum, quod non eliciatur --
Nihil in hominum pectoribus conditum, quod non reveletur -- nihil ablatum, quod
non restituatur, et nihil quod habet Orbis, sive insit, sive non, e quo Demon
non ejiciatur. Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 8.

Pliny tells us that Houses were anciently hallowed against Evil Spirits with
Brimstone! This Charm has been converted by later Times into what our Satyrist,
Churchill, in his Prophecy of Famine, calls "a precious and rare Medicine," and
is now used (but I suppose with greater Success) in exorcising those of our
unfortunate Fellow Creatures, who are haunted or possessed with a certain fiery
Spirit, said by the Wits of the South to be well known, seen, and felt, and
very troublesome in the North!


. -- The Opinion of the latter kept Thieves in Awe, and did as much Good in a
Country as a Justice of Peace.

This facetious and pointedly sensible Writer enquires farther, Why have we now
none possessed with Devils in England? The old Answer is, The Devil has the
Protestants already, and the Papists are so holy he dares not meddle with them.

Casting out Devils (he adds) is mere juggling; they never cast out any but
what they first cast in. They do it where for Reverence no Man shall dare to
examine it; they do it in a Corner, in a Mortice-hole, not in the Marketplace.
They do nothing but what may be done by Art; they make the Devil fly out of the
Window in the Likeness of a Bat or a Rat. Why do they not hold him? Why in the
Likeness of a Bat, or a Rat, or some Creature? that is, Why not in some Shape
we paint him in, with Claws and Horns? Answer may be made to his pertinent
Question, that real Bats and Rats may be procured -- but every Carver is not to
be trusted with the making of a horned or cloven-footed Image of the Devil.

Impious and antichristian Rome In an Age when every wretched Sophister,
drawing his Conclusions from false Premises, wishes to confound the pure Spirit
of Christian Philosophy with these and the like Adulterations of it, I must at
least be pardoned for obtruding the subsequent Eulogy, extracted from an old
Tragedy; -- no professed Divine has perhaps ever exhibited more forcibly the
Grandeur and Utility of Christianity, than these few Lines do: If these are
Christian Virtues, I am Christian,
The Faith that can inspire this generous Change,
Must be divine -- and glows with all its God!
Friendship and Constancy and Right and Pity,
All these were Lessons I had learned before,
But this unnatural Grandeur of the Soul
Is more than mortal, and outreaches Virtue;
It draws, it charms, it binds me to be Christian!
Hill's Alzira.


! it is impossible to say how much thou have prejudiced the Cause of manly and
rational Religion by these, and the like thy childish (to give no harsher Name
to thy) Fooleries and Superstitions!

CHAP. XII. Of Saturday Afternoon; how observed of old, by the ancient
Christians, the Church of Scotland, and the old Church of England: What End we
should observe it for: An Exhortation to the Observation of it.
IT is usual, in Country Places and Villages, where the Politeness of the Age
has made no great Conquest, to observe some particular Times with some
Ceremonies, which were customary in the Days of our Forefathers: Such are the
great Festivals of Christmas, Easter, and several others, which they observe
with Rites and Customs appropriated to them.

Among these we find a great Deference paid to Saturday Afternoon, above the
other worky Days of the Week: Then the Labors of the Plough ceast, and
Refreshment and Ease are over all the Village.

This seems to be the Remains of a laudable Custom once in this Land (but now
almost buried in that general Contempt of Religion and Love of the World, which
prevail so much every where) of attending the Evening Prayers on Saturday, and
laying aside the Concerns of this Life, to be fitter for the Duties of the Day
following. For Baily, Prac. Piety, P. 453.
it was an holy Custom among our Forefathers, when at the Ringing to Prayer
the Eve before the Sabbath, the Husbandman would give over his Labor in the
Field, and the Tradesman his Work in the Shop, and go to Evening Prayer in the
Church, to prepare their Souls, that their Minds might more cheerfully attend
GOD's Worship on the Sabbath Day.

And indeed it was the Custom both of the Jewish and the Christian Church. They
neither of them entered upon the Sabbath, without some Preparation for it. Moses
Exodus xvi. Mark xiv.
taught the Jews to remember the Sabbath over Night; from whence in all
Probability it comes to pass, that the Eve of the Jewish Sabbath is called the
Preparation. The Preparation mentioned by the Evangelists, begun at Three a
Clock on Friday Afternoon; it was proclaimed with the Noise of Trumpets and
Horns, that they might be better put in Mind of the Sabbath's drawing on, and
of that Preparation which was requisite for it.

Among the primitive Christians the LORD'S Day was always ushered in with a
Pernoctation or Vigil. They assembled in the House of GOD, and sung Psalms and
Praises to him a great Part of the Night, that they might be better prepared to
serve him on his own Day following.

In the Year of our LORD 1203, William King of Scotland In Scotia anno salutis
1203, Gulielmus Rex primorum Regni sui concilium cogit, cui etiam interfuit
Pontificius Legatus, in quo decretum est, ut Saturni Dies abhora 12 Meridiei
sacer esset, neque quisquam res profanas exerceret, quemadmodum aliis quoque
festis diebus vetitum id erat. Idque campanae pulsu populo indicaretur, ac
postea sacris rebus, ut diebus festis operam darint, concionibus interessent,
vesperas audirent, idque in diem lunae facerent, constituta transgressoribus
gravi paena. Boet. Lib. 13. de Scot. ex Hospin. P. 176.
called a Council of the chief Men of his Kingdom, at which also was present
the Pope's Legate; and it was then determined, that Saturday after the twelfth
Hour should be kept holy; that no one should follow their Business nor
Callings, but desist as on other Holy Days: That they should be put in Mind of
it by the Tolling of the Bell, and then mind the Business of Religion as on
Holy Days, be present at the Sermon, and hear Vespers; that this should be the
Practice till Monday Morning, and whoever acted otherwise should be severely
punished.

And this, as is said before, was also the Custom of our own Country, long
before this ordered in Scotland. For in the Year 958, when King Edgar made his
Ecclesiastical Laws, we find one made to this very Purpose: In which it is
ordered, That Dies sabbati ab ipsa diei saturni hora pomeridiana tertia, usque
in luminarii diei diluculum festus agitator, etc. Seld. Analect. Angl. Lib. 2.
Cap. 6.
the Sabbath or Sunday shall be observed from Saturday at Mr. Johnson upon this
Law says, That the Noontide signifies Three in the Afternoon, according to our
present Account: And this Practice, I conceive, continued down to the
Reformation. In King Winfred's Time, the LORD's Day did not begin till Sunset
on the Saturday. See 654. Numb. 10. Three in the Afternoon was hora nona in the
Latin Account, and therefore called Noon. How it came afterward to signify
Midday, I can but guess. The Monks by their Rules, could not eat their Dinner,
till they had said their Noon Song, which was a Service regularly to be said at
Three a Clock; but they probably anticipated their Devotions and their Dinner,
by saying their Noon Song immediately after their Midday Song, and presently
falling on. I wish they had never been guilty of a worse Fraud than this. But
it may fairly be supposed, that when Midday became the Time of Dining and
saying Noon Song, it was for this Reason called Noon by the Monks, who were the
Masters of the Language during the dark Ages. In the Shepherds Almanac. Noon
is Mid day, High-noon Three a Clock. Johnson, Constable. Part 1. Ann 958.
Noon, till the Light appear on Monday Morning.

Now hence has come the present Custom, of spending a Part of Saturday
Afternoon without servile Labor. And that our Forefathers, when the Bell was
heard, attended the Evening Prayer, not fearing the Loss of Time, nor the
Necessities of Poverty. Happy would it be for us, would we so banish the Care
of the Body for the Care of the Soul! Would we leave to converse about secular
Business, and mind then the Business of Religion; would we remember that it is
Luke xxiii. 54.
the Preparation, and that the Sabbath draws on.

When Jacob was going to worship GOD at Bethel, he ordered his Family to Genesis
xxxv. 2.
put away the strange Gods that were among them, and be clean, and change their
Garments, and arise and go to Bethel. He knew that the GOD of Purity and
Holiness was to be approached with the utmost Purity they could possibly cloth
themselves with. And would we, before we enter into the Presence of GOD on his
own Day, endeavor to purify our selves from the Filth of the World we have
contracted in the Days before; would we disperse these busy Swarms of Things,
which so attract our Minds, and prepare our selves for the following Day; we
should appear before GOD, less earthly and more heavenly, less sinful and more
holy; Our Psalm cxliv. 2.
Prayers would be set forth in his Sight as the Incense, and the lifting up of
our Hands be an Evening Sacrifice: And like the Smell of Jacob's Garment in the
Nostrils of his Father, the Smell of our Prayers would Genesis xxvii. 27.
be like the Smell of a Field which the LORD has blessed.

And now what is this Preparation, but the Trimming of our Lamps against we
meet the LORD on the next Day? Our Bodies should be refreshed by ceasing early
from their Labor, that they may be active and vigorous; and our Souls washed
with Sobriety and Temperance, and the private or public Prayer of the Evening.
Thus should we meet the LORD at Bethel, and obtain those Mercies we sought of
him there.

Art thou then blessed with an affluence of Things, and has Providence placed
Thee above the careful Sations of Life? What Reason then can be sufficient for
thy Neglect of this Custom? For neither can thou plead the want of Time,
neither do thou dread the straits of Poverty.

Or art thou involved in the Cares of Business? Do thou earn thy Bread by the
Sweat of thy Face, and the Labors of thy Hands? O well is Thee! And happy
may thou be. Would thou dedicate this small Time to the Service of GOD, it
would be like the Widow's Mite, which was more than all that was thrown into
the Treasury: But perhaps, thou will say thou art under the Yoke, subject to
Servitude, and obliged to work even to the latter End of the Day. It may be so,
but yet, as GOD is every where present, so would thou Remember that it is the
Preparation, and put up an Ejaculation at thy Work, GOD would accept it, and it
would prove to thee, an equal Good with the other Preparation. Cassian Haec
officia -- per totum dici spatium jugiter cum operis adjectione, spontanea
celebrantur. Cassian, Instit. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
tells us, That the ancient Monk, whilst they were working in the private
Cells, repeated their Religious Offices: And St. Jerome, when he is commending
the pleasing Retirement of the Village of Bethlehem, In Christi villa tuta
rusticitas est. Extra psalmos, silentium est. Quocunque te verteris, arator
stiuam retinens alleluia decantatur, sud^ns messor psalmis se advocat, etc.
Hierom, Ep. 18. ad Marcel.
says, That in the Village of CHRIST, there is a secure Rusticity: No Noise is
heard there, but the Singing of Psalms. Wheresoever you go, you have either the
Plough-Man singing Hallelujahs as he is holding the Plough, or the sweating
Mower pleasing himself with Hymns; or the Vine-dresser singing David's Psalms.
These without doubt were acceptable to GOD, and thine undoubtedly will be
acceptable also.

But if thou art not tied down by Necessity, do not say that the common
Necessaries of Life require then thy Labor: For this is not losing, but
Redeeming the Time; what thou spendest in the Care of thy Soul, is not lost in
the Care of thy Body. Never was Man poorer, for observing the Duties of
Religion. If thou lose any Thing of the Wages of the Day, to do the Service of
GOD, he will take care to supply it, thou shall be no loser.

Why then art thou fearful, O! Thou of little Faith! Why do thou take so much
Thought for thy Life? Behold the Fowls of the Air, for they sow not, neither do
they reap, nor gather into Barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them: Art
thou not much better than they? And why take thou thought for Raiment?
Consider the Lilies of the Field, they toil not, neither do they Spin; and yet
I say unto thee, that Solomon, in all his Glory, was not arrayed like one of
these. And shall he not much more Cloth thee, O Thou of little Faith!
Therefore take no Thought for what thou shall Eat, or what thou shall Drink, or
where withal thou shall be Clothed; but seek thou first the Kingdom of GOD and
his Righteousness; prefer the Care of these, to the Care of all other Things,
and all these Things shall be added unto Thee.

Let not then the busy Cares of this Life, be any hinderance to thy Care of the
other; set apart this small Time, for the Time of Preparation, and look on it,
as an Emblem of the whole Time of Life: Which is our Day of Preparation, for
the eternal Sabbath, the everlasting Rest, the undisturbed Quiet of the other
Life.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XII.
THE religious Observation of the Saturday Afternoon is now entirely at an End
I should be happy, were I able to say with Truth that the Conclusion of that of
the Sunday too did not seem to be approaching.

Mr. Bourne uses great Affectation in translating the Quotation from Seldom. He
has printed the Latin erroneously too: It ought to be in lunaris diei
diliculum, etc. -- The Sabbath was not to be observed from Saturday at Noon,
but from three o'Clock on that Day in the Afternoon, and whatever Part of the
Day might have been called Noon at the Time he alludes to, he might have hinted
to us in a Note, without confounding it in his Text with the Midday of this
Age.

To our Author's Account of the Custom of the old Churches of England and
Scotland, an Alteration may be added, of which he seems never to have heard. It
is, that in the Year 1332, at a Provincial Council, held by Archbishop Mepham,
at Magfield, after Complaint made, that instead of fasting upon the Vigils,
they ran out to all the Excesses of Riot, etc. it was appointed, among many
other Things relative to Holy Days, that the Solemnity for Sunday should begin
upon Saturday in the Evening, and not before, to prevent the Misconstruction of
keeping a Judaical Sabbath Mr Wheatly tells us, that in the East, the Church
thought sit to indulge the Humor of the Judaizing Christians so far, as to
observe the Saturday as a Festival Day of Devotion, and thereon to meet for the
Exercise of religious Duties, -- as is plain from several Passages of the
Ancients. Illustration of Common Prayer, p. 191.
. See Collier's Ecclesiastic Hist. Vol. I. p. 531.

Our Author's Exhortation toward the Conclusion of this Chapter is, I think,
liable to Misconstruction: An Inference might easily be deduced from it in
favor of Idleness. -- Perhaps Men, who live by manual Labor, or have Families
to support by it, cannot better spend their Saturday Afternoon, than in
following the several Callings, in which they have employed themselves on the
preceding Days of the Week. -- Industry will be no bad Preparation to the
Sabbath!

Considered in a Political View, much Harm has been done by that prodigal
Waste of Days, very falsely called Holy Days, in the Church of Rome. They have
greatly favored the Cause of Vice and Dissipation without doing any essential
Service to that of rational Religion. -- Complaints seem to have been made in
almost every Synod and Council, of the Licentiousness introduced by the keeping
of Vigils. -- Nor will the Philosopher wonder at this, for it has its
Foundation in the Nature of Things For the Honor of human Nature, (which like
the majestic Ruins of Palmyra, though prostrate in the Dust, is still
respectable in its Decay) I forbear to translate the subsequent Quotation from
Dr. Moresin. Et videre contigit. Anno 1582, Lugduni in Vigiliis Natalium Domini
deprehensos in stupro duos post Missantis Altar hora inter duodecimam et
primam noctis. cum praeter unum aut aliud Altaris lumen, nullum esset in Templo
reliquum, etc. Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 177.
.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Yule-Clog and Christmas-Candle; what they may signify;
their Antiquity; the like Customs in other Places.
IN the Primitive Church, Christmas Day was always observed as the Lord's Day
was, and was in like Manner preceded by an Eve or Vigil. Hence it is that our
Church has ordered an Eve before it, which is observed by the Religious, as a
Day of Preparation for that great Festival.

Our Forefathers, when the common Devotions of the Eve were over, and Night
was come on, were wont to light up Candles of an uncommon Size, which were
called Christmas-Candles, and to lay a Log of Wood upon the Fire, which they
termed a Yule-Clog, or Christmas-Block. These were to Illuminate the House, and
turn the Night into Day; which Custom, in some Measure, is still kept up in the
Northern Parts.

It has, in all probability, been derived from the Saxons. Forbid tells us,
That this very Night was observed in this Land before, by the Heathen Saxons.
They Incipiebant autem annum ab octavo calendarum Januarii die, ubi nunc natale
domini celebramus; and ipsam noctem nuuc nobis sacro-sanctam tunc gentili
vocabulo maedrenack, i. e. matrum noctem appellabant: Ob causam, ut suspicamur,
ceremoniarum, quas in ea pervigiles agebant. Beda de Rat. Temp. Cap. 13.
began, says he, their Year on the Eight of the Calends of January, which is
now our Christmas Day: And the very Night before, which is now Holy to us, was
by them called Maedrenack, or the Night of Mothers; because, as we imagine, of
those Ceremonies which were performed that Night. The Yule-Clog therefore has
probably been a Part of that Night's Ceremonies. The very Name seems to speak
it, and tells its Original to every Age.

It seems to have been used, as an Emblem of the return of the Sun, and the
lengthening of the Days. For as December guili, eodem quo Januarius nomine
vocatur. -- Guili a conversione solis in auctum diei, nomen accipit. Beda, ibid.
both December and January were called Guili or Gehol or Geol Angl Sax. Jol vel
Jul, Dan. Sax. And to this Day in the North Yule, You Will, signifies the solemn
Festival of Christmas, and were Words used to denote a Time of Festivity very
anciently, and before the Introduction of Christianity among the Northern
Nations. Learned Men have disputed much about this Word, some deriving it from
Julius Caesar, others from the Word Gehthe^l, a Wheel, as Bede, who would
therefore have it so called, because of the Return of the Sun's annual Course,
after the Winter Solitice. But he, writing de Rat. Temp. speaks rather as an
Astronomer than an An^i^^^ry. The best Antiquaries derive it from the Word, Ol,
Ale, which was much used in their Festivities and merry Meetings. And the I in
Iol, iul cimbr. as the Ge and Gi in Gehol, Geol, Giul, Sax, are premised only
as Intensives to add a little to the Signification, and make it more
emphatical. Ol or Ale, as has been observed, did not only signify the Liquor
they made Use of, but gave Denomination likewise to their greatest Festivals,
as that of Gehol or Yule at Midwinter; and as is yet plainly to be discerned in
that Custom of the Whitsan-Ale, at the other great Festival. Elstob. Sax. Hom.
Birth. Day-Greg. Append P. 29.

Bishop Stillingfleet has also taken Notice of this, and says, That some think
the Name of this Feast was taken from Iola, which in the Gothic Language
signifies to make merry. But he seems not inclinable to this Opinion, and
therefore tells us, that Olaus Rudbeck thinks the former ( viz. Its being
called so from the Joy that was conceived at the Return of the Sun) more
proper, not only from Bede's Authority, but because in the old Runick Fasti, a
Wheel was used to denote that Festival. Stilling. Orig. Britain.


Yule, upon Account of the Sun's Returning, and the Increase of the Days; so, I
am apt to believe, the Log has had the Name of the Yule-Log, from its being
burnt as an Emblem of the returning Sun, and the Increase of its Light and Heat.

This was probably the Reason of the Custom among the Heathen Saxons; but I
cannot think the Observation of it was continued for the same Reason, after
Christianity was embraced. For Bishop Stillingfleet observes in his Origines
Britanicae, That though the ancient Saxons observed Twelve Days at that Time,
and sacrificed to the Sun, in hopes of his Returning; yet when Christianity
prevailed, all these Idolatrous Sacrifices were laid aside, and that Time of
Feasting was joined with the religious Solemnity of that Season, which in other
Parts of the World were observed by Christians. And in like Manner as these
Days of Feasting were joined with the religious Solemnities of that Season, so
the keeping up of this Custom, seems to have been done with another View, than
it was originally. If a Conjecture may be allowed, it might have been done on
Account of our Savior's Birth, which happened that Night. For as the Burning
of it before Christianity, was an Emblem of the Coming of the Sun, which they
worshipped as their God; so the continuing it after, might have been for a
Symbol of that Light, which was that Night born into the World: The Light that
shines in Darkness; the Light that lightened the Gentiles, that turned them
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto GOD.

And indeed it will be some strengthening of the Conjecture, that Light has
been the Emblem of several Things, both in Scripture, and in the ancient
Church: For the Scripture makes use of it, and the Church in Imitation of the
Scripture, as a lively Reresentation of several Things. Thus Light is the
Emblem of GOD: For GOD is Light, says the Apostle St. John. John the Baptist
was a Burning and a Shining Light. And therefore in some Places it Feruntur
quoque brandae seu faces ardentes, and fiunt ignes, qui significant sanctum
Joannem, qui fuit lumen and lucerna ardens, and praecedens and praecursor verae
lucis, quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum. Durand. Rational.
Lib. 7. Cap. 14. Nu. 12.
is customary to carry Torches on St. John the Baptist's Eve, to represent St.
John Baptist himself, who was a Burning and a Shining Light, and a Preparer of
the Way for the True Light, that lighteneth every Man that comes into the
World. The Apostles were the Light of the World; and as our Savior was
frequently called Light, so was his Coming into the World signified, and
pointed out by the Emblems of Light: It was then (says our Countryman Gregory)
the longest Night in all the Year; and it was the midst of that, and yet there
was Day where he was: For a glorious and betokening Light shined round about
this Holy Child. So says Tradition, and so the Masters describe the Night Piece
of the Nativity. If this be called in Question, as being only Tradition, it is
out of Dispute, that the Light which illuminated the Fields of Bethlehem, and
shone round about the Shepherds as they were watching their Flocks, was an
Emblem of that Light, which was then come into the World. What Quid est quod
apparenti angelo divinae quoque claritatis splendour eos circumdedit, quod
nunquam in tota testamenti veteris serie and reperimus, cum tam innumeris
vicibus angeli prophetis and justis apparuerunt, nusquam eos fulgore divinae
lucis homines circumdedisse legimus; nisi quod hoc privilegium recte hujus
temporis dignitati servatum est? etc. Bed. Hyem. de Sanct. in Gal. Cant.
can be the meaning, says venerable Bede, that this Apparition of Angels was
surrounded with that heavenly Light, which is a Thing we never meet with in all
the Old Testament? For though Angels have appeared to Prophets and holy Men, yet
we never read of their Appearing in such Glory and Splendour before. It must
surely be, because this Privilege was reserved for the Dignity of this Time.
For when the true Light of the World, was born in the World, it was very proper
that the Proclaimer of his Nativity, should appear in the Eyes of Men, in such
an heavenly Light, as was before unseen in the World. And that supernatural
Star, which was the Guide of the Eastern Magi, was a Figure of that Star, which
was risen out of Jacob; of that Light which should lighten the Gentiles. GOD,
says Bishop Tailor, sent a miraculous Star, to invite and lead them to a new
and more glorious Light, the Light of Grace and Glory,

In Imitation of this, as Gregory tells us, the Church went on with the
Ceremony: And hence it was, that for the three or four First Centuries, the
whole Eastern Church, called the Day, which they observed for our Savior's
Nativity, the Epiphany or Manifestation of the Light. And Cassian tells ut,
Intra Egypti Regionem mos iste traditione antiqua servatur, ut peracto
epiphaniorum die, etc. Cassian, Coll. 10. C. 20.
That it was a Custom in Egypt, handed down by Tradition, as soon as the
Epiphany, or Day of Light was over, etc. Hence also came that ancient Custom of
the same Church, taken Notice of by St. Jerome, of Absque martyrum reliquiis
per totas orientis ecclesias, quum legendum est evangelium, accenduntur
luminaria jam sole rutilante, non utique ad fugandas tenebras, sed ad signum
laetitiae demonstrandum, etc. Jerome, Cont. Vigil Cap. 2.
lighting up Candles at the Reading of the Gospel, even at Noonday; and that,
not to drive away the Darkness, but to speak their Joy for the good Tidings of
the Gospel, and be an Emblem of that Light, which the Psalmist says, was a Lamp
unto his Feet, and a Light unto his Paths.

Light therefore having been an Emblem of so many Things, and particularly of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, both in the sacred History, and in the Practice of the
Church; it is no way improbable, that after their Conversion, the Saxons used
it as an Emblem of him, who that Night came into the World, and was the Light
thereof. In the City of Constantinople, on the Eve of Easter, there was a
Custom practiced, much like this of ours on Christmas-Eve. For then the whole
City was illuminated with Tapers and Torches, which continued all the Night,
turning the Night into Day, till almost the Day appeared. The Reason of this
Custom, was to represent that Light which the next Day arose upon the World.
The Difference between these two Customs, is that of the Time, the Reason of
their Observation is much the same. The one illuminated the Eve of Easter, that
there might be an Emblem of the Sun of Righteousness, who the next Day arose
upon the World; the other, the Eve of Yule, to give an Emblem of that Light
which was the Day spring from on High. Nay, this Eve of Yule, as Gregory tells
us, was illuminated with so many Tapors among the Ancients, as to give to the
Vigil the Name of Vigilia Luminum; and the Ancients, says he, did well to send
Lights one to another, whatever some think of the Christmas-Candle.

Eus. Vit. Constan. Cap. 22. Lib. 5.
OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XIII.
MR. Bourne omits the Yule-Dough, (or Dow) a Kind of Baby or little Image of
Paste, which our Bakers used formerly to bake at this Season, and present to
their Customers, in the same Manner as the Chandlers gave Christmas Candles.
They are called Yule-Cakes in the county of Durham. I find in the ancient
Calendar of the Romish Church In Vaticano -- Dulcia Patribus exhibentur.

In Cupidinariorum mensis, omnium generum Imagunculae.

Vide Librum rarissimum, cui titulus Ephemeris, sive Diarium Historicum: etc.
Francofurti. 1590. Quarto.


, that at Rome, on the Vigil of the Nativity, Sweetmeats were presented to the
Fathers in the Vatican, and that all Kinds of little Images (no doubt of Paste)
were to be found at the Confectioners' Shops.

There is the greatest Probability that we have had from hence both our
Yule-Doughs Dough or Dow is vulgarly used in the North for a little Cake,
though it properly signifies a Mass of Flour tempered with Water, Salt, Yeast,
and kneaded sit for baking. -- It is derived, as Junius tells us, from the
Dutch Deeg, which comes from the Theotiscan, t^iben, to grow bigger, or rise,
as (if I mistake not) the Bakers term it.
and Mince Pies, the latter of which are still in common Use at this Season.
The Yule-Dough has perhaps been intended for an Image of the Child Jesus. It is
now, if I mistake not, pretty generally laid aside, or at most retained only by
Children.

J. Boemus In trium quintarum feriarum noctibus, quae proxime Domini nostri
natalem praecedunt, utriusque Sexus pueri domesticatim eunt januas pulsantes,
cantantesque; futurum Salvatoris exortum annunciant et salubrem annum: unde ab
his qui in aedibus sunt, pyra, poma, nuces and nummos etiam percipiunt. P. 264.
Aubanus tells us, that in Franconia, on the three Thursday Nights preceding
the Nativity of our Lord, it is customary for the Youth of both Sexes to go
from House to House, knocking at the Doors, singing their Christmas Carrols,
and wishing a happy new Year. -- They get in Return from the Houses they stop
at, Pears, Apples, Nuts, and even Money.

Little Troops of Boys and Girls still go about in this very Manner at
Newcastle, some few Nights before, on the Night of the Eve of this Day, and on
that of the Day itself. -- The Hagmena is still preserved among them. They
still conclude too with wishing " It is ordinary among some Plebeians in the
South of Scotland, to go about from Door to Door upon New Year's Eve, crying
Hagmane, a corrupted Word from the Greek (...), i. e. Holy Month. (It is more
probably a Corruption of some Saxon Words.)

John Dixon holding forth against this Custom once in a Sermon at Kelso, says,
"Sirs, do you know what Hagmane signifies? It is the Devil be in the House!
that is the Meaning of its Hebrew Original." Vide Scotch Presb. Eloquence, p.
102.

One preaching against the Observation of Christmas, said in a Scotch Jingle,
Ye will say, Sirs, good old You Will Day; I tell you, good old Fool Day. -- You
will say it is a brave Holiday; I tell you it is a brave Belly Day. Ibid. p.
98. This is Jack tearing off the Lace and making a plain Coat! See Swift's Tale
of a Tub.


a merry Christmas and a happy new Year."

We are told in the Athenian Oracle, that the Christmas This is still retained
in Barbers' Shops: -- A Thrift-Box (as it is vulgarly called) is put up against
the Wall, and every Customer puts in something. -- Mr Gay mentions it thus:
Some Boys are rich by Birth beyond all Wants,
Beloved by Uncles and kind, good old Aunts;
When Time comes round a Christmas Box they bear,
And one Day makes them rich for all the Year.
Gay's Trivia.


Box Money is derived from hence. -- The Romish Priests had Masses said for
almost every Thing: If a Ship went out to the Indies, the Priests had a Box in
her, under the Protection of some Saint: And for Masses, as their Cant was, to
be said for them to that Saint, etc. the poor People must put in something into
the Priests' Box, which is not to be opened till the Ship return.

The Mass at that Time was called Christmas Christmas, says Seldom, succeeds
the Saturnalia, the same Time, the same Number of Holy Days, when the Master
waited upon the Servants like the Lord of Misrule. Table Talk.

In the Feast of Christmas, says Stow in his Survey, there was in the King's
House, a Lord of Misrule, or Master of Merry Disports, and the like had ye in
the House of every Nobleman of Honor, or good Worship, were he spiritual or
temporal. The Mayor of London and either of the Sheriffs had their several
Lords of Misrule, ever contending, without Quarrel or Offense, who should make
the rarest Pastimes to delight the Beholders. These Lords, beginning their Rule
at All-hallon Eve, continued the same till the Morrow after the Feast of the
Purification, commonly called Candlemas Day: In which Space, there were fine
and subtle Disguisings, Masks, and Mummeries, with playing at Cards for
Counters, Nails, and Points in every House, more for Pastime than for Gain.
P. 79.

On the pulling down of Canterbury Court, Christ Church, Oxford, 1775, many of
these Counters were found. There was a Hole in the Center of each, and they
appeared to have been strung together. I saw many of them, having been in
Oxford at that Time.


; the Box, Christmas Box, or Money gathered against that Time, that Masses
might he made by the Priests to the Saints to forgive the People the
Debaucheries of that Time; and from this Servants had the Liberty to get Box
Money, that they too might be enabled to pay the Priest for his Masses, knowing
well the Truth of the Proverb, No Penny, No Paternoster

Christmas, says Blount, was called the Feast of Lights, in the Western or
Latin Church, because they used many Lights or Candles at the Feast; or rather,
because Christ, the Light of all Lights, that true Light then came into the
World.

Hence it should seem the Christmas Candle, and what was perhaps only a
Succedaneum, the Yule Clog Clog is properly a Piece of Wood, fastened about the
Legs of Beasts, to keep them from running astray. -- In a secondary or
figurative Sense, it signifies a Load, Let, or Hinderance. Thus also a
Truant-Clog. -- Bailey supposes it to come from Log, (which he derives from the
Saxon ligan, to lie, because of its Weight, it lies as it were immovable) the
Trunk of a Tree or Stump of Wood for Fuel. -- Block has the same Signification.

There is an old Scotch Proverb, He Is as bare as the Birk at Yule Even, which
perhaps alludes to this Custom; the Birk meaning a Block of the Birch Tree,
stripped of its Bark, and dried against Yule Even. -- It is spoken of one who
is exceedingly poor.


or Block, before Candies This is merely Conjecture! and yet we can do little
else but make Conjectures concerning the Origin of Customs of such remote
Antiquity.

Perhaps the Yule Block will be found at last only the Counter Part of the
Midsummer Fires, made on within Doors because of the cold Weather at this
Winter Solstice, as those in the hot Season at the Summer one are kindled in
the open Air. -- After a diligent and close Study of Ge^elin, the French
Bryant, on this Subject, one cannot fail, I think, of adopting this Hypothesis,
which is confirmed by great Probability and many cogent if not infallible
Proofs.


were in general Use -- Thus a very large Coal is often set apart at present in
the North for the same Purpose, i. e. to make a great Light on Yule or
Christmas Eve. Lights indeed seem to have been used upon all festive
Occasions: -- Thus our Illuminations, Fireworks, etc. on the News of Victories.

In the ancient Times to which we would trace back the Origin of these almost
obsolete Customs, Blocks, Logs, or Clogs of dried Wood might be easily
procured, and provided against this festive Season: At that Time of Day it must
have been in the Power but of a few to command Candles or Torches for making
their annual Illumination.

Besides the Definitions of the Word Yule, which Bourne gives us from Elstob,
Stillingfleet, etc. I shall lay yet others before my Readers, but perhaps ought
not to presume to determine which is absolutely the truest Etymon. There have
been great Controversies about this Word; and many perhaps will think it still
left in a State of Uncertainty, like the Subject of the

-- "Certant, et adhuc sub judice lis est," of Horace.

Dr. Moresin Sed Scoti adhuc efficacius soliti sunt reddere Saturnalia, qui ad
Natalia Christi per Urbes nocte ululare solebant, IUL, Iul, non a nomine Iulii
Caesaris. sed corrupt pro Io, Io, ut ficri solet in omni linguarum ad diversos
commigratione, et hodie cum ab aliis alius accipit, sit, Moresin. Deprav. Rel.
Orig. p. 106.
supposes it a Corruption of Io! Io! well known as an ancient Acclamation on
joyful Occasions.

Ule, Yeule, Yool, or Yule Games, says Blount, in our northern Parts, are taken
for Christmas Games or Sports: From the French Nouel, Christmas, which the
Normans corrupt to Nuel, and from Nuel we had Nule, or Ule.

Dr. Hammond thinks Yule should be taken immediately from the Latin Jubilum Mr.
Seldom, in defining the Word Gentlemen, tells us, that in the Beginning of
Christianity, the Fathers writ contra Gentes, and contra Gentiles, they were
all one: But after all were Christians, the better Sort of People still
retained the Name of Gentiles, throughout the four provinces of the Roman
Empire; as Gentil-homme in French, Gentil-homo in Italian, Gentil-huombre in
Spanish, and Gentil-man in English: And they, no, Question, being Persons of
Quality, kept up those Feasts which we borrow from the Gentiles: as Christmas,
Candlemass, May Day, etc. continuing what was not directly against
Christianity, which the common People would never have endured. Table Talk.
, as that signifies a Time of Rejoicing or Festivity.

M. Court de Gebelin, in his Allegories Orientales, printed at Paris, 1773, is
profuse of his Learning on the Etymon of this Word.

Iol " Iol prononce Hiol, Iul, Jul, Giul, Hweol, Wheel, Wiel, Vol, etc. est un
mot primitif qui emporta avec lui toute idee de Revolution, et de Roue.

Iul-Iom design en Arabe le premier Jour de l'annee: c'est mot a mot le Jour
de la Revolution, ou du retour.

Giul- ous en Persan signify Anniversaire. Il est affecte a celle du
Couronnement des Rois.

Hial en Danois and en Suedois signify Roue.

En Flamand, c'est Wiel.
En Anglois, Wheel.
Chez les Germains le Verb Well-en signify Tourner.

Well design les flots, parce qu'ils ne font qu' aller and venir.

C'est notre mot Houle.

De-la le Vol- vo des Latins.

Les Solstices etant le Tems ou le Soleil revient fur ses pas, en prirent le
Nom: de-la chez les Grecs le nom des Tropiques, qui signify retour.

Il en fut de meme chez les Celtes. Ils donnerent aux Solstices, et aux Mois
qui commencent aux Solstices, le nom d' Iul, qui signifioit egalement retour.

Stiernhielm, habile dans les Langues and dans les Antiquites du Nord. nous
aprend, que les anciens Habitans de la Suede celebroient au Solstice d'hyver ou
a Noel, une fete, qu'ils appelloient Iul, que ce mot signify Revolution, roue;
que le Mois de Decembre s'en apelloit, Iul-manat, Mois du retour, and que cet
mot s'ecrivoit egalement par Hiule and Giule.

Les Habitans du Comte de Lincoln en Angleterre, appellent encore Gule-Block,
Bloc, ou souche de Iul, la souche qu'on met au feu le jour de Noel, and qui
doit durer l'Octave entiere.

Il ne faudroit donc pas etre etonne si notre Mois de Juillet qui suit le
Solstice d'Ete, eut pris son nom de la. Les Romans nous disent, il est vrai,
que ce Mois tira son Nom de Jules Caesar; ce pouroit etre une Etymology digne
des Flatteries don't ils accabloient leurs Empereurs, tandis qu'ils n'auroient
fait qu'alterer la Pronunciation du mot Iul pour le fair quadrer avec le Nom
de Jules, qu'ils prononcoient Iulus, Nom que porta aussi Ascagne, Fills d'Aenee,
and qui remontoit par la meme aux Langues premieres de'l'Orient.

Il en aura ete de meme du Mois suivant. S'ils choisirent ces deux Mois pour
leur fair porter les Noms du premier and du second de leurs Empereurs, ce fut
premierement parce que les Noms de ces Mois avoient deja du raport a ceux de
Jules and d' Auguste.

Ce fut secondement, pour imiter les Egyptiens qui avoient done a ces deux
Mois le Nom de leurs deux premiers Rois, Mesor et Thot.

Comme le Mois d'Aout etoit le premier Mois de l'annee Egyptienne, on en apella
le premier jour Gule: ce mot latinise, fit Gula. Nos Legendaires surpris de
voir ce Nom a la tete du Mois d'Aout, ne s'oublierent pas; ils en firen: la
fete de la Fille du Tribun Quirinus, guerie d'un mal de gorge en baisant les
Liens de Saint Pierre don't on celebre la fete ce jour-la."


, says he, pronounced Hiol, Iul, Jul, Giul, Hweol, Wheel, Wiel, Vol, etc. is a
primitive Word, carrying with it a general Idea of Revolution, and of Wheel.

Iul-Iom signifies in Arabic the first Day of the Year: Literally, the Day of
Revolution or of Return.

Giul-ous in the Persian Tongue is Anniversary. It is appropriated to that of a
King's Coronation.

Hiul in Danish and Swedish implies Wheel.

It is Wiel in Flemish.
In English, Wheel.
The Verb Well- en in German signifies to turn.

Well implies Waves, which are incessantly coming and going. It Is our Word Houle
(i. e. French).

The Vol- vo of the Latin too is from hence.

The Solstices being the Times when the Sun returns back again, have their Name
from that Circumstance. Hence the Greek Name Tropics, which signifies Return.

'Twas the same amongst the Celts: -- They gave the Name of Iul to the
Solstices and to the Months which commence at the Solstices, which in like
Manner signified Return.

Stiernhielm, skilled in the Languages and Antiquities of the North, informs
us, that the ancient Inhabitants of Sweden celebrated a Feast which they called
Iul, in the Winter Solstice, or Christmas; that this Word means Revolution,
Wheel; that the Month of December is called Iul-Month, the Month of Return, and
that the Word is written both Hiule and Giule.

The People in the County of Lincoln, in England, still call a Log or Stump
which they put into the Fire on Christmas Day, (which was to last for the
whole Octave) a Gule-Bl^ck, i. e. Block or Log of Iul.

We must not be surprised then if our Month of July, which follows the Summer
Solstice, has had its Name from hence. It Is true the Romans tell us this Month
took its Name from Julius Caesar; an Etymon that suited well with the
Flatteries they heaped on their Emperors, though they had done nothing but
altered the Pronunciation of the Word Iul, to make it agree with the Name of
Julius, which they pronounced Iulus, a Name which Ascanius, the Son of Aeneas,
had also, and which ascended from thence even to the primitive Languages of the
East.

The Case had been the same with the Month following.

If these two Months were fixed on to bear the Names of their first and second
Emperors, it was principally because their Names already resembled those of
Julius and Augustus.

They did it also in Imitation of the Egyptians, who had given to these two
Months the Names of their two first Kings, Mesor and Thot.

As the Month of August was the first in the Egyptian Year, the first Day of it
was called Gule, which being latinized makes Gula. Our Legendaries, surprised
at seeing this Word at the Head of the Month of August, did not overlook but
converted it to their own Purpose* They made out of it the Feast of the
Daughter of the Tribune Quirinus, cured of some Disorder in her Throat (Gula is
Latin for Throat) by kissing the Chains of St. Peter, whose Feast is solemnized
on this Day.

Thus far our learned Foreigner, and with such a convincing Parade of Proof,
that we must be Skeptics indeed if we doubt any longer of the true Origin of
this very remarkable Word.

CHAP. XIV. Of adorning the Windows at Christmas with Laurel: What the Laurel
is an Emblem of: An Objection against this Custom taken off.
ANother Custom observed at this Season, is the adorning of Windows with Bay
and Laurel. It is but seldom observed in North, but in the Southern-Parts, it
is very Common, particularly at our Universities; where it is Customary to
adorn, not only the Common Windows of the Town, and of the Colleges, but also
to bedeck the Chapels of the Colleges, with Branches of Laurel.

The Laurel was used among the ancient Romans, as an Emblem of several Things,
and in particular, of Laurus and pacifera habetur, quam praetendi inter armatos
hosts, quietis sit indicium. Romany praecipue laetitiae victoriarumque
nuntia. Polyd. Virg. de Rer. Invent. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. P. 164.
Peace, and Joy, and Victory. And I imagine, it has been used at this Season by
Christians, as an Emblem of the same Things; as an Emblem of Joy for the
Victory gained over the Powers of Darkness, and of that Peace on Earth, that
Good Will toward Men, which the Angels sung over the Fields of Bethlehem.

It The general Defense of the three Articles of the Church of England.. D. 107.
has been made use of by the Non Conformists, as an Argument against
Ceremonies, that the second Council of Bracara, Non liceat iniquas observantias
agere Kalendarum, and ociis vacare Gentilibus, neque lauro, neque viriditate
arborum cingere domos. Omnis enim haec observatio Paganismi est. Bracc. Can.
73. Instell.
Can. 73. forbad Christians to deck their Houses, with Bay Leaves and Green
Boughs. But the Council does not mean, that it was wrong in Christians, to
make use of these Things, but only at the same Time with the Pagans, when they
observed and solemnized their Paganish Pastime and Worship. And of this
Prohibition, they give this Reason in the same Canon; Omnis haec observatio
paganismi est. All this kind of Custom does hold of Paganism: Because the
outward Practice of Heathenish Rites, performed jointly with the Pagans
themselves, could not but imply a Consent in Paganism.

But at present, there is no hazard of any such Thing. It may be an Emblem of
Joy to us, without confirming any, in the Practice of Heathenism. The Time, the
Place, and the Reasons of the Ceremony, are so widely different; that, though
formerly, to have observed it, would unquestionably have been a Sin, it is now
become harmless, comely, and decent.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XIV.
STOW In the ancient Calendar of the Church of Rome, I find the following
Observation on Christmas Eve: "Templa exornantur."
"Churches are decked."
Mr Gay in his Trivia describes this Custom:
When Rosemary and Bays, the Poet's Crown,
Are bawled in frequent Cries through all the Town;
Then judge the Festival of Christmas near,
Christmas, the joyous Period of the Year!
Now with bright Holly all the Temples strew,
With Laurel green and sacred Misletoe.


There is an Essay in the Gentlemen's Magazine, 1765, in which it is
conjectured that the ancient Custom of dressing Churches and Houses at
Christmas with Laurel, Box, Holly, or Ivy, was in Allusion to many figurative
Expressions in the Prophets, relative to Christ, the Branch of Righteousness,
etc. or that it was in Remembrance of the Oratory of wrythen Wands, or Boughs,
which was the first Christian Church erected in Britain: Before we can admit
either of these Hypotheses, the Question must be determined whether or no this
Custom was not prier to the Introduction of the Christian Faith amongst us.

The learned Dr. Chandler tells us. It is related where Druidism prevailed, the
Houses were decked with Ever-greens in December, that the Sylvan Spirits might
repair to them, and remain unnipped with Frost and cold Winds, until a milder
Season had renewed the foliage of their darling Abodes.

Travels in Greece.
, in his Survey of London, tells us, Against the Feast of Christmas, every
Man's House, as also their Parish Churches, were decked with Holme, Ivy, Bays,
and whatsoever the Season of the Year afforded to be Green: The Conduits and
Standards in the Streets, were likewise garnished. Among the which, I read,
that in the Year 1444, by Tempest of Thunder and Lightning; toward the Morning
of Candlemas Day, at the Leaden Hall, in Corn-hilll, a Standard of Tree, being
set up in the Midst of the Pavement, fast in the Ground, nailed full of Holme
and Ivy, for disport of Christmas to the People; was torn up and cast down
by the malignant This illustrates the Spectator's Observation, where he tells
us, that our Forefathers looked into Nature with other Eyes than we do now, and
always ascribed common natural Effects to supernatural Causes: This Joy of the
People at Christmas was, it should seem, Death to their Infernal Enemy --
envying their festal Pleasures, and owing them a Grudge, he took this
Opportunity of spoiling their Sport!
Spirit, (as was thought) and the Stones of the Pavement all about, were cast
in the Streets, and into diverse Houses, so that the People were sore aghast at
the great Tempests.

In the North there is another Custom used at or about this Time, which if I
mistake not, was anciently observed in the Beginning of Lent: The Fool Plough
goes about, a Pageant that consists of a Number of Sword Dancers Aliter, the
White Plough, so called because the gallant young Men that compose it, appear
to be dressed in their Shirts, (without Coat or Waistcoat) upon which great
Numbers of Ribbands folded into Roses, are loosely stitched on. It appears to
be a very airy Habit at this cold Season, but they have warm Waistcoats under
it.

Mr. Wallis, in his History of Northumberland, tells us, that the Saltatio
armata of the Roman Militia on their Festival Armilustrium, celebrated 19th of
October, is still practiced by the Country People in this Neighborhood, on the
annual Festivity of Christmas, the Yule Tide of the Druids. -- Young Men march
from Village to Village, and from House to House, with Music before them,
dressed in an antic Attire, and before the Vestihulum, or Entrance of every
House entertain the Family with the motus incompositus, the Antic Dance, or
Chorus Armatus, with Swords or Spears in their Hands, erect and shining: this
they call the Sword Dance. For their Pains they are presented with a small
Gratuity in Money, more or less, according to every Householder's Ability;
their Gratitude is expressed by firing a Gun. One of the Company is
distinguished from the Rest by a more antic Dress; a Fox's Skin generally
serving him for a Covering and Ornament to his Head, the Tail hanging down his
Back. -- This droll Figure is their Chief or Leader. He does not mingle in the
Dance. Vol. 2. p. 29.


, dragging a Plough, with Music, and one, sometimes two, in a very antic Dress;
the Bessy, in the grotesque Habit of an old Woman, and the Fool, almost covered
with Skins, a hairy Cap on, and the Tail of some Animal hanging from his Back:
The Office of one of these Characters is, to go about rattling a Box amongst
the Spectators of the Dance, in which he collects their little Donations.

This Pageant or Dance as used at present, seems a Composition made up of the
Gleanings of several obsolete Customs followed anciently, here and elsewhere,
on this and the like festive Occasions.

I find a very curious and minute Description of the Sword Dance in Olaus
Magnus' De Chorea gladiatoria, vel
Armifera Saltatione.
Habent praeterea septentrionales Gothi et Sueci pro exercenda juventute --
ludum, quod inter nudos enses, et infestos Gladios seu frameas, sese exerceant
saltu: idque quodam gymnastico ritu et disciplina, aetate successiva, a peritis
et praesultore, sub cantu addiscunt: et ostendunt hunc ludum praecipue tempore
Carnisprivii Maschararum Italico verbo dicto. Ante etenim tempus ejusdem
Carnisprivii, octo diebus continua saltatione sese adolescentes numerose
exercent, elevatis scilicet Gladiis, sed vagina reclusis, ad triplicem gyrum.
Deinde evaginatis, itidemque elevatis Ensibus, postmodum manuatim extensis,
modestius gyrando alterius Cuspidem Capulumque receptantes, sese mutato ordine
in modum figurae hexagoni subjiciunt: quam Rosam dicunt. Et ilico eam gladios
retrabondo, elevandoque resolvunt, et super uniuscujusque Caput quadrata rosa
resultet; et tandem vehementissima gladiorum laterali collisione, celerrime
retrograda saltatione determinant ludum: quem tibiis, vel cantilenis, aut
utrisque simul, primum per graviorem, demum vehementiorem saltum, et ultimo
impetuosissimum, moderantur. Olai Magni. Gent. Septent. Hist. Breviar, p. 341.
History of the northern Nations. -- He tells us, that the northern Goths and
Swedes, have a Sport wherein they exercise their Youth, consisting of a Dance
with Swords in the following Manner: First with their Swords sheathed and erect
in their Hands, they dance in a triple Round. Then with their drawn Swords held
erect as before: Afterward extending them from Hand to Hand, they lay hold of
each other's Hilt and Point, while they are wheeling more moderately round, and
changing their Order, throw themselves into the Figure of a Hexagon, which they
call a Rose. -- But presently raising and drawing back their Swords, they undo
that Figure, to form (with them) a apiece Rose, that may rebound over the
Head of each. At last they dance rapidly backwards, and vehemently rattling the
Sides of their Swords together, conclude the Sport. Pipes, or Songs (sometimes
both) direct the Measure, which at first is slow, but increasing afterward,
becomes a very quick one, toward the Conclusion.

He calls this a Kind of Gymnastic Rite Dr. Moresin alludes to a Dance at this
Season, without Swords, in these Words. -- Sicinnium, Genus Saltationis, seu
Choreae ubi Saltitantes cantabant, ac Papistae facere sunt soliti in Scotia ad
Natalitia Domini, et alibi adhuc servant. p. 160.
, in which the Ignorant were successively instructed by those who were skilled
in it: And thus it must have been preserved and handed down to us. -- I have
been a frequent Spectator of this Dance, which is now performed with few or no
Alterations; only they lay their Swords, when formed into a Figure, upon the
Ground and dance round them.

With regard to the Plough drawn about on this Occasion; I find the Monday
after Twelfth Day, called anciently (as Coals tells us) Plough Monday, when our
northern Plough Men, beg Plough Money to drink (it is very probable they would
draw about a Plough on the Occasion; so in hard Frosts our Watermen drag a Boat
about the Streets, begging Money): And he adds, In some Places if the Ploughman
(after that Day's Work) come with his Whip to the Kitchen Hatch and cry, Cock
in Pot," before the Maid says, "Cock on the Dunghill," he gains a Cock for
Shrove Tuesday Coals tells us also of an old Custom in some Places, of Farmers
giving Sharping Corn to their Smith at Christmas, for sharping Plough-irons,
etc.
. Vide Cock-fighting in the Appendix.

Joannes Boemus Aubanus In die Cinerum mirum est, quod in plerisque locis
agitur. Virgins quotquot per annum choream frequentaverunt, a juvenibus
congregantur, et Aratro, pro equis, advectae, cum tibicine, qui super illud
modulans sedet, in fluvium aut lacum trahuntur. Id quare fiat non plane video,
nisi cogitem eas per hoc expiare velle, quod festis diebus contra ecclesiae
praeceptum, a levitate sua non abstinuerint. P. 267.
, in his Description of some remarkable Customs used in his Time in Franconia,
a Part of Germany, tells us of the following on Ash Wednesday. Such young Women
as have frequented the Dances throughout the Year, are gathered together by
young Men, and instead of Horses, are yoked to a Plough, upon which a Piper
sits and plays: In this Manner they are dragged into a Water. -- He suspects
this to have been a Kind of self-enjoined or voluntary Penance, for not having
abstained from their favorite Sport on Holidays, contrary to the Injunctions
of the Church.

I can find nothing more relative to the Plough, though in Du Cange's Glossary,
there is a Reference to some old Laws Aratrum circumducere, in Lege Bajuvar.
tit. 17. 2.
, which mention the "drawing a Plough about," which I guess would have afforded
something to our Purpose, could I have found them.

As to the Fool and Bessy, they are plainly Fragments of the ancient Festival
Faustinus Episcopus in Sermon. in Kalend. Jan. has these Words. Quis enim Sapiens
credere poterit inveniri aliquos sanae mentis, qui Cervulum facientes, in
ferarum se velint habitus commutari? Alii vestiuntur pellibus pecudum, alii
assumunt Capita bestiarum, gaudentes and exultantes, si taliter se in ferinas
Species transformaverint, ut homines non esse videantur. Du Cange: in Cervula.
of Fools, held on New Year's Day. See Trusler's Chronology.

There was anciently a profane Ludi profani apud Ethnicos et Paganos --
solebant ii Kalendis Januarii belluarum, pecudum, et Vetularum assumptis formis
huc et illuc discursare et petulantius se se gerere: quod a Christianis non
modo proscriptum, sed and ab iis postmodum inductum constat, ut ea die ad
calcandam Gentilium Consuetudinem privatae fierent Litaniae et jejunaretur,
etc. Ibid.
Sport, among the Heathens on the Kalends of January, when they used to roam
about in Disguises, resembling the Figures of wild Beasts, of Cattle and of old
Women. The Christians adopted this: Faustinus, the Bishop, inveighs against it
with great warmth. -- They were wont to be covered with Skins of Cattle, and to
put on the Heads of Beasts, etc.

Doctor Johnson tells us in his Journey to the Western Islands, that a
Gentleman informed him of an odd Game: At New Year's Eve, in the Hall or Castle
of the Lord, where at festal Seasons, there may be supposed a very numerous
Company, one Man dresses himself in a Cow's Hide, upon which other Men beat
with Sticks. He runs with all this Noise round the House, which all the Company
quits in a counterfeited Fright; the Door is then shut. At New Year's Eve,
there is no great pleasure to be had out of Doors in the Hebrides. They are
sure soon to recover from their Terror enough to solicit for Readmission;
which for the Honor of Poetry, is not to be obtained but by repeating a Verse,
with which those that are knowing and provident, take care to be furnished.

This is no doubt a Vestige of the Festival Affirmant se vidisse annis singulis
in Romana Urbe and juxta Ecclesiam S. Petri, in die, vel nocte, quando Calendae
Januarii intrant, Paganorum consuetudine choros ducere per plateas and
acclamationes ritu Gentilium and Cantationes sacrilegas celebrare and mensas
illas die vel nocte dapibus onerare, et nullum de domo sua, vel ignem, vel
ferramentum, vel aliquid commodi vicino suo praestare velle. Ibid.
of Fools above described. -- See Du Cange's Glossary in Verbo. Kalendae. etc.
etc. The vestiuntur pellibus pecudum and a Man's dressing himself in a Cow's
Hide, both too on the first of January, are such Circumstances as leave no Room
for Doubt, but that, allowing for the Mutilations of Time, they are one and the
same Custom The learned Traveller tells us, that they who played at this odd
Game, gave no Account of the Origin of it, and that he described it, as it
might perhaps be used in other Places, where the Reason of it is not yet
forgot. -- I am persuaded that if Dr. Johnson will take the Trouble of
consulting Du Cange's Glossary in Verb. Cervula and Kalendae, he will no longer
remain ignorant of the Original of this singular Custom.

N. B. The learned Reader is requested to substitute ut for the et, which
stands erroneously at present in the last Line of the Latin Note, p. 176,
reading "ut super uniuscujusque, etc."


.

CHAP. XV. Of the Christmas Carol, an ancient Custom: The common Observation of
it very unbecoming.
AS soon as the Morning of the Nativity appears, it is customary among the
common People to sing a Christmas-Carol, which is a Song upon the Birth of our
Savior, and generally sung with some Such are, The New Year's Songs, and that
whose Burden is Hagmena. The Word Hagmena is the same as Hagiameene, or the
Holy Month. Angli, says Hospinnian, Halegmonath, quasi sacrum mensem vocant.
Hosp. de Orig. Eth. P. 81.
others, from the Nativity to the Twelveth-Day, the Continuance of Christmas.
It comes, they say, from Cantare, to sing, and Rola, which is an Interjection
of Joy: For in ancient Times, the Burden of the Song, when Men were Merry, was
Rola, Rola.

This kind of Songs is of an ancient standing: They were sung early in the
Church it self, in memory of the Nativity, as the many HYMNS for that Season
manifestly declare: Tertullian says, Ut quisque de scripturis sanctis vel de
proprio ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo cantare. Tertul. Advers. Gent.
C. 39.
it was customary among the Christians, at their Feasts, to bring those, who
were able to sing, into the Midst, and make them sing a Song unto GOD; either
out of the Holy Scripture, or of their own Composing and Invention. And as this
was done at their Feasts, so no doubt it was observed at the great Feast of the
Nativity; which Song, no Question of it, was to them, what the Christmas-Carol
should be to us. In after Ages we have it also taken Notice of: For Durand
tells us, In quibusdam quoque locis. -- In natali Praelati cum suis clericis
ludant, vel in domibus episcopalibus: Ita ut etiam descendant. -- Ad cantus.
Durand. Rat. Lib. 6. C. 86. S. 9.
That on the Day of the Nativity, it was usual for the Bishops of some Churches
to sing among their Clergy, in the Episcopal House, which Song was undoubted a
Christmas-Carol.

The Reason of this Custom seems to be an Imitation of the Gloria in Excelsis,
or Glory be to GOD on High, etc. which was sung by the Angels, as they hovered
over the Fields of Bethlehem, in the Morning of the Nativity. For even that
Song, as the learned Bishop Tailor observes, was a Christmas-Carol. As soon,
says he, as these blessed Choristers had sung their Christmas Carol, and taught
the Church a Hymn, to put into her Offices for Ever, in the Anniversary of this
Festivity; the Angels, etc.

Was this performed with that Reverence and Decency, which are due to a Song of
this Nature, in Honor of the Nativity, and Glory to our LORD, it would be very
commendable; but to sing it, as is generally done, in the midst of Rioting and
Chambering, and Wantoness, is no Honor, but Disgrace; no Glory, but an Affront
to that Holy Season, a Scandal to Religion, and a Sin against CHRIST.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XV.
THE subsequent Specimen of a very curious Carrol in the Scotch Language,
preserved in Ane compendious Book of godly and spiritual Sangs, Edinburgh,
1621, printed from an old Copy, will, I flatter myself, be thought a precious
Relic by those who have a Taste for the literary Antiquities of this Island.

Ane Sang of the Birth of Christ:
With the Tune of Baw lula law.
(Angelus, ut opinor, loquitur.)
I come from Hevin to tell,
The best Nowellis that ever befell:
To you their Tythinges true I bring,
And I will of them say The Word "say" is happily used here. The Author,
whoever he has been, has dealt much more in saying than in singing. He is
indeed the veriest Coast-Sailer that ever ventured out into the perilous Ocean
of Verse!
and sing.
This Day to you is borne ane Child,
Of Marie meike and Virgin mylde,
That blissit Barn bining and kind
Sall you rejoice both Heart and Mind.
My Saull and Life stand up and see
Quha lies in ane Cribe of Tree,
Quhat Babe is that so good and fair?
It is Christ, God's Son and Air.
O God that made all Creature,
How art thou becum so pure,
That on the Hay and Stray will lie,
Amang the Asses, Oxin, and Kye?
O my deir Heart, zoung Jesus sweit,
Prepare thy Creddil in my Spreit,
And I fall rock thee in my Heart,
And never mair from thee depart.
But I fall praise thee ever moir
With Sangs sweit unto thy Gloir,
The Knees of my Heart fall I bow,
And sing that richt Balulalow The Rev. Mr Lamb, in his entertaining Notes on
the old Poem on the Battle of Flodden Field, tells us, that the Nurse's lullaby
Song, balow, (or "he balelow") is literally French. "He bas! la le loup!" that
is, hush! there is the Wolf!

An Etymologist with a tolerably inventive Fancy, might easily persuade himself
that the Song usually sung in dandling Children in Sandgate, the Wapping or
Billingsgate of the North, A you a hinny! (Cantilena barbara si quae sit alia)
is nearly of a similar Signification with the ancient Eastern Mode of saluting
Kings, viz. "Live for ever" a, aa, or aaa, in Anglo Saxon, signifies for ever.
See Benson's Vocab.

The good Women of the District above named are not a little famous for their
Powers in a certain Female Mode of Declamation, vulgarly called scolding. A
common Menace they use to each other is, "I Will make a holy Byson of you."
Bisene, A. Sax. is Example: So that this evidently alludes to the penitential
Act of standing in a white Sheet before the Congregation, which a certain Set
of Delinquents are enjoined to perform. -- Thus the Gentle Shepherd, a
beautiful Scotch Pastoral: -- I Will gar ye stand
We a het Face before the haly Band.



.
It is hardly credible that such a Composition as this should ever have been
thought serious. The Author has left a fine Example in the Art of Sinking. Had
he designed to have rendered his Subject ridiculous, he could not more
effectually have made it so; and yet we will absolve him from having had the
smallest Degree of any such Intention!

In the Office where this Work is printed, there is preserved an hereditary
Collection of Ballads, numerous almost as the celebrated one of Pepys. -- Among
these (the greatest Part of which is worse than Trash) I find several Carrols
for this Season; for the Nativity, St. Stephen's Day, Childermass Day, etc.
with Alexander and the King of Egypt, a mock Play, usually acted about this
Time by Mummers. The Style of them all is so puerile and simple, that I cannot
think it would be worth the Pains to invade the Hawkers' Province, by
exhibiting any Specimens of them. -- The Conclusion of this bombastic Play I
find in Ray's Collection of Proverbs: Bounce Mr. Blount tells us, that in
Yorkshire and our other Northern Parts, they have an old Custom, after Sermon
or Service on Christmas Day, the People will, even in the Churches, cry Ule,
Ule, as a Token of rejoicing, and the common Sort run about the Streets,
singing, Ule, Ule, Ule, Ule,
Three Puddings in a Pule,
Crack Nuts and cry Ule.


Hearne gives us these Lines from Robert of Gloucester.

"Bounce Buckram, etc." seems to be an Apology offered for the Badness or
Coarseness of the Mummers' Clothes: The moral Reflections that follow are
equally new and excellent; the Carpe Diem of Horace is included in them, and if
I mistake not the good Advice is seldom thrown away.


Buckram, Velvet's dear,
Christmas comes but once a Year;
And when it comes, it brings good Cheer There is an old Proverb preserved in
Ray's Collection, which I think is happily expressive of the great Doings, as
we say, or good Eating on this Festival: Blessed be St. Stephen, there is no
Fast upon his Even.

Thus also another: It is good to cry Ule at other Men's Costs.

I shall add a third; it is Scotch: "A Yule Feast may be quit at Pasche." That
is, one good Turn deserves another.

In the Collection of old Scotch Ballads abovementioned, there is a Hunting
Song, in which the Author runs down Rome with great Fury. I subjoin a Specimen:
The Hunter is Christ, that hunts in haist,
The Hunds are Peter and Paul;
The Paip is the Fox, Rome is the Rox,
That rubbis us on the Gall.


Indulgencies are alluded to in a comical Thought in the following Stanza: "He
had to sell the Tantonie Bell,
And Pardons therein was,
Remission of Sins in auld Sheep Skinnis
Our Saul's to bring from Grace."


These, which are by no means golden Verses, seem well adapted to the Poverty
of our ancient wooden Churches! Yet have we no Cause of Exultation, so long as
David's Psalms travesty by Sternhold, are retained in our religious Assemblies.


:
But when it is gone, it is never the near.


Dr. Johnson tells us, that the Pious Chansons, a Kind of Christmas Carrol,
containing some Scripture History, thrown into loose Rhythms, were sung about
the Streets by the common People, when they went at that Season to beg Alms.

Hamlet. Appendix, Vol. VIII. CHAP. XVI. Of New-Year's-Day's Ceremonies. The
New-Year's-Gift an harmless Custom: wishing a good New-Year, no Way sinful.
Mumming, a Custom which ought to be laid aside.
AS the Vulgar are always very careful to End the old Year well, so they are
also careful of Beginning well the new one: As they End the Former with a
hearty Compotation, so they begin the Latter with the Sending of Presents,
which are termed New Year's. Gifts, to their Friends and Acquaintances: The
Original of both which Customs, is Et sic quidem annum veterem terminamus,
novumque auspicamur, inauspicatis prorsus dirisque auspiciis. Hosp. de Orig.
Fest. Christ, P. 41.
superstitious and sinful; and was observed that the succeeding Year, might be
prosperous and successful.

Bishop Orig. Brit. P. 343.
Stillingfleet tells us, That among the Saxons of the Northren Nations, the
Feast of the New-Year was observed with more than ordinary Jollity: Thence as
Olaus Wormius and Scheffer observe, they reckoned their Age by so many Iola in
the Gothic Language sinifies to make merry, Stilling. ibid.
Jola's; and Snorro Sturleson describes this New Year's Feast, just as
Buchannan sets out the British Saturnalia, by Feasting and sending Presents, or
New Year's Gifts, one to another.

The Poet Naogeorgus says, Jani -- Calendis,
Atque etiam strenae charis mittuntur amicis:
Conjugibusque viri donant, gnatisque parents,
Et domini famulis, etc.
Hosp. de Orig. Fest. Christ. P. 41.
That it was usual at that Time, for Friends to present each other with a
New Year's Gift; for the Husband, the Wife; the Parents, their Children; and
Master's, their Servants; which, as Hospin. ibid.
Hospinian tells us, was an ancient Custom of the Heathens, and afterward
practiced by the Christians.

And no doubt, those Christians were highly worthy of Censure, who imagined, as
the Heathens did, that the sending of a Present then, was any way Lucky, and an
Omen of the Success of the following Year. For this was the very Thing that
made both several Holy Men, and some general Councils, take notice of, and
forbid any such Custom; because the Observance of it, out of any such Design
and View, was Superstitious and Sinful. We are told, in a Place of St. Austin,
Citatur locus ex Augustino, in quo praecipitur, ne observentur calendae
Januarii, in quibus cantilenae quaedam, and commessationes, and ad invicem dona
donentur, quasi in principio anni, boni sati augurio. Hosp. de Orig. Fest.
Christ. in Fest. Jan.
the Observation of the Calends of January is forbid, the Songs which were wont
to be sung on that Day, the Feastings, and the Presents which were then sent as
a Token and Omen of a good Year. But to send a Present at that Time, out of
Esteem, or Gratitude, or Charity, is no where forbid: On the Contrary, it is
Praise worthy. For though the In calendas Januarias antiqui patres vehementius
invehebantur, non propter istas missitationes adinvicem, and mutui amoris
pignora, sed propter diem idolis dicatum: Propter ritus quosdam profanos, and
sacrilegos in illa solennitate adhibitos. Mountacut. Orig. Eccles. Pars Prior.
P. 128.
ancient Fathers did vehemently invey against the Observation of the Calends of
January; yet it was not because of those Presents, and Tokens of mutual
Affection and Love that passed; but because the Day it self was dedicated to
Idols, and because of some profane Rites and Ceremonies they observed in
solemnizing it. If then I send a New Year's Gift to my Friend, it shall be a
Token of my Friendship; if to my Benefactor, a Token of my Gratitude; if to the
Poor, (which at this Time must never be forgot) it shall be to make their
Hearts sing for Joy, and give Praise and Adoration to the Giver of all good
Gifts.

Another old Custom at this Time, is the wishing of a good New-Year, either
when a New Year's Gift is presented, or when Friends meet, or when a New Year's
Song is sung at the Door; the Burden of which is, we wish you a happy New-Year.

This is also a Custom among the Modern Jews, who on the first Day of the Month
The Month Tisri, was the seventh Month according to the Jews sacred
Computation, and therefore it is commanded to be celebrated the first Day of
the seventh Month, Lev. xxiii. 24. But according to their civil Computation, it
was their first Month; so that Feast may be termed their New Year's Day.

Goodw. Antiq. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
Tisri, have a splended Reperiunt mensam dulcissimis cibis instructam: Ei cum
assederint, quivis partem de cibis illis sumit, and annus, inquit, bonus and
dulcis sit nobis omnibus. Hosp. de Fest. Orig. P. 54.
Entertainment, and wish each other a happy New-Year.

Now the Original of this Custom is Heathenish, as appears by the Feasting and
Presents before mentioned, which were a wish for a good Year. And it was
customary among the Heathens on the Calends of January, to go about and sing a
New Year's Song. Hospinian therefore tells us, That Discurrunt namque noctu,
tam senes quam juvenes promiscui sexus, cautantes prae foribus divitum, quibus
faelicem annum cantando precantur and optant. Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Jan.
when Night comes on, not only the Young, but also the Old of both Sexes, run
about here and there, and sing a Song at the Doors of the wealthier People, in
which they wish them a happy New-Year. This he speaks indeed of the Christians,
but he calls it an exact Copy of the Heathens Custom.

But however I cannot see the Harm of retaining this ancient Ceremony, so it be
not used superstitiously, nor attended with Obscenity and Lewdness. For then
there will be no more in it, than an hearty Wish for each others Welfare and
Prosperity; no more Harm, than wishing a good Day, or good Night; than in
bidding one GOD speed; or than in wishing to our Friend, what Abraham's Servant
did to himself, O Genesis xxiv. 12.
LORD GOD of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this Day.

There is another Custom observed at this Time, which is called among us
Mumming; which is a changing of Clothes between Men and Women; who when dressed
in each others Habits, go from one Neighbor's House to another, and partake of
their Christmas-Cheer, and make merry with them in Disguise, by dancing and
singing, and such like Merriments.

This Hoc prorsus fit ad imitationem ludorum sigillarium, oscillarium and
occillatorum, qui pars erat saturnaliorum, and circa mensem Januarium passim in
domibus privatim, non public, exercebantur inter familias. Hosp. de Orig. etc.
is an Imitation of the Customs of the Sigillaria, or Festival Days which were
added to the ancient The Original of the Saturnalia, as to the Time, is
unknown, Macrobius assuring us, That it was celebrated in Italy long before the
Building of Rome. The Story of Saturn, in whose Honor it was kept, every Body
is acquainted with. As to the Manner of the Solemnity, besides the Sacrifices
and other Parts of public Worship, there were several lesser Observations
worth our Notice. As first the Liberty now allowed to Servants to be free and
merry with their Masters, so often alluded to in Authors. It Is probable this
was done in Memory of the Liberty enjoyed in the Golden Age, under Saturn,
before the Names of Servant and Master were known to the World. Besides this
they sent Presents to one another, among Friends. No War was to be proclaimed,
and no Offender executed. The Schools kept a Vacation, and nothing but Mirth
and Freedom was to be met with in the City. They kept at first only one Day,
the Fourteenth of the Kalends of January; but the Number was afterward
increased to three, four, five, and some say seven Days.

Kennet. Romans Antiq. P. 96.
Saturnalia, and observed by the Heathens in January; which was a going in
Disguise, not publicly, or to any indifferent Place; but privately, and to
some well known Families.

This Kind of Custom received a deserved Blow from the Church, and was taken
Notice of in the Synod Can. Trull. 62. Bal. 435.
of Trullus; where it was decreed, that the Days called the Calends, should be
entirely stripped of their Ceremonies, and the Faithful should no longer observe
them: That the public Dancings of Women should cease, as being the Occasion of
much Harm and Ruin, and as being invented and observed in honor of their Gods,
and therefore quite averse to the Christian Life. They therefore decreed, that
no Man should be clothed with a Woman's Garment, no Woman with a Man's.

It were to be wished, this Custom, which is still so common among us at this
Season of the Year, was laid aside; as it is the Occasion of much Hoc autem,
quum noctu fiat, nemini dubium esse debet, quin sub hoc praetextu, multa
obscaena and turpia perpetrantur simul. Hosp. de Orig. Fest. 41.
Uncleanness and Debauchery, and directly opposite to the Word of GOD. The
Deuteronomy. xxii.
Woman shall not wear that which pertains unto a Man, neither shall a Man put
on a Woman's Garment; for all that do so, are Abomination unto the LORD thy GOD.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XVI.
Turba frequens Jani fundit pia vota Kalendis
Ut novus exacto faustior Annus eat.
BUCHANAN.
IN the ancient Saturnalia Ut olim in Saturnalibus frequentes, luxuriosaeque
coenationes inter Amicos fiebant, munera ultro citroque missitabantur, Vestium
mutationes fiebant, ita hodie etiam apud nos Christianos eadem fieri videmus a
Natalibus Dominicis usque ad Festum Epiphaniae, quod in Januario celebratur:
Hoc enim tempore omni et crebro convivamur et Strenas, hoc est, ut nos vocamus,
Novi anni Donaria missitamus. Eodem tempore mutationes vestium, ut apud Romanos
quondam, usurpantur, vicinique ad vicinos invitati hac ratione commeant, quod
nos Germani Mummerey vocamus.

Antiquitat. Convivial. 126.
, there were frequent and luxurious Feastings amongst Friends; presents were
sent mutually, and Changes of Dress made. Christians have adopted the same
Customs, which continue to be used from the Nativity to the Epiphany. --
Feastings are frequent during the whole Time, and we send what are called New
Year's Gifts Strenae usus primo die anni, Romanorum veterum est inventum --
Suetonius in Augusto. Deprav. Rel. 164.
: Exchanges of Dress too, as of old among the Romans, are common, and
Neighbors by mutual Invitations, visit each other in the Manner which we
Germans call Mummery: So writes the Author of the Convivial Antiquities, and
adds, as the Heathens had their Saturnalia in December, their Sigillaria in
January, and the Lupercalia and Bacchanalia in February; so amongst Christians
these three Months are devoted to Feastings and Revellings of every Kind
Johannes Boemus Aubanus tells us, Calendis Januarii, quo tempore et Annus and
omnis Computatio nostra inchoatur, Cognatus cognatum, Amicus amicum accedunt,
and consertis manibus invicem in novum Annum prosperitatem imprecantur, diemque
illum festiva Congratulatione and Compotatione deducunt. Tunc etiam ex avita
consuetudine ultro citroque munera mittuntur, quae a Saturnalibus, quae eo
tempore celebrantur a Romany, Saturnalitia, a Graecis Apophoreta dicta sunt.
Hunc morem anno superiori ego ita versificavi: Christ patris Verbum, etc.
Natalemque tuum celebrantes octo diebus,
Concinimus laudem, perpetuumque decus.
Atque tuo Exemplo moniti munuscula notis,
Aut Caprum pinguem mittimus, aut leporem,
Aut his liba damus signis and imagine pressa,
Mittimus aut Calathis aurea mala december,
Aurea mala december, buxo cristata virenti,
Et variis caris rebus arom^ticis.
P. 265.


.

There was an ancient There are Allusions to some other obsolete Rites at this
Time in Pope Zecharias' Interdiction of them, preserved in the Convivial
Antiquities. Si quis Calendas Januarii ritu Ethnicorum colere, ut aliquid plus
novi facere propter novum annum, aut mensas cum lampadibus, vel Epulas in
domibus praeparare, et per vicos et plateas cantatores et Choreas ducere ausus
fuerit, Anathema sit. Antiquit. Conviv. p. 126.

In Trusler's Chronology, A. D. 1198, we are told, Fools, Festival of, at
Paris, held January 1st, and continued for 240 Years, when all Sorts of
Absurdities and Indecencies were committed.

Mr Pennant tells us, that the Highlanders on New Year's Day, burn Juniper
before their Cattle, and on the first Monday in every Quarter sprinkle them
with Urine.


Custom, (I know not whether it be not yet retained in many Places): Young
Women went about with a Wassail-bowl, that is, a Bowl of spiced Ale on New
Year's Eve, with some Sort of Verses that were sung by them in going about from
Door to Door. Wassail is derived from the Anglo. Sax. Waes Hael, that is, be in
Health. They accepted little Presents from the Houses they stopped at. -- Mr.
Seldom thus alludes to it in his Table Talk, Art. Pope. The Pope in sending
Relics to Princes, does as Wenches do by their Wassels at New Year's Tide. --
They present you with a Cup, and you must drink of a slabby Stuff; but the
Meaning is, you must give them Money, ten Times more than it is worth.

Stow has preserved an Account of a remarkable Mummery, 1377, "made by the
Citizens for disport of the young Prince Richard, Son to the Black Prince.

On the Sunday before Candlemass in the Night, 130 Citizens disguised and well
horsed, in a Mummery, with Sound of Trumpets, Sackbuts, Cornets, Shalmes and
other Minstrels, and innumerable Torch Lights of Wax, rode to Kennington,
besides Lambeth, where the young Prince was.

In the 1st Rank, 48 in Likeness and Habit of Esquires, two and two together,
clothed in red Coats and Gowns of Say or Sendall, with comely Vizors on their
Faces.

After them came 48 Knights, in the same Livery: Then followed one richly
arrayed, like an Emperor; and after him some Distance, one stately tired like a
Pope, who was followed by 24 Cardinals: And after them eight or ten with black
Vizors, not amiable, as if they had been Legates from some foreign Princes.

These Maskers, after they had entered the Manor of Kennington, alighted from
their Horses, and entered the Hall on foot; which done, the Prince, his Mother
and the Lords came out of the Chambers into the Hall, whom the Mummers did
salute; showing by a Pair of Dice on the Table, their desire to play with the
young Prince; which they so handled, that the Prince did always win, when he
cast at them.

Then the Mummers set to the Prince three Jewels, one after another; which
were, a Boule of Gold, a Cup of Gold, and a Ring of Gold, which the Prince
wanne at three Casts. Then they set to the Princes Mother, the Duke, the Earls
and other Lords, to every one a Ring of Gold, which they did also win. After
which they were feasted, and the Music sounded, the Prince and Lords daunced
on the one Part with the Mummers, who did also dance; which Jollity being
ended, they were again made to drink, and then departed in Order as they came.

The like he says was to Henry the 4th -- in the 2d Year of his Reign, he then
keeping his Christmas at Eltham, twelve Aldermen of London, and their Sons,
rode in a Mumming, and had great Thanks.

We read in Fabian's Chronicle, Temp. Henry 4th: -- In which pass Time the
Dukys of Amnarle, of Surrey, and of Exetyr, with the Earlys of Salesbury, and
of Gloucetyr, with other of their Affynyte made Provysyon for a Dysguysynge, or
a Mummynge, to be showed to the King upon twelfethe Night, and the Time was
nere at Hand, and all Thing ready for the same. Upon the said twelfethe Day,
came secretlye unto the King, the Duke of Amnarle, and showed to him, that he
with the other Lordys aforenamed, were appointyd to sle him in the Time of the
fore said Dysguysynge, etc. Fol. 169.

This Mumming Mummer signifies a Masker; one disguised under a Vizard; from the
Danish Mumme, or Dutch Momme. Lipsius tells us, in his 44th Epistle, Book III.
that Momar, which is used by the Sicilians for a Fool, signifies in French, and
in our Language, a Person with a Mask on. See Lye's Junii Etymolog. in verbo.

The very ingenious Scotch Writer, Buchanan, presented to the unfortunate Mary
Queen of Scots the following singular Kind of New Year's Gift. History is
silent concerning the Manner in which her Majesty received it.

Ad Mariam Scotiae Reginam:
Do quod adest: opto quod abest tibi, dona darentur
Aurea, Sors animo si foret aequa meo*
Hoc leve si credis, paribus me ulciscere donis:
Et quod abest, opta tu mihi: da quod adest.

had like to have proved a very serious Jest!

Mr. Bourne seems to "carry Coals to Newcastle," when he attempts to prove that
it is no Way sinful to wish each other a good New Year. That Person carried his
Scruples methinks very far, who first doubted concerning the Lawfulness of this
Ceremony. -- If the Benevolent can thus hardly be saved, how shall the
Malicious and the Envious appear?

CHAP. XVII. Of the Twelfth Day; how observed: The Wickedness of observing the
Twelve Days after the common Way.
ON the Epiphany, or Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles, commonly called
the Twelfth-Day, the Eastern Magi were guided by the Star, to pay their Homage
to their Savior; and because they came that Day, which is the Twelfth after
the Day of the Nativity, it is therefore called the Twelfth-Day.

The Twelfth-Day it self is one of the greatest of the Twelve, and of more
jovial Observation than the others, for the visiting of Friends and
Christmas-Gambols. The Rites of this Day are different in diverse Places, though
the End of them is much the same in all; namely, to do Honor to the Memory of
the Eastern Magi, whom they suppose to have been Kings. In In Gallia unus ex
ministris, etc. -- Idem in Germania, etc. Hospin. in Epiphan.
France, one of the Courtiers is chosen King, whom the King himself, and the
other Nobles, attend at an Entertainment. In Germany, they observe the same
Thing on this Day in Academies and Cities, where the Students and Citizens
create one of themselves King, and provide a Magnificent Banquet for him, and
give him the Attendance of a King, or a stranger Guest. Now this is answerable
to that Custom of the Saturnalia, of Masters making Banquets for their
Servants, and waiting on them; and no doubt this Custom has in Part sprung from
that.

Not many Years ago, this was a common Christmas Gambol in both our
Universities; and it is still usual in other Places of our Land, to give the
Name of King or Queen to that Person, whose extraordinary Luck hits upon that
Part of the divided Cake, which is honored above the others, with a Bean in it.

But though this be generally the greatest of the Twelve, yet the others
preceding are observed with Mirth and Jollity, generally to Excess. Was this
Feasting confined within the Bounds of Decency and Moderation, and gave more
Way than it does to the Exercises and the Religious Duties of the Season, it
would have nothing in it immoral or sinful. The keeping up of Friendship, and
Love, and old Acquaintance, has nothing in it harmful; but the Misfortune is,
Men upon that Bottom, act rather like Brutes than Men, and like Heathens than
Christians; and the Preservation of Friendship and Love, is nothing else but a
Pretense for Drunkenness, and Rioting, and Wantonness. And such I am afraid
has been the Observation of the Christmas Holy Days, since the holiest Times
of the Christian Church; and the Generality of Men have rather looked upon
them, as a Vide Bishop Blackall's Sermon on the Lawfulness and the right Manner
of keeping Christmas and other Christian Festivals.
Time of Eating and Drinking, and Playing, than of returning Praises and
Thanksgivings to GOD, for the greatest Benefit he ever bestowed upon the Sons
of Men.

Gregory Nazianzen, in that excellent Oration of his upon Christmas Day, says,
Let us not celebrate the Feast after an Earthly, but an Heavenly Manner; let
not our Doors be crowned; let not Dancing be encouraged; let not the
Cross-paths be adorned, the Eyes fed, nor the Ears delighted, etc. Let us not
Feast to excess, nor be Drunk with Wine, etc. From this we may clearly see,
what has been the Custom in these Days. And in all Probability it has been much
the same among us, from the Beginning of Christianity: However fabulous that
Story may be, taken Notice of by Origin. Britan. Stilling.
Bishop Stillingfleet, from Hector Boethius, That King Arthur kept with his
Nobles at York, a very profane Christmas for Christmas Day is said to be none
of the twelve Days, but one of the twenty. For if it was added, it would make
thirteen Days, which are the thirteen Days here mentioned. It is said to be one
of the twenty Days, because, as I imagine, it was reckoned among those twenty
Days in which the Church forbad Fasting. For in the Laws of Canutus, it is
ordered, Atque ab ipso natali Jesu Christi die ad octavam ad Epiphania lucem,
jejunia nemo observato, nisi quidam judicio ac voluntate fecerit sua, aut id ei
fuerit a sacerdote imperatum. Seld. Analect. Lib. 2. P. 108.
That no Man shall fast from Christmas Day, till after the Octave of the
Epiphany, except he do it out of Choice, or it be commanded him of the Priest.
thirteen Days together, and that such Jollity and Feasting then, had its
Original from him. But however these Words, if true, may be a Testimony of the
too great Antiquity of the Abuse of this Festival; yet they will by no Means
justify Buchannan's Comment upon them. For as the learned Bishop goes on,
Buchannan is so well pleased with this notable Observation, that He sets it
down for good History, saying upon it, that the old Saturnalia were renewed,
only the Days increased, and Saturn's Name changed to Caesar's: For says he, we
call the Feast Julia. But why should the Name of Saturn be changed into
Caesar's? Was he worshipped for a GOD among the British Christians, as Saturn
was among the old Pagans? But the Name Julia imports it; by no Means. For
Buchannan does not prove, that this Name was ever used for that Festival among
the Britains; and the Saxons, who brought in both the Name and the Feast, give
another Vide Chap. Christ. Candle.
Reason for it.

Buchannan seems therefore to have a great deal more Malice than Truth on his
Side. But however such Revellings, and Frolicks, and Extravagances, whether or
not derived from the old Saturnalia, as are customary at this Season, do come
very near to, if not exceed its Liberties. In particular, what commoner at this
Season, than for Men to rise early in the Morning, that they may follow strong
Drink, and continue until Night, till Wine inflame them? As if CHRIST who came
into the World to save us, and was manifested to destroy the Works of the
Devil; was to be honored with the very Works he came to destroy.

With some, Christmas ends with the Twelve Days, but with the Generality of the
Vulgar, not till Candlemas. Till then they continue Feasting, and are ambitious
of keeping some of their Christmas-Chear, and then are fond of getting quit of
it. Durand tells us, Hanc Quadragessimam cum gaudio celebramus, quia Christi
incarnatio fuit gaudium angelorum and hominum. Durand. Lib. 6. C. 22.
They celebrated this Time with Joy, because the Incarnation of CHRIST was the
Occasion of Joy to Angels and Men. But the lengthening of the Time from twelve
to forty Days, seems to have been done out of Honor to the Virgin Mary's
Lying-in: Under the old Law, the Time of Purification was forty Days, which was
to Women then, what the Month is to Women now. And as during that Time, the
Friends and Relations of the Women, pay them Visits, and do them Abundance of
Honor; so this Time seems to have been calculated, to do Honor to the
Virgin's Lying-in.

There is a Canon in the Council of Trullus, Can. 80. Trul. Bal.
against those who baked a Cake in Honor of the Virgin's Lying-in, in which it
is decreed, that no such Ceremony should be observed; because it was otherwise
with her, at the Birth of our Savior, than with all other Women. She suffered
no Pollution, and therefore needed no Purification, but only in Obedience to
the Law: If then the Baking of a single Cake was faulty, how much more so many
Feasts in her Honor?

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XVII.
THE subsequent Extract from Collier's Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I. p. 163.
seems to account in a satisfactory Manner for the Name of Twelfth Day. In the
Days of King Alfred, a Law was made with Relation to Holidays, by Virtue of
which the twelve Days after the Nativity of our Savior were made Festivals.

In the ancient Calendar of the Romish Church above cited, I find in an Reges
Fabis creantur. And on the sixth Day of January, Festum Regum (as also) Regna
atque Epulae in multos dies exercentur.
Observation on the fifth of January, the Vigil of the Epiphany, Kings created
or elected by Beans. The sixth is called there "The Festival of Kings;" and
there is added, That this Ceremony of electing Kings was continued with
Feasting for many Days.

There was a Custom similar to this on the festive Days of Saturn among the
Romans, Grecians, etc. Persons of the same Rank drew Lots for Kingdoms, and
like Kings exercised their temporary Authority. Alex. ab Alex. B. 2. chapter 22.
The learned Regna sortiri inter aequales festis Saturni diebus and tanquam
Reges imperitare mos fuit, qui etiam Romany, cum Graecis et exteris communis
fuit. Circa idem tempus inter aequales, Regis fit electio ad Epiphaniae
nostrae, seu trium regum festum, et Rex fabaceus dicitur, ex sort nomen
habens. Moresin. Deprav. Rel. p. 143.
Moresin observes, that our Ceremony of choosing a King on the Epiphany or Feast
of the three Kings, is practiced about the same Time of the Year. -- He is
called the Bean King from the Lot.

This Custom is practiced no where that I know of in the Northern Parts of the
Kingdom, but is still retained in the South. I find also in Joannes Boemus
Aubanus' Description of some singular Rites in Franconia, in Germany, the
following circumstantial Description of this Ceremony:

In Epiphania Domini singulae Familiae ex melle farina, addito Zinzibere et
pipere, libum conficiunt et Regem sibi legunt hoc modo: Libum matter familias
facit, cui absque consideratione inter subigendum denarium unum immittit,
postea amoto igne supra calidum focum illud torret, tostum in tot parts
frangit, quot homines familia habet: demum distribuit, cuique partem unam
tribuens. Adsignantur etiam Christo, beataeque Virgini and tribus Magis suae
parts, quae loco eleemosynae elargiuntur. In cujus autem portione Denarius
repertus fuerit, hic Rex ab omnibus salutatus, in sedem locatur et ter in altum
cum jubilo clevatur: ipse in dextera cretam habet, qua toties signum crucis
supra in Triclinii laqueariis delineat: quae cruces quod obstare plurimis malis
credantur, in multa observatione habentur. p. 266.

Here we have the Materials of the Cake, which are Flour, Honey, Ginger, and
Pepper; one is made for every Family. The Maker thrusts in at Random a small
Coin as she is kneading it; when it is baked, it is divided into as many Parts
as there are Persons in the Family. It is distributed, and each has his Share;
Portions of it also are assigned to Christ, the Virgin, and the Three Magi,
which are given away in Alms. Whoever finds the Piece of Coin in his Share is
saluted by all as King, and being placed on a Seat or Throne, is thrice lifted
aloft with joyful Acclamations: He holds a Piece of Chalk in his Right Hand,
and each Time he is lifted up makes a Cross on the Ceiling. These Crosses are
thought to prevent many Evils, and are much revered.




I gather the present Manner of drawing King and Queen on this Day, from an
ingenious Letter preserved in the Universal Magazine, 1774, whence I shall take
the Liberty to extract a few select Passages. I went to a Friend's House in the
Country to partake of some of those innocent Pleasures that constitute a merry
Christmas; I did not return till I had been present at drawing King and Queen,
and eaten a Slice of the twelfth Cake, made by the fair Hands of my good
Friend's Consort. After Tea Yesterday, a noble Cake was produced, and two
Bowls, containing the fortunate Chances for the different Sexes. Our Host
filled up the Tickets; the whole Company, except the King and Queen, were to be
Ministers of State, Maids of Honor, or Ladies of the Bedchamber.

Our kind Host and Hostess, whether by Design or Accident became King and
Queen. According to twelfth 'Day Law, each Party is to support their Character
till Midnight. After Supper one called for a King's Speech, etc. The rest is
political Satire, and is foreign to our Purpose.

I have inserted this with a View of gratifying the Curiosity of my northern
Readers on this Head.

N. B. The Reader is desired to add the following Remarks to the Observations
on YULE: All the Celtic Nations have been accustomed to the Worship of the Sun;
either as distinguished from Thor, or considered as his Symbol: -- It was a
Custom that every where prevailed in ancient Times, to celebrate a Feast at the
Winter Solstice; by which Men testified their Joy at seeing this great Luminary
return again to this Part of the Heavens. -- This was the greatest Solemnity in
the Year. They call it in many Places, Yole, or Yuul, from the Word Hiaul and
Houl, which even at this Day signifies the Sun, in the Languages of Bass
Britagne, and Cornwall This is giving a Celtic Derivation of a Gothic Word (two
Languages extremely different). The learned Doctor Hickes, thus derives the
Term in Question. I-ol, Cimbricum, Anglo Saxonice scriptum, Geol; et Dan. Sax.
Jul, o in u facile mutato, open intensivi praefixi 1 et ge, faciunt ol,
Commessatio, Compotatio, etc. ( Isl. Ol cerevisiam denotat et metonymice
Convivium) Junii Etym. V. Yeol.

Our ingenious Author, however, is certainly right as to the Origin and Design
of the Yule Feast: The Green-landers at this Day keep a Sun Feast at the Winter
Solstice, about Dec. 22, to rejoice at the Return of the Sun, and the expected
Renewal of the Hunting Season, etc. which Custom they may possibly have learnt
of the Norvegian Colony formerly settled in Greenland. See Crantz's Hist. of
Greenland, Vol. I. p. 176. Ibid. in Not.


. Vide Mallet's Northern Antiquities, Vol. II. p. 68.

CHAP. XVIII. Of St. Paul's Day; The Observation of the Weather, a Custom of
the Heathens, and handed down by the Monks: The Apostle St. Paul himself is
against such Observations; The Opinion of St. Austin upon them.
THE Observation of the Weather which is made on this Day is altogether
ridiculous and superstitious. If it happen to be unclouded and without Rain, it
is looked upon as an Omen of the following Year's Success, if otherwise, that
the Year will be unfortunate. Thus the old Verse. Clara dies Pauli, bona
tempora denotat anni,
Si fuerint venti, denarrant praelia genti,
Si nix aut pluviae, pereunt animalia quaeque.


The Interprepation of which is very well known to be this, If St. Paul's Day
be fair and clear,
It does betide a happy Year;
If blustering Winds do blow aloft
Then Wars will trouble our Realm full often.
And if it chance to Snow or Rain,
Then will be dear all Sorts of Grain.


Such also is the Observation of St. Swithin's Day, which if rainy is a Token
that it will rain for forty Days successively; such is the Observation of Si
sol splendescat Maria purificante,
Major erit glacies post festum quam fuit ante.

Candlemas-Day, such is Childermas-Day, such Valentine's-Day, and some others.

How St. Paul's Day came to have this particular Knack of foretelling the good
or evil Fortune of the following Year, is no easy Matter to find out. The Monks
who were undoubtedly the first who made this wonderful Observation, have taken
Care it should be handed down to Posterity, but why and for what Reason this
Observation was to stand good, they have taken Care to conceal. In Church
Affairs indeed they make free with handing down Traditions from Generation to
Generation, which being approved by an infallible Judgment, are to be taken for
granted; but as far as I hear, they never pretended to an infallible Spirit, in
the Study of the Planets. One may therefore, without the Suspicion of Heresy,
or fear of the Inquisition, make a little Inquiry into this Affair, and see
whether it be true or false, whether it is built upon any Reason or no Reason,
whether still to be observed, or only laughed at as a Monkish Dream.

Now as it is the Day of that Saint, the great Apostle St. Paul, I cannot see
there is any Thing to be built upon. He did indeed labor more abundantly than
all the Apostles; but never, that I heard, in the Science of Astrology. And why
his Day should therefore be a standing Almanac to the World, rather than the
Day of any other Saint, will be pretty hard to find out. I am sure there is a
good Number of them, have as much Right to Rain or fair Weather as St. Paul,
and if St. Andrew, St. Thomas, etc. have not as much Right to Wind or Snow, let
the Reader judge.

As it is the Twenty fifth Day of January, one would think that could be no
Reason. For what is that Day more than another? Indeed they do give some Show
of Reason, why Rain should happen about the Time of St. Swithin, which is this.
About the Time of his Feast, which is on the Fourteenth of July, there are two
rainy Constellations, which are called Praecepe and Asellus, which arise
cosmically, and generally produce Rain. And to be sure in the Course of the
Sign Aquarius, there may be both Rain and Wind and fair Weather, but how these
can foretell the Destiny of the Year, is the Question.

As then there is nothing in the Saint, or his Day to prognosticate any such
Thing, I mean, as it is the Day of St. Paul, or the Twenty fifth of January, so
I must confess I cannot find out what may be the Ground of this particular
Observation. But however thus much is very obvious, that this Observation is an
exact Copy of that superstitious Custom among the Heathens, of observing one
Day as good, and another as bad. For among them were lucky and unlucky Days;
some were dies atri, and some dies albi; the atri were pointed out in their
Calendar, with a black Character, the albi with a white; the former to denote
it a Day of bad Success, the latter a Day of good. Thus have the Monks in the
dark and unlearned Ages of Popery copied after the Heathens, and dreamed
themselves into the like Superstitions, esteeming one Day more successful than
another; and so according to them, it is very unlucky to begin any Work upon
Childermass-Day; and what Day soever that falls on, whether on a Monday,
Tuesday, or any other, nothing must be begun on that Day through the Year; St.
Paul's Day is the Year's Fortune Tellers, St. Mark's Day is the Prognosticator
of your Life and Death, etc. and so instead of persuading the People to lay
aside the Whims and Fancies of the Heathen World, they brought them so
effectually in, that they are still reigning in many Places to this Day.

But of all the Days of the Year, they could not have chosen one so little to
the Purpose. For the very Saint, whose Day is so observed, has himself
cautioned them against any such Observation: For in the Fourth Chapter of his
Epistle to the Galations, he tells them, how dangerous it was to observe Days,
and Months, and Times, and Years; which is not, as some would persuade us, to
Caution us against the Observation of any Day but the Lord's Day; but only that
we should not observe the abolished Feasts of the Jews, nor the abominable
Feasts of the Gentiles, nor their superstitious Observation of fortunate and
unfortunate Days. St. Austin, upon this Place, has these Words, Non itaque
dies observemus, and annos and menses, and tempora, ne audiamus ab apostolo,
timeo vos, ne forte sine causa laboraverim in vobis. Eos enim culpat, qui
dicunt, non profisiscar, quia posterus est, aut quia luna sic fertur, vel
profisiscar, ut prospera cedant, quia ita se habet positio siderum, etc. Beda
ex Augustine. in loc.
Let us not observe Years, and Months, and Times, least we hear the Apostle
telling us, I am afraid of you, least I have shown on you labor in Vain. For
the Persons he blames, are those who say, I will not set forward on my Journey,
because it is the next Day after such a Time, or because the Moon is so; or
I Will set forward that I may have Luck, because such is just now the Position of
the Stars. I will not Traffic this Month, because such a Star presides, or I
will, because it does. I shall plant no Vines this Year, because it is
Leap-Year, etc.

The learned Mr. Bingham, has among several others, a Quotation Bingham, 16 L.
C. 5. Antiq. Eccl. P. 300. Aust. de Doct. Christ. L. 2. C. 10.
from the same St. Austin on these superstitious Observations, with which I
shall conclude this Chapter. To this kind, says he, belong all Ligatures and
Remedies, which the Schools of Physicians reject and condemn; whether in
Enchantments, or in certain Marks, which they call Characters, or in some other
Things which are to be hanged and bound about the Body, and kept in a dancing
Posture; not for any Temperament of the Body, but for certain Significations,
either Ocult, or Manifest: Which by a gentler Name, they call Physical, that
they may not seem to affright Men with the Appearance of Superstition, but do
good in a natural Way: Such are Earrings hanged upon the Tip of each Ear, and
Rings made of an Ostriches Bones for the Finger; or when you are told in a Fit
of Convulsions, or Shortness of Breath, to hold your left Thumb with your right
Hand. To which may be added a thousand vain Observations, as, if any of our
Members beat; if when two Friends are talking together, a Stone, or a Dog, or a
Child, happens to come between them, they tread the Stone to Pieces, as the
Divider of their Friendship, and this is tolerable in Comparison of beating an
innocent Child that comes between them. But it is more pleasant, that sometimes
the Childrens Quarrel is revenged by the Dogs; for many Times they are so
superstitious, as to dare to beat the Dog that comes between them, who turning
again upon him that smites him, sends him from seeking a vain Remedy, to seek a
real Physician indeed. Hence proceed likewise these other Superstitions: For a
Man to tread upon his Threshold when he passes by his own House, to return back
to Bed again, if he chance to sneeze as he is putting on his Shoes; to return
into his House, if he stumble at his Going out; if the Rats know his Cloths, to
be more terrified with the Suspicion of some future Evil, then concerned for
the present Loss. He says, Cato gave a wise and smart Answer to such an one,
who came in some Consternation to consult him, about the Rats having knawed his
Stockings; that, said he, is no great Wonder, but it would have been a Wonder
indeed, if the Stockings had knawed the Rats. St. Austin mentions this witty
Answer of a wise Heathen, to convince Christians the better of the
Unreasonableness and Vanity of all such superstitious Observations. And he
concludes, that all such Arts, whether of triffling or more noxious
Superstition, are to be rejected and avoided by Christians, as proceeding
originally from some pernicious Society between Men and Devils, and being the
Compacts and Agreements of such treacherous and deceitful Friendship. The
Apostle forbids us to have Fellowship with Devils; and that, he says, respects
not only Idols, and Things offered to Idols, but all imaginary Signs pertaining
to the Worship of Idols, and also all Remedies, and other Observations, which
are not appointed publicly by GOD to promote the Love of GOD and our
Neighbor, but proceed from the private Fancies of Men, and tend to delude the
Hearts of Poor deluded Mortals. For these Things have no natural Virtue in
them, but owe all their Efficacy to a presumptuous Confederacy with Devils: And
they are full of pestiferous Curiosity, tormenting Anxiety, and deadly Slavery.
They were first taken up, not for any real Power to be discerned in them, but
gained their Power by Men's observing them. And therefore by the Devil's Art
they happen differently to different Men, according to their own Apprehensions
and Presumptions. For the great Deceiver knows, how to procure Things agreeable
to every Man's Temper, and ensnare him by his own Suspicions and Consent.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XVIII.
A Great deal upon this Subject may be found in Pliny's Natural History,
tending to confirm what Mr. Bourne has told us, that it was a Custom of
Gentilism, adopted under the Papal Superstition, and so transmitted to our
Times. The subsequent poetical Description of the Months by Churchil, contains
in it many Allusions to the popular Notions of Days, etc.

Frose January, Leader of the Year,
Minced Pies in Van, and Calves Heads in the Rear; Alluding to the Mince Pies
in Use about Christmas or New Year's Day, and to an inhuman Insult offered, or
said to have been usually offered by a certain Party on the 31st of this Month
(a Day-Nigro carbone notandus) to the Memory of the unhappy Charles.

It is unnecessary to observe here, that it is equally mean and cowardly to
pluck a dead Lion by the Beard!



Dull February in whose leaden Reign,
My Mother bore a Bard without a Brain; Mr. Churchill discovers no small Vanity
in distinguishing the Month of February by that very important Circumstance,
his being born in it. But Vanity is indeed the Vice of Poets, and the usual
Concomitant of a fine and sprightly Imagination!

March, various, fierce and wild, with wind-crack'd cheeks,
By wilder Welshmen led and crowned with Leeks. St. David's Day.

April with Fools, and May with Bastards blessed, Vide All-Fools Day in the
Appendix. -- See also the Spectator: "Beware the Month of May."

June with white Roses in her rebel Breast;
July, to whom, the Dog Star in her Train,
St. James gives Oisters, and St. Swithin Rain; Swithin, a holy Bishop of
Winchester about the Year 860, and called the weeping St. Swithin, for that
about his Feast, Praesepe and Aselli, rainy Constellations arise cosmically,
and commonly cause Rain. Blount in Verbo.

August who banished from her Smithfield Stand, Alluding to the Interdiction of
St. Bartholomew Fair.

To Chelsea flies, with Dogget in her Hand;
September, when by Custom (right divine)
Geese are ordained to bleed at Michael's Shrine: Goose intentos, as Blount
tells us, is a Word used in Lancacashire, where the Husbandmen claim it as a
Due to have a Goose intentos on the 16th Sunday after Pentecost; which Custom
took Origin from the last Word of this old Church Prayer of that Day, Tua, nos
quaesumus, Domine, gratia semper praeveniat and sequatur; ac bonis operibus
jugiter praestet esse intentos. The common People very humourously mistake it
for a Goose with ten Toes.

October, who the Cause of Freedom joined,
And gave a second George to bless Mankind;
November, who at once to grace our Earth,
St. Andrew boasts, and our Augusta's Birth;
December, last of Months, but best, who gave,
A Christ to Man, a Savior to the Slave.
Whilst, falsely grateful, Man, at the full Feast,
To do God Honor, makes himself a Beast.
There is nothing Superstitious in the Prognostications of Weather from Achs
and Corns: Achs and Corns, says the great Philosopher Bacon, do engrieve (i. e.
afflict) either toward Rain or Frost: The one makes the Humors to abound
more, and the other makes them Sharper.

Loyd in his Dial of Days, observes on St. Paul's, that of this Day, the
Husbandmen Perphaps it will be thought no uninteresting Article in this little
Code of Vulgar Antiquities, to mention a well-known Interjection used by the
Country People to their Horses, when yoked to a Cart, etc. Heit or Heck! I find
this used in the Days of Chaucer: They saw a Cart that charged was with Hay,
The which a Carter drove forth on the Way:
Deep was the Way, for which the Cart still stood;
This Carter smote and cryde as he were wode,
Heit Scot! heit Brok! what spare ye for the Nones,
The Fend you fetch, quoth he, Body and Bones.
Fre. T. 275.

The Name of Brok is still too in frequent Use amongst Farmers' Horses.


prognosticate the whole Year: If it be a fair Day, it will be a pleasant Year;
It is common in the North to plant the Herb House-leek upon the Tops of Cottage
Houses. The learned Author of the Vulgar Errors informs us that it was an
ancient Superstition, and this Herb was planted on the Tops of Houses as a
Defensative against Lightning and Thunder. Quincunx, 126.
if it be Windy, it will be Wars; if it be Cloudy, it does foreshew the Plague
that Year.

Mr. Gay notices it thus in his Trivia: All Superstition from thy Breast repel,
Let cred'lous Boys, and prattling Nurses tell
How if the Festival of Paul be clear,
Plenty from liberal Horn shall strew the Year;
When the dark Skies dissolve in Snow or Rain,
The laboring Hind shall yoke the Steer in vain;
But if the threatening Winds in Tempest roar,
Then War shall bathe her wasteful Sword in Gore.
How if, on Swithin's Feast the Welkin lours,
And every Penthouse streams with hasty Showers,
Twice twenty Days shall Clouds their Fleeces drain,
And wash the Pavements with incessant Rain:
Let no such vulgar Tales debase thy Mind,
Nor Paul, nor Swithin, rule the Clouds and Wind.


Thus also some rural Prognostications of the Weather are alluded to in his
first Pastoral: -- We learned to read the Skies,
To know when Hail will fall, or Winds arise;
He taught us erst the Heifer's Tail to view,
When stuck aloft that Showers would straight ensue;
He first that useful Secret did explain,
That pricking Corns foretold the gathering Rain:
When Swallows fleet soar high and sport in Air,
He told us that the Welkin would be clear. Prognostications of the Weather,
for the Use of those who live in Towns, are given us in the following Words
from the abovementioned beautiful didactic Poem Trivia: But when the swinging
Signs your Ears offend
With creaking Noise, then rainy Floods impend;
Soon shall the Kennels swell with rapid Streams,
On Hosier's Poles depending Stockings tied,
Flag with the slackened Gale, from Side to Side:
Church-Monuments foretell the changing Air;
Then Niobe dissolves into a Tear,
And sweats with secret Grief: You Will hear the Sounds
Of whistling Winds, ever Kennels break their Bounds;
Ungrateful Odours Common-Shores diffuse,
And dropping Vaults distill unwholsom Dews,
Ever the Tiles rattle with the smoking Shower, etc.






I find an Observation on the 13th of December, in the ancient Calendar of the
Church of Rome, That on this Day Prognostications of the Months were drawn for
the whole Year. December. 13. Prognostica Mensium per totum annum.



On the Day of St. Barnabas, Barnabae Apost. Tempestas saepe oritur.
and on that of St. Simon, and St. Jude, "that a Tempest often rises." The
Vigil of St. Paul's is called there Dies Egyptiacus.

Many superstitious Observations on Days may be found in a curious old Book
called Practica Rusticorum.

A Highlander, says Mr. Pennant, never begins any Thing of Consequence on the
Day of the Week, on which the Third of May falls, which he calls the dismal Day.

CHAP. XIX. Of Candlemass-Day; why so called; the Blasphemy of the Church of
Rome in consecrating Wax Candles.
THIS Day goes under several Denominations: It is called the Day of CHRIST's
Presentation; because on it CHRIST was presented in the Temple; it is called
the Holy Day of St. Simeon; because it was on it, that he took our SAVIOR up
in his Arms: And it is called the Purification, because then the Holy Virgin
was purified. It is generally a Day of Festivity, and more than ordinary
Observation among Women, and is therefore called the Wives Feast Day. The
Feasting seems to be observed in Honor of the Virgin Mary; for as on the Day
of a Woman's being church'd, there is no common Entertainment, so it seems,
that this Feasting was begun in the Times of Popery, by Way of Compliment to
the Churching-Day of the Virgin Mary.

It has the Name of Nos Anglica, the Purification of our Lady. Vel communi
Sermon potius, Candlemas-Day: A distributione and gestatione cereorum
ardentium: Vel etiam, quod per illum diem cereorum usus in vespertinis precibus
and litaniis, per totam hyemem adhibitus, cessare solet, usque ad sanctorum
omnium festum anni insequentis. Montag. Orig. Ecc. Pars. Pri. P. 157.
Candlemass-Day, because Lights were distributed and carried about in
Procession, or because also the Use of lighted Tapers, which was observed all
Winter at Vespers and Litanies, were then wont to cease, till the next
All-Hallowmass.

These Lights so carried about, were blessed of the Priests, as Hospinian tells
us, who made Use of the following Prayers at their Consecration. Rogamus te per
invocationem sancti tui nominis, and per intercessionem Mariae beatae virginis
matris filii tui, etc. ut consecrare velis has candelas ad utilitatem and
commodum hominis, etc. and mox, Domine Jesu, benedicas obsecro hanc creaturam
ceream, and concede illi caelestem, -- malignus spiritus contremescat, and ita
territus aufugiat, etc. Hospin. de Fest. Purific. P. 53.
We implore thee by the Invocation of thy Holy Name, and by the Intercession of
the blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of thy Son, whose Feast we this Day
celebrate with the highest Devotion; and by the Intercession of all thy Saints,
that thou would sanctify these Candles to the Good and Profit of Men, and
the Health of his Soul and Body, whether in Earth or Sea. And again. O LORD
JESU, I beseech thee, that thou would bless this thy Creature of Wax, and
grant it thy Heavenly Benediction, by the Power of thy Holy Cross; that as it
was a Gift to Man, by which the Darkness might be driven away, so now it may be
endowed with such Virtue by the Sign of the Holy Cross, that wheresoever it is
lighted and placed, the evil Spirit may tremble, and, with his Servants, be in
such Terror and Confusion as to fly away from that Habitation, and no more vex
and disturb thy Servants.

After this, he adjures the Wax Candles, in Words like these. Adjuro te
creaturam ceream in nomine Domini nostri and sanctae Trinitatis, ut sis
extirpatio and depulsio diaboli and spectrorum ejus, etc. Hospin. ibid.
I adjure thee, O thou waxen Creature, in the Name of our LORD and the Holy
Trinity, that thou repel and extirpate the Devil and his Sprights, etc And
therefore all Christians (says Eccius. Tom. 3. Hom. de Purificat.) ought to use
these Lights, with an holy Love, having a sincere Dependence, that thus they
shall be freed by the Power of the Word and this Prayer, from all the Snares
and Frauds of the Devil.

Our Author upon this, says, That this is manifest Blasphemy and Idolatry. For
as on the one Hand, they take the Name of GOD and the Holy Trinity in vain, so
on the other they attribute to a Wax Candle, what should be ascribed to CHRIST
alone, and the quickening Power of the Holy Ghost.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XIX.
IN the forenamed ancient Calendar of the Romish Church, I find the subsequent
Observations on the 2d of February, usually called Candlemas Day.

"Torches are consecrated"

"Torches are given away for many Days Feb. 2. "Purificatio Virginis
"Faces consecrantur.
"Faces dantur multis diebus."

."

Pope Sergius In a Convocation in the Reign of Henry 8th, -- in the Passage
that relates to Rites and Ceremonies, -- among those that were not to be
contemned or cast away was bearing of Candles on Candlemass Day, in Memory of
Christ the Spiritual Light, of whom Simeon did prophecy, as is read in the
Church that Day. Fuller's Church History, p. 222.


, says Becon in his Relics of Rome, Fol. 164, commanded, that all the People
should go on Procession upon Candlemasse Day, and carry Candels about with them,
brenning in their Hands, in the Year of our Lord 684. Durand, etc.

How this Candle-bearing on Candlemass Day came first up, the Author of our
English Festival declares on this Manner. "Sometime says he, when the
Romans by great Might and royal Power, conquered all the World, they were so
proud, that they forgot God, and made them diverse Gods after their own Lust.
And so among all they had a God that they called Mars, that had been tofore a
notable Knight in Battle. And so they prayed to him for Help, and for that
they would speed the better of this Knight, the People prayed, and did great
Worship to his Mother, that was called Februa, after which Woman, much People
have Opinion, that the Month February is called. Wherefore the 2d Day of this
Month is Candlemass Day.

The Romans this Night, went about the City of Rome, with Torches and Candles
brenning in Worship of this Woman Februa, for hope to have the more Help and
Succoure of her Son Mars.

Then was there a Pope, that was called Sergius, and when he saw Christian
People draw to this false Maumetry and untrue Belief; he thought to undo this
foul Use and Custom, and turn it into God's Worship, and our Lady's, and gave
Commandment that all Christian People should come to Church, and offer up a
Candle brennyng, in the Worship that they did to this Woman Februa, and do
Worship to our Lady, and to her Son our Lord Jesus Christ. So that now this
Feast is solemnly hallowed through all Christendom. And every Christan Man and
Woman of covenable Age, is bound to come to Church, and offer up their Candles,
as though they were bodily with our Lady, hopyng for this Reverence and Worship
that they do to our Lady to have a great Reward in Heaven, etc."

Ray, in his Collection of Proverbs, preserves one that relates to this Day: On
Candlemas-day throw Candle and Candlestick away. Somerset.

CHAP. XX. Of Valentine-Day; its Ceremonies; what the Council of Trullus
thought of such Customs; that they had better be omitted.
IT is a Ceremony, never omitted among the Vulgar, to draw Lots, which they
Term Valentines, on the Eve before Valentine a Presbyter of the Church was
beheaded under Claudius the Emperor.
Valentine-day. The Names of a select Number of one Sex, are by an equal Number
of the other put into some Vessel; and after that, every one draws a Name,
which for the present is called their Valentine, and is also looked upon as a
good Omen of their being Man and Wife afterward.

There is a rural Tradition, that on this Day every Nature the Vicare of the
Almighty Lord
That hot, cold, hevie, light, moist, and dry
has knit, by even number of Accord,
In easy Voice, began to speak and say,
fowls take heed of my Sentence I pray,
And for your own ease, in fordring of your need,
as fast as I may speak, I will me speed.
Ye know well, how on St. Valentine's Day
By my Statute, and through my governaunce
Ye do these your makes, and after fly away
with hem, as I prick you with Pleasaunce.
Chaucer.
Bird chooses its Mate. From this perhaps the youthful Part of the World has
first practiced this Custom, so common at this Season.

In the Trullan Council we have Lots and Divinations forbid, as being some of
those Things which provoked the LORD to anger against King 2 Lib. Kings, Chap.
21.
Manasses, who used Lots and Divinations, etc. upon which the Scholiast has
these Words. Can. 65. in Syn. Trul. in Bals. P. 440.
The Custom of drawing Lots was after this Manner; on the 23d Day of June,
which is the Eve of St. John Baptist, Men and Women were accustomed to gather
together in the Evening by the Seaside, or in some certain Houses, and there
adorn a Girl, who was her Parents first-begotten Child, after the Manner of a
Bride. Then they feasted and leaped after the Manner of Bacchanals, and danced
and shouted as they were wont to do on their Holy Days: After this they poured
into a narrow neck'd Vessel some of the Seawater, and put also into it certain
Things belonging to each of them. Then as if the Devil gifted the Girl, with
the Faculty of telling future Things; they would enquire with a loud Voice,
about the good or evil Fortune that should attend them: Upon this the Girl
would take out of the Vessel, the first Thing that came to Hand, and show it,
and give it to the Owner; who upon receiving it, was so foolish as to imagine
himself wiser, as to the good or evil Fortune that should attend him.

This Custom, as he tells us a little after, is altogether diabolical: And
surely it was so, being used as a presage of what was future. Was the Custom of
the Lots now mentioned, used as among the Heathens, they would no Doubt be as
worthy of Condemnation; but as far as I know, there is but little Credit given
to them; though that little is too much, and ought to be laid aside. But if the
Custom was used without any Mixture or Allay of Superstition, as I believe it
is in some Places, yet it is often attended with great Inconveniences and
Misfortunes, with Uneasinesses to Families, with Scandal, and sometimes with
Ruin.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XX.
Festa Valentino rediit lux --
Quisque sibi sociam jam legit ales avem.
Inde sibi dominam per sorts quoerere in annum
Mansit ab antiquis mos repetitus avis
Quisque legit Dominam, quam casto observet amore
Quam nitidis sertis obsequioque colat:
Mittere cui possit blandi munuscula Veris.
BUCHANAN.
BIRDS are said to choose their Mates about this Time of the Year, and probably
from thence came the Custom of young Persons choosing Valentines or special
loving Friends on that Day: This is the commonly received Opinion. -- I rather
incline to controvert this, supposing it to be the Remains of an ancient
Superstition in the Church of Rome on this Day, of choosing Patrons for the
Year ensuing; and that, because Ghosts were thought to walk on the Night of
this Day This I find in an Observation of the 14th of February, in the old
Romish Calendar so often cited: "Manes nocte vagati creduntur."


, or about this Time.

Gallantry seems to have borrowed this, or rather to have taken it up, when
Superstition (at the Reformation) had been compelled to let it fall.

I have searched the Legend of St. Valentine, but think there is no Occurrence
in his Life, that could have given Rise to this Ceremony Mr. Wheatley in his
Illustration of the Common Prayer, p. 61, tells us, that St. Valentine was a
Man of most admirable Parts and so famous for his Love and Charity, that the
Custom of choosing Valentines upon his Festival, (which is still practiced) took
its rise from thence. I know not how my Reader will be satisfied with this
learned Writer's Explication. -- He has given us no Premises in my Opinion,
from whence we can draw any such Conclusion. -- Were not all the Saints
supposed to be famous for their Love and Charity? Surely he does not mean that
we should understand the Word Love here, as implying Gallantry!
.

The learned Moresin tells Et vere ad Valentini festum a viris habent Foeminae
munera, et alio temporis viris dantur. In Scotia autem ad Valentini reciprocae
fuere dationes. Moresini Deprav. Rel. 160.
us, that at this Festival, the Men used to make the Women presents, as upon
another Occasion the Women used to do to the Men, but that in Scotland on this
Day presents were made reciprocally.

Mr. Gay has left us a poetical Description of some rural Ceremonies used on
the Morning of this Day.

Last Valentine, the Day when Birds of Kind
Their Paramours with mutual Chirpings find;
I rearly rose, just at the break of Day,
Before the Sun had chased the Stars away;
Afield I went, amid the Morning Dew,
To milk my Kine (for so should Housewives do)
Thee first I spied, and the first Swain we see
In spite of Fortune shall our true Love be Mr. Pennant, in his Tour in
Scotland tells us, that in February young Persons draw Valentines, and from
thence collect their future Fortune in the nuptial State.

Dr. Goldsmith, in his Vicar of Wakefield, describing the Manners of some
Rusties, tells us they kept up the Christmas Carrol, sent True-love Knots on
Valentine Morning, eat Pancakes on Shrove-tide, showed their Wit on the first
of April, and religiously cracked Nuts on All-hallow Eve.


.
CHAP. XXI. Of Shrove-tide; what it signifies; the Custom of the Papists at
this Season; that our present Customs are very unbecoming.
SHROVE-TIDE signifies the Time of confessing Sins, as the Word Tide, which
signifies Time; and the Saxon Word Shrive or Shrift, which signifies
Confession, plainly show. The Reason why this Time is so denominated is,
because it was set apart by the Church of Rome for a Time of Shriving or
confessing Sins. For then People were wont to confess their Sins, and receive
the Sacrament, that they might be better prepared for the Religious Observation
of the following Season of Lent. Thus in the Constitutions of Simon of Sudbury
Archbishop of Canterbury, was made at Lambeth A. D. 1373, in the second Year of
Richard the Second, in the first Year of Urban the fifth Pope, and Clement the
seventh Antipope. This most eloquent Man, who was wise incomparably beyond the
rest of the Kingdom; sat about six Years, and at last was beheaded at London by
Command of the Rebels, Tyler and Stravo, A. D. 1381. Johnson Constable. 1378. I
have seen in a Church at Sudbury in Suffolk, a Skull, which is shown to
Strangers for the Skull of this Bishop, and probably it is the true one.
Simon Sudbury, it is ordered, That Laymen should be admonished to confess in
the very Beginning of Lent. And in Theodolphus's Capitula, it is ordered, That
on the Week next before Lent, every Man should go to his Shrift, and his Shrift
should shrive him in such a Manner, as his Deeds which he had done required:
And that he should charge all that belong to his District, that if any of them
have Discord with any, he make Peace with him; if any one will not be brought
to this, then he shall not shrive him; but then he shall inform the Bishop,
that he may convert him to what is right, if he be willing to belong to GOD:
Then all Contentions and Disputes shall cease; and if there be any one of them,
that has taken Offense at another, then shall they be reconciled, that they
may more freely say in the LORD'S Prayer, LORD forgive us our Trespasses, etc.
And having thus purified their Minds, let them enter upon the Holy Fast Tide,
and cleanse themselves by Satisfaction against Holy Easter, etc. Johnson 994.
36. Constitut.

This Custom of confessing to the Priest at this Time, was laid aside by our
Church at the Reformation: For Sins are to be confessed to GOD alone, and not
to the Priest, except when the Conscience cannot otherwise be quieted: Then
indeed the Grief is to be opened to the Spiritual Guide in private, Exhort. to
the Com.
That by the Ministry of GOD's Word, he may give the Benefit of Absolution,
together with ghostly Council and Advice, to the quieting of the Conscience,
and the avoiding of all Scruple and Doubtfulness. But how this other worse
Custom came to be retained, of indulging all Manner of Luxury and Intemperance,
I know nothing but that the Flesh was too powerful for the Spirit: The Duties
of Religion, how justly soever enjoined us, are tamely dispensed with, but what
will not we rather do, than give up the Pleasures of Life? Surely the Church never
designed, when she so justly took away the public Confessions of this Season,
that Rioting and Gaming, and Drunkenness, should continue amongst us. Are these
a fit Preparation for so solemn a Season? Will they qualify us for the Hearing
of the History of our LORD'S Passion? Will they prepare us for the Reception of
his Body and Blood? And fit us to meet him in the Morning of the Resurrection?
Will they not rather speak us Heathens than Christians? And lead us to Hell,
than on the Way to Heaven? Such Customs as these may, in some Measure, be
excusable among them whose Vid. Seldon. Table Talk. C. of Christmas.
Church has too much led them into those Things; but it is scandalous and
sinful and abominable in those, who pretend to be the Enemies of Error and
Superstition, to continue the Observation of such sinful Customs.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXI.
MR. Bourne seems to wonder at the Luxury and Intemperance that usually
prevailed at this Season: Was he ignorant that this was no more than a Vestige
of the Romish Carnival. See Pancake-Tuesday in the Appendix.

The learned Moresin Comedit enim et bibit, seque loco jocoque omnimodo adeo
dedit quasi usui nunquam veniant, quasi cras moritura, hodie prius omnium rerum
capere velit Satietatem, etc. Deprav. Rel. 142.
derives the Carnival from the Times of Gentilism; he introduces Johannes
Boemus Aubanus describing it thus: Men eat and drink, and abandon themselves to
every Kind of sportive Foolery, as if resolved to have their Fill of Pleasure
before they were to die, and as it were forego every Sort of Delight. Thus also
Seldom: What the Church debars us one Day, she gives us Leave to take out in
another: First we fast, and then we feast: First there is a Carnival, and then
a Lent.

Fitzstephen informs us, that anciently on Shrove-Tuesday the Schoolboys used
to bring Cocks of the Game The learned Moresin informs us, that the Papists
derived this Custom of exhibiting Cock-Fights on one Day every Year from the
Athenians, and from an Institution of Themistocles. -- Galli gallinacei, says
he, producuntur per diem singulis annis in pugnam a Papisequis, ex veteri
Atheniensium forma ducto more, et Themistoclis Instituto Cael. Rhod. Lib 9.
variar. lect. Cap. 46. Idem Pergami fiebat. Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 5. Cap. 8.
Deprav. Rel. Orig. etc. p. 66.

This Custom was retained in many Schools in Scotland within this Century;
perhaps it is still in Use. -- The Schoolmasters were said to preside at the
Battle, and claimed the run-a-way Cocks as their Perquisites. These were called
"Fugees;" corrupt I suppose of Refugees. -- I forbear to describe the Mode of
throwing at Cocks, for as Boerhaave observes on another Occasion, To teach the
Arts of Cruelty is equivalent to committing them.


to their Master, and to delight themselves in Cock-fighting all the Forenoon.
Vide Stow. Hence so many Welsh Mains, etc. about this Season.

Since that Time a barbarous Custom has been instituted on this Day of
throwing at Cocks The ingenious Artist, Hogarth, has satirized this Barbarity
in the first of the Prints called the Four Stages of Cruelty. Trusler (who by
no Means handles his Pen as the Master did his Pencil) tell us, in his
Description of this Plate, We have several Groups of Boys at their different
barbarous Diversions. One is throwing at a Cock, the universal Shrove-tide
Amusement, beating the harmless feathered Animal to Jelly." -- "It has been
judiciously observed, he farther remarks, speaking of Cats, that the Concert of
a Cat's having nine Lives, has cost at least nine Lives in ten of the whole
Race of them; scarce a Boy in the Streets, but has in this Point outdone even
Hercules himself, who was renowned for killing a Monster that had but three
Lives. Vide Hogarth Moralized, p. 134.
, which we hope will be soon forgotten amongst us. It is an Amusement fit only
for the bloodiest Savages, and not for humanized Men, much less for Christians!
This was formerly in Use on this Day at New Castle, but is now laid aside. We
wish it consigned to eternal Oblivion!

Mr. Bourne takes no Notice of Ash Wednesday, so called from a Custom observed
in the ancient Christian Church, of Penitents expressing their Humiliation at
this Time by appearing in Sackcloth and Ashes Cinere quia se conspergunt in
poenitentia Judaei, Gregor. Mag. statuit, ut in Quadragessima ante initium
Missae Cineres consecrentur, quibus Populus aspergebatur, and diem huic rei
sacrum da^, in quo cuncti generatim mortales characterem cinereum in front
accipiant. Moresin. Deprav. Rel. Orig. 37.

There is a curious Clause in one of the Romish Casuists concerning the keeping
of Lent; it is, that Beggars which are ready to affamish for Want, may in Lent
Time eat what they can get!

See Bishop Hall's Triumphs of Rome, p. 123.
. The Want of this Discipline is at present supplied by reading publicly on
this Day the Curses denounced against impenitent Sinners, when the People
repeat an Amen after each Curse.

Enlightened as we think ourselves at this Day, there are many who consider
this general Avowal of the Justice of God's Wrath against impenitent Sinners,
as cursing their Neighbors; consequently like good Christians they keep away
from Church on the Occasion. -- A Folly and Superstition worthy of the
After-midnight, the Spirit-walking Time of Popery!

In a Convocation held in the Time of Henry the Eighth, mentioned in Fuller's
Church History, p. 222, giving of Ashes on Ash Wednesday, to put in Remembrance
every Christian Man in the Beginning of Lent and Penance, that he is but Ashes
and Earth, and thereto shall return, etc. is reserved with some other Rites and
Ceremonies, that survived the Shock, that almost overthrew, at that remarkable
Era, the whole Pile of Catholic Superstitions.

CHAP. XXII. Of Palm Sunday: Why so called; how observed in the Popish Times:
What it is truly to carry Palms in our Hands on this Day.
THE Sunday before Easter, which is denominated Palm Sunday, is so called,
Dicitur enim dominica in ramis palmarum, quod illo die rami palmarum in
processionibus deportentur in significationem illorum, quos filii Israel
statuerunt in via, Christo jam veniente. Belith. 531. P. 34. Cap. Durand. Lib.
6. P. 327. in Ram.
because, as the Ritualists say, on that Day, the Boughs of Palm Trees were
wont to be carried in Procession, in Imitation of those which the Children of
Israel strawed in the Way of CHRIST. For they cut down Branches from the Trees,
and strawed them in the Way; which according to the Consent of Antiquity, were
the Branches of the Palm Tree; it being very Common in that Country, and used
as an Emblem of Victory. And a Doctor of our own Church, in his Discourse upon
this Festival, says, Dr. Spark's Feasts and Fasts.
From the Story, as described by St. Luke and St. Matthew, some of the ancient
Church took Occasion, as on this Day, to go in Procession with Palms in their
Hands, and to denominate it Palm Sunday.

But however harmless this Custom might have been, in the Times of its first
institution, it is certain, that in after Ages it sunk into Superstition and
gross Idolatry. Thus the Rhemists, in their Translation of the New Testament,
describe the Ceremony themselves: These Offices of Honor, done to our Savior
extraordinarily, were very acceptable. And for a Memory hereof, the Holy Church
makes a solemn Procession every Year upon this Day; specially in our Country,
when it was Catholic, with the Blessed Sacrament reverently carried, as it
were CHRIST upon the Ass, and strawing of Bushes and Flowers, bearing of Palms,
setting up Boughs, spreading and hanging up the richest Clothes, the Quire and
Quiresters singing, as here the Children and the People; all done in a very
godly Ceremony, to the Honor of CHRIST, and the Memory of his Triumph upon
this Day. The like Service, and the like Duties done to him in all other solemn
Processions of the Blessed Sacrament, and otherwise, be undoubtedly no less
grateful. Dr. Fulk. in Loc. Mat.
Fulke upon this, gives this Answer: Your Palm Sunday Procession was horrible
Idolatry, and abusing of the LORD'S Institution, who ordained his Supper to be
eaten and drunken, not to be carried about in Procession like a Heathenish
Idol: But it is pretty Sport, that you make the Priests that carries this
Idol, to supply the Room of the Ass, on which CHRIST did ride: Thus you turn
the Holy Mystery of CHRIST'S riding to Jerusalem, to a May Game and pagent
Play. And yet you say, such Service done to CHRIST is undoubtedly exceeding
grateful; yea, no less grateful, than that was done by his Disciples, at the
Time mentioned in the Text: Your Argument and Proof is none, but your bare
Asseverations. That which the Disciples did, had the Warrant of the Holy
Scripture; but who has regarded these Theatrical Pomps at their Hands? Or what
Word of GOD have you to assure you that he accepts such Will Worship? Who
detesteth all Worship, which is according to the Doctrines and Traditions of
Men, and not after his own Commandment.

From this superstitious and idolatrous Custom, without all doubt it comes to
pass, that we now and then, on a Palm Sunday, see the young People carrying
Branches of Palms in their Hands; which they seem fond of having that Day, and
which they as little regard at other Times. It is true indeed, it is a Relick
of the ancient Superstition of the Papists, but as it is now entirely stripped of
any Superstition, and is an Emblem of the Season, and the Transactions of that
Day; so I see no harm in so innocent an Observation.

But how much better would it be to carry in our Hands this Day, Ramos debent
fideles portare, id est bona opera. -- Opera miserecordiae sunt, vestire nudos,
colligere hospites, errantes revocare, visitare infirmos, etc. Bed. Tom. 7. P.
369.
the Palm of good Works, the Graces of Humility, and Kindness, and Charity, to
feed the Hungry, to give drink to the Thirsty, to clothe the Naked, to
entertain the Strangers, to visit the Sick and in Prison, etc. By such Actions
as these, should we truly carry Palms in our Hands; by these we should truly
straw the Way for our LORD, and so follow his Steps to the Heavenly Jerusalem.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXII.
THERE can be no Doubt but that Palm Sunday, the Dominica in Ramis Palmarum,
was so called from the Palm Branches and green Boughs formerly distributed on
that Day, in Commemoration of our Lord's riding to Jerusalem In Fuller's Church
History, p. 222, we read, Bearing of Palms on Palm Sunday, is in Memory of the
receiving of Christ into Jerusalem a little before his Death, and that we may
have the same Desire to receive him into our Hearts. Provision is made for
retaining the Rites used on Palm Sunday, and we have also the Reasons told us
why they should be retained, in the Convocation, in the Time of Henry 8th,
referred to in the Observations on the preceding Chapter.
. Sprigs of Box Wood are still used as a Substitute for Palms in Roman Catholic
Countries. -- Stow, in his Survey of London, tells us, that in the Week before
Easter, had ye great Shows made, for the fetching in of a twisted Tree, or
With, as they termed it, out of the Woods into the King's House, and the like
into every Man's House of Honor or Worship. This must also have been a
Substitute for the Palm: Thus it is still customary with our Boys to go out and
gather the Willow Flowers or Buds at this Time. -- These seem to have been
selected, because in the North they are generally the only Things at this
Season, in which the Power of Vegetation can be discovered.

The Russians (of the Greek Church) have a very solemn Procession on Palm
Sunday.

CHAP. XXIII. Of rising early on Easter Day: What is meant by the Sun dancing
that Morn: The Antiquity of rising early on this Day; the End and Design of it:
The great Advantage of it.
IT is a common Custom among the Vulgar and uneducated Part of the World, to
rise before the Sun on Easter Day, and walk into the Fields: The Reason of
which is to see the Sun Dance; which they have been told, from an old
Tradition, always dances as upon that Day. We read indeed that the Sun once
Josh. x.
stood still, but whether the Sun danced upon the very Day our Savior rose on,
we cannot tell: It Is very probable it did not, because the Scriptures are
silent; and that it never did so since, I think we may be well assured;
forasmuch as never any, that we have heard of, have seen any such Thing since
that Time. If therefore this Tradition has any Meaning, it must be a
metaphorical one; that when the Morning proves clear, there is a seeming Smile
over the Face of Nature, and Earth and Heaven show Tokens of Joy. For as the
Earth and her Valleys, by standing thick with Corn, are said to laugh and sing;
so, on Account of the Resurrection, the Heavens and the Sun may be said to
dance for Joy; or as the Psalmist words it, Psalm. xcvi. 11. Caeliquidem digni
laetentur, terra autem exultet. Damasc. in Dominicam Pascha, P. 514.
The Heavens may rejoice, and the Earth may be glad.

There is then, really speaking, nothing in the Dancing of the Sun upon
Easter Day; but yet it is a very ancient and commendable Custom to be up early
at this Holy Time: And therefore Damascen, in his Paschal Hymn, sings,
Vigilemus mane profundo, and pro unguenti hymnum afferamus Domino, and Christum
videamus justitiae solemn, omnibus vitam exorientem. Ibid.
Let us watch very early in the Morning; and instead of Ointment, let us bring
an Hymn to our Lord; and let us see our CHRIST, the Sun of Righteousness, who
is the Life that rises to all Men. And indeed it is the most seasonable Time
for meditating on our LORD'S Resurrection, and it is pleasing Circumstances. For
as the Place where any notable Thing has been transacted, seldom or never fails
to raise the Idea of the Transaction; so the particular Time, when it was done,
does generally produce the same Effect. And as the Truth of the Former, was the
Occasion of many holy and religious Men going Fulk. Test. Cont. Rhem. Matthew.
Cap. 28. in Annot.
to visit the Place of the Sepulcher, and hear it, as it were, say, what the
Angel did to the Women, Come, see the Place where the Lord lay; so the Truth of
the Latter was the Reason, why devout and holy Men, did in the best Ages of the
Church, rise early in the Morning of the Resurrection. The Primitive Christians
spent the Night preceding it, in Prayers and Praises, till the Time of
Cock-crow, the supposed Hour of our Savior's rising. For as Latinorum concors
est sententia, Christum non media nocte, verum mane in aurora, canentibus vice
Gallorum angelis, devicta morte and confractis portis inferi, surrexisse.
Durant. de Rit. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
Durant tells us, it is universally assented to by the Latin Church, that after
our Savior had conquered Death, and broken the Gates of Hell, he arose from
the Dead, not at Midnight, but in the Morning, at the Time of Cock-crow; which
not the Cocks, but the Angels themselves proclaimed. And when these
Pernoctations were laid aside, it was the Custom to rise early, and spend the
Morning in such a Manner as was suitable to the Nature of the Time. The
Salutation of the Eastern Church Anestese; or, The LORD is risen, and the usual
Answer, The LORD is risen indeed; were no doubt the common Salutation of that
Morning: And if this present Custom of the Vulgar has had at any Time any
laudable Custom for its Original, it was, no doubt, this of rising early to
contemplate the more seasonably on the Resurrection of CHRIST.

And now, was this the End of rising early at that Holy Time, it would be very
advantageous; but to rise with the View of the Vulgar, is foolish and
ridiculous. Would we rise before the Sun, and prevent the Dawn of Day, our
Meditations would be strong and vigorous, and almost persuade us that the real
Actions of that Morn were presented to our View. For when at that Time all
Things are hushed in Silence, and wrapped in Darkness, or but illuminated with
the friendly Moon, the Devotae Christi foeminae, quae illum and vivum
dilexerant and mortuum desiderabant, per noctem ambulantes, juvante luna,
venerunt ad monumentum. Rupert de Divin. Officiis. Lib. 7. Cap. 18.
Guide of Mary Magdalene, and the other Women to the Sepulcher; it is easy and
natural to meditate on these Things; to see our Savior's Tomb; to see the
Angels sit as Guardians on it; and the trembling Watch fled into the City. And
now the LORD is risen indeed, and they that seek him early shall find him.
Maria Magdalena, cujus domus erat Bethaniae, -- prima ante alias una sabbati
juxta joannem, valde diluculo venisset, dum adhuc tenebrae essent ad
monumentum. Rupert. ibid.
Behold then Mary Magdalene, on the first Day of the Week, coming from her own
House at Bethany, before the other Women, very early in the Morning, when it
was as yet Dark, Abit a loco, volens consolationem quandam invenire.
Theophlact, in Loc.
to find Ease and Consolation at the Sepulcher: Behold she and the other Women
bringing the prepared Spices to embalm their LORD: Behold Peter and John
running to the Sepulcher and returning, whilst Mary continues in Sorrow and
Tears: And as she weeps, ye may see her look into the Sepulcher; but he is not
there, he is risen. Behold then the Guardians of the Tomb, saying, John xx. 13.
etc.
Woman, why weepest thou? Nay behold the Lamb of GOD himself, with the very
same Words, wiping away the Tears from her Eyes. And JESUS said unto her,
Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seek thou? She supposing him to be the
Gardener, says unto him, Sir, If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou
have laid him, and I will take him away. JESUS said unto her, Mary. With what
Joy now does she run to his Feet, willing and desirous, and eager to embrace
them. But he bids her not to touch him, but go to his Brethren, and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my GOD and your GOD. Behold a
little after this, his Apparition to her and the other Women, and how he
suffers them to kiss his Feet. Taylor's Antiq. Christ. de Resurrect.
He appeared also about the same Time to Peter.

These and the other Accidents at our LORD'S Resurrection, would afford us a
satisfactory and comfortable Meditation; would inflame our Hearts with a
burning Love, and melt us into Tears of Joy. In our eager Wishes and warm
Desires, we should, with the Holy Women, kiss the Feet of our Savior, and be
almost Partakers of equal Happiness with them; or, sure we are, that we should
have our Savior in our Hearts, and not fail of seeing him in his Kingdom. He
whom we have so carefully sought for, will vouchsafe to be found of us; in his
Grace, at the Sepulcher, and in his Glory, in Heaven. Happy they, who so early
seek their Savior; who long after him, as the Heart does after the
Waterbrooks; who seek him among the Sol. Song ii. 17.
Lilies, until the Day break, and the Shadows flee away. Happy they, their
Conversation is now in Heaven, and their Happiness hereafter, will be the Joys
of Eternity: Where they shall no more be absent, but ever present with the LORD.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXIII.
MR. Bourne has exhausted the Subject of this Chapter. The learned Author of
the Vulgar Errors has left us his Thoughts concerning it in the subsequent
Quotation; in which if the Matter be not found curious, the Manner perhaps will
be considered as highly so: We shall not, I hope, says he, disparage the
Resurrection of our Redeemer, if we say the Sun does not dance on Easter Day. I
have heard of, when a Boy, and cannot positively say whether I have not seen
tried, an ingenious Method of making an artificial Sun Dance on Easter Sunday;
-- a Vessel full of Water was set out in the open Air, in which the reflected
Sun seemed to dance from the tremulous Motion of the Water. This looks not
unlike a Relic of Popish Legerdemain; it reminds me of a beautiful Simile in
the Loves of Medea and Jason, in the Argonautics of Apollonius Rhodius: It is
there applied to the wavering Resolves of a lovesick Maiden.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...), etc.
Reflected from the Sun's far cooler Ray,
As quivering Beams from tossing Water play,
(Poured by some Maid into her Beachen Bowl)
And ceaseless vibrate as the Swellings roll;
So heaved the Passions, etc.

-- And though we would willingly assent unto any sympathetical Exultation, yet
cannot conceive therein any more than a tropical Expression. Whether any such
Motion there were in that Day wherein Christ arised; Scripture has not
revealed, which has been punctual in other Records, concerning Solary
Miracles; and the Areopagite, that was amazed at the Eclipse, took no Notice of
this: And if metaphorical Expressions go so far, we may be bold to affirm, not
only that one Sun danced, but two arose that Day. That Light appeared at his
Nativity, and Darkness at his Death, and yet a Light at both; for even that
Darkness was a Light unto the Gentiles, illuminated by that Obscurity. That
'twas the first Time the Sun set above the Horizon. That although there were
Darkness above the Earth, there was Light beneath it, nor dare we say, that
Hell was dark if he were in it.

This is a fine aenigmatical Way of Reasoning, and from the Turn of his
Discourse, one might have asked, (with the Butler's Compliment to Vellum in the
Haunted House) if it were not to be too ludicrous upon a solemn Subject; I
fancy, Master Doctor, you could make a Riddle.

For the Pasche, vulgo Paste, or Easter Eggs, with which Children entertain
themselves here in the North at this Season, and of which Mr. Bourne has taken
no Notice, see the Appendix, in Verbo Pasche or Paste Eggs.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Easter Holy Days: A Time of Relaxation from Labor: How
observed in the dark Ages of Popery: That our Customs at this Time, are sprung
from theirs.
ON the Holy Days of Easter, it is customary for Work to cease, and Servants to
be at Liberty: Which is a Resemblance of the Practice of the primitive Church,
which set apart the whole Week after Easter, for to praise and glorify GOD,
for our SAVIOR'S Resurrection: In which Servos autem and ancillas ac omnes,
qui nostro servitio sunt addicti, profecto ab omni servitutis severitate eos
hoc tempore laxare debemus. -- Ut libere and secure omnes possint ad audiendum
divinum officium convenire, and communicare. Belith. Cap. 117.
Time all servile Labor ceased, that Servants as well as others might be
present at the Devotions of the Season. But other Customs so frequently
observed at this Time, such as public Shows, Gamings, Horse-Races, etc. were
forbidden, as being foreign to the Holiness of this Season.

In after Ages, when the Church fell into Corruption, and the Substance of
Religion decayed into the Shadow of Ceremonies, the usual Prayers and Praises
of the Season, were either much neglected, or but superficially observed. For
Belithus, a Ritualist of those Times tells us, Sunt enim nonnullae ecclesiae,
in quibus usitatum est, ut vel etiam episcopi and archiepiscopi in caenobiis
cum suis ludant subditis, ita ut etiam ad lusum pilae demittant, etc. Belith.
C. 120.
That it was customary in some Churches, for the Bishops and Archbishops
themselves to play with the inferior Clergy, even at Hand-Ball; and this also,
as Durandus witnesses, In quibusdam locis hac die. Vid. Pasch. etc. Durand.
Lib. 6. Cap. 86.
even on Easter Day it self. This was called Atque haec quidem, Libertas ideo
dicta est Decembrica, etc. Belith. ibid.
the Liberty of December, because that formerly, it was customary among the
Heathens in that Month to indulge their Servants with a certain Time of
Liberty; when they were on the Level with their Masters, and feasted and
banqueted with them.

Why they should play at Hand-Ball at this Time rather than any other Game, I
have not been able to find out; but I suppose it will be readily granted, that
this Custom of so playing, was the Original of our present Recreations and
Diversions on Easter Holy Days, and in particular of playing at Hand-Ball for a
Vid. Seld. Table Talk of Christmas.
Tanzy-Cake, which at this Season, is generally practiced; and I would hope
practiced with Harmlessness and Innocence. For when the common Devotions of the
Day are over, there is is nothing sinful in lawful Recreation. But for the
Governors of Churches to descend to such Childish Exercises, and that even on
the Great Sunday of the Year, was not only unbecoming their Gravity and
Reservedness, but was also a downright breach of the fourth Commandment. But
these were Ages of Ignorance and Darkness, when the World was taught for the
Doctrines of GOD, the Commandments of Men.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXIV.
Festa dies quoties rediit, concessaque rite
Otia, purpureoque rubentes lumine soles,
Invitant.
Mons Catherinae, p. 1.
BY the Law concerning Holidays, mentioned before in the Observations on
Chapter 17th, and made in the Time of King Alfred the Great, it was appointed
that the Week after Easter should be kept holy. Collier's Ecclesiastical Hist.
Vol. I. p. 163.

Fitzstephen tells us of an Easter Holiday Amusement used in his Time at
London, they fight Battles, says he, on the Water, a Shield is hanged upon a
Pole, fixed in the Midst of the Stream; a Boat is prepared without Oars, to be
carried by violence of the Water, and in the Forepart thereof stands a young
Man, ready to give Charge upon the Shield with his Lance. -- If so be he break
his Lance against the Shield, and do not fall, he is thought to have performed
a worthy Deed, -- if so be without breaking his Lance, he runs strongly
again the Shield, down he falls into the Water, for the Boat is violently
forced with the Tide; but on each Side of the Shield ride two Boats, furnished
with young Men, which recover him that falls as soon as they may. -- Upon the
Bridge, Wharfs and Houses by the River's Side, stand great numbers to see and
laugh thereat. Stow, p. 76.

Mr. Bourne confesses himself to be entirely ignorant of the Reasons why they
play at Hand Ball Erasmus speaking of the Proverb "Mea est Pila," that is,
"I Have got the Ball;" tells us that it signifies, I have obtained the Victory. I
am Master of my Wishes. -- The Romanists certainly erected a Standard on Easter
Day, in Token of our Lord's Victory, but it would perhaps be indulging Fancy
too far, to suppose that the Bishops and Governors of Churches, who used to
condescend to play at Hand-Ball at this Time, did it in a mystical Way, and
with reference to the triumphal Joy of the Season. -- Certain it is however,
that many of their Customs and Superstitions are founded on still more trivial
Circumstances, than even this imaginary Analogy.

It was an ancient Custom for the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriff of Newcastle,
accompanied with great Numbers of the Burgesses, to go every Year at the Feasts
of Easter and Whitsuntide to the Forth, (the little Mall of our Town) with the
Maces, Sword, and Cap of Maintenance carried before them. The young People of
the Town still assemble there, (at this Season particularly,) play at
Hand-Ball, dance, etc. but are no longer countenanced in their innocent
Festivity by the Presence of their Governors, who, no doubt, in ancient Times,
used to unbend the Brow of Authority, and partake, with their happy and
contented People, the puerile Pleasures of the festal Season.


at this Time, rather than any other Game. -- I find in J. Boemus Aubanus' In
Paschate vulgo placentae pinsuntur, quarum una, interdum duae, adolescentibus
una, puellis altera, a ditiori aliquo proponuntur: pro quibus in prato, ubi
ante noctem ingens hominum Concursus fit, quique agiles pedestres current. P.
268.
Description of ancient Rites in his Country, that there were at this Season
Foot Courses in the Meadows, in which the Victors carried off a Cake given to
be run for, as we say, by some better Sort of Person in the Neighborhood. --
Sometimes two Cakes were proposed, one for the young Men, another for the
Girls, and there was a great Concourse of People on the Occasion. -- This is a
Custom by no means unlike our Forth Meetings on these Holidays. -- The winning
a Tanzy Cake at the Game of Hand-Ball I find the following beautiful
Description in the Mons Catherinae: We may apply it to this Game, His datur,
Orbiculum
Praecipiti -- levem per Gramina mittere lapsu:
Ast aliis, quorum pedibus fiducia major,
--
Sectari, et jam jam salienti insistere praedae;
--
--
Aut volitantem alte longeque per era pulsum
Suspiciunt, pronosque inhiant, captantque volatus,
Sortiti fortunam oculis; manibusque paratis
Expectant propiorem, intercipiuntque caducum.
P. 6.

The two last Lines compose a very fine Periphrasis for the northern Word
kepping, which is derived from the Anglo-Saxon cepan, captare, advertere,
curare.


, depends chiefly upon Swiftness of Foot: It too is a Trial of Fleetness and
Speed, as well as the Foot Race.

Tansy, says Seldom, in the subsequent curious Passage in his Table Talk, was
taken from the bitter Herbs in use among the Jews at this Season. Our Meats and
our Sports, have much of them Relation to Church-Works. -- The Coffin of our
Christmas Pies, in Shape long, is in Imitation of the Cratch Rack or Manger: --
Among the MSS. of Bennet College, Cambridge, is a Translation of Part of the
New Testament in the English spoken after the Conquest. -- The 7. V. of the ii.
Chap. of Luke is thus rendered, And laid him in a Cratche, for to him was no
Place in the Dyversory, I will venture to subjoin another Specimen, which
strongly marks the Mutability of Language: Mark, vi. 22. When the Daughtyr of
Herodyas was incomyn and had tombylde and pleside to Harowde, etc.

If the original Greek had not been preserved, one might have supposed from
this English, that, instead of excelling in the graceful Accomplishment of
dancing, the young Lady had performed in some Exhibition, like the present
Entertainments at Sadlers Wells*


: Our choosing Kings and Queens on Twelfth Night, has Reference to the three
Kings. -- So likewise our eating of Fritters, whipping of Tops, roasting of
Herrings, Jack of Lents, etc. they are all in Imitation of Church-Works,
Emblems of Martyrdom. Our Tansies at Easter have Reference to the bitter Herbs;
though at the same Time 'twas always the Fashion for a Man to have a Gammon of
Bacon, to show himself to be no Jew. V. Christmas.

Durand In plerisque etiam Regionibus mulieres secunda die post pascha
verberant maritos suos: die vero tertia Mariti uxores suas. Durand. lib. 6. c.
86. 9.
tells us, that on Easter Tuesday, Wives used to beat their Husbands, on the
Day following the Husbands their Wives. There is a Custom still retained at the
City of Durham on these Holidays: On one Day the Men take off the Women's
Shoes, which are only to be redeemed by a Present; on another Day the Women
take of the Men's in like Manner.

CHAP. XXV. Of May Day; the Custom of going to the Woods the Night before; this
the Practice of other Nations: The Original of it; the Unlawfulness.
ON the Calends, or the first Day of May, commonly called May Day, the juvenile
Part of both Sexes, were wont to rise a little after Midnight, and walk to
some neighboring Wood, accompanied with Music and the blowing of Horns; where
they break down Branches from the Trees, and adorn them with Nose-gays and
Crowns of Flowers. When this is done, they return with their Booty homewards,
about the rising of the Sun, and make their Doors and Windows to Triumph in the
Flowery Spoil. The after-part of the Day, is chiefly spent in dancing round a
Tall-Poll, which is called a May-Poll; which being placed in a convenient Part
of the Village, stands there, as it were consecrated to the Goddess of Flowers,
without the least Violation offered it, in the whole Circle of the Year. And
this is not the Custom of the British Common People only, but it is the Custom
of the Generality of other Nations; particularly of the Italians, where
Polydore Virgil tells us, The Est autem consuetudinis, ut juventus promiscui
sexus Laetaebunda call. Maii exeat in agros, and cantitans inde virides reportet
arborum ramos eosque ante domorum fores ponat praesertim apud Italos, -- etc.
Poly. Virg. 302.
Youth of both Sexes were accustomed to go into the Fields, on the Calends of
May, and bring thence the Branches of Trees, singing all the Way as they came,
and so place them on the Doors of their Houses.

Celebrabantur autem hae feriae atque ludi, Lactantie test cum omni lascivia
verbis and moribus pudendis, ad placandam deam, quae floribus and fructibus
praeerat. Nam per tubam convocabantur omnis generis meretrices. Unde Juvenalis.

-- Dignissima prorsus
Florali Matrona Tuba
Ex in theatro denudatae, etc.
Hosp. de Orig. Eth. 159.
This is the Relick of an ancient Custom among the Heathen, who observed the
four last Days of April, and the first of May, in Honor of the Goddess Flora,
who was imagined the Deity presiding over the Fruit and Flowers. It was
observed with all Manner of Obscenity and Lewdness, and the undecent Sports and
Postures of naked Women, who were called together with the Noise of Trumpets,
and danced before the Spectators.

From this Custom of the Heathens has ours undoubtedly come; and though for that
Reason barely, it need not be laid aside; yet forasmuch as many Country People
are of Opinion, Sic nos tunc eo anni tempore, cum virent omnia, quasi per hunc
modum, fructuum ubertatem ominamur, ac been precamur. Polyd. Virg. 302.
That the Observation of this Ceremony is a good Omen, and a Procurer of the
Success of the Fruits of the Earth, which is entirely a Piece of Superstition;
and because also much Wickedness and Debauchery are committed that Night, to
the Scandle of whole Families, and the Dishonor of Religion, there is all the
Reason in the World, for laying it aside.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXV.
IN the old Calendar of the Romish Church above cited, there is the following
Observation on the 30th of April: The Boys go out and seek May-Trees Maii
Arbores a Pueris exquiruntur.
.

Stow tells us, in his Survey of London, The Mayings, says Mr. Strutt, are in
some Sort yet kept up by the Milk-Maids at London, who go about the Streets
with their Garlands and Music, dancing: But this tracing is a very imperfect
Shadow of the original Sports; for May-Poles were set up in the Streets, with
various martial Shows, Morris-dancing, and other Devices, with which, and
Revelling and good Cheer, the Day was passed away. At Night they rejoiced and
lighted up their Bonfires. English Era, Vol. II. p. 99.
that in the Month of May, namely, on May Day in the Morning, every Man, except
impediment, would walk into the sweet Meddowes and green Woods, there to
rejoice their Spirits with the Beauty and Savor of sweet Flowers, and with the
Harmony of Birds praising God in their Kind.

He quotes from Hall an Account of Henry the Eighth's riding a Maying from
Greenwich to the high Ground of Shooter's Hill, with Queen Katherine his wife,
accompanied with many Lords and Ladies.

He further tells us, I find also that in the Month of May, the Citizens of
London (of all Estates) lightly in every Parish, or sometimes two or three
Parishes joining together, had their several Mayings Mr. Pennant tells us, that
on the first of May, in the Highlands of Scotland, the Herdsmen of every
Village hold their Bellein, a rural Sacrifice: They cut a square Trench in the
Ground, leaving the Turf in the Middle; on that they make a Fire of Wood, on
which they dress a large Candle of Eggs, Butter, Oat-meal and Milk, and bring
besides the Ingredients of the Caudle, Plenty of Beer and Whiskey; for each of
the Company must contribute something. The Rites begin with spilling some of
the Caudle on the Ground by Way of Libation: On that every one takes a Cake of
Oat-meal, upon which are raised nine square Knobs, each dedicated to some
particular Being, the supposed Preserver of their Flocks and Herds, or to some
particular Animal, the real Destroyer of them: Each Person then turns his Face
to the Fire, breaks off a Knob, and flinging it over his Shoulders, says, this
I give to thee, preserve thou my Horses; this to thee, preserve thou my Sheep;
and so on: After that they use the same Ceremony to the noxious Animals. This I
give to thee, O Fox! spare thou my Lambs; this to thee, O hooded Crow! this to
thee, O Eagle! When the Ceremony is over they dine on the Caudle, and after the
Feast is finished, what is left is hid by two Persons deputed for that Purpose;
but on the next Sunday they re-assemble, and finish the Relics of the first
Entertainment. P. 91.
, and did fetch in May-Poles with diverse warlike Shows, with good Archers,
Morris Dancers, and other Devices for Pastime all the Day long; and toward
the Evening they had Stage-Plaies and Bone-Fires in the Streets. And again he
says, in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, the Aldermen and Sheriffs of London,
being on May Day at the Bishop of London's Wood, and having there a worshipful
Dinner for themselves and other Comers, Lydgate the Monk of Bury sent them, by
a Pursivant, a joyful Commendation of that Season, beginning thus: Mighty
Flora, Goddess of fresh Flowers,
Which clothed has the Soil in lusty Green,
Made Buds to spring with her sweet Showers,
By Influence of the Sun sheene,
To do Pleasance of Intent full clean,
Unto the States which now sit here
Has Ver sent down her own Daughter dear Brown, in his Britannia's Pastorals,
thus describes some of the May Revellings: As I have seen the Lady of the May
Set in an Arbor --
Built by the May Pole, where the jocund Swains
Dance with the Maidens to the Bagpipes Strains,
When envious Night commands them to be gone,
Call for the merry Youngsters one by one,
And for their well Performance soon disposes,
To this, a Garland interwove with Roses:
To that, a carved Hook, or well-wrought Scrip,
Gracing another with her Cherry Lip:
To one her Garter, to another then
A Handkerchief cast over and over again:
And none returns empty, that has spent
His Pains to fill their rural Merriment:
So, etc.
P. 122.
.
p. 80.

Mr. Borlase, in his curious Account of the Manners of Cornwall, tells us, An
ancient Custom, still retained by the Cornish, is that of decking their Doors
and Porches on the first of May with green Sycamore and Hawthorn Boughs, and of
planting Trees, or rather Stumps of Trees, before their Houses: And on May Eve,
they from Towns make Excursions into the Country, and having cut down a tall
Elm, brought it into Town, fitted a straight and taper Pole to the End of it,
and painted the same, erect it in the most public Places, and on Holidays and
Festivals adorn it with Flower Garlands, or Insigns and Streamers. He adds,
This Usage is nothing more than a Gratulation of the Spring Season; and every
House exhibited a proper Signal of its Approach, to testify their universal Joy
at the Revival of Vegetation.

The Author of the Pamphlet, entitled, The Way to Things by Words, and to Words
by Things, in his Specimen of an Etimological Vocabulary, considers the
May Pole Dr. Moresin gives us his Opinion concerning the Origin of this Custom
in the following Words: Maio mense exire in Agros and cantando viridem frondem
reportare, quam in Domibus and Domorum foribus appendant, aut a Flora,
lasciviae Romanae Dea, aut ab Atheniensibus est. Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 91.
in a new and curious Light: We gather from him that our Ancestors held an
anniversary Assembly on May Day; the Column of the May (whence our May Pole)
was the great Standard of Justice in the Ey-Commons, or Fields of May. Here it
was that the People, if they saw Cause, deposed or punished their Governors,
their Barons, their Kings. -- The Judge's Bough or Wand (at this Time
discontinued, and only faintly represented by a trifling Nosegay), and the
Staff or Rod of Authority in the Civil and in the Military (for it was the Mace
of Civil Power, and the Truncheon of the Field Officers) are both derived from
hence. -- A Mayor, he says, received his Name from this May, in the Sense of
lawful Power. -- The Crown, a Mark of Dignity and Symbol of Power, like the
Mace and Scepter, was also taken from the May, being Representative of the
Garland or Crown, which when hung on the Top of the May or Pole, was the great
Signal for convening the People. -- The Arches of it, which spring from the
Circlet and meet together at the Mound or round Ball, being necessarily so
formed to suspend it on the Top of the Pole.

The Word May Pole, he observes is a Pleonasm; in French it is called singly
the May.

This is, he farther tells us, one of the antientest Customs, which from the
remotest Ages, has been by Repetition from Year to Year, perpetuated down to
our Days, not being at this Instant totally exploded, especially in the lower
Class of Life. -- It was considered as the Boundary Day, that divided the
Confines of Winter and Summer, allusively to which, there was instituted a
sportful War between two Parties; the one in Defense of the Continuance of
Winter, the other for bringing in the Summer. -- The Youth were divided into
Troops, the one in Winter Livery, the other in the gay Habit of the Spring. --
The mock Battle was always fought Booty, the Spring was sure to obtain the
Victory, which they celebrated by carrying I have more than once been disturbed
early on May Morning at Newcastle, by the Noise of a Song, which a Woman sung
about the Streets, who had several Garlands in her Hand, and which, if I
mistake not, she sold to any who were superstitious enough to buy them. -- It
is homely and low, but it must be remembered that our Treatise is not "on the
Sublime:" Rise up, Maidens! fie for Shame,
I Have been four long Miles from Hame;
Ive been gathering my Garlands gay,
Rise up, fair Maids, and take in your May.


Here is no Pleonasm: It is singly, as the French have it, your May.


triumphally green Branches with May Flowers, proclaiming and singing the Song
of Joy, of which the Burden was, in these, or equivalent Terms: "We have
brought the Summer home Suecis Meridionalibus, et Gothis, longissimo
provinciarum spatio a polo remotis, alius ritus est, ut primo die Maii, sole
per Taurum agente cursum, duplices a Magistratibus urbium constituantur
robustorum juvenum and virorum equestres turmae, seu Cohortes, tanquam ad durum
aliquem conflictum progressurae, quarum altera sort deputato duce dirigitur:
qui Hyemis titulo and habitu, variis indutus pellibus, hastis focalibus
armatus, globatas nives, et crustatas glacies spargens, ut frigora prolonget,
obequitat victoriosus: eoque duriorem se simulat, et efficit, quo ab vaporariis
stiriae glaciales dependere videntur. Rursumque alterius equestris cohortis
praefectus Aestatis, Comes storialis appellatus, virentibus arborum frondibus,
foliisque et floribus (difficulter repertis) vestitus, aestivalibus indumentis
parum securis, ex campo cum duce Hyemali, licet separato loco et ordine,
Civitates ingrediuntur, hastisque edito spectaculo publico, quod Aestas hyemem
exuperet, experiuntur. Olai Magni. Gent. Septent. Hist. Brev. p. 338.
."

CHAP. XXVI. Of Parochial Perambulations: Their Antiquity, the Benefit and
Advantage of them.
IT was a general Custom formerly, and is still observed in some Country
Parishes, to go round the Bounds and Limits of the Parish, on one of the three
Days before Holy Thursday, or the Feast of our LORD's Ascension; when the
Minister, accompanied with his Churchwardens and Parishioners, were wont to
deprecate the Vengeance of GOD, beg a Blessing on the Fruits of the Earth, and
preserve the Rights and Properties of their Parish.

The Original of this Custom is dated from the Times of the Heathens. For
Refert Plutarchus in Problem 13. Numam Popilium cum finitimis agri terminis
constituisse, and in ipsis finibus Terminum Deum, quasi finium praesidem
amicitioeque, ac pacis custodem posuisse. Festa ei dicata quae Terminalia
nuncupantur,quorum vice nos quotannis ex vetustissima consuetudine parochiarum
terminos lustramus. Spelm. Gloss in Verbo. Perambulat.
from the Days of Numa Popilius, they worshipped the God Terminus, whom they
looked upon to be the Guardian of Fields and Landmarks, and the Keeper up of
Friendship and Peace among Men: Upon this Account the Feast called Terminalia,
was dedicated to him; instead of which it is a very ancient Custom to surround
the Bounds of Parishes every Year: And instead of Heathenish Rites and
Sacrifices to an imaginary God, to offer Praises and Prayers to the true GOD,
the GOD of the whole Earth. The Custom was, the People accompanied the Bishop,
or some of the Clergy into the Fields, where Litanies were made, and the Mercy
of GOD implored, that he would avert the Evils of Plague and Pestilence, that
he would send them good and seasonable Weather, and give them the Fruits of the
Earth in due Season.

The Litanies or Rogations, which were It is called Rogation-Week, because of
that Prayer and Fasting that was then used, for to supplicate GOD for his
Blessing on the Fruits of the Earth. It is also in some Places called
Cross-Week, because in ancient Times, when the Priest went into the Fields, the
Cross was carried before them. In the Northern Parts it is called Gang-Week,
from to gang which in the North signifies to go.
then made Use of, and gave Name to the Time of Rogation-Week, were first
observed by Mamertus, Bishop of Vienna, in the Year 550, Dum civitas
Viennensium crebro terrae motu subrueretur and bestiarum desolaretur incursu,
sanctus Mamertus ejus civitatis episcopus, eas legitur pro malis, quae
praemissimus, ordinasse. Walifred. Stral. C. 28. de Reb. Ecclesiast.
on Account of the frequent Earthquakes that happened, and the Incursions of
wild Beasts, which laid in Ruins, and depopulated the City. Not that Litanies
and Rogations were not used before, but that before this Time they were not
affixed to these Days. And since that, they have been observed of the whole
Church at this Season, except the Church of Hispani autem, propter hoc quod
scriptum est, non possunt filii sponsi lugere quamdiu cum illis est sponsus,
infra quinquagessimam paschae recusantes jejunare, litanios suos post
pentecosten posuerunt. Walaf. Strab. ibid.
Spain, who chus'd rather to have them after Pentecost than before it; because
from Easter Day to the Feast of Pentecost, it was the Custom of the Church not
to Fast: For as they themselves reasoned, the Children of the Bride-chamber
cannot Fast so long as the Bridegroom is with them; and therefore they held
their Rogations after Pentecost.

What now remains among us, is the Relick of this ancient and laudable Custom,
which was always observed in the old Church of England, and has been also in
some Measure since the Reformation too.

In Council. Cloveshoviae sub Cuthbert: Arch. Cant. An. 747. Cap. 16. Ut
Litaniae, i. e. Rogationes, a clero omnique populo his diebus cum magna
reverentia agantur, id est, septimo kalendarum Maiarum juxta ritum Romanae
ecclesiae, quae and litania major apud eam vocatur: Et item quoque secundum
morem priorum nostrorum tertiae dies ante ascentionem domini nostri in caelos,
cum jejunio, etc. Spelman. Gloss. 369.
the Canons of Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury, which were made at
Cloves-hoo, in the Year 747, it was ordered that Litanies, that is, Rogations,
should be observed of the Clergy, and all the People with great Reverence on
these Days, viz. the seventh of the Kalends of May, according to the Rites of
the Church of Rome, who terms this the greater Litany; and also according to
the Custom of our Forefathers, on the three Days before the Ascension of our
LORD into the Heavens, with Fasting, etc. And in the Injunctions made in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it is ordered, Injunct. 19. Eliz.
That the Curate, at certain and convenient Places, shall admonish the People
to give Thanks to GOD, in the beholding of GOD'S Benefits; for the Increase and
Abundance of his Fruits upon the Face of the Earth, with the Saying of the 103
Psalm, etc. at which Time the Minister shall inculcate these or such Sentences.
Cursed be he which translateth the Bounds and Doles of his Neighbors: Or such
Orders of Prayers as shall be hereafter.

Agreeable to this we read, in the Life of the pious Hooker, Walt. in Vit.
Hookeri.
That he would by no Means omit the Customary Time of Procession, persuading
all, both Rich and Poor, if they desired the Preservation of Love, and their
Parish Rites and Liberties, to accompany him in his Perambulation, and most did
so; in which Perambulation, he would usually Express more pleasant Discourse,
than at other Times, and would then always Drop some loving and facetious
Observations, to be remembered against the next Year, especially by the Boys and
young People: Still inclining them; and all his present Parishioners, to
meekness and mutual Kindnesses and Love; because Love thinks not Evil, but
covers a Multitude of Infirmities.

We may also observe, That the particular Office ordered by our Church for
Rogation-Sunday, is exactly suited to the Nature of the Season; that the three
Days following are appointed Fasts by our Church, and that one of our Church
Homilies is composed particularly, for the Parochial Perambulation. All which
shows the Custom and Intention of the Church, and that the practicing of it
would be serviceable to the Sons of Men: Would save their Lives from
Destruction, and crown them with Mercy and loving Kindness; would send them
Springs into their Rivers, and make them run among the Hills: Would bring forth
Grass for the Cattle, and green Herb for the Service of Men.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXVI.
THE Word Parochia or Parish anciently signified what we now call the Diocese
of a Bishop. -- In the early Ages of the Christian Church, as Kings founded
Cathedrals, so great Men founded parochial Churches, for the Conversion of
themselves and their Dependents; the Bounds of the parochial Division, being
commonly the same with those of the Founder's Jurisdiction. Some Foundations of
this Kind were as early as Justinian the Emperor. Bid mentions them about 700.

Before the Reign of Edward the Confessor, the parochial Divisions in this
Kingdom were so far advanced, that every Person might be traced to the Parish
to which he belonged. -- This appears by the Canons published in the Time of
Edgar and Canute. The Distinction of Parishes as they now stand, appears to
have been settled before the Norman Conquest: In Doomsday Book, the Parishes
agree very near to the modern Division. See Collier's Eccl. Hist. Vol. I. p.
231. -- Camden tells us, that this Kingdom was first divided into Parishes by
Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D. 636, and counts 2984 Parishes. -- The
Lateran Council made some such Division as this: It compelled every Man to pay
Tithes to his Parish Priest; Men before that Time paid them to whom they
pleased; since then, it has happend that few, if they could be excused from
doing it, would care to pay them at all.

Blount tells us, that Rogation Week, (Saxon Gangdagas, i. e. Days of
Perambulation J. Boemus Aubanus tells us, that in Franconia, in his Time, the
following Rites were used on this Occasion, some of which are still retained at
Oxford.

Tribus illis diebus, quibus Apostolico Instituto, majores litaniae passim per
totum orbem peraguntur, in plurimis Franconiae locis multae cruces (sic enim
dicunt Parochianos Caetus, quibus tum sanctae Crucis Vexillum praeferri solet)
convenient. In sacrisque aedibus non simul et unam melodiam, sed singulae
singulam per choros seperatim canunt: et puellae and adolescentes mundiori
quique habitu amicti frondentibus sertis caput coronati omnes and scipionibus
salignis instructi. Stant sacrarum aedium sacerdotes diligenter singularum
cantus attendentes: et quamcunque suavius cantare cognoscunt, illi ex veteri
more aliquot vini conchos dari adjudicant. P. 269.


) is always the next but one before Whitsunday: And so called, because on
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday of that Week, Rogations and Litanies were used:
And Fasting, or at least Abstinence then enjoined by the Church to all Persons,
not only for a devout Preparative to the Feasts of Christ's glorious Ascension,
and the Descent of the Holy Ghost shortly after, but also to request and
supplicate the Blessing of God upon the Fruits of the Earth. -- And in this
Respect, the Solemnization of Matrimony is forbidden, from the first Day of the
said Week, till Trinity Sunday.

The Dutch call it Cruys Week, i. e. Cross Week, and so it is called in some
Parts of England, because of old (as still among Roman Catholics) when the
Priests went on Procession this Week, the Cross was carried before them At
Oxford, at this Time, the little Crosses cut in the Stones of Buildings, to
denote the Division of the Parishes, are whited with Chalk. Great Numbers of
Boys, with pilled Willow Rods in their Hands, accompany the Minister, etc. in
the Procession.

On Ascension-day the Magistrates, River Jury, etc. of the Corporation of
Newcastle upon Tyne, according to an ancient Custom, make their annual
Procession by Water in their Barges, visiting the Bounds of their Jurisdiction
on the River, to prevent Encroachments, etc. -- Cheerful Libations are offered
on the Occasion to the Genius of our wealthy Flood, which Milton calls the
coaly Tyne: Tyne, The sable Stores, on whose majestic Strand,
More Tribute yield than Tagus' golden Sand.


In the painted Hall at Greenwich Hospital the Genius of the Tyne is
represented pouring forth his Coal in great Abundance. -- There is the Severn
with her Lampreys, and the Humber with his Pigs of Lead, which with Thames and
the Tyne, compose the four great Rivers of England.


.

In the Inns of Court, he adds, it is called Grass Week, because the Commons of
that Week consist much of Salads, hard Eggs, and green Sauce upon some of the
Days. -- The Feast of the old Romans called Rabigalia and Ambarvalia, (quod
Victima arva ambiret) did in their heathenish Way somewhat resemble these
Institutions, and were kept in May, in Honor of Robigus.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Midsummer-Eve: Of kindling Fires, their Original: That this
Custom formerly was superstitious, but now may be used with Innocence.
ON the Eve of St. John Baptist, commonly called Midsummer Eve, it is usual in
the most of Country Places, and also here and there in Towns and Cities, for
both Old and Young to meet together, and be Merry over a large Fire, which is
made in the open Street. Over this they frequently leap and play at various
Games, such as Running, Wrestling, Dancing, etc. But this is generally the
Exercise of the younger Sort; for the old Ones, for the most Part, sit by as
Spectators, and enjoy themselves and their Bottle. And thus they spend the Time
till Midnight, and sometimes till Cock-Crow.

Belithus tells us, Consuetum item hac vigilia ardentes deferri faculas, quod
Joannes fuerit ardens lucerna and qui domini vias praeparaverit. Belith.
Explicat. Div. Offic. C. 137. P. 556. and Durand. Cap. 14. Lib. 7.
That it was a Custom to carry lighted Torches on Midsummer-Eve, as an Emblem
of St. John Baptist, who was a burning and a shining Light, and the Preparer of
the Way of CHRIST. But if this was the Reason of this Custom formerly, as it is
probable it was, (it having been a common Thing, to shadow out Times and
Seasons by Emblems;) yet the Custom still continued among us, was originally
instituted upon another Bottom.

And indeed the Habent hoc a gentibus, antiquitus enim dracones hoc tempore ad
libidinem propter calorem excitati, volando per aerem frequenter in puteos and
fontes spermatizabant, ex quo, etc. Hoc animadvertentes medici, ignes
frequenter and passim circa fontes fieri; and quaecunque magnum and immundum
redderint fumum ibi cremari, etc. Et quia talia hoc tempore maxim fiebant,
ideo hoc adhuc ab aliquibus observatur. Durand. L. 7. C. 14. and Belith. in
eodem Fest.
Original of this Custom is Heathenish. For in ancient Times the Dragons, being
incited to Lust through the Heat of the Season, did frequently, as they flew
through the Air, Spermatize in the Wells and Fountains. By this Means the Water
became infected, and the Air polluted; so that whoever drank the Waters, was
either tormented with a grievous Distemper, or lost his Life. As soon as the
Phycians perceived this, th^^ ordered Fires to be made every where about the
Wells and Fountains, and those Things which occasioned the noisomest Smell to
be burnt, knowing that thereby the Dragons would be driven away. And forasmuch
as this Custom was observed about the Time we now celebrate St. John Baptist's
Feast, it is therefore still observed among some People. And agreeable to this
it is, that Mr. Cambden tells us, that Barnwell, a Village near Cambridge, got
its Name from the Children playing about a Well on St. John Baptist's Eve.

The Custom of kindling such Fires, was severely censured by the Church: And
therefore in the Council of Trullus, this Canon was made against it, Can. 65.
in Synod. Trull. ex Bals, P. 440.
That if any Clergyman or Layman observed the Rite of making on Fires on the
New Mood, (which some were wont to observe, and according to an old Custom, to
leap over them in a mad and foolish Manner,) he should be deposed, if the
Former, if the Latter, he should be excommunicated.

The Scholiast upon this Canon has these Words: The New Mood was always the
first Day of the Month, and it was Customary among the Jews and Greeks, to hold
then a Feast, and pray that they might be lucky during the Continuance of the
Month. Of these it was, that GOD spoke by the Prophet: My Soul hates your
New Mons and your Sabbaths. And not only this, but they also kindled Fires
before their Shops and Houses, and leaped over them; imagining that all the
Evils which had befallen them formerly, would be burnt away, and that they
should be more successful and lucky afterward. Now about the Sitting of this
Synod, there were some of the Christians, who observed this Custom upon the
same Accounts that the Heathens did, which occasioned it is being forbid by the
Council; and that if a Clergyman was Guilty of it, he should be deposed; if a
Layman, excommunicated. He also tells us, that on St. John Baptist's Eve, the
Vulgar were wont to make on Fires for the whole Night, and leap over them, and
draw Lots, and Divine about their good or evil Fortune.

But whatever Reason the Heathens had for kindling these Fires; whether as
Durandus thinks, that the lustful Dragons might be driven away, or as the
Canon, that their evil Fortune might be burnt, it is certain that the Custom
was invented and practiced by them; and because of the Superstition attending
the Observation of it, was very justly forbidden by the Council. And
undoubtedly was the Making of such Fires now, attended with any such
Superstition, it would be equally criminal to observe them. But Rogos -- quos
nos Angli Bonefires vocamus, and in publica laetitia and gaudiis adhibemus, non
obstante isto canone. Mountag. P. 130.
when they are only kindled as Tokens of Joy, to excite innocent Mirth and
Diversion, and promote Peace and good Neighborhood, they are lawful and
innocent, and deserve no Censure. And therefore when on Midsummer-Eve, St.
Peter's-Eve, and at some other Times, we make I suppose they were called
Bonefires, because that generally they were made of Bones. For as Belithus
tells us, Adversus haec ergo hujusmodi inventum est remedium, ut videlicet
rogus ex ossibus construeretur, and ita fumus hujusmodi animalia fugaret.
Belith. in Vigil. S. Joan. That to prevent the Infection before mentioned, they
were wont to make on Fires of Bones, that the Smoke might drive away the
Dragons.
Bonefires before Shops and Houses, there would be no Harm in doing so; was it
not, that some continue their Diversion to too late Hours, and others are
guilty of excessive Drinking.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXVII.
STOW tells us in his Survey of London, That on the Vigil of St. John Baptist,
every Man's Door The subsequent Extract from the ancient Calendar of the Romish
Church, shows what doings there were at Rome on this Eve.

Junius. --

23. Vigilia natalis Joannis Baptistae.

Aromata dantur Vesperis.

Ignes siunt.

Puella cum parvo Tympano, quod Coronulam appellat.

Pueri pro puellis vestiuntur.

Cantilenae ad liberales, dirae and avaros.

Aquae in nocte natantur: and pensiles ad vaticinium feruntur.

Filix vulgo in precio est propter semen.

Herbae diversi generis quaeruntur et multa fiunt.

Carduus puellarum legitur, and ab eisdem centum cruces.

24. Nativitas Joannis Baptistae: ros et novae frondes in precio.

Solstitium vulgar.

June,

23. The Vigil of the Nativity of John Baptist.

Spices are given.

Fires made on.

A Girl with a little Drum, that proclaims the Garland.

Boys are dressed in Girls' Clothes.

Carrols to the liberal, Imprecations to the avarous.

Waters are swum in during the Night: They are fetched in Vessels that hang for
the Purposes of Divination.

Fern is of vulgar Estimation because of the Seed.

Herbs of different Kinds are sought and many Things done.

Girls' Thistle is gathered: a hundred Crosses by the same.

24. John Baptist's Birth Day: dew and new Leaves in Estimation.

The vulgar Solstice.

The following Extract from Dr. Moresin illustrates not a little both these
Observations in the ancient Calendar, and Stow's Account.

Apud nostros quoque Proavos, inolevit longa Annorum serie persuasio artemesiam
in Festis Divo Joanni Baptistae sacris, ante domos suspensam, item alios
frutices et plantas, atque etiam Candelas, facesque designatis quibusdam diebus
celebrioribus aqua lustrali rigatas, etc. contra Tempestates, fulmina, Tonitrua
and adversus Diaboli potestatem, etc. -- quosdam incendere ipso die Joannis
Baptistae fasciculum lustratarum herbarum contra tonitrua, fulmina, etc.
Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 28.


being shadowed with green Birch, long Fennel, St. John's Wort, Orpin, white
Lillies, and such like, garnished upon with Garlands of beautiful Flowers,
Toral, seu Toralium antiquo tempore dicebatur florum et herbarum suaveolentium
manipulus, seu plures in restim colligati, qui suspendebantur ante Thalamorum
and Cubilium fores: et in papatu ad S. Joannis mutuato more suspendunt ad Oslia
and januas hujusmodi Serta et restes and saepius ad aras. Moresini Deprav. Rel.
Orig. 171.
had also Lamps of Glass, with Oil burning in them all the Night: Some hung out
Branches of Iron, curiously wrought, containing Hundreds of Lamps lighted at
once. He mentions also the Bone-fires Mr. Bourne supposes these to have been
called Bone-Fires, because they were generally made of Bones. -- Stow in the
cited Passage above, tells us of Men's finding Wood or Labor toward them.
This seem to oppose his Opinion. -- The learned Dr. Hickes also gives a very
different Etymon. He defines a Bone-Fire to be a Festive or triumphant Fire. In
the Islandic Language, says he, Baal signifies a Burning. In the Anglo Saxon,
Bael-fyr by a Change of Letters of the same Organ is made Baen-fyr, whence our
Bone-Fire. See that stupendous Monument of learned Industry his Thesaurus.
in the Streets, every Man bestowing Wood or Labor toward them. -- He seems
to hint that these were kindled to purify the Air.

Dr. Moresin seems to be of Opinion, that the Custom of leaping over these
Fires is a Vestige of the Ordeal, Flammam transiliendi mos videtur etiam
priscis Graeciae temporibus usurpatus fuisse, deque eo versus Sophoclis in
Antigone quosdam intelligendos putant: Cum enim rex Creon Polynicis cadaver
humare prohibuisset, Antigone autem ipsius Soror illud humo contexisset,
custodes, ut mortis poenam a rege constitutam vitarent, dicebant se paratos
esse ferrum candens manibus contrectare and per pyram incedere. Hotom. disput.
de Feudis. Cap. 44. hic mos Gallis, Germanis, et post Christianismum remansit
etiam Pontificibus: et adulteria uxorum ferro candente probant Germani. Aemil.
lib. 4, etc. -- Et Vascones accensis ignibus in Urbium vicis vidi per medios
saltare ad festum Joanni sacrum in Aestate: et qui funus antiquitus prosequuti
fuerant, ad proprios lares reversi, aqua aspersi, ignem supergradiebantur, hoc
se piaculo ex funere expiari arbitrati, etc. Deprav. Rel. Orig. 61.

So also in another Passage: -- Majores vero natu ad Festum D. Johanni sacrum
accensis vespere in Platea ignibus, flammam transiliunt stramineam mares et
Foeminae, Pueri, Pupaeque, ac fieri vidi in Galliis inter Cadurcos ad Oppidulum
Puy la Rocque. Ibid. 72.


where passing through Fires with Safety, was accounted an Indication of
Innocence. There really seems to be Probability in this Conjecture, for not
only the Young and Vigorous used to leap over them, but even those of grave
Characters: There was an Interdiction of ecclesiastical Authority to deter
Clergymen (as Mr. Bourne has told us) from this superstitious Instance of
Agility.

This Author tells us of a remarkable Custom, which he himself was an
Eyewitness of in Scotland: " Atque hodie recens baptizatos infantes (ut vidi
fieri ab Anicula in Scotia olim, quae sui Papatus reliquias saperet) statim
atque domum redierint in limine oblatis eduliis been venire dicunt, statimque
importatos, anicula, sive Obstetrix fuerit, fasciis involutos accipit and per
flammam ter quaterve leniter vibrant, verbis his additis, jam te flamma, si
unquam, absumat, terque verba repetunt. Ibid.

Mr. Pennant informs us, that in the Highlands Midwives give newborn Babes a
small Spoonful of Earth and Whisky, as the first Food they taste.


They take, says he, the new-baptized Infant, and vibrate it three or four
Times gently over a Flame, saying and repeating thrice, Let the Flame consume
thee now or never.

This too seems to favor his Supposition that passing over Fires was accounted
expiatory.

There was a Feast at Athens kept by private Families, called Amphidromia, on
the 5th Day after the Birth of the Child, when it was the Custom for the
Gossips to run round the Fire with the Infant in their Arms, and then having
delivered it to the Nurse, they were entertained with Feasting and Dancing.

Mr. Borlase in his Account of Cornwall tells us, The Cornish make Bonefires in
every Village on the Eve of St. John Baptist's and St. Peter's Days, which I
take to be the Remains of Part of the Druid Superstition.

Gebelin, before cited, in his Allegories Orientales, accounts in the following
Manner for the Custom of making on Fires on Midsummer Eve, Peut-on meconnoitre
ici les Feux de la S. Jean, ces Feux sacres allumes a minuit au moment du
Solstice chez la plupart des Nations anciennes and modernes? Ceremony
religieuse, qui remonte ainsi a la plus haute Antiquite, and qu' on observoit
pour la prosperity des Etats and des peuples, and pour ecarter tous les maux.

L'origine de ce Feu que tant de Nations conservent encore, and qui se perd
dans l'antiquite, est tres simple. C'etoit un Feu de joie allume au moment ou
l'annee commencoit; car la premiere de toutes les Annees, la plus ancienne donc
on ait quelque connoissance, s'ouvroit au mois de Juin. De-la le nom meme de ce
mois, Junior, le plus jeune, qui se renouvelle; tandis que celui qui le precede
est le mois de May, ou Major, l'ancien: aussi l'un etoit le mois des Jeunes
Gens, and l'autre celui des Vieillards.

Ces Feux-de-joie etoient accompagnes en meme tems de Voeux and de Sacrifices
pour la prosperity des Peuples and des biens de la Terre: on dansoit aussi
autour de ce Feu; car y a-t-il quelque Fete sans danse? and les plus agiles
sautoient par-dessus. En se retirant, chacun emportoit un tison plus on moins
grand, et le rest etoit jette au vent, afin qu'il emportat tout malheur comme
il emportoit ces cendres.

Lorsqu' apres une longue suite d'annees, le Solstice n'en sit plus
l'ouverture, on continua cependant egalement l'usage des feux dans le meme
tems, par une suite de l'habitude, and des idees superstitieuses qu'on y avoit
attachees; d'ailleurs, il eut ete triste d'aneantir un jour de joie, dans des
tems ou il y en avoit peu; aussi cet usage s'est-il maintenu jusqu' a nous.

Hist. d'Hercule. p. 203.
"can one, says he, overlook here the St. John Fires, those sacred Fires
kindled about Midnight, on the very Moment of the Solstice by the greatest Part
both of ancient and modern Nations? A religious Ceremony, which goes backwards
thus to the most remote Antiquity, and which was observed for the Prosperity of
States and People, and to dispel every Kind of Evil.

The Origin of this Fire, still retained by so many Nations, and which loses
itself in Antiquity, is very simple. It was a Feu de joie, (Fire of Joy)
kindled the very Moment the Year began; for the first of all Years, and the
most ancient that we know of, began at the Month of June. Thence the very Name
of this Month, Junior, the youngest, which is renewed; while that of the
preceding one is May, Major, the ancient: Thus the one was the Month of young
People, the other that of old Men.

These Feux de joie were accompanied at the same Time with Vows and Sacrifices
for the Prosperity of the People and the Fruits of the Earth; they danced also
round this Fire, for what Feast is there without a Dance? And the most active
leaped over it. Leaping over the Fires is mentioned among the superstitious
Rites used at the Palilia in Ovid's Fasti: Moxque per ardentes stipulae
crepitantis acervos
Trajicias celeri strenua membra pede.
Lib. 4. l. 781.


Each at their Departure took away a greater or less Firebrand, and the Remains
were scattered to the Wind, which was to drive away every Evil as it dispersed
the Ashes.

When after a long Train of Years, the Solstice ceased to be the Beginning of
them, the Custom of making these Fires was still continued at the same Time,
through a Train of Use and of superstitious Ideas, which were annexed to it.
Besides it would have been a sad Thing to annihilate a Day of Joy in Times when
there were but few of them: Thus has the Custom been continued and handed down
to us."

So far our learned and ingenious Foreigner. -- But I by no Means acquiesce
with him in thinking that the leaping over these Fires, was only a Trial of
Agility. A great deal of Learning might be produced here, further to show that
this was as much a religious Act as the making them on.

I have nothing to observe here concerning Mr. Bourne's lustful Dragons, their
spermatizing in the Wells or Fountains, as they flew through the Air, etc! I
find in J. Boemus Aubanus' Description of the Ceremonies of this Eve in
Germany, that a Species of Fireworks was played off, which they, who had never
seen it before, he says, "would take to be a Dragon of Fire flying." Ignis sit,
cui Orbiculi quidam lignei perforati imponuntur, qui quum inflammantur,
flexilibus virgis praefixi, art et vi in aerem supra Moganum amnem
excutiuntur: Draconem igneum volare putant, qui prius non viderunt. P. 270.
This must have had some Meaning. The Dragon is one of those Shapes, which Fear
has created to itself: They who gave it Life, have, it seems, furnished it also
with the Feelings of animated Nature; but our modern Philosophers are wiser
than to attribute any noxious Qualities in Water to Dragon's Sperm.

N. B. Stow tells us, that the Rites above described were used also on the Eve
of St. Peter and St. Paul the Apostles (the 29th of June). Dr. Moresin informs
us, that in Scotland they used on this Night to run about on the Mountains and
higher Grounds with lighted Torches, like the Sicilian Women of old in Search
of Proserpine.

I have been informed that something similar to this was practiced about half a
Century ago in Northumberland on this Night; they carried some Kind of
Firebrands about the Fields of their respective Villages: They made
Encroachments on these Occasions upon the Bonefires of the neighboring Towns,
of which they took forcibly some of the Ashes; this they called carrying off
the Flower (probably the Flour) of the Wake.

Moresin thinks this a Vestige of the ancient Cerealia.

P. 56. 72. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Feast of Sheep-shearing, an ancient Custom.
THE Feast of Sheep-sheering, is generally a Time of Mirth and Joy, and more
than ordinary Hospitality; indeed it is but little observed in these Northern
Parts, but in the Southern it is pretty common. For on the Day they begin to
sheer their Sheep, they provide a plentiful Dinner for the Sheerers, and for
their Friends who come to visit them on that Occasion; a Table also, if the
Weather permit, is spread in the open Village, for the young People and
Children.

After what Manner soever this Custom reached us, it is certain it may boast of
great Antiquity. It is mentioned in the Second Book of Samuel, as a Feast of
great Magnificence, both for Grandeur of Entertainment and Greatness of
Company. No less a Person than Absalom the King's Son was the Master of this
Feast, and no less Persons were the Guests than the King's Sons, the Brethren
of Absalom; nay it was a Feast that might entertain the King himself, or surely
the King would never have been so importuned, never would have received the
Compliment so kindly. For it is said, It came to pass after two full Years, that
Absalom had Sheep-sheerers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim, and Absalom
invited all the King's Sons. And Absalom came to the King, and said, Behold,
now thy Servant has Sheep-sheerers, let the King, I beseech thee, and his
Servants, go with thy Servant. And the King said, Nay, my Son, let us not all
go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. Of this kind also was the Feast which
Nabal made for his Sheerers, when David was driven to straits in the
Wilderness, and sent his Servants to ask a Present of him. He calls the Day it
was held on, a good Day; that is, a Day of plentiful Eating and Drinking. And
therefore Nabal answered the Servants of David, shall I then take my Bread and
my Water, and my flesh that I have killed for my Sheerers, and give it unto
Men, whom I know not whence they be? And further, it is said in the same
Chapter, that so grand and magnificent was this Feast, that he had a Feast in
his House, like the Feast of a King. We find also in the Book of Genesis, that
Laban went to sheer his Sheep, in which Time Jacob made his Escape, which Laban
heard not of till the third Day. Of such great Antiquity then is this Custom,
and though its Antiquity is not of such force as to palliate Luxury and
Profuseness in these Entertainments; yet no doubt it will vindicate the
Harmlesness of a moderate Feast upon this Occasion.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXVIII.
THE Author of the Convivial Antiquities tells us, that the Pastoral Life was
anciently accounted an honorable one, particularly amongst the Jews and the
Romans Apud Latinos oves tond^re, ut et sementem facere omnino non fuit
licitum, priusquam Catulatio, hoc est, ex Cane sacrum fieret: ut Gyraldus
testatur de Diis Gentium. Ex his ergo omnibus constat illam ovium tonsuram
(quam lunae decrescente a veteribus fieri fuisse solitam M. Varro testatur: de
tempore autem oves lavandi atque tondendi vide Plin. lib. 18. c. 17.) magna cum
festivitate, laetitia atque conviviis fuisse celebratam; id quod mirum non est.
-- Nam in Animalibus primum non sine causa putant oves assumptas, and propter
Utilitatem and propter Placiditatem; Maxim enim hae natura quietae and
aptissimae ad vitam hominum. Ad cibum enim lac, and caseum adhibitum; ad Corpus
vestitum et pelles attulerunt. Itaque cum in illis tot praesertim numero
tondendis plurimum pastoribus atque famulis esset laboris exantlandum, justa
profecto de causa Patresfamilias atque Domini illos conviviali hujusmodi
laetitia recreare rursus atque exhilarare volucrunt. Antiquit. Conviv. p. 62.


. Mr. Bourne has given us Instances from the old Testament of the festive
Entertainments of the former on this Occasion; Pliny and Varro may be consulted
for the Manner of celebrating this Feast among the latter. -- The washing and
shearing of Sheep was attended among them with great Mirth and Festivity:
Indeed the Value of the Covering of this very useful Animal must have always
made the shearing Time, in all pastoral Nations, a Kind of Harvest Home.

There is a beautiful Description of this Festivity in Dyer's Fleece, at the
End of the first Book: At shearing Time, along the lively Vales,
Rural Festivities are often heard:
Beneath each blooming Arbor all is Joy
And lusty Merriment: While on the Grass
The mingled Youth in gaudy Circles sport,
We think the golden Age again returned,
And all the fabled Dryades in Dance.
Leering they bound along, with laughing Air,
To the shrill Pipe, and deep remurm'ring Cords
Of the ancient Harp, or Tabor's hollow Sound:
While the Old apart, upon a Bank reclined,
Attend the tuneful Carol, softly mixed
With every Murmur of the sliding Wave,
And every Warble of the feathered Choir;
Music of Paradise! which still is heard,
When the Heart listens; still the Views appear
Of the first happy Garden, when Content
To Nature's flowery Scenes directs the Sight.
-- With light fantastic Toe, the Nymphs
Thither assembled, thither every Swain;
And over the dimpled Stream a-thousand Flowers,
Pale Lilies, Roses, Violets and Pinks,
Mixed with the Greens of Burnet, Mint and Thyme,
And Trefoil, sprinkled with their sportive Arms.
Such Custom holds along the irriguous Vales,
From Wreakin's Brow to rocky Dolvoryn,
Sabrina's early Haunt.
-- The jolly Cheer
Spread on a mossy Bank, untouched abides
Till cease the Rites: And now the mossy Bank
Is gaily circled, and the jolly Cheer
Dispersed in copious Measure: Early Fruits,
And those of frugal Store, in Husk or Rind;
Steeped Grain, and curdled Milk with dulcet Cream
Soft tempered, in full Merriment they quaff,
And cast about their Gibes; and some apace
Whistle to Roundelays: Their little ones
Look on delighted; while the Mountain Woods
And winding Valleys, with the various Notes
Of Pipe, Sheep, Kine, and Birds and liquid Brooks
Unite their Echoes: Near at Hand
The wide majestic Wave of Severn slowly rolls
Along the deep divided Glebe: The Flood
And trading Bark with low contracted Sail,
Linger among the Reeds and copsy Banks
To listen and to view the joyous Scene.


Thus also of the washing and shearing Sheep in Thompson's Summer: -- In one
diffusive Band
They drive the troubled Flocks, by many a Dog
Compelled, to where the mazy-running Brook
Forms a deep Pool; this Bank abrupt and high,
And that fair spreading in a pebbled Shore.
Urged to the Giddy Brink, much is the Toil,
The Clamor much of Men, and Boys and Dogs,
Ere the soft fearful People to the Flood
Commit their woolly Sides; and often the Swain
On some impatient seizing, hurls them in:
Emboldened then, nor hesitating more,
Fast, fast, they plunge amid the flashing Wave,
And panting, labor to the farther Shore.
Repeated this, till deep the well-wash'd Fleece
Has drunk the Flood, and from his lively Haunt
The Trout is banished by the sordid Stream;
Heavy and dripping, to the breezy Brow
Slow move the harmless Race; where as they spread
Their swelling Treasures to the sunny Ray,
Inly disturbed, and wondering what this wild
Outrageous Tumult means, their loud Complaints
The Country tell; and tossed from Rock to Rock,
Incessant Bleatings run around the Hills,
At last, of snowy white, the gathered Flocks
Are in the wattled Pen innumerous pressed
Head above Head; and ranged in lusty Rows
The Shepherds sit and whet the sounding Shears.
The Housewife waits to roll her fleecy Stores,
With all her gay dressed Maids attending round.
One, Chief, in gracious Dignity enthroned,
Shines over the rest, the Past'ral Queen, and rays
Her Smiles, sweet-beaming on her Shepherd King;
While the glad Circle round them yield their Souls
To festive Mirth, and Wit that knows no Gall.
Meantime, their joyous Task goes on apace:
Some mingling stir the melted Tar, and some
Deep on the new-shorn Vagrant's heaving Side
To stamp his Master's Cipher ready stand;
Others the unwilling Wether drag along:
And glorying in his Might, the sturdy Boy
Holds by the twisted Horns the indignant Ram.
Behold where bound, and of its Robe bereft,
By needy Man, that all-depending Lord,
How meek, how patient, the mild Creature lies!
What Softness in its melancholy Face,
What dumb complaining Innocence appears!
Fear not, ye gentle Tribes! it is not the Knife
Of horrid Slaughter that is over you waved;
No, it is the tender Swain's well-guided Shears,
Who having now, to pay his annual Care,
Borrowed your Fleece, to you a cumbrous Load,
Will send you bounding to your Hills again. Line 368.


Mr. Bourne's Definition of a "Good Day" in this Chapter is a pleasant one: He
calls, says he, the Day it was held on, a good Day; that is, a Day of plentiful
Eating and Drinking.

By Parity of Reasoning, the vulgar Ceremony of wishing a good Day to you, is
synonimous with wishing you a good Dinner This calls to my Remembrance the
following curious Passage in Dr. Moresin: Ebrietati, says he, et gulae indulget
Papa diebus suis festis: nam amplius largiusque rei divinae caussa invitare se
credebatur fas, unde et (...) inflexum Arist. putat, quod ebrii fierent, (...),
id est, post Sacrificium: quin dapes et Convivia dictitabant (...), a (...) et
(...), veluti deorum gratia amplius indulgendum foret. Cael. lib. 7. cap. 2.
ant. lect. P. 52.
!

CHAP. XXIX. Of Michaelmass: Guardian Angels the Discourse of Country People at
this Time: That it seems rather true, that we are protected by a Number of
Angels, than by one particular Genius.
THE Feast of this Season is celebrated in Commemoration of St. Michael, and
all the Orders of Angels. It is called, The Dedication of St. Michael, because
of a Church being dedicated to him on this Day in Mount Garganus.

At this Season of the Year, it is a general Custom to elect the Governors of
Towns and Cities, to promote Peace among Men, and guard them against Harm from
their malicious Fellow Creatures. Whether this particular Time of the Year has
been chosen for electing them, because then is the Feast of Angels, the
Guardians and Protectors of Men, and of their Communities and Daniel, C. 1.
Provinces, is not so certain. It is certainer, that when ever it comes, it
brings into the Minds of the People, that old Opinion of Tutelar Angels, that
every Man has his Guardian Angel; that is, one particular Angel who attends him
from his Coming in, till his Going out of Life, who guides him through the
Troubles of the World, and strives as much as he can, to bring him to Heaven.

Now that good Angels attend good Men is without Dispute. They guide them in
the Mazes of the Wilderness of Life, and bring them to their desired Homes;
they surround them in the Seas of Afflictions, and lead them to the Shores of
Peace; and as when the Israelites passed through the Red Sea, the Cloud became
Light to them, but Darkness to their Enemies, so in the troublesome Seas of
this Life, the Angels are both the Guides of good Men, and their Protectors
from Evil, from the Devil and his Angels. And therefore the Psalmist says, The
Angel of the LORD tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them;
and that he will give his Angels Charge over good Men. They are also supposed
to be that Hedge, which GOD placed about Job, which the Devil so much complains
of; and sure we are, that when the Eyes of Elisha's Servant were opened, he saw
the Mountain full of Chariots and Horses of Fire round about Elisha. That
therefore good Men are guarded and protected by Angels the Scripture shows very
clearly. But that every Man has his particular Genius, seems to be founded more
upon Tradition, than any Certainty from Scripture. Thus the Egyptians believed
that every Man had three Angels attending him; the Pythagoreans, that every Man
had two; the Romans, that there was a good and an evil Genius. And hence it is
that the Roman Poet says, Quisque suos patitur manes, every Man has his evil
Genius. And if we may believe the Authority of Plutarch, the evil Genius of
Brutus appeared to him the Night before the Battle of Philippi, and told him he
was his evil Genius, and that he would meet him there.

But there are greater Authorities than these in Vindication of this Opinion:
Casalion observes, it may be proved from Scripture, and not only from the
Tradition of the Unicuique Deus custodem apposuit; and asserimus indubitanter
nos ex scripturas illam fidem, non gentium nugibus. Cassal. 217. P. de Vet.
Christ. Ri^.
Heathens. And of this Opinion was Justin Martyr, Theodoret, St. Basil, St.
Jerome, and St. Austin.

There are indeed two Places in the New Testament, which have a View to this
Opinion. The first is in the 18th of St. Matthew, the 10th Verse, Take heed
that ye despise not one of these little Ones: For I say unto you, that their
Angels do always behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven. Now because
this Place takes Notice of the Angels of these little Ones, some have therefore
concluded that every Man has his good Angel; at least that good Men have. But
now this Conclusion does not certainly follow from these Words: For when it is
said their Angels, it does indeed certainly infer, that the Angels do protect
good Men, but not that every Man has his particular Angel. And hence therefore,
as one observes, St. Chrisostom makes use of these Words, Enteuthen, delon,
etc. it is manifest that the Saints at least, if not all Men, have their
Angels: But he does not hence conclude, that every Man has one. The other Place
is in the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said, that when Peter was delivered
out of Prison, they would not believe the Maid it was he, but said, It was his
Angel. It must be owned indeed from this, that it seems the Opinion of those in
the House, that every Man had his Guardian Angel; but this is no Proof of the
Thing's being so: It only proves, that it was their Opinion, but not that this
Opinion is true. The Jews had such a Tradition among them, and what was here
spoken, was perhaps only according to that Tradition. Besides we read on the
contrary, that sometimes one and the same Angel has been sent to different
Persons; thus Gabriel was sent to Daniel, Zacharias, and the blessed Virgin:
Sometimes the Scripture tells us of many Angels protecting one Man; for so was
Elisha protected; and as we wrestle not only against Flesh and Blood, but
against all the Powers of Darkness, so we have many Angels to assist and defend
us. I shall not dare to determine positively against this Opinion, which has
traveled down through so many Ages, which has been held by so many wise and
learned Men, and which has such Scriptures brought to its Defense; this I shall
only say, that of the two Opinions, the Latter seems to be the more probable;
that it seems more consonant to Scripture, that we are attended by a Number of
Angels, than by a particular Tutelar Angel. But this I mention, not as
necessary to be believed. For I am persuaded there is no Fault in believing
either the one or the other, as it appears more probable: For whether soever we
believe, we believe in the Protection of Angels, and that seems to be all which
the Scripture requires.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXIX.
SYmmachus, against the Christians, says, "The divine Being has distributed
various Guardians to Cities. -- As Souls are communicated to Infants at their
Birth, so particular Genii are assigned to particular Societies of Men.

Moresin tells us, that papal Rome, in Imitation of this Tenet of Gentilism,
has fabricated such Kinds of Genii for Guardians and Defenders of Cities and
People. -- Thus she has assigned St. Andrew to Scotland, St. George to England,
St. Dennis to France, etc. -- Egidius to Edinburgh, Nicholas to Aberdeen, etc.
etc Custodes varios (ait Symmachus in relatione ad Valentinianum etc. pro
veteri Deorum cultu adversus Christianos) Urbibus and cultus Men's divina
distribuit: ut animae nascentibus, ita Populis fatales Genii dividuntur. Sic
Papa populis et Urbibus consimiles fabricat cultus et Genios Custodes and
Defensores, ut Scotiae Andream, Angliae Georgium, Galliae Dionysium, etc. --
Edinburgo Egidium, Aberdoniae Nicolaum, etc. Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. P. 48.
.

It were superfluous to enumerate the Tutelar Gods of Heathenism. -- Few are
ignorant that Apollo and Minerva presided over Athens, Bacchus and Hercules
over Boeotian Thebes, Juno over Carthage, Venus over Cyprus and Paphos, Apollo
over Rhodes, Mars was the Tutelar God of Rome In the Observations on Days in
the ancient Calendar of the Church of Rome, I find on this Day the following:
"Arx tonat in gratiam tutelaris numinis."
, as Neptune of Taenarus: Diana presided over Crete, etc. etc.

St. Peter succeeded to Mars at the Revolution of the religious Creed of Rome:
He now presides over the Castle of St. Angelo, as Mars did over the ancient
Capitol.

It is observable in this Place, how closely Popery has in this Respect copied
the Heathen Mythology. -- She has the Supreme Being for Jupiter, and has
substituted Angels for Genii. -- The Souls of Saints for Heroes, retaining all
kinds of Demons. Against these Pests, she has carefully provided her
Antidotes. -- She exorcises them out of Waters, she rids the Air of them by
ringing her hallowed Bells, etc.

Thus the Pope, like Pluto of old, may be said to preside over the Infernal
Regions.

The Romanists in Imitation of the Heathens, have assigned Tutelar Gods to each
Member of the Body, to Professions Apollini et Aesculapio ejus filio datur
morbo medicinam facere, apud nos Cosmae et Damiano: at Pestis in partem cedit
Rocho: oculorum lippitudo Clarae. Antonius suibus medendis sufficit: (St.
Antony's Pig), etc. Morbo sontico olim Hercules, nunc Joannes and Valentinus
praesunt. -- In art obstetricandi Lucinam long superat nostra Margareta, et
quia haec moritur Virgo, ne non satis attenta ad curam sit, quam neque didicit,
neque experientia cognovit illi in officio jungitur fungendo expertus
Marpurgus. Aliqui addunt loco Junonis, Reginam nostri coeli divam Mariam, etc.
Moresin Deprav. Rel. p. 16.

Statilinus erat Deus cujusque privatus, qui semper suum hominem est dictus
comitari: sic Papa cuique adglutinat suum Angelum et quisque sibi patronum ex
defunctis unum eligit, cujus sit cliens et cui vota ferat. Ibid. P. 164.


, Trades Sartoribus nemo Deorum veterum prae est, quem legere contigit, nisi
sit Mercurius Fur, cum ipsi sint furacissimi. Bulling. Cap. 34. Orig. ex papae
decreto concedit illis, cum sint plerunque belli homunculi, dignum suis moribus
Deum Gutmannum nescio quem. Sed barbarum nomen cogit fateri civiliores esse
Scotos, qui Annam. Matrem Virginis Mariae coluerunt, quae ac dicunt Tunicam
Christi texuit, et ideo merito illis Dea est. Ibid. 15^.

Fabrorum Deus Vulcanus fuit serrariorum, nunc in papatu commutant Vulcanum cum
Eulogio -- Scoti hisce fabris dederunt A^^^ium, quem colerent, ut et reliquis
qui malleo utuntur. Ibid. P. 56.


, etc.

It is perhaps owing to this ancient Notion of good and evil Genii attending
each Person, that many of the Vulgar pay so great an Attention to particular
Dreams, thinking them, it should seem the Means these invisible Attendants use
to inform their Wards Theodoretus in Expositione Epist. Pauli ad Coloss. 2.
dicit, qui legem defendebant Pseudo-Apostoli eos etiam ad Angelos colendes
inducebant, dicentes, legem per ipsos datam fuisse, mansit autem hoc vitium diu
in Phrygia and Pisidia, quocirca Synodus quoque convenit Laodiceae, quae est
Phrygiae metropolis, et lege prohibuit, ne precarentur Angelos: Canon Council
Laodicen. est 34. ac ita habet. Non oportet Christianos derelicta Ecclesia
abire ad Angelos et Idololatriae abominandae congregationes facere, etc. Sed
nunc ex Papismo Angeli duo cuique assident, bonum his conceptis precantur
verbis.

Angele qui meus est Custos pietate superna,
Me tibi commissum serva, defend, guberna.
Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 10.
of any imminent Danger.

Michaelmas, says Bailey, is a Festival appointed by the Church, to be observed
in Honor of St. Michael the Archangel, who is supposed to be the Chief of the
Host of Heaven, as Lucifer is of the Infernal, and as he was supposed to be the
Protector of the Jewish Church, so he is now esteemed the Guardian and Defender
of the Christian Church.

A red Velvet Buckler is said to be still reserved in a Castle of Normandy,
which the Archangel Michael made use of when he combated the Dragon! See Bishop
Hall's Triumphs of Rome, p. 62.

This Writer ridicules also the Superstition of Sailors among the Romanists,
who in passing by St Michael's Grecian Promontory Malea, used to ply him with
their best Devotions, that he would hold still his Wings, from resting too hard
upon their Sails. Triumph of Piety, p. 50.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Country Wake: How observed formerly: A Custom of the
Heathens, and regulated by Gregory the Great.
IN the Southern Parts of this Nation, the most of Country Villages are wont to
observe some Sunday in a more particular Manner, than the other common Sundays
of the Year, viz. the Sunday after the Day of Dedication, i. e. the Sunday
after the Day of the Saint, to whom their Church was dedicated. Then the
Inhabitants deck themselves in their gaudiest Clothes, and have open Doors and
splendid Entertainments, for the Reception and Treating of their Relations and
Friends, who visit them on that Occasion, from each neighboring Town. The
Morning is spent for the most Part at Church, though not as that Morning was wont
to be spent, not with the Commemoration of the Saint or Martyr, nor the
grateful Remembrance of the Builder and Endower. The remaining Part of the Day,
is spent in Eating and Drinking; and so is also a Day or two afterward,
together with all Sorts of Rural Pastimes and Exercises, such as Dancing on the
Green, Wrestling, Cudgelling, etc.

Agreeable to this we are told, that formerly Die Dominica post Encaeniam seu
Festum Dedicationis cujusvis villae convenire solet in Aurora magna hominum
Iuvenumque multitudo, and canora voce Holy-wakes, Holy-wakes, Exclamando
Designare, etc. Spelm. Gloss. in Verb. Wak.
on the Sunday after the Encaenia, or Feast of the Dedication of the Church, it
was usual for a great Number of the Inhabitants of the Village, both Grown and
Young, to meet together about break of Day, and cry, Holy-wakes, Holy-wakes,
and after Mattens to go to Feasting and Sporting, which they continued for two
or three Days.

In the Northren Parts, the Sunday's Feasting is almost lost, and they observe
only one other Day for the whole, which among them is called the Hopping; I
suppose from the dancing and other Exercises then used. The ancient Name, and
which is still common in the Southern Parts, is the Wake; which according to
Sir H. Spelman, are Sunt celebritates Bacchanales sub fructuum temporibus, ab
occiduiis and Borealibus Anglis pagatim habitae. Bacchanales dixi ex nomine:
Nam Wak. Sax. est temulentia. Spelm. ibid.
Bacchanal Feasts, observed about Fruit Time, and which were in Villages by
Turns, among the Northern and Western English. He calls them Bacchanals,
because, as he observes, the Saxon Word Wak, signifies Drunkenness. This Custom
our Forefathers did in all Probability borrow from their Fellow Heathens, Haec
eadem sunt quae apud Ethnicos Paganalia dicebantur, etc. Spelm. ibid.
whose Paganalia or Country Feasts, were of the same Stamp, with this of the
Wake.

At the Conversion of the Saxons by Austin the Monk, it was continued among the
Converts, with some Regulations, by an Order of Pope Gregory the Great, to
Mellitus the Abbot, who accompanied Austin in his Voyage. His Words are these,
Ut Die Dedicationis, vel Natalitiis Sanctorum Martyrrum, quorum illic reliquiae
ponuntur, tabernacula sibi circa easdem Ecclesias, quae ex Fanis commutatae
sunt, de ramis arborum faciant, etc. Bed. Lib. Cap. 30.
On the Day of Dedication, or the Birthday of the Holy Martyrs, whose Relics
are there placed, let the People make to themselves Booths of the Boughs of
Trees, round about those very Churches, which had been the Temples of Idols,
and in a Religious way to observe a Feast; that Beasts may no longer be
slaughtered by way of Sacrifice to the Devil, but for their own Eating, and the
Glory of GOD; and that when they are full and satisfied, they may return him
Thanks, who is the Giver of all good Things.

This then is the Beginning of our Country Wakes, but they continued not in
their original Purity: For the Feasting and Sporting got the ascendant of
Religion, and so this Feast of Dedication, degenerated into Drunkenness and
Luxury. At present there is nothing left but the very Refuse and Dregs of it;
Religion having not the least Share in it, which till these latter Ages always
had some. Rioting and Feasting are now all that remain, a Scandal to the Feast
in particular, and to Christianity in general.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXX.
IN the Council held at Magfield in the Time of Edward the Third, in the List
of the principal Holydays to be observed in England, are the Anniversaries of
the Consecration of Churches and of the Saints to whose Memory they are
dedicated Vide Collier's Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I. P. 531.
.

The learned Mr. Borlase, in his Account of Cornwall, speaking on this Subject,
tells us, The Parish Feasts instituted in Commemoration of the Dedication of
the parochial Churches were highly esteemed among the primitive Christians, and
originally kept on the Saint's Day to whose Memory the Church was dedicated:
The Generosity of the Founder and Endower thereof was at the same Time
celebrated, and a Service composed suitable to the Occasion. (This is still
done in the Colleges at Oxford to the Memory of the respective Founders.) On
the Eve of this Day Prayers were said, and Hymns were sung all Night in the
Church; and from these Watchings the Festivals were styled Wakes Speght in his
Glossary to Chaucer, gives us a curious Description of Wakes. -- It was the
Manner in Times past, (says he) upon Festival Evens called Vigiliae, for
Parishioners to meet in their Church Houses or Church Yards, and there to have
a drinking Fit for the Time. -- Here they used to end many Quarrels between
Neighbor and Neighbor: Hither came the Wives in comely Manner, and they which
were of the better Sort had their Mantles carried with them, as well for Show
as to keep them from Cold at the Table. These Mantles also many did use in the
Church at Morrow Masses and other Times.

In the 28 Canon given under King Edgar (preserved in Wheloc's Edition of
Bid.) I find decent Behavior enjoined at these Church Wakes: The People are
commanded to pray devoutly at them, and not betake themselves to drinking or
Debauchery.

28. And e laerath that man aet Cyric aeccan spithe gedreoh sy. and georne
gebidde. and aenige dren^ ne aenig unnit tharne dreoge. -- This seems to oppose
the Opinion of Spelman, that Wakes are derived, as Bourne c^tes (...), from the
Saxon Word Wak, which signifies Drunkenness.


; which Name still continues in many Parts of England, though the Vigils have
been long abolished. -- It being found very inconvenient, especially in Harvest
Time, to observe the Parish Feast on the Saint's Day, they were by the Bishop's
special Authority transferred to the following Sunday, and at length, in the
28th Year of Henry VIII. it was injoined, that they should be always every
where celebrated on the first Sunday in October, and no other Day: Which
Injunction was never universally complied with, Custom in this Case prevailing
against the Law of the Land. -- These Feasts (he continues) have been much
exclaimed against by those who do not duly distinguish between the Institution
itself and the degenerate Abuse of it.

When the Order was made in 1627 and 1631, at Exeter and in Somersetshire, for
their Suppression, both the Ministers and the People desired their Continuance,
not only for preserving the Memorial of the Dedication of their several
Churches, but for civilizing their Parishioners, composing Differences by the
Mediation and Meeting of Friends, increasing of Love and Unity by these Feasts
of Charity, and for the Relief and Comfort of the Poor.

Mr. Strutt gives us a pertinent Quotation on this Subject from Dugdale's
Warwickshire, from an old MS Legend of St. John the Baptist: "And ye shall
understond and know how the Evyns were furst found in old Time. In the
Beginning of holy Church, it was so that the Pepul came to the Church with
Candellys brennyng, and would wake and coome with Light toward to the Church in
their Devocions; and after they fell to Lechery and Songs, Bishop Hall in his
Triumphs of Rome, alludes thus to these convivial Entertainments. "What should
I speak of our merry Wakes, and May Games, and Christmas Triumphs, which you
have once seen here, and may see still in those under the Roman Dition; in all
which put together, you may well say, no Greek can be merrier than they."
Triumph of Pleasure. P. 23.
Daunces, Harping, Piping, and also to Glotony and Sin, and so turned the
Holiness to Cursydness: Wherefore holy Faders ordained the Pepul to leve that
Waking, and to fast the Evyn. But hit is called Vigilia, that is Waking in
English, and it is called Evyn, for at Evyn they were wont to come to Church."

This Quotation also seems to overthrow the Etymology of Wake, given from
Spelman by our Author.

This ingenious Antiquary deduces the Origin of our Fairs from these ancient
Wakes, where great Numbers attending, by Degrees less Devotion and Reverence
were observed; till at length from Hawkers and Pedlars coming thither to sell
their petty Wares, the Merchants came and set up Stalls and Booths in the
Churchyards: And not only those, says Spelman, who lived in the Parish to
which the Church belonged, resorted thither, but others from all the
neighboring Towns and Villages; and the greater the Reputation of the Saint,
the greater were the Numbers that flocked together on this Occasion. -- Keeping
these Fairs on Sundays was justly found Fault with by the Clergy: The Abbot of
Ely, in John's Reign, preached much against such Profanation of the Sabbath,
but this irreligious Custom was not entirely abolished till the Reign of King
Henry the Sixth. See Strutt's English Era, Vol. II. p. 98. See Article Fairs
in the Appendix.

These Meetings are still kept up, under the Name of Hoppings Hopping is
derived from the Anglo Saxon, Poppan, to leap or dance, which Skinner deduces
from the Dutch, Huppe, Coxendix, (whence also our Hip) haec enim Saltitatio,
qua Corpus in altum tollitur, open robustissimorum illorum musculorum, qui
ossibus femoris et coxendicis movendis dicati sunt, praecipue peragitur.
Skinner in verb. Hop. Dancings are here vulgarly called Hops. -- The Word in
its original Meaning is preserved in Grass- Hopper.
, in many of our northern Villages. -- We shall hope the Rejoicings on them are
still in general restrained within the Bounds of innocent Festivity, though it
is to be feared they sometimes prove fatal to the Morals of our Swains, and to
the Innocence of our rustic Maids.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Harvest Supper: A Custom of the Heathens, taken from the
Jewish Feast of Tabernacles.
WHEN the Fruits of the Earth are gathered in, and laid in their proper
Receptacles, it is common, in the most of Country Places to provide a plentiful
Supper for the Harvest-Men, and the Servants of the Family; which is called a
Harvest-Supper, and in some Places a Mell-Supper, a Churn-Supper, etc. At this
the Servant and his Master are alike, and every Thing is done with an equal
Freedom. They sit at the same Table, converse freely together, and spend the
remaining Part of the Night in dancing, singing, etc. without any Difference or
Distinction.

There Antiquitus consuetudo fuit apud Gentiles, quod hoc mense servi pastores
and ancillae quadam liberate fruerentur: Et cum Dominis suis Dominarentur, and
cum eiis facerent festa, and convivia, post Collectas Messes. Durand. Rat. Lib.
6. Cap. 86.
was a Custom among the Heathens, much like this, at the gathering in of their
Harvest, when Servants were indulged with Liberty and being on the Equality
with their Masters for a certain Time.

Now the Original of both these Custom, is Jewish: And therefore Hospinian
tells us, Et pro collectis frugibus Deo gratiae agebantur. Quem morem Ethnici
postea ab iis mutuati sunt. Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Jud. Stukius Antiq. Convival
P. 63.
That the Heathens copied after this Custom of the Jews, and at the End of
their Harvest, offered up their first Fruits to the Gods. For the Jews rejoiced
and feasted at the getting in of the Harvest.

THEOPHYLACT in talking of this Feast, is undoubtedly mistaken, when he says,
Scenopegia, quod celebrant in Gratiarum Actionem propter convectas Fruges in
Mense Septembri. Tunc enim gratias agebant Deo, convectis omnibus fructibus,
etc. Theophylact. in 7 Cap. Joan.
That the Feast of Tabernacles was celebrated, that Thanks might be returned
for the getting in of the Fruits of the Earth. For GOD himself tells his own
People, it was instituted, Levit. 22. --
that their Generations might know, that he had made the Children of Israel to
dwell in Booths. But however, it is certainly true, that it was a Time of
returning Thanks to GOD, for the Success of the Harvest, a Time of Festivity,
and Joy, and Gladness. Thus the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 16.
Thou shall observe the Feast of Tabernacles seven Days, after thou have
gathered in thy Corn and thy Wine. And thou shall rejoice in thy Feast, thou
and thy Son and thy Daughter, and thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant; and
the Levite, the Stranger, and the Fatherless and the Widow, that are within thy
Gates.

Now as the Heathens have imitated the Jews in this Custom, so it is not
improbable that we have had it from the Heathens; there being a very great
Likeness between the Custom now, and that of the Heathens formerly, For
Macrobius tells us, That Patres Familiarum, and frugibus and fructibus jam
coactis, passim cum servis vescerentur, cum quibus patientiam laboris in
colendo rure toleraverant. Macreb. Saturnal. Die prim. Cap. 10.
the Masters of Families, when they had got in their Harvest, were wont to
Feast with their Servants, who had labored with them in Tilling the Ground:
Which is exactly answerable to the Custom now amongst us. But whatever Truth
there is in this, it is certain this Custom was practiced by the Saxons, and is
at least as ancient among us, as their Days. For among their Holy Days, we find
a Elstob. Append. P. 30.
Week set a part at Harvest; of which our Harvest-Home, and Mell-Supper, in the
North, are the only Remains.

Here end the Antiquitates Vulgares.

OBSERVATIONS ON CHAPTER XXXI.
VACINA, ( aliter Vacuna, a vacando, the tutelar Deity, as it were, of Rest and
Ease) among the Ancients, was the Name of the Goddess to whom the Rustics
sacrificed at the Conclusion of Harvest.

Moresin Vacina Dea, cui sacrificabant Agricolae mess peracta: Papatus fert
domum spiceas Coronas, quas a tignis suspendit, nunc altaribus suorum
Tutelarium offerunt, gratias agunt pro collectis frugibus and otium precantur.
Alii stramineas statuas circumferunt. Anglos vidi spiceam far domum in Rheda
Imaginem circum cantantibus promiscue viris et foeminis, praecedente tibicine
aut Tympano. Deprav. Rel. Orig. in verbo Vacina.
tells us, that Popery, in Imitation of this, brings home her Chaplets of Corn,
which she suspends on Poles; that Offerings are made on the Altars of her
tutelar Gods, while Thanks are returned for the collected Stores, and Prayers
are put up for future Rest and Ease. Images too of Straw, or Stubble, he tells
us, are wont to be carried about on this Occasion; and in England he himself
saw the Country People bringing home in a Cart (I suppose from the Field) a
Figure made of Corn, round which Men and Women promiscuously singing, followed
a Piper or a Drum. -- A Vestage of this Custom is still preserved in some
Places in the North: Not Half a Century ago they used every where to dress up
something, similar to the Figure above described, at the End of Harvest, which
was called a Kern Baby. I had this Information from an old Woman at a Village
in Northumberland. -- The Reader may perhaps smile, but I am not ashamed of my
Evidence. In a Case of this Nature old Women are respectable Authorities. --
This northern Word is plainly a Corruption of Corn Baby or Image, as is the
Kern or Churn Supper, of Corn Supper This, as Mr. Bourne tells us, is called
also a Mell-Supper, plainly I think from the French Mesler, to mingle or mix
together, the Master and Servants sitting promiscuously at the same Table: All
being upon an equal footing, or, as our Northern vulgar idiom has it,
"Hail-Fellow well met." -- Amell is commonly used here for betwixt or among. I
find indeed that many of our Northumbrian rustic and vulgar Words are derived
to us from the French: Perhaps we have not imported them from the first Market,
but have had them at second Hand from the Scots, a People that in former Times
were greatly connected with that Nation.
.

This Feast is undoubtedly of the most remote Antiquity In the ancient Roman
Calendar so often cited, I find the following Observations on the eleventh of
June (the Harvests in Italy are much earlier than with us): The Season of
Reapers, and their Custom with rustic Pomp. Messorum aestas, et eorum
consuetudo cum agresti pompa.
. That Men in all Nations, where Agriculture flourished, should have expressed
their Joy on this Occasion by some outward Ceremony, has its Foundation in the
Nature of Things: Sowing is Hope; Reaping, Fruition of the expected Good. To
the Husbandman, whom the Fear of Wet, Blights, etc. had harassed with great
Anxiety, the Completion of his Wishes could not fail of imparting an enviable
gust of Delight. -- Festivity is but the reflex of inward Joy, and it could
hardly fail of being produced on this Occasion, which is a temporary suspension
of every Care.

The Respect, shown to Servants Mr Pennant informs us, that a Custom prevails
in Gloucestershire on the Twelfth-day, or on the Epiphany in the Evening: All
the Servants of every particular Farmer assemble together in one of the Fields
that has been sown with Wheat; on the Border of which, in the most conspicuous
or most elevated Place, they make twelve Fires of Straw in a Row; around one of
which, made larger than the Rest, they drink a cheerful Glass of Cider to their
Master's Health, Success to the future Harvest, etc. then returning home, they
feast on Cakes made of Carraways, etc. soaked in Cider, which they claim as a
Reward for their past Labors in sowing the Grain. -- This, he observes, seems
to resemble a Custom of the ancient Danes, who in their Addresses to their
rural Deities, emptied on every Invocation a Cup in Honor of them. Niordi et
Frejae memoria poculis recolebatur, annua ut ipsis contingeret felicitas,
frugumque et reliquae annonae uberrimus proventus.

Worm. Monument. Dan. lib. 1. p. 28. See Note in Pennant's Tour, p. 91. Dr.
Johnson tells us that he saw the Harvest of a small Field in one of the western
Islands: -- The Strokes of the Sickle were timed by the Modulation of the
Harvest Song, in which all their Voices were united: -- They accompany in the
Highlands every Action which can be done in equal Time with an appropriated
Strain, which has, they say, not much Meaning, but its Effects are Regularity
and Cheerfulness. The ancient proceleusmatic Song, by which the Rowers of
Galleys were animated, may be supposed to have been of this Kind. There is now
an Oar Song used by the Hebridians -- Thus far the learned Traveller. Our
Sailors at Newcastle, in heaving their Anchors, etc. use a Song of this Kind.


at this Season, seems to have sprung from a grateful Sense of their good
Services -- Every thing depends at this Juncture upon their Labor and Dispatch.

Different Places adopt different Ceremonies:

There is a Sport on this Occasion in Hertfordshire, called, "crying the Mare,"
when the Reapers tie together the Tops of the last Blades of Corn, which is
Mare; and standing at some Distance, throw their Sickles at it, and he who cuts
the Knot, has the Prize, with Acclamations and good Cheer. Mr. Blount tells us
farther, That after the Knot is cut, then they cry with a loud Voice three
Times "I have her." Others answer, as many Times "What have you?" -- A Mare, a
Mare, a Mare: "Whose is she?" thrice also. J. B (naming the Owner three Times)
Whither will you send her? To Jo. a Nicks, (naming some Neighbor, who has not
all his Corn reaped) then they all shout three Times, and so the Ceremony ends
with good Cheer. In Yorkshire, upon the like Occasion, they have a Harvest
Dame; in Bedfordshire, a Jack and a Gill. Blount in Verbo.
Vide Bailey.

Mr Thompson has left us a beautiful Description of this annual Festivity of
Harvest-home. -- His Words are these: -- The Harvest-Treasures all
Now gathered in, beyond the Rage of Storms,
Sure to the Swain; the circling Fence shut up;
And instant Winter's utmost Rage defied:
While, loose to festive Joy, the Country round
Laughs with the loud sincerity of Mirth,
Shook to the Wind their Cares. The toil-strung Youth,
By the quick Sense of Music taught alone,
Leaps wildly graceful in the lively Dance.
Her every Charm abroad, the Village toast,
Young, buxom, warm, in native Beauty rich,
Darts not unmeaning Looks; and where her Eye
Points an approving Smile, with double Force
The Cudgel rattles, and the Wrestler twines.
Age too shines out; and, garrulous, recounts
The Feats of Youth. Thus they rejoice; nor think
That with tomorrow's Sun, their annual Toil
Begins again the never ceasing Round.
Autumn. Line 1134.

APPENDIX.
Of Pasche, or as they are commonly called, Paste Eggs.
Ab OVO -- HORAT.
EGGS, stained with various Colors in boiling, and sometimes covered with
Leaf-gold, are at Easter presented to Children at Newcastle, and other Places
in the North -- They ask for their Paste Eggs, as for a Fairing, at this Season.

This Custom which had its beginning in childish Superstition, seems to be
ending in a Way not unsuitable to its Origin.

Paste is plainly a Corruption of Pasche, Coals in his Latin Dictionary renders
the Pasch or Easter Egg by " Ovum paschale, croceum, seu luteum." It is plain
from hence that he has been acquainted with the Custom of dying or staining
Eggs at this Season.

Ainsworth leaves out these two Epithets, and calls it singly "Ovum paschale".
-- He has known nothing I presume of this ancient Custom, and has therefore
omitted the "croccum" or luteum. -- It is in this Manner, that many of our
English Dictionaries have been improved in modern Editions!


Easter.

This also is a Relic of Popish Superstition, which, for whatever Cause, had
made Eggs emblematic of the Resurrection, as may be gathered from the
subsequent Prayer, Subveniat, quaesumus, Domine, tuae benedictionis gratia,
huic Ovorum creaturae, ut cibus salubris fiat fidelibus tuis in tuarum
gratiarum action sumentibus, ob resurrectionem Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui
tecum, etc. p. 133.

In the Romish Bee-hive, Fol. 15, I find the following Catalogue of popish
Superstitions, in which the Reader will find our Paste Eggs very properly
included: -- Many traditions of idle Heads, which the Holy Church of Rome has
received for a perfect serving of God: As fasting Days, Years of Grace,
Differences and Diversities of Days, of Meats, of Clothing, of Candles, Holy
Ashes, Holy Pace Eggs and Flames, Palms and Palm Boughs. Staves, Fools
Hoods, Shells and Bells, (relative to Pilgrimages) licking of rotten Bones,
(Relics) etc. etc.


which the Reader will find in an "Extract from the Ritual of Pope Paul the
Vth, made for the Use of England, Ireland, and Scotland." -- It contains
various other Forms of Benediction: --

Bless, O Lord, we beseech thee, this thy Creature of Eggs, that it may become
a wholesome Sustenance to thy faithful Servants, eating it in Thankfulness to
thee, on Account of the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee
and the holy Spirit, etc.

The ancient Egyptians, if the Resurrection of the Body had been a Tenet of
their Faith, would perhaps have thought an Egg no improper hieroglyphical
Representation of it. -- The Exclusion of a living Creature by Incubation,
after the vital Principle has lain a long while dormant or extinct, is a
Process so truly mavelous, that if it could be disbelieved, would be thought
by some a Thing as incredible, as that the Author of Life should be able to
re-animate the Dead.

I conjecture that the Romanists borrowed this Custom from the Jews, who in
celebrating their Passover, set on the Table two unleavened Cakes, and two
Pieces of the Lamb; to this they added some small Fishes, because of the
Leviathan; a hard Egg, because of the Bird Ziz; some Meal, because of the
Behemoth: These three Animals being, according to their Rabbinical Doctors,
appointed for the Feast of the Elect in the other Life.

This Custom still prevails in the Greek Church: Dr. Chandler, in his Travels
in Asia Minor, gives us the following Account of the Manner of celebrating
Easter among the modern Greeks: The Greeks now celebrated Easter: A small Bier,
prettily decked with Orange and Citron-buds, Jasmine, Flowers, and Boughs, was
placed in the Church, with a Christ crucified rudely painted on Board, for the
Body: we saw it in the Evening, and before Day Break were suddenly awakened by
the blaze and crackling of a large Bonefire, with singing and shouting in
Honor of the Resurrection. -- They made us Presents of colored Eggs, and
Cakes of Easter Bread. Probably the Cross Buns made at present on Good Friday,
have been derived from these or such like Cakes of Easter Bread. The Country
People in the North make with a Knife many little Cross-Marks on their Cakes,
before they put them into the Oven, etc -- I have no doubt but that this too,
trifling as the Remark may appear, is a Relic of Popery. Thus also persons,
who cannot writ^, instead of signing their Names, are bid to make their Mark,
which is generally done in the form of a Cross.


Easter Day. says the Abbe d' Auteroche in his Journey to Siberia, is set apart
for visiting in Russia. -- A Russian came into my Room, offered me his Hand,
and gave me at the same Time an Egg; -- Another succeeded, he embraced me, and
also gave me an Egg. I gave him in Return the Egg I had just received. The Men
go to each others Houses in the Morning, and introduce themselves into the
Houses, by saying, "Jesus Christ is risen." The Answer is, "Yes, he is risen."
The People then embrace, give each other Eggs, and drink a great deal of
Brandy.

This corresponds pretty much with the subsequent Account of far older Date,
which I transcribe from Hakluyt's Voyages. 1589. Black Letter. Page 342.

They (the Russians) have an Order at Easter, which they always observe, and
that is this; -- Every Year against Easter to die, or color red with Brazzel
(Brazil Wood), a great Number of Eggs, of which every Man and Woman gives one
unto the Priest of their Parish upon Easter Day in the Morning. And moreover
the Common People use to carry in their Hands one of these red Eggs, not only
upon Easter Day, but also three or four Days after, and Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen have Eggs gilaed, Doctor Chandler in his Travels in Greece, tells
us, that at the City of Zante, he saw a Woman in a House, with the Door open,
bewailing her little Son, whose dead Body lay by her, dressed, the Hair
powdered, the Face painted, and bedecked with Leaf-Gold.

In the ancient Calendar of the Romish Church, to which I have so often
referred, I find the subsequent Observation on the 25th of March, which I
confess myself entirely at a loss how to translate: " Ova annunciatae, ut
aiunt, reponuntur."


which they carry in like Manner. -- They use it, as they say, for a great
Love, and in Token of the Resurrection, whereof they rejoice. For when two
Friends meet during the Easter Holy Days, they come and take one another by the
Hand; the one of them says, "The Lord or Christ is risen." The other
answers, "It is so of a Truth." And then they kiss and exchange their Eggs
both Men and Women, continuing in Kissing four Days together.

Our ancient Voyage Writer means no more, it should seem, than that the
Ceremony was kept up for four Days.

Ray has preserved an old English Proverb on this Subject: "I Will warrant you
for an Egg at Easter."

Of TOBACCO.
Non fumum ex fulgore, sed ex fumo dare lucem Cogitat. HORAT.
A Foreign Weed, which has made so many Englishmen, especially of the common
Sort, become its Slaves, must not be omitted in our Catalogue of popular
Antiquities.

Captain R. Greenfield and Sir Francis Drake are said to have been the first
who brought Tobacco into this Kingdom, about the Year 1586, during the Reign of
Elizabeth. -- A pleasant Kind of Tale is given us in the Athenian Oracle by Way
of accounting for the frequent Use and Continuance of taking it;

When the Christians first discovered America, the Devil was afraid of losing
his hold of the People there by the Appearance of Christianity. He is reported
to have told some Indians of his Acquaintance, that he had found a Way to be
revenged upon the Christians for beating up his Quarters, for he would teach
them to take Tobacco, to which, when they had once tasted it, they should be
perpetual Slaves.

Our British Solomon, James the Is It, who was a great Opponent of the Devil, and
even wrote a Book against Witchcraft, made a formidable Attack also upon this
"Invention of Satan," in a learned Performance, which he called a
Counter-blaste to Tobacco His Majesty in the Course of his Work informs us,
that some of the Gentry of the Land bestowed (at that Time) three, some Four
Hundred Pounds a Year upon this precious stink!

An incredible Sum, especially when we consider the Value of Money in his Time.
They must not have been Sterling but Scotch Pounds.

The following extraordinary Account of a Buckinghamshire Parson who abandonned
himself to the use of Tobacco, is worth quoting. It may be found in Lilly's
History of his Life and Times, p. 44.

In this Year also, William Bredon, Parson or Vicar of Thornton in Bucks, was
living, a profound Divine, but absolutely the most polite Person for Nativities
in that Age, strictly adhering to Ptolomy, which he well understood; he had a
Hand in composing Sir Christopher Heydon's defense of Judicial Astrology, being
at that Time his Chaplain; he was so given over to Tobacco and Drink, that when
he had no Tobacco, (and I suppose too much Drink) he would cut the Bell-Ropes
and smoke them!


. It is printed in the Edition of his Work by Barker and Bill. London, 1616.

He concludes this bitter Blast How widely different the Strains of the
subsequent Parody: Little Tube of mighty Power,
Charmer of an idle Hour,
Object of my warm Desire,
Lip of Wax and Eye of Fire:
And thy snowy taper Waist,
With my Finger gently braced;
And thy pretty swelling Crest,
With my little Stopper pressed, etc.
The Style of that puling Bard, Ambrose Phillips, is here ridiculed.

As is also that of the subsequent Imitation of Dr. Young. Critics avaunt,
Tobacco is my Theme;
Tremble like Hornets at the blasting Steam.
And you, Court-Insects, flutter not too near
Its Light, nor buzz within the scorching Sphere.
Pollio, with flame like thine, my Verse inspire,
So shall the Muse from Smoke elicit Fire.
Coxcombs prefer the tickling Sting of Snuff;
Yet all their Claim to Wisdom is -- a Puff:
Lord Foplin smokes not -- for his Teeth afraid;
Sir Tawdry smokes not -- for he wears Brocade.
Ladies, when Pipes are brought, affect to swoon,
They love no Smoke, except the Smoke of Town;
But Courtiers hate the puffing Tribe -- no Matter,
Strange if they love the Breath that cannot flatter!
It Is Foes but show their Ignorance; can he
Who scorns the Leaf of Knowledge, love the Tree?
Yet Crowds remain, who still its Worth proclaim,
While some for Pleasure smoke, and some for Fame:
Fame, of our Actions universal Spring,
For which we drink, eat, sleep, smoke, -- every Thing.
Both of these were written by Hawkins Brown, Esquire


of his, his sulphurous Invective against this transmarine Weed, with the
following Peroration: Have you not Reason then to be ashamed and to forbear
this filthy Novelty, so basely grounded, so foolishly received, and so grossly
mistaken in the right Use thereof! In your Abuse thereof sinning against God,
harming yourselves both in Persons and Goods, and taking also thereby (look to
ye that take Snuff in Profusion!) the Marks and Notes of Vanity upon you; by
the Custom thereof making yourselves to be wondered at by all foreign civil
Nations, and by all Strangers that come among you, to be scorned and contemned;
a Custom loathsome to the Eye, hateful to the Nose, harmful to the Brain,
dangerous to the Lungs, and in the black stinking Fume thereof, nearest
resembling the horrible Stygian Smoke of the Pit that is bottomless!

If even this small Specimen of our learned Monarch's Oratory, which seems well
adapted to the Understanding of old Women, does not prevail upon them all to
break in Pieces their Tobacco Pipes and forego Smoking, it will perhaps be
impossible to say what can.

The Subject, as his Majesty well observes, is Smoke, and no doubt many of his
Readers will think his Arguments but the Fumes of an idle Brain, and it may be
added too, of an empty Head!

Of WITCHES.
Devovet absentes, simulachraque cerea fingit,
Et miserum tenues in jecur urget acus.
OVID.
WITCH is derived from the Dutch Witchelen, which signifies whinnying and
neighing like a Horse: In a secondary Sense, also to foretell and prophecy;
because the Germans, as Tacitus informs us, used to divine and foretell Things
to come by the whinnying and neighing of their Horses There is a superstitious
Custom among some People of nailing Horse-Shoes on the Threshold to keep out
Witches.

To break the Egg-Shell after the Meat is out, is a Relic of Superstition,
thus mentioned in Pliny, huc pertinet Ovorum, ut exorbuerit quisque, calices
protinus frangi aut eosdem coclearibus perforari.

Dr. Brown tells us, that the Intent of this was to prevent Witchcraft; for
lest Witches should draw or prick their Names therein, and veneficiously
mischief their Persons, they broke the Shell, as Dalecampius has observed. Vide
Vulg. Errors.

Mr. Pennant tells us, in his Tour in Scotland, that the Farmers carefully
preserve their Cattle against Witchcraft by placing Boughs of the Mountain Ash,
and Honey Suckle in their Cow-Houses on the 2d of May. -- They hope to preserve
the Milk of their Cows, and their Wives from Miscarriage, by tying red Threads
about them; they bleed the supposed Witch to preserve themselves from her
Charms.


. His very Words are hinnitu and fremitu.

Perkins defines Witchcraft to be an Art serving for the working of Wonders by
the Assistance of the Devil, so far as God will permit. -- Delrio defines it to
be an Art in which, by the Power of a Contract entered into with the Devil,
some Wonders are wrought, which pass the common Understanding of Men. Lib. 1.
cap. 2. de Mag. disq. Vide Blount.

Witchcraft, in modern Estimation, is a Kind of Sorcery, (especially in Women)
in which it is ridiculously supposed that an old Woman, by entering into a
Contract with the Devil, is enabled in many Instances to change the Course of
Nature, to raise Winds, perform Actions that require more than human Strength;
and to afflict those that offend her with the sharpest Pains, etc.

In those Times of more than Egyptian Darkness He tells us also, that the last
Instance of these frantic Executions for Witchcraft in the North of Scotland,
was in June 1727, as that in the South was at Paisly in 1696, where among
others a Woman, young and handsome, suffered, and with a reply to her enquiring
Friends, worthy a Roman Matron:

Being asked why she did not make a better Defense on her Trial, she answered,
"My Persecutors have destroyed my Honor, and my Life is not now worth the
Pains of defending." He goes on: "The last Instance of national Credulity on
this Head was the Story of the Witches of Thurso, who tormenting for a long
Time an honest Fellow under the usual form of Cats, at last provoked him so,
that one Night he put them to flight with his broad Sword, and cut off the Leg
of one less nimble than the Rest: On his taking it up, to his Amazement he
found it belonged to a Female of his own Species, and next Morning discovered
the Owner, an old Hag, with only the companion Leg to this."

But these Relations of almost obsolete Superstitions must never be thought a
Reflection on this Country, as long as any Memory remains of the tragical End
of the Poor People at Tring, who within a few Miles of our Capital itself, in
1751, fell a Sacrifice to the Belief of the Common People in Witches, or of
that ridiculous Imposture in the Capital itself, in 1762, of the Cocklane
Ghost, which found credit with all Ranks of People. Note, p. 145.

He farther observes, that at Edinburgh, there is still shown a deep and wide
Hollow beneath Calton Hill, the Place where those imaginary Criminals, Witches
and Sorcerers, were burnt in less enlightened Times

The ingenious Artist Hogarth, in his Medley, represents with great Spirit of
Satire, a Witch, sucked by a Cat, and flying on a Broomstick: It being said, as
Trusler remarks, that the Familiar with whom a Witch converses, sucks her right
Breast, in Shape of a little dun Cat, as smooth as a Mole, which, when it has
sucked, the Witch is in a Kind of Trance. Vide Hogarth Moralized, p. 116.


, when Ignorance and Superstition overspread the World, many severe Laws were
made against Witches, by which, to the Disgrace of Humanity, great Numbers of
innocent Persons, distressed with Poverty and Age, were brought to violent and
untimely Ends.

The Witch-Act, a Disgrace to the Code of English Laws, was not repealed till
the Year 1736!!!

Lord Verulam, that Sun of Science that rose upon our Island, and dispelled an
hereditary Night of Ignorance and Superstition, gives us the following
Reflections on Witches in the 10th Century of his Natural History: They form a
fine Contrast to the narrow and bigoted Ideas of the royal Author of the
Demonology.

"Men may not too rashly believe the Confession of Witches, nor yet the
Evidence against them: For the Witches themselves are imaginative, and believe
oftentimes they do that which they do not: And People are credulous in that
Point, and ready to impute Accidents and natural Operations to Witchcraft -- It
is worthy the observing, that both in ancient and late Times (as in the
Thessalian Witches and the Meetings of Witches that have been recorded by so
many late Confessions) the great Wonders which they tell, of carrying in the
Air, transforming themselves into other Bodies, etc. are still reported to be
wrought, not by Incantation or Ceremonies, but by Ointments and anointing
themselves all over -- This may justly move a Man to think that these Fables
are the Effects of Imagination; for it is certain that Ointments do all (if
they be laid on any Thing thick) by stopping of the Pores, shut in the Vapors,
and send them to the Head extremely; and for the particular Ingredients of
those magical Ointments, it is like they are opiate and soporiferous: For
anointing of the Forehead, Neck, Feet, Backbone, we know is used for procuring
dead Sleeps. And if any Man say, that this Effect would be better done by
inward Potions; Answer may be made, that the Medicines which go to the
Ointments are so strong, that if they were used inwards, they would kill those
that use them; and therefore they work potently though outward." He tells us
elsewhere;

"The Ointment, that Witches use, is reported to be made of the Fat of
Children, dug out of their Graves; of the Juices of Smallage Olla autem
omnium Maleficarum commmune solet esse Instrumentum, quo succos, herbas, vermes
et exta decoquant, atque ea venefica dape ignavos ad vota alliciunt, et instar
bullientis ollae, navium and equitum aut Cursorum excitant celeritatem. Olai
Magni. Gent. Septent. Hist. Brev. p. 96. See also, for the Witches Por or
Caldron, Macheth.
, Wolfe-bane, and Cinque Foil, mingled with the Meal of fine Wheat: But I
suppose that the soporiferous Medicines are likest to do it, which are
Hen-bane, Hemlock, Mandrake, Moon-shade, Tobacco, Opium, Saffron, Poplar
Leaves, etc." -- Thus far that great Philosopher There had been about the Time
of Lord Verulam, no small Stir concerning Witchcraft. -- Ben. Johnson, says Dr.
Percy, has left us a Witch Song, which contains an Extract from the various
Incantations (...) classic Antiquity. Some learned Wise-Acres had just before
(...) themselves on this Subject, with our British Solomon, James (...) at
their Head. -- And these had so ransacked all Writers ancient ^^d modern, and
so blended and kneaded together the several Su^erstitions of different Times
and Nations, that those of genuine ^nglish Growth could no longer be traced out
and distinguished.

It was a supposed Remedy against Witchcraft to put some of the ^^witched
Person's Water, with a Quantity of Pins, Needles and ^ails, into a Bottle, cork
them up, and set them before the Fire, (...) order to confine the Spirit; but
this sometimes did not prove ^fficient, as it would often force the Cork out
with a loud Noise, ^^ke that of a Pistol, and cast the Contents of the Bottle
to a consi^rable Height.

Bewitched Persons are said to fall frequently into violent Fits, ^^d vomit
Needles, Pins, Stones, Nails, Stubbs, Wool and Straw. (...) Trusler's Hogarth
moralized -- A^t. Medley.


.

The Sabbath of Witches is a nocturnal Assembly supposed to be held on
Saturday, in which the Devil is said to appear in the Shape of a Goat, about
which they make several Dances and magic Ceremonies. In order to prepare
themselves for this meeting, they take several soporific Drugs, after which
they are fancied to fly up the Chimney, and to be spirited or carried through
the Air, riding on a Switch to their Sabbath Assembly. Hence the Idea of
Witches on Broomsticks, etc. The Author of the Gentle Shepherd, (a beautiful
Pastoral in the ^^^ch Language, that equals perhaps the Idyllia of Theocritus,)
has made great Use of this Superstition. -- He introduces a Clo^ telling the
Powers of a Witch in the following Words: She can overcast the Night, and cloud
the Moon,
And make the Deils obedient to her crune.
At Midnight Hours over the Kirk-yards she raves,
And howks unchristen'd Weans out of their Graves;
Boils up their Livers in a Warlock's Pow,
Rins withershins about the Hemlock's Low;
And seven Times does her Prayers backwards pray,
Till Plotcok comes with Lumps of Lapland Clay,
Mixed with the Venom of black Taids and Snakes;
Of this unsonsy Pictures aft she makes
Of any ane she hates; -- and gars expire
With slaw and racking Pains before a Fire:
Stuck fou of Prines, the devilish Pictures melt;
The Pain by Fowk they represent is felt.
And yonder is Mause --
She and her Cat sit beeking in her Yard, etc.


Afterward he describes the ridiculous Opinions of the Count People, who never
fail to surmise that the commonest natural I fects are produced from Causes
that are supernatural: When last the Wind made Glaud a roofless Barn;
When last the Burn bore down my Mither's Yarn;
When Brawny elf-shot never mair came hame;
When Tibby kirn'd, and there nae Butter came;
When Bessy Freetock's chuffy-cheeked Wean
To a Fairy turned, and could nae stand its lane;
When Wattie wandered ae Night through the Shaw,
And tint himsel amaist amang the Snaw;
When Mungo's Mare stood still and swat with Fright,
When he brought East the Howdy under Night;
When Bawsy shot to dead upon the Green,
And Sarah tint a snood was nae mair seen;
You, Lucky, gat the wit of aw fell out,
And ilka ane here dreads you round about, etc.


The old Woman in the subsequent Soliloquy gives us a philosophical Account of
the People's Folly: Hard Luck, alake! when Poverty and Eild
Weeds out of Fashion; and a lanely Bield,
With a sma' Cast of Wiles, should in a Twitch,
Gie ane the hatefu' Name, a wrinkled Witch.
This fool imagines, as do money sic,
That I Am a Wretch in Compact with auld Nick,
Because by Education I was taught.
To speak and act aboon their common Thought.


This Pastoral, unfortunately for its Fame, is written in a Lan^^age but local,
and not generally understood. -- Had Mr. Addi^^n known or could he have read
this, how fine a Subject would have afforded him on which to have displayed his
inimitable ^^lent for Criticism!




A Cat too is the "sine qua non" of a Witch: -- These Animals were anciently
revered as Emblem of the Moon, and among the Egyptians we^^ on that Account so
highly honored as to r^ceive Sacrifices and Devotions, and had state^^ Temples
erected to their Honor. It is said tha^ in whatever House a Cat died, all the
Family shaved their Eyebrows. Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus relate, that a
Roman happening accidentally to kill a Cat, the Mob immediately gathered about
the House where he was, and neither the Entreaties of some principal Men sent
by the King, nor the Fear of the Romans, with whom they were then negotiating a
Peace, could save the Man's Life. Vide Bailey.

Hence no doubt they have been taken and adopted into the Species of
Superstition under Consideration.

Mr Strutt, in his Description of the Ordeals under the Saxons, tells us, That
the second Kind of Ordeal by Water, was to thrust the accused into a deep
Water, where, if he struggled in the least to keep himself on the Surface, he
was accounted Guilty; but if he remained on the Top of the Water without
Motion, he was acquitted with Honor. Hence (he observes) without doubt came
the long continued Custom of swimming People, suspected of Witchcraft. -- There
are also, he observes farther, the faint traces of these ancient Customs in
another superstitious Method of proving a Witch; it was done by weighing the
suspected Party against the Church Bible, which if they outweighed, they were
innocent; but on the contrary, if the Bible proved the heaviest, they were
instantly condemned. -- However absurd and foolish these superstitious Customs
may seem to the present Age, little more, he observes, than a Century ago,
there were several unhappy Wretches, not only apprehended, but also cruelly
burnt alive for Witchcraft, on very little better Evidence than the above
ridiculous Trials. Several great and learned Men have also taken vast Pains to
convince the doubting Age of the real Existence of Witches, and the Justness of
their Executions: But so very unbelieving we are grown at present in these and
such like Stories, as to consider them only as the idle Phantoms of a fertile
Imagination.

The Ephialtes, or Night Mare, is called by the Common People Witch-riding.
This is in Fact an old Gothic or Scandinavian Superstition: Mara The Reader
will please to add an Observation to the Note i^ Page 116, "Boggle-boe."' Boh,
Mr Warton tells us, was one of the most fierce and formidable of the Gothic
Generals, and the So^^ of Odin; the mention of whose Name only was sufficient
to spread an immediate Panic among his Enemies. -- Few will question the
probability of an Opinion that has the Sanction of the very learned and
ingenious Person who has advanced this. -- It is an additional Instanc^ of the
inconstancy of Fame. -- The Terror of Warriors has dwindle^ down into a Name
contemptible with Men, and only retained so the Purpose of intimidating
Children: A Reflection as mortifyin^ to human Vanity as that of our Poet,
Shakespeare, whose Imagination traced the noble Dust of Alexander, till he found
it stoppin^ a Bunghole! See Hamlet.
* from whence our Nightmare is derived, was in the Runic Theology, a Spectre
of the Night, which seized Men in their Sleep, and suddenly deprived them of
Speech and Motion. See Warton's first Dissertat. Hist. Poet.

In Ray's Collection of Proverbs, I find the following relative to this
Superstition:

Go in God's Name, so ride no Witches. There is also a Scotch one:

Ye breed of the Witches, ye can do nae Good to your sell. Of CARLINGS.
AT Newcastle upon Tyne, and other Places in the North of England, gray Peace,
There were several religious Uses of Pulse, particularly Beans, among the
Romans. -- Hence Pliny says, in eadem peculiaris religio. -- Thus in Ovid's
Fasti. Book 5. l. 435, where he is describing some superstitious Rites for
appeasing the Dead: Terque manus puras fontana proluit unda;
Vertitur, et nigras accipit ore sabas.
Aversusque jacit: sed dum jacit, Haec ego mitto;
His, inquit, redimo, meque meosque fabis.
Thus also in Book 2. l. 575.
Tum cantata ligat cum fusco licia rhombo;
Et septem nigras versat in ore fabas.


Sacrificia apud Graecos pro mortuis erant, alia a tempore, ut (...), alia
nomen a re significata sumebant, ut (...). alia a sepulchris, ut (...); alia a
mortuis, ut (...). Pollux lib. 8. cap. ult. Cael. Rhod lib. 17. cap. 21.
Aeschin. contra Ctesiphont. Demosth adversus Macartatum. hujusmodi habet Papa.
Morelini Deprav. Rel. Orig. 153.


after having been steeped a Night in Water, are fried with Butter, given away,
and eaten at a Kind of Entertainment on the Sunday preceding Palm Sunday, which
was formerly called Care-sunday, as may be yet seen in some of our old
Almanacks. -- They are called Carlings, probably a Corruption of Carings, as we
call the Presents at our Fairs, Fairings. Marshal in his Observations on the
Saxon Gospels, Vol. I. p. 536, elucidates the old Name (Care) of this Sunday in
Lent: He tells us, The Friday, on which Christ was crucified, is called in
German, both Gute Freytag and Karr Freytag; -- that the Word Karr signifies a
Satisfaction for a Fine or Penalty; and that Care or Carr Sunday was not
unknown to the English in his Time, at least to such as lived among old People
in the Country Memini me legisse diem illam Veneris, in qua passus est
Christus, Germanice dici ut gute Freytag, ita Karr-Frytag, a voce Karr, quae
satisfactionem pro mulcta significat. -- Certe Care vel Carr Sunday non prorsus
inauditum est hodiernis Anglis, ruri saltem inter senes degentibus.
. -- Rites, peculiar it should seem to Good Friday, were used on this Day,
which was called Passion Sunday in the Church of Rome. Durand assigns many
superstitious Reasons for this, which confirm the Fact, but are too ridiculous
for transcribing.

Lloyd tells us, in his Dial of Days, that on the 12th of March Passion, or
Carling Sunday, might often happen on this Day. -- Easter always falls between
the 21st of March and the 26th of April. I know not why these Rites were
confined in the Calendar to the 12th of March. However that be, one cannot
doubt of their having belonged to what Durand calls Passion Sunday.
, they celebrated at Rome the Mysteries of Christ and his Passion, with much
Devotion and great Ceremony. -- In the old Romish Calendar so often cited, I
find it observed on this Day, that a Dole is made of soft Beans "The soft
Beans" are much to our purpose: Why soft, but for the Purpose of eating? Thus
our Peace on this Occasion are steeped in Water.
.

I have satisfied myself Quadragesimae Reformatio
Cum stationibus and toto Mysterio Passionis.
Fabae molles in Sportulam dantur.

that our Custom is derived from hence, and hope to evince it clearly to my
Readers. It was usual amongst the Romanists to give away Beans in the Doles at
Funerals: Fabis Romani saepius in sacrificiis funeralibus operati sunt, nec est
ea Consuetudo abolita alicubi inter Christianos, ubi in Elecmosinam pro mortuis
Fabae distribuuntur. Moresini Deprav. Rel. p. 56, verb. Fabis.

The Repast designed for the Dead, consisting commonly of Beans, etc. Kennett's
Roman Antiq. p. 361.

In the Lemuria, which was observed the 9th of May, every other Night for three
Times, to pacify the Ghosts of the Dead, the Romans threw Beans on the Fire of
the Altar, to drive them out of their Houses.


It was also a Rite in the Funeral Ceremonies of Heathen Rome. Why we have
substituted Peace I know not, unless it was because they are a Pulse somewhat
fitter to be eaten. They are given away in a Kind of a Dole at this Day: In the
Country, Men assemble at the Village Alehouse, Carlings are set before them,
and each spends his Carling Groat. Our popish Ancestors celebrated the Funeral
of our Lord on this Care Sunday, with many other Superstitions; this only has
traveled down to us. Durand tells us, that on Passion Sunday the Church began
her public Grief, remembering the Mystery of the Cross, the Vinegar, the Gall,
the Reed, the Spear, etc.

There is a great deal of Learning in Erasmus' Quin and apud Romanos inter
funesta habebantur fabae: quippe quas nec tangere, nec nominare Diali flamini
liceret, quod ad Mortuos pertinere putarentur. Nam et Lemuribus jaciebantur
larvis and Parentalibus adhibebantur sacrificiis and in flore carum literae
luctus apparere videntur ut testatur Festus Pompeius. Plinius existimat ob id a
Pythagora damnatam fabam, quod hebetet sensus and pariat Insomnia, vel quod
Animae Mortuorum sint in ea. Qua de causa et in Parentalibus assumitur. Unde et
Plutarchus testatur, legumina potissimum valere ad evocandos manes. Erasmi
Adag. in Prove. A fabis abstinete.
Adages concerning the religious Use of Beans: they were thought to belong to
the Dead: -- An Observation he gives us of Pliny concerning Pythagoras'
Interdiction of this Pulse is highly remarkable; -- it is, That Beans contain
the Souls of the Dead: For which Cause also they are used in the Parentalia.
Plutarch too, he tells us, held that Pulse was of the highest Efficacy for
invoking the Manes. -- Ridiculous and absurd as these Superstitions are, yet it
is certain that our Carlings deduce their Origin from hence. Every ancient
Superstition seems to have been adopted into papal Christianity.

The Vulgar here in the North give the following Names to Sundays in Lent, the
first of which is anonymous: Tid, Mid, Misera,
Carling, Palm, Paste Egg Day.


I suspect that the three first are Corruptions of some Part of the ancient
Latin Service In the Festa Anglo. Romana, London, 1678, we are told the first
Sunday in Lent is called Quadragesima or Invocavit; the 2d Remin ^ere, the 3d
Oculi, the 4th Laetare, the 5th Judica, and 6th Domm^ca Magna. -- Oculi, from
the Entrance of the 14th v. of 25th Psalm. Oculi mei semper ad Dominum, etc. --
Reminiscere, from the Entrance of 5th Verse of Psalm 25. -- Reminiscere
miserationum, etc. and so of the others.
on these Days, perhaps the beginnings of Psalms, etc. Te Deum, Mi Deus,
Miserere mei. -- See the Goose intentos, in the Notes on Chapter XVIII. the
Carling we have been describing; Palm Sunday is obvious; and for the last or
Easter Sunday, see Paste Eggs.

The Word Care In a Pamphlet published in Manchester, 1763, containing a View
of the Lancashire Dialect, etc. I find this Article in the Glossary, Carlings,
Pease boiled on Care Sunday are so called, i. e. the Sunday before Palm Sunday.
Joannes Boemus Aubanus tells us of a Custom used in Franconia in the Middle of
Lent, in which he mentions Peace, which were eaten at that Time. In medio
quadragesimae, quo quidem Tempore ad laetitiam nos Ecclesia adhortatur,
Iuventus in patria mea ex stramine imaginem contexit, quae mortem ipsam
(quemadmodum depingitur) imitetur; inde hasta suspensam in vicinos pagos
vociferans portat. Ab aliquibus perhumane suscipitur, et lacte, pisis
siccatisque pyris, (quibus tum vulgo vesci solemus) refecta, domum remittitur:
a caeteris, quia malae res (ut puta mortis) praenuncia sit, humanitatis nihil
percipit: sed armis et ignominia etiam adfecta, a sinibus repellitur. Which may
be thus englished: In the Middle of Lent the Youth in my Country make an Image
of Straw in the Form of Death, as it is usually depicted. They suspend it on a
Pole, and carry it with Acclamations into the neighboring Villages. -- Some
receive this Pageant kindly, and after a Refreshment of Milk, Peace and dried
Pears, (which we commonly eat at that Time) it is sent home again. Others
thinking it a Presage of something bad (Death for instance) forcibly drive it
away from their respective Districts.

The fourth Sunday in Lent, says Wheatly on the Common Prayer, is generally
called Midlent, though Bishop Sparrow and some others term it Dominica
Refectionis, the Sunday of Refreshment, the Reason perhaps is because the
Gospel for the Day treats of our Savior's feeding miraculously Five Thousand,
or else from the first Lesson in the Morning, which gives us the Story of
Joseph's entertaining his Brethren. -- He is of Opinion, that the Appointment
of these Scriptures upon this Day, might probably give the first Rise to a
Custom still retained in many Parts of England, and well known by the Name of
Midlenting, or Mothering.

Bailey supposes Mothering, a Custom still retained in many Places of England,
of visiting Parents on Mid-Lent Sunday, to have been so called from the Respect
paid in old Time to the Mother Church. It being the Custom for People in Popish
Times to visit their Mother Church on Mid-Lent Sunday, and to make their
Offerings at the high Altar.


is preserved in the subsequent Account of an obsolete Custom at Marriages in
this Kingdom; According to the Use of the Church of Sarum, when there was a
Marriage before Mass, the Parties kneeled together, and had a fine Linen Cloth
(called the Care-Cloth) laid over their Heads during the Time of Mass, till
they received the Benediction, and then were dismissed. Vide Blount in Verbo.

Dr. Chandler, in his Travels in Greece, tells us, that he was at a Funeral
Entertainment amongst the modern Greeks, where, with other singular Rites, Two
followed, carrying on their Heads each a great Dish of parboiled Wheat: These
were deposited over the Body.

I know not whether the following Passage be not to our Purpose: Skeleton, Poet
Laureat to Henry VIIIth, in his Colin Clout, inveighing against the Clergy, has
these Words, in his usual strange and rambling Style: Men call you therefore
Prophanes,
Ye pick no Shrympes, nor Pranes,
Salt-fish, Stock Fish, nor Herring,
It is not for your Wearing.
Nor in Holy Lenton Season,
Ye will neither Beans ne Peason;
But ye look to be let loose,
To a Pygge or to a Goose. etc.


PANCAKE TUESDAY.
THIS is also called in the North Fastens, or Fastern's Even, or Even, or
Shrove Tuesday; the succeeding Day being Ash Wednesday, the first of the Lenten
Fast. J. Boemus Aubanus gives us the following Description of the Manner of
spending the three Days before the Lent Fast commenced, commonly called the
Carnival, that is, the bidding Farewell to Flesh.

"Populari spontanea insania Germania tunc vivit. Comedit et bibit, seque ludo
jocoque omnimodo adeo dedit, quasi usui nunquam veniant, quasi cras moritura,
hodie prius omnium rerum satietatem capere velit. Novi aliquid spectaculi
quisque excogitat, quo mentes et oculos omnium delectet, admirationeque
detineat. Atque, ne pudor obstet, qui se ludicro illi committunt, facies larvis
obducunt, sexum et aetatem mentientes, viri mulierum vestimenta, muli^res
virorum induunt. Quidam Satyros, aut malos daemones potius representare
volentes, minio se, aut atramento tingunt, habituque nefando deturpant, alii
nudi discurrentes Lupercos agunt, a quibus Ego annuum istum delirandi morem ad
nos defluxisse existimo. p. 267.




At Newcastle upon Tyne, the great Bell of St. Nicholas' Church is tolled at
Twelve o'Clock at Noon on this Day; Shops are immediately shut up, Offices
closed, and all Kind of Business ceases; a Sort of little Carnival ensuing for
the remaining Part of the Day.

The preceding Monday is vulgarly called here Collop Monday; -- Eggs and
Collops compose a usual Dish at Dinner on it, as Pancakes do on this Day, from
which Customs they both derive their Names.

On Collop Monday in papal Times they must have taken their Leave of Flesh,
which was anciently preserved through the Winter, by salting, drying, and
hanging up: Slices of this Kind of Meat are at this Day called Collops Collop
(S. of doubtful Etymology) a small Slice of Meat, a Piece of any Animal. Ash.

Colab, Colob, Segmentum. unde Anglis Colabs and Eggs dicuntur Segmenta lardi
ovis instrata. (...) Suidae est Offula, buccea parvula. (...), decurto, minuo.
Adi quoque Etym. Voss. in Collabi. M. Casaubon. de vet. ling. Angl. p. 279.

Lye's Junii Etymolog. Collop, Minshew deflectit (...), incido, vel a Belg.
kole, carbo, and op, super, ut idem sit quod Fr. G. Carbonade, vel a (...),
Corium durius in Cervicibus et dorsis boum, aut Ovium, vel a (...), cibus, vel
a (...), quod Vossio in Et. LL. exp. Buccea. Offula. Skinner in V.

Dr. Kennett, in the Glossary to his Parochial Antiquities, tells us of an old
Latin Word colponer, Slices or cut Pieces, in Welsh a Gollwith.


in the North, whereas they are named Steaks when cut from fresh Meat, as
unsalted Flesh is usually styled here; a Kind of Food which our Ancestors seem
to have seldom tasted in the Depth of Winter.

A Kind of Pancake Feast, preceding Lent, Bishop Hall, in his Triumphs of Rome,
thus describes the jovial Carneval: Every Man cries Sciolto, letting himself
loose to the maddest of Merriments, marching wildly up and down in all Forms of
Disguises; each Man striving to outgo other in strange Prancks of humorous
Debauchedness, in which even those of the Holy Order are wont to be allowed
their Share: For howsoever it was by some sullen Authority forbidden to Clerks
and Votaries of any Kind to go masked and misguised in those seemingly abusive
Solemnities, yet more favorable Construction has offered to make them
believe, that it was chiefly for their Sakes, for the Refreshment of their
sadder and more restained Spirits, that this free and lawless Festivity was
taken up. P. 19.
was used in the Greek Church, from whence we have probably borrowed it, with
Pasche Eggs, and other suchlike Ceremonies: The Russes, as Hakluyt tells us,
begin their Lent always eight Weeks before Easter; the first Week they eat
Eggs, Milk, Cheese, and Butter, and make great Cheer with Pancakes, and such
other Things.

The Custom of frying Pancakes, (in turning of which in the Pan, there is
usually a good deal of Pleasantry in the Kitchen) is still retained in many
Families in the North, but seems, if the present fashionable Contempt of old
Customs continues, not likely to last another Century.

The Apprentices, whose particular Holiday this Day is now called, and who are
on several Accounts so much interested in the Observation of it, ought, with
that watchful Jealousy of their ancient Rights and Liberties, (typified here by
Pudding and Play,) which becomes young Englishmen, to guard against every
Infringement of its Ceremonies, and transmit them entire and unadulterated to
Posterity!

In the Oxford Almanacks, the Saturday preceding this Day is called Fest.
Ovorum, the Egg Feast.

Their Egg Saturday corresponds with our Collop Monday.

Of the RING FINGER.
THE particular Regard to this Finger is of high Antiquity. It has been
honored with the Golden Annulus Sponsae do no mittebatur a Viro qui pronubus
dictus. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. Et mediante annulo contrahitur
Matrimonium papanorum. Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 12.

Dextra data, acceptaque invicem Persae et Assyrii foedus matrimonii ineunt.
Alex ab Alex. lib 2. cap. 5. Papatus retinet.

Ibid. p. 50.
Token and Pledge of Matrimony preferably to any other Finger, not, as Levinus
Lemnius in his Occult Miracles of Nature tells us, because there is a Nerve,
Mr. Wheatly tells us, that the Rubric of the Salisbury Manual has these Words:
It is because from thence there proceeds a particular Vein to the Heart. This
indeed, he adds, is now contradicted by Experience; but several eminent
Authors, as well Gentiles as Christians, as well Physicians as Divines, were
formerly of this Opinion, and therefore they thought this Finger the properest
to bear this Pledge of Love, that from thence it might be conveyed as it were
to the Heart. Illust. Comm. Prayer. p. 437.
as some have thought, but because a small Artery runs from the Heart to this
Finger, the Motion of which in parturient Women, etc. may be perceived by the
Touch of the Finger Index.

This Opinion has been exploded by later Physicians, but it was from hence that
Antiquity judged it worthy, and selected it to be adorned with the Circlet of
Gold. They called it also the Medical Finger, and were so superstitious as to
mix up their Medicines and Potions with it.

Some of the common Ceremonies at Marriages seem naturally to fall under this
Class of popular Antiquities.

I have received, from those who have been present at them, the following
Account of the Customs used at vulgar Northern Weddings about Half a Century
ago The Author of the Convivial Antiquities thus describes the Rites at
Marriages in his Country and Time: Antequam eatur in Templum jentaculum Sponsae
et invitatis apponitur, serta atque Corollae distribuuntur. Postea certo ordine
viri primum cum Sponso, deinde Puellae cum Sponsa in Templum procedunt. Peracta
re divina Sponsa ad Sponsi domum deducitur, indeque panis projicitur, qui a
pueris certatim rapitur. Prandium sequitur Coena, coenam comessatio, quas
Epulas omnes tripudia atque Saltationes comitantur. Postremo Sponsa abrepta ex
Saltatione subito, atque Sponsus in thalamum deducuntur. Fol. 68.
.

The young Women in the Neighborhood, with Bride Favors (Knots See the
Article True-love-knot in the Appendix.
of Ribbands) at their Breasts, and Nosegays in their Hands, attended the Bride
on her Wedding Day in the Morning. -- Fore-Riders announced with shouts the
Arrival of the Bridegroom: After a Kind of Breakfast, at which the Bride-Cakes
There was a Ceremony used at the Solemnization of a Marriage, called
Confarreation, in Token of a most firm Conjunction between the Man and Wife,
with a Cake of Wheat or Barley: This Ceremony, Blount tells us, is still
ratained in Part with us, by that which we call the Bride-cake, used at
Weddings. Confarreation and the Ring were used anciently as binding Ceremonies,
in making Agreements, Grants, etc. as appears from the subsequent Extract from
an old Grant, cited in Du Cange's Glossary. Verb. Confarreatio:

Miciacum concedimus et quidquid est fisci nostri intra Fluminum alveos et per
sanctam Confarreationem et annulum inexceptionaliter tradimus.

Moresin mentions the Bride-cake thus: Sumanalia, Panis erat ad formam rotae
factus: hoc utuntur Papani in nuptiis, etc. Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 165. I will
give one Authority more:

Quint. Curtius tells us, lib. 1. de gest. Alex. Et Rex. medio cupiditatis
ardore jussit afferri patrio more panem (hoc erat apud Macedones sanctissimum
cocuntium pignus) quem divisum gladio uterque libabat.

In the North, slices of the Bride-Cake are put through the Wedding Ring, they
are afterward laid under Pillows at Night to cause young Persons to dream of
their Lovers.


were set on and the Barrels broached, they walked out toward the Church. --
The Bride was led by two young Men; the Bridegroom by two young Women: Pipers
preceded them, while the Crowd tossed up their Hats, shouted and clapped their
Hands. An indecent Custom prevailed after the Ceremony, and that too before the
Altar: -- Young Men strove who could first unloose I have sometimes thought
this a Fragment of the ancient Grecian and Roman Ceremony, the loosening the
Virgin Zone or Girdle, a Custom that wants no Explanation.
, or rather pluck off the Bride's Garters: Ribbands supplied their Place on
this Occasion; whosoever was so fortunate as to tear them thus off from her
Legs, bore them about the Church in Triumph.

It is still usual for the young Men present to salute the Bride immediately
after the performing of the Marriage Service.

Four, with their Horses, were waiting without; they saluted the Bride at the
Church Gate, and immediately mounting, contended who should first carry home
the good News, and win what they called the Kail, i. e. a smoking Prize of
Spice-Broth, which stood ready prepared to reward the Victor in this singular
Kind of Race.

Dinner succeeded; to that Dancing and Supper; after which a Posset Skinner
derives this Word from the French Poser, residere, to settle; because when the
Milk breaks, the cheesy Parts, being heavier, subside. Nobis proprie designat
Lac calidum infuso vino, cerevisia, etc. coagulatum. Lye's Junii Etymolog. in
Verbo.
was made, of which the Bride and Bridegroom were always to taste first. --
The Men departed the Room till the Bride was undressed by her Maids, and put to
Bed; the Bridegroom in his Turn was undressed by his Men, and the Ceremony
concluded with the well-known Rite of throwing the Stocking I find the
following singular Custom in the Convivial Antiq. Fol. 229: Ceremonia hodie in
nobilium nuptiis apud Germanos usitata, qua Sponsa, postquam in thalamum ad
lectum genialem est deducta, calceum detractum in circumstantium turbam
projicit, quem qui excipit (in quo certatim omnes laborant) is id ceu futuri
Matrimonii felix faustumque omen interpretatur. See Observations on Mr.
Bourne's Chapt. on Omens. -- Throwing an old Shoe. Page, 94.

Mr. Pennant tells us, that among the Highlanders during the Marriage Ceremony,
great Care is taken that Dogs do not pass between them, and particular
Attention is paid to the leaving the Bride-groom's left Shoe, without Buckle or
Latchet, to prevent Witches An old Opinion, Gesner says, that the Witches made
Use of Toads as a Charm, "ut vim cocundi, ni fallor, in viris tollerent."
Gesner. de quad. Ori. p. 72.
from depriving him on the nuptial Night of the Power of loosening the Virgin
Zone. Tour, p. 160.


.

At present a Party always attend here at the Church Gates, after a Wedding, to
demand of the Bridegroom Money for a Football: This claim admits of no Refusal
-- Coals, in his Dictionary, mentions the Ball Money, which he says was given
by a new Bride to her old Playfellows.

Our Rustics retain to this Day many superstitious Notions concerning the Times
of the Year, when it is accounted lucky or otherwise to perform this Ceremony.
None are ever married on Childermass-Day; Tempus quoque nuptiarum celebrandarum
certum a Veteribus definitum et constitutum esse invenio. Concilii Ilerdensis
33. q. 4. Et in decreto Juonis lib. 6. Non oportet a Septuagesima usque in
Octavam Paschae, et tribus hebdomadibus ante Festivitatem S. Joannis Baptistae,
et ab Adventu Domini usque post Epiphaniam nuptias celebrare. Quod si factum
fuerit, separentur. Conviv. Antiq. Fol. 72.
for whatever Cause, this is a black Day in the Calendar Sic apud Romanos olim
Mense Maio nubere inauspicatum habebatur, unde Ovid. in Fastis: Nec Viduae
taedis eadem, nec virginis apta
Tempora: quae nupsit, non diuturna fuit.
Hac quoque de causa, si te proverbia tangunt,
Mense malas Maio nubere Vulgus ait.
Ibid.

There was a remarkable Kind of Marriage Contract amongst the Danes, called
Hand-Festing. See Ray's Collect of local Words, Glossarium Northanhymbricum.

The Mercheta Mulierum has been discredited by an eminent Antiquary. It was
said, that Eugenius the 3d King of Scotland did wickedly ordain, that the Lord
or Master should have the first Night's Lodging with every Woman married to his
Tenant, or Bondman; which Ordinance was afterward abrogated by King Malcome
the 3d, who ordained that the Bridegroom should have the sole Use of his own
Wife, and therefore should pay to the Lord, a Piece of Money called Marca.
Hect. Boel. l. 3. ca. 12. Spotsw. Hist. Fol. 29.

They must have been (in the ancient Sense of the Word) Villains indeed, who
could submit to this singular Species of Despotism!


of impatient Lovers.

The subsequent Proverb from Ray marks another ancient Conceit on this Head:

Who marries between the Sickle and the Scythe will never thrive. The following
must not be omitted, though I have given it before in the Chapter that relates
to Burial Rites:

Happy is the Bride the Sun shines on, and the Corpse the Rain rains on. I
shall add a Third, which no doubt has been often quoted for the purpose of
encouraging a dissident or timorous Mistress:

As your Wedding Ring wears, your Cares will wear away. There was a Custom in
the Highlands and North of Scotland, where new-married Persons, who had no
great Stock, or others low in their Fortune, brought Carts and Horses with them
to the Houses of their Relations and Friends, and received from them Corn,
Meal, Wool, or what else they could get. See Glossary to Douglas' Virgil. verb.
Thig.

Of the Saying, "I Will pledge you."
Quo tibi potarum plus est in ventre Salutum,
Hoc minus epotis, hisce Salutis habes.
Una Salus sanis, nullam potare Salutem.
Non est in pota vera Salute Salus.
Owen. Epigram. P. 1. lib. 2. Ep. 42.
MR. Blount derives this Word from the French Pleige, a Surety, or Gage. -- To
pledge one drinking is generally thought to have had its Origin thus: When the
Danes bore sway in this Land, if a Native drank, they would sometimes stab him
with a Dagger or Knife; hereupon People would not drink in Company, There was
an ancient Custom called a Bid-Ale or Bidder-Ale, from the Saxon Bidden to pray
or supplicate, when any honest Man decayed in his Estate, was set up again by
the liberal Benevolence and Contributions of Friends at a Feast, to which those
Friends were bid or invited. It was most used in the West of England, and in
some Counties called a Help Ale. Such Instances of Benevolence are retained in
the North. -- At the Christening Entertainments of many of the poor People (who
are unfortunate enough to provide more Mouths than they find Meat for) great
Collections are made oftentimes by the Guests, and such as will far more than
defray the Expenses of the Feast of which they have been partaking.
unless some one present would be their Pledge or Surety, that they should
receive no Hurt, whilst they were in their Draught.

Others affirm the true sense of the Word to be this: That if the Person drank
unto, was not disposed to drink himself, he would put another for a Pledge to
do it for him, otherwise the Party who began, would take it ill.

Mr. Strutt confirms the former Opinion in the following Words: The old Manner
of Pledging each other when they drank Such great Drinkers, says he also, were
the Danes, who were in England in the Time of Edgar, and so much did their bad
Examples prevail with the English, that he, by the Advice of Dunstan,
Archbishop of Canterbury, put down many Alehouses, suffering only one to be
in a Village, or small Town: And he also further ordained, that Pins or Nails
should be fastened into the drinking Cups and Horns at stated distances, and
whosoever should drink beyond those Marks at one Draught, should be obnoxious
to a severe Punishment. This was to prevent the pernicious Custom of Drinking.

Ibid. Bumpers are of great Antiquity. -- Thus Paulus Warnefridus is cited in
Du Cange's Glossary, telling us, in lib. 5. de gestis Langobard. Cap. 2. Cumque
ii qui diversi generis potiones ei a Rege deferebant, de verbo Regis eum
rogarent, ut totam fialam biberent, ille in honorem Regis se totam bibere
promittens, parum aquae libabat de argenteo Calice. Vide Martial. lib. 1. Ep.
72. lib. 8. 51, etc.

That it is good to be drunk once a Month, says the Author of the Vulgar
Errors, is a common Flattery of Sensuality, supporting itself upon Physic, and
the healthful Effects of Inebriation. -- It is a striking Instance of the doing
ill, as we say, that good may come of it. -- It may happen that Inebriation, by
causing Vomiting, may cleanse the Stomach, etc. but it seems a very dangerous
Kind of Dose. and of which the "repetatur hausius," too quickly repeated, will
evince, that Men may pervert that, which Nature intended for a Cordial, into
the most baneful of all Poisons. It has been vulgarly called, "giving a Fillip
to Nature."

Dr. Brown is of Opinion, that the human Faces described in Alehouse Signs,
in Coats of Arms, etc. for the Sun and Moon, are Relics of Paganism, and that
these Visages originally implied Apollo and Diana.

The Chequers, at this Time a common Sign of a Public-House, was originally
intended for a Kind of Draught-Board, called Tables, and showed that there that
Game might be played. From their Color, which was red, and the Similarity to a
Lattice, it was corruptly called the Red Lettuce, which Word is frequently used
by ancient Writers to signify an Alehouse. Vide Antiq. Repertor. Vol. I. p. 50.


was thus: The Person who was going to drink, asked any one of the Company that
sat next him, whether he would pledge him, on which he answering that he would,
held up his Knife or Sword, to guard him whilst he drank (for while a Man is
drinking he necessarily is in an unguarded Posture, exposed to the treacherous
Stroke of some hidden or secret Enemy).

This Custom, as it is said, first took rise from the Death of young King
Edward, (called the Martyr) Son to Edgar, who was by the Contrivance of
Elfrida, his Stepmother, traitorously stabbed in the Back as he was drinking.

Mr. Strutt's Authority here is William of Malmsbury, and he observes from the
Delineation he gives, (and it must be observed that his Plates, being Copies
from ancient illuminated Manuscripts, are of unquestionable Authority) that it
seems perfectly well to agree with the reported Custom; the middle Figure is
addressing himself to his Companion, who (seems to) tell him that he pledges
him, holding up his Knife in Token of his readiness to assist and protect him.
Vol 1st. p. 49. of Manners and Customs. Anglo. Saxon Era.

The ancient Greeks and Romans used at their Meals to make Libations, pour out
and even drink Wine in Honor of the Gods. -- The classical Writings abound
with Proofs of this.

The Grecian Poets and Historians, as well as the Roman Writers, have
transmitted to us Accounts also of the grateful Custom of drinking to the
Health of our Benefactors and of our Acquaintance.

-- Pro te, fortissime, vota
Publica suscipimus: Bacchi tibi sumimus haustus.
The Men of Gallantry among the Romans used to take off as many Glasses to
their Mistresses, as there were Letters in the Name of each, according to
Martial: How exceedingly similar to our modern Custom of saying to each of the
Company in turn, "give us a Lady to toast," is the following:

Da puere ab summo, age tu interibi ab infimo da Suavium.

Plauti Asinaria. Our Word Tossed, or Toast, signifying to name, or begin a new
Health, concerning the Etymology of which all our Dictionary Writers are
silent, is a Cant Word. I find it in the canting Vocabulary. Who tosts now? Who
christens the Health? An old Tossed, a pert, pleasant, old Fellow. -- Toss-Pot,
quaere from hence?

I find the subsequent Dissuasive from Drunkenness, a Vice to which it must be
confessed the drinking of Healths does but too naturally tend, in Chapter Johnson's
Wife's Relief.

-- Oh when we swallow down
Intoxicating Wine, we drink Damnation;
Naked we stand the Sport of mocking Fiends,
Who grin to see our noble Nature vanquished;
Our Passions then like swelling Seas burst in,
The Monarch Reason's governed by our Blood,
The noisy Populace declare for Liberty,
While Anarchy and riotous Confusion
Usurp the Sov'reign's Throne, claim his Prerogative,
Till gentle sleep exhales the boiling Surfeit.



Six Cups to Noevia's Health go quickly round,

And be with seven the fair Tustina's crowned.

Hence no doubt our Custom of toasting or drinking Healths, a Ceremony which
Prynne in his "Healthes; Sickness" inveighs against with all the Madness of
enthusiastic Fury.

This extraordinary Man, who though he drank no Healths, yet appears to have
been intoxicated with the Fumes of a most fanatical Spirit, and whom all
Anticyra could not, it should seem, have reduced to a State of mental Sobriety,
concludes his Address to the Christian Reader thus: The unfeigned Well-wisher of
thy Spiritual and Corporal, though the oppugner of thy pocular and Pot-emptying
Health. William Prynne.

Of ALLHALLOW EVEN: Vulgo Halle Even, as also Nut-crack Night.
Da nuces pueris, --
Catullus.
IN the ancient Calendar of the Church of Rome so often cited, I find the
following Observation on the 1st of November: "Festum Stultorum veterum huc
translatum est." Perhaps it it has been afterward removed to the First of
April.


"The Feast of old Fools is removed to this Day."

Hallow Even is the Vigil of All Saints' Day.

It is customary on this Night with young People in the North to dive for
Apples, catch at them when stuck on at one End of a Kind of hanging Beam, at
the other Extremity of which is fixed a lighted Candle, and that with their
Mouths only, having their Hands tied behind their Backs; with many other
Fooleries.

Nuts In the Marriage Ceremonies amongst the ancient Romans, the Bridegroom
threw Nuts about the Room for the Boys to scramble: The Epithalamiums in the
Classics prove this. They were supposed to do this in Token of leaving childish
Diversions. "Quanquam Plinius, lib. 15. cap. 22. causas alias adfert, quam ob
rem Nuces in nuptialibus ceremoniis consueverint antiquitus adhiberi; sed
praestat ipsius reserre Verba: Nuces, inquit, juglandes, quanquam et ipsae
nuptialium Fescenninorum comites, multum pineis minores universitate, eaedemque
portione ampliores nucleo. Nec non et honor his Naturae peculiaris, gemino
protectis operimento, pulvinati primum calycis, mox lignei putaminis. Quae
causa eas nuptiis fecit religiosas, tot modis foetu munito: quod est
verisimilius, etc.

Vide Erasmus on the Proverb: "Nuces relinquere." The Roman Boys had some Sport
or other with Nuts, to which Horace refers in these Words:

-- Te talos Aule nucesque. Nuts have not been excluded from the Catalogne of
Superstitions under papal Rome. Thus on the 10th of August in the Romish
ancient Calendar, I find it observed that some religious Use was made of them,
and they were in great Estimation.

Nuces in pretio et religiosae.
and Apples chiefly compose the Entertainment, and from the Custom of flinging
the former into the Fire, it has doubtless had its vulgar Name of
Nutcrack-Night. The catching at the Apple and Candle at least puts one in mind
of the ancient English Game of the Quintain, which is now almost forgotten, and
of which a Description may be found in Stow's Survey of London.

Mr. Pennant tells us in his Tour in Scotland, that the young Women there
determine the Figure and Size of their Husbands by drawing Cabbages blindfold
on Allhallow Even, and like the English fling Nuts into the Fire.

This last Custom is beautifully described by Gay in his Spell: Two hazel Nuts
I threw into the Flame,
And to each Nut I gave a Sweetheart's Name:
This with the loudest Bounce me sore amazed,
That in a Flame of brightest Color blazed Mr. Gay describes some other rustic
Methods of Divination on this Head: Thus with Peascods: As Peascods once I
plucked, I chanced to see
One that was closely filled with three Time three;
Which when I cropped, I safely home conveyed,
And over the Door the Spell in secret laid;
The latch moved up, when who should first come in,
But in his proper Person, Lubberkin.
Thus also with the Insect called Lady Fly:
This Lady Fly I take from off the Grass,
Whose spotted Back might Scarlet red surpass.
Fly, Lady-Bird, North, South, or East or West,
Fly where the Man is found that I love best.
Thus also with Apple-parings:
I pare this Pippin round and round again,
My Shepherds Name to flourish on the Plain,
I fling the unbroken Paring over my Head,
Upon the Grass a perfect L is read.


They made Trial also of the Fidelity of their Swains by sticking an Apple
Kernel on each Cheek; that which fell first indicated, that the Love of him
whose Name it bore, was unsound, Snails, set to crawl on the Hearth, were
thought too to mark in the Ashes the Initial of the Lover's Name.


;
As blazed the Nut so may thy Passion grow, etc.


The Rev. Mr. Shaw in his History of the Province of Moray, seems to consider
the Festivity of this Night as a Kind of Harvest Home Rejoicing: A Solemnity
was kept, says he, on the Eve of the first of November as a Thanksgiving for
the safe Ingathering of the Produce of the Fields. This I am told, but have not
seen it, is observed in Buchan, and other Countries, by having Hallow-Eve-Fires
kindled on some rising Ground.

He tells us also in that little Fore-taste of his Work, with which he favored
the Public in an Appendix to Mr. Pennant's Tour, that on Hallow-Even, they have
several superstitious Customs. I wish he had given us particular Descriptions
of them, for general Accounts are exceedingly unsatisfactory. -- Curiosity is
indeed tantalized, not relieved or gratified by them.

Of the Meaning of the OLD SAW;
"Five Score of Men, Money and Pins,
"Six Score of all other Things."
IN this great Northern Emporium of Commerce, where the Names of Merchant and
Gentleman are synonymous Terms, and which owes its present Grandeur and
Opulence to the Industry of Men of that very respectable Profession in ancient
Times; some of whom, from the smallest Beginnings Thus Mr. Bourne in his
History of Newcastle:
"At the West-gate came Thornton in,
"With a Hap, and a Halfpenny, and a Lamb-Skin.
This old saying is very expressive of the Poverty of this first Founder of a
very great Name in the North. I cite it as an Eulogium on honest Industry.

Merchants often times contribute to the Safety of a State, they do at all
times to its Happiness. -- Great Britain perhaps owes every Thing to Commerce.
-- Our wise Ancestors, sensible of this, made provision for encouraging the
Industry of the Merchants, by advancing them to Rank and Dignity in the State.
-- Thus, in a very old Saxon Law, they take Place of the Scholar:

gif Massere getheaH that He ferde thrithe ofer pid Sae be His agenum craft,
He paes thonne siththan Degne rigtespeorthe; And gif leorner getheaH thurH lare
that He Had Hefde and thenode Xpe, He paes thonne siththan maethe and numde
stha micel, etc. that is, If a Merchant so thrived that he passed thrice over
the wide Sea of his own Craft, he was thenceforth equal in Rank with a Than^.
And if a Scholar so thrived through learning, that he had Degree, and served
Christ, he was thenceforth of Dignity and Peace so much worthy as thereto
belonged, etc. -- These Laws are of remove Antiquity, and do great Honor to
the good Sense of our Forefathers.


, advanced themselves, as well as the Place of their Residence, to an high
Degree of Honor and Wealth, the subsequent Observations on what I shall call a
Mercantile Antiquity, will not, I slatter myself, be altogether uninteresting.

Enquiring frequently both of Books and Men, why the Hundred should in some
Articles imply Five, in others Six Score, I found at last, in the learned Dr.
Hicke's Thesaurus, an Answer to a Question which I had often asked before in
vain. -- I gather from him that the Norwegians and Islandic People used a
Method of numbering peculiar to themselves Notetur etiam Norvegis and Islandis
peculiarem numerandi rationem in usu esse per additionem Vocum Tolfroedr,
Tolfroed, vel Tolfraet, quae december significare faciunt duodecim; Centum, Centum
et Viginti. -- Mill, Mill and 200, etc.

Causa istius Computationis haec est, quod apud istas Gentes duplex est decas,
nempe minor caeteris Nationibus communis december continens Unitates; et major
continens 12. i. e. Tolf Unitates.

Inde addita voce Tolfraedr, vel Tolfraed, Centuria non decies december, sed
decies duodecim, i. e. 120 continet. -- Haec Tolfraedica, sive duodena
computandi ratio per majores decades, quae duodecim unitates continent, apud
nos etiamnum usurpatur in computandis certis rebus per duodenum numerum, quem
Dozen; Succice dusin; Gallice douzain, vocamus; quinimo in numeris, ponderibus
et mensuris multarum rerum, ut ex Mercatoribus et Ve^eculariis accepi, centuria
apud Nos etiamnum semper praesumitur significare majorem, sive Tolfraedicam
illam centuriam, quae ex decies 12 conflatur, scilicet 120.

Sic Arngrim Jonas in Crymogaea, sive rerum Island. lib. 1. cap. 8. hundrad
centum sonat, sed quadam co^suetudine ^lus continet nempe 120. Inde etiamnum
apud nos ^ctus istud de Centenario numero; Five Score of Men, Money and Pins:
Six Score of all other Things. P. 43. Gram. Isl.


, by the Addition of the Words Tolfraedr, Tolfraed, or Tolfraet, (whence our
Twelve) which made Ten signify Twelve; a Hundred, a Hundred and Twenty; a
Thousand, a Thousand Two Hundred, etc.

Of which Method of Computation the following is the Cause: The Nations
abovenamed had two Decads or Tens; a less which they used in common with other
Nations, consisting of Ten Units, and a greater containing Twelve (Tolf) Units.

Hence, by the Addition of the Word Tolfraedr or Tolfroed, the Hundred
contained not Ten Times Ten, but Ten Times Twelve, that is, a Hundred and
Twenty.

The Doctor observes that this Tolfraedic (for I am obliged to make a new Word
in translating him) Mode of Computation by the greater Decads, or Tens, which
contain Twelve Units, is still retained amongst us in reckoning certain Things
by the number Twelve, which the Swedes call Dusin, the French Douzain, and we
Dozen.

"And I am informed, he says, by Merchants, etc. that in the Number, Weight and
Measure of many Things, the Hundred among us, still consists of that greater
Tolfraedic Hundred, which is composed of Ten Times Twelve."

Hence then without Doubt is derived to us the present Mode of reckoning many
Things by Six Score to the Hundred.

Of the TRUE-LOVE KNOT.
A Knot, among the ancient Northern Nations, seems to have been the Symbol of
Love, Faith and Friendship, pointing out the indissoluble Tie of Affection and
Duty. -- Thus the ancient Runic Inscriptions are in the Form of a Knot. See
Hicke's Thesaurus In his autem Monumentis, ut et in id genus fere omnibus,
Inscriptionum Runae in nodis sive Gyris nodorum insculptae leguntur, propterea
quod apud Veteres Septentrionales gentes Nodus Amoris, fidei, Amicitiae
symbolum fuisse videtur, ut quod insolubilem pietatis et Affectus Nexum
significavit, Hinc apud Boreales, Anglos, Scotosque, qui Danorum Veterum tum
Sermonem, tum mores magna ex part adhuc retinent, Nodus in gyros curiose
ductus, fidei and promissionis, quam Amasius et Amasia dare solent invicem,
symbolum servatur, quodque ideo vocant A True-Love Knot -- a veteri Danico
Trulofa, fidem do; -- Hinc etiam apud Anglos Scotosque consuetudo reportandi
capitalia Donata curiose in gyros, nodosque torta a solennibus nuptiis plane
quasi symbola insolubilis fidei et Affectus, quae Sponsum inter et Sponsam esse
debent. Hickesii Thesaur. Gram. Island. p. 4.
.

Hence among the Northern English and Scots, who still retain in a great
Measure the Language and Manners of the ancient Danes, that curious Kind of
Knot, a mutual Present between the Lover and his Mistress, which, being
considered as the Emblem of plighted Fidelity, is therefore called a True-Love
Knot. -- The Epithet is not derived, as one would naturally suppose it to be,
from the Words True and Love, but from the Danish Verb Trulofa Thus also in the
Islandic Gospels -- In Matthew, Chap. 1st, is the following Passage which
confirms beyond the Possibility of a Doubt the Sense here given, til einrar
Meyar er Trulofad var einum Manne, etc. i. e. To a Virgin espoused, that is,
who was promised, or had engaged herself to a Man, etc.
, fidem do, I plight my Faith.

It is undoubtedly from hence, that the Bride-Favours, or the Top-Knots at
Marriages, which were considered as Emblems of the Ties of Duty and Affection,
between the Bride and her Spouse, have been derived.

Mr Gay, in his Pastoral entitled the Spell, thus beautifully describes the
rustic Manner of knitting this True-Love Knot: As Lubberkin once slept beneath
a Tree,
I twitched his dangling Garter from his Knee;
He wist not when the hempen String I drew;
Now mine I quickly doff of Inkle Blue:
Together fast I tie the Garters twain,
And while I knit the Knot, repeat this Strain,
Three Times a True-Love's Knot I tie secure,
Firm be the Knot, firm may his Love endure.


Of the Custom of BLESSING PERSONS when they SNEEZE.
THE very learned Author of the Vulgar Errors, has left us a great Deal on this
Subject. -- It is generally believed that the Custom of Saluting or Blessing
upon that Motion, derives its Origin from a Disease, wherein such as sneezed
died. -- Carolus Sigonius, in his History of Italy, mentions a Pestilence in
the Time of Gregory the Great, that proved mortal to such as sneezed.

The Custom has an elder Era: Apulcius mentions it 300 Years before. -- Pliny
It is said, that Tiberius the Emperor, otherwise a very four Man, would perform
this Rite most punctually to others, and expect the same from others to himself.
also in the Problem, "Cur sternutantes salutantur." Petronius Arbiter
Petronius Arbiter, who lived before them both, has these Words: Gyton
collectione spiritus plenus, ter continuo ita sternutavit ut grabatum
concuteret, ad quem motum Eumolpus conversus, Salvere Gytona jubet.
too describes it. -- Caelius Rhodiginus has an Example of it among the Greeks,
in the Time of Cyrus the Younger When consulting about their retreat, it
chanced that one of them sneezed, at the Noise whereof the Rest of the Soldiers
called upon Jupiter Soler.
. In the Greek Anthology Non potis est Proclus digitis emungere Nasum,
Namque est pro Nasi mole pusilla manus:
Non vucat ille Jovem sternutans, quippe nec audit
Sternutamentum, tam procul aure sonat.

it is alluded to in an Epigram -- It is received at this Day in the remotest
Parts of Africa So we read in Codignus, that upon a Sneeze of the Emperor of
Monomotapha, there passed Acclamations successively through the City. -- And as
remarkable an Example there is of the same Custom in the remotest Parts of the
East, in the Travels of Pinto.
.

The History of it will run much higher, if we take in the Rabbinical Account
That sneezing was a mortal Sign even from the first Man; until it was taken off
by the special Supplication of Jacob. From whence as a thankful
Acknowledgement, this Salutation first began, and was after continued by the
Expression of Tobim Chaiim, or vita bona, by standers by, upon all Occasions of
sneezing. Buxtorf Lex. Chald.
.

Dr. Brown himself supposes that the Ground of this ancient Custom was the
Opinion the Ancients held of Sternutation, which they generally conceived to be
a good Sign or a bad, and so upon this Motion accordingly used a Salve or
(...), as a Gratulation for the one, and a Deprecation from the other.

He then gives their Physical Sneezing being properly a Motion of the Brain
suddenly expelling through the Nostrils what is offensive to it, it cannot but
afford some Evidence of its Vigor, and therefore says Aristotle, they that
hear it "(...)." honor it as something sacred, and a Sign of Sanity in the
diviner Part, and this he illustrates from the Practice of Physicians, who in
Persons near Death use Sternutatories, (Medicines to provoke sneezing) when if
the Faculty arise, and Sternutation ensues, they conceive Hopes of Life and
with Gratulation receive the Signs of Safety.
Notions of it. -- Hippocrates says, that sneezing cures the Hiccup, is
profitable to parturient Women, in Lethargies, Apoplexies, Catalepsies, and
Coma's: It is bad and pernicious in Diseases of the Chest, in the Beginning of
Catarrhs, in new and tender Conceptions, for then it endangers Abortion.

To these succeed their superstitious and augurial ones. St. Austin tells us,
that the Ancients were wont to go to Bed again if they sneezed while they put
on their Shoe. Aristotle has a Problem, "why sneezing from Noon to Midnight was
good, but from Night to Noon unlucky." Eustathius upon Homer observes, that
sneezing to the Left was unlucky, but prosperous to the Right. See Plutarch in
the Life of Themistocles When Themistocles sacrificed in his Galley before the
Battle of Xerxes, and one of the Assistants upon the right Hand sneezed;
Euphrantides, the Southsayer, presaged the Victory of the Greeks, and the
Overthrow of the Persians.
.

I shall give the whole of his Conclusion: "Thus we may perceive the Custom to
be more ancient than is commonly thought; -- and these Opinions hereof in all
Ages, not any one Disease to have been the Occasion of this salute and
Deprecation: arising at first from this vehement and affrighting Motion of the
Brain, from whence some finding dependant Effects to ensue: Others ascribing
hereto as a Cause, what perhaps but casually or inconnexedly succeeded; they
might proceed into forms of Speeches, felicitating the good and deprecating the
evil to follow."

Of ROYAL-OAK DAY.
ON the 29th of May May the 29th, says the Author of the Festa Anglo-Romana,
London, 1678, is celebrated upon a double Account, first in Commemoration of
the Birth of our Sovereign King Charles the Second, the princely Son of his
Royal Father Charles the First of happy Memory, and Mary the Daughter of Henry
the 4th King of France, who was born the 29th of May, Anno. 1630. And also by
Act of Parliament 12 Car. 2, by the passionate Desires of the People, in Memory
of his most happy Restoration to his Crown and Dignity, after 12 Years forced
Exile from his undoubted Right, the Crown of England, by barbarous Rebels and
Regicides; and on the 8th of this Month his Majesty was with universal Joy and
great Acclamations proclaimed in London and Westminster, and after throughout
all his Dominions; the 16th he came to the Hague; the 23d with his two Brothers
he embarked for England; and on the 25th he happily landed at Dover, being
received by General Monk, and some of the Army: From whence he was, by several
voluntary Troops of the Nobility and Gentry, waited upon to Canterbury; and on
the 29th, 1660, he made his magnificent Entrance into that Emporium of Europe,
his stately and rich Metropolis, the renowned City of London. On this very Day
also, Anno. 1662, the King came to Hampton Court with his Queen Catherine after
his Marriage at Portsmouth: This as it is his Birthday is one of his
Collar-Days without Offering. P. 66.
, the Anniversary of the Restoration of Charles the Second, it is still
customary in the North for the common People to wear in their hats the Leaves
of the Oak, which are sometimes covered on the Occasion with Leaf-Gold.

This is done, as every Body knows, in Commemoration of the mavelous Escape
of that Monarch from his Pursuers, who passed under the very Oak Tree, in which
he had secreted himself. This happened after the Battle of Worcester. Vide
Boscobello.

The Boys here had formerly a taunting Rhyme on the Occasion: Royal Oak
The Whigs to provoke.


There is a Retort courteous by others, who contemptuously wore Plane-Tree
Leaves, of the same homely Sort of Stuff: Plane-tree Leaves
Vhe Church Folk are Thieves.


Puerile and low as these Sarcasms may appear, yet they breathe strongly that
Party-Spirit, which it is the Duty of every good Citizen and real Lover of his
Country to endeavor to suppress.

Well has Party been called the Madness of many for the Gain of a Few. It is a
Kind of epidemic Fever, that in its boiling Fury stirs up from the Bottom every
Thing gross, filthy, and impure in human Society: Often has it raged with
prodigious virulence in this Island, and yet our strong Constitution has always
hitherto had the Happiness of being able to throw it off.

With Tears of Philanthropy we have viewed the rapidity of its late
Devastations: and lamented the Progress of a Contagion fatal it should seem
almost beyond the Example of any in former Times!

May it subside at the present Crisis, which is truly alarming, and that too
(if it be possible by any other Means to recover a Body Politic, in which
Health, for Want of Change, seems to have produced Disease) not by Loss of
Blood, but by insensible Perspiration!

Of MARTINMASS. In the ancient Calendar of the Church of Rome so often quoted,
I find the subsequent Observations on 11th November. The Martinalia, a genial
Feast." "Wines are tasted of and drawn from the Lees." "The Vinalia, a Feast of
the Ancients removed to this Day." "Bacchus in the Figure of Martin.
Martinalia, Geniale Festum. Vina delibantur and defecantur. Vinalia veterum
Festum huc translatum. Bacchus in Martini Figura.

FORMERLY a Custom prevailed everywhere, though generally confined at present
to Country Villages, of killing Cows, Oxen, Swine, etc. at this Season, which
were cured for the Winter, when fresh Provisions were seldom or never to be had.

Two or more of the poorer Sort of rustic Families still join in purchasing a
Cow, etc. for Slaughter at this Time, (called in Northumberland a Mart Mart,
says Skinner is a Fair: I think it, he adds, a Contraction of Market. These
Cattle are usually bought at a Kind of Cow-Fair or Mart at this Time. Had it
not been a general Name for a Fair, one might have been tempted to suppose it a
Contraction of Martin, the Name of the Saint of the Time.
) the Entrails of which, after having been filled with a Kind of Pudding-Meat,
consisting of Blood, Suet, Groats, Groats, Oats hull'd, but unground. Glossary
of Lancashire Words. This Word is derived from the Anglo. Saxon Grut, Far.
etc. are formed into little Sausage Links, boiled, and sent about as Presents,
etc. From their Appearance, they are called Black Puddings.

The Author of the Convivial Hujusmodi porro Conviviis in Ovium tonsura apud
Hebreos antiquitus celebrari solitis videntur similia esse illa quae apud nos
cum in urbe, tum in pagis post pecorum quorundam, ut Ovium ^^um, ac presertim
Suum mactationem summa cum laetitia agitari solent. "Farciminum Convivia" vulgo
appellantur. P. 62.
Antiquities tells us, that in Germany, there was in his Time a Kind of
Entertainment on the above Occasion, vulgarly called the Feast of Sausages or
Gut-puddings, which was wont to be celebrated with great Joy and Festivity.

J. Boemus Aubanus Nemo per totam Regionem tanta paupertate premitur, nemo
tanta tenacitate tenetur qui in Festo Sancti Martini non Altil aliquo, vel
saltem Suillo, Vitulinove viscere assato vescatur, qu vino non remissius
indulgeat. P. 272.
too tells us, that in Franconia, there was a great deal of Eating and Drinking
at this Season; no one was so poor or niggardly that on the Feast of St. Martin
had not his Dish of the Entrails either of Oxen, Swine, or Calves. They drank
too, he says, very liberally of Wine on the Occasion.

The learned Moresin (...) mense Novembri celebrabantur apud Athenienses
Plutarch, in 8. Sympos. 10. Sicuti nostris temporibus in omni fere Europa
undecima Novembris quae D. Martino dicata est. Mercur Variar. lect. lib. 1.
cap. 15. Deprav. Rel. Orig. etc. p. 127.
refers the great Doings on this Occasion, which he says were common to almost
all Europe in his Time, to an ancient Athenian Festival, observed in Honor of
Bacchus, upon the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Days of the Month
Anthesterion, corresponding with our November.

J. Boemus Aubanus, above cited, seems to confirm this Conjecture, though there
is no mention of the Slaughter of any Animal in the Description of the Rites of
the Grecian Festival. The eleventh Day of that Month had a Name from the
Ceremony of "tapping their Barrels on it;" it was called also by the
Chaeroneans the Day of good Genius, because it was customary to make merry upon
it. See Potter's Grecian Antiquities.

Of FAIRS.
Expositas, late Cami prope Flumina merces,
Divitiasque loci, vicosque, hominumque labores,
Sparsaque per virides passim megalia campos. --
Nundinae Sturbrigienses. A Fair is a greater Kind of Market, granted to any
Town by Privilege, for the more speedy and commodious providing of such Things
as the Place stands in need of. They are generally kept once or twice in a
Year. Proclamation is to be made how long they are to continue, and no Person
shall sell any Goods after the Time of the Fair is ended, on Forfeiture of
double the Value. -- A Toll is usually paid at Fairs.

In the first Volume of the ingenious Mr. Wharton's Hist. of Poetry, p. 279,
there is a Note which contains a great deal of Learning on this Subject; the
subsequent Extracts will requite the Pains of Perusal, and throw no small Light
upon this ancient Kind of Mart.

"Before flourishing Towns, he tells us, were established and the Necessaries
or Ornaments of Life, from the Convenience of Communication and the increase of
Provincial Civility, could be procured in various Places, Goods and Commodities
of every Kind were chiefly sold at Fairs Here Pedlars' Stalls with glittering
Toys are laid,
The various Fairings of the Country Maid,
Long silken Laces hang upon the Twine,
And rows of Pins and Amber Bracelets shine.
Here the tight Lass, Knives, Combs and Scissars spies,
And looks on Thimbles with desiring Eyes,
The Mountebank now treads the Stage and sells
His Pills, his Balsams, and his Ague Spells;
Now over and over the nimble Tumbler springs,
And on the Rope the venurous Maiden swings;
Jack Pudding in his party colored Jacket,
Tosses the Glove and jokes at every Packet;
Here raree shows are seen, and Punche's Feats,
And Pockets picked in Crowds and various Cheats.
GAY. The ancient Northern Nations held annual Ice Fairs: See Olaus Magnus.

We also have heard of a Fair upon the Thames in a very hard Frost.


: To these, as to one universal Mart, the People resorted periodically and
supplied most of their Wants for the ensuing Year.

The Display of Merchandise, and the Conflux of Customers, at these principal
and almost only Emporia of domestic Commerce, were prodigious: and they were
therefore often held on open and extensive Plains. (Thus at Newcastle on our
Town Moor, the Cow-bill).

One of the chief of them was that of St. Giles's Hill or Down, near
Winchester: The Conqueror instituted and gave it as a Kind of Revenue to the
Bishop of Winchester. It was at first for three Days, but afterward, by Henry
III. prolonged to sixteen Days. -- Its Jurisdiction extended seven Miles round,
and comprehended even Southampton, then a Capital and trading Town. Merchants
who sold Wares at that time within that Circuit, forfeited them to the Bishop.
Officers were placed at a considerable Distance, at Bridges Thus at present at
Newcastle: At our Gates also.
, and other Avenues of Access to the Fair, to exact Toll of all Merchandise
passing that Way: In the mean while all Shops in the City of Winchester were
shut. A Court called the Pavilion composed of the Bishop's Justiciaries and
other Officers had Power to try Causes of various Sorts for seven Miles round.
The Bishop had a Toll of every Load or Parcel of Goods passing through the
Gates of the City. On St. Giles's Eve, the Mayor, etc. delivered up the Keys of
the four Gates to the Bishop's Officers. Many and extraordinary were the
Privileges granted to the Bishop on this Occasion, all tending to obstruct
Trade and oppress the People.

Numerous foreign Merchants It appears that the Justiciaries of the Pavilion,
and the Treasurers of the Bishop's Palace received annually for a Fee,
according to ancient Custom, four Basins and Ewers of those foreign Merchants
who sold brazen Vessels in the Fair, and were called Mercatores diaunteres. Ibid.
frequented this Fair; several Streets were formed in it, assigned to the Sale
of different Commodities Called the Drapery, the Pottery, the Spicery, etc.
Thus we say now the Cloth Fair, the Shoe Fair, etc.
. The surrounding Monasteries had Shops or Houses in these Streets used only at
the Fair; they held them under the Bishop, and they often were let by Lease for
a Term of Years.

In the revenue Roll of Bishop William of Waynflete, (an. 1475) this Fair
appears to have greatly decayed; in which among other Proofs, I find mention
made of a District in the Fair being unoccupied. "Ubi Homines Cornubiae stare
solebant."

The whole Reception to the Bishop this Year was 45 l. 18s. 5d. more than 400l.
at this Day. Ibid.


Different Counties had their different Stations.

It appears from a curious Record now remaining containing the Establishment
and Expenses of the Household of Henry Percy, the 5th Earl of Northumberland, A.
D. 1512, and printed by Dr. Percy, that the Stores of his Lordship's House at
Wresille, for the whole Year, were laid in from Fairs: He that stands charged
with my Lords House for the houll Yeir, if he may possible, shall be at all
Faires, where the groice Emptions shall be boughte for the House for the houll
Yeir, as Wine, Wax, Beiffes, Multons, Wheite and Malt This proves that Fairs
still continued to be the principal Marts for purchasing Necessaries in large
Quantities, which now are supplied by frequent trading Towns: And the Mention
of Beisses and Multons, (which are salted Oxen and Sheep) shows that at so late
a Period they knew little of breeding Cattle. Their Ignorance is so important
an Article of Husbandy, is also an Evidence, that in the Reign of King Henry
VIII. the State of Population was much lower among us than we may imagine. Ibid.
. P. 407.

In In the Statutes of St. Mary Ottery's College, in Devonshire, given by
Bishop Grandison, the Founder, the Sacrists and Stewards are ordered to
purchase annually two hundred Pounds of Wax for the Choir of the College at
Winchester Fair. Ibid.
the Account of the Priories of Maxtoke, in Warwickshire, and of Bicester, in
Oxfordshire, in the Time of Henry VI. the Monks appear to have laid in yearly
Stores, of various, yet common Necessaries at the Fair of Sturbridge,
Cambridgeshire, at least 100 Miles distant from either Monastry.

It may seem surprising that their own Neighborhood, including the Cities of
Oxford and Coventry, could not supply them with Commodities neither rare nor
costly, which they thus fetched at a considerable Expense of Carriage. -- There
is a Rubric in some of the Monastic Rules de cuntibus ad Nundinas i. e.
concerning those who go to Fairs."

Our two annual Fairs on the Town Moor, Newcastle, are called Lammass and St.
Luke's Fairs, from the Days on which they begin. Mr. Bourne tells us, that the
Tolls, Booths, Stallage, Pickage and Courts of Pie Powder, (dusty Foot) to each
of these Fairs, were reckoned communibus Annis 12l. in Oliver's Time. The
Records of our Monasteries are lost, otherwise they would doubtless have
furnished some Particulars relative to the Institution and ancient Customs of
the Fairs at Newcastle.

Mr. Bailey tells us, that in ancient Times amongst Christians, upon any
extraordinary Solemnity, particularly the anniversary Dedication of a Church
Festum, Nundinae quae in festis Patronorum vulgo siunt. Du Cange, Gloss.

Pitching Pence was paid (in Fairs and Markets) for every Bag of Corn, etc.
Coals Dict.


, Tradesmen used to bring and sell their Wares, even in the Churchyards,
especially upon the Festival of the Dedication; as at Westminster, on St.
Peter's Day; at London, on St. Bartholomew; at Durham, on St. Cuthbert's Day,
etc. But Riots and Disturbances often happening, by Reason of the Numbers
assembled together, Privileges were by Royal Charter granted for various Causes
to particular Places, Towns, and Places of strength where Magistrates presided
to keep the People in Order. Courts were granted to take Notice of all Manner
of Causes and Disorders committed upon the Place, called Pie-powder Poudre des
piez, French. -- Dust of the Feet.
, because Justice was done to any injured Person before the Dust of the Fair
was off his Feet. It is customary at all Fairs to present Fairings, which are
gifts, bought at these annual Markets.

Ray has preserved two old English Proverbs that relate to Fairs: Men speak of
the Fair as Things went with them there.

As also, To come a Day after the Fair. Kennett, in his Glossary to his
parochial Antiquities, tells us, that from the solemn Feasting at Wakes and
Fairs, came the Word Fare, provision, good fare, to fare well. In verbo. Feriae.

N. B. See also the Observations on Mr. Bourne's Chapter on Wakes.




Of the Customs in SCHOOLS on St. NICHOLAS' DAY.
J. Boemus Aubanus In die vero Sancti Nicolai, Adolescentes, qui disciplinarum
gratia Scholas frequentant, inter se tres eligunt: unum, qui Episcopum: duos
qui diaconos agant: is ipsa die in sacram aedem solenniter a Scholastico coetu
introductus, divinis officiis infulatus praesidet: Quibus finitis, cum electis
domesticatim cantando nummos colligit, eleemosynam esse negant, sed Episcopi
subsidium. Vigiliam dici pueri a parentibus jejunare eo modo invitantur, quod
persuasum habeant, ea munuscula, quae noctu ipsis in calceos sub mensam ad hoc
locatos imponuntur, se a largissimo praesule Nicolao percipere: unde tanto
desiderio plerique jejunant, ut quia eorum fanitati timeatur, ad cibum
compellendi sint. P. 272
in his Description of some singular Customs used in his Time in Franconia, to
which I have so often referred, tells us, that Scholars on St. Nicholas Day
used to elect three out of their Number, one of whom was to play the Bishop,
the others to act the Parts of Deacons. -- The Bishop was escorted by the Rest
of the Boys in solemn Procession to Church, where, with his Mitre on, he
presided during the Time of divine Worship: This being ended, he, with his
Deacons, went about singing from Door to Door, and collected Money, which they
did not beg as Alms, but demanded as the Bishop's Subsidy. The Boys were
prevailed upon to fast on the Eve of this Day, in order to persuade themselves
that the little Presents, which on that Night were put for them into Shoes
There is a Festival or Ceremony observed in Italy, (called Zopata, from a
Spanish Word signifying a Shoe) in the Courts of certain Princes on St.
Nicholas' Day, wherein Persons hide Presents in the Shoes and Slippers of those
they do honor to, in such Manner as may surprise them on the Morrow when they
come to dress. This is done in Imitation of the Practice of St. Nicholas, who
used in the Night Time to throw Purses in at the Windows of poor Maids, to be
Marriage Portions for them. Vide Bailey.
, (placed under the Table for that Purpose,) were made them by their very
bountiful Prelate Nicholas. -- On which Account many of them kept the Fast so
rigourously, that their Friends were under the necessity of forcing them to
take some Sustenance, in order to prevent them from injuring their Health.

The ancient Calendar of the Church of Rome December.
6. Nicolao Episcopo.
Scholarum feriae.
Reges ad aedem muneribus and pompa accedunt.
Poetarum mos olim in schola ad pueros relatus.
Regales in scholis Epulae.

, has the following Observations on this Day, which is the 6th of December.

December.
6. "Nicholas, Bishop.
School Holidays.
The Kings go to Church
With Presents and great show.
The ancient Custom of Poets in School
related to the Boys.
The King's Feasts in Schools."
Vestiges of these ancient Popish Superstitions are still retained in several
Schools about this Time of the Year, particularly in the Grammar School at
Durham At Salt-Hill, near Windsor, the Eton Boys have an annual Custom (in
June) of giving Salt and extorting Money from every one that passes by. -- The
Captain, for so they style their Leader, is said to raise, some Years, 300
Pounds on this Occasion, all which he claims as his own: They stop even the
Stage Coaches. -- There is generally a great Concourse of the Nobility, Gentry,
etc. at Salt-Hill on the Day.

This seems to be a Fragment, but greatly mutilated, of the above described
ancient Customs in Schools on St. Nicholas' Day.

I received this Information at the Windmill, one of the very elegant Inns at
Salt-Hill; and if I mistake not, the Bedchamber in which I slept, had a Latin
Title (Montem) above the Chimney-piece that referred to the Little-Hill, the
Scene of this singular Custom.


. They ask and forcibly obtain from the Master, what they call Orders. -- I
have heard also of a similar Custom at the School of Houghton-le-Spring, in the
County of Durham.

Of the GULE of AUGUST, commonly called LAMMASS-DAY.
"LAmmas-Day, says Blount, the first of August, otherwise called the Gule or
Yule of August, which may be a Corruption of the British Word Gwyl Awst,
signifying the Feast of August, or may come from Vincula, (Chains) that Day
being called in Latin, Festum Sancti Petri ad Vincula." The last Opinion seems
a wild and vague Conjecture. How much more probable is the Hypothesis of the
learned Gebelin, which the Reader will find, both in the original French, and
translated into English, if he will be at the Trouble of turning back to Page
171.

Antiquaries are divided also in their Opinions concerning the Origin of the
Word Lam, or Lamb-mass.

Some suppose it is called Lammass-Day We have an old Proverb "At latter
Lammass" which is synomymous with the "Ad Graecas Calendas" of the Latins, and
the vulgar saying "When two Sundays come together," i. e. never.
, quasi Lamb-Masse, because on that Day the Tenants that held Lands of the
Cathedral Church in York, (which is dedicated to Saint Peter ad Vincula In the
ancient Calendar of the Romish Church, I find the subsequent Observation on the
1st of August: Chains are worshipped, etc.
Catenae coluntur ad Aram in Exquiliis
Ad Vicum Cyprium juxta Titi thermas.

) were bound by their Tenure to bring a live Lamb into the Church at high Mass
on that Day.

Others suppose it to be derived from the Saxon Hlaf Maesse. i. e. Loaf Mass,
or Bread Mass, so named as a Feast of Thanksgiving to God for the first Fruits
of the Corn, and seems to have been observed with Bread of new Wheat; and
accordingly it is a Usage in some Places for Tenants to be bound to bring in
Wheat of that Year to their Lord, on or before the first of August. Ham. Resol.
to 6 Quaeres, p 465. Vide Blount.

Of the vulgar Saying, " UNDER the ROSE."
DOctor Brown leaves me little more on this Subject, than the easy and
agreeable Task of making him speak concisely and in plain English.

Nazianzen, says he, seems to imply in the subsequent translated Verses, that
the Rose, from a natural Property, has been made the Symbol of Silence.

Utque latet Rosa verna suo putamine clausa,
Sic os vincla ferat, validisque arctetur habenis,
Indicatque suis prolixa silentia labris.
Hence it should seem when we desire to confine our Words, we commonly say,
"they are spoken under the Rose."

There is a Propriety in this Expression also, if we mean only in Society at
convivial Entertainments, where it was an ancient Custom to wear Chaplets of
Roses about the Head.

The Germans have a Custom of describing a Rose in the Ceiling over the Table I
shall favor my Reader here with another curious Observation of the learned
Author of the Vulgar Errors: Coral was thought to preserve and fasten the Teeth
in Men, yet is used in Children to make an easier Passage for them; hence that
well-known Toy, with Bells, etc. and Coral at the end, which is generally
suspended from their Necks. This Custom is supposed with the greatest
Probability to have had its Origin in an ancient Superstition, which considered
it as an Amulet or Defensative against Fascination. -- For this we have the
Authority of Pliny, in the following Words: Aruspices religiosum Coralli
gestamen amoliendis periculis arbitrantur; Et Surculi Infantiae alligati
tutelam habere creduntur.
.

Lemnius and others have traced it to another Origin: The Rose, say they, was
the Flower of Venus, which Cupid consecrated to Harpocrates, the God of
Silence, etc. it was therefore an Emblem of it to conceal the Pranks of Venery;
thus the Poet: "Ut Rosa flos Veneris, cujus quo facta laterent
Harpocrati Matris, dona dicavit Amor;
Inde Rosam mensis Hospes suspendit amicis,
Conviviae ut sub ea dicta tacenda sciant."


Of the SILLY HOW, that is, the holy, or fortunate CAP or HOOD.
VARIOUS were the Superstitions, about half a Century In Scotland, says the
learned and modest Author of the Glossary to Douglas' Virgil, the Women call a
haly or sely how, (i. e. holy or fortunate Cap, or Hood) a Film, or Membrane
stretched over the Heads of Children new born, which is nothing else but a Part
of that which covers the Foetus in the Womb; and they give out that Children so
born will be very fortunate. In Verbo How.

An Instance of great Fortune in one born with this Coif is given by Aelius
Lampridius, in the History of Diadumenos, who came afterward to the Sovereign
Dignity of the Empire. This Superstition prevailed much in the primitive Ages
of the Church. St. Chrysostom in several of his Homilies inveighs against it:
He is particularly severe against one Praetus, a Clergyman, who being desirous
of being fortunate, bought such a Coif of a Midwife. See Athenian Oracle.

It would be giving the Reins up to Fancy altogether to suppose that the
present remarkable black Spots in the Wigs of those of the highest Orders of
the Law, owe their Origin to this ancient Superstition; but I have no Kind of
Doubt but that the Word Howdy, used in the North for a Midwife, and which I
take to be a diminitive of How, is derived from this obsolete Opinion of old
Women. An Etymon I have heard of Howdy, that is, "How do ye," is not unlike the
"All Eggs under" of Swift, and forcibly satirizes that Licentiousness of Fancy
in which many Philologists have indulged themselves.


ago, concerning a certain membranous Covering, commonly called the Silly How,
that was sometimes found about the Heads of newborn Infants. -- It was
preserved with great Care, not only as medical in Diseases, but also as
contributing to the good Fortune of the Infant and others. -- This, says Dr
Brown, is no more than the Continuation of a Superstition that is of very
remote Antiquity. Thus we read in the Life of Antoninus, by Spartianus, that
Children are sometimes born with this natural Cap, which Midwives were wont to
sell to credulous Lawyers, who held an Opinion that it contributed to their
Promotion "But to speak strictly, continues our Author, the Effect is natural,
and thus to be conceived, the Infant has three Teguments, or membranous Filmes
which cover it in the Womb, i. e. the Corion, Amnios and Allantois; the Corion
is the outward Membrane, wherein are implanted the Veins, Arteries, and
umbilical Vessels, whereby its Nourishment is conveyed: The Allantois a thin
Coat seated under the Corion, wherein are received the watery Separations
conveyed by the Urachus, that the Acrimony thereof should not offend the Skin.
The Amnios is a general Investment, containing the sudorous, or thin Serosity
perspirable through the Skin. Now about the Time when the Infant breaks these
Coverings, it sometimes carries with it about the Head a Part of the Amnios,
or nearest Coat; which says Spiegelius, either proceeds from the Toughness
of the Membrane or Weakness of the Infant that cancot get clear thereof, and
therefore herein Significations are natural and concluding upon the Infant, but
not to be extended unto magical Signalities or any other Person."
.

Of the Phenomenon Blount tells us it is a certain viscous Substance,
reflecting Light in the Dark, evaporated out of a fat Farth and flying in the
Air. It commonly haunts Churchyards, Privies, and Fens, because it is begotten
out of Fatness; it flies about Rivers, Hedges, etc. because in those Places
there is a certain Flux of Air: It follows one that follows it, because the Air
does so.

It is called Ignis Fatuus, or foolish Fire, because it only fears Fools.
Hence is it when Men are led away with some idle Fancy or Conceit, we use to
say an Ignis Fatuus has done it. Blount in Verbo.


, vulgarly called WILL or KITTY with the WISP Wisp properly signifies a little
Twist of Straw, for the Purpose of easing the Head under the Pressure of some
heavy Burden. (It is corrupted into Weeze in the vulgar Dialect of Newcastle)
as also a Handful of Straw, folded up a little to wipe any Thing with. Thus in
that very curious and scarce Poem, the Visions of Pierce Plowman:

"And wished it had been wiped with a Wisp of Firses." Pass. 5.

It implies in the Name of this Phenomenon a Kind of Straw-Torch. Thus Junius
in Verbo: Frisiis Wispien etiamnum est ardentes straminis fasciculos in altum
tollere.

These vulgar Names are undoubtedly derived from its Appearance, as if Will,
Jack or Kit. some Country Fellows, were going about with lighted Straw-Torches
in their Hands.


, or JACK with a LANTHORN.
How Will a Wisp misleads nightfaring Clowns,
Over Hills and sinking Bogs, and pathless Downs.
GAY.
THIS Appearance, called in Latin, Ignis Fatuus, has long been an article in
the Catalogue of popular Superstitions. It is said to be chiefly seen in Summer
Nights, frequenting Meadows, Marshes, and other moist Places. -- It has been
thought by some to arise from a viscous Exhalation, which being kindled in the
Air, reflects a Sort of thin Flame in the Dark without any sensible Heat. It is
often found flying along Rivers and Hedges, because, as it is conjectured, it
meets there with a Stream of Air to direct it.

Philosophers are much divided in their Solution of this Phenomenon. Sir Isaac
Newton says it is a Vapor shining without Heat, and that there is the same
Difference between this Vapor and Flame, as between rotten Wood shining
without Heat and burning Coals of Fire.

Others suppose it to be some nocturnal flying Insect: Indeed they have gone so
many different Ways in pursuit of this Wanderer, that, according to the popular
Notion of its conducting into Bogs and other Precipices, some of them must have
been misled and bewildered by it. -- We may follow them however as far as we
please in this Paper Pursuit without any Danger.

Me^iana has given us an Accout of the famous Indian Lanthorn Fly, published
amongst her Insects at Surinam. It has a Hood* or Bladder on its Head, which
gives a Light like a Lanthorn in the Night, but by Daylight is clear and
transparent, curiously adorned with Stripes of Red or Green Color. -- One may
read Writing of tolerable large Character by it at Night. -- The Creature, it
is said, can contract or dilate the Hood or Bladder over its Head at Pleasure.
-- They hide all their Light when taken, but when at Liberty afford it
plentifully.

It inclines one to think that the Appearance under Consideration is no more
than the shining of some Night-flying Insect, when we are informed, that they
give Proof as it were of Sense, by avoiding Objects -- that they often go in a
Direction contrary to the Wind -- that they often seem extinct, and then shine
again. -- Their passing along a few Feet above the Ground or Surface of the
Water, agrees with the Motion of some Insect in quest of Prey; as also their
settling on a Sudden, and rising again immediately I subjoin what will perhaps
be thought a curious Extract concerning the Appearance commonly called a
Falling Star, from Dr. Charlton's Paradoxes -- It is, says he, the Nocturnal
Pollution of some plethorical and wanton Star, or rather Excrement blown from
the Nostrils of some Rheumatic Planet, falling upon Plains and Sheep Pastures,
of an obscure Red or brown Tawney; in Consistence like a Gelly and so trembling
if touched, etc.

The Thoughts in the above Passage are perhaps the quaintest that can be found
in any Language.

Haggs, says Blount, are said to be made of Saveat, or some other Vapor
issuing out of the Head; a not unusual Sight among us when we ride by Night in
the Summertime: They are extinguished like Flames by shaking the Horses'
Manes. But I believe rather it is only a Vapor reflecting Light, but sat and
sturdy, compacted about the Manes of Horses or Men's Hair. Vide Blount in Verbo.


.

Some indeed have affirmed that Ignes Fatui are never seen but in Salt Marshes,
or other boggy Places. On the other Hand it is proved that they have been seen
flying over Fields, Heaths, and other dry Places.

I am informed in Boreman's second Volume of his Description of a great Variety
of Animals, Vegetables, etc etc. that a respectable Person in Hertfordshire At
Astley, seven Miles from Worcester, three Gentlemen saw one of these
Appearances in a Garden about Nine o'Clock in a dark Night. -- At first they
imagined it to be some Country Fellow with a Lanthorn, till approaching within
about six Yards, it suddenly disappeared. -- It became visible again in a dry
Field thirty or forty Yards off -- it disappeared as suddenly a second Time,
and was seen again a hundred Yards off. -- Whether it passed over the Hedge, or
went through it, could not be observed, for it disappeared as it passed from
Field to Field.

At another Time when one approached within ten or twelve Yards, it seemed to
pack off as in a fright.


, presuming upon his Knowledge of the Grounds about his House, was tempted one
dark Night to follow one of these Lights, which he saw flying over a Piece of
fallow Ground. -- It led him over a plowed Field, flying and twisting about
from Place to Place -- sometimes it would suddenly disappear, and as suddenly
appear again. -- It once made directly to a Hedge, when it came near, it
mounted over, and he lost Sight, after a full Hour's Chase. -- In his return to
his House, he saw it again, but was too fatigued to think of renewing the
Pursuit. This Light is said also to have been observed to stand still as well
as to move, and sometimes seemed fixed on the Surface on the Water. -- We are
informed that in Italy, two Kinds of these Lights have been discovered; one on
the Mountains, the other on the Plains. -- The common People call them Cularsi,
because they look upon them as Birds, the Belly and other Parts of which are
resplendent like the Pyraustae, or Fire-Flies.

Mr. Bradley, F. R. S. supposes the Will with the Wisp to be no more than a
Group of small enlightened Insects.

Mr. Fr. Willoughby and Mr. Ray are of Opinion, that the Ignis Fatuus is
nothing but the shining of some Night-flying Insect. -- Dr. Derham was of
Opinion, they were fired Vapors There is a Fire, some Times seen flying in the
Night, like a Dragon: (who has seen a Dragon that may with Propriety speak to
the Resemblance?) It is called a Fire-Drake. Common People think it a Spirit
that keeps some Treasure hid, but Philosophers affirm it to be a great unequal
Exhalation inflamed between two Clouds, the one hot, the other cold, (which is
the Reason that it also smokes) the middle Part whereof according to the
Proportion of the hot Cloud, being greater than the Rest, makes it seem like a
Belly, and both Ends like a Head and Tail. See Blount.
.

After having summoned such respectable Witnesses in the Cause under
Consideration, and having found that their Depositions by no means agree, I
shall not presume to sum up the Evidence or pronounce Sentence.

We leave therefore the Decision of the Controversy to future Discoveries in
Natural History, and to the Determination of succeeding Times.

Of the BORROWED DAYS.
THere is an old Proverb preserved in Ray's Collection.

" April, borrows three Days of March and they are ill."

April, is pronounced with an Emphasis on the last Syllable, and so it is made
into a Kind of Rhyme.

I have taken Notice of this, because I find in the ancient Calendar of the
Church of Rome, to which I have so often referred, the following Observations
on the 31st of March.

The rustic Fable concerning the Nature of the Month.
The rustic Names of six Days, which shall follow in
April, or may be the last of March Rustica fabula de natura Mensis.
Nomina rustica 6 Dierum, qui sequentur
in Aprili, ceu ultimi sint Martii.

.
There is no Doubt but that these Observations in the ancient Calendar, and our
Proverb are derived from one common Origin. -- I confess myself in the mean
while unable to go any farther in tracing them back to their Source.

Of COCK-FIGHTING.
-- Quanquam in media jam morte tenentur Non tamen disistunt, Martemve iramve
remittunt Magnanimi From a beautiful Latin Poem on this Subject, in the 2d
Volume of the Mulae Anglicanae, it is signed, Jo. Friend. Aedis Christi Alamnus.
: --
MEN have long availed themselves of the Antipathy one Cock shows to another,
and have encouraged that natural hatred with Arts that disgrace human Reason.
-- The Origin of this Sport is said to be derived from the Athenians on the
following Occasion: When Themistocles was marching his Army against the
Persians, he by the Way espying two Cocks fighting, caused his Army to behold
them, and made the following Speech to them: "Behold, these do not fight for
their Household Gods, for the Monuments of their Ancestors, nor for Glory, nor
for Liberty, nor for the Safety of their Children, but only because the one
will not give Way unto the other." This so encouraged the Grecians, that they
fought strenuously, and obtained the Victory over the Persians; upon which
Cock-fighting was by a particular Law ordained to be annually practiced by the
Athenians; and hence was the Original of the Sport in England derived -- Thus I
do not find his Authority for this among the Ancients. It is not taken Notice
of by Plutarch. -- Neither does Cornelius Nepos mention any such Incident in
his Memoir of Themistocles.
far Mr Bailey. -- The best Treatise on this Subject, is in the third Volume of
the Archacologia, by one I wish this ingenious Gentleman's Dissuasions against
our barbarous Sport may be found cogent enough to put an End to it. -- He has
been happily successful in tracing its Origin.
, who is an Ornament to a Society, the Institution of which does Honor to our
Country.

I shall give the Reader something like a Compendium of this excellent Memoir.
-- Though the ancient Greeks piqued themselves on their Politeness, calling all
other Nations barbarous; yet Mr Pegge has proved clearly in this Treatise, that
they were the Authors of this cruel and inhuman Mode of Diversion -- The
Inhabitants of Delos were great Lovers of this Sport, and Tanagra, a City of
Boeotia; the Isle of Rhodes, Chalcis in Euboea, and the Country of Media, were
famous for their generous and magnanimous Race of Chickens -- It appears they
had some Method of preparing the Birds for Battle The modern Manner of
Preparing is thus described in the Poem above cited: -- Nec per Agros sivit
dulces ve errare per hortos;
Ne Venerc absumant natas ad praelia vires,
Aut Alvo nimium pleni turgente laborent.
Sed rerum prudens penetrali in sede locavit,
Et salicis circum virgas dedit: insuper ipsos
Cortibus inclusos tenero nutrimine fovit;
Et panem, mulsumque genussque leguminis omne,
Atque exorta sua de conjuge praebuit ova
Ut validas firment Vires --
Quinetiam cristas ipsis, caudasque fluentes
Et colli impexas secuit pulchro ordure plumas
Ut rapido magis adversum, quasi veles, in hostem
Impete procurrat Gallus.
Arma dedit calci; chalybemque aptavit acutum
Ad talos, graviore queat quo surgere pla^a.
Musae Anglicanae.


. Cock-fighting was an Institution partly religious, and partly political at
Athens -- (Socrates sacrificed a Cock to Aesculapius), and was continued there
for the Purpose of improving the Seeds of Valor in the Minds of their Youth.
-- But it was afterward abused, and perverted both there and in other Parts of
Greece, to a common Pastime and Amusement, without any moral, political, or
religious Intention; and as it is now followed and practiced amongst us. -- It
appears that the Romans, who borrowed this, with many other Things from Greece,
used Quails Hence Marcus Aurelius. 1. sect. 6. says, "I learn from Diognetus,"
ne rebus inambus shedium impenderem, ne Coturnices ad pugnam alerem, neve rebus
istiusmodi animum adj^cerem.
as well as Cocks for fighting. -- The first Cause of Contention between the
two Brothers, Bassianus and Geta, Sons of the Emperor Septimius Severus,
happened, according to Herodian, in their Youth, about fighting their Quails
and Cocks Interque se fratres dissidebant, pueriliprimum certamine, edendis
Cotornicum pugnis, Gallinaceorumq conflictibus, ac puerorum colluctationibus
exorta discordia. Herodian. III. Sect. 33.
. -- Cocks and Quails, fitted for the Purpose of engaging one another to the
last Gasp, for Diversion, are frequently compared in the Roman Writers Hence
Pliny's Expression, Gallorum, seu Gladiatorum, and that of Columella* rixosarum
Av^um lanistae. -- Lanista being the Proper Term for the Master of the
Gladiators.
, and with much Propriety, to Gladiators. The Fathers of the Church inveigh
with great Warmth against the Spectacles of the Arena -- the wanton shedding of
human Blood in Sport -- One would have thought that with this, Cock-fighting
would also have been discarded, under the mild and humane genius of
Christianity. -- But it was reserved for this enlightened Era to practice it
with new and aggravating Circumstances of Cruelty. -- The Shrove Tuesday
Massacre To the Credit of our northern Manners; the barbarous Sport of throwing
at Cocks on Shrove Tuesday is worn out in this Country.
of this useful and spirited Creature, is now indeed in a declining Way; but
that monstrous Barbarity, the Battle-royal and Welsh-main still continue to be
in full Force amongst us. -- A striking Disgrace to the manly Character of
Britons!

It is probable that Cock-fighting was first introduced into this Island by the
Romans. -- The Bird itself was here before Caesar's Arrival B. G. V. Sect. 10.
.

William Fitz-Stephen, who wrote the Life of Becket, in the Reign of Henry II.
is the first of our Writers that mentions Cocking, describing it as the Sport
of Schoolboys It was also a Boys Sport at Rome.
on Shrove Tuesday. The Theater (the Cockpit) it seems was the School, and the
Master was the Comptroller and Director of the Sport Vide Stowe's Survey of
London.
. -- From this Time at least, the Diversion, however absurd, and even impious,
was continued amongst us: It was followed, though disapproved and prohibited 39
Edward III. Maitland's History of London, p. 101. Stowe's Survey of London, B.
1. p. 302. Edit. 1754.
-- Also in the Reign of Henry VIII. Maitland, p. 1343. 933.
and A. D. 1569 Maitland, p. 260.
. -- It has been by some called a Royal Diversion, and as every one knows the
Cockpit at Whitehall was erected by a Crowned Head King Henry VIII. Maitland,
p. 1343. -- It appears that James I. was remarkably fond of Cock-fighting; is
it impertinent to add?

Cowards are cruel, but the Brave
Love mercy, and delight to save.

, for the more magnificent celebrating of the Sport. It was prohibited however
by one of Oliver's Acts, March 31, 1654 Historia Histrionica.
.

Mr Pegge describes the Welsh-main, in order to expose the Cruelty of it, and
supposes it peculiar to this Kingdom: -- known neither in China, nor in Persia,
nor in Malacca, nor among the savage Tribes of America. Suppose sixteen Pair of
Cocks -- of these the sixteen Conquerors are pitted the second Time -- the
eight Conquerors of these are pitted a third Time -- the four of these a fourth
Time -- and lastly, the two Conquerors of these are pitted a fifth Time; so
that, incredible Barbarity! thirty-one of these Creatures are sure to be
inhumanely destroyed for the Sport and Pleasure (amid Noise and Nonsense,
blended with the horrid Ecce december pono libras: Quis pignore certat
Dimidio^ hunc alter transverso lumine spectat
Gallorum mores multorum expertus et arts;
Tecum, inqu^^t, contendam!
Musae Anglicanae.
Blasphemy and Profaneness) of those, who will yet assume to themselves the
Name of Christians. Without running into all the Extravagance and Superstition
of Pythagoreans and Bramins, yet certainly we have no right, no Power or
Authority, to abuse and torment any of God's Creatures, or needlessly to sport
with their Lives; but on the contrary, ought to use them with all possible
Tenderness and Moderation.

In a Word, Cock-fighting is an heathenish Mode of Diversion from the first,
and at this Day ought certainly to be confined to barbarous Nations. Yet (it
may, and must be added) to aggravate the Matter, and enhance our Shame, that
our Butchers have contrived a Method unknown to the Ancients, of arming the
Heels of the Bird with Steel; a Device considered as a most noble Improvement
Pliny mentions the Spur and calls it Telum, but the Castle is a mere modern
Invention, as likewise is the great, and I suppose necessary exactness in
matching them

N. B. The Asiatics however use Spurs, that act on each Side like a Lancet, and
which almost immediately decide the Battle. -- Hence they are never permitted
by the modern Cock-fighters.


in the Art, and indeed an Invention highly worthy of Men that delight in Blood"

It still continues to be a favorite Sport of our Colliers in the North; In
performing not long since the Service appropriated to the Visitation of the
Sick with one of these Men, (who died a few Days after) to my great
Astonishment I was interrupted by the crowing of a Game Cock, hung in a Bag
over his Head; to this Exaltation an immediate Answer was given by another
Cock, conceal, in a Closet, to whom the first replied, and instantly the last
rejoined. -- I never met with an Incident so truly of the tragi-comical ca^t
as this, and could not proceed in the execution of that very solemn Office,
till one of the Disputants was removed.

It had been, it should seem, industriously hung there for the Sake of Company.
-- He had thus an Opportunity of casting* a^ an Object he had dearly loved in
the Days of his Health and Strength, what Mr Gray calls "a longing lingering
look behind."


the clamorous Wants of their Families solicit them to go to Work in vain, when
a Match is heard of: Nequicquam jejuni urgent Vestigia nati,
Poscentes lacrymis tenerisque amplexibus escam
Vincit amor gallorum, et avitae gloria gentis.


Of the Vulgar Superstitions concerning the MOON.
THE Moon, the ancient Object of idolatrous Worship, has in later Times
composed an Article in the Creed of popular Superstition: The Moon, Dr. Johnson
tells us, has great influence in vulgar Philosophy. In his Memory, he observes,
it was a Precept annually given in one of the English Almanacks, to kill Hogs
when the Moon was increasing, and the Bacon would prove the better in boiling.

The common People, Bailey tells us, in some Counties in England are accustomed
at the Prime of the Moon to say: "It is a fine Moon, God bless her," which some
imagine to proceed from a blind Zeal, retained from the ancient Irish, who
worshipped the Moon, or from a Custom in Scotland, (particularly in the
Highlands) where the Women make a Curtesy to the New Moon: And some English
Women still retain a Touch of this Gentilism, who getting up upon and sitting
astride on a Gate or Style, the first Night of the New Moon say: "All hail to
the Moon, all hail to thee,
I prithee good Moon declare to me.
This Night who my Husband shall be."


The ancient Druids had their superstitious Rites at the Changes of the Moon.
-- The hornedness of the New Moon is still faintly considered by the vulgar as
an Omen with Regard to the Weather.

The Rev. Mr. Shaw in his Account of Elgin, and the Shire of Murray, See
Appendix to Pennant's Tour, informs us, that at the full Moon in March, they
cut Withes of the Misletoe or Ivy, make Circles of them, keep them all the
Year, and pretend to cure Hectics and other troubles by them.

Dr. Johnson in his Journey to the Western Islands, tells us, they expect
better Crops of Grain, by sowing their Seed in the Moon's Increase.

Of SECOND SIGHT.
THE learned Author of the Rambler having favored the Public with his Thoughts
on this singular Kind of Superstition, and having so lately visited the Scene
of its declining Influence, it will be unnecessary to apologize for using his
own Words on the Subject: "We should have had little claim, says he, to the
Praise of Curiosity, if we had not endeavored with particular Attention to
examine the Question of the Second Sight. Of an Opinion received for Centuries
by a whole Nation, and supposed to be confirmed through its whole Descent, by a
series of successive Facts, it is desirable that the Truth should be
established, or the Fallacy detected.

The Second Sight is an Impression made either by the Mind upon the Eye, or by
the Eye upon the Mind, by which Things distant or future are perceived, and
seen as if they were present. A Man on a Journey far from Home falls from his
Horse, another who is perhaps at work about the House, sees him bleeding upon
the Ground, commonly with a Landscape of the Place where the Accident befalls
him. Another Seer driving Home his Cattle, or wandering in Idleness, or musing
in the Sunshine, is suddenly surprised by the Appearance of a bridal Ceremony,
or funeral Procession, and counts the Mourners or Attendants, of whom, if he
knows them, he relates the Names, if he knows them not, he can describe the
Dresses. Things distant are seen at the Instant when they happen. Of Things
future I know not that there is any Rule for determining the Time between the
Sight and the Event.

This receptive Faculty, for Power it cannot be called, is neither voluntary
nor constant. The Appearances have no Dependence upon Choice: they cannot be
summoned, detained, or recalled. The Impression is sudden, and the Effect often
painful.

By the term Second Sight, seems to be meant a Mode of seeing, superadded to
that which Nature generally bestows. In the Earse it is called Taisch; which
signifies likewise a Spectre, or a Vision. I know not, nor is it likely that
the Highlanders ever examined, whether by Taisch, used for the Second Sight,
they mean the Power of seeing, or the Thing seen.

I do not find it to be true, as it is reported, that to the Second Sight
nothing is presented but Phantoms of Evil. Good seems to have the same
Proportion in those visionary Scenes, as it obtains in real Life: almost all
remarkable Events have evil for their Basis; and are either Miseries incurred,
or Miseries escaped. Our Sense is so much stronger of what we suffer, than of
what we enjoy, that the Ideas of pain predominate in almost every Mind. What is
Recollection but a Revival of Vexations, or History but a Record of Wars,
Treasons, and Calamities? Death, which is considered as the greatest Evil,
happens to all. The greatest good, be it what it will, is the Lot but of a Part.

That they should often see Death is to be expected; because Death is an Event
frequent and important. But they see likewise more pleasing Incidents. A
Gentleman told me, that when he had once gone far from his own Island, one of
his laboring Servants predicted his Return, and described the Livery of his
Attendant, which he had never worn at Home; and which had been, without any
previous Design, occasionally given him.

Our Desire of Information was keen, and our Inquiry frequent. Mr. Boswell's
Frankness and Gaiety made every Body communicative; and we heard many Tales of
these airy Shows, with more or less Evidence and Distinctness.

It is the common Talk of the Lowland Scots, that the Notion of the Second
Sight is wearing away with other Superstitions; and that its Reality is no
longer supposed, but by the grossest People. How far its Prevalence ever
extended, or what Ground it has lost, I know not. The Islanders of all degrees,
whether of Rank or Understanding, universally admit it, except the Ministers,
who universally deny it, and are suspected to deny it, in Consequence of a
System, against Conviction. One of them honestly told me, that he came to Sky
with a Resolution not to believe it.

Strong Reasons for Incredulity will readily occur. This Faculty of seeing
Things out of sight is local, and commonly useless It is a Breach of the common
Order of Things, without any visible Reason or perceptible Benefit. It is
ascribed only to a People very little enlightened; and among them, for the most
Part, to the mean and the ignorant.

To the Confidence of these Objections it may be replied, that by presuming to
determine what is fit, and what is beneficial, they presuppose more Knowledge
of the universal System than Man has attained; and therefore depend upon
Principles too complicated and extensive for our Comprehension; and that there
can be no Security in the Consequence, when the Premises are not understood;
that the Second Sight is only wonderful because it is rare, for, considered in
itself, it involves no more difficulty than dreams, or perhaps than the regular
Exercises of the cogitative Faculty; that a general Opinion of communicative
Impulses, or visionary representations, has prevailed in all Ages and all
Nations; that particular Instances have been given, with such Evidence, as
neither Bacon nor Bail has been able to resist; that sudden Impressions, which
the Event has verified, have been felt by more than own or publish them; that
the Second Sight of the Hebrides implies only the local Frequency of a Power,
which is nowhere totally unknown; and that where we are unable to decide by
antecedent Reason, we must be content to yield to the Force of Testimony.

By pretension to Second Sight, no profit was ever sought or gained. It is an
involuntary Affection, in which neither Hope nor Fear are known to have any
Part. Those who profess to feel it, do not boast of it as a Privilege, nor are
considered by others as advantageously distinguished. They have no temptation
to feign; and their hearers have no motive to encourage the Imposture.

To talk with any of these Seers is not easy. There is one in Sky, with whom we
would have gladly conversed; but he was very gross and ignorant, and knew no
English. The Proportion in these Countries of the Poor to the Rich is such,
that if we suppose the Quality to be accidental, it can very rarely happen to a
Man of Education; and yet on such Men it has sometimes fallen. There is now a
Second Sighted Gentleman in the Highlands, who complains of the Terrors to
which he is exposed.

The foresight of the Seers is not always prescience: they are impressed with
Images, of which the Event only shows them the Meaning. They tell what they
have seen to others, who are at that Time not more knowing than themselves, but
may become at last very adequate Witnesses, by comparing the Narrative with its
Verification.

To collect sufficient Testimonies for the Satisfaction of the Public, or
ourselves, would have required more Time than we could bestow. There is,
against it, the seeming Analogy of Things confusedly seen, and little
understood; and for it, the indistinct Cry of national Persuasion, which may be
perhaps resolved at last into Prejudice and Tradition. I never could advance my
Curiosity to conviction; but came away at last only willing to believe."

Of DREAMS.
EVERY Dream, according to Wolfius, takes its Rise from some Sensation, and is
continued by the Succession of Phantasms in the Mind: His Reasons are, that
when we dream, we imagine something, or the Mind produces Phantasms; but no
Phantasms can arise in the Mind without a previous Sensation, hence neither can
a Dream arise without some previous Sensation.

Lord Bacon observes, that the Interpretation of natural Dreams has been much
labored, but mixed with numerous Extravagancies, and adds, that at present it
stands not upon its best Foundation. It may be observed that in our Days,
except amongst the most ignorant and vulgar, the whole imaginary Structure is
fallen to the Ground.

Physicians seem to be the only Persons at present who interpret Dreams:
frightful Dreams are perhaps always Indications of some violent Oppression of
Nature. Hippocrates has may curious Observations on Dreams: Ennius of old, has
made that very sensible Remark, that what Men studied and pondered in the Day
Time, the same they dreamed on at Night. I suppose there are few who cannot
from their own Experience assent to the Truth of his Observation.

Various are the popular Superstitions, or at least the faint Traces of them,
that yet are made use of to procure Dreams of Divination. Such as fasting St.
Agnes' Festum S. Agnetis celebrari coeptum est propter quoddam Miraculum, quod
octavo die suis contigit parentibus, ad ejus tumulum lamentantibus. Ita
Beletus, c. 75.

Vide du Cange. in verb. Festum. Somniandi modus Franciscanorum hinc ducit
originem. Antiqui moris fuit Oracula et futurorum praescientiam quibusdam
adhibitis facris per insomnia dari; qui mos talis erat, ut victimas caederent,
mox sacrificio peracto sub pellibus caesarum Ovium incubantes, somnia
captarent, eaque lymphatica insomnia verissimos exitus sortiri. Et Monachi
super storea cubant in qua alius Frater ecstaticus fuerat somniatus, sacrificat
Missam, process et Jejunia adhibet, inde ut communiter fit de amoribus per
somnia consulit, redditque responsa pro occurrentibus Spectris, etc.

Moresini Deprav. Rel. Orig. p. 162.
Fast, laying a Piece of the first Cut of the Cheese, at a Lying-in, called
here vulgarly the "Groaning Cheese," under the Pillow, to cause young Persons
to dream of their Lovers, etc. Various also are the Interpretations of Dreams
given by old Women, but of which the Regard is insensibly wearing away.

Of the vulgar Saying, "Deuce take you."
FEW perhaps, who use this Expression, particularly they of the soft Sex, who,
accompanying it with the "gentle Pat of a Fan," cannot be supposed to mean any
ill by it: are aware that it is synonymous with "sending you to the Devil." Yet
is it undoubtedly of equal Import with the Latin, "Abi in malam rem." Dusius
Quoniam creberrima fama est, multique se expertos, vel ab is, qui experti
essent, de quorum fide dubitandum non est, audisse onfirmant Sylvanos and
Faunos quos vulgo Incubos vocant, improbos saepe extitisse mulieribus and earum
appetisse ac peregissi concubitum; et quosdam Daemones quos Dusios nuncupant
Galli hanc assidue immunditiam et tentare et efficere, plures talesqu^
asseverant, ut hoc negare impudentiae videatur: non hinc aude aliquid temere
definire, utrum aliqui Spiritus elemento aereo corporati, possint etiam hanc
pati libidinem, ut quomodo possunt, set tientibus feminis misceantur. Cap. 23.
was the ancient popular Name for a Kind of Demon or Devil among the Gauls, so
that this Saying, of which so few understood the Meaning, has at least its
Antiquity to recommend it: It is mentioned in St. Austin's City of God as a
libidinous Demon who used to violate the Chastity of Women, and with the
Incubus of old, was charged with doing a great Deal of Mischief of so subtle a
Nature, that as none saw it, it did not seem possible to be prevented. Later
Times have done both these Devils justice, heartily supposing them to have been
much traduced by a certain Set of Delinquents, who used to father upon
invisible and imaginary Agents the Crimes of real Men.

Of the LONG POLES, which are used as SIGNS to BARBER'S SHOPS.
BArbers' Shops are generally marked by long Poles instead of Signs: The
Athenian Oracle accounts for this Custom, which is of remote Antiquity, in the
following Manner. The Barber's Art was so beneficial to the Public, that he,
who first brought it up in Rome, had, as Authors relate, a Statue erected to
his Memory. In England, they were in some sort the Surgeons of old Times, into
whose Art those beautiful Leeches An old Word for a Doctor, or a Surgeon.
, our fair Virgins then too used to be initiated. (Thus in corporate Towns, the
present Companies of Barber-Chirurgeons.) They therefore used to hang their
Basins out upon Poles, to make known at a Distance to the weary and wounded
Traveller I am better pleased with the subsequent ingenious Co^jecture, which I
take the Liberty of extracting from the Antiquarian Repertory. The Barber's
Pole has been the Subject of many Conjectures, some conceiving it to have
originated from the Word Poll, or Head, with several other Conceits, as far
fetched, and as unmeaning; but the true Intention of that party-colored Staff,
was to show the Master of the Shop practiced Surgery, and could breathe a Vein
as well as mow a Beard; such a Staff being to this Day, by every Village
Practitioner, put into the Hand of a Patient undergoing the Operation of
Phlebotomy. The white Band, which encompasses the Staff, was meant to represent
the Phillet, thus elegantly twined about it. p. 50.
, where all might have recourse: They used Poles, as some Inns still gibbet
their Signs across a Town.

GYPSIES.
GYPSIES, says Brown, are a Kind of counterfeit Moors, to be found in many
Parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa. They are commonly supposed to have come from
Egypt; (their Name is corrupt for Egyptians) they derive themselves from hence.
-- Munster discovered in the Letters and Pass, which they obtained from
Sigismund the Emperor, that they first came out of Lesser Egypt; that having
turned Apostates from Christianity and relapsed into Pagan Rites, some of every
Family were enjoined this Penance to wander about the World. Aventinus tells
us, that they pretend for this vagabond Course, a Judgment of God upon their
Forefathers, who refused to entertain the Virgin Mary and Jesus, when she fled
into their Country (this Lie would be of Service to them in Roman Catholic
Countries).

Poly. Virg. accounts them originally Syrians.
Philip Bergoinas derives them from Chaldea.
Aeneas Silvius from some Part of Tartary.
Bellonius from Walachia and Bulgaria.
Aventinus from the Confines of Hungary.
That they are no Egyptians Bellonius makes appear Egyptiani Erronum,
Impostorumque Genus nequissimum; in Continente ortum, sed et Britannias nostras
ut Europam reliquam pervolans. Nigredine deformes, excocti sole, immundi vest
and usu rerum omnium foedi. Foeminae, cum stratis and parvulis, jumento
invehuntur. Literas circumferunt Principum, ut innoxius illis permittatur
transitus. Oriuntur quippe and in nostra and in omni Regione, spurci hujusmodi
nebulones, qui sui similes in Gymnasium sceleris adsciscantes; vultum, cultum,
moresque supradictos sibi inducunt. Linguam (ut exotici magis videantur)
fictitiam blaterant, provinciasque vicatim pervagantes, auguriis et furtis,
imposturis et technarum millibus plebeculam rodunt and illudunt, linguam hanc
Germani Rotwelch quasi rubrum Wallicum, id est barbarismum; Angli Canting
nuncupant. Spelman in Verbo.
, who met great Droves of Gypsies in Egypt, in Villages on the Banks of the
Nile; they were accounted Strangers there, and wanderers from foreign Parts, as
with us.

They made their first Appearance in Germany about 1400, they were never
observed before in other Parts of Europe. That they were first from the
Neighborhood of Germany, is also probable from their Language, which was the
Sclavonian Tongue. They are called Bohemians in France.

Of what Nation soever they were at first, (he adds) they are now almost of
all, associating unto them some of every Country, where they wander; when they
will be lost, or whether at all again is not without some Doubt -- unsettled
Nations have survived others of fixed Habitations.

They have been banished by most Christian Princes. -- They seem beneath the
Notice of the Laws. -- The Great Turk at least tolerates them near the Imperial
City; he is said to employ them as Spies. They were banished as such by Charles
the Vth."

One still sees great Quantities of them in the South of England. As the
Egyptians of old were famous for Astronomy, Natural Magic, the Art of
Divination, etc. so these their fictitious Descendants are Pretenders to
Fortune-telling. To color their Impostures, they artificially (as Mr. Fuller
would word it) discolor their Faces, and rove up and down the Country in Rags
and Tatters, deluding the ignorant Vulgar, promising the Country The following
Extract from Mr Gay's Pastorals, will not, I hope, be thought impertinent here.

A Girl speaks that is slighted by her Lover:
"Last Friday's Eve, when as the Sun was set,
I near yon Style, three fallow Gypsies met;
Upon my hand they cast a poring Look,
Bid me beware, and thrice their Heads they shook:
They said that many Crosses I must prove,
Some in my worldly Gain, but most in Love.
Next Morn I missed three Hens and our old Cock,
And off the Hedge two Pinners and a Smock." The Ditty.

Girls Lovers, and in Return borrowing their Fowls, Smocks, etc. They are said
indeed, and it is with great Probability, to have in general very vague Notions
of meum and tuum.

See more on this Subject in Dufresne's Glossary, and in an ingenious Essay in
the Antiquarian Repertory These swarthy Itinerants, it is there said, at
present, seem likely either to degenerate into common Beggars, or, like some of
their Brethren in Spain, to be obliged to take to a Trade or Business for a
Livelihood. The great Increase of Knowledge in all Ranks of People, has
rendered their pretended Art of Divinaton of little Benefit to them, at least
by no Means sufficient to procure them Subsistence.

Such Sort of People are called Faws in Northumberland; a Word, of which I know
no Etymon, unless it be derived from Feaw. foul, ugly. See the Glossary to the
View of the Lancashire Dialect, where Feaw Whean, is rendered an ugly Woman.


; with which, if I had had the Pleasure of seeing it before the Compilation of
this Sketch, I should have taken the Liberty of enriching my little Collection.

Of the WANDERING JEW.
DR. Percy Dr. Brown remarks upon this Legend, (which, as it has been an
Article of the Peoples' Belief, merited some Consideration) "Sure were this
true, the wandering Jew might be a happy Arbitrator in many Christian
Controversies; but must unpardonably condemn the Obstinacy of the Jews, who can
contemn the Rhetoric of such Miracles, and blindly behold so living and lasting
Conversions."
tells us, "the Story of the wandering Jew is of considerable Antiquity: It had
obtained full Credit in this Part of the World before the Year 1228, as we
learn from Matt. Paris. For in that Year it seems there came an Armenian
Archbishop into England to visit the Shrines and Relics preserved in our
Churches; who being entertained at the Monastry of St. Alban's, was asked
several Questions relating to his Country, etc. Among the rest a Monk, who sat
near him, enquired if he had ever seen or heard of the famous Person named
Joseph, that was so much talked of, who was present at our Lord's Crucifixion
and conversed with him, and who was still alive in Confirmation of the
Christian Faith: The Archbishop answered, that the Fact was true; and
afterward one of his Train, who was well known to a Servant of the Abbot's,
interpreting his Master's Words, told them in French, that his Lord knew the
Person they spoke of very well; that he dined at his Table but a little while
before he left the East; that he had been Pontius Pilate's Porter, by Name
Cartaphilus; who, when they were dragging Jesus out of the Door of the
Judgment-hall, struck him with his Fist on the Back, saying, "go faster Jesus,
go faster; why do thou linger?" Upon which Jesus looked at him with a Frown,
and said, I indeed am going, but thou shall tarry till I come. Soon after he
was converted and baptized by the Name of Joseph. He lives for ever, but at the
End of every hundred Years, falls into an incurable Illness, and at length into
a Fit of Extacy, out of which when he recovers, he returns to the same State of
Youth he was in when Jesus suffered, being then about thirty Years of Age. He
remembers all the Circumstances of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, the
Saints that arose with him; the composing of the Apostles' Creed, their
Preaching and Dispersion; and is himself a very grave and holy Person. This is
the Substance of M. Paris' Account, who was himself a Monk at St. Alban's, and
was living at the Time when this Armenian Archbishop made the above Relation
Since his Time several Impostors have appeared at Intervals under the Name and
Character of the wandering Jew. See Calmet's Dict. of Bible. Turkish Spy, Vol.
2. B 3. Let. 1."

We had one of these Impostors not many Years ago here in the North, who made a
very Hermit-like Appearance, and went up and down our Streets, with a long
Train of Boys at his Heels, muttering "poor John Aliter poor Jew alone.
alone!" "poor John alone!" in a Manner singularly plaintive.

Of the vulgar Saying that a HUSBAND WEARS HORNS, or is a CORNUTE, when his
Wife proves false to him: Also the Meaning of the Word CUCKOLD, which has
become a popular Indication of the same Kind of Infamy.
Si quando sacra jura tori violaverit U xor
Cur gerit immeritus Cornua vir? Caput est.
Owen. Epigram. THE Word Horn His Horn shall be exalted: The Horn of my
Salvation, etc.
, in the sacred Writings, denotes fortitude and vigor of Mind. In the
Classics, Namque in malos acerrimus parata tollo cornua. Horat. Epod.
Jam feror in pugnas and nondum cornua sumpsi.
Ovid de Ebrietate.
personal Courage (metaphorically from the pushing of Animals) is intimated by
Horns. Whence is it then that a Custom has prevailed almost universally of
saying that the unhappy Husbands of false Women wear Horns, or are Cornutes? it
may be said almost universally, for we are told that even among the Indians it
was the highest Indignity that could be offered them even to point at a Horn.

In Spain it is a Crime as much punishable by the Laws to put up Horns against
a Neighbor's House, as to have written a Libel against him.
There is a great Parade of Learning on the Subject of this very serious Jest in
the "Paradise of pleasant Questions," Question 77. Various Elysius jucund arum
Questionum Campus.

Bruxellae, 1661, Folio.
are the Opinions the learned have given in that curious Collection of this
strange Custom, -- I shall present the Reader with the Sum of each of them: The
Lawyer Parladorus supposes the Word Cornutus a compound of nudus and cord, as
meaning a pitiful and sneaking Fellow, as that Man must needs be, who can sit
down tamely under so great an Insult.

A Conjecture this, that is perhaps worthy of some of our English Etymologists,
who in Matters that required the deepest Exertion of the Judgment, have left
all to the Licentiousness of Fancy, and of Consequence disgraced the Study of
Philology.

Caelius Rhodoginus wishes to derive it from an Insensibility, peculiar as he
says to the He-Goat A ducenda Uxore valde abhorreo, quia Gentem barbatulam,
hircosamque progeniem pertremisco. Elysius jucund Quest. Camp. 614.
, who will stand looking on, while others possess his Female Staung
Eboracensibus est Lignum ablongum, Contus bajulorum. Hicks. There was an
ancient Custom of riding the Stang, when one, in Derision, is made to ride on a
Pole for his Neighbor's Wife's Fault. See Glossary to Gaw. Douglas' Virgil.
. And Aldrovandus accounts for this by telling us, that this very salacious
Animal, is debilitated by his Excesses before he is Six Years old, after which
Period, as if conscious of his own Impotence, he will molest no Rival: This too
has been exploded, for it has been proved that this Animal is equally jealous
with, and will fight like others on such an Occasion.

Another Conjecture is, that some mean Husbands, availing themselves of their
Wives' Beauty, have turned it to account by prostituting them, obtaining by
this Means the Horn Pauper erat, sieri vult dives, quaerit et unde,
Vendidit Uxorem Naenius, emit agrum.
Martial. Epigram.
of Amalthea, the Cornu-Copia, which if I mistake not is called in the Language
of modern Gallantry, tipping the Horns with Gold: There seems to be a great
Deal of Probability in this Surmise. Pancirollus, on the other Hand, derives it
from a Custom of the debauched Emperor Andronicus, who used to hang up in a
Frolic, in the Porticos of the Forum, the Stags Horns he had taken in Hunting,
intending, as he says, by this new Kind of Insignia, to denote at once the
Manners of the City, the Lasciviousness of the Wives he had debauched, and the
Size of the Animals he had made his Prey, and that from hence the Sarcasm
spread abroad, that the Husband of an adulterous Wife bare Horns.

I am not satisfied with this last Account; all one gathers from it seems to
be, that what Andronicus did was a Continuation, not the Origin of this Custom:
As to the Word Cuckold Pliny tells us, that Vine-dressers were anciently called
Cuckows, i. e. slothful, because they deferred cutting their Vines, till that
Bird began to sing, which was later than the right Time, so that the same Name
may have been given to the unhappy Persons under Consideration, when through
disregard and neglect of their fair Partners, they have caused them to go a
gadding in search of more diligent and industrous Companions.
, it is plainly from the Latin Cuculus, the Cuckoo, a Bird, that as Aristotle
says, builds no Nest herself, but deposits her Eggs in that of some other Bird,
who hatches and adopts her Offspring as the Mari Cocu French for Cuckold,
does the Children who are none of his.

I must conclude this Subject with an Apology; it is not of the most delicate
Kind, yet in speaking of popular Antiquities, it seemed incumbent upon me to
say something about it.

To jest concerning a Crime, which is replete with every Evil to Society, is
indeed to scatter Fires-brands and Arrows in our Sport. It may be added there
is no philosophical Justice in such Insults: If the Husband was not to blame,
it is highly ungenerous, and an Instance of that common Meanness in Life of
confounding a Person's Misfortunes with his Faults: The Cruelty of such wanton
Reflections will appear, if we consider that a Man, plagued with a vicious
Wife, needs no Aggravation of his Misery.

FIRST of APRIL, ALL-FOOLS' DAY. Hunc Jocus -- mensem
Vindicat: hunc Risus et sine fell Sales.
BUCHANAN.
A Custom, says the Spectator, prevails every where among us on the First of
April, when every Body strives to make as many Fools as he can. The Wit chiefly
consists in sending Persons on what are called sleeveless Skinner guesses this
to mean a lifeless Errand. I am not satisfied with this Etymon. he assigns no
Cause for his Conjecture. -- This Epithet is found in Chaucer.
Errands, for the History of Eve's Mother, for Pigeon Milk, with similar
ridiculous Absurdities. He takes no Notice of the Rise of this singular Kind of
Anniversary. This is generally called All-Fools' Day, a Corruption it should
seem of Auld i. e. Old-Fools' Day; in Confirmation of which Opinion, I quote an
Observation on the First of Vide Hallow Even, or Nut-crack Night.
November in the ancient Roman Calendar so often cited: The Feast of Old Fools I
find in Poor Robin's Almanac for 1760, a pleasant, and what is meant for a
poetical Description of the modern Fooleries on the 1st of April, with the open
Avowal of being ignorant of the Origin of them. The first of April some do say
Is set apart for All-Fools Day;
But why the People call it so,
Nor I, nor they themselves do know:
But on this Day are People sent
On Purpose for pure Merriment;
And though the Day is known before
Yet frequently there is great Store
Of these Forgetfuls to be found,
Who Are sent to dance Moll Dixon's round;
And having tried each Shop and Stall,
And disappointed at them all,
At last some tells them of the Cheat;
Then they return from their Pursuit,
And straightway Home with Shame they run,
And others laugh at what is done.
But it is a Thing to be disputed,
Which is the greatest Fool reputed,
The Man that innocently went,
Or he that him design'dly sent.

is removed to this Day. This (Old Fools) seems to denote it to be a different
Day from the "Feast of Fools," which was held on the First of January, of which
a particular Description may be found in Du Cange's learned Glossary in verbo
Kalendae (See New Year's Day). All our Antiquaries (that I have had the
Opportunity of consulting) are silent concerning the first of April. It owes
its Beginning probably to a Removal, which was of frequent Use in the crowded
Roman Calendar, and of which I have just now adduced a seemingly apposite
Instance. There is nothing hardly (says the Author of the Essay to retrieve the
ancient Celtic,) that will bear a clearer Demonstration, than that the
primitive Christians by Way of conciliating the Pagans to a better Worship,
humoured their Prejudices by yielding to a Conformity of Names This Writer
contends, that the ancient Druidical Religion of Britain and the Gauls, had its
Pope, its Cardinals, its Bishops, its Deacons, etc.
, and even of Customs, where they did not essentially interfere with the
Fundamentals of the Gospel Doctrine. This was done in Order to quiet their
Possession and to secure their Tenure: An admirable Expedient and extremely fit
in those barbarous Times, to prevent the People from returning to their old
Religion. Among these in Imitation of the Roman Saturnalia, was the Festum
Fatuorum, when Part of the Jollity of the Season was a burlesque Election of a
Mock Pope, Mock Cardinals, Mock Bishops Andrew, (says this Writer) signifies a
head Druid or Divine; Hence it was, that when the Christians, by way of
exploding the Druids, turned them into Ridicule, in their Feast or Holiday of
Fools, one of the Buffoon Personages was a Merry Andrew." This Name is usually,
but as erroneously, as it should seem from this Writer's Explication, derived
from the Greek, where it signifies manly or courageous. From the Contrarieties
in the Definitions of Etymologists, Philology seems but too justly to bear the
reproachful Title of Eruditio ad libitum! Science that we twist and turn at
Pleasure.
, attended (says he) with a Thousand ridiculous and indecent Ceremonies,
Gambols, and Antics, such as singing and dancing in the Churches, in lewd
Attitudes, to ludicrous Anthems, all allusively to the exploded Pretensions of
the Druids, whom these Sports were calculated to expose to Scorn and Derision.
This Feast of Fools, had, continues he, its designed Effect, and contributed
perhaps more to the Extermination of those Heathens, than all the collateral
Aids of Fire and Sword, neither of which were spared in the Persecution of
them. The Continuance of Customs (especially droll ones, which suit the gross
Taste of the Multitude), after the original Cause of them has ceased, is a
great but no uncommon Absurdity.

Our Epithet We in the North call Persons who are thus deceived April-Gowks. --
A Gowk is properly a Cuckoo, and is used here metaphorically in vulgar Language
for a Fool. The Cuckoo is indeed every where a Name of Contempt. Gauch,
Teutonic, is rendered stultus, Fool, whence also our Northern Word a Goke or a
Gawky.

Vide Skinner in Verbo. A vulgar Superstition still prevails here concerning
the Cuckoo; it is thought very unlucky to have no Money about ones Person on
hearing this Bird for the first Time in a Season.

Mr Gay mentions thus, in his Spell, another popular Superstition, a Species of
Divination amongst Lovers on the Occasion.

"When first the Year I heard the Cuckoo sing,"
And call with welcome Notes the budding Spring,
I straightway set a running with such Haste,
Deb'rah that won the Smock scarce ran so fast,
Till spent for Lack of Breath, quite weary grown,
Upon a rising Bank I sat me down;
Then doff'd my Shoe, and by my Troth I swear,
Therein I spied this yellow frizzled Hair,
As like to Lubberkin's in Curl and Hue,
As if upon his comely Pate it grew."

of old Fools, (in the Northern and old English Auld,) does not ill accord with
the Pictures of Druids transmitted to us. The united Appearances of Age,
Sanctity and Wisdom, which these ancient Priests assumed, doubtless contributed
not a little to the Deception of the People. -- The Christian Teachers, in
their Labors to undeceive the fettered Multitudes, would probably spare no
Pains to pull off the Mask from these venerable Hypocrites, and point out to
their Converts that Age was not always synonymous with Wisdom, that Youth was
not the peculiar Period of Folly; but that with young ones, there were also Old
(Auld) Fools.

The Reader must content himself with this Explication, which I think not an
improbable one, at least till a better can be found. In joining the scattered
Fragments that survive the Mutilation of ancient Customs, we must be forgiven
if all the Parts are not found closely to agree; little of the Means of
Information is transmitted to us: that little can only be eked out by
Conjecture.

I have sometimes thought that the obsolete Sports of the ancient Hoc-tide, an
old Saxon Word, importing the Time of Scorning or Triumphing If I were asked to
turn this "Fools' Day" into Latin, methinks it could not be more aptly rendered
than by " Dies irrisorius. -- And so I find some of our best Antiquaries
translate the Saxon Word Hucx-daeg.
, which must have been about this Time of the Year, might have degenerated into
the April Fooleries. But I find no Authority for this Supposition, and insert
it as a mere Conjecture.

Hoke Day Hardeknuto mortuo, liberata est Anglia extunc a servitute Danorum: In
cujus signum usque hodie illa die, vulgariter dictu Hoxtuisday, ludunt in
villis trahendo cordas partialiter cum aliis jocis. J. Rossi. Ant. Warwic.
Hist. p. 105.
, was an annual Festival, said to have been instituted in Memory of the almost
total Destruction of the Danes in England by Ethelred, Anno. 1002. See Lambard,
Blount, Heylin, Verstegan, Strutt, Watt's Glossary to Matt. Paris, etc.

Miscellaneous additional REMARKS.
TO the Observations on the Rag Well, Chapter VIIIth, add the following: Bishop
Hall, in his Triumphs of Rome, ridicules a superstitious Prayer of the Popish
Church, for the Blessing of Clouts in the Way of cure of Diseases.

Mr. Hanway; in his Travels into Persia, Vol. 1. p. 177. tells us, After ten
Days Journey we arrived at a desolate Caravanserai, where we found nothing but
Water. -- I observed a Tree with a number of Rags tied to the Branches, these
were so many Charms which Passengers coming from Ghilan, a Province remarkable
for Agues, had left there, in a fond Expectation of leaving their Disease also
on the same Spot. He tells us that Sneezing is held a most happy Omen amongst
the Persians, especially when repeated often. -- That Cats are held in great
Esteem, and that in that Country too they have a Kind of Divination by the Bone
of a Sheep.

To the Observations on Chapter XXVII. -- In the Appendix, No. 2. to Pennant's
Tour, the Rev. Mr. Shaw, in his Account of Elgin and the Shire of Murray, tells
us, that in the middle of June, Farmers go round their Corn with burning
Torches in Memory of the Cerealia.

To the Notes Page 335. -- It is customary at Oxford to cut what we in the
North call the Groaning Cheese in the Middle when the Child is born, and so by
degrees, form with it a large Kind of Ring, through which the Child is passed
on the Christening Day.

Slices of the first Cut of the Groaning Cheese are laid under Pillows in the
North, for the same purpose with those of the Bride-Cake. The Bride-Cake is
here sometimes broken over the Bride's Head, and then thrown among the Crowd to
be scrambled for.

It would be thought here very unlucky to send away a Child the first Time its
Nurse has brought it on a visit, without giving it an Egg, Salt or Bread.

To the Observations on Chaper XIV. -- Fool-Plough, add " Aratrum inducere
moris fuit Romany, cum urbem aliquam evertissent, ut eam funditus delerent.
Vocabular. utriusque juris. a Scot. J. C. in verb. Aratrum."

It is remarkable that in some Places where this Pageant is retained, they
plough up the Soil before any House, at which they have exhibited, and received
no Reward.

The Morris-Dance, in which Bells are gingled, or Staves, or Swords clashed,
was learned, says Dr. Johnson, by the Moors, and was probably a Kind of
Pyrrhick or Military Dance.

Morisco, says Blount, (Span.) a Moor; also a Dance so called wherein there
were usually five Men, and a Boy dressed in a Girl's Habit, whom they called
the Maid Marrion, or perhaps Morian, from the Italian Morione, a Headpiece,
because her Head was wont to be gaily trimmed up. -- Common People call it a
Morris Dance.

To the Note on Toast, Page 342, add, In the Tatler, Vol. 1, No. 24, it is said
that the Word, in its present Sense, had its Rise from an Accident at the Town
of Bath, in the Reign of Charles the IId: It happened that on a public Day a
celebrated Beauty of those Times was in the Cross Bath, and one of the crowd of
her Admirers took a Glass of the Water in which the Fair One stood, and drank
her Health to the Company. There was in the Place a gay Fellow, half fuddled,
who offered to jump in, and swore, though he liked not the Liquor, he would
have the Toast: He was opposed in his Resolution; yet this Whim gave Foundation
to the present Honor which is done to the Lady we mention in our Liquor, who
has ever since been called a Toast.

I am not able to controvert this Account, but am by no means satisfied with
it. -- The Wit here is likelier to have been a Consequence, than the Cause of
this singular Use of the Word; it puts one in Mind of the well-known Reply of a
Mr. Brown, in some late Jest Book, who, on having it observed to him, that he
had given a certain Lady a long while for his Toast, answered, "Yes, but I have
not been able to toast her Brown yet."

Archbishop Tillotson tells us, That in all Probability those common juggling
Words of Hocus Pocus are nothing else but a Corruption of hoc est corpus, by
Way of ridiculous Imitation of the Priests of the Church of Rome in their Trick
of Transubstantiation, etc. Discourse on Transub. Ser. 26.

The subsequent Passage from Gay may be added to the Incantations of rustic
Maids, relative to their Lovers. P. 344.

At Eve last Midsummer no Sleep I sought,
But to the Field a Bag of Hemp Seed brought;
I scattered round the Seed on every Side,
And three Times in a trembling Accent cried,
This Hemp Seed with my Virgin Hand I sow,
Who shall my True-love be, the Crop shall mow.
Our rural Virgins in the North, are said to use some singular Rites in fasting
what they call St. Agnes' Fast, for the purpose of discovering their future
Husbands.

Mr. Strutt, speaking of the Sports of Children in his English Era, tells us,
Their Amusements were much the same with those at present played over by the
young Lads of this Age, as trundling Hoops, Blind-man's Buff, playing with
Tops, shooting with Bows at Marks, and swimming on Bladders; nay the still
younger Sort, playing with Whirligigs and Paper Wind-Mills, all which are found
in an old Missal in the Possession of John Ives, Esquire. P. 99

It is said, if I mistake not, in Hawksworth's Voyges, that the Top is known
among the Indians, some of whom pointed to our Sailors, who seemed to wonder at
seeing it amongst them; that in order to make it spin, they should lash it with
a Whip. -- Blindman's Buff is thus described by Gay: As once I played at
Blind-man's Buff, it hapt
About my Eyes the Towel thick was wrapped,
I missed the Swain, and seized on Blouzalind,
True speaks that ancient Proverb, "Love is Blind."


Thus also another puerile Sport: As at Hot Cockles once I laid me down,
And felt the weighty Hand of many a Clown;
Buxoma gave a gentle Tap and I
Quick rose, and read soft Mischief in her Eye.


Thus also of the Meritot, vulgo apud puerulos nostrates, Shuggy-Shew; in the
South, a Swing: On two near Elms the slackened Cord I hung,
Now high, now low, my Blouzalinda swung, etc.


Meritot, in Chaucer, a Sport used by Children, by swinging themselves in
Bell-ropes, or suchlike, till they are giddy. In Latin it is called Oscillum,
and is thus described by an old Writer: Oscillum est genus ludi, scilicet cum
sunis dependitur de trabe, in quo Pueri et Puellae sedentes impelluntur huc et
illuc. Speght's Gloss. to Chaucer.

I find the following elegant Description of Duck and Drake in an ancient
Church Writer: -- The Antiquity of this puerile Sport will appear by the
subsequent Extract from Minucius Felix: "Pueros videmus certatim gestientes,
testarum in mare jaculationibus ludere. Is lusus est testam teretem, jactatione
fluctuum levigatam, legere de litore: eam testam plano situ digitis
comprehensam, inclinem ipsum, atque humilem, quantum potest, super undas
inrotare: ut illud jaculum vel dorsum maris raderet, vel enataret, dum leni
impetu labitur; vel, summis fluctibus tonsis, emicaret, emergeret, dum assiduo
saltu sublevatur. Is se in pueris victorem ferebat cujus testa et procurreret
longius et frequentius exsiliret." P. 6.

Gay describes another well-known Kind of Sport thus: Across the fallen Oak the
Plank I laid,
And myself poised against the tottering Maid;
High leaped the Plank; adown Buxoma fell, etc.


The following beautiful Sketches of other puerile Diversions, are taken from
Mr. Grey's Ode on a distant Prospect of Eton College: Say, Father Thames, for
thou have seen
Full many a sprightly Race,
Disporting on thy Margent green,
The Paths of Pleasure trace,
Who foremost now delight to cleave
With pliant Arm thy glassy Wave?
The captive Linnet which enthrall?
What idle Progeny succeed,
To chase the rolling Circle's Speed,
Or urge the flying Ball?


To have a Month's Mind, implying a longing Desire, is a figurative Expression,
of which the Subsequent is the Origin:

Minnyng Days, says Blount, (from the Saxon Gemynde, i. e. the Mind, q. Mynding
Days) Bid Hist. lib. 4. ca. 30. Commemorationis Dies; Days which our Ancestors
called their Monthe's Mind, their Year's Mind, and the like, being the Days
whereon their Souls (after their Deaths) were had in special Remembrance, and
some Office or Obsequies said for them; as Obits, Dirges, etc. This Word is
still retained in Lancashire; but elsewhere more commonly called Anniversary
Days.

Add the following to the Observations on Chap. 16th, p. 195. Wassail-bowl: In
the Antiquarian Repertory, Vol. I. p. 218, is a Wood Cut of a large Oak Beam,
the ancient Support of a Chimney-piece, on which is carved a large Bowl, with
this Inscription on one Side -- Wass heil.

"The Figure, says the ingenious Remarker on it, is of the old Wassell-bowl, so
much the Delight of our hardy Ancestors, who on the Vigil of the New Year,
never failed to assemble round the glowing Hearth with their cheerful
Neighbors, and then in the spicy Wassel-bowl (which testifies the Goodness of
their Hearts) drowned every former Animosity, an Example worthy modern
Imitation. Wassell was the Word, Wassell every Guest returned, as he took the
circling Goblet from his Friend, whilst Song and civil Mirth brought in the
infant Year."

The three blue Balls, as I find in the abovenamed elegant Collection, prefixed
to the Doors and Windows of Pawn-brokers Shops, by the Vulgar humourously
enough said to indicate that it is two to one, that the Things pledged, are
never redeemed, was in reality the Arms of a set of Merchants from Lombardy,
who were the first that publicly lent Money on Pledges -- They dwelt together
in a Street from them named Lombard Street, in London -- The Appellation of
Lombard, was formerly all over Europe considered as synonimous to that of
"Usurer."

The purple flowered Lady's Thistle, which grows in great plenty about the
Ruins of Tinmouth Castle and Monastry, Northumberland, and of which, the Leaves
are beautifully diversified with numerous white Spots like Drops of Milk; is
vulgarly thought to have been originally marked by the falling of some Drops of
the Virgin Mary's Milk on it -- Whence I suppose its Name, Lady's (scil. our
Lady's) Thistle: An ingenious little Invention of Popery, and which, no doubt,
has been of Service to the Cause of Superstition.

To cry Coke, is in vulgar Language, synonymous with crying Peccavi -- Coke,
says the Author of the Glossary to Douglas' Virgil, is the Sound which Cocks
utter, especially when they are beaten, from which Sk. is of opinion, that they
have their Name of Cock. In Verb.

Marry, a Term of Asseveration in common Use, was originally in Popish Times, a
swearing by the Virgin Mary -- q. d. by Mary. So also Marrow-bones for the
Knees: I Will bring him down upon his Marrow-bones, q. d. I Will make him bend his
Knees, as he does to the Virgin Mary.

There is a vulgar Custom in the North, called riding the Stang, when one in
Derision is made to ride on a Pole, for his Neighbor's Wife's Fault: -- This
Word Stang, says Ray, is still used in some Colleges in the University of
Cambridge, to stang Scholars in Christmas Time, being to cause them to ride on
a Colt-staff or Pole, for missing of Chapel. It is derived from the Islandic
Staung, hasta.

Add to the Conjecture on the Etymon of Waffs, P. 99, the following: -- Wrach
in the Glossary to Gawen Douglas' Virgil, signifies a Spirit or Ghost. pafian
too A. Saxon is rendered stupere, horrere, fluctuare.

N. B. I have carefully endeavored to steer clear of Scripture Controversy in
the preceding Observations. -- The sacred Writings, given for very different
Purposes, and to Nations whose Genius and Manners by no means resembled our
own, cannot in my Opinion, with any Propriety, be applied to this Subject. If
it be objected here that Spirits and Apparitions, Dreams, etc. are mentioned in
them -- so, I add, are Miracles, yet we do not now make Pretensions to a Power
of performing them.

The GREAT BEING, who presides over every Cause of Nature, can undoubtedly make
all its Effects subservient to his Pleasure: In the silence of rational
Adoration, I prostrate my Faith before the immensity of his Power, of which I
believe infallible Wisdom to have been the inseparable Concomitant: I must
therefore apply in this Place what Horace said upon another Occasion: Nec Deus
intersit, nisi dignus Vindice nodus
Inciderit.


FINIS.
GENERAL INDEX.
A
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
AByssum 140 Absalom, his Feast 283 Air, the Means by which a Spirit becomes
visible 111 Alexander ab Alexandro, his Story of an Apparition ibid. All Saints
Church, in Newcastle upon Tyne, an Account of the ceasing and reviving of the
tolling of the Bell, from a Vestry Book belonging to it 5 Altar, worshipping
toward it 44 Ambrose, St. his Corpse watched 20 Anestese, the Salutation of
the Greek Church on Easter Day 243 Angels, good and evil attending upon Men 55
Anthony, St. buries Paul the Hermit 32 The Devil appears to him in the
Wilderness 104 Anselm, a Canon of his against worshipping of Fountains 83
Apparitions at Tombs 77 Arthur, King, how he observed 13 Days at Christmas 201
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Ash Wednesday 235 Ascension-Day, Custom on at Newcastle 270 Akenside, Dr. his
Birth, False-Shame 114 A you a hinny 184 Apparitions 72 Ash Wednesday,
remarkable Custom on in Germany 178 All-hallow Eve 343 Armed Man, meeting, a
good Omen on an Expedition 101 Armilustrium -- Roman Festival 175 Achs and
Corns, Prognostication of Weather by 217 Artificial Sun-Dance on Easter Day 247
Amphidromia, Feast of 278 Alehouse Signs 340 Apple-Parings, Divination by 345
Apple-Kernels, -- ditto ibid. All-Fools-Day 398 Andrew-merry 400 Agnes' Fast
405 and 387
B
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Babylas, his Body carried out with Psalmody 32 Bid, his Account of the Custom
of Monasteries at the Death of any of the Brethren 2 Bells, when first in the
Church 1 Tolling of them for the Dead, a Custom of the old Church of England 3
Beersheba, the Name of Abraham's Well 84 Bethany, the Place where Mary
Magdalene lived 245 Bethlehem, the Village of Christ 151 Blowing of Horns, when
used 255 Bone-fires 275 Bones of the Dead 76 Brownists, their Charge against
tolling the Bell 5 Brutus, his evil Genius appears to him 58 Buchanan 203
Burying with the Feet to the East, and the Head to the West 46 Our Savior so
buried ibid.
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Bells passing, additional Remarks on 12 -- general Observations on 14
Bible-Clerk, Custom of at Oxford 15 Board-streeking 23 Black, used in Mourning
35 Bearers-Under 35 Bowing and turning to the Altar, additional Remarks on 50
Buller of Buchan 75 Benton, Rag-well on the Road to 85 Babes in the Wood 92
Bars, Strangers at 94 Backwards, getting out of Bed 95 Blue, Candles burning 97
Blue, Specks on the Nails 98 Benshi, or the Fairy's Wife, Shrieks of 99
Barefoot, Woman, Omen 101 Bruisers, Custom of spitting in their Fists 101 Boys,
Custom of spitting their Saul ib. Brownies, a Kind of Ghosts 116 Bogle-boe,
116, and 324 Butter, Fairy 119 Brimstone, used in exorcising 143 Bessy 176
Balow, Nurse's Song 184 Byson, holy 185 Bowl, Wassail 195 and 408 Bean-King,
twelfth Day 205 Brok, Farmer's Horses so called 218 Ball-Hand, Game of 252
Bell-Tein, a rural Sacrifice 258 Bone-Fires 277 Buckler, a red Velvet one of
St. Michael 295 Baby, Corn or Kern 307 Bell-Ropes, Tobacco made of 315
Broom-Sticks, Witches riding on 321 Bewitched Persons vomiting ibid. Beans, see
Carlings 327 Bride-Favours 335 Bride-Cakes ibid. and 403 Banners hung over the
Tombs of Knights 42 Box Sprigs of a substitute for Palms 240 Bay, decking the
Coffin with 37 Borlase Mr. his Account of May Day Rites in Cornwall 260
Bringing the Summer Home 262 Bacchanalia 195 Ball-Money 337 Bid-Ale 339 Bumpers
340 Black-Puddings 355 Borrowed Day 373 Barbers' Shops, Poles at 388
Blind-Man's Buff 406 Blue Balls -- Pawn-Brokers 408
C
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Cake, baked in Honor of the Virgin Mary 204 Cake, with a Bean in when used
200 Candles, when lighted up in the Eastern Church 161 Candlemass-Day 220 Cato
214 Cassian, his Account of Spirits vanishing at Daybreak 63 Childermass-Day
211 Christ born about the Time of Cock Crow 64 Christmas Candle 155 Christmas
Carrol, what derived from 181 -- First sung by the Angels 63 Churchyards 76
Cloven Foot, the Devil appearing with 102 Cock-Crow 62 Collect for Aid against
Perils 61 Dr. Comber, his discourse of the ancient Manner of burying 47
Crickets, ominous 88 Crow, an ominous Bird 87 Crowning the Corpse, a Custom of
the Heathens 39 Crucifix 139 Cypress, what it is an Emblem of 30
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Clock, critique on the Word 13 Curfew 18 Candle set upon the Corpse, etc. 24
Coffin 25 -- 100 Cock 74 Cock-Weather, or Vane 75 Children dying unbaptized 74
Churchyards, anciently without the Walls 80 Cheek, burning of, an Omen 91
Chough 93 Cats -- Omens 92 Cats 322 403 Candles, Letters at 94 Cross-legged, to
sit 95 Cricket ibid. Crooked-Pin 97 Chips of Gallows ibid. Charms for driving
away Rats, etc. ibid. Carrying a Corpse on Shipboard 98 Candles, dead Men's 99
Candle, Rings in the 100 Cinders bounding from the Fire ibid. Circle, Fairies'
117 Conjuring, Remarks on 143 Casting out Devils 144 Cakes, Yule 163 Christmas
Box 164 Christmas Clog and Coal 166 Cock-fighting 374 Cow's Hide, Custom of
dressing in 180 Christmas Carrol in old Scotch 183 Cake, Twelfth 206 Calves'
Heads 216 Corns and Achs, Prognostics of the Weather 217 Church Monuments,
ditto 219 Common Shores, ditto 219 Candlemass Day, bearing of Candles on 223
Carnival, see also Pancake Tuesday 233 331 Cocks, thrown at 234 Cats, nine
Lives ibid. Christmas Pies 254 Cratch, Rack or Manger ibid. Column of the May
260 Cross Week 269 Cities, Guardians of 293 Corn Baby, or Image 307 Cross Bunns
312 Cross Mark ib. Cat, the sine qua non of a Witch 322 Carlings 325 Collop
Monday 331 Confarreation, a Wedding Ceremony 335 Crowing, unseasonable of
Cocks, ominous 92 Cats, coming in, etc. of strange, ominous ibid. Circle, a
Conjurer's Trap 121 Conjurers, African, St. Chrysostom's saying to 142
Coranich, Song at Funerals 27 Creed, turning to the Altar at the repeating of
50 Canute's Law against worshipping Wells 85 Churn or Kern Supper 307
Care-Sunday 326 Care-Cloth 330 Coral, Child's Toy 366 Cornute Cuckold ibid. 394
Childrens' Sports 406 Cheese Groaning 403 and 387 Cuckoo 401 To cry Coke 409
D
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Dancing in Public forbid 193 Days, lucky and unlucky 211 Dead, how placed in
the Grave 47 Dead-Watch, ominous 88 December, how named of the ancient Saxons
156 Dunstan, St. took the Devil by the Nose 109
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Devils, afraid of Bells 17 Debauchery at Lake-Wakes 27 Doles used at Funerals
36 Death Watch, Swift's Account of 95 Divination, various Modes of 96 Dog,
howling of, by Night, Omen 101 Devil, Names of, Old Nick, Old Harry 115 Doughs,
Yule 163 Decking Churches at Christmas 174 Divisions, political and civil, of
the Day 75 Deer, Sight of, Omen on an Expedition 101 Drummer, or Haunted House,
Extract from 120 Dragon or Fire-Drake 372 Deuce take you, vulgar Saying, what
387 Dreams 386 Duck and Drake 407
E
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
East, the Part of Heaven our Savior ascended to 45 Easter Holidays 249 Easter
Sunday 241 Eastern Magi 199 Edgar, a Canon made in his Time against worshipping
of Fountains 83 And upon the Observation of Saturday Afternoon 147 Egyptians,
their Guardian Angels 289 Epiphany 161 Eseck, the Name of a Well 84 Eve of St.
John Baptist, how observed 159 Exorcising a haunted House, what 123
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Earth, a small Quantity of, laid upon the Corpse 23 Ever-Greens at Funerals 37
East, Altar toward 52 East Position in the Grave 52 Ear tingling, a Sign that
somebody talks of us 91 Ephialtes, or Nightmare to prevent 97 Elf-locks 98
Elf-shots 117 Epiphany, or Twefth Day Cake 205 Easter Holidays 251 Eulogium on
Christian Philosophy 144 Easter Holiday Amusements 252 Egg-shell, breaking
after the Meat is out 317 Egg Saturday 333 Eggs at Easter 310
F
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Fairies 107 Faunes, how they appeared 104 Flora, Goddess of Flowers 256
Flowers, strawed on Graves 40 Friday, what observed on it in exorcising an
haunted House 132 Fulk, his Answer to the Papists in Defense of their
Palm Sunday Procession 237
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Face-Cloth 23 Funeral Sermons 36 Funeral Entertainments 24 Flat-Stones over
Graves 37 Feet forward, carrying a Corpse ibid. Flowers scattered on the Tomb 42
Falling of Salt, Omen 95 Fetch Lights, or dead Men's Candles 99 Forcing Fire
with a Wheel 100 Fox, Omen 101 Fairies stealing Children 116 -- 117 Fairies
Circle or Ring, Butter 117 -- 119 Fool-Plough 175 -- 404 Fools, Festival of 179
-- 195 Flower, or Flour of the Wake 281 Fontinalia 86 Fasting Spittle,
superstitious Opinion of 101 Fields of May 260 Fastens or Fasterns Even 331
Football Money at Weddings 337 Fairs 357 Falling Star 371
G
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Garlands of Flowers, when used 39 Guardian Angels 289 Genius Evil, appearing
to Brutus 58 Ghosts departed, whether they appear again 56 Goat, what it is an
Emblem of 104 Gloria in excelsis 182 Grass, why plucked up by the Jews 31
Grave, strewed with Flowers 40 Greens Ever, why used at Funerals 29 Gregory, a
Tradition mentioned by him 159 Guili 156
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Garlands 41 Ghosts 73 Guest -- Newcastle walking Spirit 75 Goblin 116 Giul 168
Gentlemen, Selden's Definition of the Word ibid. Goose intentos 217 Gebelin,
Mr. his Etymon of Yule 168 Gule of August 171 Guardians to Cities, People, etc.
293 Guardian Angels 295 Groats 355 Gule of August 171 -- 364 Gypsies 389
H
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Hagmena, what it signifies 181 Hall, Bishop, his Opinion of the Soul Bell 6
Hallowed Bells ibid. Hand Ball 250 Hare crossing the Way, an ill Omen 87
Harvest Supper 303 Haunted House 110 Hesperitius, his House haunted 140 Hilda,
St. her Death 2 High Noon, what 148 Holy Water 139 Hooker, Mr. his Custom at
parochial Perambulations 266 Husbandmen, Observers of Saturday Afternoon 145
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
House-Leek, why planted on House-Tops 218 Heck or Heit! In^^rjection to Horses
217 Heifer's Tail, stuck aloft, bodes Showers 218 Hand-Ball -- Game 252
Harvest-Home Ceremonies 306 Hamlet, Passage in Grave-Diggers' Scene 53 Hare,
Divination by 92 Hens -- sudden Fall of, Ominous ibid. Hornedness of the Moon
-- Omen ibid. Holy, or Hollow Stones, hung up in Stables 97 Hydromancy,
Divination by Water 96 -- 276 Howling of Dogs by Night, Ominous 101 Hobgoblin
116 Hagmena 164 Holme, Churches decked with at Christmas 174 Holly ibid.
Hunting Song, curious Stanza from 186 Hoppings, Etymon, of 302 Harvest Song 308
Harvest Home, Thompson's Description of 309 Horse-Shoe nailed on Threshold to
keep out Witches 317 Hand-Festing 338 Healths, drinking of 341 Haggs 371
I and K
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Jacob, how he prepared to go and worship God 149 Jerusalem, a Tradition held
by the Holy Men of it 46 Job, his Visions of the Night 59 John Baptist's Eve,
St. 271 Jonathan, his asking a Sign 89 Julius, not the Original of Yule 156
Ivy, why used at Funerals 29
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Iron Ladles affixed to Wells 86 Jesmond Well ibid. Inn Pilgrims ibid. Johnson
Dr. his Account of a New Year's-Day Ceremony 180 Juniper, burnt by Highlanders
on New Year's-Day 195 Judges Nose-gay 261 John St. Fires 279 Jack with the
Lanthorn 369 Ignis Fatuus ibid. Knells, nine for a Man, after tolling the Bell
for a Person's Death 13 Keeping of the Corpse four Days 25 Kisses, strange felt
on the Lips 100 Kepping the Ball 253 Kail, winning at Weddings 336 Kitty with
the Wisp 369
L
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Laurel, why used at Funerals 29 -- What it is an Emblem of at Christmas 172
Laying of Spirits 113 Ligatures 213 Light, the Emblem of several Things 158
Lock his Opinion of Apparitions 57
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Lake-Wake -- watching with the Dead 21 Laying out, or streeking the Corpse 23
Leaving the Coffin unscrewed till the Time of Burial 25 Looking-Glass, breaking
one, ominous 91 Lambkin sudden Death of, ominous 96 Libanomancy ibid. Lead-Ore,
Hazel's Tendency to ibid. Lots, Divination by ibid. Lord of Misrule 165 Log 166
Lamb, Rev. Mr. his Etymon of Balow 184 Leaping over Bone-Fires 277 Leaf-Gold --
Eggs covered with 310 -- 313 Lemuria 327 Lupercalia 195 Lucky, or otherwise
what Times to marry 337 Lady-Fly, Divination by 345 Lammass-Day 364
M
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Mag-Pye, its chattering ominous 88 Mamertus, Bishop of Vienna 264 Mary
Magdalene, guided by the Moon to the Sepulcher 244 May Pole 255 Mede, Mr. his
Opinion of the Manner of good and evil Spirits appearing 104 Maedrenack 156
Mell-Supper 303 Mid-Winter 157 Miserere Animabus 7 Monica, her Corpse watched 20
Monks, wrought in their Cells 151 Morning Hymn, whether sung by the Angels 67
Monday, what observed on it in exorcising a House 123 Mumming 191
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Muffling of Bells 18 Mortuaries 25 Mercy-Seat, Jews used to turn toward 50
Mark, golden found in Bed 74 Moles, on different Parts, ominous 95 -- 98
Merry-thought, plucking of 97 Mince-Pies 163 -- 216 Mummers 185, 194, etc.
May Day Ceremonies 257 Milk Maids at London ibid. Highlanders, Ceremonies on
258 May, Lady of 259 Mace 261 Mayor ibid. May Day Song at Newcastle 262
Midsummer Eve Rites 275 Michaelmas, farther Remarks on 292 Mell-Supper 307
Mare, crying the. Custom in Hertfordshire 308 Midlenting or Mothering 329 --
330 Mercheta Mulierum 338 Martinmas-Marts 355 Moon, Superstitions relative to
380
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Nabal, his Feast 283 New Year 187 Night before Easter 20 Night, the properest
Time for the appearing of evil Spirits 57 Nonconformists, Objections against
Ceremonies 173 Noon Song, what 148 Northern Parts, the Place where Psalmody is
chiefly observed 32 Nurses, their Stories of bad Consequence to Children 57
Nymphs, the Goddesses of Fountains 85
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Names given to Bells 16 Nail, rusty, ominous 97 Nails, Spots on 98 --, set
Times of paring 98 -- 100 Nule, for Yule 167 Nightmare, Account of 324 Nails
in drinking Cups 340 Nutcrack Night 343 Nuts 344 St. Nicholas' Day, Customs on
in Schools 362
O
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Ol, what it means 156 Old Year, how ended 187 Olivet, Mount 45 Omens, the
Observation of them, diabolical 90 Ostriches, Bones 213 Oswald, St. his Words
when dying 7 Owl, an ominous Bird 87
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Osiers, fencing the Grave with 43 Onychomancy or Onymancy, Divination by the
Nails 96 Owls-screech, etc. 97 Old Nick, and Old Harry, popular Names of the
Devil 115 Obsession of the Devil 142 Old Hat, used in raising the Devil 143 Old
Woman, Figure in the Fool-Plough 176 Olaus Magnus' Description of Sword Dance
ibid. Ointment of Witches 320 Old Shoe-throwing after one 94 -- 336 Orders, see
St. Nicholas Day 364
P
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Palm Sunday 236 Palms of good Works, what they are 239 Panites, how they
appeared 104 Paul, St. his Day 208 Paul, the Hermit 32 Paula, buried at
Bethlehem ibid. Peace of the Disciples 9 Perambulations 263 Plough-man 151
Plutarch, his Story of the evil Genius of Brutus 58 Popish Priests, famous
among the Vulgar 113 Power of Prayer 4 Prayers for dying Persons 9 Preparation
for the Sabbath, what it is an Emblem of 152 Prudentius, his Account of the
vanishing of Spirits at Cock-crow 62 Psalm, sung at watching the Corpse 20
Psalmody, used at Funerals 32
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Passing Bell, why the Soul Bell is so called 12 Psalmody at Funerals 34 Pall
to cover the Coffin 35 Poor, invited to Funerals 36 Pie, chattering of 93 Pin,
crooked, omen. 97 Palmistry 98 Print of Foot in the Ashes, Divination by 100
Purses bounding from the Fire ibid. Plough Monday 178 Pious Chansons 186 Paul
St. Festival of, Gay's Account 218 Prognostications of Weather, by a Heifer's
Tail stuck aloft 218 -- by pricking Corns 219 -- by Swallows soaring high ibid.
-- by swinging Signs in Towns ibid. -- by whistling Winds ibid. -- by common
Shores (sewers) ibid. -- by dropping Vaults ibid. -- Stockings on Hosier's
Poles ibid. Palm Sunday, farther Remarks on 240 Parish what it anciently
signified 268 Procession, parochial at Oxford 269 Pasche or Paste Eggs 310 Pot
or Caldron of Witches 320 Passion Sunday, in the Church of Rome, the Sunday
preceding Palm Sunday 326 Par-boiled Wheat 330 Pancake Tuesday 331 Plucking off
the Bride's Garters 336 Posset at Wedding Suppers 336 Pledge, I Will Pledge you
339 Pins in Drinking Cups 340 Peascods, Divination by 344 Pie-Powder Court 362
Q
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Queen Elizabeth, an Injunction of hers 266
R
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Raphael, the Angel 110 Ravens, their Cry, ominous 81 Recreation lawful, not
sinful 251 Reformation, too great 4 Rehoboth, the Name of a Well 84
Resurrection of the same Body always the Opinion of the ancient Church 48 -- 49
Rising early on Easter Day 241 Rogation Week, why so called 264 Romish Church
filled the World with Apparitions 108 Rosemary, why used at Funerals 29
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Rejoicing with Bells 16 Reever Bell 17 Rose Trees, planted round the Graves 43
Rain, happy the Corpse it falls on 53 Red Sea, laying Spirits in 74 Rag Well,
near Newcastle 85 -- 402 Robin Red-breasts, unlucky to kill 92 Rod, Divination
by 96 Rings in the Candle 100 Rogation Week 269 Ring-Finger 333 Royal Oak Day
353 Rose -- under the Rose, old Saying 366
S
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Sabbath Day, what observed on it, in the exorcising of an House 136 Sacrifices
to the Sun 157 Salamis, its Inhabitants how buried 48 Salt, its falling ominous
87 Satyrs, how they appeared 104 Saturday Afternoon, how observed 145
Saturnalia, what it was 192 Saxons, why they used the Yule-Clog 158 Scot,
Doctor, his Opinion of Ghosts in Church Yards 78 Seghnirim, how interpreted 104
Sepulcher, how visited 243 Shakespeare, his Accounts of Spirits vanishing at
Cock-Crow 54 Sheep-sheering, its Feast 282 Shepherds, when they have had
Apparitions 102 Shrove Tide 230 Shrift ibid. Sitnah, the Name of a Well 84 St.
Simeon 220 Simon of Sudbury 230 Sneezing when putting on the Shoes 214 Song,
New Year's 190 Spanish Church, why it observed not the Rogation Days 265
Spirits, how they converse with Men 104 Star which appeared to the Magi, what
it was an Emblem of 160 Sunday, what observed on it in exorcising an House 136
Sun Dancing on Easter Day 241 Swithin, his Day 208
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Streeking, and Streeking Board 23 Salt, a little upon a Plate set upon the
Corpse ibid. Shroud ibid. Spurs hung up over the Tombs of Knights 42 Spectator,
on Ghosts 73 -- on Omens 96 Swallows, unlucky to kill 92 Spiders, ditto 93
Sorts Homericae Virgilianae ibid. Speal-Bone Divination ibid. Second sight 94
-- 381 Strangers at the Candle and Bars ibid. Shoe old throwing after one ibid.
Scraping when we bow ibid. Stumbling in going down Stairs, omen. 95 Sitting
cross-leg'd and with our Fingers shut together ibid. Shooting of a Star 92 --
96 Saw-dust 97 Sailors' Superstition of Whistling, etc. 98 Spitting,
Superstitions relative to 101 Saturday Afternoon, farther Remarks on 153 Sword
Dancers 175 Sharping Corn. given at Christmas 178 Sandgate, Billingsgate of
the North 184 Saturnalia 194 Scot, Name of Farmer's Horse 218 Sheep Shearing.
Thompson's and Dyer's Description of 285 Sabbath of Witches 321 Sigillaria 195
Scots Farmers, their Method of preserving their Cattle against Witchcraft 318
Snails, Divination by 345 Six Score to the Hundred, Reason of 346 Sneezing.
Superstitions relative to 350 Salt, Custom of giving at Salt Hill 364 Silly, or
Seely-How 367 Second Sight 381
T
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Tanzy Cake 250 Tuesday, what was observed on it in the exorcising of an House
125 Theophilact, a Mistake of his 304 Threshold 214 Thumb 213 Thursday, what
observed on it 130 Tizri, a Month of the Jews 190 Tomb of Christ 46 Tombs,
Apparitions at them 56 Twelfth-Day 199 Twenty Days of Christmas, which 201
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Tintinnabula, Bells 14 Trumpets used for Bells by the Jews 15 Tom of Lincoln,
mighty Tom. Chapter Church 16 Torches at Funerals 35 Tears painted on
Window-shutters, Scotland 43 Transubstantiation, curious Thoughts on 51 True
Love Knots at the Bottom of Tea Cups 100 Thrift-Box 164 Truant-Clog 166 Twelfth
Day, Custom on 204 -- 308 Twelfth Cake, Mode of making 206 Torches consecrated
on Candlemass Day 223 Tanzy-Cake 253 -- 254 Truncheon of Field Officers 261
Tobacco 314 Tid, Mid, Misera 328 Throwing the Stocking 336 Toasting 342 -- 404
True-Love Knot 348 Top-Knot ibid.
V
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Valentine-Day 225 Vigilia Luminum 162 Vine-Dresser 151 Vigil 146
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Under-Bearers at Funerals 35 Valentine-Day, farther Remarks on 229
W
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Walking Place of Spirits 108 Watching with Corpse 20 Watches, four of the
Night, how employed by the primitive Christians 60 Wax Candles 222 Wednesday,
what observed on it in exorcising a House 127 Wells 82 Whitby, Doctor, an
Opinion of the Jews from him about Midnight Spirits 60 William, King of Scots
147 Windows adorned with Laurel 172 Winter's Evening, how spent by the Country
People 102 Wishing a good new Year 190 Wives Feast Day 220
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Watching a Corpse, see Lake Wake Wells 86 Weasel meeting one Ominous 95 Warts
97 Waff, seeing a Person's 99 -- 410 Witches 317 White Plough 175 Wassail Bowl
195 -- 408 Willow Flowers or Buds, substitute for Palms 240 With 240 Wake
Country, farther Remarks on 299 Witches, Witchcraft 317 Whistling on Shipboard
98 Wisp 369 Will with the Wisp ibid. Welsh Main 378 Wandering Jew 392
Y
ANTIQUITATES VULGARES.
Yule Clog, what is an Emblem of 155 Yule Eve 162
ADDENDA and APPENDIX.
Yule Dough or Dow 163 Yule Cakes ibid. Yule Coal 166 Yule, various Etymons of
167 -- 207 Yew Trees in Church Yards 37

