THE HAUNCH OF VENISON, A POETICAL EPISTLE TO LORD CLARE.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

Entered at Stationers Hall.

portrait of Oliver Goldsmith

THE HAUNCH OF VENISON, A POETICAL EPISTLE TO LORD CLARE.

By the late Dr. GOLDSMITH.

With a HEAD of the AUTHOR, Drawn by HENRY BUNBURY, Esquire and Etched by
BRETHERTON.

LONDON: Printed for J. RIDLEY, in St. James's Street; and G. KEARSLY, in Fleet
Street. MDCCLXXVI.

TO Lord CLARE.
THANKS, my Lord, for your Ven'son; for finer, or fatter,
Never ranged in a forest, or smok'd on a platter:
The Haunch was a picture for Painters to study;
The white was so white, and the red was so ruddy!
I had thoughts, in my chamber to hang it in view,
To be shown to my Friends as a piece of Virtu;
As in some Irish Houses, where things are so-so,
One Gammon of Bacon hangs up for a show;
But, for eating a rasher of what they take pride in,
They Would as soon think of eating the pan it is fried in.
But hold -- let us pause -- Don't I hear you pronounce
This tale of the Bacon a damnable bounce?
Well, suppose it a bounce; sure a Poet may try,
By a bounce now and then, to get courage to fly:
But, my Lord, it is no bounce: I protest, in my turn,
It Is a truth; and your Lordship may ask Mr. BURN.
To go on with my tale -- As I gazed on the Haunch,
thought of a Friend that was trusty and staunch:
So I cut it, and sent it to REYNOLDS undrest,
To paint it, or eat it, just as he liked best.
Of the Neck and the Breast I had next to dispose;
'Twas a neck and a breast -- that might rival MONROE's:
But in parting with these I was puzzled again,
With the how, and the who, and the where, and the when:
There Is COLEY, and WILLIAMS, and HOWARD, and HIFF --
I think they love Ven'son; I know they love Beef:
But -- hang it! -- to Poets, that seldom can eat,
Your very good Mutton's a very good treat:
Such dainties to them! It would look like a flirt,
Like sending 'em Ruffles when wanting a Shirt.
While thus I debated, in reverie centered,
An Acquaintance, a Friend -- as he called himself, entered;
A fine-spoken Custom-house Officer he,
Who smiled as he gazed on the Ven'son and me.
" What have we got here? -- Aye, this is good eating!
" Your own, I suppose -- or is it in waiting?"
Why, whose should it be, Sir? cried I, with a flounce;
I get these things often -- But that was a bounce.
" If that be the case then," cried he very gay,
" I Am glad I have taken this house in my way.
" Tomorrow you take a poor dinner with me:
" No words -- I insist on it -- precisely at three.
" And now that I think on it, as I am a sinner,
" We wanted this Ven'son to make up the dinner.
" I Will take no denial -- you shall, and you must;
" And my Wife, little Kitty, is famous for Crust.
" We'll have JOHNSON and BURKE; all the Wits will be there;
" My acquaintance is slight, or I Would ask my Lord CLARE.
" Here, Porter! this Ven'son with me to Mile-end --
" No words, my dear GOLDSMITH! my very good Friend!"
Thus, seizing his hat, he brushed off like the wind,
And the Porter and Eatables followed behind.
Left alone to reflect, having emptied my shelf,
And nobody with me at sea, but myself;
Though I could not help thinking my Gentleman hasty,
Yet JOHNSON and BURKE, and a good Ven'son Pasty,
Were things that I never disliked in my life,
Though clogged with a Coxcomb, and Kitty his Wife.
So next day, in due splendour to make my approach,
I drove to his door in my own Hackney-coach.
When come to the place where we all were to dine,
(A chair-lumber'd Closet, just twelve feet by nine)
My Friend bid me welcome, but struck me quite dumb
With tidings that JOHNSON and BURKE could not come:
" And I knew it," he cried; "both eternally fail;
" The one at the House, and the other with THRALE.
" But, I warrant for me, we shall make up the Party,
" With two full as clever, and ten times as hearty.
" The one is a Scotchman, the other a Jew,
" Who dabble and write in the Papers -- like you:
" The one writes the Snarler; the other, the Scourge:
" Some think he writes Cinna -- he owns to Panurge."
While thus he described them by Trade and by Name,
They entered; and Dinner was served as they came:
At the top a fried Liver and Bacon was seen;
At the bottom was Tripe in a swinging terrene;
At the sides there was Spinach and Pudding made hot;
In the middle -- a place, where the Ven'son was not.
Now, my Lord, as for Tripe, it is my utter aversion;
And your Bacon I hate, like a Turk, or a Persian:
But what vexed me most was that damned Scottish Rogue,
With his long-winded speeches, and smiles, and his brogue:
" And, Madam," says he, "may this bit be my poison
" If a prettier Dinner I ever set eyes on!
" Pray, a slice of your Liver; -- but may I be cursed,
" But I Have eat of your Tripe till I Am ready to burst."
'Your Tripe!' quoth the Jew, 'if the truth I may speak,
'I could eat of this Tripe seven days in the week:
'I like these here Dinners, so pretty and small;
'But your Friend there, the Doctor, eats nothing at all.'
" O ho!" quoth my Friend, "he will come on in a trice;
" He Is keeping a corner for something that is nice:
" There Is a Pasty." -- 'A Pasty!' returned the Scot;
'I don't care if I keep a corner for thot.'
" We'll all keep a corner," the Lady cried out:
We'll all keep a corner, was echoed about.
While thus we resolved, and the Pasty delayed,
With looks quite astonishing entered the Maid:
A visage so sad, and so pale with affright!
Waked PRIAM, by drawing his curtains by night.
But too soon we found out (for who could mistake her?)
That she came with some terrible news from the Baker;
And so it fell out; for that negligent Sloven
Had shut out the Pasty on shutting his Oven.
Sad Philomel thus -- but let similes drop;
And now, that I think on it, the story may stop.
To be plain, my good Lord, it is but labor misplaced
To send such good Verses to one of your taste:
You Have got an odd something, a kind of discerning,
A relish, a taste, sicken'd over by learning;
At least it is your temper, it is very well known,
That you think very slightly of all that is your own:
So perhaps, in your habits of thinking amiss,
You may make a Mistake -- and think slightly of This.
THE END.
EPITAPH.
THIS tomb, inscribed to gentle PARNEL's name,
May speak our gratitude, but not his fame.
What heart but feels his sweetly-moral lay,
That leads to Truth through Pleasure's flowery way?
Celestial themes confessed his tuneful aid;
And Heaven, that lent him Genius, was repaid.
Needless to him the tribute we bestow,
The transitory breath of Fame below:
More lasting rapture from his Works shall rise,
While Converts thank their Poet in the skies.
FROM THE Oratorio of the CAPTIVITY, BY Dr. GOLDSMITH.
SONG.
THE Wretch condemned with life to part,
Still, still on Hope relies;
And every pang that rends the heart,
Bids Expectation rise.
Hope, like the glim'ring taper's light,
Adorns and chears the way;
And still, as darker grows the night,
Emits a brighter ray.
SONG.
I.
O Memory! thou fond deceiver,
Still importunate and vain,
To former joys, recurring ever,
And turning all the past to pain;
II.
Thou, like the world, the oppressed oppressing,
Thy smiles increase the wretch's woe;
And he who wants each other blessing,
In thee must ever find a foe.

