THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY.
SECT. XLIV.
MORE poetry was written in the single reign of Elizabeth, than in the two
preceding centuries. The same causes, among others already enumerated and
explained, which called forth genius and imagination, such as the new sources
of fiction opened by a study of the classics, a familiarity with the French
Italian and Spanish writers, the growing elegancies of the English language,
the diffusion of polished manners, the felicities of long peace and public
prosperity, and a certain freedom and activity of mind which immediately
followed the national emancipation from superstition, contributed also to
produce innumerable compositions in poetry. In prosecuting my further
examination of the poetical annals of this reign, it therefor becomes
necessary to reduce such a latitude of materials to some sort of methodical
arrangement. On which account, I shall class and consider the poets of this
reign, under the general heads, or divisions, of SATIRE, SONNET, PASTORAL, and
MISCELLANEOUS poetry. Spenser will stand alone, without a class, and without a
rival.

Satire, specifically so called, did not commence in England till the latter
end of the reign of queen Elizabeth. We have seen, indeed, that eclogues, and
allegories were made the vehicle of satire, and that many poems of a satirical
tendency had been published, long ago. And here, the censure was rather
confined to the corruptions of the clergy, than extended to popular follies and
vices. But the first professed English satirist, to speak technically, is
bishop Joseph Hall, successively bishop of Exeter and Norwich, born at
Bristow-park within the parish of Ashby de la Zouch in Leicestershire, in the
year 1574, and at the age of fifteen, in the year 1588, admitted into
Emanuel-college at Cambridge, where he remained about eight years. He soon
became eminent in the theology of those times, preached against predestination
before prince Henry with unrivalled applause, and discussed the doctrines of
Arminianism in voluminous dissertations. But so variable are our studies, and
so fickle is opinion, that the poet is better known to posterity than the
prelate or the polemic. His satires have outlived his sermons at court, and his
laborious confutations of the Brownists. One of his later controversial tracts
is, however, remembered on account of the celebrity of its antagonist. When
Milton descended from his dignity to plead the cause of fanaticism and ideal
liberty, bishop Hall was the defender of our hierarchical establishment. Bail,
who knew Hall only as a theologist, seems to have written his life merely
because he was one of the English divines at the Synod of Dort, in 1618. From
his inflexible and conscientious attachment to the royal and episcopal cause
under king Charles the first, he suffered in his old age the severities of
imprisonment and sequestration; and lived to see his cathedral converted into a
barrack, and his palace into an alehouse. His uncommon learning was meliorated
with great penetration and knowledge of the world, and his mildness of manners
and his humility were characteristical. He died, and was obscurely buried
without a memorial on his grave, in 1656, and in his eighty second year, at
Heigham a small village near Norwich, where he had sought shelter from the
storms of usurpation, and the intolerance of presbyterianism.

I have had the good fortune to see bishop Hall's funeralsermon, preached some
days after his interment, on the thirtieth day of September, 1656, at saint
Peter's church in Norwich, by one John Whitefoote, Master of Arts, and rector
of Heigham. The preacher, no contemptible orator, before he proceeds to draw a
parallel between our prelate and the patriarch Israel, thus illustrates that
part of his character with which we are chiefly concerned, and which I am now
hastening to consider. "Two years together he was chosen rhetoric professor
in the universitie of Cambridge, and performed the office with extraordinary
applause. He was noted for a singular wit from his youth: a most acute
rhetorician, and an elegant poet. He understood many tongues; and in the
rhetoric of his own, he was second to none that lived in his time Fol. 3.
." It is much to our present purpose to observe, that the style of his prose is
strongly tinctured with the manner of Seneca. The writer of the satires is
perceptible in some of his gravest polemical or scriptural treatises; which are
perpetually interspersed with excursive illustrations, familiar allusions, and
observations on life. Many of them were early translated into French; and their
character is well drawn by himself, in a dedication to James the first, who
perhaps would have much better relished a more sedate and profound theology.
"Seldom any man has offered to your royal hands a greater bundle of his own
thoughts, nor perhaps more variety of discourse. For here shall your majesty
find Morality, like a good handmaid, waiting on Divinity: and Divinity, like
some great lady, every day in several dresses. Speculation interchanged with
experience, Positive theology with polemical, textuall with discursorie,
popular with scholasticall WORKS, Land. 1628. sol. vol. i. p. 3.
."

At the age of twenty-three, while a student at Emanuelcollege, and in the year
1597, he published at London three Books of anonymous Satires, which he called
Toothless SATYRS, poetical, academical, moral In small duodecimo, Wh. Let. But
see the Catalogue to Mr. Capell's SHAKESPERIANA, given to Trinity college
Cambridge, NUMBER. 347. "Virgidemiarum, libri 6. Satires, Hall. 1597, 80."
. They were printed by Thomas Creed for Robert Dexter, and are not recited in
the registers of the Stationers of London. The following year, and licenced by
the stationers, three more books appeared, entitled, "VIRGIDEMIARUM, The three
last Books of Biting Satyrs." These are without his name, and were printed by
Richard Bradock for Robert Dexter, in the size and letter of the last In pages
106. With vignettes. Entered, March 30, 1598, to R. Dexter. REGISTR. STATION.
C. f. 33. a. Ames recites an edition of all the SIX BOOKS, in 68 pages, in
1598. HIST. PRINT. p. 434. I suspect this to be a mistake.
. All the six Books were printed together in 1599, in the same form, with this
title, "VIRGIDEMIARUM, The three last Books of biting Satyrs corrected and
amended with some additions by J. H. [John Hall.] LONDON, for R. Dexter, etc.
1599." A most incomprehensive and inaccurate title: for this edition, the last
and the best, contains the three first as well as the three last Books A modern
edition, however, a thin duodecimo, was printed at Oxford, for R. Clements,
1753, under the direction of Mr. Thomson, late fellow of Queen's college
Oxford. The editors followed an edition bought from Lord Oxford's library,
which they destroyed, when the new one was finished.
. It begins with the first three books: then at the end of the third book,
follow the three last, but preceded by a new title, "VIRGIDEMIARUM. The three
last Books, of biting Satyrs. Corrected and amended with some additions by J.
H." For R. Dexter, as before, 1599. But the seventh of the fourth Book is here
made a second satire to the sixth or last Book. Annexed are, "Certain worthy
manvscript poems of great antiquity reserved long since in the study of a
Northfolke gentleman, And now first published by J. S. I. The stately tragedy
of Guistard and Sismond. II. The Northern mother's blessing. III. The way to
Thrifte. Imprinted at London for R. D. 1597." Dedicated, "to the worthiest poet
Master Ed. Spenser." To this identical impression of Hall's Satires, and the
Norfolk gentleman's manuscript poems annexed, a false title appeared in 1602,
"VIRGIDEMIARUM. Six Books. First three books, Of toothlesse Satyrs. 1.
POETICAL. 2. ACADEMICALL. 3. MORAL. London, Printed by John Harison, for
Robert Dexter, 1602." All that follows is exactly what is in the edition of
1599. By VIRGIDEMIA, an uncouth and uncommon word, we are to understand a
Gathering or Harvest of rods, in reference to the nature of the subject.

These satires are marked with a classical precision, to which English poetry
had yet rarely attained. They are replete with animation of style and
sentiment. The indignation of the satirist is always the result of good sense.
Nor are the thorns of severe invective unmixed with the flowers of pure poetry.
The characters are delineated in strong and lively coloring, and their
discriminations are touched with the masterly traces of genuine humor. The
versification is equally energetic and elegant, and the fabric of the couplets
approaches to the modern standard. It is no inconsiderable proof of a genius
predominating over the general taste of an age when every preacher was a
punster, to have written verses, where laughter was to be raised, and the
reader to be entertained with sallies of pleasantry, without quibbles and
conceits. His chief fault is obscurity, arising from a remote phraseology,
constrained combinations, unfamiliar allusions, elleiptical apostrophes, and
abruptness of expression. Perhaps some will think, that his manner betrays too
much of the laborious exactness and pedantic anxiety of the scholar and the
student. Ariosto in Italian, and Regnier in French, were now almost the only
modern writers of satire: and I believe there had been an English translation
of Ariosto's satires. But Hall's acknowledged patterns are Juvenal and Persius,
not without some touches of the urbanity of Horace. His parodies of these
poets, or rather his adaptations of ancient to modern manners, a mode of
imitation not unhappily practiced by Oldham, Rochester, and Pope, discover
great facility and dexterity of invention. The moral gravity and the censorial
declamation of Juvenal, he frequently enlivens with a train of more refined
reflection, or adorns with a novelty and variety of images.

In the opening of his general PROLOGUE, he expresses a decent consciousness of
the difficulty and danger of his new undertaking. The laurel which he sought
had been unworn, and it was not to be won without hazard.

I FIRST ADVENTURE, with foolhardy might,
To tread the steps of perilous despite:
I FIRST ADVENTURE, follow me who list,
And be the SECOND ENGLISH SATIRIST.
His first book, containing nine satires, is aimed at the numerous impotent yet
fashionable scribblers with which his age was infested. It must be esteemed a
curious and valuable picture, drawn from real life, of the abuses of poetical
composition which then prevailed; and which our author has at once exposed with
the wit of a spirited satirist, and the good taste of a judicious critic. Of
Spenser, who could not have been his cotemporary at Cambridge, as some have
thought, but perhaps was his friend, he constantly speaks with respect and
applause.

I avail myself of a more minute analysis of this Book, not only as displaying
the critical talents of our satirist, but as historical of the poetry of the
present period, and illustrative of my general subject. And if in general, I
should be thought too copious and prolix in my examination of these satires, my
apology must be, my wish to revive a neglected writer of real genius, and my
opinion, that the first legitimate author in our language of a species of
poetry of the most important and popular utility, which our countrymen have so
successfully cultivated, and from which Pope derives his chief celebrity,
deserved to be distinguished with a particular degree of attention.

From the first satire, which I shall exhibit at length, we learn what kinds of
pieces were then most in fashion, and in what manner they were written. They
seem to have been, tales of love and chivalry, amatorial sonnets, tragedies,
comedies, and pastorals.

Nor lady's wanton love, nor wandering knight,
Legend I out in rimes all richly dight:
Nor fright the reader, with the pagan vaunt
Of mighty Mahound, and great Termagaunt Saracen divinities.
.
Nor list I sonnet of my mistress' face,
To paint some Blowesse In modern ballads, Blousilinda, or Blousibella. Doctor
Johnson interprets BLOWZE, a ruddy fat-faced wench. DICT. in V.
with a borrowed grace.
Nor can I bide Abide, bear, endure.
to pen some hungry Perhaps the true reading is angry, that is, impassioned.
These satires have been most carelessly printed.
scene
For thick-skin ears, and undiscerning eene:
Nor ever could my scornful Muse abide
With tragic shoes Buskins.
her anckles for to hide.
Nor can I crouch, and with my fawning tail,
To some great patron, for my best avail.
Such hunger-starven trencher poetry Poetry written by hirelings for bread.
,
Or let it never live, or timely die!
Nor under every bank, and every tree,
Speak rimes unto mine oaten minstrelsie:
Nor carol our so pleasing lively lays
As might the Graces move my mirth to praise Perhaps this couplet means Comedy.
.
Trumpet, and reeds, and socks, and buskins fine,
I them bequeathe Heroic poetry, pastorals, comedy, and tragedy, I leave to the
celebrated established masters in those different kinds of composition, such as
Spensor and Shakespeare. Unless the classic poets are intended. The imitation
from Persius's PROLOGUE is obvious.
, whose statues the wandering twine
Of iuie, mixed with bays, circles around,
Their living temples likewise lawrel-bound.
Rather had I, albe in careless rimes,
Check the misorder'd world, and lawless times.
Nor need I crave the Muse's midwifry,
To bring to birth so worthless poetry.
Or, if we list Or, even if I was willing to invoke a muse, etc.
, what baser Muse can bide
To sit and sing by Granta's naked side?
They haunt the tided Thames and salt Medway,
Eer since the fame of their late bridal day.
Naught have we here but willow-shaded shore,
To tell our Grant his banks are left forlore B. i. 1. f. 1. edit. 1599.
.
The compliment in the close to Spenser, is introduced and turned with singular
address and elegance. The allusion is to Spenser's beautiful episode of the
marriage of Thames and Medway, recently published, in 1595, in the fourth book
of the second part of the FAIRY QUEEN B. iv. C. xi.
. But had I, says the poet, been inclined to invoke the assistance of a Muse,
what Muse, even of a lower order, is there now to be found, who would
condescend to sit and sing on the desolated margin of the Came? The Muses
frequent other rivers, ever since Spenser celebrated the nuptials of Thames and
Medway. Came has now nothing on his banks but willows, the types of desertion.

I observe here in general, that Thomas Hudson and Henry Lock, were the Bavius
and Mevius of this age. In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, 1606, they are thus
consigned to oblivion by Judicio. "Lock and Hudson, sleep you quiet shavers
among the shavings of the press, and let your books lie in some old nook
amongst old boots and shoes, so you may avoid my censure A. i. S. ii.
." Hudson translated into English Du Bartas's poem of JUDITH AND HOLOFERNES, in
which is this couplet. And at her ear a pearl of greater value
There hung, than that the Egyptian queen did swallow.
Yet he is commended by Harrington for making this translation in a "very good
and sweet English verse Transl. ORL. FUR. Notes, B. xxxv. p. 296. 1633. Hence,
or from an old Play, the name HOLOFERNES got into Shakespeare.
," and is largely cited in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, 1600. Lock applied the Sonnet
to a spiritual purpose, and substituting christian love in the place of amorous
passion, made it the vehicle of humiliation, holy comfort, and thanksgiving.
This book he dedicated, under the title of the PASSIONATE PRESENT to queen
Elizabeth, who perhaps from the title expected to be entertained with a subject
of very different nature I have before cited this Collection, which appeared in
1597, vol. iii. 445. That was a second edition. To his ECCLESIASTES there is a
recommendatory poem by Lilly. Some of David's Psalms in verse appear with his
name the same year.
.

In the second satire, our author poetically laments that the nine Muses are no
longer vestal virgins.

Whilom the Muses nine were vestal maids,
And held their temple in the secret shades
Of fair Parnassvs, that two-headed hill
Whose ancient fame the southern world did fill:
And in the stead of their eternal fame
Was the cool stream, that took his endless name
From out the fertile hoof of winged steed:
There did they sit, and do their holy deed
That pleased both heaven and earth. --
He complains, that the rabble of rymesters new have engrafted the myrtle on
the bay; and that poetry, departing from its ancient moral tendency, has been
unnaturally perverted to the purposes of corruption and impurity. The Muses
have changed, in defiance of chastity, Their modest stole to garish looser weed,
Decked with loue-fauours, their late whoredom's meed.
While the pellucid spring of Pyrene is converted into a poisonous and muddy
puddle.

-- Whose infectious stain
Corrupts all the lowly fruitful plain B. i. 2. f. 4.
.
Marlow's OVID'S ELEGIES, and some of the dissolute sallies of Green and Nash,
seem to be here pointed out. I know not of any edition of Marston's PYGMALION'S
IMAGE before the year 1598, and the CALTHA POETARUM, or BUMBLE-BEE, one of the
most exceptionable books of this kind, written by T. Cutwode, appeared in 1599
To R. Olave, April 17, 1599. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 50. b.
. Shakespeare's VENUS AND ADONIS, published in 1593, had given great offense to
the graver readers of English verse This we learn from a poem entitled, "A
Scourge for Paper-persecutors, by J. D. with an Inquisition against
Paperpersecutors by A. H. Land. for H. H." 1625. 4to. Signat. A. 3.

Making lewd Venus with eternal lines
To tie Adonis to her loves designs:
Fine wit is shown therein, but finer 'twere
If not attired in such bawdy geere:
But be it as it will, the coyest dames
In private read it for their closet-games.
See also Freeman's Epigrams, the Second Part, entitled, RUN AND A GREAT CAST,
Land. 1614. 4to. EPIGR. 92. Signat. K. 3.

TO MASTER WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.
Shakespeare, that nimble Mercury thy brain, etc.
Who list read lust, there is VENUS AND ADONIS,
True model of a most lascivious letcher.

.

In the subsequent satire, our author more particularly censures the
intemperance of his brethren; and illustrates their absolute inability to
write, till their imaginations were animated by wine, in the following apt and
witty comparison, which is worthy of Young.

As frozen dunghills in a winter's morn,
That void of vapors seemed all beforn,
Soon as the sun sends out his piercing beams,
Exhale forth filthy smoke, and stinking steams;
So does the base and the fore-barren brain,
Soon as the raging wine begins to reign.
In the succeeding lines, he confines his attack to Marlow, eminent for his
drunken frolicks, who was both a player and a poet, and whose tragedy of
TAMERLANE THE GREAT, represented before the year 1588, published in 1590, and
confessedly one of the worst of his plays, abounds in bombast. Its false
splendor was also burlesqued by Beaumont and Fletcher in the COXCOMB; and it
has these two lines, which are ridiculed by Pistol, in Shakespeare's KING HENRY
THE FOURTH A. ii. S. iv.
, addressed to the captive princes who drew Tamerlane's chariot. Holla, you
pampered jades of Asia,
What, can ye draw but twenty miles a day?
We should, in the mean time, remember, that by many of the most skilful of our
dramatic writers, tragedy was now thought almost essentially and solely to
consist, in the pomp of declamation, in sounding expressions, and unnatural
amplifications of style. But to proceed.

One, higher pitched, does set his soaring thought
On crowned kings that fortune low has brought;
Or some vpreared high-aspiring swain,
As it might be the Turkish Tamberlaine There is a piece entered to R. Jones,
Aug. 14. 1590, entitled, "Comicall discourses of Tamberlain the Cithian
[Scythian] shepherd." REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 262. b. Probably the story of
Tamerlane was introduced into our early drama from the following publication,
"The history of the great emperor Tamerlane, drawn from the ancient monuments
of the Arabians. By messire Jean du Bec, abbot of Mortimer. Translated into
English by H. M. London, for W. Ponsonbie, 1597." 4to. I cite from a second
edition.
:
Then weeneth he his base drink-drowned spright
Rapt to the threefold loft of heauen's hight:
When he conceiues upon his feigned stage
The stalking steps of his great personage
Graced with huff cap terms, and thundering threats,
That his poor hearers hair qvite upright sets,
So soon as some brave minded hungry youth
Sees fitly frame to his wide-strained mouth,
He vaunts his voice upon a hired stage,
With high-set steps, and princely carriage. --
There if he can with terms Italianate,
Big-sounding sentences, and words of state,
Fair patch me up his pure iambicke verse,
He rauishes the gazing scoffolders Those who sat on the scaffold, a part of
the playhouse which answered to our upper-gallery. So again, B. iv. 2. f. 13.
When a crazed scaffold, and a rotten stage,
Was all rich Nenius his heritage.
See the conformation of our old English theater accurately investigated in the
SUPPLEMENT TO SHAKESPEARE, i. 9. seq. [See supr. vol. iii. 327.]
.
But, adds the critical satirist, that the minds of the astonished audience may
not be too powerfully impressed with the terrors of tragic solemnity, a VICE,
or buffoon, is suddenly and most seasonably introduced.

Now lest such frightful shows of fortvne's fall,
And bloody tyrant's rage, should chance appall
The dead-struck audience, mid the silent rout
Comes leaping in a self-misformed lout,
And laughs, and grins, and frames his mimic face,
And jostles straight into the prince's place. --
A goodly hotch-potch, when vile russetings
Are matched with monarchs, and with mighty kings:
A goodly grace to sober tragic muse,
When each base clown his clumsy fist does bruise In striking the benches to
express applause.
!
To complete these genuine and humorous anecdotes of the state of our stage in
the reign of Elizabeth, I make no apology for adding the paragraph immediately
following, which records the infancy of theatric criticism.

Meanwhile our poets, in high parliament,
Sit watching every word and gesturement,
Like curious censors of some doutie gear,
Whispering their verdict in their fellows ear.
Woe to the word, whose margin in their scrole Copy.

Is noted with a black condemning coal!
But if each period might the synod please,
Ho! bring the ivy boughs, and bands of bays B. i. 3. f. 8.
.
In the beginning of the next satire, he resumes this topic. He seems to have
conceived a contempt for blank verse; observing that the English iambic is
written with little trouble, and seems rather a spontaneous effusion, than an
artificial construction.

Too popular is tragic poesy,
Straining his tiptoes for a farthing fee:
And does, beside, on rimeless numbers tread:
Unbid iambicks flow from careless head.
He next inveighs against the poet, who
-- in high heroic rimes
Compileth worm-eat stories of old times.
To these antique tales he condemns the application of the extravagant
enchantments of Ariosto's ORLANDO FURIOSO, particularly of such licentious
fictions as the removal of Merlin's tomb from Wales into France, or Tuscany, by
the magic operations of the sorceress Melissa See ORL. FUR. iii. 10. xxvi. 39.
. The ORLANDO had been just now translated by Harrington.

And makes up his hard-betaken tale
With strange enchantments, fetched from darksom vale
Of some Melissa, who by magic doom
To Tuscans soil transporteth Merlin's tomb.
But he suddenly checks his career, and retracts his thoughtless temerity in
presuming to blame such themes as had been immortalised by the fairy muse of
Spenser.

But let no rebel satyr dare traduce
The eternal legends of thy faerie muse,
Renowned Spenser! Whom no earthly wight
Dares once to emulate, much less dares despite.
Salust Du Bartas.
of France, and Tuscan Ariost,
Yield up the laurel garland ye have lost B. i. 4. f. 11. In the Stanzas
called a DEFIANCE to ENVY, prefixed to the Satires, he declares his reluctance
and inability to write pastorals after Spenser. At Colin's feet I throw my
yielding reed.
But in some of those stanzas in which he means to ridicule the pastoral, he
proves himself admirably qualified for this species of poetry.
!
In the fifth, he ridicules the whining ghosts of the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES,
which the ungenerous and unpitying poet sends back to hell, without a penny to
pay Charon for their return over the river Styx B. i. 5. f. 12.
.

In the sixth, he laughs at the hexametrical versification of the Roman
prosody, so contrary to the genius of our language, lately introduced into
English poetry by Stanihurst the translator of Virgil, and patronised by
Gabriel Harvey and sir Philip Sidney.

Another scorns the homespun thread of rimes,
Matched with the lofty feet of elder times.
Give me the numbered verse that Virgil sung,
And Virgil's self shall speak the English tongue. --
The nimble dactyl striving to outgo
The drawling spondees, pacing it below:
The lingering spondees laboring to delay
The breathless dactyls with a sudden stay B. i. 6. f. 13, 14.
.
His own lines on the subject are a proof that English verse wanted to borrow
no graces from the Roman.

The false and foolish compliments of the sonnet-writer, are the object of the
seventh satire. Be she all sooty black, or berry brown,
She Is white as morrow's milk, or flakes new-blown.
He judges it absurd, that the world should be troubled with the history of the
smiles or frowns of a lady; as if all mankind were deeply interested in the
privacies of a lover's heart, and the momentary revolutions of his hope and
despair B. i. 7. f. 15.
.

In the eighth, our author insinuates his disapprobation of sacred poetry, and
the metrical versions of scripture, which were encouraged and circulated by the
puritans. He glances at Robert Southwell's SAINT PETER'S COMPLAINT Wood says
that this poem was written by Davies of Hereford. ATH. OXON. i. 445. But he had
given it to Southwell, p. 334.
, in which the saint weeps pure Helicon, published this year, and the same
writer's FUNERAL TEARS of the two Mary's. He then, but without mentioning his
name, ridicules Markham's SION'S MUSE, a translation of Solomon's Song See
supr. vol. iii. p. 318.
. Here, says our satirical critic, Solomon assumes the character of a modern
sonnetteer; and celebrates the sacred spouse of Christ with the levities and in
the language of a lover singing the praises of his mistress B. i. 8. f. 1 7.
.

The hero of the next satire I suspect to be Robert Green, who practiced the
vices which he so freely displayed in his poems. Green, however, died three or
four years before the publication of these satires In 1593, Feb. 1, a piece is
entered to Danter called Greene's Funeral. REGISTR. STATION, B. f. 304. b.
. Nor is it very likely that he should have been, as Oldys has suggested in
some manuscript papers, Hall's cotemporary at Cambridge, for he was
incorporated into the University of Oxford, as a Master of Arts from Cambridge,
in July, under the year 1588 Registr. Univ. Oxon. sub ann.
. But why should we be sollicitous to recover a name, which indecency, most
probably joined with dullness, has long ago deservedly delivered to oblivion?
Whoever he was, he is surely unworthy of these elegant lines.

Envy, ye Muses, at your thriving mate!
Cupid has crowned a new laureate.
I saw his statue gayly tired in green,
As if he had some second Phoebus been:
His statue trimmed with the Venerean tree,
And shrined fair within your sanctuary.
What he, that erst to gain the rhyming goal, etc.
He then proceeds, with a liberal disdain, and with an eye on the stately
buildings of his university, to reprobate the Muses for this unworthy
profanation of their dignity.

Take this, ye Muses, this so high despite,
And let all hateful, luckless birds of night,
Let screeching owls nest in your razed roofs;
And let your floor with horned satyr's hoofs
Be dinted and defiled every morn,
And let your walls be an eternal scorn!
His execration of the infamy of adding to the mischiefs of obscenity, by
making it the subject of a book, is strongly expressed.

What if some Shoreditch A part of the town notorious for brothels.
fury shoud incite
Some lust-stung lecher, must he needs indite
The beastly rites of hired venery,
The whole world's uniuersal bawd to be?
Did never yet no damned libertine,
Nor older heathen, nor new Florentine Peter Aretine.
, etc.
Our poets, too frequently the children of idleness, too naturally the lovers
of pleasure, began now to be men of the world, and affected to mingle in the
dissipations and debaucheries of the metropolis. To support a popularity of
character, not so easily attainable in the obscurities of retirement and study,
they frequented taverns, became libertines and buffoons, and exhilarated the
circles of the polite and the profligate. Their way of life gave the color to
their writings: and what had been the favorite topic of conversation, was sure
to please, when recommended by the graces of poetry. Add to this, that poets
now began to write for hire, and a rapid sale was to be obtained at the expense
of the purity of the reader's mind Harrington has an Epigram on this subject.
EPIGR. B. i. 40. Poets hereaft for pensions need not care,
Who call you beggars, you may call them liars;
Verses are grown svch merchantable ware,
That now for Sonnets, sellers are and buyers.
And again, he says a poet was paid "two crowns a sonnet." EPIGR. B. i. 39.
. The author of the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, acted in 1606, says of Drayton a
true genius, "However, he wants one true note of a poet of our times, and that
is this: he cannot swagger it well in a tavern A. i. S. ii.
."

The first satire of the second Book properly belongs to the last. In it, our
author continues his just and pointed animadversions on immodest poetry, and
hints at some pernicious versions from the FACETIAE of Poggius Florentinus, and
from Rabelais. The last couplet of the passage I am going to transcribe, is
most elegantly expressive.

But who conjured this bawdie Poggie's ghost
From out the stews of his lewd homebred coast;
Or wicked Rablais' drunken reuellings Harvey, in his Four Letters, 1592,
mentions "the fantastical mould of Aretine or Rabelays." p. 48. Aretine is
mentioned in the last satire.
,
To grace the misrule of our tauernings?
Or who put bays into blind Cupid's fist,
That he should crown what laureates him list B. ii. 1. f. 25.
?
By tauernings, he means the increasing fashion of frequenting taverns, which
seems to have multiplied with the playhou^es. As new modes of entertainment
sprung up, and new places of public resort became common, the people were more
often called together, and the scale of convivial life in London was enlarged.
From the playhouse they went to the tavern. In one of Decker's pamphlets,
printed in 1609, there is a curious chapter, "How a young Gallant should behave
himself in an Ordinary Decker's GULS HORN BOOK, p. 22. There is an old
quarto. "The Meeting of Gallants at an Ordinary, or the Walks of Powles,"
1604. Jonson says of lieutenant Shift. EPIGR. xii. He steals to Ordinaries,
there he plays
At dice his borrowed money. --
And in CYNTHIA'S REVELLS, 1600. "You must frequent Ordinaries a month more, to
initiate yourself." A. iii. S i.
. One of the most expensive and elegant meetings of this kind in London is here
described. It appears that the company dined so very late, as at half an hour
after eleven in the morning; and that it was the fashion to ride to this polite
symposium on a Spanish jennet, a servant running before with his master's
cloak. After dinner, they went on horseback to the newest play. The same author
in his BELMAN'S NIGHT WALKS The title page is "O per se O, or A new Crier of
Lantern and candle light, etc" Land. 1612. 4to. Bl. Let. For J. Busbie.
There is a later edition 1620. 4to.
, a lively description of London, almost two centuries ago, gives the following
instructions. "Haunt tavernes, there shall thou find prodigalls: pay thy two
pence to a player in his gallerie, there shall thou sit by an harlot. At
ORDINARIES thou may dine with silken fools CHAPTER ii. Again, in the same
writer's "BELMAN of LONDON Bringing to light the most notorious villainies that
are now practiced in the kingdom," Signat. E. 3. "At the best ORDINARIES where
your only Gallants spend afternoones, etc." Edit. 1608. 4to. Bl. Let. Printed
at London for N. Butter. This is called a second edition. There was another,
1616, 4to. This piece is called by a cotemporary writer, the most witty,
elegant, and eloquent display of the vices of London then extant. W. Fennnor's
COMPTOR'S COMMONWEALTH, 1617. 4to. p. 16.
."

In the second satire, he celebrates the wisdom and liberality of our
ancestors, in erecting magnificent mansions for the accommodation of scholars,
which yet at present have little more use than that of reproaching the rich
with their comparative neglect of learning. The verses have much dignity, and
are equal to the subject.

To what end did our lavish ancestors
Erect of old those stately piles of ours?
For thread bare-clerks, and for the ragged muse,
Whom better fit some cotes of sad secluse?
Blush, niggard Ago, be ashamed to see
Those monuments of wiser auncestrie!
And ye, fair heaps, the Muses sacred shrines,
In spite of time, and envious repines,
Stand still, and flourish till the world's last day,
Vpraiding it with former love's Of learning.
decay.
What needs me care for any bookish skill,
To blot white paper with my restless quill:
To pore on painted leaves, or beat my brain
With far-fetched thought: or to consvme in uaine
In latter even, or midst of winter nights,
Ill-smelling oils, or some still-watching lights, etc.
He concludes his complaint of the general disregard of the literary
profession, with a spirited paraphrase of that passage of Persius, in which the
philosophy of the profound Arcesilaus and of the aerumnosi Solones, is proved
to be of so little use and estimation B. ii. 2. f. 28. In the last line of this
satire he says, Let swinish Grill delight in dunghill clay.
Gryllus is one of Ulysses's companions transformed into a hog by Circe, who
refuses to be restored to his human shape. But perhaps the allusion is
immediately to Spenser, FAIR. QU. ii. 12. 81.
.

In the third, he laments the lucrative injustice of the law, while ingenuous
science is without emolument or reward. The exordium is a fine improvement of
his original.

Who doubts, the Laws fell down from heauen's hight,
Like to some gliding star in winters night?
Themis, the scribe of god, did long agone
Engrave them deep in during marble stone:
And cast them down on this unruly clay,
That men might know to rule and to obey.
The interview between the anxious client and the rapacious lawyer, is drawn
with much humor: and shows the authoritative superiority and the mean
subordination subsisting between the two characters, at that time.

The crowching client, with low-bended knee,
And many worships, and fair flattery,
Tells on his tale as smoothly as him list;
But still the lawyer's eye squints on his fist:
If that seem lined with a larger fee,
"Doubt not the suite, the law is plain for thee."
Tho Yet even.
must he buy his vainer hope with price,
Disclout his crowns Pull them out of his purse.
, and thank him for advice B. ii. 3. f. 31.

I cite a couplet from this satire to explain it. Genus and Species long since
barfoote went
Upon their tentoes in wild wonderment, etc.
This is an allusion to an old distich, made and often quoted in the age of
scholastic science. Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus honores,
Sed Genus et Species cogitur ire pedes.


That is, the study of medicine produces riches, and jurisprudence leads to
stations and offices of honor: while the professor of logic is poor, and
obliged to walk on foot.


.
The fourth displays the difficulties and discouragements of the physician.
Here we learn, that the sick lady and the gouty peer were then topics of the
ridicule of the satirist.

The sickly lady, and the gowtie peer,
Still would I haunt, that love their life so dear:
Where life is dear, who cares for coined dross?
That spent is counted gain, and spared loss.
He thus laughs at the quintessence of a sublimated mineral elixir.

Each powdered grain ransometh captive kings,
Purchases realms, and life prolonged brings B. ii. 4. f. 35.
.
Imperial oils, golden cordials, and universal panaceas, are of high antiquity:
and perhaps the puffs of quackery were formerly more ostentatious than even at
present, before the profession of medicine was freed from the operations of a
spurious and superstitious alchemy, and when there were mystics in philosophy
as well in religion. Paracelsus was the father of empericism.

From the fifth we learn, that advertisements of a LIVING WANTED were affixed
on one of the doors of Saint Paul's cathedral.

Sawst thou ere SIQUIS SIQUIS was the first word of advertisements, often
published on the doors of Saint Paul's. Decker says, "The first time that you
enter into Paul's, pass thorough the body of the church like a porter; yet
presvme not to fetch so much as one whole turn in the middle i will, nor to cast
an eye upon SIQUIS door, pasted and plaistered up with seruingmens
supplications, etc." THE GULS HORN BOOK, 1609. p. 21. And in Wroth's
EPIGRAMS, 1620. EPIG^. 93. A merry Greek set up a SIQUIS late,
To signify a stranger come to town
Who could great noses, etc.

patched on Paul's church door,
To gain some vacant vicarage before?
The sixth, one of the most perspicuous and easy, perhaps the most humorous, in
the whole collection, and which I shall therefore give at length, exhibits the
servile condition of a domestic preceptor in the family of an esquire. Several
of the satires of this second BOOK, are intended to show the depressed state of
modest and true genius, and the inattention of men of fortune to literary merit.

A gentle squire would gladly entertain
Into his house some trencher-chapelaine Or, a table-chaplain. In the same
sense me have trencher-knight, in LOVES LABOR LOST.
;
Some willing man, that might instruct his sons,
And that would stand to good conditions.
First, that he lie upon the truckle-bed,
While his young master lies oer his head This indulgence allowed to the
pupil, is the reverse of a rule anciently practiced in our universities. In the
Statutes of Corpus Christi college at Oxford, given in 1516, the Scholars are
ordered to sleep respectively under the beds of the Fellows, in a truckle-bed,
or small bed shifted about upon wheels. "Sit unum [cubile] altius, et aliud
humile et rotale, et in altiori cubet Socius, in altero semper Discipulus."
Cap. xxxvii. Much the same injunction is ordered in the statutes of Magdalen
college Oxford, given 1459. "Sint duo lecti principales, et duo lecti rotales,
Trookyll beddys vulgariter nuncupati, etc." Cap. xlv. And in those of Trinity
college Oxford, given 1556, where troccle bed, the old spelling of the word
truckle bed, ascertains the etymology from tro^l^a, a wheel. Cap. xxvi. In an
old Comedy THE RETURN FROM PARNAS^US, acted at Cambridge in 1606, Amoretto
says, "When I was in Cambridge, and lay in a trundle-bed under my tutor, etc."
A. ii. Sc. vi.
:
Second, that he do, upon no default,
Never presume to sit above the salt Toward the head of the table was placed a
large and lofty piece of plate, the top of which, in a broad cavity, held the
salt for the whole company. One of these stately salt-sellars is still
preserved, and in use, at Winchester college. With this idea, we must
understand the following passage, of a table meanly decked. B. vi. i. f. 83.
Now shall thou never see the Salt beset
With a bid-bellied gallon flagonet.


In Jonson's CYNTHIA'S REVELLS, acted in 1600, it is said of an affected
coxcomb, "His fashion is, not to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in
clothes. He never drinks below the salt." A. i. S. ii.

So Dekker, GULS HORN BOOK, p. 26. "At your twelve penny Ordinary, you may
give any justice of the peace, or young knight, if he sit but one degree
toward the Equinoctial of the Saltsellar, leave to pay for the wine, etc."
See more illustrations, in Reed's OLD PLAYS, edit. 1780. vol. iii. 285. In
Parrot's SPRINGES FOR WOODCOCKES, 1613, a guest complains of the indignity of
being degraded below the salt. Lib. ii. EPIGR. 188.

And swears that he below the Salt was set.


:
Third, that he never change his trencher twice;
Fourth, that he use all common courtesies:
Sit bare at meals, and one half ri^e and wait:
Last, that he never his young master beat;
But he must ask his mother to define
How many jerks she would his breech should line.
All these observed, he could contented be,
To give five marks, and winter liverie B. ii. 6. f. 38.
,
From those who despised learning, he makes a transition to those who abused or
degraded it by false pretenses. Judicial astrology is the subject of the
seventh satire. He supposes that astrology was the daughter of one of the
Egyptian midwives, and that having been nursed by Superstition, she assumed the
garb of Science. That now, who pares his nails, or libs his swine?
But he must first take counsel of the sign.
Again, of the believer in the stars, he says,

His fear or hope, for plenty or for lack,
Hangs all upon his new year's Almanac.
If chance once in the spring his head should ache,
It was fortold: "thus says mine Almanac."
The numerous astrological tracts, particularly pieces called PROGNOSTICATIONS,
published in the reign of queen Elizabeth, are a proof how strongly the people
were infatuated with this sort of divination. One of the most remarkable, was a
treatise written in the year 1582, by Richard Harvey, brother to Gabriel
Harvey, a learned astrologer of Cambridge, predicting the portentous
conjunction of the primary planets, Saturn and Jupiter, which was to happen the
next year. It had the immediate effect of throwing the whole kingdom into the
most violent consternation. When the fears of the people were over, Nash
published a droll account of their opinions and apprehensions while this
formidable phenomenon was impending; and Elderton a ballad-maker, and Tarleton
the comedian, joined in the laugh. This was the best way of confuting the
impertinencies of the science of the stars. True knowledge must have been
beginning to dawn, when these profound fooleries became the objects of wit and
ridicule See Nash's APOLOGY OF PEERS PENNILESS, etc. Land. 1593. 4to. f. 11.
.

SECT. XLV.
THE opening of the first satire of the third Book, which is a contrast of
ancient parsimony with modern luxury, is so witty, so elegant, and so poetical
an enlargement of a shining passage in Juvenal, that the reader will pardon
another long quotation.

Time was, and that was termed the time of gold,
When world and time were young, that now are old:
When quiet Saturn swayed the mace of lead,
And pride was yet unborne, and yet unbred.
Time was, that whiles the autumne-fall did last,
Our hungry sires gaped for the falling mast.
Could no unhusked akorne leave the tree,
But there was challenge made whose it might be.
And if some nice and liquorous appetite
Desired more dainty dish of rare delight,
They scaled the stored crab with clasped knee,
Till they had sated their delicious ee.
Or searched the hopeful thicks of hedgy-rows,
For brierie berries, hawes, or sowrer sloes:
Or when they meant to fare the fin'st of all,
They licked oake-leaues besprint with hony-fall.
As for the thrice three-angled beech-nut shell,
Or chesnut's armed husk, and hid kernel,
Nor squire durst touch, the law would not afford,
Kept for the court, and for the king's own board.
Their royal plate was clay, or wood, or stone,
The vulgar, save his hand, else he had none.
Their only cellar was the neighbor brook,
None did for better care, for better look.
Was then no 'plaining of the brewer's escape Cheats.
,
Nor greedy vintner mixed the strained grape.
The king's pavilion was the grassie green,
Under safe shelter of the shadie treen. --
But when, by Ceres' huswifrie and pain,
Men learned to bury the reviving grain,
And father Janus taught the newfound vine
Rise on the elm, with many a friendly twine:
And base desire bade men to deluen low
For needless metalls, then began mischief grow:
Then farewell, fairest age! etc. --
He then, in the prosecution of a sort of poetical philosophy, which prefers
civilized to savage life, wishes for the nakedness or the furs of our simple
ancestors, in comparison of the fantastic fopperies of the exotic apparel of
his own age.

They, naked went, or clad in ruder hide,
Or homespun russet void of foraine pride.
But thou can mask in garish gawderie,
To suite a Fool's far-fetched liuerie.
A French head joined to neck Italian,
Thy thighs from Germany, and breast from Spain:
An Englishman in none, a fool in all,
Many in one, and one in several B. iii. 1. f. 45.
.
One of the vanities of the age of Elizabeth was the erection of monuments,
equally costly and cumbersome, charged with a waste of capricious decorations,
and loaded with superfluous and disproportionate sculpture. They succeeded to
the rich solemnity of the gothic shrine, which yet, amid a profusion of
embellishments, preserved uniform principles of architecture.

In the second satire, our author moralizes on these empty memorials, which
were alike allotted to illustrious or infamous characters.

Some stately tomb he builds, Egyptian-wise,
REX REGUM written on the pyramid:
Whereas great Arthur lies in ruder oak,
That never felt aught but the feller's stroke He alludes to the discovery of
king Arthur's body in Glastonbury abbey. Lately, in digging up a barrow, or
tumulus, on the downs near Dorchester, the body of a Danish chief, as it
seemed, was found in the hollow trunk of a huge oak for a coffin.
,
Small honor can be got with gaudie grave,
A rotten name from death it cannot save.
The fairer tomb, the fowler is thy name,
The greater pomp procvring greater shame.
Thy monument make thou thy living deeds,
No other tomb than that true virtue needs!
What, had he naught whereby he might be known,
But costly pilements of some curious stone?
The matter nature's, and the workman's frame
His purse's cost: -- where then is Osmond's name?
Deservedst thou ill? Well were thy name and thee,
Were thou inditched in great secrecy;
Whereas no passengers might curse thy dust, etc B. iii. 2. f. 50.
.
The third is the description of a citizen's feast, to which he was invited,
With hollow words, and ouerly Slight. Shallow.
request.


But the great profusion of the entertainment was not the effect of liberality,
but a hint that no second invitation must be expected. The effort was too great
to be repeated. The guest who dined at this table often, had only a single dish
B. iii. 3. f. 52.
.

The fourth is an arraignment of ostentatious piety, and of those who strove to
push themselves into notice and esteem by petty pretensions. The illustrations
are highly humorous.

Who ever gives a pair of velvet shoes
To the holy rood In a gallery over the screen, at entering the choir, was a
large crucifix, or rood, with the images of the holy Virgin and saint John. The
velvet shoes were for the feet of Christ on the cross, or of one of the
attendant figures. A rich lady sometimes bequeathed her wedding-gown, with
necklace and earrings, to dress up the Virgin Mary. This place was called the
Rood-loft.
, or liberally allows
But a new rope to ring the curfew bell?
But he desires that his great deed may dwell,
Or graven in the chancell-window glass,
Or in the lasting tomb of plated brass.
The same affectation appeared in dress.

Nor can good Myron wear on his left hond,
A signet ring of Bristol-diamond;
But he must cut his glove to show his pride,
That his trim jewel might be better spied:
And, that men might some burgess Some rich citizen.
him repute,
With satin sleeves has That is, he has, etc.
graced his sacke-cloth suit B. iii. 4. f. 55.
.
The fifth is a droll portrait of the distress of a lusty courtier, or fine
gentleman, whose periwinkle, or peruke, was suddenly blown off by a boisterous
puff of wind while he was making his bows In a set of articles of enquiry sent
to a college in Oxford, about the year 1676, by the visitor bishop Morley, the
commissary is ordered diligently to remark, and report, whether any of the
senior fellows wore periwigs. I will not suppose that bobwigs are here
intended. But after such a proscription, who could imagine, that the bushy
grizzle-wig should ever have been adopted as a badge of gravity? So arbitrary
are ideas of dignity or levity in dress! There is an Epigram in Harrington,
written perhaps about 1600, "Of Galla's goodly periwigge." B. i. 66. This was
undoubtedly false hair. In Hayman's QUODLIBETS or Epigrams, printed 1628, there
is one "to a Periwiggian." B. i. 65. p. 10. Again, "to a certain Periwiggian."
B. ii. 9. p. 21. Our author mentions a periwigg again, B. v. 2. f. 63.

A golden periwigg on a blackmoor's brow.
.

He lights, and runs and quickly has him sped
To overtake his ouer-running head, etc.
These are our satirist's reflections on this disgraceful accident.

Fie on all courtesy, and unruly winds,
Two only foes that fair disguisement finds!
Strange curse, but fit for such a fickle age,
When scalpes are subject to such vassalage! --
Is It not sweet pride, when men their crowns must shade
With that which jerkes the hams of every jade B. iii. 5. f. 57.
!
In the next, is the figure of a famished Gallant, or beau, which is much
better drawn than in any of the comedies of those times. His hand is
perpetually on the hilt of his rapier. He picks his teeth, but has dined with
duke Humphry That is, he has walked all day in saint Paul's church without a
dinner. In the body of old saint Paul's, was a huge and conspicuous monument of
sir John Beauchamp, buried in 1358. son of Guy and brother of Thomas, earls of
Warwick. This, by a vulgar mistake, was at length called the tomb of Humphry
duke of Gloucester, who was really buried at Saint Alban's, where his
magnificent shrine now remains. The middle i will of Saint Paul's is called the
Dukes gallery, in a chapter of the GULS HORN BOOK, "How a gallant should
behave himself in Powles Walks." CHAPTER iiii. p. 17. Of the humors of this
famous ambulatory, the general rendezvous of lawyers and their clients,
pickpookets, cheats, bu^ks, pimps, whores, poets, players, and many others who
either for idleness or business found it convenient to frequent the most
fashionable crowd in London, a more particular description may be seen, in
Dekker's "DEAD TERM, or Westminsters Complaint for long Vacations and short
Terms, under the chapter, Pawles Steeples complaint." SIGNAT. D. 3. Land. for
John Hodgetts, 1608. 4to. Bl. Let.
. He professes to keep a plentiful and open house for every straggling
cavaliere, where the dinners are long and enlivened with music, and where many
a gay youth, with a high-plumed hat, chooses to dine, much rather than to pay
his shilling. He is so emaciated for want of eating, that his sword-belt hangs
loose over his hip, the effect of hunger and heavy iron. Yet he is dressed in
the height of the fashion, All trapped in the newfound bravery.
He pretends to have been at the conquest of Cales, where the nuns worked his
bonnet. His hair stands upright in the French style, with one long lock hanging
low on his shoulders, which, the satirist adds, puts us in mind of a native
cord, the truly English rope which he probably will one day wear.

His linen collar labyrinthian set,
Whose thousand double turnings never met:
His sleeves half-hid with elbow-pinionings,
As if he meant to fly with linen wings Barnaby Rich in his IRISH HUBBUB,
printed 1617, thus describes four GALLANTS coming from an Ordinary. "The third
was in a yellow-starched band, that made him look as if he had been troubled
with the yellow iaundis. -- They were all four in white boots and gylt
spurs, etc." Land. 1617. 4to. p. 36.
.
But when I look, and cast mine eyes below,
What monster meets mine eyes in human show?
So slender waist, with such an abbot's loyne,
Did never sober nature sure conjoyne!
Like a straw scarecrow in the new-sowne field,
Reared on some stick the tender corn to shield B. iii. 7. f. 62.
.
In the Prologue to this book, our author strives to obviate the objections of
certain critics who falsely and foolishly thought his satires too perspicuous.
Nothing could be more absurd, than the notion, that because Persius is obscure,
therefore obscurity must be necessarily one of the qualities of satire. If
Persius, under the severities of a proscriptive and sanguinary government, was
often obliged to conceal his meaning, this was not the case of Hall. But the
darkness and difficulties of Persius arise in great measure from his own
affectation and false taste. He would have been enigmatical under the mildest
government. To be unintelligible can never naturally or properly belong to any
species of writing. Hall of himself is certainly obscure: yet he owes some of
his obscurity to an imitation of this ideal excellence of the Roman satirists.

The fourth Book breathes a stronger spirit of indignation, and abounds with
applications of Juvenal to modern manners, yet with the appearance of original
and unborrowed satire.

The first is miscellaneous and excursive, but the subjects often lead to an
unbecoming licentiousness of language and images. In the following nervous
lines, he has caught and finely heightened the force and manner of his master.

Who list, excuse, when chaster dames can hire
Some snout-fair stripling to their apple squire Some fair-faced stripling to
be their page. Marston has this epithet, Sc. VILLAN. B. i. 3.

Had I some snout-faire brats, they should endure
The newly-found Castilion calenture,
Before some pedant, etc.
In Satires and Epigrams, called THE LETTING OF HUMORS BLOOD IN THE HEAD-VAYNE,
1600, we have "Some pippin-squire." EPIGR. 33.


,
Whom staked up, like to some stallion steed,
They keep with eggs and oysters for the breed.
O Lucine! barren Caia has an heir,
After her husband's dozen years despair:
And now the bribed midwife swears apace,
The bastard babe does bear his father's face.
He thus enhances the value of certain novelties, by declaring them to be,
Worth little less than landing of a whale,
Or Gades spoils Cadiz was newly taken.
, or a churl's funerale.


The allusion is to Spenser's Talus in the following couplet, Gird but the
cynicke's helmet on his head,
Cares he for Talus, or his flayle of lead?


He adds, that the guilty person, when marked, destroys all distinction, like
the cuttle-fish concealed in his own blackness.

Long as the crafty cuttle lies sure,
In the black cloud of his thick vomiture;
Who list, complain of wronged faith or fame,
When he may shift it to another's name.
He thus describes the effect of his satire, and the enjoyment of his own
success in this species of poetry.

Now see I fire-flakes sparkle from his eyes,
Like to a comet's tail in the angry skies:
His powting cheeks puffed up above his brow,
Like a swollen toad touched with the spider's blow:
His mouth shrinks side-ways like a scornful playse A fish. Jonson says in the
SILENT WOMAN, "Of a fool, that would stand thus, with a playse-mouth, etc." A.
i. S. ii. See more instances in OLD PLAYS, vol. iii. p. 395. edit. 1780.
,
To take his tired ear's ungrateful place. --
Now laugh I loud, and break my spleen to see,
This pleasing pastime of my poesy:
Much better than a Paris-garden bear "Then led they cousin [the gull] to the
gase of an interlude, or the beare-bayting of Paris-Garden, or some other place
of thieving." A MANIFEST DETECTION of the most vile and detestable use of DICE
PLAY, etc. No date, Bl. Let. Signat. D. iiii. Abraham Vele, the printer of
this piece, lived before the year 1548. Again, ibid. "Some ii or iii
[pickpockets] has Paul's church on charge, other has Westminster hawle in
term time, diverse Chepesyde with the flesh and fish shambles, some the
Borough and Bearebayting, some the court, etc." Parisgarden was in the borough.
,
Or prating poppet on a theater,
Or Mimo's whistling to his tabouret Piping or fifing to a tabour. I believe
Kempe is here ridiculed.
,
Selling a laughter for a cold meal's meat.
It is in Juvenal's style to make illustrations satirical. They are here very
artfully and ingeniously introduced B. iv. 1. f. 7.
.

The second is the character of an old country squire, who starves himself, to
breed his son a lawyer and a gentleman. It appears, that the vanity or luxury
of purchasing dainties at an exorbitant price began early.

Let sweet-mouth'd Mercia bid what crowns she please,
For half-red cherries, or green garden pease,
Or the first artichoak of all the year,
To make so lavish cost for little cheer.
When Lollio feasteth in his revelling fit,
Some starved pullen scoures the rusted spit:
For else how should his son maintained be
At inns of court or of the chancery, etc.
The tenants wonder at their landlord's son,
And bless them Themselves.
at so sudden coming on!
More than who gives his pence to view some trick
Of strange Morocco's dumb arithmeticke Bankes's horse called Morocco. See
Steevens's Note, SHAKESP. ii. 292.
,
Or the young elephant, or two-tayl'd steer,
Or the ridg'd camel, or the fiddling freere Shows of those times. He says in
this satire, -- 'Gin not thy gait^
Until the evening owl, or bloody bat;
Never until the lamps of Paul's been light:
And niggard lanterns shade the moonshine night.
The lamps about Saint Paul's, were at this time the only regular
night-illuminations of London. But in an old Collection of JESTS, some Bucks
coming drunk from a tavern, and reeling through the city, amused themselves in
pulling down the lanterns which hung before the doors of the houses. A grave
citizen unexpectedly came out and seized one of them, who said in defense, "I
am only snuffing your candle." JESTS TO MAKE YOU MERRY. Written by T. D. and
George Wilkins. Land. 1607." 4to. p. 6. JEST. 17.
. --
Fools they may feed on words, and live on air The law is the only way to
riches. Fools only will seek preferment in the church, etc.
,
That climb to honor by the pulpit's stayre;
Sit seven years pining in an anchor's cheyre In the chair of an anchoret.
,
To win some patched shreds of minivere The hood of a Master of Arts in the
universities. B. iv. 2. f. 19.

He adds, And seven more* plod at a patron's tail,
To get some gilded Chapel's cheaper sail.
I believe the true reading is gelded chapel. A benefice robbed of its tithes,
etc. Sail Sale is. So in the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, A. iii. S. 1. "He has a
proper gelded parsonage."


!
He predicts, with no small sagacity, that Lollio's son's distant posterity
will rack their rents to a treble proportion, And hedge in all their neighbors
common lands.


Enclosures of waste lands were among the great and national grievances of our
author's age Without attending to this circumstance, we miss the meaning and
humor of the following lines, B. v. 1. Pardon, ye glowing ears! Needs will
it out,
Though brazen walls compassed my tongue about,
As thick as wealthy Scrobio's quickset rows
In the wide common that he did enclose.
Great part of the third satire of the same book turns on this idea.
. It may be presumed, that the practice was then carried on with the most
arbitrary spirit of oppression and monopoly.

The third is on the pride of pedigree. The introduction is from Juvenal's
eighth satire; and the substitution of the memorials of English ancestry, such
as were then fashionable, in the place of Juvenal's parade of family statues
without arms or ears, is remarkably happy. But the humor is half lost, unless
by recollecting the Roman original, the reader perceives the unexpected
parallel.

Or call some old church-windowe to record
The age of thy fair arms. --
Or find some figures half obliterate,
In rain-beat marble near to the church-gate,
Upon a crosse-legg'd tomb. What boots it thee,
To show the rusted buckle that did tie
The garter of thy greatest grandsire's knee?
What, to reserve their relics many years,
Their silver spurs, or spils of broken spears?
Or cite old Ocland's verse See supr. vol. iii. p. 314.
, how they did wield
The wars in Turwin or in Turney field?
Afterward, some adventurers for raising a fortune are introduced. One trades
to Guiana for gold. This is a glance at sir Walter Rawleigh's expedition to
that country. Another, with more success, seeks it in the philosopher's stone.

When half his lands are spent in golden smoke,
And now his second hopeful glass is broke.
But yet, if happily his third furnace hold,
Devoteth all his pots and pans to gold.
Some well-known classical passages are thus happily mixed, modernised, and
accommodated to his general purpose.

Was never fox but wily cubs begets;
The bear his fierceness to his brood besets:
Nor fearful hare falls from the lyon's seed,
Nor eagle wont the tender dove to breed.
Crete ever wont the cypress sad to bear,
Acheron's banks the palish popelar:
The palm does rifely rise in Jury field In Judea.
,
And Alpheus' waters naught but olive yield:
Asopus breeds big bullrushes alone,
Meander heath; peaches by Nilus grown:
An English wolf, an Irish toad to see,
Were as a chaste man nursed in Italy B. iv. 3. f. 26.
.
In the fourth, these diversions of a delicate youth of fashion and refined
manners are mentioned, as opposed to the rougher employments of a military life.

Gallio may pull me roses ere they fall,
Or in his net entrap the tennis-ball;
Or tend his spar-hawke mantling in her mewe,
Or yelping beagles busy heels pursue:
Or watch a sinking cork upon the shore Angle for fish.
,
Or halter finches through a privy door A pit-fall. A trap-cage.
;
Or list he spend the time in sportful game, etc.
He adds,

See thou the rose-leaues fall ungathered?
Then hye thee, wanton Gallio, to wed. --
Hye thee, and give the world yet one dwarf more,
Svch as it got, when thou thyself was bore.
In the contrast between the martial and effeminate life, which includes a
general ridicule of the foolish passion which now prevailed, of making it a
part of the education of our youth to bear arms in the wars of the Netherlands,
are some of Hall's most spirited and nervous verses.

If Martius in boisterous buffs be dressed,
Branded with iron plates upon the breast,
And pointed on the shoulders for the nonce With tags, or shoulder knots.
,
As new come from the Belgian-garrisons;
What should thou need to envy aught at that,
When as thou smellest like a ciuet-cat?
When as thine oyled locks smooth-platted fall,
Shining like varnished pictures on a wall?
When a plumed fan Fans of feathers were now common. See Harrington's EPIGR.
i. 70. And Steevens's Shakespeare. i. p. 273.
may shade thy chalked Painted.
face,
And lawny strips thy naked bosom grace?
If brabbling Makefray, at each fair and 'size, Assise.
,
Picks quarrels for to show his valiantize,
Straight pressed for an hvngry Switzer's pay
To thrust his fist to each part of the pray;
And piping hot, puffs toward the pointed Full of pikes.
plain,
With a broad scot A Scotch broad sword.
, or proking spit of Spain:
Or hoyseth sail up to a foreign shore,
That he may live a lawless conqueror Turn pirate.
.
If some such desperate huckster should devise
To rowze thine hare's-heart from her cowardice,
As idle children It will be like, etc.
, striving to excel
In blowing bladders from an empty shell.
Oh Hercules, how like Likely.
to prove a man,
That all so rath Early.
his warlike life began!
Thy mother could for thee thy cradle set
Her husband's rusty iron corselet;
Whose jargling sound might rock her babe to rest,
That never plained of his uneasy nest:
There did he dream of dreary wars at hand,
And woke, and fought, and won, ere he could stand O Hercules, a boy so
delicately reared must certainly prove a hero! You, Hercules, was nursed in
your father's shield for a cradle, etc. But the tender Gallio, etc.
.
But who has seen the lambs of Tarentine,
Must guess what Gallio his manners been;
All soft, as is the falling thistle-downe,
Soft as the fumy ball A ball of perfume.
, or morrion's crown Morrion is the fool in a play.
.
Now Gallio gins thy youthly heat to reign,
In every vigorous limb, and swelling vain:
Time bids thee raise thine headstrong thoughts on high
To valor, and adventurous chivalry.
Pawn thou no glove He says with a sneer, Do not play with the character of a
soldier. Be not contented only to show your courage in tilting. But enter into
real service, etc.
for challenge of the deed, etc B. iv. 4. In a couplet of this satire, he
alludes to the SCHOLA SALERNITANA, an old medical system in rhyming verse,
which chiesly describes the qualities of diet. Tho never have I Salerne rimes
professed,
To be some lady's trencher-critick guest.


There is much humor in trencher-critick. Collingborn, mentioned in the
beginning of this satire, is the same whose Legend is in the MIRROR OF
MAGISTRATES, and who was hanged for a distich on Catesby, Ratcliff, Lord Lovel,
and king Richard the third, about the year 1484. See MIRR. MAG. p. 455. edit.
1610. 4to. Our author says, Or lucklesse Collingbourne feeding of the crows.
That is, he was food for the crows when on the gallows. At the end, is the
first use I have seen, of a witty apothegmatical comparison, of a libidinous
old man. The maidens mock, and call him withered leeke,
That with a green tail has an hoary head.



.
The fifth, the most obscure of any, exhibits the extremes of prodigality and
avarice, and affords the first instance I remember to have seen, of nominal
initials with dashes. Yet in his POSTSCRIPT, he professes to have avoided all
personal applications B. iv. 6. Collybist, here used, means a rent or tax
gatherer. (...), nummularius.
.

In the sixth, from Juvenal's position that every man is naturally
discontented, and wishes to change his proper condition and character, he
ingeniously takes occasion to expose some of the new fashions and affectations.

Out from the Gades to the eastern morn,
Not one but holds his native state forlorn.
When comely striplings wish it were their chance,
For Cenis' distaffe to exchange their lance;
And wear curled periwigs, and chalk their face,
And still are poring on their pocket-glasse;
Tired Attired. Dressed, adorned.
with pinned ruffs, and fans, and partlet strips,
And buskes and verdingales about their hips:
And tread on corked stilts a prisoner's pace.
Beside what is here said, we have before seen, that perukes were now among the
novelties in dress. From what follows it appears that coaches were now in
common use Of the rapid increase of the number of coaches, but more
particularly of Hackney-coaches, we have a curious proof in A pleasant Dispute
between Coach and Sedan, Land. 1636. 4to. "The most eminent places for stoppage
are Pawles-gate into Cheapside, Ludgate and Ludgatehill, especially when the
Play is done at the Friars: then Holborne Conduit, and Holborne-Bridge, is
villainously pestered with them, Hosier-Lane, Smithfield, and Cow-Lane, sending
all about their new or old mended coaches. Then about the Stocks, and
Poultrie, Temple-Barre, Fetter-lane, and Shoe-Lane next to Fleetstreete. But to
see their multitude, either when there is a Masque at Whitehall, or a lord
Mayor's Feast, or a New Play at some of the playhouses, you would admire to see
them how close they stand together, like mutton-pies in a cook's oven, etc."
Signat. F. Marston, in 1598, speaks of the joulting Coach of a Messalina. Sc.
VILLAN. B. i. 3. And in Marston's Postscript to PIGMALION, 1598, we are to
understand a coach, where he says, -- Run as sweet
As does a tumbrell through the paved street.
In CYNTHIA'S REVELS, 1600, a spendthrift is introduced, who among other polite
extravagancies, is "able to maintain a lady in her two carroches a day." A.
iv. S. ii. However, in the old comedy of RAMALLEY, or MERRY TRICKS, first
printed in 1611, a coach and a caroche seem different vehicles, A. iv. S. ii.
In horslitters, [in] coaches or caroaches.
Unless the poet means a synonime for coach.

In some old account I have seen of queen Elizabeth's progress to Cambridge, in
1564, it is said, that lord Leicester went in a coach, because he had hurt his
leg. In a comedy, so late as the reign of Charles the first, among many studied
wonders of fictitious and hyperbolical luxury, a lover promises his lady that
she shall ride in a coach to the next door. Cartwright's LOVES CONVERT. A. ii.
S. vi. Land. 1651. WORKS, p. 125.

-- Thou shall
Take coach to the next door, and as it were
An Expedition not a Visit, be
Bound for an house not ten strides off, still carried
Aloof in indignation of the earth.
Stowe says, "In the year 1564, Guylliam Boonen, a dutchman, became the
Queene's coachmanne, and was the first that brought the use of coaches into
England. And after a while, diverse great ladies, with as great jealousy of the
queene's displeasure, made them coaches, and rid in them up and down the
countries to the great admiration of all the behoulders, but then by little and
little they grew usual among the nobility, and others of sort, and within
twenty years became a great trade of coachmaking. And about that time began
long wagons to come in use, such as now come to London, from Caunterbury,
Norwich, Ipswich, Gloucester, etc. with passengers and commodities. Lastly, even
at this time, 1605, began the ordinary use of caroaches." Edit. fol. 1615. p.
867. col. 2.

From a comparison of the former and latter part of the context, it will
perhaps appear that Coaches and Caroaches were the same.


.

Is It not a shame, to see each homely groom
Sit perched in an idle chariot-roome?
The rustic wishing to turn soldier, is pictured in these lively and poetical
colors.

The sturdy ploughman does the soldier see
All scarfed with pied colors to the knee,
Whom Indian pillage has made fortunate;
And now he gins to loathe his former state:
Now does he inly scorn his Kendal-greene This sort of stuff is mentioned in
a statute of Richard the second, an. 12. A. D. 1389.
,
And his patched cockers now despised been:
Nor list he now go whistling to the carre,
But sells his teeme, and settleth to the war.
O war, to them that never tried thee sweet!
When his dead mate falls grovelling at his feet:
And angry bullets whistlen at his ear,
And his dim eyes see naught but death and dreare!
Another, fired with the flattering idea of seeing his name in print, abandons
his occupation, and turns poet.

Some drunken rimer thinks his time well spent,
If he can live to see his name in print;
Who when he once is fleshed to the press,
And sees his handsell have such fair success,
Sung to the wheel, and sung unto the payle By the knife-grinder and the
milkmaid.
,
He sends forth thraves A thrave of straw is a bundle of straw, of a certain
quantity, in the midland counties.
of ballads to the sale These lines seem to be levelled at William Elderton, a
celebrated drunken ballad-writer. Stowe says, that he was an attorney of the
Sheriff's court in the city of London about the year 1570, and quotes some
verses which he wrote about that time, on the erection of the new portico with
images, at Guildhall. SURV. LAND. edit. 1599. p. 217. 4to. He has two epitaphs
in Camden's REMAINS, edit. 1674. p. 533. seq. Hervey in his FOUR LETTERS,
printed in 1592, mentions him with Green. "If [Spenser's] MOTHER HUBBARD, in
the vain of Chawcer, happen to tell one Canicular tale, Father Elderton and
his son Green, in the vain of Skeleton or Skoggin, will counterfeit an hundred
dogged fables, libels, etc." p. 7. Nash, in his APOLOGY OF PIERS PENNILESSE,
says, that "Tarleton at the theater made jests of him [Hervey,] and W. Elderton
consumed his ale-crammed nose to nothing, in bear-baiting him with whole
bundles of ballads." Signat. E. edit. 1593. 4to. And Harvey, ubi supr. p. 34. I
have seen "Elderton's Solace in time of his sickness containing sundry sonnets
upon many pithie parables," entered to R. Jones, Sept. 25. 1578. REGISTR.
STATION. B. f. 152. a. Also "A ballad against marriage, by William Elderton
balladmaker." For T. Colwell, 1575. 12mo. A Ballad on the Earthquake by
Elderton, beginning Quake, Quake, Quake, is entered to R. Jones, Apr. 25. 1579.
REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 168. a. In 1561, are entered to H. Syngleton,
"Elderton's Jestes with his merry toys." REGISTR. STATION. A. f. 74. a. Again,
in 1562, "Elderton's Parrat answered." Ibid. f. 84. a. Again, a poem as I
suppose, in 1570, "Elderton's ill fortune." ibid. f. 204. a. Harvey says, that
Elderton and Green were "the ringleaders of the riming and scribbling crew."
LET. ubi supr. p. 6. Many more of his pieces might be recited.
.
Having traced various scenes of dissatisfaction, and the desultory pursuits of
the world, he comes home to himself, and concludes, that real happiness is only
to be found in the academic life. This was a natural conclusion from one who
had experienced no other situation In this Satire, among the lying narratives
of travelers, our author, with Mandeville and others, mentions the SPANISH
DECADS. It is an old black-letter quarto, a translation from the Spanish into
English, about 1590. In the old anonymous play of LINGUA, 1607, Mendacio says,
"Sir John Mandeviles trauells, and great part of the DECADS, were of my doing."
A. ii. S. i.
.

Among all these stirs of discontented strife,
Oh, let me lead an academick life!
To know much, and to think we nothing know,
Nothing to have, yet think we have enowe:
In skill to want, and wanting seek for more;
In weal nor want, nor wish for greater store B. iv. 6.
.
The last of this Book, is a satire on the pageantries of the papal chair, and
the superstitious practices of popery, with which it is easy to make sport. But
our author has done this, by an uncommon quickness of allusion, poignancy of
ridicule, and fertility of burlesque invention. Were Juvenal to appear at Rome,
he says,

How his enraged ghost would stamp and stare,
That Cesar's throne is turned to Peter's chair:
To see an old shorn lozel perched high,
Crouching beneath a golden canopie! --
And, for the lordly Fasces borne of old,
To see two quiet crossed keys of gold! --
But that he most would gaze, and wonder at,
Is, the horned mitre, and the bloody hat Cardinal's scarlet hat.
;
The crooked staff Bishop's crosier.
, the coule's strange form and store And multitude of them.
,
Save that he saw the same in hell before.
The following ludicrous ideas are annexed to the exclusive appropriation of
the eucharistic wine to the priest in the mass.

The whiles the liquorous priest spits every trice,
With longing for his morning sacrifice:
Which he reares up quite perpendiculare,
That the mid church does spite the chancel's fare B. iv. 7
.
But this sort of ridicule is improper and dangerous. It has a tendency, even
without an entire parity of circumstances, to burlesque the celebration of this
aweful solemnity in the reformed church. In laughing at false religion, we may
sometimes hurt the true. Though the rites of the papistic eucharist are
erroneous and absurd, yet great part of the ceremony, and above all the radical
idea, belong also to the protestant communion.

SECT. XLVI.
THE argument of the first satire of the fifth Book, is the oppressive exaction
of landlords, the consequence of the growing decrease of the value of money.
One of these had perhaps a poor grandsire, who grew rich by availing himself of
the general rapine at the dissolution of the monasteries. There is great
pleasantry in one of the lines, that he Begged a cast abbey in the church's
wayne.


In the mean time, the old patrimonial mansion is desolated; and even the
parish church unroofed and dilapidated, through the poverty of the inhabitants,
and neglect or avarice of the patron.

Would it not vex thee, where thy sires did keep Live, inhabit.
,
To see the dunged folds of dag-tayl'd sheep?
And ruined house where holy things were said,
Whose freestone walls the thatched roof vpbraid;
Whose shrill saints-bell hangs on his lovery,
While the rest are damned to the plumbery The bells were all sold, and melted
down; except that for necessary use the Saints-bell, or sanctus-bell, was only
suffered to remain within its lovery, that is louver, or turret, usually placed
between the chancel and body of the church. Marston has "pitch-black loueries."
SC. VILLAN. B. ii. 5.
:
Yet pure devotion lets the steeple stand,
And idle battlements on either hand, etc Just to keep up the appearance of a
church.
.
By an enumeration of real circumstances, he gives us the following lively
draught of the miserable tenement, yet ample services, of a poor copyholder.

Of one bay's breadth, god wot, a silly cote,
Whose thatched spars are furred with sluttish soote
A whole inch thick, shining like black-moor's brows,
Through smoke that down the headless barrel blows.
At his bed's feet feeden his stalled teame,
His swine beneath, his pullen oer the beam.
A starued tenement, such as I guess
Stands straggling on the wastes of Holdernesse:
Or such as shivers on a Peake hill side, etc. --
Yet must he haunt his greedy landlord's hall
With often presents at each festival:
With crammed capons every New-yeare's morn,
Or with green cheeses when his sheep are shorn:
Or many maunds-full Maund is Basket. Hence MAUNDAYThursday, the Thursday in
Passion-week, when the king with his own hands distributes a large portion of
alms, etc. MAUNDAY is DIES SPORTULAE. Maund occurs again, B. iv. 2. With a
manud charged with household merchandise.
In the WHIPPINGE OF THE SATYR, 1601. Signat. C. 4. Whole MAUNDS and baskets
full of fine sweet praise.

of his mellow fruit, etc.
The lord's acceptance of these presents is touched with much humor.

The smiling landlord shows a sunshine face,
Feigning that he will grant him further grace;
And leers like Esop's fox upon the crane,
Whose neck he craves for his chirurgian B. v. ^. f. 58.
.
In the second In this Satire there is an allusion to an elegant fiction in
Chaucer, v. 5. f. 61. Certes if Pity dyed at Chaucer's date.
Chaucer places the sepulcher of PITY in the COURT OF LOVE. See COURT OF L. v.
700. -- A tender creature
Is shrinid there, and PITY is her name:
She saw an Egle wreke him on a Fly,
And pluck his wing, and eke him in his game,
And tendir heart of that has made her die.
This thought is borrowed by Fenton, in his MARIAMNE.
, he reprehends the incongruity of splendid edifices and worthless inhabitants.

Like the vain bubble of Iberian pride,
That overcroweth all the world beside The Escurial in Spain.
;
Which reared to raise the crazy monarch's fame,
Strives for a court and for a college name:
Yet naught within but lousy coules does hold,
Like a scabb'd cuckoo in a cage of gold. --
When As when.
Maevio's first page of his poesy
Nailed to a hundred posts for nouelty,
With his big title, an Italian mot i In this age, the three modern languages
were studied to affectation. In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, above quoted, a
fashionable fop tells his Page, "Sirrah, boy, remember me when I come in Paul's
Churchyard, to buy a Ronsard and Dubartas in French, an Aretin^ in Italian,
and our hardest writers in Spanish, etc." A. ii. Sc. iii.


,
Lays siege unto the backward buyer's grot, etc.
He then beautifully draws, and with a selection of the most picturesque
natural circumstances, the inhospitality or rather desertion of an old
magnificent rural mansion.

Beat the broad gates, a goodly hollow sound
With double echoes does again rebound;
But not a dog does bark to welcome thee,
Nor churlish porter can thou chafing see:
All dumb and silent, like the dead of night,
Or dwelling of some sleepy Sybarite!
The marble pavement hid with desert weed,
With house-leek, thistle, dock, and hemlock-seed. --
Look to the towered chimnies, which should be
The wind-pipes of good hospitality: --
Lo, there the unthankful swallow takes her rest,
And fills the tunnell with her circled nest The motto on the front of the
house OYDEIS EISITO, which he calls a fragment of Plato's poetry, is a humorous
alteration of Plato's OYDEIS AKATHAPTOS EISITO.
!
Afterward, the figure of FAMINE is thus imagined.

Grim FAMINE sits in their fore-pined face,
All full of angles of unequal space,
Like to the plane of many-sided squares
That wont be drawn out by geometars B. v. 2.
.
In the third, a satire is compared to the porcupine. The satire should be like
the porcupine,
That shoots sharp quills out in each angry line B. v. 3.
.
This ingenious thought, though founded on a vulgar error, has been copied,
among other passages, by Oldham. Of a true writer of satire, he says, He Would
shoot his quills just like a porcupine,
At view, and make them stab in every line APOLOGY for the foregoing ODE, etc.
WORKS, vol. i. p. 97. edit. 1722. 12mo.
.


In the fourth and last of this Book, he enumerates the extravagancies of a
married spendthrift, a farmer's heir, of twenty pounds a year. He rides with
two liveries, and keeps a pack of hounds.

But whiles ten pound goes to his wife's new gown,
Not little less can serve to suite his own:
While one piece pays her idle waiting-man,
Or buys an hood, or siluer-handled fan:
Or hires a Friezeland trotter, half yard deep,
To drag his tumbrell through the staring Cheap B. v. 4.
.
The last Book consisting of one long satire only, is a sort of epilogue to the
whole, and contains a humorous ironical description of the effect of his
satires, and a recapitulatory view of many of the characters and foibles which
he had before delineated. But the scribblers seem to have the chief share. The
character of Labeo, already repeatedly mentioned, who was some cotemporary
poet, a constant censurer of our author, and who from pastoral proceeded to
heroic poetry, is here more distinctly represented. He was a writer who
affected compound epithets, which sir Philip Sydney had imported from France,
and first used in his ARCADIA We have our author's opinion of Skeleton in these
lines of this satire. f. 83. Well might these checks have fitted former times,
And shouldered angry Skelton's breathelesse rimes.

. The character in many respects suits Chapman, though I do not recollect that
he wrote any pastorals.

That Labeo reads right, who can deny,
The true strains of heroic poesy;
For he can tell how fury reft his sense,
And Phoebus filled him with intelligence:
He can implore the heathen deities,
To guide his bold and busy enterprise:
Or filch whole pages at a clap for need,
From honest Petrarch, clad in English weed;
While big BUT OH'S each stanza can begin,
Whose trunk and tail sluttish and heartlesse been:
He knows the grace of that new elegance
Which sweet Philisides fetched late from France,
That well beseem'd his high-stil'd ARCADY,
Though others mar it with much liberty,
In epithets to join two words in one,
Forsooth, for adjectives cannot stand alone.
The arts of composition must have been much practiced, and a knowledge of
critical niceties widely diffused, when observations of this kind could be
written. He proceeds to remark, it was now customary for every poet, before he
attempted the dignity of heroic verse, to try his strength by writing pastorals
Though these lines bear a general sense, yet at the same time they seem to be
connected with the character of Labeo, by which they are introduced. By the
Carmelite, a pastoral writer ranked with Theocritus and Virgil, he means
Mantuan.
.

But ere his Muse her weapon learn to wield,
Or dance a sober Pirrhicke The Pyrrhic dance, performed in armor.
in the field; --
The sheepe-cote first has been her nursery,
Where she has worn her idle infancy;
And in high startups walked the pastur'd plains,
To tend her tasked herd that there remains;
And winded still a pipe of oate or breare, etc.
Poems on petty subjects or occasions, on the death of a favorite bird or dog,
seem to have been as common in our author's age, as at present. He says,

Should Bandell's throstle die without a song,
Or Adamans my dog be laid along
Down in some ditch, without his exequies In pursuance of the argument, he
adds, Folly itself or Boldness may be praised.
An allusion to Erasmus's MORIAE ENCOMIUM, and the ENCOMIUM CALVITIEI, written
at the restoration of learning. Cardan also wrote an encomium on Nero, the
Gout, etc.
,
Or epitaphs or mournful elegies In this Satire, Tarleton is praised as a poet,
who is most commonly considered only as a comedian. Meres commends him for his
facility in extemporancous versification. WITS TR. f. 286.

I shall here throw together a few notices of Tarleton's poetry. "A new book
on English verse, entitled, TARLTON'S TOYS," was entered Dec. 10, 1576, to R.
Jones. REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 136. b. "See Heruey's FOUR LETTERS, 1592. p.
34. Tarleton's devise upon the unlooked for great snow," is entered, in 1578.
Ibid. f. 156. b. -- A ballad called TARLETON'S FAREWELL, is entered in 1588.
Ibid. f. 2^3. a. -- "Tarleton's repentance just before his death," is entered
in 1589. Ibid. f. 249. a. The next year, viz. 1590, Aug. 20, "A pleasant dittye
dialogue-wise between Tarleton's ghost and Robyn Goodfellowe," is entered to
H. Carre. Ibid. f. 263. a. There is a transferred copy of TARLTON'S JESTS, I
suppose TARLTON'S TOYS, in 1607. REGISTR. C. f. 179. b. Many other pieces
might be recited. [See supr. iii. 481.] See more of Tarleton, in SUPPLEMENT to
SHAKESPEARE, i. pp. 55. 58. 59. And OLD PLAYS, edit. 1778. PREFACE, p. lxii.

To what is there collected concerning Tarleton as a player, it may be added,
that his ghost is one of the speakers, in that character, in Chettle's
KIND-HARTE'S DREAM, printed about 1593. Without date, quarto. Signat. E. 3.
And that in the Preface, he appears to have been also a musician. "Tarlton with
his Tabe^ taking two or three leaden friskes, etc." Most of our old comedians
professed every part of the histrionic science, and were occasionally fiddlers,
dancers, and gesticulators. Dekker says, Tarleton, Kempe, nor Singer, "ever
played the Clown more naturally." Dekker's GULS HORN BOOK, 1609, p. 3. One or
two of Tarleton's Jests are mentioned in "THE DISCOVERY OF THE KNIGHTS OF THE
POST, etc." By S. S. Land. Impr. by G. S. 1597. 4to. Bl. Let. In
Fitz-Geoffrey's CENOTAPHIA, annexed to his AFFANIAE, 1601, there is a panegyric
on Tarleton. Signat. N. 2. Tarleton and Green are often mentioned as
associates in Harvey's FOUR LETTERS, 1592.


?
In the old comedy, the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, we are told of a coxcomb who
could bear no poetry "but flyblown sonnets of his mistress, and her loving
pretty creatures her monkey and her parrot A. 3. Sc. iv.
."

The following exquisite couplet exhibits our satirist in another and a more
delicate species of poetry.

Her lids like Cupid's bow-case, where he hides
The weapons that do wound the wanton-ey'd B. vi. Pontan here mentioned, I
presume, is Jovinianus Pontanus, an elegant Latin amatorial and pastoral poet
of Italy, at the revival of learning.
.
One is surprised to recollect, that these satires are the production of a
young man of twenty three. They rather seem the work of an experienced master,
of long observation, of study and practice in composition.

They are recited among the best performances of the kind, and with applause,
by Francis Meres, a cotemporary critic, who wrote in 1598 WIT^ TREAS. f. 282.
It is extraordinary, that they should not have afforded any choice flowers to
ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, printed in 1600.
. But whatever fame they had acquired, it soon received a check, which was
never recovered. They were condemned to the flames, as licentious and immoral,
by an order of bishop Bancroft in 1599. And this is obviously the chief reason
why they are not named by our author, in the SPECIALITIES of his Life, written
by himself after his preferment to a bishopric SHAKING OF THE OLIVE, or his
Remaining Works, 1660. 4to. Nor are they here inserted.
. They were, however, admired and imitated by Oldham. And Pope, who modernised
Done, is said to have wished he had seen Hall's satires sooner. But had Pope
undertaken to modernise Hall, he must have adopted, because he could not have
improved, many of his lines. Hall is too finished and smooth for such an
operation. Done, though he lived so many years later, was susceptible of
modern refinement, and his asperities were such as wanted and would bear the
chissel.

I was informed, by the late learned bishop of Gloucester, that in a copy of
Hall's Satires in Pope's library, the whole first satire of the sixth book was
corrected in the margin, or interlined, in Pope's own hadn; and that Pope had
written at the head of that satire, OPTIMA SATIRA.

Milton who had a controversy with Hall, as I have observed, in a remonstrance
called an APOLOGY FOR SMECTYMNUUS, published in 1641, rather unsuitably and
disingenuously goes out of his way, to attack these satires, a juvenile effort
of his dignified adversary, and under every consideration alien to the dispute.
Milton's strictures are more sarcastic than critical; yet they deserve to be
cited, more especially as they present a striking specimen of those awkward
attempts at humor and raillery, which disgrace his prose-works.

"Lighting upon this title of TOOTHLESS SATYRS, I will not conceal ye what I
thought, readers, that sure this must be some sucking satyr, who might have
done better to have used his coral, and made an end of breeding ere he took
upon him to wield a satyr's whip. But when I heard him talk of scouring the
shields of elvish knights A misquoted line in the DEFIANCE TO ENVY, prefixed to
the Satires. I will give the whole passage, which is a compliment to Spenser,
and shows how happily Hall would have succeeded in the majestic march of the
long stanza. Or scour the rusted swords of Elvish knights,
Bathed in pagan blood: or sheathe them new
In mistie moral types: or tell their fights,
Who mighty giants, or who monsters slew:
And by some strange enchanted spear and shield,
Vanquished their foe, and won the doubtful field.
May be she might, in stately stanzas frame
Stories of ladies, and aduenturous knights:
To raise her silent and inglorious name
Unto a reachlesse pitch of praise's hight:
And somewhat say, as more unworthy done That is, have done.
,
Worthy of brass, and hoary marble stone.

, do not blame me if I changed my thought, and concluded him some desperate
cutler. But why his scornful Muse could never abide with tragic shoes her
ancles for to hide B. i. 1.
, the pace of the verse told me, that her mawkin knuckles were never shapen to
that royal buskin. And turning by chance to the sixth [seventh] Satyr of his
second Book, I was confirmed: where having begun loftily in heaven's universal
alphabet, he falls down to that wretched poorness and frigidity as to talk of
Bridge-street in heaven, and the ostler of heaven Hall supposes, that the
twelve signs of the zodiac are twelve inns, in the highstreet of heaven, --
With twelve fair signs
Ever well tended by our star-divines.
Of the astrologers, who give their attendance, some are ostlers, others
chamberlaines, etc. The zodiacal Sign AQUARIUS, he supposes to be in the
BRIDGE-STREET of heaven. He alludes to Bridge-street at Cambridge, and the
signs are of inns at Cambridge.
. And there wanting other matter to catch him a heat, (for certain he was on
the frozen zone miserably benumbed,) with thoughts lower than any beadle's,
betakes him to whip the sign-posts of Cambridge alehouses, the ordinary subject
of freshmens tales, and in a strain as pitiful. Which, for him who would be
counted the FIRST ENGLISH SATYRIST, to abase himself to, who might have
learned better among the Latin and Italian Satyrists, and in our own tongue
from the VISION AND CREED OF PIERCE PLOWMAN, besides others before him,
manifested a presumptuous undertaking with weak and unexamined shoulders. For a
Satyr is as it were born out of a Tragedy, so ought to resemble his parentage,
to strike high, and adventure dangerously at the most eminent vices among the
greatest persons, and not to creep into every blind taphouse that fears a
constable more than a satyr. But that such a poem should be TOOTHLESS, I still
affirm it to be a bull, taking away the essence of that which it calls itself.
For if it bite neither the persons nor the vices, how is it a satyr? And if it
bite either, how is it toothless? So that TOOTHLESS SATYRS, are as much as if
he had said TOOTHLESS TEETH, etc APOLOGY FOR SMECTYMNUUS, Milton's Prose-works,
vol. i. p. 186. edit. Amst. School. fol. See also p. 185. 187. 191.
."

With Hall's SATIRES should be ranked his MUNDUS ALTER ET IDEM, an ingenious
satirical fiction in prose, where under a pretended description of the TERRA
AUSTRALIS, he forms a pleasant invective against the characteristic vices of
various nations, and is remarkably severe on the church of Rome. This piece was
written about the year 1600, before he had quitted the classics for the
fathers, and published some years afterward, against his consent. Under the
same class should also be mentioned his CHARACTERISMES OF VIRTUES, a set of
sensible and lively moral essays, which contain traces of the satires WORKS ut
supr. p. 171. Under the Character of the HYPOCRITE, he says, "When a rimer
reads his poem to him, he begs a copy, and persuades the press, etc." p 187.
Of the VAINEGLORIOUS. "He swears big at an Ordinary, and talks of the Court
with a sharp voice. -- He calls for pheasants at a common inn. -- If he have
bestowed but a little sum in the glazing, pauing, parieting, of gods house,
you shall find it in the church-window." [See SAT. B. iv. 3.] "His talk is,
how many mourners he has furnished with gowns at his father's funerals, what
exploits he did at Cales and Newport, etc." p. 194, 195. Of the BUSY BODY.
"If he see but two men talk and read a letter in the street, he runs to
them and asks if he may not be partner of that secret relation: and if they
deny it, he offers to tell, since he cannot hear, wonders: and then falls upon
the report of the Scottish Mine, or of the great fish taken up at Linne, or of
the freezing of the Thames, etc." p. 188. Of the SUPERSTITIOUS. "He never goes
without an Erra Pater in his pocket. -- Every lantern is a ghost, and every
noise is of chains, etc." p. 189. These pieces were written after the
Gunpowder-plot, for it is mentioned, p. 196.
.

I take the opportunity of observing here, that among Hall's prose-works are
some metaphrastic versions in meter of a few of David's Psalms WORK^, ut supr.
p. 151. In the DEDICATION he says, "Indeed my Poetry was long sithence out of
date, and yielded her place to grauer studies, etc." In his EPISTLES he speaks
of this unfinished undertaking. "Many great wits have undertaken this task. --
Among the rest, were those two rare spirits of the Sidnyes; to whom poesy was
as natvrall as it is affected of others: and our worthy friend Mr. Sylvester
has showed me how happily he has sometimes turned from his Bartas to the
sweet singer of Israel. -- There is none of all my labors so open to all
censures. Perhaps some think the verse harsh, whose nice ear regards
roundnesse more than sense. I embrace smoothness, but affect it not." DEC. ii.
Ep. v. p. 302. 303. ut supr.
, and three anthems or hymns written for the use of his cathedral. Hall, in his
Satires, had condemned this sort of poetry.

An able inquirer into the literature of this period has affirmed, that Hall's
Epistles, written before the year 1613 See WORKS, ut supr. p. 275.
, are the first example of epistolary composition which England had seen.
"Bishop Hall, he says, was not only our first satirist, but was the first who
brought epistolary writing to the view of the public: which was common in that
age to other parts of Europe, but not practiced in England till he published
his own Epistles See Whalley's INQUIRY INTO THE LEARNING OF SHAKESPEARE, p. 41.
." And Hall himself in the Dedication of his Epistles to Prince Henry observes,
"Your grace shall herein perceive a new fashion of discourse by EPISTLES, new
to our language, usual to others: and, as nouelty is never without plea of
use, more free, more familiar WORKS, ut supr. p. 172. The reader of Hall's
SATIRES is referred to DEC. vi. Epist. vi. p. 394.
."

The first of our countrymen, however, who published a set of his own Letters,
though not in English, was Roger Ascham, who flourished about the time of the
Reformation; and when that mode of writing had been cultivated by the best
scholars in various parts of Europe, was celebrated for the terseness of his
epistolary style. I believe the second published correspondence of this kind,
and in our own language, at least of any importance after Hall, will be found
to be EPISTOLAE HOELIANAE, or the Letters of James Howell, a great traveller,
an intimate friend of Jonson, and the first who bore the office of the royal
historiographer, which discover a variety of literature, and abound with much
entertaining and useful information "EPISTOLAE HOELIANAE, Familiar Letters,
Domestic and Foreign, divided into sundry sections partly historical,
political, and philosophical." Land. 1645. 4to. They had five editions from
1645, to 1673, inclusive. A third and fourth volume was added to the last
impression.

I must not dismiss our satirist without observing, that Fuller has preserved a
witty encomiastic English epigram by Hall, written at Cambridge, on Greenham's
Book of the SABBATH, before the year 1592. CHURCHHISTORY, B. ix. CENT. xvi..
vii. page 220. edit. 1655. fol. I find it also prefixed to Greenham's WORKS, in
folio, 1601.


.

SECT. XLVII.
IN the same year, 1598, soon after the appearance of Hall's Satires, John
Marston, probably educated at Cambridge, a dramatic writer who rose above
mediocrity, and the friend and coadjutor of Jonson, published "The
metamorphosis of Pigmalion's image. And Certain Satyrs. By John Marston. At
London, printed for Edmond Matts The Colophon at the end of the book, is "At
London printed by James Roberts, 1598."
, and are to be sold at the sign of the hand and plough in Fleetstreete, 1598
In duodecimo. With vignettes. Pages 82. They are entered to Matts, May 27,
1598. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 36. b. Hall's Satires are entered only the
thirtieth day of March preceding.
." I have nothing to do with PIGMALIONS IMAGE, one of Ovid's transformations
heightened with much paraphrastic obscenity Of this piece I shall say little
more, than that it is thought by some, notwithstanding the title page just
produced, not to be Marston's. But in his SCOURGE OF VILLAINY he cites it as
his own. B. ii. 6. Again, B. iii. 10. And in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, published in
1600, part of the dedication to OPINION is quoted, with the name J. Marston, p.
221. He seems to have written it in ridicule of Shakespeare's VENUS AND ADONIS.
He offers this apology, B. i. 6. (ut supr.) -- Know, I wrote
Those idle rimes, to note the odious spot
And blemish, that deformes the lineaments
Of Modern Poesie's habiliments.
Oh, that the beauties of invention
For want of iudgement's disposition,
Should all be spoiled! O, that such treasury,
Such strains of well-conceited poesy,
Should molded be in such a shapelesse form
That want of art should make such wit a scorn!
The author of the Satires appears in stanzas, x. xiv. xix. I have thought that
this poem suggested to Shakespeare what Lucio says in MEASURE FOR MEASURE. A.
iii. S. ii. Vol. ii. p. 92. [See supr. vol. iii. 417.]
. The Satires here specified are only four in number. In Charles Fitzgeoffry's
AFFANIAE, a set of Latin epigrams, printed at Oxford in 1601, he is not
inelegantly complimented as the second English Satirist, or rather as dividing
the palm of priority and excellence in English satire with Hall.

Ad JOHANNEM MARSTONIUM.
Gloria Marstoni satyrarum proxima primae,
Primaque, fas primas si numerare duas:
Sin primam duplicare nefas, tu gloria saltem
Marstoni primae proxima semper eris.
Nec te poeniteat stationis, Jane: secundus,
Cum duo sunt tantum, est neuter, et ambo pares Lib. ii. Sig. F. 4. In Davies's
SCOURGE OF FOLLY, there is an Epigram to "The acute Mr. John Marston," on his
comedy of the MALECONTENT. p. 105.
.
In general it is not easy to give a specimen of Marston's satires, as his
strongest lines are either openly vitiated with gross expression, or pervaded
with a hidden vain of impure sentiment. The following humorous portrait of a
sick inamorato is in his best, at least in his chastest, manner of drawing a
character.

For when my ears received a fearful sound
That he was sick, I went, and there I found
Him laid of love The midwife's phrase.
, and newly brought to bed
Of monstrous folly, and a frantic head.
His chamber hanged about with elegies,
With sad complaints of his love's miseries:
His windows strow'd with sonnets, and the glass
Drawn full of loue-knotts. I approacht the ass,
And straight he weeps, and sighs some sonnet out
To his fair love! And then he goes about
For to perfvme her rare perfection
With some sweet smelling pink-epitheton.
Then with a melting look he writhes his head,
And straight in passion rises in his bed;
And having kissed his hand, strok'd up his hair,
Made a French conge, cries, O cruel Fair,
To the antique bed-post! --
In these lines there is great elegance of allusion, and vigor of expression.
He addresses the objects of his satire, as the sons of the giants,

Is Minos dead, is Rhadamanth asleep,
That thus ye dare unto Ioue's palace creep?
What, has Rhamnusia spent her knotted whip,
That ye dare strive on Hebe's cup to sip?
Yet know, Apollo's quiver is not spent,
But can abate your daring hardiment.
Python is slain, yet his accursed race
Dare look divine Astrea in the face SAT. 5.
.
In the same satire he calls himself, A beadle to the world's impuritie!


Marston seems to have been the poetic rival of Hall at Cambridge, whom he
repeatedly censures or ridicules. In the fourth satire, he supposes Hall's
criticisms on Dubartas, the versions of David's Psalms by Sternhold and king
James, Southwell's MARY and SAINT PETER'S TEARS, the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES,
and other pieces of equal reputation, to be the production of pedantry or
malignity. And the remainder of this satire is no unpleasant parody of Hall's
prefatory stanzas against envy It appears from the SCOURGE OF VILLAINY, that
Hall had caused a severe Epigram to be pasted on the last page of every copy of
Marston's PIGMALION'S IMAGE, that was sent from London to the booksellers of
Cambridge. B. iii. 10. The Epigram is there cited. This tenth satire of the
third Book was added in the second edition, in 1599. It is addressed "to his
very friend master E. G." One Edward Gilpin is cited in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS,
1600.

It appears from this Satire, that the devices on shields and banners, at
tournaments, were now taken from the classics.

He who upon his glorious scutchion,
Can quaintly show wits new invention,
Advancing forth some thirsty Tantalus,
Or else the vulture on Prometheus,
With some short motto of a dozen lines, etc.
Peacham says, that of Emblems and Impresses, "the best I have seen have been
the devices of tilting, whereof many were till of late reserved in the private
gallery at White Hall, of sir Philip Sydney, the earl of Cumberland, sir Henry
Leigh, the earl of Essex, with many others: most of which I once collected with
intent to publish them, but the charge dissuaded me." COMPL. GENT. CHAPTER xviii.
p. 277. edit. 3^. 1661. 4to.


.

A Thrasonical captain, fresh from the siege of Cadiz, is delineated in this
lively coloring.

Great Tubrio's feather gallantly does wave,
Full twenty falls do make him wondrous brave!
Oh golden jerkin! Royal arming coat!
Like ship on sea, he on the land does floate. --
-- What news from Rodio?
"Hot service, by the lord," cries Tubrio.
Why do thou halt? "Why, six times through each thigh
"Pushed with the pike of the hot enemy.
"Hot service, Hot! -- The Spaniard is a man. --
"I say no more -- And as a gentleman
"I served in his face. Farewell, Adieu!"
Welcome from Netherland -- from steaming stew Sat. i.
.
Marston's allusions often want truth and accuracy. In describing the ruff of a
beau, he says, His ruff did eat more time in neatest setting,
Than Woodstock-worke in painful perfecting.
The comparison of the workmanship of a laced and plaited ruff, to the labored
nicety of the steel-work of Woodstock, is just. He adds, with an appearance of
wit, It has more doubles far than Ajax shield.
This was no exaggeration. The shield of Ajax was only sevenfold. To say
nothing of one of the leading ideas, the delicacy of contexture, which could
not belong to such a shield.

But Marston is much better known as a satirist by a larger and a separate
collection, yet entirely in the strain of the last, called the SCOURGE OF
VILLAINY, published the same year. I will give the title exactly and at length.
"The SCOVRGE OF VILLAINY. Three Books of SATYRS. [No Name of the Author.] --
Nec scombros metuentia carmina nec thus. At London, Printed by I. R. [James
Roberts,] and are to be sold by John Buzbie, in Pawles churchyard, at the sign
of of the Crane, 1598 In duodecimo. With vignettes. Wh. Let. The signatures run
inclusively to, Sign. I 3. The title of the second edition is "THE SCOURGE OF
VILLAINY. By John Marston. Nec scombros, etc. At London. Printed by I. R. Anno
Dom. 1599." The tenth Satire is not in the former edition. All Marston's
SATIRES, with other pieces of old poetry, were reprinted, Land. for R.
Horsfield, 1764, 12mo.
." He here assumes the appellation of KINSAYDER, by which he is recognized
among other cotemporary poets in the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS. In his metrical
introduction, he wishes all readers of fashion would pass over his poetry, and
rather examine the play-bills pasted on every post, or buy some ballad about
the fairy king, and king Cophetua and the female beggar. Instead of a Muse, he
invocates REPROOF, in this elegant and animated address.

I invoke no Delian deity,
Nor sacred offspring of Mnemosyne:
I pray in aid of no Castalian Muse,
No Nymph, no female angel, to infuse
A sprightly wit to raise my flagging wings,
And teach me tune these harsh discordant strings.
I crave no Sirens of our halcyon-times,
To grace the accents of my rough-hew'd rimes:
But grim Reproof, stern Hate of villainy,
Inspire and guide a satyr's poesy!
Fair Detestation of foul odious sin,
In which our swinish times lie wallowing,
Be thou my conduct and my Genius,
My wit's enticing sweet-breathed Zephirus!
Oh that a satyr's hand had force to pluck
Some floodgate up, to purge the world from muck!
Would god, I could turn Alpheus' river in,
To purge this Augean stable from foul sin!
Well, I will try. -- Awake, Impuritie!
And view the veil drawn from thy villainy B. iii. PROEM.
.
The passage reminds us of a witty line in Young's UNIVERSAL PASSION, I know
not if borrowed from hence.

And cleanse the Augean stable with thy quill There is a thought like this in
Dekker's GULS HORN BOOK, 1609, p. 4. "To pvrge [the world] will be a sorer
labor, than the cleansing of Augeas' stable, or the scouring of Moore-ditch."
.
Part of the following nervous paragraph has been copied either by Dryden or
Oldham.

Who would not shake a satyr's knotty rod,
When to defile the sacred name of god,
Is but accounted gentlemen's disport?
To snort in filth, each hour to resort
To brothell-pits: alas, a venial crime,
Nay royal, to be last in thirtieth slime B. i. 2.
?
In an invocation to RHYME, while he is not inelegantly illustrating the
pleasingness of an easy association of consonant syllables, he artfully
intermixes the severities of satire.

Come pretty pleasing symphonie of words,
Ye well-match'd twins, whose like-tun'd tongue affords
Such musical delight, come willingly,
And dance Levoltos An old fashionable dance. Hanmer, on Shakespeare, defines
it to be a dance in which there was much capering and turning. HEN. V. A. iii.
S. v. The word implies more capering than turning.
in my poesy!
Come all as easy as spruce Curio will,
In some court-hall to show his capering skill: --
As willingly as wenches trip around,
About a may pole, to the bagpipe's sound. --
-- Let not my ruder hand
Seem once to force you in my lines to stand:
Be not so fearful, pretty souls, to meet,
As Flaccus is, the sergeant's face to greet:
Be not so backward-loth to grace my sense,
As Drusus is, to have intelligence,
His dad's alive: but come into my head,
As iocundly, as, when his wife was dead,
Young Lelius to his home. Come, like-fac'd Rhyme,
In tunefull number's keeping musick's time!
But if you hang an arse like Tubered,
When Chremes dragged him from the brothel-bed,
Then hence, base ballad-stuffe! My poesy
Disclaimes you quite. For know, my liberty
Scorns riming laws. Alas, poor idle sound!
Since first I Phoebus knew, I never found,
Thy interest in sacred poetry:
Thou to Invention addst but surquedry Pride. False pomp.
,
A gaudie ornature: but have no part
In that soule-pleasing high-infused art B. ii. AD RITHMUM.
.
He thus wages war with his brother-bards, especially the dreamers in fairy
land.

Here Is one must invoke some loose-leg'd dame,
Some brothel-drab, to help him stanzas frame.
Another yet dares tremblingly come out,
But first he must inuoke good COLIN CLOUT Spenser as a pastoral writer.
.
Yon's one has yean'd a fearful prodigy,
Some monstrous and misshapen balladry An allusion to some late Ballad, with a
print, of a monster, or incredible event. A Ballad-monger is a character in,
"WHIMZIES, or a New Cast of CHARACTERS," where says the writer, "For want of
truer relations, for a need, he can find you out a Sussex-dragon, some sea or
inland monster, etc." Land. 1631. CHA^. II. p. 9. For this Sussex dragon, see
the Harleian miscellany.
. --
Another walks, is lazy, lies him down,
Thinks, reads: at length, some wonted sleep does crown,
His new-falne lids, dreams: straight, ten pounds to one,
Out steps some Fayery with quick motion,
And tells him wonders of some flowery vale;
He wakes, he rubs his eyes, and prints his tale B. ii. 6.
.
The following line is a ridicule on the poetical language of his time, which
seems rather intended for certain strains of modern poetry.

Thou nursing mother of fair wisdom's lore,
Ingenuous Melancholy PROEM. B. i.
! --
He supposes himself talking with Esop, and alludes to the story of his coming
into the streets of Athens to look for a man The introductory line, supposed to
be spoken by Esop, is no unhappy parody on a well-known line in Shakespeare's
RICHARD. A Man, a Man, my kingdom for a man.

. This idea introduces several ridiculous characters. Among the rest a fine
lady.

Peace, cynicke, see what yonder does approach,
"A cart, a tumbrell?" No, a badged coach A coach painted with a coat of arms.
[See above, p. 39.]
.
"What Is in it? Some Man." No, nor yet woman kind,
But a celestial angel, fair refinde.
"The devil as soon. Her mask so hinders me,
"I cannot see her beautie's deity.
"Now that is off, she is so vizarded,
"So steeped in lemon-iuyce, so surphuled The word is often used by Hall and
Marston. Our author supposes, that the practice came with other corruptions
from Venice. CERT. SAT. 2.

Did thou to Venis go aught else to have
But buy a lute, and use a curtezan? --
And now from thence what hither do thou bring,
But SURPHULINGS, new paints and poisoning,
Aretine's pictures, etc.
I find the word used for a meretricious styptic lotion. "This mother baud
having at home, a well painted manerly harlot, as good a maid as Fletcher's
mare, that bare three great foles, went in the morning to the apothecaries for
half a pint of sweet water, that commonly is called SURFULYNG water, or
Clynckerdeuice, etc." From "A manifest DETECTION of the most vile and
detestable use of DICE PLAY, etc. Imprinted at London in Paul's churchyard, at
the sign of the Lamb, by Abraham Vele." No date. But early in the reign of
Elisabeth. Bl. Let. 12mo. "Apothecaries would have SURPHALING water, and
potatoe roots, lie dead on their hands. -- The suburbs should have a great
miss of us, and Shoreditch would complain to dame Anne a Clear, etc." Thieves
falling out, True men come by their goods. By R. G. Land. 1615. 4to. SIGNAT. C.
3. Bl. Let. See Steevens's Shakesp. ix. 168.


,
I cannot see her face. Under one hood
"Two faces: but I never understood,
"Or saw one face under two hoods till now.
"Away, away! Hence, coachman, go inshrine,
"Thy new glazed puppet in port Esquiline B. ii. 7. The classical reader
recollects the meaning of this allusion to the Porta Esquilina at Rome. In
passing, I will illustrate a few passages in Marston's satires.

Lib. iii. 11. He says,
Praise but ORCHESTRA, and the skipping art.
This is an allusion to sir John Davies's ORCHESTRA, a poetical dialogue
between Penelope and one of her wooers, on the antiquity and excellency of
Dancing, printed with his NOSCE TEIPSUM in 1599. This piece occasioned a
humorous epigram from Harrington, EPIGR. B. ii. 67.

A few lines afterward Marston says,
Room for the spheres, the orbs celestial
Will dance KEMP'S IIGGE. --
Of Kemp, the original performer of Dogberry, I have spoken before. I find,
entered to T. Gosson, Dec. 28, 1591. The third and last part of "Kempe's
Iigge." Registr. STATION. B. f. 282. b. And May 2, 1595, to W. Blackwell, "A
ballad of Mr. Kempe's New ligge of the kitchen stuff woman." Ibid. f. 132. a.
Again, October. 21, 1595, to T. Gosson, Kempe's New Iigge betwixt a soldier and
a miser. Ibid. f. 3. b. In Kemp's NINE DAYS WONDER, printed in 1600, is the
character of an innkeeper at Rockland, which could not be written by Kemp, and
was most probably a contribution from his friend and fellow-player,
Shakespeare. He may vie with our host of the Tabard. SIGNAT. B. 3.

He was a man not over spare,
In his eybals dwelt no care:
Anon, Anon, and coming friend,
Were the most words he used to spend:
Save, sometime he would sit and tell,
What wonders once in Bullayne fell;
Closing each period of his tale
With a full cup of nut-browne ale.
Turwyn and Turney's siedge were hot,
Yet all my host remembers not:
Kets field, and Musseleborough fray,
Were battles fought but yesterday.
"O, it was a goodly matter then,
"To see your sword and buckler men!
"They would lay here, and here and there,
"But I would meet them every where, etc."
By this some guest cries ho, the house!
A fresh friend has a fresh carouse.
Still will he drink, and still be dry,
And quaffe with euerey company.
Saint Martin send him merry mates
To enter at his hostry gates!
For a blither lad than he
Cannot an Innkeeper be.
In the same strain, is a description of a plump country lass, who officiates
to Kemp in his morris-dance, as his Maid Marian. SIGNAT. B. 3. Jonson alludes
to Kemp's performance of this morris-dance, from London to Norwich in nine
days. EPIGR. cxxxiv.

-- or which
Did dance the famous morrisse unto Norwich.
But to return to Marston.
In the Preface called* In lectores prorsus indignos, is the word "Proface." I
do not recollect that the passage has been adduced by the late editors of
Shakespeare. Vol. v. p. 595. edit. 1778. Proface, read on, for your extreamst
dislikes
Will add a pinion to my praises flights.
In the GULS HORN BOOK, 1609, p. 4. "Comus, thou clarke of Gluttonie's
kitchen, do thou also bid me PROFACE." In the same author's BELMAN OF LONDON,
1608, the second edition, Bl. Let^. 4to. "The table being thus furnished,
instead of Grace, every one drew out a knife, rapt out a round oath, and
cried, PROFACE, you mad rogves, etc." Signat. C. See also Taylor's SCULLER,
EPIGR. 43. These instances may be added, to those which Farmer, Steevens, and
Malone, have collected on the word. The meaning is obvious, "Fall on -- Much
good may it do you."

B. i. 3.

Candied potatoes are Athenians meat. Our philosophers, our academics, indulge
themselves in food inciting to venery.

B. i. 4. He Will cleanse himself to Shoreditch purity.


I have before observed that Shoreditch was famous for brothels. He just before
speaks of a "White friars queen. We have a Shoreditch baulke. B. iii. 11." In
his CERTAIN SATYRS he mentions the gallants trooping to "Brownes common." Sat.
ii. In Goddard's MASTIF, or Satires, No Date. SAT. 27. Or is he one that lets a
Shoreditch wench
The golden entrails of his purse to drench.
In Dekker's JESTS TO MAKE YOU MERRY, 1607. JEST. 59. "Sixpenny signets that
lay in the Spittle in Shoreditch." In Middleton's INNER TEMPLE MASQUE, printed
1619.

It Is in your charge to pull down bawdy houses.
-- Cause spoil SHOREDITCH,
And deface Turnbull [street.] --
And in the Preface to The Letting of Humors blood in the head vain, or
Satires, 1600, Signat. A. 2. -- Some coward gull
That is but champion to a Shoreditch drab.


I know not whether it will illustrate the antiquity of the Ballad of George
Barnwell to observe, that the house of the Harlot, the heroine of the story, is
in Shore-ditch. The CURTAIN, one of our old theaters, was in Shoreditch.

B. ii. PROEM. st. 3. With tricksey tales of speaking Cornish dawes.


Tricksey, I think, is an epither of Ariel in the TEMPEST. A tricksie strain
occurs. B. iii. 9.

Ibid. st. 4. What though some John a style will basely toil.
This is the first use I remember of John a Styles. But we have below, B. ii.
7. Look you, comes John a noke, and John a style.
He means two lawyers.

B. ii. 7. Of a gallant, Note his French herring-bones. --


His band-strings. Wood says, that Dr. Owen, dean of Christ church, and
Cromwell's vice chancellor at Oxford, in 1652, used to go, in contempt of form,
"like a young scholar, with powdered hair, snakebone bandstrings, or bandstrings
with very large tassells, lawn band, a large set of ribbands, pointed, at his
knees, and Spanish-leather boots with large lawn tops, and his hat mostly
cocked." ATHEN. OXON. ii. 738. Number. 572.

B. ii. 7. He is speaking of a Judge, in his furred damaske-coate. He Is naught
but budge. --
That is, fur. So Milton in COMUS, v. 707.


Those budge doctors of the stoic fur. He alludes to the furred gown of a
graduate. See Life of SIR T. POPE, p. 285. edit. 2.

B. iii. 9. He speaks of a critic abusing Mortimer's numbers. I believe he
means Drayton's epistle of MORTIMER TO QUEEN ISABEL. Drayton's EPISTLES
appeared in 1597. Or perhaps Drayton's MORTIMERIADOS, published in 1596.

B. iii. 11. -- Loathsome brothell-rime,
That stinks like Aiax-froth, or muckpit slime.
He means sir John Harrington's Ajax, which gave great offense to queen
Elizabeth. See Harrington's EPIGRAMS, B. i. 51. And Jonson, EPIGR. cxxxiv. My
Muse has plough'd with his that sung A-JAX.


B. ii. 7. He now is forced his paunch and guts to pack
In a fair tumbrell. --
That is, To ride in a Coach. [See supr. p. 39.]

B. ii. 7. Her seat of sense is her rebato set.
The set of her rebato is the stiffness of her ruff newly plaited, starched,
and poked. To set a hat, is to cock a hat, in provincial language. The ruff was
adjusted or trimmed by what they called a poking-stick, made of iron, which was
gently heated. A pamphlet is entered to W. Wright, Jul. 4. 1590, called "Blue
starch and poking-stickes." REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 260. a. Jonson says of a
smoking coxcomb. "The other opened his nostrils with a poaking-sticke, to give
the smoke more free delivery." EVERY M. OUT OF HIS H. Act. iii. Sc. iii.

In Goddard's Dogs from the Antipedes, a lady says, whose ruff was
discomposed, SAT. 29. "Lord! my ruff! SET it with thy finger, John!"
And our author, Sc. VILL. i. z. Lucia, new SET thy ruff --
In the GULS HORN BOOK, p. 7. "Your stiff-necked rebatoes, that have more
arches for pride to row under, than can stand under five London bridges, durst
not then set themselves out in print." And hence we must explain a line in
Hall, iii. 7. His linen collar Labyrinthian set.


B. i. 3. A Crabs bakt guts, a lobsters butterd thigh, etc.
So in Marston's MALECONTENT, printed 1604. A. ii. S. ii. "Crabs guts baked,
distilled ox-pith, the pulverized hairs of a lions upper lip, etc."

SAT. iii. 8. I saw him court his mistress lookingglasse,
Worship a buske-point. --
A buske was a flexile pin or stick for keeping a woman's stays tight before.
Marston's context too clearly explains the meaning of the word. So in
PIGMALION'S IMAGE, st. xix. Love is a child contented with a toy,
A buske point or some favor stills the boy.
But see OLD-PLAYS, v. 251.

SATYRS, Sat. iv. Ye Granta's white Nymphs come! --


White was anciently used as a term of fondling or endearment. In the RETURN
FROM PARNASSUS, 1606, Amoretto's Page says, "When he returns, I Will tell twenty
admirable lies of his hawk: and then I shall be his little rogue, his WHITE
villain, for a whole week after." A. ii. S. vi. Doctor Busby used to call his
favorite scholars, his White Boys. I could add a variety of other combinations.


.
He thus nervously describes the strength of custom.

For ingrain'd habits, died with often dips,
Are not so soon discolored. Young slips
New set are easly moved, and plucked away;
But elder roots clip faster in the clay B. i. 4.
.
Of the influence of the drama, which now began to be the most polite and
popular diversion, on conversation, we have the following instance.

Luscus, what is played to day? Faith, now I know,
I set thy lips abroach, from whence does flow
Naught but pure JULIET AND ROMEO.
Say, who acts best, Drusus or Roscio?
Now I have him, that nere, if aught, did speak
But when of plays or players he did treat:
Has made a commonplace book out of plays,
And speaks in print: at least whateer he says,
Is warranted by curtain- plaudities.
If eer you heard him courting Lesbia's eyes,
Say, courteous sir, speaks he not movingly
From out some new pathetique tragedy B. iii. 11.
?
He appears to have been a violent enemy of the puritans.

-- But thou, rank Puritan,
I Will make an ape as good a christian:
I Will force him chatter, turning up his eye,
Look sad, go grave, Demure civilitie
Shall scorn to say, good brother, sister dear!
As for the rest, to snort in belly cheer,
To bite, to gnaw, and boldly intermell
With holy things, in which thou do excel,
Vnforc'd he will do. O take compassion
Even on your souls: make not Religion
A bawd to lewdness. Civil Socrates,
Clip not the youth of Alcibiades
With unchaste arms. Disguised Messaline,
I Will tear thy mask, and bare thee to the eyne, etc B. iii. 9.
.
It is not that I am afraid of being tedious, that I find myself obliged to
refrain from producing any more citations. There are however, a few more
passages which may safely be quoted, but which I choose to reserve for future
illustration.

There is a carelessness and laxity in Marston's versification, but there is a
freedom and facility, which Hall has too frequently missed, by laboring to
confine the sense to the couplet. Hall's measures are more musical, not because
the music of verse consists in uniformity of pause, and regularity of cadence.
Hall had a correcter ear; and his lines have a tuneful strength, in proportion
as his language is more polished, his phraseology more select, and his
structure more studied. Hall's meaning, among other reasons, is not always so
soon apprehended, on account of his compression both in sentiment and diction.
Marston is more perspicuous, as he thinks less and writes hastily. Hall is
superior in penetration, accurate conception of character, acuteness of
reflection, and the accumulation of thoughts and images. Hall has more humor,
Marston more acrimony. Hall often draws his materials from books and the
diligent perusal of other satirists, Marston from real life. Yet Hall has a
larger variety of characters. He possessed the talent of borrowing with
address, and of giving originality to his copies. On the whole, Hall is more
elegant, exact, and elaborate.

It is Marston's misfortune, that he can never keep clear of the impurities of
the brothel. His stream of poetry, if sometimes bright and unpolluted, almost
always betrays a muddy bottom. The satirist who too freely indulges himself in
the display of that licentiousness which he means to proscribe, absolutely
defeats his own design. He inflames those passions which he professes to
suppress, gratifies the depravations of a prurient curiosity, and seduces
innocent minds to an acquaintance with ideas which they might never have known.

The satires of Hall and Marston were condemned to the same flame and by the
same authority. But Hall certainly deserved a milder sentence. Hall exposes
vice, not in the wantonness of description, but with the reserve of a cautious
yet lively moralist. Perhaps every censurer of obscenity does some harm, by
turning the attention to an immodest object. But this effect is to be
counteracted by the force and propriety of his reproof, by showing the
pernicious consequences of voluptuous excesses, by suggesting motives to an
opposite conduct, and by making the picture disgustful by dashes of deformity.
When Vice is led forth to be sacrificed at the shrine of virtue, the victim
should not be too richly dressed.

SECT. XLVIII.
THE popularity of Hall's and Marston's Satires, notwithstanding their
proscription or rather extermination by spiritual authority, produced an
innumerable crop of SATIRISTS, and of a set of writers, differing but little
more than in name, and now properly belonging to the same species,
EPIGRAMMATISTS.

In 1598, printed at London, appeared "SKIALETHEIA, or a Shadow of Truth in
certain Epigrams and Satyrs." The same year, SEVEN SATIRES, applied to the
week, including the world's ridiculous follies Entered to William Fyrebrand,
May 3, 1598. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 34. b.
. This form was an imitation of the SEMAINES of Du Bartas, just translated into
English by Delisle. The same year, "A SHADOW of TRUTH in certain Epigrams and
Satires. Entered to N. Linge, Sept. 15, 1598. Ibid. f. 41. b.
." This year also, as I conjecture, were published Epigrams by sir John Davies,
author of NOSCE TEIPSUM Marlowe's OVID'S ELEGIES were accompanied with these
Epigrams. The whole title is, "Epigrammes and Elegies, by J. D. and C. M.
[Marlowe.] at Middleburgh." No date. Davies's Epigrams are commended in
Jonson's Epigrams, xviii. And in Fitzgeoffry's AFFANIAE, Lib. ii. Signat E. 4.
DAVISIOS laedat mihi, Jonsoniosque lacessat.

. These must not be confounded with the SCOURGE OF FOLLY, by John Davies of
Hereford, printed in 1611. In 1598 also, was published in quarto, "Tyros
roaring Megge, planted against the walls of Melancholy, London, 1598." With two
Decads of Epigrams With "sequitur Tyronis Epistola." Compare Wood, ATH. OXON,
F. i. 219.
. The author appears to have been of Cambridge. Tyro is perhaps a real name.
The dedication is to Master John Lucas.

In the year 1598, was also published, under the general title of CHRESTOLOROS,
seven Books of Epigrams, by Thomas Bastard Entered to Joane Brom, Apr. 3,
1598. Ibid. f. 38. b.
. Bastard, a native of Blandford in Dorsetshire, was removed from a fellowship
of New-College Oxford, in 1591, being, as Wood says, "much guilty of the vices
belonging to the poets, "and given to libelling ATH. OXON. i. 431.
." Harrington, the translator of Ariosto, has an Epigram addressed to "Master
Bastard, a minister, that made a pleasant Book of English Epigrams
HARRINGTON'S EPIGRAMS, B. ii. 64. See also B. ii. 84. They are also mentioned
with applause in Goddard's MASTIF, no date, SAT. 81. And in Parrot's SPRINGES
FOR WOODCOCKES, Lib. i. EPIGR. 118.
." Wood, in his manuscript Collection of Oxford libels and lampoons, which
perhaps he took as much pleasure in collecting as the authors in writing, now
remaining in the Ashmolean Museum, and composed by various students of Oxford
in the reign of queen Elizabeth, has preserved two of Bastard's satirical
pieces One of them is entitled, "An admonition to the City of Oxford, or
Mareplate's Bastardine." In this piece, says Wood, he "reflects upon all
persons of note in Oxford, who were guilty of amorous exploits, or that mixed
themselves with other men's wives, or with wanton houswives in Oxon." The other
is a disavowal of this lampoon, written after his expulsion, and beginning
Jenkin, why man, etc. See Meres, WITS TR. f. 284.
. By the patronage or favor of lord treasurer Suffolk, he was made vicar of
Bere-regis, and rector of Hamer, in Dorsetshire; and from writing smart
epigrams in his youth, became in his graver years a quaint preacher There are
two sets of his Sermons, Five, London, 1615, 4to. The three first of these are
called the MARIGOLD OF THE SUN. Twelve, London, 1615. 4to.
. He died a prisoner for debt, in Dorchester-gaol, April 19, 1618. He was an
elegant classic scholar, and appears to have been better qualified for that
species of the occasional pointed Latin epigram established by his
fellow-collegian John Owen, than for any sort of English versification.

In 1599, appeared "MICROCYNICON six snarling satyrs by T. M. Gentleman,"
perhaps Thomas Middleton. About the same time appeared, without date, in
quarto, written by William Goddard, "A MASTIF WHELP, with other ruff-iland-like
currs fetched from amongst the Antipedes, which bite and bark at the
fantastical humourists and abusers of the time. Imprinted at the Antipedes, and
are to be bought where they are to be sold." It contains eighty-five satires.
To these is added, "Dogs from the Antipedes," containing forty one The name
of the author, who appears to have been a soldier, is added in the Dedication,
to some of his flatt-cappe friends at the Temple. The Satires were written
after Bastard's EPIGRAMS, which are commended, SAT. 81. I will give a specimen
from the second part, SAT. 5.

To see Morilla in her coach to ride,
With her long lock of hair upon one side;
With hatt and feather worn in swaggring gvise,
With buttned boddice, skirted dubblettwise,
Unmasked, and sit in the booth without a fan:
Speak, could you judge her less than be some manne, etc.
Here is the dress of a modern amazon, in what is called a Riding-habit. The
sidelock of hair, which was common both to men and women, was called the French
Lock. So Freeman of a beau, in RUB AND A GREAT CAST, edit. 1614, EPIGR. 32.

Beside a long French lock. --
And Hall, SAT. iii. 7.
His hair French-like stares on his frighted head,
One lock, amazon-like, disheveled.
Hence may be illustrated a passage in a Letting of Humors blood, etc. printed
about 1600. EPIGR. 27. Ask Humors why a feather he does wear, --
Or what he does with such a horsetail lock.
See also Perrott's Springes for Woodcockes, or Epigrams, 1613, Lib. i. EPIGR.
i. Of a beau. And on his shoulder wears a dangling lock.
In B. Rich's OPINION DEIFIED, etc. "Some by wearing a long lock that hangs
dangling by his ear, do think by that louzie commodity to be esteemed by the
opinion of foolery." Land. 1613. 4to. chapter xxix. p. 53. Again, in RETURN FROM
PARNASSUS, 1606, A. iii. S. ii. Must take tobacco, and must wear a lock.
Compare Warburton's note on MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, A. v. S. i. "He wears a
key in his ear, and a long lock hanging by it, etc." I add but one more
instance, from the character of a RUFFIAN, or bully. "When without money, his
gingling spur has last his voice, his head his lock, etc." WHIMZIES, or a
new Cast of CHARACTERS, Land. 1631. 16mo. p. 136.


.

A satirical piece in stanzas, which has considerable merit, called PASQUILL'S
MAD-CAP, was printed at London in quarto, for V. S. in the year 1600 He says,
p. 36. And tell prose writers, STORIES are so stale,
That penie ballads make a better sale.
He mentions country-players, p. 31. PASQUILL'S MAD-CAP is applauded in THE
WHIPPINGE OF THE SATYR, 1601. Signat. F. 3. That MAD-CAP yet superior praise
does win, etc.
In Dekker's GUL'S HORN BOOK, 1609, we have, "I am the Pasquill's MAD-CAPPE
that will doot." p. 8. "PASQUILL'S JESTS, with the merriments of mother Bunch,"
were published, Land. 1629. Bl. Let. 4to. But this I suppose not to have been
the first edition. And in reference to Pasquill's MAD-CAP, there is, "Old
Mad-cappes new gallimaufry, made into a merry mess of mingle mangle, 1602."
. With Pasquill's MESSAGE. Also by the same author, perhaps Nicholas Breton,
Pasquill's FOOLE-CAP, printed for T. Johnes in the same year, the dedication
signed, N. B. At the end is "Pasquill's passion for the world's waiwardnesse
Under the title of PASQUIN, we have also the following coeval pieces.
"PASQUILL'S MISTRESS, or the worthy and unworthie woman, 1600. -- PASQUILL'S
PASS, and passes not, set down in three pees, 1600. -- PASQUILL'S PALINODIA,
and his Progress to the tavern, where, after the survey of the Sellar, you
are presented with a pleasant pynte of poetical sherry, 1619."
." In the year 1601, was published in duodecimo, "The whipper of the Satyr,
his penance in a white sheet, Or the Beadles Confutation, Imprinted at
London, by John Fasket, 1601." And by way of reply, "No whippinge nor
trippinge, but a kind of snippinge, London, 1601." Again, "The whipping of the
SATYR, Imprinted at London for John Flasket, 1601 In duodecimo. It is
dedicated to the "Vain glorious, the HUMOURIST, SATYRIST, and EPIGRAMMATIST."
The writer's initials are I. W. I believe this piece to be a Reply to Rowlands.
But in one place he seems to attack Marston. Signat. D 2. But hark, I hear
the Cynicke Satyr cry,
A man, a man, a kingdom for a man!
He mentions the Fatness of Falstaff. Signat. D 3. That sir John Falstaff was
not any way
More gross in body, than you are in brain.

." About the same time, as I conjecture, were published, "Epigrams served out
in fifty-two several dishes, for every man to taste without surfeting. By I.
C. gentleman." At London, without date. In 1608, "Epigrams, or Humour's Lottery
Entered, April 11, to Busbie and Holme. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 165. b.
." The same year, "A Century of Epigrams, by R. W. Bachelor of Arts, Oxon
Entered, Apr. 21, to T. Thorpe, Ib. f. 166. a. I take R. W. to be Richard West,
who is the author of "News from Bartholomew fair," entered to I. Wright, Jul.
16, 1606. Ibid. f. 141. b. I find "Merry Jests, concerning popes, monks, and
friars, from the French, by R. W. Bachelor of Arts, of H. H. [Hart-Hall] Oxon,
assigned to John Barnes." REGISTR. STATION. D. f. 11. a.
." The same year, "Satyrs, by Richard Myddleton, gentleman, of York Entered
to Jos. Harrison, May 4. REGISTR. C. f. 167. a.
." In 1619, "New Epigrams, having in their Company a mad satyr, by Joseph
Martin, London, for Elde There is a second edition entered to Elde, May 8,
1621. REGISTR. D. f. 15. a. In 1617, "A paraphrasticke transcript of Juvenal's
tenth Satyr, with the tragical narrative of Virginia's death is entered, Oct.
14, to N. Newbury." REGISTR. C. f. 284. b.
." In 1613, were published two books of epigrams, written by Henry Perrot,
entitled, "LAQUEI RIDICULOSI, or Springes for Woodcockes. Caveat emptor. Land.
for J. Busbie, 1613 In the Latin Dedication, it appears they were written in
1611. Mr. Steevens quotes an edition in 1606. Shakesp. Vol. viii. 409.
." Many of them are worthy to be revived in modern collections. I am tempted to
transcribe a specimen.

A Welshman and an Englishman disputed,
Which of their Lands Countries.
maintained the greatest state:
The Englishman the Welshman quite confuted;
Yet would the Welshman naught his brags abate;
"Ten cooks in Wales, quoth he, one wedding sees;
"True, quoth the other, -- Each man toasts his cheese Lib. i. EPIGR. 9.

Tailor the water poet, has mentioned Parrot's Epigrams, in EPIGRAMS, p. 263.
fol. edit. EPIGR. vii. My Muse has vowed revenge shall have her swindge,
To catch a Parrot in the woodcockes spring.
See also p. 265. EPIGR. xxxi.


."
John Weaver, I believe the antiquary who wrote ANCIENT FUNERAL MONUMENTS,
published a book of Epigrams, in 1599, or rather 1600, which are ranked among
the best, by Jonson Jonson's EPIGR. xviii. They are in duodecimo, and cited in
ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, 1600.
. Thomas Freeman, a student in Magdalen college Oxford, about the year 1607,
who appears to have enjoyed the friendship and encouragement of Owen,
Shakespeare, Daniel, Done, Chapman, and Heywood the dramatist, printed in
quarto, "RUB AND A GREAT CAST. In one hundred Epigrams, London, 1614 I am
tempted to give the following specimen of our author's humor, more especially
as it displays the growing extent of London, in the year 1614. Sign. B. 3.
EPIGR. 13. LONDON'S PROGRESS.
Quo ruis, ab demens? --
Why how now, Babell, whither will thou build?
I see old Holborne, Charing-crosse, the Strand,
Are going to Saint Giles's in the field.
Saint Katerne she takes Wapping by the hand,
And Hogsdon will to Hygate ere't be long.
London is got a great way from the stream,
I think she means to go to Islington,
To eat a dishe of strawberries and cream.
The City's sure in progress I surmise,
Or going to revell it in some disorder,
Without the walls, without the Liberties,
Where she need fear nor Mayor nor Recorder.
Well, say she do, 'twere pretty, yet it is pity,
A Middlesex Bailiff should arrest the City.
This poetical rant has been verified far beyond the writer's imagination.
." To these is annexed, "RUB AND A GREAT CAST. The second Bowl in an hundred
Epigrams." Both sets are dedicated to Thomas Lord, Windsor. Thomas Wroth of
Glocester-Hall, Oxford, about 1603, published at London, in quarto, 1620, "An
Abortive of an idle Hour, or a century of Epigrams They are mentioned with
applause in Stradling's EPIGRAMMATA, published 1607.
."

To the opening of 1600, I would also assign "The MASTIVE or young Whelpe of
the old dog. Epigrams and Satyrs. London, printed by Thomas Creed. In
quarto, without date." The Advertisement to the reader is subscribed H. P I
know not if these initials mean Henry Parrot, an epigrammatist before recited.
There is also, "THE MORE THE MERRIER, containing threescore and odd headless
Epigrams shot, like the Fools bolt amongst you, light where you will. By H. P.
Gent." Land. 1608. 4to. "Who says in his dedication, Concerning unsavory
lewdness, which many of our Epigrammatist so much affect, I have esteemed it
fitter for Pick-hatch than Powles churchyard." Is H. P. for Henry Peacham? One
of the Epigrams (Epig. 51.) in the last mentioned collection appears, with some
little difference only, in Peacham's MINERVA, fol. 61. edit. 4to. By one H. P.
are "Characters and Cures for the Itch. Characters, Epigrams, Epitaphs." A
BALLAD-MAKER is one of the characters, p. 3. London, for T. Jones, 1626. 12mo.
. We are sure that they were at least written after Churchyard's death: for in
the third Epigram, the writer says, that Haywood was held for EPIGRAMS the best
when Churchyard wrote I have some faint remembrance of a collection of
Epigrams, by Thomas Harman, about the year 1599. Perhaps he is the same who
wrote the following very curious tract, unmentioned by Ames. "A Caveat for
common ^vrsitors uulgariter, called Uagabondes, set forth by Thomas Harman,
esqvier, for the utility and proffyt of his natural country. Newly augmented
and imprinted Anno domini. M. D. LXVII. Imprinted at London in fletestrete, at
the sign of the faulcon, by Wylliam Gryffith, and are to be sold at his
shoope, in saint Dunstones churchyard, in the west." A quarto in black letter,
with a wooden cut in the title. In the work, is a reference to the first
edition in the preceding year, 1566. It is dedicated, with singular
impropriety, to Elizabeth countess of Shrewsbury. The writer speaks of his
lodgings "at the White friars within the cloister." fol. 20. b. This seems to
have given rise to another piece of the same sort, unnoticed also by Ames, "The
fraternitye of vacabondes, as well of ruflyng vacabondes, as of beggarly, as
women as of men, of gyrles as of boys, etc. Whereunto also is adjoined the xxv
order of Knaves, etc. Imprinted at London, by John Awdely, dwelling in little
Britayne street, without Aldersgate, 1575." Bl. Let. 4to. These, by the way,
are some of the first books exhibiting, not only the tricks but the language,
of thieves, which Jonson has introduced into his MASQUE OF GYPSIES. Compare
Ames, HIST. PR. p. 423.
.

Some of the critics of the author's days are thus described.

The mending poet takes it next in hand;
Who having often the verses ouerscan'd,
"O filching!" straight does to the stat'ner say,
"Here Is four lines stolen from my last new play." --
Then comes my Innes of court-man in his gown,
Cries, Mew! What hackney brovght this wit to town?
But soon again my gallant youth is gone,
Minding the kitchen They were famous for their entertainments at the inns of
court.
more than Littleton.
Tut what cares he for law, shall have enough
When Is father dies, that cankered miser-chuffe.
Next after him the country farmer Country gentleman, yeoman.
views it,
"It may be good, says he, for those that use it:
"Show me king ARTHUR, BEUIS, or SIR GUY, etc Old Romances. SAT. ii. SIGNAT.
H. 3.
."
In these days, the young students of the Inns of Court, seem to have been the
most formidable of the critics Hence, among a variety of instances, says
Marston in the second preface to his SCOURGE OF VILLAINY. Some pedant spruce, or
some span-new-come fry,
Of Inns a-court, striving to vilefie
My dark reproves, etc.

.

The figure and stratagems of the hungry captain, fresh from abroad, are thus
exposed.

Mark, and you love me. -- Who Is yond' marching hither?
Some brave Low Country Captain with his feather,
And high-crown'd hat. See, into Paul's The isles of Saint Paul's church were
the fashionable walk.
he goes,
To show his doublet, and and Italian hose.
The whiles his Corporal walks the other i will,
To see what simple gulls he can beguile Sat. iii. SIGNAT. I. 2.
.
The wars in Spain and the Low Countries filled the metropolis with a set of
needy military adventurers, returning from those expeditions, who were a
mixture of swaggering and submission, of flattery and ferocity, of cowardice
and courage, who assumed a sort of professional magnanimity, yet stooped to the
most ignominious insults, who endeavored to attract the attention of the
public, by the splendor of martial habiliments, were ready for any adventures
of riot and debauchery, and insinuated themselves into favor by hyperbolical
narrations of their hazardous achievements. Jonson's Bobadill was of this race
of heroic rakes. We have seen one of them admirably described by Marston And in
another place, B. ii. 7.

What, meanst thou him, that in his swaggering slops
Wallowes unbraced all along the street?
He that salvtes each gallant he does meet,
With farewell captain, kind heart, adieu!
He that the last night, tumbling thou did view,
From out the great man's head A sign.
, and thinking still,
He had been sentinel of warlike Brill, etc.
The great man's head, if the true reading, must be a cant word for the Sign of
some tavern. Harrington has an Epigram of one getting drunk at the Sarazens
head. B. i. 52. W. Fenner mentions the Saracen's head, without Newgate, and
another without Bishopsgate, both famous for ferocity of feature. The Compter's
Commonwealth, etc. p. 3. Land. 1617. 4to. Brill, which we now call The Brill,
is a town in the Netherlands. See also Hall, SAT. iv. 4. And pointed on the
shoulders for the nonce,
As new come from the Belgian garrisons.



.

In 1600 appeared, a mixture of Satires and Epigrams, "THE LETTING OF HUMORS
BLOOD IN THE HEAD VAIN, with a new morisco daunced by seven satyrs, upon the
bottom of Diogenes tubbe," written by Samuel Rowlands, and printed by William
White In small octavo. There is another edition, without date, in small quarto,
exhibiting a very different title, "HUMORS ORDINARY, where a man may be very
marry, and exceedingly well used for his sixpence. At London, Printed for
William Firebrand, etc." I know not which is the first of the two. He praises
Tarleton the comedian, for his part of the Clown, and his Clownishe ^^oppe,
EPIGR. 30. And Pope for his part of the Clown. SAT. iv. Singer the player is
also mentioned. ibid. One Samuel Rowlands, I know not if the same, has left in
verse, "The Betraying of Christ, Judas in despair, The seven wounds of our
Savior on the cross, with other poems on the passion," dedicated to sir
Nicholas Walsh, knight, 1598, for Adam Islip, in quarto. Under the same name I
have seen other religious poems, rather later. See Percy's BALL. iii. 117.
.

In a panegyric on Charnico, a potation mentioned by Shakespeare, he alludes to
the unfortunate death of three cotemporary poets, two of which are perhaps
Green and Marlowe, or perhaps George Peele It is called a sparkling liquor, in
Goddard's MASTIF-WHELP, or Satires, no date. SAT. 63. [See Notes to SE^. P.
HENR. vi. A. ii. S. 3.] -- I will steep
Thy muddy brains in sparkling CHA^NICO.
See Reed's OLD PLAYS, iii. 457.
.

As for the Worthies on his hoste's wall Pictures on the walls of the tavern.
,
He knows three worthy drunkards pass them all:
The first of them, in many a tavern tried,
At last subdued by Aquavitae did:
His second worthy's date was brought to fine,
Freshing with oysters, and brave Rhenish wine.
The third, whom diverse Dutchmen held full dear,
Was stabbed by pickled herrings and strong beer.
Well, happy is the man does rightly know,
The virtue of three cups of Charnico Sat. vi. Again, EPIGR. 22. Marlow's end
has been before related. Robert Green was killed by a surfeit of pickled
herrings and Rhenish wine. This was in 1592. At which fatal banquet Thomas Nash
was present. Meres says, that Peele died of the venereal disease. WITS TR. f.
285. p. 2. He must have been dead before, or in, 1598.
!
The rotation of fashionable pleasures, and the mode of passing a day of polite
dissipation in the metropolis, are thus represented. The speaker is SIR REVELL,
who is elegantly dressed in a dish-crowned hat and square-toed shoes.

Speak, gentlemen, what shall we do to day?
Drink some brave health upon the Dutch carouse Marston asks, what a traveller
brings from Holland, CERT. SAT. ii. From Belgia what, but their deep bezeling,
Their boote-carouse, and their beerebuttering.
Again, Sc. VILLAN. B. i. 3. In Cyprian dalliance, and in Belgic cheer.

,
Or shall we to the GLOBE, and see a Play?
Or visit Shoreditch for a bawdie house See George Wither's ABUSES STRIPPED AND
WHIPPED, or SATIRICAL ESSAYS, Land. 1615. 12mo. The SCOURGE, p. 277.. -- But
here approaches
A troop, with torches hurried in their coaches,
Stay, and behold, what are they? I can tell,
Some bound for Shoreditch, or for Clarkenwell.
O, these are they which think that fornication, etc.
See above, p. 64.
?
Let Us call for cards, or dice, and have a game:
To sit thus idle, etc EPIGR. 7.
.
In another we have the accomplished fashion-monger I will subjoin the same
character from Marston's SCOURGE OF VILLAINY, which is more witty, but less
distinct and circumstantial. B. iii. 11. This fashion-monger, each morn fore
he rise,
Contemplates sute-shapes, and once out of bed,
He has them straight full lively portrayed:
And then he chuckes, and is as proud of this,
As Taphus when he got his neighbors bliss.
All fashions, since the first year of the Queen,
May in his study fairly drawn be scene; --
The long Fools coat, the huge slop, the lug'd boot,
From mimick Pyso all do claim their root.
O, that the boundless power of the soul
Should be coup'd up in fashioning some roll!
See above, a fantastic beau by Hall, p. 30.
.

Behold a most accomplished cavaleere,
That the world's ape of fashions does appear!
Walking the streets, his humor to disclose,
In the French doublet, and the German hose:
The muffe, cloak, Spanish hat, Toledo blade,
Italian ruff, a shoe right Flemish made:
Lord of misrule, wherever he comes he will revell, etc EPIGR. 25.
.
In another, of a beau still more affected, he says, How rare his spurs do
ring the morris dance EPIGR. 32. Boots were a mark of dignity or elegance,
ibid. EPIGR. 8. He scorns to walk in Powles without his boots.

!


One of the swaggerers of the times, who in his rambles about the town, visits
the Royal Exchange as a mercantile traveller, is not unluckily delineated.

Sometimes into the Royal 'Change he will drop,
Clad in the ruins of a broker's shop.
And there his tongue runs bias on affairs,
No talk, but of commodities and wares. --
If news be harken'd for, then he prevalyes,
Setting his mynt at work to coin new tails Hall has a character partly
resembling this, SAT. vi. 1. Tattelius, the new-come traveler,
With his disguised coat, and ringed ear,
Trampling the bourse's marble twice a day,
Tells nothing but stark truths, I dare well say, etc.
The bourse's marble is the pavement of the Royal Exchange, now newly erected
by sir Thomas Gresham. The Royal Exchange seems to have been frequented by
hungry walkers as well as saint Paul's, from Robert Hayman's QUODLIBETS, or
EPIGRAMS, etc. Land. 1628. 4to. Epigr. 35. p. 6. TO SIR PEARCE PENNILESSE.
Though little coin thy purselesse pockets line,
Yet with great company you are taken up;
For often with duke Humfray thou do dyne,
And often with sir Thomas Gresham sup.

. --
He Will tell you of a tree that he does know,
Upon the which rapiers and daggers grow,
As good as Fleetstrete has in any shop,
Which being ripe down into scabbards drop. --
His wondrous trauells challenge such renown,
That sir John Mandeuille is qvite pvt down Hall alludes to sir John
Mandevill's TRAVELLS, a book not yet out of vogue. SAT. B. iv. 6. Or whetstone
leesings of old Mandeuille.
And in the IRISH BANQUET, or the Mayors feast of Youghall, Certain pieces of
this age parabolized in T. Scot's PHILOMYTHIE, printed in 1606. 8vo. Signat. M.
2. Of Ladies loves, of Turnaies, and such sights
As Mandeville nere saw. --
I have "THE SPANISH MANDEVILE OF MIRACLES, translated from the Spanish," Land.
1618. 4to. The Dedication, to lord Buckhurst, is dated 1600.
.
Men without heads, and pigmies hand breadth hie,
Those, with no legs, that on their backs do lie;
Or Or those, who having legs, and lying on their backs, etc.
, do the weather's injury sustain,
Making their legs a penthouse for the rain SAT. i. In these Satires,
Monsieur Domingo, a drunkard is mentioned. EPIGR. i. See Shakesp. SEC. P. H.
iv. A. 5. S. 3.
.
Gabriel Harvey, in his Four Letters printed in 1592, quotes some English
hexameters, from "those vnsatyrical Satyrs, which Mr. Spencer long since
embraced in an overloving sonnet LET. iii. p. 44.
." This passage seems to indicate a set of satires, now unknown, to which
Spenser had prefixed the undeserved honor of a recommendatory sonnet, now
equally forgotten.

Meres, who wrote in 1598, observes, "As Horace, Lucilius, Juvenal, Persius,
and Lucullus, are the best for SATYR among the Latins, so with us, in the same
faculty these are chief: Piers PLOWMAN, Lodge, Hall of Emanuel college in
Cambridge, the author of PIGMALION'S IMAGE AND CERTAIN SATYRS Marston's
SCOURGE OF VILLAINY had not yet appeared.
, the author of SHIALETHIA Fol. 282. 2.
." And in another place, having cited some of Marston's satires, he adds
Rankins as a satirist Fol. 277.
. I have never elsewhere seen the name of Rankins. Nor have I seen Lodge's
Satires, unless his "ALARM AGAINST USURERS, containing tried experiences
against worldly abuses," and its appendix his History of Forbonius and
Prisaeria, printed at London, in 1584, may be considered under that character.

Wood also, a great dealer in the works of our old minor poets, yet at the same
time a frequent transcriber from Meres, still more embarrasses this matter,
where he says, that Lodge, after he left Trinity college at Oxford, about the
year 1576, and "had spent some time in exercising his fancy among the poets in
the great city, he was esteemed, not Joseph Hall of Emanuel college excepted,
the best for satyr among English men ATH. OXON. i. 498.
." Lodge was fitted for a different mode of composition. He was chiefly noted
for pastorals, madrigals, and sonnets; and for his EUPHUES GOLDEN LEGACY, which
furnished the plot of the AS YOU LIKE IT of Shakespeare. In an extended
acceptance, many of the prose-pamphlets written about this period, by Green
and Decker, which paint or expose popular foibles and fashions, particularly
Decker's GUL'S HORN-BOOK, a manual or directory for initiating an unexperienced
spendthrift into the gaieties of the metropolis, might claim the appellation of
satires Harrrington in his Epigrams, mentions the Satires of a poet whom he
often attacks under the name of Lynus. B. i. 67. His Distickes, SATYRS,
Sonnets and Hexameters,
His Epigrams, his Lyricks, and Pentameters.
And again, he has an Epigram "Against a foolish Satyrist, called Lynus." B. i.
14. See also, B. i. 41.
. That the rage of writing satires, and satirical epigrams, continued long,
will appear from a piece of some humor, called "An Inquisition against
Paper-persecutors," written in 1625 By A. H. Land. for H. H. 1625. p. 1. At the
end of "A Scourge for Paperpersecutors, by I. D."

And shall it still be so? Nor is it more hard
To repair Paul's, than to mend Paul's churchyard?
Still shall the youths that walk the middle i will,
To whet their stomachs before meals, compile
Their sudden volumes, and be never barred
From scattering their bastards through the yard? --
-- It is no wonder,
That Paul's so often has been struck with thunder;
It Was aimed at those shops, in which there lie
Such a confvsed heap of trumperie,
Whose titles each term on the posts are reared,
In such abundance, it is to be feared
That they in time, if thus they go on, will
Not only LITTLE but GREAT Britain fill,
With their infectious swarms, whose guilty sheets
I have observed walking in the streets;
Still lurking near some church, as if hereby
They had retired to a sanctuary,
For murdering paper so. --
-- Each drincking lozell now,
That has but seen a college, and knows how, etc.
After having censured those who versified the bible, and made it all
Apocryphal, but with a compliment to the translators of Du Bartas, he adds,

Others that nere searched newe-born vice at all,
But the Seven Deadly Sins in general,
Drawn from the tractate of some cloistered friar,
Will needs write SATYRS, and in raging fire
Exasperate their sharp poeticke strain;
And think they have touched it, if they rail at Spain,
The pope, and devil. --
The reader will recollect, that Saint Paul's churchyard and its environs, in
which was LITTLE-BRITAIN, abounded with shops and stalls of booksellers: that
its steeple was thrown down by lightening, in 1561: and that a general
reparation of the church was now become a great object of the nation.


. But of this, more distinct proofs will appear in the progress of our history.

It must not be forgotten, that a second impression of an English version of
Ariosto's Satires, which contain many anecdotes of his life and circumstances,
and some humourous tales, and which are marked with a strong vein of free
reprehension, but with much less obscenity than might be expected from satires
written by the author of ORLANDO FURIOSO, appeared in long verse, by an
anonymous translator, in 1611 "Ariosto's SEVEN PLANETS governing Italy. Or,
his Satyrs in seven famous discourses, etc. Newly corrected and augmented, etc.
With a new edition of three most excellent ELEGIES, written by the same
Lodovico Ariosto." By W. Stan^by, 1611. 4to. I believe this title gave rise to
the following. "A Book of the seven planets, or seven wandering motions of
William Alablaster's wit, retrograded or removed by John Ra^ster." Land. 1598.
4to. There is an edition of this translation of Ariosto's Satires, 1608. See
supr. vol. iii. 481.

It is more certain that Ariosto's title gave rise to "The Philosophers Satyrs,
or the Philosophers Seven Satyrs, alluding to the seven Planets, etc." By
Robert Anton of Magdalene college, Cambridge. Land. 1616. 4to. It may be
sufficient to have mentioned these Satires here.


. I believe these satires are but little known or esteemed by the Italians.

For the sake of juxtaposition, I will here anticipate in throwing together the
titles of some others of the most remarkable collections of satires and
satirical epigrams, published between 1600 and 1620, meaning to consider
hereafter those that best deserve, more critically and distinctly I have seen
"N. Britland's BOURE OF DELIGHT, Containing Epigrams, Pastorals, Sonnets, etc."
Printed for W. Jones 1597. But these Epigrams do not so properly belong to the
class before us. The same may be said of the Epigrams of George Turberville,
and some few others.
. The COURT OF CONSCIENCE, or Dick Whipper's Sessions, appeared in 1607. More
fools yet, a collection of Epigrams in quarto, by R. S. perhaps Richard Smith,
in 1610. The most elegant and witty Epigrams of sir James Harrington, the
translator of Ariosto, in four books, in 1611 Many of Harrington's Epigrams
were certainly written before. Perhaps there was an older edition. In
Fitzgeoffrey's Latin Epigrams, called AFFANIAE, published 1601, there is an
Epigram to Harrington, with these lines preferring him to Haywood or Davies, as
an English epigrammatist. Signat. B. 3. Sive arguta vago flectas epigrammata
torno,
Sive Britanna magis sive Latina velis.
At tu Biblidicis malis comes ire Camenis,
Illis HAYWOODOS DAVISIOSQUE praeis.
And in sir John Stradling's Epigrams, published 1607, there is one to
Harrington with this title, Lib. i. p. 32. "Ad D. I. Harrington, Equitem
doctissimum, de quibusdam epigrammatis Stradlingo, equiti, dono missis, 1590."
And in Stradling's epigrams, we have two of Harrington's translated into Latin.
. Jonson's EPIGRAMS, in 1616 Jonson's epigrams, as we have seen, are mentioned
with Davies's, by Fitzgeoffrey, 1601. AFFAN. Lib. ii. Signat. E. 4. DAVISIOS
laedis mihi, JONSONIOSQUE lacessis.


Of this the first Davies, Harrington says, "This Haywood [the epigrammatist]
for his proverbs and epigrams is not yet put down by any of our country, though
one [Davies in the margin] does indeed come near him, that graces him the
more in saying he put him down, etc." -- "A NEW DISCOVRSE of a stale svbiect,
called the METAMORPHOSIS of AJAX, etc." Printed 1596. 12mo. SIGNAT. D. 2.
Again, "But as my good friend M. Dauies said of his Epigrams, that they were
made like doublets in Birchen-lane, for every one whom they will serve, etc."
Ibid. SIGNAT. I.


. Henry Fitzgeoffry's SATIRES in 1617 In Hayman's QUODLIBETS, or Epigrams,
there is one, "To the reverend, learned, and acute, Master Charles
FitzGeoffrey, bachelor in divinity, my especial kind friend, and most
excellent poet." He compares him to Homer, being blind of one eye. B. i. 111.
p. 18. This was Charles the author of the Latin Epigrams, abovementioned.
. PHILOMYTHIE or PHILOMYTHOLOGIE, wherein outlandish birds, beasts, and fishes,
are taught to speak true English plainly, By T. SCOT. gentleman, including
satires in long English verse, in 1616 This is a second edition, "much
enlarged," Land. For Francis Constable, etc. 8vo.
. The second part of PHILOMYTHIE, containing certain Tales of True Liberty,
False Friendship, Power United, Faction and Ambition, by the same, 1616 For
Constable. ut supr.
. Certain Pieces of this age parabolized, by the same, in 1616 Land. Printed
by E. Griffin, for F. Constable, etc. 8vo. I suppose these two last to be
second editions.
. George Wither, of Manydowne in Hamshire, educated at Magdalene College, in
Oxford, and at Lincolns inn, afterward an officer in Cromwell's army, and
popular even among the puritans as a poet, published ABUSES stripped and whipped,
or Satyricall Essays. Divided into two Books. in 1613 Three editions soon
followed, 1614, 1615, 1622, 8vo.
. For this publication, which was too licentious in attacking establishments,
and has a vein of severity unseasoned by wit, he suffered an imprisonment for
many months in the Marshalsea. Not being debarred the use of paper, pens and
ink, he wrote during his confinement, an apology to James the first, under the
title of A SATYR, printed the following year, for his censures of the
government in his first book. But, like Prynne in the pillory railing at the
bishops, instead of the lenient language of recantation and concession, in this
piece he still perseveres in his invectives against the court Reprinted 1615,
1622, 8vo.
. Being taken prisoner in the rebellion, by the royalists, he was sentenced to
be hanged; but sir John Denham the poet, prevailed with the king to spare his
life, by telling his majesty, So long as Wither lives, I shall not be the worst
poet in England. The revenge of our satirist was held so cheap, that he was
lampooned by Tailor the water-poet The titles of Wither's numerous pieces may
be seen in Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 392. seq. He was born in 1588, and died in 1667.
He has left some anecdotes of the early part of his life, in the first book of
his ABUSES, and. The OCCASION, p. 1. seq. In Hayman's Epigrams, 1628, there is
one, "To the accute Satyrist, Master George Wither." EPIGR. 20. And 21. p. 61.

Here might be mentioned, "ESSAYS and CHARACTERS, ironicall and instructive,
etc, By John Stephens the younger, of Lincolnes inn, Gent." Land. 1615. 12mo.
Mine is a second impression. Many of the ESSAYS are Satires in verse.

There is also a collection of Satirical poems called the KNAVE OF HEARTS,
1612. Another, the KNAVE OF SPADES, 1611. And "Knaves yet, The Knaves of Spades
and Diamonds. With new additions," 1612. 4to. Among Mr. Capell's SHAKESPERIANA,
at Trinity college, Cambridge, are "Dobson's Dry Bobs," 1610, Bl. Let^. 4to.
And Heath's EPIGRAMS, 1610. 8vo.


. Richard Brathwayte, a native of Northumberland, admitted at Oriel college,
Oxford, in 1604, and afterward a student at Cambridge, chiefly remembered, if
remembered at all, as one of the minor pastoral poets of the reign of James the
first, published in 1619, "NATVRES embassy, or the Wilde-mans measures, danced
naked, by twelve Satyrs, with sundry others, etc For R. Whitcher, 12mo. They
were reprinted for the same, 1621. 12mo. In his satire on ADULTERY, are these
lines, p. 30. And when you have no favors to bestow,
Looks are the lures which draw Affection's bow.
To these pieces is annexed, "The second Section of Divine and Moral Satyrs,
etc." This is dedicated to S. W. C. by R. B. See also Brathwayte's STRAPPADO
for the Devil, 1615. 8vo.
." -- Donne's SATIRES were written early in the reign of James the first,
though they were not published till after his death, in the year 1633. Jonson
sends one of his Epigrams to Lucy Countess of Bedford, with MR. DONNES SATYRS
EPIGR. xciii. See xcvi. Though Jonson's EPIGRAMS were printed in 1616, many
were written long before. And among Freeman's Epigrams, RUN AND A GREAT CAST,
1614, we have the following. EPIGR. 84. TO JOHN DONE.
The STORM described has set thy name afloat,
Thy CALM a gale of famous wind has got:
Thy SATYRS short too soon we them o'erlook,
I prithee, Persius, write another book!

. It is conjectured by Wood, that a lively satirical piece, on the literature
of the times, which I have already cited, with Donne's initials, and connected
with another poem of the same cast, is one of Donne's juvenile performances. I
had supposed John Davies. But I will again exhibit the whole title of the
Bodleian edition. "A Scourge for paper-persecutors, by I. D. With an
Inquisition against paper-persecutors, by A. H. London, for H. H. 1625," in
quarto. But Wood had seen a detached edition of the former piece. He says,
"Quaere, whether John Done published A Scourge for Paper Persecutors, printed
in quarto, tempore Jacobi primi. The running title at the top of every page is
PAPER'S COMPLAINT, in three sheets and a half. The date on the title pared out
at the bottom ATH. OXON. i. 556. [See above, p. 81.] He thus ridicules the
minute commemoration of unhistorical occurrences in the Chronicles of
Hollinshead and Stowe. Signat. B. 3. Some chroniclers that write of kingdom's
states,
Do so absurdly sableize my white
With maskes, and interludes, by day and night,
Bald may games, bear baytings, and poor orations,
Made to some prince, by some poor corporations.
And if a bricke-bat from a chimney falls,
When puffing Boreas nere so little bralls;
Or wanton rig, or leacher dissolute,
Do stand at Paules-crosse in a sheeten suit:
All these, and thousand such like toys as these,
They close in Chronicles like butterflies.
And so confound grave matters of estate
With plays of poppets, and I know not what. --
Ah good sir Thomas More, fame be with thee,
Thy hand did bless the English history! --
As also when the weathercock of Paul's
Amended was, this chronicler enroules, etc. --

." This must have been an older edition, than that in which it appears
connected, from similarity of subject, with its companion, An Inquisition
against paper-persecutors, in the year 1625, as I have just noticed.

Owen's idea of an epigram points out the notion which now prevailed of this
kind of composition, and shows the propriety of blending the epigrams and
satires of these times, under one class. A satire, he says, is an epigram on a
larger scale. Epigrams are only satires in miniature. An epigram must be
satirical, and a satire epigrammatical Robert Hayman above quoted, thus
recommends his own Epigrams. QUODLIBETS, B. iv. 19. p. 61. Epigrams are like
Satyrs, rough without,
Like chestnuts sweet; take thou the kernel out.

. And Jonson, in the Dedication of his EPIGRAMS to Lord Pembroke, was so far
from viewing this species of verse, in its original plan, as the most harmless
and inoffensive species of verse, that he supposes it to be conversant above
the likeness of vice and facts, and is conscious that epigrams carry danger in
the sound. Yet in one of his epigrams, addressed TO THE MERE ENGLISH CENSVRER,
he professes not exactly to follow the track of the late and most celebrated
epigrammatists.

To thee my way in EPIGRAMMES seems new,
When both it is the old way and the true.
Thou say that cannot be: for thou have seen
DAVIS, and WEEVER, and the BEST have BEEN,
And mine come nothing like, etc EPIGR. xviii. Freeman also celebrates Davis,
RUN AND A GREAT CAST, 1614. 4to. EPIGR. 100. Haywood wrote Epigrams, and so did
Davis,
Reader, thou doubtest utrum horum mavis.


In Dunbar's Latin Epigrams, published 1616, there is a compliment to Davies of
Hereford, author of the SCOURGE OF FOLLY, as a Satyrist or epigrammatist. CENT.
xx. p. 66.


.
This, however, discovers the opinion of the general reader.

Of the popularity of the epigram about the year 1600, if no specimens had
remained, a proof may be drawn, together with evidences of the nature of the
composition, from Marston's humourous character of Tuscus, a retailer of wit.

But room for Tuscus, that iest-moungering youth,
Who near did open his apish gerning mouth,
But to retaile and broke another's wit.
Discourse of what you will, he straight can fit,
Your present talk, with, Sir, I Will tell a jest, --
Of some sweet lady, or grand lord at least.
Then on he goes, and near his tongue shall lie,
Till his engrossed jests are all drawn dry:
But then as dumb as Maurus, when at play,
Has lost his crowns, and paun'd his trim array.
He does naught but retaile jests: break but one,
Out flies his table-booke, let him alone,
He Will have it in faith: Lad, have an EPIGRAM,
Will It have it put into the chaps of Fame?
Give Tuscus copies: sooth, as his own wit,
His proper issue, he will father it, etc Sc. VILLAN. B. iii. 11.
.
And the same author says, in his Postscript to PIGMALION, Now by the whyppes
of EPIGRAMMATISTS,
I Will not be lashed. --


One of Harrington's Epigrams, is a comparison of the Sonnet and the Epigram.

Once by mishap two poets fell a squaring,
The Sonnet and our Epigram comparing.
And Faustus having long demur'd upon it
Yet at the last gave sentence for the Sonnet,
Now, for such censvre, this his chief defense is,
Their sugared taste best likes his likrous senses.
Well, though I grant sugar may please the taste,
Yet let my verse have salt to make it last EPIGR. B. i. 37.
.
In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, acted 1616, perhaps written foam time before,
Sir Roderick says, "I hope at length England will be wise enough: then an old
knight may have his wench in a corner, without any SATIRES or EPIGRAMS A. ii.
S. 2.
." In Decker's VNTRUSSING OF THE HUMOROUS POET, Horace, that is Jonson,
exclaims in a passion, "Sirrah! I Will compose an EPIGRAM upon him shall go thus
-- Edit. 1602. Sign. C. 2. Again, ibid. "Here be EPIGRAMS upon Tucca." E. 3.
"They are bitter EPIGRAMS composed on you by Horace." F. 3. "A gentleman, or
honest citizen, shall not sit in your pennie-bench theaters with his squirrell
by his side cracking nuttes, but he shall be SATYRED and EPIGRAMMED upon, etc."
H. 3. "It shall not be the whippinge of the satyr nor the whipping of the
blind bear, etc." L. 3. "He says here, you diuulged my EPIGRAMS." H. "And that
same PASQUILLS-MADCAP nibble, etc." A.
."

INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME OF WARTON'S History of English Poetry.
A. R. 480, 483 Abbot, Archbishop, 487 Achelly, or Acheley, Thomas, 281
Acricious, Ball^t of, 417 Active Policy of a Prince, a Poem, by George Ashby,
81 Acts of the Apostles, translated into English meter by Dr. C. Tie, 190,
191, 192, 193, 468 Acts of the Popes by Bale, translated by Studley, 384 Aesop,
347, 449 Aelian's various History, translated by Abraham Fleming, 403 Aeneidos
of Virgil translated. See Virgil. Affaniae, by Charles Fitzjeffrey, 281
Affectionate Shepherd, by Barnefield, 405 Agamemnon, Seneca's Tragedy of,
translated by Studeley, 290, 383, 417 Aged Lover renounceth Love, a Poem, by
Lord Vaulx, 45 Agon Heroicus, by Edmund Bolton, 278 Agriculture, Spiritual, 458
Agrippa, Cornelius, 7 Alan, Cardinal, 276 Albion's England, by Warner, 272,
273, 277 Alcione and Ceyx. 413 Alcoran of the Prelates, by John Bale, 79 Ales,
various kinds, Account of, 128, 129 Alexander, Geste of, by Adam Davie, 112,
124, 126, 127, 128, 132 Alexander and Campaspe, Play of, 423 Alexander,
Campaspe, and Apelles, 423 Alexius, 466 Alfayn^ and Archelaus, the famooste and
notable History of, 422 Allen, Edward, Founder of Dulwich College, 436, 475
Allot, Robert, 280, 281, 483 Alveare, by Baret, 404, 414 Amadis de Gaul,
Romance of, 425, 477, 488 Amors, with Sonnets by J. or G. D. and W. S. 402
Anatomy of Melancholy, by Burton, 295, 434 Andria of Terence, translated by
Kyffin, 449 Andria of Terence, Commentary on, by M. Grimoald, 60 Anglorum
Prelia, a Latin Poem, by Ocland, 314 Anne Boleyn, 28, 49, 58 Anslay, or
Annesley, Brian, 79 Anstis, 279 Antichrist's Mas, or Mass, the Downsal of, 145
Antichrist, or the Papal Dominion, a Poem on, by Naogeorgius, or Kirchmaier,
458 Antigone of Sophocles, translated, 433 Antiprognosticon of W. Fulk,
translated by William Paynter, 465 Antonio, Nicholas, 476 Apelles and
Pygmalyne, 423 Appelles, Song of, 423 Apius, Terannye of Judge, a Poem, 416
Apology for Woman, by William Heal, 320 Apology of Pierce Penniless, 400
Apostolic Creed, versified by William Whyttingham, 168 Appius and Virginia,
Tragedy of, 416 Appolyn of Tire, Romance of, 142 Arbor of Ami^ie set forth by
Thomas Howell, 418 Arcaoeus, F. Anatomy, by, 181 Arca^dia, by Sidney, 419, 425,
496 Arcadian Rhetoric by France, 406 Arc^te and Palamon, Play of, 287, 290
Arch^propheta sive Johannes Baptista Tragedia; that i^, the Archprophet, or St.
John the Baptist, a Latin Tragedy, by Nicholas Gr^moald, 60 Are^ine's War of
Italy, translated, 413 Argonautica of Catullus, 407 Ariodanto and Jane^ra,
daughter unto the King of Scots, the tragical and pleasant History of, by
Peter Beverley, 479 Ariosto, 11, 25, 352, 485, 488 Arisbas, by J D. 417
Aristotle, 330. Table of the Ten Categories o^ translated by Googe, 458
Aristotle's Ethics, Commentary on, by Figlinei Fel^^e, 24 Arnalt and Lucinda, a
fyn Tuscane Hy^torye, 474 Arnolds, R^. Chronicle, by, 135 Arraignment of Paris,
by Geo. Peele, 417, 418 Art of English Poesy, see Puttenham, 10, 44, 96, 213,
277, 293, 335, 400, 415, 426, 499. Of French Poetry, 350, 351 Art of Logic, by
Wilson, 298, 331 Art of Rhetoric, by Wilson, 91, 331, 332 339 to 344 Art de
Rhetorique, in French Ryme, 348 Art et Science de Rhetorique, metrifiee par N.
Viellard. 348 Arthur, an Armorican Knight, H^story of, translated by Lord
Berners, 58 Arthur, King, History of, 123, 341 Arthur of Little Brittayne,
Romance of, 477 Arthure, Prince, by R. R. i. e. Richard Robinson, 391 Arundel,
Philip, Earl of, 421 Ascham, Roger. 24, 300, 329, 330, 331, 415, 441, 461, 491
Ashby, George, 81 Ashmole, Elias, Theatrum Chemicum, by. 85 Asserterio Arthuri
of Leland, translated by Robinson, 391 Astionax and Polixine, 417 Assault of
Cupide upon the Fort in which the Lover's Heart lay wounded, a Poem by Lord
Vaulx, 45, 49 As^le, 30^ Atchlow, a Player, 436 Athanasian Creed, versified by
W. Whyttingham, 169. By Hunnis, 180 Atropoion De^ion, a Poem, 392 Aubrey, 26
Auctours, uncertain, 28, 41 Audley, Lord Chancellor, Poem on the Death of, 46
Aulica, de, by Gabriel Harvey, 426 Aurelio and Isabella, Romance of, 477
Aurelius, Marcus, Golden Book of, by Lord Ber^ers, 279 Ausonius, Epigrams of,
translated by Kendall, 432
B
B. N. See Nicholas Breton. B. T. 290, 390 B. W. 448 Babtism and Temptation, an
Interlude, by John Bale, 78 Bacon^ Sir Nicholas, 336 Bais, Lazare de, 35
Baldwyn, William, 181, 212, 213, 214, 267, 317 Bale, John, 43, 58, 61, 78, 83,
195, 198, 206, 213, 316 Bancroft, Archbishop, 488 Bandello, 470, 484 Banishment
of Cupid, 402, 477 Banockburn, a Poem, by Laurence Minot, 107 Banquet of
Dainty Conceiptes, 485 Bansley, Charles, 84 Barcham, Dr. John, 279
Barnefielde, Richard, 405 Barrett, John, 404, 414 Bartholomeus, 487 Bastard,
Thomas, 281 Bathsabe and David, Play of, by Geo. Peele, 328 Batman, or Bateman,
Dr. Stephen, 450, 487 Batman's Doom, 487 Batrachomuomachy of Homer, translated
by Chapman, 445 Batrachomuomachy of Homer, imitated by John Heywood, 95
Batrachomuomachy of Homer, translated by Dr. Johnson, 433 Bavande, William, 274
Bays, Poem on, 51 Beard, D. Theater of God's Judgments, by, 289, 437 Beau
Miracle de S. Nicolas, French Play of, 325 Beaumont, Francis, 279, 280, 419
Bid, 248 Bedwell, William, 103 Beearde, Richard, 319 Bell, David, 450 Bellay,
352 Belleforest, 487 Belvedere, or Garden of the Muses, by John Bodenham, 280
Bembo, Pietro, 352 Bentley, 436 Bernard, Richard, 449 Berners, Lord, 42, 58,
147, 279 Besalin, Ramon, Vidal de, 349 Betham's Military Precepts, 396 Beverly,
Peter, 479 Bevis of Southampton, Romance of, 141 Beza, Theodore, 162, 432
Bible, translated by William Bedwell, 103 Bird, William, 58, 59 Blase, Bishop,
353 Blasts of Retrait from Plays, the Second and Third, 288 Blazon of
Jealousy, by R. T. 481 Blessedness of Brytaine, a Poem, by Kyffin, 449
Blomefield, William, 84, 85, 86 Blomefield's Blossoms, or Camp of Philosophy,
85 Blount's Ancient Tenures, 73 Blundeville, or Blondeville, Thomas, 274 Boar's
Head, Custom of the, 143 Boccace's Epistle to Pinus, translated by Lord Surrey,
26 Boccace, 99, 216, 251, 352, 458, 464, 465, 467, 468, 470, 484, 488 Bodenham,
John, 280 Boleyne, Anne, 28, 49, 58, 152 Boleyne, Geo. Viscount Rochford, 41,
42, 43, 57 Bolton, Edmund, 24, 275, 276, 278 Bonner, Bishop, 28 Borbonius's
Epigrams, translated by Kendall, 432 Board, Andrew, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76,
77, 78, 337 Boy, Bishop, Ceremony of the, 302, 303, 304, 321, 322, 323, 324,
325 Bouchier, John, Lord Berners, 42, 58, 147, 279 Brandon, Charles and Henry,
Account of, 342. Epitaphia on, by Wilson, 432 Breton, Nicholas, 402, 485
Breviary of Health, by Andrew Board, 70, 77 Breviarie of Britain, by T. Twyne,
396 Brian, Sir Francis. See Bryan. Brice, Thomas, 355 Briggam, or Brigham,
Nicholas, 353 Brimsley's Translation of Virgil's Bucolics, and Fourth Georgic,
404 British Muse, by Thomas Hayward, 281 Broadgate Hall, Oxford, Account of, 90
Brook, Thomas, 272. Arthur, 471, 472 Brown, Prebendary of Westminster, 396
Brunetto's Tesoretto, and Tesoro, 237, 254 Brunne, Robert de, 127 Bruno's
Epigrams, translated by Kendall, 432 Brunswerd, John, 192 Bryan, Sir Francis,
28, 34, 41, 42, 57 Buchanan, 70 Bucer, 179, 450 Bucolics of Virgil, translated.
See Virgil Buckhurst, Lord. See Sackville Thomas Bullocar, William, 346 Burton,
John, alias Robert, 295, 425, 434, 471, 483 Buryal and Resurrection of Christ,
an Interlude, by Bale, 78 Burying of the Mass, in Rithme, 197 Buttis, Doctor,
78 Bussy d'Amboise, Tragedy of, by Chapman, 448 Byron, Charles, Duke of, a
Play, 447
C
C. H. i. e. Henry Chettle, 291 C. H. i. e. Henry Constable, 292 C. I. 170, 469
Caesar's Commentaries, translated by Golding, 414. By Tiptoft, Earl of
Worcester, 414 Calvin, John, 164, 169, 179 Caltha Poetarum, 488 Cambyses, Play
of, by Preston, 289 Camden, William, 384, 401 Campaspe and Alexander, Play of,
423 Campbell, Dr. 281 Camp of Philosophy, 85 Campion, Edmund, 290, 291, 401.
Thomas, 469 Campo di Fior, or the Flourie Field of Four Languages of M.
Claudius Desainliens, 465 Canterbury Tales by Chaucer, 203 Canticles of
Solomon, versified, 181. Metrical Commentary on, by Dudley Fenner, 317. In
English Verse, by Spenser, 317 Carew, Sir Nicholas, 58 Carlisle, Christopher,
450 Carman's Whistle, a Ballad, 292 Carols, Account of, 142, 143, 144, 306, 307
Carowles, certain goodly, to be song to the Glory of God, 306 Carr, Nicholas,
334 Carter, Peter, 429 Case is Altered, Play of, 291 Castiglio's il Cortegiano,
translated by Thomas Hoby, 371 Castle of Love, translated from the Spanish by
Lord Berners, 58 Castle of Memory, translated by William Fullwood, 345
Catechismus Paulinus, by Mulcaster, 346 Catherine, Saint, Play of, 323 Cato,
449 Catullus, 407 Cave, Henry, Narration of the Fall of Paris Garden, by, 289
Cavyll, or Cavil, 215, 270 Caxton's Ovid, 57. Epilogue to Chaucer's Book of
Fame, 353 Cecil, Sir William, 24 Ceiris, a Fable of Nisus and Scylla, 406 Cent
Nouvelles Nouvelles, les, 475 Cent Histoires Tragiques of Belleforest, 487
Cephalus and Procris, 417 Certain Noble Stories, 484 Certain Meters by Sir
Thomas More, 98 Ceyx and Alcione, History of, drawn into English Meeter by
William Hubbard, 413 Chaloner, Sir Thomas, 396, 464 Chance of the Dolorous
Lover, a Poem, by Christopher Goodwin, 84 Chanson a Boire, or Drinking Ballad,
the first, 206 Chaos of Histories, 484 Chapman, George, 276, 279, 281, 291,
434, 441, 442, 445, 446, 447, 448 Charles, Duke of Biron, Play of, 447
Chatter^on, George, 450 Chaucer, Geoffry, 12, 25, 35, 56, 76, 81, 93, 103, 203,
276, 311, 327, 335, 353, 354, 415, 426, 436, 451, 464 Chertsey, Andrew, 80, 313
Chestre, Thomas, 133, 134 Chettle, Henry, 291, 292, 386, 436 Children of the
Chapel Stripped and Wipt, 288 Child Bishop, Song of the, 321 Chopping Knives, a
Ballad, 292 Christian Friendship, by Newton, 392 Christ in his Twelfth Year,
Interlude of, by John Bale, 78 Christmas Carols, 142, 143, 144, 306, 307
Christmas Recreations, by Robinson, 391 Chronicle of Brutes, in English Verse,
by Arthur Kelton, 205, 206 Chronicle of the Emperors, by Richard Reynholds, 346
Chrysanalia, by A. Monday, 290 Chryso-Triumphos, a City Pageant, by A. Monday,
290 Churchyard, Thomas, 11, 214, 215, 260, 280, 281, 391, 421 Child, Bishop,
Song of the, 321 Chytraeus, Postils of, 413 Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Poem on the
Death of, by N. Grimoald, 62 Cicero's Epistles, translated by Fleming, 404
Oration for the Poet Archias, translated by Drant, 431 Orations, translated,
431 Dream of Scipio, translated, 86 Cicero, 200, 330 City of Civilitie, 466
City of Dames, a Comedy, by Brian Annesley, 80 Clavell, John, 399 Clem
Clawbacke and Prig Pickshanke, Picture of, 370 Cleomenes and Juliet, History
of, 473 Clerc, John, 26 Clear, Sir Thomas, Poetical Epitaph on, by Lord Surrey,
26 Clerk of Tranent, his Scotch Version of the Exploits of Gawaine, 133
Clitophon and Leucippe, 448 Cloris, or Complaynt of the Passion of the Despised
Sheppard, by W. Smyth, 402 Cognatus Gilbertus, 416 Collection of Choice
Flowers, by Fitzgeffry, 281 Collins, William, 81, 292, 478 Coluthus's Rape of
Helen, translated by Marlowe, 433 Comoedia, a Work in Rhyme, by H. N. 202
Commandments, versified by Whyttingham, 169 Commedia il Divina, di Dante, 236,
237, 238, 239 to 255 Commendacion of True Poetry, 486 Commune Desunctorum, by
Stanyhurst, 401 Complaint against the Stiff-necked Papists, in Verse, by
Mardiley, 194 Complaint, a Poem, ascribed to Anne Boleyn, 58 Complete Angler,
438 Comus, Masque of, by Milton, 22 Confessio Amantis, 353 Consutation of Miles
Hoggard, by Crowley, 197 Consutation to the Answer of a Wicked Ballad, 197
Constable, Henry, 277, 280, 281, 286, 292, 386 Conway, Sir John, 479 Cooper,
John, 469 Copland, Robert, 180, 313 Coprario, or Cooper, John, 469 Corbet,
Bishop, 170 Cosen^, Dr. 189 Council of the High Priests, an Interlude, by John
Bale, 78 Court of Venus, moralized, 355 Court of Virtue, by J. Hall, 181, 424
Coverdale's Bible, 172 Courtier of Castilio, translated, 211, 371 Courtier's
Life, by Sir Thomas Wyat, 37, 38 Cox, Leonarde, Tract on Rhetoric, by, 331
Cowper, the Fearful Fantyses of the Florentyne, 477 Coxeter, Thomas, 281, 401,
410, 415, ^^^, 422, 431, 433 Cranmer, Archbishop, 198, 204 Creeds, the Nicene,
Apostolic, and Athanasian, versified by Whyttingham and Clement Marot, 168
Cromwell, Thomas, Lord, a ballad on, 144 Cromwell, Oliver, 164 Cronicle of the
Brutes, in English Verse, by Arthur Kelton, 205, 206 Crowley, Rob. the Printer,
187, 188, 197 Cruel Detter, by Wayer, a Ballet, 423 Cruget, Claude, 481
Cuckowe, William, 292 Culex, by Spenser, 406 Cundyt of Comfort, by Fleming, 404
Cupid, Banishment of, a Romance, 477 Cupid and Psyche, Play of, 288 Cupydo,
serten Verses of, by Mr. Fair, 396 Cupid's Whirligig, Play of, 484 Cymon and
Iphigenia, 469 Cynthia and Cassandra, by Barnefield, 405 Cyropoedia, English
Version of, by Grimoald, 61
D
D. G. 402 D. J. 314, 402 D. R. 259 D. T. 430. See Thoma^ Deloney Damon and
Pythias, Play of, by Edwards, 284, 289 Damonde and Pi^hias, Tragical Comedye
of, 289 Daniel, Samuel, 272, 276, 280, 281, 400, 447 Dante, 11, 236, 237, 238,
239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 255, 453,
464 Darius, King, Play of, 328 David and Bethsabe, Play of, by George Peele,
67, 328 David and Goliath, Story of, exhibited in Dumb Show, 350 Davi^, Adam,
112, 124, 126, 128, 132 David's Psalms, translated, etc. See Psalms David,
King, a new Interlude on the tw^ Sy^nes of, 328 Davies, Sir John, 280, 488
Davison's Poems, 32 Day, John, the Printer, 182 Decameron of Boccace, 487, 488
Deceipts in Love, discoursed in a Comedy of two Italian Gentlemen, and
translated into English, 485 Decker, or Dekker, Thomas, 281, 292, 426, 430,
436, 488 Declaration of God's Judgments at Paris Garden, by John Field, 288
Dee, John, 396, 478 Defense of Poetry, by Sir P. Syney, 273, 363 Defense of
Women, by E. More, 320 Deloney, Thomas, 430 Democritus, Junior, 295. See Burton
Demosthenes, Seven Orations of, translated by T. Wilson, 334; by Carr, 384
Denny, Sir Anthony, Poem on the Death of, 46 Dering, Edward, 466 Description of
the Restless State of a Lover, a Poem, by Lord Surrey, 19 Descriptio
Hiberniae, 401 Devereux, Richard, Poem on the Death of, 46 Diamant of
Devotions, by A. Fleming, 404 Diana, or the excellent Conceitful Sonnets of H.
C. 292 Diana of Montmayer, Romance of, translated from Spanish by Tho. Wilson,
344 Dial for Dainty Darlings, 485 Dialogue against the Pope, by Ochin,
Englished by Poynet, 188 Dialogue on Proverbes, by J. Heywood, 91 Dialogue on
Tribulation, by Sir Thomas More, 329 Dickenson, 417 Didaco and Violenta,
Tragical History of, 422 Dido, Tragedy of, by Edw. Haliwell, 84 Dido, Queen of
Carthage, Tragedy of, by Christopher Marloe, 435 Dido and Eneas, Interlude of,
435 Diella, certain Sonnets adjoining to the Amorous Poem of Dom Diego and
Gineura, by R. L. Gentleman, 480 Dietarie of Health, by Andrew Board, 77
Dietarie for the Clergy, 204 Dingley, Francis, 261 Discovery of Campion the
Jesuit, 290, 291 Discourse of English Poetry, by Web, 44, 291, 400 Doctrine
of Urines, by Andrew Board, 77 Dodipoll, Doctor, the Wisdom of, a Play, 475
Dodington, Bartholomew, 384 Dolce, 482 Dolman, John, 215 Doni's Moral
Philosophy, from the Italian, by Sir T. North, 273 Done, John, 278, 279, 424
Doom, by Batman, 487 Downsal of Antichrist's Mass, 145 Downsal of Diana of the
Ephesians, 314 Dramata Sacra, by Oporinus, 458 Drant, Thomas, 320, 386, 424,
425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 431, 450 Drayton, Michael, 3, 11, 14, 41, 76, 263,
264, 266, 270, 272, 277, 280, 433, 435, 445 Dream of Scipio, Tully's, 86
Drinking Ballad, the First, 206 Dryden, John, 443, 447, 470 Dumb Show, Account
of, 291, 350, 360, 361 Duke, Gilbert, 450 Dugdale's Monasticon, 153 Dyer, Sir
Edward, 277
E
E. R.; quaere, R. C. i. e. R. Carew Earthquake, Account of, in the Year 1580,
by A. Golding, 414 Eastward Hoe, Play of, 447 Ecclesiastes of Solomon,
versifyed by Lord Surrey, 26, 182 Ecclesiastes, versifyed by Oliver Starchy,
320 Ecclesiastes, versifyed by John P^llaine, 316 Ecclesiastes, versifyed by
Ed. Spenser, 320 Ecclesiastes, versifyed by Henry Lok, or Lock, 320, 445
Ecclesiastes, versifyed by Drant, 320, 429 Ecclesiasticus, versifyed by John
Hall, 181 Edmonton, Merry Devil of, Play of the, 81 Edward II. Play of, by
Marlowe, 438 Edward III. Poem on the Wars of, by Minot, 103 Edward VI. 195
Education, a Compendious Fourm of, etc. in Verse, by E. Hake, 275, 276 Edward^,
Richard, 283, 285, 286, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 296, 297 Elizabetha, a Latin
Poem, by Christopher Ocland, 314 Elucidarium, 81 Elementarie, by Mulcaster, 346
Elizabeth, Queen, 277, 287, 394, 418, 425, 493 Elisabeth, Queen, a rueful
Lamentation on the Death of, by Sir Thomas More, 99, 100, 101, 102 Emare, Lay,
or Romance of, 117, 134 Enchiridion of Surgery, by Gale, 181 Endimion and
Phoebe, 418 Eneidos of Virgil, translated. See Virgil Enemy of Idleness, by
Fullwood, 345 England's Parnassus, 280, 440, 469, 483 England's Helicon, 292,
319, 402 English Policy, a Poem, 123 Englishman's Roman Life, by Ant. Mundaye,
290 Ennius, 431 Interlude for Boys to handle and pass Time at Christmas, 307
Enterludes prohibited, 198 Entertainment at Killing worth Castle, 98 Epictetus,
459 Epigrammata Seria, by Parker, 432 Epigrams, by J. Heywood, 88; by Crowley,
188 Episcopus Puerorum, 302, 303, 304, 321, 322, 325 Erasmus, 59, 404 Erra
Pater, 77 Esdras and Darius, Play of, 328 Esop's Fables, translated by
Bullocar, 347 Esop, translated by Bullokar, 347, 449 Essex, Robert, Earl of,
421, 422 Ester, Queen, Play of, 328 Esther, Book of, versified by John
Pullaine, 316 Ethics of Aristotle, Commentary on, by Fignilei Felice, 24
Ethiriden, George, 284 Etiocles and Polynices, Tale of, 386 Evans, Lewis, 425
Eunuchu^ of Terence, translated, 449 Euryalus and Lucretia, 416 Eustathius, 444
Exhortations to the Citizens of London, a Poem, by Lord Surrey, 26 Exposition
on the Psalms, by Thomas Wilson, 345 Exposition on the Proverbs, by Thomas
Wilson, 345 Expedition into Scotland, of the most woorthely fortunate Prince,
Edward, Duke of Somerset, by William Patten, 213
F
F. A. 403. See Abraham Fleming. Fabell's Merry Pranks, 82 Fabri Pierre, or Le
Fevre, 350 Fabyl's Ghost, a Poem, 81 Fagius, 179 Fairsax, Edward, 281, 485
Fair. See Phaier Fairy Queen, by Spenser, 87, 234, 262, 409, 445, 498 Falcon
and the Pie, a Poem, by Robert Vaughan, 106, 107 Fall and Evil Success of
Rebellion, a Poem, by Wilfrid Holme, 83 Fall of Princes, by Lidgate, 217 Family
of Love, 202 Fancy of a Wearied Lover, by Howard, Earl of Surrey, 8 Farmer,
Dr. 482 Fasti, 415 Faust, John, 4^7 Faustus, Dr. Play of, 437 Faustus, Dr.
Ballad on the Life and Death of the Great Congerer, 437 Fearful Fantyses of
the Florentine Cowper, 477 Fenner, Dudley, 317 Fenton, Edward, 481, Geffray,
479, 480, 481 Ferdinando, Jeronimi, Tale of, 474 Ferrers, George, 212, 213,
218, 293, 294, 414. Edward, 213, 285, 293 Ferrex and Porrex, Tragedy of, 356.
See Gordobu^ Ferris, Richard, the dangerous Adventure of, etc. 214 Feyld, or
Field, Richard, 84 Fiametta of Boccace, translated by B. Giouanno del M. Temp,
467, 488 Field, John, 288. Richard, 84 Figlinei Felice, 24 Finnaeus Historica
Litteraria, 26^ First Fruits, by Florio, 465 Fitzgerald, Lord Gerald, 6
Fitzgerald, Lady Elizabeth, 6 Fitzgeffrey, Charles, 281 Fitzroy, Henry, Duke of
Richmond, 2, 3 Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry, by Tusser, 303, 304,
305, 306 Fleming, Abraham, 402, 403, 404, 451, 460. John, 404.- Samuel, 402,
403 Fletcher, Giles, 432. Robert, 279, 317 Fleury, Jean, 470 Florio, John, 465
Florishe upon Fancy, by N. B. Nicholas Breton, 484 Florentine Cowper, 477
Florus, English Version of, by Bolton, 278 Flosculi of Terence, by Higgins, 259
Flower of God's Commandments, 80 Flowers of Epigrams, by Timothy Kendall, 432
Flower of Fame, compyled by Ulpia^ Fulwell, 271 Fontaine, 161 Fontanini, 407
Forest, or Collection of Histories, by Fortescue, 481 Fornari, Simon, 352
Forest of Fancy, 386 Forest, Sir William, 311, 312, 313 Fortescue, Thomas,
481 Fortunate Isles, Masque of, by Ben Jonson, 76 Fortune, Book of, by Sir
Thomas More, 98 Fountain of Ancient Fiction, by Richard Linche, 486 Four P's,
Play of, 88 Fox, 167, 354 Foxa, Je^re de, 349 Franc, Guillaume de, 164 France,
Abraham, 281, 400, 405, 406, 420, 421 Friar and the Boy, 475 Friar Fox-Taile,
a Ballad, 292 Froissart, 123, 431 Frogs and Mice, 433, 445 Fulk, William, 465
Fullwood, William, 345 Fulwell, Ulpian, 271 Furio's Counsels and Counselors,
translated into English Verse by Blundeville, 274
G
G. B. 422; i. e. Bernard Garter G. H. 486 G. I. 289 G. N. See Nicholas
Grimoald G. W. 47, 357 Gar. Ber. 423; i. e. Bernard Gardener, or Bernard Garter
Gadshill, Ballad of, by Fair, 399 Gager, Dr. 290, 320 Galathea, Play of, by
Lilly, 406 Galesus, Cymon and Iphigenia, pleasant and delightful History of,
by T. C. 469 Gallery of Gallant Inventions, 485 Gallus, Cornelius, 407 Gammer
Gurtons Needle, Comedy of, 208 Garter, Bernard, 423 Gascoigne, George, 44, 45,
67, 277, 281, 286, 290, 293, 346, 372, 382 to 386, 414, 426, 44^, 473, 474 Gaya
Sciencia, Consistorio de la, sounded by Ramon Vidal de Besalin, 349 Gay
Science, Account of, 349 Genesis, translated into English Ryme by Hunnis, 180
Genesis, the First Chapter of, Ballet of, 424 Gentle Craft, the, 430 Gentleness
and Nobility, Play of, 88 Geoffrey of Monmouth, 38, 278 Geography of P. Mela,
translated by Golding, 414 George, Saint, Play of, 326 Georgics of Virgil,
translated. See Virgil Geraldine, the Fair, 7, 16 Gerileon, a Poem, 292 Geste
of Alexander, a Poem, by Adam Davie, 112, 124, 126, 127 Giamboni, Bono, Tesoro
of Brunetto, translated into Italian by, 237 Giavanno, B. del M. Temp. 467
Gilpin, Edward, 281 Giuletta, La, 471 Glaucus and Scylla, 418 God's Promises to
Man, Tragedy of, by John Bale, 78 Godfrey of Bolloign, an heroycall Poem of S.
Torquato Tasso, Englished by R. E. quaere, 485 Godfrey of Bolloigne, Interlude
of, with the Conquest of Jerusalem, 485 Golden Apple, Ballet of, 417 Golden
Book, or Life of Marcus Aurelius, translated by Lord Berners, 42 Golden Book
of the Leaden Gods, by Dr. Stephen Batman, 487 Golden Legend, 154 Golden
Terge, by Sir D. Lyndsey, 50 Golding, Arthur, 290, 409 to 413, 414, 439, 441,
494 Goldingham, Henry, 414 Goodman, Dr. Christopher, a Pamphlet against Queen
Mary, by, 305 Goodly Matter, Play of, 326 Goodwin, Christopher, 84 Googe,
Barnaby, 274, 290, 322, 405, 441, 449, 450 Gordobucke, Tragedy of, by
Sackville, 67, 169, 277, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365,
366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371 Gosson, Stephen, 288 Gotham, Mad Men of, 72
Got^eham, Kemp's Merymentes of the Men of, 475 Goujet, 350 Gower, 81, 203, 336,
353 Grafton's Chronicle, 213, 431 Grammar, English, by Bullocar, 347 Grantham,
Henry, his translation of Scipio Lentulo's Italian Grammar, 465 Grant, Edward,
Specilegium of the Greek Tongue, by, 402 Grant, 396 Gratalorus, 393 Gratian du
Pont, 348 Gratulationes Valdinenses, by Gabriel Harvey, 426 Green, Robert,
290, 291, 386, 436 Greenwich, Devices shown at, 157, 302 Gresield, Patient, 311
Gresield the Second, a Poem, by Sir Wm. Forest, 311 Grevile, Fulke, Lord
Brook, 278 Grimoald, Nicholas, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69
Groatsworth of Wit, by Robert Green, 292, 386 Grounds of Good Huswisery, 425
Guazzo, Stephen, Civil Conversation of, translated by Bartholemew Young and
William Pe^tie, 466 Guevara, Antonio de, Golden Epistles of, versifyed by
Fenton, 480 Guicciadini's History, translated by Fenton, 480 Guido de Columna,
409 Guichard et Sigismonde, 47^ Guillaume de Franc, 164 Guls Hombook, 425, 426
Guy, Earl of Warwick, Romance of, 141
H
H. A. i. e. Arthur Hall, 440 H. E. 275 H. R. 307 H. T. 417 Hackluyt's Voyages,
123 Haddon, Dr. Walter, 343, 432 Hake, Edward, 275, 426 Haliwell, Edward, 84
Hall's Satires, 272, 315, 317 Hall, Bishop Joseph, 272, 315, 317, 486. Arthur,
440. Eliseus, 181. Edward, 156. John, 181, 424 Hall's Chronicle, 154, 156, 214,
431 Hamanus, a Latin Tragedy, by Kirchmaier, 458 Hamlet, Play of, 45, 289, 435,
501 Hampole, 86 Handful of Hidden Secrets, collected by R. Williams, 485
Handful of Honeysuckles, by William Hunnis, 180 Harpalus and Phyllida, a Poem,
51, 52, 53, 54 Harrington, Sir John, 281, 389, 485 Harriots, Master, 442
Harrison's Description of Britain, 74, 93, 94 Harvey, Gabriel, 334, 382, 400,
426, 474, 475, 480, 488 Harvey's (Gabriel) Hunt is up, by T. Nash, 475 Hatcher,
298 Hathway, Richard, 291 Hatton, Sir Christopher, 376 Haunse, Everard, 291
Hawkins, Sir Thomas, 424 Hawkwood, Sir John, Life and Death of, 66 Hayward,
Thomas, 281 Hecuba of Euripides, translated into French by Lazare de Baef, 351
Hecuba and the Ladies of Troy, Lamentation of, a Ballad, 445 Heal, William,
320 Hearne, Thomas, 13, 71, 73, 76, 151, 178, 279, 328 Hebdomada, Mariana, 401
Hedly, Thomas, 477 Helen's Epistle to Paris, a Ballet, by B. G. 422 Helenae
Raptus, or Helen's Rape, 433 Helicon, England's, 69, 292, 319, 402, 438
Heliodorus, Ethiopics of, translated, 419, 420, 449, 496 Hellowes, Edward, 481
Hemidos, ruefull Tragedy of, by Robinson, 391 Henry IV. by Shakespeare, 399
Henry V. Play of, 501 Henry and Emma, a Poem, by Prior, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141
Henry VIII. Encomium in Greek Verse, on, by George Etheredge, 284 Henry VIII.
King, ^, 58, 59, 203, 205 Heptameron of Civil Discourses, by Whetstone, 483
Hercules and his End, Ballet of, 417 Hercules Oetaeus of Seneca, translated
into Blank Verse by Q. Elizabeth, 394 Heresbach, Conrade, Treatise on
Agrigulture, by, translated by Googe, 458 Hermaphroditus and Salmacus, by
Peend, 416 Hermes, Fable of, 404 Hero and Leander, 434 Hesiod's Works and Days,
Second Book of, translated by Geo. Chapman, 446 Hither, Dr. William, 313
Heusius, or Hews, 442 Heuterus, 295 Heywood, Jasper, 273, 287, 290, 386, 388,
441. Thomas, 290, 418, 436; or Heiwood, John, 87, 96, 343, 347, 388 Hiberniae
Descriptio, by Stanyhurst, 401 Hieronymo, Tragedy of, 67 Higgins, or Higins,
John, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 275, 28^ Historical Parallel, by Bolton, 278
Histories, Chaos of, 484 Histriomastix, by Prynne, 314, 464 Hive full of Honey,
by William Hunni^, 180 Hoby, Thomas, 371 Hoggard, Miles, 197, 319 Holcot's
Dictionarie, corrected, etc. by Higgins, 259 Holland, 195. Hugh, 278, 279
Hollinshed, 47, 50, 159, 431, 493. Chronicle of, supervised by Fleming, 403
Holme, Wilfrid, 83 Holofernes, Play of, 328 Homer, 24, 276, 395, 434, 440, 441
Odyssy, translated into Spanish Blank Verse by Gonsalvo Perez, 24 Illiad, by G.
Chapman, 276, 441, 442. By Arthur Hall, 440
Honesty of this Age, by Barnabe Rich, 482 Honorable Prentice, 66 Hooker,
John, 84, 276 Hopkins, John, 39, 167, 171, 173, 174, 175, 178, 180, 189, 275,
355, 455 Horace's Art of Poetry, translated into French by Pelletier, 352
Horace, translated, 35, 352, 395, 424, 451 Horace, Epistles of, Commentary on,
by N. Grimoald, 60 Horace's Satyrs, two Books of, translated by Drant, 424
Horologium Principum, by Antonio Guevara, translated by Sir Thomas North, 273
Horn, Bishop of Winchester, 290 Howard, Henry. See Surrey, Lord Howard, Henry,
Earl of Northampton, 421 Howell, Thomas, 418 Hubbard, William, 413 Hudson,
Thomas, 280, 281 Hues, Robert, 442 Hugh, Sir, of Bourdeaux, 58, 425 Hughes,
Robert, 442 Humphry, Duke, Legend of, by C. Middleton, 483 Hundred Sonnets, or
Passionate Century of Love, by Those. Watson, 433 Hundred Merry Tales, 475
Hundred Points of Evell Huswyfraye, 304 Hundred good Points of Husboundry,
etc. 304 Hunnis, William, 180, 370, 414 Hypercritica, by Bolton, 24, 276, 278
I
Jacob and Esau, a new, merry, and witty Comedy, 328 Jack of Newbery, 430
James I. King, 173, 281 Jane Shore, Tragedy of, 280 Jancura and Ariodanto, 479
Jardin de Plaisance et Fleur de Rhetorique, 347 Jason and Medea, Story of,
translated by Nycholas White, 409 Jealousy, Blazon of, 481 Jeptha, Judge of
Israel, a Ballad, by Wm. Petowe, 434 Jeremiah, translated, 424 Jeremye,
Lamentation of, 424 Jew of Malta, Tragedy of, by Marlowe, 392, 436 Ignoto, 438
Iliad of Homer, translated. See Homer Illustria aliquot Anglorum Encomia, 391
Introduction of Knowledge, a Poem, by A. Board, 73 Job, Book of, by Saint
Jerome, 248 Job, Book of, paraphrased by Drant, 429 Jocasta of Euripides,
translated by Geo. Gascoigne, 67, 372, 373, 374 Johan, Johan the Husband, Tyb
the Wife, and Sir Johan the Preeste, Play of, 88 Johnson, Dr. Christopher, 433
John, King, Play of, 435 John the Babtist, Comedy of, by John ^ale, 78 Jones,
Inigo, 237, 447. John, 450 Jonson, Ben, 79, 129, 278, 279, 281, 291, 433, 435,
436, 447, 448 Jordi Messen, a Provencial Poet, 31 Jopas, Song of, by Sir Thomas
Wyat, 38 Joseph, the tragedious Troubles, etc. of, a Poem, by Sir William
Forest, 312 Iphis, unfortunate End of, versified, 413 Irish Hubbub, by B.
Rich, 482 Iscanus, Josephus, Poem on the Trojan War, by, 61 Isocrates, 330
Isocrates, certain Orations, translated by Christopher Johnson, 433 Italia
Liberata di Goti, by Trissino, 25 Italian Schoolemaister, 474 Ite in Vineam, or
the Parable of the Vineyard, Comedy, by Lord Berners, 58 Itzwert, James, 450
Julian of Brentford, the Testament of, by R. Copland, 313 Judith, Book of,
versified by Pullaine, 316 Judith and Holofernes, Ballad of, 328 Juliet and
Cleomenes, History of, 473 Justinian, 160 Justin's History, translated by
Golding, 414 Juvenal, 451 Ivychurch, Countess of Pembroke's, by France, 405
K
K. J. or John Kepyer, 418 K. W. i. e. William Kethe, 170, 305, 418 Keeper,
John, 186, 418 Kelton, Arthur, Chronicle of Brutes, by, 205, 206 Kempe,
William, 290, 430, 475 Kendall, Timothy, 404, 432 Kenilworth Castle, Princely
Pleasures of, 129, 139, 293, 356, 414, 498 Kepyer, John, 186, 418 Kethe,
William, 170, 305, 418 Kett's Norsolk Insurrection, Latin Narrative of, by
Nevyl, 385 Kinwelmersh, Francis, 372, 374 Killingworth Castle, Entertainments
at, 98, 139 Kinde-Hart's Dream, by Henry Chettle, 291 King, Dr. Philip; alias
Henry, 279 Kings, Book of, versified, 190 Knack to Know a Knave, a Comedy, 475
Knight^ Conjuring, by Decker, 292 Knight of the Burning Pestle, a Play, by
Beaumont and Fletcher, 280 Knox, 168, 418 Kongs-Scugg Sio, or Royal Mirror,
263 Kyd, Those. 281 Kyffin, Maurice, 449 King Appolyn of Tire, Romance of, 142
L
L. F. 420 L. R. 480, 482 La Croze, Histoire de la Vie et des Ouvrages de, 477
Lambarde, 385 Lamb, William, Memorial of, by A. Fleming, 404 Lament for the
Death of the Makkari^, 133 Lamentation of Hecuba and the Ladies of Troy, 445
Lamentation of Jeremye, etc. 424 Lamentation of Troy for the Death of Hector,
445 Lamentation of Corydon for Love of Alexis, by A. France, 405 Lamentation
of Amyntas for the Death of Phillis, 405 Laneham, 98, 139, 416 Lancelot du Lac,
Romance of, 242, 477 Latimer, Bishop, Song on, 197 Lattini, Brunetto, 237
Lavaterus of Ghosts, translated into English by R. H. 307 Launval, Romance of,
123, 133 Lay of Emare, 117, 134 Lay of Launval, 123, 133 Lay of the Earl of
Toulouse, 122 Laws, the Three, a Comedy, by Bale, 198 Lear, King, Play of, 379.
Lectionary of Cardinal Wolsey, 146 Lee, Lady Margaret, Poem on the Death of, 69
Leland, John, 11, 29, 79, 160, 353, 429 Lent and Liberty, Dialogue between, by
Crowley, 188 Lenten Stuff, by Nash, 434 Lentulo, Scipio, his Italian Grammar,
translated by Henry Grantham, 465 Lepanto, by King James I. 277 Lewick, Edw.
468 Lhuyd, Humphrey, 396 Lidgate, John, 81, 99, 217, 275, 336, 353 Life of Man,
a Description of the, a Poem, 181 Life of Milliado, a British Knight, 476
Lilly, John, 290; or Lilly, 406, 416, 423 Lives of the Saints, 149 Lives and
Sayings of Philosophers, etc. by W. Baldwyn, 212 Linch, Richard, 486 Litany,
translated into Ryme by R. Crowley the Printer, 187 Lloyd, Lodowyke, 322, 390
Lock, or Lok, Henry, 280, 320, 445 Locrine, Play of, 435 Lodge, Thomas, 280,
281, 288, 290 Logic, by Seton, 429 London Chaunticleres, 475 Lord of Misrule,
213, 293, 307 Lord's Prayer, versified by Whittingham, 168 Lord's Supper,
Interlude of, by John Bale, 78 Love, Play of, 88 Lover and the Jaye, Treatise
of, a Poem, by Richard Feylde, 84 Love's Labor Lost, Play of, 465 Lucan, First
Book of, translated by C. Marlowe, 434 Lu^^nda and Arnalt, 474 (...), a Ballad
of the traitorous and unbrideled Crueltye of, executed over Eriphile, Daughter
to Hortensia Castilion, of Genoway, in Italy, 485 Lucrece, Rape of, by
Shakespeare, 416 Lucrece, grievous Complaynt of, 415 Lucretia, Poem on, 415,
416 ^^^^etius 209, 308 L^^^^dayre, 81 Lu^^^ra seu Epigrammata Juvenilia, by
Parkhurst, 432 Luther, the Pope, Cardinal and Husbandman, Balad of, 196 Luther,
164 Lusty Juventus, an Interlude, by R. Wever, 200, 201 Lyndsey, Sir David, 50,
455
M
M. A. 290. i. e. Anthony Mundaye M. J. 319. 485. See Jervis Markham Macbeth,
Play of, 413 Machiavel, 470 Mad Men of Gotham, Merry Tales of the, 72, 73 Magna
Charta, translated from the French into Latin and English, by Geo. Ferrers, 213
Mamillia, by Green, 402 Mantuan, versified by Turberville, 421 Marbeck, John,
a Musician, 172, 194, 313 Marcus Aurelius, 279 Marloe, or Marlowe, Christopher,
280, 281, 392, 420, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439 Mardiley, John, 194
Margarite of Ambrica, a Romance, by Thomas Lodge, 481 Markham, Jervis or
Gervaise, 281, 319, 485 Marot, Clement, 161, 163, 164, 167, 169, 177 Marshall,
George, 319 Marston, John, 272, 280, 281, 318, 417, 437, 447, 486, 488 Martial,
20, 395, 432 Martorell, John, 476 Martyrs and Confessors, Register of, in
Meter, by Thomas Brice, 355 Mary Magdalen, Repentance of, an Interlude, 328
Mary, Queen of Scots, a Poem, by, 56 Mary, Queen, Latin Life of, by Samuel
Fleming, 402 Mary, Queen, Accession of, celebrated in a goodly Psalm, by Rich.
Beearde, 319 Mason, William, 438 Mason's English Garden, 310 Masks, Account
of the, 155, 156, 157 Mass of the Gluttons, by Bale, 79 Mass, the Antichrist's,
Downfall of, 149 May Day, Comedy of, by Chapman, 279 Mayden's Dreme, a Poem, by
Christopher Goodwin, 84 Measure for Measure, Play of, 483 Medea and Jason, 409
Medusa, Ballet of, 418 Mela, Pomponius, Geography of, translated by Golding,
414 Meliado, Sir, Life of, 476 Menaechmi of Plautus, translated by W. W. 449
Mendoza, Lopez de, his Proverbs, translated by Googe, 458 Merbeck, John. See
Marbeck Merchant of Venice, Play of, 57, 483 Meres, Francis, 46, 213, 290, 345,
399, 401, 414, 432, 433, 441, 469, 473 Merlini Vitae et Prophetiae, 146 Merlyn,
Treatise of, or his Prophecies in Verse, 146, 151 Merry Jest, etc. by Sir Those.
More, 97 Merry Devil of Edmonton, Play of the, 81, 83 Merry Tales, Wittye
Questions, and Quick Answers, 484 Merry Andrew, 71 Merry Passages and Jeastes,
414 Merry Wives of Windsor, Play of, 438 Messia, Petro de, 481 Meteranus, 350
Metrical Preface to Heywood's Thyestes, 273, 387 Metropolis Coronata, a City
Pageant, by A. Monday, 290 Midas, King, Ballad of, 417 Middleton, Christopher,
280, 281, 483 Midsummer Night's Dream, 417, 418, 435 Military Precepts, by
Philip Betham, 396 Milton, John, 160, 240, 246, 247, 440 Minerva, a Book of
Emblems, by Peacham, 299 Minot, Laurence, 103, 146, 148, 149, 150 Minstrels,
Account of, 302 Miracles, 325 Mirandula, John Picus, Life of, translated by Sir
Thomas More, 102 Mirror for Magistrates, 99, 209, 213, 216 to 239, 251, 256,
279, 281, 282, 293, 294, 298, 339, 359, 361, 423 Mirror of the Church of Saint
Austin^ of Abyngdon, 313 Mirror for Magistrates of Cities, by Whetstone, 279,
289 Mirror of the Mathematikes, 259 Mirror of Mirth, by R. D. 259 Mirror of
Monsters, 259 Mirror of Mirrours, 281 Moderation, a Poem in Praise of, by M.
Grimoald, 67 Montanus, Ferrarius, 274 Monge, Negro, 349 Monthly Miscellany, or
Memoirs for the Curious, the Muse's Mercury, 139 Month's Mind of Margaret,
Countess of Richmond, a Sermon, by Bishop Fisher, 322 Moon, Peter, 319
Morando, the Tritameron of Love, 483 Moralities, 203, 350, 351, 352 More, Sir
Thomas, 55, 56, 87, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 136, 159, ^^^, 399, 432. Edward,
320 Morley, Lord, Henry Parker, 85 Mornay's, Philip, Treatise on the Truth of
Christianity, translated by Sir P. Sydney and A. Golding, 414 Morte D'Arthur,
119, 123, 462, 463 Morys, John, 145, 148, 151 Mother Redd Cappe, 484 Much Ado
About Nothing, Play of, by Shakespeare, 201, 475 Mulcaster, Richard, 315, 346
Monday, a Musician, 172 Mundaye, Anthony, 290, 291, 292 Muses Library, 12 Muses
Mercury, 139, improperly called the Monthly Miscellany Musaeus, translated, 395
Mustapha, Tragedy of, by Greville, Lord Brook, 278 Myce and the Frogs, 433,
434, 445 Mylner of Abington, a right pleasant and merry History of the, with
his Wife, and his Fair Daughter, and of two Poor Scolars of Cambridge, 76
Mysteries, 203, 324, 325
N
N. H. 202 N. T. 370, 391. See Thomas Norton N. T. 392. See Thomas Newton
Naenia, by Stephanus Surigonius, 353 Naogeorgii Regnum Papisticum, 458
Naogeorgii Regnum Antichristi, 322 NAOGEOPGOS, or Kirchmaier, 458 Narcissus,
from Ovid, translated into English Mytre, 417 Nash, Thomas, 280, 290, 291, 400,
434, 435, 488 Nastagio and Traversari, the History of, translated out of
Italian into English, by C. T. 194, 468 Nazianzen, Gregory, his Greek Epigrams,
translated by Drant, 429 New Caesar, or Monarchy depraved, by Bolton, 278
Nevil, Sir Edward, 156 Nevill's Kettu^, 429 Nevyle, Alexander, 290, 384
Newbery, Jack of, 430 Newce, or Nuce, Thomas, 384 New Sonettes and Pretty
Pamphettes, 297 News out of Kent, a Ballad, 306 News out of Heaven and Hell,
306 Newton, Thomas, 76, 159, 261, 269, 315, 383, 390, 391, 392, 393 Niccols,
Richard, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 294 Nice Valor, Play of,
by Fletcher, 475 Nicene Creed, versified by W. Whyttingham, 168 Nicholas,
Henry, 202 Nine Days Wonder, by Kemp, 290, 430 Nine Worthies, Pageant of the,
326 Nobility, Treatise of, by John Clerc, 26 Nomenclator of Adrian Junius,
translated by Higgins and Fleming, 260 Norden's Speculum Britaniae, 76, 83
North, Sir Thomas, 273, 293 Northampton, Hen. Howard, Earl of, 421 Norton,
Thomas, 169, 274, 355, 357, 370, 415 Norvicus, by Nevyl, 386 Nosegay, 423 No^
Brown Maid, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141 Nouvelles Nouvelles, les Cent,
475 Nuce, Thomas, 384 Nugae Antiquae, 59 Nugae, or Latin Epigrams, by
Borbonius, 432
O
Ochin, 188 Ocland, Christopher, 314 Octavia, by T. N. or Thomas Nuce, 384
Odyssy of Homer, translated into Spanish Blank Verse, 24 Oedipus, Lamentable
History of the Prince 384 Oedipus of Seneca, translated by Neville, 290 Oenone
to Paris, 420 Olave, Saint, Play of the Life of, 326 Oldy^, William, 281
Opilio, or Lucas Shepherd, 316 Oporinus, Religious Interludes in Latin,
published by, 327, 328 Orator, the, written in French by Alexander Silvayn, and
Englished by L. P. or Lazarus Pilot, 482 Orlando Furioso, 352, 484
Orthographie, Treatise of, by Bullocar, 347 Othello, Tragedy of, 287 Overbury,
Sir Thomas, 419 Ovid, 57, 162, 409, 413, 415, 420, 421, 494 Ovid's
Metamorphosis, translated by Golding, 409, 415; by Sandy^, 413; by Peend, 413
Ovid's Fasti, translated, 415 Ovid's Ibis, translated by Thomas Underdown, 419
Ovid's Remedy of Love, translated by Underdown, 419; by Sir T. Overbury, 419;
by Marlowe, 420 Ovid's Elegies, translated by Marlowe, 420 Ovid's Epistles,
translated, 57, 420, 421 Ovid's Banquet of Sauce, by Geo. Chapman, 446 Owen's
Epigrams, 433 Oxford, Edw. Earl of, 290, 292
P
P. L. i. e. Lazarus Pilot, 482 P's, Four, Play of the, by John Heywood, 88
Pace, 26 Pageant of Popes, by T. S. 384 Pageantries, 151 Pageants, Nine, of the
Stages of Life, contrived by Sir Thomas More, 101, 102 Paget, William, Lord,
299 Painter, William, 465, 466 Palace of Pleasure, 465 Palamon and Arcite,
Poem, by Chaucer, 35, 416 Palamon and Arcite, 470, Play of, by Edwards, 284,
287 Palingenius, 274, 387, 405, 415, 449 Palladis Tamia. See Witt's Treasury --
by Meres Palmerin of England, 488 Pammachius, Tragedy of, translated by Bale,
79 Panoplie of Epistles, by Fleming, 404 Pan, his Pipe, a Poem, 405 Papal
Dominion, by Googe, 458 Parable of the Vineyard, Comedy of the, by Lord
Berners, 58 Paradise of Dainty Devises, 44, 69, 181, 283, 287, 297, 322, 388,
396 Paragon of Pleasant Histories, or this Nutt was New Cracked, containing a
Discourse of a Noble King and his Three Sons, 481 Pardoner and the Friar,
Play of, 88 Parker, Henry, Lord Morley, 85 Parker, Archbishop, 1, 181, 365,
385, 386, 487 Parkhurst, John, Bishop of Norwich, 432 Parlour of Pleasant
Delyghtes, 485 Parnassus, England's, 280, 440, 469 Parsons, a Musician, 172
Pascale, Lodovico, 482 Pasquill's Madness, a Poem, 425 Pasquill's Mad Cappe,
445, 484 Pasquill's Mad Cappe's Message, 484 Passion of Christ, Play of the,
326 Passion of our Lord, an Interlude, by Bale, 78; translated by Chertsey, 80,
313 Passio Domini Jesu, by Gilbert Pilkington, 103 Passionate Shepherd to his
Love, 438 Patch, Cardinal Wolsey's Fool, 88 Pater Noster, versified by Forest,
313 Pathway to Military Practice, by Barnabie Rich, 482 Patient Gre^ield, 311
Patten, William, 213 Paynter, William, 465, 466 Peacham, Henry, 299 Peckham,
Archbishop, 325 Peele, George, 67, 281, 328, 417, 418, 436 Peend, Thomas, 416,
417 Peleus and Thetis, 407 Pelle^ier, Jaques, 351, 352 Pembroke, Countess of,
Poem on the Death of, 46 Penelope's Web, 418 Penetential Psalms of David,
translated by Sir Those. Wyat, 39 Penny, Sir, Romance of, 93, 94, 106
Perceforest, Romance of, 477 Pericles, Prince of Tire, Play of, 280 Perez
Gonsalvo, Homer's Odyssy, translated into Spanish by, 24 Perseus and Andromeda,
446 Perymus and Thybye, 417 Petite Palace of Petie, his Pleasure, 466 Petowe,
Henry, 434. William, 434 Petty, William, 466 Petrarch, 1, 11, 12, 25, 31, 40,
58, 162, 311, 352, 447, 463 Petrarch's Seven Penetential Psalms, translated by
Chapman, 447 Phaier, or Phayer, Thomas, 214, 290, 395, 396, 397, 399, 410, 415,
441 Phebe and Endimion, 418 Phelyppis, or Philips, Sir Thomas, 46 Phillips,
John, 11, 440. Robert, Poem on the Death of, 46 Phillis and Flora, Amorous
Contention of, by Chapman, 446 Philocasander and Elamira, the Fair Lady of
Brytayne, 477 Philotas, Comedy of, 88 Phist, William, Welspring of Witty
Conceights, translated from the Italian by, 308 Phoenix Nest, by R. S. 401, 402
Pictorius Epigrams, translated by Kendall, 432 Pie and Falcon, a Poem, 106
Pierce Plainness, Seven Years Prentiship, a Romance, by H. C. i. e. Henry
Chettle, 291 Pierce Plowman, 108, 128, 187, 196, 197, 336 Pilkington, Gilbert,
103 Pilot, Lazarus, 482, 48^ Pinner of Wakefi^ld, Comedy of, 88 Piscator, or
the Fisher Caught, a Comedy, by John Hooker, 84 Pit^, 281 Pithias and Damon, a
Ballad, entitled two lamentable Songs of, 289 Plato, 330 Plautus, 449, 473
Play of Love, by John Heywood, 88 Play of Plays, 288 Plays, 198, 338 Plays
confuted in Five Actions, 288 Pleasant Poesy of Princely Practice, a Poem, by
Forest, 312 Pleasure and Pain, Metrical Sermon on, by Crowley, 188 Plowman,
Pierce. See Pierce Plowman Plutarch, 393 Plutarch's Commentary, translated into
English Meeter by Thomas Blundeville, 274 Poem of Poems, or Sion's Muse, by J.
M. 318 Poemata Varia et Externa, by Drant, 429 Poetry, English, a Character of,
in the Age of Elizabeth, 490, etc. Poines, John, 34, 36 Poggio, 470 Pole,
Cardinal, 9 Politian's Epigrams, translated by Kendall, 432 Polixine and
Astionax [i. e. Astyanax], 417 Polliceute, King, Ballet of, 423 Polybius, 278
Polyhistory of Solinus, 414 Polyolbion, by Drayton, 266 Pontanus, Isaacus, 349
Pope and the Turk, a Metrical Prayer, by Rob. Wisdom, 170 Pope, a, 11, 67, 357
Pope, Sir Thomas, Life of, 34, 44, 46, 389 Pope and Popery, Ballade made
against, by William Punt, 320 Popish Kingdom, a Poem, by Googe, 322 Ports,
Philip de, 485 Pore Help, a Poem, 197 Porter, Henry, 291. Endimion, 278
Positions, by Mulcaster, 346 Pos^ils of Chrytaeus, 413 Potter, George, 486
Powell, Thomas, 426 Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, 71, 188 Preservative, a Tract
against the Pelagians, by Turner, 355 Preston, 289 Princely Pleasures of
Kenilworth-Castle, by Gascoigne, 293 Principles of Astronomical
Prognostication, by Board, 77 Prior, Matthew, 135, 137, 138, 140 Procris and
Cephalus, 417 Procopius, 160 Progymnasmata aliquot Poemata, 392 Prolusions, by
E. Capel, 136 Promos and Cassandra, 484 Promptuarie of Medicine, by Board, 77
Prosopopeia Basilica, a Latin Poem, by Bolton. 279 Proverbes, etc. by John
Heywood, 91, 343 Proverbs of Lopez de Mendoza, by Googe, 458 Proverbes,
Exposition on the, by Th. Willson, 345 Prynne, Will iam, 314, 464 Psalms of
David, translated by Lord Surrey, 26, 166 by Wyat, 39, 166, 181 into French
Rymes by Clement Marot, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167 by R. Wisdom, 170 by King
James I. 173 by William Hunnis, 180 by John Keeper, 186 by John Hall, 181 by
Francis Seagar, 181 by Archbishop Parker, 181, 186 by Crowley, 187 by John
Mardiley, 194 into a short Hebrew Meter by Etheredge. 284 into English Meter,
by Sir William Forest, 313 into English Prose, by Christopher Carlisle, 450 by
Anonymus Authors, 182, 186
Psalms of David, versifyed by Thomas Norton, 169 fitted to Tunes by William
Slatyer, 144 versifyed by Sternhold and Hopkins, 161, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175,
176, 185, 189, 191 Metrical Translation of, by Lucas Shepherd, 316 Treatise in
Meter on the 119th, by Miles Hogard, 319 Exposition on the, by Drant, 429
Exposition on the, by Thomas Wilson, 345 Seven, reduced into Meter by Will.
Hunnys, 370 Four First, Englished in Latin Measures by Rd. Stanyhurst, 399 the
Ninety-fourth, paraphrased by Lord Morley, 86
Psalter, by A. Golding, 414 Psyche and Cupid, Play of, 288 Pullayne, John,
316, 317 Punt, William, Ballad^ made against Pope and Popery, by, 320
Puttenham, 44, 50, 96, 213, 277, 285, 291, 293, 335, 400, 415, 426 Pygmalion's
Image, by Marston, 272, 417 Pygmalion, Ballet of, 417 Pymlico, or run away Red
Cap, 280 Pyramus and Thybe, 417 Pythias and Damon, Play of, 284, 289
Q
Queens, Masque of, by Ben Johnson, 129 Quintil, 351 Quintilian, translated,
336, 338
R
Rainolde, Richard, 345, 346 Raleigh, Sir Walter, 276, 278, 438 Randolph,
Thomas, 418 Rape of Helen, by Marlowe, 433 Rape of Lucrece, 416 Raphael, 159
Rattlesden, or Bloomefield, William, 84, 85 Raydon; i. e. Roydon, Matthew, 281
Recreations on Adam's Banishment, in Verse, by W. Hunnis, 180 Redford, John,
Organist of St. Paul's, a celebrated Musician, 298 Red-Cappe, Mother, her Last
Will and Testament, 484 Refutation of Heywood's Apology for Actors, 289
Register of York Cathedral, 302 Resurrection of Lazarus, an Interlude, by John
Bale, 78 Return from Parnassus, Play of the, 280, 436 Reve of Totenham, 104
Reulidge, Richard, 289 Reynard the Fox, 73 Reynholds, Henry, 41, 435. Thomas,
345, 346 Rhetoric, System of, by Grimoald, 61 Rhetoric, English, 331, etc.
Rhodes, Hugh, the Book of Nurtur for Men's Servants and Children, or of the
Governance of Youth, by, 321 Richard Coeur de Lion, a Romance, 141, 347, 348
Richard III History of, by Sir Thomas More, 329 Richard III. Play of, 339, 361
Richard III. Tragical Report of, a Ballad, 339 Rich, Barnaby, 482 Richmond,
Henry Fitzroy, Duke of, e. Poem on, by Lord Surrey, 26 Rightwise, John, 435
Robert de Brunne, 127 Robin Hood, 290 Robinson, Richard, 391. Clement, 391
Rochford, Earl of, 41 Rock of Regard, by Whetstone, 404 Rogero and Rhodomont,
Ariosto's Story of, translated from the French of Philip de Ports, by Gervis
Markham, 485 Romanus Egidius, 313 Romeo and Juliet, Play of, 287, 471 Romeus
and Juletta, 471 Rosa Rosalynd and Rosemary, Romance of, by Newton, 392 Round
Table, Order of the, 476 Rowley, 290 Roydon, Matthew, 281 Rubric explained, 434
Rufull Lamentation, a Poem, by Sir Thomas More, 99 Rule of Life, or the Fifth
Essence, by Bloomefield, 85 Rythmi Elegantissimi, by George Boleyn, 43
S
S. E. 484 S. I. 384 S. M. 285 S. R. i. e. Robert Southwell, 402, 442 S. W. 402
Sachetti, 470 Sackefull of News, 423 Sackville, Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, 169,
210, 212, 221, 233, 264, 273, 277, 281, 285, 293, 355, 356, 362, 397 Sacra
Dramata, 458 Sadler, John, 429 Saint Catherine, Play of, 323 Saint George, Play
of, 327 Saint Nicholas Day, 322, 325 Saint Paul's Epistles, versified by John
Hall, 181 Saint Peter's Complaint, by Southwell, 277, 318 Salmacis and
Hermaphroditus, translated by Peend, 416; by Beaumont, 417 Solomon, King, a
Ballad, 306 Sandys, Lord, 155 Sappho and Phao, Play of, by Lilly, 418, 420
Saracens, Notable History of the, by Thomas Newton, 392 Scaliger, 444 School of
Virtue and Book of Good Nurture, a Rhyming Manual, by Crowley, 188 School of
Abuse, by Gosson, 288 Schoolmaster, by Ascham, 331 Scogan, 76 Scoggin's Jests,
76, 475 Scole House of Women, 142, 320, 423 Scot, Dr. Cuthbert, Latin Elegy on,
by Drant, 429 Scots, Queen of, Mary, 56 Scourge of Villainy, by Marston, 272
Scourging of Tiplers, by Re^lidge, 289 Scylla and Glaucus, 418 Seagar, or
Seagers, Francis, 181, 215, 267, 272 Secret of Secrets of Aristotle,
translated by Copland, 313 Seige of Tournay, by Minot, 148 Seneca, 273, 290,
382, 386, 415, 417 Sergeant and Freere, Merry Jeste of, by Sir Thomas More, 97,
98, 136 Seton, John, 429 Settle, Dennis, Voyage of, 404 Seven Sobs of a
Sorrowful Soul for Sin, by William Hunnis, 180 Seven Steps to Heaven, 370
Seven Wise Men of Gotham, 475 Sexton, Master, the real Name of Patch, Cardinal
Wolsey's Fool, 89 Shadow of Truth in Epigrams and Satires, 488 Shakespeare,
William, 45, 57, 67, 102, 108, 153, 265, 266, 267, 281, 287, 290, 293, 294,
295, 339, 361, 366, 393, 399, 416, 435, 447, 465, 471, 475, 478, 483, 494, 496,
499 Sheffield, Edmund, Lord, 58 Shelton, 26 Shepherd, Lucas, 316 Sheppard, 313
Shepreve, John, 284 Sherlock, Roger, 429 Sherry, Richard, English Rhetoric, by,
345 Shoemaker's Holyday, or the Gentle Craft, Play of, 430 Shore, Jane, 215,
270, 280 Short Resytal of certyne Holy Doctors, collected in Myter, by John
Mardiley, 194 Sibelet, Thomas, 350, 351 Sidney. See Sydney. Similies and
Proverbes, by Baldwyn, 212 Similis, a Treasorie and Storehouse of, 486 Simon
the Leper, an Interlude, by John Bale, 78 Simonides, the strange and
wonderful Adventures of, by Barnaby Rich, 48^ Sion's Muse, or the Poem of
Poems, 318, 319 Sir Bevis of Southampton, Romance of, 141, 142 Sir Hugh of
Bourdeux, Romance of, translated from the French by Lord Berners, 58 Sir Penny,
Romance of, 93, 94, 106 Sir Thopas, Poem, by Chaucer, 35 Sir Tristram and Bell
Isoulde, Romance of, 420 Siworix and Camma, 466 Six Yeomen of the West, 430
Skeleton, John, 44, 74, 83, 200, 215, 270, 276 Skotte, Cuthbert, 429 Slatyer,
William, certain Psalms of David, fitted to Tunes, by, 144 Smith, or Smyth,
Sir Thomas, 450. Robert, 481. William, 402. Richard, 450 Smithus, by Gabriel
Harvey, 334 Solinus, 414. Polyhistory of, translated by Golding, 414 Solomon
and Queen of Sheba, a Ballad, 307 Solomon, Canticles or Songs of, versified by
W. Baldwyn, 181, 212 Solomon's Proverbes, translated into English Meter by John
Hall, 181 Solomon's Song, 317, 318, 451 Somerset, Edw. Duke of, Expedition into
Scotland, by Wm. Patten, 213 Somerset, Lord Protector, 198 Summers, William,
336, 337 Somnium Scipionis, by Tully, 236 Song of Songs, translated into
English Meater, 317 Sonnets by B. Googe, 450 Sonnets by Henry Lock, 445 Sonnets
by Sackville, 273 Sonnets by Turberville, etc. 286, 296, 355 Sonnets by Watson,
433 Southwell, Robert, 277, 318. Sir Richard, 299 Spanish Library, 476 Speculum
Britanniae, by Norden, 76, 83 Speed, 279 Spence, 366 Spencer, Edmund, 14, 51,
87, 233, 234, 239, 262, 276, 280, 281, 400, 406, 409, 421, 422, 436, 445, 447,
480, 498, 499 Spicelegium of the Greek Tongue, by Edward Grant, 402 Spider and
the Fly, a Poem, by J. Heywood, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96 Spiritual Agriculture, by
Barnaby Googe, 458 Spondanus, 444 Stage of Popish Toys, written by T. N. 370
Stafford, Lord Henry, 216 Stanbridge's Latin Prosody, 393 Stanyhurst, Robert,
399, 400, 401, James, 399 Stapylton, Richard, 402, 442 Starkey, Oliver, 320
Statius, 253 Steevens, Henry, Epigrams of, translated by Kendall, 432
Sternhold, Thomas, 39, 161, 166, 167, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 178, 181, 185,
189, 191, 314, 319, 441, 455 Stoke Clare, College of, 183 Stonehenge, 278
Storehouse of Similies, 486 Storer, Thomas, 281 Stories of Men's Lives, 203
Stowe, 291, 425 Strype, John, 186, 191, 202, 204, 301, 326, 355 Stubb's
Anatomy of Abuses, 289 Studley, John, 290, 383, 384, 417 Suffolk, Henry, Duke
of, 342 Sundry Christian Passions in 200 Sonnets, by Lock, 445 Supposes, a
Comedy, by G. Gascoigne, 474 Surfeit to A, B, C, by Dr. Philip King, 279
Surrey, Lord, 2 to 9, 27, 57, 65, 70, 85, 166, 182, 273, 277, 281, 382, 415,
426 Susannah, Book of, versified by Pullaine, 316 Susanna, Play of, 328. Balad
of, 287. Swi^t, Dean, 13 Sydney, Sir P. 11, 169, 273, 277, 281, 363, 386, 414,
419, 421, 480, 496 Sylva, by Drant, 429 Sylvan, or Sylvain, Alexander, 482, 483
Sylvester, John, 281 Sylvius, Aeneas, 416 Synesius, Greek Panegyric on
Baldness, translated by Fleming, 404 Syrinx, or a Seavenfold History, by
Warner, 473
T
T. C. 194 T. R. i. e. Robert To^ts, 481 Table of Aristotle's Ten Categories,
by Googe, 458 Tale of Two Swannes, a Poem in Blank Verse, by Wm. Vall^ns, 65
Tales in Prose, set forth by Edwards, 293 Tales, Utility of, 340 Tallis, a
Musician, 172, 194 Tamberlain the Great, Play of, 392 Taming of the Shrew, a
Play, by Shakespeare, 294 Tancred and Gismund, 376, 470 Tanner, Bishop, 293,
425, 430, 450, 473 Tarlton, Richard, 291, 345, 481 Tasso, Torquato, 485, 499
Taverner, John, 313 Tears of the Muses, by Spenser, 409 Te Deum, versified by
Whyttingham, 168; by (...), 182; by Forest, 313 Tempest, Play of the, 129,
435, 478 Ten Commandments, versified by W. Whittingham, 168 Terannye of Judge
Apius, a Ballad, 416 Terence, translated, 449 Terence, And^ia of, Commentary
on, by N. Grimoald, 60 Terge, Golden, by Sir D. Lyndsay, 50 Tesoretto, a Poem,
by Brunetto Lattini, 237, 254 Textor's Epigrams, translated by Kewdall, 432
Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, by Pullaine, 316 Testwood, a Singer, 46
Theater of God's Judgments, 289, 437 Theatrum Poetarum, by Phillips, 11, 392
Thebais, by Newton, 391 Theodore and Honoria, 468 Thersytes, his Humors and
Conceits, an Interlude, 445 Theseid and Troilus, by Boccace, 464 Theseus and
Ariadne, excellent History of, 420 Toulouse, the Earl of, Lay of the, 122
Thomas, William, Italian Grammar, by, 464 Three Books of Moral Philosophy, by
W. Baldwyn, 212 Three worthy Squires of Darius King of Persia, 328 Three Laws,
a Comedy, by John Bale, 198, 200 Thyestes of Seneca, translated, 273 Tiberius,
Life of the Emperor, by Bolton, 278 Tibullus, 408 Timon of Athens, Play of, 153
Terante the White, Romance of, 476 Titerus and Galathea, Comoedie of, 406
Titian, 159 Titus Andronicus, Tragedy of, 485 Titus and Gesippus, 468 Tom of
all Trades, by Thomas Powell, 426 Tom Thumb, Origin of, 71 Tottell, Richard,
28, 47, 60, 69 Touchstone of Wits, by Edward Hake, 275 Touchstone for this
Time present, by Edward Hake, 426 Tournament of Tottenham, 102, 103, 104, 105,
106 Toxophilus, by Ascham, 300, 329, 331 Tragical Discourses, by Fenton, 478
Tragical Tales, by Turberville, 475 Tragical Treatises, by R. Tarleton, 481
Treasorie of Similes, 486 Trionli d'Amour of Petrarch, 463 Trissino, 25
Tristram, Sir, Romance of, 242 Tristram, Sir, and Bell Isoulde, 420 Tritameron
of Love, 483 Triumphs of reunited Britannia, 290 Triumphs of Old Drapery, 290
Troa^ of Seneca, translated by Jasper Heywood, 290 Troilus, History of, a
Ballet, 417 Troilus and Cressida, by Chaucer, 12, 57 Troilus and Cressida, Play
of, by Shakespeare, 57, 108 Trojan War, by Iscanus, 61 Trovar, Libro de la Art
de, o Gaya Sciencia, por Enrique de Villena, 349 Troya, Belenguer de, 349
Tully's Dream of Scipio, translated by Parker, Lord Morley, 86. See Cicero
Tully's Offices, translated by N. Grimoald, 60 Tully's Tusculane Questions,
translated by I. Dolman, 215 Tumblers, 303 Turberville, George, 11, 57, 281,
286, 420, 421, 457, 472, 475, 476, 479, 481, 485. Thomas lege George, 420
Turner, Dr. William, a Poem against the Papists, by, 188 Tusser, Thomas, 298,
299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310 Twel^th Night,
Comedy of, 287 Twelve Patriarch^, Testament of, versified by Pullai^e, 316 Two
Gentlemen of Verona, Play of the, 345 Two Sins of King Davide, interlude of
the, 328 Twyne, Thomas, 287, 396. John, 396. Lawrence, 396 Tie, Dr.
Christopher, 170, 190, 19^, 468 Tie the Mare Tomboye, a Ballad, 418 Tyndale's
Bible, 203
V
Vaghane or Vaughan, Robert, 106, 107 Valerius Flaccus, 409 Valla Laurentio, 61
Vallans, William, 65, 66, 67 Van Wilder, Philip, 301 Vandenbright, Alexander,
483 Vaulx or Vaux, Lord, 41, 43, 45, 57, 215 Udall, Nicholas, 259, 298
Vegetius's Tactics, English Version of, by Sadler, 429 Verstegan's Restitution
of Decayed Intelligence, 399 Vindiciae Britanicae, by Bolton, 279 Vineyard of
Virtue, by Robinson, 391 Violenta and Didaco, 422 Virgil, 21 to 25, 209, 238,
278, 395, 396, 402, 403, 407, 415 Eneid, Second and Fourth Books of, translated
by Lord Surrey, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 278 Eneid, Second Part of, translated by
Sir Thomas Wroth, 404 Eneid, translated by Phair, 395, 396 to 415 Eneid,
translated by Stanyhurst, 399, 400 Bucolics, translated by Abraham Fleming, 25,
402 Virgil's Bucolics, and Fourth Georgic, translated by Mr. Brinsly, 404
Georgics, translated by Abraham Fleming, 25, 402, 403 Georgics, translated by
William Web, 405 Georgics, paraphrased by Nicholas Grimoald, 60 Alexis,
translated by Abraham France, 405 Culex, paraphrase on, by Edmund Spenser, 406
Ceiris, or the Fable of Nisus and Scylla, a Poem, attributed to, 406, 407, 408
Virgil, Polydore, 307 Virginia and Appius, a poem, 415 Virtue, Court of, 424
Virtues and Vices, Battle between, by A. Fleming, 404 Vive^ Ludovicus, 294
Underdown, Thomas, 419, 420 Ungod^inesse of the Hethnicke Gods, a Poem, by J.
D. 314 Union of the two Noble and Illustrious Families of York and Lancaster,
by Hall, 214 Untrussing of the Humorous Poet, Play of, by Dekker, 488 Voice of
the last Trumpet blown by the Seventh Angel, by Crowley, 187 Voltaire, 177,
252, 253 Voyage Liturgique, by Sieur Le Brun, 152 Urania, a Romance, by Lady
Mary Wroth, 444 Use of Adagues, by W. Baldwyn, 212
W
W. R. i. e. Robert Wilmot, 376, 466, 470, 482 W. W. See William Warner Waller,
Ed. 11, 16, 443 Walpole, Horace, 4 Walton, Isaac, Complete Angler, by, 438
Warner, William, 272, 277, 281, 449, 473 Watkin's Ale, a Ballad, 292 Watson,
Thomas, 280, 281, 315, 400, 433 Wayer, 423 Waylings of the Prophet Hieremiah
done into English Verse by T. Drant, 424 Weathers, Interlude of all manner of,
88 Web, William, 44, 275, 276, 291, 376, 399, 400, 404, 414, 479 Weede^, by
George Gascoigne, 474 Weever, John, 280, 281. William, 281 Weever's Funeral
Monuments, 81 Welspring of Witty Conceits, translated out of the Italian by
W. Phist, 308 Wentworth, Lady, Poem on the Death of, 46 Wever, R. 200
Whetstone, George, 279, 289, 404, 483, 484 Whipping of Runawaies, by Pe^owe,
434 Whitgift, John, 488 Whyttingham, William, 167, 168 172 Whore of Babylon, a
ballad on the Fall of the, 418 Whore of Babylon, Comedy of the, 195 White,
Nycholas, 409 Wiat. See Wyat Wickliffe, 354 Will of Wit, by Nicholas Breton, 402
Wilford, Sir James, Poem on the Death of, 46, 69 Williams, R. 485. Henry, Poem
on the Death of, 46. Sir John, 46 Willow Garland, a Song, 287 Wilmot, Robert,
376, 466, 470, 482 Wilson, Thomas, 91, 291, 298, 331, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338,
339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 353 Wilton's Epitaphia, 432 Windsor Castle,
12, 13 Winsore, Miles, an Actor, 287 Wisdom, Robert, 170 Wit's Commonwealth,
290 Wit's Treasury, by Meres, 213, 290, 345, 399, 433 Wolsey, Cardinal, 146,
155, 158, 435 Wood, Anthony, 28, 45, 72, 96, 167, 283, 293, 311, 425 Works of
a Young Wit, etc. by N. B. or Nicholas Breton, 485 Wroth, Lady Mary, 444. Sir
Thomas, 404 Wyat, Sir Thomas, 10 to 18, 28, 38, 46, 57, 70, 166, 277, 281, 415
Wyvyng and Thryvynge of Tushers, with two Lessons for Old and Young, a
Dialogue, 304
Y
Ywain and Gawain, Romance of, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132,
133, 134 Yelverton, Christopher, 274 Young or Young Bartholemew, 466 Youth,
Charity and Humylite, 475
Z
Zodiacus Vitae of Palingenius, 405, 449, 451, 466 Zodiac of Life, translated
by B. Googe, 405, 449, 466 Zorvas, an Egyptian Astronomer, Poem on the Death
of, by Nicholas Grimoald, 63, 64, 65
INDEX TO THE GESTA ROMANORUM, PREFIXED TO THE THIRD VOLUME OF WARTON'S History
of English Poetry.
AELIAN, 58 Aesopicae Anonymi Fabulae, 73 Agrippa Cornelius, 21 Ahasuerus and
Ester, Romance of, 74 Alanus de Lynne, 87 Albione King of the Lombards, History
of, 24. Tragedy by Davenant, 25 Alexander, Romance of, 33, 39, 42, 43, 59
Allexius, or Alexis, 11, 12, 13 Alphonsus Peter, 6, 42, 66, 68, 69, 73, 74, 82,
94 Amadis de Gaul, Romance of, 16, 96 Amyot 20 Amys and Amelion, 54 Androclus,
Story of, 40 Andronicus Titus, 25 Antiche Cento Novelle, 25, 49, 54, 58, 66, 84
Antiochus, Story of, 4 Antoine Marc La Vie et Fais de, et de sa mie Cleopatra,
20 Appollonius of Tire, Romance of, 4, 62, 63 Appion, 40, 41 Aquinas, Thomas,
74, Argus and Mercury, Story of, 51 Ariosto, 16, 96 Artstotle's Secretum
Secretorum, 10, 19 Aristotelem de Regina quae equitavit, 93 Arthur King,
Romance of, 80, 88 Asmodeus King, 26 Askew Dr. 69 Atis and Porphilion, Romance
of, 35 Atalanta, Tale of, 27 Aunfour le Romaunz de pere coment il aprist et
chastia son fills belement, 6 Austin Saint, his City of God, 58, 74
B
Barlaam and Josaphat, Romance of, by Joannes Damascenus, 49, 51, 61, 68
Belleforest, 3, 25 Berchorius Petrus, or Pierre Bercheur, Author of the Gesta
Romanorum, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93 Bernard Saint, Legend of, 68 Bible
allegorised, 87 Bibliae Moralizationes, 87 Boccace, 2, 16, 25, 49, 50, 68, 81,
84, 92, 93, 94 Boethius, 5 Breviari d'Amor, by Eymegau de Bezers, 81 Brown
William, 56, 57
C
Caesar Julius, Romance of, 20, 32 Cacan or Cacanus, 23 Calilah u Dumnah, 6,
55, 74 Cambucas, by Vincent Beauvais, 39 Canterbury Tales, 65 Caxton, 2, 13,
14, 17, 22, 24, 50, 52, 62, 68, 69, 70 Celestinus, 67 Cendrata Ludovicus, 66
Cent's Novelle Antiche, 25, 49, 54, 58, 66, 84 Cervantes, 72, Cesarius, 82
Chapman George, 3 Charlemagne, 23 Chaucer, 3, 6, 15, 38, 39, 47, 59, 65, 66,
69, 70, 74, 81, 83, 84, 93 Chorle and the Bird, by Lidgate, 6 Christine of
Pisa, 52 Chronica Novella, by Herman Korner, 7, 88 Chronicle of St. Albans, 6
Chronicon of St. Denis, 38 City of God, by S. Austin, 58, 62, 74 City of
Ladies, Romance of the, 58 Clericalis Disciplina, by Peter Alphonsus, 5, 6, 42,
68, 73, 82 Conan and Rosmilla, 23 Contemptu Mundi, by Pope Innocent the Third,
89 Copland Robert, 63 Cosmographie, by Heylin, 25, 90 Court of Sapience,
translated by Caxton, 2, 70
D
Daemonologie, by James First, 37 Damascenus Joannes, his Romance of Barlaam
and Josaphat, 49, 61, 68 Darius, Romance of, 56, 57, 78 Davenant Sir William,
25 Davie Adam, 33, 39, 43 Decameron of Boccaccio, 2, ^2 Despauterius, 90
Diaconus Paulus, 23 Dialogues Divine, by Dr. Henry More, 31 Diasconios Sir
Libeaux, Romance of, 47 Dictionarium Morale, by Berchorius, 87 Dionysius, 22
Discipulus, or Herolt John, 93, 94 Ditmar, 47 Doctrinale Metricum, by
Berchorius, 87 Doni, 55 Dryden John, 25 Dymock Roger, 65
E
Edituus Hermanus, 90 Edric, 6 Edwards Richard, 69 Elizabeth Queen, 90 Emare,
Lay of, 59, 75, 78 Engelhus Conrade, 90 Esop, Fables of, 1, 17, 73, 74 Ester
and Ahasuerus, a Romance, 74 Eusebius, Chronica of, 58, 88 Eymegau de Bezers, a
Bard of Languedoc, 81
F
Fabricius, 66 Fais de Romans, 6 Faguel Lady of, Romance of the, 25 Farmer Dr.
4 Fayttes of Arms and of Chivalrye, by Christine of Pisa. Translated by
Caxton, 52 Florence, History of, by Machiavel, 25 Florentino Giovanni, 83
Florio and Biancoflore, Adventures of, by Boccaccio, 81 Florus, 6, 89
Frankelein's Tale, by Chaucer, 15 Froissart, 74, 76, 77
G
Ganterus, 33 Garin, French Romance of, 38 Gaston, Earl of Foiz, 75 Gerbert
Pope, or Sylvester Second, 45, 46 Gerelaus, 83 Gervase of Tilbury, 64, 67, 88,
90 Gesta Grayorum, 3 Gesta Longobardorum, 18, 23 Gesta Romanorum, Account of
the Editions of, 4, 5, 6, 7, 82, 83 Giles Goosecap, Comedy of, 3 Gilbert King,
18 Giron the Courteous, Romance of, 16 Glassius Solomon, 86, 87 Godfrey of
Viterbo, 90 Golden Legende, 50 Gorgonius, 52 Gower, 3, 7, 9, 22, 26, 37, 49,
55, 61, 65, 70, 83, 84 Gregory of Tours, 76 Guiccardini, 22 Guido and Tirius,
71 Guillaume, Prior of Chaulis, 69 Guy Earl of Warwick, Romance of, 71
H
Herbert Sir Philip, his Conceptions to his Son, 31 Hermegild, 84 Heroldus
Joannes Basilius, 90 Herolt John, 93, 94 Histories Tragiques, by Belleforest,
3, 25 Howel's Letter, 30
I
Jacobus de Vitriaco Jacobus de Voragine, 13, 18 James, King, the First, 37
Jerusalem, Sege of, a Romance, 43 Innocent, Pope 3rd, his Misery of Human
Nature, 89 Johnson, Dr. 50 Josephus, 66 Julian, 14 Jovinian, l'Empereur,
L'Orgueil et Presomption de, an old French Moralite, 27 Iris and Osiris, how
the Egyptians deified, 19 Isodore, 21 Julius Caesar, Romance of, 20, 32 Ivo, 90
Justin, 68, 89
K
Kalendrier des Bergers, 67 Knight of the Swanne, Romance of the, translated by
Copland, 63 Korner Herman, 7
L
Lady of Faguel, Romance of the, 25 Lancelot du Lake, Romance of, 16 Lanfrane,
90 Langius Paulus, 90, 91 Lapus de Castellione, 7 Launfal Sir, Romance of, 35,
38, 43, 54, 56, 63 Legenda Aurea, translated by Caxton, 13, 14, 17, 51, 68
Livy, 6, 7, 68, 89, 91 Lucretia, Story of, 58 Luther, Martin, 17 Lycophron, 95
Lydgate, 3, 6, 26, 69, 70
M
Machiavel's History of Florence, 25 Macrobius, 5, 22 Malmsbury William of, 47
Man of Law's Tale, by Chaucer, 84 Mauffer Peter, 66 Maundeville Sir John,
Travels, 11 Maximus Valerius, 21 May Day, a Comedy, by George Chapman, 3
Mazentius, 32 Medro King, 58 Merchant of Venice, Play of the, 49, 82 Metrical
Lives of the Saints, 11, 18, 50, 68 Milton, 42, 79 Mirabilia Romae, 26 Mirror
of History, by Vincent Beauvais, 1 Mirror for Magistrates, 4 Miseries of Human
Nature, or de Miseria Humanae conditionis, by Innocent the Third, 89 Montaigne,
77 Montfaucon, 20, 26 Moralizationes Bibliae, 87 More Dr. Henry, 31 Mozarabes,
or Missal of St. Isodore, 52 Muratori, 21 Mysteries, 17, 37
N
Nangis Guillaume, 88 Nevelet, 73 North Sir Thomas, 20 Nonnes Priests
Prologue, by Chaucer, 39
O
Occleve, 56, 83, 84, 94 Orosius, 89 Otia Imperialia, by Gervase of Tilbury, 67
Ovid, 65, 88, 92, 95. Commentary on, by Berchorius, 92
P
Pallas, Discovery of the gigantic Body of, 88 Paris Matthew, 55 Parnell, 30,
94 Paulus Diaconus, 23 Pecorone of Ser Florentino Giovanni, 83 Pelagyen, the
Life of, 17 Pelerin de l'Ame, by Guillaume, Prior of Chaulis, 69 Pepin, 53, 54
Perce Forest, Romance of, 16 Periander of Corinth, 62 Pfinzing Melchior,
Romance of Teurdank, 23 Phoebus de deduiz de la Chasse des Bestes Sauvages et
des Oyseaux de proye, 21 Philip of Macedon, a Romance, 57 Philologiae Sacrae,
by Glassius, 86 Piso, 59 Placidus or Placidas, the Life of, 51 Plistonices or
Appion, 40 Pliny, 5, 20, 21, 32 Polonus Martinus, 90 Pompey of a Daughter of
King, whose Chamber was guarded by five armed Knights and a Dog, 8 Pope
Alexander, 31 Porphilion and Ati^, Romance of, 35 Possevin, 16 Primalcon,
Romance of, 16 Prodigal Son, 9 Pylgrimage of the Soul, by Caxton, 69
Pilgrimage of the World, 70,
R
Record of Ancient Hystories, 83 Reductorium Morale, by Berchorius, 87
Repertorium Morale, by Berchorius, 87 Rinucinus Alamanus, 64, 74 Robert of
Gloucester, 79 Robert of St. Victor, 90 Robert King of Sicily, Poem of, 27
Romaunt of the Ro^e 38, 81, 96 Rome, the Stacions of, a Romance, 26 Romeo and
Juliet, Play of, 76 Romuleon, or des Fais de Romans, 6, 7, 89 Romulus, 73
Rosmilla and Conan, 23 Rucellai Giovanni, 25 Rudimentum Novitiorum, 74 Rymer,
77
S
Saint Alban's Chronicle, 6 Saint Austin, 58, 74 Saints, Metrical Lives of the,
11, 18, 50, 68 Sapience, laberous and marveylous Work of, 70. Court of, 2, 70
Salmeron, 87 Scotus Marianus, his Epitaphia joco seria, 90 Scientiarum de
Vanitate, 21 Secretum Secretorum of Aristotle, 8, 10, 19 Sege of Jerusalem,
Romance of the, 44 Seneca, 5, 59 Sermones de Sanctis, 94 Sermones
Quadragesimales, 94 Seth Simeon, 55, 59 Shakespeare, 20, 25, 49, 50, 76, 82, 83
Shepherd's Pipe, by W. Brown, 56, 57 Speculum Historiale, by Vincent Beauvais,
11, 49, 59, 61 Spenser, Edmund, 44, 96 Solinus, 90 Sompnour's Tale, by Chaucer,
59 Stacions of Rome, Romance of, 26 Swanne, Knight of the, a Romance, 63
Sweertius, 91 Swift Dean, 32 Sylvester the Second, 45 Sir Launfal, Romance of,
35, 38, 43, 54, 56, 63 Sir Libeaux Diasconio^ Romance of, 47 Sir Tryamore,
Romance of, 84
T
Tale of two Merchants of Egypt and Bagdad, by Lidgate, 69 Tale of a Tub, by
Swift, 32 Tankarville, le Comte de, 21 Tanner Bishop, 4 Theagenes and Chariclea
of Heliodorus, translated into French by Amyot, 20 Theocritus, 37 Thomas of
Elmhan, 74 Tito and Gesippo, 68, 69, 94 Titus Andronicus, by Shakespeare, 25
Tristan, Romance of, 16 Trogus Pompeius, 68, 69 Trophologia, 90 Troy Book, 65
Tryamore Sir, Romance of, 84 Tuerdank, a Romance in German Rhymes, 23 Tumbeley
Robert, 65 Turpin, 54, 65 Tyrwhitt, 66, 67, 92
V
Valerius Maximus, 5 Vanitate Scientiarum, 21 Vere Guido, Bishop of Trevoly, 10
Vespasian, 10 Vincent of Beauvais, 1, 9, 15, 25, 39, 49, 54, 59, 61, 74, 86
Virgil the Nicromancer, History of, 25 83 Virgin Mary, Li^ of, by Lidgate, 69,
70. Miracles of, 94 Voragine Jacobus de, 18 Vossius, 64
W
Waley's Thomas, 65. John, 95 Westfalia John de, 4 William of Malmsbury, 45, 88
Wit H. his Diarum Biographicum, 86
X
Ximenes Cardinal, 53 Yvan of Leschell, 75
Z
Zeiner Joannes de Reutlingen, his Moralizationes Bibliae, 87

