THE POETICAL WORKS OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH, M.B.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

THE POETICAL AND DRAMATIC WORKS OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH, M.B. NOW FIRST COLLECTED.

WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF THE AUTHOR.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

LONDON: PRINTED BY H. GOLDNEY, FOR MESSIEURS RIVINGTON, T. CARNAN AND F.
NEWBERY, IN ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD; T. LOWNDES AND G. KEARSLEY, IN
FLEET STREET; T. CADELL AND T. EVANS IN THE STRAND. MDCCLXXX.

PLAYS, BY DR. GOLDSMITH.
THE GOOD-NATURED MAN: A COMEDY.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN COVENT GARDEN.

FIRST PRINTED IN MDCCLXVIII.

PREFACE.
WHEN I undertook to write a comedy, I confess I was strongly prepossessed in
favor of the poets of the last age, and strove to imitate them. The term,
genteel comedy, was then unknown amongst us, and little more was desired by an
audience, than nature and humor, in whatever walks of life they were most
conspicuous. The author of the following scenes never imagined that more would
be expected of him, and therefore to delineate character has been his principal
aim. Those who know any thing of composition, are sensible, that in pursuing
humor, it will sometimes lead us into the recesses of the mean; I was even
tempted to look for it in the master of a spunging-house: but in deference to
the public taste, grown of late, perhaps, too delicate, the scene of the
bailiffs was retrenched in the representation. In deference also to the
judgment of a few friends, who think in a particular way, the scene is here
restored. The author submits it to the reader in his closet; and hopes that too
much refinement will not banish humor and character from ours, as it has
already done from the French theater. Indeed the French comedy is now become so
very elevated and sentimental, that it has not only banished humor and Moliere
from the stage, but it has banished all spectators too.

Upon the whole, the author returns his thanks to the public for the favorable
reception which the Good-natured Man has met with: and to Mr. Colman in
particular, for his kindness to it. It may not also be improper to assure any,
who shall hereafter write for the theater, that merit, or supposed. merit, will
ever be a sufficient passport to his protection.

PROLOGUE,
WRITTEN BY DR. JOHNSON:
SPOKEN BY MR. BENSLEY. PRESSED by the load of life, the weary mind
Surveys the general toil of human' kind;
With cool submission joins the laboring train,
And social sorrow, loses half its pain:
Our anxious bard, without complaint, may share
This bustling season's epidemic care.
Like Caesar's pilot, dignified by fate,
Tossed in one common storm with all the great;
Distressed alike, the statesman and the wit,
When one a borough courts,and one the pit.
The busy candidates for power and fame,
Have hopes, and fears, and wishes, just the same;
Disabled both to combat, or to fly,
Must hear all taunts, and hear without reply.
Uncheck'd on both, loud rabbles vent their rage,
As mongrels bay the lion in a cage.
The offended burgess hoards his angry tale,
For that blessed year when all that vote may rail;
Their schemes of spite the poet's foes dismiss,
Till that glad night, when all that hate may hiss.
" This day the powdered curls and golden coat,"
Says swelling Crispin, "begged a cobler's vote."
" This night, our wit," the pert apprentice cries,
" Lies at my feet, I hiss him, and he dies."
The great, it is true, can charm the electing tribe;
The bard may supplicate, but cannot bribe.
Yet judged by those, whose voices never were sold,
He feels no want of ill-persuading gold;
But confident of praise, if praise be due,
Trusts without fear, to merit, and to you.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Mr. Honeywood, Mr. POWELL. Croaker, Mr. SHUTER. Lofty, Mr. WOODWARD. Sir
William Honeywood, Mr. CLARKE. Leontine, Mr. BENSLEY. Jarvis, Mr. DUNSTALL.
Butler, Mr. CUSHING. Bailiff, Mr. R. SMITH. Dubardieu, Mr. HOLTOM. Postboy, Mr.
QUICK.
WOMEN.
Miss Richland, Mrs. BULKELEY. Olivia, Mrs. MATTOCKS. Mrs. Croaker, Mrs. PIT.
Garnet, Mrs. GREEN. Landlady, Mrs. WHITE.
SCENE, LONDON. THE GOOD-NATURED MAN.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE, an apartment in Young HONEYWOOD'S house. Enter Sir WILLIAM HONEYWOOD,
JARVIS. Sir WILLIAM. GOOD Jarvis, make no apologies for this honest bluntness.
Fidelity, like yours, is the best excuse for every freedom.


JARVIS. I cannot help being blunt, and being very angry too, when I hear you
talk of disinheriting so good, so worthy a young gentleman as your nephew, my
master. All the world loves him.


Sir WILLIAM. Say rather, that he loves all the world; that is his fault.


JARVIS. I Am sure there is no part of it more dear to him than you are, though
he has not seen you since he was a child,


Sir WILLIAM. What signifies his affection to me; or how can I be proud of a
place in a heart where every sharper and coxcomb find an easy entrance?


JARVIS. I grant you that he is rather too good-natured; that he is too much
every man's man; that he laughs this minute with one, and cries the next with
another: but whose instructions may he thank for all this?


Sir WILLIAM. Not mine, sure? My letters to him during my employment in Italy,
taught him only that philosophy which might prevent, not defend his errors.


JARVIS. Faith, begging your honor's pardon, I Am sorry they taught him any
philosophy at all; it has only served to spoil him. This same philosophy is a
good horse in the stable, but an arrant jade on a journey. For my own part,
whenever I hear him mention the name on it, I Am always sure he is going to play
the fool.


Sir WILLIAM. Don't let us ascribe his faults to his philosophy, I entreat you.
No, Jarvis, his good nature arises rather from his fears of offending the
importunate, than his desire of making the deserving happy.


JARVIS. What it rises from, I don't know. But, to be sure, every body has it,
that asks it.


Sir WILLIAM. Ay, or that does not ask it. I have been now for some time a
concealed spectator of his follies, and find them as boundless as his
dissipation.


JARVIS. And yet, faith, he has some fine name or other For them all. He calls
his extravagance, generosity; and his trusting every body, universal
benevolence. It was but last week he went security for a fellow whose face he
scarce knew, and that he called an act of exalted mu -- mu -- munificence; ay,
that was the name he gave it.


Sir WILLIAM. And upon that I proceed, as my last effort, though with very
little hopes to reclaim him. That very fellow has just absconded, and I have,
taken up the security. Now, my intention is to involve him in fictitious
distress, before he has plunged himself into real calamity. To arrest him for
that very debt, to clap an officer upon him, and then let him see which of his
friends will come to his relief.


JARVIS. Well, if I could but any way see him thoroughly vexed, every groan of
his would be music to me; yet faith, I believe it impossible. I have tried to
fret him myself every morning these three years; but, instead of being angry,
he sits as calmly to hear me scold, as he does to his hair-dresser.


Sir WILLIAM. We must try him once more, however, and I Will go this instant to
put my scheme into execution; and I don't despair of succeeding, as, by your
means, I can have frequent opportunities of being about him, without being
known. What a pity it is, Jarvis, that any man's good will to others should
produce so much neglect of himself, as to require correction? Yet, we must
touch his weaknesses with a delicate hand. There are some faults so nearly
allied to excellence, that we can scarce weed out the vice without eradicating
the virtue.

[Exit.
JARVIS. Well, go thy ways, Sir William Honeywood. It is not without reason
that the world allows thee to be the best of men. But here comes his hopeful
nephew; the strange, good-natured, foolsh, openhearted -- And yet, all his
faults are such that one loves him still the better for them.


Enter HONEYWOOD. HONEYWOOD. Well, Jarvis, what messages from my friends this
morning?


JARVIS. You have no friends.


HONEYWOOD. Well; from my acquaintance then?


JARVIS. (Pulling out bills) A few of our usual cards of compliment, that is
all. This bill from your tailor; this from your mercer; and this from the
little broker in Crooked-lane. He says he has been at a great deal of trouble
to get back the money you borrowed.


HONEYWOOD. That I don't know; but I Am sure we were at a great deal of trouble
in getting him to lend it.


JARVIS. He has lost all patience.


HONEYWOOD. Then he has lost a very good thing.


JARVIS. There Is that ten guineas you were fending to the poor gentleman and
his children in the Fleet. I believe that would stop his mouth, for a while at
least.


HONEYWOOD. Ay, Jarvis, but what will fill their mouths in the mean time? Must
I be cruel because he happens to be importunate; and, to relieve his avarice,
leave them to insupportable distress?


JARVIS. 'Sdeath! Sir, the question now is how to relieve yourself. Yourself --
Hav'nt I reason to be out of my senses, when I see things going at sixes and
sevens?


HONEYWOOD. Whatever reason you may have for being out of your senses, I hope
you will allow that I Am not quite unreasonable for continuing in mine.


JARVIS. You're the only man alive in your present situation that could do so
-- Every thing upon the waste. There Is Miss Richland and her fine fortune gone
already, and upon the point of being given to your rival.


HONEYWOOD. I Am no man's rival.


JARVIS. Your uncle in Italy preparing to disinherit you; your own fortune
almost spent; and nothing but pressing creditors, false friends, and a pack of
drunken servants that your kindness has made unfit for any other family.


HONEYWOOD. Then they have the more occasion for being in mine.


JARVIS. Soh! What will you have done with him that I caught stealing your
plate in the pantry? In the fact; I caught him in the fact.


HONEYWOOD. In the fact? If so, I really think that we should pay him his
Wages, and turn him off.


JARVIS. He shall be turned off at Tyburn, the dog; we'll hang him, if it be
only to frighten the rest of the family.


HONEYWOOD. No, Jarvis: it is enough that we have lost what he has stolen, let
us not add to it the loss of a fellow creature!


JARVIS. Very fine; well, here was the footman just now, to complain of the
butler; he says he does most work, and ought to have most wages.


HONEYWOOD. That Is but just; though perhaps here comes the butler to complain
of the footman.


JARVIS. Ay, its the way with them all, from the scullion to the
privy-counsellor. If they have a bad master, they keep quarrelling with him: if
they have a good master, they keep quarrelling with one another.


Enter BUTLER, drunk. BUTLER. Sir, I Will not stay in the family with Jonathan
you must part with him, or part with me, that is the ex-ex-exposition of the
matter, Sir.


HONEYWOOD. Full and explicit enough. But what is his fault, good Philip?


BUTLER. Sir, he is given to drinking, Sir, and I shall have my morals
corrupted, by keeping such company.


HONEYWOOD. Have ha! He has such a diverting way --


JARVIS. O quite amusing.


BUTLER. I find my wines a-going, Sir; and liquors don't go without mouths,
Sir; I hate a drunkard, Sir.


HONEYWOOD. Well, well, Philip, I Will hear yon upon that another time, so go to
bed now.


JARVIS. To bed! Let him go the devil.


BUTLER. Begging your honor's pardon, and begging your pardon, master Jarvis,
I Will not go to bed, nor to the devil neither. I hare enough to do to mind my
cellar. I forgot, your honor, Mr. Croaker is below. I came on purpose to tell
you.


HONEYWOOD. Why didn't you show him up, blockhead?


BUTLER. Show him up, Sir! With all my heart, Sir. Up or down, all is one to me.

Exit.
JARVIS. Ay, we have one or other of that family in this house from morning
till night. He comes on the old affair, I suppose. The match between his son,
that is just returned from Paris, and Miss Richland, the young lady he is
guardian to.


HONEYWOOD. Perhaps so. Mr. Croaker, knowing my friendship for the young lady,
has got it into his head that I can persuade her to what I please.


JARVIS. Ah! if you loved yourself but half as well as she loves you, we should
soon fee a marriage that would set all things to rights again.


HONEYWOOD. Love me! Sure, Jarvis, you dream. No, no; her intimacy with me
never amounted to more than friendship -- mere friendship. That she is the most
lovely woman that ever warmed the human heart with desire, I own. But never let
me harbor a thought of making her unhappy, by a connection with one so
unworthy her merits as I am. No, Jarvis, it shall be my study to serve her,
even in spite of my wishes; and to secure her happiness, though it destroys my
own.

JARVIS.

Was ever the like! I want patience.


HONEYWOOD. Besides, Jarvis, though I could obtain Miss Richland's consent, do
you think I could succeed with her guardian, or Mrs. Croaker his wife; who,
though both very fine in their way, are yet a little opposite in, their
dispositions you know.


JARVIS. Opposite enough, heaven knows; the very reverse of each other; she all
laugh and no joke; he always complaining and never sorrowful; a fretful poor
soul that has a new distress for every hour in the four and twenty --


HONEYWOOD. Hum, hush, he is coming up, he will hear you.


JARVIS. One who is voice is a passing bell --


HONEYWOOD. Well, well, go, do.


JARVIS. A raven that bodes nothing but mischief; a coffin and cross bones; a
bundle of rue; a sprig of deadly night shade;a --


(Honeywood stopping his mouth, at last pushes him off.) [Exit Jarvis.
HONEYWOOD. I must own my old monitor is not entirely wrong. There is something
in my friend Croaker's conversation that quite depresses me. His very mirth is
an antidote to all gaiety, and his appearance has a stronger effect on my
spirits than an undertaker's shop. -- Mr. Croaker, this is such a satisfaction
--


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. A pleasant morning to Mr. Honeywood, and many of them.
How is this! you look most shockingly to day, my dear friend. I hope this
weather does not affect your spirits. To be sure, if this weather continues --
I say nothing -- But God send we be all better this day three months.


HONEYWOOD. I heartily concur in the wish, though I own not in your
apprehensions.


CROAKER. May be not! indeed what signifies what weather we have in a country
going to ruin like ours? taxes rising and trade falling. Money flying out of
the kingdom, and Jesuits swarming into it. I know at this time no less than an
hundred and twenty-seven Jesuits between Charing Cross and Temple Bar.


HONEYWOOD. The Jesuits will scarce pervert you or me, I should hope.


CROAKER. May be not. Indeed what signifies whom they pervert in a country that
has scarce any religion to lose? I Am only afraid for our wives and daughters.


HONEYWOOD. I have no apprehensions for the ladies, I assure you.


CROAKER. May be not. Indeed what signifies whether they be perverted or no?
the women in my time were good for something. I have seen a lady dressed from top
to toe in her own manufactures formerly. But now adays the devil a thing of
their own manufactures about them, except their faces.


HONEYWOOD. But, however these faults may be practiced abroad, you don't find
them at home, either with Mrs. Croaker, Olivia, or Miss Richland.


CROAKER. The best of them will never be canonized for a saint when she is dead.
By the bye, my dear friend, I don't find this match between Miss Richland and
my son much relished, either b y one side or the other.


HONEYWOOD. I thought otherwise.


CROAKER. Ah, Mr. Honeywood, a little of your fine serious advice to the young
lady might go far: I know she has a very exalted opinion of your understanding.


HONEYWOOD. But would not that be usurping an authority that more properly
belongs to yourself?


CROAKER. My dear friend, you know but little of my authority at home. People
think, indeed, because they see me come out in a morning thus, with a pleasant
face, and to make my friends merry, that all is well within. But I have cares
that would break an heart of stone. My wife has so encroached upon every one of
my privileges, that I Am now no more than a mere lodger in my own house.


HONEYWOOD. But a little spirit exerted on your side might perhaps restore
your, authority.


CROAKER. No, though I had the spirit of a lion! I do rouse sometimes. But what
then! always haggling and haggling. A man is tired of getting the better before
his wife is tired of losing the victory.


HONEYWOOD. It Is a melancholy consideration indeed, that our chief comforts
often produce our greatest anxieties, and that an increase of our possessions
is but an, inlet to new disquietudes.


CROAKER. Ah, my dear friend, these were the very words of poor Dick Doleful to
me not a week before he made, away with himself. Indeed, Mr. Honeywood, I never
fee you but you put me in mind of poor -- Dick. Ah there was merit neglected
for you! and so true a friend; we loved each other for thirty years, and yet he
never asked me to lend him a single farthing.


HONEYWOOD. Pray what could induce him to commit so rash an action at last?


CROAKER. I don't know, some people were malicious enough to say it was keeping
company with me; because we used to meet, now and then and open our hearts to
each other. To be sure I loved to hear him talk, and he loved to hear me talk;
poor dear Dick. He used to say that Croaker rhim'd to joker,; and so we used to
laugh -- Poor Dick. (Going to cry.)


HONEYWOOD. His fate affects me.


CROAKER. Ay, he grew sick of this miserable, life, where we do nothing but eat
and grow hungry, dress and undress, get up and lie down; while reason, that
should watch like a nurse by our side, falls as fast asleep as we do.


HONEYWOOD. To say truth, if we compare that part of life which is to come, by
that which we have past, the prospect is hideous.


CROAKER. Life at the greatest and best is but a froward child, that must be
humored and coax'd a little till it falls asleep, and then all the care is
over.


HONEYWOOD. Very true, Sir, nothing can exceed the vanity of our existence, but
the folly of our pursuits. We wept when we came into the world, and every day
tells us why.


CROAKER. Ah, my dear friend, it is a perfect satisfaction to be miserable with
you. My son Leontine shall not lose the benefit of such fine conversation. I Will
just step home for him. I am willing to show him so much seriousness in one
scarce older than himself -- And what if I bring my last letter to the
Gazetteer on the increase and progress of earthquakes? It will amuse us, I
promise you. I there prove how the late earthquake is coming round to pay us
another visit from London to Lisbon, from Lisbon to the Canary Islands, from
the Canary Islands to Palmyra, from Palmyra to Constantinople, and so from
Constantinople back to London again.

[Exit.
HONEYWOOD. Poor Croaker! his situation deserves the utmost pity. I shall
scarce recover my spirits these three days. Sure to live upon such terms is
worse than death itself. And yet, when I consider my own situation, a broken
fortune, an hopeless passion, friends in distress; the wish but not the power
to serve them -- (pausing and sighing.)


Enter BUTLER. BUTLER. More company below, Sir: Mrs. Croaker and Miss Richland;
shall I show them up? but they are showing up themselves.

[Exit.
Enter Mrs. CROAKER and Miss RICHLAND. Miss RICHLAND. You're always in such
spirits.


Mrs. CROAKER. We have just come, my dear Honeywood, from the auction. There
was the old deaf dowager, as usual, bidding like a fury against herself. And
then so curious in antiques! herself the most genuine piece of antiquity in the
whole collection.


HONEYWOOD. Excuse me, ladies, if some uneasiness from friendship makes me
unfit to share in this good humor: I know you will pardon me.


Mrs. CROAKER. I vow he seems as melancholy as if he had taken a dose of my
husband this morning. Well, if Richland here can pardon you, I must.


Miss RICHLAND. You would seem to insinuate, madam, that I have particular
reasons for being disposed to refuse it.


Mrs. CROAKER. Whatever I insinuate, my dear, don't be so ready to wish an
explanation.


Miss RICHLAND. I own I should be sorry, Mr. Honeywood's long friendship and
mine should be misunderstood.


HONEYWOOD. There Is no answering for others, madam. But I hope you will never
find me presuming to offer more than the most delicate friendship may readily
allow.


Miss RICHLAND. And I shall be prouder of such a tribute from you than the most
passionate professions from others.


HONEYWOOD. My own sentiments, madam: friendship is a disinterested commerce
between equals; love, an abject intercourse between tyrants and slaves.


Miss RICHLAND. And, without a compliment, I know none more disinterested, or
more capable of friendship than Mr. Honeywood.


Mrs. CROAKER. And, indeed, I know nobody that has more friends, at least among
the ladies. Miss Fruzz, Miss Odbody, and Miss Winterbottom praise him in all
companies. As for Miss Biddy Bundle, she is his professed admirer.


Miss RICHLAND. Indeed! an admirer! I did not know, Sir, you were such a
favorite there. But is she seriously so handsome? Is she the mighty thing
talked of?


HONEYWOOD. The town, madam, seldom begins to praise a lady's beauty, till
she is beginning to lose it. (Smiling.)


Mrs. CROAKER. But she is resolved never to lose it, it seems. For, as her
natural face decays, her skill improves in making the artificial one. Well,
nothing diverts me more than one of those fine, old, dressy things, who thinks
to conceal her age, by every where exposing her person; sticking herself up in
the front of a sidebox; trailing through a minuet at Almack's; and then, in the
public gardens, looking for all the world like one of the painted ruins of the
place.


HONEYWOOD. Every age has its admirers, ladies. While you, perhaps, are trading
among the warmer climates of youth; there ought to be some to carry on an
useful commerce in the frozen latitudes beyond fifty.


Miss RICHLAND. But, then, the mortifications they must suffer, before they can
be fitted out for traffic. I have seen one of them fret an whole morning at her
hairdresser, when all the fault was her face.


HONEYWOOD. And yet, I Will engage, has carried that face at last to a very good
market. This good-natured town, madam, has husbands, like spectacles, to fit
every age, from fifteen to fourscore.

Mrs. CROAKER.

Well, you're a dear good-natured creature. But you know you're engaged with us
this morning upon a strolling party. I want to show Olivia the town, and the
things; I believe I shall have business for you for the whole day.


HONEYWOOD. I am sorry, madam, I have an appointment with Mr. Croaker, which it
is impossible to put off.


Mrs. CROAKER. What! with my husband! then I Am resolved to take no refusal.
Nay, I protest you must. You know I never laugh so much, as with you.


HONEYWOOD. Why, if I must, I must. I Will swear you have put me into such
spirits. Well, do you find jest, and I Will find laugh, I promise you. We'll wait
for the chariot in the next room.


[Exeunt. Enter LEONTINE and OLIVIA. LEONTINE. There they go, thoughtless and
happy. My dearest Olivia, what would I give to see you capable of sharing in
their amusements, and as cheerful as they are?


OLIVIA. How, my Leontine, how can I be cheerful, when I have so many terrors
to oppress me? the fear of being detected by this family, and the apprehensions
of a censuring world, when I must be detected --


LEONTINE. The world! my love, what can it say? At worst it can only say that,
being compelled by a mercenary guardian to embrace a life you disliked, you
formed a resolution of flying with the man of your choice; that you confided in
his honor, and took refuge in my father's house; the only one where yours
could remain without censure.


OLIVIA. But consider, Leontine, your disobedience and my indiscretion: your
being sent to France to bring home a sister; and, instead of a sister, bringing
home --


LEONTINE. One dearer than a thousand sisters. One that I am convinced will be
equally dear, to the rest of the family, when she comes to be known.


OLIVIA. And that, I fear, will shortly be.


LEONTINE. Impossible, 'till we ourselves think proper to make the discovery.
My sister, you know, has been with her aunt, at Lions, since she was a child,
and you find every creature in the family takes you for her.


OLIVIA. But may not she write, may not her aunt write?


LEONTINE. Her aunt scarce ever writes, and all my sister's letters are
directed to me.


OLIVIA. But will not your refusing Miss Richland, for whom you know the old
gentleman intends you, create a suspicion?


LEONTINE. There, there is my master-stroke. I have resolved not to refuse her;
nay, an hour hence I have consented to go with my father, to make her an offer
of my heart and fortune.


OLIVIA. Your heart and fortune!


LEONTINE. Don't be alarmed, my dearest. Can Olivia think so meanly of my
honor, or my love, as to suppose I could ever hope for happiness from any but
her? No, my Olivia, neither the force, nor, permit me to add, the delicacy of
my passion, leave any room to suspect me. I only offer Miss Richland an heart,
I am convinced she will refuse; as I am confident, that, without knowing it,
her affections are fixed upon Mr. Honeywood


OLIVIA. Mr. Honeywood! You Will excuse my apprehensions; but when your merits
come to be put in the balance --


LEONTINE. You view them with too much partiality. However, by making this
offer, I show a seeming compliance with my father's command; and perhaps, upon
her refusal, I may have his consent to choose for myself.


OLIVIA. Well, I submit. And yet, my Leontine, I own, I shall envy her, even
your pretended addresses. I consider every look, every expression of your
esteem, as due only to me. This is folly perhaps: I allow it: but it is natural
to suppose, that merit which has made an impression on one's own heart, may be
powerful over that of another.


LEONTINE. Don't, my life's treasure, don't let us make imaginary evils, when
yon know we have so many real ones to encounter. At worst, yon know, if Miss
Richland should consent, or my father refuse his pardon, it can but end in a
trip to Scotland; and --


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Where have you been, boy? I have been seeking you. My
friend Honeywood here, has been saying such comfortable things. Ah! he is an
example indeed. Where is he? I left him here.


LEONTINE. Sir, I believe you may see him, and hear him too in the next room:
he is preparing to go out with the ladies.


CROAKER. Good gracioas, can I believe my eyes or my ears! I Am struck dumb with
his vivacity, and stunned with the loudness of his laugh. Was there ever such a
transformation! (A laugh behind the scenes, Croaker mimics it.) Ha! ha! ha!
there it goes: a plague take their balderdash; yet I could expect nothing lest,
when my precious wife was of the party. On my conscience, I believe, she could
spread an horselaugh through the pews of a tabernacle.


LEONTINE. Since you find so many objections to a wife, sir, how can you be so
earnest in recommending one to me?


CROAKER. I have told you, and tell you again, boy, that Miss Richland's
fortune must not go out of the family; one may find comfort in the money,
whatever one does in the wife.


LEONTINE. But, Sir, though, in obedience to your desire, I am ready to marry
her; it may be possible, she has no inclination to me.


CROAKER. I Will tell you once for all how it stands. A good part of Miss
Richland's large fortune consists in a claim upon government, which my good
friend, Mr. Lofty, assures me the treasury will allow. One half of this she is
to forfeit, by her father's will, in case she refuses to marry you. So, if she
rejects you, we seize half her fortune; if she accepts you, we seize the whole,
and a fine girl into the bargain.


LEONTINE. But, Sir, if you will but listen to reason --


CROAKER. Come, then, produce your reasons. I tell you. I Am fixed, determined,
so now produce your reasons. When I Am determined, I always listen to reason,
because it can then do no harm.


LEONTINE. You have alleged that a mutual choice was the first requisite in
matrimonial happiness.


CROAKER. Well, and you have both of you a mutual choice. She has her choice --
to marry you, or lose half her fortune; and you have your choice -- to marry
her, or pack out of doors without any fortune at all.


LEONTINE. An only son, Sir, might expect more indulgence.


CROAKER. An only father, Sir, might expect more obedience; besides, has not
your sister here, that never disobliged me in her life, as good a right as you?
He Is a sad dog, Livy, my dear, and would take all from you. But he shall not, I
tell you he shall not, for you shall have your share.


OLIVIA. Dear Sir, I wish you would be convinced that I can never be happy in any
addition to my fortune, which is taken from his.


CROAKER. Well, well, it is a good child, so say no more; but come with me, and
we shall see something that will give us a great deal of pleasure, I promise
you; old Ruggins, the curry-comb-maker, lying in state; I Am told he makes a
very handsome corpse, and becomes his coffin prodigiously. He was an intimate
friend of mine, and these are friendly things we ought to do for each other.


[Exeunt. ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE, CROAKER'S House. Miss RICHLAND, GARNET. Miss RICHLAND. OLIVIA not his
sister? Olivia not Leontine's sister? You amaze me!


GARNET. No more his sister than I am; I had it all from his own servant; I can
get any thing from that quarter.


Miss RICHLAND. But how? Tell me again, Garnet.


GARNET. Why, madam, as I told you before, instead of going to Lions, to bring
home his sister, who has been there with her aunt these ten years; he never
went further than Paris; there he saw and fell in love with this young lady, by
the bye, of a prodigious family.


Miss RICHLAND. And brought her home to my guardian, as his daughter?


GARNET. Yes, and his daughter she will be. If he don't consent to their
marriage, they talk of trying what a Scotch parson can do.


Miss RICHLAND. Well, I own they have deceived me -- And so demurely as Olivia
carried it to! -- Would you believe it, Garnet, I told her all my secrets; and
yet the sly cheat concealed all this from me?


GARNET. And, upon my word, madam, I don't much blame her; she was loath to
trust one with her secrets, that was so very bad at keeping her own.


Miss RICHLAND. But, to add to their deceit, the young gentleman, it seems,
pretends to make me serious proposals. My guardian and he are to be here
presently, to open the affair in form. You know I am to lose half my fortune if
I refuse him.


GARNET. Yet, what can you do? For being, as you are, in love with Mr.
Honeywood, madam --


Miss RICHLAND. How! idiot; what do you mean? In love with Mr. Honeywood! Is
this to provoke me?


GARNET. That is, madam, in friendship with him; I meant nothing more than
friendship, as I hope to be married; nothing more.


Miss RICHLAND. Well, no more of this! As to my guardian, and his son, they
shall find me prepared to receive them; I Am resolved to accept their proposal
with seeming pleasure, to mortify them by compliance, and so throw the refusal
at last upon them.


GARNET. Delicious! and that will secure your whole fortune to yourself. Well,
who could have thought so innocent a face could cover so much cuteness!


Miss RICHLAND. Why, girl, I Only oppose my prudence to their cunning, and
practice a lesson they have taught me against themselves.


GARNET. Then you're likely not long to want employment, for here they come,
and in close conference.


Enter CROAKER, LEONTINE. LEONTINE. Excuse me. Sir, if I seem to hesitate upon
the point of putting to the lady so important a question.


CROAKER. Lord! good Sir, moderate your fears; you're so plaguey shy, that one
would think you had changed sexes. I tell you we must have the half or the
whole. Come, let me see with what spirit you begin? Well, why don't you? Eh!
What? Well then -- I must, it seems -- Miss Richland, my dear, I believe yon
guess at our business; an affair which my son here comes to open, that nearly
concerns your happiness.


Miss RICHLAND. Sir, I should be ungrateful not to be pleased with any thing
that comes recommended by you.


CROAKER. How, boy, could you desire a finer opening? Why don't you begin, I
say? (To Leont.)


LEONTINE. It Is true, madam, my father, madam, has some intentions -- hem -- of
explaining an affair -- which -- himself -- can best explain, madam.


CROAKER. Yes, my dear; it comes entirely from my son; it is all a request of
his own, madam. And I will permit him to make the best of it.


LEONTINE. The whole affair is only this, madam; my father has a proposal to
make, which he insists none but himself shall deliver.


CROAKER. My mind misgives me, the fellow will never be brought on. (Aside.) In
short, madam, you see before you one that loves you; one whose whole happiness
is all in you.


Miss RICHLAND. I never had any doubts of your regard, Sir; and I hope you can
have none of my duty.


CROAKER. That Is not the thing, my little sweeting; my love! No, no, another
guess lover than I; there he stands, madam, his very looks declare the force of
his passion -- Call up a look you dog (Aside) -- But then, had you seen him, as
I have, weeping, speaking soliloquies and blank verse, sometimes melancholy,
and sometimes absent --


Miss RICHLAND. I fear, Sir, he is absent now; or such a declaration would have
come most properly from himself.


CROAKER. Himself! madam, he would die before he could make such a confession;
and if he had not a channel for his passion through me, it would ere now have
drowned his understanding.


Miss RICHLAND. I must grant, Sir, there are attractions in modest diffidence
above the force of words. A silent address is the genuine eloquence of
sincerity.


CROAKER. Madam, he has forgot to speak any other language; silence is become
his mother tongue.


Miss RICHLAND. And it must be confessed, Sir, it speaks very powerfully in his
favor. And yet I shall be thought too forward in making such a confession;
shall not I, Mr. Leontine?


LEONTINE. Confusion! my reserve will undo me. But, if modesty attracts her,
impudence may disgust her. I Will try. (Aside.) Don't imagine from my silence,
madam, that I want a due sense of the honor and happiness intended me. My
father, madam, tells me, your humble servant is not totally indifferent to you.
He admires you; I adore you; and when we come together, upon my soul I believe
we shall be the happiest couple in all St. James's.


Miss RICHLAND. If I could flatter myself, you thought as you speak, Sir --


LEONTINE. Doubt my sincerity, madam? By your dear self I swear. Ask the brave,
if they desire glory? ask cowards, if they covet safety --


CROAKER. Well, well, no more questions about it.


LEONTINE. Ask the sick, if they long for health? ask misers, if they love
money? ask --


CROAKER. Ask a fool, if he can talk nonsense! What Is come over the boy? What
signifies asking, when there is not a soul to give you an answer? If you would
ask to the purpose, ask this lady's consent to make you happy.


Miss RICHLAND. Why indeed, Sir, his uncommon ardour almost compels me --
forces me to comply. And yet I Am afraid he will despise a conquest gained with
too much ease: will not you, Mr. Leontine?


LEONTINE. Confusion! (Aside.) Oh, by no means, madam, by no means. And yet,
madam, you talked of force. There is nothing I would avoid so much as
compulsion in a thing of this kind. No, madam, I will still be generous, and
leave you at liberty to refuse.


CROAKER. But I tell you, Sir, the lady is not at liberty. It Is a match. You
see she says nothing. Silence gives consent.


LEONTINE. But, Sir, she talked of force. Consider, Sir, the cruelty of
constraining her inclinations.


CROAKER. But I say there is no cruelty. Don't you know, blockhead, that girls
have always a roundabout way of saying yes before company? So get you both gone
together into the next room, and hang him that interrupts the tender
explanation. Get you gone, I say; I Will not hear a word.


LEONTINE. But, Sir, I must beg leave to insist --


CROAKER. Get off, you puppy, or I Will beg leave to insist upon knocking you
down. Stupid whelp! But I don't wonder, the toy takes entirely after his mother


[Exeunt Miss Rich. and Leont. Enter Mrs. CROAKER. Mrs. CROAKER. Mr. Croaker, I
bring you something, my dear, that I believe will make you smile.


CROAKER. I Will hold you a guinea of that, my dear.


Mrs. CROAKER. A letter; and, as I knew the hand, I ventured to open it.


CROAKER. And how can you expect your breaking open my letters should give me
pleasure?


Mrs. CROAKER. Poo, it is from your sister at Lions, and contains good news:
read it.


CROAKER. What a Frenchified cover is here! That sister of mine has some good
qualities, but I could never teach her to fold a letter.


Mrs. CROAKER. Fold a fiddlestick. Read what it contains.


CROAKER, reading. DEAR NICK,
AN English gentleman, of large fortune, has for some time made private, though
honorable proposals to your daughter Olivia. They love each other tenderly,
and I find she has consented, without letting any of the family know, to crown
his addresses. As such good offers don't come every day, your own good sense,
his large fortune, and family considerations, will induce you to forgive her.

Yours ever, RACHAEL CROAKER.


My daughter, Olivia, privately contracted to a man of large fortune! This is
good news, indeed. My heart never foretold me of this. And yet, how silly the
little baggage has carried it since she came home. Not a word on it to the old
ones for the world. Yet, I thought, I saw something she wanted to conceal.


Mrs. CROAKER. Well, if they have concealed their amor, they shall not conceal
their wedding; that shall be public, I Am resolved.


CROAKER. I tell thee, woman, the wedding is the most foolish part of the
ceremony. I can never get this woman to think of the more serious part of the
nuptial engagement.


Mrs. CROAKER. What, would you have me think of their funeral? But come, tell
me, my dear, don't you owe more to me than you care to confess? Would you have
ever been known to Mr. Lofty, who has undertaken Miss Richland's claim at the
treasury, but for me? Who was it first made him an acquaintance at lady
Shabbaroon's rout? Who got him to promise us his interest? Is not he a
back-stairs favorite, one that can do what he pleases with those that do what
they please? Is not he an acquaintance that all your groaning and lamentations
could never have got us?


CROAKER. He is a man of importance, I grant you. And yet, what amazes me is,
that while he is giving away places to all the world, he cannot get one for
himself.


Mrs. CROAKER. That perhaps may be owing to his nicety. Great men are not
easily satisfied.


Enter FRENCH SERVANT. SERVANT. An express from Monsieur Lofty. He vil be vait
upon your honor's instrammant. He be only giving four five instruction, read
two three memorial, call upon von ambassadeur. He vil be vid you in one tree
minutes.


Mrs. CROAKER. You see now, my dear. What an extensive department! Well,
friend, let your master know, that we are extremely honored by this honor.
Was there any thing ever in a higher style of breeding! All messages among the
great are now done by express.


CROAKER. To be sure, no man does little things with more solemnity, or claims
more respect than he. But he is in the right on it. In our bad world, respect is
given, where respect is claimed.


Mrs. CROAKER. Never mind the world, my dear; you were never in a pleasanter
place in your life. Let us now think of receiving him with proper respect (a
loud rapping at the door) and there he is by the thundering rap.


CROAKER. Ay, verily, there he is; as close upon the heels of his own express,
as an indorsement upon the back of a bill. Well, I Will leave you to receive him,
whilst I go to chide my little Olivia for intending to steal a marriage without
mine, or her aunt's consent. I must seem to be angry, or she too may begin to
despise my authority.

[Exit.
Enter LOFTY, speaking to his Servant. LOFTY. "And if the Venetian ambassador,
or that teazing creature the marquis, should call, I Am not at home. Dam'me,
I Will be pack-horse to none of them." My dear madam, I have just snatched a
moment -- "And if the expresses to his grace be ready, let them be sent off;
they are of importance." Madam, I ask a thousand pardons.


Mrs. CROAKER. Sir, this honor --


LOFTY. "And Dubardieu! if the person calls about the commission, let him know
that it is made out. As for lord Cumbercourt's stale request, it can keep cold:
you understand me." Madam, I ask ten thousand pardons.


Mrs. CROAKER. Sir, this honor --


LOFTY. "And, Dubardieu! if the man comes from the Cornish borough, you must do
him; you must do him, I say." Madam, I ask ten thousand pardons. "And if the
Russian -- ambassador calls: but he will scarce call today, I believe." And
now, madam, I have just got time to express my happiness in having the honor
of being permitted to profess myself your most obedient humble servant.


Mrs. CROAKER. Sir, the happiness and honor are all mine; and yet, I Am only
robbing the public while I detain you.


LOFTY. Sink the public, madam, when the fair are to be attended. Ah, could all
my hours be so charmingly devoted! Sincerely, don't you pity us poor creatures
in affairs? Thus it is eternally; solicited for places here, teized for
pensions there, and courted every where. I know you pity me. Yes, I see you do.


Mrs. CROAKER. Excuse me, Sir. "Toils of empires pleasures are," as Waller says.


LOFTY. Waller, Waller; is he of the house?


Mrs. CROAKER. 'The modern poet of that name, Sir.


LOFTY. Oh, a modern! We men of business despise the moderns; and as for the
ancients, we have no time to read them. Poetry is a pretty thing enough for our
wives and daughters; but not for us. Why now, here I stand that know nothing of
books. I say, madam, I know nothing of books; and yet, I believe, upon a land
carriage fishery, a stamp act, or a jag-hire, I can talk my two hours without
feeling the want of them.


Mrs. CROAKER. The world is no stranger to Mr. Lofty's eminence in every
capacity.


LOFTY. I vow to gad, madam, you make me blush. I Am nothing, nothing, nothing
in the world; a mere obscure gentleman. To be sure, indeed, one or two of the
present ministers are pleased to represent me as a formidable man. I know they
are pleased to be-spatter me at all their little dirty levees. Yet, upon my
soul, I wander what they see in me to treat me so! Measures, not men, have
always been my mark; and I vow, by all that is honorable, my resentment has
never done the men, as mere men, any manner of harm -- that is as mere men.


Mrs. CROAKER. What importance, and yet what modesty!


LOFTY. Oh, if you talk of modesty, madam! there I own, I Am accessible to
praise: modesty is my foible: it was so, the duke of Brentford used to say of
me. "I love Jack Lofty, he used to say:" no man has a finer knowledge of
things; quite a man of information; and when he speaks upon his legs, by the
Lord he is prodigious, he scouts them; and yet all men have their faults; too
much modesty is his, says his grace.


Mrs. CROAKER. And yet, I dare say, you don't want assurance when you come to
solicit for your friends.


LOFTY. O, there indeed I Am in bronze. Apropos! I have just been mentioning
Miss Richland's case to a certain personage; we must name no names. When I ask,
I Am not to be put off, madam. No, no, I take my friend by the button. A fine
girl, Sir; great justice in her case. A friend of mine. Borough interest.
Business must be done, Mr. Secretary. I say, Mr. Secretary, her business must
be done, Sir. That Is my way, madam.


Mrs. CROAKER. Bless me! you said all this to the secretary of state, did you?


LOFTY. I did not say the secretary, did I? Well, curse it, since you have
found me out I will not deny it. It was to the secretary.


Mrs. CROAKER. This was going to the fountain head at once, not applying to the
understrappers, as Mr. Honeywood would have had us.


LOFTT. Honeywood! he! he! He was, indeed, a fine solicitor. I suppose you have
heard what has just happened to him?


Mrs. CROAKER. Poor dear man; no accident, I hope.


LOFTY. Undone, madam, that is all. His creditors have taken him into custody. A
prisoner in his own house.


Mrs. CROAKER. A prisoner in his own house! How! At this very time! I Am quite
unhappy for him.


LOFTY. Why so am I. The man, to be sure, was immensely good-natured. But then
I could never find that he had any thing in him.


Mrs. CROAKER. His manner, to be sure, was excessive harmless; some, indeed,
thought it a little dull. For my part, I always concealed my opinion.


LOFTY. It cannot be concealed, madam; the man was dull, dull as the last new
comedy! A poor impracticable creature? I tried once or twice to know if he was
fit for business; but he had scarce talents to be groom-porter to an orange
barrow.


Mrs. CROAKER. How differently does Miss Richland think of him! For, I believe,
with all his faults, she loves him.


LOFTY. Loves him! Does she? You should cure her of that by all means. Let me
see; what if she were sent to him this instant, in his present doleful
situation? My life for it, that works her cure. Distress is a perfect antidote
to love. Suppose we join her in the next room? Miss Richland is a fine girl,
has a fine fortune, and must not be thrown away. Upon my honor, madam, I have
a regard for Miss Richland; and rather than she should be thrown away, I should
think it no indignity to marry her myself.


[Exeunt. Enter OLIVIA and LEONTINE. LEONTINE. And yet, trust me, Olivia, I had
every reason to expect Miss Richland's refusal, as I did every thing in my
power to deserve it. Her indelicacy surprises me!


OLIVIA. Sure, Leontine, there is nothing so indelicate in being sensible of
your merit. If so, I fear, I shall be the most guilty thing alive.


LEONTINE. But you mistake, my dear. The same attention I used to advance my
merit with you, I practiced to lessen it with her. What more could I do?


OLIVIA. Let us now rather consider what is to be done. We have both dissembled
too long -- I have always been ashamed -- I am now quite weary of it. Sure I
could never have undergone so much for any other but you.


LEONTINE. And you shall find my gratitude equal to your kindest compliance.
Though our friends should totally forsake us, Olivia, we can draw upon content
for the deficiencies of fortune.


OLIVIA. Then why should we defer our scheme of humble happiness, when it is
now in our power? I may be the favorite of your father, it is true; but can it
ever be thought, that his present kindness to a supposed child, will continue
to a known deceiver?


LEONTINE. I have many reasons to believe it will. As his attachments are but
few, they are lasting. His own marriage was a private one, as ours may be.
Besides, I have sounded him already at a distance, and find all his answers
exactly to our wish. Nay, by an expression or two that dropped from him, I am
induced to think he knows of this affair.


OLIVIA. Indeed! But that would be an happiness too great to be expected.


LEONTINE. However it be, I Am certain you have power over him; and am
persuaded, if you informed him of our situation, that he would be disposed to
pardon it.


OLIVIA. You had equal expectations, Leontine, from your last scheme with Miss
Richland, which you find has succeeded most wretchedly.


LEONTINE. And that is the best reason for trying another.


OLIVIA. If it must be so, I submit.


LEONTINE. As we could wish, he comes this way. Now, my dearest Olivia, be
resolute. I Will just retire within hearing, to come in at a proper time, either
to share your danger, or confirm your victory.

[Exit.
Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Yes, I must forgive her; and yet not too easily,
neither. It will be proper to keep up the decorums of resentment a little, if
it be only to impress her with an idea of my authority.


OLIVIA. How I tremble to approach him! -- Might I presume, Sir -- If I
interrupt you --


CROAKER. No, child, where I have an affection, it is not a little thing that
can interrupt me. Affection gets over little things.


OLIVIA. Sir, you're too kind. I Am sensible how ill I deserve this partiality.
Yet, heaven knows, there is nothing I would not do to gain it.


CROAKER. And you have but too well succeeded, you little hussy, you. With
those endearing ways of yours, on my conscience, I could be brought to forgive
any thing, unless it were a very great offense indeed.


OLIVIA. But mine is such an offense -- When you know my guilt -- Yes, you
shall know it, though I feel the greatest pain in the confession.


CROAKER. Why then, if it be so very great a pain, you may spare yourself the
trouble; for I know every syllable of the matter before you begin.


OLIVIA. Indeed! Then I Am undone.


CROAKER. Ay, miss, you wanted to steal a match, without letting me know it,
did you? But, I Am not worth being consulted, I suppose, when there is to be a
marriage in my own family. No, I Am to have no hand in the disposal of my own
children. No, I Am nobody. I Am to be a mere article of family lumbe; a piece of
cracked china to be stuck up in a corner.


OLIVIA. Dear Sir, nothing but the dread of your authority could induce us to
conceal it from you.


CROAKER. No, no, my consequence is no more; I Am as little minded as a dead
Russian in winter, just stuck up with a pipe in his mouth till there comes a
thaw -- It goes to my heart to vex her. (Aside.)


OLIVIA. I was prepared, Sir, for your anger, and despaired of pardon, even
while I presume to ask it. But your severity shall never abate my affection, as
my punishment is but justice.


CROAKER. And yet you should not despair neither, Livy. We ought to hope all
for the best.


OLIVIA. And do you permit me to hope, Sir? Can I ever expect to be forgiven?
But hope has too long deceived me.


CROAKER. Why then, child, it shall not deceive you now, for I forgive you this
very moment. I forgive you all; and now you are indeed my daughter.


OLIVIA. O transport! This kindness overpowers me.


CROAKER. I was always against severity to our children. We have been young and
giddy ourselves, and we cannot expect boys and girls to be old before their time.


OLIVIA. What generosity! But can you forget the many falsehoods, the
dissimulation --


CROAKER. You did indeed dissemble, you urchin you; but where is the girl that
will not dissemble for an husband? My wife and I had never been married, if we had
not dissembled a little beforehand.


OLIVIA. It shall be my future care never to put such generosity to a second
trial. And as for the partner of my offense and folly, from his native honor,
and the just sense he has of his duty, I can answer for him that --


Enter LEONTINE. LEONTINE. Permit him thus to answer for himself. (Kneeling.)
Thus, Sir, let me speak my gratitude for this unmerited forgiveness. Yes, Sir,
this even exceeds all your former tenderness: I now can boast; the most
indulgent of fathers. The life he gave, compared to this, was but a trifling
blessing.


CROAKER. And, good Sir, who sent for you, with that fine tragedy face, and
flourishing manner? I don't know what we have to do with your gratitude upon
this occasion.


LEONTINE. How, Sir! Is it possible to be silent, when so much obliged! Would
you refuse me the pleasure of being grateful! of adding my thanks to my
Olivia's! of sharing in the transports that you have thus occasioned?


CROAKER. Lord, Sir, we can be happy enough, without your coming in to make up
the party. I don't know what is the matter with the boy all this day; he has got
into such a rhodomontade manner all this morning!


LEONTINE. But, Sir, I that have so large a part in the benefit, is it not my
duty to show my joy? is the being admitted to your favor so slight an
obligation? is the happiness of marrying my Olivia so small a blessing?


CROAKER. Marrying Olivia! marrying Olivia! marrying his own sister! Sure the
boy is out of his senses. His own sister!


LEONTINE. My sister!


OLIVIA. Sister! How have I been mistaken! [Aside.


LEONTINE. Some cursed mistake in all this I find. [Aside.


CROAKER. What does the booby mean? or has he any meaning? Eh, what do you
mean, you blockhead you?


LEONTINE. Mean, Sir -- why, Sir -- only when my sister is to be married; that
I have the pleasure of marrying her, Sir, that is, of giving her away, Sir -- I
have made a point of it.


CROAKER. O, is that all. Give her away. You have made a point of it. Then yon
had as good make a point of first giving away yourself, as I Am going to prepare
the writings between you and Miss Richland this very minute. What a fuss is
here about nothing! Why, what is the matter now? I thought I had made you at
least as happy as you could wish.


OLIVIA. O! yes, Sir, very happy.


CROAKER. Do you foresee any thing, child? You look as if you did. I think if
any thing was to be foreseen, I have as sharp a look out as another: and yet I
foresee nothing.


[Exit. LEONTINE, OLIVIA. OLIVIA. What can it mean?


LEONTINE. He knows something, and yet for my life I cannot tell what.


OLIVIA. It cannot be the connection between us, I Am pretty certain.


LEONTINE. Whatever it be, my dearest, I Am resolved to put it out of fortune's
power to repeat our mortification. I Will haste and prepare for our journey to
Scotland this very evening. My friend Honeywood has promised me his advice and
assistance. I Will go to him, and repose our distresses on his friendly bosom:
and I know so much of his honest heart, that if he cannot relieve our
uneasiness, he will at least share them.


[Exeunt. ACT THE THIRD.
SCENE, Young HONEYWOOD'S House. BAILIFF, HONEYWOOD, FOLLOWER. BAILIFF. LOOKEY,
Sir, I have arrested as good men as you in my time: no disparagement of you
neither. Men that would go forty guineas on a game of cribbage. I challenge the
town to show a man in more genteeler practice than myself.


HONEYWOOD. Without all question, Mr. --. I forget your name, Sir?


BAILIFF. How can you forget what you never knew; he! he! he!


HONEYWOOD. May I beg leave to ask your name?


BAILIFF. Yes, you may.


HONEYWOOD. Then, pray, Sir, what is your name, Sir?


BAILIFF. That I didn't promise to tell you. He! he! he! A joke breaks no
bones, as we say among us that practice the law.


HONEYWOOD. You may have reason for keeping it a secret, perhaps?


BAILIFF. The law does nothing without reason. I Am ashamed to tell my name to
no man, Sir. If you can show cause, as why, upon a special capus, that I should
prove my name -- But, come, Timothy Twitch is my name. And, now you know my
name, what have you to say to that?


HONEYWOOD. Nothing in the world, good Mr. Twitch, but that I have a favor to
ask, that is all.


BAILIFF. Ay, favors are more easily asked than granted, as we say among us
that practice the law. I have taken an oath against granting favors. Would you
have me perjure myself?


HONEYWOOD. But my request will come recommended in so strong a manner, as, I
believe, you will have no scruple (pulling out his purse) The thing is only this:
I believe I shall be able to discharge this trifle in two or three days at
farthest; but as I would not have the affair known for the world, I have
thoughts of keeping you, and your good friend here, about me till the debt is
discharged; for which I shall be properly grateful.


BAILIFF. Oh? that is another maxum, and altogether within my oath. For certain,
if an honest man is to get any thing by a thing, there is no reason why all
things should not be done in civility.


HONEYWOOD. Doubtless, all trades must live, Mr. Twitch; and yours is a
necessary one. (Gives him money.)


BAILIFF. Oh! your honor; I hope your honor takes nothing amiss as I does, as
I does nothing but my duty in so doing. I Am sure no man can say I ever give a
gentleman, that was a gentleman, ill usage. If I saw that a gentleman was a
gentleman, I have taken money not to see him for ten weeks together.


HONEYWOOD. Tenderness is a virtue, Mr. Twitch.


BAILIFF. Ay, Sir, it is a perfect treasure. I love to see a gentleman with a
tender heart. I don't know, but I think I have a tender heart myself. If all
that I have lost by my heart was put together, it would make a -- but no matter
for that.


HONEYWOOD. Don't account it lost, Mr. Twitch. The Ingratitude of the world can
never deprive us of the conscious happiness of having acted with humanity
ourselves.


BAILIFF. Humanity, Sir, is a jewel. It Is better than gold. I love humanity.
People may say, that we, in our way, have no humanity; but I Will show yon my
humanity this moment. There Is my follower here, little Flanigan, with a wife
and four children, a guinea or two would be more to him, than twice as much to
another. Now, as I cannot show him any humanity myself, I must beg leave you will
do it for me.


HONEYWOOD. I assure you, Mr. Twitch, yours is a most powerful recommendation.
(Giving money to the follower.)


BAILIFF. Sir, you're a gentleman. I see you know what to do with your money.
But, to business: we are to be with you here as your friends, I suppose. But
set in case company comes. -- Little Flanigan here, to be sure, has a good
face; a very good face: but then, he is a little seedy, as we say among us that
practice the law. Not well in clothes. Smoke the pocket-holes.


HONEYWOOD. Well, that shall be remedied without delay.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Sir, Miss Richland is below.


HONEYWOOD. How unlucky! Detain her a moment. We must improve my good friend,
little Mr. Flanigan's appearance first. Here, let Mr. Flanigan have a suit of
my clothes -- quick -- the brown and silver -- Do you hear?


SERVANT. That your honor gave away to the begging gentleman that makes
verses, because it was as good as new.


HONEYWOOD. The white and gold then.


SERVANT. That, your honor, I made bold to sell, because it was good for
nothing.


HONEYWOOD. Well, the first that comes to hand then. The blue and gold then. I
believe Mr. Flanigan will look best in blue.


[Exit Flanigan. BAILIFF. Rabbit me, but little Flanigan will look well in any
thing. Ah, if your honor knew that bit of flesh as well as I do, you would be
perfectly in love with him. There Is not a prettier scout in the four counties
after a shy-cock than he: scents like a hound; sticks like a weazle. He was
master of the ceremonies to the black queen of Morocco, when I took him to
follow me. (Re-enter Flanigan.) Heh, ecod, I think he looks so well, that I
don't care if I have a suit from the same place for myself.


HONEYWOOD. Well, well, I hear the lady coming. Dear Mr. Twitch, I beg you will
give your friend directions not to speak. As for yourself, I know you will say
nothing without being directed.


BAILIFF. Never you fear me; I Will show the lady that I have something to say
for myself as well as another. One man has one way of talking, and another man
has another, that is all the difference between them.


Enter Miss RICHLAND and her MAID. Miss RICHLAND. You Will be surpised, Sir,
with this visit. But you know I Am yet to thank you for choosing my little
library.


HONEYWOOD. Thanks, madam, are unnecessary; as it was I that was obliged by
your commands. Chairs here. Two of my very Good friends, Mr. Twitch and Mr.
Flanigan. Pray, gentlemen, sit without ceremony.


Miss RICHLAND. Who can these odd-looking men be! I fear it is as I was
informed. It must be so. (Aside.)


BAILIFF, after a Pause. Pretty weather, very pretty weather for the time of
the year, madam.


FOLLOWER. Very good circuit weather in the country.


HONEYWOOD. You officers are generally favorites among the ladies. My friends,
madam, have been upon very disagreeable duty, I assure you. The fair should, in
some measure, recompense the toils of the brave!


Miss RICHLAND. Our officers do indeed deserve every favor. The gentlemen are
in the marine service, I presume, Sir?


HONEYWOOD. Why, madam, they do -- occasionally serve in the fleet, madam. A
dangerous service!


Miss RICHLAND. I Am told so. And I own, it has often surprised me, that while
we have had so many instances of bravery there, we have had so few of wit at
home to praise it.


HONEYWOOD. I grant, madam, that our poets have not written as our soldiers
have fought; but they have done all they could, and Hawke or Amherst could do
do more.


Miss RICHLAND. I Am quite displeased when I see a fine subject spolied by a
dull writer.


HONEYWOOD. We should not be so severe against dull writers, madam. It is ten
to one, but the dullest writer exceeds the most rigid French critic who
presumes to despise him.


FOLLOWER. Damn the French, the parle vous, and all that belongs to them.


Miss RICHLAND. Sir!


HONEYWOOOD. Ha, ha, ha! honest Mr. Flanigan. A true English officer, madam;
he is not contented with beating the French, but he will scold them too.


Miss RICHLAND. Yet, Mr. Honeywood, this does not convince me but that severity
in criticism is necessary. It was our first adopting the severity of French
taste, that has brought them in turn to taste us.


BAILIFF. Taste us! By the Lord, madam, they devour us. Give monseers but a
taste, and I Will be damned but they come in for a bellyful.


Miss RICHLAND. Very extraordinary this!


FOLLOWER. But very true. What makes the bread rising? the parle vous that
devour us. What makes the mutton fivepence a pound? the parle vous that eat it
up. What makes the beer threepence-halfpenny a pot? --


HONEYWOOD. Ah! the vulgar rogues; all will be out. (Aside.) Right, gentlemen,
very right, upon my word, and quite to the purpose. They draw a parallel,
madam, between the mental taste and that of our senses. We are injured as much
by French severity in the one, as by French rapacity in the other. That Is their
meaning.


Miss RICHLAND. Though I don't see the force of the parallel, yet, I Will own,
that we should sometimes pardon books, as we do our friends, that have now and
then agreeable absurdities to recommend them.


BAILIFF. That Is all my eye. The king only can pardon, as the laws says: for,
set in case --


HONEYWOOD. I Am quite of your opinion, Sir. I see the whole drift of your
argument. Yes, certainly, our presuming to pardon any work, is arrogating a
power that belongs to a another. If all have power to condemn, what writer can
be free?


BRILIFF. By his habus corpus. His habus corpus can set him free at any time:
for, set in case --


HONEYWOOD. I Am obliged to you, Sir, for the hint. If, madam as my friend
observes, our laws are so careful of a gentleman's person, sure we ought to be
equally careful of his dearer part, his fame.


FOLLOWER. Ay, but if so be a man's nabb'd, you know --


HONEYWOOD. Mr. Flanigan, if you spoke for ever, you could not improve the last
observation. For my own part, I think it conclusive.


BAILIFF. As for. the matter of that, mayhap --


HONEYWOOD. Nay, Sir, give me leave in this instance to be positive. For, where
is the necessity of censuring works without genius, which must shortly sink of
themselves? what is it, but aiming our unnecessary blow against a victim
already under the hands of justice?


BAILIFF. Justice! O, by the elevens, if you talk about justice, I think I am
at home there: for, in a course of law --


HONEYWOOD. My dear Mr. Twitch, I discern what you would be at perfectly; and I
believe the lady must be sensible of the art with which it is introduced. I
suppose you perceive the meaning, madam of his course of law.


Miss RICHLAND. I protest, Sir, I do not. I perceive only that you answer one
gentleman before he has finished, and the other before he has well begun.


BAILIFF. Madam, you are a gentlewoman, and I will make the matter out. This
here question is about severity and justice, and pardon, and the like of they.
Now to explain the thing --


HONEYWOOD. O! curse your explanations. [Aside.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Mr. Leontine, Sir, below, desires to speak with you
upon earnest business.


HONEYWOOD. That Is lucky. (Aside.) Dear madam, you will excuse me and my good
friends here, for a few minutes. There are books, madam, to amuse you. Come,
gentlemen, you know I make no ceremony with such friends. After you, Sir.
Excuse me. Well, if I must. But I know your natural politeness.


BAILIFF. Before and behind, you know.


FOLLOWER. Ay, ay, before and behind, before and behind.


[Exeunt Honeywood, Bailiff, and Follower. Miss RICHLAND. What can all this
mean, Garnet?


GARNET. Mean, madam! why, what should it mean, but what Mr. Lofty sent you
here to see! These people he calls officers are officers sure enough: sheriff's
officers; bailiffs, madam.


Miss RICHLAND. Ay, it is certainly so. Well, though his perplexities are far
from giving me pleasure, yet I own there is something very ridiculous in them,
and a just punishment for his dissimulation.


GARNET. And so they are. But I wonder, madam, that the lawyer you just
employed to pay his debts, and set him free, has not done it by this time. He
ought at least to have been here before now. But lawyers are always more ready
to get a man into troubles, than out of them.


Enter Sir WILLIAM. Sir WILLIAM. For Miss Richland to undertake setting him
free, I own, was quite unexpected. It has totally unhinged my schemes to
reclaim him. Yet, it gives me pleasure to find, that, among a number of
worthless friendships, he has made one acquisition of real value; for there
must be some softer passion on her side that prompts this generosity. Ha! here
before me: I Will endeavor to sound her affections. Madam, as I am the person
that have had some demands upon the gentleman of this house, I hope you will
excuse me, if, before I enlarged him, I wanted to see yourself.


Miss RICHLAND. The precaution was very unnecessary, Sir. I suppose your wants
were only such as my agent had power to satisfy.


Sir WILLIAM. Partly, madam. But, I was also willing you should be fully
apprized of the character of the gentleman you intended to serve.


Miss RICHLAND. It must come, sir, with a very ill grace from you. To censure
it, after what you have done, would look like malice; and, to speak favorably
of a character you have oppressed, would be impeaching your own. And sure, his
tenderness, his humanity, his universal friendship, may atone for many faults.


Sir WILLIAM. That friendship, madam, which is exerted in too wide a sphere,
becomes totally useless. Our bounty, like a drop of water, disappears when
diffused too widely. They, who pretend most to this universal benevolence, are
either deceivers, or dupes. Men who desire to cover their private ill nature,
by a pretended regard for all; or, men who, reasoning themselves into false
feelings, are more earnest in pursuit of splendid, than of useful virtues.


Miss RICHLAND. I am surprised, Sir, to hear one, who has probably been a
gainer by the folly of others, so severe in his censure of it.


Sir WILLIAM. Whatever I may have gained by folly, madam, you see I am willing
to prevent your losing by it.


Miss RICHLAND. You cares for me, Sir, are unnecessary. I always suspect those
services which are denied where they are wanted, and offered, perhaps, in hopes
of a refusal. No, Sir, my directions have been given, and I insist upon their
being complied with.


Sir WILLIAM. Thou amiable woman! I can no longer contain the expressions of my
gratitude: my pleasure. You see before you one, who has been equally careful of
his interest; one, who has for some time been a concealed spectator of his
follies, and only punished, in hopes to reclaim them -- his uncle!


Miss RICHLAND. Sir William Honeywood! You amaze me. How shall I conceal my
confusion? I fear, Sir, you will think I have been too forward in my services. I
confess I --


Sir WILLIAM. Don't make any apologies, madam. I only find myself unable to
repay the obligation. And yet, I have been trying my interest of late to serve
you. Having learnt, madam, that you had some demands upon government, I have,
though unasked, been your solicitor there.


Miss RICHLAND. Sir, I Am infinitely obliged to your intentions. But my guardian
has employed another gentleman who assures him of success.


Sir WILLIAM. Who, the important little man that visits here? Trust me, madam,
he is quite contemptible among men in power, and utterly unable to serve you.
Mr. Lofty's promises are much better known to people of fashion, than his
person, I assure you.


Miss RICHLAND. How have we been deceived! As sure as can be, here he comes.


Sir WILLIAM. Does he! Remember I Am to continue unknown. My return to England
has not as yet been made public. With what impudence he enters!


Enter LOFTY. LOFTY. Let the chariot -- let my chariot drive off; I Will visit to
his grace's in a chair. Miss Richland here before me! Punctual, as usual, to
the calls of humanity. I Am very sorry, madam, things of this kind should
happen, especially to a man I have shown every where, and carried amongst us as
a particular acquaintance.


Miss RICHLAND. I find, Sir, you have the art of making the misfortunes of
others your own.


LOFTY. My dear madam, what can a private man like me do? One man cannot do
every thing; and then, I do so much in this way every day: let me see;
something considerable might be done for him by subscription; it could not fail
if I carried the list. I Will undertake to set down a brace of dukes, two dozen
lords, and half the lower house, at my own peril.


Sir WILLIAM. And, after all, it is more than probable, Sir, he might reject the
offer of such powerful patronage.


LOFTY. Then, madam, what can we do? You know I never make promises. In truth,
I once or twice tried to do something with him in the way of business; but, as
I often told his uncle, Sir William Honeywood, the man was utterly
impracticable.


Sir WILLIAM. His uncle! Then that gentleman, I suppose, is a particular friend
of yours.


LOFTY. Meaning me, Sir? -- Yes, madam, as I often said, my dear Sir William,
you are sensible I would do any thing, as far as my poor interest goes, to
serve your family: but what can be done? there is no procuring first-rate places
for ninth-rate abilities.


Miss RICHLAND. I have heard of Sir William Honeywood; he is abroad in
employment: he confided in your judgment, I suppose.


LOFTY. Why, yes, madam, I believe Sir William had some reason to confide in my
Judgment; one little reason, perhaps.


Miss RICHLAND. Pray, Sir, What was it?


LOFTY. Why, madam -- but let it go no further -- it was I procured him his
place.


Sir WILLIAM. Did you, Sir?


LOFTY. Either you or I, Sir,


Miss RICHLAND. This, Mr. Lofty, was very kind indeed.


LOFTY. I did love him, to be sure; he had some amusing qualities; no man was
fitter to be toast-master to a club, or had a better head.


Miss RICHLAND. A better head?


LOFTY. Ay, at a bottle. To be sure, he was as dull as a choice spirit: but
hand it, he was grateful, very grateful; and gratitude hides a multitude of
faults.


Sir WILLIAM. He might have reason, perhaps. His place is pretty considerable,
I Am told.


LOFTY. A trifle, a mere trifle, among us men of business. The truth is, he
wanted dignity to fill up a greater.


Sir WILLIAM. Dignity of person, do you mean, Sir? I Am told he is much about my
size and figure, Sir.


LOFTY. Ay, tall enough for a marching regiment; but then he wanted a something
-- a consequence of form -- a kind of a -- I believe the lady perceives my
meaning.


Miss RICHLAND. O, perfectly: you courtiers can do any thing, I see.


LOFTY. My dear madam, all this is but a mere exchange: we do greater things
for one another every day. Why, as thus, now: let me suppose you the first lord
of the treasury; you have an employment in you that I want; I have a place in
me that you want! do me here, do you there: interest of both sides, few words,
flat, done and done, and its over.


Sir WILLIAM. A thought strikes me. (Aside.) Now you mention Sir William
Honeywood, madam; and as he seems, Sir, an acquaintance of yours; you will be
glad to hear he is arrived from Italy; I had it from a friend who knows him as
well as he does me, and you may depend on my information.


LOFTY. The devil he is! If I had known that, we should not have been quite so
well acquainted. (Aside.)


Sir WILLIAM. He is certainly returned; and, as this gentleman is a friend of
yours, he can be of signal service to us, by introducing me to him; there are
some papers relative to your affairs, that require dispatch and his inspection.


Miss RICHLAND. This gentleman, Mr. Lofty, is a person employed in my affairs:
I know you will serve us.


LOFTY. My dear madam, I live but to serve you. Sir William shall even wait
upon him, if you think proper to command it.


Sir WILLIAM. That would be quite unnecessary.


LOFTY. Well, we must introduce you then. Call upon me -- let me see -- ay, in
two days.


Sir WILLIAM. Now, or the opportunity will be lost for ever.


LOFTY. Well, if it must be now, now let it be. But damn it, that is
unfortunate; my lord Grig's cursed Pensacola business comes on this very hour,
and I Am engaged to attend -- another time --


Sir WILLIAM. A short letter to Sir William will do.


LOFTY. You shall have it; yet, in my opinion, a letter is a very bad way of
going to work; face to face, that is my way.


Sir WILLIAM. The letter, Sir, will do quite as well.


LOFTY. Zounds! Sir, do you pretend to direct me; direct me in the business of
office? Do you know me, Sir? who am I?


Miss RICHLAND. Dear Mr. Lofty, this request is not so much his as mine; if my
commands -- but you despise my power.


LOFTY. Delicate creature! your commands could even control a debate at
midnight: to a power so constitutional, I am all obedience and tranquillity. He
shall have a letter; where is my secretary! Dubardieu! And yet, I protest I
don't like this way of doing business. I think if I spoke first to Sir William
-- But you will have it so.

[Exit with Miss Richland.
Sir WILLIAM, alone. Ha, ha, ha! This too is one of my nephew's hopeful
associates. O vanity, thou constant deceiver, how do all thy efforts to exalt,
serve but to sink us! Thy false colorings, like those employed, to heighten
beauty, only seem to mend that bloom which they contribute to destroy. I Am not
displeased at this interview: exposing this fellow's impudence to the contempt
it deserves, may be of use to my design; at least, if he can reflect, it will
be of use to himself.


Enter JARVIS. Sir WILLIAM. How now, Jarvis, where is your master, my nephew?


JARVIS. At his wit's end, I believe: he is scarce gotten out of one scrape, but
he is running his head into another.


Sir WILLIAM. How so?


JARVIS. The house has but just been cleared of the bailiffs, and now he is
again engaging tooth and nail in assisting old Croaker's son to patch up a
clandestine match with the young lady that passes in the house for his sister.


Sir WILLIAM. Ever busy to serve others.


JARVIS. Aye, any body but himself. The young couple, it seems, are just
setting out for Scotland; and he supplies them with money for the Journey.


Sir WILLIAM. Money! how is he able to supply others, who has scarce any for
himself?


JARVIS. Why, there it is: he has no money, that is true; but then, as he never
said no to any request in his life, he has given them a bill, drawn by a friend
of his upon a merchant in the city, which I am to get changed; for you must
know that I am to go with them to Scotland myself.


Sir WILLIAM. How!


JARVIS. It seems the young gentleman is obliged to take a different road from
his mistress, as he is to call upon an uncle of his that lives out of the way,
in order to prepare a place fore their reception, when they return; so they
have borrowed me from my master, as the properest person to attend the young
lady down.


Sir WILLIAM. To the land of matrimony! A pleasant journey, Jarvis.


JARVIS. Ay, but I Am only to have all the fatigues on it.


Sir WILLIAM. Well, it may be shorter, and less fatiguing, than you imagine. I
know but too much of the young lady's family and connections, whom I have seen
abroad. I have also discovered that Miss Richland is not indifferent to my
thoughtless nephew; and will endeavor, thought I fear, in vain, to establish
that connection. But, come, the litter I wait for muft be almost finished; I Will
let you further into my intentions, in the next room.


[Exeunt. ACT THE FOURTH.
SCENE, CROAKER'S House. LOFTY. WELL, sure the devil's in me of late, for
running my head into such defiles, as nothing but a genius like my own could
draw me from. I was formerly contented to husband out my places and pensions
with some degree of frugality; but, curse it, of late I have given away the
whole Court Register in less time than they could print the title page: yet,
hang it, why scruple a lie or two to come at a fine girl, when I every day tell
a thousand for nothing. Ha! Honeywood here before me. Could Miss Richland have
set him at liberty?

Enter HONEYWOOD. Mr. Honeywood, I Am glad to see you abroad again. I find my
concurrence was not necessary in your unfortunate affairs. I had put things in
a train to do your business; but it is not for me to say what I intended doing.


HONEYWOOD. It was unfortunate indeed, Sir. But what adds to my uneasiness is,
that while you seem to be acquainted with my misfortune, I, myself, continue
still a stranger to my benefactor.


LOFTY. How! not know the friend that served you?


HONEYWOOD. Cannot guess at the person.


LOFTY. Inquire.


HONEYWOOD. I have; but all I can learn is, that he chooses to remain concealed,
and that all inquiry must be fruitless.


LOFTY. Must be fruitless?


HONEYWOOD. Absolutely fruitless.


LOFTY. Sure of that?


HONEYWOOD. Very sure.


LOFTY. Then I Will be damned if you shall ever know it from me.


HONEYWOOD. How, Sir!


LOFTY. I suppose now, Mr. Honeywood, you think my rent-roll very considerable,
and that I have vast sums of money to throw away; I know you do. The world to
be sure says such things of me.


HONEYWOOD. The world, by what I learn, is no stranger to your generosity. But
where does this tend?


LOFTY. To nothing; nothing in the world. The town, to be sure, when it makes
such a thing as me the subject of conversation, has asserted, that I never yet
patronized a man of merit.


HONEYWOOD. I have heard instances to the contrary, even from yourself.


LOFTY. Yes, Honeywood, and there are instances to the contrary, that you shall
never hear from myself.


HONEYWOOD. Ha! dear Sir, permit me to ask you but one question.


LOFTY. Sir, ask me no questions: I say, Sir, ask me no questions; I Will be
damned, if I answer them.


HONEYWOOD. I will ask no further. My friend! my benefactor, it is, it must be
here, that I am indebted for freedom, for honor. Yes, thou worthiest of men,
from the beginning I suspected it, but was afraid to return thanks; which, if
undeserved, might seem reproaches.


LOFTY. I protest I don't understand all this, Mr. Honeywood. You treat me very
cavalierly. I do assure you, Sir. -- Blood, Sir, cannot a man be permitted to
enjoy the luxury of his own feelings, without all this parade?


HONEYWOOD. Nay, do not attempt to conceal an action that adds to your honor.
Your looks, your air, your manner, all confess it.


LOFTY. Confess it, Sir! Torture itself, Sir, shall never bring me to confess
it. Mr. Honeywood, I have admitted you upon terms of friendship. Don't let us
fall out; make me happy, and let this be buried in oblivion. You know I hate
ostentation; you know I do. Come, come, Honeywood, you know I always loved to
be a friend, and not a patron. I beg this may make no kind of distance between
us. Come, come, you and I must be more familiar -- Indeed we must.


HONEYWOOD. Heavens! Can I ever repay such friendship! Is there any way! Thou
best of men, can I ever return the obligation?


LOFTY. A bagatelle, a mere bagatelle! But I see your heart is laboring to be
grateful. You shall be grateful. It would be cruel to disappoint you.


HONEYWOOD. How! teach me the manner. Is there any way?


LOFTY. From this moment you're mine. yes, my friend, you shall know it -- I Am
in love.


HONEYWOOD. And can I assist you?


LOFTY. Nobody so well.


HONEYWOOD. In what manner. I Am all impatience.


LOFTY. You shall make love for me.


HONEYWOOD. And to whom shall I speak in your favor?


LOFTY. To a lady with whom you have great interest, I assure you: Miss
Richland.


HONEYWOOD. Miss Richland!


LOFTY. Yes, Miss Richland. She has struck the blow un to the hilt in my bosom,
by Jupiter.


HONEYWOOD. Heavens! was ever any thing more unfortunate! It is too much to be
endured.


LOFTY. Unfortunate indeed! And yet I can endure it, till you have opened the
affair to her for me. Between ourselves, I think she likes me. I Am not apt to
boast, but I think she does.


HONEYWOOD. Indeed! But, do you know the person you apply to?


LOFTY. Yes, I know you are her friend and mine: that is enough. To you,
therefore, I commit the success of my paffion. I Will say no more, let friendship
do the rest. I have only to add, that if at any time my little interest can be
of service -- but, hang it, I Will make no promises -- you know my interest is
yours at any time. No apologies, my friend, I Will not be answered, it shall be
so.

[Exit.
HONEYWOOD. Open, generous, unsuspecting man! He little thinks that I love her
too; and with such an ardent passion! -- But then it was ever but a vain and
hopeless one; my torment, my persecution! What shall I do! Love, friendship, an
hopeless passion, a deserving friend! Love, that has been my tormentor; a
friend, that has, perhaps, distressed himself, to serve me. It shall be so.
Yes, I will discard the fondling hope from my bosom, and exert all my influence
in his favor. And yet to see her in the possession of another! --
Insupportable! But then to betray a generous, trusting friend! -- Worse, worse!
Yes, I Am resolved. Let me but be the instrument of their happiness, and then
quit a country, where I must for ever despair of finding my own.

[Exit.
Enter OLIVIA, and GARNET, who carries a Milliner's Box. OLIVIA. Dear me, I
wish this journey were over. No news of Jarvis yet? I believe the old peevish
creature delays purely to vex me.


GARNET. Why, to be sure, madam, I did hear him say, a little snubbing, before
marriage, would teach you to bear it the better afterward.


OLIVIA. To be gone a full hour, though he had only to get a bill changed in
the city! How provoking!


GARNET. I Will lay my life, Mr. Leontine, that had twice as much to do, is
setting off by this time from his inn; and here you are left behind.


OLIVIA. Well, let us be prepared for his coming, however. Are you sure you
have omitted nothing, Garnet?


GARNET. Not a stick, madam -- all is here. Yet I wish you could take the white
and silver to be married in. It Is the worst luck in the world, in any thing but
white. I knew one Bett Stubbs, of our town, that was married in red; and, as
sure as eggs is eggs, the bridegroom and she had a miff before morning.


OLIVIA. No matter. I Am all impatience till we are out of the house.


GARNET. Bless me, madam, I had almost forgot the wedding-ring! -- The sweet
little thing -- I don't think it would go on my little finger. And what if I
put in a gentleman's nightcap, in case of necessity, madam? But here is Jarvis.


Enter JARVIS. OLIVIA. O, Jarvis, are you come at last? We have been ready this
half hour. Now let us be going. Let us fly!


JARVIS. Aye, to Jericho; for we shall have no going to Scotland this bout, I
fancy.


OLIVIA. How! What Is the matter?


JARVIS. Money, money, is the matter, madam. We have got no money. What the
plague do you send me of your fool's errand for? My master's bill upon the city
is not worth a rush. Here it is; Mrs. Garnet may pin up her hair with it.


OLIVIA. Undone! How could Honeywood serve us so! What shall we do? Cannot we go
without it?


JARVIS. Go to Scotland without money! To Scotland without money! Lord how some
people understand geography! We might as well set sail for Patagonia upon a
cork jacket.


OLIVIA. Such a disappointment! What a base insincere man was your master, to
serve us in this manner? Is this his good nature?


JARVIS. Nay, don't talk ill of my master, madam. I will not bear to hear any body
talk ill of him but myself.


GARNET. Bless us! now I think on it, madam, you need not be under any
uneasiness: I saw Mr. Leontine receive forty guineas from his father just
before he set out, and he cannot yet have left the inn. A short letter will
reach him there.


OLIVIA. Well remembered, Garnet; I Will write immediately. How Is this! Bless me,
my hand trembles so, I cannot write a word. Do you write, Garnet; and, upon
second thought, it will be better from you.


GARNET. Truly, madam, I write and indite but poorly. I never was kute at my
larning. But I Will do what I can to please you. Let me see. All out of my own
head, I suppose?


OLIVIA. Whatever you please.


GARNET. (Writing.) Muster Croaker -- Twenty guineas, madam?


OLIVIA. Aye, twenty will do.


GARNET. At the bar of the Talbot till called for. Expedition -- Will be blown
up -- All of a flame -- Quick dispatch -- Cupid, the little god of love -- I
conclude it, madam, with Cupid; I love to see a love-letter end like poetry.


OLIVIA. Well, well, what you please, any thing. But how shall we send it? I
can trust none of the servants of this family.


GARNET. Odso, madam, Mr. Honeywood's butler is in the next room: he is a dear,
sweet man; he will do any thing for me.


JARVIS. He! the dog, he will certainly commit some blunder. He Is drunk and sober
ten times a day.


OLIVIA. No matter. Fly, Garnet: any body we can trust will do. [Exit Garnet.]
Well, Jarvis, now we can have nothing more to interrupt us. You may take up the
things, and carry them on to the inn. Have you no hands, Jarvis?


JARVIS. Soft and fair, young lady. You, that are going to be married, think
things can never be done too fast: but, we, that are old, and know what we are
about, must elope methodically, madam.


OLIVIA. Well, sure, if my indiscretions were to be done over again --


JARVIS. My life for it, you would do them ten times over.


OLIVIA. Why will you talk so? If you knew how unhappy they make me --


JARVIS. Very unhappy, no doubt: I was once just as unhappy when I was going to
be married myself. I Will tell you a story about that --


OLIVIA. A story! when I Am all impatience to be away. Was there ever such a
dilatory creature! --


JARVIS. Well, madam, if we must march, why we will march; that is all. Though,
odds bobs, we have still forgot one thing we should never travel without -- a
case of good razors, and a box of shavingpowder. But no matter, I believe we
shall be pretty well shaved by the way.

[Going.
Enter GARNET. GARNIST. Undone, undone, madam. Ah, Mr. Jarvis, you said right
enough. As sure as death Mr. Honeywood's rogue of a drunken butler, dropped the
letter before he went ten yards from the door. There Is old Croaker has just
picked it up, and is this moment reading it to himself in the hall.


OLIVIA. Unfortunate! We shall be discovered.


GARNET. No, madam: don't be uneasy, he can make neither head nor tail of it.
To be sure he looks as if he was broke loose from Bedlam about it, but he cannot
find what it means for all that. O lud, he is coming this way all in the
horrors!


OLIVIA. Then let us leave the house this instant, for fear he should ask
farther questions. In the mean time, Garnet, do you write and send off just
such another.


[Exeunt. Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Death and destruction! Are all the horrors of
air, fire and water to be levelled only at me! Am I only to be singled out for
gunpowder-plots, combustibles and conflagration! Here it is -- An incendiary
letter dropped at my door. "To muster Croaker, these, with speed." Aye, aye,
plain enough the direction: all in the genuine incendiary spelling, and as
cramp as the devil. "With speed." O, confound your speed. But let me read it
once more. (Reads.) "Muster Croaker as soon as yoew see this leve twenty
guineas at the bar of the Talboot tell called for or you and yower experetion
will be al blown up." Ah, but too plain. Blood and gunpowder in every line of
it. Blown up! murderous dog! All blown up! Heavens! what have I and my poor
family done, to be all blown up! (Reads.) "Our pockets are low, and money we
must have." Aye, there is the reason; they will blow us up, because they have got
low pockets. (Reads.) "It is but a short time you have to confider; for if this
takes wind, the house will quickly be all of a flame." Inhuman monsters! blow
us up, and then burn us. The earthquake at Lisbon was but a bonfire to it.
(Reads.) "Make quick dispatch, and so no more at present. But may Cupid, the
little god of love, go with you wherever you go" The little god of love! Cupid,
the little god of love go with me! Go you to the devil, you and your little
Cupid together; I Am so frightened, I scarce knew whether I fit, stand, or go.
Perhaps this moment I Am treading on lighted matches, blazing brimstone and
barrels of gunpowder. They are preparing to blow me up into the clouds. Murder!
We shall be all burnt in our beds; we shall be all burnt in our beds.


Enter Miss RICHLAND. Miss RICHLAND. Lord, Sir, what is the matter?


CROAKER. Murder's the matter. We shall be all blown up in our beds before
morning.


Miss RICHLAND. I hope not, Sir.


CROAKER. What signifies what you hope, madam, when I have a certificate of it
here in my hand? Will nothing alarm my family? Sleeping and eating, sleeping
and eating is the only work from morning till night in my house. My insensible
crew could sleep, though rocked by an earthquake; and fry beef steaks at a
volcano.


Miss RICHLAND. But, Sir, you have alarmed them so often already, we have
nothing but earthquakes, famines, plagues and mad dogs from year's end to
year's end. You remember, Sir, it is not above a month ago, you assured us of a
conspiracy among the bakers, to poison us in our bread; and so kept the whole
family a week upon potatoes.


CROAKER. And potatoes were too good for them. But why do I stand talking here
with a girl, when I should be facing the enemy without? Here, John, Nicodemus,
search the house. Look into the cellars, to see if there be any combustibles
below; and above, in the apartments, that no matches be thrown in at the
windows. Let all the fires be put out, and let the engine be drawn out in the
yard, to play upon the house in case of necessity.

[Exit.
Miss RICHLAND, alone. What can he mean by all this? Yet, why should I inquire,
when he alarms us in this manner almost every day! But Honeywood has desired an
interview with me in private. What can he mean? or, rather, what means this
palpitation at his approach? It is the first time he ever showed any thing in
his conduct that seemed particular. Sure he cannot mean to -- but he is here.


Enter HONEYWOOD. HONEYWOOD. I presumed to solicit this interview, madam,
before I left town, to be permitted --


Miss RICHLAND. Indeed! Leaving town, Sir? --


HONEYWOOD. Yes, madam; perhaps the kingdom. I have presumed, I say, to desire
the favor of this interview, -- in order to disclose something which our long
friendship prompts. And yet my fears --


Miss RICHLAND. His fears! What are his fears to mine? (Aside.) We have indeed
been long acquainted, Sir; very long. If I remember, our first meeting was at
the French ambassador's. -- Do you recollect how you were pleased to rally me
upon my complexion there?


HONEYWOOD. Perfectly, madam: I presumed to reprove you for painting: but your
warmer blushes soon convinced the company, that the coloring was all from
nature.


Miss RICHLAND. And yet you only meant it, in your good-natured way, to make me
pay a compliment to myself. In the same manner you danced that night with the
most awkward woman in company, because you saw nobody else would take her out.


HONEYWOOD. Yes; and was rewarded the next night, by dancing with the finest
woman in company, whom every body wished to take out.


Miss RICHLAND. Well, Sir, if you thought so then, I fear your judgment has
since corrected the errors of a first impression. We generally show to most
advantage at first. Our sex are like poor tradesmen, that put all their best
goods to be seen at the windows.


HONEYWOOD. The first impression, madam, did indeed deceive me. I expected to
find a woman with all the faults of conscious flattered beauty. I expected to
find, her vain and insolent. But every day has since taught me that it is
possible to possess sense without pride, and beauty without affectation.


Miss RICHLAND. This, Sir, is a style very unusual with Mr. Honeywood; and I
should be glad to know why he thus attempts to increase that vanity, which his
own lessons have taught me to despise.


HONEYWOOD. I ask pardon, madam. Yet, from our long friendship, I presumed I
might have some right to offer, without offense, what you may refuse without
offending.


Miss RICHLAND. Sir! I beg you would reflect; though, I fear, I shall scarce have
any power to refuse a request of yours; yet you may be precipitate: consider,
Sir.


HONEYWOOD. I own my rashness; but, as I plead the cause of friendship, of one
who loves -- Don't be alarmed, madam -- who loves you with the most ardent
passion, whose whole happiness is placed in you --


Miss RICHLAND. I fear, Sir, I shall never find whom you mean, by this
description of him.


HONEYWOOD. Ah, madam, it but too plainly points him out; though he should be
too humble himself to urge his pretensions, or you too modest to understand
them.


Miss RICHLAND. Well; it would be affectation any longer to pretend ignorance;
and I will own, Sir, I have long been prejudiced in his favor. It was but
natural to wish to make his heart mine, as he seemed himself ignorant of its
value.


HONEYWOOD. I see she always loved him. (Aside.) I find, madam, you're already
sensible of his worth, his passion. How happy is my friend, to be the favorite
of one with such sense to distinguish merit, and such beauty to reward it.


Miss RICHLAND. Your friend, Sir! What friend?


HONEYWOOD. My best friend -- my friend Mr. Lofty, madam.


Miss RICHLAND. He, Sir!


HONEYWOOD. Yes, he, madam. He is, indeed, what your warmest wishes might have
formed him. And to his other qualities, he adds that of the most passionate
regard for you.


Miss RICHLAND. Amazement! -- No more of this, I beg you, Sir.


HONEYWOOD. I see your confusion, madam, and know how to interpret it. And,
since I so plainly read the language of your heart, shall I make my friend
happy, by communicating your sentiments?


Miss RICHLAND. By no means.


HONEYWOOD. Excuse me; I must; I know you desire it.


Miss RICHLAND. Mr. Honeywood, let me tell you, that you wrong my sentiments
and yourself. When I first applied to your friendship, I expected advice and
assistance; but, now, Sir, I see that it is vain to expect happiness from him,
who has been so bad an oeconomist of his own; and that I must disclaim his
friendship, who ceases to be a friend to himself.

[Exit.
HONEYWOOD. How is this! she has confessed she loved him, and yet she seemed to
part in displeasure. Can I have done any thing to reproach myself with? No: I
believe not: yet, after all, these things should not be done by a third person;
I should have spared her confusion. My friendship carried me a little too far.


Enter CROAKER, with the Letter in his Hand, and Mrs. CROAKER. Mrs. CROAKER.
Ha! ha! ha! And so, my dear, it is your supreme wish that I should be quite
wretched upon this occasion? ha! ha!


CROAKER, mimicking. Ha! ha! ha! And so, my dear, it is your supreme pleasure to
give me no better consolation?


Mrs. CROAKER. Positively, my dear; what is this incendiary stuff and trumpery
to me? our house may travel through the air like the house of Loretto, for
aught I care, if I Am to be miserable in it.


CROAKER. Would to heaven it were converted into an house of correction for
your benefit. Have we not every thing to alarm us? Perhaps, this very moment
the tragedy is beginning.


Mrs. CROAKER. Then let us reserve our distress till the rising of the curtain,
or give them the money they want, and have done with them.


CROAKER. Give them my money! -- And pray, what right have they to my money?


Mrs. CROAKER. And pray, what right then have you to my good humor?


CROAKER. And so your good humor advises me to part with my money? Why then,
to tell your good humor a piece of my mind, I Would sooner part with my wife.
Here Is Mr. Honeywood, see what he will say to it. My dear Honeywood, look at this
incendiary letter dropped at my door. It will freeze you with terror; and yet
lovey here can read it -- can read it, and laugh.


Mrs. CROAKER. Yes, and so will Mr. Honeywood.


CROAKER. If he does, I Will suffer to be hanged the next minute in the rogue's
place, that is all.


Mrs. CROAKER. Speak, Mr. Honeywood; is there any thing more foolish than my
husband's fright upon this occasion?


HONEYWOOD. It would not become me to decide, madam; but doubtless, the
greatness of his terrors, now, will but invite them to renew their villainy
another time.


Mrs. CROAKER. I told you, he would be of my opinion.


CROAKER. How, Sir! do you maintain that I should lie down under such an
injury, and show, neither by my tears, or complaints, that I have something of
the spirit of a man in me?


HONEYWOOD. Pardon me, Sir. You ought to make the loudest complaints, if you
desire redress. The surest way to have redress, is to be earnest in the pursuit
of it.


CROAKER. Aye, whose opinion is he of now?


Mrs. CROAKER. But don't you think that laughing off our fears is the best way!


HONEYWOOD. What is the best, madam, few can say? but I Will maintain it to be a
very wise way.


CROAKER. But we are talking of the best. Surely the best way is to face the
enemy in the field, and not wait till he plunders us in our very bedchamber.


HONEYWOOD. Why, Sir, as to the best, that -- that is a very wise way too.


Mrs. CROAKER. But can any thing be more absurd, than to double our distresses
by our apprehensions, and put it in the power of every low fellow, that can
scrawl ten words of wretched spelling, to torment us?


HONEYWOOD. Without doubt, nothing more absurd.


CROAKER. How! would it not be more absurd to despise the rattle till we are
bit by the snake?


HONEYWOOD. Without doubt, perfectly absurd.


CROAKER. Then you are of my opinion?


HONEYWOOD. Entirely.


Mrs. CROAKER. And you reject mine?


HONEYWOOD. Heavens forbid, madam! No, sure, no reasoning can be more just than
yours. We ought' certainly to despise malice if we cannot oppose it, and not
make the incendiary's pen as fatal to our repose as the highwayman's pistol.


Mrs. CROAKER. O! then you think I Am quite right?


HONEYWOOD. Perfectly right.


CROAKER. A plague of plagues, we cannot be both right. I ought to be sorry, or
I ought to be glad. My hat must be on my head, or my hat must be off.


Mrs. CROAKER. Certainly, in two opposite opinions, if one be perfectly
reasonable, the other cannot be perfectly right.


HONEYWOOD. And why may not both be right, madam? Mr. Croaker in earnestly
seeking redress, and you in waiting the event with good humor? Pray let me see
the letter again. I have it. This letter requires twenty guineas to be left at
the bar of the Talbot inn. If it be indeed an incendiary letter, what if you
and I, Sir, go there; and, when the writer comes to be paid his expected booty,
seize him?


CROAKER. My dear friend, it is the very thing; the very thing. While I walk by
the door, you shall plant yourself in ambush near the bar; burst out upon the
miscreant like a masqued battery; extort a confession at once, and so hang him
up by surprise.


HONEYWOOD. Yes; but I would not choose to exercise too much severity. It is my
maxim, Sir, that crimes generally punish themselves.


CROAKER. Well, but we may upbraid him a little, I suppose? [Ironically.


HONEYWOOD. Aye, but not punish him too rigidly.


CROAKER. Well, well, leave that to my own benevolence.


HONEYWOOD. Well, I do: but remember that universal benevolence is the first
law of nature.


[Exeunt Honeywood and Mrs. Croaker. CROAKER. Yes; and my universal benevolence
will hang the dog, if he had as many necks as a hydra.


ACT THE FIFTH.
SCENE, an Inn. Enter OLIVIA, JARVIS. OLIVIA. WELL, we have got safe to the
Inn, however. Now, if the post-chaise were ready --


JARVIS. The horses are just finishing their oats; and, as they are not going
to be married, they choose to take their own time.


OLIVIA. You are for ever giving wrong motives to my impatience.


JARVIS. Be as impatient as you will, the horses must take their own time;
besides, you don't consider, we have got no answer from our fellow-traveller
yet. If we hear nothing from Mr. Leontine, we have only one way left us.


OLIVIA. What way?


JARVIS. The way home again.


OLIVIA. Not so. I have made a resolution to go, and nothing shall induce me to
break it.


JARVIS. Aye; resolutions are well kept, when they jump with inclination.
However, I Will go hasten things without. And I Will call, too, at the bar, to see
if any thing should be left for us there. Don't be in such a plaguey hurry,
madam, and we shall go the faster, I promise you.


[Exit Jarvis. Enter LANDLADY. LANDLADY. What! Solomon, why don't you move?
Pipes and tobacco for the Lamb there. -- Will nobody answer? To the Dolphin;
quick. The Angel has been outrageous this half hour. Did your ladyship call,
madam?


OLIVIA. No, madam.


LANDLADY. I find, as you're for Scotland, madam -- But that is no business of
mine; married, or not married, I ask no questions. To be sure, we had a sweet
little couple set off from this two days ago for the same place. The gentleman,
for a tailor, was, to be sure, as fine a spoken tailor, as ever blew froth from
a full pot. And the young lady so bashful, it was near half an hour before we
could get her to finish a pint of rasberry between us.


OLIVIA. But this gentleman and I are not going to be married, I assure you.


LANDLADY. May be not. That Is no business of mine; for certain, Scotch
marriages seldom turn out. There was, of my own knowledge, Miss Macfag, that
married her father's footman. -- Alack-a-day, she and her husband soon parted,
and now keep separate cellars in Hedge-lane.


OLIVIA. A very pretty picture of what lies before me!

[Aside.
Enter LEONTINE. LEONTINE. My dear Olivia, my anxiety, till you were out of
danger, was too great to be resisted. I could not help coming to see you set
out, though it exposes us to a discovery.


OLIVIA. May every thing you do prove as fortunate. Indeed, Leontine, we have
been most cruelly disappointed. Mr. Honeywood's bill upon the city has, it
seems, been protested, and we have been utterly at a loss how to proceed.


LEONTINE. How! an offer of his own too, Sure, he could not mean to deceive us.


OLIVIA. Depend upon his sincerity; he only mistook the desire for the power of
serving us. But let us think no more of it. I believe the post-chaise is ready
by this.


LANDLADY. Not quite yet: and, begging your ladyship's pardon, I don't think
your ladyship quite ready for the post-chaise. The north road is a cold place,
madam. I have a drop in the house of as pretty rasberry as ever was tipped over
tongue. Just a thimble full to keep the wind off your stomach. To be sure, the
last couple we had here, they said it was a perfect nosegay. Ecod, I sent them
both away as good natured -- Up went the blinds, round went the wheels, and
drive away post-boy, was the word.


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Well, while my friend Honeywood is upon the post of
danger at the bar, it must be my business to have an eye about me here. I think
I know an incendiary's look; for, wherever the devil makes a purchase, he never
fails to set his mark. Ha! who have we here? My son and daughter! What can they
be doing here!


LANDLADY. I tell you, madam, it will do you good; I think I know by this time
what is good for the north road. It Is a raw night, madam. -- Sir --


LEONTINE. Not a drop more, good madam. I should now take it as a greater
favor, if you hasten the horses, for I am afraid to be seen myself.


LANDLADY. That shall be done. Wha, Solomon! are you all dead there? Wha,
Solomon, I say!

[Exit, bawling.
OLIVIA. Well! I dread, lest an expedition begun in fear, should end in
repentance. -- Every moment we stay increases our danger, and adds to my
apprehensions.


LEONTINE. There Is no danger, trust me, my dear; there can be none: if
Honeywood has acted with honor, and kept my father, as he promised, in
employment till we are out of danger, nothing can interrupt our journey.


OLIVIA. I have no doubt of Mr. Honeywood's sincerity, and even his desires to
serve us. My fears are from your father's suspicions. A mind so disposed to be
alarmed without a cause, will be but too ready when there is a reason.


LEONTINE. Why, let him, when we are out of his power. But believe me, Olivia,
yon have no great reason to dread his resentment. His repining temper, as it
does no manner of injury to himself, so will it never do harm to others. He
only frets to keep himself employed, and scolds for his private amusement.


OLIVIA. I don't know that; but, I Am sure, on some occasions, it makes him look
most shockingly.


CROAKER, discovering himself. How does he look now? -- How does he look now?


OLIVIA. Ah!


LEONTINE. Undone.


CROAKER. How do I look now? Sir, I am your very humble servant. Madam, I am
yours. What, you are going off, are you? Then, first, if you please, take a
word or two from me with you before you go. Tell me first where you are going?
and when you have told me that, perhaps, I shall know as little as I did before.


LEONTINE. If that be so, our answer might but increase your displeasure,
without adding to your information.


CROAKER. I want no information from you, puppy: and you too, good madam, what
answer have you got? Eh! (A cry without, stop him.) I think I heard a noise. My
friend Honeywood without -- has he seized the incendiary? Ah, no, for now I
hear no more on it.


LEONTINE. Honeywood without! Then, Sir, it was Mr. Honeywood that directed you
hither.


CROAKER. No, Sir, it was Mr. Honeywood conducted me hither.


LEONTINE. Is it possible?


CROAKER. Possible! Why, he is in the house now, Sir: more anxious about me,
than my own son, Sir,


LEONTINE. Then, Sir, he is a villain.


CROAKER. How, sirrah! a villain, because he takes most care of your father?
I Will not bear it. I tell you I Will not bear it. Honeywood is a friend to the
family, and I Will have him treated as such.


LEONTINE. I shall study to repay his friendship as it deserves.


CROAKER. Ah, rogue, if you knew how earnestly he entered into my griefs, and
pointed out the means to detect them, you would love him as I do. (A cry
without, stop him.) Fire and fury! they have seized the incendiary they have
the villain, the incendiary in view. Stop him! stop an incendiary! a murderer;
stop him!

[Exit.
OLIVIA. Oh, my terrors! What can this new tumult mean?


LEONTINE. Some new mark, I suppose, of Mr. Honeywood's sincerity. But we shall
have satisfaction: he shall give me instant satisfaction.


OLIVIA. It must not be, my Leontine, if you value my esteem or my happiness.
Whatever be our fate, let us not add guilt to our misfortunes -- Consider that
our innocence will shortly be all we have left us. You must forgive him.


LEONTINE. Forgive him! Has he not in every instance betrayed us? Forced me to
borrow money from him, which appears a mere trick to delay us: promised to keep
my father engaged till we were out of danger, and here brought him to the very
scene of our escape?


OLIVIA. Don't be precipitate. We may yet be mistaken.


Enter POSTBOY, dragging in JARVIS: HONEYWOOD entering soon after. POSTBOY.
Aye, master, we have him fast enough. Here is the incendiary dog. I Am entitled
to the reward; I Will take my oath I saw him ask for the money at the bar, and
then run for it.


HONEYWOOD. Come, bring him along. Let us see him. Let him learn to blush for
his crimes. (Discovering his mistake.) Death! what is here! Jarvis, Leontine,
Olivia! What can all this mean?


JARVIS. Why, I Will tell you what it means: that I was an old fool, and that you
are my master -- that is all.


HONEYWOOD. Confusion!


LEONTINE. Yes, Sir, I find you have kept your word with me. After such
baseness, I wonder how you can venture to see the man you have injured?


HONEYWOOD. My dear Leontine, by my life, my honor --


LEONTINE. Peace, peace, for shame; and do not continue to aggravate baseness
by hypocrisy. I know you, Sir, I know you.


HONEYWOOD. Why, will not you hear me! By all that is just, I knew not --


LEONTINE. Hear you, Sir! to what purpose? I now see through all your low arts;
your ever complying with every opinion; your never refusing any request; your
friendship as common as a prostitute's favors, and as fallacious; all these,
Sir, have long been contemptible to the world, and are now perfectly so to me.


HONEYWOOD. Ha! contemptible to the world! That reaches me. [Aside.


LEONTINE. All the seeming sincerity of your professions, I now find, were only
allurements to betray; and all your seeming regret for their consequences, only
calculated to cover the cowardice of your heart. Draw, villain!


Enter CROAKER, out of breath. CROAKER. Where is the villain? Where is the
incendiary? (Seizing the postboy.) Hold him fast, the dog; he has the gallows
in his face. Come, you dog, confess; confess all, and hang yourself.


POSTBOY. Zounds! master, what do you throttle me for?


CROAKER, beating him.

Dog, do you resist; do you resist?


POSTBOY. Zounds! master, I Am not he; there is the man that we thought was the
rogue, and turns out to be one of the company.


CROAKER. How!


HONEYWOOD. Mr. Croaker, we have all been under a strange mistake here; I find
there is nobody guilty; it was all an error; entirely an error of our own.


CROAKER. And I say, Sir, that you're in an error; for there is guilt and double
guilt, a plot, a damned jesuitical pestilential plot, and I must have proof of
it.


HONEYWOOD. Do but hear me.


CROAKER. What, you intend to bring 'em off, I suppose; I Will hear nothing.


HONEYWOOD. Madam, you seem at least calm enough to hear reason.


OLIVIA. Excuse me.


HONEYWOOD. Good Jarvis, let me then explain it to you.


JARVIS. What signifies explanations, when the thing, is done?


HONEYWOOD. Will nobody hear me? Was there ever such a set, so blinded by
passion and prejudice! (To the postboy.) My good friend, I believe you will be
surprised, when I assure you --


POSTBOY. Sure me nothing -- I Am sure of nothing but a good beating.


CROAKER. Come, then, you, madam, if you ever hope for any favor or
forgiveness, tell me sincerely all you know of this affair.


OLIVIA. Unhappily, Sir, I Am but too much the cause of your suspicions: you see
before you, Sir, one that with false pretenses has stepped into your family to
betray it: not your daughter --


CROAKER. Not my daughter!


OLIVIA. Not your daughter -- but a mean deceiver -- who -- support me, I
cannot --


HONEYWOOD. Help, she is going, give her air.


CROAKER. Aye, aye, take the young woman to the air; I would not hurt a hair of
her head, whose ever daughter she may be -- not so bad as that neither.


[Exeunt all but Croaker. CROAKER. Yes, yes, all is out; I now see the whole
affair: my son is either married, or going to be so, to this lady, whom he
imposed upon me as his sister. Aye, certainly so; and yet I don't find it
afflicts me so much as one might think. There Is the advantage of fretting away
our misfortunes beforehand, we never feel them when they come.


Enter Miss RICHLAND and Sir WILLIAM. Sir WILLIAM. But how do you know, madam,
that my nephew intends setting off from this place?


Miss RICHLAND. My maid assured me he was come to this inn, and my own
knowledge of his intending to leave the kingdom, suggested the rest. But what
do I see, my guardian here before us! Who, my dear, Sir, could have expected
meeting you here? to what accident do we owe this pleasure?


CROAKER. To a fool, I believe.


Miss RICHLAND. But, to what purpose did you come?


CROAKER. To play the fool.


Miss RICHLAND. But, with whom?


CROAKER. With greater fools than myself.


Miss RICHLAND. Explain.


CROAKER. Why, Mr. Honeywood brought me here, to do nothing, now I am here; and
my son is going to be married to I don't know who, that is here: so now you are
as wise as I am.


Miss RICHLAND. Married! to whom, Sir?


CROAKER. To Olivia; my daughter as I took her to be; but who the devil she is,
or whose daughter she is, I know no more than the man in the moon.


Sir WILLIAM. Then, Sir, I can inform you; and, though a stranger, yet you
shall find me a friend to your family: it will be enough, at present, to assure
you, that, both in point of birth and fortune, the young lady is at least your
son's equal. Being left by her father, Sir James Woodville --


CROAKER. Sir James Woodville! What, of the west?


Sir WILLIAM. Being left by him, I say, to the care of a mercenary wretch,
whose only aim was to secure her fortune to himself, she was sent to France,
under pretense of education; and there every art was tried to fix her for life
in a convent, contrary to her inclinations. Of this I was informed, upon my
arrival at Paris; and, as I had been once her father's friend, I did all in my
power to frustrate her guardian's base intentions. I had even meditated to
rescue her from his authority, when your son stepped in with more pleasing
violence, gave her liberty, and you a daughter.


CROAKER. But I intend to have a daughter of my own choosing, Sir. A young lady,
Sir, whose fortune, by my interest with those who have interest, will be double
what my son has a right to expect. Do you know Mr. Lofty, Sir.


Sir WILLIAM. Yes, Sir; and know that you are deceived in him. But step this
way, and I Will convince you.


[ Croaker and Sir William seem to confer. Enter HONEYWOOD. HONEYWOOD.
Obstinate man, still to persist in his outrage! insulted by him, despised by
all, I now begin to grow contemptible, even to myself. How have I sunk by too
great an assiduity to please! How have I overtaxed all my abilities, lest the
approbation of a single fool should escape me! But all is now over; I have
survived my reputation, my fortune, my friendships, and nothing remains
henceforward for me but solitude and repentance.


Miss RICHLAND. Is it true, Mr. Honeywood, that you are setting off, without
taking leave of your friends? The report is, that you are quitting England. Can
it be?


HONEYWOOD. Yes, madam; and though I am so unhappy as to have fallen under your
displeasure, yet, thank Heaven, I leave you to happiness; to one who loves you,
and deserves your love; to one who has power to procure you affluence, and
generosity to improve your enjoyment of it.


Miss RICHLAND. And are you sure, Sir, that the gentleman you mean is what you
describe him?


HONEYWOOD. I have the best assurances of it, his serving me. He does indeed
deserve the highest happiness, and that is in your power to confer. As for me,
weak and wavering as I have been, obliged by all, and incapable of serving any,
what happiness can I find but in solitude? What hope but in being forgotten.


Miss RICHLAND. A thousand! to live among friends that esteem you, whose
happiness it will be to be permitted to oblige you.


HONEYWOOD. No, madam; my resolution is fixed. Inferiority among strangers is
easy; but among those that once were equals, insupportable. Nay, to show you
how far my resolution can go, I can now speak with calmness of my former
follies, my vanity, my dissipation, my weakness. I will even confess, that,
among the number of my other presumptions, I had the insolence to think of
loving you. Yes, madam, while I was pleading the passion of another, my heart
was tortured with its own. But it is over, it was unworthy our friendship, and
let it be forgotten.


Miss RICHLAND. You amaze me!


HONEYWOOD. But you will forgive it, I know you will; since the confession should
not have come from me even now, but to convince you of the sincerity of my
intention of -- never mentioning it more. [Going.


Miss RICHLAND. Stay, Sir, one moment -- Ha! he here --


Enter LOFTY. LOFTY. Is the coast clear? None but friends. I have followed you
here with a trifsing piece of intelligence: but it goes no farther, things are
not yet ripe for a discovery. I have spirits working at a certain board; your
affair at the treasury will be done in less: than -- a thousand years. Mum!


Miss RICHLAND. Sooner, Sir, I should hope.


LOFTY. Why; yes; I believe it may, if it falls into proper hands, that know
where to push and where to parry; that know how the land lies -- eh, Honey wood:


Miss RICHLAND. It has fallen into yours.


LOFTY. Well, to keep you no longer in suspense, your thing is done. It is
done, I say -- that is all. I have just had assurances from Lord Neverout, that
the claim has been examined, and found admissible. Quietus is the word, madam.


HONEYWOOD. But how! his lordship has been at Newmarket these ten days.


LOFTY. Indeed! Then Sir Gilbert Goose must have been most damnably mistaken. I
had it of him.


Miss RICHLAND. He! why Sir Gilbert and his family have been in the country
this month.


LOFTY. This month! It must certainly be so -- Sir Gilbert's letter did come to
me from Newmarket, so that he must have met his lordship there; and so it came
about. I have his letter about me; I Will read it to you. (Taking out a large
bundle.) That Is from Paoli of Corsica, that from the marquis of Squilachi. --
Have you a mind to see a letter from count Poniatowski, now king of Poland --
Honest Pon -- (Searching.) O, Sir, what are you here too? I Will tell you what,
honest friend, if you have not absolutely delivered my letter to Sir William
Honeywood, you may return it. The thing will do without him.


Sir WILLIAM. Sir, I have delivered it; and must inform you, it was received
with the most mortifying contempt.


CROAKER. Contempt! Mr. Lofty, what can that mean?


LOFTY. Let him go on, let him go on, I say. You Will find it come to something
presently.


Sir WILLIAM. Yes, Sir, I believe you will be amazed, if, after waiting some time
in the antichamber, after being surveyed with insolent curiosity by the
passing servants, I was at last assured, that Sir William Honeywood knew no
such person, and I must certainly have been imposed upon.


LOFTY. Good; let me die; very good. Ha! ha! ha!


CROAKER. Now, for my life, I cannot find out half the goodness of it.


LOFTY. You cannot. Ha! ha!


CROAKER. No, for the soul of me! I think it was as confounded a bad answer, as
ever was sent from one private gentleman to another.


LOFTY. And so you cannot find out the force of the message? Why, I was in the
house at that very time. Ha! ha! It was I that sent that very answer to my own
letter. Ha! ha!


CROAKER. Indeed! How! why!


LOFTY. In one word, things between Sir William and me must be behind the
curtain. A party has many eyes. He sides with lord Buzzard, I side with Sir
Gilbert Goose. So that unriddles the mystery.


CROAKER. And so it does, indeed; and all my suspicions are over.


LOFTY. Your suspicions! What, then, you have been suspecting, you have been
suspecting have you? Mr. Croaker, you and I were friends; we are friends no
longer. Never talk to me. It Is over; I say, it is over.


CROAKER. As I hope for your favor, I did not mean to offend. It escaped me.
Don't be discomposed.


LOFTY. Zounds! Sir, but I am discomposed, and will be discomposed. To be
treated thus! Who am I! Was it for this, I have been dreaded both by ins and
outs! Have I been libelled in the Gazetteer, and praised in the St. James's?
have I been chaired at Wildman's, and a speaker at Merchant-Taylors Hail? have
I had my hand to addresses, and my head in the print-shops; and talk to me of
suspects?


CROAKER. My dear Sir, be pacified. What can you have but asking pardon?


LOFTY. Sir, I will not be pacified -- Suspects! Who am I! To be used thus!
Have I paid court to men in favor, to serve my friends; the lords of the
treasury, Sir William Honeywood, and the rest of the gang, and talk to me of
suspects! Who am I, I say, who am I!


Sir WILLIAM. Since, Sir, you are so pressing for an answer, I Will tell you who
you are. A gentleman, as well acquainted with politics, as with men in power;
as well acquainted with persons of fashion, as with modesty; with lords of the
treasury, as with truth; and with all, as you are with Sir William Honeywood. I
am Sir William Honeywood.

Discovering his ensigns of the Bath.


CROAKER. Sir William Honeywood!


HONEYWOOD. Astonishment! my uncle! [Aside.


LOFTY. So then, my confounded genius has been all this time only leading me up
to the garret, in order to fling me out of the window.


CROAKER. What, Mr. Importance, and are these your works! Suspect yon? You who
have been dreaded by the ins and outs: you, who have had your hand to
addresses, and your head stuck up in printshops. If you were served right, you
should have your head stuck up in the pillory.


LOFTY. Aye, stick it where you will; for, by the Lord, it cuts but a very poor
figure where it sticks at present.


Sir WILLIAM. Well, Mr. Croaker, I hope you now see how incapable this
gentleman is of serving you, and how little Miss Richland has to expect from
his influence.


CROAKER. Aye, Sir, too well I see it; and I cannot but say I have had some
boding of it these ten days. So, I Am resolved, since my son has placed his
affections on a lady of moderate fortune, to be satisfied with his choice, and
not run the hazard of another Mr. Lofty, in helping him to a better.


Sir WILLIAM. I approve your resolution; and here they come, to receive a
confirmation of your pardon and consent.


Enter Mrs. CROAKER, JARVIS, LEONTINE, and OLIVIA. Mrs. CROAKER. Where Is my
husband! Come, come, lovey, you must forgive them. Jarvis here has been to tell
me the whole affair; and, I say, you must forgive them. Our own was a stolen
match, you know, my dear; and we never had any reason to repent of it.


CROAKER. I wish we could both say so. However, this gentleman, Sir William
Honeywood, has been beforehand with you, in obtaining their pardon. So, if the
two poor fools have a mind to marry, I think we can tack them together without
crossing the Tweed for it. [Joining their hands.


LEONTINE. How blessed and unexpected! What, what can we say to such goodness!
But, our future obedience shall be the best reply. And, as for this gentleman,
to whom we owe --


Sir WILLIAM. Excuse me, Sir, if I interrupt your thanks, as I have here an
interest that calls me. Turning to Honeywood.) Yes, Sir, you are surprised to
see me; and I own that a desire of correcting your follies led me hither. I
saw, with indignation, the errors of a mind that only sought applause from
others; that easiness of disposition, which, though inclined to the right, had
not courage to condemn the wrong. I saw, with regret, those splendid errors,
that still took name from some neighboring duty. Your charity, that was but
injustice; your benevolence, that was but weakness; and your friendship, but
credulity. I saw, with regret, great talents, and extensive learning, only
employed to add sprightliness to error, and increase your perplexities. I saw
your mind with a thousand natural charms: but, the greatness of its beauty
served only to heighten my pity for it is prostitution.


HONEYWOOD. Cease to upbraid me, Sir: I have for some time but too strongly
felt the justice of your reproaches. But there is one way still left me. Yes,
Sir, I have determined this very hour, to quit for ever a place where I have
made myself the voluntary slave of all; and to seek among strangers that
fortitude which may give strength to the mind, and marshal all its dissipated
virtues. Yet, ere I depart, permit me to solicit favor for this gentleman;
who, notwithstanding what has happened, has laid me under the most signal
obligations. Mr. Lofty --


LOFTY. Mr. Honeywood, I Am resolved upon a reformation, as well as you. I now
begin to find, that the man who first invented the art of speaking truth was a
much cunninger fellow than I thought him. And, to prove that I design to speak
truth for the future, I must now assure you, that you owe your late enlargement
to another; as, upon my soul, I had no hand in the matter. So now if any of the
company has a mind for preferment, he may take my place, I Am determined to
resign.

[Exit.
HONEYWOOD. How have I been deceived!


Sir WILLIAM. No, Sir, you have been obliged to a kinder, fairer friend for
that favor. To Miss Richland. Would she complete our joy, and make the man she
has honored by her friendship happy in her love, I should then forget all, and
be as blessed as the welfare of my dearest knisman can make me.


Miss RICHLAND. After what is past, it would be but affectation to pretend to
indifference. Yes, I will own an attachment, which, I find, was, more than
friendship. And, if my entreaties cannot alter his resolution to quit the
country, I will even try if my hand has not power to detain him. [Giving her
hand.


HONEYWOOD. Heavens! how can I have deserved all this? How express my
happiness, my gratitude! A moment, like this, overpays an age of apprehension.


CROAKER. Well, now I see content in every face; but Heaven send we be all
better this day three months!

Sir WILLIAM.

Henceforth, nephew, learn to respect yourself. He who secks only for applause
from without, has all his happiness in another's keeping.


HONEYWOOD. Yes, Sir, I now too plainly perceive my errors. My vanity in
attempting to please all, by fearing to offend any. My meanness in approving
folly, lest fools should disapprove. Henceforth, therefore, it shall be my
study to reserve my pity for real distress; my friendship for true merit; and
my love for her, who first taught me what it is to be happy.


EPILOGUE. The author, in expectation of an Epilogue from a friend at Oxford,
deferred writing one himself till the very last hour. What is here offered,
owes all it is success to the graceful manner of the actress who spoke it.

SPOKEN BY MRS. BULKLEY. AS puffing quacks some caitiff wretch procure
To swear the pill, or drop, has wrought a cure;
Thus, on the stage, our play-wrights still depend
For Epilogues and Prologues on some friend,
Who knows each art of coaxing up the town,
And make full many a bitter pill go down.
Conscious of this, our bard has gone about,
And teased each rhyming friend to help him out.
An Epilogue, things cannot go on without it;
It could not fail, would you but set about it.
Young man, cries one, (a bard laid up in clover)
Alas, young man, my writing days are over;
Let boys play tricks, and kick the straw, not I;
Your brother doctor there, perhaps, may try.
What I! dear Sir, the doctor interposes;
What, plant my thistle, Sir, among his roses!
No, no, I Have other contests to maintain;
Tonight I head our troops at Warwick Lane.
Go, ask your manager -- Who, me! Your pardon;
Those things are not our forte at Covent Garden.
Our author's friends, thus placed at happy distance,
Give him good words indeed, but no assistance.
As some unhappy wight, at some new play,
At the pit door stands elbowing away,
While often, with many a smile, and many a shrug,
He eyes the center, where his friends sit snug;
His simpering friends, with pleasure in their eyes,
Sinks as he sinks, and as he rises rise:
He nods, they nod; he cringes, they grimace;
But not a soul will budge to give him place.
Since then, unhelp'd, our bard must now conform
" To 'bide the pelting of this pitt'less storm,"
Blame where you must, be candid where you can,
And be each critic the Good-natured Man.
SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER: OR, THE MISTAKES OF A NIGHT. A COMEDY.

AS IT IS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN COVENT GARDEN.

FIRST PRINTED IN MDCCLXXII.

TO SAMUEL JOHNSON, L.L.D.
DEAR SIR,
BY inscribing this slight performance to you, I do not mean so much to
compliment you as myself. It may do me some honor to inform the public, that I
have lived many years in intimacy with you. It may serve the interests of
mankind also to inform them that the greatest wit may be found in a character,
without impairing the most unaffected piety.

I have, particularly, reason to thank you for your partiality to this
performance. The undertaking a comedy, not merely sentimental, was very
dangerous; and Mr. Colman, who saw this piece in its various stages, always
thought it so. However, I ventured to trust it to the public; and, though it
was necessarily delayed till late in the season, I have every reason to be
grateful. I am,

DEAR SIR, YOUR MOST SINCERE FRIEND AND ADMIRER, OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

PROLOGUE.
BY DAVID GARRICK, ESQUIRE.
Enter Mr. Woodward, dressed in Black, and holding a handkerchief to his Eyes.
EXCUSE me, Sirs, I pray -- I cannot yet speak --
I Am crying now -- and have been all the week.
" It Is not alone this mourning suit," good masters;
" I Have that within" -- for which there are no plasters!
Pray, would you know the reason why I Am crying?
The comic muse, long sick, is now a dying!
And if she goes, my tears will never stop;
For as a play'r, I cannot squeeze out one drop:
I am undone, that is all -- shall lose my bread --
I Would rather, but that is nothing -- lose my head.
When the sweet maid is laid upon the bier,
Shuter and I shall be chief mourners here.
To her a mawkish drab of spurious breed,
Who deals in Sentimentals, will succeed!
Poor Ned and I are dead to all intents;
We can as soon speak Greek as Sentiments!
Both nervous grown, to keep our spirits up,
We now and then take down a hearty cup.
What shall we do? -- If Comedy forsake us!
They Will turn us out, and no one else will take us.
But, why cannot I be moral? -- Let me try --
My heart thus pressing -- fixed my face and eye --
With a sententious look, that nothing means,
(Faces are blocks, in sentimental scenes)
Thus I begin -- " All is not gold that glitters,
" Pleasures seem sweet, but prove a glass of bitters,
" When ignorance enters, folly is at hand:
" Learning is better far than house and land.
" Let not your virtue trip, who trips may stumble,
" And virtue is not virtue, if she tumble."
I give it up -- morals will not do for me;
To make you laugh, I must play tragedy.
One hope remains -- hearing the maid was ill,
A Doctor comes this night to show his skill.
To cheer her heart, and give your muscles motion,
He, in Five Draughts prepared, presents a potion:
A kind of magic charm -- for be assured,
Is you will swallow it, the maid is cured:
But desperate the Doctor, and her case is,
If you reject the dose, and make wry faces!
This truth he boasts, will boast it while he lives,
No poisonous drugs are mixed in what he gives.
Should he succeed, you will give him his degree:
If not, within he will receive no fee!
The college you, must his pretensions back,
Pronounce him Regular, or dub him Quack.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Sir Charles Marlow, Mr. GARDNER. Young Marlow, (his son) Mr. JEWS.
Hardcastle, Mr. SHUTER. Hastings, Mr. DUBELLAMY. Tony Lumpkin, Mr. QUICK.
Diggory, Mr. SAUNDERS.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Hardcastle, Mrs. GREEN. Miss Hardcastle, Mrs. BULKLEY. Miss Neville, Mrs.
KNIVETON. Maid, Miss WILLEMS.
Landlord, Servants, etc. etc.
SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER: OR, THE MISTAKES OF A NIGHT.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE, a Chamber in an old-fashioned House. Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE and Mr.
HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I VOW, Mr. Hardcastle, you're very particular. Is
there a creature in the whole country, but ourselves, that does not take a trip
to town now and then, to rub off the rust a little? There Is the two Miss Hoggs,
and our neighbor, Mrs. Grigsby, go to take a month's polishing every winter.


HARDCASTLE. Aye, and bring back vanity and affectation to last them the whole
year. I wonder why London cannot keep its own fools at home! In my time, the
follies of the town crept slowly among us, but now they travel faster than a
stage-coach. Its fopperies come down, not only as inside passengers, but in the
very basket.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Aye, your times were fine times, indeed; you have been
telling us of them for many a long year. Here we live in an old rumbling
mansion, that looks for all the world like an inn, but that we never see
company. Our bell visitors are old Mrs. Oddfish, the curate's wife, and little
Cripplegate, the lame dancing master: and all our entertainment your old
stories of prince Eugene and the duke of Marylborough. I hate such
old-fashioned trumpery.


HARDCASTLE. And I love it. I love every thing that is old: old friends, old
times, old manners, old books, old wine; and, I believe, Dorothy, (taking her
hand) you will own I have been pretty fond of an old wife.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Lord, Mr. Hardcastle, you're for ever at your Dorothy's and
your old wife's. You may be a Darby, but I Will be no Joan, I promise you. I Am
not so old as you would make me, by more than one good year. Add twenty to twenty,
and make money of that.


HARDCASTLE. Let me see; twenty added to twenty, makes just fifty and seven.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. It Is false, Mr. Hardcastle: I was but twenty when I was
brought to bed of Tony, that I had by Mr. Lumpkin, my first husband; and he is
not come to years of discretion yet.


HARDCASTLE. Nor ever will, I dare answer for him. Aye, you have taught him
finely.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. No matter, Tony Lumpkin has a good fortune. My son is not to
live by his learning. I don't think a boy wants much learning to spend fifteen
hundred a year.


HARDCASTLE. Learning, quotha! A mere composition of tricks and mischief.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Humor, my dear: nothing but humor. Come, Mr. Hardcastle,
you must allow the boy a little humor.


HARDCASTLE. I Would sooner allow him an horse-pond. If burning the footmens shoes,
frighting the maids, and worrying the kittens, be humor, he has it. It was but
yesterday he fastened my wig to the back of my chair, and when I went to make a
bow, I popt my bald head in Mrs. Frizzle's face.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. And am I to blame? The poor boy was always too sickly to do
any good. A school would be his death. When he comes to be a little stronger,
who knows what a year or two's Latin may do for him?


HARDCASTLE. Latin for him! A cat and fiddle. No, no, the alehouse and the
stable are the only schools he will ever go to.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well, we must not snub the poor boy now, for I believe we
shall not have him long among us. Any body that looks in his face may see he is
consumptive.


HARDCASTLE. Aye, if growing too fat be one of the symptoms.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. He coughs sometimes.


HARDCASTLE. Yes, when his liquor goes the wrong way.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I Am actually afraid of his lungs.


HARDCASTLE. And truly so am I; for he sometimes whoops like a speaking trumpet
-- (Tony hallooing behind the scenes) -- O there he goes -- A very consumptive
figure, truly.


Enter TONY, crossing the Stage. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Tony, where are you going, my
charmer? Will Not you give papa and I a little of your company, lovee?


TONY. I Am in haste, mother, I cannot stay.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. You shall not venture out this raw evening, my dear: You look
most shockingly.


TONY. I cannot stay, I tell you. The three pigeons expects me down every
moment. There Is some, fun going forward.


HARDCASTLE. Aye; the alehouse, the old place: I thought so.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. A low, paltry set of fellows.


TONY. Not so low neither. There Is Dick Muggins the exciseman, Jack Slang the
horse doctor, little Aminadab that grinds the music box, and Tom Twist that
spins the pewter platter.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pray, my dear, disappoint them for one night at least.


TONY. As for disappointing them I should not so much mind; but I cannot abide
to disappoint myself.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Detaining him) You shall not go.


TONY. I will, I tell you.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I say you shall not.


TONY. We'll see which is strongest, you or I.

[Exit, hauling her out.
HARDCASTLE, solus. Aye, there goes a pair that only spoil each other. But is
not the whole age in a combination to drive sense and discretion out of doors?
There Is my pretty darling Kate; the fashions of the times have almost infected
her too. By living a year or two in town, she is as fond of gauze, and French
frippery, as the best of them.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Blessings on my pretty innocence! dressed out
as usual, my Kate. Goodness! What a quantity of superfluous silk have thou got
about thee, girl! I could never teach the fools of this age, that the indigent
world could be clothed out of the trimmings of the vain.


Miss HARDCASTLE. You know our agreement, Sir. You allow me the morning to
receive and pay visits, and to dress in my own manner; and in the evening, I
put on my housewife's dress to please you.


HARDCASTLE. Well, remember I insist on the terms of our agreement; and, by the
bye, I believe I shall have occasion to try your obedience this very evening.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I protest, Sir, I don't comprehend your meaning.


HARDCASTLE. Then, to be plain with you, Kate, I expect the young gentleman I
have chosen to be your busband from town this very day. I have his father's
letter, in which he informs me his son is set out, and that he intends to
follow himself shortly after.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Indeed! I wish I had known something of this before. Bless
me, how shall I behave? It Is a thousand to one I shall not like him; our meeting
will be so formal, and so like a thing of business, that I shall find no room
for friendship or esteem.


HARDCASTLE. Depend upon it, child, I Will never control your choice; but Mr.
Marlow, whom I have pitched upon, is the son of my old friend, Sir Charles
Marlow, of whom you have heard me talk so often. The young gentleman has been
bred a scholar, and is designed for an employment in the service of his
country. I am told he is a man of an excellent understanding.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Is he?


HARDCASTLE. Very generous.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I believe I shall like him.


HARDCASTLE. Young and brave.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am sure I shall like him.


HARDCASTLE. And very handsome.


Miss HARDCASTLE. My dear papa, say no more, (kissing his hand) he is mine, I Will
have him.


HARDCASTLE. And, to crown all, Kate, he is one of the most bashful and reserved
young fellows in all the world.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Eh! you have frozen me to death again. That word reserved,
has undone all the rest of his accomplishments. A reserved lover, it is said,
always makes a suspicious husband,


HARDCASTLE. On the contrary, modesty seldom resides in a breast that is not
enriched with nobler virtues. It was the very feature in his character that
first struck me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. He must: have more striking features to catch me, I promise
you. However, if he be so young, so handsome, and so every thing, as you
mention, I believe he will do still I think I Will have him.


HARDCASTLE. Aye, Kate, but there is still an obstacle. It Is more than an even
wager, he may not have you.


Miss HARDCASTLE. My dear papa, why will you mortisy one so? -- Well, if he
refuses, instead of breaking my heart at his indifference, I Will only break my
glass for its flattery. Set my cap to some newer fashion, and look out for some
less difficult admirer.


HARDCASTLE. Bravely resolved! In the mean time I Will go prepare the servants
for his reception; as we seldom see company, they want as much training as a
company of recruits, the first day's muster.

[Exit.
Miss HARDCASTLE, sola. Lud, this news of papa's puts me all in a flutter.
Young, handsome; these he put last? but I put them foremost. Sensible,
good-natured; I like all that. But then reserved, and sheepish, that is much
against him. Yet cannot he be cured of his timidity, by being taught to be proud
of his wife? Yes, and cannot I -- But I vow I Am disposing of the husband, before
I have secured the lover.


Enter Miss NEVILLE. Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am glad you're come, Neville, my dear.
Tell me, Constance, how do I look this evening? Is there any thing whimsical
about me? Is it one of my well looking days, child? am I in face today?


Miss NEVILLE. Perfectly, my dear. Yet now I look again -- bless me! -- sure no
accident has happened among the canary birds or the gold fishes. Has your
brother or the cat been meddling? or has the last novel been too moving?


Miss HARDCASTLE. No; nothing of all this. I have been threatened -- I can
scarce get it out -- I have been threatened with a lover.


Miss NEVILLE. And his name --


Miss HARDCASTLE. Is Marlow.


Miss NEVILLE. Indeed!


Miss HARDCASTLE. The son of Sir Charles Marlow.


Miss NEVILLE. As I live, the most intimate friend of Mr. Hastings, my admirer.
They are never asunder. I believe you must have seen him when we lived in town.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Never.


Miss NEVILLE. He Is a very singular character, I assure you. Among women of
reputation and virtue, he is the modestest man alive; but his acquaintance give
him a very different character among creatures of another stamp: you understand
me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. An odd character, indeed. I shall never be able to manage
him. What shall I do? Pshaw, think no more of him, but trust to occurrences for
success. But how goes on your own affair, my dear? has my mother been courting
you for my brother Tony, as usual?


Miss NEVILLE. I have just come from one of our agreeable tetea-tetes. She has
been saying a hundred tender things, and setting off her pretty monster as the
very pink of perfection.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And her partiality is such, that she actually thinks him so.
A fortune like yours is no small temptation. Besides, as she has the sole
management of it, I Am not surprised to see her unwilling to let it go out of
the family.


Miss NEVILLE. A fortune like mine, which chiefly consists in jewels, is no
such mighty temptation. But at any rate if my dear Hastings be but constant, I
make no doubt to be too hard for her at last. However, I let her suppose that I
am in love with her son, and me never once dreams that my affections are fixed
upon another.


Miss HARDCASTLE. My good brother holds out stoutly. I could almost love him
for hating you so.


Miss NEVILLE. It is a good-natured creature at bottom, and I Am sure would wish
to see me married to any body but himself. But my aunt's bell rings for our
afternoon's walk round the improvements. Allons! Courage is necessary as our
affairs are critical.


Miss HARDCASTLE. "Would it were bed time and all were well."


[Exeunt. SCENE, an Alehouse Room. Several shabby fellows, with punch and
tobacco. TONY at the Head of the Table, a little higher than the rest: a mallet
in his hand. OMNES. Hurrea! hurrea! hurrea! bravo!


FIRST FELLOW. Now gentlemen, silence for a song. The 'squire is going to knock
himself down for a song.


OMNES. Aye, a song, a song!


TONY. Then I Will sing you, gentlemen, a song I made upon this alehouse, the
Three Pigeons.


SONG.
Let schoolmasters puzzle their brain,
With grammar, and nonsense, and learning;
Good liquor, I stoutly maintain,
Gives genus a better discerning.
Let them brag of their heathenish gods,
Their Lethes, their Styxes, and Stygians;
Their qui's, and their quae's, and their quod's,
They Are all but a parcel of pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
When methodist preachers come down,
A preaching that drinking is sinful,
I Will wager the rascals a crown,
They always preach best with a skinful,
But when you come down with your pence,
For a slice of their scurvy religion,
I Will leave it to all men of sense,
But you my good friend are the pigeon,
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
Then come put the jorum about,
And let us be merry and clever,
Our hearts and our liquors are stout,
Here Is the three jolly pigeons for ever.
Let some cry up woodcock or hare,
Your bustards, your ducks, and your widgeons;
But of all the birds in the air,
Here Is a health to the three jolly pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
OMNES. Bravo, bravo!


FIRST FELLOW. The 'squire has got spunk in him.


SECOND FELLOW. I loves to hear him sing, bekeays he never gives us nothing
that is low.


THIRD FELLOW. O damn any thing that is low, I cannot bear it.


FOURTH FELLOW. The genteel thing is the genteel thing at any time. If so be
that a gentleman bees in a concatenation accordingly.


THIRD FELLOW. I like the maxum of it, master Muggins. What, though I am
obligated to dance a bear, a man may be a gentleman for all that. May this be
my poison if my bear ever dances but to the very genteelest of tunes. "Water
Parted," or "the minuet in Ariadne."


SECOND FELLOW. What a pity it is the 'squire is not come to his own. It would
be well for all the publicans within ten miles round of him.


TONY. Ecod and so it would, master Slang. I Would then show what it was to keep
choice of company.


SECOND FELLOW. O he takes after his own father for that. To be sure old
'squire Lumpkin was the finest gentleman I ever set my eyes on. For winding the
straight horn, or beating a thicket for a hare, or a wench, he never had his
fellow. It was a saying in the place, that he kept the best horses, dogs, and
girls in the whole county.


TONY. Ecod, and when I Am of age, I Will be no bastard, I promise you. I have
been thinking of Bett Bouncer and the miller's gray mare to begin with. But,
come, my boys, drink about and be merry, for you pay no reckoning. Well,
Stingo, what is the matter?


Enter LANDLORD. LANDLORD. There be two gentlemen in a post-chaise at the door.
They have lost their way upo' the forest; and they are talking something about
Mr. Hardcastle.


TONY. As sure as can be, one of them must be the gentleman that is coming down
to court my sister. Do they seem to be Londoners?


LANDLORD. I believe they may. They look woundily like Frenchmen.


TONY. Then desire them to step this way, and I'il set them right in a
twinkling. (Exit Landlord.) Gentlemen, as they may not be good enough company
for you, step down for a moment, and I Will be with you in the squeezing of a
lemon.


[Exeunt mob. TONY, solus. Father-in-law has been calling me whelp, and hound,
this half year. Now, if I pleased, I could be so revenged upon the old
grumbletonian. But then I Am afraid -- afraid of what! I shall soon be worth
fifteen hundred a year, and let him frighten me out of that if he can.


Enter LANDLORD, conducing MARLOW and HASTINGS. MARLOW. What a tedious
uncomfortable day have we had of it! We were told it was but forty miles across
the country, and we have come above threescore.


HASTINGS. And all, Marlow, from that unaccountable reserve of yours, that
would not let us inquire more frequently on the way.


MARLOW. I own, Hastings, I am unwilling to lay myself under an obligation to
every one I meet; and often stand the chance of an unmannerly answer.


HASTINGS. At present, however, we are not likely to receive any answer.


TONY. No offense, gentlemen. But I Am told you have been inquiring for one Mr.
Hardcastle in those parts. Do yon know what part of the country you are in?


HASTINGS. Not in the least, Sir, but should thank you for information.


TONY. Nor the way you came?


HASTINGS. No, Sir? but if you can inform us --


TONY. Why, gentlemen, if you know neither the road you are going, nor where
you are, nor the road you came, the first thing I have to inform you is, that
-- you have lost your way.


MARLOW. We wanted no ghost to tell us that.


TONY. Pray, gentlemen, may I be so bold as to ask the place from whence you
came?


MARLOW. That Is not necessary toward directing us where we are to go.


TONY. No offense; but question for question is all fair, you know. Pray,
gentlemen, is not this same Hardcastle a cross-grained, oldfashion'd, whimsical
fellow, with an ugly face; a daughter, and a pretty son?


HASTINGS. We have not seen the gentleman, but lie has the family you mention.


TONY. The daughter, a tall, trapesing, trolloping, talkative maypole -- the
son, a pretty, well-bred, agreeable youth, that every body is fond of.


MARLOW. Our information differs in this. The daughter is said to be well-bred
and beautiful; the son, an awkward booby, reared up, and spoiled at his
mother's apron-string.


TONY. He-he-hem! -- Then, gentlemen, all I have to tell you is, that you will not
reach Mr. Hardcastle's house this night, I believe.


HASTINGS. Unfortunate!


TONY. It Is a damned long, dark, boggy, dirty, dangerous way. Stingo, tell the
gentlemen the way to Mr. Hardcastle's! (Winking upon the Landlord.) Mr.
Hardcastle's of Quagmire Marsh, you understand me.


LANDLORD. Master Hardcastle's! Lock-a-daisy, my masters, you're come a deadly
deal wrong! When you came to the bottom of the hill, you should have crossed
down Squash-lane.


MARLOW. Cross down Squasn-lane!


LANDLORD. Then you were to keep straight forward, 'till you came to four roads.


MARLOW. Come to where four roads meet!


TONY. Aye; but you must be sure to take only one of them.


MARLOW. O Sir, you're facetious.


TONY. Then keeping to the right, you are to go sideways till you come upon
Crack-skull common: there you must look sharp for the track of the wheel, and
go forward, 'till you come to farmer Murrain's barn. Coming to the farmer's
barn, you are to turn to the right, and then to the left, and then to the right
about again, till you find out the old mill.


MARLOW. Zounds, man! we could as soon find out the longitude


HASTINGS. What Is to be done, Marlow?


MARLOW. This house promises but a poor reception; though perhaps the landlord
can accommodate us.


LANDLORD. Alack, master, we have but one spare bed in the whole house.


TONY. And to my knowledge, that is taken up by three lodgers already. (After a
pause, in which the rest seem disconcerted) I have hit it. Don't you think,
Stingo, our landlady could accommodate the gentlemen by the fireside, with --
three chairs and a bolster?


HASTINGS. I hate sleeping by the fireside.


MARLOW. And I detest your three chairs and a bolster.


TONY. You do, do you! -- then let me see -- what -- if you go on a mile
further, to the Buck's Head; the old Buck's Head on the hill, one of the best
inns in the whole county?


HASTINGS. O ho! so we have escaped an adventure for This night, however.


LANDLORD. (Apart to Tony) Sure, you ben't sending them to your father's as an
inn, be you?


TONY. Mum, you fool you. Let them find that out. (To them.) You have only to
keep on straight forward, till you come to a large old house by the road side.
You Will see a pair of large horns over the door. That Is the sign. Drive up the
yard, and call stoutly about you.


HASTINGS. Sir, we are obliged to you. The servants cannot, miss the way?


TONY. No, no: but I tell you though, the landlord is rich, and going to leave
off business; so he wants to be thought a gentleman, saving your presence, he!
he! he! He Will be for giving you his company, and ecod if you mind him, he will
persuade you that his mother was an alderman, and his aunt a justice of peace.


LANDLORD. A troublesome old blade to be sure; but a keeps as good wines and
beds as any in the whole country.


MARLOW. Well, if he supplies us with these, we shall want no further
connection. We are to turn to the right, did you say?


TONY. No, no; straight forward. I Will just step myself, and show you a piece of
the way. (To the landlord) Mum.


LANDLORD. Ah, bless your heart, for a sweet, pleasant -- damned mischievous
son of a whore.


[Exeunt. ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE, an old-fashioned House. Enter HARDCASTLE, followed by three or four
awkward servants. HARDCASTLE. WELL, I hope you're perfect in the table exercise
I have been teaching you these three days. You all know your posts and your
places, and can show that you have been used to good company, without ever
stirring from home.


OMNES. Aye, aye.


HARDCASTLE. When company comes, you are not to pop out and stare, and then run
in again, like frighted rabbits in a warren.


OMNES. No, no.


HARDCASTLE. You, Diggory, whom I have taken from the barn, are to make a show
at the side-table; and you, Roger, whom I have advanced from the plough, are to
place yourself behind my chair. But you're not to stand so, with your hands in
your pockets. Take your hands from your pockets, Roger; and from your head, you
blockhead you. See how Diggory carries his hands. They Are a little too stiff,
indeed, but that is no great matter.


DIGGORY. Aye, mind how I hold them. I learned to hold my hands this way, when
I was upon drill for the militia. And so being upon drill --


HARDCASTLE. You must not be so talkative, Diggory. You must be all attention
to the guests. You must hear us talk, and not think of talking; you must see us
drink, and not think of drinking; you must see us eat, and not think of eating.


DIGGORY. By the laws, your worship, that is parfectly unpossible. Whenever
Diggory sees yeating going forward, ecod he is always wishing for a mouthful
himself.


HARDCASTLE. Blockhead! Is not a belly-full in the kitchen as good as a
belly-full in the parlour? Stay your stomach with that reflection.


DIGGORY. Ecod I thank your worship, I Will make a shift to stay my stomach with
a slice of cold beef in the pantry.


HARDCASTLE. Diggory, you are too talkative. Then if I happen to say a good
thing, or tell a good story at table, you must not all burst out a-laughing as
if you made part of the company.


DIGGORY. Then ecod your worship must not tell the story of old grouse in the
gun room: I cannot help laughing at that -- he! he! he! -- for the soul of me.
We have laughed at that these twenty years -- ha! ha! ha!


HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! The story is a good one. Well, honest Diggory, you may
laugh at that -- but still remember to be attentive. Suppose one of the company
should call for a glass of wine, how will you behave? A glass of wine, Sir, if
you please, (To Diggory) -- Eh, why don't you move?


DIGGORY. Ecod, your worship, I never have courage till I see the eatables and
drinkables brought upo' the table, and then I Am as bauld as a lion.


HARDCASTLE. What, will nobody move?


FIRST SERVANT. I Am not to leave this place.


SECOND SERVANT. I Am sure it is no place of mine.


THIRD SERVANT. Nor mine, for sartain.


DIGGORY. Wauns, and I Am sure it canna be mine.


HARDCASTLE. You numbskulls! and so while, like your betters, you are
quarrelling for places, the guests must be starved. O you dunces! I find I must
begin all over again. -- But don't I hear a coach drive into the yard? To your
posts, you blockheads. I Will go in the mean time and give my old friend's son a
hearty reception at the gate.


[Exit Hardcastle. DIGGORY. By the elevens, my place is gone quite out of my
head.


ROGER. I know that my place is to be every where.


FIRST SERVANT. Where the devil is mine?


SECOND SERVANT. MY pleace is to be no where at all; and so ize go about my
business.


[Exeunt servants, running about as if frighted, different ways. Enter SERVANT
with Candles, showing in MARLOW and HASTINGS. SERVANT. Welcome, gentlemen, very
welcome! This way.


HASTINGS. After the disappointments of the day, welcome Once more, Charles, to
the comforts of a clean room and a good fire. Upon my word, a very welllooking
house; antique but creditable.


MARLOW. The usual fate of a large mansion. Having first ruined the master by
good housekeeping, it at last comes to levy contributions as an inn.


HASTINGS. As you say, we passengers are to be taxed to pay all these fineries.
I have often seen a good sideboard, or a marble chimney-piece, though not
actually put in the bill, inflame a reckoning confoundedly.


MARLOW. Travelers, George, must pay in all places. The only difference is,
that in good inns, you pay dearly for luxuries; in bad inns, you are fleeced
and starved.


HASTINGS. You have lived pretty much among them. In truth, I have been often
surprised, that you who have seen so much of the world, with your natural good
sense, and your many opportunities, could never yet acquire a requite share of
assurance.


MARLOW. The Englishman's malady. But tell me, George, where ^ould I have
learned that assurance you talk of? My life has been chiefly spent in a
college, or an inn, in seclusion from that lovely part of the creation that
chiefly teach men confidence. I don't know that I was ever familiarly
acquainted with a single modest woman -- except my mother -- But among females
of another class you know --


HASTINGS. Aye, among them you are impudent enough of all conscience.


MARLOW. They are of us, you know.


HASTINGS. But in the company of women of reputation I never saw such an idiot,
such a trembler; you look for all the world as if you wanted an opportunity of
stealing out of the room.


MARLOW. Why, man, that is because I do want to steal out of the room. Faith, I
have often formed a resolution to break the ice, and rattle away at any rate.
But I don't know how, a single glance from a pair of fine eyes has totally
overset my resolution. An impudent fellow may counterfeit modesty, but I Will be
hanged if a modest man can ever counterfeit impudence.


HASTINGS. If you could but say half the fine things to them that I have heard
you lavish upon the bar-maid of an inn, or even a college bed-maker --


MARLOW. Why, George, I cannot say fine things to them; they freeze, they
petrify me. They may talk of a comet, or a burning mountain, or some such
bagatelle. But to me, a Modest woman, dressed out in all her finery, is the most
tremendous object of the whole creation.


HASTINGS. Ha! ha! ha! At this rate, man, how can you ever expect to marry?


MARLOW. Never, unless, as among kings and princes, my bride were to be courted
by proxy. If, indeed, like an eastern bridegroom, one were to be introduced to
a wife he never saw before, it might be endured. But to go through all the
terrors of a formal courtship, together with the episode of aunts,
grandmothers, and cousins, and at last to blurt out the broad staring question
of, madam, will you marry me? No, no, that is a strain much above me, I assure
you.


HASTINGS. I pity you. But how do you intend behaving to the lady you are come
down to visit at the request of your father?


MARLOW. As I behave to all other ladies. Bow very low. Answer yes, or no, to
all her demands -- But for the rest, I don't think I shall venture to look in
her face, till I see my father's again.


HASTINGS. I Am surprised that one who is so warm a friend can be so cool a
lover.


MARLOW. To be explicit, my dear Hastings, my chief inducement down was to be
instrumental in forwarding your happiness, not my own. Miss Neville loves you,
the family don't know you, as my friend you are sure of a reception, and let
honor do the rest.


HASTINGS. My dear Marlow! But I Will suppress the emotion. Were I a wretch,
meanly seeking to carry off a fortune, you should be the last man in the world
I would apply to for assistance. But Miss Neville's person is all I ask, and
that is mine, both from her deceased father's consent, and her own inclination.


MARLOW. Happy man! You have talents and art to captivate any woman. I Am doomed
to adore the sex, and yet to converse with the only part of it I despise. This
stammer in my address, and this awkward prepossessing visage of mine, can never
permit me to soar above the reach of a milliner's 'prentice, or one of the
duchesses of Drury Lane. Pshaw! this fellow here to interrupt us.


Enter HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Gentlemen, once more you are heartily welcome.
Which is Mr. Marlow? Sir, you're heartily welcome. It Is not my way, you see, to
receive my friends with my back to the fire. I like to give them a hearty
reception in the old style at my gate. I like to see their horses and trunks
taken care of.


MARLOW (aside.) He has got our names from the servants already. (To him) We
approve your caution and hospitality, Sir. (To Hastings) I have been thinking,
George, of changing our traveling dresses in the morning. I am grown
confoundedly ashamed of mine.


HARDCASTLE. I beg, Mr. Marlow, you will use no ceremony in this house.


HASTINGS. I fancy, George, you're right: the first blow is half the battle. I
intend opening the campaign with the white and gold.


HARDCASTLE. Mr. Marlow -- Mr. Hastings -- gentlemen -- pray be under no
constraint in this house. This is Liberty-hall, gentlemen. You may do just as
you please here.


MARLOW. Yet, George, if we open the campaign too fiercely at first, we may
want ammunition before it is over. I think to reserve the embroidery to secure
a retreat.


HARDCASTLE. Your talking of a retreat, Mr. Marlow, puts me in wind of the duke
of Marlborough, when we went to besiege Denain. He first summoned the garrison.


MARLOW. Don't you think the ventre dor waistcoat will do with the plain brown?


HARDCASTLE. He first summoned the garrison, which might consist of about five
thousand men --


HASTINGS. I think not: brown and yellow mix but very poorly.


HARDCASTLE. I say, gentlemen, as I was telling you, he summoned The garrison,
which might consist of about five thousand men --


MARLOW. The girls like finery.


HARDCASTLE. Which might consist of about five thousand men, well appointed
with stores ammunition, and other implements of war. Now, says the duke of
Marlborough to George Brooks, that stood next to him -- you must have heard of
George Brooks -- I Will pawn my dukedom, says he, but I take that garrison
without spilling a drop of blood. So --


MARLOW. What, my good friend, if you gave us a glass of punch in the mean
time, it would help us to carry on the siege with vigor.


HARDCASTLE. Punch, Sir! (Aside) This is the most unaccountable kind of modesty
I ever met with.


MARLOW. Yes, Sir, punch. A glass of warm punch, after our journey, will be
comfortable. This is Liberty-hall, you know.


HARDCASTLE. Here Is cup, Sir.


MARLOW. (Aside) So this fellow, in his Liberty-hall, will only let us have
just what he pleases.


HARDCASTLE. (Taking the cup) I hope you will find it to your mind. I have
prepared it with my own hands, and I believe you will own the ingredients are
tolerable. Will you be so good as to pledge me, Sir? Here, Mr. Marlow, here is
to our better acquaintance. (Drinks.)


MARLOW. (Aside) A very impudent fellow this! but he is a character and I Will
humor him a little. Sir, my service to you. (Drinks.)


HASTINGS. (Aside) I see this fellow wants to give us his company, and forgets
that he is an innkeeper, before he has learned to be a gentleman.


MARLOW. From the excellence of your cup, my old friend, I suppose you have a
good deal of business in this part of the country. Warm work, now and then, at
elections, I suppose.


HARDCASTLE. No, Sir, I have long given that work over. Since our betters have
hit upon the expedient of electing each other, there is no business 'for us
that sell ale.'


HASTINGS. So, then you have no turn for politics I find.


HARDCASTLE. Not in the least. There was a time, indeed, I fretted myself about
the mistakes of government, like other people; but finding myself every day
grow more angry, and the government growing no better, I left it to mend
itself. Since that, I no more trouble my head about Heyder Ally or Ally Cawn,
than about Ally Croaker. Sir, my service to you.


HASTINGS. So that with eating above stairs, and drinking below, with receiving
your friends within, and amusing them without, you lead a good pleasant
bustling life of it.


HARDCASTLE. I do stir about a great deal, that is certain. Half the differences
of the parish are adjusted in this very parlour.


MARLOW. (After drinking) And you have an argument in your cup, old gentleman,
better than any in Westminster Hall.


HARDCASTLE. Aye, young gentleman, that, and a little philosophy.


MARLOW. (Aside.) Well, this is the first time I ever heard of an innkeeper's
philosophy.


HASTINGS. So then, like an experienced general, you attack them on every
quarter. If you find their reason manageable, you attack it with your
philosophy; if you find they have no reason, you attack them with this. Here Is
your health, my philosopher. (Drinks.)


HARDCASTLE. Good, very good, thank you; ha! ha! Your generalship puts me in
mind of prince Eugene, when he fought the Turks at the battle of Belgrade. You
shall hear.


MARLOW. Instead of the battle of Belgrade, I believe it is almost time to talk
about supper. What has your philosophy got in the house for supper?


HARDCASTLE. For supper, Sir! (Aside) Was ever such a request to a man in his
own house!


MARLOW. Yes, Sir, supper, Sir; I begin to feel an appetite. I shall make
devilish work tonight in the larder, I promise you.


HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Such a brazen dog sure never my eyes beheld. (To him) Why
really, Sir, as for supper I cannot well tell. My Dorothy, and the cook-maid,
settle these things between them. I leave these kind of things entirely to then.


MARLOW. Yon do, do you?


HARDCASTLE. Entirely. By-the-bye, I believe they are in actual consultation
upon what is for supper this moment in the kitchen.


MARLOW. Then I beg they will admit me as one of their privy council. It Is a way
I have got. When I travel, I always choose to regulate my own supper. Let the
cook be called. No offense I hope, Sir.


HARDCASTLE. O no, Sir, none in the least; yet I don't know how: our Bridget,
the cook-maid, is not very communicative upon these occasions. Should we send
for her, she might scold us all out of the house.


HASTINGS. Let Us see your list of the larder then. I ask it as a favor. I
always match my appetite to my bill of fare.


MARLOW. (To Hardcastle, who looks at them with surprise) Sir, he is very right,
and it is my way too.


HARDCASTLE. Sir, you have a right to command here. Here, Roger, bring us the
bill of fare for to-night's supper. I believe it is drawn out. Your manner, Mr.
Hastings, puts me in mind of my uncle, colonel Wallop. It was a saying of his,
that no man was sure of his supper till he had eaten it.


HASTINGS. (Aside) All upon the high ropes! His uncle a colonel! We shall soon
hear of his mother being a justice of peace. But let us hear the bill of fare.


MARLOW. (Perusing) What Is here? For the first course; for the second course;
for the desert. The devil, Sir, do you think we have brought down the whole
joiners company, or the corporation of Bedford, to eat up such a supper? Two or
three little things, clean and comfortable, will do.


HASTINGS. But, let us hear it.


MARLOW. (Reading) For the first course at the top, a pig, and pruin sauce.


HASTINGS. Damn your pig, I say.


MARLOW. And damn your pruin sauce, say I.


HARDCASTLE. And yet, gentlemen, to men that are hungry, pig, with pruin sauce,
is very good eating.


MARLOW. At the bottom, a calve's tongue and brains.


HASTINGS. Let your brains be knocked out, my good Sir; I don't like them.


MARLOW. Or you may clap them on a plate by themselves.


HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Their impudence confounds me. (To them) Gentlemen, you are
my guests, make what alterations you please. Is there any thing else you wish
to retrench or alter, gentlemen?


MARLOW. Item. A pork pie, a boiled rabbit and sausages, a Florentine, a
shaking pudding, and a dish of tiff -- taff -- taffety cream!


HASTINGS. Confound your made dishes, I shall be as much at a loss in this
house as at a green and yellow dinner at the French ambassador's table. I Am for
plain eating.


HARDCASTLE. I Am sorry, gentlemen, that I have nothing you like, but if there
be any thing you have a particular fancy to --


MARLOW. Why, really, Sir, your bill of fare is so exquisite, that any one part
of it is full as good as another. Send us what you please. So much for supper.
And now to see that our beds are air'd, and properly taken care of.


HARDCASTLE. I entreat you will leave all that to me. You shall not stir a step.


MARLOW. Leave that to you! I protest, Sir, you must excuse me, I always look
to these things myself.


HARDCASTLE. I must insist, Sir, you will make yourself easy on that head.


MARLOW. You see I Am resolved on it. (Aside.) A very troublesome fellow this,
as ever I met with.


HARDCASTLE. Well, Sir, I Am resolved at least to attend you. (Aside) This may
be modern modesty, but I never saw any thing look so like old-fashioned
impudence.


[Exeunt Marlow and Hardcastle. HASTINGS, solus. So I find this fellow's
civilities begin to grow troublesome. But who can be angry at those assiduities
Which are meant to please him? Ha! what do I see? Miss Neville, by all that is
happy!


Enter Miss NEVILLE. Miss NEVILLE. My dear Hastings! To what unexpected good
fortune? to what accident, am I to ascribe this happy meeting?


HASTINGS. Rather let me ask the same question, as I could never have hoped to
meet my dearest Constance at an inn.


Miss NEVILLE. An inn! sure you mistake! my aunt, my guardian, lives here. What
could induce you to think this house an inn?


HASTINGS. My friend, Mr. Marlow, with whom I came down, and I, have been sent
here as to an inn, I assure you. A young fellow whom we accidentally met at a
house hard by directed us hither.


Miss NEVILLE. Certainly it must be one of my hopeful cousin's tricks, of whom
you have heard me talk so often, ha! ha! ha!


HASTINGS. He whom your aunt intends for you? he of whom I have such just
apprehensions?


Miss NEVILLE. You have nothing to fear from him, I assure you. You Would adore him
if you knew how heartily he despises me. My aunt knows it too, and has
undertaken to court me for him, and actually begins to think she has made a
conquest.


HASTINGS. Thou dear dissembler! You must know, my Constance, I have just
seized this happy opportunity of my friend's visit here to get admittance into
the family. The horses that carried us down are now fatigued with their
journey, but they will soon be refreshed; and then, if my dearest girl will trust
in her faithful Hastings, we shall soon be landed, in France, where even among
slaves the laws of marriage are respected.


Miss NEVILLE. I have Often told you, that, though ready to obey you, I yet
should leave my little fortune behind with reluctance. The greatest part of it
was left me by my uncle, the India director, and chiefly consists in jewels. I
have been for some time persuading my aunt to let me wear them. I fancy I Am
very near succeeding. The instant they are put into my possession you shall
find me ready to make them and myself yours.


HASTINGS. Perish the baubles! Your person is all I desire. In the mean time,
my friend Marlow must not be let into his mistake. I know the strange reserve
of his temper is such, that if abruptly informed of it, he would instanly quit
die house before our plan was ripe for execution.


Miss NEVILLE. But how shall we keep him in the deception? Miss Hardcastle is
just returned from walking; what if we still continue to deceive him? -- This,
this way --


[They confer. Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. The assiduities of these good people teize
me beyond bearing. My host seems to think it ill manners to leave me alone, and
so he claps not only himself but his old-fashioned wife on my back. They talk
of coming to sup with us too; and then, I suppose, we are to run the gauntlet
through all the rest of the family. -- What have we got here! --


HASTINGS. My dear Charles! Let me congratulate you! -- The most fortunate
accident! -- Who do you think is just alighted?


MARLOW. Cannot guess.


HASTINGS. Our mistresses, boy, Miss Hardcastle and Miss Neville. Give me leave
to introduce Miss Constance Neville to your acquaintance. Happening to dine in
the neighborhood, they called, on their return, to take fresh horses here.
Miss Hardcastle has just stepped into the next room, and will be back in an
instant. Was Not it lucky? eh!


MARLOW. (Aside) I have been mortified enough of all conscience, and here comes
something to complete my embarrassment.


HASTINGS. Well! but was'nt it the most fortunate thing in the world?


MARLOW. Oh! yes. Very fortunate -- a most joyful encounter -- But our dresses,
George, you know are in disorder -- What if we should postpone the happiness
'till tomorrow? -- Tomorrow at her own house -- It will be every bit as
convenient -- and rather more respectful -- Tomorrow let it be. [Offering to
go.


Miss NEVILLE. By no means, Sir. Your ceremony will displease her. The disorder
of your dress will show the ardour of your impatience. Besides, she knows you
are in the house, and will permit you to see her.


MARLOW. O! the devil! how shall I support it? hem! hem! Hastings, you must not
go. You are to assist me, you know. I shall be confoundedly ridiculous. Yet,
hang it! I Will take courage. Hem!


HASTINGS. Pshaw, man! it is but the first plunge, and all is over. She Is but a
woman, you know.


MARLOW. And of all women, she that I dread most to encounter!


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE, as returned from walking, a bonnet, etc. HASTINGS,
introducing them. Miss Hardcastle, Mr. Marlow. I Am proud of bringing two
persons of such merit together, that only want to know, to esteem each other.


Miss HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Now, for meeting my modest gentleman with a demure
face, and quite in his own manner. (After a pause, in which be appears very
uneasy and disconcerted.) I Am glad of your safe arrival, Sir -- I Am told you
had some accidents by the way.


MARLOW. Only a few, madam. Yes, we had some. Yes, madam, a good many
accidents, but should be sorry -- madam -- or rather glad of any accidents --
that are so agreeably concluded. Hem!


HASTINGS. (To him) You never spoke better in your whole life. Keep it up, and
I Will insure you the victory.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am afraid you flatter, Sir. You that have seen so much of
the finest company can find little entertainment in an obscure corner of the
country.


MARLOW. (Gathering courage) I have lived, indeed, in the world, madam; but I
have kept very little company. I have been but an observer upon life, madam,
while others were enjoying it.


Miss NEVILLE. But that, I am told, is the way to enjoy it at last.


HASTINGS. (To him) Cicero never spoke better. Once more, and you are confirmed
in assurance for ever.


MARLOW. (To him) Hem! stand by me then, and when I Am down, throw in a word or
two to set me up again.


Miss HARDCASTLE. An observer, like you, upon life, were, I fear, disagreeably
employed, since you must have had much more to censure than to approve.


MARLOW. Pardon me, madam. I was always willing to be amused. The folly of most
people is rather an object of mirth than uneasiness.


HASTINGS. (To him) Bravo, bravo. Never spoke so well in your whole life. Well!
Miss Hardcastle, I see that you and Mr. Marlow are going to be very good
company. I believe our being here will but embarrass the interview.


MARLOW. Not in the least, Mr. Hastings. We like your company of all things.
(To him) Zounds! George, sure you will not go? how can you leave us?


HASTINGS. Our presence will but spoil conversation. so we'll retire to the
next room. (To him) Yon don't consider, man, that we are to manage a little
tete-a-tete of our own.


[Exeunt. Miss HARDCASTLE. (After a pause I But you have not been wholly an
observer, I presume, Sir: the ladies I should hope have employed some part of
your addresses.


MARLOW. (Relapsing into timidity) Pardon me, madam, I -- I -- I -- as yet have
studied -- only -- to -- deserve them.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And that, some say, is the very worst way to obtain them.


MARLOW. Perhaps so madam. But I love to converse only with the more grave and
sensible part Of the sex. -- But I Am afraid I grow tiresome.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Not at all, Sir; there is nothing I like so much as grave
conversation myself; I could hear it for ever. Indeed I have often been
surprised how a man of sentiment could ever admire those light airy pleasures,
where nothing reaches the heart.


MARLOW. It Is -- a disease -- of the mind, madam. In the variety of tastes
there must be some who wanting a relish -- for -- um -- a -- um.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I understand you, Sir. There must be some, who wanting a
relish for refined pleasures, pretend to despise what they are incapable of
tasting.


MARLOW. My meaning, madam, but infinitely better expressed. And I cannot help
observing -- a --


Miss HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Who could ever suppose this fellow impudent upon such
occasions. (To him) You were going to observe, Sir --


MARLOW. I was observing, madam -- I protest, madam, I forget what I was going
to observe.


Miss HARDCASTLE. (Aside) I vow and so do I. (To him) You were observing, Sir,
that in this age of hypocrisy something about hypocrisy, Sir.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. In this age of hypocrisy there are few who upon strict
inquiry do not -- a -- a -- a --


Miss HARDCASTLE. I understand you perfectly, Sir.


MARLOW. (Aside) Egad! and that is more than I do myself.


Miss HARDCASTLE. You mean that in this hypocritical age there are few that do
not condemn in public what they practice in private, and think they pay every
debt to virtue when they praise it.


MARLOW. True, madam; those who have most virtue in their mouths, have least of
it in their bosoms. But I Am sure I tire you, madam.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Not in the least, Sir; there is something so agreeable and
spirited in your manner, such life and force -- pray, Sir, go on.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. I was saying -- that there are some occasions -- when a
total want of courage, madam, destroys all the -- and puts us -- upon a -- a --
a --


Miss HARDCASTLE. I agree with you entirely, a want of courage upon some
occasions assumes the appearance of ignorance and betrays us when we most want
to excel. I beg you will proceed.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. Morally speaking, madam -- But I see Miss Neville
expecting us in the next room. I would not intrude for the world.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I protest, Sir, I never was more agreeably entertained in all
my life. Pray go on.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. I was -- But she beckons us to join her. Madam, shall I do
myself the honor to attend you?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Well then, I Will follow.


MARLOW. (Aside) This pretty smooth dialogue has done for me.

[Exit.
Miss HARDCASTLE, sola. Ha! ha! ha! Was there ever such a sober sentimental
interview? I Am certain he scarce looked in my face the whole time. Yet the
fellow, but for his unaccountable bashfulness, is pretty well too. He has good
sense, but then so buried in his fears, that it fatigues one more than
ignorance. If I could teach him a little confidence, it would be doing somebody
that I know of a piece of service. But who is that somebody? -- That, faith, is
a question I can scarce answer.

[Exit
Enter TONY and Miss NEVILLE, followed by Mrs. HARDCASTLE and HASTINGS. TONY.
What do you follow me for, cousin Con? I wonder you're not ashamed to be so
very engaging.


Miss NEVILLE. I hope, cousin, one may speak to one's own relations, and not be
to blame.


TONY. Aye, but I know what sort of a relation you want to make me though; but
it will not do. I tell you, cousin Con, it will not do; so I beg you will keep your
distance, I want no nearer relationship.

She follows, coquetting him to the back scene.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well! I vow, Mr. Hastings, you are very entertaining. There Is
nothing in the world I love to talk of so much as London, and the fashions,
though I was never there myself.


HASTINGS. Never there! You amaze me! From your air and manner, I conclude you
had been bred all your life either at Ranelagh, St. James's, or Tower Wharf.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O! Sir, you're only pleased to say so. We country persons can
have no manner at all. I Am in love with the town, and that serves to raise me
above some of our neighboring rustics; but who can have a manner, that has
never seen the Pantheon, the Grotto Gardens, the Borough, and such places where
the nobility chiefly resort? All I can do, is to enjoy London at second-hand. I
take care to know every tete-a-tete from the scandalous magazine, and have all
the fashions, as they come out, in a letter from the two Miss Rickets of
Crookedlane. Pray how do you like this head, Mr. Hastings?


HASTINGS. Extremely elegant and degagee, upon my word, madam. your friseur is
a Frenchman, I suppose?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I protest I dressed it myself from a print in the ladies
memorandum-book for the last year.


HASTINGS. Indeed! Such a head in a side-box, at the playhouse, would draw as
many gazers as my lady may'ress at a city ball.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I vow, since inoculation began, there is no such thing to be
seen as a plain woman; so one must dress a little particular, or one may escape
in the crowd.


HASTINGS. But that can never be your case, madam, in any dress. (Bowing.)


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Yet, what signifies my dressing when I have such a piece of
antiquity by my side as Mr. Hardcastle: all I can say will never argue down a
single button from his clothes. I have often wanted him to throw off his great
flaxen wig, and where he was bald, to plaster it over, like my Lord Pately,
with powder.


HASTINGS. You are right, madam; for, as among the ladies there are none ugly,
so among the men there are none old.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. But what do you think his answer was? Why, with his usual
Gothic vivacity, he said I only wanted him to throw off his wig to convert it
into a tete for my own wearing.


HASTINGS. Intolerable! At your age you may wear what you please, and it must
become you.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pray, Mr. Hastings, what do you take to be the most
fashionable age about town?


HASTINGS. Some time ago, forty was all the mode; but I Am told the ladies
intend to bring up fifty for the ensuing winter.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Seriously. Then I shall be too young for the fashion.


HASTINGS. No lady begins now to put on jewels 'till she is past forty. For
instance, Miss there, in a polite circle, would be considered as a child, as a
mere maker of samplers.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. And yet Mrs. Niece thinks herself as much a woman, and is as
fond of jewels as the oldest of us all.


HASTINGS. Your niece, is she? And that young gentleman, a brother of yours, I
should presume?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. My son, Sir. They are contracted to each other. Observe their
little sports. They fall in and out ten times a day, as if they were man and
wife already. (To them) Well, Tony, child, what soft things are you saying to
your cousin Constance this evening?


TONY. I have been saying no soft things; but that it is very hard to be
followed about so. Ecod! I Have not a place in the house now that is left to
myself, but the stable.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Never mind him, Con, my dear. He Is in another story behind
your back.


Miss NEVILLE. There Is something generous in my cousin's manner. He falls out
before faces to be forgiven in private.


TONY. That Is a damned confounded -- crack.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ah! he is a sly one. Don't you think they are like each other
about the month, Mr. Hastings? The Blenkinsop mouth to a T. They Are of a size
too. Back to back, my pretties, that Mr. Hastings may see you. Come, Tony.


TONY. You had as good not make me, I tell you.

Measuring.


Miss NEVILLE. O lud! he has almost cracked my head.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O the monster! For shame, Tony. You a man, and behave so!


TONY. If I Am a man, let me have my fortin. Ecod! I Will not be made a fool of no
longer.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Is this, ungrateful boy, all that I Am to get for the pains I
have taken in your education? I that have rocked yon in your cradle, and fed
that pretty mouth with a spoon! Did not I work that waistcoat to make you
genteel? Did not I prescribe for you every day, and weep while the receipt was
operating?


TONY. Ecod! you had reason to weep, for you have been dosing me ever since I
was born. I have gone through every receipt in the complete housewife ten times
over; and you have thoughts of coursing me through Quincy next spring. But,
ecod! I tell you, I Will not be made a fool of no longer.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was Not it all for your good, viper? Was Not it all for your
good?


TONY. I wish you would let me and my good alone then. Snubbing this way when I Am
in spirits. If I Am to have any good, let it come of itself; not to keep dinging
it, dinging it into one so.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. That Is false; I never see you when you're in spirits. No,
Tony, you then go to the alehouse or kennel. I Am never to be delighted with
your agreeable, wild notes, unfeeling monster!


TONY. Ecod! mamma, your own notes are the wildest of the two.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was ever the like? But I see he wants to break my heart, I
see he does.


HASTINGS. Dear madam, permit me to lecture the young gentleman a little. I Am
certain I can persuade him to his duty.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well! I must retire. Come, Constance, my love. You see, Mr.
Hastings, the wretchedness of my situation: was ever poor woman so plagued with
a dear, sweet, pretty, provoking, undutiful boy.


[Exeunt Mrs. Hardcastle and Miss Neville. HASTINGS, TONY. TONY, singing.
"There was a young man riding by, and fain would have his will. Rang do didlo
dee." -- Don't mind her. Let her cry. It Is the comfort of her heart. I have
seen her and sister cry over a book for an hour together, and they said, they
liked the book the better the more it made them cry.


HASTINGS. Then you're no friend to the ladies, I find, my pretty young
gentleman?


TONY. That Is as I find 'um.


HASTINGS. Not to her of your mother's choosing, I dare answer? And yet she
appears to me a pretty well-tempered girl.


TONY. That Is because you don't know her as well as I. Ecod! I know every inch
about her; and there is not a more bitter cantanckerous toad in all christendom.


HASTINGS. (Aside) Pretty encouragement this for a lover!


TONY. I have seen her since the height of that. She has as many tricks as a
hare in a thicket, or a colt the first day's breaking.


HASTINGS. To me she appears sensible and silent!


TONY. Aye, before company. But when she is with her play-mate she is as loud as
a hog in a gate.


HASTINGS. But there is a meek modesty about her that charms me.


TONY. Yes, but curb her never so little, she kicks up, and you're flung in a
ditch.


HASTINGS. Well, but you must allow her a little beauty. -- Yes, you must allow
her some beauty.


TONY. Bandbox! She Is all a made up thing, mum. Ah! could you but see Bet
Bouncer of these parts, you might then talk of beauty. Ecod, she has two eyes
as black as stoes, and cheeks as broad and red as a pulpit cushion. She Would make
two of she.


HASTINGS. Well, what say you to a friend that would take this bitter bargain
off your hands?


TONY. Anon.


HASTINGS. Would you thank him that would take Miss Neville, and leave you to
happiness and your dear Betsy?


TONY. Aye; but where is there such a friend, for who would take her?


HASTINGS. I am he. If you but assist me, I Will engage to whip her off to
France, and you shall never hear more of her.


TONY. Assist you! Ecod I will, to the last drop of my blood. I Will clap a pair
of horses to your chaise that shall trundle you off in a twinkling, and may be
get you a part of her fortin beside, in jewels, that you little dream of.


HASTINGS. My dear 'squire, this looks like a lad of spirit.


TONY. Come along then, and you shall see more of my spirit before you have
done with me.

Singing.

We are the boys

That fears no noise

Where the thundering cannons roar.


[Exeunt. ACT THE THIRD.
Enter HARDCASTLE, solus. HARDCASTLE. WHAT could my old friend Sir Charles mean
by recommending his son as the modestest young man in town? To me he appears
the most impudent piece of brass that ever spoke with a tongue. He has taken
possession of the easy chair by the fireside already. He took off his boots in
the parlour, and desired me to see them taken care of. I Am desirous to know how
his impudence affects my daughter. -- She will certainly be shocked at it.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE, plainly dressed. HARDCASTLE. Well, my Kate, I see you
have changed your dress as I bid you; and yet, I believe, there was no great
occasion.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I find such a pleasure, Sir, in obeying your commands, that I
take care to observe them without ever debating their propriety.


HARDCASTLE. And yet, Kate, I sometimes give you some cause, particularly when
I recommended my modest gentleman to you as a lover today.


Miss HARDCASTLE. You taught me to expect something extraordinary, and I find
the original exceeds the description.


HARDCASTLE. I was never so surprised in my life! He has quite confounded all
my faculties!


Miss HARDCASTLE. I never saw any thing like it: and a man of the world too!


HARDCASTLE. Aye, he learned it all abroad, -- what a fool was I, to think a
young man could learn modesty by traveling. He might as soon learn wit at a
masquerade.


Miss HARDCASTLE. It seems all natural to him.


HARDCASTLE. A good deal assisted by bad company and a French dancing master.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sure you mistake, papa! A French dancingmaster could never
have taught him that timid look, -- that awkward address, -- that bashful
manner --


HARDCASTLE. Whose look? whose manner, child?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Mr. Marlow's: his mauvaise honte, his timidity struck me at
the first sight.


HARDCASTLE. Then your first sight deceived you; for I think him one of the
most brazen first sights that ever astonished my senses.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sure, Sir, you rally! I never saw any one so modest.


HARDCASTLE. And can you be serious! I never saw such a bouncing swaggering
puppy since I was born. Bully Dawson was but a fool to him.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Surprising! He met me with a respectful bow, a stammering
voice, and a look fixed on the ground.


HARDCASTLE. He met me with a loud voice, a lordly air, and a familiarity that
made my blood freeze again.


Miss HARDCASTLE. He treated me with diffidence and respect; censured the
manners of the age; admired the prudence of girls that never laughed; tired me
with apologies for being tiresome; then left the room with a bow, and, "madam,
I would not for the world detain you."


HARDCASTLE. He spoke to me as if he knew me all his life before. Asked twenty
questions, and never, waited for an answer, interrupted my best remarks with
some, silly pun, and when I was in my best story of the Duke of Marlborough and
Prince Eugene, he asked if I had not a good hand at making punch. Yes, Kate, he
asked your father if he was a maker of punch.


Miss HARDCASTLE. One of us must certainly be mistaken.


HARDCASTLE. If he be what he he has shown himself, I Am determined he shall
never have my consent.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And if he be the fullen thing I take him, he shall never have
mine.


HARDCASTLE. In one thing then we are agreed -- to reject him.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes. But upon conditions. For if you should find him less
impudent, and I more presuming; if you find him more respectful, and I more
importunate -- I don't know -- the fellow is well enough for a man -- Certainly
we don't meet many such at a horse race in the country.


HARDCASTLE. If we should find him so -- But that is impossible. The first
appearance has done my business. I Am seldom deceived in that.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And yet there may be many good qualities under that first
appearance.


HARDCASTLE. Aye, when a girl finds a fellow's outside to her taste, she then
sets about guessing the rest of his furniture. With her, a smooth face stands
for good sense, and a genteel figure for every virtue.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I hope, Sir, a conversation begun with a compliment to my
good sense will not end with a sneer at my understanding?


HARDCASTLE. Pardon me, Kate. But if young Mr. Brazen can find the art of
reconciling contradictions, he may please us both, perhaps.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And as one of us must be mistaken, what if we go to make
further discoveries?


HARDCASTLE. Agreed. But depend on it I Am in the right.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And depend on it I Am not much in the wrong.


[Exeunt. Enter TONY, running in with a casket. TONY. Ecod! I have got them.
Here they are. My cousin Con's necklaces, bobs and all. My mother shall not cheat
the poor souls out of their fortin neither. O! my genus, is that you?


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. My dear friend, how have you managed with your
mother? I hope you have amused her with pretending love for your cousin, and
that you are willing to be reconciled at last? Our horses will be refreshed in
a short time, and we shall soon be ready to set off.


TONY. And here is something to bear your charges by the way, (giving the
casket) your sweetheart's jewels. Keep them, and hang those, I say, that would
rob you of one of them.


HASTINGS. But how have you procured them from your mother?


TONY. Ask me no questions, and I Will tell you no fibs. I procured them by the
rule of thumb. If I had not a key to every drawer in mother's bureau, how could
I go to the alehouse so often as I do? An honest man may rob himself of his own
at any time.


HASTINGS. Thousands do it every day. But to be plain with you, Miss Neville is
endeavoring to procure them from her aunt this very instant. If she succeeds,
it will be the most delicate way at least of obtaining them.


TONY. Well, keep them, till you know how it will be. But I know how it will be
well enough, she would as soon part with the only sound, tooth in her head.


HASTINGS. But I dread the effects of her resentment, when she finds she has
lost them.


TONY. Never you mind her resentment, leave me to manage that. I don't value
her resentment the bounce of a cracker. Zounds! here they are. Morris! Prance!


[Exit Hastings. TONY, Mrs. HARDCASTLE, and Miss NEVILLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE.
Indeed, Constance, you amaze me. Such a girl as you want jewels? It will be
time enough for jewels, my dear, twenty years hence, when your beauty begins to
want repairs.


Miss NEVILLE. But what will repair beauty at forty, will certainly improve it
at twenty, madam.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Yours, my dear, can admit of none. That natural blush is
beyond a thousand ornaments. Besides, child, jewels are quite out at present.
Don't you see half the ladies of our acquaintance, my lady Kill-day-light, and
Mrs. Crump, and the rest of them, carry their jewels to town, and bring nothing
but paste and marcasites back.


Miss NEVILLE. But who knows, madam, but somebody that shall be nameless would
like me best with all my little finery about me?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Consult your glass, my dear, and then see if, with such a
pair of eyes, you want any better sparklers. What do you think, Tony, my dear?
does your cousin Con, want any jewels, in your eyes, to set off her beauty?


TONY. That Is as thereafter may be.


Miss NEVILLE. My dear aunt, if you knew how it would oblige me.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. A parcel of old-fashioned rose and table cut things. They
would make you look like the court of king Solomon at a puppet-shew. Besides, I
believe I cannot readily come at them. They may be missing for aught I know to
the contrary.


TONY. (Apart to Mrs. Hardcastle.) Then why don't you tell her so at once, as
she is so longing for them? Tell her they are lost. It Is the only way to quiet
her. Say they are lost, and call me to bear witness.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Apart to Tony.) You know, my dear, I Am only keeping them for
you. So if I say they are gone, you will bear me witness, will you? He! he! he!


Tony. Never sear me. Ecod! I Will say I saw them taken out with my own eyes.


Miss NEVILLE. I desire them but for a day, madam. Just to be permitted to show
them as relics, and then they may be locked up again.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. To be plain with you, my dear Constance; if I could find
them, you should have them. They Are missing, I assure you. Lost, for aught I
know; but we must have patience wherever they are.


Miss NEVILLE. I Will not believe it; this is but a shallow pretense to deny me.
I know they are too valuable to be so slightly kept, and as you are to answer
for the loss.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Don't be alarmed, Constance. If they be lost, I must restore
an equivalent. But my son knows they are missing, and not to be found.


TONY. That I can bear witness to. They are missing, and not to be found, I Will
take my oath on it.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. You must learn resignation, my dear; for though we lose our
fortune, yet we should not lose our patience. See me, how calm I am.


Miss NEVILLE. Aye, people are generally calm at the misfortunes of others.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Now, I wonder a girl of your good sense should waste a
thought upon such trumpery. We shall soon find them; and, in the mean time, you
shall make use of my garnets till your jewels be found.


Miss NEVILLE. I detest garnets.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. The most becoming things in the world to set off a clear
complexion. You have often seen how well they look upon me, You shall have them.

[Exit.
Miss NEVILLE. I dislike them of all things. You shall not stir. -- Was ever any
thing so provoking to mislay my own jewels, and force me to wear her trumpery.


TONY. Don't be a fool. If she gives you the garnets, take what you can get.
The jewels are your own already. I have stolen them out of her bureau, and she
does not know it. Fly to your spark, he will tell you more of the matter. Leave
me to manage her.


Miss NEVILLE. My dear cousin!


TONY. Vanish. She Is here, and has missed them already. Zounds! how she fidgets
and spits about like a catharine wheel.


Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Confusion! thieves! robbers! we are
cheated, plundered, broke open, undone.


TONY. What Is the matter, what is the matter, mamma? I hope nothing has happened
to any of the good family!


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. We are robbed. My bureau has been broke open, the jewels
taken out, and I Am undone.


TONY. Oh! is that all? Ha! ha! ha! By the laws, I never saw it better acted in
my life. Ecod, I thought you was ruined in earnest, ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Why, boy, I Am ruined in earnest. My bureau has been broke
open, and all taken away.


TONY. Stick to that; ha! ha! ha! stick to that. I Will bear witness, you know,
call me to bear witness.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I tell you, Tony, by all that is precious, the jewels are
gone, and I shall be ruined for ever.


TONY. Sure I know they are gone, and I Am to say so.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. My dearest Tony, but hear me. They Are gone, I say.


TONY. By the laws, mamma, you make me for to laugh, ha! ha! I know who took
them, well enough, ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was there ever such a blockhead, that cannot tell the
difference between jest and earnest! I tell you I Am not in jest, booby.


TONY. That Is right, that is right: you must be in a bitter passion, and then
nobody will suspect either of us. I Will bear witness that they are gone.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was there ever such a cross-grained brute, that will not hear
me? Can you bear witness that you're no better than a fool? Was ever poor woman
so beset with fools on one hand, and thieves on the other.


TONY. I can bear witness to that.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Bear witness again, you blockhead you, and I Will turn you out
of the room directly. My poor niece, what will become of her! Do you laugh, you
unfeeling brute, as if you enjoyed my distress?


TONY. I can bear witness to that.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Do you insult me, monster? I Will teach you to vex your mother,
I will.


TONY. I can bear witness to that.

He runs off, she follows him.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE and Maid. Miss HARDCASTLE. What an unaccountable
creature is that brother of mine, to send them to the house as an inn, ha! ha!
I don't wonder at his impudence.


MAID. But what is more, madam, the young gentleman, as you passed by in your
present dress, asked me if you were the bar-maid? He mistook you for the
bar-maid, madam.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Did he? Then as I live, I Am resolved to keep up the delusion.
Tell me, Pimple, how do you like my present dress. Don't you think I look
something like Cherry in the Beaux Stratagem?


MAID. It Is the dress, madam, that every lady wears is the country, but when
she visits, or receives company.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And are you sure he does not remember my face or person?


MAID. Certain of it.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I vow, I thought so? for though we spoke for some time
together, yet his fears were such, that he never once looked up during the
interview. Indeed, if he had, my bonnet would have kept him from seeing me.


MAID. But what do you hope from keeping him in his mistake?


Miss HARDCASTLE. In the first place, I shall be seen, and that is no small
advantage to a girl who brings her face to market. Then I shall perhaps make an
acquaintance, and that is no small victory gained over one who never addresses
any but the wildest of her sex. But my chief aim is to take my gentleman off
his guard, and, like an invisible champion of romance, examine the giant's
force before I offer to combat.


MAID. But are you sure you can act your part, and disguise your voice, so that
he may mistake that, as he has already mistaken your person?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Never fear me. I think I have got the true barcant. -- Did
your honor call? -- Attend the Lion there. -- Pipes and tobacco for the Angel.
-- The Lamb has been outrageous this half hour.


MAID. It will do, madam. But he is here.


[Exit Maid. Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. What a bawling in every part of the house! I
have scarce a moment's repose. If I go to the best room, there I find my host
and his story. If I fly to the gallery, there we have my hostess with her
courtesy down to the ground. I have at last got a moment to myself, and now for
recollection. [Walks and muses.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Did you call, Sir? Did your honor call?


MARLOW. (Musing.) As for Miss Hardcastle, she is too grave and sentimental for
me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Did your honor call?

She still places herself before him, be turning away.


MARLOW. No, child, (musing.) Besides, from the glimpse I had of her, I think
she squints.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am sure, Sir, I heard the bell ring.


MARLOW. No, no. (musing.) I have pleased my father, however, by coming down,
and I Will tomorrow please myself by returning.

Taking out his tablets, and perusing.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Perhaps the other gentleman called, Sir?


MARIOW. I tell you, no.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I should be glad to know, Sir. We have such a parcel of
servants.


MARLOW. No, no, I tell you. (Looks full in her face). Yes, child, I think I
did call. I wanted -- I wanted -- I vow, child, you are vastly handsome.


Miss HARDCASTLE. O la, Sir, you will make one ashamed.


MARLOW. Never saw a more sprightly malicious eye. Yes, yes, my dear, I did
call. Have you got any of your -- a -- what do you call it in the house?


Miss HARDCASTLE. No, Sir, we have been out of that these ten days.


MARLOW. One may call in this house, I find, to very little purpose. Suppose I
should call for a taste, just by way of trial, of the nectar of your lips;
perhaps I might be disappointed in that too.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Nectar! nectar! That Is a liquor there is no call for in those
parts. French, I suppose. We keep no French wines here, Sir.


MARLOW. Of true English growth, I assure you.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then it is odd I should not know it. We brew all sorts of
wines in this house, and I have lived here these eighteen years.


MARLOW. Eighteen years! Why one would think, child, you kept the bar before
you were born. How old are you?


Miss HARDCASTLE. O! Sir, I must not tell my age. They say women and music
should never be dated.


MARLOW. To guess at this distance you cannot be much above forty (approaching).
Yet nearer I don't think so much (approaching). By coming close to some women
they look younger still; but when we come very close indeed -- (attempting to
kiss her).


Miss HARDCASTLE. Pray, Sir, keep your distance. One would think you wanted to
know one's age as they do horses, by mark of mouth.


MARLOW. I protest, child, you use me extremely ill. If you keep me at this
distance, how is it possible you and I can ever be acquainted?


Miss HARDCASTLE. And who wants to be acquainted with you? I want no such
acquaintance, not I. I Am sure you did not treat Miss Hardcastle that was here
awhile ago in this obstropalous manner. I Will warrant me, before her you looked
dashed, and kept bowing to the ground, and talked, for all the word, as if you
was before a justice of peace.


MARLOW. (Aside) Egad! She has hit it, sure enough. (To her) In awe of her,
child s Ha! ha! ha! A mere, awkward, squinting thing, no, no. I find you don't
know me. I laughed, and rallied her a little; but I was unwilling to be too
severe. No, I could not be too severe, curse me!


Miss HARDCASTLE. O! then, Sir, you are a favorite, I find, among the ladies?


MARLOW. Yes, my dear, a great favorite. And yet, hang me, I don't see what
they find in me to follow. At the ladies club in town, I Am called their
agreeable Rattle. Rattle, child, is not my real name, but one I Am known by. My
name is Solomon's. Mr. Solomon's, my dear, at your service. (Offering to salute
her.)


Miss HARDCASTLE. Hold, Sir; you are introducing me to your club, not to
yourself. And you're so great a favorite there, you say?


MARLOW. Yes, my dear. There Is Mrs. Mantrap, lady Betty Blackleg, the countess
of Sligo, Mrs. Langhorns, old Miss Biddy Buckskin, and your humble servant,
keep up the spirit of the place.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then it is a very merry place, I suppose?


MARLOW. Yes, as merry as cards, supper, wine, and old women, can make us.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And their agreeable Rattle, ha! ha! ha!


MARLOW. (Aside) Egad! I don't quite like this chit. She looks knowing,
methinks. You laugh, child!


Miss HARDCASTLE. I cannot but laugh to think what time they all have for
minding their work or their family.


MARLOW. (Aside) All Is well; she don't laugh at me. (To her) Do you ever work,
child?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Aye, sure. There Is not a screen or a quilt in the whole house
but what can bear witness to that.


MARLOW. Odso! then you must show me your embroidery. I embroider and draw
patterns myself a little. If you want a judge of your work you must apply to
me. [Seizing her hand.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Aye, but the colors do not look well by candlelight. You
shall see all in the morning.

Struggling.


MARLOW. And why not now, my angel? Such beauty fires beyond the power of
resistance -- Pshaw! the father here! My old luck: I never nicked seven that I
did not throw ames ace three times following.


[Exit Marlow. Enter HARDCASTLE, who stands in surprise. HARDCASTLE. So, madam.
So I find this is your modest lover. This is your humble admirer that kept his
eyes fixed on the ground, and only adored at humble distance. Kate, Kate, art
thou not ashamed to deceive your father so?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Never trust me, dear papa, but he is still the modest man I
first took him for, you will be convinced of it as well as I.


HARDCASTLE. By the hand of my body I believe his impudence is infectious!
Didn't I see him seize your hand? Didn't I see him hawl you about like a
milk-maid? and now you talk of his respect and his modesty, forsooth!


Miss HARDCASTLE. But if I shortly convince you of his modesty, that he has
only the faults that will pass off with time, and the virtues that will improve
with age, I hope you will forgive him.


HARDCASTLE. The girl would actually make one run mad! I tell you I Will not be
convinced. I am convinced. He has scarce been three hours in the house, and he
has already encroached on all my prerogatives. You may like his impudence, and
call it modesty. But my son-in-law, madam, must have very different
qualifications.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sir, I ask but this night to convince you.


HARDCASTLE. You shall not have half the time, for I have thoughts of turning
him out this very hour.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Give me that hour then, and I hope to satisfy you.


HARDCASTLE. Well, an hour let it be then. But I Will have no trifling with your
father. All fair and open, do you mind me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I hope, Sir, you have ever found that I considered your
commands as my pride; for your kindness is such, that my duty as yet has been
inclination.


ACT THE FOURTH.
Enter HASTINGS and Miss NEVILLE. HASTINGS. YOU surprise me! Sir Charles Marlow
expected here this night? Where have you had your information?


Miss NEVILLE. You may depend upon it. I just saw his letter to Mr. Hardcastle,
in which he tells him he intends setting out a few hours after his son.


HASTINGS. Then, my Constance, all must be completed before he arrives. He
knows me; and should he find me here, would discover my name, and perhaps my
designs, to the rest of the family.


Miss NEVILLE. The jewels, I hope, are safe.


HASTINGS. Yes, yes. I have sent them to Marlow, who keeps the keys of our
baggage. In the mean time, I Will go to prepare matters for our elopement. I have
had the, squire's promise of a fresh pair of horses; and, if I should not see
him again, will write him further directions.

[Exit.
Miss NEVILLE. Well! success attend you. In the mean time, I Will go amuse my
aunt with the old pretense of a violent passion for my cousin.

[Exit.
Enter MARLOW, followed by a servant. MARLOW. I wonder what Hastings could mean
by sending me so valuable a thing as a casket to keep for him, when he knows
the only place I have is the seat of a postcoach at an inn-door. Have you
deposited the casket with the landlady, as I ordered you? Have you put it into
her own hands?


SERVANT. Yes, your honor.


MARLOW. She said she would keep it safe, did she?


SERVANT. Yes, she said she would keep it safe enough; she asked me how I came by
it? and she said she had a great mind to make me give an account of myself.


[Exit Servant. MARLOW. Ha! ha! ha! They Are safe however. What an unaccountable
set of beings have we got amongst! This little bar-maid though runs in my head
most strangely, and drives out the absurdities of all the rest of the family.
She Is mine, she must be mine, or I Am greatly mistaken.


Enter HASTINCS. HASTINGS. Bless me! I quite forgot to tell her that I intended
to prepare at the bottom of the garden. Marlow here, and in spirits too!


MARLOW. Give me joy, George! Crown me, shadow me with laurels! Well, George,
after all, we modest fellows don't want for success among the women.


HASTINGS. Some women you mean. But what success has your honor's modesty been
crowned with now, that it grows so insolent upon us?


MARLOW. Didn't you see the tempting, brisk, lovely, little thing that runs
about the house with a bunch of keys to its girdle?


HASTINGS. Well, and what then?


MARLOW. She Is mine, you rogue you. Such fire, such motion, such eyes, such
lips -- but, egad! she would not let me kiss them though.


HASTINGS. But are you so sure, so very sure of her?


MARLOW. Why, man, she talked of showing me her work above stairs, and I am to
improve the pattern.


HASTINGS. But how can you, Charles, go about to rob a woman of her honor?


MARLOW. Pshaw! pshaw! We all know the honor of the bar-maid of an inn. I
don't intend to rob her, take my word for it, there is nothing in this house, I
shall not honestly pay for.


HASTINGS. I believe the girl has virtue.


MARLOW. And if she has, I should be the last man in the world that would
attempt to corrupt it.


HASTINGS. You have taken care, I hope, of the casket I sent you to lock up?
It Is in safety?


MARLOW. Yes, yes. It Is safe enough. I have taken care of it. But how could you
think the seat of a postcoach at an inn-door a place of safety? Ah! Numbskull!
I have taken better precautions for you than you did for yourself. -- I have --


HASTINGS. What!


MARLOW. I have sent it to the landlady to keep for you.


HASTINGS. To the landlady!


MARLOW. The landlady!


HASTINGS. You did?


MARLOW. I did. She Is to be answerable for its forthcoming, you know.


HASTINGS. Yes, she will bring it forth, with a witness.


MARLOW. Was Not I right? I believe you will allow that I acted prudently upon
this occasion?


HASTINGS. (Aside) He must not see my uneasiness.


MARLOW. You seem a little disconcerted though, methinks. Sure nothing has
happened?


HASTINGS. No, nothing. Never was in better spirits in all my life. And so you
left it with the landlady, who, no doubt, very readily undertook the charge?


MARLOW. Rather too readily. For she nor only kept the casket; but, through her
great precaution, was going to keep the messenger too. Ha! ha! ha!


HASTINGS. He! he! he! They Are safe however.


MARLOW. As a guinea in a miser's purse.


HASTINGS. (Aside) So now all hopes of fortune are at an end, and we must set
off without it. (To him) Well, Charles, I Will leave you to your meditations on
the pretty bar-maid, and, he! he! he! may you be as successful for yourself as
you have been for me.

[Exit.
MARLOW. Thank ye, George! I ask no more. Ha! ha! ha!


Enter HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. I no longer know my own house. It Is turned all
topsey-turvey. His servants have got drunk already. I Will bear it no longer, and
yet, from my respect for his father, I Will be calm. (To him) Mr. Marlow, your
servant. I Am your very humble servant.

Bowing low.


MARLOW. Sir, your humble servant. (Aside) What Is to be the wonder now?


HARDCASTLE. I believe, Sir, you must be sensible, Sir, that no man alive ought
to be more welcome than your father's son, Sir. I hope you think so?


MARLOW. I do from my soul, Sir. I don't want much entreaty. I generally make
my father's son welcome wherever he goes.


HARDCASTLE. I believe you do, from my soul, Sir. But though I say nothing to
your own conduct, that of your servants is unsufferable. Their manner of
drinking is setting a very bad example in this house, I assure you.


MARLOW. I protest, my very good Sir, that is no fault of mine. If they don't
drink as they ought they are to blame. I ordered them not to spare the cellar.
I did, I assure you. (To the side scene) Here, let one of my servants come up.
(To him) My positive directions were, that as I did not drink myself, they
should make up for my deficiencies below.


HARDCASTLE. Then they had your orders for what they do! I Am satisfied!


MARLOW. They had, I assure you. You shall hear from one of themselves.


Enter SERVANT, drunk. MARLOW. You, Jeremy! Come forward, sirrah! What were my
orders? Were you not told to drink freely, and call for what you thought fit,
for the good of the house?


HARDCASTLE. (Aside) I begin to lose my patience.


JEREMY. Please your honor, liberty and Fleet Street for ever! Though I Am but
a servant, I Am as good as another man. I Will drink for no man before supper,
Sir, dammy! Good liquor will sit upon a good supper, but a good supper will not
sit upon -- hiccup -- upon my conscience, Sir.


MARLOW. You see, my old friend, the fellow is as drunk as he can possibly be.
I don't know what you would have more; unless you would have the poor devil soused in a
beer-barrel.


HARDCASTLE. Zounds! he will drive me distracted if I contain myself any longer.
Mr. Marlow. Sir; I have submitted to your insolence for more than four hours,
and I see no likelihood of its coming to an end. I Am now resolved to be master
here, Sir, and I desire that you and your drunken pack may leave my house
directly.


MARLOW. Leave your house! -- Sure you jest, my good friend? What, when I Am
doing what I can to please you.


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, Sir, you don't please me; so I desire you will leave my
house.


MARLOW. Sure you cannot be serious? at this time o'night, and such a night.
You only mean to banter me?


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, Sir, I Am serious? and, now that my passions are
rouzed, I say this house is mine, Sir; this house is mine, and I command you to
leave it directly.


MARLOW. Ha! ha! ha! A puddle in a storm. I shall not stir a step, I assure you.
(In a serious tone) This, your house, fellow! It Is my house. This is my house.
Mine, while I choose to stay. What right have you to bid me to leave this house,
Sir? I never met with such impudence, curse me, never in my whole life before.


HARDCASTLE. Nor I, confound me if ever I did. To come to my house, to call for
what he likes, to turn me out of my own chair, to insult the family, to order
his servants to get drunk, and then to tell me "This house is mine, Sir." By
all that is impudent it makes me laugh. Ha! ha! ha! Pray, Sir, (bantering) as
you take the house, what think you of taking the rest of the furniture? There Is
a pair of silver candlesticks, and there is a fire-screen, and here is a pair of
brazen nosed bellows, perhaps you may take a fancy to them?


MARLOW. Bring me your bill, Sir; bring me your bill, and let us make no more
words about it.


HARDCASTLE. There are a set of prints too. What think you of the rake's
progress for your own apartment?


MARLOW. Bring me your bill, I say; and I Will leave you and your infernal house
directly.


HARDCASTLE. Then there is a mahogany table that you may see your own face in.


MARLOW. My bill, I say.


HARDCASTLE. I had forgot the great chair, for your own particular slumbers,
after a hearty meal.


MARLOW. Zounds! bring me my bill, I say, and let us hear no more on it.


HARDCASTLE. Young man, young man, from your father's letter to me, I was
taught to expect a well-bred modest man, as a visitor here, but now I find him
no better than a coxcomb and a bully; but he will be down here presently, and
shall hear more of it.

[Exit.
MARLOW. How Is this! Sure I have not mistaken the house! Every thing looks like
an inn. The servants cry, coming. The attendance is awkward; the bar-maid too
to attend us. But she is here, and will further inform me. Whither so fast,
child? A word with you.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE. Miss HARDCASTLE. Let it be short then. I Am in a hurry.
(Aside) I believe he begins to find out his mistake, but it is too soon quite to
undeceive him.


MARLOW. Pray, child, answer me one question. What are you, and what may your
business in this house be?


Miss HARDCASTLE. A relation of the family, Sir.


MARLOW. What, a poor relation?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir. A poor relation appointed to keep the keys, and to
see that the guests want nothing in my power to give them.


MARLOW. That is, you act as the bar-maid of this inn.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Inn. O law -- What brought that in your head? One of the best
families in the county keep an inn! Ha! ha! ha! old Mr. Hardcastle's house an
inn!


MARLOW. Mr. Hardcastle's house! Is this house Mr. Hardcastle's house, child?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Aye, sure. Whose else should it be?


MARLOW. So then all is out, and I have been damnably imposed on. O, confound my
stupid head, I shall be laughed at over the whole town. I shall be stuck up in
caricatura in all the print-shops. The Dullissimo Maccaroni. To mistake this
house of all others for an inn, and my father's old friend for an innkeeper!
What a swaggering puppy must he take me for? What a silly puppy do I find
myself? There again, may I be hanged, my dear, but I mistook you for the
bar-maid.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Dear me! dear me! I Am sure there is nothing in my behavior to
put me upon a level with one of that stamp.


MARLOW. Nothing, my dear, nothing. But I was in for a list of blunders, and
could not help making you a subscriber. My stupidity saw every thing the wrong
way. I mistook your affiduity for assurance, and your simplicity for
allurement. But its over -- This house I no more show my face in.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I hope, Sir, I have done nothing to disoblige you. I Am sure I
should be sorry to affront any gentleman who has been so polite, and said so
many civil things to me. I Am sure I should be sorry (pretending to cry) if he
left the family upon my account. I Am sure I should be sorry, people said any
thing amiss, since I have no fortune but my character.


MARLOW. (Aside) By Heaven, she weeps. This is the first mark of tenderness I
ever had from a modest woman, and it touches me. (To her) Excuse me, my lovely
girl, you are the only part of the family I leave with reluctance. But to be
plain with you, the difference of our birth, fortune and education, make an
honorable connection impossible: and I can never harbor a thought of seducing
simplicity that trusted in my honor, of bringing ruin upon one, whose only
fault was being too lovely.


Miss HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Generous man! I now begin to admire him. (To him) But
I Am sure my family is as good as Miss Hardcastle's, and though I Am poor, that is
no great misfortune to a contented mind, and, until this moment, I never
thought that it was bad to want fortune.


MARLOW. And why now, my pretty simplicity?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Because it puts me at a distance from one, that if I had a
thousand pound I would give it all to.


MARLOW. (Aside) This simplicity bewitches me, so that if I stay I Am undone. I
must make one bold effort, and leave her. (To her) Your partiality in my
favor, my dear, touches me most sensibly, and were I to live for myself alone,
I could easily fix my choice. But I owe too much to the opinion of the world,
too much to the authority of a father, so that -- I can scarcely speak it -- it
affects me. Farewell.

[Exit.
Miss HARDCASTLE. I never knew half his merit till now. He shall not go, if I
have power or art to detain him. I Will still preserve the character in which I
stooped to conquer, but will undeceive my papa, who, perhaps, may laugh him out
of his resolution.

[Exit.
Enter TONY, Miss NEVILLE. TONY. Aye, you may steal for yourselves the next
time. I have done my duty. She has got the jewels again, that is a sure thing;
but she believes it was all a mistake of the servants.


Miss NEVILLE. But, my dear cousin, sure you will not forsake us in this distress.
If she in the least suspects that I am going off, I shall certainly be locked
up, or sent to my aunt Pedigree's, which is ten times worse.


TONY. To be sure, aunts of all kinds are damned bad things. But what can I do?
I have got you a pair of horses that will fly like Whistlejacket, and I Am sure
you cannot say but I have courted you nicely before her face. Here she comes, we
must court a bit Or two more, for fear she should suspect us.

They retire, and seem to fondle.


Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well, I was greatly fluttered, to be
sure. But my son tells me it was all a mistake of the servants. I shall not be
easy, however, till they are fairly married, and then let her keep her own
fortune. But what do I see! fondling together, as I Am alive. I never saw Tony
so sprightly before. Ah! have I caught you, my pretty doves! What, billing,
exchanging stolen glances, and broken murmurs. Ah!


TONY. As for murmurs, mother, we grumble a little now and then, to be sure.
But there is no love lost between us.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. A mere sprinkling, Tony, upon the flame, only to make it burn
brighter.


Miss NEVILLE. Cousin Tony promises to give us more of his company at home.
Indeed, he shall not leave us any more. It will not leave us, cousin Tony, will it?


TONY. O! it is a pretty creature. No, I Would sooner leave my horse in a pound,
than leave you when you smile upon one so. Your laugh makes you so becoming.


Miss NEVILLE. Agreeable cousin! Who can help admiring that natural humor,
that pleasant, broad, red, thoughtless, (patting his cheek) ah! it is a bold
face.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pretty innocence!


TONY. I Am sure I always loved cousin Con's hazle eyes, and her pretty long
fingers, that she twists this way and that, over the haspicholls, like a parcel
of bobbins.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ah, he would charm the bird from the tree. I was never so
happy before. My boy takes after his father, poor Mr. Lumpkin, exactly. The
jewels, my dear Con, shall be yours incontinently. You shall have them. Is Not
he a sweet boy, my dear? You shall be married tomorrow, and we'll put off' the
rest of his education, like Dr. Drowsy's sermons, to a fitter opportunity.


Enter DIGGORY. DIGGORY. Where Is the 'squire? I have got a letter for your
worship.


TONY. Give it to my mamma. She reads all my letters first.


DIGGORY. I had orders to deliver it into your own hands.


TONY. Who does it come from?


DIGGORY. Your worship mun ask that of the letter itself.


TONY. I could wish to know, though (turning the letter, and gazing on it.)


Miss NEVILLE. (Aside) Undone! undone! A letter to him from Hastings. I know
the hand. If my aunt sees it we are ruined for ever. I Will keep her employed a
little if I can. (To Mrs. Hardcastle) But I have not told yon, madam, of my
cousin's smart answer just now to Mr. Marlow. We so laughed -- You must know,
madam, -- This way a little, for he must not hear us.


[They confer. TONY. (Still gazing) A damned cramp piece of penmanship, as ever
I saw in my life. I can read your print hand very well. But here there are such
handles, and shanks, and dashes, that one can scarce tell the head from the
tail. "To Anthony Lumpkin, esquire." It Is very odd, I can read the outside of
my letters, where my own name is, well enough. But when I come to open it, it is
all -- buzz. That Is hard, very hard; for the inside of the letter is always the
cream of the correspondence.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! Very well, very well. And so my son was too hard
for the philosopher.


Miss NEVILLE. Yes, madam; but you must hear the rest, madam. A little more
this way, or he may hear us. You Will hear how he puzzled him again.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. He seems strangely puzzled now himself, methinks.


TONY. (Still gazing) A damned up and down hand, as if it was disguised in
liquor. (Reading) Dear Sir. Aye, that is that. Then there is an M, and a T, and
an S, but whether the next be an izzard or an R, confound me, I cannot tell.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. What Is that, my dear. Can I give you any assistance?


Miss NEVILLE. Pray, aunt, let me read it. No body reads a cramp hand better
than I. (twitching the letter from her) Do you know who it is from?


TONY. Cannot tell, except from Dick Ginger the feeder.


Miss NEVILLE. Aye, so it is, (pretending to read) Dear 'squire, hoping that
you're in health, as I am at this present. The gentlemen of the Shake-bag club
has cut the gentlemen of Goose-green quite out of feather. The odds -- um --
odd battle -- um -- long fighting -- um -- here, here, it is all about cocks and
fighting; it is of no consequence, here, put it up, put it up. [Thrusting the
crumpled letter upon him.


TONY. But I tell you, miss, it is of all the consequence in the world. I would
not lose the rest of it for a guinea. Here, mother, do you make it out. Of no
consequence! [Giving Mrs. Hardcastle the letter.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. How Is this! (reads) "Dear 'squire, I Am now waiting for Miss
Neville, with a post-chaise and pair, at the bottom of the garden, but I find
my horses yet unable to perform the journey. I expect you will assist us with a
pair of fresh horses, as you promised. Dispatch is necessary, as the hag (aye
the hag) your mother, will otherwise suspect us. Yours, Hastings." Grant me
patience. I shall run distracted. My rage choaks me.


Miss NEVILLE. I hope, madam, you will suspend your resentment for a few moments,
and not impute to me any impertinence, or sinister design, that belongs to
another.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Curtesying very low.) Fine spoken, madam, you are most
miraculously polite and engaging, and quite the very pink of curtesy and
circumspection, madam. (Changing her tone) And you, you great ill-fashioned
oaf, with scarce sense enough to keep your mouth shut. Were you too joined
against me? But I Will defeat all your plots in a moment. As for you, madam,
since you have got a pair of fresh horses ready, it would be cruel to
disappoint them. So, if you please, instead of running away with your spark,
prepare, this very moment, to run off with me. Your old aunt Pedigree will keep
you secure, I Will warrant me. You too, Sir, may mount your horse, and guard us
upon the way. Here, Thomas, Roger, Diggory, I Will show you, that I wish you
better than you do yourselves.

[Exit.
Miss NEVILLE. So now I Am completely ruined.


TONY. Aye, that is a sure thing.


Miss NEVILLE. What better could be expected from being connected with such a
stupid fool, and after all the nods and signs I made him?


TONY. By the laws, Miss, it was your own cleverness, and not my stupidity,
that did your business. You were so nice and so busy with your Shake-bags and
Goosegreens, that I thought you could never be making believe.


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. So, Sir, I find by my servant, that you have shown
my letter, and betrayed us. Was this well done, young gentleman?


TONY. Here Is another. Ask Miss there who betrayed you? Ecod, it was her doing,
not mine.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. So I have been finely used here among you. Rendered
contemptible, driven into ill manners, despised, insulted, laughed at.


TONY. Here Is another. We shall have old Bedlam broke loose presently.


Miss NEVILLE. And there, Sir, is the gentleman to whom we all owe every
obligation.


MARLOW. What can I say to him, a mere boy, an idiot, whose ignorance and age
are a protection.


HASTINGS. A poor contemptible booby, that would but disgrace correction.


Miss NEVILLE. Yet with cunning and malice enough to make himself merry with
all our embarrassments.


HASTINGS. An insensible cub.


MARLOW. Replete with tricks and mischief.


TONY. Baw! damme, but I Will fight you both one after the other, -- with baskets.


MARLOW. As for him, he is below resentment. But your conduct, Mr. Hastings,
requires an explanation. You knew of my mistakes, yet would not undeceive me.


HASTINGS. Tortured as I am with my own disappointments, is this a time for
explanations. It is not friendly, Mr. Marlow.


MARLOW. But, Sir --


Miss NEVILLE. Mr. Marlow, we never kept on your mistake, till it was too late
to undeceive you. Be pacified.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. My mistress desires you will get ready immediately,
madam. The horses are putting to. Your hat and things are in the next room. We
are to go thirty miles before morning.


[Exit servant. Miss NEVILLE. Well, well; I Will come presently.


MARLOW. (To Hastings) Was it well done, Sir, to assist in rendering me
ridiculous. To hang me out for the scorn of all my acquaintance. Depend upon
it, Sir, I shall expect an explanation.


HASTINGS. Was it well done, Sir, if you're upon that subject, to deliver what
I entrusted to yourself, to the care of another, Sir.


Miss NEVILLE. Mr. Hastings. Mr. Marlow. Why will you increase my distress by
this groundless dispute? I implore, I entreat you --


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Your cloak, madam. My mistress is impatient.


[Exit Servant. Miss NEVILLE. I come. Pray be pacified. If I leave you thus, I
shall die with apprehension.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Your fan, muff, and gloves, madam. The horses are
waiting.


Miss NEVILLE. O, Mr. Marlow! if you knew what a scene of constraint and
ill nature lies before me, I Am sure it would convert your resentment into pity.


MARLOW. I Am so distracted with a variety of passions, that I don't know what I
do. Forgive me, madam. George, forgive me. You know my hasty temper, and should
not exasperate it.


HASTINGS. The torture of my situation is my only excuse.


Miss NEVILLE. Well, my dear Hastings, if you have that esteem for me that I
think, that I am sure you have, your constancy for three years will but
increase the happiness of our future connection. If --


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Within) Miss Neville. Constance, why Constance, I say.


Miss NEVILLE. I Am coming. Well, constancy. Remember, constancy is the word.

[Exit.
HASTINGS. My heart! how can I support this. To be so near happiness, and such
happiness!


MARLOW. (To Tony) You see now, young gentleman, the effects of your folly.
What might be amusement to you, is here disappointment, and even distress.


TONY. (From a reverie) Ecod, I have hit it. It Is here. Your hands. Yours and
yours, my poor Sulky. My boots there, ho. Meet me two hours hence at the bottom
of the garden; and if you don't find Tony Lumpkin a more good-natured fellow
than you thought for, I Will give you leave to take my best horse, and Bet
Bouncer into the bargain. Come along. My boots, ho!


[Exeunt. ACT THE FIFTH.
SCENE continues. Enter HASTINGS and SERVANT. HASTINGS. YOU saw the old lady
and Miss Neville drive off, you say.


SERVANT. Yes, your honor. They went off in a post coach, and the young
'squire went on horseback. They Are thirty miles off by this time.


HASTINGS. Then all my hopes are over.


SERVANT. Yes, Sir. Old Sir Charles is arrived. He and the old gentleman of the
house have been laughing at Mr. Marlow's mistake this half hour. They are
coming this way.


HASTINGS. Then I must not be seen. So now to my fruitless appointment at the
bottom of the garden. This is about the time.

[Exit.
Enter Sir CHARLES and HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! The peremptory tone
in which be sent forth his sublime commands.


Sir CHARLES. And the reserve with which I suppose he treated all your advances.


HARDCASTLE. And yet he might have seen something in me above a common
innkeeper, too.


Sir CHARLES. Yes, Dick, but he mistook you for an uncommon innkeeper, ha! ha!
ha!


HARDCASTLE. Well, I Am in too good spirits to think of any thing but joy. Yes,
my dear friend, this union of our families will make our personal friendships
hereditary; and though my daughter's fortune is but small --


Sir CHARLES. Why, Dick, will you talk of fortune to me? My son is possessed of
more than a competence already, and can want nothing but a good and virtuous
girl to share his happiness and increase it. If they like each other, as you
say they do --


HARDCASTLE. If, man! I tell you they do like each other. My daughter as good
as told me so.


Sir CHARLES. But girls are apt to flatter themselves, you know.


HARDCASTLE. I saw him grasp her hand in the warmest manner myself; and here he
comes to put you out of your ifs, I warrant him.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. I come, Sir, once more, to ask pardon for my strange
conduct. I can scarce reflect on my insolence without confusion.


HARDCASTLE. Tut, boy, a trifle. You take it too gravely. An hour or two's
laughing with my daughter will set all to rights again. She Will never like you
the worse for it.


MARLOW. Sir, I shall be always proud of her approbation.


HARDCASTLE. Approbation is but a cold word, Mr. Marlow; if I am not deceived,
you have something more than approbation thereabouts. You take me.


MARLOW. Really, Sir, I have not that happiness.


HARDCASTLE. Come, boy, I Am an old fellow, and know what is what, as well as you
that are younger. I know what has past between you; but mum.


MARLOW. Sure, Sir, nothing has past between us but the most profound respect
on my side, and the most distant reserve on hers. You don't think, Sir, that my
impudence has been past upon all the rest of the family.


HARDCASTLE. Impudence! No, I don't say that -- not quite imprudence -- though
girls like to be played with, and rumpled a little too sometimes. But she has
told no tales, I assure you.


MARLOW. I never gave her the slightest cause.


HARDCASTLE. Well, well, I like modesty in its place well enough. But this is
over-acting, young gentleman. You may be open. Your father and I will like you
the better for it.


MARLOW. May I die, Sir, if I ever --


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, she don't dislike you; and as I Am sure you like her --


MARLOW. Dear, Sir -- I protest,Sir --


HARDCASTLE. I see no reason why you should not be joined as fast as the parson
can tie you.


MARLOW. But hear me, Sir --


HARDCASTLE. Your father approves the match, I admire it, every moment's delay
will be doing mischief, so --


MARLOW. But why will not you hear me? By all that is just and true, I never gave
Miss Hardcastle the slightest mark of my attachment, or even the most distant
hint to suspect me of affection. We had but one interview, and that was formal,
modest and uninteresting.


HARDCASTLE. (Aside) This fellow's formal modest impudence is beyond bearing.


Sir CHARLES. And you never grasped her hand, or made any protestations.


MARLOW. As Heaven is my witness, I came down in obedience to your commands. I
saw the lady without emotion, and parted without reluctance. I hope you will
exact no further proofs of my duty, nor prevent me from leaving a house in
which I suffer so many mortifications.

[Exit.
Sir CHARLES. I Am astonished at the air of sincerity with which he parted.


HARDCASTLE. And I Am astonished at the deliberate intrepidity of his assurance.


Sir CHARLES. I dare pledge my life and honor upon his truth.


HARDCASTLE. Here comes my daughter, and I would stake my happiness upon her
veracity.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Kate, come hither, child. Answer us
sincerely, and without reserve; has Mr. Marlow made you any professions of love
and affection?


Miss HARDCASTLE. The question is very abrupt, Sir! But since you require
unreserved sincerity, I think he has.


HARDCASTLE. (To Sir Charles) You see.


Sir CHARLES. And pray, madam, have you and my son had more than one interview?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir, several.


HARDCASTLE. (To Sir Charles) You see.


Sir CHARLES. But did he profess any attachment?


Miss HARDCASTLE. A lasting one.


Sir CHARLES. Did he talk of love?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Much, Sir.


Sir CHARLES. Amazing! And all this formally?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Formally.


HARDCASTLE. Now, my friend, I hope you are satisfied.


Sir CHARLES. And how did he behave, madam?


Miss HARDCASTLE. As most professed admirers do. Said some civil things of my
face, talked much of his want of merit, and the greatness of mine; mentioned
his heart, gave a short tragedy speech, and ended with pretended rapture.


Sir CHARLES. Now I Am perfectly convinced, indeed. I know his conversation
among women to be modest and submissive. This forward canting ranting manner by
no means describes him, and, I am confident, he never sat for the picture.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then what, Sir, if I should convince you to your face of my
sincerity? If you and my papa, in about half an hour, will place yourselves
behind that screen, you shall hear him declare his passion to me in person.


Sir CHARLES. Agreed. And if I find him what you describe, all my happiness in
him must have an end.

[Exit.
Miss HARDCASTLE. And if you don't find him what I describe -- I fear my
happiness must never have a beginning.


[Exeunt. SCENE changes to the Back of the Garden. Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS.
What an idiot am I, to wait here for a fellow, who probably takes a delight in
mortifying me. He never intended to be punctual, and I Will wait no longer. What
do I see! It is he! and perhaps with news of my Constance.


Enter TONY, booted and spattered. HASTINGS. My honest 'squire! I now find you
a man of your word. This looks like friendship.


TONY. Aye, I Am your friend, and the best friend you have in the world, if you
knew but all. This riding by night, by the bye, is cursedly tiresome. It has
shook me worse than the basket of a stagecoach.


HASTINGS. But how? where did you leave your fellow travelers? Are they in
safety? Are they housed?


TONY. Five and twenty miles in two hours and a half is no such bad driving.
The poor beasts have smoaked for it: rabbet me, but I Would rather ride forty miles
after a fox, than ten with such varment.


HASTINGS. Well, but where have you left the ladies? I die with impatience,


TONY. Left them! Why where should I leave them, but where I found them?


HASTINGS, This is a riddle.


TONY. Riddle me this then. What Is that goes round the house, and round the
house, and never touches the house?


HASTINGS, I Am still astray.


TONY. Why that is it, mon. I have led them astray. By jingo, there is not a pond
or slough within five miles of the place but they can tell the taste of.


HASTINGS. Ha! ha! ha! I understand; you took them in a round, while they
supposed themselves going forward, and so you have at last brought them home
again.


TONY. You shall hear: I first took them down Featherbed-lane, where we stuck
fast in the mud. I then rattled them crack over the stones of Up-and-down Hill
-- I then introduced them to the gibbet on Heavy-tree Heath, and from that with
a circumbendibus, I fairly lodged them in the horse-pond at the bottom of the
garden.


HASTINGS. But so accident, I hope.


TONY. No, no. Only mother is confoundedly frightened. She thinks herself
forty-miles off. She Is sick of the journey, and the cattle can scarce crawl. So
if your own horses be ready, you may whip off with coufin, and I Will be bound
that no soul here can budge a foot to follow you.


HASTINGS. My dear friend, how can I be gratesul?


TONY. Aye, now its dear friend, noble 'squire. Just now, it was all idiot,
cub, and run me through the guts. Damn your way of fighting, I say. After we
take a knock in this part of the country, we kiss and be friends. But if you
had run me through the guts, then I should be dead, and you might go kiss the
hangman.


HASTINGS. The rebuke is just. But I must hasten to relieve Miss Neville; if
you keep the old lady employed, I promise to take care of the young one.


[Exit Hastings. TONY. Never fear me. Here she comes. Vanish. She Is got from
the pond, and draggled up to the waist like a mermaid.


Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Oh, Tony, I Am killed. Shook. Battered
to death. I shall never survive it. That last jolt that laid us against the
quickset hedge has done my business.


TONY. Alack, mamma, it was all your own fault. You would be for running away
by night, without knowing one inch of the way.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I wish we were at home again. I never met so many accidents
in so short a journey. Drenched in the mud, overturned in a ditch, stuck fast
in a slough, jolted to a jelly, and at last to lose our way. Whereabouts do you
think we are, Tony?


TONY. By my guess we should come upon Crackskull common, about forty miles
from home.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O lud! O lud! The most notorious spot in all the country. We
only want a robbery to make a complete night on it.


TONY. Don't be afraid, mamma, don't be afraid. Two of the five that kept here
are hanged, and the other three may not find us. Don't be afraid. Is that a man
that is galloping behind us? No; it is only a tree. Don't be afraid.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. The fright will certainly kill me.


TONY. Do you see any thing like a black hat moving behind the thicket?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O death!


TONY. No, it is only a cow. Don't be afraid, mamma; don't be afraid.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. As I Am alive, Tony, I see a man coming toward us. Ah! I Am
sure on it. If he perceives us we are undone.


TONY. (Aside) Father-in-law, by all that is unlucky, come to take one of his
night walks. (To her) Ah, it is a highwayman, with pistols as long as my arm. A
damned ill-looking fellow.


Mrs. HARDCASTIE. Good Heaven defend us! He approaches.


TONY. Do you hide yourself in that thicket, and leave me to manage him. If
there be any danger I Will cough and cry hem. When I cough be sure to keep close.


[Mrs. Hardcastle hides behind a tree in the back scene. Enter HARDCASTLE.
HARDCASTLE. I Am mistaken, or I heard voices of people in want of help. Oh,
Tony, is that you? I did not expect you so soon back. Are your mother and her
charge in safety?


TONY. Very safe, Sir, at my aunt Pedigree's. Hem.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (From behind) Ah death! I find there is danger.


HARDCASTLE. Forty miles in three hours; sure, that is too much, my youngster.


TONY. Stout horses and willing minds make short journeys, as they say. Hem.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (From behind) Sure he will do the dear boy no harm.


HARDCASTLE. But I heard a voice here; I should be glad to know from whence it
came.


TONY. It was I, Sir, talking to myself, Sir. I was saying that forty miles in
four hours was very good going. Hem. As to be sore it was. Hem. I have got a
sort of cold by being out in the air. We'll go in, if you please. Hem.


HARDCASTLE. But if yon talked to yourself, you did not answer yourself. I am
certain I heard two voices, and am resolved (raising his voice) to find the
other out.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (From behind) Oh! he is coming to find me out. Oh!


TONY. What need yon go, Sir, if I tell you. Hem. I Will lay down my life for the
truth -- hem -- I Will tell you all, Sir. [Detaining him.


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, I will not be detained. I insist on seeing. It Is in
vain to expect I Will believe you.


Mrs. HARDCASTIE. (Running forward from behind) O lud! he will murder my poor
boy, ray darling. Here good gentleman, whet your rage upon me. Take my money,
my life, but spare that young gentleman, spare my child, if you have any mercy.


HARDCASTLE. My wife! as I Am a Christian. From whence can she come? or what
does she mean?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Kneeling) Take compassion on us, good Mr. Highwayman. Take
our money, our watches, all we have, but spare our lives. We will never bring
you to justice, indeed we will not, good Mr. Highwayman.


HARDCASTLE. I believe the woman's out of her senses. What, Dorothy, don't you
know me?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mr. Hardcastle, as I Am alive! My fears blinded me. But who,
my dear, could have expected to meet you here, in this frightful place, so far
from home? What has brought you to follow us?


HARDCASTLE. Sure, Dorothy, you have not lost your wits? So far from home, when
you are within forty yards of your own door. (To him) This is one of your old
tricks, you graceless rogue you. (To her) Don't you know the gate, and the
mulberry-tree; and don't you remember the horsepond, my dear?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Yes, I shall remember the horsepond as long as I live; I have
caught ray death in it. (To Tony) And is it to you, you graceless varlet, I owe
all this. I Will teach you to abuse your mother, I will.


TONY. Ecod, mother, all the parish says you have spoiled me, and so you may
take the fruits on' t.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I Will spoil you, I will.

[Follows him off the Stage. Exit.
HARDCASTLE. There Is morality, however, in his reply.

[Exit.
Enter HASTINGS and Miss NEVILLE. HASTINGS. My dear Constance, why will you
deliberate thus? If we delay a moment, all is lost for ever. Pluck up a little
resolution, and we shall soon be out of the reach of her malignity.


Miss NEVILLE. I find it impossible. My spirits are so sunk with the agitations
I have suffered, that I am unable to face any new danger. Two or three years
patience will at last crown us with happiness.


HASTINGS. Such a tedious delay is worse than inconstancy. Let us fly, my
charmer. Let us date our happiness from this very moment. Perish fortune! Love
and content will increase what we possess beyond a monarch's revenue. Let me
prevail?


Miss NEVILLE. No, Mr. Hastings; no. Prudence once more comes to my relief, and
I will obey its dictates. In the moment of passion, fortune may be despised,
but it ever produces a lasting repentance. I Am resolved to apply to Mr.
Hardcastle's compasion and justice for redress.


HASTINGS. But though he had the will, he has not the power to relieve you.


Miss NEVILLE. But he has influence, and upon that I am resolved to rely.


HASTINGS. I have no hopes. But since you persist, I must reluctantly obey you.


[Exeunt. SCENE changes. Enter Sir CHARLES and Miss HARDCASTLE.


Sir CHARLES. What a situation am I in! If what you say appears, I shall then
find a guilty son. If what he says be true, I shall then lose one, that, of all
others, I most wished for a daughter.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I am proud of your approbation, and to show I merit it, if
you place yourselves as I directed, you shall hear his explicit declaration.
But he comes.


Sir CHARLES. I Will to your father, and keep him to the appointment.


[Exit Sir Charles. Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. Though prepared for setting out, I
come once more to take leave, nor did I, till this moment, know the pain I feel
in the separation.


Miss HARDCASTLE. (In her own natural manner) I believe these sufferings cannot
be very great, Sir, which you can so easily remove. A day or two longer,
perhaps, might lessen your uneasiness, by showing the little value of what you
now think proper to regret.


MARLOW. (Aside) This girl every moment improves upon me. (To her) It must not
be, madam. I have already trifled too long with my heart. My very pride begins
to submit to my passion. The disparity of education and fortune, the anger of a
parent, and the contempt of my equals, begin to lose their weight; and nothing
can restore me to myself, but this painsul effort of resolution.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then go, Sir. I Will urge nothing more to detain you. Though my
family be as good as hers you came down to visit, and my education, I hope, not
inferior, what are these advantages without equal affluence? I must remain
contented with the slight approbation of imputed merit; I must have only the
mockery of your addresses, while all your serious aims are fixed on fortune.


Enter HARDCASTLE and Sir CHARLES from behind. Sir CHARLES. Here, behind this
screen.


HARDCASTLE. Aye, aye, make no noise. I Will engage my Kate covers him with
confusion at last.


MARLOW. By Heavens, madam, fortune was ever my smallest consideration. Your
beauty at first caught my eye; for who could see that without emotion. But
every moment that I converse with you, steals in some new grace, heightens the
picture, and gives it stronger expression. What at first seemed rustic
plainness, now appears resin'd simplicity. What seemed forward assurance, now
strikes me as the result of courageous innocence, and conscious virtue.


Sir CHARLES. What can it mean? He amazes me!


HARDCASTLE. I told you how it would be. Hush!


MARLOW. I am now determined to stay, madam, and I have too good an opinion of
my father's discernment, when he sees you, to doubt his approbation.

Miss HARDCASTLE.

No, Mr. Marlow, I will not, cannot detain you. Do you think I could suffer a
connection, in which there is the smallest room for repentance? Do you think I
would take the mean advantage of a transient passion, to load you with
confusion? Do you think I could ever relish that happiness, which was acquired
by lessening yours?


MARLOW. By all that is good, I can have no happiness but what is in your power
to grant me. Nor shall I ever feel repentance, but in not having seen your
merits before. I will stay, even contrary to your wishes; and though you should
persist to shun me, I will make my respectful assiduities atone for the levity
of my past condust.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sir, I must entreat you will desist. As our acquaintance began,
so let it end, in indifference. I might have given an hour or two to levity;
but seriously, Mr. Marlow, do you think I could ever submit to a connection,
where I must appear mercenary, and you imprudent? do you think I could ever
catch at the confident addresses of a secure admirer?


MARLOW. (Kneeling) Does this look like security? Does this look like
confidence? No, madam, every moment that shows me your merit, only serves to
increase my diffidence and confusion. Here let me continue --


Sir CHARLES. I can hold it no longer. Charles, Charles, how have thou deceived
me! Is this your indifference, your uninteresting conversation!


HARDCASTLE. Your cold contempt; your formal interview. What have you to say
now?


MARLOW. That I Am all amazement! What can it mean!


HARDCASTLE. It means that you can say and unsay things at pleasure. That you
can address a lady in private, and deny it in public; that you have one story
for us, and another for my daughter!


MARLOW. Daughter! -- this lady your daughter!


HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir, my only daughter. My Kate, whose else should she be?


MARLOW. Oh, the devil!


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir, that very identical tall squinting lady you were
pleased to take me for, (curtesying) she that you addressed as the mild,
modest, sentimental man of gravity, and the bold forward agreeable Rattle of
the ladies club; ha! ha! ha!


MARLOW. Zounds, there is no bearing this; it is worse than death.


Miss HARDCASTLE. In which of your characters, Sir, will you give us leave to
address you. As the faultering gentleman, with looks on the ground, that speaks
just to be heard, and hates hypocrisy; or the loud confident creature, that
keeps it up with Mrs. Mantrap, and old Miss Biddy Buckskin, till three in the
morning: ha! ha! ha!


MARLOW. O, curse on my noisy head. I never attempted to be impudent yet, that
I was not taken down. I must be gone.


HARDCASTLE. By the hand of my body, but you shall not. I see it was all a
mistake, and I am rejoiced to find it. You shall not, Sir, I tell you. I know
she will forgive you. Will Not you forgive him, Kate. We'll all forgive you. Take
courage, man.

They retire, she tormenting him to the back scene.


Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE, TONY. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. So, so, they are gone off. Let
them go, I care not.


HARDCASTLE. Who gone?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. My dutiful niece and her gentleman, Mr. Hastings, from town.
He who came down with our modest visitor here.


Sir CHARLES. Who, my honest George Hastings! As worthy a fellow as lives, and
the girl could not have made a more prudent choice.


HARDCASTLE. Then, by the hand of my body, I Am proud of the connection.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well, if he has taken away the lady, he has not taken her
fortune, that remains in this family to console us for her loss.


HARDCASTLE. Sure, Dorothy, you would not be so mercenary?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Aye, that is my affair, not yours. But you know if your son,
when of age, refuses to marry his cousin, her whole fortune is then at her own
disposal.


HARDCASTLE. Aye, but he is not of age, and she has not thought proper to wait
for his refusal.


Enter HASTINGS and Miss NEVILLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Aside) What, returned so
soon! I begin not to like it.


HASTINGS. (To Hardcastle) For my late attempt to fly off with your niece, let
my present confusion be my punishment. We are now come back, to appeal from
your justice to your humanity. By her father's consent, I first paid her my
addresses, and our passions were first founded in duty.


Miss NEVILLE. Since his death, I have been obliged to stoop to dissimulation
to avoid oppression. In an hour of levity, I was ready even to give up my
fortune to secure my choice. But I Am now recovered from the delusion, and hope
from your tenderness what is denied me from a nearer connection.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pshaw, pshaw, this is all but the whining end of a modern
novel.


HARDCASTLE. Be it what it will, I Am glad they are come back to reclaim their
due. Come hither, Tony boy. Do you refuse this lady's hand whom I now offer you?


TONY. What signifies my refusing. You know I cannot refuse her till I Am of age,
father.


HARDCASTLE. While I thought concealing your age, boy, was likely to conduce to
your improvement, I concurred with your mother's desire to keep it secret. But
since I find she turns it to a wrong use, I must now declare, you have been of
age these three months.


TONY. Of age I Am I of age, father?


HARDCASTLE. Above three months.


TONY. Then you will see the first use I Will make of my liberty. (Taking Miss
Neville's band) Witness all men by these presents, that I, Anthony Lumpkin,
esquire, of BLANK place, refuse you, Constantia Neville, spinster, of no place
at all, for my true and lawful wife. So Constance Neville may marry whom she
pleases, and Tony Lumpkin is his own man again.


Sir CHARLES. O brave 'squire!


HASTINGS. My worthy friend!

Mrs. HARDCASTLE.

My undutiful offspring!


MARLOW. Joy, my dear George, I give you joy sincerely And could I prevail upon
my little tyrant here to be less arbitrary, I should be the happiest man alive,
if you would return me the savor.


HASTINGS. (To Miss Hardcastle) Come, madam, you are now driven to the very
last scene of all your contrivances. I know you like him, I Am sure he loves
yon, and you must and shall have him.


HARDCASTLE. (Joining their hands) And I say so too. And, Mr. Marlow, if she
makes as good a wife as she has a daughter, I don't believe you will ever repent
your bargain. So now to supper. Tomorrow we shall gather all the poor of the
parish about us, and the mistakes of the night shall be crowned with a merry
morning; so, boy, take her; and as you have been mistaken in the mistress, my
wish is, that you may never be mistaken in the wife.


EPILOGUE.
BY DR GOLDSMITH.
WELL, having stooped to conquer with success,
And gained a husband without aid from dress,
Still as a bar-maid, I could wish it too,
As I have conquered him to conquer you:
And let me say, for all your resolution,
That pretty bar-maids have done execution.
Our life is all a play, composed to please,
" We have our exits and our entrances."
The first act shows the simple country maid,
Harmless and young, of every thing afraid;
Blushes when hired, and with unmeaning action,
" I hopes as how to give you satisfaction."
Her second act displays a livelier scene. --
The unblushing bar-maid of a country inn,
Who whisks about the house, at market caters,
Talks loud, coquets the guests, and scolds the waiters.
Next the scene shifts to town, and there she soars,
The chop-house toast of ogling connoisieurs.
On 'squires and cits she there displays her arts,
And on the gridiron broils her lover's hearts --
And as she smiles, her triumphs to complete,
Even common councilmen forget to eat.
The fourth act shows her wedded to the 'squire,
And madam now begins to hold it higher;
Pretends to taste, at operas cries caro,
And quits her Nancy Dawson, for Che Faro.
Doats upon dancing, and in all her pride,
Swims round the room, the Heinell of Cheapside:
Ogles and leers with artificial skill,
Till having lost in age the power to kill,
She sits all night at cards, and ogles at spadille.
Such, through our lives, the eventful history --
The fifth and last act still remains for me.
The bar-maid now for your protection prays,
Turns female Barrister, and pleads for Bays.
EPILOGUE,
TO BE SPOKEN IN THE CHARACTER OF TONY LUMPKIN. This came too late to be spoken.

BY J. CRADDOCK, ESQUIRE.
WELL -- now all is ended -- and my comrades gone,
Pray what becomes of mother's nonly son?
A hopeful blade! -- in town I Will fix my station,
And try to make a bluster in the nation.
As for my cousin Neville, I renounce her,
Off -- in a crack -- I Will carry big Bett Bouncer.
Why should not I in the great world appear?
I soon shall have a thousand pounds a year?
No matter what a man may here inherit,
In London -- 'gad, they have some regard to spirit.
I see the horses prancing up the streets,
And big Bett Bouncer, bobs to all she meets;
Then hoikes to jiggs and pastimes every night --
Not to the plays -- they say it a'n't polite;
To Sadler's-Wells perhaps, or operas go,
And once by chance, to the roratorio.
Thus here and there, for ever up and down,
We'll set the fashions too, to half the town;
And then at auctions -- money never regard,
Buy pictures like the great, ten pounds a yard;
Zounds, we shall make these London gentry say,
We know what is damned genteel as well as they.
FINIS.

