THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY, FROM THE CLOSE of the ELEVENTH TO THE
COMMENCEMENT of the EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED TWO
DISSERTATIONS. I. ON THE ORIGIN OF ROMANTIC FICTION IN EUROPE. II. ON THE
INTRODUCTION OF LEARNING INTO ENGLAND.

VOL. II.

By THOMAS WARTON, B. D. FELLOW of TRINITY COLLEGE, OXFORD, and of the SOCIETY
of ANTIQUARIES, and late PROFESSOR of POETRY in the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for, and sold by, J. DODSLEY, Pall Mall; J. WALTER,
Charing Cross; J. ROBSON, New Bond-Street; G. ROBINSON, and J. BEW,
Paternoster Row; and Messrs. FLETCHER, at OXFORD. M. DCC. LXXVIII.

CONTENTS OF THE SECTIONS in the SECOND VOLUME.
SECTION I. p. 1. JOHN GOWER. His character and poems. His tomb. His Confessio
Amantis. Its subject and plan. An unsuccessful imitation of the Roman de la
Rose. Aristotle's Secretum Secretorum. Chronicles of the middle ages. Colonna.
Romance of Lancelot. The Gesta Romanorum. Shakespeare's caskets. Authors quoted
by Gower. Chronology of some of Gower's and Chaucer's poems. The Confessio
Amantis preceded the Canterbury Tales. Estimate of Gower's genius. SECTION II.
p. 32. Boethius. Why, and how much, esteemed in the middle ages. Translated by
Johannes Capellanus, the only poet of the reign of king Henry the fourth.
Number of Harpers at the coronation-feast of Henry the fifth. A minstrel-piece
on the Battle of Agynkourte. Occleve. His poems. Egidius de Regimine
Principum, and Jacobus of Casali De Ludo Scaccorum. Chaucer's picture. Humphrey
duke of Gloucester. Sketch of his character as a patron of literature. Apology
for the gallicisms of Chaucer, Gower, and Occleve. SECTION III. p. 51. Reign of
Henry the sixth. Lydgate. His life and character. His Dance of Death. Macaber a
German poet. Lydgate's poem in honor of Saint Edmund. Pre^ented to Henry the
sixth, at Bury-abbey, in a most splendid manuscript, now remaining. His Life of
our Lady. Elegance and harmony of his style and ver^ification. SECTION IV. p.
61. Lydgate continued. His Fall of Princes, from Laurence Premierfait's French
parapbra^e of B^ccace on the same subject. Nature, plan, and specimens of that
poem. Its sublime allgorical figure of Fortune. Authors cited in the same.
B^ccace's opportunities of collecting many stories of Greek original, now not
extant in any Greek writer. Lydgate's Story of Thebes. An additional
Canterbury Tale. Its plan, and originals. Martianus Capella. Happily imitated
by Lydgate. Feudal manners applied to Greece. Specimen of Lydgate's force in
description. SECTION V. p. 81. Lydgate's Troy-Boke. A paraphrase of Co^^nna's
Historia Trojana. Homer, when, and how, first known in Europe. Lydgate's powers
in rural painting. Dares and Dictys. Feudal manners, and Arabian imagery,
ingrafted on the Trojan story. Anecdotes of ancient Gothic architecture
displayed in the structure of Troy. An ideal theater at Troy so described, as
to prove that no regular stage now existed. Game of chess invented at the ^i^ge
of Troy. Lydgate's gallantry. His anachronisms. Hector's shrine and chantry.
Specimens of another Troy-Boke, anonymous, and written in the reign of Henry
the sixth. SECTION VI. p. 101. Reign of Henry the sixth continued. Hugh
Campeden translates the French romance of Sidrac. Thomas Chestre's Sir
Launfale. Metrical romance of the Earl of Toulouse. Analysis of its Fable.
Minstrels paid better than the clergy. Reign of Edward the fourth. Translation
of the classics and other books into French. How it operated on English
literature. Caxton. Anecdotes of English typography. SECTION VII. p. 125.
Harding's Chronicle. First mention of the king's Poet Laureate occurs in the
reign of Edward the fourth. History of that office. Scogan. Didactic poems on
chemistry by Norton and Ripley. SECTION VIII. p. 139. Poems under the name of
Thomas Rowlie. Supposed to be spurious. SECTION IX. p. 165. The reigns of
Richard the third, and Henry the seventh, abound in obscure versifiers. Bertram
Walton. Benedict Burgh translates Cato's Latin Di^tichs. History of that work.
Julian Barnes. Abbesses fond of hunting and ^awking. A religious poem by
William of Nassyngton. His Prologue explained. Minstrels and Gestours to be
distinguished. Gest of the Three Kings of Cologne sung in the arched chamber of
the Prior at Winchester. The Gest of the Seven Sleepers. Originally a Greek
Legend. Bradshaw's Life of Saint Werburgh. Metrical chronicles of the kings of
England fashionable in this century. Ralph Higden proved to be the author of
the Chester-plays. Specimen of Bradshaw's poem, from his description of the
historical tapestry in the hall of Ely monastery when the princess Werburgh was
admitted to the ^eil. Legends and legend-makers. Fabyan. Watson. Caxton a poet.
Calendar of Shepherds. Pageaunts. Transition to the drama. Histrionic
profession. Mysteries^ Nicodemus's Gospel. Use of Mysteries. SECTION X. p. 210.
Reign of Henry the seventh. Hawes. His poems. Painting on the walls of
chambers. Visions. Hawes's Pastyme of Pleasure. The fable analyzed. Walter.
Medwall. Wade. SECTION XI. p. 240. Barklay's Ship of Fools. Its origin.
Specimens. Barklay's Eclogues, and other pieces. Alcock bishop of Ely. Modern
Bucolics. SECTION XII. p. 257. Digression to the Scotch poets. William Dunbar.
His Thistle and Rose, and Golden Terge. Specimens. Dunbar's comic pieces.
Estimate of his genius. Moralities fashionable among the Scotch in the
fifteenth century. SECTION XIII. p. 280. Scotch poets continued. Gawen
Douglass. His translation of the Eneid. His genius for descriptive poetry. His
Palice of Honor, and other pieces. SECTION XIV. p. 295. Scotch poets
continued. Sir David Lyndesay. His chief performances the Dreme, and Monarchy.
His talents for description and imagery. His other poems examined. An anonymous
Scotch poem, never printed, called Duncane Laider. Its humor and satire.
Feudal robbers. Blind Harry reconsidered. A History of the Scotch poetry
recommended. SECTION XV. p. 336. Skeleton. His life. Patronised by Henry, fifth
earl of Northumberland. His character, and peculiarity of style. Critical
examination of his poems. Macaronic poetry. Skelton's Morality called the
Nigramansir. Moralities at their height about the close of the seventh Henry's
reign. SECTION XVI. p. 366. A digression on the origin of Mysteries. Various
origins assigned. Religious dramas at Constantinople. Plays first acted in the
monasteries. This ecclesiastical origin of the drama gives rise to the practice
of performing plays in universities, colleges, and schools. Influence of this
practice on the vernacular drama. On the same principle, plays acted by
singing-boys in choirs. Boybishop. Fete de Foux. On the same principle, plays
acted by the company of parish cle^ks. By the Law-societies in London.
Temple-Masques. SECTION XVII. p. 407. Causes of the increase of vernacular
composition in the fifteenth century. View of the revival of classical
learning. In Italy. In France. In Germany. In Spain. In England. SECTION XVIII.
p. 433. The same subject continued. Reformation of religion. Its effects on
literature in England. Application of this digression to the main subject.
THE HISTORY O^ ENGLISH POETRY.
SECT. I.
IF Chaucer had not existed, the compositions of John Gower, the next poet in
succession, would alone have been sufficient to rescue the reigns of Edward the
third and Richard the second from the imputation of barbarism. His education
was liberal and uncircumscribed, his course of reading extensive, and he
tempered his severer studies with a knowledge of life. By a critical
cultivation of his native language, he labored to reform its irregularities,
and to establish an English style See supr. vol. i. page 342.
. In these respects he resembled his friend and cotemporary Chaucer It is
certain that they both lived and wrote together. But I have considered Chaucer
first, among other reasons h^re^fter given, as Gower survived him. Chaucer died
October 25, 1400, aged 72 years. Gower died, 1402.
: but he participated no considerable portion of Chaucer's spirit, imagination,
and elegance. His language is tolerably perspicuous, and his ver^i^ication
often harmonious: but his poetry is of a grave and sententious turn. He has
much good sense, solid reflection, and useful observation. But he is serious
and didactic on all occasions: he preserves the tone of the scholar and the
moralist on the most lively topics. For this reason he seems to have been
characterised by Chaucer with the appellation of the MORAL Gower Troil. Cress.
ad calc. page 333. edit. Urr. ut supr.
. But his talent is not confined to English verse only. He wrote also in Latin;
and copi^d Ovid's elegiacs with some degree of purity, and with fewer false
quantities and corrupt phrases, than any of our countrymen had yet exhibited
since the twelfth century.

Gower's capital work, consisting of three parts, only the last of which
properly furnishes matter for our present enquiry, is entitled SPECULUM
MEDITANTIS, VOX CLAMANTIS, CONFESSIO AMANTIS. It was finished, at least the
third part, in the year 1393 CONFESS. AMANT. Prol. fol. 1. a. col. 1. Imprinted
at London, in Flete^^rete, by Thomas Berthelette, the xii. day of March, ann.
1554. folio. This edition is here always cited.
. The SPECULUM MEDITANTIS, or the Mirror of Meditation, is written in French
rhymes, in ten books Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Bodl. NE. F. 8. 9. And MSS. Fairf. 3.
. This tract, which was never printed, displays the general nature of virtue
and vice, enumerates the felicities of conjugal fidelity by examples selected
from various authors, and describes the path which the reprobate ought to
pursue for the recovery of the divine grace. The VOX CLAMANTIS, or the Voice of
one crying in the Wilderness, which was also never printed, contains seven
books of Latin elegiacs. This work is chiefly historical, and is little more
than a metrical chronicle of the insurrection of the commons in the reign of
king Richard the second. The best and most beautiful manuscript of it is in the
library of All Souls college at Oxford; with a dedication in Latin verse,
addressed by the author, when he was old and blind, to archbishop Arundel MSS.
Number. 26. It occurs more than once in the Bodleian library; and, I believe^
often in private hands. There is a fine manuscript of it in the British Museum.
It was written in the year 1397, as appears by the following line, MSS. Bodl.
294. Hos ego BIS DENO Ricardi regis in anno.

. The CONFESSIO AMANTIS, or the Lover's Confession, is an English poem, in
eight books, first printed by Caxton, in the year 1483. It was written at the
command of Richard the second; who meeting our poet Gower rowing on the Thames
near London, invited him into the royal barge, and after much conversation
requested him to book some new thing TO THE REDER, in Berthlette's edition.
From the PROLOGUE. See supr. vol. i. p. 539. Notes.
.

This tripartite work is represented by three volumes on Gower's curious tomb
in the conventual church of Saint Mary Overee in Southwark, now remaining in
its ancient state; and this circumstance furnishes me with an obvious
opportunity of adding an anecdote relating to our poet's munificence and piety,
which ought not to be omitted. Although a poet, he largely contributed to
rebuild that church in its present elegant form, and to render it a beautiful
pattern of the lighter Gothic architecture: at the same time he founded, at his
tomb, a perpetual chantry.

It is on the last of these pieces, the CONFESSIO AMANTIS, that Gower's
character and reputation as a poet are almost entirely founded. This poem,
which bears no immediate reference to the other two divisions, is a dialogue
between a lover and his confessor, who is a priest of Venus, and, like the
mystagogue in the PICTURE of Cebes, is called Genius. Here, as if it had been
impossible for a lover not to be a good catholic, the ritual of religion is
applied to the tender passion, and Ovid's Art of Love is blended with the
breviary. In the course of the confession, every evil affection of the human
heart, which may tend to impede the progress or counteract the success of love,
is scientifically subdivided; and its fatal effects exemplifi^d by a variety of
apposite stories, extracted from classics and chronicles. The poet often
introduces or recapitulates his matter in a few couplets of Latin long and
short verses. This was in imitation of Boethius.

This poem is strongly tinctured with those pedantic affectations concerning
the passion of love, which the French and Italian poets of the fourteenth
century borrowed from the troubadours of Provence, and which I have above
examined at large. But the writer's particular model appears more immediately
to have been John of Meun's celebrated ROMAUNT DE LA ROSE. He has, however,
seldom attempted to imitate the picturesque imageries, and expressive
personifications, of that exquisite allegory. His most striking pourtraits,
which yet are conceived with no powers of creation, nor delineated with any
fertility of fancy, are IDLENESS, AVARICE, MICHERIE or Thieving, and
NEGLIGENCE, the ^ecretary of SLOTH Lib. iv. f. 62. a. col. 1. Lib. v. f. 94. a.
col. 1. Lib. iv. f. 68. a. col. 1. Lib. v. f. 119. a col. 2.
. Instead of boldly clothing these qualities with corporeal attributes, aptly
and poetically imagined, he coldly yet sensibly describes their operations, and
enumerates their properties. What Gower wanted in invention, he supplied from
his commonplace book; which appears to have been stored with an inexhaustible
fund of instructive maxims, pleasant narrations, and philosophical definitions.
It seems to have been his object to crowd all his erudition into this elaborate
performance. Yet there is often some degree of contrivance and art in his
manner of introducing and adapting subjects of a very distant nature, and which
are totally foreign to his general design.

In the fourth book, our confessor turns chemist; and discoursing at large on
the Hermetic science, developes its principles, and exposes its abuses, with
great penetration Lib. iv. f. 76. b. col. 2.
. He delivers the doctrines concerning the vegetable, mineral, and animal
stones, to which Falstaff alludes in Shakespeare Fal^taffe mentions a
philosopher's or chemist's two stones. See P. Henr. iv. Act iii. Sc. 2. Our
author abundantly confirms doctor Warburton's explication of this passage,
which the rest of the commentators do not seem to have understood. See Ashm.
Theatr. Chemic. p. 484. edit. Land. 1652. 4to.
, with amazing accuracy and perspicuity Ibid. f. 77. a. col. 1.
; although this doctrine was adopted from systems then in vogue, as we shall
see below. In another place he applies the Argonautic expedition in search of
the golden fleece, which he relates at length, to the same visionary philosophy
Lib. v. f. 101. a. seq.
. Gower very probably conducted his associate Chaucer into these profound
mysteries, which had been just opened to our countrymen by the books of Roger
Bacon See supr. vol. 1. p. 425.
.

In the seventh book, the whole circle of the Aristotelic philosophy is
explained; which our lover is desirous to learn, supposing that the importance
and variety of its speculations might conduce to sooth his anxieties by
diverting and engaging his attention. Such a discussion was not very likely to
afford him much consolation: especially, as hardly a single ornamental
digression is admitted, to decorate a field naturally so destitute of flowers.
Almost the only one is the following description of the chariot and crown of
the sun; in which the Arabian ideas concerning precious stones are interwoven
with Ovid's fictions and the classical mythology.

Of gold glistrende Glistering.
, spoke and whele,
The Son his Carte Chariot.
has, fair and well;
In which he sit, and is croned
With bright stones environed:
Of which, if that I speak shall
There be Before.
tofore, inspeciall Above all.
,
Set in the front of his corone,
Three stones, which no person
Has upon earth: and the first is
By name cleped Leucachatis;
That other two cleped thus
Astroites and Ceraunus,
In his corone; and also byhynde,
By old books, as I find, --
There ben of worthy stones three,
Set each of hem in his degree;
Whereof a Cristelle is that one,
Which that corone is set upon:
The second is an Adamant;
The third is noble and avenant Beautiful.
,
Which cleped is Idriades --
And over this yet natheless Still farther.
,
Upon the sidis of the work,
After the writynge of the clerk The philosopher.
,
There sitten five stones mo More.
;
The Smaragdine is one of tho Them.
,
Jaspis, and Helitropius,
And Vandides, and Jacinctus.
Lo! thus the corone is beset,
Whereof it shines well the bet Much better.
.
And in such wise, his light to spread,
Sit, with his diadem on head,
The Son, shinende in his carte:
And for to lead him swithe Swift.
and smarte,
After the bright days law,
There ben ordained for to draw
Four horse his chare, and him withal,
Whereoff the names tell I shall:
Eritheus the first is hot Named.
,
The which is read, and shines hot;
The second Acteos the bright,
Lamps the third courser hight,
And Philogeus is the ferth Fourth.
,
That bringen light unto this earth
And gone so swift upon the heven, etc Lib. vii. f. 145. b. col. 1. 2.
.
Our author closes this course of the Aristotelic philosophy with a system of
politics Lib. vii. f. 151. a.
: not taken from Aristotle's genuine treatise on that subject, but from the
first chapter of a spurious compilation entitled, SECRETUM SECRETORUM
ARISTOTELIS See supr. vol. i. p. 132. Notes, x.
, addressed under the name of Aristotle to his pupil Alexander the Great, and
printed at Bononia in the year 1516. A work, treated as genuine, and explained
with a learned gloss, by Roger Bacon See Wood, Hist. Antiquit. Univ. Oxon. lib.
i. p. 15. col. 1.
: and of the highest reputation in Gower's age, as it was transcribed, and
illustrated with a commentary, for the use of king Edward the third, by his
chaplain Walter de Millemete, prebendary of the collegiate church of Glaseney
in Cornwall Tanner Bibl. p. 527. It is cited by Bradwardine, a famous English
theologist, in his grand work de CAUSA DEI. He died 1349.
. Under this head, our author takes an opportunity of giving advice to a weak
yet amiable prince, his patron king Richard the second, on a subject of the
most difficult and delicate nature, with much freedom and dignity. It might
also be proved, that Gower, through this detail of the sciences, copied in many
other articles the SECRETUM SECRETORUM; which is a sort of an abridgement of
the Aristotelic philosophy, filled with many Arabian innovations and
absurdities, and enriched with an appendix concerning the choice of wines,
phlebotomy, justice, public notaries, tournaments, and physiognomy, rather than
from the Latin translations of Aristotle. It is evident, that he copied from
this work the doctrine of the three chemical stones, mentioned above There is
an Epistle under the name of Alexander the Great, De Lapide Philosophorum,
among the SCRIPTORES CHEMICI artis aurif^rae, Basil. 1593. tom. i. And edit.
1610. See below, Note k.

I have mentioned a Latin romance of Alexander's life, as printed by Frederick
Corsellis, about 1468. supr. vol. i. p. 131. On examination, that impression is
said to be finished December. 17, 1468. Unluckily, the seventeenth day of
December was a Sunday that year. A manifest proof that the name of Corsellis
was forged.


. That part of our author's astronomy, in which he speaks of the magician
Nectabanus instructing Alexander the Great, when a youth, in the knowledge of
the fifteen stars, and their respective plants and precious stones,
appropriated to the operations of natural magic Lib. vii. f. 148. a. seq.
, seems to be borrowed from Callisthenes, the fabulous writer of the life of
Alexander h Or from fictitious books attributed to Alexander the Great, De
s^ptem H^rbis s^ptem Plan^tarum, etc. See Fabric. Bibl. Gr. tom. ii. p. 206.
See supr. vol. i. p. 129. And p. 223. Notes, f. Calli^^henes is mentioned twice
in this poem, Lib. vii. f. 139. b. col. 2. And vi. f. 139. b. col. 2. See a
chapter of Callisthenes and Alexander, in Lydgate's FALL OF PRINCES, B. iv. chapter
1. seq. fol. 99. edit. ut infr.
. Yet many wonderful inventions, which occur in this romance of Alexander, are
also to be found in the SECRETUM SECRETORUM: particularly the fiction of
Alexander's Stentorian horn, mentioned above, which was heard at the distance
of sixty miles See supr. vol. i. p. 132.
, and of which Kircher has given a curious representation in his PHONURGIA,
copied from an ancient picture of this gigantic instrument, belonging to a
manuscript of the SECRETUM SECRETORUM, preserved in the Vatican library Page
140. See SEC^ETUM SECRETORUM, Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Bodl. D. i. 5. Cap. penult. lib.
5.
.

It is pretended by the mystic writers, that Aristotle in his old age reviewed
his books, and digested his philosophy into one system or body, which he sent,
in the form of an epistle, to Alexander. This is the supposititious tract of
which I have been speaking; and it is thus described by Lydgate, who has
translated a part of it.

Title of this book LAPIS PHILOSOPHORUM,
Named also DE REGIMINE PRINCIPUM,
Of philosophres SECRETUM SECRETORUM. --
The which book direct to the king
Alysaundre, both in the werre and pees Peace.
,
Like According to.
his request and royal commanding^
Fulle accomplishid by Aristotiles.
Feeble of age. --
Then follows a rubric "How Aristotile declares to king Alysandre of the
stonys MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Laud. B. 24. K. 53. Part of this manuscript is printed
by Ashmol^, THEATR. CHEMIC. ^t supr. p. 397. See Julius Bartolocc. tom. i.
Bibl. ^abbinic. p. 475. And Joann. a Lent, Theol. Judaic. p. 6.
." It was early translated into French prose Mem. de Litt. tom. xvii. p. 737.
4-to.
, and printed in English, "The SECRET OF ARISTOTYLE, with the GOVERNALE OF
PRINCES and every manner of estate, with rules for health of body and soul, very
good to teache children to read English, newly translated out of French, and
emprented by Robert and William Copland, 1528 Octavo. A work called Aristotle's
POLITIQUES, or DISCOURSES O^ GOVERNMENT, from the French of Louis le Roy,
printed by Adam Islip, in folio, in the year 1527, and dedicated to sir Robert
Sid^ey, i^ Aristotle's genuine work. In Gresham college library there is
"Alexandri M. Epistolae ad preceptorem Aristotelem, Ang^ic^ fa^^^^." MSS. 52.
But I believ it Occleve's or Lydgate's poem on the subject, hereafter mentioned.
." This work will occur again under Occleve and Lidgate. There is also another
forgery consecrated with the name of Aristotle, and often quoted by the
astrologers, which Gower might have used: it is DE REGIMINIBUS COELESTIBUS,
which had been early translated from Arabic into Latin Hotting. Bibl. Orient.
p. 255. See Pic. Mirandulan. contra Astrolog. lib. i. p. 284.
.

Considered in a general view, the CONFESSIO AMANTI^ may be pronounced to be no
unpleasing miscellany of those shorter tales which delighted the readers of the
middle age. Most of these are now forgotten, together with the voluminous
chronicles in which they were recorded. The book which appears to have
accommodated our author with the largest quantity of materials in this article,
was probably a chronicle entitled PANTHEON, or MEMORIAE SECULORUM, compiled in
Latin, partly in prose and partly in verse, by Godfrey of Viterbo, a chaplain
and notary to three German emperors, who died in the year 1190 See sup. vol.
i. p. 351. Notes, h. And Jacob. Quetif. i. p. 740.
. It commences, according to the established practice of the historians of this
age, with the creation of the world, and is brought down to the year 1186. It
was first printed at Basil, in the year 1569 In folio. Again, among Scriptor^
de Reb. Germanicis, by Pistorius. Francof. fol. 1584. And Hanov. 1613. Lastly
in a new edit. of Pistorius's collection by Struvius, Ratisbon. 1726. fol.
There is a chronicle, I believe sometimes confounded with Godfrey's PANTHEON,
called the PANTALEONE, from the creation to the year 1162, about which time it
was compiled by the Benedictine monks of Saint Pantaleon at Cologn, printed by
Eccard, with a German translation, in the first volume of SCRIPTORES MEDII
AEVI, p. 683. 945. It was continued to the year 1237, by Godfridus, a
Pantaleonist monk. This continuation, which has conside^able merit as a
history, is extant in Freherus, Rer. Germanicar. tom. i. edit. Struvian. p. 335.
. The learned Muratori has not scrupled to insert the five last sections of
this universal history in the seventh tome of his writers on Italy P. 346.
. The subject of this work, to use the laborious compiler's own expressions, is
the whole Old and New Testament; and all the emperors and kings, which have
existed from the beginning of the world to his own times: of whom the origin,
end, names, and achievements, are commemorated In proem.
. The authors which our chronicler professes to have consulted for the gentile
story, are only Josephus, Dion Cassius, Strabo, Orosius, Hegesippus See supr.
vol. 1. p. 217.
, Suetonius, Solinus, and Julius Africanus: among which, not one of the purer
Roman historians occurs. Gower also seems to have used another chronicle
written by the same Godfrey, never printed, called SPECULUM REGUM, or the
MIRROR OF KINGS, which is almost as multifarious as the last; containing a
genealogy of all the potentates, Trojan and German, from Noah's flood to the
reign of the emperor Henry the sixth, according to the chronicles of the
venerable Bede, Eusebius, and Ambrosius See Lambecc. ii. p. 274.
. There are besides, two ancient collectors of mavelous and delectable
occurrences to which our author is indebted, Cassiodorus and Isidorus. These
are mentioned as two of the chroniclers which Caxton used in compiling his
CRONICLES OF ENGLAND Bale, apud Lewis's CAXTON, p. xvii. post pref. And in the
prologue to the FRUCTUS TEMPORUM, printed at St. Alban's in 1483, one of the
authors is "Cassiodorus of the actys of emperors and bisshoppys."
. Cassiodorus See CONFE^. AMANT. lib. vii. f. 156. b. col. 1. And our author to
king Henry, Urry's Chapter p. 542. v. 330.
wrote, at the command of the Gothic king Theodoric, a work named CHRONICON
BREVE, commencing with our first parents, and deduced to the year 519, chiefly
deduced from Eusebius's ecclesiastic history, the chronicles of Prosper and
Jerome, and Aurelius Victor's Origin of the Roman nation It has often been
printed. See OPERA Cassiodori, duobus tomis, Rothomag. 1679. fol.
. An Italian translation by Lodovico Dolce was printed in 1561 Compendio di
Sesto Ruffo, con la C^ONICA DI CA^SIODORO, de Fatti de Romani, etc. In Venezia,
per il Giolto, 1561. 4-to.
. Isidorus, called Hispalensis, cited by Davie and Chaucer See supr. vol. i. p.
230, Notes, u.
, in the seventh century, framed from the same author a CRONICON, from Adam to
the time of the emperor Heraclius, first printed in the year 1477, and
translated into Italian under the title of CRONICA D' ISIDORO, so soon after as
the year 1480 Stampata nel Friuli. It is sometimes called Chronica DE SEX MUNDI
AETATIBUS, IMAGO MUNDI, and ABBREVIATIO TEMPORUM. It was continued by Isidorus
Pacensis from 610 to 754. This continuation was printed in 1634, fol. Pampelon.
Under the title "Epitome Imperatorum vel Arabum Ephemeridos una cum Hispaniae
Chronico."

Isidore has likewise left a history or chronicle of the Goths, copied also by
our author, from the year 176, to the death of king Sisebut in the year 628. It
was early printed. See it in Grotius's COLLECTIO RERUM GOTHICARUM, page 707.
Amst. 1655. 8-vo.


.

These comprehensive systems of all sacred and profane events, which in the
middle ages multiplied to an excessive degree, superseded the use of the
classics and other established authors, whose materials they gave in a
commodious abridgement, and in whose place, by selecting those stories only
which suited the taste of the times, they substituted a more agreeable kind of
reading: nor was it by these means only, that they greatly contributed to
retard the acquisition of those ornaments of style, and other arts of
composition, which an attention to the genuine models would have afforded, but
by being written without any ideas of elegance, and in the most barbarous
phraseology. Yet productive as they were of these and other inconvenient
consequences, they were not without their use in the rude periods of
literature. By gradually weaning the minds of readers from monkish legends,
they introduced a relish for real and rational history; and kindling an ardour
of inquiring into the transactions of past ages, at length awakened a curiosity
to obtain a more accurate and authentic knowledge of important events by
searching the original authors. Nor are they to be entirely neglected in modern
and more polished ages. For, besides that they contain curious pictures of the
credulity and ignorance of our ancestors, they frequently preserve facts
transcribed from books which have not descended to posterity. It is extremely
probable, that the plan on which they are all constructed, that of deducing a
perpetual history from the creation to the writer's age, was partly taken from
Ovid's Metamorphoses, and partly from the Bible.

In the mean time there are three histories of a less general nature, which
Gower seems more immediately to have followed in some of his tales. These are
Colonna's Romance of Troy, the Romance of Sir Lancelot, and the GESTA ROMANORUM.

From Colonna's Romance, which he calls The Tale of Troie, The Book of Troie Of
Palamedes and Nauplius, "The book of Troie whosoever read." Lib. ii. fol. 52. b.
col. 2. The story of Jason and Medea, "whereof the tale in special is in the
book of Troie writ." Lib. v. fol. 101. ^. col. 2. Of the Sirens seen by
Ulysses, "which in the tale of Troie I find." Lib. i. f. 10. b. col. 1. Of the
eloquence of Ulysses, "As in the book of Troie is funde." Lib. vii. f. 150. a.
col. 1. etc. etc. See supr. vol. 1. p. 127.
, and sometimes The Cronike In the story of the Theban chief Capaneus, "This
knight as the CRONIKE seine." Lib. 1. f. 18. b. col. 2. Of Achilles and Teucer,
"In a CRONIQUE I find thus." Lib. iii. fol. 62. a. col. 1. Of Peleus and
Phocus, "As the CRONIQUE seithe." Lib. iii. f. 61. b. col. 1. Of Ulysses and
Penelope, "In a CRONIQUE I find writ." Lib. iv. f. 63. b. col. 2. He
mentions also the CRONIQUE for tales of other nations. "In the CRONIQUE as I
find, Cham was he which first the letters fond, and wrote in Hebrew with his
hand, of natural philosophy." Lib. iv. fol. 76. a col. 1. For Darius's four
questions, Lib. vii. fol. 151. b. col. 1. For Perillus's brazen bull. f. etc.
etc. See below.
, he has taken all that relates to the Trojan and Grecian story, or, in
Milton's language, THE TALE OF TROY DIVINE. This piece was first printed at
Cologne in the year 1477 In quarto. HISTORIA TROJANA, a Guidone de Columpna
Messanensi Judice edita 1287. Impressa per Arnoldum Therburnem Coloniae
commorantem, 1477. Die penult. Nov. I am mistaken in what I have said, supr.
vol. i. p. 126. There is another edition at Oxford by Rood, 1480, 4-to. Two at
Strasburgh 1486, and 1489. fol. Ames calls him Columella. Hist. Print. p. 204.
. At Colonia an Italian translation appeared in the same year, and one at
Venice in 1481. It was translated into Italian so early as 1324, by Philipp
Ceffi a Florentine See Haym's Bibl. Italian. p. 35. edit. Venez. 1741. 4-to. I
am not sure whether Haym's Italian translation in the year 1477 is not the
Latin of that year. They are both in quarto, and by Arnoldo Terbone. A Florence
edition of the translation in 1610, quarto, is said to be most scarce.
. By some writers it is called the British as well as the Trojan story Sandius
and Hallerwood, in their Supplement to Vossius's Latin Historians, suppose
Colonna's Trojan and British chronicle the same. In Theodoric Engelhusen's
CHRONICA CHRONICORUM, compiled about the year 1420, where the author speaks of
Troy, he cites Colonna de Bello Trojano. In the Preface he mentions Colonna's
CHRONICA BRITANNORUM. See Engelhusen's first edition, Helmst. 1671, 4-to. Or
rather, Scriptor. Brunsvic. Leibnitii, tom. p. 977. See also Fabyan and other
historians.
; and there are manuscripts in which it is entitled the history of Medea and
Jason See supr. vol. i. p. 138. Notes. It will occur again under Lydgate.
. In most of the Italian translations it is called LA STORIA DELLA GUERRA DI
TROJA. This history is repeatedly called the TROIE BOOK by Lydgate, who
translated it into English verse Tragedies of Bochas, B. i. chapter xvi. How the
translatoure wrote a book of the siege of Troy, called TROY BOOK. And ib. St.
7. 17. 20. edit. Wayland. fol. xxx. b. xxxi. a. And in Lydg. DESTR. of Troy.
.

As to the romance of sir Lancelot, our author, among others on the subject,
refers to a volume of which he was the hero: perhaps that of Robert Borron,
altered soon afterward by Godefroy de Leigny, under the title of le ROMAN DE
LA CHARETTE, and printed with additions at Paris by Antony Verard, in the year
1494.

For if thou will the books read
Of LANCELOT and other mo,
Then might thou seen how it was tho
Of arms, for this would atteine
To love, which, withouten peine
May not be get of idleness:
And that I take to witness
An old Cronike in special
The which in to memorial
Is write for his loves sake,
How that a Knight shall undertake Lib. iv. f. 74. a. col. 2.
.
He alludes to a story about sir Tristram, which he supposes to be universally
known, related in this romance.

In every man's mouth it is
How Tristram was of love drunk
With Bele Isolde, when this drunk
The drink which Bragweine him betoke,
Er that king Mark, etc Lib. vi. f. 130. b. col. 2.
.
And again, in the assembly of lovers.

There was Tristram which was beloved
With Bele Isolde, and Lancelot
Stood with Gonnor Geneura, Arthur's queen.
, and Galahot
With his lady Lib. viii. f. 188. a. col. 1.
. --
The oldest edition of the GESTA ROMANORUM, a manuscript of which I have seen
in almost Saxon characters, I believe to be this. Incipiunt History NOTABILES,
collecte ex GESTIS ROMANORUM, et quibusdam aliis libris cum applicationibus
eorundem Princip. "Pompeius regnavit dives, etc. Fin." "Quidam vero princeps
nomine Cleonicus, etc. Karissimi, is^e princeps est xps, etc. Oscula
blandientis, etc." It is in folio, in double columns, without initials, page^,
signatures, or catchwords. ANGLIE i^ mentioned in chapters, 155. 161.
. It is without date or place, but supposed by the critics in typographical
antiquities to have been printed before or about the year 1473. Then followed a
second edition at Louvain by John de Westfalia, with this title: Ex GESTIS
ROMANORUM HISTORY NOTABILES de viciis virtutibusque tractantes cum
applicationibus moralisatis et mysticis. At the end this colophon appears:
GESTA ROMANORUM cum quibusdam aliis historiis eisdem annexis ad moralitates
dilucide reducta hic finem habent. Quae diligenter, correctis aliorum viciis,
impressit Joannes de Westfalia, alma in Univers. Louvaniensi Princip. "De
DILECTIONE, cap. i. Pompeius regnavit dives valde, etc. -- MORALIZATIO. De
MISERICORDIA, cap. ii." De ADULTERIO, in cap. clxxxi. It is in quarto, with
signatures to K k. The initials are written in red ink. Mr. Farmer of Cambridge
has this edition.
. This edition has twenty-nine chapters more than there are in the former: and
the first of these additional chapters is the story of Antiochus, related in
our author. It is probably of the year 1473. Another followed soon afterward,
by GESTIS ROMANORUM HISTORY NOTABILES moralizatae per Girardum Lieu. Goudae,
1480 In quarto.
. The next But I think there is another Goudae, 1489. fol.
is at Louvain, GESTA ROMANORUM, cum applicationibus moralisatis ac mysticis.
-- At the end. -- Ex GESTIS ROMANORUM cum pluribus applicatis HYSTORIIS de
virtutibus et vitiis mistice ad intellectum transumptis recollectorii finis.
Anno nostrae salutis 1494. In die sancti Adriani martyris In quarto. Again,
Paris. 1499, quarto. Hagen. 1508. fol. Paris. 1521. octav. And undoubtedly
others. It appeared in Dutch so early as the year 1484. fol.
.

It was one of my reasons for giving these titles and colophons so much at
large, that the reader might more fully comprehend the nature and design of a
performance which operated so powerfully on the present state of our poetry.
Servius says that the Eneis was sometimes called GESTA POPULI ROMANI Ad Aeneid.
vi. 752.
. Ammianus Marcellinus, who wrote about the year 450, mentions a work called
the GESTORUM VOLUMEN, which according to custom, was solemnly recited to the
emperor "Imperatori de more recitatum," Hist. xxix. i. In the title of the
SAINT ALBANS CHRONICLE, printed 1483, Titus Livyus de GESTIS ROMANORUM is
recited.
. Here perhaps we may perceive the groundwork of the title.

In this mixture of moralisation and narrative, the GESTA ROMANORUM somewhat
resembles the plan of Gower's poem. In the rubric of the story of Julius and
the poor knight, our author alludes to this book in the expression, Hic
secundum GESTA, etc Lib. viii. f. 153. a. col. 1. And in other rubrics. In the
rubric there is also GESTA ALEXANDRI, lib. iii. f. 61. a. col. 1. And in the
story of Sardanapalus, "These old GESTES tellen us," lib. iii. 167. a. col. 1.
. When he speaks of the emperors of Rome paying reverence to a virgin, he says
he found this custom mentioned, "Of Rome among the GESTES old Lib. v. f. 118.
a. col. 2.
." Yet he adds, that the GESTES took it from Valerius Maximus. The story of
Tarquin and his son Arrous is ushered in with this line, "So as these old
GESTES seyne Lib. vii. f. 169. a. col. 1.
." The tale of Antiochus, as I have hinted, is in the GESTA ROMANORUM; although
for some parts of it Gower was perhaps indebted to Godfrey's PANTHEON
abovementioned See supr. vol i. p. 150. Notes, h.
. The foundation of Shakespeare's story of the three casketts in the MERCHANT
OF VENICE, is to be found in this favorite collection: this is likewise in our
author, yet in a different form, who cites a Cronike He refers to a CRONIKE for
other stories, as the story of Lucius king of Rome, and the king's fool. "In a
CRONIKE it tells us." Lib. vii. f. 165. a. col. 2. Of the translation of the
Roman empire to the Lombards. "This made an emperor anon, whose name, the
CHRONICLE tells was Oaths." Prol. fol. 5. b. col. 2. Of Constantine's
leprosy. "For in CRONIKE thus I read." Lib. iii. f. 46. b. col. 2. For which he
also cites "the books of Latin," ib. f. 45. a. col. 1. In the story of Caius
Fabricius, "In a CRONIQUE I find thus." Lib. vii. f. 157. a. col. 2. Of the
soothsayer and the emperor of Rome. "As in CRONIKE it is witholde." -- "Which
the CHRONIKE has autorized." Lib. vii. f. 154. b. col. 1. f. 155. b. col. 2.
Of the emperor's son who serves the Sultan of Persia. "There was as the
CRONIQUE seith, an emperor, etc." Lib. ii. f. 41. b. col. 1. For the story of
Carmidotoirus consul of Rome, he refers to these old bokes^ Lib. vii. f. 157.
b. col. 2. etc. etc.
for his authority. I make no apology for giving the passage somewhat at large,
as the source of this elegant little apologue, which seems to be of eastern
invention, has lately so much employed the searches of the commentators on
Shakespeare, and that the circumstances of the story, as it is told by Gower,
may be compared with those with which it appears in other books.

The poet is speaking of a king whose officers and courtiers complained, that
after a long attendance, they had not received adequate rewards, and
preferments due to their services. The king, who was no stranger to their
complaints, artfully contrives a scheme to prove whether this defect proceeded
from his own want of generosity, or their want of discernment.

Anon he let two cofres Coffers. Chests.
make,
Of one semblance, of one make,
So lyche Like.
, that no life thilke throw
That one may fro that other know:
They were into his chamber brought,
But no man wot why they be brought,
And netheles the king has bid,
That they be set in privy stead,
As he that was of wisdom sligh,
When he thereto his time sigh Saw.
,
All privilyche Privily.
, that none it wiste,
His own hondes that one chist Chest.

Of fine gold and of fine perie Gems.
,
(The which out of his tresurie
Was take) anon he filde full;
That other cofre of straw and mulle Rubbish.
,
With stones mened, he filde also:
Thus be they full both tho.
The king assembles his courtiers, and showing them the two chests, acquaints
them, that one of these is filled with gold and jewels; that they should choose
which of the two they liked best, and that the contents should instantly be
distributed among them all. A knight by common consent is appointed to choose
for them, who fixes upon the chest filled with straw and stones.

This king then in the same stead Place.
,
Anon that other cofre undede,
Whereas they sawen great richesse
Wile more than they couthen guess.
"Lo, says the king, now may ye see
"That there is no default in me:
"Forthy Therefore.
, myself I will acquit,
"And bears your own wite
"Of that fortune has you refused Lib. v. f. 86. a. col. 1. seq. The ^^ory
which follows is somewhat similar, in which the emperor Frederick places before
two beggars two pasties, one filled with capons, the other with florins. ibid.
b. col. 2.
."
It must be confessed, that there is a much greater and a more beautiful
variety of incidents in this story as it is related in the GESTA ROMANORUM,
which Shakespeare has followed, than in Gower: and was it not demonstrable,
that this compilation preceded our author's age by some centuries, one would be
tempted to conclude, that Gower's story was the original fable in its simple
unimproved state. Whatever was the case, it is almost certain that one story
produced the other.

A translation into English of the GESTA ROMANORUM was printed by Wynkyn de
Word, without date. In the year 1577, one Richard Robinson published A Record
of ancient Hystoryes, in Latin GESTA ROMANORUM, perused, corrected, and
bettered, by R. Robinson, London, 1577 In twelves. See among the Royal
Manuscripts, Brit. Mus. "Richard Robinson's Eupolemia, Archippus and Panoplia:
being an account of his Patrons and Benefactions, etc. 1603." See fol. 5. MSS.
Reg. 18 A. lxvi. This R. Robinson, I believe, published Part of the harmony of
king David's harp. A translation of the first twenty one psalms, for J. Wolf,
1582. 4-to. A translation of Leland's ASSERTIO ARTHURI, for the same, 1582.
4to. The ancient order society, etc. of prince Arthure, and his knightly
armory of the round table, in verse, for the same, 1583, 4to.
. Of this translation there were six impressions before the year 1601 There is
an edition, in black letter, so late as 1689.
. The later editions, both Latin and English, differ considerably from a
manuscript belonging to the British Museum MSS. Harl. 2270. 1. See ibid. cap.
xcix. for this story. Tit. " Liber Asceticus cui titulus Gesta Romanorum, cum
Reductionibus ^ive Moralitatibus eorundem." There is an English translation,
ibid. MSS. Harl. 7333. This has the Je^'s bond and the Casketts. In the same
library there is a large collection of legendary tales in different hands,
written on parchment, 8-vo. MSS. Harl. 2316. One of these is, "De vera
amicitia, et de Passione Christi: Narratio a Petro Alphonso." 18. fol. 8. b.
The history of the two friends here related, is told more at large in the GESTA
ROMANORUM, where the friends are two knights. Peter Alphonsus lived about 1110.
This tale, I think, is Lydgate's fabula duorum mercatorum, MSS. Harl. 2251. 33.
fol. 56. "In Egypt whilom, etc." See also 2255. 17. fol. 72. Manuscripts of
these GESTA occur thrice in the Bodleian library. MSS. Bodl. B. 3. 10. Ibid.
super O. 1. Art. 17. And Hyper. Bodl. (Cod. Grav.) B. 55. 3. viz. Narrationes
breves e GESTIS ROMANORUM et aliorum. But this last seems rather a defloration.
In Hereford cathedral, 73. In Worcester cathedral, 80. In (late) Burscough's
(rector of Totness) MSS. Cod. 82. 1. In (late) Sir Symonds D'Ewes's MSS. Cod.
150. 2. In Trinity college Dublin, G. 326. At Oxford, Saint John's college
twice, C. 31. 2. G. 41. Magdalen college, twice, Cod. Lat. 13. 60. Lincoln
college Libr. Theol. 60. See what is said of Gests, supr. vol. i. p. 74. Among
the manuscript books written by Lapus de Castellione, a Florentine civilian,
and a great translator from Greek into Latin, about the year 1350, Balusius
mentions De Origin Urbis Romae, et de G^stis Romanorum. What this piece is I
cannot ascertain. Apud Fabric. Bibl. Med. Inf. Latinitat. iv. 722. Compare de
Gestis Imperatorum Liber, MSS. Harl. 5259. i.
, which contains not only the story of the CASKETTS in Shakespeare's MERCHANT
of VENICE, but that of the JEW'S BOND in the same play Chapter xlviii.
. I cannot exactly ascertain the age of this piece, which has many fictitious
and fabulous facts intermixed with true history; nor have I been able to
discover the name of its compiler.

It appears to me to have been formed on the model of Valerius Maximus, the
favorite classic of the monks. It is quoted and commended as a true history,
among many historians of credit, such as Josephus, Orosius, Bid, and Eusebius,
by Herman Korner, a dominican friar of Lubec, who wrote a CHRONICA NOVELLA, or
history of the world, in the year 1435 See Eccard's Corp. Histor. tom. ii. p.
432. -- 1343. Lips. 1723. fol.
.

In speaking of our author's sources, I must not omit a book translated by the
unfortunate Antony Widville, first earl of Rivers, chiefly with a view of
proving its early popularity. It is the Dictes or Sayings of Philosophres,
which lord Rivers translated from the French of William de Thignonville,
provost of the city of Paris about the year 1408, entitled Les dictes moraux
des philosophes, les dictes des sages et les secrets d' Aristote See Mem. de
Litt. xvii. 754. 4to.
. The English translation was printed by Caxton, in the year 1477. Gower refers
to this tract, which first existed in Latin, more than once; and it is most
probable, that he consulted the Latin original Among these other " tales wise
of philosophers in this wise I read, etc." Lib. vii. f. 143. a. col. 1. f. 142.
b. col. 2. etc. See Walpole's Cat. royal and noble authors.

There is another translation, done in 1450, dedicated to sir John Fastolfe,
knight, by his son in law Stevyn Scrope Squire. MSS. Harl. 2265. William de
Thignonville is here said to have translated this book into French for the use
of king Charles the sixth.


.

It is pleasant to observe the strange mistakes which Gower, a man of great
learning, and the most general scholar of his age, has committed in this poem,
concerning books which he never saw, his violent anachronisms, and
misrepresentations of the most common facts and characters. He mentions the
Greek poet Menander, as one of the first historians, or "first enditours of the
old cronike," together with Esdras, Solinus, Josephus, Claudius Salpicius,
Termegis, Pandulfe, Frigidilles, Ephiloquorus, and Pandas. It is extraordinary
that Moses should not here be mentioned, in preference to Esdras. Solinus is
ranked so high, because he recorded nothing but wonders Our author has a story
from Solinus concerning a monstrous bird, lib. iii. f. 62. b. col. 2. See supr.
vol. i. p. 102. Notes, 0.
; and Josephus, on account of his subject, had long been placed almost on a
level with the bible. He is seated on the first pillar in Chaucer's HOUSE OF
FAME. His Jewish history, translated into Latin by Ru^inus in the fourth
century, had given rise to many old poems and romances See supr. vol. 1. p.
217. 311. There is JOSEPHUS de la BATTAILLE JUDAIQUE translate de Latin en
Francois, printed by Verard at Paris, 1480. fol. I think it is a poem. All
Josephus's works were printed in the old Latin translation, at Verona 1480.
fol. And frequently soon afterward. They were translated into French, German,
Spanish, and Italian, and printed, between the years 1492 and 1554. See the
COLLANA GRECA, in Haym's Bibliothec. p. 6. 7. A French translation was made in
1460, or 1463. Cod. Reg. Paris. 7015.
: and his MACCABAICS, or history of the seven Maccabees martyred with their
father Eleazar under the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, a separate work,
translated also by Rufinus, produced the JUDAS MACCABEE of Belleperche in the
year 1240, and at length enrolled the Maccabees among the most illustrious
heroes of romance See supr. vol. i. p. 417. In the British Museum there is
"Maccabeorum et Josephi Historiarum Epitome, metrice." 10 A. viii. 5. MSS. Reg.
See MSS. Harl. 5713.
. On this account too, perhaps Esdras is here so respectably remembered. I
suppose Sulpicius is Sulpicius Severus, a petty annalist of the fifth century.
Termegis is probably Trismegistus, the mystic philosopher, certainly not an
historian, at least not an ancient one. Pandulf seems to be Pandulph of Pisa,
who wrote lives of the popes, and died in the year 1198 See the story, in our
author, of pope Boni^ace suppl^nting Celestine. "In a CRONYKE of time ago."
Lib. ii. f. 42. a. col. 2.
. Frigidilles is perhaps Fregedaire, a Burgundian, who flourished about the
year 641, and wrote a chronicon from Adam to his own times; often printed, and
containing the best account of the Franks after Gregory of Tours See Ruinart.
Dissertat. de Fredegario ejusque Operibus. tom ii Hist. Franc. p. 443. There is
also Fridegodus, a ^onk of Dover, who wrote the lives of some sainted bishops
about the year 960. And a Frigeridus, ^nown only by a reference which Gregory
of Tours makes to the ^wel^th book of his H^stor^, concerning the times
preceding Valentinian the third, and the capture of Rome by Totila. Gregor.
Turonens. Hist^ Francor. lib. ii. cap. ^. 9. If this last be the writer in the
text, a manuscript of Frigeridus's History might have existed in Gower's age,
which is now lost.
. Our author, who has partly suffered from ignorant transcribers and printers,
by Ephiloquorus undoubtedly intended Eutropius. In the next paragraph indeed,
he mentions Herodotus: yet not as an early historian, but as the first writer
of a system of the metrical art, "of meter, of ryme, and of cadence Lib. vi. f.
76. b. col. 1.
." We smile, when Hector in Shakespeare quotes Aristotle: but Gower gravely
informs his reader, that Ulysses was a clerk, accomplished with a knowledge of
all the sciences, a great rhetorician and magician: that he learned rhetoric of
Tully, magic of Zoroaster, astronomy of Ptolomy, philosophy of Plato,
divination of the prophet Daniel, proverbial instruction of Solomon, botany of
Macer, and medicine of Hippocrates Lib. vi. f. 135. a. col. 1.
. And in the seventh book, Aristotle, or the philosophre, is introduced
reciting to his scholar Alexander the great, a disputation between a Jew and a
Pagan, who meet between Cairo and Babylon, concerning their respective
religions: the end of the story is to show the cunning, cruelty, and
ingratitude of the Jew, which are at last deservedly punished Lib. vii. f. 156.
b. col. 2.
. But I believe Gower's apology must be, that he took this narrative from some
christian legend, which was feigned, for a religious purpose, at the expense of
all probability and propriety.

The only classic Roman writers which our author cites are Virgil, Ovid,
Horace, and Tully. Among the Italian poets, one is surprised he should not
quote Petrarch: he mentions Dante only, who in the rubric is called "a certain
poet of Italy named Dante," quidam po^ta Italiae qui DANTE vocabatur Lib. vii.
f. 154. b. col. 1.
. He appears to have been well acquainted with the Homelies of pope Gregory the
great Prolog. f. 2. b. col. 1. Lib. v. f. 93. a. col. 1. 2. f. 94. a. col. 1.
, which were translated into Italian, and printed at Milan, so early as the
year 1479. I can hardly decypher, and must therefore be excused from
transcribing, the names of all the renowned authors which our author has quoted
in alchemy, astrology, magic, palmistry, geomancy, and other branches of the
occult philosophy. Among the astrological writers, he mentions Noah, Abraham,
and Moses. But he is not sure that Abraham was an author, having never seen any
of that patriarch's works: and he prefers Trismegistus to Moses Lib. vii. f.
134. b. col. 1. vii. f. 149. b. col. 1.
. Cabalistical tracts were however extant, not only under the names of Abraham,
Noah, and Moses, but of Adam, Abel, and Enoch See supr. vol. i. p. 425. p. 393.
Notes, h. And Morhof. Polyhist. tom. ii. p. 455. seq. edit. 1747.
. He mentions, with particular regard, Ptolomy's ALMAGEST; the grand source of
all the superstitious notions propagated by the Arabian philosophers concerning
the science of divination by the stars Mabillon mentions, in a manuscript of
the ALMAGEST written before the year 1240, a drawing of Ptolomy, holding a
mirror, not an optical tube, in his hand, and contemplating the stars. Itin.
Germanic. p. 49.
, These infatuations seem to have completed their triumph over human credulity
in Gower's age, who probably was an ingenious adept in the false and frivolous
speculations of this admired species of study.

Gower, amidst his graver literature, appears to have been a great reader of
romances. The lover, in speaking of the gratification which his passion
receives from the sense of hearing, says, that to hear his lady speak is more
delicious, than to feast on all the dainties that could be compounded by a cook
of Lombardy. They are not so restorative

As bin the words of her mouth;
For as the wyndes of the South
Ben most of all debonaire,
So when her lust She chooses.
to speak fair,
The virtue of her goodly speech
Is verily mine hearts leche Physician.
.
These are elegant verses. To hear her sing is paradise^ Then he adds,

Full often time it falls so,
My ere Ear.
with a good pitance
Is fed of redynge of romance
Of IDOYNE and AMADAS,
That whilom were in my cas;
And eke of other, many a score,
That loved long ere I was bore Born.
:
For when I of her Their.
loves read,
Mine ere with the tale I feed;
And with the lust of her histoire,
Sometime I draw into memoire,
How sorrow may not ever last,
And so hope comith in at last Lib. vi. f. 133. a. col. 2.
.
The romance of IDOYNE and AMADAS is recited as a favorite history among
others, in the prologue to a collection of legends called CURSOR MUNDI,
translated from the French See supr. vol. 1. p. ^23. Notes, t.
. I have already observed our poet's references to Sir LANCELOT'S romance.

Our author's account of the progress of the Latin language is extremely
curious. He supposes that it was invented by the old Tuscan prophetess Carmens;
that it was reduced to method, to composition, pronunciation, and prosody, by
the grammarians Aristarchus, Donatus, and Didymus: adorned with the flowers of
eloquence and rhetoric by Tully: then enriched by translations from the
Chaldee, Arabic, and Greek languages, more especially by the version of the
Hebrew bible into Latin by saint Jerome, in the fourth century: and that at
length, after the labors of many celebrated writers, it received its final
consummation in Ovid, the poet of lovers. At the mention of Ovid's name, the
poet, with the dexterity and address of a true master of transition, seizes the
critical moment of bringing back the dialogue to its proper argument Lib. iv.
f. 77. b. col. 2.
.

The CONFESSIO AMANTIS was most probably written after Chaucer's TROILUS AND
CRESSIDA. At the close of the poem, we are presented with an assemblage of the
most illustrious lovers Lib. viii. f. 158. a. col. 2.
. Together with the renowned heroes and heroines of love, mentioned either in
romantic or classical history, we have David and Bathsheba, Sampson and Dalila,
and Solomon with all ^is concubines. Virgil, also, Socrates, Plato, and Ovid,
are enumerated as lovers. Nor must we be surprised to find Aristotle honored
with a place in this gallant groupe: for whom, says the poet, the queen of
Greece made such a syllogism as destroyed all his logic. But, among the rest,
Troilus and Cressida are introduced; seemingly with an intention of paying a
compliment to Chaucer's poem on their story, which had been submitted to
Gower's correction Chaucer's Tr. Cress^ Urr. edit. p. 333.
. Although this famous pair had been also recently celebrated in Boccacio's
FILOSTRATO See supr. vol. i. p. 385.
. And in another place, speaking of his absolute devotion to his lady's will,
he declares himself ready to acquiesce in her choice, whatsoever she shall
command: whether, if when tired of dancing and caroling, she should choose to
play at chess, or read TROILUS AND CRESSIDA. This is certainly Chaucer's poem.

That when her li^t on nights wake
In chamber, as to carol and dance,
Methinke I may me more avaunce,
If I may gone upon her hand,
Than if I win a kings land.
For when I may her hand beclip Clasp.
,
With such gladness I dance and skip,
Methinketh I touch not the floor;
The roe which renneth on the moore
Is than naught so light as I. --
And when it falls other gate Gaiety, or way.
,
So that her likes not to dance,
But on the dies to cast a chance,
Or ask of love some demand;
Or else that her list command
To read and here of TROILUS Lib. iv. ^. 78^ b. col. 1.
.
That this poem was written after Chaucer's FLOWER AND LEAF, may be partly
collected from the following passage, which appears to be an imitation of
Chaucer, and is no bad specimen of Gower's most poetical manner. Rosiphele, a
beautiful princess, but setting love at defiance, the daughter of Herupus king
of Armenia, is taught obedience to the laws of Cupid by seeing a vision of
Ladies.

When come was the month of May,
She would walk upon a day,
And that was er the son arist Arose.
,
Of women but a few it wist "But a few of her women knew of this."
;
And forth she went prively,
Unto a park was fast by,
All soft walkende on the gras,
Till she came there There where.
the launde was
Through which ran a great rivere,
It thought her fair; and said, here
I will abide under the shawe;
And bad her women to withdraw:
And there she stood alone stille
To think what was in her will.
She sighe Saw.
the sweet flowers spring,
She herd glad fowls sing;
She sigh beasts in her kind,
The buck, the do, the heart, the hynde,
The males go with the femele:
And so began there a quarele Dispute^

Between love and her own heart
Fro which she couthe not asterte.
And as she cast her eye about,
She sigh, clad in one suit, a route
Of ladies where they comen ride
Alonge under the woodde side;
On fair Ambling.
ambulende horse they set,
That were al white, fair, and great;
And everichone ride on side A mark of high rank.
.
The sadels were of such a pride,
So rich sighe she never none;
With perles and gold so well begone,
In kirtels and in copes rich
They were clothed all aliche Alike^
,
Departed even of white and blewe,
With all lusts Lists. Colors.
that she knew
They were embroudred over all:
Her Their.
bodies weren long and small,
The beautee of her fair face,
There may none erthly thing deface:
Corownes on their heads they bare,
As each of hem a queen were.
That all the gold of Cresus hall
The least coronall of all
Might not have boughte, after the worth,
Thus comen they ridend forth.
The kings daughter, which this sigh,
For pure abasshe drew her adrigh,
And held her close undir the bough.
At length she sees riding in the rear of this splendid troop, on a horse lean,
galled, and lame, a beautiful lady in a tattered garment, her saddle mean and
much worn, but her bridle richly studded with gold and jewels: and round her
waist were more than an hundred halters. The princess asks the meaning of this
strange procession; and is answered by the lady on the lean horse, that these
are specter of ladies, who, when living, were obedient and faithful votaries
of love. "As to myself, she adds, I am now receiving my annual penance for
being a rebel to love."

For I whilom no love had;
My horse is now feeble and badde,
And al to torn is mine araie;
And every year this fresh Mai^
These lusty ladies ride about,
And I must needs sew Follow.
her route,
In this manner as ye now see,
And trusse her hallters forth with me,
And am but her horse knave Their groom.
.
The princess then asks her, why she wore the rich bridle, so inconsistent with
the rest of her furniture, her dress, and horse? The lady answers, that it was
a badge and reward for having loved a knight faithfully for the last fortnight
of her life.

"Now have ye herd all mine answer;
"To god, madam, I you betake,
"And warns all, for my sake,
"Of love, that they be not idell,
"And bid hem think of my bridell."
And with that word, all suddenly
She passes, as it were a sky A shadow, (...), umbra.
,
All clean out of the ladies sight Lib. iv. f. 70. seq.
.
My readers will easily conjecture the change which this spectacle must
naturally produce in the obdurate heart of the princess of Armenia. There is a
farther proof that the FLOWER AND LEAF preceded the CONFESSIO AMANTIS. In the
eighth book, our author's lovers are crowned with the Flower and Leaf.

Mine eye I cast all aboutes,
To know among hem who was who:
I sigh where lusty YOUTH tho,
As he which was a captain
Before all others on the plain,
Stood with his route well begone:
Her heads kempt, and thereupon
Garlondes not of one color,
Some of the lefe, some of the flower,
And some of great perles were:
The new guise of Beme Boeme. Bohemia.
was there, etc Lib. viii. f. 188. a. col. 1. See supr. vol. i. p. 466.
.
I believe on the whole, that Chaucer had published most of his poems before
this piece of Gower appeared. Chaucer had not however at this time written his
TESTAMENT OF LOVE: for Gower, in a sort of Epilogue to the CONFESSIO AMANTIS,
is addressed by Venus, who commands him to greet Chaucer as her favorite poet
and disciple, as one who had employed his youth in composing songs and ditties
to her honor. She adds at the close,

For thy, now in his days old,
Thou shall him tell this message,
That he upon his later age
To set an end of all his work
As he, which is mine own clerk,
Do make his TESTAMENT OF LOVE,
As thou have done thy SHRIFTE above:
So that my court it may record Lib. viii. f. 190. b. col. 1.
.
Chaucer at this time was sixty-five years of age. The Court of Love, one of
the pedantries of French gallantry, occurs often. In an address to Venus,
"Madame, I am a man of thine, that in thy COURT has served long Lib. i. f. 8.
b. col. 1.
." The lover observes, that for want of patience, a man ought "among the women
all, in LOVES COURT, by judgment the name bear of paciant Lib. iii. f. 51.
a. col. 1.
." The confessor declares, that many persons are condemned for disclosing
secrets, "In LOVES COURT, as it is said, that let their tongues gone untide
Lib. iii. f. 52. a. col. 1. See supr. vol. i. p. 460. In the^ same strain, we
have Cupid's parliament. Lib. viii. f. 187. b. col. 2.
." By Thy SHRIFTE, the author means his own poem now before us, the Lover's
CONFESSION.

There are also many manifest evidences which lead us to conclude, that this
poem preceded Chaucer's CANTERBURY'S TALES, undoubtedly some of that poet's
latest compositions, and probably not begun till after the year 1382. The MAN
OF LAWS TALE is circumstantially borrowed from Gower's CONSTANTIA Conf. Amant.
Lib. ii f. 30. b. col. 2. See particularly, ibid. f. 35. b. col. 2. a. col. 1.
And compare Chapter MAN OF L. T. v. 5505. "Some men would sayn, etc." That is, GOWER.
: and Chaucer, in that TALE, apparently censures Gower, for his manner of
relating the stories of Canace and Apollonius in the third and eighth books of
the CONFESSIO AMANTIS See Chaucer, ibid. v. 4500. And Conf. Amant. Lib. iii. f.
48. a. col. 1. seq. Lib. viii. f. 175. a. col. 2. seq. I have just discovered,
that the favorite story of Apollonius, having appeared in ancient Greek,
Latin, Saxon, barbarous Greek, and old French, was at length translated from
French into English, and printed in the black letter, by Wynkyn de Word, A. D.
1510. 4to. "King Appolyn of Thyre." [See supr. vol i. p. 350.] A copy is in my
possession.
. The WIFE OF BATHES TALE is founded on Gower's Florent, a knight of Rome, who
delivers the king of Sicily's daughter from the incantations of her stepmother
Lib. i. f. 15. b. col. 2.
. Although the GESTA ROMANORUM might have furnished both poets with this
narrative. Chaucer, however, among other great improvements, has judiciously
departed from the fable, in converting Sicily into the more popular court of
king Arthur.

Perhaps, in estimating Gower's merit, I have pushed the notion too far, that
because he shows so much learning he had no great share of natural abilities.
But it should be considered, that when books began to grow fashionable, and the
reputation of learning conferred the highest honor, poets became ambitious of
being thought scholars; and sacrificed their native powers of invention to the
ostentation of displaying an extensive course of reading, an^ to the pride of
profound erudition. On this account, the minstrels of these times, who were
totally uneducated, and poured forth spontaneous rhymes in obedience to the
workings of nature, often exhibit more genuine strokes of passion and
imagination, than the professed poets. Chaucer is an exception to this
observation: whose original feelings were too strong to be suppressed by books,
and whose learning was overbalanced by genius.

This affectation of appearing learned, which yet was natural at the revival of
literature, in our old poets, even in those who were altogether destitute of
talents, has lost to posterity many a curious picture of manners, and many a
romantic image. Some of our ancient bards, however, aimed at no other merit,
than that of being able to versify; and attempted nothing more, than to cloth
in rhyme those sentiments, which would have appeared with equal propriety in
prose.

SECT. II.
ONE of the reasons which rendered the classic authors of the lower empire more
popular than those of a purer age, was because they were christians. Among
these, no Roman writer appears to have been more studied and esteemed, from the
beginning to the close of the barbarous centuries, than Boethius. Yet it is
certain, that his allegorical personifications and his visionary philosophy,
founded on the abstractions of the Platonic school, greatly concurred to make
him a favorite It is observable, that this SPIRIT OF PERSONIFICATION tinctures
the writings of some of the christian fathers, about, or rather before, this
period. Most of the agents in the SHEPHERD of HERMAS are ideal beings. An
ancient lady converses with Hermas, and tells him that she is the CHURCH OF
GOD. Afterward several virgins appear and discourse with him; and when he
desires to be informed who they are, he is told by the SHEPHERD-ANGEL, that
they are FAITH, ABSTINENCE, PATIENCE, CHASTITY, CONCORD, etc. Saint Cyprian
relates, that the church appeared in a vision, in visione per noctem, to
Colerinus; and commanded him to assume the office of Reader, which he in
humility had declined. Cyprian. Epist. xxxix. edit. Oxon. The church appearing
as a woman they perhaps had from the scripture, REV. xii. 1. ESDRAS, etc.
. His CONSOLATION of PHILOSOPHY was translated into the Saxon tongue by king
Alfred, the father of learning and civility in the midst of a rude and
intractable people; and illustrated with a commentary by Asser bishop of Saint
David's, a prelate patronised by Alfred for his singular accomplishments in
literature, about the year 890. Bishop Grosthead is said to have left
annotations on this admired system of morality. There is a very ancient
manuscript of it in the Laurentian library, with an inscription prefixed in
Saxon characters Mabillon. Itin. Ital. p. 221.
. There are few of those distinguished eccle^iastics, whose erudition
illuminated the thickest gloom of ignorance and superstition with uncommon
luster, but who either have cited this performance, or honored it with a
panegyric He is much commended as a catholic and philosopher by Hincmarus
archbishop of Rheims, about the year 880. De Pra^destinat. contr. Godeschalch.
tom. i. 211. ii. 62. edit. Sirmond. And by John of Salisbury, for his eloquence
and argument. Policrat. vii. 15. And by many other writers of the same class.
. It has had many imitators. Eccard, a learned French Benedictine, wrote in
imitation of this CONSOLATION OF PHILOSOPHY, a work in verse and prose
containing five books, entitled the CONSOLATION OF THE MONKS, about the year
1120 See Trithem. cap. 387. de S. E. And Illustr. Benedictin. ii. 107.
. John Gerson also, a doctor and chancellor of the university of Paris, wrote
the CONSOLATION OF THEOLOGY in four books, about the year 1420 Opp. tom. i. p.
130. edit. Dupin. I think there is a French CONSOLATIO THEOLOGIAE by one
Cerisier.
. It was the model of Chaucer's TESTAMENT OF LOVE. It was translated into
French See Haym, p. 199.
and English before the year 1350 Beside John of Meun's French version of
Boethius, printed at Lions 1483, with a translation of Virgil by Guillaume le
Roy, there is one by De Cis, or Thri, an old French poet. Matt. Annal. Typogr.
i. p. 171. Francisc. a Cruce, Bibl. Gallic. p. 216. 247. It was printed in
Dutch at Ghent, apud Arend de Keyser, 1485. fol. In Spanish at Valladolid,
1598, fol. See supr. vol. i. p. 458. Polycarpus Leys^rus, in that very s^arce
book DE POESI MEDII AEVI, [printed HALAE, 1721, 8vo.] ^numerates many curious
old editions of Boethius, p. 95. 105.
. Dante was an attentive reader of Boethius. In the PURGATORIO, Dante gives
THEOLOGY the name of Beatrix his mistress, the daughter of Fulco Portinari, who
very gravely moralizes in that character. Being ambitious of following Virgil's
steps in the descent of Eneas into hell, he introduces her, as a daughter of
the empyreal heavens, bringing Virgil to guide him through that dark and
dangerous region See PURGAT. Cant. xxx.
. Leland, who lived when true literature began to be restored, says that the
writings of Boethius still continued to retain that high estimation, which they
had acquired in the most early periods. I had almost forgot to observe, that
the CONSOLATION was translated into Greek by Maximus Planudes, the most learned
and ingenious of the Constantinopolitan monks Montfauc. Bibl. Coislin. p. 140.
Of a Hebrew version, see Wolf. Bibl. Hebr. tom. i. p. 229. 1092. 243. 354. 369.
.

I can assign only one poet to the reign of king Henry the fourth, and this a
translator of Boethius I am aware that Occleve's poem, called the Letter of
Cupid, was written in this king's reign in the year 1402. "In the year of grace
joyful and joconde, a thousand four hundred and second." Urry's Chaucer, p.
537. v. 475. But there are reasons for making Occleve, as I have done,
something later. Nor is Gower's Balade to Henry the fourth a su fficient reason
for placing him in that reign. Ibid. p. 540. The same may be said of Chaucer.
. He is called Johannes Capellanus, or John the Chaplain, and he translated
into English verse the treatise DE CONSOLATIONE PHILOSOPHIAE in the year 1410.
His name is John Walton. He was canon of Oseney, and died subdean of York. It
appears probable, that he was patronised by Thomas Chaundler, among other
preferments, dean of the king's chapel and of Hereford cathedral, chancellor of
Wells, and successively warden of Wykeham's two colleges at Winchester and
Oxford; characterised by Antony Wood as an able critic in polite literature,
and by Leland as a rare example of a doctor in theology who graced scholastic
disputation with the flowers of a pure latinity Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
ii. p. 134. Leland, Script. Brit. CHAUNDLERUS.
. In the British Museum there is a correct manuscript on parchment of Walton's
translation of Boethius: and the ma^gin is filled throughout with the Latin
text, written by Chaundler abovementioned MSS. Harl. 43. 1. And MSS. Coll.
Trin. Oxon. 75.
. There is another less elegant manuscript in the same collection. But at the
end is this note; Explicit liber Boecij de Consolatione Philosophy de Latino
in Anglicum translatus A. D. 1410. per Capellanum Joannem MSS. Harl. 44. chart.
et pergam.
. This is the beginning of the prologue, "In suffisaunce of cunnyng and wit."
And of the translation, "Alas I wretch that whilom was in wealth." I have seen a
third copy in the library of Lincoln cathedral MSS. i. 53.
, and a fourth in Baliol college MSS. B. 5. He bequeathed his Biblia^ and other
books, to this library.
. This is the translation of Boethius printed in the monastery of Tavistoke, in
the year 1525. "The BOOK of COMFORT, called in Latin Boecius de Consolatione
Philosophy. Emprented in the exempt monastery of Tavestock in Denshyre, by me
Dan Thomas Rychard monk of the said monastry. To the instant desire of the
right worshipful esquyre magister Robert Langdon. Anno Domini, MDXXV. Deo
gracias." In octave rhyme This is among Rawlinson's Codd. impress. Bibl. Bodl.
There is an English translation of Boethius by one George Colvil, or Coldewell,
bred at Oxford, with the Latin, "according to the book of the translatour,
which was a very old printe." Dedicated to queen Mary, and printed by John
Cawood, 1556. 4to. Reprinted 1566. 4to.
. This translation was made at the request of Elisabeth Berkeley. I forbear to
load these pages with specimens not original, and which appear to have
contributed no degree of improvement to our poetry or our phraseology. Henry
the fourth died in the year 1399.

The coronation of king Henry the fifth, was celebrated in Westminster Hall
with a solemnity proportioned to the luster of those great achievements which
afterward distinguished the annals of that victorious monarch. By way of
preserving order, and to add to the splendour of the spectacle, many of the
nobility were ranged along the sides of the tables on large war-horses, at this
stately festival; which, says my chronicle, was a second feast of Ahasuerus
Thomae de Elmham Vit. et Gest. Henr. V. edit. Hearne, Oxon. 1727. cap. xii. p.
23. Compare Lel. Coll. APPEND. iii. 226. edit. 1770.
. But I mention this ceremony, to introduce a circumstance very pertinent to
our purpose; which is, that the number of harpers in the hall was innumerable
Elmham, ubi supr. p. 23.
, who undoubtedly accompanied their instruments with heroic rhymes. The king,
however, was no great encourager of the popular minstrelsy, which seems at this
time to have flourished in the highest degree of perfection. When he entered
the city of London in triumph after the battle of Agincourt, the gates and
streets were hung with tapestry, representing the histories of ancient heroes;
and children were placed in artificial turrets, singing verses Elmham, ubi
supr. cap. xxxi. p. 72.
. But Henry, disgusted at these secular vanities, commanded by a formal edict,
that for the future no songs should be recited by the harpers, or others, in
praise of the recent victory "CANTUS de suo triumpho fieri, seu per CITHARI ST
AS, vel alios quoscunque, CANTARI, penitus prohibebat." Ibid. p. 72. And
Hearnii Praefat. p. xxix. seq.. viii. See also Hollingsh. Chron. iii. p. 556.
col. 1. 40.
. This prohibition had no other effect than that of displaying Henry's
humility, perhaps its principal and real design. Among many others, a
minstrel-piece soon appeared, evidently adapted to the harp, on the SEYGE of
HARFLETT and the BATTALLYE of AGYNKOURTE. It was written about the year 1417.
These are some of the most spirited lines.

Sent Jorge be fore our king they did se "The French saw the standard of Saint
George before our king."
,
They trompyd up full meryly,
The great battle to gederes ed This is Milton's "Together rushed both battles
main."
;
Our archorys Archers.
theiy schot full heartily,
They made the French men fast to blede,
Her arrowys they went with full good speed.
Our enemies with them they began down throw
Through breast plats, habourgenys, and basnets Breast-plates, habergeons and
helmets.
.
Eleven thousand was slain on a rue Row.
.
Denters of death men myt well deem,
So fercelly in ffelde theye began fythe Fight.
.
The heve upon here helmyts schene "They struck upon their bright helmets."
^
With axes and with swerdys bryt.
When our arowys were at a flyt Flying.

Amon the French men was a well sorry schere Much distress.
.
There was to bring of gold bokylyd Buckled.
so bryt
That a man myt hold a strong armoure.
Owre gracyus king men myt know
That day fot with his owene hond,
The erlys was dys comwityd up on a row I believe it is "The earls he had
slain were all thrown together on a heap or in a row."
,
That he had slain understond.
He there Showed.
schevyd our other lordys of this land,
Forsothe that was a full fair day.
Therefore all England may this sing
LAWS Laus.
DEO we may well say.
The Duke of Glocetor, that nys no nay,
That day full wordely Worthily.
he wrote,
On every side he made good way,
The French men fast to grond they browt.
The earl of Hontynton spared not,
The earl of Oxynforthe Oxford.
laid on all so Also.
,
The young earl of Devynschyre he ne rout,
The French men fast to grunde began goo.
Our Englismen they were ffoul sekes do
And ferce to fyt as any lyone.
Basnets bryt they crasyd a to "They broke the bright helmets in two."
,
And bet the French banerys adoune;
As thonder-strokys there was a scownde Sound.
,
Of axys and sperys there they began glyd.
The lordys of Franyse France.
lost her renown
With gresoly Griesly.
wondys they began abide.
The Frensche men, for all here pride,
They fell down all at a flyt:
Ie me rende they cryde, on every side,
Our Englys men they understod not arit "They did not rightly."
.
Their pollaxis out of her hondys they twit,
And laid ham along stryte Strait.
upon the grass.
They spared another deuke, erlle, ne knight Printed [from MSS. Cotton. VITELL.
D. XII. 11. fol. 214.] by Hearne, Elmham, ut supr. APPEND. p. 359. Number. vi. See
p. 371. seq. There is The BATTLE of EGYNCOURTE, Libr. impres^. Bibl. Bodl. C.
39. 4to. Art. Seldom. See OBSERVAT. on Spens. ii. 41. Doctor Percy has printed
an ancient ballad on this subject. ANC. BALL. vol. ii. p. 24. edit. 1767. See
Hearne's PRAEFAT. ut supr. p. xxx.
.
These verses are much less intelligible than some of Gower'^ and Chaucer's
pieces, which were written fifty years before. In the mean time we must not
mistake provincial for national barbarisms. Every piece now written is by no
means a proof of the actual state of style. The improved dialect, which yet is
the estimate of a language, was confined only to a few writers, who lived more
in the world and in polite life: and it was long, before a general change in
the public phraseology was effected. Nor must we expect among the minstrels,
who were equally careless and illiterate, those refinements of diction, which
mark the compositions of men who professedly studied to embellish the English
idiom.

Thomas Occleve is the first poet that occurs in the reign of Henry the fifth.
I place him about the year 1420. Occleve is a feeble writer, considered as a
poet: and his chief merit seems to be, that his writings contributed to
propagate and establish those improvements in our language which were now
beginning to take place. He was educated in the municipal law He studied in
Chestres-inn where Som^rset-house now stands. See Buck, De t^r^^a A^gliae
Accademia, cap. xxv.
, as were both Chaucer and Gower; and it reflects no small degree of honor on
that very liberal profession, that its students were some of the first who
attempted to polish and adorn the English tongue.

The titles of Occleve's pieces, very few of which have been ever printed,
indicate a coldness of genius; and on the whole promise no gratification to
those who seek for invention and fancy. Such as, The tale of Jonathas and of a
wicked woman Ubi. infr. Bibl. Bodl. MSS. From the GESTA ROMANORUM.
. Fable of a certain emperess Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Seld. supr. 53. Digb. 185. Laud.
K. 78. MSS. Reg. Brit. Mus. 17 D. vi. 2. This story seems to be also taken from
the GESTA ROMANORUM. Pr. "In the ROMAN ACTYS writyn."
. A prologue of the nine lessons that is read over Allhalow-day Ubi supr. Bibl.
Bodl. MSS.
. The most profitable and h^lsomest craft that is to cunne Know.
, to learn to dye MSS. Bodl. ut supr. And MSS. Reg. Brit. Mus. 17 D. vi. 3. 4.
The best manuscript of Occleve.
. Consolation offered by an old man MSS. Digb. 185. More [Cant.] 427.
. Pentasthicon to the king. Mercy as defined by Saint Austin. Dialogue to a
friend MSS. Seld. ut supr.
. Dialogue between Occleef and a beggar MSS. Harl. 4826. 6.
. The letter of Cupid MSS. Digb. 181. MSS. Arch. Bodl. Seld. B. 24. It is
printed in Chaucer's Works, Urr. p. 534. Bale [MS. Glynne] mentions one or two
more pieces, particularly De Theseo Atheniensi, lib. i. Pr. "Tum esset, ut
veteres historiae tradunt." This is the beginning of Chaucer's KNIGHT'S TALE.
And there are other pieces in the libraries.
. Verses to an empty purse This, and the Pentastichon ad Regem, are in MSS.
Fairf. xvi. Bibl. Bodl. And in the editions of Chaucer. But the former appears
to be Chaucer's, from the twenty additional stanzas not printed in Urry's
Chaucer, page 549. MSS. Harl. 2251. 133. fol. 298.
. But Occleve's most considerable poem is a piece called a translation of
Egidius DE REGIMINE PRINCIPUM.

This is a sort of paraphrase of the first part of Aristotle's epistle to
Alexander abovementioned, entitled SECRETUM SECRETORUM, of Egidius, and of
Jacobus de Casulis, whom he calls Jacob de Cassolis. Egidius, a native of Ro^e,
a pupil of Thomas Aquinas, eminent among the schoolmen by the name of Doctor
Fundatissimus, and an archbishop, flourished about the year 1280. He wrote a
Latin tract in three books DE REGIMINE PRINCIPUM, or the ART OF GOVERNMENT, for
the use of Philip le Hardi, son of Louis king of France, a work highly esteemed
in the middle ages, and translated early into Hebrew, French Wolf. Biblioth.
Hebr. tom. iii. p. 1206. It was translated into French by Henry de Gand, at the
command of Philip king of France. Mem. de Lit. tom. xvii. p. 733. 4to.
, and Italian. In those days ecclesiastics and schoolmen presumed to dictate to
kings, and to give rules for administering states, drawn from the narrow circle
of speculation, and conceived amid the pedantries of a cloister. It was
probably recommended to Occleve's notice, by having been translated into
English by John Trevisa, a celebrated translator about the year 1390 Bibl.
Bodl. MSS. Digb. 233. Princip. "To his special, [etc.] politik sentence that
is." In this manuscript there is an elegant picture of a monk, or ecclesiastic,
presenting a book to a king. See supr. vol. i. p. 343. Notes, g.
. The original was printed at Rome in 1482, and at Venice 1498, and, I think,
again at the same place in 1598 All in folio. Those of 1482, and 1598, are in
the Bodleian library. In AllSouls college library at Oxford, there is a
manuscript TABULA IN AEGIDIUM DE REGIMINE PRINCIPUM, by one Thomas Abyndon.
MSS. G. i. 5.
. The Italian translation was printed at Seville, in folio, 1494, "Transladar
de Latin en romance don Bernardo Obispo de Osma: impresso por Meynardo Ungut
Alemano et Stanislao Polono Companeros." The printed copies of the Latin are
very rare, but the manuscripts innumerable. A third part of the third book,
which treats of De Re Militari Veterum, was printed by Hahnius in 1722 In the
first tome of Collectio Monumentorum veter. et recent. ine^itorum. E. Cod. MS.
in Biblioth. Obrecktina. The curious reader may see a full account of Aegidius
de REGIMINE PRINCIPUM in Morlier, Essais de Litterature, tom. i. p. 198. seq.
And of the Venetian edition in 1498, in Theophilus Sincerus De Libris Rariorib.
tom. i. p. 82. seq.
. One of Egidius's books, a commentary on Aristotle DE ANIMA, is dedicated to
our Edward the first Cave, p. 755. edit. 1688.
.

Jacobus de Casulis, or of Casali in Italy, another of the writers copied in
this performance by our poet Occleve, a French Dominican friar, about the year
1290, wrote in four parts a Latin treatise on chess, or, as it is entitled in
some manuscripts, De moribus hominum et de officiis nobilium super LUDO
LATRUNCULORUM sive SCACCORUM. In a parchment manuscript of the Harleian
library, neatly illuminated, it is thus entitled, LIBER MORALIS DE LUDO
SCACCORUM, ad honorem et solacium Nobilium et maxim ludencium, per fratrem
JACOBUM D^ CASSULIS ordinis fratrum Praedicatorum. At the conclusion, this work
appears to be a translation MSS. Harl. 1275. 1. 4to. membran.
. Pits carelessly gives it to Robert Holcot, a celebrated English theologist,
perhaps for no other reason than because Holcot was likewise a Dominican. It
was printed at Milan in 1479. I believe it was as great a favorite as Egidius
on GOVERNMENT, for it was translated into French by John Ferron, and John Du
Vignay, a monk hospitalar of Saint James du Haut-pag Who also translated the
GOLDEN LEGEND of James de Voragine, and the SPECULUM HISTORIALE of Vincent of
Beauvais. Vie de Petr. tom. iii. p. 548. And Mem. Lit. xvii. 742. 746. 747.
edit. 4to.
, under the patronage of Jeanne duchess of Bourgogne, Caxton's patroness,
about the year 1360, with the title of LE JEU DES ECHECS moralize, or Le traite
des Nobles et de gens du peuple selon le JEU DES ECHECS. This was afterward
translated by Caxton, in 1474, who did not know that the French was a
translation from the Latin, and called the GAME OF THE CHESS. It was also
translated into German, both prose and verse, by Conrade von Almenhusen See
Jacob. Quetif. tom. i. p. 471. ii. p. 818. Lambecc. tom. ii. Bibl. Vindob. p.
848. One Simeon Ailward, an Englishman, about the year 1456, wrote a Latin poem
De L^do Scaccorum. Pits. APPEND. p. 909. Princip. "Ludus scaccorum datur hic
correctio morum."
. Bale absurdly supposes that Occleve made a separate and regular translation
of this work Bale in OCCLEVE.
.

Occleve's poem was never printed. This is a part of the Prologue.

Aristotle, most famous philosofre The learned doctor Gerard Langbaine, author
of the Lives of the Dramatick Poets, speaking of the REGIMINE PRINCIPUM by
Occleve, says that it is "collected out of Aristotle, Alexander, and Aegidius
on the same, and Jacobus de Cassolis (a friar preacher) his book of chess, viz.
that part where he speaks of the king's draught, etc." Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Langb.
Cod. xv. page 102.
,
His epistles to Alisaunder sent See supr. p. 9.
;
Whose sentence is well bet then gold in cofre,
And more holsum, grounded in true intent,
Fore all that ever the Epistle meant
To set us this worthi conqueroure,
In rewle how to sustain his honor,
The tender love, and the fervent good chere,
That the worthi clerk aye to this king bear,
Thrusting sore his wealth durable to be,
Unto his heart ^lah and sat sovere,
That by writing his counsel gaf he clear
Unto his lord to hope him from mischaunce,
As witnesses his Book of Governaunce Aristotle's SECRETUM SECRETORUM.
,
Of which, and of Giles his REGIMENT Aegidius de REGIMINE PRINCIPUM.

Of prince's plotmele, think I to translete, etc.
My dear master, god his soul quite Aquitt. Save.
,
And fader Chaucer feign would have me taught,
But I was dule Dull.
, and learned lyte or naught.
Alas my worthy master honorable,
This londis verray tresour and richesse,
Death by thy death has harm irreparable
Unto us done: his vengeable duresse Cruelty.

Dispoiled has this land of the sweetness
Of rhetoryke, for unto Tullius
Was never man so like amongst us.
Alas! who was here There.
in philosophy
To Aristotle in owre tongue but thou?
The steppis of Virgile in poesy
Thou suedest Followedst.
eke: men know well inowe
That combre-world He calls death the encumbrance of the world. The expression
seems to be taken from Chaucer, where Troilus says of himself, "I combre-world,
that may of nothing serve." Tr. Cress. p. 307. v. 279. Urr. edit.
that thou, my master, slow Slew.
:
Would I slain were! Death was too hastise
To run on thee, and reve thee of thy life:
She might have tarried her vengeance awhile
To that some man had egal to thee be:
Nay, let that be: she knew well that this isle
May never man forth bring like unto thee,
And her of offis nedis do mote she;
God bade her so, I trust for all the best,
O master, master, god thy soul rest!
In another part of the Prologue we have these pathetic lines, which seem to
flow warm from the heart, to the memory of the immortal Chaucer, who I believe
was rather Occleve's model than his master, or perhaps the patron and
encourager of his studies.

But weleawaye, so is mine heart woe
That the honor of English tongue is deed,
Of which I wont was han counsel and read!
O master dear, and fadir reverent,
My master Chaucer, flower of eloquence,
Mirror of fructuous entendement,
O universal fadir in science,
Alas that thou thine excellent prudence
In thy bed mortel mighest not bequethe,
What eyled Ailed.
Death? Alas why would he sle' the!
O Death that didist naught harm singulere
In slaughtre of him, but all the land it smertith:
But nathelesse yet hastowe Ha^t thou.
no powere
His name to sle. His hie virtue astertith
Unslayn from thee, which aye us lifely hertith
With book of his ornate enditing,
That is to all this lo^d enlumyning MSS. Rawlins. 647. fol. This poem has at
the end "Explicit Aegidius de Regimine Principum" in MSS. Laud. K. 78. Bibl.
Bodl. See also ibid. MSS. Seldom. Supr. 53. Digb. 185. MSS. Ashmol. 40. MSS.
Reg. 17 D. vi. 1. 17 D. xviii. MSS. Harl. 4826. 7. and 4866. In some of these a
sort of dialogue is prefixed between a father and a son. Occleve, in the
Prologue cited in the text, mentions Jacobus ^e Cassolis [Casulis] as one of
his authors.
.
Occleve seems to have written some of these verses immediately on Chaucer's
death, and to have introduced them long afterward into this Prologue.

It is in one of the royal manuscripts of this poem in the British Museum that
Occleve has left a drawing of Chaucer MSS. Reg. 17 D. vi. 1.
: according to which, Chaucer's portraiture was made on his monument, in the
chapel of Saint Blase in Westminsterabbey, by the benefaction of Nicholas
Brigham, in the year 1556 He was of Caversham in Oxfordshire. Educated at
Hart-Hall in Oxford, and studied the law. He died at Westminster, 1559.
. And from this drawing, in 1598, John Speed procured the print of Chaucer
prefixed to Speght's edition of his works; which has been since copied in a
most finished engraving by Virtue In Urry's edit. 1721. fol.
. Yet it must be remembered, that the same drawing occurs in an Harleian
manuscript written about Occleve's age MSS. Harl. 4866. The drawing is at fol.
91.
, and in another of the Cottonian department MSS. Cotton. OATH. A. 18.
. Occleve himself mentions this drawing in his CONSOLATIO SERVILIS. It exactly
resembles the curious picture on board of our venerable bard, preserved in the
Bodleian gallery at Oxford. I have a very old picture of Chaucer on board, much
like Occleve's, formerly kept in Chaucer's house, a quadrangular stone-mansion,
at Woodstock in Oxfordshire; which commanded a prospect of the ancient
magnificent royal palace, and of many beautiful scenes in the adjacent park:
and whose last remains, chiefly consisting of what was called Chaucer's
bedchamber, with an old carved oaken roof, evidently original, were demolished
about fifteen years ago. Among the ruins, they found an ancient gold coin of
the city of Florence I think a FLOREIN, anciently common in England. Chaucer,
PARDON. TALE, v. 2290. p. 135. col. 2. "For that the FLORAINS ben so fair and
bright." Edward the third, in 1344, altered it from a lower value to 6 s. and 8
d. The particular piece I have mentioned seems about that value.
. Before the grand rebellion, there was in the windows of the church of
Woodstock, an escucheon in painted glass of the arms of sir Pain Rouet, a
knight of Henault, whose daughter Chaucer married.

Occleve, in this poem, and in others, often celebrates Humphrey duke of
Gloucester As he does John of Gaunt.
; who at the dawn of science was a singular promoter of literature, and,
however unqualified for political intrigues, the common patron of the scholars
of the times. A sketch of his character in that view, is therefore too closely
connected with our subject to be censured as an unnecessary digression. About
the year 1440, he gave to the university of Oxford a library containing six
hundred volumes, only one hundred and twenty of which were valued at more than
one thousand pounds. These books are called Novi Tractatus, or New Treatises,
in the universityregister Reg. F. fol. 52. 53. b. Epist. 142.
, and said to be admirandi apparatus Ibid. fol. 57. b. 60. a. Epist. 148.
. They were the most splendid and costly copies that could be procured, finely
written on vellum, and elegantly embellished with miniatures and illuminations.
Among the rest was a translation into French of Ovid's Metamorphoses Leland.
coll. iii. p. 58. edit. 1770.
. Only a single specimen of these valuable volumes was suffered to remain: it
is a beautiful manuscript in folio of Valerius Maximus, enriched with the most
elegant decorations, and written in Duke Humphrey's age, evidently with a
design of being placed in this sumptuous collection. All the rest of the books,
which, like this, being highly ornamented, looked like missals, and conveyed
ideas of popish superstition, were destroyed or removed by the pious visitors
of the university in the reign of Edward the sixth, whose zeal was equalled
only by their ignorance, or perhaps by their avarice. A great number of
classics, in this grand work of reformation, were condemned as antichristian
Some however had been before stolen or mutilated. Leland, coll. iii. p. 58.
edit. 1770.
. In the library of Oriel college at Oxford, we find a manuscript Commentary on
Gene^is, written by John Capgrave, a monk of saint Austin's monastery at
Canterbury, a learned theologist of the fourteenth century. It is the author's
autograph, and the work is dedicated to Humphrey duke of Gloucester. In the
superb initial letter of the dedicatory epistle is a curious illumination of
the author Capgrave, humbly presenting his book to his patron the duke, who is
seated, and covered with a sort of hat. At the end is this entry, in the
handwriting of duke Humphrey. "C' est livre est a moy Humfrey duc de
Gloucestre du don de friar Jehan Capgrave, quy le me fist presenter a mon
manoyr de Pensherst le jour... de l'an. MCCCXXXVIII. Cod. MSS. 32.
." This is one of the books which Humphrey gave to his new library at Oxford,
destroyed or dispersed by the active reformers of the young Edward He gave also
Capgrave SUPER EXODUM ET REGUM LIBROS. Registr. Univ. Oxon. F. ^ol. 67. b.
. John Whethamstede, a learned abbot of saint Alban's, and a lover of scholars,
but accused by his monks for neglecting their affairs, while he was too deeply
engaged in studious employments and in procuring transcripts of useful books
Supr. vol. i. See DISSERTAT. i. Signat. F. 2. We are told in this abbot's
GESTA, that soon after his installment he built a library for his abbey, a
design which had long employed his contemplation. He covered it with lead; and
expended on the bare walls, besides desks, glasing, and embattelling, or, to
use the expressions of my chronologer, educta vitriacione, crestacione,
positione descorum, upwards of one hundred and twenty pounds. Apud Hearne's
OTTERBOURNE, vol. i. Praefat. Append. p. cxxiii. ed. Oxon. 1732. He founded
also a library for all the students of his monastery at Oxford. Ibid. p. cxiii.
And to each of these students he allowed an annual pension, at his own expense,
of thirteen shillings and four-pence. Ibid. p. cxviii. See also p. cxxix. A
grand transcript of the Postilla of Nicholas de Lyra on the bible was begun
during his abbacy, and at his command, with the most splendid ornaments and
handwriting. The monk who records this important anecdote, lived soon after
him, and speaks of this great undertaking, then unfinished, as if it was some
magnificent public edifice. "God grant, says he, that this work in our days may
receive a happy consummation!" Ibid. p. cxvi.
, notwithstanding his unwearied assiduity in beautifying and enriching their
monastery Among other things, he expended forty pounds in adorning the roof and
walls of the virgin Mary's chapel with pictures. GEST. ut supr. p. cx. He gave
to the choir of the church an organ; than which, says my chronicler, there was
not one to be found in any monastery in England, more beautiful in appearance,
more pleasing for its harmony, or more curious in its construction. It cost
upwards of fifty pounds. Ibid. p. cxxviii. His new buildings were innumerable:
and the MASTER OF THE WORKS was of his institution, with an ample salary. Ibid.
p. cxiii.
, was in high favor with this munificent prince Leland, Script. Brit. p. 437.
. The duke was fond of visiting this monastery, and employed abbot Whethamstede
to collect valuable books for him Leland, ibid. 442. 432. See also Hollinsh.
Chron. f. 488. b. And f. 1234. 1235. 1080. 868. 662. Weever FUN. MON. p. 562.
574. Whethamstede erected in his lifetime the beautiful tabernacle or shrine
of stone, now remaining, over the tomb of duke Humphrey in saint Alban's abbey
church. Hearne's OTTERB. ut supr. p. cxxi. seq. See also ibid. p. cxix. cxvi.
. Some of Whethamstede's tracts, manuscript copies of which often occur in our
libraries, are dedicated to the duke See Whethamstede, De viris illustribus,
Brit. Mus. MSS. Cotton. TIBER. D. vi. i. OATH. B. iv. And Hearne, Pref. Pet.
Langtoft. p. xix. seq.
: who presented many of them, particularly a fine copy of Whethamstede's
GRANARIUM Registr. Univ. Oxon. F f. 68.
, an immense work, which Leland calls ingens volumen, to the new library
Leland, ubi modo infr.
. The copy of Valerius Maximus, which I mentioned before, has a curious table
or index made by Whethamstede MSS. Bodl. NE. vii. ii.
. Many other abbots paid their court to the duke by sending him presents of
books, whose margins were adorned with the most exquisite paintings "Multos
codices, pulcherrime pi^t^s, ab abbatibus dono accepit." The Du^e wrote in the
frontispieces of his books, MOUN BIEN MONDAIN. Leland. Coll. iii. p. 58. edit.
ut supr.
. Gilbert Kymer, physician to king Henry the sixth, among other ecclesiastic
promotions, dean of Salisbury, and chancellor of the university of Oxford By
the recommendatory letters of duke Humphrey. Registr. Univ. Oxon. F. fol. 75.
Epist. 180.
, inscribed to duke Humphrey his famous medical system Diaetarium de sanitatis
custodia, in the year 1424 See Hearne's Append. ad Libr. Nigr. Scaccar. p. 550.
And Praefat. p. 34.
. I do not mean to anticipate when I remark, that Lydgate, a poet mentioned
hereafter, translated Boccacio's book de CASIBUS VIRORUM ILLUSTRIUM at the
recommendation and command, and under the protection and superintendence, of
duke Humphrey: whose condescension in conversing with learned ecclesiastics,
and diligence in study, the translator displays at large, and in the strongest
expressions of panegyric. He compares the duke to Julius Caesar, who amidst the
weightiest cares of state, was not ashamed to enter the rhetorical school of
Cicero at Rome PROL. Sign. A. ii. A. iii. edit. Wayland, ut supr. He adds, And
has joye with clerks to commune,
And no man is more expert in langage,
Stable in study. --
His courage never does appall
To study in books of antiquity. --
He studieth ever to have intelligence,
Readyng of books. --
And with support of his magnificence,
Under the wings of his protection, --
I shall proce^d in this translation. --
Lowly submittyng, every hour and space,
My rude langage to my lords grace.
See also fol. xxxviii. b. col. 2. Lydgate has an epitaph on the duke, MSS.
Ashmol. 59. 2. MSS. Harl. 2251. 6. fol. 7. There ^s a curious letter of
Lydgate, in which he sends for a supply of money to the duke, while he was
translating BOCHAS. "Litterra dom. Joh. Lydgate missa ad ducem Glocestrie in
tempore translationis Bochasii, pro oportunitate pecunie." MSS. ibid. 5. fol.
6. See also ibid. 131. fol. 279. b. of the duke's marriage.
. Nor was his patronage confined only to English scholars. His favor was
solicited by the most celebrated writers of France and Italy, many of whom he
bountifully rewarded Leland, Script. p. 442.
. Leonard Aretine, one of the first restorers of the Greek tongue in Italy,
which he learned of Emanuel Chrysoloras, and of polite literature in general,
dedicates to this universal patron his elegant Latin translation of Aristotle's
POLITICS. The copy presented to the duke by the translator, most elegantly
illuminated, is now in the Bodleian library at Oxford See MSS. Bodl. D. i. 8.
10. And Leland, Script. p. 443.
. To the same noble encourager of learning, Petrus Candidus, the friend of
Laurentius Valla, and secretary to the great Cosmo duke of Milan, inscribed by
the advice of the archbishop of Milan, a Latin version of Plato's REPUBLIC
Leland, Script. p. 442. And Mus. Ashmol. 789. f. 54. 56. Where are also two of
the duke's epistles to Petrus Candidus.
. An illuminated manuscript of this translation is in the British museum,
perhaps the copy presented, with two epistles prefixed, from the duke to Petrus
Candidus P. Candidi Decembris, Duci Mediolani a secretis, Translatio POLITIAE
Platonis, -- ad Hum^redum Gloucestrie Ducem, etc. Cui praefiguntur duae
Epistolae Ducis Glocestriae ad P. Candidum. Most elegantly written. Membran. ad
fin. "Cest livre est a moy Humfrey Duc de Glocestre du don P. Candidus
secretary du duc de Mylan." Catal. MSS. Angl. tom. ii. page 212. Number. 6858.
[See MSS. Harl. 1705. fol.]
. Petrus de Monte, another learned Italian, of Venice, in the dedication of his
treatise DE VIRTUTUM ET VITIORUM DIFFERENTIA to the duke of Gloucester, mentions
the latter's ardent attachment to books of all kinds, and the singular avidity
with which he pursued every species of literature MSS. Nowic. MORE. 257. Bibl.
publ. Cantabrig.
. A tract, entitled COMPARATIO STUDIORUM ET REI MILITARIS, written by Lapus de
Castellione, a Florentine civilian, and a great translator into Latin of the
Greek classics, is also inscribed to the duke, at the desire of Zeno archbishop
of Bayeux. I must not forget, that our illustrious duke invited into England
the learned Italian, Tito Livio of Foro-Juli, whom he naturali^ed, and
constituted his poet and orator Author of the Vita Henrici quinti, printed by
Hearne, Oxon. 1716. And of other pieces. See Hollinsh. iii. 585.
. Humphrey also retained learned foreigners in his service, for the purpose of
transcribing, and of translating from Greek into Latin. One of these was
Antonio de Beccaria, a Veronese, a translator into Latin prose of the Greek
poem of Dionysius Afer DE SITU ORBIS Printed at Venice 1477. Ibid. 1498. Pari^.
1501. Basil. 1534. 4to.
: whom the duke employed to translate into Latin six tracts of Athanasius. This
translation, inscribed to the duke, is now among the royal manuscripts in the
British Museum, and at the end, in his own handwriting, is the following
insertion: "C'est livre est a moi Homphrey Duc le Gloucestre: le que^ je fis
translater de Grec en Latin par un de mes secretaires Antoyne de Beccara, ne de
Verone MSS. Reg. 5 F. 4to. ii. In the same library is a fine folio manuscript
of "Chronique des Roys de France jusques a la mort de S. Loys, l'an. 1270." At
the end is written with the duke of Gloucester's hand, "C est livre est a moy
Homfrey duc de Gloucestre du don des executeurs le Sr de Faunhore." 16 G. vi.
."

An astronomical tract, entitled by Leland TABULAE DIRECTIONUM, is falsely
supposed to have been written by duke Humphrey See Hollingsh. Chron. sub. ann.
1461. f. 662. col. 2.
. But it was compiled at the duke's instance, and according to tables which
himself had constructed, called by the anonymous author in his preface, Tabulas
illustrissimi principis et nobilissimi domini mei Humfredi, etc MSS. More, 820.
. In the library of Gresham college, however, there is a scheme of calculations
in astronomy, which bear his name MSS. Gresh. 66. See MSS. Ashmol. 856.
. Astronomy was then a favorite science: nor is to be doubted, that he was
intimately acquainted with the politer branches of knowledge, which now began
to acquire estimation, and which his liberal and judicious attention greatly
contributed to restore.

I close this section with an apology for Chaucer, Gower, and Occleve; who are
supposed, by the severe^ etymologists, to have corrupted the purity of the
English language, by affecting to introduce so many foreign words and phrases.
But if we attend only to the politics of the times, we shall find these poets,
as also some of their successors, much less blameable in this respect, than the
critics imagine. Our wars with France, which began in the reign of Edward the
third, were of long continuance. The principal nobility of England, at this
period, resided in France, with their families, for many years. John king of
France kept his court in England; ^o which, exclusive of these French lords who
were his fellow prisoners, or necessary attendants, the chief nobles of his
kingdom must have occasionally resorted. Edward the black prince made an
expedition into Spain. John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, and his brother the
duke of York, were matched with the daughters of Don Pedro king of Castile. All
these circumstances must have concurred to produce a perceptible change in the
language of the court. It is rational therefore, and it is equitable to
suppose, that instead of coining new words, they only complied with the common
and fashionable modes of speech. Would Chaucer's poems have been the delight of
those courts in which he lived, had they been filled with unintelligible
pedantries? The cotemporaries of these poets never complained of their
obscurity. But whether defensible on these principles or not, they much
improved the vernacular style by the use of this exotic phraseology. It was
thus that our primitive diction was enlarged and enriched. The English language
owes its copiousness, elegance, and harmony, to these innovations.

SECT. III.
I Consider Chaucer as a genial day in an English spring. A brilliant sun
enlivens the face of nature with an unusual luster: the sudden appearance of
cloudless skies, and the unexpected warmth of a tepid atmosphere, after the
gloom and the inclemencies of a tedious winter, fill our hearts with the
visionary prospect of a speedy summer: and we fondly anticipate a long
continuance of gentle gales and vernal serenity. But winter returns with
redoubled horrors: the clouds condense more formidably than before; and those
tender buds, and early blossoms, which were called forth by the transient gleam
of a temporary sunshine, are nipped by frosts, and torn by tempests.

Most of the poets that immediately succeeded Chaucer, seem rather relapsing
into barbarism, than availing themselves of those striking ornaments which his
judgment and imagination had disclosed. They appear to have been insensible to
his vigor of versification, and his flights of fancy. It was not indeed likely
that a poet should soon arise equal to Chaucer: and it must be remembered, that
the national distractions which ensued, had no small share in obstructing the
exercise of those studies which delight in peace and repose. His successors,
however, approach him in no degree of proportion. Among these, John Lydgate is
the poet who follows him at the shortest interval.

I have placed Lydgate in the reign of Henry the sixth, and he seems to have
arrived at his highest point of eminence about the year 1430 In a copy of
Lydgate's Chronicle of English Kings, there is a stanza of Edward the fourth.
MSS. Harl. 2251. 3. In his poem Ab inimicis nostris, etc. Edward the fourth,
his Queen and Modir are remembered. MSS. Harl. ibid. 9. fol. 10. But these
pieces could not well be written by Lydgate. For he was ordained a subdeacon,
1389. Deacon, 1393. And priest, 1397. Registr. Gul. Cratfield, abbatis de Bury,
MSS. Cott. TIBER. B. ix. fol. 1. 35. 52. Edward came to the crown, 1461. Pitts
says, that our author died, 1482. Lydgate, in his PHILOMELA, mentions the death
of Henry lord Warwick, who died in 1446. MSS. Harl. ibid. 120. fol. 255.
. Many of his poems, however, appeared before. He was a monk of the Benedictine
abbey of Bury in Suffolk, and an uncommon ornament of his profession. Yet his
genius was so lively, and his accomplishments so numerous, that I suspect the
holy father saint Benedict would hardly have acknowledged him for a genuine
disciple. After a short education at Oxford, he traveled into France and Italy
See one of his DITTIES, MSS. Harl. 2255. 41. fol. 148. I have been offte in
dyvers londys, etc.

; and returned a complete master of the language and the literature of both
countries. He chiefly studied the Italian and French poets, particularly Dante,
Boccacio, and Alain Chartier; and became so distinguished a proficient in
polite learning, that he opened a school in his monastery, for teaching the
sons of the nobility the arts of versification, and the elegancies of
composition. Yet although philology was his object, he was not unfamiliar with
the fashionable philosophy: he was not only a poet and a rhetorician, but a
geometrician, an astronomer, a theologist, and a disputant. On the whole I am
of opinion, that Lydgate made considerable additions to those amplifications of
our language, in which Chaucer, Gower, and Occleve led the way: and that he is
the first of our writers whose style is clothed with that perspicuity, in
which the English phraseology appears at this day to an English reader.

To enumerate Lydgate's pieces, would be to write the catalogue of a little
library. No poet seems to have possessed a greater versatility of talents. He
moves with equal ease in every mode of composition. His hymns, and his ballads,
have the same degree of merit: and whether his subject be the life of a hermit
or a hero, of saint Austin or Guy earl of Warwick, ludicrous or legendary,
religious or romantic, a history or an allegory, he writes with facility. His
transitions were rapid from works of the most serious and laborious kind to
sallies of levity and pieces of popular entertainment. His muse was of
universal access; and he was not only the poet of his monastery, but of the
world in general. If a disguising was intended by the company of goldsmiths, a
mask before his majesty at Eltham, a maygame for the sheriffs and aldermen of
London, a mumming before the lord mayor, a procession of pageants from the
creation for the festival of Corpus Christi, or a carol for the coronation,
Lydgate was consulted and gave the poetry See a variety of his pieces of this
kind, MSS. Ashmol. 59. ii. Stowe says, that at the reception of Margaret queen
of Henry sixth, several pageaunts, the verses by Lydgate, were shown at Paul's
gate, in 1445. Hist. p. 385. See also MSS. Harl. 2251. 118. fol. 250. b. The
COVENTRY PLAY for Corpus Christi day, in the Cotton library, was very probably
written by our author. VESPAS. D. viii. fol.
.

About the year 1430, Whethamstede the learned and liberal abbot of saint
Albans, being desirous of familiarising the history of his patron saint to the
monks of his convent, employed Lydgate, as it should seem, then a monk of Bury,
to translate the Latin legend of his life in English rhymes. The chronicler who
records a part of this anecdote seems to consider Lydgate's translation, as a
matter of mere manual mechanism; for he adds, that Whethamstede paid for the
translation, the writing, and illuminations, one hundred shillings. It was
placed before the altar of the saint, which Whethamstede afterward adorned
with much magnificence, in the abbey church GEST. Joh. Whethamst. ut supr. p.
cxvi. cxxvii. cxxiv. It is added, that Whethamstede expended on the binding,
and other exterior ornaments of the manuscript, upwards of three pounds. Bal^
and Pitts say, that Whethamstede himself made the translation. p. 584. 630. It
is in Trinity college at Oxford, MSS. 10. And in Lincoln cathedral, MSS. I. 57.
Among Lydgate's works is recited, Vita S. Albani Martyris ad JOH. FRUMENTARIUM
[Whethamstede] abbatem.
.

Our author's stanzas, called the DANCE OF DEATH, which he translated from the
French, at the request of the chapter of saint Paul's, to be inscribed under
the representation of DEATH leading all ranks of men about the cloister of
their church in a curious series of paintings, are well known. But their
history has not, I believe, yet appeared. These verses, founded on a sort of
spiritual masquerade, anciently celebrated in churches See supr. vol. i. p.
210. Notes, h.

A DANCE OF DEATH seems to be alluded to so early as in Pierce Plowman's
VISIONS, written about 1350. DEATH came driving after and al to dust pashed
KINGS, and KAISA^S, KNIGHTS, and POPES.



, were originally written by one Macaber in German rhymes, and were translated
into Latin about the year 1460, by one who calls himself Petrus Desrey Orator.
This Latin translation was published by Goldastus, at the end of the SPECULUM
OMNIUM STATUUM TOTIUS ORBIS TERRARUM compiled by Rodericus Zamorensis, and
printed at Hanau in the year 1613 In 4to.
^ But a French translation was made much earlier than the Latin, and written
about the walls of saint Innocents cloister at Paris; from which Lydgate formed
his English version See the DANCE OF MACABRE, MSS. Harl. 116. 9. fol. 129. And
OBSERVATIONS on the FAIRY QUEEN, vol. ii. p. 116. ^eq. The DANCE OF DEATH,
falsely supposed to have been invented by Holbein, is different from this,
though founded in the same idea. It was painted by Holbein in the Augustine
monastery at Basil, 1543. But it appeared much earlier. In the chronicle of
Hartmannus Schedelius, Norimb. 1493. fol. In the Quotidian Offices of the
church, Paris, 1515. 8vo. And, in public buildings, at Minden, in Westphalia,
so early as 1383. At Lubec, in the portico of saint Mary's church, 1463. At
Dresden, in the castle or palace, 1534. At Annaberg^ 1525. At Leipsic, etc.
Paul Christian Hilscher has written a very learned and entertaining German book
on this subject, printed at Dresden, 1705. 8vo. Engravings of Holbein's
pictures at Basil were published, curante Matthaeo Meriano, at Francfort 1649,
and 1725, 4to. The German verses there ascribed, appeared in Latin elegiacs, in
Caspar Laudisman's DECENNALIA HUMANAE PEREGRINATIONIS, A. D. 1584. I have not
mentioned in my Observations on Spenser, that Georgius Aemylius published this
DANCE at Lions, 1542. One year before Holbein's painting at Basil appeared.
Next, at the same place, 1547. 8vo.
.

In the British Museum is a most splendid and elegant manuscript on vellum,
undoubtedly a present to king Henry the sixth MSS. Harl. 2278. 4to.
. It contains a set of Lydgate's poems, in honor of saint Edmund the patron of
his monastery at Bury. Besides the decoration of illuminated initials, and one
hundred and twenty pictures of various sizes, representing the incidents
related in the poetry, executed with the most delicate pencil, and exhibiting
the habits, weapons, architecture, utensils, and many other curious
particulars, belonging to the age of the ingenious illuminator, there are two
exquisite portraits of the king, one of William Curteis abbot of Bury, and one
of the poet Lydgate kneeling at saint Edmund's shrine There is an ancient
drawing, probably coeval, of Lydgate presenting his poem called the PILGRIM to
the earl of Salisbury, MSS Harl. 4826. 1. It was written 1426. Another of these
drawings will be mentioned below.
. In one of the king's pictures, he is represented on his throne, crowned, and
receiving this volume from the abbot kneeling: in another he appears as a child
prostrate on a carpet at saint Edmund's shrine, which is richly delineat^d, yet
without any idea of perspective or proportion. The figures of a great number of
monks, and attendants, are introduced. Among the rest, two noblemen, perhaps
the king's uncles, with bonnets, or caps, of an uncommon shape. It appears that
our pious monarch kept his Christmas at this magnificent monastery, and that he
remained here, in a state of seclusion from the world, and of an exemption from
public cares, till the following Easter: and that at his departure he was
created a brother of the chapter Fol. 6.
. It is highly probable, that this sumptuous book, the poetry of which was
undertaken by Lydgate at the command of abbot Curteis Cu^t^is was abbot of Bury
between the years 1429, and 1445. It appears that Lydgate was also commanded,
"Late charchyd in mine oold days," to make an English me^rical translation of De
Profundis, etc. To be hung against the walls of the abbey church. MSS. Harl.
2255. 11. fol. 40. See the last stanza.
, was previously prepared, and presented to his majesty during the royal visit,
or very soon afterward. The substance of the whole work is the life or history
of saint Edmund, whom the poet calls the "precious charbo^^ (...) martirs all
The poet's Prayer to saint Edmund for his assistance in compilin^ his LIF^,
fol. 9. The history begins thus, fol. 10. b. In Saxony whilom there was a king
Callid Alkmond of excellent noblesse.
It seems to be taken from John of Tinmouth's SANCTILOGIUM, who flourished
about the year 1360. At the end, connected with saint Edmund's legend, and a
part of the work, is the life of saint Fremund. fol. 69. b. But Lydgate has
made many additions. It begins thus, Who han remember the miracles merueilous
Which Crist Jhesu list for his seyntes show.
Compare MSS. Harl. 372. 1. 2. fol. 1. 25. 43. b.
." In some of the prefatory pictures, there is a description and a delineation
of two banners, pretended to belong to saint Edmund Fol. 2. 4.
. One of these is most brilliantly displayed, and charged with Adam and Eve,
the serpent with a human shape to the middle, the tree of life, the holy lamb,
and a variety of symbolical ornaments. This banner our bard feigns to have been
borne by his saint, who was a king of the east Angles, against the Danes: and
he prophesies, that king Henry, with this ensign, would always return
victorious Fol. 2.
. The other banner, given also to saint Edmund, appears to be painted with the
arms of our poet's monastery, and its blazoning is thus described.

The' other standard, ffeld sable, off color ynde Blue.
,
In which of gold been notable crownys three,
The first tokne: in cronycle men may find,
Grauntyd to him for royal dignyte:
And the second for his virgynyte:
For martyrdam the thridde, in his suffering.
To these annexyd feyth, hope, and charity,
In tokne he was martyr, maid, and king.
These three crownys See fol. 103. b. f. 104.
king Edmund bar certain,
When he was sent by grace of goddis hand,
At Geynesburuhe for to sleyn king Sweyn.
A sort of office, or service to saint Edmund, consisting of an antiphone,
versicle, response, and collect, is introduced with these verses.

To all men present, or in absence,
Which to saint Edmund have devocion
With hool heart and dew reverence,
Seyn Sing.
this antephne and this orison;
Two hundred days is grauntid of pardoun,
Writ and registered afforn his holy shryne,
Which for our feyth suffrede passioun,
Blyssyd Edmund, king, martyr, and virgyne.
This is our poet's l'envoye.

Go littel book, be ferfull, quaak for dread,
For to appear in so hyhe presence Fol. 118. b.
.
Lydgate's poem called the LIFE OF OUR LADY, printed by Caxton "This book was
compyled by Dan John Lydgate monk of Burye, at the excitation and styrrynge of
the noble and victorious prince, Harry the fyfthe, in the honowre, glory and
reverance of the birth of our most blessed lady, etc." Without date. fol.
Afterward by Robert Redman, 1531. 4to^^ See MSS. Harl. 629. fol. membran.
, is opened with these harmonious and elegant lines, which do not seem to be
destitute of that eloquence which the author wishes to share with Tully,
Petrarch, and Chaucer Cap. xxxiii. xxxiv.
. He compares the holy Virgin to a star.

O thoughtfull heart, plonged in distress
With slombre of sloth, this long wynter's night!
Out of the sleep of mortal hevinesse
Awake anon, and look upon the light
Of thilke sterre, that with her bemys bright,
And with the shynynge of her stremes merye,
Is wont to glad all our hemisperie Hemisphere.
! --
This sterre in beauty passith Pleiades,
Both of shynynge, and eke of stremes clear,
Boots, and Arctur, and also Iades,
And Esperus, when that it does appear:
For this is Spica, with her brighte spear Sphere.
,
That toward evyn, at midnyght, and at morrow,
Down from hevyn adawith Affright. Remove.
al our sorrow. --
And dries up the bitter terys wete
Of Aurora, after the morrow graye,
That she in wepying does on flowers flete Float. Drop.
,
In lusty April, and in fresshe May:
And causes Phoebus, the bright summers day,
With his wayne gold-yborned Burnished with gold. So in Lydgate's Legend on Dan
Joos a monk, taken from Vincentius Bellovacensis's Speculum HISTORIALE, the
name Maria is full fair igraven on a red rose, in lettris of BOURNID gold. MSS.
Harl. 2251. 39. fol. 71. b.
, bright and fair,
To' enchase the mystes of our cloudy air.
Now fair sterre, O sterre of sterrys all!
Whose light to se the angels do delight,
So let the gold-dewe of thy grace yfall
Into my breast, like scalys fair and white,
Me to enspire Prologue.
! --
Lydgate's manner is naturally verbose and diffuse. This circumstance
contributed in no small degree to give a clearness and a fluency to his
phraseology. For the same reason he is often tedious and languid. His chief
excellence is in description, especially where the subject admits a flowery
diction. He is seldom pathetic, or animated.

In another part of this poem, where he collects arguments to convince
unbelievers that Christ might be born of a pure virgin, he thus speaks of God's
omnipotence.

And he that made the high and cristal heven,
The firmament, and also every sphere,
The golden ax-tre Of the sun.
, and the sterres seven,
Citherea, so lusty for to' appear,
And read Marse Mars.
, with his stern here;
Might he not eke only for our sake
Wythyn a maid of man his Nature.
kind take?
For he that does the tender branches spring,
And the fresshe flouris in the great mede,
That were in winter deed and eke droupynge,
Of bawme all yvoyd and lestyhede;
Might he not make his grain to grow and sede,
Within her breast, that was both maid and wife,
Whereof is made the sothfast True.
bread of life Cap. xx.
?
We are surprised to find verses of so modern a cast as the following at such
an early period; which in this sagacious age we should judge to be a forgery,
was not their genuineness authenticated, and their antiquity confirmed, by the
venerable types of Caxton, and a multitude of unquestionable manuscripts.

Like as the dew discendeth on the rose
With sylver drops Cap. xix.
. --
Our Savior's crucifixion is expressed by this remarkable metaphor.

When he of purple did his baner sprede
On Calvarye abroad upon the rode,
To save mankind Cap. ix.
.. --
Our author, in the course of his panegyric on the Virgin Mary, affirms, that
she exceeded Hester in meekness, and Judith in wisdom; and in beauty, Helen,
Polyxena, Lucretia, Dido, Bathsheba, and Rachel Cap. iv. In a LIFE of the
Virgin in the British museum, I find these ^^sy lyrics introduced, MSS. Harl.
2382. 2. 3. fol. 75. fol. 86. b. Though I am not certain that they properly
belong to this work. A merry tale I tell you may
Of saint Marie that sweet may:
All the tale of this lesson^
Is of her Assumptione. --
Mary mother, well thee be!
Mary maiden, thenk on me!
Maiden and mother was never none,
Togader, lady, save thee allone.
But these lines will be considered again^
. It is amazing, that in an age of the most superstitious devotion so little
discrimination should have been made between sacred and profane characters and
incidents. But the common sense of mankind had not yet attained a just estimate
of things. Lydgate, in another piece, has versified the rubrics of the missal,
which he applies to the god Cupid: and declares, with how much delight he
frequently meditated on the holy legend of those constant martyrs, who were not
afraid to suffer death for the faith of that omnipotent divinity MSS. Fairfax,
xvi. Bibl. Bodl.
. There are instances, in which religion was even made the instrument of love.
Arnaud Daniel, a celebrated troubadour of the thirteenth century, in a fit of
amorous despair, promises to found a multitude of annual masses, and to
dedicate perpetual tapers to the shrines of saints, for the important purpose
of obtaining the affections of an obdurate mistress.

SECT. IV.
BUT Lydgate's principal poems are the FALL OF PRINCES, the SIEGE OF THEBES,
and the DESTRUCTION OF TROY. Of all these I shall speak distinctly.

About the year 1360, Boccacio wrote a Latin history in ten books, entitled DE
CASIBUS VIRORUM ET FEMINARUM ILLUSTRIUM. Like other chronicles of the times, it
commences with Adam, and is brought down to the author'^ age. Its last grand
event is John king of France taken prisoner by the English at the battle of
Poitiers, in the year 1359 Printed at Ausbourg. And at Paris, 1544. fol. It is
amazing, that Vossius should not know the number of books of which this work
consisted, and that it was ever printed. De Hist. Lat. lib. iii. cap. ii. It
was translated into Italian by Betussi, in Firenza, 1566. 8vo. 2 volum.
. This book of Boccacio was soon afterward translated into French, by one of
whom little more seems to be known, than that he was named Laurence; yet so
paraphrastically, and with so many considerable additions, a^ almost to be
rendered a new work In Lydgate's PROLOGUE, B. i. fol. i. a col. 1. edit. ut
infr. He that sumtime did his diligence
The book of Bochas in French to translate
Out of Latin, he called was LAURENCE.
He says that Laurence (in his Prologue) declares, that he avails himself of
the privilege of skillful artificers; who may change and turn, by good
dis^^e^ion, shapes and forms, and newly them devise, make and unma^^, etc. And
that old authors may be rendered more agreeable, by b^ing clothed in new
ornaments of language, and improved with new inventions. Ibid. a. col. 1. He
adds, that it was Laurence's design, in his translation into French, to amend,
co^rect, and declare, and not to spare things touched shortly. Ibid. col. 2.
Afterward he calls him this noble translatour. Ibid. b. col. 1. In another
place, where a panegyric on France is introduced, he says that this passage is
not Boccacio's, but added. By one LAURENCE, which was translatour
Of this process, to commend France;
To praise that land was all his pleasaunce.
B. ix. chapter 28. fol. 31. a. col. 1. edit ut in^r. Our author, in the Prologue
above-cited^ seems to speak as if there had been a previous translation of
Boccacio's book into French. Ut supr. a. col. 1. Thus LAURENCE from him envy
excluded
Though toforne him translated was this book.
But I suspect he only means, that Boccacio's original work wa^ nothing more
than a collection or compilation from more ancient authors.
. Laurence's French translation, of which there is a copy in the British Museum
MSS. Harl. See also ibid. MSS. Reg. 18 D. vii. And 16 G. v. And MSS. Bodl. F^
10. 2. [2465.] He is said to have translated this work in 1409. MSS. Reg. ut
supr. 20 C. iv.
, and which was printed at Lions in the year 1483 In folio. Bail says, that a
French translation appeared at Paris, by Claudius Vitart, in 1578. 8vo.
Diction. BOCCACE. Note g.
, is the original of Lydgate's poem. This Laurence or Laurent, sometimes called
Laurent de Premierfait, a village in the diocese of Troies, was an
ecclesiastic, and a famous translator. He also translated into French
Boccacio's DECAMERON, at the request of Jane queen of Navarre: Cicero DE
AMICITIA and DE SENECTUTE; and Aristotle's Oeconomics, dedicated to Louis de
Bourbon, the king's uncle. These versions appeared in the year 1414 and 1416 He
died in 1418. See Martene, Ampl. Collect. tom. ii. p. 1405. And Mem. de Litt.
xvii. 7^9. 4to. Compare du Verdier, Biblioth. Fr. p 72. And Bibl. Romans ii. 291.
It is extraordinary that the piece before us should not be mentioned by the
French antiquaries as one of Laurence's translations. Lydgate, in the Prologue
above cited, observes, that Laurence, who in ^unyng did excel, undertook this
translation at the request of some eminent personages in France, who had the
interest of rhetorike at heart. Ut supr. a. col. 2.
. Caxton's TULLIUS OF OLD AGE, or DE SENECTUTE, printed in 1481, is translated
from Laurence's French version. Caxton, in the postscript, calls him Laurence
de primo facto.

Lydgate's poem consists of nine books, and is thus entitled in the earliest
edition. "The TRAGEDIES gathered by Jhon BOCHAS of all such princes as fell
from their ^states through the mutability of fortune since the CREACION of
ADAM until his time, etc. Translated into English by John Lidgate monk of
Burye Imprinted at London by John Wayland, without date, fol. H^ printed in the
reign of H^nry the eighth. There is a small piece by L^dgate, not connected
with this, entitled The Trag^d^ of princes that were LECHEROUS. MSS. Ashmol.
59. ii.
." The best and most authentic manuscript of this piece is in the British
Museum; probably written under the inspection of the author, and perhaps
intended as a present to Humphrey duke of Gloucester, at whose gracious command
the poem, as I have before hinted, was undertaken. It contains among numerous
miniatures illustrating the several histories, portraits of Lydgate, and of
another monk habited in black, perhaps an abbot of Bury, kneeling before a
prince, who seems to be saint Edmund, seated on a throne under a canopy, and
grasping an arrow MSS. Harl. 1766. fol 5.
.

The work is not improperly styled a set of tragedies. It is not merely a
narrative of men eminent for their rank and misfortunes. The plan is perfectly
dramatic, and partly suggested by the pageants of the times. Every personage is
supposed to appear before the poet, and to relate his respective sufferings:
and the figures of these specter are sometimes finely drawn. Hence a source is
opened for moving compassion, and for a display of imagination. In some of the
lives the author replies to the speaker, and a sort of dialogue is introduced
for conducting the story. Brunchild, a queen of France, who murdered all her
children, and was afterward hewn in pieces, appears thus.

She came, arrayed nothing like a queen,
Her hair untr^ssed, Bochas took good head;
In all his book he had before not seen
A more woeful creature indede,
With weping eyne, to torn was al her wede:
Rebuking Bochas cause he' had left behind
Her wretchedness for to put in mind Lib. vii. f. xxi. a. col. 1.
.
Yet in some of these interesting interviews, our poet excites pity of another
kind. When Adam appears, he familiarly accosts the author with the salutation
of Cosyn Bochas B. i. sol. i. a. col. 2. In the same style he calls Ixion
Juno's secr^tary. B. i. chapter xii. fol. xxi. b. col. 2.
.

Nor does our dramatist deal only in real characters and historical personages.
Boccacio standing pensive in his library, is alarmed at the sudden entrance of
the gigantic and monstrous image of FORTUNE, whose agency has so powerful and
universal an influence in human affairs, and especially in effecting those
vicissitudes which are the subject of this work. There is a Gothic greatness in
her figure, with some touches of the grotesque. An attribute of the early
poetry of all nations, before ideas of selection have taken place. I must add,
that it was Boethius's admired allegory on the CONSOLATION OF PHILOSOPHY, which
introduced personification into the poetry of the middle ages.

While Bochas pensyfe stood in his lybrarye,
With chere oppressed, pale in his vysage,
Somedeale abashed, alone and solitarye;
To him appeared a monstrous image,
Parted in twain of color and courage,
Her right side full of summer flowers,
The the other oppressed with winter stormy showers.
Bochas astonished, full fearful to abrayde,
When he beheld the wonderful figure
Of FORTUNE, thus to himself he said.
"What may this mean? Is this a creature,
"Or a monstre transfourmed again nature,
"Whose brenning eyes spercle of their light,
"As do the sterres the frosty winter night?"
And of her chere full god head he took;
Her face semyng cruel and terrible,
And by disdain menacing of look;
Her hear untrussd, hard, sharp, and horyble,
Froward of shape, loathsome, and odible:
An hundred hands she had, of each part On either ^ide.
,
In sondrye wise her gifts to depart Distribute.
.
Some of her hands lift up men alofte,
To hye estate of wordlye dignite;
Another hand griped full unsofte,
Which cast another in great adversite,
Gave one richesse, another poverte, etc. --
Her habyte was of manyfolde colors,
Watchet blewe of feigned steadfastness,
Her gold allayd like sun in watery showers,
Meynt Mingled.
with grene, for change and doubleness. --
Her hundred hands, her burning eyes, and disheveled tresses, are sublimely
conceived. After a long silence, with a stern countenance she addresses Bochas,
who is greatly terrified at her horrible appearance; and having made a long
harangue on the revolutions and changes which it is her business to produce
among men of the most prosperous condition and the most elevated station, she
calls up Caius Marius, and presents him to the poet.

Black was his wede, and his habyte also,
His heed unkempt, his locks hoar and gray,
His look downe-cast in token of sorrow and woe;
On his chekes the salt tears lay,
Which bare record of his deadly affray. --
His robe stained was with Romayne blood,
His sword aye ready whet to do vengeance;
Like a tyrant most furyouse and wode Mad.
,
In slaughter and murdre set at his plesaunce Ibid. f. cxxxviii. b. col. 2.
.
She then teaches Bochas how to describe his life, and disappears.

These words said, Fortune made an end,
She beat her wings, and took her to flight,
I can not se what way she did wend;
Save Bochas tells, like an angel bright,
At her departing she showed a great light Ibid. fol. cxxxix. a. col. 2.
.
In another place, Dante, "of Florence the laureate poet, demure of look
fullfilled with patience," appears to Bochas; and commands him to write the
tale of Gualter duke of Florence, whose days for his tyranny, lechery, and
covetyse, ended in mischefe. Dante then vanishes, and only duke Gualter is left
alone with the poet B. ix. fol. xxxiv. b. col. 1. 2. In another place Dante's
three books on heaven, purgatory, and hell, are particularly commended. B. iv.
Prol. fol. xciii. a. col. 1.
. Petrarch is also introduced for the same purpose B. viii. fol. 1. Prol. a. b.
He mentions all Petrarch's works, Prol. B. iv. fol. 93. a. col. 1.
.

The following golden couplet, concerning the prodigies which preceded the
civil wars between Caesar and Pompey, indica^e dawnings of that poetical
coloring of expression, and of that facility of versification, which mark the
poetry of the present times.

Serpents and adders, scaled sylver-bryght,
Were over Rome seen flying all the night B. vi. fol. 147. a. col. 1.
.
These verses, in which the poet describes the reign of S^turn, have much
harmony, strength, and dignity.

Fortitude then stood steadfast in his might,
Defended wydowes, cherishd chastity;
Knyghtehood in prowes gave so clear a light,
Girte with his sword of truth and equity B. vii. fol. 161. b. col. 1.
.
Apollo, Diana, and Miner^a, joining the Roman army, when Rome was besieged by
Bren^us, are poetically touched.

Appollo first yshewed his presence,
Fresshe, young, and lusty, as any sun shene,
Armd all with gold; and with great vyolence
Entered the field, as it was well seen:
And Diana came with her arowes kene:
And Mynerva in a bright haberjoun;
Which in there coming made a terrible soun B. iv. chapter 22. fol. cxiii. a. col. 1,
.
And the following lines are remarkable.

God has a thousand hands to chastyse,
A thousand darts of punicion,
A thousand bows made in diverse wise,
A thousand arlblasts bent in his dongeon Tower. Castle. B. 1. chapter 3. fol. vi.
a. col. 1.
.
Lydgate, in this poem, quotes Seneca's tragedies B. i. chapter 9. fol. xviii. a.
col. 1.
for the story of Oedipus, Tully, Virgil and his commentator Servius, Ovid,
Livy, Lucan, Lactantius, Justin B. i. chapter 11. fol. xxi. b. col. 2. B. ii. chapter
6. fol. xlv. a. col. 1. B. iii. chapter 14. fol. lxxxi. b col. 1. Ibid. chapter 25.
fol. Ixxxix. a. col. 2. B. iv. chapter 11. fol. iii. b. col. 1. See PROL. B. i.
or "prudent Justinus an old croniclere," Josephus, Valerius Maximus, saint
Jerome's chronicle, Boethius B. ii. chapter 15. fol. li. a. col. 1. col. 2. Ibid.
chapter 16. fol. 52. a. col. 2. Ibid. ch^ 2. fol. xlii. a. col. 1. Ibid. chapter 30.
fol. lxii. ^. col. 1. B. viii. chapter 24. fol. xiiii. a. col. 2.
, Plato on the immortality of the soul B. iii. chapter 5. fol. lxxi. a. col. 1.
, and Fulgentius the mythologist B. ix. chapter 1. fol. xx. a. col. 1. From whom
Boccacio largely transcribes in his GENEALOGIAE DEORUM, hereafter mentioned.
. He mentions "noble Persius," Prosper's epigrams, Vegetius's book on Tactics,
which was highly esteemed, as its subject coincided with the chivalry of the
times, and which had been just translated into French by John of Meun and
Christina of Pisa, and into English by John Trevisa MSS. Digb. Bibl. Bodl. 233.
Princip. "In old time it was the manner." Finished at the command of his
patron Thomas lord Berkeley. See supr. vol. i. p. 343.
, "the grene chaplet of Esop and Juvenal Prol. B. iv. fol. 92. a. col. 2. 93.
a. col. 1.
," Euripides "in his time a great tragician, because he wrote many tragedies,"
and another called Clarke Demosthenes B. ii. chapter 22. fol. 54. b. col. 2.
. For a catalogue of Tully's works, he refers to the SPECULUM HISTORIALE See
supr. vol. i. p.
, or Myrrour Hystori^ll, of Vyncentius Bellovacensis; and says, that he wrote
twelve books of Orations, and several moral ditti^s B. vi. chapter 15. fol. 151.
b. col. 1.
. Aristotle is introduced as teaching Alexander and Callisthenes philosophy B.
iv. chapter 9. fol. xcix. seq. This is from Aristotle's SECRETUM SECRETORUM, which
Lydgate, as I have mentioned above, translated. But he did not ^ini^h the
translation: for about the middle of it we have this note. "Here dyed this
translator and notable poet John Lydgate, monk of Bury, and FOWLER bygan his
prolog in this wise. Where flower of knighthood the bataile does re^use." fol.
336. MSS. Laud. K. 53. The Prologue consists of ten stanzas: in which he
compares himself to a dwarf entering the lists when the knight is foiled. But
it is the young FOWLER, in MSS. Laud. B. xxiv. In the Harleian copy of this
piece I find the following note, at fol. 236. "Here deyde the translatour a
noble poet Dan Johne Lydgate, and his folowere began his prologe in this wise.
Per Benedictum Burghe. Where flower of, etc." MSS. Harl. 2251. 117. Where
Folowere may be a corruption of Folwer, or Fowler. But it must be observed,
that there was a Benedict Burghe, coeval with Lydgate, and preferred to many
dignities in the church, who translated into English verse, for the use of lord
Bourchier son of the earl of Essex, CATONIS moralia carmina, altered and
printed by Caxton, 1483. fol. More will be said of Burgh's work in its proper
place.
. With regard to Homer, he observes, that "Great Omerus, in Isidore ye may see,
found among Greeks the craft of eloquence B. ii. chapter 15. fol. 51. a. col. 2.
." By Isidore he means the ORIGINES, or ETYMOLOGIES of Isidore Hispalensis, in
twenty books; a system of universal information, the encyclopede of the dark
ages, and printed in Italy before the year 1472 See Gesner. Bibl. p. 468. And
Matt. Annal. Typ. i. p. 100.
. In another place, he censures the singular partiality of the book called
Omere, which places Achilles above Hector B. iv. Prol. fol. 93. a. col. 1.
. Again, speaking of the Greek writers, he tells us, that Bochas mentions a
scriveyn, or scribe, who in a small scroll o^ paper wrote the destruction of
Troy, following Homer: a history much esteemed among the Greeks, on account of
its brevity B. ii. cap. 15. fol. 51. b. col. 1.
. This was Dictys Cre^ensis, or Dares Phrygius. But for perpetuating the
achievements of the knights of the round table, he supposes that a clerk was
appointed, and that he compiled a register from the poursuivants and heralds
who attended their tournaments; and that thence the histories of those
invincible champions were framed, which, whether read or sung, have afforded so
much delight B. viii. chapter 25. fol. xv. a. col. 1. See supr. col. 1. p. 331. seq.
. For the stories of Constantine and Arthur he brings as his vouchers, the
chronicle or romance called BRUT or BRUTUS, and Geoffrey of Monmouth B. viii.
chapter 13. fol. 7. a. col. 2. fol. 14. b. col. 1. fol. 16. a. col. 2. See supr.
vol. 1. p. 62.
. He concludes the legend of Constantine by telling us, that an equestrian
statue in brass is still to be seen at Constantinople of that emperor; in which
he appears armed with a prodigious sword, menacing the Turks B. viii. chapter 13.
fol. viii. b. col. 2. Boccacio wrote the original Latin of this work long
before the Turks took and sacked Constantinople, in 1453.
. In describing the Pantheon at Rome, he gives us some circumstances highly
romantic. He relates that this magnificent fane was full of gigantic idols,
placed on lofty stages: these images were the gods of all the nations conquered
by the Romans, and each turned his countenance to that province over which he
presided. Every image held in his hand a bell framed by magic; and when any
kingdom belonging to the Roman jurisdiction was meditating rebellion against
the imperial city, the idol of that country gave, by some secret principle, a
solemn warning of the distant treason by striking his bell, which never sounded
on any other occasion B. viii. chapter 1. fol. xx. a. col. 1.
. Our author, following Boccacio who wrote the THESEID, supposes that Theseus
founded the order of knighthood at Athens B. i. c. 12. fol. xxii. a. col. 2.
. He introduces, much in the manner of Boethius, a disputation between Fortune
and Poverty; supposed to have been written by ANDALUS the blake, a doctor of
astronomy at Naples, who was one of Bochas's preceptors.

At Naples whylom, as he does specifye,
In his youth when he Boccacio.
to schole went,
There was a doctor of astronomye. --
And he was called Andalus the blake B. iii. chapter 1. fol. lxv. a. col. 1. "He
read in schools the moving of the heavens, etc." Boccacio mentions with much
regard ANDALUS DE NIGRO as one of his masters, in his GENEAL. DEOR. lib. xv.
cap. vi. And says, that Andalus has extant many Opuscula astrorum caelique
motus ostendentia. I think Leander, in his ITALIA, calls this Andalus,
Andalotius niger, curiosus astrologus. See Papyrius Mass. Elog. tom. ii. p. 195.
.
Lydgate appears to have been far advanced in years when he finished this poem:
for at the beginning of the eighth book he complains of his trembling joints,
and declares that age, having benumbed his faculties, has deprived him "of all
the subtylte of curious making in English to endyte B. vii. Prol. fol. i. b.
col. 2. ad calc. He calls himself older than sixty years.
." Our author, in the structure and modulation of his style, seems to have been
ambitious of rivalling Chaucer Prol. B. i. f. ii. a. col. 2. seq.
: whose capital compositions he enumerates, and on whose poetry he bestows
repeated encomiums.

I cannot quit this work without adding an observation relating to Boccacio,
its original author, which perhaps may deserve attention. It is highly probable
that Boccacio learned many anecdotes of Grecian history and Grecian fable, not
to be found in any Greek writer now extant, from his preceptors Barlaam,
Leontius, and others, who had lived at Constantinople while the Greek
literature was yet flourishing. Some of these are perhaps scattered up and down
in the composition before us, which contains a considerable part of the Grecian
story; and especially in his treatise of the genealogies of the gods In fifteen
books. First printed in 1481. fol. And in Italian by Betussi, Venet. 1553. In
French at Paris, 1531. fol. In the interpretation of the fables he is very
prolix and jejune.
. Boccacio himself calls his master Leontius an inexhaustible archive of
Grecian tales and fables, although not equally conversant with those of the
Latins GENEAL. DEOR. lib. xv. cap. vi.
. He confesses that he took many things in his book of the genealogies of the
gods from a vast work entitled COLLECTIVUM, now lost, written by his
cotemporary Paulus Peru^inus, the materials of which had in great measure been
furnished by Barlaam "Quicquid apud Graecos inveniri potest, ADJUTORIO BARLAAE
arbitror collegisse." GENEAL. DEOR. lib. xv. cap. vi.
. We are informed also, that Perusinus made use of some of these fugitive Greek
scholars, especially Barlaam, for collecting rare books in that language.
Perusinus was librarian, about the year 1340, to Robert king of Jerusalem and
Sicily: and was the most curious and inquisitive man of his age for searching
after unknown or uncommon manuscripts, especially histories, and poetical
compositions, and particularly such as were written in Greek. I will beg leave
to cite the words of Boccacio, who records this anecdote. "Et, si usquam
CURIOSISSIMUS ^uit homo in perquirendis, jussu etiam principis, PEREGRINIS
undecunque libris, HISTORIIS et POETICIS operibus, iste fuit. Et ob id,
singulari amicitiae Barlaae conjunctus, quae a Latinis habere non poterat EO
MEDIO INNUMERA exhausit a GRAECIS GENEAL. DEOR. lib. xv. cap. vi.
." By these HISTORIAE and POETICA OPERA, brought from Constantinople by
Barlaam, undoubtedly works of entertainment, and perhaps chiefly of the
romantic and fictitious species, I do not understand the classics. It is
natural to suppose that Boccacio, both from his connections and his curiosity,
was no stranger to these treasures: and that many of these pieces, thus
imported into Italy by the dispersion of the Constantinopolitan exiles, are
only known at present through the medium of his writings. It is certain that
many oriental fictions found their way into Europe by means of this
communication.

Lydgate's STORY OF THEBES was first printed by William Thin, at the end of
his edition of Chaucer's works, in 1561. The author introduces it as an
additional Canterbury tale. After a severe sickness, having a design to visit
the shrine of Thomas a Beckett at Canterbury, he arrives in that city while
Chaucer's pilgrims were assembled there for the same purpose; and by mere
accident, not suspecting to find so numerous and respectable a company, goes to
their inn. There is some humor in our monk's traveling figure Edit. 1687.
fol. ad CALC. CHAUCER'S WORKS. page 623. col. 1. Prol.
.

In a cope of black, and not of grene,
On a palfray, slender, long, and lene,
With rusty bridle, made not for the sale,
My man toforne with a void male Portmanteau.
.
He sees, standing in the hall of the inn, the convivial host of the tabard,
full of his own importance; who without the least introduction or hesitation
thus addresses our author, quite unprepared for such an abrupt salutation.

-- Dan Pers,
Dan Dominike, Dan Godfray, or Clement,
Ye be welcome newl^ into Kent;
Though your bridle have neither boss, ne bell See supr. vol. i. p. 164. notes,
h.
,
Beseching you that you will tell,
First of your name, etc. --
That look so pale, all devoid of blood,
Upon your head a wonder thredbare hood Ibid.
. --
Our host then invites him to supper, and promises that he shall have, made
according to his own directions, a large pudding, a round hagis, a French
moile, or a phrase of eggs: adding, that he looked extremely lean for a monk,
and must certainly have been sick, or else belong to a poor monastery: that
some nut-brown ale after supper will be of service, and that a quantity of the
seed of annis, cummin, or coriander, taken before going to bed, will remove
flatulencies. But above all, says the host, cheerful company will be your best
physician. You shall not only sup with me and my companions this evening, but
return with us tomorrow to London; yet on condition, that you will submit to
one of the indispensable rules of our society, which is to tell an entertaining
story while we are traveling.

What, look up, Monk! For by God's.
cocks blood,
Thou shall be merry, whosoever that say nay;
For to-morrowe, anon as it is day,
And that it ginne in the east to dawe Dawn.
,
Thou shall be bound to a new law,
At going out of Canterbury town,
And lien aside thy professioun;
Thou shall not chese Choose.
, nor thyself withdraw,
If any mirth be found in thy mawe,
Like the custom of this company;
For none so proud that dare me deny,
Knight, nor knave, chanon, priest, ne nonne,
To tell a tale plainly as they conne Can, or Know.
,
When I assign, and see time oportune;
And, for that we our purpose woll contune Continue.
,
We will homeward the same custom use Page 622. col. 2. seq.
.
Our monk, unable to withstand this profusion of kindness and festivity,
accepts the host's invitation, and sups with the pilgrims. The next morning, as
they are all riding from Canterbury to Ospringe, the host reminds his friend
DAN JOHN of what he had mentioned in the evening, and without farther ceremony
calls for a story. Lydgate obeys his commands, and recites the tragical
destruction of the city of Thebes Ibid.
. As the story is very long, a pause is made in descending a very steep hill
near the Thrope Or Thorpe. Properly a lodge in a forest. A hamlet. It occurs
again page 651. col. 1. Bren towns, thropes, and villages.
And in the TROY-BOKE, he mentions "provinces, borowes, vyllages, and thropes."
B. ii. c. x.
of Broug^ton on the Blee; when our author, who was not furnished with that
accommodation for knowing the time of the day, which modern improvements in
science have given to the traveller, discovers by an accurate examination of
his calendar, I suppose some sort of graduated scale, in which the sun's horary
progress along the equator was marked, that it is nine in the morning Page 630.
col. 2.
.

It has been said, but without any authority or probability, that Chaucer first
wrote this story in a Latin narrative, which Lydgate afterward translated into
English verse. Our author's originals are Guido Colonna, Statius, and Seneca
the tragedian See. page 630. col. 1.
. Nicholas Trevet, an Englishman, a Dominican friar of London, who flourished
about the year 1330, has left a commentary on Seneca's tragedies MSS. Bodl. NE.
F. 8. 6. Leland saw this Commentary in the library of the Cistercian abbey of
Buckfast-Lees in Devonshire. Coll. iii. p. 257.
: and he was so favorite a poet as to have been illustrated by Thomas Aquinas
Some say, Thomas Anglicus.
. He was printed at Venice so early as the year 1482. Lydgate in this poem
often refers to mine auctor, who, I suppose, is either Statius, or Colonna Page
623. col. 2. 630. col. 1. 632. col. 2. 635. col. 2. 647. col. 2. 654. col. 1.
659. col. 1. See supr. vol. i. p. 126.
. He sometimes cites Boccacio's Latin tracts: particularly the GENEALOGIAE
DEORUM, a work which at the restoration of learning greatly contributed to
familiarise the classical stories, DE CASIBUS VIRORUM ILLUSTRIUM, the
groundwork of the FALL OF PRINCES just mentioned, and DE CLARIS MULIERIBUS, in
which pope Joan is one of the heroines First printed, Ulm. 1473. fol.
. From the first, he has taken the story of Amphion building the walls of
Thebes by the help of Mercury's harp, and the interpretation of that fable,
together with the Lydgate says, that this was the same Lycurgus who came as an
ally with Palamon to Athens against his brother Arcite, drawn by four white
bulls, and crowned with a wreath of gold. Page 650. col. 2. See KN. TALE,
Urry's Chapter p. 17. v. 2^31. seq. col. 1. Our author expres^ly refers to
Chaucer's KNIGHT'S TALE about Theseus, and with some address, "As ye have
before heard it related in passing through Dept^ord, etc." page 568. col. 1.
^ictions about Lycurgus king of Thrace Page 623. col. 2. 624. col. 1. 651.
col. 1.
. From the second, as I recollect, the accoutrements of Polymites Page 634.
col. 2.
: and from the third, part of the tale of Isophile Page 648. col. 1. seq.
. He also characterises Boccacio for a talent, by which he is not now so
generally known, for his poetry; and styles him, "among poets in Itaile
stalled Page 651. col. 1.
." But Boccacio's THESEID was yet in vogue. He says, that when Oedipus was
married, none of the Muses were present, as they were at the wedding of
SAPIENCE with ELOQUENCE, described by that poet whilom so sage, Matrician
inamed de Capella. This is Marcianus Mineus Felix de Capella, who lived about
the year 470, and whose Latin prosaico-metrical work, de Nuptiis Philologiae et
Mercurii, in two books, an introduction to his seven books, or system, of the
SEVEN SCIENCES, I have mentioned before See su^r. vol. 1. p. 391.
: a writer highly extolled by Scotus Erigena De Divis. Nature. lib. iii. p. 147.
14^.
, Peter of Blois Ep^st. 101.
, John of Salisbury, and other early authors in corrupt Latinity See Alcuin. De
Sept. Artib. p. 1256. Ho^orius Augustodunus, de Philosophia Mundi, lib. ii.
cap. 5. And the book of Thomas Cantipratanus attributed to Boethius, De
Disciplina Scholarium. Compare Barth. ad Claudian. p. 32.
; and of such eminent estimation in the dark centuries, as to be taught in the
seminaries of philological education as a classic Barth. ad Bri^on. p. 110.
"M^di^ aevi scholas tenuit, adol^scentibus praelectus, etc." See Wilibaldus,
Epist. 147. tom. ii. Vet. Monum. Marten. p. 334.
. Among the royal manuscripts in the British museum, a manuscript occurs
written about the ^^^venth century, which is a commentary on these nine books
of Capella, compiled by Duncant an Irish bishop Leland says he saw this work in
the library of Worcester ab^ey. Coll. iii. p. 268.
, and given to his scholars in the monastery of saint Remigius MSS. Reg. 15 A.
xxxiii. Liber olim S. Remig. Studio Gi^ardi scriptus. Labb. Bibl. Nov. Manus^r.
p. 66. In imitation of the first part of this work, a Frenchman, Jo. Bor^^us,
wrote NUPTIAE JURISCONSULTI ET PHILOLOGIAE, Paris. 1651. 4to.
. They were early translated into Latin leonine rhymes, and are often imitated
by Saxo Grammaticus Stephan. in Prolegomen. c. xix. And in the Notes, passim.
He is adduced by ^^lgentius.
. Gregory of Tours has the vanity to hope, that no readers will think his
Latinity barbarous: not even those, who have refined their taste, and enriched
their understanding with a complete knowledge of every species of literature,
by studying attentively this treatise of Marcianus Hi^t. Fr. lib. x. ad calc. A
manuscript of Marcianus, more than seven hundred years old, is mentioned by
Bernard a Pez. Thesaur. Anecdot. tom. iii. p. 620. But by some writers of the
early ages he is censured as obscure. Galfredus Canonicus, who flourished about
1170, declares, "Non petimus nos, aut la^civir^ cum Sidonio, aut v^rnare cum
Hortensio, aut inv^lvere cum Marciano." Apud Marten. ubi supr. to^. i. p. 506.
He will occur again.
. Alexander Necham, a learned abbot of Cirencester, and a voluminous Latin
writer about the year 1210, wrote annotations on Marcianus, which are yet
preserved Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Digb. 221. And in other places. As did Scotus
Erigena, Labb. Bibl. Nov. Manuscr. p. 45. And others of that period.
. He was first printed in the year 1499, and other editions appeared soon
afterward. This piece of Marcianus, dictated by the ideal philosophy of Plato,
is supposed to have led the way to Boethius's celebrated CONSOLATION OF
PHILOSOPHY See Mabillon. Itin. Ital. p. 221.
.

The marriage of SAPIENCE and ELOQUENCE, or Mercury and Philology, as described
by Marcianus, at which Clio and Calliope with all their sisters assisted, and
from which ^ISCORD and SEDITION, the great enemies of literature, we^^
excluded, is artfully introduced, and beautifully contraste^ w^^h that of
Oedipus and Jocasta, which was celebrated by an assemblage of the most hideous
beings.

Ne was there none of the Muses nine, --
By one accord to maken melody:
For there sung not by heavenly harmony,
Neither Clio nor Caliope,
None of the sistren in number thrice three,
As they did, when PHILOLAIE PHILOLOGIA.

Ascended up high above the sky,
To be wedded, this lady virtuous,
Unto her lord the god Mercurius. --
But at this weddinge, plainly for to tell,
Was CERBERUS, chief porter of hell;
And HEREBUS, fader to Hatred,
Was there present with his holle kindred,
His WIFE also NIGHT.
with her brows black,
And her daughters, sorrow for to make,
Hideously chered, and uglie for to see,
MEGERA, and THESIPHONEE,
ALECTO eke: with LABOR, and ENVY,
DREAD, FRAUD, and false TRETCHERIE,
TRESON, POVERT, INDIGENCE, and NEED,
And cruel DEATH in his rent wede Garment.
:
WRETCHEDNESS, COMPLAINT, and eke RAGE,
FEAR full pale, DRONKENESSE, crooked AGE:
Cruel MARS, and many a tigre wood The attendants on Mars.
,
Brenning Burning.
IRE, and UNKIND BLOOD,
FRATERNALL HATE deep set in the root,
Sauf only death that there was no boot "Death was the only refuge, or remedy."
:
ASSURED OATHS at fine untrew "Oaths which proved false in the end."
,
All these folks were at weddyng new;
To make the town desolate and bare,
As the story after shall declare Page 629. col. 1.
.
The bare conception of the attendance of this allegorical groupe on these
incestuous espousals, is highly poetical: and although some of the
personifications are not presented with the addition of any picturesque
attributes, yet others are marked with the powerful pencil of Chaucer.

This poem is the THEBAID of a troubadour. The old classical tale of Thebes is
here clothed with feudal manners, enlarged with new fictions of the Gothic
species, and furnished with the descriptions, circumstances, and machineries,
appropriated to a romance of chivalry. The Sphinx is a terrible dragon, placed
by a necromancer to guard a mountain, and to murder all travelers passing by
Page 627. col. 2.
. Tydeus being wounded sees a castle on a rock, whose high towers and crested
pinnacles of polished stone glitter by the light of the moon: he gains
admittance, is laid in a sumptuous bed of cloth of gold, and healed of his
wounds by a king's daughter Page 640. col. 2. seq.
. Tydeus and Polymite tilt at midnight for a lodging, before the gate of the
palace of king Adrastus; who is awakened with the din of the strokes of their
weapons, which shake all the palace, and descends into the court with a long
train by torch-light: he orders the two combatants to be disarmed, and clothed
in rich mantles studded with pearls; and they are conducted to repose by many a
stair to a stately tower, after being served with a refection of hypocras from
golden goblets. The next day they are both espoused to the king's two
daughters, and entertained with tournaments, feasting, revels, and masks Page
633. col. 1. seq. Concerning the dresses, perhaps in the masks, we have this
line. page 635. col. 2. And the DEVISE of many a SOLEIN WEDE.

. Afterward Tydeus, having a message to deliver to Eteocles king of Thebes,
enters the hall of the royal palace, completely armed and on horseback, in the
midst of a magnificent festival Page 637. col. 2.
. This palace, like a Norman fortress, or feudal castle, is guarded with
barbicans, portcullisses, chains, and fosses Page 644. col. 2.
. Adrastus wishes to close his old age in the repose of rural diversions, of
hawking and hunting Page 635. col. 1.
.

The situation of Polymite, benighted in a solitary wilderness, is thus
forcibly described.

Holding his way, of heart nothing light,
Mate Afraid. Fatigued.
and weary, till it draws to night:
And all the day beholding envirown,
He neither saw ne castle, tower, ne town;
The which thing greveth him full sore,
And suddenly the sea began to rore,
Wind and tempest hidiously to arise,
The rain down beten in full grisly wise;
That many a beast thereof was adrad,
And nigh for fere began to wax mad,
As it seemed by the full woeful sownes
Of tigres, beres, of bores, and of liounes;
Which to refute, and himself for to save,
Evrich in haste draws to his cave.
But Polymite in this tempest huge
Alas the while finds no refuge.
Ne, him to shrowde, saw no where no succor,
Till it was passed almost midnight hour P. 631. col. 2.
.
When Oedipus consults concerning his kindred the oracle of Apollo, whose image
stood on a golden chariot with four wheels burned bright and sheen, animated
with a fiend, the manner in which he receives his answer is touched with spirit
and imagination.

And when Edipus by great devotion
Finished had fully his orison,
The fiend anon, within invisible,
With a voice dredefull and horrible,
Bade him in haste take his voyage
Towrds Thebes, etc Page 626. col. 2.
. --
In this poem, exclusive of that general one already mentioned, there are some
curious mixtures of manners, and of classics and scripture. The nativity of
Oedipus at his birth is calculated by the most learned astronomers and
physicians Page 62^ col. 1.
. Eteocles defends the walls of Thebes with great guns Page 644. col. 2. Great
and small, and some as large as tonnes.
. And the priest As in Chaucer.
Amphiorax, or Amphiaraus, is styled a bishop Page 645. col. 1.
, whose wife is also mentioned. At a council held at Thebes, concerning the
right of succession to the throne, Esdras and Solomon are cited: and the
history of Nehemiah rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem is introduced Page 636.
col. 1.
. The moral intended by this calamitous tale consists in showing the pernicious
effects of war: the diabolical nature of which our author still further
illustrates by observing, that discord received its origin in hell, and that
the first battle ever fought was that of Lucifer and his legion of rebel angels
Page 660. col. 1.
. But that the argument may have the fullest confirmation, Saint Luke is then
quoted to prove, that avarice, ambition, and envy, are the primary sources of
contention; and that Christ came into the world to destroy these malignant
principles, and to propagate universal charity.

At the close of the poem, the mediation of the holy virgin is invoked, to
procure peace in this life, and salvation in the next. Yet it should be
remembered, that this piece is written by a monk, and addressed to pilgrims
Lydgate was near fifty when this poem was written. page 622. col. 2.
.

SECT. V.
THE third of Lydgate's poems which I proposed to consider, is the TROY BOOK,
or the DESTRUCTION OF TROY. It was first printed at the command of king Henry
the eighth, in the year 1513, by Richard Pinson, with this title, " THE HYSTORY
SEGE AND DESTRUCTION OF TROY. The table or rubrisshe of the content of the
chapitres, etc. Here after follows the TROY BOOK, otherwise called the SEGE
OF TROY. Translated by JOHN LYDGATE monk of Bury, and emprynted at the
commandment of our souveraygne lord the king Henry the eighth, by Richard
Pinson, etc. the year of our lord god a M. CCCCC. and XIII Among other curious
decorations in the title page, there are soldiers firing great guns at the city
of Troy. Caxton, in his RECUYLE OF THE HYSTORYES OF TROY, did not translate
the account of the final destruction of the city from his French author Rauol
le Feure, "for as much as that worshipful and religious man Dan John Lydgate
monk of Burye did translate it but late, after whose work I fear to take
upon me, etc." At the end of B. ii.
." Another, and a much more correct edition followed, by Thomas Marshe, under
the care of one John Braham, in the year 1555 With this title. "The ancient
history, and only true and sincere cronicle, of the wars betwixt the
Grecians and the Troyans, and subsequently of the first evercyon of the
ancient and famous cite of Troy under Laomedon the king, and of the last and
fynall destructyon of the same under Pryam: written by Daretus a Troyan and
Dictus a Grecian, both soldiers and present at and in all the said wars,
and digested in Latin by the learned Guydo de Columpnis, and sythes translated
into English verse by John Lydgate moncke of Burye and newly imprinted." The
colophon, "Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Princes Arms
by Thomas Marshe. Anno. do. M. D. L. V." This book was modernised, and printed
in five^lined stanzas, under the title, "The LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR, etc.
written by John Lydgate monk of Berry, etc. At London, printed by Thomas
Purfoot. Anno Dom. 1614." fol. But I suspect this to be a second edition.
Princip. "In Thessalie king Pel^us once did reign." See Farmer's ESSAY, p. 39.
40. edit. 1767. This spurious TROYEBOKE is cited by Fuller, Winstanley, and
others, as Lydgate's genuine work.
. It was begun in the year 1414, the last year of the reign of king Henry the
fourth. It was written at that prince's command, and is dedicated to his
successor. It was finished in the year 1420. In the Bodleian library there is a
manuscript of this poem elegantly illuminated, with the picture of a monk
presenting a book to a king MSS. Digb. 232.
. From the splendor of the decorations, it appears to be the copy which
Lydgate gave to Henry the fifth.

This poem is professedly a translation or paraphrase of Guido de Colonna's
romance, entitled HISTORIA TROJANA Princip. "Licet cotidie vetera recentioribus
obruantur."
. But whether from Colonna's original Latin, or from a French version Of a
Spanish version, by Petro Nunez Degaldo, see Nic. Anton. Bibl. Hispan. tom. ii.
p. 179.
mentioned in Lygdate's Prologue, and which existed soon after the year 1300, I
cannot ascertain See supr. vol. i. p. 127. Notes. Yet he says, having finished
his version, B. v. Signat. EE. i. I have no more of Latin to translate,
After Dytes, Dares, and Guydo.
Again, he despairs of translating Guido's Latin elegantly. B. ii. c. x. See
also B. iii. Sign. R. iii. There was a French translation of Dares printed,
Cadom. 1573. See WORKS OF THE LEARNED. A. 1703. p. 222.
. I have before observed Ibid. p. 126.
, that Colonna formed his Trojan History from Dares Phrygius and Dictys
Cretensis As Colonna's book is extremely scarce, and the subject interesting, I
will translate a few lines from Colonna's Prologue and Postscript. From the
Prologue. "These things, originally written by the Grecian D^ctys and the
Phrygian Dares, (who were present in the Trojan war, and faithful, relators of
what they saw,) are transferred into this book by Guido, of Colonna, a judge.
-- And although a certain Roman, Cornelius by name, the nephew of the great
Sallustius, translated Dares and Dictys into Latin, yet, attempting to be
concise, he has very improperly omitted those particulars of the history, which
would have proved most agreeable to the reader. In my own book therefore every
article belonging to the Trojan story will be comprehended." -- And in his
Postscript. "And I Guido de Colonna have followed the said Dictys in every
particular; for this reason, because Dictys made his work perfect and complete
in every thing. -- And I should have decorated this history with more m^taphors
and ornaments of style, and by incidental digressions, which are the pictures
of composition. But deterred by the difficulty of the work, etc." Guido has
indeed ma^e Dictys nothing more than the groundwork of his story. All this is
translated in Lydgate's Prologue.
; who perpetually occur as authorities in Lydgate's translation. Homer is
however referred to in this work; particularly in the catalogue, or
enumeration, of the ships which brought the several Grecian leaders with their
forces to the Trojan coast. It begins thus, on the testimony of Colonna From
Dict. Cretens. lib. i. c. xvii. p. 17. seq. edit. Dacer. Amstel. 1702. 4to. And
Dar. Phryg. cap. xiv. p. 158. ibid. There is a very ancient edition of Dares in
quarto, without name or place. Of Dictys at Milan, 1477^ 4to. Dares is in
German, with cuts, by Marcus Tatius, August. Vindel. 1536. fol. Dictys, by John
Herold, at Basil, 1554. Both in Russian, at Moscow, 1712. 8vo.
. Mine auctor tells how Agamamnon,
The worthi king, an hundred shippis brought.
And is closed with these lines.

Full many ships was in this navye,
More than GUIDO makes rehersayle,
Toward Troy with Greeks for to sail:
For as HOMER in his discrypcion
Of Greeks ships makes mention,
Shortly affyrminge the man was never born^
That such a nombre of ships saw to forne B. ii. c. xvi.
.
In another place Homer, notwithstanding all his rhetoryke and sugared
eloquence, his lusty songs and dytees sweet, is blamed as a prejudiced writer,
who favors the Greeks B. iv. c. xxxi. And in the PROLOGUE, Virgil is censured
for following the traces of HOMERIS style, in other respects a tru^ writer. We
have the same complaint in our author's FALL OF PRINCIS. See supr. And in
Chaucer's HOUSE OF FAME, Colonna is introduced, among other authors of the
Trojan story, making this objection to Homer's veracity. B. iii. p. 468. col.
1. v. 389. Urr. edit. One ^aied that OMERE made lies,
And feinyng in his poetries;
And was to the Greeks favorable,
And therefore held he it but fable.

: a censure, which flowed from the favorite and prevailing notion held by the
western nations of their descent from the Trojans. Homer is also said to paint
with colors of gold and azure B. iv. c. xxxi. Signat. X. ii.
. A metaphor borrowed from the fashionable art of illumining. I do not however
suppose, that Colonna, who flourished in the middle of the thirteenth century,
had ever seen Homer's poems: he might have known these and many other
particulars, contained in the Iliad, from those factitious historian^ whom he
professes to follow. Yet it is not, in the mean time, impossible, that Lydgate
might have seen the Iliad, at least in a Latin translation. Leontius Pilatus,
already mentioned, one of the learned Constantinopolitan exiles, had translated
the Iliad into Latin prose, with part of the Odyss^y, at the desire of Boccacio
It is a slight error in Vigneul Marville, that this translation was procured by
Petrarch. Mel. Litt. tom. i. p. 21. The very ingenious and accurate author of
MEMOIRES POUR LA VIE DE PETRARQUE, is mistaken in saying that Hody supposes
this version to have been made by Petrarch himself. live. vi. tom. iii. p. 633.
On the contrary, Hody has adjusted this matter with great perspicuity, and from
the best authorities. DE GRAEC. ILLUSTR. lib. i. c. 1. p. 2. seq.
, about the year 1360. This appears from Petrarch's Epistles to his friend
Boccacio SENIL. lib. iii. Cap. 5.
: in which, among other curious circumstances, the former requests Boccacio to
send him to Venice that part of Leontius's new Latin version of the Odyssey, in
which Ulysses'^ descent into hell, and the vestibule of Erebus, are described.
He wishes also to see, how Homer, blind and an Asiatic, had described the lake
of Averno and the mountain of Circe. In another part of these letters, he
acknowledges the receipt of the Latin Homer; and mentions with how much
satisfaction and joy the report of its arrival in the public library at Venice
was received, by all the Greek and Latin scholars of that city Hody, ubi supr.
p. 5. 6. 7. 9. The Latin Iliad in prose was published under the name of
Laurentius Valla, with some slight alterations, in 1497.
. The Iliad was also translated into French verse, by Jacques Milet, a
licentiate of laws, about the year 1430 Mem. de Litt. xvii. p. 761. ed. 4to.
. Yet I cannot believe that Lydgate had ever consulted these translations,
although he had traveled in France and Italy. One may venture to pronounce
peremptorily, that he did not understand, as he probably never had seen, the
original. After the migration of the Roman emperors to Greece, Boccacio was the
first European that could read Homer; nor was there perhaps a copy of either of
Homer's poems existing in Europe, till about the time the Greeks were driven by
the Turks from Constantinople See Boccat. GENEAL. DEOR. xv. 6. 7. Theodorus
archbishop of Canterbury in the seventh century brought from Rome into England
a manuscript of Homer; which is now said to be in Bennet library at Cambridge.
See the SECOND DISSERTATION. In it is written with a modern hand, Hic liber
quondam THEODORI archiepiscopi Cant. But probably this Theodore is THEODORE
Gaza, whose book, or whose transcript, it might have been. Hody, ^bi supr. Lib.
i. c. 3. p. 59. 60.
. Long after Boccacio's time, the knowledge of the Greek tongue, and
consequently of Homer, was confined only to a few scholars. Yet some ingenious
French critics have insinuated, that Homer was familiar in France very early,
and that Christina of Pisa, in a poem never printed, written in the year 1398,
and entitled L'EPITRE D'OTHEA A HECTOR In the royal manuscripts of the British
Museum, this piece is entitled LA CHEVALERIE SPIRITUELLE de ce monde. 17 E. iv.
2.
, borrowed the word Othea, or WISDOM, from (...) in Homer, a formal appellation
by which that poet often invocates Minerva Mons. L'Abbe Sallier, Mem. Litt.
xvii. p. 518.
.

This poem is replete with descriptions of rural beauty, formed by a selection
of very poetical and picturesque circumstances, and clothed in the most
perspicuous and musical numbers. The coloring of our poet's Streaks of light.
A very common word in Lydgate. Chaucer, Kn. T. v. 597. col. 2. Urr. p. 455. And
while the twilight and the rowis red
Of Phoebus light. --

mornings is often remarkably rich and splendid.

When that the rows Streaks of light. A very common word in Lydgate. Chaucer,
Kn. T. v. 597. col. 2. Urr. p. 455.

And while the twilight and the rowis red Of Phoebus light. --


and the rays read
Eastward to us full early ginnen spredde,
Even at the twylyght in the dawneynge,
When that the lark of custom ginneth sing,
For to salve Salute.
in her heavenly lay,
The lusty goddess of the morrow graye,
I mean Aurora, which before the sun
Is wont to Chase.
enchase the black skies dunne,
And all the darkness of the dimmy night:
And fresh Phoebus, with comfort of his light,
And with the brightness of his bemes shene,
Has overgylt the huge hills grene;
And flowers eke, again the morowe-tide,
Upon their stalks began plain Open.
their leaves wide B. i. c. vi.
.
Again, among more pictures of the same subject.

When Aurora the sylver drop shene,
Her tears, had shed upon the fresh grene;
Complaynyng aye, in weping and in sorrow,
Her chyldren's death on every sommer-morowe:
That is to say, when the dew so soote,
Embawmed has the flower and eke root
With lusty lycour in April and in May:
When that the lark, the messenger of day,
Of custom aye Aurora does salve,
With sundry notes her sorrow to Change.
transmue B. iii. c. xxiiii.
.
The spring is thus described, renewing the buds or blossoms of the groves, and
the flowers of the meadows.

And them whom winter's blastes have shaken bare
With sote blosomes freshly to repare;
And the meadows of many a sundry hew,
Tapitid ben with diverse flowers new
Of sundry motless Colors.
, lusty for to seen;
And wholesome balm is shed among the grene.
Frequently in these florid landscapes we find the same idea differently
expressed. Yet this circumstance, while it weakened the description, taught a
copiousness of diction, and a variety of poetical phraseology. There is great
softness and facility in the following delineation of a delicious retreat.

Till at the last, among the bows glade,
Of adventure, I caught a plesaunt shade;
Full smothe, and plain, and lusty for to seen,
And soft as velvette was the young grene:
Where from my horse I did alight as fast,
And on a bow aloft his reyne cast.
So faynte and mate of werynesse I was,
That I me laid adowne upon the gras,
Upon a brincke, shortly for to tell,
Beside the river of a cristall well;
And the water, as I rehearse can,
Like quicke-sylver in his streams yran,
Of which the gravel and the bryghte stone,
As any gold, against the sun yshone B. ii. cap. xii.
.
The circumstance of the pebbles and gravel of a transparent stream glittering
against the sun, which is uncommon, has much of the brilliancy of the Italian
poetry. It recalls to my memory a passage in Theocritus, which has been lately
restored to its pristine beauty.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
They found a perpetual spring, under a high rock,
Filled with pure water: but underneath
The pebbles sparkled as with crystal and silver
From the bottom (...). Idyll. xxii. v. 37.
. --
There is much elegance of sentiment and expression in the portrait of Creseide
weeping when she parts with Troilus.

And from her eyn the teare's round drops tryll,
That al fordewed have her black wede;
And eke untrussd her hair abroad began sprede,
Like golden wyre, forrent and alto torn. --
And over this, her fresh and rosey hew,
Whylom ymeynt Mingled.
with white lylyes new,
With woeful weeping pyteously disteynd;
And like the herbs in April all bereynd,
Or flowers fresh with the dew sweet,
Right so her chekes moist were and wete B. iii. c. xxv. So again of Polyxena,
B. iv. c. xxx. And aye she rent with her fingers small
Her golden heir upon her black wede.

.
The following verses are worthy of attention in another style of writing, and
have great strength and spirit. A knight brings a steed to Hector in the midst
of the battle.

And brought to Hector. Sothly there he stood
Among the Greeks, al bathed in their blood:
The which in haste full knightly he bestrode,
And them among like Mars himself he rode B. iii. c. xxii.
.
The strokes on the helmets are thus expressed, striking fire amid the plumes.

But strokys fell, that men might herden ring,
On bassenetts, the fields round about,
So cruelly, that the fire sprange out
Among the tuftes broad, bright and shene,
Of foil of gold, of feathers white and grene B. ii. c. xviii.
.
The touches of feudal manners, which our author affords, are innumerable: for
the Trojan story, and with no great difficulty, is here entirely accommodated
to the ideas of romance. Hardly any adventure of the champions of the round
table was more chimerical and unmeaning than this of our Grecian chiefs: and
the cause of their expedition to Troy was quite in the spirit of chivalry, as
it was occasioned by a lady. When Jason arrives at Cholcos, he is entertained
by king Oetes in a Gothic castle. Amadis or Lancelot were never conducted to
their fairy chambers with more ceremony and solemnity. He is led through many a
hall and many a tower, by many a stair, to a sumptuous apartment, whose walls,
richly painted with the histories of ancient heroes, glittered with gold and
azure.

Through many a halle, and many a rich toure,
By many a turn, and many diverse way,
By many a gree Greece. Degree. Step. Stair. Gradus.
ymade of marbyll graye. --
And in his chambre', englosed Painted. Or r. Englased. Skelton's CROWN OF
LAUREL, p. 24. edit. 1736. Where the postis were enbulioned with saphir's indy
blewe
Englased glitteringe, etc.

bright and clear,
That shone full shene with gold and with asure,
Of many image that there was in picture,
He has commanded to his officers,
Only' in honor of them that were strangers,
Spyces and wine B. i. c. v. See Colonna, Signat. b.
. --
The siege of Troy, the grand object of the poem, is not conducted according to
the classical art of war. All the military machines, invented and used in the
crusades, are assembled to demolish the bulwarks of that city, with the
addition of great guns. Among other implements of destruction borrowed from the
holy war, the Greek fire, first discovered at Constantinople, with which the
Saracens so greatly annoyed the Christian armies, is thrown from the walls of
the besieged B. ii. c. xviii. See supr. vol. i. p. 157. In Caxton's TROY-BOOK,
Hercules is said to make the fire artificial as well as Cacus, etc. ii. 24.
.

Nor are we only presented in this piece with the habits of feudal life, and
the practices of chivalry. The poem is enriched with a multitude of oriental
fictions, and Arabian traditions. Medea gives to Jason, when he is going to
combat the brazen bulls, and to lull the dragon who guarded the golden fleece
asleep, a mavelous ring; in which was a gem whose virtue could destroy the
efficacy of poison, and render the wearer invisible. It was the same sort of
precious stone, adds our author, which Virgil celebrates, and which Venus sent
her son Eneas that he might enter Carthage unseen. Another of Medea's presents
to Jason, to assist him in this perilous achievement, is a silver image, or
talisman, which defeated all the powers of incantation, and was framed
according to principles of astronomy Ibid.
. The hall of king Priam is illuminated at night by a prodigious carbuncle,
placed among saphires, rubies, and pearls, on the crown of a golden statue of
Jupiter, fifteen cubits high B. ii. c. xi.
. In the court of the palace, was a tree made by magic, whose trunk was twelve
cubits high; the branches, which overshadowed distant plains, were alternately
of solid gold and silver, blossomed with gems of various hues, which were
renewed every day B. ii. c. xi.
. Most of these extravagancies, and a thousand more, are in Guido de Colonna,
who lived when this mode of fabling was at its height. But in the fourth book,
Dares e Phrigius is particularly cited for a description of Priam's palace,
which seemed to be founded by FAYRIE, or enchantment; and was paved with
crystal, built of diamonds, saphires, and emeralds, and supported by ivory
pillars, surmounted with golden images Cap. xxvi.
. This is not, however, in Dares. The warriors who came to the assistance of
the Trojans, afford an ample field for invention. One of them be^ongs to a
region of forests; amid the gloom of which wander many monstrous beasts, not
real, but appearances or illusive images, formed by the deceptions of
necromancy, to terrify the traveller B. ii. c. xviii.
. King Epistrophus brings from the land beyond the Amazons, a thousand knights;
among which is a terrible archer, half man and half beast, who neighs like a
horse, whose eyes sparkle like a furnace, and strike dead like lightening So
described by Colonna, Signat. n 4. seq.
. This is Shakespeare's DREADFUL SAGITTARY Ibid. And B. iii. c. xxiv. The
Sagittary is not in Dictys or Dares. In whom also, these warriors are but
barely named, and are much fewer in number. See Dar. cap. xviii. p. 161. Dict.
lib. ii. cap. xxxv. p. 51. The description of the persons of Helen, and of the
Trojan and Gre^ian heroes [B. ii. c. xv.] is from Dares through Colonna, Daret.
Hist. c. xii. p. 156. seq.
. The Trojan horse, in the genuine spirit of Arabian philosophy, is formed of
brass In Dictys "tabulatis extruitur ligneis." lib. v. c. x. p. 113. In Gower
he is also a horse of brass. Conf. Amant. lib. i. fol. xiiii. a. col. 1. From
Colonna, Signat. t 4. Here also are Shakespeare's ^abulous names of the gates
of Troy. Signat. d 4. seq.
^ of such immense size, as to contain a thousand soldiers.

Colonna, I believe, gave the Trojan story its romantic additions. It had long
before been falsified by Dictys and Dares; but those writers, misrepresenting
or enlarging Homer, only invented plain and credible facts. They were the basis
of Colonna: who first filled the faint outlines of their fabulous history with
the colorings of eastern fancy, and adorned their scanty forgeries with the
gorgeous trappings of Gothic chivalry. Or, as our author expresses himself in
his Prologue, speaking of Colonna's improvements on his originals.

For he ENLUMINETH, by craft and cadence,
This noble story with many a FRESH COLOR
Of rhetorike, and many a RICH FLOWER
Of eloquence, to make it sound the bett Better.
.
Clothed with these new inventions, this favorite tale descended to later
times. Yet it appears, not only with these, but with an infinite variety of
other embellishments, not fabricated by the fertile genius of Colonna, but
adopted from French enlargements of Colonna, and incorporated from romances on
other subjects, in the French RECUYEL OF TROY, written by a French
ecclesiastic, Rauol le Feure, about the year 1464, and translated by Caxton As
for instance, Hercules having killed the eleven giants of Cremona, builds over
them a vast tower, on which he placed eleven images of metal, of the size and
figure of the giants. B. ii. c. 24. Something like this, I think, is in Amadis
de Gaul. Robert Braham, in the EPISTLE TO THE READER, prefixed to the edition
of Lydgate's TROY-BOOK of 1555, is of opinion, that the fables in the French
RECUYEL ought to be ranked with the trifeling tales and bar^ay^e lu^rdries of
ROBYN HODE and BEVYS OF HAMPTON, and are not to be compared with the faithful
and true reports of this history given by Dares Phrigius and Dictys Cretensis.
.

The description of the city of Troy, as newly built by king Priam, is
extremely curious; not for the capricious incredibilities and absurd
inconsistencies which it exhibits It is three days journey in length and
breadth. The walls are two hundred cubits high, of marble and alabaster, and
machiocolated. At every angle was a crown of gold, set with the riche^t gems.
There were great guns in the towers. On each turret were figures of savage and
monstrous beasts in brass. The gates were of brass, and each has a portcullis.
The houses were all uniform, and of marble, sixty cubits high.
, but because it conveys anecdotes of ancient architecture, and especially of
that florid and improved species, which began to grow fashionable in Lydgate's
age. Although much of this is in Colonna. He avoids to describe it
geometrically, having never read Euclid. He says that Priam procured,

-- Each carver, and curious joyner,
To make knottes with many a queint flower
To set on crestes within and eke without. --
That he sent for such as could "grave, groupe, or carve, were sotyll in their
fantasye, good devysours, marveylous of castinge, who could raise a wall with
batayling and crestes marciall, every imageour in entayle Intaglia.
, and every portreyour who could paynt the work with fresh hewes, who could
pullish alabaster, and make an image."

And if I should rehersen by and by,
The corve knottes by craft of masonry;
The fresh embowing Arching.
with verges right as lines,
And the housyng full of bachewines,
The rich coynyng, the lusty tablements,
Vinettes Vignettes.
running in casements. --
Nor how they put, instede of mortere,
In the joyntoures, coper gilt full clear;
To make them join by level and by line,
Among the marbell freshly for to shine
Against the sun, when that his shene light
Smote on the gold that was burned bright.
The sides of every street were covered with fresh alures Allies, or
covert-ways. Lat. Alura. viz. "ALURA quae ducit a coquina conventus, usque ad
cameram prioris." Hearne's OTTERB. Praef. Append. p. cxi. Where Hearne derives
it from ALA, a wing, or side. Rather from All^r, whence Allee, Fr. Al^ey.
Robert of Gloucester mentions the ladies standing "upe [upon] the alurs of the
castle," to see a tournament. See supr. vol. 1. p. 50. The word Alura in not in
Du Cange.
of marble, or cloisters, crowned with rich and lofty pinnacles, and fronted
with tabernacular or open work Like the latticed stone-work, or cancelli, of a
Gothic shrine.
, vaulted like the dormitory of a monastery, and called deambulatories, for the
accommodation of the citizens in all weathers.

And every house ycovered was with lead;
And many a gargoyle, and many a hideous head,
With spoutes thorough, etc. --
And again, of Priam's palace.

And the walls, within and eke without,
Endilong were with knottes graven clear,
Depeynt with asure, gold, cinople', and grene. --
And all the wyndowes and each fenestrall
Wrought were with beryll and of cler^ crystal. s Said to have been invented
by Marchion of Arezzo. Walpole, ANECD. PAINT. i^ p. 111.
.
With regard to the reality of the last circumstance, we are told, that in
Studley castle in Shropshire, the windows, so late as the reign of Elizabeth,
were of beryl Har^ison's DESCRIPT. BRIT. Cap. xii. p. 188. The occupations of
the citizens of Troy are mention^d. Ther^ were goldsmiths, jewellers,
embroiderers, weavers of woollen and linen, of cloth, of gold, damask, satin,
velvet, sendel, or a think silk like cypress, and double samyte, or satin.
Smiths, who forged poll-axes, spears, and quarrel-heads, or cross-bow darts
shaped square. Armourers, Bowyers, Fletchers, makers of trappings, banners,
standards, penons, and for the field^ fresh and gaye G^TOURS. I do not
precisely understand the last word. Perhaps it is a sort of ornamented armor
for the legs.
.

The account of the Trojan theater must not be omitted, as it displays the
imperfect ideas of the stage, at least of dramatic exhibition, which now
prevailed; or rather, the absolute inexistence of this sort of spectacle. Our
author supposes, that comedies and tragedies were first represented at Troy All
that follows on this subject, is not in Colonna.
. He defines a comedy to begin with complaint and to end with gladness:
expressing the actions of those only who live in the lowest condition. But
tragedy, he informs us, begins in prosperity, and ends in adversity: showing
the wonderful vicissitudes of fortune which have happened in the lives of kings
and mighty conquerours. In the theater of Troy, he adds, was a pulpit, in which
stood a poet, who rehearsed the noble deeds that were historial of kings,
princes, and worthy emperors; and, above all, related those fatal and sudden
catastrophes, which they sometimes suffered by murder, poison, conspiracy, or
other secret and unforeseen machinations.

And this was told and read by the poet.
And while that he in the pulpet stood
With deadlye face all devoyd of blood,
Singing his dites with tresses al to rent;
Amydde the theater, shrouded in a tent,
There came out men, gastfull of their cheres,
Disfygured their faces with vyseres,
Playing by signs in the people's sight
That the poet song has on height "That which the poet sung, standing in
the pulpit."
:
So that there was no manner discourdaunce,
Atween his ditees and their countenance.
For like as he alofte did express
Words of joye or of hevinesse, --
So craftily they The actors.
could them Themselves.
transfygure Lib. ii. cap. x. See also, B. iii. c. xxviii.
.
It is added, that these plays, or rytes of tragedyes old, were acted at Troy,
and in the theater hallowed and yholde, when the months of April and May
returned.

In this detail of the dramatic exhibition which prevailed in the ideal theater
of Troy, a poet, placed on the stage in a pulpit, and characteristically
habited, is said to have recited a series of tragical adventures; whose
pathetic narrative was afterward expressed, by the dumb gesticulations of a
set of masqued actors. Some perhaps may be inclined to think, that this
imperfect species of theatric representation, was the rude drama of Lydgate's
age. But surely Lydgate would not have described at all, much less in a long
and labored digression, a public show, which from its nature was familiar and
notorious. On the contrary, he describes it as a thing obsolete, and existing
only in remote times. Had a more perfect and legitimate stage now subsisted, he
would not have deviated from his subject, to communicate unnecessary
information, and to deliver such minute definitions of tragedy and comedy. On
the whole, this formal history of a theater, conveys nothing more than an
affected display of Lydgate's learning; and is collected, yet with apparent
inaccuracy and confusion of circumstances, from what the ancient grammarians
have left concerning the origin of the Greek tragedy. Or perhaps it might be
borrowed by our author from some French paraphrastic version of Colonna's Latin
romance.

Among the ancient authors, beside those already mentioned, cited in this poem,
are Lollius for the history of Troy, Ovid for the tale of Medea and Jason,
Ulysses and Polyphemus, the Myrmidons and other stories, Statius for Polynices
and Eteocles, the venerable Bede, Fulgentius the mythologist, Justinian with
whose institutes Colonna as a civilian must have been well acquainted, Pliny,
and Jacobus de Vitriaco. The last is produced to prove, that Philometer, a
famous philosopher, invented the game of chess, to divert a tyrant from his
cruel purposes, in Chaldea; and that from thence it was imported into Greece.
But Colonna, or rather Lydgate, is of a different opinion; and contends, in
opposition to his authority, that this game, so sotyll and so marvaylous, was
discovered by prudent clerks during the siege of Troy, and first practiced in
that city. y Colonna calls him, ille FABULARIUS Sulmonensis, -- fabulose
commentans, etc. Signat. b 2.
Jacobus de Vitriaco was a canon regular at Paris, and, among other dignities
in the church, bishop of Ptolemais in Palestine, about the year 1230. This
tradition of the invention of chess is mentioned by Jacobus de Vitriaco in his
ORIENTAL AND OCCIDENTAL HISTORY In three books.
. The anecdote of Philometer is, I think, in Egidius Romanus on this subject,
abovementioned. Chaucer calls Athalus, that is Attalus Philometer, the same
person, and who is often mentioned in Pliny, the invento^ of chess DREME, p.
408. col. 2. edit. Urr.
.

I must not pass over an instance of Lydgate's gallantry, as it is the
gallantry of a monk. Colonna takes all opportunities of satirising the fair
sex; and Lydgate with great politeness declares himself absolutely unwilling to
translate those passages of this severe moralist, which contain such unjust and
illiberal misrepresentations of the female character. Instead of which, to
obviate these injurious reflections, our translator enters upon a formal
vindication of the ladies; not by a panegyric on their beauty, nor encomiums on
those amiable accomplishments, by which they refine our sensibilities, and give
elegance to life; but by a display of that religious fortitude with which some
women have suffered martyrdom; or of that inflexible chastity, by means of
which others have been snatched up alive into heaven, in a state of genuine
virginity. Among other striking examples which the calendar affords, he
mentions the transcendent grace of the eleven thousand virgins who were
martyred at Cologne in Germany. In the mean time, female saints, as I suspect,
in the barbarous ages were regarded with a greater degree of respect, on
account of those exaggerated ideas of gallantry which chivalry inspired: and it
is not improbable that the distinguished honors paid to the virgin Mary might
have partly proceeded from this principle.

Among the anachronistic improprieties which this poem contains, some of which
have been pointed out, the most conspicuous is the fiction of Hector's
sepulcher, or tomb: which also merits our attention for another reason, as it
affords us an opportunity of adding some other notices of the modes of ancient
architecture to those already mentioned. The poet from Colonna supposes, that
Hector was buried in the principal church of Troy, near the high altar, within
a magnificent oratory, erected for that purpose, exactly resembling the Gothic
shrines of our cathedrals, yet charged with many romantic decorations.

With crafty archys raysyd wonder clean,
Embowed over all the work to cure,
So marveylous was the celature:
That all the rofe, and closure envyrowne,
Was of With.
fine gold plated up and down,
With knottes grave wonder curyous
Fret full of stony's rich and precious, etc.
The structure is supported by angels of gold. The steps are of crystal.
Within, is not only an image of Hector in solid gold; but his body embalmed,
and exhibited to view with the resemblance of real life, by means of a precious
liquor circulating through every part in golden tubes artificially disposed,
and operating on the principles of vegetation. This is from the chemistry of
the times. Before the body were four inextinguishible lamps in golden sockets.
To complete the work, Priam founds a regular chantry of priests, whom he
accommodates with mansions near the church, and endows with revenues, to sing
in this oratory for the soul of his son Hector B. iii. ^. xxviii. Joseph of
Exeter in his Latin poem entitled ANTIOCHEIS, or the CRUSADE, has borrowed from
this tomb of Hector, in his brilliant description of the mausoleum of Teuthras.
lib. iv. 451. I have quoted the passage in the SECOND DISSERTATION. Signat. i.
.

In the Bodleian library, there is a prodigious folio manuscript on vellum, a
translation of Colonna's TROJAN HISTORY into verse MSS. Laud. K. 76. fol.
; which has been confounded with Lydgate's TROYE-BOKE now before us. But it is
an entirely different work, and is written in the short minstrel-metre. I have
given a specimen of the Prologue, above Supr. vol. i. p. 119. 120.
. It appears to me to be Lydgate's TROYE-BOKE divested of the octave stanza,
and reduced into a measure which might more commodiously be sung to the harp It
may, however, be thought, that this poem is rather a translation or imitation
of some French original, as the writer often refers to The Romance. If this be
the case, it is not immediately formed from the TROYE-BOKE of Lydgate, as I
have suggested in the text. I believe it to be about Lydgate's age; but there
is no other authority for supposing it to be written by Lydgate, than that, in
the beginning of the Bodleian manuscript now before us, a handwriting, of
about the reign of James the first, assigns it to that poet. I will give a few
lines from the poem itself: which begins with Jason's expedition to Cholcos,
the constant prelude to the Trojan story in all the writers of this school.

In Colkos i will a cite was,
That men called hanne Jaconitas;
F^air, and mekel Great.
, large, and long,
With walls huge and wondir strong,
Fful of toures, and heye paleis,
Off rich knytes, and burgeis:
A king that time hete Hig^t, named.
Eetes
Governed than that land in pes Peace.
,
With his baronage, and his meyne,
Dwelleden thanne in that cite:
Ffor al about that rich town
Stood wodes, and parkis, enviroun,
That were replenysched wonderful
Of heart, and hynd, bore, and bull,
And other many savage bestis,
Betwixt that wode and that forestis.
There was large contray and plain,
Ffaire wodes, and champayn
Fful of semely-rennyng wells,
As the ROMAUNCE the sothe Tr^th.
tells,
Without the cite that there sprung.
There was of briddes michel song,
Through all the er Year.
and michel cry,
Of al joys great melody.
To that cite [of] Eetes
ode Came.
Jason and Hercules,
And all the ffelawes that he had
In clothe of gold as kings he cladde, etc.
Afterward, the sorceress Medea, the king's daughter, is thus characterised.

Sche couthe the science of clergy,
And mochel of nigramauncy. --
Sche could with conjurisouns,
With here schleyght Slight, art.
, and oresouns,
The day, that was most fair and light,
Make as dark as any night:
Sche couthe also, in selcouthe wise,
Make the wind both blow and rise,
And make him so loud blow,
As it schold howses overthrowe.
Sche couth turn, verament,
All weders Wethers.
, and the firmament, etc.
The reader, in some of these lines, observes the appeal to The romance for
authority. This is common throughout the poem, as I have hinted. But at ^he
close, the poet wishes eternal salvation to the soul of the author of the
Romaunce.

And he that this romaunce wroght and made,
Lord in heven thou him glade.
If this piece is translated from a French romance, it is not from the ancient
metrical one of Benoit, to whom, I believe, Colonna is much indebted; but
perhaps from some later French romance, which copied, or translated, Colonna's
book. This, among other circumstances, we may collect from these lines.

Dares the heraud of Troy says,
And Dites that was of the Gregeis, etc.
And after him comes master GY,
That was of Rome a notary.
This master Gy, or Guy, that is Guido of Colonna, he adds, wrote this
history, In the manner I schall tell.


That is "my author, or romance, follows Colonna." [See supr. vol. i. p. 127.]
Dares the heraud is Dares Phrygius, and Dites Dictys Cretensis.

This poem, in the Bodleian manuscript aforesaid, is finished, as I have partly
observed, with an invocation to god, to save the author, and the readers, or
hearers; and ends with this line, Seythe all Amen for charity.
But this rubric immediately follows, at the beginning of a page. "Hic bellum
de Troy^ ffinit et Greci transierunt versus p^triam suam." Then follow several
lineated pages of vellum, without writing. I have never seen any other
manuscript of this piece.


. It is not likely that Lydgate is its author: that he should either thus
transform his own composition, or write a new piece on the subject. That it was
a poem in some considerable estimation, appears from the size and splendor of
the manuscript: and this circumstance induces me to believe, that it was at a
very early period ascribed to Lydgate. On the other hand, it is extraordinary
that the name of the writer of so prolix and laborious a work, respectable and
conspicuous at least on account of its length, should have never transpired.
The language accords with Lydgate's age, and is of the reign of Henry the
sixth: and to the same age I refer the handwriting, which is executed with
remarkable elegance and beauty.

SECT. VI.
TWO more poets remain to be mentioned under the reign of Henry the sixth, if
mere translation merit that appellation. These are Hugh Campeden and Thomas
Chester.

The first was a great traveller, and translated into English verse the French
romance of SIDRAC See supr. vol. i. p. 143.
. This translation, a book of uncommon rarity, was printed with the following
title, at the expense of Robert Saltwood, a monk of saint Austin's convent at
Canterbury, in the year 1510. "The History of king Boccus and SYDRACKE how he
confoundyd his learned men, and in the sight of them drunk strong venyme in
the name of the trinite and did him no hurt. Al^o his divynite that he learned
of the book of Noe. Also his profesyes that he had by revelation of the angel.
Also his aunsweris to the questyons of wysdom both moral and natural with
much wysdom contained in [the] noumber CCCLXV. Translated by Hugo of Caumpeden
out of French into English, etc With a wooden cut of Bocchus, and Sidracke.
There is a fine manuscript of this translation, Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Laud. G. 57.
pergam.
. There is no sort of elegance in the diction, nor harmony in the
versification. It is in the minstrel-metre MS. Laud. G. 57. Princip.
Men may find in old books
Who so yat in them looks
That men may mooche here
And yerefore yff yat ye wolle le^e
I shall teache yoowe a lytill jeste
That befell oonys in the este
There was a king that Boctus hight
And was a man of mooche might
His land lay de great Inde
Bectorye hight hit as we find
After the time of Noee even
VIIJ^^ hundred year forty and seven
The king Boc^us him be thought
That he would have a city wrought
The read Jews fro him spear
And for to mayntene his were
A yenst a king that was his foo
And has most of Inde longyng him to^
His name was Garaab the king
Bocchus tho proved all this thing
And smartly a tower begenne he
There he would make his city
And it was right at the incomyng
Of Garabys land the king
The masons with great labor
Began to work upon the toure
And all that they wroghten on day
On night was hit done away
On morn when Bochus hit herd
He was wroth that hit so ferde
And did hit all new begin
At even when they should blynne
Off work when they went to rest
In the night was all down heste
Well vii months this they wrought
And in the night avaylid yt naught
Boccus was wroth wonderly
And callid his folk that was him by
Councellith me lordinges seyde he
How I may best make this city
They said sir sendith a noon
Aftir your philosophers everychon
And the astronomers of your land
Of hem shall ye counseill fond.
Afterward king Tractabare is requested to send -- the book of astronomye
That whilom Noe had in baylye,
together with his astronomer Sidracke.

At the end.
And that Hugh of Campedene
That this book has thorogh soght
And untoo Englyssh ryme hit brought.
Sidrake, who is a christian, at length builds the tower in Nomine S.
Trinitatis, and he teaches Bocchus, who is an idolater, many articles of true
religion. The only manuscript I have seen of this translation is among MSS.
Laud. G. 57. fol. ut. supr.


.

Thomas Chestre appears also to have been a writer for the minstrels. No
anecdote of his life is preserved. He has left a poem entitled Sir LAUNFALE,
one of Arthur's knights^ who is celebrated with other champions in a set of
French metrical tales or romances, written by some Armorican bard, under the
name of LANVAL It begins thus.

LAUNFAL M^LES.
Le douty Artours dawes
That held Engelond in good law,
There fell a wondyr cas,
Of a ley Liege.
that was ysette,
That hit LAUNFAL and hatte ette.
Now herkeneth how hit was;
Douty Artour some while
Sojournede in Kerdenyle Or, K^rdevyle. f. Ca^rli^^e.
,
With joye and gr^et solas,
And knyts that were profitable,
With Artour of the round table,
Never noon better th^r was.
Sere Persevall, and sir Gawyn^
Sir Gyherther, and sir Agrayn,
And Lancelot du Lake,
Sir Kay, and sir Ewayn,
That well couthe fyt in plain,
Bateles for to take.
King Ban Boort, and king Bos,
Of ham there was a greet los,
Men saw tho no where Th^r.
her Match.
make.
Sir Galafre, and sir LAUNFALE,
Whereof a noble tale
Among us shall a wake.
With A^tour there was a bachelor
And had y be well many a er,
LAUNFAL for soot Soth.
he hit,
He gaf gifts largelyche
Gold and sylver and clothes rich,
To squire and to knyt.
For his largess and his bounte
The kings steward made was he
Ten yer I you plyt,
Of all the knytes of the table round
So large there was noon y ^ounde,
Be days ne be nyt.
So hit befyll in the tenth ere
Marlyn was Artours counsalare,
He radde him for to wend
To king Ryon of Irlond ryt,
And fette him there a lady bryt
Gwenere his daughter hende, etc.
In the conclusion.

THOMAS CHESTER made this tale
Of the noble knyt sir Launfale
Good of chyvalrye:
Jesus that is hevene king
eve us all his blessyng
And his mother Marye.
EXPLICIT LAUNFALE.
Never printed. MSS. Cotton. CALIG. A. 2. f. 33. I am obliged to doctor Percy
for this transcript. It was afterward altered into the romance of sir LAMBWELL.


. They are in the British Museum MSS. Harl. 978. 112. fol. i. 154. "En Bretains
l'apelent LAUNVAL."
See a note at the beginning of DISS. ^.


.

I think I have seen some evidence to prove, that Chestre was also the author
of the metrical romance called the EARL OF TOULOUSE Never printed. MSS. Ashmol.
Oxon. 45. 4to. [6926.] And MSS. More. Camb. 27. Princip. Jesu Crist in trinite,
Only god in persons three, etc.
Lefe frendys I shall you tell
Of a tale that sometime befell
Far in unkouthe lade,
How a lady had great myschese, etc.

. This is one of the romances called LAIS by the poets of Britany, or Armorica:
as appears from these lines, In romance this gest
A LEY Perhaps ley in the fourth line of sir LAUNFAL may mean Lay in this
sense. See note at the beginning of the FIRST DISSERTATION.
of BRITAYN called I wys, etc.
And that it is a translation, appears from the reference to an original, "The
Romans tells so." I will however give the outlines of the story, which is not
uninteresting, nor inartificially constructed.

Dioclesian, a powerful emperor in Germany, has a rupture with Barnard earl of
Toulouse, concerning boundaries of territory. Contrary to the repeated
persuasions of the empress, who is extremely beautiful, and famous for her
conjugal fidelity, he meets the earl, with a numerous army, in a pitched
battle, to decide the quarrel. The earl is victorious, and carries home a great
multitude of prisoners, the most respectable of which is sir Tralabas of Turkey,
whom he treats as his companion. In the midst of their festivities they talk of
the beauties of the empress; the earl's curiosity is inflamed to see so
matchless a lady, and he promises liberty to sir Tralabas, if he can be
conducted unknown to the emperor's court, and obtain a sight of her without
discovery. They both set forward, the earl disguised like a hermit. When they
arrive at the emperor's court, sir Tralabas proves false: treacherously
imparts the secret to the empress that he has brought with him the earl of
Toulouse in disguise, who is enamoured of her celebrated beauty; and proposes
to take advantage of so fair an opportunity of killing the emperor's great and
avowed enemy. She rejects the proposal with indignation, injoyns the knight not
to communicate the secret any farther, and desires to see the earl next day in
the chapel at mass. The next day the earl in his hermit's weeds is conveniently
placed at mass. At leaving the chapel, he asks an alms of the empress; and she
gives him forty florins and a ring. He receives the present of the ring with
the highest satisfaction, and although obliged to return home, in point of
prudence, and to avoid detection, comforts himself with this reflection.

Well is me, I have thy grace,
Of the to have this thing!
If ever I have grace of the,
That any love between us be,
This may be a TOKENYNG.
He then returns home. The emperor is called into some distant country; and
leaves his consort in the custody of two knights, who attempting to gain her
love without success, contrive a stratagem to defame her chastity. She is
thrown into prison, and the emperor returns unexpectedly The emperor's
disappointment is thus described. Anon to the chamber went he,
He longyd sore his wife to se,
That was so sweet a wight:
He called them that should her keep,
Where is my wif is she on sleep?
How farys that byrd so bright?
The traitors answered anon,
And ye wi^t how she had done, etc. --
The young knight sir Artour,
That was her hervour, etc.
For bale his armies abroad he sprede,
And sell in swoone on his bed.

, in consequence of a vision. The tale of the two treacherous knights is
believed, and she is sentenced to the flames: yet under the restriction, that
if a champion can be found who shall foil the two knights in battle, her honor
shall be cleared, and her life saved. A challenge is published in all parts of
the world; and the earl of Toulouse, notwithstanding the animosities which
still subsist between him and the emperor, privately undertakes her quarrel.
He appears at the emperor's court in the habit of a monk, and obtains
permission to act as confessor to the empress, in her present critical
situation. In the course of the confession, she protests that she was always
true to the emperor; yet owns that once she gave a ring to the earl of
Toulouse. The supposed confessor pronounces her innocent of the charge brought
against her; on which one of the traitorous knights affirms^ that the monk was
suborned to publish this confession, and that he deserved to be consumed in the
same fire which was prepared for the lady. The monk pretending that the honor
of his religion and character was affected by this insinuation, challenges both
the knights to combat: they are conquered; and the empress, after this trial,
is declared innocent. He then openly discovers himself to be the earl of
Toulouse, the emperor's ancient enemy. A solemn reconciliation ensues. The
earl is appointed seneschal of the emperor's domain. The emperor lives only
three years, and the earl is married to the empress.

In the execution of this performance, our author was obliged to be concise, as
the poem was intended to be sung to the harp. Yet, when he breaks through this
restraint, instead of dwelling on some of the beautiful situations which ^he
story affords, he is diffuse in displaying trivial and unimportant
circumstances. These popular poets are never so happy, as when they are
describing a battle or a feast.

It will not perhaps be deemed impertinent to observe, that about this period
the minstrels were often more amply paid than the clergy. In this age, as in
more enlightened times, the people loved better to be pleased than instructed.
During many of the years of the reign of Henry the sixth, particularly in the
year 1430, at the annual feast of the fraternity of the HOLY CROSS at
Abingdon, a town in Berkshire, twelve priests each received four pence for
singing a dirge: and the same number of minstrels were rewarded each with two
shillings and four pence, beside diet and horse-meat. Some of these minstrels
came only from Maydenhithe, or Maidenhead, a town at no great distance in the
same county Hearne's Lib. Nig. Scacc. APPEND. p. 598.
. In the year 1441, eight priests were hired from Coventry to assist in
celebrating a yearly obit in the church of the neighboring priory of Maxtoke;
as were six minstrels, called MIMI, belonging to the family of lord Clinton,
who lived in the adjoining castle of Maxtoke, to sing, harp, and play, in the
hall of the monastery, during the extraordinary refection allowed to the monks
on that anniversary. Two shillings were given to the priests, and four to the
minstrels Ex Computis Prioris Priorat. de Max^ock. penes me. [See supr. vol. i.
p. 90.] "Dat. sex Mimis domini Clynton cantantibus, citharisantibus, et
ludentibus, in aula in dicta Pietantia, iiii. s."
: and the latter are said to have supped in camera picta, or the painted
chamber of the convent, with the subprior "Mimis cenantibus in camera picta cum
suppriore eodem tempore," [the sum ^bliterated.]
, on which occasion the chamberlain furnished eight massy tapers of wax Ex
comp. Camerarii, ut supr.
. That the gratuities allowed to priests, even if learned, for their labors,
in the same age of devotion, were extremely slender, may be collected from
other expenses of this priory Ex comp. praedict.
. In the same year, the prior gives only sixpence Worth about five shillings of
our pre^ent money.
for a sermon, to a DOCTOR PRAEDICANS, or an itinerant doctor in theology of
one of the mendicant orders, who went about preaching to the religious houses.

We are now arrived at the reign of king Edward the fourth, who acceded to the
throne in the year 1461 I know not whether it is worth mentioning, that a
metrical Dialogue between God and the penitent Soul, belonging to the preceding
reign, is preserved at Caius college, Cambridge. Pr. "Our gracious lord prince
of pite." MSS. E. 147. 6. With other pieces of the kind. The writer, William
Lichfield, a doctor in theology, shone most in prose; and is said to have
written, with his own hand, 3083 English sermons. See T. Gascoign, (MS.)
Diction. V. PRAEDICATOR. He died 1447. See Stowe, Land. 251. 386. Newcourt, i.
819.
. But before I proceed in my series, I will employ the remainder of this
section in fixing the reader's attention on an important circumstance, now
operating in its full extent, and therefore purposely reserved for this period,
which greatly contributed to the improvement of our literature, and
consequently of our poetry: I mean the many translations of Latin books,
especially classics, which the French had been making for about the two last
centuries, and were still continuing to make, into their own language. In order
to do this more effectually, I will collect into one view the most
distinguished of these versions: not solicitous about those notices on this
subject which have before occurred incidentally; nor scrupulous about the
charge of anticipation, which, to prepare the reader, I shall perhaps incur by
lengthening this enquiry, for the sake of comprehension, beyond the limits of
the period just assigned. In the mean time it may be pertinent to premise, that
from the close communication which formerly subsisted between England and
France, manuscript copies of many of these translations, elegantly written, and
often embellished with the most splendid illuminations and curious miniatures,
were presented by the translators or their patrons to the kings of England; and
that they accordingly appear at present among the royal manuscripts in the
British Museum. Some of these, however, were transcribed, if not translated, by
command of our kings; and others brought into England, and placed in the royal
library, by John duke of Bedford, regent of France.

It is not consistent with my design, to enumerate the Latin legends, rituals,
monastic rules, chronicles, and historical parts of the bible, such as the BOOK
OF KINGS and the MACCABEES, which were looked upon as stories of chivalry As
"Plusieurs Battles des Roys d'Israel en contre les Philistien^ et Assyrien^,
etc." Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 19 D. 1. 7.
, translated by the French before the year 1200. These soon became obsolete:
and are, besides, too deeply tinctured with the deplorable superstition and
barbarity of their age, to bear a recital I must however except their
LAPIDAIRE, a poem on precious stones, from the Latin of Marbodeus; and the
BESTIAIRE, a set of metrical fables, from the Latin Esop. These however ought
to be looked upon as efforts of their early poetry, rather than translations.
. I will therefore begin with the thirteenth century. In the year 1210, Peter
Comestor's Or Le Mangeur, because he devoured the scriptures.
HISTORIA SCHOLASTICA, a sort of breviary of the old and new testament,
accompanied with elaborate expositions from Josephus and many pagan writers, a
work compiled at Paris about the year 1175, and so popular, as not only to be
taught in schools, but even to be publicly read in the churches with its
glosses, was translated into French by Guiart des Moulins, a canon of Air The
French was first published, without date or place, in two tomes. With old
wood-cuts. Vossius says that the original was abridged by Gualter Hunte, an
English Carmelite, about the year 1460. Hist. Lat. lib. iii. c. 9. p. 197.
edit. Amst. 1689. fol. It was translated into German rhymes about 1271. Sander.
Bibl. Belg. page 285. There are numerous and very sumptuous manuscripts of this
work in the British Museum. One of them, with exquisite paintings, was ordered
to be written by Edward the fourth at Bruges, 1470. MSS. Reg. 15 D. i. Another
is written in 1382. Ibid. 19. B. xvii.
. About the same time, some of the old translations into French made in the
eleventh century by Thibaud de Vernon, canon of Rouen, were retouched: and the
Latin legends of many lives of saints, particularly of saint George, of Thomas
a Beckett, and the martyrdom of saint Hugh, a child murdered in 1206 by a Jew
at Lincoln See Chaucer, PRIORES. T. p. 144. col. 2. v. 3193.
, were reduced into French verse. These pieces, to which I must add a metrical
version of the bible from Genesis to Hezekiah, by being written in rhyme, and
easy to be sung, soon became popular, and produced the desired impression on
the minds of the people It is rather beside my purpose to speak particularly of
some of the divine Offices now made French, and of the churchhymns.
. They were soon followed by the version of AEGIDIUS DE REGIMINE PRINCIPUM See
modo supr. p. 39. And MSS. Reg. 15 E. vi. 11. And ibid. 19 B. i. And ibid. 19
A. xx. "Stephanus Fortis clericus scripsit, An. 1395."
, by Henri de Gauchi. Dares Phrygius, The SEVEN SAGES OF ROME by Hebers See
supr. vol. i. p. 462.
, Eutropius He was early translated into Greek at Constantinople.
, and Aristotle's SECRETUM SECRETORUM Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 20 B. iv. 3.
, appeared about the same time in French. To say nothing of voluminous versions
of PANDECTS and feudal COUTUMES See a French JUSTINIAN, etc. Brit. Mus. MSS.
Reg. 20 D. ix. 2. 3. A manuscript before 1300.
, Michael de Harnes translated Turpin's CHARLEMAGNE in the year 1207 Caxton
printed a life of CHARLES THE GREAT, 1485.
. It was into prose, in opposition to the practice which had long prevailed of
turning Latin prose into French rhymes. This piece, in compliance with an age
addicted to romantic fiction, our translator undoubtedly preferred to the more
rational and sober Latin historians of Charlemagne and of France, such as
Gregory of Tours, Fredegaire, and Eginhart. In the year 1245, the SPECULUM
MUNDI, a system of theology, the seven sciences, geography, and natural
philosophy One of the most eminent astronomers in this work is the poet Virgil.

I know not when the LE LIVRE ROYAL, a sort of manual, was made French. The
Latin original was compiled at the command of Philip le Bell, king of France,
in 1279. Pref. to Caxton's Engl. Translat. 1484. fol.


, was translated at the instance of the duke of Berry and Auvergne See Brit.
Mus. MSS. Reg. 19 A. ix. This version was translated into English, and printed,
by Caxton, 1480.
. Among the royal manuscripts, is a sort of system of pious tracts, partly of
ritual offices, compiled in Latin by the confessors of Philip in 1279,
translated into French Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 19 C. ii.
; which translation queen Isabel ordered to be placed in the church of saint
Innocents at Paris, for the use of the people.

The fourteenth century was much more fertile in French translation. The spirit
of devotion, and indeed of this species of curiosity, raised by saint Louis,
after a short intermission, rekindled under king John and Charles the fifth. I
pass over the prose and metrical translations of the Latin bible in the years
1343, and 1380, by Mace, and Raoul de Presles. Under those reigns, saint
Austin, Cassianus, and Gregory the Great See Brit. M^s. MSS. Reg. 15 D. v. 1. 2.
, were translated into French; and they are the first of the fathers that
appeared in a modern tongue. Saint Gregory's HOMELIES are by an anonymous
translator Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 15 D. v. 1. 20 D. v.
. His DIALOGUES were probably translated by an English ecclesiastic It is
supposed that they were rendered by an Englishman, or one living in England, as
the translator's name is marked by an A. And as there is a prayer in the
manuscript to saint Frideswide, an Oxford saint. Mem. Litt. xvii. p 735. 4to.
It is very rare that we find the French tran^^^ting from us. Yet Fauchett
mentions a French poetess, named Marie de France, who translated the Fables of
Esop MORALIZED, from English into French, about the yea^ 1310. But this was to
gratify a com^e Guillaume, with whom she was in love, and who did not perhaps
understand English. See Fauchett, RECUEIL, lxxxiv. p. 163. edit. 1581. I know
nothing of the fables.
. Saint Austin's DE CIVITATE DEI was translated by Raoul de Presles, who acted
professedly both as confessor and translator to Charles the fifth Brit. Mus.
MSS. Reg. 17 F. iii. With pictures. And 14 D. i.
, about the year 1374. During the work he received a yearly pension of six
hundred livres from that liberal monarch, the first founder of a royal library
in France, at whose command it was undertaken. It is accompanied with a prolix
commentary, valuable only at present as preserving anecdotes of the opinions,
manners, and literature, of the writer's age; and from which I am tempted to
give the following specimen, as it strongly illustrates the ancient state of
the French stage, and demonstrably proves that comedy and tragedy were now
known only by name in France See supr. vol. i. p. 235.
. He observes, that Comedies are so denominated from a room of entertainment,
or from those places, in which banquets were accustomed to be closed with
singing, called in Greek CONIAS: that they were like those jeux or plays, which
the minstrel, le Chanteur, exhibits in halls or other public places, at a
feast: and that they were properly styled INTERLUDIA, as being presented
between the two courses. Tragedies, he adds, were spectacles, resembling those
personages which at this day we see acting in the LIFE and PASSION of a matyr
Chapter viii. live. ii.
. This shows that only the religious drama now subsisted in France. But to
proceed, Cassianus's COLLATIONES PATRUM, or the CONFERENCES, was translated by
John Goulain, a Carmelite monk, about 1363. Two translations of that
theological romance Boethius's CONSOLATION, one by the celebrated Jean de Meun,
author of the ROMANCE OF THE ROSE, existed before the year 1340. Others of the
early Latin christian writers were ordered to be turned into French by queen
Jane, about 1332. But finding that the archbishop of Rouen, who was
commissioned to execute this arduous task, did not understand Latin, she
employed a mendicant friar. About the same period, and under the same
patronage, the LEGENDA AUREA, written by James de Voragine, archbishop of
Genoa, about the year 1260, that inexhaustible repository of religious fable In
the year 1555, the learned Claud. Espence was obliged to make a public
recantation for calling it LEGENDA FERREA. Thuan. sub. ann. Laun. Hist. Gymnas.
Navarr. p. 704. 297.
, was translated by Jehan de Vignay, a monk hospitalar Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 19
B. xvii. The copy was written 1382. This version seems to be the same which
Caxton translated, and printed, 1483. While it was printing, William lord
Arundel gave Caxton annually a buck in summer and a do in winter.
. The same translator gave also a version of a famous ritual entitled SPECULUM
ECCLESIAE, or the MIRROR OF THE CHURCH, of CHESS MORALIZED, written by Jacobus
de Casulis Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 19 C. xi. 1. This version was translated in
English, and printed, by Caxton, 1474.
: and of Odoricus's VOYAGE INTO THE EAST Ibid. 19 D. i. 4. 5.
. Thomas Benoit, a prior of saint Genevieve gratified the religious with a
translation into a more intelligible language of some Latin liturgic pieces
about the year 1330. But his chief performance was a translation into French
verse of the RULE OF SAINT AUSTIN. This he undertook merely on a principle of
affection and charity, for the edification of his pious brethren who did not
understand Latin. Pour l'amour de vous, tres chers freres,
En Francois ai traduit ce Latin.
And in the preface he says, "Or scai-je que plusieurs de vous n' entendent pas
bien LATIN auquel il fut chose necessaire de la rieule [regle] entendre."
Benoit's successor in the priorate of saint Genevieve was not equally
attentive to the discipline and piety of his monks. Instead of translating
monkish Latin, and enforcing the salutary regulations of saint Austin, he wrote
a system of rules for BALLAD-WRITING, L'ART DE DICTIER BALLADE ET RONDELS, the
first Art of poetry that ever appeared in France.

Among the moral books now translated, I must not omit the SPIRITUELLE AMITY
of John of Meun, from the Latin of Aldred an English monk It is mentioned in
the cata^ogue of his traductions, at the beginning of his C^ns^lation
philosophique. I am not acquainted with the English monk.
. In the same style of mystic piety was the treatise of CONSOLATION, written in
Latin, by Vincent de Beauvais, and sent to saint Louis, translated in the year
1374. In the year 1340, Henri de Suson, a German dominican and a mystic doctor,
wrote a most comprehensive treatise called HOROLOGIUM SAPIENTIAE. This was
translated into French by a monk of saint Francois Englished, and printed by
Caxton, very early.
. Even the officers of the court of Charles the fifth were seized with the
ardour of translating religious pieces, no less than the ecclesiastics. The
most elegant tract of moral Latinity translated into French, was the celebrated
book of our countryman John of Salisbury, DE NUGIS CURIALIUM. This version was
made by Denis Soulechart, a learned Cordelier, about the year 1360.
Notwithstanding the EPISTLES of Abelard and Eloisa, not only from the celebrity
of Abelard as a Parisian theologist, but on account of the interesting history
of that unfortunate pair, must have been as commonly known, and as likely to be
read in the original, as any Latin book in France, they were translated into
French in this century, by John of Meun; who prostituted his abilities when he
relinquished his own noble inventions, to interpret the pedantries of monks,
schoolmen, and proscribed classics. I think he also translated Vegetius, who
will occur again There is a copy written in 1284, [1384,] Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg.
20 B. xv. Often, ibid. John of Meun is also said to have translated MIRABILIA
HIBERNIAE.
. In the library of saint Genevieve, there is, in a sort of system of religion,
a piece called JERARCHIE, translated from Latin into French at the command of
our queen Elinor in the year 1297, by a French friar "Cette JERARCHIE translata
friar J^han de Pentham de Latin en Francoys, a la request la r^ine
d'Engleterre Alienore femme le roy Edward." There is also this note in the
manuscript. "Cest livre resigna friar Jordan de Kyngestone a la commune des
freres Menurs de Southampton, par la volunte du grant friar Willame Notington
[f. Northington in Hampshire,] ministre d'Engleterre... l'an. de grace M. CCC.
XVII."
. I must not however forget, that amidst this profusion of treatises of
religion and instruction, civil history found a place. That immense chaos of
events real and fictitious, the HISTORICAL MIRROR of Vincent de Beauvais, was
translated by Jehan de Vignay above mentioned Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 1^ E. i.
. One is not surprised that the translator of the GOLDEN LEGEND should make no
better choice.

The desolation produced in France A curious picture of the dis^racted state of
France is recorded by Petrarch. The king, with the Dauphin, returning from his
captivity in England, in passing through Picardy, was obliged to make a
pecuniary bargain with the numerous robbers that infested that country, to
travel unmolested^ VIE PETR. iii. 543.
by the victorious armies of the English, was instantly succeeded by a
flourishing state of letters. King John, having indulged his devotion, and
satisfied his conscience, by procuring numerous versions of books written on
sacred subjects, at length turned his attention to the classics. His ignorance
of Latin was a fortunate circumstance, as it produced a curiosity to know the
treasures of Latin literature. He employed Peter Bercheur, prior of saint Eloi
at Paris, an eminent theologist, to translate Livy into French See Henault,
NOUVEL. ABR^G. HIST. FR. p. 229. edit. 1752. 4to. And VIE DE PERTRARQUE, iii.
p. 547.
; notwithstanding that author had been anathematised by pope Gregory. But so
judicious a choice was undoubtedly dictated by Petrarch, who regarded Livy with
a degree of enthusiasm, who was now resident at the court of France, and who
perhaps condescended to direct and superintend the translation. The translator
in his Latin work called REPERTORIUM, a sort of general dictionary, in which
all things are proved to be allegorical, and reduced to a moral meaning, under
the word ROMA, records this great attempt in the following manner. "TITUM
LIVIUM, ad requisitionem domini Johannis inclyti Francorum regis, non sine
labor et sudoribus, in linguam Gallicam transtuli This was the translation of
Livy, which, with other books, the duke of Bedford, regent of France, about
1425, sent into England to Humphrey duke of Gloucester. The copy had been a
present to the king of France. Mem. Litt. ii. 747. 4to. See the SECOND
DISSERTATION. In the Sorbonne library at Paris, there is a most valuable
manuscript of this version in two folio volumes. In the front of each book are
various miniatures and pictures, most beautifully finished. Dan. Maichel de
Bibliothec. Paris. p. 79. There is a copy, transcribed about the time the
translation was finished. Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 15 D. vi. DES FAIS DE ROMANS.
With pictures.
." To this translation we must join those of Sallust, Lucan, and Caesar: all
which seem to have been finished before the year 1365. This revival of a taste
for Roman history, most probably introduced and propagated by Petrarch during
his short stay in the French court, immediately produced a Latin historical
compilation called ROMULEON, by an anonymous gentleman of France; who soon
found it necessary to translate his work into the vernacular language. Valerius
Maximus could not remain long untranslated. A version of that favorite author,
begun by Simon de Hesdin, a monk, in 1364, was finished by Nicolas de Gonesse,
a master in theology, 1401 Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 18 E. iii. iv. With elegant
delineations, and often in the same library.
. Under the last-mentioned reign, Ovid's Metamorphoses MORALIZED Perhaps
written in Latin by Joannes Grammaticus, about 1070. See the SECOND
DISSERTATION.
were translated by Guillaume de Nangis: and the same poem was translated into
French verse, at the request of Jane de Bourbonne, afterward the consort of
Charles the fifth, by Philip de Vitri, bishop of Meaux, Petrarch's friend, who
was living in 1361 There was a French Ovid in duke Humphrey's library at
Oxford. See supr. p. 45. And Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 17 E. iv. 1. This version, as
I apprehend, is the same that Caxton translated into English prose, and
printed, 1480. A manuscript is in Bibl. Pepys Magd. Coll. Cant. Cat. MSS. Angl.
etc. tom. ii. N. 6791.
. A bishop would not have undertaken this work, had he not perceived much moral
doctrine couched under the pagan stories. Jean le Fevre, by command of Charles
the fifth, translated the poem DE VETULA, falsely ascribed to Ovid Polycarpus
Leyserus supposes this piece to be the forgery of one Leo Protonotarius, an
officer in the court at Constantinople, who writes the preface. Hist. Poes.
Med. Aev. p. 2089. He proves the work supposititious, from its several
Arabicisms and scrip^ural expressions, etc. Brawardine cites many lines from
it, Advers. Pelag. p. 33. As does Bacon, in his astrological tracts. It is
condemned by Bid as heretical. In Boeth. de Trinit. Seldom intended a
DISSERTATION on this forgery^ De Synedr. iii. 16. It is in hexameters, in three
books.
. Cicero's RHETORICA appeared in French by master John de Antioche, at the
request of one friar W^lliam, in the year 1383. About the same time, some of
Aristotle's pieces were translated from Latin; his PROBLEMS by Evrard de Conti,
physician to Charles the fifth: and his ETHICS and POLITICS by Nicholas
d'Oresme, while canon of Rouen. This was the most learned man in France, and
tutor to Charles the fifth; who, in consequence of his instructions, obtained a
competent skill in Latin, and in the rules of the grammar Christin. VIE CHARLES
V.
. Other Greek classics, which now began to be known by being translated into
Latin, became still more familiarised, especially to general readers, by being
turned into French. Thus Poggius Florentinus's recent Latin version of
Xenophon's CYROPEDIA was translated into French by Vasque de Lucerie, 1370
Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 17 E. v. 1. And 16 G. ix. Wi^h pictures.
. The TACTICS of Vegetius, an author who frequently confounds the military
practices of his own age with those of antiquity, appeared under^ the title of
LIVRES DES FAIS D'ARMES ET DE CHEVALLERIE, by Christina of Pisa MSS. Reg. 19 B.
xviii. etc. Vegetius was early translated into all the modern languages. There
is an English one, probably by John Trevisa, as it is addressed to his patron
lord Berkeley, A. D. 1408. MSS. Digb. 233. Prin^. "In old time it was the
manner." There is a translation of Vegetius, written at Rhodes, "die 25
Octobris, 1459, per Johannem Newton." ad cal^. Bibl. Bodl. K. 53. Laud. MSS.
Christina's version was translated, and printed, by Caxton, 1489. See supr. p.
67.
. Petrarch DE REMEDIIS UTRIUSQUE FORTUNAE, a set of Latin dialogues, was
translated, not only by Nicholas d'Oresme, but by two of the officers of the
royal household See Niceron, tom. 28. p. 384.
, in compliment to Petrarch at his leaving France Mons. l'Ab. Lebeuf says
Seneca instead of P^trarch. Mem. Litt. xvii. p. 752.

I must not forget to observe, that several whole books in Brunetto's TRESOR
consist of translations from Aristotle, Tully, and Pliny, into French. Brunetto
was a Florentine, and the master of Dante. He died in 1295. The TRESOR was a
sort of Encyclopede, exhibiting a course of practical and theoretic philosophy,
of divi^ity, cosmography, geography, history sacred and profane, physics,
ethics, rhetoric, and politics. It was written in French by Brunetto du^ing his
residence in France: but he afterward translated it into Italian, and it has
been translated by others into Latin. It was the model and foundation of
Bartholomeus of the PROPERTIES OF THINGS, of Berch^ur's REPERTORIUM, and of
many other works of the same species, which soon followed. See Brit. Mus. MSS.
Reg. 17 E. i. It will occur again.


. Many philosophical pieces, particularly in astrology, of which Charles the
fifth was remarkably fond, were translated before the and of the fourteenth
century. Among these, I must not pass over the QUADRIPARTITUM of Ptolemy, by
Nicholas d'Oresme; the AGRICULTURE DES PROUFFITZ CHAMPESTRES ET RURAUX. Brit.
Mus. MSS. Reg. 14 E.
, or LIBRI RURALIUM COMMODORUM, of Peter de Crescentiis, a physician of
Bononia, about the year 1285, by a nameless friar preacher In twelve books. See
Jacob. Quetif. tom. i. p. 666.
; and the book DE PROPRIETATIBUS RERUM of Bartholomew Anglicus, the Pliny of
the monks, by John Corbichon, an Augustine monk Leland says, that this
translation is elegant; and that he saw it in duke Humfrey's library at Oxford.
Script. Brit. cap. ccclxviii. See Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 17 E. iii. With
pictures. Ibid. 15 E. ii. Where the translation is assigned to the year 1362.
The writing of the manuscript, to 1482. With pictures.
. I have seen a French manuscript of Guido de Colonna's Trojan romance^ the
handwriting of which belongs to this century Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 16 F. ix. A
new translation seems to have been made by Rauol le Feure, in 1464. Englished
by Caxton, and printed, 1471. Caxton's GODEFROY OF BOLOGNE, translated from the
French, and printed 1481, had a Latin original. The French, a fine copy, is in
Brit. Mus. 17 F. v. MSS. Reg. Saepiu^ ibid. [See s^pr. p. 99.]
.

In the fifteenth century it became fashionable among the French, to polish and
reform their old rude translations made two hundred years before; and to reduce
many of their metrical versions into prose. At the same time, the rage of
translating ecclesiastical tracts began to decrease. The latter circumstance
was partly owing to the introduction of better books, and partly to the
invention of printing. Instead of procuring laborious and expensive
translations of the ancient fathers, the printers, who multiplied greatly
toward the close of this century, found their advantage in publishing new
translations of more agreeable books, or in giving ancient versions in a modern
dress I take this opportunity of observing, that one of these was the romance
of sir LANCELOT DU LAC, translated from the Latin by Robert de Borron, at the
command of our Henry the second or third. See supr. vol. i. p. 114. This new
LANCELOT, I believe, is the same which was printed at Paris by Antony Verard,
1494. In three vast folio volumes. Another, is the romance of GYRON LE
COURTOIS, translated also from Latin, at the command of the same monarch, by
Lucas, or Luce, chevalier du Chateau du Gast, or Gat, or Gal, and printed by
Verard as above. See Lenglet, Bibl. Romans ii. p. 117. The old GUIRON LE COURTOIS
is said to be translated by "LUCE chevalier seigneur du chasteau du Gal,
[perhaps Sal. an abreviation for Salisbury,] voisin prochain du ^ire du
Sablieres, par le commendement de tres noble et tres puissant prince M. le roy
Henry jadis roy d'Angleterre." Bibl. Reg. Paris. Cod. 7586. See su^r. vol. i.
p. 115. Notes.
. Yet in this century some of the more recent doctors of the church were
translated. Not to mention the epistles of saint Jerome, which Antoine Dufour, a
Dominican friar, presented in French to Anne de Bretagne, consort to king
Charles the eighth, we find saint Anselm's CUR DEUS HOMO Written in 1098.
, The LAMENTATIONS OF SAINT BERNARD, The SUM OF THEOLOGY of Albertus Magnus,
The PRICK OF DIVINE LOVE Supr. vol. i. p. 77.
of saint Bonaventure a seraphic doctor He flourished in Italy, about the year
1270. The enormous magni^icence of his funeral deserves notice, more than any
anecdote of his life; as it paints the high devotion of the times, and the
attention formerly paid to theological literature. There were present pope
Gregory the tenth, the emperor of Greece by several Greek noblemen his
proxies, Baldwin the second the Latin eastern emperor, James king of Arragon,
the patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch, all the cardinals, five hundred
bishops and archbishops, sixty abbots, more than a thousand prelates and
priests of lower rank, the ambassadors of many kings and potentates, the
deputies of the Tartars and other nations, and an innumerable concourse of
people of all orders and degrees. The sepulchral ceremonies were celebrated
with the most consummate pomp, and the funeral oration was pronounced by a
future pope. Miraei Auctar. Script. Eccles. page 72. edit. Fabric. [See supr.
vol. i. p. 77.]
, with other pieces of the kind, exhibited in the French language before the
year 1480, at the petition and under the patronage of many devout duchesses.
Yet in the mean time, the lives of saints and sacred history gave way to a
species of narrative more entertaining and not less fabulous. Little more than
Josephus, and a few MARTYRDOMS, were now translated from the Latin into French.

The truth is, the French translators of this century were chiefly employed on
profane authors. At its commencement, a French abridgement of the three first
decads of Livy was produced by Henri Romain a canon of Tournay. In the year
1416, Jean de Courci, a knight of Normandy, gave a translation of some Latin
chronicle, a HISTORY OF THE GREEKS AND ROMANS, entitled BOUQUASSIERE. In 1403,
Jean de Courteauisse, a doctor in theology at Paris, translated Seneca on the
FOUR CARDINAL VIRTUES It is supposititious. It was forged, about the year 560,
by Martianus an archbishop of Portugal, whom Gregory of Tours calls the most
eminent writer of his time. Hist. Franc. v. 38. It was a great favorite of the
theological ages.
. Under the reign of king Charles the seventh, Jean Cossa translated the
CHRONOLOGY of Mattheus Palmerius a learned Florentine, and a writer of Italian
poetry in imitation of Dante. In the dedication to Jane the third, queen of
Jerusalem, and among other titles countess of Provence, the translator
apologizes for supposing her highness to be ignorant of Latin; when at the same
time he is fully convinced, that a lady endowed with so much natural grace,
must be perfectly acquainted with that language. "Mais pour ce que le vulgar
Francoys est plus commun, j' ai pris peine y translater ladite oeuvre." Two
other translations were offered to Charles the seventh in the year 1445. One,
of the FIRST PUNIC war of Leonard of Arezzo, an anonymous writer, who does not
choose to publish his name a cause de sa petitesse; and the STRATAGEMS of
Frontinus, often cited by John of Salisbury, and mentioned in the Epistles of
Peter of Blois Epist. 94.
, by Jean de Rouroy, a Parisian theologist. Under Louis the eleventh, Sebastian
Mamerot of Soissons, in the year 1466, attempted a new translation of the
ROMULEON: and he professes, that he undertook it solely with a view of
improving or decorating the French language I am not sure whether this is not
much the same as LE GRANDE HISTOIRE CAESAR, etc. Taken from Lucan, Su^tonius,
Orosius, etc. Written at Bruges at the command of our Edward the fourth, in
1479. That is, ordered to be written by him. A manuscript with pictures. MSS.
Reg. 17 F. ii. 1. Brit. Mus. But see ibid. ROMELEON, ou des Faits des Romans,
in ten b^oks. With pictures. MSS. Reg. 19 E. v. See also 20 C. i.
.

Many French versions of classics appeared in this century. A translation of
Quintus Curtius is dedicated to Charles duke of Burgundy, in 1468 Brit. Mus.
MSS. Reg. 17 F. i. With beautiful pictures.
. Six years afterward, the same liberal patron commanded Cesar's COMMENTARIES
to be translated by Jean du Chesne Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 16 G. viii. With
pictures. Another appeared by Robert Gaguen in 1485.
. Terence was made French by Guillaume Rippe, the king's secretary, in the year
1466. The following year a new translation of Ovid's METAMORPHOSES was executed
by an ecclesiastic of Normandy Perhaps this might be Caxton's copy. See above,
p. 115.
. But much earlier in the century, Laurence Premierfait, mentioned above,
translated, I suppose from the Latin, the OECONOMICS of Aristotle, and Tully's
DE AMICITIA and DE SENECTUTE, before the year 1426 The two latter versions were
translated into English by William Botoner, and John Tiptoft earl of Worcester,
and printed by Caxton, 1481. Botoner presented his manuscript copy to William
of Waynflete bishop of Winchester in 1473. See supr. p. 62. Caxton's English
CATO, printed 1483, was from the French. As were his FABLES OF AESOP, printed
1483.
. He is said also to have translated some pieces, perhaps the EPISTLES, of
Seneca Crucimanius mentions a version of Seneca by Premi^rfait, as printed at
Paris, in 1500. Bibl. Gall. p. 287. A translation of Seneca's DE QUATUOR
VIRTUTIBUS CARDINALIBUS, but supposititious, is given to Premierfait, Brit.
Mus. MSS. Reg. 20 A. xii. Sanders recites the EPISTLES of Seneca, translated
into French by some anonymous writer, at the command of Messire Barthelemi
Siginulfe a nobleman of Naples. Bibl. Cathedr. Tornacens. p. 209. Pieces of
Seneca have been frequently translated into French, and very early.
. Encouraged by this example, Jean de Luxembourgh, Laurence's cotemporary,
translated Tully's Oration against Verres. I must not forget, that Hippocrates
and Galen were translated from Latin into French in the year 1429. The
translator was Jean Tourtier, surgeon to the duke of Bedford, then regent of
France; and he humbly supplicates Rauoul Palvin, confessor and physician to the
duchess, and John Major, first physician to the duke, and graduate en l'estude
d'Auxonford Oxonford. Oxford.
, and master Roullan, physician and astronomer of the university of Paris,
amicably to amend the faults of this translation, which is intended to place
the science and practice of medicine on a new foundation. I presume it was from
a Latin version that the ILIAD, about this period, was translated into French
meter.

Among other pieces that might be enumerated in this century, in the year 1412,
Guillaume de Tignonville, provost of Paris, translated the DICTA PHILOSOPHORUM
Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 19 A. viii. Saepius. ibid. This version was translated
into English by lord Rivers, and printed by Caxton, 1477,
: as did Jean Gallopes dean of the collegiate church of saint Louis, of
Salsoye, in Normandy, the ITER VITAE HUMANAE of Guillaume prior of Chalis See
Labb. Bibl. MSS. p. 317. Bibl. Roman. ii. 236. And Oudin. iii. 976. Guillaum
lived about 1352. Some of the French literary antiquaries suppose this to be a
Latin piece. It is^ however, in French verse, which was reduced into prose by
Gallopes.
. This version, entitled LE PELERINAGE DE LA VIE HUMAN, is dedicated to Jean
queen of Sicily, above mentioned; a duchess of Anjou and a countess of
Provence: who, without any sort of difficulty, could make a transition from the
Life of sir Lancelot to that of saint Austin, and who sometimes quitted the
tribunal of the COURT OF LOVE to confer with learned ecclesiastics, in an age
when gallantry and religion were of equal importance. He also translated, from
the same author, a composition of the same ideal and contemplative cast, called
LE PELERIN DE L'AME, highly esteemed by those visionaries who preferred
religious allegory to romance, which was dedicated to the duke of Bedford I am
not certain, whether this is Caxton's PILGRIMAGE OF THE SOUL, an English
translation from the French, printed in 1483. fol. Ames says, that Antonine
Gerard is the author of the French, which was printed at Paris, 1480. Hist.
Print. p. 34.
. In Bennet college library at Cambridge, there is an elegant illuminated
manuscript of Bonaventure's LIFE OF CHRIST, translated by Gallopes; containing
a curious picture of the translator presenting his version to our Henry the
fifth See ARCHAEOL. vol. ii. p. 194. And Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 16 G. iii. 20 B.
iv. Englished about 1410, and printed by Caxton very early. The English
translator, I believe, is John Morton, an Augustine friar.
. About the same time, but before 1427, Jean de Guerre translated a Latin
compilation of all that was mavelous in Pliny, Solinus, and the OTIA
IMPERIALIA, a book abounding in wonders, of our countryman Gervais of Tilbury
He flourished about the year 1218.
. The French romance, entitled L'ASSAILLANT, was now translated from the Latin
chronicles of the kings of Cologne: and the Latin tract DE BONIS MORIBUS of
Jacobus Magnus, confessor to Charles the seventh, about the year 1422, was made
French See supr. p. 61. There is a version of Boccacio's DE CLARIS MULIERIBUS,
perhaps by Premierfait, Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 20 C. v.
. Rather earlier, Jean de Premierfait translated BOCCACIO DE CASIBUS VIRORUM
ILLUSTRIUM This version was Englished, and printed, by Caxton, 1487.
. Nor shall I be thought to deviate too far from my detail, which is confined
to Latin originals, when I mention here a book, the translation of which into
French conduced in an eminent degree to circulate materials for poetry: this is
Boccacio's DECAMERON, which Premierfait also translated, at the command of
queen Jane of Navarre, who seem^ to have made no kind of conditions about
suppressing the licentious stories, in the year 1414 See Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg.
19 E. i. Where it is said that the Decameron wa^ first translated into Latin.
It is not very literal. It was printed at Paris 1485. fol. Again, ibid. 1534.
8vo. It was again translated by Antoine le Macon, fol. Paris 1543. And often
afterward.
.

I am not exactly informed, when the ENEID of Virgil was translated into a sort
of metrical romance or history of Eneas, under the title of LIVRE D' ENEIDOS
COMPILE PAR VIRGILE, by Guillaume de Roy. But that translation was printed at
Lions in 1483, and appears to have been finished not many years before. Among
the translator's historical additions, are the description of the first
foundation of Troy by Priam, and the succession of Ascanius and his descendants
after the death of Turnus. He introduces a digression upon Boccacio, for giving
in his FALL OF PRINCES an account of the death of Dido, different from that in
the fourth book of the Eneid. Among his omissions, he passes over Eneas's
descent into hell, as a tale manifestly forged, and not to be believed by any
rational reader: as if many other parts of the translator's story were not
equally fictitious and incredible It was translated, and printed, by Caxton,
1490.
.

The conclusion intended to be drawn from this long digression is obvious. By
means of these French translations, our countrymen, who understood French much
better than Latin, became acquainted with many useful books which they would
not otherwise have known. With such assistances, a commodious access to the
classics was opened, and the knowledge of ancient literature facilitated and
familiarised in England, at a much earlier period than is imagined; and at a
time, when little more than the productions of speculative monks, and
irrefragrable doctors, could be obtained or were studied. Very few Englishmen,
I will venture to pronounce, had read Livy before the translation of Bercheur
was imported by the regent duke of Bedford. It is certain that many of the
Roman poets and historians were now read in England, in the original. But the
Latin language was for the most part confined to a few ecclesiastics. When
these authors, therefore, appeared in a language almost as intelligible as the
English, they fell into the hands of illiterate and common readers, and
contributed to sow the seeds of a national erudition, and to form a popular
taste. Even the French versions of the religious, philosophical, historical,
and allegorical compositions of those more enlightened Latin writers who
flourished in the middle ages, had their use, till better books came into
vogue: pregnant as they were with absurdities, they communicated instruction on
various and new subjects, enlarged the field of information, and promoted the
love of reading, by gratifying that growing literary curiosity which now began
to want materials for the exercise of its operations. How greatly our poets in
general availed themselves of these treasures, we may collect from this
circumstance only: even such writers as Chaucer and Lydgate, men of education
and learning, when they translate a Latin author, appear to execute their work
through the medium of a French version. It is needless to pursue this history
of French translation any farther. I have given my reason for introducing it at
all. In the next age, a great and universal revolution in literature ensued;
and the English themselves began to turn their thoughts to translation.

These French versions enabled Caxton, our first printer, to enrich the state
of letters in this country with many valuable publications. He found it no
difficult task, either by himself, or the help of his friends, to turn a
considerable number of these pieces into English, which he printed. Ancient
learning had as yet made too little progress among us, to encourage this
enterprising and industrious artist to publish the Roman autho^s in their
original language It is, however, remarkable, that from the year 1471, in which
Caxton began to print, down to the year 1540, during which period the English
press flourished greatly under the conduct of many industrious, ingenious, and
even learned artists, only the very few following classics, some of which
hardly deserve that name, were printed in England. These were, BOETHIUS de
Consolatione; both Latin and English, for Caxton, without date. The Latin
ESOPIAN Fables, in verse, for Wynkyn de Word, 1503. 4to. [And once or twice
afterward.] TERENCE, with the Comment of Badi^s Ascensius, for the same, 1504.
4to. VIRGIL'S BUCOLICS, for the same, 1512. 4to. [Again, 1533. 4to.] TULLY'S
OFFICES, Latin and English, the translation by Whittington, 1533. 4to. The
university of Oxford, during this period, produced only the first Book of
TULLY'S EPISTLES, at the charge of cardinal Wolsey, without date, or printer's
name. Cambridge not a single classic.

No Greek book, of any^kind, had yet appeared from an English press. I believe
the first Greek characters used in any work printed in England, are in
Linacer's translation of Galen de Temperamentis, printed at Cambridge in 1521,
4to. A few Greek words, and abbreviatures, are here and there introduced. The
printer was John Siberch, a German, a friend of Erasmus, who styles himself
primus UTRIUSQUE linguae in Anglia impressor. There are Greek characters in
some of his other books of this date. But he printed no entire Greek book. In
Linacer's treatise De emendata Structura Latini sermonis, printed by Pinson in
1524, many Greek characters are intermixed. In the sixth book are seven Greek
lines together. But the printer apologizes for his imperfections and
unskillfulness in the Greek types; which, he says, were but recently cast, and
not in a sufficient quantity for such a work. The passage is curious. "Aequo
animo feras siquae literae, in exemplis Hellenismi, vel tonis vel spiritibus
careant. His enim non satts instructus erat typographus, videlicet recens ab eo
fusis ch^racteribus Graecis, nec parata ei copia qua ad hoc agendum opus est."
About the same period of the English press, the same embarrassments appear to
have happened with regard to Hebrew types; which yet were more likely, as that
language was so much less known. In the year 1524, doctor Robert Wakefield,
chaplain to Henry the eighth, published his Oration de laudibus et utilitate
trium linguarum Arabicae, Chald^ic^^, et Hebraicae, etc. 4to. The printer was
Wynkyn de Word; and the author complains, that he was obliged to omit his
whole third part, because the printer had no Hebrew types. Some few Hebrew and
Arabic characters, however, are introduced; but extremely rude, and evidently
cut in wood. They are the first of the sort used in England. This learned
orientalist was instrumental in preserving, at the dissolution of monasteries,
the Hebrew manuscripts of Ramsey abbey, collected by Holbech one of the monks,
together with Holbech's Hebrew Dictionary^ Wood, Hist. Ant. Univ. Oxon. ii.
251. Leland. Scriptor. v. HOLBECCUS.

It was a circumstance favorable at least to English literature, owing indeed
to the general illiteracy of the times, that our first printers were so little
employed on books written in the learned languages. Almost all Caxton's books
are English. The multiplication of English copi^s multiplied English readers,
and these again produced new vernacular writers. The existence of a press
induced many persons to turn authors, who were only qualified to write in their
native tongue.


: and had not the French furnished him with these materials, it is not likely,
that Virgil, Ovid, Cicero, and many other good writers, would by the means of
his press have been circulated in the English tongue, so early as the close of
the fifteenth century ^.

SECT. VII.
THE first poet that occurs in the reign of king Edward the fourth is John
Harding To the preceding reign of Henry the sixth, belongs a poem written by
James the first, king of Scotland, who was atrociously murdered at Perth in
the year 1436. It it entitled the KING'S COMPLAINT, is allegorical, and in the
seven-lined stanza. The subject was suggested to the poet by his own
misfortunes, and the mode of composition by reading Boethius. At the close, he
mentions Gower and Chaucer as seated on the steppys of rhetoryke. Bibl. Bodl.
MSS. Seldom. Archiv. B. 24. chart. fol. [With many pieces of Chaucer.] This
unfortunate monarch was educated while a prisoner in England, at the command of
our Henry the fourth, and the poem was written during his captivity there. The
Scotch historians represent him as a prodigy of erudition. He civilized the
Scotch nation. Among other accomplishments, he was an admirable musician, and
particularly skilled in playing on the harp. See Lesley, DE REB. GEST. SCOT.
lib. vii. p. 257. 266. 267. edit. 1675. 4to. The same historian says, "ita
orator erat, ut ejus dictione nihil fuerit artificiosius: ita POETA, ut carmina
non tam art strinxisse, quam natura sponte fudisse vider^tur. Cui rei ^idem
faciunt carmina diversi generis, quae in rhythmum Scotice illigavit, ^o
artificio, etc." Ibid. p. 267. See also Buchanan, RER. Scot. lib. x. p. 186. --
196. Opp. tom. i. Edingb. 1715. Among other pieces, which I have never seen,
Bale mentions his CANTILENAE SCOTICAE, and RHYT^MI LATINI. Bale, paral. post.
Cent. xiv. 56. page 217. It is not the plan of this work to comprehend and
examine in form pieces of Scotch poetry, except such only as are of singular
merit. Otherwise, our royal bard would have been considered at large, and at
his proper period, in the text. I will, however, add here, two stanzas of the
poem contained in the Seld^n manuscript, which seems to be the most
distinguished of his compositions, and was never printed.

In ver that full of virtue is and good,
When nature first begins her empryse,
That quilham was be cruel frost and flude,
And shoures scharp, oppressed in many wise;
And Cynthius gynneth to arise
Heigh in the est a morrow soft and sweet
Upwards his course to drive in Ari^t^:
Passit bot mydday ^oure grees evyn
Off lenth and bread, his angel wingis bright
He spread upon the ground down fro the hevyn;
That for gladness and confort of the sight,
And with the tiklyng of his hete and light
The tender sloures opinyt thanne and sprad
And in thar nature thankit him for glad.
This piece is not specified by Bale, Dempster, or Mackenzie. See Bale, ubi
supr. Dempster, SCOT. SCRIPTOR. ix. 714. page 380. edit. 1622. Mackenzie, vol.
i. p. 318. Edingb. 1708. fol.

John Major mentions the beginning of some of his other poems, viz. "Yas sen,
etc." And "At Beltayn, etc." Both these poems seem to be written on his wife,
Joan daughter of the duchess of Clarence, with whom he fell in love while ^
prisoner in England. Major mentions besides, a libellus artificiosus, whether
verse or prose I know not, which he wrote on this lady in England, before his
marriage; and which Bale entitles, Super Uxore futura. This historian, who
flourished about the year 1520, adds, that our monarch's CANTILENAE were
commonly sung by the Scotch as the most ^avorite compositions: and that he
played better on the harp, than the most skillful Irish or highland harper.
Major does not enumerate the poem I have h^r^ cited. Major, GEST. SCOT. lib.
vi. cap. xiv. fol. 135. edit. 1521. 4to. Doctor Percy has one of James's
CANTILENAE, in which there is much merit.


. He was of northern extraction, and educated in the family of lord Henry Percy
One William Peeris, a priest, and secretary to the fifth ^a^l of
Northumberland, wrote in verse, William P^^ri^'s discente of the Lord P^rcis.
Pr. Prol. "Cronykills and annuel books of kings." Brit. Mus. MSS. Reg. 18 D. 9.
Then immediately follows (^0) in the same manuscript, perhaps written by the
same author, a collection of metrical proverbs painted in several chambers of
Lekingfield and Wresille, ancient seats of the Percy family.
: and, at twenty-five years of age, hazarded his fortunes as a volunteer at the
decisive battle of Shrewsbury, fought against the Scots in the year 1403. He
appears to have been indefatigable in ^xamining original records, chiefly with
a design of ascertaining the fealty due from the Scottish kings to the crown of
England: and he carried many instruments from Scotland, for the elucidation of
this important enquiry, at the hazard of his life, which he delivered at
different times to the fifth and sixth Henry, and to Edward the fourth Henry
the sixth granted immunities to Harding in several patents for procuring the
Scottish evidences. The earliest is dated ^n. reg. xviii. [1440.] There is a
memorandum in the exchequer, that, in 1458, John Harding of Kyme delivered to
John Talbot, treasurer of England, and chancellor of the exchequer, five
Scottish letters patent, acknowledging various homages of the kings and
nobility of Scotland. They are enclosed in a wooden box in the exchequ^r, kept
in a large chest, under the mark, SCOTIA. HARDING. So says Ashmole [MSS.
Ashmol. 860. p. 186.] from a register in the exchequer called the YELLOW-BOOK.
. These investigations seem to have fixed his mind on the study of our national
antiquities and history. At length he clothed his researches in rhyme, which
he dedicated under that form to king Edward the fourth, and with the title of
The Chronicle of England unto the reign of king Edward the fourth in verse
Printed, at London, 1543. 4to. by Grafton, who has prefixed a dedication of
three leaves in verse to Thoma^ duke of Norfolk. A continuation in prose from
Edward the fourth to Henry the eighth is add^d, probably by Grafton. But s^^
Grafton's Preface to his ABRID^EMENT OF THE CHRONICLE OF ENGLAND, edit^ 1570.
. The copy probably presented to the king, although it exhibits at the end the
arms of Henry Percy earl of Northumberland, most elegantly transcribed on
vellum, and adorned with superb illuminations, is preserved among Selden's
manuscripts in the Bodleian library MSS. Archiv. Seld. B. 26. It is richly
bound and studded. At the end is a curious map of Scotland; together with many
prose pieces by Harding of the historical kind. The Ashmolean manuscript is
entitled, The CHRONICLE OF JOHN HARDING in meter from the beginning of England
unto the reign of Edward the fourth. MSS. Ashmol. Oxon. 34. membran.
. Our author is concise and compendious in his narrative of events from Brutus
to the reign of king Henry the fourth: he is much more minute and diffuse in
relating those affairs of which, for more than the space of sixty years, he was
a living witness, and which occurred from that period to the reign of Edward
the fourth. The poem seems to have been completed about the year 1470. In his
final chapter he exhorts the king, to recall his rival king Henry the sixth,
and to restore the partisans of that unhappy prince.

This work is almost beneath criticism, and fit only for the attention of an
antiquary. Harding may be pronounced to be the most impotent of our metrical
historians, especially when we recollect the great improvements which English
poetry had now received. I will not even except Robert of Gloucester, who lived
in the infancy of taste and versification. The chronicle of this authentic and
laborious annalist has hardly those more modest graces, which could properly
recommend and adorn a detail of the British story in prose. He has left some
pieces in prose: and Winstanly says, "as his prose was very useful, so was his
poetry as much delightful." I am of opinion, that both his prose and poetry
are equally useful and delightful. What can be more frigid and unanimated than
these lines?

King Arthur then in Avalon so dyed,
Where he was buried in a chapel fair,
Which now is made, and fully edifyed,
The mynster church, this day of great repair
Of Glastenbury, where now he has his layre;
But then it was called the black chapel
Of our lady, as chronicles can tell.
Where Geryn earl of Chartres then abode
Beside his tomb, for whole devocion,
Whither Lancelot de Lake came, as he rode
Upon the chase, with trompet and claryon;
And Geryn told him, there all up and down
How Arthur was there laid in sepulture
For which with him to abide he hight full sure Chapter lxxxiv. fol. lxxvii. edit.
Graft. 1543.
.
Fuller affirms our author to have "drunk as deep a draught of Helicon as any
of his age." An assertion partly true: it is certain, however, that the diction
and imagery of our poetic composition would have remained in just the same
state had Harding never wrote.

In this reign, the first mention of the king's poet, under the appellation of
LAUREATE, occurs. John Kay was appointed poet laureate to Edward the fourth. It
is extraordinary, that he should have left no pieces of poetry to prove his
pretensions in some degree to this office, with which he is said to have been
invested by the king, at his return from Italy. The only composition he has
transmitted to posterity is a prose English translation of a Latin history of
the Siege of Rhodes MSS. Cotton. Brit. Mus. VITELL. D. xii. 10. It was printed
at London, 1506. This impres^ion was in Henry Worsley's library, Cat. MSS.
Angl. etc. tom. ii. p. 212. N. 6873. 25. I know nothing of the Latin; except
that Gulielmus Caorsinus, vice chancellor for forty years of the knights of
Malta, wrote an ORSIDIO RHODIAE URBIS, when it was in vain attempted to be
taken by the Turks in 1480. Separately printed without date or place in quarto.
It was also printed in German, Argentorat. 1513. The works of this Gulielmus,
which are numerous, were printed together, at Ulm, 1496. fol. with rude wooden
prints. See an exact account of this writer, Diar. Eruditor. Ital. tom. xxi. p.
412.

One John Caius a poet of Cambridge is mentioned in sir T. More's WORKS, p.
204. And in Parker's De^. of Pr. Marr^ against Martin, p. 99.


: in the dedication addressed to king Edward, or rather in the title, he styles
himself his humble poet laureate. Although this our laureate furnishes us with
no materials as a poet, yet his office, which here occurs for the first time
under this denomination, must not pass unnoticed in the annals of English
poetry, and will produce a short digression.

Great confusion has entered into this subject, on account of the degrees in
grammar, which included rhetoric and versification In the ancient statutes of
the university of Oxford, every Regent Master in Grammar is prohibited from
reading in his faculty, unless ^e first pass an examination DE MODO
VERSIFICANDI et dictandi, etc. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. fol. membran. Arch. A. 91.
[nunc 2874.] f. 55. b. This scholastic cultivation of the art of PROSODY gave
rise to many Latin systems of METER about this period. Among others, Thomas
Langley, a monk of Hulm in Norfolk, in the year 1430, wrote, in two books, DE
VARIETATE CARMINUM. Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Digb. 100. One John Seguard, a Latin poet
and rhetorician of Norwich, about the year 1414, wrote a piece of this kind
called METRISTENCHIRIDION, addressed to Courtney bishop of Norwich, treating of
the nature of meter in general, and especially of the common metres of the
Hymns of Boecius and Oracius [Horace.] Oxon. MSS. Coll. Merton. Q. iii. 1.
, anciently taken in our universities, particularly at Oxford: on which
occasion, a wreath of laurel was presented to the new graduate, who was
afterward usually styled poeta laureatus When any of these graduated
grammarians were licenced to teach boys, they were publicly presented in the
Convocationhouse with a rod and ferrel. Registr. Univ. Oxon. G. fol. 72. a.
. These scholastic laureations, however, seem to have given rise to the
appellation in question. I will give some instances at Oxford, which at the
same time will explain the nature of the studies for which our accademical
philologists received their rewards. About the year 1470, one John Watson, a
student in grammar, obtained a concession to be graduated and laureated in that
science; on condition that he composed one hundred Latin verses in praise of
the university, and a Latin comedy Registr. Univ. Oxon. G. fol. 143. I take
this opportunity of acknowledging my obligations to the learned Mr. Swinton,
keeper of the Archives at Oxford, for giving me frequent and free access to the
Registers of that university.
. Another grammarian was distinguished with the same badge, after having
stipulated, that, at the next public Act, he would affix the same number of
hexameters on the great gates of saint Mary's church, that they might be seen
by the whole university. This was at that period the most convenient mode of
publication Ibid^ fol. 162.
. About the same time, one Maurice Byrchensaw, a scholar in rhetoric,
supplicated to be admitted to read lectures, that is, to take a degree, in that
faculty; and his petition was granted, with a provision, that he should write
one hundred verses on the glory of the university, and not suffer Ovid's ART OF
LOVE, and the Elegies of Pamphilus Ovid's supposititious pieces, and other
verses of the lower age, were printed together by Goldastus, Francof. 1610.
8vo. Among these is, "Pamphili Mauriliani PAMPHILUS, ^ive de Art Amandi,
Elegiae lxiii." This is from the same school with Ovid DE VETULA, and by some
thought to be forged by the same author.
, to be studied in his auditory Registr. Univ. Oxon. G. fol. 134. a.
. Not long afterward, one John Bulman, another rhetorician, having complied
with the terms imposed, of explaining the first book of Tully's OFFICES, and
likewise the first of his EPISTLES, without any pecuniary emolument, was
graduated in rhetoric; and a crown of laurel was publicly placed on his head by
the hands of the chancellor of the university Registr. ut supr. G. fol. 124. b.
. About the year 1489 Caxton, in the preface to his English ENEYDOS, Mentions
"master John Skeleton, late created poet laureate in the universite of
Oxenford, etc." This work was printed in 1490. Churchyard mentions Skelton's
accademical laureation, in his poem prefixed to Skelton's works, Lond^ 1568.
8vo. Nay Skeleton wore the laurel wreath,
And past in schools ye knoe.
And again, That war the garland wreath.
Of laurel leaves so late.

, Skeleton was laureated at Oxford, and in the year 1493, was permitted to wear
his laurel at Cambridge Registr. Univ. Cantabrig. sub anno. "Conceditur Johanni
Skeleton poetae in partibus transmarinis atque Oxonii laurea ornato, ut apud nos
eadem decoraretur." And afterward, Ann. 1504, 5. "Conceditur Johanni Skeleton
poet laureato quod possit constare eodem gradu hic quo stetit Oxonii, et quod
possit uti habitu sibi concesso a principe." The latter clause, I believe,
relates to some distinction of habit, perhaps of ^ur or velvet, granted him by
the king. Skeleton is said to have been poet laureate to Henry the eighth. He
also styles himself Orator regius, p. 1. 6. 109. 107. 284. 285. 287. Works,
1736.
. Robert Whittington affords the last instance of a rhetorical degree at
Oxford. He was a secular priest, and eminent for his various treatises in
grammar, and for his facility in Latin poetry: having exercised his art many
years, and submitting to the customary demand of an hundred verses, he was
honored with the laurel in the year 1512 Registr. Univ. Oxon. ut supr. G. 173.
b. 187. b.
. This title is prefixed to one of his grammatical systems. "ROBERTI
WHITTINTONI, Lichfeldiensis, Grammatices Magistri, PROTOVATIS Angliae, in
florentissima Oxoniensi Achademia LAUREATI, DE OCTO PARTIBUS ORATIONIS Land.
1513. See the next note.
." In his PANEGYRIC to cardinal Wolsey, he mentions his laurel, Suscipe
LAURICOMI munuscula parva Roberti In his "Opusculum Roberti Whittintoni in
florentissima Oxoniensi achademia laureati." Signat. A. iii. Bl. Let. 4to.
Colophon, "Expliciunt Roberti Whittintoni Oxonii protovatis epigrammata, una
cum quibusdam panegyricis, impressa Londini per me Wynandum de Word. Anno post
virgineum partum M. CCCCC. xix. decimo vero Kal. Maii." The Panegyrics are, on
Henry the eighth, and cardinal Wols^y. The Epigrams, which are long copies of
verse, are addressed to Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk, sir Thomas More, and
to Skeleton, under the title Ad lepidissimum poetam SCHELTONEM carmen, etc. Some
of the lines are in a very classical style, and much in the manner of the
earlier Latin Italian poets. At the end of these Latin poems i^ a defense of
the author, called ANTILYCON, etc. This book is extremely scarce, and not
mentioned by Wood, Ames, and some other collectors. These pieces are in
manuscript, Oxon. MSS. Bodl. D. 3. 22.
.


With regard to the Poet laureate of the kings of England, an officer of the
court remaining under that title to this day, he is undoubtedly the same that
is styled the KING'S VERSIFIER, and to whom one hundred shillings were paid as
his annual stipend, in the year 1251 See supr. vol. i. p. 47.
. But when or how that title commenced, and whether this officer was ever
solemnly crowned with laurel at his first investiture, I will not pretend to
determine, after the ^earches of the learned Seldom on this question have
proved unsuccessful. It seems most probable, that the barbarous and inglorious
name of VERSIFIER gradually gave way to an appellation of more elegance and
dignity: or rather, that at length, those only were in general invited to this
appointment, who had received accademical sanction, and had merited a crown of
laurel in the universities for their abilities in Latin composition,
particularly Latin versification. Thus the king's Laureate was nothing more
than "a graduated rhetorician employed in the service of the king." That he
originally wrote in Latin, appears from the ancient title versificator: and may
be moreover collected from the two Latin poems, which Baston and Gulielmus, who
appear to have respectively acted in the capacity of royal poets to Richard the
first and Edward the second, officially composed on Richard's crusade, and
Edward's ^iege of Striveling castle See supr. vol. i. p. 232. By the way,
Baston is called by Bale "laureatus apud Oxonienses." Cent. iv. cap. 92.
.

Andrew Bernard, successively poet laureate of Henry the seventh and the
eighth, affords a still stronger proof that this officer was a Latin scholar.
He was a native of Toulouse, and an Augustine monk. He was not only the king's
poet laureate See an instrument PRO POETA LAUREATO. dat. 1486. Rymer's FO^D.
tom. xii. p. 317. But, by the way, in this instrument there is no specification
of any thing to be done officially by Bernard. The king only grants to Andrew
Bernard, Poetae ^au^^ato, which we may construe either THE laureated poet, or A
poet laureate, a salary of ten marcs, till he can obtain some equivalent
appointment. This, however, is only a precept to the treasurer and chamberlains
to disburse the salary, and refers to letters patent, not printed by Rymer. It
is certain that Gower and Chaucer were never appointed to this office,
notwithstanding this is commonly supposed. Skeleton, in his CROWN OF LAUREL,
sees Gower, Chaucer, and Lydgate approach: he describes their whole apparel as
glittering with the richest precious stones, and then immediately adds, They
wanted nothing but the LAUREL.
Afterward, however, there is the rubric Master Chaucer LAUREATE poet to
Skeleton. Works, p. 21. 22. edit. 1736.
, as it is supposed, but his historiographer Apostolo Zeno was both poet and
historiographer to his imperial majesty. So was Dryden to James the second. It
is observable that Petrarch was laureated as poet and historian.
, and preceptor in grammar to prince Arthur. He obtained many eccle^iastical
preferments in England One of these, the mastership of saint Leonard's hospital
at Bedford, was given him by bishop Smith, one of the founders of Brase-nose
college, Oxford, in the year 1498. Registr. SMITH, epis^. Lincoln. sub. ann.
. All the pieces now to be found, which he wrote in the character of poet
laureate, are in Latin Some of Skelton's Latin poems seem to be written in the
character of the Royal laureate, particularly one, entitled "Haec Laureatus
Skeltonus, orator reginae, super triumphali, etc. It is subscribed "Per
Skeltonida Laureatum, oratorem regium." Work^, p. 110. edit. ut supr. Hardly
any of his English pieces, which are numerous, appear to belong to that
character. With regard to the ORATOR REGIUS, I find one John Mallard in that
office to Henry the eighth, and his epistolary secretary. He has left a Latin
elegiac paraphrase on the lord's prayer, MSS. Bibl. Reg. 7 D. xiii. Dedicated
to that king. Le premier livre de la cosmographie, in verse, ibid. 20 B. xii.
And a P^alter, beautifully written by himself, for the use of the king. In the
margin, are short notes in the handwriting, and two exquisite miniatures, of
Henry the eighth. Ibid. 2 A. xvi.
. These are, an ADDRESS to Henry the eighth for the most auspicious beginning
of the tenth year of his reign, with an EPITHALAMIUM on the marriage of Francis
the Dauphin of France with the king's daughter MS. olim penes Thom. Martin de
Palgrave.
. A NEW YEAR'SGIFT for the year 1515 MSS. Coll. Nov. Oxon. 287.
. And verses wishing prosperity to his majesty's thirteenth year Brit. Mus.
MSS. Reg. 12 A. x. The copy presented. In paper. There is a wretched false
quantity in the first line, Indue, honor, cult^s, et adole munera flammis.

. He has left some Latin hymns And a Latin life of saint Andrew. MSS. Cotton.
DOMITIAN. A. xviii. 15.
: and many of his Latin prose pieces, which he wrote in the quality of
historiographer to both monarchs, are remaining A chronicle of the life and
achievements of Henry the seventh to the taking of Perkin Warbeck, MSS.
Cotton. DOMITIAN. A. xviii. 15. Other historical commentaries on the reign of
that king. Ibid. JUL. A. 4. JUL. A. 3.
.

I am of opinion, that it was not customary for the royal laureate to write in
English, till the reformation of religion had begun to diminish the veneration
for the Latin language: or rather, till the love of novelty, and a better sense
of things, had banished the narrow pedantries of monastic erudition, and taught
us to cultivate our native tongue. In the mean time it is to be wished, that
another change might at least be suffered to take place in the execution of
this institution, which is confessedly Gothic, and unaccommodated to modern
manners. I mean, that the more than annual return of a composition on a trite
argument would be no longer required. I am conscious I say this at a time, when
the best of kings affords the most just and copious theme for panegyric: but I
speak it at a time, when the department is honorably filled by a poet of taste
and genius, which are idly wasted on the most splendid subjects, when imposed
by constraint, and perpetually repeated.

To what is here incidentally collected on an article more curious than
important, I add an observation, which shows that the practice of other nations
in this respect altogether corresponded with that of our own. When we read of
the laureated poets of Italy and Germany, we are to remember, that they most
commonly received this honor from the state, or some university; seldom, at
least not immediately, from the prince: and if we find any of these professedly
employed in the department of a court-poet, that they were not, in consequence
of that peculiar situation, styled poets laureate. The distinction, at least in
general, was previously conferred The reader who requires a full and particular
information concerning the first origin of the laureation of poets, and the
solemnities with which this ceremony was performed in Italy and Germany, is
referred to Selden's TIT. HON. Op. tom. p. 457. seq. VIE DE PETRARQUE, tom.
iii. Notes, etc. p. 1. Not. quat. And to a memoir of M. l'Abbe du Resnel, MEM.
LIT. x. 507. 4to. I will only add, the form of the creation of three poets
laureate by the chancellor of the university of Strasburgh, in the year 1621.
"I create you, being placed in a chair of state, crowned with laurel and ivy,
and wearing a ring of gold, and the same do pronounce and constitute, POETS
LAUREATE, in the name of the holy Trinity, the father, son, and holy ghost.
Amen."
.

John Scogan is commonly supposed to have been a cotemporary of Chaucer, but
this is a mistake See Hollinsh. Chron. iii. f. 710. It is uncertain whether the
poem addressed by Chaucer to Scogan, was really written by the former, MSS.
Fairfax. xvi.
. He was educated at Oriel college in Oxford: and being an excellent mimic, and
of great pleasantry in conversation, became the favorite buffoon of the court
of Edward the fourth, in which he passed the greatest part of his life. Bale
inaccurately calls Scogan, the JOCULATOR of Edward the fourth: by which word he
seems simply to understand the king's JOKER, for he certainly could not mean
that Scogan was his majesty's MINSTREL Script. xi. 70. By the way, the SERGEANT
of the King's Minstrels occurs under this reign: and in a manner, which shows
the confidential character of this officer, and his facility of access to the
king at all hours and on all occasions. "And as he [k. Edw. iv.] was in the
north contray in the month of Septembre, as he lay in his bed, one namid
Alexander Carlisle, that was sariaunt of the mynstrallis, came to him in great
h^ste, and bade him arise, for he had enemies cummyng, etc." A REMARKABLE
FRAGMENT, etc. [an. ix.^ Edw. iv.] ad calc. SPORTTI CHRON. edit. Hearne. Oxon.
1729. 8vo. Compare Percy's E^^. MINSTR. p. 56. Anstis, ORD. GART. ii. 303.
. Andrew Board, a mad physician and a dull poet in the reign of Henry the
eighth, published his JESTS, under the title of SCOGIN'S JESTS It is from these
pieces we learn that he was of Oriel college: for he speaks of retiring, with
that society, to the hospital of saint Bartholomew, while the plague was at
Oxford. These JESTS are sixty in number. Pr. Pref. "There is nothing besides."
Pr. "On a time in Lent." They were reprinted about the restoration. 4to.
, which are without humor or invention; and give us no very favorable idea of
the delicacy of the king and courtiers, who could be exhilarated by the
merriments of such a writer. A MORAL BALADE, printed in Chaucer's works,
addressed to the dukes of Clarenc^, Bedford, and Gloucester, and sent from a
tavern in the Vintry at London, is attributed to Scogan It may yet be doubted
whether it belongs to Scogan; as it must have been written before the year
1447, and the writer complains of the approach of old age. col. i. v. 10. It
was first printed, under Scogan's name, by Caxton, in the COLLECTION OF
CHAUCER'S and LYDGATE'S POEMS. The little piece, printed as Chaucer's, [Urr.
ed. p. 548.] called FLEE FROM THE PRESS, is expres^ly given to Scogan, and
called PROVERBIUM JOANNIS SKOGAN, MSS. C. C. C. Oxon. 203.
. But our jocular bard evidently mistakes his talents when he attempts to give
advice. This piece is the dullest sermon that ever was written in the octave
stanza. Bale mentions his COMEDIES xi. 70.
, which certainly mean nothing dramatic, and are perhaps only his JESTS
abovementioned. He seems to have flourished about the year 1480.

Two didactic poets on chemistry appeared in this reign, John Norton and George
Ripley. Norton was a native of Bristol He speaks of the wife of William
Canning, who will occur again below, five times mayor of Bristol, and the
founder of saint Mary of Radcliffe church there. ORDINAL, p. 34.
, and the most skillful alchemist of his age Printed by Ashmole, in his
THEATRUM CHEMICUM Land. 1652. 8vo. p. 6. It was finished A. D. 1477. ORDIN. p.
106. It was translated into Latin by Michael Maier, M. D. Francof. 1618. 4to.
Norton wrote other chemical pieces.
. His poem is called the ORDINAL, or a manual of the chemical art See ORDIN. p.
9. 10. Norton declares, that he learned his art in forty days, at twenty-eight
years of age. Ibid. p. 33. 88.
. It was presented to Nevil archbishop of York, who was a great patron of the
hermetic philosophers Ashmole, ubi supr. p. 455. Notes.
; which were lately grown so numerous in England, as to occasion an act of
parliament against the transmutation of metals. Norton's reason for treating
his subject in English rhyme, was to circulate the principles of a science of
the most consummate utility among the unlearned Page 106.
. This poem is totally void of every poetical elegance. The only wonder which
it relates, belonging to an art, so fertile in striking inventions, and
contributing to enrich the storehouse of Arabian romance with so many
magnificent imageries, is that of an alchemist, who projected a bridge of gold
over the river Thames near London, crowned with pinnacles of gold, which being
studded with carbuncles, diffused a blaze of light in the dark Page 26.
. I will add a few lines only, as a specimen of his versification.

Wherefore he would set up in higth
That bridge, for a wonderful sight,
With pinnacles guilt, shininge as goulde,
A glorious thing for men to behoulde.
Then he remembered of the new,
How greater fame should him pursewe,
If he might make that bridge so brighte,
That it might shine also by night:
And so continewe and not break,
Then all the land of him would speak, etc Page 26.
.
Norton's heroes in the occult sciences are Bacon, Albertus Magnus, and Raymond
Lully, to whose specious promises of supplying the coinage of England with
inexhaustible mines of philosophical gold, king Edward the third became an
illustrious dupe Ashmol. ubi supr. p. 443. 467. And Camden's REM. p. 242. edit.
1674. By the way, Raymond Lu^ly is said to have died at eighty years of age, in
the year 1315. Whart. APP. Cave, cap. p. 6.
.

George Ripley, Norton's cotemporary, was accomplished in many parts of
erudition; and still maintains his reputation as a learned chemist of the lower
ages. He was a canon regular of the monastery of Bridlington in Yorkshire, a
great traveller Ashmole says, that Ripley, during his long stay at Rhodes, gave
the knights of Malta 100,000 l. annually, toward maintaining the war against
the Turks. Ubi supr. p. 458. Ashmole could not have made this incredible
assertion, without supposing a circumstance equally incredible, that Ripley was
in actual possession of the Philosopher's Stone.
, and studied both in France and Italy. At his return from abroad, pope
Innocent the eighth absolved him from the observance of the rules of his order,
that he might prosecute his studies with more convenience and freedom. But his
convent not concurring with this very liberal indulgence, he turned Carmelite
at saint Botolph's in Lincolnshire, and died an anachorite in that fraternity
in the year 1490 Ashmol. p. 455. seq. Bale, viii. 49. Pits. p. 677.
. His chemical poems are nothing more than the doctrines of alchemy clothed in
plain language, and a very rugged versification. The capital performance is THE
COMPOUND OF ALCHEMIE, written in the year 1471 Ashmol. THEATR. CHEM. p. 193. It
was first printed in 1591. 4to. Reprinted by Ashmole, THEATR. CHEM. ut supr. p.
107. It has been thrice translated into Latin, Ashm. ut supr. p. 465. See Ibid.
p. 108. 110. 122. Most of Ripley's Latin works were printe^ by Lud. Combachius,
Cassel. 16^9. 12mo.
. It is in the octave meter, and dedicated to Edward the fourth He mentions the
abbey church at Westminster as unfinished. Page 154. st. 27. P. 156. and st. 34.
. Ripley has left a few other compositions on his favorite science, printed by
Ashmole, who was an enthusiast in this abused species of philosophy Ashmole
conjectures, that an English chemical piece in the octave stanza, which he has
printed, called HERMES'S BIRD, no unpoetical fiction, was translated from
Raymond Lully, by Cremer, abbot of Westminster, a great chemist: and adds, that
Cremer brought Lully into England, and introduced him to the notice of Edward
the third, about the year 1334. Ashmol. ubi supr. p. 213. 467. The writer of
HERMES'S BIRD, however, appears by the versification and language, to have
lived at least an hundred years after that period. He informs us, that he made
the translation "owte of the Frensche." Ibid. p. 214. Ashmole mentions a
curious picture of the GRAND MYST^RIES OF THE PHILOSOPHER'S STONE, which abbot
Cremer ordered to ^e painted in Westminster abbey, upon an arch where the waxen
kings and queens are placed: but that it was obliterated with a plaisterer's
brush by the puritans in Oliver's time. He al^o mentions a large and beautiful
window^ behind the pulpit in the neighboring church of saint Margaret, painted
with the same subject, and destroyed by the same ignoran^ zealots, who mistook
these innocent hi^roglyphics for some story in a popish legend. Ashmol. ibid.
211. 466. 467. Compar^ Widmore's Hist. WESTMINSTER-ABBEY. p. 174. seq. edit.
1751. 4to.
. One of them, the MEDULLA, written in 1476, is dedicated to archbishop Nevil
Ashm. p. 389. See also p. 374. seq.
. These pieces have no other merit, than that of serving to develope the
history of chemistry in England. They certainly contributed nothing to the
state of our poetry It will be sufficient to throw some of the obscurer rhymers
of this period into the Notes. Osbern Bokenham wrote or translated metrical
lives of the saints, about 1445. See supr. vol. i. p. 14. Notes. Gilbert
Banester wrote in English verse the Miracle of saint Thomas, in the year 1467.
CCCC. MSS. Q. viii. See supr. vol. i. p. 75. Notes. And Lel. COLLECTAN. tom. i.
(p. ii.) page 510. edit. 1770. Wydville earl of Rivers, already mentioned,
translated into English dis^ichs, The morale Proverbes of Crystyne of Pyse,
printed by Caxton, 1477. They consist of two sheets in folio. This is a
couplet; Little vailleth good example to see
For him that wole not the contrary flee.
This nobleman's only original piece is a Balet of four stanzas, preserved by
Rouse, a cotemporary historian, Ross. Hist. p. 213. edit. Hearn. apud Leland.
Itin. tom. x. edit. Oxon. 1745. I refer also the NOTBROWNE MAID to this
period. See Capel's PROLUSION^, p. 23. seq. edit. 1760. And Percy's ANC. BALL.
vol. ii. p. 26. seq. edit. 1767. Of the same date is perhaps the DELECTABLE
HISTORY of king Edward the fourth and the Tanner of Tamworth, etc. etc. See
Percy, ubi supr. p. 81. Hearne affirms, that in this piece there are some
"romantic assertions: -- otherwise it is a book of value, and more authority is
to be given to it than is given to poetical books of LATE YEARS." Hearne's
Leland, ut supr. vol. ii. p. 103.
.

SECT. VIII.
BUT a want of genius will be no longer imputed to this period of our poetical
history, if the poems lately discovered at Bristol, and said to have been
written by Thomas Rowlie, a secular priest of that place, about the year one
thousand four hundred and seventy, are genuine.

It must be acknowledged, that there are some circumstances which incline us to
suspect these pieces to be a modern forgery. On the other hand, as there is
some degree of plausibility in the history of their discovery, as they possess
considerable merit, and are held to be the real productions of Rowlie by many
respectable critics; it is my duty to give them a place in this series of our
poetry, if it was for no other reason than that the world might be furnished
with an opportunity of examining their authenticity. By exhibiting therefore
the most specious evidences, which I have been able to collect, concerning the
manner in which they were brought to light I acknowledge myself greatly
indebted to the ingenious doctor Harrington of Bath, for facilitating my
enquiries on this subject.
, and by producing such specimens, as in another respect cannot be deemed
unacceptable; I will endeavor, not only to gratify the curiosity of the public
on a subject that has long engaged the general attention, and has never yet
been fairly or fully stated, but to supply the more inquisitive reader with
every argument, both external and internal, for determining the merits of this
interesting controversy. I shall take the liberty to add my own opinion, on a
point at least doubtful: but with the greatest deference to decisions of much
higher authority.

About the year 1470, William Cannynge, an opulent merchant and an alderman of
Bristol, afterward an ecclesiastic, and dean of Westbury college, erected the
magnificent church of Saint Mary of Redcliffe, or Radcliff, near Bristol He is
said to have rebuilt Westbury college. Dugd. WARWICKSH. p. 634. edit. 1730. And
Atkyns, GLOCESTERSH. p. 802. On his monument in Radcliffechurch, he is twice
represented, both in an alderman's and a priest's habit. He was five times
mayor of Bristol. See Godwin's BISH. p. 446. [But see edit. fol. p. 467.]
. In a muniment-room over the northern portico of the church, the founder
placed an iron chest, secured by six different locks It is said there were four
chests: but this is a circumstance of no consequence.
; which seems to have been principally intended to receive instruments relating
to his new structure, and perhaps to his other charities These will be
mentioned below.
, inventories of vestments and ornaments See an inventory of ornaments given to
this church by the founder, Jul. 4, 1470^ ^ormerly kept in this chest, and
printed by Mr. Walpole, AN^CD. PAINT. i. p. 45.
, accounts of churchwardens, and other parochial evidences. He is said to have
directed, that this venerable chest should be annually visited and opened by
the mayor and other chief magistrates of Bristol, attended by the vicar and
churchwardens of the parish: and that a feast should be celebrated every year,
on the day of visitation. But this order, that part at least which relates to
the inspection of the chest, was soon neglected.

In the year 1768, when the present new bridge at Bristol was finished and
opened for passengers, an account of the ceremonies observed on occasion of
opening the old bridge, appeared in one of the Bristol Journals; taken, as it
was declared, from an ancient manuscript The old bridge was built about the
year 1248. HISTORY of BRISTOL, MS. Archiv. Bodl. C. iii. By Abel Wantner.

Archdeacon Furney, in the year 1755, left by will to the Bodleian library,
large collections, by va^ious hands, relating to the history and antiquities of
the city, church, and county of Gloucester, which are now preserved there,
Archiv. C. ut supr. At the end of N. iii. is the manuscript HISTORY just
mentioned, supposed to have been compiled by Abel Wantner, of Minchin-Hampton
in Glocestershire, who published proposals and specimens for a history of that
county, in 1683.


. Curiosity was naturally raised to know from whence it came. At length, after
much enquiry concerning the person who sent this singular memoir to the
news-paper, it was discovered that he was a youth about seventeen years old,
whose name was Chatterton; and whose father had been sexton of Radcliffe church
for many years, and also master of a writing-school in that parish, of which
the churchwardens were trustees. The father however was now dead: and the son
was at first unwilling to acknowledge, from whom, or by what means, he had
procured so valuable an original. But after many promises, and some threats, he
confessed that he received a manuscript on parchment containing the narrative
abovementioned, together with many other manuscripts on parchment^ from his
father; who had found them in an iron chest, the same that I have mentioned,
placed in a room situated over the northern entrance of the church.

It appears that the father became possessed of these manuscripts in the year
1748. For in that year, he was permitted, by the churchwardens of
Radcliffe-church, to take from this chest several written pieces of parchment,
supposed to be illegible and useless, for the purpose of converting them into
covers for the writing-books of his scholars. It is impossible to ascertain,
what, or how many, writings were destroyed, in consequence of this absurd and
unwarrantable indulgence. Our schoolmaster, however, whose accomplishments
were much above his station, and who was not totally destitute of a taste for
poetry, found, as it is said, in this immense heap of obsolete manuscripts,
many poems written by Thomas Rowlie abovementioned, priest of Saint John's
church in Bristol, and the confessor of alderman Cannynge, which he carefully
preserved. These at his death, of course fell into the hands of his son.

Of the extraordinary talents of this young man more will be said hereafter. It
will be sufficient to observe at present, that he saw the merit and value of
these poems, which he diligently transcribed. In the year 1770, he went to
London, carrying with him these transcripts, and many originals, in hopes of
turning so in^stimable a treasure to his great advantage. But from these
flattering expectations, falling into a dissipated course of life, which ill
suited with his narrow circumstances, and finding that a writer of the most
distinguished taste and judgment, Mr. Walpole, had pronounced the poems to be
suspicious, in a fit of despair, arising from distress and disappointment, he
destroyed all his papers, and poisoned himself. Some of the poems however, both
transcripts and originals, he had previously sold, either to Mr. Catcott, a
merchant of Bristol, or to Mr. Barrett, an eminent surgeon of the same place,
and an ingenious antiquary, with whom they now remain Mr. Barrett, to whom I am
greatly o^^iged ^or his unreserved and liberal information on this subject, is
now engaged in writing the ANTIQUITIES of BRISTOL.
. But it appears, that among these there were but very few of parchment: most
of the poems which they purchased were copies in his own hand. He was always
averse to give any distinct or satisfactory account of what he possessed: but
from time to time, as his necessities required, he produced copies of his
originals, which were bought by these gentlemen. The originals, one or two only
excepted, he chose to retain in his own possession.

The chief of these poems are, The TRAGEDY of ELLA, The EXECUTION of sir
CHARLES BAWDWIN, ODE to ELLA, The BATTLE of HASTINGS, The TOURNAMENT, one or
two DIALOGUES, and a Description of CANNYNGE'S FEAST.

The TRAGEDY OF ELLA has six characters; one of which is a lady, named Birtha.
It has a chorus consisting of minstrels, whose songs are often introduced. Ella
was governor of the castle of Bristol, and a puissant champion against the
Danes, about the year 920. The story seems to be the poet's invention. The
tragedy is opened with the following soliloquy.

CELMONDE at Brystowe.
Before yonne roddie son has droove his wayne
Through half his joornie, dyghte in gites of gowlde,
Me, hapless me, he will a wretch behowlde,
Myself, and all thatts mine, bound in Myschaunche's chain!
Ah Byrtha, why did nature frame thee fair,
Why art thou all that poyntelle Pencil.
can bewreene?
Why art thou notte as coarse as odhers are?
Botte then thie soughle Soul.
would throw thie vysage sheene,
Yatte That.
shemres Glimmers.
onne thie comlie semlykeene Seemliness. Beauty.
,
Or scarlette with waylde lynnen clothe Perhaps we should read, O^ scarlette
veiled with a linen clothe.
,
Like would thie sprite Soul.
[shine] upon thie vysage:
This day brave Ella does thine hand and heart
Claim as his own to be, which nee Never.
from his most part.
And cann I lynne to see herre with anere Another.
?
Ytte cannotte, must notte, naie ytte shall notte be!
This night I'lle putt strong poysonne in the beer,
And hymme, herre, and myself attones At once.
will slay.
Assyst, me hell, let devylles round me tend,
To slay myself, my love, and eke my doughhtie friend!
The following beautiful descriptions of SPRING, AUTUM^, and MORNING, are
supposed to be sung in the tragedy, by the chorus of minstrels.

SPRING.
The boddyng flowrettes bloshes at the lyhte,
The mees be springede The meadows are sprinkled, etc.
with the yellowe hue,
In daiseyed mantells is the monntayne dyghte,
The neshe Tender.
young cowslepe bendethe with the dew;
The trees enleafede, into heaven straught Stretching. Stretched.
,
When gentle wyndes do blow, to whestlynge dynne is i. e. Are.
brought.
The evenynge commes, and brynges the dew alonge,
The rodie welkynne sheeneth toe the eyne,
Arounde the alestake A sign-post before an alchouse. In Chaucer, the HOST
says, -- Here at this ale^ouse-sta^e,
I wol both drink, and etin of a cake.
WORDS HOST. v. 1835. Urr. p. 131. And in the SHIP OF FOOLS, fol. 9. a. edit.
1570. By the ale-sta^e know we the alehouse,
And every inn is known by the sign.

mynstrelles sing the song,
Young ivy round the doore-post does entwyne;
I lay me on the grass: yette to mie will,
Albeytte all is fair, theere lackethe sommethynge stylle.
AUTUMN.
When Autumn, blake, and sonne-brente do appear,
With his goulde hand, guylteynge the falleynge lefe,
Bryngeynge oppe Wynterre to folfylle the year,
Beereynge uponne his back the riped shefe;
When all the hylls with woddie seed is white,
When levynne fyres, ande lemes, do mete fromme far the syghte:
When the fair apple, rudde as even sky,
Do bend the tree untoe the fructyle ground,
When joicie peers, and berryes of black die,
Do dance ynne air, and call the eyne arounde:
Thanne, be the even foul, or even fair,
Meethynckes mie hartys joie is steyned with sum care.
MORNING.
Bryghte son han ynne his roddie robes been dyghte,
Fro the red east he flytted with his train;
The hours draw away the geete of night,
Herre sable tapistrie was rent ynne twain:
The dauncynge streakes bedeckedd heavenne's plain,
And onne the dew dydd smyle with shemrynge Glimmering.
eye,
Lyche gottes Drops.
of blodde which do black armoure steyne,
Sheenynge uponne the borne which stondethe bye: --
The souldyerrs stood uponne the hyllis side,
Lyche young enlefed trees which ynne a forreste bide There is a description of
morning in another part of the tragedy. The morning gynes alonge the east to
sheene,
Darkling the light does on the waters play;
The feynte rod beam slow creepethe over the leene,
To chase the morkynesse of night away.
Swift fleis the hour that will bring out the day,
The soft dew falls onne the greeynge grass;
The shepster maiden dyghtynge her arraie,
Scante sees her vysage ynne the wavie glass:
By the fulle daylight we scalle ELLA see,
Or BRISTOWE'S walled town. Damoyselle follow me.

.
But the following ode, belonging to the same tragedy, has much more of the
choral or lyric strain.

I.
O! sing unto mie roundelaie,
O! drop the bryny tear with me,
Dance ne more at hallie day,
Like a running river be.
My love is dedde,
Gone to his death bed,
Al under the willowe tree.
II.
Black his cryne Hair.
as the wyntere night,
White his rode Neck.
as summer snow,
Rod his face as morning light,
Cold he lies in the grave below.
My love is dedde, etc.
III.
Swote his tongue as the throstle's note,
Quycke in dance as thought can be,
Deft his tabor, codgelle stote,
Oh! he lies by the willowe tree.
My love is dedde, etc.
IV.
Hark! the raven flaps his wynge,
In the brier'd delle below;
Hark! the death owl loud does sing
To the night mares as they go.
My love is dedde, etc.
V.
See the white moon sheenes on hie!
Whyter is my true love's shrowde,
Whyter than the morning sky,
Whyter than the evening cloud.
My love is dedde, etc.
VI.
Here upon my true love's grave
Shall the garen Bright.
fleurs be laid:
Ne one hallie saint to save
All the celness of a maid.
My love is dedde, etc.
VII.
With my hondes I Will dente Indent. Bend into the ground.
the brieres,
Round his hallie corse to gre Grow.
,
Ouphante Ouphan. Elphin.
faeries, light your fyres,
Here my body still shall be.
My love is dedde, etc.
VIII.
Come with acorne-cup, and thorn,
Drain mie harty's blodde away:
Life and all its goods I scorn,
Dance by night, or feast by day.
My love is dedde, etc.
IX.
Watere wytches crownde with reytes R^eds^
,
Bear me to your lethale tide;
I die -- I come -- My true love waytes!
Those the damselle spoke, and died.
According to the date assigned to this tragedy, it is the first drama extant
in our language. In an Epistle prefixed to his patron Cannynge, the author thus
censures the MYSTERIES, or religious interludes, which were the only plays then
existing.

Plays made from HALLIE Holy.
TALES I hold unmete;
Let some great story of a man be song;
When, as a man, we Godde and Jesus trete,
Ynne mie poor mind we do the godhead wrong.
The ODE TO ELLA is said to have been sent by Rowlie in the year 1468, as a
specimen of his poetical abilities, to his intimate friend and cotemporary
Lydgate, who had challenged him to write verses. The subject is a victory
obtained by Ella over the Danes, at Watchett near Bristol With this address to
Lydgate prefixed. Well then, good John, sithe ytt must needs so be,
That thou, and I a bowtynge match must have;
Let ytt ne breaking of oulde friendshipp^ be,
This is the on^lie allaboone I crave.
Remember Stowe, the Bryghtstowe Carmalyte,
Who, when John Clackynge, one of myckle lore,
Dydd throw his gauntlette pen wyth^ him to write,
He shewde small wit, and shewde his weakness more.
This is mie 'formance, which I now have writ,
The best performance of mie lyttel wit.
S^owe should be Stone, a Carmelite friar of Bristol, educated at Cambridge,
and a famous preacher. Lydgate's answer on receiving the ode, which certainly
cannot be genuine, is beneath transcription. The writer, freely owning his
inferiority, declares, that Rowlie rivals Chaucer and Turgotus, who both lived
in Norman times. The latter, indeed, may in some measure be said to have
flourished in that era, for he died bishop of Saint Andrews in 1115. But he is
oddly coupled with Chaucer in another respect, for he wrote only some Latin
chronicles. Besides, Lydgate must have been sufficiently acquainted with
Chaucer's age; for he was living, and a young man, when Chaucer died. The
writer also m^ntions Stone, the Carmelite, as living with Chaucer and Turgotus:
whereas he was Lydgate's cotemporary. These circumstances, added to that of the
extreme and affected meanness of the composition, evidently prove this little
piece a forgery.
. I will give this piece at length.

SONG TO AELLE LORD OF THE CASTLE OF BRISTOWE ynne days of yore.
Oh! thou (orr whatt remaynes of thee)
EALLE the darlynge of futuritie!
Let this mie song bold as thie courage be,
As everlastynge to posterity!
When Dacya's sons, whose hayres of blood read hue,
Lyche king cups brastynge with the morning due,
Arraung'd ynn dreare arraie,
Uppone the lethale day,
Spredde far and wide onn Watchett's shore:
Thenn dyddst thou furyouse stand,
And bie thie brondeous hand
Beesprengedd all the mees with gore.
Drawn bie thine anlace fell Sword.
,
Down to the depthe of hell,
Thousands of Dacyanns went;
Brystowannes men of might,
Ydar'd the bloody fight,
And actedd deeds full quente.
Oh! thou, wherever (thie bones at rest)
Thie spryte to haunt delyghteth best,
Whytherr upponn the bloude-embrewedd pleyne^
Orr whare thou kennst fromme far
The dysmalle cry of war,
Orr seeste sum mountain made of corse of sleyne:
Orr seeste the harnessd steed,
Yprauncynge over the meede,
And neighe to be among the poynctedd speeres;
Orr ynn black armoure staulke arounde
Embattell'd Brystowe, once thie ground,
And glowe ardorous onn the castle steeres:
Orr fiery round the mynster The monastery. Now the cathedral.
glare:
Let Brystowe stylle be made thie care,
Guarde ytte fromme foemenne and consumynge fyre^
Lyche Avone streme ensyrke ytt round;
Ne let a flame enharme the ground,
'Tyll ynne one flame all the whole world expyres.
The BATTLE OF HASTINGS is called a translation from the Saxon: and contains a
minute description of the persons, arms, and characters of many of the chiefs,
who fought in that important action. In this poem, Stonehenge is described as a
Druidical temple.

The poem called the TOURNAMENT, is dramatically conducted, among others, by
the characters of a herald, a knight, a minstrel, and a king, who are
introduced speaking.

The following piece is a description of an alderman's feast at Bristol; or, as
it is entitled, ACCOUNTE OF W. CANNYNGE'S FEAST.

Through the hall the belle han sound,
Byalccoyle BELLACCOYLE. A personage in Chaucer's Romans R. v. 2984. etc. i. e.
KIND WELCOME. From the Fr. Bell ac^ueil.
do the grave beseem;
The ealdermenne do sytte arounde,
And snoffelle Snuff up.
opp the cheorte steeme.
Like asses wild in deserte waste
Swotely the morneynge do taste,
Syke kene they ate: the mynstrells play,
The dynne of angels do they keep:
They stylle The mi^strels cease.
: the guestes ha ne to say,
But nodde there thanks, and fall asleep.
Those echeone day be I to deene Dine.
,
Gyff If.
Rowley, Ischamm, or Tybb Gorges, be ne seen.
But a dialogue between two ladies, whose knights, or husbands, served in the
wars between York and Lancaster, and were now fighting at the battle of Saint
Albans, will be more interesting to many readers. This battle happened in the
reign of Edward the fifth, about the year 1471.

ELINOUR and JUGA.
Anne Ruddeborne Rudborn, in Saxon, red-water, a river near Saint Albans.
bank two pynynge maidens sat,
Their tears fast dryppeynge to the waterre clear;
Echone bementynge Lamenting.
for her absente mate,
Who at Seyncte Albonns shouke the morthynge Murdering.
spear.
The nottebrowne Ellynor to Juga fair,
Did speak acroole Faintly.
, with languyshmente of eyne,
Like drops of pearlie dew, lemed Glistened.
the quyvrynge brin^.
ELINOUR.
O gentle Juga! hear mie dernie Sad complaint.
plainte,
To fight for York mie love is dyght Arrayed, or cased.
in steel;
O may ne sanguen steine the white rose peyncte,
May good Seyncte Cuthberte watch syrre Robynne well!
Moke more thanne death in fantasy I feelle;
See! see! upon the ground he bleedynge lies!
Inhild Infuse.
some joice Juice.
of life, or else my dear love dies.
JUGA.
Systers in sorrow on this daise eyed bank,
Where melancholych broods, we will lamente:
Be wette with morning dew and evene danke;
Lyche levynde Blasted.
oaks in each the oder bente:
Or like forletten Forsaken.
halles of merriemente,
Whose gastlie Ruins.
nitches hold the train of fryghte Fear.
,
Where lethale Deadly, or death-boding.
ravens bark, and owlets wake the night.
No mo the miskynette A small bagpipe.
shall wake the morn,
The minstrelle dance, good cheer, and morryce play;
No mo the amblynge palfrie and the horn,
Shall from the lessel In a confined sense, a bush or hedge, though sometimes
used as a forest.
roue the fox away:
Ill seek the foreste all the lyve-longe day:
All nete amenge the gravde cherche Churchyard, full of graves.
glebe will go,
And to the passante spryghtes lecture Relate.
mie tale of woe.
When mokie Black.
clouds do hang upon the leme
Of leden Decreasing.
moon, ynn sylver mantels dyghte:
The tryppeynge faeries weve the golden dreme
Of selyness Happiness^ Chaucer, TR. CRES. iii. 815.
, which flyethe with the night;
Then (but the seynctes forbydde) gif to a spryghte
Syrre Rychardes form is lyped; I Will hold dystraughte
His bledeynge clai-colde corse, and die each day in thought.
ELINOUR.
Ah, woe-bementynge words; what words can show!
Thou limed Glassy.
river, on thie linche Bank.
may bleed
Champyons, whose blood will with thie waterres flow,
And Rudborne streeme be rudborne streeme indeed!
Haste gentle Juga, trippe ytte o'ere the meade
To know or wheder we must wail again,
Or whythe our fallen knight be menged onne the plain.
So saieing, like two levyn-blasted trees,
Or twain of clouds that holds stormy rain,
Theie moved gentle o'ere the dew mees Meads.
;
To where Seyncte Albon's holy shrynes remain.
There did theye find that both their knights were sleyne;
Distraughte Distracted.
, theie wandered to swollen Rudborne's side,
Yelled their leathalle knelle, sonke in the waves and did.
In a DIALOGUE, or ECLOGUE, spoken by two ladies, are these lines.

Sprytes of the blaste, the pious Nygelle sedde,
Power out your pleasaunce on mie fadres hedde.
Richard of lyonn's heart to fight is gonne,
Upon the broad sea do the banners gleme;
The aminusedd natyons be astonn
To ken syke So.
large a flete, syke fine, syke breme Fierce.
:
The barkis heofods coupe the lymed Polished. Bright.
streme:
Oundes Waters.
synkyng oundes upon the hard ache Oak. Ship.
rise;
The waters slughornes with a swoty cleme
Conteke Contend with.
the dynninge Noisy.
air, and reche Reach.
the skies.
Sp^ytes of the blaste, on gouldenn trones astedde Seated.
,
Power out your pleasaunce on mie fadres hedde!
I am of opinion, that none of these pieces are genuine. The EXECUTION of SIR
CHARLES BAUDWIN is now allowed to be modern, even by those who maintain all the
other poems to be ancient It contains 98 stanzas, and was printed at London, in
the year 1772. 4to. I am told, that in the abovementioned chest, belonging to
Radcliffe-church, an ancient Record was discovered, containing the expenses for
Edward the fourth to see the execution of sir Charles Baldwin; with a
description of a canopy under which the king ^ate at thi^ execution. This
Record seems to have given rise to the poem. A bond which sir Charles Baldwin
gave to king Henry the sixth, I suppose about seizing the earl of Warwick, is
said to have be^n mentioned in one of Rowlie's manuscripts, called the YELLOW
ROLL, perhaps the same, found in Cannynge's chest, but now lost. See Stowe's
CHRON. by Howes, edit. fol. 1615. p. 406. col. 2. And Speed's, p. 669. col. 2.
edit. 1611. Stowe says, that king Edward^ the fourth was ^at Bristol, on a
progress through England, in the harvest s^ason of the year 1462. And that he
was mos^ royally received. Ibid. p. 416. col. 2. Cannynge was then mayor of
Bristol. Sir Charles Baldwin is said to have been executed at Bristol, in the
presence of Edward the fourth, in the year 1463. MS. Wantn. Bibl. Bodl. ut
supr. The same king was at Bristol, and lodged in saint Augu^tine's abbey, in
1472, when he received a large gratuity from the citizens for carrying on the
war against France. Wantner, ibid.
. The ODE TO ELLA, and the EPISTLE to Lydgate, with his ANSWER, were written on
one piece of parchment; and, as pretended, in Rowlie's own hand. This was shown
to an ingenious critic and intelligent antiquary of my acquaintance; who
assure^ me, that the writing was a gross and palpable forgery. It was not even
skilfully counterfeited. The form of the letters, although artfully contrived
to wear an antiquated appearance, differed very essentially from every one of
our early alphabets. Nor were the characters uniform and consistent: part of
the same manuscript exhibiting some letters shaped according to the present
round hand, while others were traced in imitation of the ancient court and text
hands. The parchment was old; and that it might look still older, was stained
on the outside with ochre, which was easily rubbed off with a linen cloth. Care
had also been evidently taken to tincture the ink with a yellow cast. To
communicate a stronger stamp of rude antiquity, the ODE was written like prose:
no distinction, or termination, being made between the several verses.
Lydgate's ANSWER, which makes a part of this manuscript, and is written by the
same hand, I have already proved to be a manifest imposition. This parchment
has since been unfortunately lost At the same time, another manuscript on
parchment, written, as pretended, by Rowlie, was shown to this gentleman:
which, tallying in every respect with the ODE to ELLA, plainly appeared to be
forged, in the same manner, and by the same modern hand. It was in prose; and
contained an account of Saxon coins, and the rise of coining in England, with a
list of coins, poems, ancient inscriptions, monuments, and other curiosities,
in the cabinet of Cannynge abovementioned. This parchment is also lost; and, I
believe, no copy remain^.
. I have myself carefully examined the original manuscript, as it is called, of
the little piece entitled, ACCOUNTE OF W. CANNYNGE'S FEAST. It is likewise on
parchment, and, I am sorry to say, that the writing betrays all the suspicious
signatures which were observed in that of the ODE TO ELLA. I have repeatedly
and diligently compared it with three or four authentic manuscripts of the time
of Edward the fourth, to all which I have found it totally unlike. Among other
smaller vestiges of forgery, which cannot be so easily described and explained
here, at the bottom are added in ink two coats of arms, containing empalements
of Cannynge and of his friends or relations, with family-names, apparently
delineated by the same pen which wrote the verses. Even the style and drawing
of the armorial bearings discover the hand of a modern herald. This, I believe,
is the only pretended original of the poetry of Rowlie, now remaining.

As to internal arguments, an unnatural affectation of ancient spelling and of
obsolete words, not belonging to the period assigned to the poems, strikes us
at first sight. Of these old words combinations are frequently formed, which
never yet existed in the unpolished state of the English language: and
sometimes the antiquated diction is most inartificially misapplied, by an
improper contexture with the present modes of speech. The attentive reader will
also discern, that our poet sometimes forgets his assumed character, and does
not always act his part with consistency: for the chorus, or interlude, of the
damsel who drowns herself, which I have cited at length from the TRAGEDY of
ELLA, is much more intelligible, and free from uncouth expressions, than the
general phraseology of these compositions. In the BATTLE OF HASTINGS, said to
be translated from the Saxon, Stonehenge is called a Druidical temple. The
battle of Hastings was fought in the year 1066. We will grant the Saxon
original to have been written soon afterward: about which time, no other
notion prevailed concerning this miraculous monument, than the supposition
which had been delivered down by long and constant tradition, that it was
erected in memory of Hengist's massacre. This was the established and uniform
opinion of the Welsh and Armorican bards, who most probably received it from
the Saxon minstrels: and that this was the popular belief at the time of the
battle of Hastings, appears from the evidence of Geoffrey of Monmouth, who
wrote his history not more than eighty years after that memorable event. And in
this doctrine Robert of Gloucester and all the monkish chroniclers agree. That
the Druids constructed this stupendous pile for a place of worship, was a
discovery reserved for the sagacity of a wiser age, and the laborious
discussion of modern antiquaries. In the EPISTLE to Lydgate, prefixed to the
TRAGEDY, our poet condemns the absurdity and impropriety of the religious
dramas, and recommends SOME GREAT STORY OF HUMAN MANNERS, as most suitable for
theatrical representation. But this idea is the result of that taste and
discrimination, which could only belong to a more advanced period of society It
would be tedious and trifling to descend to minute particulars. But I will
mention one or two. In the ODE TO ELLA, the poet supposes, that the spectre of
Ella sometimes appears in the mynster, that is Bristol-cathedral. But when
Rowlie is supposed to have lived, the present cathedral of Bristol was nothing
more than an Augustine monastery, in which Henry the eighth established long
afterward a bishop, and a dean and chapter, in the year 1542. Minster is a
word almost appropriated to Cathedrals: and I will venture to say, that the
church of this monastery, before the present foundation took place, never was
called Bristol-minster, or The minster. The inattention to this circumstance,
has produced another unfortunate anachronism in some of Rowlie's papers. Where,
in his panegyric on Cannynge he says, "The favouryte of godde, the ^ryende of
the church, the companyonne of kings, and the fadre of his natyve CITY, the
great and good Wyllyamme Canynge." Bristol was never styled a CITY till the
erection of its bishopric in 1542. See Willis's NOTIT. PARLIAMENT. p. 43.
Land. 1750. See also king Henry's Patent for creating the bishopric of
Bristol, in Rymer, dat. Jun. 4. A. D. 1542. An. reg. 34. Where the king orders,
"Ac quod tota Villa nostra Bristolliae exnunc et d^inceps imperpetuum sit
Civitas, ipsamque CIVITATEM BRISTOLLIAE appellari et nominari, volumus et
decernimus, etc." FOED. tom. xv. p. 749. Bristol was proclaimed a CITY, an. 35
Henr. viii. MS. Wantner, ut supr. In which manuscript, to that period it is
constantly called a town.

The description of Cannynge's feast, is called an ACCOUNTE of CANNYNGE'S
FEAST. I do not think, that so early as the year 1470, the word Accounte had
lost its literal and original sense of a computus, or computation, and was used
in a looser acceptance for narrative or detail. Nor had it even then lost its
true spelling account, in which its proper and primary signification is
preserved and implied.


.

But, above all, the cast of thought, the complexion of the sentiments, and the
structure of the composition, evidently prove these pieces not ancient. The ODE
TO ELLA, for instance, has exactly the air of modern poetry; such, I mean, as
is written at this day, only disguised with antique spelling and phraseology.
That Rowlie was an accomplished literary character, a scholar, an historian,
and an antiquarian, if contended for, I will not deny He is also said to have
been an eminent mechanic and mathematician. I am informed, that one of Rowlie's
manuscripts discovered in Cannynge's iron chest, was a plan for supporting the
tower of the Temple-church in B^istol, which had greatly declined from its
perpendicular. In a late reparation of that church, some subterraneous works
were found, minutely corresponding with this manuscript.
. Nor is it impossible that he might write English poetry. But that he is the
writer of the poems which I have here cited, and which have been so confidently
ascribed to him, I am not yet convinced.

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that these poem^ were composed by the
son of the schoolmaster before mentioned; who inherited the inestimable
treasures of Cannynge's chest in Radcliffe-church, as I have already related at
large. This youth, who died at eighteen, was a prodigy of genius: and would
have proved the first of English poets, had he reached a maturer age. From his
childhood, he was fond of reading and writing verses: and some of his early
compositions, which he wrote without any design to deceive, have been judged to
be most astonishing productions by the first critic of the present age. From
his situation and connections, he became a skilful practitioner in various
kinds of handwriting. Availing himself therefore of his poetical talent, and
his facility in the graphic art, to a miscellany of obscure and neglected
parchments, which were commodiously placed in his own possession, he was
tempted to add others of a more interesting nature, and such as he was enabled
to forge, under these circumstances, without the fear of detection. As to his
knowledge of the old English literature, which is rarely the study of a young
poet, a sufficient quantity of obsolete words and phrases were readily
attainable from the glossary to Chaucer, and to Percy's Ballads. It is
confessed, that this youth wrote the EXECUTION OF SIR CHARLES BAWDWIN: and he
who could forge that poem, might easily forge all the rest.

In the mean time, we will allow, that some pieces of poetry written by Rowlie
might have been preserved in Cannynge's chest: and that these were enlarged and
improved by young Chatterton. But if this was the case, they were so much
altered as to become entirely new compositions. The poem which bids the fairest
to be one of these originals is CANNYNGE'S FEAST. But the parchment-manuscript
of this little poem has already been proved to be a forgery. A circumstance
which is perhaps alone sufficient to make us suspect that no originals ever
existed.

It will be asked, for what end or purpose did he contrive such an imposture? I
answer, from lucrative views; or perhaps from the pleasure of deceiving the
world, a motive which, in many minds, operates more powerfully than the hopes
of gain. He probably promised himself greater emoluments from this indirect
mode of exercising his abilities: or, he might have sacrificed even the vanity
of appearing in the character of an applauded original author, to the private
enjoyment of the success of his invention and dexterity.

I have observed above, that Cannynge ordered his iron chest in
Radcliffe-church to be solemnly visited once in every year, and that an annual
entertainment should be provided for the visitors. In the notices relating to
this matter, which some of the chief patrons of Rowlie's poetry have lately
sent me from Bristol, it is affirmed, that this order is contained in
Cannynge's will: and that he specifies therein, that not only his manuscript
evidences abovementioned, but that the POEMS of HIS CONFESSOR ROWLIE, which
likewise he had deposited in the aforesaid iron chest, were also to be
submitted to this annual inspection. This circumstance at first strongly
inclined me to think favorably of the authenticity of these pieces. At least
it proved, that Rowlie had left some performances in verse. But on examining
Cannynge's will, no such order appears. All his bequests relating to
Radcliffe-church, of every kind, are the following. He leaves legacies to the
vicar, and the three clerks, of the said church: to the two chantry-priests, or
chaplains, of his foundation: to the keeper of the PYXIS OBLATIONUM, in the
north-door: and to the fraternity Commemoracionis martirum. Also vestments to
the altars of saint Catharine, and saint George. He mentions his tomb built
near the altar of saint Catharine, where his late wife is inrerred. He gives
augmentations to the endowment of his two chantries Compare Willis, MITR. ABB.
ii. 88.
, at the altars of saint Catharine and saint George, abovementioned. To the
choir, he leaves two service-books, called Liggers, to be used there, on either
side, by his two chantry-priests. He directs, that his funeral shall be
celebrated in the said church with a month's mind, and the usual solemnities
This will is in Latin, dated Nov. 12. 1474. Proved Nov. 29. It was made in
Westbury college. Cur. Praerog. Cant. Registr. WATTIS, quatern. xvii. fol. 125.
Beside the bequests mentioned in the text, he leaves legacies to all the
canons, the chaplains and deacons, and the twelve choristers, of Westbury
college. To the six priests, six almsmen and six almswomen, founded in the new
chapel at Westbury by Carpenter, bishop of Worcester. To many of the servants
of the said college. To the fabric of the church of that college, xl s. To
rebuilding the tower of the church of Compton Graynefield, xl s. He also makes
bequests to his almshouses at Bristol, and to the corporation of that town. He
remembers some of the religious foundations, chiefly the mendicants, at
Bristol. He styles himself, nuper mercator villae Bristoll, ^t nunc decanus
collegii S. Trin. de Westbury. The subdean of Westbury college is one of the
executors. In this will the name of ROWLIE is not mentioned. Compare Tanner,
NOTIT. MONAST. p. 484. And Atkyns's GLOUCESTERSH. p. 802.

Bishop Carpenter, about the year 1460, was a considerable benefactor to
Westbury college. He pulled down the old college, "and in the new building,
enlarged it very much, compassing it about with a strong wall embattled, adding
a fair gate with diverse towers, more like unto a castle than a college: and
lastly, bestowed much good land for augmenting the revenew of the same."
Godwin, SUCCESS. BISHO^S, page 446. edit. 1. ut supr. And Leland speaks much to
the same purpose. "Hic [Carpenter] ex veteri collegio, quod erat Westberiae,
novum fecit, et praediis auxit, addito pinnato muro, porta, et turribus, instar
castelli." ITIN. vol. viii. fol. 112. a. And hence it appears to be a mistake,
that Cannynge, who was indeed dean while these benefactions took place, rebuilt
the college. As Dugd. WARWICKSH. p. 634. edit. 1730. Atkyns, GLOUCESTERSH. p.
802. supr. citat. p. 140.


.

Very few anecdotes of Rowlie's life have descended to posterity. The following
MEMOIRS of his life are said to have been written by himself in the year 1460,
and to have been discovered with his poetry: which perhaps to many readers will
appear equally spurious.

I was fadre confessor to masteres Roberte and mastre William Cannings. Mastre
Roberte was a man after his fadre's own heart, greedy of gaynes and sparying
of alms deeds; but master William was mickle courteous, and gave me many marks
in my needs. At the age of twenty-two years deceasd master Roberte, and by
master William's desire, bequeathd me one hundred marks; I went to thank
master^ William for his mickle courtesy, and to make tender of my self to
him. -- Fadre, quod he, I have a crotchett in my brain that will need your
aid. Master William, said I, if you command me I will go to Room for you; not
so far distant, said he: I ken you for a mickle learnd priest, if you will
leave the parysh of our lady, and travel for me, it shall be mickle to your
profits.

I gave my hands, and he told me I must go to all the abbeys and pryorys, and
gather together ancient drawyings I much doubt, if this word now existed, in
the modern, or any, sense. Indeed, the phrase to draw a picture might have been
now known: but to draw, in its present uncombined use, had not yet acquired
this meaning. So late as the reign of James the first, a Painter was often
called a picture-drawer. In ancient inventories of furniture, a drawing never
occurs as any species of production of the art of designing: it became a
technical and distinguishing term when that art began to attain some degree of
maturity. Pictures, although this word is now confined to a precise
signification, would not have been improper here. Yet the word Picture was not
anciently used in its present sense and manner: but, a picture with a cloth, a
table with a picture, etc.
, if of any account at any price. Consented I to the same, and pursuant set
out the Mundaie following for the minster of our lady I suppose, Worcester
cathedral.
and Saint Goodwyne, where a drawing of a steeple, contryvd for the belles when
runge to swaie out of the side into the air, had I thence, it was done by sir
Simon de Mambrie Or Malmesbury.
, who in the troublesomme rain of king Stephen devoted himself, and was
shorn.

Hawks showd me a manuscript This was not an English word at this early
period: it was not used, and for obvious reasons, till after the invention of
printing. So again we have below, "the Saxon manuscript^." These, at this time,
would have been called books.
in Saxonne, but I was onley to bargayne for drawyngs. -- The next drawyings I
metten with was a church to be reard, so as in form of a cross, the end
standing in the ground, a long manuscript was annexd. Master Canning thought no
workman culd be found handie enough to do it. -- The tale of the drawers
deserves relation. -- Thomas de Blunderville, a preeste, although the preeste
had no allows, lovd a fair maiden, and on her begett a son. Thomas educated
his soon; at sixteen years he went into the wars, and near did return for five
years. -- His mother was married to a knight, and bare a daughter, then
sixteen, who was seen and lovd by Thomas, son of Thomas, and married to him
unknown to her mother, by Ralph de Mesching, of the Minster, who invited, as
custom was, two of his brothers, Thomas de Blunderville and John Heschamme.
Thomas nevertheless had not seen his son for five years, kenning him
instauntly; and learning the name of the bryde, took him aside and disclosd to
him that he was his son, and was weded to his own sistre. -- Yoyng Thomas took
on so that he was shorn.

He drew many fine drawyings on glass.

The abott of the minster of Peterburrow sold it me, he might have bargaynd
twenty marks better, but master William would not depart with it. The prior of
Coventree did sell me a picture of great account, made by Badilian Y'allyanne,
who did lyve in the rain of king Henry the first, a mann of fickle temper,
havyng been tendered syx pounds of silver for it, to which he said naie, and
afterward did give it to the then abott This should have been Prior. An abbot
was never the title of the superior in cathedral-convents. The PRIOR OF
COVENTRY must have been a dignitary wellknown by that name, as he sat in
parliament.
of Coventriee. In brief, I gathered together many marks value of fine
drawyings, all the works of mickle cunning. -- Master William culld the most
choice parts, but hearing of a drawying in Durham church he did send me.

Fadree you have done mickle well, all the chatills are more worth than you
gave; take this for your pains: so saying, he did put into my hands a purse of
two hundreds good pounds, and did say that I should note be in need, I did
thank him most heartily. -- The choice drawyng, when his fadre did dye, was
begunn to be put up, and sum houses near the old church erased; it was drawn
by Aflema, priest of Saint Cutchburts, and offered as a drawyng for Westminster,
but cast aside, being the tender did not speak French.

I had now mickle of riches, and lyvd in a house on the hill, often repayrings
to mastere William, who was now lord of the house. I sent him my verses
touching his church, for which he did send me mickle good things.

In the year king Edward came to Bristow, Master Cannings send for me to avoid
a marriage which the king was bent upon between him and a lady he near had
seen, of the familee of the Winddivilles, the danger where nigh, unless avoided
by one remidee, an holy one, which was, to be ordained a son of holy church,
being frank from the power of kings in that cause, and can be wedded. -- Mr.
Cannings instauntly sent me to Carpenter, his good friend, bishop of Worcester,
and the Friday following was prepaird and ordaynd the next day, the day of
Saint Matthew, and on Sunday sung his first mass in the church of our lady Most
probably Worcester cathedral.
, to the astonishing of king Edward, who was so furiously madd and ravyngs
withal, that master Cannings was wyling to give him three thousand marks,
which made him peace again, and he was admyted to the presence of the king,
staid in Bristow, partook of all his pleasures and pastimes till he departed
the next year See above, p. 153.
.

I gave master Cannings my Bristow tragedy That is, the poem called the
EXECUTION OF SIR CHARLES BAWDWIN, mentioned above, p. 153. What is there said
concerning this poem, greatly invalidates the authenticity of these MEMOIRS.
Rowlie might indeed write a poem on this subject; but not the poem circulated
as his.
, for which he gave me in hands twenty pound, and did praise it more then I
did think my self did deserve, for I can say in troth I was never proud of my
verses since I did read master Chaucer; and now having naught to do, and not
wyling to be idle, I went to the minster of our Lady and Saint Goodwin, and
then did purchase the Saxon manuscripts, and set my self diligently to
translate and word it in English meter, which in one year I performd and
settled in the Battle of Hastyngs; master William did bargyin for one to be
manuscript, and John Pelham, an esquire, of Ashley, for another. -- Master
William did praise it muckle greatly, but advisd me to tender it to no man,
beying the mann whose name where therein mentioned would be offended. He gave
me twenty marks, and I did go to Ashley, to master Pelham, to be paid of him
for the other one I left with him.

But his lady being of the family of the Fiscamps A Norman family.
, of whom some things are said, he told me he had burnt it, and would have me
burnt too if I did not avaunt. Dureing this dinn his wife did come out, and
made a dinn to speak by a figure would have over sounded the bells of our
Lady of the Cliffe; I was fain content to get away in a safe skin.

I wrote my Justice of Peace I know nothing of this piece.
, which master Cannings advisd me secrett to keep, which I did; and now being
grown ancient I was seizd with great pains, which did cost me mickle of marks
to be cured off. -- Master William offered me a cannon's place in Westbury
collige, which gladly had I accepted, but my pains made me to stay at home.
After this mischance I livd in a house by the Tower, which has not been repaird
since Robert Consul of Gloucester repayrd the castle and wall; here I livd
warm, but in my house on the hill the air was mickle keen, some marks it cost
me to put it in repair my new house, and brynging my chattles from the old; it
was a fine house, and I much marville it was untenanted. A person greedy of
gains was the then possessour, and of him I did buy it at a very small rate,
having lookd on the ground works and main supports, and fynding them staunch,
and repayrs no need wanting, I did buy of the owner, Geoffry Coombe, on a
repayring lease for ninety-nine years I very much question, whether this
technical law-term, or even this mode of contract, existed in the year 1460.
, he thinkying it would fall down every day; but with a few marks expense did
put it up in a manner neat, and therein I lyvd.

It is with regret that I find myself obliged to pronounce Rowlie's poems to be
spurious. Ancient remains of English poetry, unexpectedly discovered, and
fortunately rescued from a long oblivion, are contemplated with a degree of
fond enthusiasm: exclusive of any real or intrinsic excellence, they afford
those pleasures, arising from the idea of antiquity, which deeply interest the
imagination. With these pleasures we are unwilling to part. But there is a more
solid satisfaction, resulting from the detection of artifice and imposture.

SECT. IX.
THE subsequent reigns of Richard the third, Edward the fifth, and Henry the
seventh, abounded in obscure versifiers.

A mutilated poem which occurs among the Cotton manuscripts in the British
museum, and principally contains a satire on the nuns, who not less from the
nature of their establishment, than from the usual degeneracy which attends all
institutions, had at length lost their original purity, seems to belong to this
period Disadvantageous suspicions against the chastity of the female religious
were pretended in earlier times. About the year 1250, a bishop of Lincoln
visited the nunneries of his diocese: on which occasion, says the continuator
of Matthew Paris, "ad domos religiosarum veniens, fecit EXPRIMI MAMILLAS
earundem, ut sic physice, si esset inter eas corruptela, experiretur." Matt.
Paris. Hist. p. 789. HENRICUS iii. edit. Tig. 1589. fol. An anecdote, which the
historian relates with indignation; not on account of the nuns, but of the
bishop.
. It is without wit, and almost without numbers. It was written by one Bertram
Walton, whose name now first appears in the catalogue of English poets; and
whose life I calmly resign to the researches of some more laborious and patient
antiquary.

About the year 1480, or rather before, Benedict Burgh, a master of arts of
Oxford, among other promotions in the church, archdeacon of Colchester,
prebendary of saint Paul's, and canon of saint Stephen's chapel at Westminster
See Newcourt, Repertor. i. 90. ii. 517. The university sealed his letters
testimonial, jul. 3. A. D. 1433. Registr. Univ. Oxon. supr. citat. T. f. 27. b.
He died A. D. 1483.
, translated Cato's MORALS into the royal stanza, for the use of his pupil lord
Bourchier son of the earl of Essex Gascoigne says that "rithme royal is a verse
of ten syllables, and ten such verses make a staff, etc." Instructions for
verse, etc. Sign. D. i. ad calc. WORKS, 1587. [See supr. vol. i. p. 464.
Notes, a.] Burgh's stanza is here called balade royal: by which, I believe, is
commonly signified the octave stanza. All those pieces in Chaucer, called
Certain Ballads, are in this measure. In Chaucer's LEGEND OF GOOD WOMEN,
written in long verse, a song of three octave stanzas is introduced; beginning,
Hide Absolon thy gilte tressis clear. v. 249. p. 340. Urr. Afterward, Cupid
says, v. 537. p. 342.

-- a full great negligence
Was it to thee, that ilke time thou made,
Hide Absolon thy tressis, IN BALADE.
In the British Museum there is a Kalandre in English, made in BALADE by Dann
John Lydgate monk of Bury. That is, in this stanza. MSS. Harl. 1706. 2. fol.
10. b. The reader will observe, that whether there are eight or seven lines, I
have called it the octave stanza. Lydgate has, most commonly, only seven lines.
As in his poem on Guy earl of Warwick, MSS. Laud. D. 31. fol. 64. Here ginneth
the lyff of Guy of Warwyk. [Pr. From Criste's birth complete nine 100 year.] He
is speaking of Guy's combat with the Danish giant Colbrand, at Winchester.

Without the gate remembered as I read,
The place called of antiquytye
In Inglysh tongue named hyde mede,
Or ellis denmarch not far from the cite:
Meeting to gedre, there men might see
Terryble strokys, lyk the dent of thond^r;
Sparklys out of thar harnyss, etc.

. Encouraged by the example and authority of so venerable an ecclesiastic, and
tempted probably by the convenient opportunity of pilfering phraseology from a
predecessor in the same arduous task, Caxton translated the same Latin work;
but from the French version of a Latin paraphrase, and into English prose,
which he printed in the year 1483. He calls, in his preface, the measure, used
by Burgh, the BALAD ROYAL. Caxton's translation, which superseded Burgh's work,
and with which it is confounded, is divided into four books, which comprehend
seventy-two heads.

I do not mean to affront my readers, when I inform them, without any apology,
that the Latin original of this piece was not written by Cato the censor, nor
by Cato Uticensis See Vignol. Marville. Miscell. tom. i. p. 56.
: although it is perfectly in the character of the former, and Aulus Gellius
has quoted Cato's poem DE MORIBUS Noct. At. xi. 2.
. Nor have I the gravity of the learned Boxhornius, who in a prolix and
elaborate dissertation has endeavored to demonstrate, that these distichs are
undoubtedly supposititious, and that they could not possibly be written by the
very venerable Roman whose name they bear. The title is DISTICHA DE MORIBUS AD
FILIUM, which are distributed into four books, under ^he name of Dionysius
Cato. But he is frequently called MAGNUS CATO.

This work has been absurdly attributed by some critics to Seneca, and by
others to Ausonius It was printed under the name of Ausonius, Rostoch. 1572.
8vo.
. It is, however, more ancient than the time of the emperor Valentinian the
third, who died in 455 Ex Epistol. Vindiciani Medici, ad Valent. They are
mentioned by Notkerus, who flourished in the tenth century, among the M^trorum,
Hymnorum, Epigrammatumque conditor^s. Cap. vi. DE ILLUSTRIB. VIR. etc. printed
by Fabric. M. Lat. v. p. 904.
. On the other hand, it was written after the appearance of Lucan's PHARSALIA,
as the author, at the beginning of the second book, commends Virgil, Macer The
poem DE VIRTUTIBUS HERBARUM, under the name of Macer, now extant, was written
by Odo, or Odobonus, a physician of the dark ages. It was translated into
English, by John Lelarmoner, or Lelamar, master of Hereford school, about the
year 1373. MSS. Sloane. 29. Princ. "Apium, Ache is hot and dry." There is
Macer's Herbal, ibid. 43. This seems to have been printed, see Ames, p. 158.
, Ovid, and Lucan. The name of Cato probably became prefixed to these distichs,
in a lower age, by the officious ignorance of transcribers, and from the
acquiescence of readers equally ignorant, as Marcus Cato had written a set of
moral distichs. Whoever was the author, this metrical system of ethics had
attained the highest degree of estimation in the barbarous ages. Among
Langbain's manuscripts bequeathed to the university of Oxford by Antony Wood,
it is accompanied with a Saxon paraphrase Cod. 12. [8615.]
. John of Salisbury, in his POLYCRATICON, mentions it as the favorite and
established manual in the education of boys Polycrat. vii. 9. p. 373. edit.
Lugd. Bat. 1595. It is cited, ibid. p. 116. 321. 512. In the ART OF
VERSIFICATION, a Latin poem, written by Eberhardus Bethuniensis, about the year
1212, there is a curious passage, in which all the classics of that age are
recited; or the best authors, then in vogue, and whom he recommends to be
taught to youth. [Leyser. Poet. Med. aev. p. 8^5.] They are, CATO the moralist.
THEODULUS, the author of a l^onine Eclogue, a dialogue between Truth and
Falsehood, written in the tenth century, printed among the OCTO MORALES, and by
Goldastus, Man. Bibl. 1620. 8vo. MSS. Harl. 3093. 4. Wynkyn de Word printed
this piece under the titl^ of Theodoli liber, cum comm^nto satis prolixo
autoris cujusdam Anglici qui multa Anglicana ubique miscuit. 1515. 4to. It was
from one of Theodulus's ECLOGUES, beginning Aethiopum terras, that Field,
master of Fotheringay college, about the year 1480, set the v^rsis of the
book caullid Aethiopum terras, in the glass window, with figures very neatly.
Leland. ITIN. i. fol. 5. [p. 7. edit. 1745.] This seems to have been in a
window of the new and beautiful cloister, built about that time. FLAVIUS
AVIANUS, a writer of Latin sables, or apologues, Lugd. Bat. 1731. 8vo. AESOP,
or the Latin fabulist, printed among the OCTO MORALES, Lugd. Bat. 1505. 4to.
MAXIMIANUS, whose six elegies, written about the seventh century, pass under
the name of Gallus. Chaucer cites this writer; and in a manner, which shows his
elegies had not then acquired the name of Gallus. COURT OF L. v. 798.
"MAXIMINIAN truly thus does he write." PAMPHILUS MAURILIANUS, author of the
hexametrical poem de Vetula, and the elegies de Art amandi, entitled
PAMPHILUS, published by Goldastus, Catalect. Ovid. Francof. 1610. 8vo. [See
supr. p. 130.] GETA, or Hosidius Geta, who has left a tragedy on Medea, printed
in part by Pet. S^riverius, Fragm. Vett. Tragic. Lat. p. 187. [But see supr.
vol. i. p. 234.] DARES PHRYGIUS, on the destruction of Troy. MACER. [See supr.
p. 159.] MARBODEUS, a Latin poet on Gems. [See supr. vol. i. p. 378.] PETRUS DE
RIGA, canon of Rheims, whose AURORA, or the History of the Bible allegorised,
in Latin verses, some of which are in rhyme, was never printed entire. He has
left also Speculum Ecclesi^^, with other pieces, in Latin poetry. He flourished
about the year 1130. SEDULIUS. PROSPER. ARATOR. PRUDENTIUS. BOETHIUS. ALANUS,
author of the Anticlaudian, a poem in nine books, occasioned by the skepticism
of Claudian. [See supr. vol. i. p. 391.] VIRGIL, HORACE, OVID, LUCAN, STATIUS,
JUVENAL, and PERSIUS. JOHN HANVILLE, an Englishman, who wrote the A^CHITRENIUS,
in the twelfth century, a Latin hexameter poem in nine books. PHILIP GUALTIER,
of Chatillon, who wrote, about the same period, the ALEXANDREID, an heroic poem
on Alexander the great. SOLYMARIUS, or GUNTHER, a German Latin poet, author of
the SOLYMARIUM, or Crusade. GALFRIDUS, our countryman, whose NOVA POETRIA was
in higher celebrity than Horace's Art of Poetry. [See vol. i. Dissertat. ii.]
MATTHAEUS, of Vendosme, who in the year 1170, paraphrased the Book of T^bit
into Latin elegiacs, from the Latin bible of saint Jerome, under the title of
the TOBIAD, sometimes called the THEBAID, and first printed among the OCTO
MORALES. ALEXANDER DE VILLA DEI, whose DOCT^INALE, or Grammar in Leonine verse,
superseded Priscian about the year 1200. ^t was first printed at Venice, fol.
1473. And by Wynkyn de Word, 1503. He was a French friar minor, and also wrote
the ARGUMENTS of the chapters of all the books of either Testament, in two
hundred and twelve hexameters. With some other forgotten pieces. MARCIANUS
CAPELLA, whose poem on the MARRIAGE OF MERCURY WITH PHILOLOGY rivalled
Boethius. [See supr. p. 75.] JOANNES DE GARLANDIA, an Englishman, a poet and
grammarian, who studied at Paris about the year 1200. The most eminent of his
numerous Latin poems, which crowd our libraries, seem to be his EPITHALAMIUM on
the Virgin Mary in ten books of elegiacs. MSS. Cotton. CLAUD. A. x. And DE
TRIUMPHIS ECCLESIAE, in eight books, which contains much English history. MS.
ibid. Some of his pieces, both in prose and verse, have been printed. BERNARDUS
CARNOTENSIS, or Sylvester, much applauded by John of Salisbury, who styles him
the most perfect Platonic of that age. Metallog. iv. c. 35. His MEGACOSM and
MICROCOSM, a work consisting both of verse and prose, is frequently cited by
the barbarous writers. He is imitated by Chaucer, Man of L. Tale, v. 4617. "In
sterres many a winter, etc." PHYSIOLOGUS, or THEOBALDUS EPISCOPUS, who wrote in
Latin verse De Naturis xii. animalium, MSS. Harl. 3093. 5. He is there called
Italicus. There is also a Magister FLORINUS, styled also PHYSIOLOGUS, on the
same subject. Chaucer quotes PHYSIOLOGUS, whom I by mistake have supposed to be
Pliny, "For PHISIOLOGUS says sikerly." NONNES PR. TALE. v. 15277. [See supr.
vol. i. p^ 420.] SIDONIUS, who wrote a metrical dialogue between a Jew and a
Christian on both the Testaments. And a SIDONIUS, perhaps the same, r^gis qui
^ingit praelia. To these our author adds his own GRECISMUS, or a poem in
hexameters on rhetoric and grammar; which, as Du Cange [Praef. Lat. Gloss.
XLV.] observes, was anciently a common manual in the seminaries of France, and,
I suppose, of England.
. To enumerate no others, it is much applauded by Isidore the old etymologist
Etymol. V. OFFICIPERDA.
, Alcuine Contra Elipand. lib. ii. p. 949.
, and Abelard Lib. i. Theol. Christ. p. 1183.
: and we must acknowledge, that the writer, exclusive of the utility of his
precepts, possesses the merit of a nervous and elegant brevity. It is
perpetually quoted by Chaucer. In the MILLER'S TALE, he reproaches the simple
carpenter for having never read in Cato, that a man should marry his own
likeness V. 3227.
: and in the MARCHAUNT'S TALE, having quoted Seneca to prove that no blessing
is equal to an humble wife, he adds Cato's precept of prudently bearing a
scolding wife with patience V. 9261.
. It was translated into Greek at Constantinople by Maximus Planudes, who has
the merit of having familiarised to his countrymen many Latin classics of the
lower empire, by metaphrastic versions It occurs often among the Baroccian
manuscripts, Bibl. Bodl. viz. 64. 71, bis. 95. 111. 194. The first edition of
Cato, soon followed by many others, I believe, is August. A D. 1485. The most
complete edition is that of Christ. Daumius, Cygn. 1672. 8vo. Containing the
Greek metaphrases of Maximus Planudes, Joseph Scaliger, Matthew Zuber, and John
Mylius, a Ger^a^ version by Martinus Apicius, with annotations and other
accessions. It was before translated into German rhymes by Abraham Morterius,
of Weissenburgh, Francof. 1590. 8vo.
: and at the restoration of learning in Europe, illustrated with a commentary
by Erasmus, which is much extolled by Luther Colloqu. Mensal. c. 37.
. There are two or three French translations One by Peter Grosnet, L^s mots
dorces du sage Caton. Paris. 1543.
. That of Mathurine Corderoy is dedicated to Robert Stephens. In the British
museum, there is a French translation by Helis de Guincestre, or Winchester;
made, perhaps, at the time when our countrymen affected to write more in French
than English MSS. H^rl. 4388. This manuscript is older than 1400. Du Cange
quotes a CATO in French rhymes. Gl. Lat. V. LECATOR. See MSS. Ashmol. 789. 2.
[6995.]
. Chaucer constantly calls this writer CATON or CATHON, which shows that he was
more familiar in French than in Latin. Caxton in the preface to his aforesaid
translation affirms, that Poggius Florentinus, whose library was furnished with
the most valuable authors, esteemed CATHON GLOSED, that is, Cato with notes, to
be the best book in his collection Many of the glossed manuscripts, so common
in the libraries, were the copies with which pupils in the university attended
their readers, or lecturers; from whose mouths paraphrastic notes were
interlined or written in the margin, by the more diligent hearers. In a Latin
translation of some of Aristotle's philosophical works, once belonging to
Rochester priory, and transcribed about the year 1350, one Henry de Rewham is
said to be the writer; and to have glossed the book, during the time he heard
it explained by a public reader in the schools of Oxford. "Et audivit in
scholis Oxonie, et emendavit et GLOSAVIT audiendo." MSS. Reg. 12 G. ii. 4to. In
the mean time, I am of opinion, that the word reader originally took its rise
from a paucity of books: when there was only ONE book to be had, which a
professor or lecturer recited to a large audience.
. The glossarist I take to be Philip de Pergamo, a prior at Padua; who wrote a
most elaborate MORALISATION on Cato, under the title of SPECULUM REGIMINIS, so
early as the year 1380 Printed, August. 1475. In Exeter college library, there
is CATO MORALISATUS, MSS. 37. [837.] And again at All Souls, MSS. 9. [1410.]
Compare MSS. More, 35. [9221.] And Bibl. Coll. Trin. Dublin. 651. 14. And MSS.
Harl. 6294.
. In the same preface, Caxton observes, that it is the best book for to be
taught to young children in scole. But he supposes the author to be Marcus
Cato, whom he duly celebrates with the two Scipios and other noble Romans. A
kind of supplement to this work, and often its companion, under the title of
CATO PARVUS, or Facetus, or Urbanus, was written by Daniel Church, or
Ecclesiensis, a domestic in the court of Henry the second, a learned prince and
a patron of scholars, about the year 1180 MSS. Coll. Trin. Dublin. 275. And
Bibl. Eccles. Vigorn sub. Tit. URBANUS, MSS. 147. One Tedbaldus, of the same
age, is called the author, from a manuscript cited, Giornal. Let. d'Ital. iv.
p. 181. In Lewis's CAXTON, in a collection of Chaucer's and Lydgate's poems by
Caxton, without date, are recited 3. PARVUS CATHO. 4. MAGNUS CATO. p. 104. What
these translations are I know not. Beside Caxton's CATO, mentioned above, there
is a separate work by Caxton, "Hic incipit PARVUS CATON," in English and Latin.
No date. Containing thirtyseven leaves in quarto. I find PARVUS CATO in English
rhyme, MSS. Vernon. Bibl. Bodl. fol. cccx. [See supr. vol. i. p. 14.] The Latin
of the lesser CATO is printed among AUCTORES OCTO MORALES, Lugd. 1538. Compare
MSS. Harl. 2251. iii. fol. 174. 112. fol. 175. A translation into English
verses of both CATOS, perhaps by Lydgate. See also MSS. Coll. Trin. Dublin. V.
651. The PROVERBIA CATONIS are a different work from either of these, written
in hexameters by Marbodeus, Opp. Hildebert. p. 1634. Paris 1708. fol.
. This was also translated by Burghe; and in the British museum, both the CATOS
of his version occur, as forming one and the same work, viz. Liber MINORIS
Catonis, et MAJORIS, translatus a Latino in Anglicum per Mag. Benet Borugh MSS.
Harl. 116. 2. See also, 271. 2.
. Burghe's performance is too jejune for transcription; and, I suspect, would
not have afforded a single splendid extract, had even the Latin possessed any
sparks of poetry. It is indeed true, that the only critical excellence of the
original, which consists of a terse conciseness of sentences, although not
always expressed in the purest latinity, will not easily bear to be transfused.
Burghe, but without sufficient foundation, is said to have finished Lydgate's
GOVERNAUNCE OF PRINCIS See supr. LYDGATE. There is a translation of the Wyz
Cato, and Aesop's Fables, into English dogrell, by one William Bulloker, for
Edm. Bollifant. 1585. This W. Bulloker wrote a Pamphlet for grammar, for the
same, 1586. 12mo.
.

About the year 1481, Julian Barnes, more properly Berners, sister of Richard
lord Berners, and prioress of the nunnery of Sopewell, wrote three English
tracts on Hawking, Hunting, and Armory, or Heraldry, which were soon afterward
printed in the neighboring There was a strong connection between the two
monasteries. In that of saint Alban's a monk was annually appointed, with the
title of Custos monialium de Sopewelle. Registr. Abbat. Wallingford, [Sub an.
1480.] MSS. Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Tanner.
monastery of saint Alban's In the year 1486. fol. Again, at Westminster, by W.
de Word. 1496. 4to. The barbarism of the times strongly appears in the
indelicate expressions which she often uses; and which are equally incompatible
with her sex and profession. The poem begins thus. [I transcribe from a good
manuscript, MSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bodl. papyr. fol.]

Mi dear sons, where ye fare, by frith, or by fell Wood or ^^^ld.
,
Take good head in his time how Tristrem Sir Tristr^m. See OBSERVAT. SPENS. i.
p. 21.
wol tell;
How many manner bestes of venery there were,
Listenes now to our Dame, and ye shullen here.
Ffowre manner bestes of venery there are,
The first of hem is a heart, the second is an hare;
The boor is one of tho,
The wolff, and no mo.
And whereso ye comen in play Plain.
or in place,
Now shall I tell you which ben bestes of chase:
One of the a buck, another a do,
The ffox, and the marteryn, and the wild^ roo:
And ye shall, my dear sons, other bestes all,
Where so ye hem find, rascal hem call,
In frith or in fell,
Or in fforrest, y you tell.
And to speak of the heart, if ye will hit lere,
Ye shall call him a calfe at the first year;
The second year a broket, so shall he be,
The third year a spayard, lerneth this at me;
The iiii year calls hem a stagge be any way
The first year a great stagge, my dame bade you say.
Among Crynes's books [911. 4to. Bibl. Bodl.] there is a bl. let. copy of this
piece, "Imprynted at London in Paul's churchyard by me Hary Tab." Again by
William Copland without date, "The book of hawkyng, hunting, and fishing, with
all the properties and medecynes that are necessary to be kept." With wooden
cuts. Here the tract on armory is omitted, which seems to have been first
inserted that the work might contain a complete course of education for a
gentleman. The same title is in W. Powel's edit. 1550. The last edition is "The
GENTLEMAN'S ACADEMY, or the book of saint Albans, concerning hawking, hunting,
and armory." Land. 1595. 4to.


. From an abbess disposed to turn author, we might more reasonably have
expected a manual of meditations for the closet, or select rules for making
salves, or distilling strong waters. But the diversions of the field were not
thought inconsistent with the character of a religious lady of this eminent
rank, who resembled an abbot in respect of exercising an extensive manerial
jurisdiction; and who hawked and hunted in common with other ladies of
distinction At the magnificent marriage of the princess Margaret with James the
fourth, king of Scotland, in 1503, his majesty sends the new queen, "a grett
tame heart, for to have a corse." Leland. Coll. APPEND. iii. 280. edit. 1770.
. This work, however, is here mentioned, because the second of these treatises
is written in rhyme. It is spoken in her own person; in which, being otherwise
a woman of authority, she assumes the title of dame. I suspect the whole to be
a translation from the French and Latin This is the latter part of the colophon
at the end of the saint Alban's edition. "And here now endith the book of
blasyng of armies, translatyt and ^ompylyt togedyr ^t saint Albons the year from
thyncarnacyon of our lord Jhesu Crist MCCCCLXXXVI." [This very scarce book,
printed in various inks, was in the late Mr. West's library.] This part is
translated or abstracted from Upton's book De re milita^i, et factis
illustribus, written about the year 1441. See the fourth book De insignibus
Anglorum nobilium. Edit. Biss. Land. 1654. 4to. It begins with the following
curious piece of sacred heraldry. "Of the offspring of the gentilman Jafeth,
come Habraham, Moses, Aron, and the profettys, and also the king of the right
Iyne of Mary, of whom that gentilman Jhesus was borne, very god and man: after
his manhood king of the land of Jude and of Jues, gentilman by is mother Mary,
prince of Come armure, etc."

Nicholas Upton, above mentioned, was a fellow of New college Oxford, about the
year 1430. He had many dignities in the church. He was patronised by Humphrey
duke of Gloucester, to whom he dedicates his book. This I ought to have remarked
before.


.

To this period I refer William of Nassyngton, a proctor or advocate in the
ecclesiastical court at York. He translated into English rhymes, as I
conjecture, about the year 1480, a theological tract, entitled A treatise on
the Trinity and Unity with a declaration of God's Works and of the Passion of
Jesus Christ, written by John of Waldenby, an Augustine friar of Yorkshire, a
student in the Augustine convent at Oxford, the provincial of his order in
England, and a strenuous champion against the doctrines of Wiccliffe Wood^ Ant.
Univ. Oxon. i. 117.
. I once saw a manuscript of Nassyngton's translation in the library of Lincoln
cathedral See also MSS. Reg. 17 C. viii. p. 2.
; and was tempted to transcribe the few following lines from the prologue, as
they convey an idea of our poet's character, record the titles of some old
popular romances, and discover ancient modes of public amusement.

I warn you first at the beginning,
That I will make no vain carpynge,
Of deeds of arms, ne of amou^s,
As does MYNSTRELLIS and GESTOURS,
That makes carpynge in many a place
Of OCTOVIANE and ISENBRACE,
And of many other GESTES,
And namely when they come to festes;
Ne of the life of BEVYS OF HAMPTOUNE,
That was a knight of great renoune:
Ne of sir GYE OF WARWYKE, etc.
Our translator in these verses formally declares his intention of giving his
reader no entertainment; and disavows all concern with secular vanities,
especially those unedifying tales of love and arms, which were the customary
themes of other poets, and the delight of an idle age. The romances of
OCTAVIAN, sir BEVIS, and sir GUY, have already been discussed at large. That of
sir ISEMBRAS was familiar in the time of Chaucer, and occurs in the RHYME of SIR
THOPAS V. 6. See supr. vol. i. p. 123. Notes.
. In Mr. Garrick's curious library of chivalry, which his friends share in
common with himself, there is an edition by Copland, extremely different from
the manuscript copies preserved at Cambridge MSS. Caius Coll. Class. A. 9. (2.)
, and in the Cotton collection CALIG. A. 12. f. 128.
. I believe it to be originally a French romance, yet not of very high
antiquity. It is written in the stanza of Chaucer's sir THOPAS See Percy's
BALL. i. 306.
. The incidents are for the most part those trite expedients, which almost
constantly form the plan of these metrical narratives.

I take this opportunity of remarking, that the MINSTRELS, who in this prologue
of Nassyngton are named separately from the GESTOURS, or tale-tellers, were
sometimes distinguished from the harpers. In the year 1374, six Minstrels,
accompanied with four Harpers, on the anniversary of Alwyne the bishop,
performed their minstrelsies, at dinner, in the hall of the convent of saint
Swithin at Winchester; and during supper, sung the same GEST, or tale, in the
great arched chamber of the prior: on which solemn occasion, the said chamber
was hung with the arras, or tapestry, of THE THREE KINGS OF COLOGNE Registr.
Priorat. S. Swithini Winton. ut supr. [vol. i. p. 89.] "In festo Alwyni
episcopi..... Et durante pietancia in aula conventus, sex MINISTRALLI, cum
quatuor CITHARISATORIBUS, faciebant ministralcias suas. Et post cenam, in magna
camera arcuata dom. Prioris, cantabant idem GESTUM, in qua camera
suspendebatur, ut moris est, magnum dorsale Prioris, habens picturas trium
regum Colein. Veniebant autem dicti joculatores a castello domini regis, et ex
familia episcopi...." The rest is much obliterated, and the date is hardly
discernible. Among the Harleian manuscripts, there is an ancient song on the
three kings of Cologne, in which the whole story of that favorite romance is
resolved into alchemy. MSS. 2407. 13. fol. Wynkyn de Word printed this romance
in quarto, 1526. It is in MSS. Harl. 1704. 11. fol. 49. b. Imperf. Coll. Trin.
Dublin. V. 651. 14. [C. 16.] MSS. More, 37. And frequently in other places.
Barclay, in his EGLOGES, mentions this subject, a part of the nativity, painted
on the walls of a church cathedral. EGL. v. Signat. D. ii. ad calc. Ship of
fools, edit. 1570.

And the three kings, with all their company,
Their crowns glistening bright and oriently,
With their presents and gifts mystical,
All this beheld I in picture on the wall.
In an Inventory of ornaments belonging to the church of Holbech in
Lincolnshire, and sold in the year 1548, we find this article. " Item, for the
COATS of the iii. kings of Coloyne, v s. iiii d." I suppose these coats were
for dressing persons who represented the three kings in some procession on the
NATIVITY. Or perhaps for a MYSTERY on the subject, played by the parish. But in
the same Inventory we have, Item, for the apostylls [the apostles] coats, and
for HAROD'S [Herod's] coat, etc. Stukeley's ITIN. CURIOS. page 19. In old
accounts of churchwardens for saint Helen's at Abingdon, Berks, for the year
1566, there is an entry For setting up ROBIN HOODES BOWER. I suppose for a
parish interlude. ARCHAEOL. vol. i. p. 16.


. These minstrels and harpers belonged, partly to the royal household in
Winchester castle, and partly to the bishop of Winchester. There was an annual
mass at the shrine or tomb of bishop Alwyne in the church, which was regularly
followed by a feast in the convent. It is probable, that the GEST here
specified was some poetical legend of the prelate, to whose memory this yearly
festival was instituted, and who was a Saxon bishop of Winchester about the
year 1040 He is buried in the north wall of the presbytery, with an inscription.
. Although songs of chivalry were equally common, and I believe more welcome to
the monks, at these solemnities. In an accompt-roll of the priory of Bicester,
in Oxfordshire In Thesauriaro Coll. Trin. Oxon. [See supr. vol. i. p. 90.]
, I find a parallel instance, under the year 1432. It is in this entry. " Dat.
sex Ministrallis de Bokyngham cantantibus in refectorio MARTYRIUM SEPTEM
DORMIENTIUM in ffesto epiphanie, iv s." That is, the treasurer of the monastery
gave four shillings to six minstrels from Buckingham, for singing in the
refectory a legend called the MARTYRDOM OF THE SEVEN SLEEPERS In the fourth
century, being enclosed in a cave at Ephesus by the emperor Decius 372 years,
they were afterward found sleeping, and alive.
, on the feast of the Epiphany. In the Cotton library, there is a Norman poem
in Saxon characters on this subject MSS. Cott. CALIG. A. ix. iii. fol. 213. b.
[See supr. vol. i. p. 18.] " Jci commence la vie de Semt dormanz." La uertu deu
iur tut ius and dure
^ tvt iurz est certain epure.

; which was probably translated afterward into English rhyme. The original is
a Greek legend MSS. Lambecc. viii. p. 375. Photius, without naming the author,
gives the substance of this Greek legend, Bibl. COD. CCLIII. page 1399. edit.
1591. fol. This story was common among the Arabians. The mussulmans borrowed
many wonderful narratives from the christians, which they embellished with new
fictions. They pretend that a dog, which was accidentally shut up in the cavern
with the seven sleepers, become rational. See Herbelot, DICT. ORIENT. P^ 139.
a. V. ASHAB. p. 17. In the British Museum there is a poem, partly in Saxon
characters, De pueritia domini nostri Jhesu Cristi. Or, the childhood of
Christ. MSS. Harl. 2399. 10. fol. 47. It begins thus. All myhty god in Trynyte,
That bowth [bought] man on rode dear;
He gefe ows wash to the
A lytyl wyle that ye will me here.
Who would suspect that this absurd legend had also a Greek original? It was
taken, I do not suppose immediately, from an apocryphal narrative ascribed to
saint Thomas the apostle, but really compiled by Thomas Israelites, and
entitled, (...), Liber de pueritia et miraculis domini, etc. It is printed in
part by Cotelerius, Not. ad Patr^ Apostol. p. 274. Who there mentions a book of
Saint Matthew the Evangelist, De Inf^ntia Salvatoris, in which our Lord is
introduced learning to read, etc. See Iren. lib. i. c. xvii. p. 104. Among
other figments of this kind, in the Pseudo-Gelasian Decree are recited, The
^istory and nat^vity of our Savior, and of Mary and the midwife. And^ The
history of the inf^ncy of ^^r Savior. Jur. Can. DISTINCT. can. 3. The latter
piece is mentioned by Ana^tafius, where he censures as supposititious, the
puerile miracles of Christ. (...) c. xiii. p. 26.

On the some subject there is an Arabic book, probably compiled soon after the
ri^e of Mahometani^m, translated into Latin by Sikius, called EVANGELIUM
IN^ANTIAE, Arab. et Latin. Traject. ad Rhen. 169^. 8vo. In this piece, Christ
is e^amined by the Jewish doctors, in astronomy, medicine, physics, and
metaphysics. Sikius says, that the PUERILE MIRACLES of Christ were common among
the Persians. Ibid. in Not. p^ 55. Fabricius cites a German poem, more than
four hundred years old, founded on these legends. Cod. Apocryph. NOV. TEST.
tom. i. pa^. 212. Hamburg. 1703.

At the end of the English poem on this subject above cited, is the following
rub^ic. "Qod dnus Johannes Arcitenens canonicus Bodminie et natus in illa."
Whether this canon of Bodmin in Cornwall, whose name was perhaps Archer, or
Bowyer, is the poet, or only the transcriber, I cannot say. See fol. 48. In the
same manuscript volume, [8.] there is an old English poem to our Sa^iour, with
this note. "Explicit Contemplati^nem b^nam. Qu^d dnus Johannes Arcuarius
Canonicus Bodminie." See what is said, below, of the PSEUDO-EVANGELIUM
attributed to Nichodemus.


, never printed; but which, in the dark ages, went about in a barbarous Latin
translation, by one Syrus Apud Surium, ad 2^ Jul.
; or in a narrative framed from thence by Gregory of Tours Hist^ria Sept^m
Dormientium. Paris. 1511. 4to. Ibid. 1640. And apud Ruinart. p. 1270. See
Praef. Ruinart.. 79. And Gregory himself De gl^ria martyrum, cap. 95. page 826.
This piece is noticed and much commended by the old chronicler Albericus, ad
ann. 319.
.

Henry Bradshaw has rather larger pretensions to poetical fame than William of
Nassington, although scarcely deserving the name of an original writer in any
respect. He was a native of Chester, educated at Gloucester college in Oxford,
and at length a Benedictine monk of saint Werburgh's abbey in his native place
Athen. Oxon. i. p. 9. Pits. 690.
. Before the year 1500, he wrote the LIFE OF SAINT WERBURGH, a daughter of a
king of the Mercians, in English verse He declares, that he does not mean to
rival Chaucer, Lydgate sententious, pregnaunt Barklay, and i^^ventive Skeleton.
The two last were his cotemporaries. L. ii. c. ^4.
. This poem, beside the devout deeds and passion of the poet's patroness saint,
comprehends a variety of other subjects; as a description of the kingdom of the
Mercians Lib. i. c. ii.
, the lives of saint Etheldred and saint Sexburgh Lib. i. cap. xviii. xix.
, the foundation of the city of Chester Lib. i. cap. iii.
, and a chronicle of our kings Lib. ii. cap. xv. The fashion of writing
metrical Chronicles of the kings of England grew very fashionable in this
century. See supr. vol. i. p. 92. Many of these are evidently composed for the
harp: but they are mostly mere genealogical deductions. Hearne has printed,
from the Heralds office, a PETEGREE of our kings, from William the conqueror to
Henry the sixth, written in 1448. [APPENDIX to Rob. Gloucestr. vol. ii. p. 585.
see p. 588.] This is a specimen.

Then regnyd Harry naught full wise,
The son of Mold [Maud] the emperyse.
In his time then saint Thomas
At Caunterbury marteryd was.
He held Rosomund the sheen,
Great sorwe hit was for the queen:
At Wodestoke for hure he made a toure,
That is called ROSEMOUNDES ^OURE. --
And sithen regnyd his sone Richerd,
A man that was never aferd:
He werred often time and wise
Worthily upon goddis enemyse.
And sithen he was shoten, alas!
At castle Gailard there he was.
A^te Font Everarde he lithe there:
He regnyd almost two year. --
In Johne is time, as y understonde,
Was entredyted all Engelonde:
He was fulle wroth and grym,
For prestus would naught sing before him, etc.
Lydgate has left the best chronicle of the kind, and most approaching to
poetry. The regnynge of kyngys after the conquest by the monk of Bury. MSS^
Fairf. Bibl. Bodl. 16. [And MSS. Ashmol. 59. ii. MSS. Harl. 2251. 3. And a
beautiful copy, with pictures of the kings, MSS. Cotton. JULIUS. E. 5.] Never
printed. [Unless printed by Wynkyn de Word, 1530. 4to. "This mighty Wyllyam
duke of Normandy."] This is one of the stanzas. [See MSS. Bodl. B. 3. 1999. 6.]

RICARD^S PRIMUS.
Rychard the next by succession,
Ffirst of that name, strong, har^y, and notable,
Was crouned king, called Cur de lion,
With Saryzonys hedys served at table:
Sleyn at Galard by death full lamentable:
The space reigned fully ix year;
His heart buried in Roon, at high autere.
Compare MSS. Harl. 372. 5. There was partly a political view in these
deductions: to ascertain the right of our kings to the crowns of France,
Castile, Leon, and the duchy of Normandy. See MSS. Harl. 326. 2. -- 116. 11.
fol. 142. I know not whether it be worth observing, that about this time a
practice prevailed of constructing long parchment-rolls in Latin, of the
Pedigree of our kings. Of this kind is the Pedigree of British kings from Adam
to Henry the sixth, written about the year 1450, by Roger Alban, a Carmelite
friar of London. It begins, "Considerans chronicorum prolixitatem." The
original copy, presented to Henry the sixth by the compiler, is now in Queen's
college library at Oxford. MSS. [22.] B. 5. 3. There are two copies in
Winchester college library, and another in the Bodleian. Among bishop More's
manuscripts, there is a parchment-roll of the Pedigree^ of our king^ from
Ethelred to Henry the fourth, in French, with pictures of the several monarchs.
MSS. 495. And, in the same collection, a Pedigree from Harold to Henry the
fourth, with elegant illuminations. MSS. 479. In the same rage of
genealogising, Alban abovementioned framed the Descent of Jesus Christ, from
Adam through the Levitical and regal tribes, the Jewish patriarchs, judges,
kings, prophets, and priests. The original roll, as it seems, on vellum,
beautifully illuminated, is in MSS. More, ut supr. 495. But this was partly
copied from Peter of Poictou, a disciple of Lombard about the year 1170, who,
for the benefit of the poorer clergy, was the first that found out the method
of forming, and reducing into parchment-rolls, HISTORICAL TREES of the old
testament. Alberic. in Chron. p. 441. See MSS. Denb. 1627. 1. Rot. membr.

As to Bradshaw's history of the foundation of Chester, it may be classed with
the FOUNDATION OF THE ABBEY OF GLOUCESTER, a poem of twenty-two stanzas,
written in the year 1534, by the last abbot William Malverne, printed by
Hearne, Ubi supr. p. 378. This piece is mentioned by Harpsfield, HIST. ECCLES.
ANGL. p. 264. Princip. "In sundry ^ayer volumes of antiquity." MSS. Harl.
539. 14. fol. 111.


. It is collected from Bid, Alfred of Beverly, Malmesbury, Girardus
Cambrensis, Higden's Polychronicon, and the passionaries of the female saints,
Werburgh, Etheldred, and Sexburgh, which were kept for public edification in
the choir of the church of our poet's monastery For as declares the true
PASSIONARY,
A book where her holy life written is,
Which book remains in Chester monastery.
Lib. i. c. vii. Signat. C ii. And again, ibid. I follow the legend and true
hystory
After an humble style and from it little vary.
And in the Prologue, lib. i. Signat. A iiii.

Untoo this rude work mine auctors these,
First the true Legends, and the venerable Bede,
Master Alfrydus, and Wyllyam Malmusbury,
Gyrard, Polychronicon, and other mo indeed.

. Bradshaw is not so fond of relating visions and miracles as his argument
seems to promise. Although concerned with three saints, he deals more in plain
facts than in the fictions of religious romance; and, on the whole, his
performance is rather historical than legendary. This is remarkable, in an age,
when it was the fashion to turn history into legend Even scripture-history was
turned into romance. The story of Esther and Ahasuerus, or of AMON or Hamon,
and MARDOCHEUS or Mordecai, was formed into a fabulous poem. MS. Vernon, ut
supr. fol. 213.

Of AMON and MARDOCHEUS.
Money winter witerly
Or Crist weore boren of ure ladi,
A rich king, hite AHASWERE,
That stif was on stead and stere;
Mighti king he was, i wis,
He livede muchel in weolye ant blis,
His bliss may i not tell ou,
How lange hit weore to schewe hit nou;
But thing that tovcheth to ure matere
I wol ou tell, gif e wol here.
The king lovede a knight so well,
That he commanded men should knel^
Before him, in vche a street,
Over all there men mihte him meet;
AMON was the knihtes nome,
On him fell muchel worldus schome,
Ffor in this ilke kings land
Was much folk of Jews wonande,
Of heore kind the king him tok
A qwene to wyve, as tells the bok, etc.
In the British Museum, there is a long commentitious narrative of the Creation
of Adam and Eve, their Sufferings and Repentance, Death and Burial. MSS. Harl.
1704. 5. fol. 18. This is from a Latin piece on the same subject, ibid. 495.
12. fol. 43. imperf. In the English, Peter Comestor, the master of stories,
author of the historia scholastica, who flourished about the year 1170, is
quoted. fol. 26. But he is not mentioned in the Latin, at fol. 49.

In Chaucer's MILLER'S TALE, we have this passage, v. 3538.

Have thou not herd, quod Nicholas also,
The sorwe of Noe with his felawship,
Or that he might get his wif to ship?
I know not whether this anecdote about Noah is in any similar supposititious
book of Genesis. It occurs, however, in the Chester Whitsun Plays, where the
authors, according to the established indulgence allowed to dramatic poets,
perhaps thought themselves at liberty to enlarge on the sacred story. MSS.
Harl. 2013. This altercation between Noah and his wife, takes up almost the
whole third pageaunt of these interludes. Noah, having reproached his wife for
her usual frowardness of temper, at last conjures her to come on board the ark,
for fear of drowning. His wife insists on his sailing without her; and swears
by Christ and saint John, that she will not embark, till some of her old female
comp^nions are ready to go with her. She adds, that if he is in such a hurry,
he may sail alone, and fetch himself a new wife. At length Shem, with the help
of his brothers, forces her into the vessel; and while Noah very cordially
welcomes her on board, she gives him a box on the ear.

There is an apocryphal book, of the expulsion of Adam from Paradise, and of
Seth's pilgrimage to Paradise, etc. etc. MSS. Eccles. Cathedr. Winton. 4.


. His fabulous origin of Chester is not so much to be imputed to his own want
of veracity, as to the authority of his voucher Ranulph Higden, a celebrated
chronicler, his countryman, and a monk of his own abbey There is the greatest
probability, that RALPH HIGDEN, hitherto known as a grave historian and
theologist, was the compiler of the Chester-plays, mentioned above, vol. i. p.
243. In one of the Harleian copies [2013. 1.] under the Proclamation for
performing these plays in the year 1522, this note occurs, in the hand of the
third Randal Holme, one of the Chester antiquaries. "Sir John Arnway was mayor,
A. D. 1327, and 1328. At which time these plays were written by RANDALL
HIGGENET, a monk of Chester abbey, etc." In a Prologue to these plays, when
they were presented in the year 1600, are these lines, ibid. 2.

That some times there was mayor of this city
Sir John Arnway knight: who most worthily
Contented himself to set out in play,
The Devise of one Done RONDALL, Moonke of Chester abbaye.
Done Rondall is Dan [dominus] Randal. In another of the Harleian copies of
these plays, written in the year 1607, this note appears, seemingly written in
the year 1628. [MSS. Harl. 2124.] "The Whitsun plays first made by one Don
Rondle Heggenet, a monk of Chester abbey: who was thrice at Rome before he
could obtain leave of the pope to have them in the English tongue." Our
chronicler's name in the text, sometimes written Hikeden, and Higgeden, was
easily corrupted into Higgenet^ or Heggenet: and Randa^ is Ranulph or Randolph,
Ralph. He died, having been a monk of Chester abbey sixty-four years, in the
year 1363. In PIERS PLOWMAN, a friar says, that he is well acquainted with the
" rimes of RANDALL OF CHESTER" fol. 26. edit. 1550. I take this pass^ge to
allude to this very person, and to his compositions of this kind, for which he
was probably soon famous. In an anonymous CHRONICON, he is styled Ranulphus
Cestrensis, which is nothing more than RANDALL OF CHESTER, MS. Ric. James, xi.
8. Bibl. Bodl. And again we have, RANULPHI CESTRENSIS "ars componendi
sermone^." MSS. Bodl. sup. N. 2. Art. 10. And in many other places.

By the way, if it be true that these MYSTERIES were composed in the year 1328,
and there was so much difficulty in obtaining the pope's permission that they
might be presented in English, a presumptive proof arises, that all our
MYSTERIES before that period were in Latin. These plays will therefore have the
merit of being the first English interludes.


. He supposes that Chester, called by the ancient Britons CAIR LLEON, or the
city of Legions, was founded by Leon Gaur, a giant, corrupted from LEON VAUR,
or the great legion.

The founder of this city, as says Polychronicon,
Was Leon Gaur, a might strong gyaunt,
Which buildid caves and dongeons many a one,
No goodly buildyng, ne proper, ne pleasant.
He adds, with an equal attention to etymology:

But king Leir a Britan fine and valiant,
Was founder of Chester by pleasant buildyng,
And was named Guar Leir by the king Lib. ii. c. iii.
.
But a greater degree of credulity would perhaps have afforded him a better
claim to the character of a poet: and, at least, we should have conceived a
more advantageous opinion of his imagination, had he been less frugal of those
traditionary fables, in which ignorance and superstition had clothed every
part of his argument. This piece was first printed by Pinson in the year 1521.
"Here begins the holy life of SAINT WERBURGE, very fruitful for all christian
people to read In octavo. With a wooden cut of the Saint. Princip. "When Phoebus
had run his course in Sagittari." At the beginning is an English copy of
verses, by J. T. And at the end two others.
." He traces the genealogy of saint Werburg with much historical accuracy A
descryp^yon of the geanalogy of SAINT WERBURGE, etc. This noble princes, the
daughter of Syon,
The flower of virtue, and vyrgyn glorious,
Blessed saint Werburge, full of devocyon,
Descended by auncetry, and title famous,
Of four mighty kings, noble and vyctoryous,
Reynynge in his land, by true succession,
As her ly^e historyall That is, her Legend.
, makes declaracyon.
The year of our lord, from the natyuyte
Fvue h^ndreth xiiii. and iiii. score,
When Aust^n was send, from saint Gregorye,
To conue^t this regyon, unto our sauyoure
The noble king Cryda than reigned with honor
Upon the Mercyens, which king was father
Unto king Wybba, and Quadriburge his sister.
This Wybba gate Penda, king of Mercyens,
Which Penda subdued, ^yue kings of this regyon
Reygnynge thyrty year, in worship and reuerens
Was grauntfather to Werburge, by lynyall succession
By his queen Kyneswith, had a noble generacyon
Five valiant princes, Penda and king Wulfer,
King Ethelred, saint Marceyl, saint Marwalde in ^ere Edit. Pins. 1521.
.

.

The most splendid passage of this poem, is the following description of the
feast made by king Ulpher in the hall of the abbey of Ely, when his daughter
Werburgh was admitted to the veil in that monastery. Among other curious
anecdotes of ancient manners, the subjects of the tapestry, with which the hall
was hung, and of the songs sung by the minstrels, on this solemn occasion, are
given at large "Of the great solempnyte king Wulfer made at the ghostly
marriage of Saint Werburge his daughter, to all his lovers, cosyns, and
friends." Ca. xvi. L. i.
.

King Wulfer her father at this ghostly spousage
Prepared great tryumphes, and solempnyte;
Made a royal feast, as custom is of marriage,
Send for his friends, after good humanyte
Kept a noble household, showed great lyberalyte
Both to rich and poor, that to this feast would come,
No man was denied, every man was welcome.
Her uncles and auntes, were present there all
Ethelred and Merwalde, and Mercelly also
Three blessed kings, whom saints we do call
Saint Keneswyd, saint Keneburg, their sisters both two
And of her noble lynage, many other mo
Were ready that season, with reverence and honor
At this noble tryumphe, to do all their devour.
Tho kings met them, with their company,
Egbryct king of Kent, brother to the queen;
The second was Aldulphe king of the east party,
Brother to saint Audry, wife and maid serene;
With diverse of their progeny, and nobles as I wene,
Dukes, earls, barons, and lords far and nere,
In their best array, were present all in fere Together.
.
It were full tedyous, to make descrypcyon
Of the great tryumphes, and solemn royalte,
Belonging to the feast, the honor and provysyon,
By plain declaracyon, upon every party;
But the sothe to say, withouten ambyguyte,
All herbs and flowers, fragraunt, fair and sweet,
Were strawed in halles, and laid under their fete.
Clothes of gold and arras, were hanged in the hall
Depaynted with pyctures, and hystoryes manyfolde,
Well wroughte and craftily, with precious stones all
Glyterynge as Phoebus, and the beten gold,
Like an erthly paradyse, pleasant to behold:
As for the said moynes Nun. i. e. The Lady Werburg.
, was not them among,
But prayenge in her cell, as done all novice young.
The story of Adam, there was goodly wrought
And of his wife Eve, between them the serpent,
How they were deceyved, and to their peynes brought;
There was Cayn and Abell, offering their present,
The sacryfyce of Abell, accept full evydent:
Tuball and Tubalcain, were purtrayed in that place
The inventours of musyke, and craft by great grace.
Noe and his ship, was made there curyously
Sendynge forth a raven, which never came again;
And how the dove returned, with a branch hastily,
A token of comfort and peace, to man certain:
Abraham there was, standing upon the mount plain
To offer in sacrifice, Isaac his dear sone,
And how the sheep for him was offered in oblacyon.
The twelve sons of Jacob, there were in purtrayture
And how into Egypt, young Joseph was sold,
There was imprisoned, by a false conjectour,
After in all Egypt, was ruler (as is told).
There was in pycture, Moses wise and bold,
Our Lord apperynge, in bushe flammynge as fire
And nothing thereof brent, lefe, tree, nor spyre Twig. Branch.
.
The ten plages of Egypt, were well embost
The children of Israel, passing the reed see,
King Pharoo drowned, with all his proud host,
And how the two table, at the mount Synaye
Were gyven to Moses, and how soon to idolatry
The people were prone, and punyshed were therefore,
How Datan and Abyron, for pride were full your Burnt.
.
Duke Josue was joined, after them in pycture,
Ledynge the Isre^elytes to the land of promyssyon,
And how the said land was divided by mesure
To the people of God, by equal sundry porcyon:
The judges and bishops were there everychone,
Their noble acts, and tryumphes marcyall,
Fresshly were browdred in these clothes royal.
Next to the great lord, appeared fair and bright
King Saull and David, and prudent Solomon,
Roboas succedynge, which soon lost his might,
The good king Esechyas, and his generacyon,
And so to the Machabees, and dyvers other nacyon,
All these said stories, so rychely done and wrought.
Belongyng to king Wulfer, again that time were brought All this tapestry,
belonging to king Wulfer, was brought to Ely monastery on this occasion.
.
But over the hye desse Seat.
, in the pryncypall place
Where the said three kings sat crowned all,
The best hallynge Tapestry.
hanged, as reason was,
Whereon were wrought the ix. orders angelical
Dyvyded in three ierarchyses, not cessynge to call
Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, blessed be the Trynite,
Dominus Deus Sabbath, three persons in one deyte.
Next in order suynge Following.
, set in goodly purtrayture
Was our blessed lady, flower of femynyte,
With the twelve Apostles, echeone in his figure,
And the four Evangelystes, wrought most curyously:
Also the Dyscyples of Christ in their degree
Prechynge and techynge, unto every nacyon,
The faythtes Feats. Facts.
of holy church, for their salvacyon.
Martyrs than followed, right manifold:
The holy Innocents, whom Herod had slain,
Blessed Saint Stephen, the prothomartyr truly,
Saint Laurence, Saint Vyncent, sufferynge great pain;
With many other mo, than here ben now certain,
Of which said martyrs exsample we may take,
Pacyence to observe, in heart, for Christ's sake.
Confessors approached, right convenient,
Fressely enbrodred in rich tysshewe and fine;
Saint Nycholas, Saint Benedycte, and his convent,
Saint Jerome, Basylyus, and Saint Augustine,
Gregory the great doctor, Ambrose and Saint Martyne:
All these were set in goodly purtrayture,
Them to behold was a heavenly pleasure.
Vyrgyns them followed, crowned with the lyly,
Among whom our lady chief president was;
Some crowned with rooses for their great vyctory:
Saint Kather^ne, Saint Margerette, Saint Agathas,
Saint Cycyly, Saint Agnes, and Saint Charytas,
Saint Lucye, Saint Wenefryde, and Saint Apolyn;
All these were brothered Embroidered.
, the clothes of gold within.
Upon the other side of the hall set were
Noble ancient stories, and how the strong Sampson
Subdued his enemies by his mighty power;
Of Hector of Troy, slain by falls treason;
Of noble Arthur, king of this regyon:
With many other mo, which it is to long
Plainly to express this time you among.
The tables were covered with clothes of dyaper,
Rychely enlarged with silver and with gold,
The cupborde with plate shynyng fair and clear,
Marshalles their offices fulfilled manyfolde:
Of mighty wine plenty, both new and old,
All manner kind of meets delycate
(When grace was said) to them was preparate.
To this noble feast there was such ordinance,
That nothing wanted that gotten might be
On see and on land, but there was habundance
Of all manner pleasures to be had for monye;
The bordes all charged full of meet plente,
And dyvers subtyltes Dishes of curious cookery, so called.
prepared sothly were,
With cordyall and spyces, their guestes for to chere.
The joyful words and sweet communycacyon
Spoken at the table, it were hard to tell;
Each man at lyberte, without interrupcyon,
Both sadness and myrthes, also pryve counsel,
Some adulacyon, some the truth did tell,
But the great astates Kings.
spoke of their regyons,
Knights of their chyvalry, of crafts the commons.
Certain at each course of service in the hall,
Trumpettes blewe up, shalmes and claryons,
Showing their melody, with toynes Tunes.
musycall,
Dyvers other mynstrelles, in crafty proporcyons,
Mad sweet concordaunce and lusty dyvysyons:
An hevenly pleasure, such armony to here,
Rejoysynge the hertes of the audyence full clear.
A singular Mynstrell, all other far passing,
Toyned Tuned.
his instrument in pleasant armony,
And sang most swetely, the company gladynge,
Of mighty conquerours, the famous vyctory;
Wherewith was ravysshed their sprytes and memory:
Specially he sange of the great Alexandere,
Of his tryumphes and honors endurynge xii year.
Solemply he song the scate of the Romans,
Ruled under kings by policy and wisdom,
Of their hye justice and ryghtful ordinauns
Daily encreasynge in worship and renown,
Till Tarquyne the proud king, with that great confusion,
Oppressed dame Lucrece, the wife of Colatyne,
Kings never reyned in Rome sith that time.
Also how the Romans, under three dyctatours,
Governed all regyons of the world right wisely,
Till Julyus Caesar, excellynge all conquerours,
Subdued Pompeius, and took the hole monarchy
And the rule of Rome to him self manfully;
But Cassius Brutus, the false conspyratour,
Caused to be slain the said noble emperor.
After the said Julius, succeeded his sister sone,
Called Octavianus, in the imperyall see,
And by his precepte was made descrypcyon
To every regyon, land, shyre This puts one in mind of the Sheriffs, in our
Translation of the Bible, among the officers of the kingdom of Babylon, DAN.
iii. 2.
, and cytee,
A tribute to pay unto his dignyte:
That time was universal peace and honor,
In which time was borne our blessed Savyoure.
All these hystoryes, noble and ancient,
Rejoysynge the audyence, he sange with pleasuer;
And many other mo of the New Testament,
Pleasant and profitable for their souls cure,
Which be omytted, now not put in ure Not mentioned here.
:
The mynysters were ready, their office to fullfyll,
To take up the tables at their lords will.
When this noble feast and great solempnyte,
Daily endurynge a long time and space,
Was royally ended with honor and royalte,
Each king at other lysence taken hace,
And so departed from thens to their place:
King Wulfer returned, with worship and renown,
From the house Monastery.
of Ely to his own mansyon.
If there be any merit of imagination or invention, to which the poet has a
claim in this description, it altogether consists in the application. The
circumstances themselves are faithfully copied by Bradshaw, from what his own
age actually presented. In this respect, I mean as a picture of ancient life,
the passage is interesting; and for no other reason. The versification is
infinitely inferior to Lydgate's worst manner.

Bradshaw was buried in the cathedral church, to which his convent was annexed,
in the year 1513 Ath. Oxon. i. 9.
. Bale, a violent reformer, observes, that our poet was a person remarkably
pious for the times in which he flourished Cent. ix. Numb. 17.
. This is an in^irect satire on the monks, and on the period which preceded the
reformation. I believe it will readily be granted, (...) our author had more
piety than poetry. His Prolog^^ contains the following humble professions of
his inability ^o treat lofty subjects, and to please light readers.

To descrybe hye hystoryes I dare not be so bold,
Sith it is a matter for clerks convenyent;
As of the seven ages, and of our parents old,
Or of the four empyres whilom most excellent;
Knowing my lerning thereto insuffycient:
As for baudy balades you shall have none of me,
To excyte light hertes to pleasure and vanity Prol. lib. i. Signat. A. iii.
.
A great translator of the lives of the Saxon saints, from the Saxon, in which
language only they were then extant, into Latin, was Goscelinus, a monk of
Saint Austin's at Canterbury, who passed from France into England, with Herman,
bishop of Salisbury, about the year 1058 W. Malmesbur. lib. iv. ubi infr. --
Goscelin. in Praefatt. ad Vit. S. Augustini. See Mabillon, ACT. BEN. Saec. i.
p. 499.
. As the Saxon language was at this time but little understood, these
translations opened a new and ample treasure of religious history: nor were
they acquisitions only to the religion, but to the literature, of that era.
Among the rest, were the Lives of saint Werburgh Printed, ACT. SANCTOR.
Bolland. tom. i. februar. p. 386. A part in Leland, Coll. ii. 154. Compare MSS.
C. C. C. Cant. J. xiii.
, saint Etheldred In Registr. Eliens. ut infr.
, and saint Sexburgh See Leland. Coll. iii. p. 152. Compare the Lives of S.
Etheldred, S. Werburgh, and S. Sexburgh, at the end of the HISTORIA AUREA of
John of Tinmouth, MS. Lambeth. 12. I know not whether they make a part of his
famous SANCTILOGIUM. He flourished about the year 1380.
, most probably the legends, which were Bradshaw's originals. Usher observes,
that Goscelinus also translated into Latin the ancient Catalogue of the Saxon
saints buried in England Antiquit. Brit. c. ii. p. 15. See Leland's Coll. iii.
86. seq. And Hickes. Thesaur. vol. ult. p. 86. 146. 208.
. In the register of Ely it is recorded, that he was the most eloquent writer
of his age; and that he circulated all over England, the lives, miracles, and
GESTS, of the saints of both sexes, which he reduced into prose-histories Cap.
x. Vit. Ethel.
. The words of the Latin deserve our attention. "In historiis in prosa dictando
mutavit." Hence we may perhaps infer^ that they were not before in prose, and
that he took the^ from old metrical legends: this is a presumptive proof, that
the lives of the saints were at first extant in verse. In the same light we are
to understand the words which i^^^diately follow. "Hic scripsit Prosam sanctae
Etheld^^^ae Which is extant in this Ely register, and contains 54 heads.
." Where the Prose of saint Etheldred is opposed to her poetical legend And
these improved prose-narratives were often turned back again into verse, even
so late as in the age before us: to which, among others I could mention, we may
refer the legend of Saint Eustathius, MSS. Cotton. CALIG. A. 2.

Saint Eustace, a nobull knyte,
Of hethen law he was;
And ere than he crystened was
Mean called him Placidas.
He was with Trajan themperor, etc.
A Latin legend on this saint is in MSS. Harl. 2316. 42.

Concerning legend-makers, there is a curious story in MSS. James, xxxi. p. 6.
[ad ITER LANCASTR. number. 39. vol. 40.] Bibl. Bodl. Gilbert de Stone, a learned
ecclesiastic, who flourished about the year 1380, was soli^^^ed by the monks of
Holywell in Flintshire, to write the life of their patron saint. Stone applying
to these monks for materials, was answe^ed, that they had none in their
monastery^ Upon which he declared, that he could ^^^^ute the work just as
easily without any ^^terials at all: and that he would write them a most
excellent legend, after the manner of the legend of Thomas a Becket. He has the
character of an elegant Latin writer; and seems to have done the same piece of
service, perhaps in the same way, to other religious houses. From his EPISTLES,
it appears that he wrote the life of saint Wolfade, patron of the priory of
canons regular of his native town of Stone in Staffordshire, which he dedicated
to the prior, William de Madely. Epist. iii. dat. 1399. [MSS. Bibl. Bodl. Sup.
D i. Art. 123.] He was Latin secretary to several bishops, and could possibly
write a legend or a letter with equal facility. His epistles are 123 in number.
The first of them, in which he is styled chancellor to the bishop of
Winchester, is to the archbishop of Canterbury. That is, secretary. [MSS.
Cotton. VITELL. E. x. 17.] This bishop of Winchester must have been William of
Wykeham.

The most extraordinary composition of this kind, if we consider, among other
circumstances, that it was compiled at a time when knowledge and literature had
made some progress, and when mankind were so much less disposed to believe or
to invent miracles, more especially when the subject was quite recent, is the
LEGEND of KING HENRY the SIXTH. It is entitled, De MIRACULIS beatissimi illius
Militis Christi, Henrici sexti, etc. That it might properly rank with other
legends, it was translated from an English copy into Latin, by one Johannes,
styled Pauperculus, a monk, about the year 1503, at the command of John Morgan,
dean of Windsor, afterward bishop of saint David's. It is divided into two
books: to both of which, prefaces are prefixed, containing proofs of the
miracles wrought by this pious monarch. At the beginning, there is a hymn, with
a prayer, addressed to the royal saint. fol. 72. Salve, miles preciose,
Rex Henrice generose, etc.
Henry could not have been a complete saint without his legend. MSS. Harl. 423.
7. And MSS. Reg. 13 C. 8. What shall we think of the judgment and abilities of
the dignified ecclesiastic, who could seriously patronise so ridiculous a
narrative?


. By mutavit dictando, we are to understand, that he translated, or reformed,
or, in the most general sense, wrote anew in Latin, these antiquated lives. His
principal objects were the more recent saints, especially those of this island.
Malmesbury says, "Innumeras SANCTORUM VITAS RECENTIUM stylo extulit, veterum
vel amissas, vel informiter editas, comptius renovavit Hist. Angl. lib. iv. p.
130.
." In this respect, the labors of Goscelin partly resembled those of Symeon
Metaphrastes, a celebrated Constantinopolitan writer of the tenth century: who
obtained the distinguishing appellation of the METAPHRAST, because, at the
command, and under the auspices of Constantine Porphyrogenitus, he modernised
the more ancient narratives of the miracles and martyrdoms of the most eminent
eastern and western saints, for the use of the Greek church: or rather
digested, from detached, imperfect, or obsolete books on the subject, a new and
more commodious body of the sacred biography.

Among the many striking contrasts between the manners and characters of
ancient and modern life, which these annals present, we must not be surprised
to find a mercer, a sheriff, and an alderman of London, descending from his
important occupations, to write verses. This is Robert Fabyan, who yet is
generally better known as an historian, than as a poet. He was esteemed, not
only the most facetious, but the most learned, of all the mercers, sheriffs,
and aldermen, of his time: and no layman of that age is said to have been
better skilled in the Latin language. He flourished about the year 1494. In his
CHRONICLE, or Concordance of histories, from Brutus to the year 1485, it is his
usual practice, at the division of the books, to insert metrical prologues, and
other pieces in verse. The best of his metres is the COMPLAINT of king Edward
the second; who, like the personages in Boccacio's FALL OF PRINCES, is very
dramatically introduced, reciting his own misfortunes Fol. 171. tom. ii. edit.
1533. See Hearne's Lib. Nig. Scacc. p. 425. And Praefat. p. xxxviii. Fabyan
says, "they are reported to be his own making, in the time of his
emprysonment." ibid. By the way, there is a passage in this chronicler which
points out the true reading of a controverted passage in Shakespeare, "Also
children were christened thorough all the land, and men houseled and anealed,
except such, etc." tom. ii. p. 30. col. 2.
. But th^^ soliloquy is nothing more than a translation from a short and a very
poor Latin poem attributed to that monarch, but probably written by William of
Wyrcester, which is preserved among the manuscripts of the college of arms, and
entitled, Lamentatio gloriosi regis Edvardi de Karnarvon quam edidit tempore
suae incarcerationis. Our author's transitions from prose to verse, in the
course of a prolix narrative, seem to be made with much ease; and, when he
begins to versify, the historian disappears only by the addition of rhyme and
stanza. In the first edition of his CHRONICLE, by way of epilogues to his seven
books, he has given us The seven joys of the Blessed Virgin in English Rhyme.
And under the year 1325, there is a poem to the virgin; and another on one
Badby, a Lollard, under the year 1409 Edit. ^ond. 1516. fol.
. These are suppressed in the later editions. He has likewise left a panegyric
on the city of London; but despairs of doing justice to so noble a subject for
verse, even if he had the eloquence of Tully, the morality of Seneca, and the
harmony of that fair Lady Calliope Fol. 2. tom. ii. ut supr.
. The reader will thank me for citing only one stanza from king Edward's
COMPLAINT.

When Saturn, with his cold and isye face,
The ground, with his frostes, turns grene to white;
The time winter, which trees does deface,
And causes all verdure to avoyde quite:
Then fortune, which sharp was, with storms not lite
Has me assaulted with her froward will,
And me beclipped with dangers right ill In the British Museum there is a poem
on this subject, and in the same stanza. MSS. Harl. 2393. 4to. 1. The ghost of
Edward the second, as here, is introduced speaking. It is addressed to queen
Elizabeth, as appears, among other passages, from st. 92. 242. 243. 305. It
begins thus. Whi^ should a wasted spirit spent in woe
Disclose the wounds receyved within his breast?
It is imperfect, having only 352 stanzas. Then follows the same poem; with
many alterations, additions, and omissions. This i^ addressed to James the
first, as appears from st. 6. 259. 260. 326, etc. It contains 581 stanzas.
There is another copy in the same library, Number. 558. At the end the poet calls
himself INFORTUNIO. This is an appellation which, I think, Spenser sometimes
assumed. But Spenser was dead before the reign of James: nor has this piece any
of Spenser's characteristic merit. It begins thus. I sing thy s^d disaster,
fatal king,
Carnarvon Edward, second of that name.
The poem on this subject in the addition to the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, by
William Niccols, is a different composition. A WINTER NIGHT'S VISION. Land.
1610. p. 702. These two manuscript poems deserve no further mention: nor would
they have been mentioned at all, but from their reference to the text, and on
account of their subject. Compare, MSS. Harl. 2251. 119. fol. 254. An
unfinished poem on Edward the second, perhaps by Lydgate. Princ. "Behold this
great prince Edward the secunde."
.
As an historian, our author is the dullest of compilers. He is equally
attentive to the succession of the mayors of London, and of the monarchs of
England: and seems to have thought the dinners at guildhall, and the
pageantries of the city-companies, more interesting transactions, than our
victories in France, and our struggles for public liberty at home. One of
Fabyan's historical anecdotes, under the important reign of Henry the fifth,
is, that a new weathercock was placed on the cross of Saint Paul's steeple. It
is said, that cardinal Wolsey commanded many copies of this chronicle to be
committed to the flames, because it made too ample a discovery of the excessive
revenues of the clergy. The earlier chapters of these childish annals
faithfully record all those fabulous traditions, which generally supply the
place of historic monuments in describing the origin of a great nation.

Another poet of this period is John Watson, a priest. He wrote a Latin
theological tract entitled SPECULUM CHRISTIANI, which is a sort of paraphrase
on the decalogue and the creed MSS. C. C. C. Oxon. 155. MSS. Laud. G. 12. MSS.
Thoresb. 530. There is an abridgement of this work, [MSS. Harl. 2250. 20.] with
the date 1477. This is rather beyond the period with which we are at present
engaged.
. But it is interspersed with a great number of wretched English rhymes: among
which, is the following hymn to the virgin Mary Compare a hymn to the holy
virgin, supr. vol. i. p. 314. Matthew Paris relates, that Godrich, a hermit,
about the year 1150, who lived in a solitary wild on the banks of the river
Ware near Durham, had a vision, in his oratory, of the virgin Mary, who taught
him this song.

Seint Marie clane virgin,
Mother Jesu Christ Nazarine,
On so scild their Godrich
On ^ang bring haeli widh the in gods rich.
Seinte Marie, Christ's bur,
Maidenes clenhad, moderes flur,
Delle mine sennen, rixe in mine mod,
Bring me to win widh self god.
Matt. Paris. Hist. Angl. [HENRIC. ii.] p. 115. edit. Tig. 1589.

In one of the Harl^ian manuscripts, many very ancient hymns to the holy virgin
occur. MS. 2253. These are specimens. 66. fol. 80. b.

Blessed be thou [thou] levedy, full of heovene bliss,
Sweet flur of parays, mother of mildness,
Pray e Jhesu thy [thy] sone that [that] he me read and wysse
So my wey for to gone, that he me nevere mysse.
Ibid. 67. ^ol. 81. b.

As y me rod this ender day,
By grene wode to seche play,
Mid heart y thohte al on a May [Maid], Swetest of al thing!
Lythe, and ich ou tell may al of that sweet thing.
Ibid. 69. fol. 83. In French and English.

Maiden mother mild, oyez cel oreysoun,
From shom thou me shilde, e di la mal feloun,
For love of thine child, me muez de tresoun,
Ich was wod and wild, ore su ^n prisoun.
See also ibid. 49. fol. 75. -- 57. fol. 78. And 372. 7. fol. 55.

In the library of Mr. Farmer, of Tusmore in Oxfordshire, are, or were lately,
a collection of hymns and antiphones, paraphrased into English, by William
Herbert, a Franciscan friar, and a famous preacher, about the year 1330. These,
with some other of his pieces contained in the same library, are unmentioned by
Bale, v. 31. And Pitts, p. 428. [Autogr. in pergamen.] Pierre de Corbian, a
troubadour, has left a hymn, or prayer, to the holy virgin: which, he says, he
chose to compose in the romance^language, because he could write it more
intelligibly than Latin. Another troubadour, a mendicant friar of the
thirteenth century, had worked himself up into such a pitch of enthusiasm
concerning the holy virgin, that he became deeply in love with her. It is
partly owing, as I have already hinted, to the gallantry of the dark ages, in
which the female sex was treated with so romantic a respect, that the virgin
Mary received such exaggerated honors, and was so distinguished an object of
adoration in the devotion of those times.


.

Mary Mother, well thou be;
Mary Mother thenke on me:
Maiden and mother was never none
Togeder, lady, safe thou allone These four lines are in the exordium of a
prayer to the virgin, MSS. Harl. 2382. (4to.) 3. fol. 86. b. [Se^ supr. p. 60.]
.
Sweet lady, maiden clean,
Schilde me fro ille, schame, and tene,
And out of debt, for charitee, etc. Printed by William Maclyn or Machlinia.
Without date.
.
Caxton, the celebrated printer, was likewise a poet; and beside the rhyming
introductions and epilogues with which he frequently decorates his books, has
left a poem of considerable length, entitled the WORK OF SAPIENCE Printed by
him, without date. fol. in thirty-seven leaves.
. It comprehends, not only an allegorical fiction concerning the two courts of
the castle of Sapience, in which there is no imagination, but a system of
natural philosophy, grammar, logic, rhetoric, geometry, astronomy, theology,
and other topics of the fashionable literature. Caxton appears to be the
author, by the prologue: yet it is not improbable, that he might on this
occasion employ some professed versifier, at least as an assistant, to prepare
a new book of original poetry for his press. The writer's design, is to
describe the effects of wisdom from the beginning of the world: and the work is
a history of knowledge or learning. In a vision, he meets the goddess SAPIENCE
in a delightful meadow; who conducts him to her castle, or mansion, and there
displays all her miraculous operations. Caxton, in the poem, invokes the gylted
goddess and most facundyous lady Clio, apologizes to those makers who delight
in terms gay, for the inelegancies of language which as a foreigner he could
not avoid, and modestly declares, that he neither means to rival or envy Gower
and Chaucer.

Among the anonymous pieces of poetry belonging to this period, which are very
numerous, the most conspicuous is the CALENDAR OF SHEPHERDS. It seems to have
been translated into English about the year 1480, from a French book entitled
KALENDRIER DES BERGERS I have seen an edition of the French, of 1500.
. It was printed by Wynkyn de Word in the year 1497 I have an edition printed
by John Wally, at London, without date. 4to. In the prolog^e it is said, "This
book was first corruptly printed in France, and after that at the cost and
charges of Richard Pinson newly translated and ^eprinted although not so
faithfully as the original copy required, etc." It was certainly first printed
by de Word, 1497. Again, chapter ii. "From the year this calendar was made M.
CCCC. XCVII. unto the year M. CCCCC. XVI." From whence I conclude, that
Worde's edition was in 1497, Wally's in 1516. Again, "This year of the present
calendar which began to have course the first day of January M. CCCC. XCVII."
. This piece was calculated for the purposes of a perpetual almanac; and seems
to have been the universal magazine of every article of salutary and useful
knowledge. It is a medley of verse and prose; and contains, among many other
curious particulars, the saints of the whole year, the moveable feasts, the
signs of the zodiac, the properties of the twelve months, rules for
blood-letting, a collection of proverbs, a system of ethics, politics,
divinity, phisiognomy, medicine, astrology, and geography Pieces of this sort
were not uncommon. In the British museum there is an ASTROLOGICAL poem,
teaching when to buy and sell, to let blood, to build, to go to sea, the
fortune of children, the interpretation of dreams, with other like important
particulars, from the day of the moon's age. MSS. Harl. 2320. 3. fol. 31. In
the principal letter the author is represented in a studious posture. The
manuscript, having many Saxon letters intermixed, begins thus.

He that wol herkyn of wit
that is witnest in holy wryt,
Lystenyth to me a stand,
Of a story y schal ow tell,
What time is good to byen and to fylle,
In book as hit is y fownde.
The reader who is curious to know the state of quackery, astrology,
fortune-telling, midwi^ery, and other occult sciences, about the year 1420, may
consult the works of one John Crophill, who practiced in Suffolk. MSS. Harl.
1735. 4to. 3. seq. [See fol. 29. 36.] This cunning-man was likewise a poet; and
has left, in the same manuscript, some poetry spoken at an entertainment of
Friar Thomas, and five ladies of quality, whose names are mentioned: at which,
two great bowls, or goblets, called MERCY and CHARITY, were briskly circulated.
fol. 48.


. Among other authors, Cathon the great clarke Epilogue.
, Solomon, Ptolomeus the prince of astronomy, and Aristotle's Epistle to
Alexander, are quoted Cap. 42.
. Every month is introduced respectively speaking, in a stanza of balad royal,
its own panegyric. This is the speech of May Cap. 2.
.

Of all months in the year I am king,
Flourishing in beauty excellently;
For, in my time, in virtue is all thing,
Fields and medes sprede most beautiously,
And birds singe with sweet harmony;
Rejoysing lovers with hot love endewed,
With fragrant flowers all about renewed^
In the theological part, the terrors and certainty of death are described, by
the introduction of Death, seated on the pale horse of the Apocalypse, and
speaking thus Cap. xix.
.

Upon this horse, black and hideous
DEATH I am, that fiercely does sit:
There is no fairness, but sight tedious,
All gay colors I do hitte.
My horse runs by dales and hills,
And many he smites dead and killes.
In my trap I take some by every way,
By towns [and] castles I take my rent.
I will not respite one an hour of a day,
Before me they must needs be present.
I slay all with my mortal knife,
And of duty I take the life.
HELL knows well my killing,
I sleep never, but wake and warke;
It That is, HELL.
follows me ever running,
With my darte I slay weak and stark:
A great number it has of me,
Paradyse has not the fourth part, etc.
In the eighth chapter of our CALENDAR are described the seven visions, or the
punishments in hell of the seven deadly sins, which Lazarus saw between his
death and resurrection. These punishments are imagined with great strength of
fancy, and accompanied with wooden cuts boldly touched, and which the printer
Wynkyn de Word probably procured from some German engraver at the infancy of
the art Compare the torments of Dante's hell. INFERN. Cant. v. vi. seq.
. The PROUD are bound by hooks of iron to vast wheels, like mills, placed
between craggy precipices, which are incessantly whirling with the most violent
impetuosity, and sound like thunder. The ENVIOUS are plunged in a lake half
frozen, from which as they attempt to emerge for ease, their naked limbs are
instantly smote with a blast of such intolerable keenness, that they are
compelled to dive again into the lake. To the WRATHFUL is assigned a gloomy
cavern, in which their bodies are butchered, and their limbs mangled by demons
with various weapons. The SLOTHFUL are tormented in a horrible hall dark and
tenebrous, swarming with innum^rable flying serpents of various shapes and
sizes, which sting to the heart. This, I think, is the Hell of the Gothic EDDA.
The COVETOUS are dipped in cauldrons filled with boiling metals. The GLUTTONOUS
are placed in a vale near a loathsome pool, abounding with venomous creatures,
on whose banks tables are spread, from which they are perpetually crammed with
toads by devils. CONCUPISCENCE is punished in a field full of immense pits or
wells, overflowing with fire and sulphur. This visionary scene of the infernal
punishments seems to be borrowed from a legend related by Matthew Paris, under
the reign of king John: in which the soul of one Thurkhill, a native of
Tidstude in Essex is conveyed by saint Julian from his body, when laid asleep,
into hell and heaven. In hell he has a sight of the torments of the damned,
which are presented under the form and name of the INFERNAL PAGEANTS, and
greatly resemble the fictions I have just described. Among the tormented, is a
knight, who had passed his life in shedding much innocent blood at tilts and
tournaments. He is introduced, completely armed, on horseback; and couches his
lance against the demon, who is commissioned to seize and to drag him to his
eternal destiny. There is likewise a priest who never said mass, and a baron of
the exchequer who took bribes. Turkill is then conducted into the mansions of
the blessed, which are painted with strong oriental coloring: and in Paradise,
a garden replenished with the most delicious fruits, and the most exquisite
variety of trees, plants, and flowers, he sees Adam, a personage of gigantic
proportion, but the most beautiful symmetry, reclined on the side of a fountain
which sent forth four streams of different water and color, and under the
shade of a tree of immense size and height, laden with fruits of every kind,
and breathing the richest odours. Afterward saint Julian conveys the soul of
Turkhill back to his body; and when awakened, he relates this vision to his
parish priest Matt. Paris. Hist. page 206. seq. E^it. Tig. Much the same sort
of fable is related, ibid. p. 178. seq. There is an old poem on this subject,
called OWAYNE MILES, MSS. COTT. CALIG. A. 12. f. 90.
. There is a story of a similar cast in Bid See DISSERTATION ii. Signat. E.
The DEAD MAN'S SONG there mentioned, seems to be more immediately taken from
this fiction as it stands in our SHEPHERD'S CALENDAR. It is entitled, The DEAD
MAN'S SONG, whos^ Dwelling was near Basing^all in London. Wood's BALLADS, Mus.
Ashmol. Oxon. It is worthy of doctor Percy's excellent collection, and begins
thus. Sore sick, dear frienns, long time I was,
And weakly laid in bed, etc.


See also the legend of saint Patrick's cave, Matt. Paris. p. 84. And MSS.
Harl. 2385. 82. De quo^am ducto videre pe^as Inferni. fol. 56. b.


, which I have mentioned before I choose to throw together in the Notes many
other anonymous pieces belonging to this period, most of which are too minute
to be formally considered in the series of our poetry. The CASTLE OF HONOR,
printed in quarto by Wynkyn de Word, 1506. The PARLYAMENT OF DEVYLLES.
Princip. "As Mary was great with Gabriel, etc." For the same, in quarto, 1509.
The HISTORY OF JACOB AND HIS TWELVE SONS. In stanzas. For the same, without
date. I believe about 1500. Princ. "Al yo^ge and old that list to here." A
LITTLE TREATISE called the Dysputacyon or Complaynt of the Heart thorugh^ ^erced
with the lokynge of the eye. For the same, in quarto, perhaps before 1500. The
first stanza is elegant, and deserves to be transcribed.

^n the first weke of the season of May,
When that the wodes be covered in grene,
In which the nyghtyngale list for to play
To show his voys among the thorns kene,
Them to rejoice which loves servaunts been,
Which fro all comfort think them fast behynd;
My pleasyr was as it was after seen
For my dysport to chase the heart and hynde.
The LIFE OF SAINT JOSEPH OF ARIMATHEA. For Pinson, in quarto. 1520. The LIFE
OF PETRONYLLA. In stanzas, for the same, without date, in quarto. THE CASTLE OF
LABOR. In stanzas. For the same, in quarto, without date, with neat wooden
cuts. THE LIFE OF SAINT RADEGUNDA. In quarto, for the same. THE A. B. C. E. OF
ARISTOTILLE, MSS. Harl. 1304. 4. Proverbial verses in the alliterative manner,
viz. Woso will be wise and worship desires,
Let him learn one letter, and look on another, etc.
Again, ibid. 541. 19. fol. 213. [Compare, ibid^ 913. 10. fol. 15. b. 11. fol.
15. b.] See also some satirical Ballads written by Friar Micha^l Kildare,
chie^ly on the Religious o^de^s, S^ints, the White Friars of D^ogheda, the
vanity of riches, etc. etc. A divine poem on death, etc. MSS. Harl. 913. 3.
fol. 7. 4. fol. 9. 5. fol. 10. 13. fol. 16. [He has le^t a Latin poem in rhyme
on the abbot and prior of Gloucester, ibid. 5. fol. 10. And burlesque pieces on
some of the divine offices, ibid. 6. fol. 12. 7. fol. 13. b.] Hither we may
also refer a few pieces written by one Whyting, not mentioned in Tanner, MSS.
Harl. 541. 14. fol. 207. seq. Undoubtedly many other poems of this period^ both
printed and manuscript, have escaped my enquiries, but which, if discovered,
would not have repaid the research.

Among Rawlinson's manuscripts there is a poem, of considerable length, on the
antiquity of the Stanley family, beginning thus.

I entende with true report to praise
The valiaunte acts of the stout Standelais,
Ffrom whence they came, etc.
It comes down no lower than Thomas earl of Derby, who was executed in the
reign of Henry the seventh. This induced me to ^hink at first, that the piece
was written about that time. But the writer mentions king Henry the eighth, and
the suppression of Mona^teri^s. I will only add part o^ a Will in verse, dated
1477. MSS. Lang^. Bibl. Bodl. ^i. fol. 176. [M. 13. Th.]

Fleshly lusts and festes,
And furures of diverse bestes,
(A fend was hem fond;)
Hole clothe cast on shredys,
And wymen with their hye hedys^
Have almost lost this land!

.

As the ideas of magnificence and elegance were enlarged, the public pageants
of this period were much improved: and beginning now to be celebrated with new
splendor, received, among other advantages, the addition of SPEAKING
PERSONAGES. These spectacles, thus furnished with speakers, characteristically
habited, and accompanied with proper scenery, co-operated with the MYSTERIES,
of whose nature they partook at first, in introducing the drama. It was
customary to prepare these shows at the reception of a prince, or any other
solemnity of a similar kind: and they were presented on moveable theaters, or
occasional stages, erected in the streets. The speeches were in verse; and as
the procession moved forward, the speakers, who constantly bore some allusion
to the ceremony, either conversed together in the form of a dialogue, or
addressed the noble person whose presence occasioned the celebrity. Speakers
seem to have been admitted into our pageants about the reign of Henry the sixth.

In the year 1432, when Henry the sixth, after his coronation at Paris, made a
triumphal entry into London, many stanzas, very probably written by Lydgate,
were addressed to his majesty, amidst a series of the most splendid allegorical
spectacles, by a giant representing religious fortitude, Enoch and Eli, the
holy Trinity, two Judges and eight Sergeants of the coife, dame Clennesse,
Mercy, Truth, and other personages of a like nature ^abyan, ubi supr. fol. 382.
seq.
.

In the year 1456, when Margaret wife of Henry the sixth, with her little son
Edward, came to Coventy, on the feast of the exaltation of the holy cross, she
was received with the presentation of pageants, in one of which king Edward the
confessor, saint John the Evangelist, and saint Margaret, each speak to the
queen and the prince in verse LEET-BOOK of the city of Coventry. MS. fol. 168.
Stowe says, that at the reception of this queen in London, in the year 1445,
several pageaunts were exhibited at Paul's-gat^, with verses written by
Lydgate, on the following lemmata. Ingr^dimini et replete terram. Non amplius
irascar super terram. Madam Grace chancellor de di^u. Five wise and five
foolish virgins. Of saint Margaret, etc. HIST. ENGL. page 385. edit. Howes. I
know not whether these poems were spoken, or only affixed to the pageaunts.
Fabyan says, that in those pageaunts there was resemblance of dyvirse old
hystoryes. I suppose tapestry. CRON. tom. ii. fol. 398. edit. 1533. See the
ceremonies at the coronation of Henry the sixth, in 1430. Fab. ibid. fol. 378.
. In the next reign in the year 1474, another prince Edward, son of Edward the
fourth, visited Coventry, and was honored with the same species of show: he
was first welcomed, in an octave stanza, by Edward the confessor; and
afterward addressed by saint George, completely armed: a king's daughter
holding a lamb, and supplicating his assistance to protect her from a terrible
dragon, the lady's father and mother, standing in a tower above, the conduit on
which the champion was placed, "renning wine in four places, and minstralcy of
organ playing Ibid. fol. 221.
." Undoubtedly the Franciscan friars of Coventry, whose sacred interludes,
presented on Corpus Christi day, in that city, and at other places, make so
conspicuous a figure in the history of the English drama See supr. vol. i. p.
293. The friars themselves were the actors. But this practice being productive
of some enormities, and the laity growing as wise as the clergy, at least as
well qualified to act plays; there was an injunction in the MEXICAN COUNCIL,
ratified at Rome in the year 1589, to prohibit all clerks from playing in the
Mysteries, even on CORPUS CHRISTIDAY. "Neque in Comoediis personam agat, etiam
in FESTO CORPORIS CHRISTI." SACROSANCT. COUNCIL. fol. per Labb. tom. xv. p.
1268. edit. Paris. 1672.
, were employed in the management of these devises: and that the Coventry men
were famous for the arts of exhibition, appears from the share they took in the
gallant entertainment of queen Elisabeth at Kenelworth-castle, before whom they
played their old storial show See supr. vol. i. p. 91.
.

At length, personages of another cast were added; and this species of
spectacle, about the period with which we are concerned, was enlivened by the
admission of new characters, drawn either from profane history, or from profane
allegory Profane allegory, however, had been applied in pageants, somewhat
earlier. In the pageants, abovementioned, presented to Henry the sixth, the
seven liberal sciences personi^^ed are introduced, in a tabernacle of curious
work, from which their queen dame Sapience speaks verses. At entering the city
he is met, and faluted in meter by three ladies, richly cladde in gold and
silks with coronets, who suddenly issue from a stately tower hung with the
most splendid arras. These are the Dames, NATURE, GRACE, and FORTUNE. Fabyan,
ut supr. fol. 382. seq. But this is a rare instance so early.
, in the application of which, some degree of learning and invention appeared.

I have observed in a former work, and it is a topic which will again be
considered in its proper place, that the frequent and familiar use of allegoric
personifications in the public pageants, I mean the general use of them,
greatly contributed to form the school of Spenser See Obs. FAIRY QUEEN. ii. 90.
. But moreover from what is here said, it seems probable, that the PAGEAUNTS,
which being shown on civil occasions, derived great part of their decorations
and actors from historical fact, and consequently made profane characters the
subject of public exhibition, dictated ideas of a regular drama, much sooner
than the MYSTERIES: which being confined to scripture stories, or rather the
legendary miracles of sainted martyrs, and the no less ideal personifications
of the christian virtues, were not calculated to make so quick and easy a
transition to the representations of real life and rational action.

In the year 1501, when the princess Catharine of Spain came to London, to be
married to prince Arthur, her procession through the city was very magnificent.
The pageants were numerous, and superbly furnished; in which the principal
actors, or speakers, were not only God the father, saint Catharine, and saint
Ursula, but king Alphonsus the astronomer and an ancestor of the princess, a
Senator, an Angel, Job, Boethius, Nobility, and Virtue. These personages
sustained a sort of action, at least of dialogue. The lady was compared to
Hesperus, and the prince to Arcturus; and Alphonsus, from his skill in the
stars, was introduced to be the fortune tellers of the match Chron. MS.
. These machineries were contrived and directed by an ecclesiastic of great
eminence, bishop Fox; who, says Bacon, "was not only a grave counselor for war
or peace, but also a good surveyor of works, and a good master of ceremonies,
and any thing else that was fit for the active part, belonging to the service
of court, or state of a great king." It is probable, that this prelate's
dexterity and address in the conduct of a courtrareeshow procured him more
interest, than the gravity of his counsels, and the depth of his political
knowledge: at least his employment in this business presents a striking picture
of the importance of those popular talents, which even in an age of blind
devotion, and in the reign of a superstitious monarch, were instrumental in
paving the way to the most opulent dignities of the church. "Whosoever, adds
the same penetrating historian, had these toys in compiling, they were not
altogether PEDANTICAL Bacon's HENRY THE SEVENTH. COMPL. Hist. Engl. vol. i. p.
628.
." About the year 1487, Henry the seventh went a progress into the north; and
at every place of distinction was received with a pageant; in which he was
saluted, in a poetical oration, not always religious, as, at York by Ebranck, a
British king and the founder of the city, as well as by the holy virgin, and
king David: at Worcester by Henry the sixth his uncle: at Hereford by saint
George, and king Ethelbert, at entering the cathedral there: at Bristol, by
king Bremmius, Prudence, and Justice. The two latter characters were personated
by young girls From a manuscript in the Cotton library, printed in Leland.
COLLECTAN. ad calc. vol. iii. p. 185.
.

In the mean time it is to be granted, that profane characters were personated
in our pageants, before the close of the fourteenth century. Stowe relates,
that in the year 1377, for the entertainment of the young prince Richard, son
of Edward the black prince, one hundred and thirty citizens rode disguised from
Newgate to Kennington where the court resided, attended with an innumerable
multitude of waxen torches, and various instruments of music, in the evening of
the Sunday preceding Candlemas-day. In the first rank were forty-eight, habited
like esquires, with visors; and in the second the same number, in the character
of knights. "Then followed one richly arrayed like an EMPEROR, and after him,
at some distance, one stately-tyred like a POPE, whom followed twenty-four
CARDINALS, and after them eight or ten with black visors not amiable, as if
they had been LEGATES from some foreign princes." But this parade was nothing
more than a DUMB SHOW, unaccompanied with any kind of interlocution. This
appears from what follows. For our chronicler adds, that when they entered the
hall of the palace, they were met by the prince, the queen, and the lords;
"whom the said mummers did salute, showing by a pair of dice their desire to
play with the prince," which they managed with so much complaisance and skill,
that the prince won of them a bowl, a cup, and a ring of gold, and the queen
and lords, each, a ring of gold. Afterward, having been feasted with a
sumptuous banquet, they had the honor of dancing with the young prince and the
nobility, and so the ceremony was concluded Stowe's SURV. LAND. page 71. edit.
1599. 4to. It will perhaps be said, that this show was not properly a PAGEANT
but a MUMMERY. But these are frivolous distinctions: and, taken in a general
view, this account preserves a curious specimen of early PERSONATION, and
proves at least that the practice was not then in its infancy.
. Matthew Paris informs us, that at the magnificent marriage of Henry the third
with Eleanor of Provence, in the year 1236, certain strange pageants, and
wonderful devises, were displayed in the city of London; and that the number of
HISTRIONES on this occasion was infinite I will cite the passage more at large,
and in the words of the original. "Convenerunt autem vocata ad convivium
nuptiale tanta nobilium multitudo utriusque sexus, tanta religiosorum
numerositas, tanta plebium populositas, tanta HISTRIONUM Varietas, quod vix eos
civitas Londoniarum sinu suo capaci comprehenderet. Ornata est igitur civitas
tota olosericis, et vexillis, coronis, et palliis, cereis et lampadibus, et
quibusdam prodigiosis ingeniis et portentis, etc." HIST. p. 406. edit. Tig.
1589. sub HENRICO iii. Here, by the way, the expression Varietas histrionum
plainly implies the comprehensive and general meaning of the word HISTRIO; and
the multi^arious performances of that order of men. Yet in the Injunctions
given by the Barons to the religious houses, in the year 1258, there is an
article which seems to show, that the Histriones were sometimes a particular
species of public entertainers. "HISTRIONUM LUDI non videantur vel audiantur,
vel permittantur fieri, coram abbate vel monasticis." Annal. Burton. p. 437.
Oxon. 1684. Whereas minstrels, harpers, and juglers, were notoriously permitted
in the monasteries. We cannot ascertain whether LUDI here means plays, then
only religious: LUDI theatrales in churches and churchyards, on vigils and
festivals, are forbidden in the Synod of Exeter, dat. 1287. cap. xiii. COUNCIL.
MAGN. BRIT. per Wilkins. tom. ii. p. 140. col. 2. edit. 1737. fol.

I cannot omit the opportunity of adding a striking instance of the
extraordinary freedom of speech, permitted to these people, at the most solemn
celebrities. About the year 1250, king Henry the third, passing some time in
France, held a most magnificent feast in the great hall of the knights-templars
at Paris; at which, beside his own suite, were present the kings of France and
Navarre, and all the nobility of France. The walls of the hall were hung all
over with shields, among which was that of our king Richard the first. Just
before the feast began, a JOCULATOR, or minstrel, accosted king Henry thus. "My
lord, why did you invite so many Frenchmen to feast with you in this hall?
Behold, there is the shield of Richard, the magnanimous king of England! -- All
the Frenchmen present will eat their dinner in f^^r and trembling!" Matt.
Paris. p. 871. sub. HENR. iii. edit. Tigur. 1589. fol. Whether this was a
preconcerted compliment, previously suggested by the king of France, or not, it
is equally a proof of the familiarity with which the minstrels were allowed to
address the most eminent personages.


. But the word HISTRIO, in the Latin writers of the barbarous ages There is a
passage in John of Salisbury much to our purpose, which I am obliged to give in
Latin, "At eam [desidiam] nostris prorogant HISTRIONES. Admissa sunt ergo
SPECTACULA, et infinita lenocinia vanitatis. -- Hinc mimi, salii vel saliares,
balatroues, aemil^ani, gladiatores, palaestritae, gignadii, praestigiatores,
malefici quoque multi, et tota JOCULATORUM SCENA procedit. Quorum adeo error
invaluit, ut a praeclaris domibus non arceantur etiam illi, qui obscaenis
partibus corporis, oculis omnium eam ingerunt turpitudinem, quam erubescet
videre vel cynicus. Quodque magis mirere, nec tun^ ejiciuntur, quando
TUMULTUANTES INFERIUS crebro sonitu aerem ^aedant, et turpiter inclusum turpius
produnt. Veruntamen quid in singulis possit aut deceat, animus sapientis
advertit, nec APOLOGOS refugit, aut NARRATIONES, aut quaecunque SPECTACULA, dum
virtutis, etc." POLYCRAT. lib. i. cap. viii. p. 28. edit. Lugd. Bat. 1595.
Here, GIGNADII, a word unexplained by Du Cange, signifies wrestlers, or the
performers of athletic exercises: for gignasium was used for gymnasium in the
barbarous Latinity. By apologos, we are perhaps to understand an allegorical
story or fable, such as were common in the Provencial poetry; and by
narrationes, tales of chivalry: both which were recited at festivals by these
HISTRIONES. Spectacula I need not explain: but here seems to be pointed out the
whole system of ancient exhibition or entertainment. I must add another
pertinent passage from this writer, whom the reader will recollect to have
flourished about the year 1140. "Non facile tamen crediderim ad hoc quemquam
impelli posse litteratorem, ut HISTRIONEM profiteatur. -- GESTUS siquidem
EXPRIMUNT, rerum utilitate deducta." Ibid. lib. viii. cap. xii. p. 514.
[Compa^e Bloun^'s ANT. TENURES, p. 11. HEMINGSTON.]

With regard to APOLOGI, mentioned above, I have farther to observe, that the
Latin metrical apologues of the dark ages, are probably translations from the
Provencial poetry. Of this kind is Wircker's SPECULUM STULTORUM, or BURNELL'S
ASS. See supr. vol. i. p. 419. And the ASINUS PAENITENTIARIUS, in which an ass,
wol^, and fox, are introduced, confessing their ^ins, etc. See Matt. Flacius,
Catal. Test. Verit. page 903. edit. 1556. In the British museum there is an
ancient thin folio volume on vellum, containing upwards of two hundred short
moral tales in Latin prose, which I also class under the APOLOGI here mentioned
by John of Salisbury. Some are legendary, others romantic, and others
allegorical. Many of them I believe to be translations from the Provencial
poetry. Several of the Esopian fables are intermixed. In this collection is
Parnell's HERMIT, De ANGELO et Heremita Peregrinum occisum sepelientibus, Rubr.
32. fol. 7. And a tale, I think in Fontaine, of the king's son who never saw a
woman. Rubr. 8. fol. 2. The stories seem to have been collected by an
Englishman, at least in England: for there is, the tale of one Godfrey, a
priest of Sussex. Rubr. 40. fol. 8. MSS. Harl. 463. The story of Parnell's
HERMIT is in Gesta Roman^rum, MSS. Harl. 2270. chapter lxxxx.


, generally comprehends the numerous tribe of mimics, juglers, dancers,
tumblers, musicians, minstrels, and the like public practitioners of the
recreative arts, with which those ages abounded: nor do I recollect a single
instance in which it precisely bears the restrained modern interpretation.

As our thoughts are here incidentally turned to the rudiments of the English
stage See supr. vol. i. p. 236. seq.
, I must not omit an anecdote, entirely new, with regard to the mode of playing
the MYSTERIES at this period, which yet is perhaps of much higher antiquity. In
the year 1487, while Henry the seventh kept his residence at the castle at
Winchester, on occasion of the birth of prince Arthur, on a sunday, during the
time of dinner, he was entertained with a religious drama called CHRISTI
DESCENSUS AD INFEROS, or Christ's descent into hell Registr. Priorat. S.
Swithin. Winton. MS. ut supr.
. It was represented by the PUERI ELEEMOSYNARII, or choirboys, of Hyde abbey,
and saint Swithin's priory, two large monasteries at Winchester. This is the
only proof I have ever seen of choir-boys acting in the old MYSTERIES: nor do I
recollect any other instance of a royal dinner, even on a festival, accompanied
with this species of diversion Except, that on the first Sunday of the
magnificent marriage of king James of Scotland with the princess Margaret of
England, daughter of Henry the seventh, celebrated at Edinburgh with high
splendor, "after dynnar a MORALITE was played by the said master Inglyshe and
his companyons in the presence of the king and qwene." On one of the preceding
days, "After soupper the king and qwene being togader in her grett chamber,
John Inglysh and his companyons played." This was in the year 1503. Apud Leland.
coll. iii. p. 3co. 299. APPEND. edit. 1770.
. The story of this interlude, in which the chief characters were Christ, Adam,
Eve, Abraham, and John the Baptist, was not uncommon in the ancient religious
drama, and I believe made a part of what is called the LUDUS PASCHALIS, or
Easter Play The Italians pretend that they have a LUDUS PASCHALIS as old as the
twelfth century. TEATRO ITALIANO, tom. i. See Un Istoria del Teatro, etc.
prefixed, p. ii. Veron. 1723. 12mo.
. It occurs in the Coventry plays acted on Corpus Christi day [See supr. vol.
i.] "Nunc dormiunt milites, et veniet anima Christi de inferno cum Adam et Eva,
Abraham, Joh. Baptiste, et aliis."
; and in the Whitsun-plays at Chester, where it is called the HARROWING OF HELL
MSS. Harl. 2013. PAGEAUNT xvii. fol. 138.
. The representation is Christ entering hell triumphantly, delivering our first
parents, and the most sacred characters of the old and new testaments, from the
dominion of Satan, and conveying them into Paradise. There is an ancient poem,
perhaps an interlude, on the same subject, among the Harleian manuscripts;
containing our savior's dialogues in hell with Sathanas, the Janitor, or
porter of hell, Adam, Eve, Habraham, David, Johan Baptist, and Moses. It
begins,

All herkneth to me nou:
A strif wolle y tellen ou
Of Jhesu ant of Satan
THo Jhesus was to hell y-gan MSS. Harl. 2253. 21. fol. 55. b. There is a poem
on this subject, MS. Bodl. 1687. How Jesu Crist harowed hell
Of hardi gestes ich will tell.
[See supr. vol. i. p. 18.]
.
The composers of the MYSTERIES did not think the plain and probable events of
the new testament sufficiently mavelous for an audience who wanted only to be
surprised. They frequently selected their materials from books which had more
of the air of romance. The subject of the MYSTERIES just-mentioned was borrowed
from the PSEUDO-EVANGELIUM, or the FABULOUS GOSPEL, ascribed to Nicodemus In
Latin. A Saxon translation, from a manuscript at Cambridge, coeval with the
conquest, was printed at Oxford, by T^^vaites, 1699. In an English translation
by Wynkyn de Word, the prologue says, "Nichodemus, which was a worthy prince,
did write this blessed storye in Hebrewe. And Theodosius, the emperor, did
it translate out of Hebrew into Latin, and bishop Turpyn did translate it
out of Latin into Frensshe." With wooden cuts, 1511. 4to. There was another
edition by Wynkyn de Word, 1518. 4to. and 1532. See a very old French version,
MSS. Harl. 2253. 3. fol. 33. b. There is a translation into English verse,
about the fourteenth century. MSS. Harl. 4196. 1. fol. 206. See also, 149. 5.
fol. 254. b. And MSS. coll. Sion. 17. The title of the original is, NICODEMI
DISCIPULI de Jesu Christi passione et resurrectione EVANGELIUM. Sometimes it is
entitled GESTA SALVATORIS nostri Jesu Christi. Our lord's Descent into hell is
by far the best invented part of the work. Edit. apud ORTHODOX. PATR. Jac.
Greyn. [Basil. 1569. 4to.] page 653. seq. The old Latin title to the pageaunt
of this story in the Chester plays is, "DE DESCENSU AD INFERNA, et de his que
ibidem fiebant ^ecundum EVANGELIUM NICODEMI," fol. 138. ut supr. Hence the
first line in the old interlude, called HICKSCORNER, is illustrated. Now Jesu
the gentle that brought Adam from hell.
There is a Greek homily on Saint John's Descent into Hell, by Eusebius
Alexandrinus. They had a notion that saint John was our Savior's precursor,
not only in this world, but in hades. See Allat. de libr. eccles. Graecor. p.
303. seq. Compare the Legend of Nicodemus, Christ's descent into hell, Pilate's
exile, etc. MSS. Bodl. B. 5. 2021. 4. seq.
: a book, which, together with the numerous apocryphal narratives, containing
infinite innovations of the evangelical history, and forged at Constantinople
^^ the early writers of the Greek church, gave birth to an ^ndless variety of
legends concerning the life of Christ and his apostles In the manuscript
register of saint Swithin's priory at Winchester, it is recorded, that Leofric,
bishop of Exeter, about the year 1150, gave to the convent, a book called GESTA
Beatissimi Apostoli Petri cum Glosa. This is probably one of these
commentitious histories. By the way, the same Leofric was a great benefactor in
books to his church at Exeter. Among others, he gave Boetii Liber ANGLICUS,
and, Magnus liber ANGLICUS omnino METRICE descriptus. What was this translation
of Boethius, I know not; unless it is Alfred's. It is still more difficult to
determine, what was the other piece, the GREAT BOOK OF ENGLISH VERSE, at so
early a period. The grant is in Saxon, and, if not genuine, must be of high
antiquity. Dugdal. MONAST. tom. i. p. 222. I have given Dugdale's Latin
translation. The Saxon words are, "Boeties boc on englisc. -- And 1. mycel
englisc boc be gehilcum thingum on leodthisan geoht."
; and which, in the barbarous ages, was better esteemed than the genuine
gospel, on account of its improbabilities and absurdities.

But whatever was the source of these exhibitions, they were thought to
contribute so much to the information and instruction of the people on the most
important subjects of religion, that one of the popes granted a pardon of one
thousand days to every person who resorted peaceably to the plays performed in
the Whitsun week at Chester, beginning with the creation, and ending with the
general judgment; and this indulgence was seconded by the bishop of the
diocese, who granted forty days of pa^^on: the pope at the same time denouncing
the sentence of damnation on all those incorrigible sinners, who presumed to
disturb or interrupt the due celebration of these pious sports MSS. Harl. 2124.
2013.
. It is certain that they had their use, not only in teaching the great truths
of scripture to men who could not read the bible, but in abolishing the
barbarous attachment to military games, and the bloody contentions of the
tournament, which had so long prevailed as the sole species of popular
amusement. Rude and even ridiculous as they were, they softened the manners of
the people, by diverting the public attention to spectacles in which the mind
was concerned, and by creating a regard for other arts than those of bodily
strength and savage valor.

SECT. X.
THE only writer deserving the name of a poet in the reign of Henry the
seventh, is Stephen Hawes. He was patronised by that monarch, who possessed
some tincture of literature, and is said by Bacon to have confuted a Lollard in
a public disputation at Canterbury LIFE of HENRY vii. p. 628. edit. ut supr.
One Hodgkins, a fellow of King's college in Cambridge, and vicar of Ringwood in
Hants, was eminently skilled in the mathematics; and on that account, Henry the
seventh frequently condescended to visit him at his house at Ringwood. Hatcher,
MS. Catal. Pr^^pos. et Soc. Coll. Regal. Cant.
.

Hawes flourished ^^out the close of the fifteenth century; and was a native of
Suffolk Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. 5.
. After an academical education at Oxford, he traveled much in France; and
became a complete master of the French and Italian poetry. His polite
accomplishments quickly procured him an establishment in the household of the
king; who struck with the liveliness of his conversation, and because he could
repeat by memory most of the old English poets, especially Lydgate, made him
groom of the privy chamber Bale says, that he was called by the king "ab
inter^ori camera ad privatum cubiculum." Cent. viii.
. His facility in the French tongue was a qualification, which might strongly
recommend him to the fa^our of Henry the seventh; who was fond of studying the
best French books then in vogue Bacon, ut supr. p. 637.
.

Hawes has left many poems, which are now but imperfectly known, and scarcely
remembered. These are, the TEMPLE OF GLASS. The CONVERSION OF SWERERS "The
CONVERSYON OF SWERERS, made and compyled by Stephen Hawes, groom of the
chamber of our sovereigne lord king Henry vii."
, in octave stanzas, with Latin lemmata, printed by de Word in 1509 It
contains only one sheet in quarto.
. A JOYFUL MEDITATION OF ALL ENGLAND, OR THE CORONACYON TO OUR MOST NATURAL
SOVEREIGN LORD KING HENRY THE EIGTH IN VERSE. By the same, and without date;
but probably it was printed soon after the ceremony which it celebrates. These
coronation-carols were customary. There is one by Lydgate A BALLAD presented to
Henry the sixth the day of his coro^ation. Princ. "Most noble prince of christian
princes all." MSS. Ashmol. 59. ii.
. THE CONSOLATION OF LOVERS. THE EXEMPLAR OF VIRTUE. THE DELIGHT OF THE SOUL.
OF THE PRINCE'S MARRIAGE. THE ALPHABET OF BIRDS. Some of the five latter
pieces, none of which I have seen, and which perhaps were never printed, are
said by Wood to be written in Latin, and seem to be in prose.

The best of Hawes's poems, hitherto enumerated, is the TEMPLE OF GLASS By
mistake, as it seems, I have hither quoted Hawes's TEMPLE of GLASS, under the
name of Lydgate. See supr. vol. i. p. 410. 417. It was first printed by Wynken
de Word, in 1500. " Here bygenneth the TEMPLE of GLASS. By Stephen Hawes,
grome of the chamber to king Henry vii." [Ames, Hist. Print. page 86.] 8vo. in
twenty-seven leaves. Afterward by Berthelette, without date, or name of the
author, with this colophon. "Thus ends the temple of glass. Emprinted at
London, in Fletestrete, in the house of Thomas Berthelette, near to the
cundite, at the sign of the Lucrece. Cum privilegio." I will give the
beginning, with the title.

This book called the Temple of glass, is in many places amended, and late
diligently imprynted.

Through constreynt and grievous heuyness,
For great thought and for high pensyuenesse,
To bed I went now this other night,
When that Lucina with her pale ^yght,
Was joined last with Phoebus in Aquary,
Amydde Decembre, when of January
There be kalendes of the new year;
And derke Dyana, horned and nothing clear,
Hid her beams under a mysty cloud,
Within my bed for cold began me shroude;
All desolate for constraynt of my woe,
The long night walowyng to and fro,
Till at last, or I began take kep^, etc.
This edition, unmentioned by Ames, is in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. C. 39. Art. Seld.
4to. In the same library are two manuscript copies of this poem. MSS. Fairfax,
xvi. membran. without a name. And MSS. Bodl. 638. In the first leaf of the
Fairfax manuscript is this entry. "I bought this at Gloucester, 8 Sept. 1650,
intending to exchange it for a better book. F^air^ax." And at the end, in the
same hand. "Here lacks seven leaves that are in Joseph Holland's book." This
manuscript, however, contains as much as Berthelett's edition. Lewis mentions
the Temple of Glass by John Lydgat^, in Caxton's second edition of CHAUCER.
[LIFE CHAPTER p. 104. See also Middleton's DISSERT. p. 263.] But no such poem
appears in that edition in saint John's college library at Oxford.

The strongest argument which induces me to give this poem to Hawes, and not to
Lydgate, is, that it was printed in Hawes's lifetime, with his name, by Wynkyn
de Word. Bale also mentions, among Hawes's poems, Templum Crystallinum in one
book. There is, however, a no less strong argument for giving it to Lydgate,
and that is from Hawes himself; who, reciting Lydgate's Works, in the PASTIME
OF PLEASURE, says thus, [ch. xiv. edit. 1555. Signat. G. iiii. ut infr.] -- And
the time to pass
Of love he made the bright temple of glass.
And I must add, that this piece is expressly recited in the large catalogue of
Lydgate's works, belonging to W. Thin, in Speght's edition of Chaucer,
printed 1602. fol. 376. Yet on the whole, I think this point still doubtful:
and I leave it to be determined by the reader, before whom the evidence on both
sides is laid at large.


. On a comparison, it will be found to be a copy of the HOUSE OF FAME of
CHAUCER, in which that poet sees in a vision a temple of glass, on the walls of
which were engraved stories from Virgil's En^id and Ovid's Epistles. It also
strongly resembles that part of Chaucer's ASSEMBLY OF FOWLS, in which there is
the fiction of a temple of brass, built on pillars of jasper, whose walls are
painted with the stories of unfortunate lovers V. 290.
. And in his ASSEMBLY of LADIES, in a chamber made of beryl and crystal,
belonging to the sumptuous castle of Pleasant Regard, the walls are decorated
with historical sculptures of the same kind V. 451.
. The situation of Hawes's TEMPLE on a craggy rock of ice, is evidently taken
from that of Chaucer's HOUSE OF FAME. In Chaucer's DREAM, the poet is
transported into an island, where wall and yate was all of glass V. 72.
. These structures of glass have their origin in the chemistry of the dark
ages. This is Hawes's exordium.

Me did oppress a sudden, dedely sleep:
Within the which, methought that I was
Ravyshed in spyrite into a TEMPLE OF GLASS,
I ne wist how full far in wilderness,
That founded was, all by lyckelynesse,
Not upon stele, but on a craggy roche
Like yse yfroze: and as I did approach,
Again the son that shone, methought, so clear
As any cristall; and ever, nere and nere,
As I began nyghe this grisely dredefull place,
I wext astonyed, the light so in my face
Began to smite, so persyng ever in one,
On every part where that I did gone,
That I ne might nothing as I would
About me consydre, and behold,
The wondre esters The wonderful chambers of this temple.
, for brightness of the son:
Till at the last, certain skies done Dun. Dark.

With wind i. e. Collected.
ychased, han their course ywent,
Before the stremes of Titan and iblent Blinded, darkened the sun.
^
So that I might within and without,
Where so I would, behelden me about,
For to report the facyon and manner
Of all this place, that was circuler,
In cumpace-wyse round by yntale ywrought:
And when I had long goon, and well sought,
I found a wicket, and entered in as fast
Into the temple, and mine eyes cast
On every side, etc This text is given from Berthelett's edition, collated with
MSS. Fairfax. xvi.
.
The walls of this wonderful temple were richly pictured with the following
historical portraitures; from Virgil, Ovid, king Arthur's romance, and Chaucer.

I saw depeynted upon a wall From Pr. Cop. and MSS. Fairf. xvi. as before.
,
From est to west full many a fair image,
Of sundry lovers, like as they were of age
I set in order after they were true;
With lyfely colors, wonders fresshe of hew,
And as methought I saw some sit and some stand,
And some knelyng, with bylles Bills of complaint.
in their hand,
An some with complaynt woeful and pitious,
With doleful chere, to put to Venus,
So as she sat fletynge in the sea,
Upon their woe for to have pite.
And first of all I saw there of Cartage
Dido the queen, so goodly of visage,
That began complain her adventure and caas,
How she disceyued was of Aeneas,
For all his hestes and his oaths sworn,
And said helas that she was borne,
When she saw that deed she must be.
And next her I saw the complaynt of Medee,
How that she was falsed of Jason.
And nygh by Venus saw I sit Addon,
And all the manner how the bore him sloughe,
For whom she wept and had pite inoughe.
There saw I also how Penelope,
For she so long ne might her lord se,
Was of color both pale and grene.
And alder next was the fresshe queen;
I mean Alcest, the noble true wife,
And for Admete how she lost her life;
And for her truth, if I shall not lie,
How she was turned into a daysye.
There was also Grisildis innocence,
And all her meekness and her patience.
There was eke Y^aude, and many other mo,
And all the tourment and all the cruel woe
That she had for Tristram all her live;
And how that Tysbe her heart did ryue
With thylke sword of sir Pyramus.
And all manner, how that Theseus
The minotaure slew, amyd the house
That was forwrynked by craft of Dedalus,
When that he was in prison shyt in Crete, etc.
And uppermore men depeinten might see,
How with her ring goodly Canace
Of every foul the leden Language.
and the song
Could understand, as she hem walked among:
And how her brother so often helped was
In his mischefe by the stead of brass See Chaucer's SQUIER'S TALE.
.
We must acknowledge, that all the picturesque invention which appears in this
composition, entirely belongs to Chaucer. Yet there was some merit in daring to
depart from the dull taste of the times, and in choosing Chaucer for a model,
after his sublime fancies had been so long forgotten, and had given place for
almost a century, to legends, homilies, and chronicles in verse. In the mean
time, there is reason to believe, that Chaucer himself copied these imageries
from the romance of GUIGEMAR, one of the metrical TALES, or LAIS, of Bretagne
Fol. 141. MSS. Harl. 978. See supr. DISSERTAT. i.
, translated from the Armorican original into French, by Marie, a French
poetess, about the thirteenth century: in which the walls of a chamber are
painted with Venus, and the Art of love from Ovid A passage in Ovid's REMEDIUM
AMORIS concerning Achilles's spear, is supposed to be alluded to by a
troubadour, Bernard Ventadour, who lived about the year 1150. HIST. TROUB^D. p.
27. This Mons. Millot calls, "Un trait d'erudition singulier dans un
troubadour." It is not, however, impossible, that he might get this fiction
from some of the early romances about Troy.
. Although, perhaps, Chaucer might not look further than the temples in
Boccacio's THESEID for these ornaments. At the same time it is to be
remembered, that the imagination of these old poets must have been assisted in
this respect, from the mode which anciently prevailed, of entirely covering the
walls of the more magnificent apartments, in castles and palaces, with stories
from scripture, history, the classics, and romance. I have already given
instances of this practice, and I will here add more See supr. vol. i. p. 303.
To the passages adduced from Chaucer these may be added, CHAUCER'S DREME, v.
1320. -- In a chamber paint
Full of stories old and diverse.
Again, ibid. v. 2167. For there n' as no lady ne creture,
Save on the walls old portraiture
Of horsemen, hawkis, and hounds, etc.
Compare Dante's PURGATORIO, c. x. page 105. seq. edit. Ald.
. In the year 1277, Otho, duke of Milan, having restored the peace of that city
by a signal victory, built a noble castle, in which he ordered every particular
circumstance of that victory to be painted. Paulus Jovius relates, that these
paintings remained, in the great vaulted chamber of the castle, fresh and
unimpaired, so late as the year 1547. "Extantque adhuc in maximo testudinatoque
conclavi, incorruptae praeliorum cum veris ducum vultibus imagines, Latinis
elegis singula rerum elogia indicantibus Vit. Vicecomit. Mediolan. OTHO. p. 56.
edit. Paris, 1549. 4to.
." That the castles and palaces of England were thus ornamented at a very early
period, and in the most splendid style, appears from the following notices.
Langton, bishop of Litchfield, commanded the coronation, marriages, wars, and
funeral, of his patron king Edward the first, to be painted in the great hall
of his episcopal palace, which he had newly built Erdswicke's Staffordshire, p.
101.
. This must have been about the year 1312. The following anecdote relating to
the old royal palace at Westminster, never yet was published. In the year 1322,
one Symeon, a friar minor, and a doctor in theology, wrote an ITINERARY, in
which is this curious passage. He is speaking of Westminster Abbey. "Eidem
monasterio quasi immediate conjungitur illud famosissimum palatium regium
Anglorum, in quo illa VULGATA CAMERA, in cujus parietibus sunt omnes HISTORIAE
BELLICAE TOTIUS BIBLIAE ineffabiliter depictae, atque in Gallico completissime
et perfectissime constanter conscriptae, in non modica intuentium admiratione,
et maxima regali magnificentia "Itinerarium Symeonis et fratris Hugonis
Illuminatoris ex Hibernia in terram sanctam, A. D. MCCCXXII." MSS. C. C. C.
Cantabr. G. 6. Princip. "Culmine honoris spreto." It comprehends a journey
through England, and describes many curiositie^ now lost. See supr. vol. i. p.
114.
." -- "Near this monastery stands the most famous royal palace of England; in
which is that celebrated chamber, on whose walls all the warlike histories of
the whole Bible are painted with inexpressible skill, and explained by a
regular and complete series of texts, beautifully written in French over each
battle, to the no small admiration of the beholder, and the increase of royal
magnificence This palace was consumed by fire in 1299, but immediately rebuilt,
I suppose, by Edward the first. Stowe's LONDON, p. 379. 387. edit. 1599. So
that these paintings must have been done between the years 1299, and 1322. It
was again destroyed by fire in 1512, and never afterward re-edified. Stowe,
ibid. p. 389. About the year 1500, the walls of the Virgin Mary's chapel, built
by prior Silkestede, in the cathedral of Winchester, were elegantly painted
with the miracles, and other ^^ories, of the New Testament, in small ^igures;
many delicate traces of which now remain.

Falcandus, the old historian of Sicily, who wrote about the year 1200, says,
that the chapel in the royal palace at Palermo, had its walls decorated "de
lapillulis quadris, partim aureis, partim diversicoloribus veteris ac novi
Testamenti depictam historiam continentibus." Sicil. Histor. p. 10. edit.
Paris. 1550. 4to. But this was mosaic work, which, chiefly by means of the
Crusades, was communicated to all parts of Europe from the Byzantine Greeks;
and with which all the churches, and other public edifices at Constantinople,
were adorned. EPIST. de COMPARAT. Vet. et Nov. Romae. p. 122. Man. Chrysolor.
See supr. vol. i. p. 354. Leo Ostiensis says, that one of the abbots of Cassino
in Italy, in the eleventh century, sent messengers to Constantinople, to bring
over artificers in MOSAIC, to ornament the church of the monastery, after Rome
or Italy had lost that art for five hundred years. He calls Rome magistra
Latinitas. Chron. Cassin. lib. iii. c. 27. Compare Muratori, ANTICH. ITALIAN.
Tom. i. Diss. xxiv. p. 279. Nap. 1752. 4to.


." This ornament of a royal palace, while it conveys a curious history of the
arts, admirably exemplifies the chivalry and the devotion of the times, united.
That part of the Old Testament, indeed, which records the Jewish wars, was
almost regarded as a book of chivalry: and their chief heroes, Joshua and
David, the latter of whom killed a giant, are often recited among the champions
of romance. In France, the battles of the kings of Israel with the Philistines
and Assyrians, were wrought into a grand volume, under the title of "Plusieurs
Batailles des roys d'Israel en contre les Philistines et Assyriens MSS. Reg.
[Brit. Mus.] 19 D. 7. ^ol. Among the Harleian manuscripts, there is an Arabic
book, containing the Psalms of David, with an additional psalm, on the
slaughter of the giant Goliath. MSS. Harl. 5476. See above.
."

With regard to the form of Hawes's poem, I am of opinion, that VISIONS, which
are so common in the poetry of the middle ages, partly took their rise from
Tully's SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS. Had this composition descended to posterity among
Tully's six books de REPUBLICA, to the last of which it originally belonged,
perhaps it would have been overlooked and neglected But they were extant about
the year 1000, for they are cited by Gerbert. Epist. 83. And by Peter of
Poitou, who died in 1197. See Barth. Advers. xxxii. 5. 58. Leland says, that
Tully de REPUBLICA was consumed by fire, among other books, in the library of
William Selling, a learned abbot of saint Austin's at Canterbury, who died in
1494. SCRIPT. CELLINGUS.
. But being preserved, and illustrated with a prolix commentary, by Macrobius,
it quickly attracted the attention of readers, who were fond of the mavelous,
and with whom Macrobius was a more admired classic than Tully. It was printed,
subjoined to Tully's OFFICES, in the infancy of the typographic art Venet.
1472. fol. Apud. Vindel. Spiram.
. It was translated into Greek by Maximus Planudes Lambeccius mentions a Greek
manuscript of Julian, a cardinal of S. Angelo, (...). 5. p. 153. The DISPUTATIO
of Favonius Elogius, a Carthaginian rhetorician, and a disciple of saint
Austin, on the SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS, was printed by G. S^hottus, Antw. 1613. 4to.
; and is frequently quoted by Chaucer ROMANS ROSE. lib. i. v. 7. [etc.] An author
that hight MACROBE,
That halte not dremis ^alse ne lefe;
But undoth us the AVISION
That whilom met KING CIPIOUN.
NONNES PR. TALE, v. 1238. Urr. MACROBIUS that writith the AVISION
In A^^ricke, of the worthy SCIPION.
DREME CHAPTER v. 284 He mentions thi^ as the most wonderful of dreams. HOUSE F. v.
407. lib. i. He describes a prospect more extensive and various than that which
Scipio saw in his dream. That saw in dreme, at point devise,
Heven, and earth, hell, and paradise.
And in other places.
. Particularly in the ASSEMBLY OF FOWLS, he supposes himself to fall asleep
after reading the SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS, and that Scipio showed him the beautiful
vision which is the subject of that poem He makes Scipio say to him, v. 110. --
Thou have the so well borne
In looking of mine old book al to torn,
Of which MACROBIE raught not a lite, etc.

. Nor is it improbable, that, not only the form, but the first idea of Dante's
INFERNO, was suggested by this favorite apologue; which, in Chaucer's words,
treats -- Of heaven, and hell,
And earth, and souls, that therein dwell Ibid. v. 32.
.
Not to insist on Dante's subject, he uses the shade of Virgil for a
mystagogue; as Tully supposes Scipio to have shown the other world to his
ancestor Africanus.

But Hawes's capital performance is a poem entitled, "THE PASSETYME OF
PLEASURE, or the HISTORY OF GRAUNDE AMOURE and LA BAL PUCEL: containing the
knowledge of the seven sciences, and the course of man's life in this world.
Invented by Stephen Hawes, groom of king Henry the seventh his chamber By
Wynkyn de Word, in 1517. 4to. with wooden cuts. A second edition followed in
1554. By John Wayland, in 4to. A third, in 4to. by John Waley, in 1555. See a
poem called a Dialogue between a Lover and a Jay, by one Thomas Feylde, printed
by Wynkyn de Word, in 4to. Princ. Prol. "Thoug^e laureate poets in old
antiquite." This obscure rhymer is here only mentioned, as he has an ^llusion
to his cotemporary Hawes.
." It is dedicated to the king, and was finished at the beginning of the year
1506.

If the poems of Rowlie are not genuine, the PASTIME OF PLEASURE is almost the
only effort of imagination and invention which had yet appeared in our poetry
since Chaucer. This poem contains no common touches of romantic and allegoric
fiction. The personifications are often happily sustained, and indicate the
writer's familiarity with the Provencial school. The model of his versification
and phraseology is that improved harmony of numbers, and facility of diction,
with which his predecessor Lydgate adorned our octave stanza. But Hawes has
added new graces to Lydgate's manner. Antony Wood, with the zeal of a true
antiquary, laments, that "such is the fate of poetry, that this book, which in
the time of Henry the seventh and eighth was taken into the hands of all
ingenious men, is now thought but worthy of a ballad-monger's stall!" The truth
is, such is the good fortune of poetry, and such the improvement of taste, that
much better books are become fashionable. It must indeed be acknowledged, that
this poem has been unjustly neglected: and on that account, an apology will be
less necessary for giving the reader a circumstantial analysis of its substance
and design.

GRAUNDE AMOURE, the hero of the poem, and who speaks in his own person There
is something dramatic in this circumstance. Raimond Vidal de Besaudin, a
troubadour of Provence, who flourished about the year 1200, has given the
following dramatic form to one of his contes or tales. One day, says the
troubadour, Alphonsus, king of Castille, whose court was famous for good cheer,
magnificence, loyalty, valor, the practice of arms and the management of
horses, held a solemn assembly of minstrels and knights. When the hall was
quite full, came his queen Eleanor, covered with a veil, and disguised in a
close robe bordered with silver, adorned with the blason of a golden lion; who
making obeisance, seated herself at some distance from the king. At this
instant, a minstrel advancing to the king, addressed him thus. "O king,
emperor of valor, I come to supplicate you to give me audience." The king,
under pain of disgrace, ordered that no pers^ should interrupt the minstrel in
what he should say. The minstrel had traveled from his own country to recite
an adventur^ which had happened to a ba^on of Arragon, ^ot unknown to king
Alphonsus: and he now proceeds to tell no unaffecting story concerning a
jealous husband. At the close, the minstrel humbly requests the king and queen,
to banish all jealous husbands from their dominions. The king replied,
"MINSTREL, your tale is pleasant and gentle, and you shall be rewarded. But to
show you still further how much you have entertained me, I command that
henceforth your tale shall be called Le JALOUX CHATIE." Our troubadour's tale
is greatly enlivened by these accompaniments, and by being thrown into the
mouth of a minstrel.
, is represented walking in a delicious meadow. Here he discovers a path which
conducts him to a glorious image, both whose hands are stretched out and
pointing to two highways; one of which is the path of CONTEMPLATION, the other
of ACTIVE LIFE, leading to the Tower of Beauty. He chooses the last-mentioned
path, yet is often tempted to turn aside into a variety of bye-paths, which
seemed more pleasant: but proceeding directly forward, he sees afar off another
image, on whose breast is written, "This is the road to the Tower of DOCTRINE,
he that would arrive there must avoid sloth, etc." The evening being far
advanced, he sits down at the feet of the image, and falls into a profound
sleep; when, toward the morning, he is suddenly awakened by the loud blast of
a horn. He looks forward through a valley, and perceives a beautiful lady on a
palfrey, swift as the wind, riding toward him, encircled with tongues of fire
In Shakespeare, RUMOR is painted full of tongues. This was from the PAGEANTS.
. Her name was FAME, and with her ran two milk-white greyhounds, on whose
golden collars were inscribed in diamond letters Grace and Governaunce See
supr. vol. i. p. 363. Greyhounds were anciently almost as great favorites as
hawks. Our forefathers reduced hunting to a science; and have left large
treatises on this species of diversion, which was so connected with their state
of life and manners. The most curious one I know, is, or was lately, among the
manuscripts of Mr. Farmor, of Tusmore in Oxfordshire. It is entitled, "LE ART
DE VENERIE, le quel maistre Guillame Twici venour le roy d'Angleterre sist ^n
son temps per aprandre autres." This master William Twici was grand huntsman to
Edward the second. In the Cotton library, this book occurs in English under the
names of William Twety and John Giffard, most probably a translation from the
French copy, with the title of a book of Venerie dialogue wise. Princ. "TWETY
now will we beginnen." MSS. Cotton. VESPAS. B. xii. The less ancient tract on
this subject, called the Maistre of the Game, written for the instruction of
prince Henry, a^terwards Henry the fi^th, is much more common. MSS. Digb. 182.
Bibl. Bodl. I believe the maistre veneur has been long abolished in England:
but the ^oyal falcon^r still remains. The latter was an officer of high dignity
in the Grecian court of Constantinople, at an early period, under the style of
(...). Pachym. lib. i. c. 8. x. 15. Codin. cap. ii. Phrenzes says, that the
emperor Andronicus Palaeologus the younger kept more than one thousand and four
hundred hawks, with almost as many men to take care of them. lib. i. c. 10.

About the year 750, Winifrid, or Boniface, a native of England, and archbishop
of Mons, acquaints Ethelbald, a king of Kent, that he has sent him, one hawk,
two falcons, and two shields. And Hedilbert, a king of the Mercians, requests
the same archbishop Winifrid, to send him two falcons which have been trained
to kill cranes. See EPISTOL. Winifrid. [Bonifac.] Mogunt. 1605. 1629. And in
Bibl. Patr. tom. vi. and tom. xiii. p. 70. Falconry, or a right to sport with
falcons, is mentioned so early as the year 986. Chart. Ottonis iii. Imperator.
ann. 986. apud Ughell. de Episcop. Januens. A charter of Kenulf, king of the
Mercians, granted to the abbey of Abingdon, and dated 821, prohibits all
persons carrying hawks or falcons, to trespass on the lands of the monks. Dugd.
Monast. i. p. 100. Julius Firmicus, who wrote about the year 355, is the first
Latin author who mentions hawking, or has even used the word. FALCO. Math^s.
lib. v. c. 7. vii. c. 4. Hawking is often mentioned in the capitularies of the
eighth and ninth centuries. The grand fauconnier of France was an officer of
great eminence. His salary was four thousand florins; he was attended by a
retinue of fifty gentlemen and fifty assistant falconers, and allowed to keep
three hundred hawks. He licens^d every vender of falcons in France; and
received a tribute for every bird that was sold in that kingdom, even within
the verge of the court. The king of France never rode out, on any occasion,
without this officer. [See supr. vol. i. p. 166.]

An ingenious French writer insinuates, that the passion for hunting, which at
this day subsists as a favorite and ^ashionable species of diversion in the
most civilized countries of Europe, is a strong indication of our gothic
origin, and is one of the savage habits, yet unreformed, of our northern
ancestors. Perhaps there is too much refinement in this remark. The pleasures
of the chase seem to have been implanted by nature; and, under due regulation,
if pursued as a matter of mere relaxation and not of employment, are by no
means incompatible with the modes of polished life.


. Her palfrey is Pegasus; and the burning tongues denote her office of
consigning the names of illustrious personages to posterity; among which she
mentions a lady of matchless accomplishments, named LA BELL PUCELL, who lives
within a tower seated in a delightful island; but which no person can enter,
without surmounting many dangers. She then informs our hero, that before he
engages in this enterprise, he must go to the Tower of DOCTRINE, in which he
will see the Seven Sciences The author of the TRESOR, a troubadour, gives the
following account of his own system of erudition, which may not be inapplicable
here. He means to show himself a profound and universal scholar; and professes
to understand the seven liberal arts, grammar, the Latin language, logic, the
Decreta^s of Gratian, music according to Boethius and Guy Aretin, arithmetic,
geography, astronomy, the ecclesiastic computation, medicine, pharmacy,
surgery, necromancy, geomancy, magic, divination, and mythology, better than
Ovi and Thal^s le Menteur: the histories of Thebes, Troy, Rome, Romulus, Caesar,
Pompey, Augustus, Nero, Vespasian, Titus, who took Jerusalem, the Twelve Cesars
down to Constantine; the history of Greece, and that of Alexander, who dying
distributed his acquisitions among his twelve peers; the history of France,
containing the transactions of Clovis, converted by saint Remi; Charles Ma^tel,
who established tenths; king Pepin, Charlemagne and Roland, and the good king
Louis. To these he adds, the HISTORY of ENGLAND, which comprehends the arrival
of Brutus in England, and his conquest of the giant Corineus, the prophesies of
Merlin, the redoubted death of Arthur, the adventures of Gawaine, and the
amors of Tristram and Bell Isould. Amidst this profusion of fabulous history,
which our author seems to think real, the history of the Bible is introduced;
which he traces from the patriarchs down to the day of judgment. At the close
of the whole, he gives us some more of his fashionable accomplishments; and
says, that he is skilled in the plain chant, in singing to the lute, in making
canzonetts, pastorals, amorous and pleasant poesies, and in dancing: that he is
beloved by ecclesiastics, knights, ladies, citizens, minstrels, squires, etc.
The author of this TREASURE, or cyclopede of science, mentioned above, is
Pierre de Corbian, who lived about the year 1200. Crescimbeni says, that this
TRESOR furnished materials of a similar compilation in Italian verse to Bennet,
Dante's master; and of another in French prose. But see Jul. Niger, Script.
Flor. p. 112.
; and that there, in the turret, or chamber, of Music, he will have the first
sight of La Bell Pucell. FAME departs, but leaves with him her two greyhounds.
Graunde Amoure now arrives at the Tower, or rather castle, of DOCTRINE, framed
of fine copper, and situated on a craggy rock: it shone so bright, that he
could distinctly discern the form of the building; till at length, the sky
being covered with clouds, he more visibly perceives its walls decorated with
figures of beasts in gold, and its lofty turrets crowned with golden images He
says, that the little turr^ts had, for weathercocks or fans, images of gold,
which, moving with the wind, played a tune. So Chaucer, CHAPTER DREAM, v. 75. For
every yate [tower] of fine gold
A thousand fanis, aie turning,
^^tunid had, and briddes singing
Div^rs, and on each fane a pair,
With opin mouth again the air:
And of a suit were all the toures: --
And many a small turret hie.
Again, in the castle of PLEASANT REGARD, the fans on the high towers are
mentioned as a circumstance of pleasure and beauty. ASSEMBL. LAD. v. 160. The
towris hie ^ull pleasant shall ye find,
With phanis fresh, turning with every wind.
And our author again, chapter xxxviii.
Alost the towers the golden fanes good
Did with the wind make ^ull sweet armony
Them for to hear it was great melody.
Our author here paints from the life. An excessive agglomeration of turrets,
with their fans, is one of the characteristic marks of the florid mode of
architecture, which was now almost at its height. See views of the palaces of
Nonesuch and Richmond.
. He is admitted by COUNTENANCE the portress, who leads him into a court, where
he drinks water of a most transcendent fragrance, from a magnificent fountain,
whence flow four rivers, clearer than Nilus, Ganges, Tigris, or Euphrates The
Crusades made the eastern rivers more ^amous among the Europeans than any of
their own. Arnaud Daniel, a troubadour of the thirteenth century, declares, he
had rather please his mistress than possess all the dominions which are washed
by Hebrus, Meander, and Tigris. Hist. Troub. ii. p. 485. The compliment would
have been equally exaggerated, if he had alluded to some of the rivers of his
own country.
. He next enters the hall framed of jasper, its windows crystal, and its roof
overspread with a golden vine, whose grapes are represented by rubies From sir
John Maundeville's TRAVELS. "In the hall, is a vine made of gold, that goes
all about the hall: and it has many branches of grapes, some are white, etc.
All the red are of rubies, etc." chapter lxvii. Paulus Silentiarius, in his
description of the church of S. Sophia at Constantinople, mentions such an
ornament. ii. 235. (...), etc.
Pa'mitibus auricomis circumcurrens vitis serpit.

: the floor is paved with beryl, and the walls hung with rich tapestry, on
which our hero's future expedition to the Tower of La Bell Pucell was
gloriously wrought In the eleventh book of Boccacio's THESEID, after Arcite is
dead, Palamon builds a superb temple in honor of him, in which his whole
history is painted. The description of this painting is a recapitulatory
abridgement of the preceding part of the poem. Hawes's tapestry is less
judiciously placed in the beginning of the piece, because it precludes
expectation by forestalling all the future incidents.
. The marshall of this castle is REASON, the sewer OBSERVANCE, the cook
TEMPERANCE, the high-steward LIBERALITY, etc. He then explains to DOCTRINE his
name and intended adventure; and she entertains him at a solemn feast. He
visits her seven daughters, who reside in the castle. First he is conducted to
GRAMMAR, who delivers a learned harangue on the utility of her science: next to
LOGIC, who dismisses him with a grave exhortation: then to RHETORIC, who
crowned with laurel, and seated in a stately chamber, strewed with flowers, and
adorned with the clear mirrours of speculation, explains her five parts in a
labored oration. Graunde Amoure resolves to pursue their lessons with vigor;
and animates himself, in this difficult task, with the examples of Gower,
Chaucer, and Lydgate He recites some of the pieces of the two latter. Chaucer,
he says, wrote the BOOK OF FAME on his own invencion. The TRAGEDIES of the xix
ladies, a t^anslacyon. The CANTERBURY TALES, upon his ymaginacyon, some of
which are virtuous, others glad and merry. The pytous dolor of TROYLUS AND
CRESSIDA, and many other books.

Among Lydgate's works, he recites the LIFE of OUR LADY. SAINT EDMUND'S LIFE.
The FALL OF PRINCES. The THREE REASONS. The CHORLE AND THE BIRD. The TROYBOOK.
VIRTUE AND VICE, [MSS. Harl. 2251. 63. fol. 95.] The TEMPLE OF GLASS. The BOOK
OF GODS AND GODDESSES. This last, I suppose, is The BANQUET OF GODS AND
GODDESSES.

The poem of the CHORLE AND THE BIRD our author calls a pamfl^te. Lydgate
himself says, that he translated this tale from a pamflete in Frensche, st 5.
It was first printed by Caxton in his CHAUCER. Afterward by Wynkyn de Word,
before 1500, in quarto. And, I think, by Copland. Ashmole has printed it under
the title of HERMES'S BIRD, and supposes it to have been written originally by
Raymund Lully; or at least made English by Cremer, abbot of Westminster,
Lully's scholar. THEATR. CHEM. p. 213. 467 465. Lydgate, in the last stanza,
again speaks of this piece as a "trans^acyon owte of the Frenshe." But the
fable on which it is founded, is told by Petrus Alphonsus, a writer of the
twelfth century, in his tract de Clericali Disciplina, never printed. See supr.
p. 137.

Our author, in his recital of Chaucer's pieces, calls the LEGENDE OF GOOD
WOMEN tragidyes. Anciently a serious narrative in verse was called a tragedy.
And it is observable, that he mentions xix ladies belonging to this legend.
Only nine appear at present. Nineteen was the number intended^ as we may
collect from Lydgate's FALL PR. Prol. and ibid. l. i. c. 6. Compare MAN of L.
T. Prol. v. 60. Urr. Where eight more ladies than are in the present legende
are mentioned. This piece is called the l^gendis of ix good women, MSS. Fairf.
xvi. Chaucer himself says, "I saw cominge of ladies Nineteen in royal ^abit."
v. 383. Urr. Compare Pars. T. Urr. p. 214. col. 1.


, who are panegyrised with great propriety. He is afterward admitted to
ARITHMETIC, who wears a GOLDEN wede The walls of her chamber are painted in
gold with the three fundamental rules of arithmetic.
: and, last of all, is led to the Tower of MUSIC In the TRESOR of Pierre de
Corbian, cited at large above, Music, according to Boethius and Guy Aretin, is
one of the seven liberal sciences. At Oxford, the graduates in music, which
still remains there as an academical science, are at this day required to show
their proficiency in Boethius DE MUSICA. In a pageant, at the coronation of
king Edward the sixth, MUSIC personified appears among the seven sciences.
Leland. Coll. APPEND. iii. 317. edit. 1770.
, which was composed of crystal, in eager expectation of obtaining a view of La
Bell Pucell, according to FAME'S prediction. MUSIC was playing on an organ,
before a solemn assembly; in the midst of which, at length he discovers La Bell
Pucell, is instantly captivated with her beauty, and almost as soon tells her
his name, and discloses his passion In the description of her person, which is
very elegant, and consists of three stanzas, there is this circumstance, "She
gartered well her hose." chapter xxx. Chaucer has this circumstance in describing
the Wife of Bath. Prol. v. 458. Hire hosen weren of fine scarlet read
Full strait yteyed. --

. She is more beautiful than Helen, Proserpine, Cressida, queen Hyppolita,
Medea, Dido, Polyxena, Alcmena, Menalippa, or even fair Rosamund. The solemnity
being finished, MUSIC and La Bell Pucell go forth into a stately temple,
whither they are followed by our hero. Here MUSIC seats herself amidst a
concert of all kinds of instruments That is, tabours, trumpets, pipes,
sackbuts, organs, recorders, harps, lutes, croudds, tymphans, [l. symphans]
dulcimers, ^laricimbales, rebeckes, clarychordes. chapter xvi. At the marriage of
James of Scotland with the princess Margaret, in the year 1503, "the king began
before her to play of the clarychord^s and after of the lut^^ And upon the
said clarychorde sir Edward Stanley played a ballade and sange therewith."
Again, the king and queen being together, "after she played upon the
clarychorde and after of the lute, he being upon his knee allwaies
bareheaded." Leland. Coll. APPEND. iii. p. 284. 285. edit. 1770. In Lydgate's
poem, entitled REASON AND SENSUALLITE, compyl^d by John Lydgate, various
instruments and sorts of music are recited. MSS. Fairfax. xvi. Bibl. Bodl. [Pr.
"To all folkys virtuous."] "H^re rehersyth the auctor the MYNSTRALCYS that were
in the gardyn." Of al manner mynstralcye
That any man kan specifye:
F^or there were rotys of Almayne.
And eke of Arragon and Spain:
Songs, stampes, and eke daunces,
Diverse plente of plesaunces;
And many unkouth notys new
Of swiche folk as lovid true;
And instrumentys that did excelle,
Many moo than I kan tell:
Harpys, fythales, and eke rotys,
Well according with her notys,
Lutys, ribibles, and geternes,
More for estatys than tavernes;
Orguys, cytolis, monacordys. --
There were trumpes, and trumpettes,
Loud shallys, and doucettes.
Here get^rn^, is a guittar, which, with cytolis, has its origin in cit^ara.
Fythales is fiddles. Shallys, I believe, should be shalmies, or shawms. Orguys
is organs. See supr. vol. i. p. 429. and 61. By estatys he means states, or
solemn assemblies.
. She explains the principles of harmony. A dance is played Music commands her
mynstrelles to play the dance, which was called Mamours the sweet. So at the
royal marriage just mentioned, "The mynstrelles begone to play a basse dance,
etc. After this done, they played a rownde, the which was daunced by the lord
Gray ledyinge the said queen. -- After the dinner incontinent the mynstrelles
of the chammer [chamber] began to play and then daunced the queen, etc."
Leland, APPEND. ubi supr. p. 284. seq.
, and Graunde Amoure dances with La Bell Pucell. He retires, deeply in love. He
is met by COUNSEL, who consoles and conducts him to his repose in a stately
chamber of the castle. In the morning, COUNSEL and our hero both together
visit La Bell Pucell. At the gate of the garden of the castle they are informed
by the portress CURTESY, that the lady was sitting alone in an arbor, weaving
a garland of various flowers. The garden is described as very delicious, and
they find the lady in the arbor near a stately fountain, among the flowers of
aromatyke fume. After a long dialogue, in which for some time she seems to
reject his suit, at last she resigns her heart; but withal acquaints her lover,
that he has many monsters to encounter, and many dangers to conquer, before he
can obtain her. He replies, that he is well acquainted with these difficulties;
and declares, that, after having received instructions from ASTRONOMY, he will
go to the Tower of CHIVALRY, in order to be more completely qualified to
succeed in this hazardous enterprise. They take leave with tears; and the lady
is received into a ship, which is to carry her into the island where her Tower
stood. COUNSEL consoles Amoure COUNSEL mentions the examples of Troilus and
Cressida, and of Ponthus and Sidonia. Of the latter faithful pair, there is an
old French romance, "Le Roman du noble roy Pontus fills du roy de Gallice et de
la belle Sidoine fille du roy de Bretagne." Without date, in bl. letter. 4to.
It is in the royal library at Paris, MS. fol. See Lengl. Bibl. Romans ii. 250.
And among the king's manuscripts in the British museum there is, "Le Livre du
roy Ponthus." 15 E. vi. 6. I think there are some elegant miniatures in this
manuscript. Our author calls him "the famous knight yclypped Ponthus, which
loved Sydonye." chapter xvi. KING PONTHUS is among the copies of James Roberts, a
printer in the reign of queen Elisabeth, Ames, p. 342. I believe it was first
printed by Wynkyn de Word, "The hystory of Ponthus and Galyce, and of little
Brytayne." With wooden cuts. 1511. 4to.
, and leaves him to attend other desponding lovers. Our hero bids adieu in
pathetic terms to the Tower of MUSIC, where he first saw Pucell. Next he
proceeds to the Tower of GEOMETRY, which is wonderfully built and adorned. From
thence he seeks ASTRONOMY, who resides in a gorgeous pavilion pitched in a
fragrant and flowery meadow: she delivers a prolix lecture on the several
operations of the mind, and parts of the body In a wooden cut Ptolomy the
astronomer is here introduced, with a quadrant: and Plato, the conynge and
famous clerk, is cited.
. He then, accompanied with his greyhounds, enters an extensive plain
overspread with flowers; and looking forward, sees a flaming star over a tower.
Going forward, he perceives that this tower stands on a rough precipice of
steel, decorated with beasts of various figures. As he advances toward it, he
comes to a mighty fortress, at the gate of which were hanging a shield and
helmet, with a mavelous horn. He blows the horn with a blast that shook the
tower, when a knight appears; who, asking his business, is answered, that his
name is Graunde Amoure, and that he was just arrived from the tower of
DOCTRINE. He is welcomed by the knight, and admitted. This is the castle of
CHIVALRY. The next morning he is conducted by the porter STEDFASTNESS into the
base court, where stood a tower of prodigious height, made of jasper: on its
summit were four images of armed knights on horses of steel, which, on moving a
secret spring, could represent a turney. Near this tower was an ancient temple
of Mars: within it was his statue, or picture, of gold, with the figure of
FORTUNE on her wheel; and the walls were painted with the siege of Troy This
was a common subject of tapestry, as I have before observed: but as it was the
most favorite martial subject of the dark ages, is here introduced with
peculiar propriety. Chaucer, from the general popularity of the story, has made
it a subject for painted glass. DREME CHAUC. v. 322. p. 406. Urr. col. 1. --
and with glass
Were all the windows well yglased
Full clear, and not an hole ycrased,
That to behold it was great joy;
For wholly all the story of Troy
Was in the glai^inge ywrought thus,
Of Hector, and king Priamus,
Achilles, etc.
^n our author's description of the palace of Pucell, "there was enameled with
figures curious the syege of Troy." cap. xxxviii. Sign. A. iii. edit. 1555. The
arras was the syege of Thebes. ibid. In the temple of Mars was also "the sege
of Thebes depaynted ^ayre and clear" on the walls. cap. xxvii. Sign. Q. iii.
[See supr. p. 216.]
. He supplicates Mars, that he may be enabled to subdue the monsters which
obstruct his passage to the Tower of Pucell. Mars promises him assistance; but
advises him first to invoke Venus in her temple. FORTUNE reproves Mars for
presuming to promise assistance; and declares, that all human glory is in the
power of herself alone. Amoure is then led Through the sumptuous hall of the
castle, which is painted with the Siege of Theb^s, and where many knights are
playing at chess.
by Minerva to king Melyzus A fabulous king of Thrace, who, I think, is
mentioned in Caxton's RECUYAL OF THE HYSTORYES OF TROY, now just printed; that
is, in the year 1471. Our author appeals to this romance, which he calls the
Recule of Troy, as an authentic voucher for the truth of the labors of
Hercules. chapter i. By the way, Boccacio's GENEALOGY OF THE GODS is quoted in this
romance of Troy, B. ii. chapter xix.
, the inventor of tilts and tournaments, who dubs him a knight. He leaves the
castle of CHIVALRY, and on the road meets a person, habited like a Fool, named
Godfrey Gobilive His father is Davy Drunken nole,
Who never drank but in a fair black boule.
Here he seems to allude to Lydgate's poem, called Of Jack Wat that could pull
the lining^ out of a black boll. MS. Ashmol. Oxon. 59. ii. MSS. Harl. 2251. 12.
fol. 14. One Jack Hare is the same sort of ludicrou^ character, who is thus
described in Lydgate's Tale of froward Maymonde. MSS. Laud. D. 31. Bibl. Bodl.
A froward knave pleynly to descryve,
And a sloggard shortly to declare,
A precious knave that castith him never to thryve,
His mouth weel weet, his slevis riht thredbare;
A turnebroche, [turn-spit] a boy for hog of ware,
With louring face noddyng and slumb^ryng^
Of new crystened, and called Jakke Hare,
Which of a boll can ^lukke out the lynyng.
These two pieces of Lydgate appear to be the same.
, who enters into a long discourse on the falsehood of women He relates, how
Aristotle, for all his clergy, was so infatuated with love, that he suffered
the lady, who only laughed at his passion, to bridle and ride him about his
chamber. This story is in Gower, CONF. AMANT. lib. viii. fol. clxxxix. b. edit.
ut supr. [See supr. p. 25.] I saw there Aristote also
Whom that the queen of Greece also
Has brideled, etc.
Then follows a long and ridiculous story about Virgil, not the poet, but a
necromancer framed in the dark ages, who is deceived by the tricks of a lady at
the court of Rome; on whom, however, her paramour takes ample revenge by means
of his skill in music. chapter xxix. I have mentioned this Virgil, supr. vol. i. p.
407. See also, supr. p. 2^. Where I have falsely supposed him to be the poet.
This ^iction is also alluded to by Gower, and added to that of Aristotle's,
among his ex^^ples of the power of love over the wisest men. ubi supr. And eke
Virgile of acqueintance
I sigh [saw] where he the maiden praid
Which was the daughter, as men said,
Of the emperor whilom of Rome.
There is an old book, printed in 1510, entitled, "VIRGILIUS. This book
treats of the life of Virgilius, and of his death, and many marvayles that he
did in his lyfetyme by whitchcraft and nigramansy, thorouhg the help of the
devylls of hell." Coloph. " Thus ends the life of Virgilius with many dyvers
consaytes that he did. Emprynted in the city of Andewarpe by me John
D^esborche, dw^llyng at the Camer Port." With cuts, octavo. It was in Mr.
West's library. Virgil's Li^e is mentioned by Lan^ham among other romantic
pieces, Killinw. Castle. p. 34. edit. 1575. 120. This fictitious personage,
however, seems to be formed on the genuine Virgil, because, from the subject of
his eighth Eclogue, he was supposed to be an adept in the mysteries of magic
and incantation.
. They both go together into the temple of Venus, who was now holding a solemn
assembly, or court, for the redress of lovers. Here he meets with SAPIENCE, who
draws up a supplication for him, which he presents to Venus. Venus, after
having exhorted him to be constant, writes a letter to Pucell, which she sends
by Cupid. After offering a turtle, he departs with Godfrey Gobilive, who is
overtaken by a lady on a palfrey, with a knotted whip in her hand, which she
frequently exercises on Godfrey In another place he is called FOLLY, and said
to ride on a mare. When chivalry was at its height in France, it was a
disgrace to any person, not below the degree of a gentleman, to ride a mar^.
. Amoure asks her name, which, she answers, is CORRECTION; that she lived in
the Tower of CHASTITY, and that he who assumed the name of Godfrey Gobilive was
FALSE REPORT, who had just escaped from her prison, and disguised himself in a
fool's coat. She invites Amoure to her Tower, where they are admitted by Dame
MEASURE; and led into a hall with a golden roof, in the midst of which was a
carbuncle of a prodigious size, which illuminated the room From Chaucer, ROMANS
ROSE, v. 1120. Urr. p. 223. a. RICHESSE is crowned with the costliest gems, But
all before full subtilty
A ^ine carboncle sell saw I,
The stone so clear was and bright,
That al so son^ as it was night,
Men mightin seen to go for need
A mile or two in length and ^rede.
Such light ysprange out of that stone.
But this is not uncommon in romance, and is an Arabian idea. See supr. vol. i.
p. 378. In the History of the SEVEN CHAMPIONS, a book compiled in the reign of
James the first by one Richard Johnson, and containing some of the most capital
^ictions of the old Arabian romance, in the adventure of the ENCHANTED
FOUNTAIN, the knights entering a dark hall, "took off their gauntletts from
their left hands whereon they wore mavelous great and ^ine diamonds, that
gave so much light, that they might plainly see all things that were in the
hall, the which was very great and wide, and upon the walls were painted the
figures of many furious fiends, etc." SEC. P. chapter ix. And in Maundeville's
TRAVELLS, "The emperor has in his chamber a pillar of gold, in which is a
ruby and carbuncle a foot long, which lights all his chamber by night, etc."
chapter lxxii.
. They are next introduced to a fair chamber; where they are welcomed by many
famous women of antiquity, Helen, queen Proserpine, the lady Meduse,
Penthesilea, etc. The next morning, CORRECTION shows our hero a mavelous
dungeon, of which SHAMFAS^NESSE is the keeper; and here FALSE REPORT is
severely punished. He now continues his expedition, and near a fountain
observes a shield and a horn hanging. On the shield was a lion rampant of gold
in a silver field, with an inscription, importing, that this was the way to La
Bell Pucell's habitation, and that whoever blows the horn will be assaulted by
a most formidable giant. He sounds the horn: when instantly the giant appeared,
twelve feet high, armed in brass, with three heads, on each of which was a
streamer, with the inscriptions Falsehood, Imagination, Perjury. After an
obstinate combat, he cuts off the giant's three heads with his sword
Claraprudence. He next meets three fair ladies, VANITY, GOOD-OPERATION,
FIDELITY. They conduct him to their castle with music; where, being admitted by
the portress OBSERVANCE, he is healed of his wounds by them. He proceeds and
meets PERSEVERANCE, who acquaints him, that Pucell continued still to love:
that, after she had read Venus's letter, STRANGENESS and DISDAIN came to her,
to dissuade her from loving him; but that soon after, PEACE and MERCY MERCY is
no uncommon divinity in the love-system of the troub^dours. See M. Millot's
HIST. LITT. DES TROUBAD. tom. i. p. 181. Par. 1774.
arrived, who soon undid all that DISDAIN and STRANGENESS had said, advising
her to send PERSEVERANCE to him with a shield. This shield PERSEVERANCE now
presents, and invites him to repose that night with her cousin COMFORT, who
lived in a moated manor-place under the side of a neighboring wood There is a
description of a magnificent ma^or-place, curious ^or its antiquity, in an old
poem, written before the year 1300, entitled a Disputation between a Cryste^
man and a J^we, perhaps translated from the French, MS. Vernon. fol. 301. ut
supr. [See Carpentier's Suppl. du Cange, Lat. Gloss. V. RADIMERE.] Forth heo
They.
wenten on the ^^eld
To an hul Hill.
they by held,
The eorthe clevet Cleaved.
as a scheld Shield.
,
On the grownde grene:
Some fond they on Road. Way. Cavern asc^nt.
stih,
They went thereon Readily. Easily.
radly;
The christian mon hedde Was very attentive. H^^ded.
farly
What hit mihte mean.
Aftir that sti lay a street,
Clear i pavet with Paved with gritt, i. e. sand, or gravel.
get,
They fond a Manner that was mete
With murthes full schene;
W^l corven and wroht
With halles heie upon With halls built high.
loft,
To a place weore they brouht
As paradys the Bright, or pl^asant, as Paradise.
clean.
There was foulen Fo^ls, birds.
song,
Much murthes among,
Hose lenge would long
Fful luitell him thouht:
On vche a side of the halle,
Pourpell, p^lure, and The guests sat on each side of the hall, clothed in
purple, furs, or ermine, and rich robes.
palle;
Wyndowes in the wall
Was wonderli Wonderfully wrought.
i wrouht:
There was D^ss^r ^s a basket carried on the back. Lat. Dorsarium. Chaucer's H.
F. iii. ^50. "Or else hutchis or Dossers.' We must here understand Provisions.
dosers on the Dees is here the table.
dees,
Hose the chief would Whoever would choose the best.
ches
That never richere was,
In no sale Hall. Lat. Sala.
souht:
Both the mot and the mold
Schone al on red gold
The cristene mon had ferli of that House.
fold,
That hider was brout.
There was erbes An Herbary, for furnishing domestic medicines, always made a
part of our ancient gardens. In Hawes s poem, now before us, in the delicious
garden of the castle of Music, "Amid (...) the garden there was an herber fair
and quadrante." chapter xviii. In the Glossary to Chaucer, Erbe is absurdly
interpreted Arbours. NON. PR. T. v. 1081. "Or ^r^e ive growing in our ^rberis."
Chaucer is here enumerating various medical herbs, usually planted in ^rberis,
or herbaries.
grown grene,
Spices springynge by twene,
Such had I not seen,
Ffor sothe as I say:
The thrustell Thrush.
song full srhille,
He newed notes at his will;
Ffaire fflowers to ^ille,
Ffine in that ffay:
And all the round table good,
Hou Arthur in eorthe (...) went. Walked on earth.
od,
Sum sat and sum stod,
O the ground gray:
Hit was a wonder siht
As they were quik men As if they were living men.
diht
To seo hou they To see their sports, tournaments, etc.
play.
Together with some of his expressions, I do not always understand this
writer's context and transitions, which have great abruptness. In what he says
of king Arthur, I suppose he means, that king Arthur's round table, and his
knights turneying, were painted on the walls of the hall.
. Here he is ushered into a chamber precious, per^umed with the richest odours.
Next morning, guided by PERSEVERANCE and COMFORT, he goes forward, and sees a
castle, nobly ^ortified, and walled with jet. Before it was a giant with seven
heads, and upon the trees about him were hanging many shields of knights, whom
^e had conquered. On his seven heads were seven h^lmets crowned with seven
streamers, on which were inscribed Dissimulation, Delay, Discomfort, Variance,
Envy, Detraction, Doubleness. After a bloody battle, he kills the giant, and is
saluted by the five ladies STEDFASTNESS, AMOROUS PURVEYANCE, JOY AFTER SORROW,
PLEASAUNCE, GOOD REPORT, AMIT^E, CONTINUANCE, all riding from the castle on
white palfries. These ladies inform Amoure, that they had been exiled from La
Bell Pucell by DISDAIN, and besieged in this castle, for one whole year, by
the giant whom he had just slain. They attend him on his journey, and travel
through a dreary wilderness, full of wild beasts: at length they discern, at a
vast distance, a glorious region, where stood a stately palace beyond a
tempestuous ocean. "That, says PERSEVERANCE, is the palace of Pucelle." They
then discover, in the island before them, an horrible fiend, roaring like
thunder, and breathing flame, which my author strongly paints, The fire was
greet, it made the ylande light.
PERSEVERANCE tells our hero, that this monster was framed by the two witches
STRANGENESS and DISDAIN, to punish La Bell Pucell for having banished them
from her presence. His body was composed of the seven metals, and within it a
demon was enclosed. They now enter a neighboring temple of Pallas; who shows
Amoure, in a trance, the secret formation of this monster, and gives him a box
of wonderful ointment. They walk on the seashore, and espy two ladies rowing
toward them; who land, and having told Amoure that they are sent by PATIENCE
to enquire his name, receive him and his company into the ship PERFECTNESS.
They arrive in the island; and Amoure discovers the monster near a rock, whom
he now examines more distinctly. The face of the monster resembled a virgin's,
and was of gold; his neck of silver; his breast of steel; his forelegs, armed
with strong talons, of laten; his back of copper; his tail of lead, etc.
Amoure, in imitation of Jason, anoints his sword and armor with the unguent of
Pallas; which, at the first onset, preserves him from the voluminous torrent of
fire and smoke issuing from the monster's mouth. At length he is killed; and
from his body flew out a foul ethiope, or black spirit, accompanied with such
a smoke that all the island was darkened, and loud thunderclaps ensued. When
this spirit was entirely vanished, the air grew serene; and our hero now
plainly beheld the magnificent castle of La Pucell, walled with silver, and
many a story upon the wall enameled royally See supr. p. 217. and vol. i. p.
114. 303. I know not from what romantic history of the crusades, Richard
Johnson took the description of the stately house of the courteous Jew at
Damascus, built for entertaining christian pilgrims, in which "the walls were
painted with as many stories as there were years since the creation of the
world." SEC. P. chapter iv. The word enameled, in the text, is probably used in the
same sense as in Stowe, SURVEY LAND. p. 359. edit. 1599. "The great bell-tower,
[of the priory of S. John in Cle^kenwell,] a most curious piece of
workmanshippe, graven, guilt, and inamel^d, to the great beautifying of the
city, and passinge all other that I have seen, etc." So again our author,
Hawes, chapter ii. -- The toure does stand
Made all of gold, enameled about
With noble stories. --

. He rejoins his company; and entering the gate of the castle, is solemnly
received by PEACE, MERCY, JUSTICE, REASON, GRACE, and MEMORY. He is then led by
the portress COUNTENANCE into the base court; where, into a conduit of gold,
dragons spouted water of the richest odor. The gravel of the court is like
gold, and the hall and chambers are most superbly decorated. Amoure and La
Pucell sit down and coverse together. Venus intervenes, attended by Cupid
clothed in a blue mantle embroidered with golden hearts pierced with arrows,
which he throws about the lovers, declaring that they should soon be joined in
marriage. A sudden transition is here made from the pagan to the christian
theology. The next morning they are married, according to the catholic ritual,
by LEX ECCLESIAE; and in the wooden print prefixed to this chapter, the lovers
are represented as joining hands at the western portal of a great church, a
part of the ceremonial of ancient marriages For this custom, see supr. vol. i.
p. 437. And the romance of APPOLYNE, chapter xxxiii.
. A solemn feast is then held in honor of the nuptials Which is described
thus, chapter xxix. Why should I tarry by long continuance
Of the feast, etc.
In the same manner Chaucer passes over the particularities of Cambuscan's
feast, SQU. T. v. 83. Urr. And of Theseus's feast, KN. T. v. 2199. See also MAN
OF L. T. v. 704. And Spenser's FAIRY QU. v. iii. 3. [See supr^ vol. i. p. 333.]
And Matthew Paris, in describing the magnificent marriage and coronation of
queen Eleanor in 1236, uses exactly the same formulary, and on a similar
subject, "Quid in ecclesia seriem enarrem deo, ut decuit, reverenter
ministrantium? Quid in mensa dapium et diversorum libaminum describam
fertilitatem redundantem? Venationis [venison] abundantiam? Piscium varietatem?
Joculatorum voluptatem? Ministrantium venustatem? etc." HIST. ANGL. sub. HEN.
iii. p. 406. edit. Tig. ut supr. Compare another feast described in the same
chronicle, much after the same manner; and which, the writer adds, was more
splendid than any feast celebrated in the time of Ahasuerus, king Arthur, or
Charlemagne. ibid. p. 871.
.

Here the poem should have ended. But the poet has thought it necessary to
extend his allegory to the death and burial of his hero. Graund Amoure having
lived in consummate happiness with his amiable bride for many years, saw one
morning an old man enter his chamber, carrying a staff, with which he strikes
Amoure's breast, saying, Obey, etc. His name is OLD AGE. Not long after came
POLICY or Cunning, and AVARICE. Amoure now begins to abandon his triumphal
shows and splendid carousals, and to be intent on amassing riches. At last
arrived DEATH, who peremptorily denounces, that he must prepare to quit his
wealth and the world. After this fatal admonition, came CONTRITION and
CONSCIENCE, and he dies. His body is interred by MERCY and CHARITY; and while
his epitaph is written by REMEMBRANCE, FAME appears; promising that ^he will
enroll his name with those of Hector, Joshua, Judas Maccabeus, king David The
chief reason for ranking king David among the knights of romance was, as I have
already hinted, because he killed the giant Goliath: an achievement here
mentioned by Hawes. See supr. p. 217. and vol. i. p. 418.
, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Arthur Of Arthur and his knights he says,
that their exploits are recorded "in royal books and jestes hystoryall." chapter
xliii. Sir Thomas Maillorie had now just published his MORTE ARTHUR, a
narrative digested from various French romances on Arthur's story. Caxton's
printed copy of this favorite volume must have been known to our poet Hawes,
which appeared in 1485. fol. By the way, in panegyrising Chaucer, Hawes
mentions it, as a circumstance of distinction, that his works were printed. chapter
xiiii. -- Whose name
In PRINTED books does remain in fame.
This was natural at the beginning of the typographic art. Many of Chaucer's
poems were now recently printed by Caxton.

With regard to Millorie's book, much, if not most, of it, I believe, is taken
from the great French romance of LANCELOT, translated from Latin into French at
the command of one of our Henrys, a metrical English version of which is now in
Benet library at Cambridge. [See a specimen in Mr. Naasmith's curious
catalogue, p. 54.] I have left it doubtful whether it was the third Henry who
ordered this romance to be translated into Latin, vol. i. p. 115. But, beside
the proofs there suggested, in favor of that hypothesis, it appears, that
Henry the third paid great attention to these compositions, from the following
curious anecdote just published, which throws new light on that monarch's
character.

Arnaud Daniel, a troubadour, highly celebrated by Dante and Petrarch, about
the year 1240 made a voyage into England, where, in the court of king Henry the
third, he met a minst^^^, who challenged him at difficult rhymes. The challenge
was accep^ed, a considerable wager was laid, and the rival bards were shut up
in separate chambers of the palace. The king, who appears to have much
interested himself in the dispute, allowed them ten days for composing, and
five more for learning to sing, their respective pieces: after which, each was
to exhibit his performance in the presence of his majesty. The third day, the
English minstrel announced that he was ready. The troubadour declared he had
not wrote a line; but that he had tried, and could not as yet put two words
together. The following evening he overheard the minstrel practicing his
chanson to himself. The next day he had the good fortune to hear the same
again, and learned the air and words. At the day appointed they both appeared
before the king. Arnaud desired to sing first. The minstrel, in a fit of the
greatest surprise and astonishment, suddenly cried out, C'est ma chanson, This
is MY SONG. The king said it was impossible. The minstrel still insisted upon
it; and Arnaud, being closely pressed, ingenuously told the whole affair. The
king was much entertained with this adventure; and ordering the wager to be
withdrawn, loaded them with rich presents. But he afterward obliged Arnaud to
give a chanson of his own composition. Millot, ut supr. tom. ii. p. 491.

In the mean time I would not be understood to deny, that Henry the second
encouraged these pieces; for it partly appears, that Gualter Mapes, archdeacon
of Oxford, translated, from Latin into French, the popular romance of SAINT
GRAAL, at the instance of Henry the second, to whom he was chaplain, about the
year 1190. See MSS. Reg. 20 D. iii. a manuscript perhaps coeval with the
translator; and, if so, the original copy presented to the king. Master
Benoit, or Benedict, a rhymer in French, was also patronised by this monarch:
at whose command he compiled a metrical Chronicle of the DUKES OF NORMANDY: in
which are cited Isidore Hispalensis, Pliny, and saint Austin. MSS. Harl. 1717.
1. on vellum. See fol. 85. 192. 163. 2^6. This old French poem is full of
fabulous and romantic matter; and seems to be partly translated from a Latin
Chronicle, DE MORIBUS ET ACTIS PRIMORUM NORMANNIAE DUCUM, written about the
year 1000, by Dudo, dean of S. Quintin^s, and printed among Du Chesne's
SCRIPTOR. NORMAN. p. 49. edit. 1619. Master Benoit ends with our Henry the
first. Dudo with the year 996.


, Charlemagne With his d^us^p^res, or twelve peers, among which he mentions
Rowland and Oliver.
, and Godfrey of Bulloign These are the NINE WORTHIES: to whom Shakespeare
alludes in LOVE'S LAB. LOST. "Here is like to be a good presence of WORTHI^S.
He presents Hector of Troy: The swain, Pompey the Great: The pari^h-curate,
Alexander: Armado's page, Hercules: The pedant, Judas Macchabeus, etc." ACT. v.
SC. i. Elias Cairels, a troubadour of Perigord, about the year 1240, wishes for
the wisdom of Solomon, the courtesy of Roland, the puissance of Alexander, the
strength of Samson, the friendly attachment of sir Tristram, the c^evalerie of
sir Gawaine, and the learning of Merlin. Though not immediately connected with
the present purpose, I cannot resist the temptation of transcribing the
remainder of our troubadour's idea of complete happiness in this world. His
ambition can be gratified by nothing less than by possessing, "Une si parfaite
loyaute, que null chevalier et null jongleur n' aient rien a reprendre en lui;
une maitresse jeune, jolie, et decente; mill cavaliers bien en order pour le
suivre par tout, etc." Millot, HIST. LITT. des TROUBAD. tom. i. p. 388. [See
supr. vol. i. p. 417.
. Aftewards TIME, and ETERNITY clothed in a white vestment and crowned with a
triple diadem of gold, enter the temple, and pronounce an exhortation. Last
follows an epilogue, in which the poet apologizes for his hardiness in
attempting to feign and devise this fable.

The reader readily perceives, that this poetical apologue is intended to
shadow the education of a complete gentleman; or rather, to point out those
accomplishments which constitute the character of true gallantry, and most
justly deserve the reward of beauty. It is not pretended, that the
personifications display that force of coloring, and distinctness of
delineation, which animate the ideal portraits of John of Meun. But we must
acknowledge, that Hawes has shown no inconsiderable share of imagination, if
not in inventing romantic action, at least in applying and enriching the
general incidents of the Gothic fable. In the creation of allegoric imagery he
has exceeded Lydgate. That he is greatly superior to many of his immediate
predecessors and cotemporaries, in harmonious versification, and clear
expression, will appear from the following stanza.

Besides this gyaunt, upon every tree
I did see hanging many a goodly shield
Of noble knygtes, that were of hie degree,
Which he had slain and murdered in the field:
From far this gyaunt I right well beheld;
And toward him as I rode on my way,
On his first head I saw a banner gay Chapter xxxv.
.
To this poem a dedication of eight octave stanzas is prefixed, addressed to
king Henry the seventh: in which our author professes to follow the manner of
his master Lydgate.

To follow the trace and all the perfytness
Of my master Lydgate, with due exercise,
Such feigned tales I do find Invent.
and devyse:
For under color a truth may arise,
As was the guyse, in old antiquity,
Of the poets old a tale to surmyse,
To cloak the truth. --
In the course of the poem he complains, that since Lydgate, the most dulcet
spring of famous rhetoryke, that species of poetry which deals in fiction and
allegoric fable, had been entirely lost and neglected. He allows, that some of
Lydgate's successors had been skilful versifiers in the balade royal or octave
stanza, which Lydgate carried to such perfection: but adds this remarkable
restriction,

They feign no fables pleasant and covert: --
Making balades of fervent amytie,
As gestes and tryfles Chapter xiv. So Barklay, in the SHIP OF FOOLS, finished in
1508, fol. 18. a. edit. 1570. He is speaking of the profane and improper
conversation of priests in the choir. And all of fables and jestes of Robin
Hood,
Or other tri^les. --

. --
These lines, in a small compass, display the general state of poetry which now
prevailed.

Coeval with Hawes was William Walter, a retainer to sir Henry Marney,
chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster: an unknown and obscure writer whom I
should not have named, but that he versified, in the octave stanza, Boccacio's
story, so beautifully paraphrased by Dryden, of Sigismonda and Guiscard. This
poem, I think, was printed by Wynkyn de Word, and afterward reprinted in the
year 1597, under the title of THE STATELY TRAGEDY OF GUISCARD AND SIGISMOND
Viz. "Certain worthy manuscript poems of great antiquity, reserved long in
the study of a Northfolke gentleman, now first published by J. S. Land. R. D.
1597." 12mo. In this edition, beside the story of SIGISMUNDA, mentioned in the
text, there is "The Northern Mother's Blessing, written nine years before the
death of G. Chaucer. And The Way to Thrift." This collection is dedicated to
the worthiest Poet MASTER EDMOND SPENSER.
. It is in two books. He also wrote a dialogue in verse, called the Spectacle
of Lovers Begins the PROLOGUE, "Forasmuch as ydelness is rote of all vices"
This and the following piece are also printed in quarto, by Wynkin de Word.
, and the History of Titus and Gesippus, a translation from a Latin romance
concerning the siege of Jerusalem.

About the year 1490, Henry Medwall, chaplain to Morton archbishop of
Canterbury, composed an interlude, called NATURE, which was afterward
translated into Latin. It is not improbable, that it was played before the
archbishop. It was the business of chaplains in great houses to compose
interludes for the family. This piece was printed by Rastel, in 1538, and
entitled, "NATURE, a goodly interlude of nature, compylyd by master Henry
Medwall, chaplayn to the right reverent father in God, Johan Morton, sometime
cardynall, and archebyshop of Canterbury."

In the year 1497, Laurence Wade, a Benedictine monk of Canterbury Professed in
the year 1467. CATAL. Mon. ^ant. inter MSS. C. C. C. C. N. 7.
, translated, into English rhymes, THE LIFE OF THOMAS A BECKETT, written about
the year 1180, in Latin VITA ET RES ^ESTAE THOMAE EPISCOPI CANTUARIENSIS,
published in the QUADRILOGUS, Paris. 1495. 4to.
, by Herbert Bosham See supr. vol. i. 61.
. The manuscript, which will not bear a citation, is preserved in Benet college
in Cambridge MSS. Coll. C. C. Cant. CCCXCVII. 1. Beginn. Prol. "O ye virtuous
soverayns spiritual and temporal."
. The original had been translated into French verse by Peter Langtoft Pits. p.
890. APPEND.
. Bosham was Becket's secretary, and present at his martyrdom.

SECT. VII.
I Place Alexander Barklay within the year 1500, as his SHIP OF FOOLS appears
to have been projected about that period. He was educated at Oriel college in
Oxford He seems to have spent some time at Cambridge, EGLOG. i. Signat. A. iii.
And once in Cambridge I heard a scoller say,
One of the same that go in copes gay.

, accomplished his academical studies by traveling, and was appointed one of
the priests, or prebendaries, of the college of saint Mary Ottery in Devonshire
The chief patron of his studies appears to have been Thomas Cornish, provost of
Oriel college, and Suffragan bishop of Tyne, in the diocese of Bath and Wells;
to whom he dedicates, in a handsome Latin epistle, his SHIP OF FOOLS. But in
the poem, he mentions My Master Kyrkham, calling himself "his true servitour,
his chaplayne, and bede-man." fol. 152. b. edit. 1570. Some biographers suppose
Barklay to have been a native of Scotland. It is certain that he has a long and
labored encomium on James the fourth, king of Scotland; whom he compliments
for his bravery, prudence, and other eminent virtues. One of the stanz^s of
this panegyric is an acrostic on JACOBUS. fol. 206. a. He most probably was of
Devonshire or Gloucestershire.
. Afterward he became a Benedictine monk of Ely monastery In the title to his
tran^^ation from Mancinus, called the MIRROR OF GOOD MANNERS.
; and at length took the habit of the Franciscans at Canterbury MS. Bale,
Sl^an. f. 68.
. He temporised with the changes of religion; for he possessed some
church-preferments in the reign of Edward the sixth He was instituted to Much
Badew in Essex, in 1546. Newcourt, REP. i. 254. And to Wokey in Somersetshire,
the same year. Registr. Wellens. He had also the church of All Saints, in
Lombard Street, London, on the presentation of the dean and chapter of
Canterbury, which was vacant by his death, Aug. 24, 1552. Newcourt, ut supr.
. He died, very old, at Croydon, in Surry He frequently mentions Croydon in his
EGLOGES. He was buried in Croydon church. EGL. i. Signat. A. iii. And as in
CROIDON I heard the Collier preach.
Again, ibid. While I in youth in CROIDON town did dwell.
Again, ibid. He has no ^elowe between this and CROIDON
Save the proud plowman Gnatho of Chorlington.
He mentions the collier again, ibid. Such manner riches the collier tell thee
can.
Also, ibid. As the rich shepherd that woned in Mortlake.

, in the year 1552.

Barklay's principal work is the SHIP OF FOOLS, abovementioned. About the year
1494, Sebastian Brandt, a learned civilian of Basil, and an eminent
philologist, published a satire in German with this title I presume this is the
same Sebastian Brandt, to whom Thomas Acuparius, poet laureate, dedicates a
volume of Poggius's works, Argentorat. 1513. fol. He is here styled, "Juris
utriusque doctor, et. S. P. Q. Argentinensis cancellarius." The dedication is
dated 1511. See Hendreich. PANDECT. p. 703.
. The design was to ridicule the reigning vices and follies of every rank and
profession, under the allegory of a Ship freighted with Fools of all kinds, but
without any variety of incident, or artificiality of fable; yet although the
poem is destitute of plot, and the voyage of adventures, a composition of such
a nature became extremely popular. It was translated into French By Joce Bade.
Paris, 1497.
; and, in the year 1497, into tolerable Latin verse, by James Locher, a German,
and a scholar of the inventour Brandt See THE PROLOGUE.
. From the original, and the two translations, Barklay formed a large English
poem, in the balade or octave stanza, with considerable additions gleaned from
the follies of his countrymen. It was printed by Pinson, in 1509, whose name
occurs in the poem. Howbeit the charge PINSON has on me laid
With many fools our navy not to charge Fol. 38. In another place he complains
that some of his words are amiss, on account of the printers not perfect in
science. And adds that, -- The printers in their busynes
Do all their works speediely and in haste. fol. 258. b.

.
It was finished in the year 1508, and in the college of saint Mary Ottery, as
appears by this rubric, "The SHIP OF FOLYS, translated in the colege of saint
Mary Otery, in the count of Devonshyre, out of Laten, French, and Doch, into
English tongue, by Alexander Barclay, priest and chaplen in the said college,
M.CCCCC.VIII In folio. A second edition, from which I cite, was printed with
his other works, in the year 1570, by Cawood, in folio, with curious wooden
cuts, taken from Pinson's impression, viz. "The SHIP OF FOOL^S, wherein is
showed the solly of all stat^s, with diverse other works adjoined to the same,
etc." This has both Latin and English. But Ames, under Wynkyn de Word, recites
"The Ship of Fools in this World." 4to. 1517. HIST. PRINT. p. 94.
. "Our author's stanza is verbose, prosaic, and tedious: and for many pages
together, his poetry is little better than a trite homily in verse. The title
promises much character and pleasantry: but we shall be disappointed, if we
expect to find the foibles of the crew of our ship touched by the hand of the
author of the CANTERBURY TALES, or exposed in the rough ye^ strong ^atire of
Pierce Plowman. He sometimes has a stroke of humor: as in the following
stanza, where he wishes to take on board the eight secondaries, or minor
canons, of his college. "Alexander Barclay ad FATUOS, ut dent locum OCTO
SECUNDARIIS beatae Mariae de Ottery, qui quidem prima bujus ratis transtra
merentur Fol. 68.
."

Soft, Foolis, soft, a little slack your pace,
Till I have space you to' order by degree;
I have eight neighbors, that first shall have a place
Within this my ship, for they most worthy be:
They may their learning receyve costles and fre^.
Their walls abutting and joining to the schools To the collegiate church of
saint Mary Ottery a school was annexed, by the mu^ificent founder, Grandison,
bishop of Exeter. This college was founded in the year 1337.
;
Nothing they can Know.
, yet naught will they learn nor see,
Therefore shall they guide this one ship of fools.
The ignorance of the English clergy is one of the chief objects of his
animadversion. He says Fol. 2.
^ For if one can flatter, and bear a hawke on his fist,
He shall be made parson of Honington or of Clift.
These were rich benefices in the neighborhood of saint Mary Ottery. He
disclaims the profane and petty tales of the times.

I write no jeste ne tale of Robin Hood Fol. 23.
,
Nor sow no sparkles, ne sede of viciousnes;
Wi^e men love virtue, wild people wantonness,
It longs not my science nor cuning,
For Philip the sparrow the dirige to sing.
The last line is a ridicule on his cotemporary Skeleton, who wrote a LITTLE BOOK
OF PHILIP SPARROW, or a Dirge, For the soul of Philip Sparrow
That was late slain at Carow, etc See Skelton's WORKS, p. 215. edit. 1736.
This will be mentioned again, below.
.
And in another place, he thus censures the fashionable reading of his age:
much in the tone of his predecessor Hawes.

For goodly scripture is not worth an hawe,
But tales are loved ground of ribaudry,
And many are so blinded with their folly,
That no scriptur think they so true nor god^
As is a foolish jest of Robin hode Fol. 23.
.
As a specimen of his general manner, I insert his character of the Student, or
Bookworm: whom he supposes to be the First Fool in the vessel.

That I subjoin the Latin from which he translates, that the reader may judge
how much is our poet's own. fol. 1. a. Primus in excelso ten^o quod nave
rudentes^
Slultivagosque sequor comit^s per flumina vasta,
Non ratione vacat ce^ta, sensuque latenti^
Conge^tis etenim stultus con^ido libellis;
Spem quoque, nec parvam, conge^ta volumina pr^ebent.
Calleo nec verbum^ nec libri^sentio mentem:
Attamen in magno per me servantur honor,
Pulveris et cariem plumatis tergo flabellis.
Ast ubi doctrina^ cer^amen volvitur, inquam,
Aedib^s in nostris librorum culta supellex
Emin^t, et chartis vivo contentus opertis,
Qu^s video ignora^s, juvat et me copia sola.
Con^tituit quondam dives Ptolomeus, haberet
Ut libros toto quaesit^s undique mundo;
Quos grandes rerum thesauros esse putabat:
Non tamen arcan^e legis documenta tenebat,
Q^eis^in^ non poterat vitae disponere cursum^
E^ pariter teneo numerosa volumina, tardus:
Pauca lego, viridi contentus tegmine libri.
^ur velle^ studio sensus turbare frequenti,
Aut tam sollicitis animum confundere rebus?
Qui ^^udet, assiduo motu ^it stultus et amens.
S^^ ^^udeam, seu non, dominus tamen esse vo^^bor;
Et possum studio socium disponere nos^ro^
Qui pro me sapiat, doctasque examinet arts:
Aut si cum doctis versor, concedere malo
Omnia, ne cogar fors verba Latina profa^^.

in this ship the chief place I govern^,
By this wide sea with foolis wandering,
The cause is plain and easy to discern;
Still am I busy books assembling,
For to have plenty it is a pleasant thing,
In my conceyt, to have them ay in hand;
But what they mean do I not understande.
But yet I have them in great reverence
And honor, saving them from filth and ordure;
By often brusshing and much diligence,
Full goodly bound in pleasant coverture
Of damas, satin, or else of velvet pure Students and monks were anciently the
binders of books. In the first page of a manuscript Life of Concubranus, this
note occurs, "EX CONJUNCTIONE dompni Wyllelmi Edys monasterii B. Mariae S.
Modwenae virginis de Burton super Trent monachi, dum esset studens Oxoniae, A.
D. MDXVII." See MSS. Cotton. CLEOPATR. ii. And MSS. Coll. Oriel. N. vi. 3. et
7. Art. The word Conjunctio is ligatura. The book is much older than this entry.
:
I keep them sure fearing least they should be lost
For in them is the cunning wherein I me boast.
But if it fortune that any learned man
Within my house fall to disputation,
I draw the curtaynes to show my books then,
That they of my cunning should make probation:
I love not to fall in alterication:
And while the commen, my books I turn and wind,
For all is in them, and nothing in my mind.
Ptolomeus Ptolomeus Philadelphus, for whom he quotes Josephus, lib. xii.
the rich caused, long agone,
Over all the world good books to be sought,
Done was his commandment, etc.
Lo in likewise of books I have store,
But few I read, and fewer understande;
I follow not their doctrine, nor their lore,
It is enough to bear a book in hand:
It were too much to be in such a land;
For to be bound to look within the book
I am content on the fair coveryng to look. --
Each is not lettred that now is made a lord,
Nor each a clerk that has a benefice;
They are not all lawyers that plees do record,
All that are promoted are not fully wise;
On such chance now fortune throws her dice:
That though one know but the yrishe game
Yet would he have a gentleman's name.
So in likewise, I am in such a case,
Though I naught can Know.
, I would be called wise;
Also I may set another in my place
Which may for me my books exercise;
Or else I will ensue the common guise,
And say concedo to every argument
Lest by much speech my Latin should be spent Fol. 2.
.
In one part of the poem, Prodicus's apologue, of Hercules meeting VIRTUE and
PLEASURE, is introduced. In the speech of PLEASURE, our author changes his
meter; and breaks forth into a lyrical strain, not totally void of elegance and
delicacy, and in a rhythmical arrangement adopted by Gray.

All my vesture is of gold pure,
My gay chaplet with stones set,
With couverture of fine asure,
In silver net my hair upknet,
Soft silk between, le^t it might fret;
My purple pall oercovereth all,
Clear as cristall, no thing egall. --
With harp in hand, always I stand,
Passing each hour, in sweet pleasour;
A wanton band, of every land,
Are in my tower, me to honor,
Some of valor, some bare and poor;
Kings in their pride sit by my side:
Every fresh flower, of sweet odoure,
To them I provide, that with me bide. --
Whoeer they be, that follow me,
And gladly flee to my standarde,
They shall be free, nor sick, nor see
Adversity, and pains hard.
No point of pain shall he sustain,
But joy soverayne, while he is here;
No frost ne rain there shall distayne
His face by pain, ne hurt his chere.
He shall his head cast to no dread
To get the mede Meed. Reward.
and lawde of war;
Nor yet have need, for to take heed,
How battayles speed, but stand afar.
Nor yet be bound to care the sound
Of man or ground, or trompet shrill;
Strokes that redound shall not confound,
Nor his mind wound, but if he will, etc Fol. 241. b.
.
All ancient satirical writings, even those of an inferior cast, have their
merit, and deserve attention, as they transmit pictures of familiar manners,
and preserve popular customs. In this light; at least, Barklay's SHIP OF FOOLS,
which is a general satire on the times, will be found entertaining. Nor must it
be denied, that his language is more cultivated than that of many of his
cotemporaries, and that he contributed his share to the improvement of the
English phraseology. His author, Sebastian Brandt, appears to have been a man
of universal erudition; and his work, for the most part, is a tissue of
citations from the ancient poets and historians.

Barklay's other pieces are the MIRROR OF GOOD MANNERS, and five EGLOGES He
also wrote, The figure of our mother holy ^^urch oppressed by the French king,
printed for Pinson, 4to. -- Answer to John Skeleton the P^^t. -- The Lives of S.
Catharine, S. Margaret, and St. Etheldred. -- The Life of S. George, from
Mantuan: dedicated to N. West bishop of Ely, and written while our author was a
monk of Ely. -- De Pronuntiatione Gallica. John Pal^grave, a polite scholar,
and an eminent preceptour of the French language about the reign of Henry the
eighth, and one of the first who published in English a grammar or system of
rules for teaching that language, says in his L'Ecla^r^issement de la language
Francois, addressed to H^nry the eighth, and printed (fol. Land.) in 1530, that
our author Barklay wrote a tract on this subject at the command of Thomas duke
of Norfolk. -- The famous Cronycle of the War which the Romans had against
Jugurth usurper of the kingdom of Numidy: which cronycle is compyled in Latin
by the renowned Romayn Sa^lust. And translated into English by SIR ALEXAN^ER
BARCLAY, pre^st, at the commaundmente of the ^ye and mighty prince Thomas duke
of Norfolk. In two editions, by Pinson, of this work, both in folio, and in the
public library at Cambridge, the Latin and English are printed together. The
Latin is dedicated to Vesey bishop of Exeter, and dated "ex Cellula Hatfeld
regis [i. e. Kings Hatfield, Hertfordshire] iii. id. November." A new edition,
without the Latin and the two dedications, was printed by J. Waley, 1557, 4to.
-- Orationes variae. -- De ^ide Orthodoxa. -- To these I add, what does not
deserve mention in the text, a poem translated from the French, called The
CASTLE OF LABOR, wherein is riches, virtue, and honor. It is of some length,
and an all^gory; in which Lady REASON conquers Despair, Poverty, and other
evils, which attend a poor man lately married. The Prologue begins, "Ye mortal
people that desire to obtain." The poem begins, "In musyng an evenynge with me
was none." Printed for Wynken de Word, 1506. 4to. And again by Pinson, without
date. 4to. In seven-lined stanzas. By mi^take I have mentioned this piece as
anonymous, supr. p. 200.
.

The MIRROR is a translation from a Latin ^legiac poem, written in the year
1516, by Dominic Mancini DE QUATUOR VIRTUTIBUS. It is in the ballad-stanza
Printed as above, 1570. fol. And by Pinson, at the command of Richard earl of
Kent. Without date, 4to. The Latin elegiacs are printed in the margin, which
have been frequently printed. At Basil, 1543. At Antwerp, 1559. With the
epigram of Peter Carmelian annexed. And often before. Lastly, at the end of
MARTINI Braccarensis Formula honestae Vitae, Helmstad. 1691. 8vo. They are
dedicated "Frederico Severinati episcopo Malleacensi." They first appeared at
Leipsic, 1516. See Trithemius, concerning another of his poems, Mancini's, De
passione domini, cap. 995.
. Our translator, as appears by the address prefixed, had been requested by sir
Giles Alyngton to abridge, or modernise, Gower's CONFESSIO AMANTIS. But the
poet declined this undertaking, as unsuitable to his age, infirmities, and
profession; and chose rather to oblige his patron with a grave system of
ethics. It is certain that he made a prudent choice. The performance shows how
little qualified he was to correct Gower.

Our author's EGLOGES, I believe, are the first that appeared in the English
language Printed as above, 1570, fol. First, I believe, by Humphry Powell. 4to.
Without date. Perhaps about 1550.
. They are, like Petrarch's and Mantuan's Whom he mentions, speaking of
EGLOGES. EGLOG. I. PROL. And in like manner, now lately in our days,
Has other poets attempted the same ways,
As the most famous Baptist Mantuan
The best of that sort since poets first began,
And Frauncis Petrarke also in Italy, etc.

, of the moral and satirical kind; and contain but few touches of rural
description and bucolic imagery. They seem to have been written about the year
1514 Because he praises "noble Henry which now departed late." Afterward he
falls into a long panegyric on his successor Henry the eighth. EGLOG. i. As he
does in the SHIP OF FOOLS, fol. 205. a. where he says, This noble prince
begins virtuously
By justice and pity his realm to maintain.
He then wishes he may retake Jerusalem from the Turks; and compares him to
Hercules, Achilles, etc.
. The three first are paraphrased, with very large additions, from the MISERIAE
CURIALIUM of Eneas Sylvius That is pope PIUS the second, who died in 1464. This
piece is among his EPISTLES, some of which are called Tracts. EPIST. CLVI.
, and treat of the Miseryes of Courtiers and Courts of all Princes in general.
The fourth, in which is introduced a long poem in stanzas, called the Tower of
Virtue and Honor It is properly an elegy on the death of the duke of Norfolk,
lord high admiral.
, of the behavior of rich men against poets. The fifth, of the disputation
of citizens and men of the country. These pastorals, if they deserve the name,
contain many allusions to the times. The poet is prolix in his praises of
Alcock bishop of Ely, and founder of Jesus college in Cambridge This very
learned and munificent prelate deservedly possessed some of the highest
dignities in church and state. He was appointed bishop of Ely in 1486. He died
at Wisbich, 1501. See Whart. ANGL. SACR. i. 675. 801. 381. Rosse says, that he
was tutor to prince Edward, afterward Edward the fifth, but removed by the
king's uncle Richard. Rosse, I think, is the only historian who records this
anecdote. HIST. REG. ANGL. p. 212. edit. Hearn.
.

Yes since his days a cock was in the fen The isle of Ely.
,
I know his voice among a thousand men:
He laughed, he preached, he mended every wrong;
But, Coridon, alas no good thing bideth long!
He All was a Cock ALCOCK.
, he wakened us from sleep,
And while we slumbered, he did our foldes keep.
No cur, no foxes, nor butchers dogs wood,
Could hurt our fouldes, his watching was so good.
The hungry wolves, which that time did abound,
What time he crowed Among Wren's manuscript Collections, (Registr. parv.
Consistorii Eliensis, called the BLACK BOOK.) the following curious memorial,
concerning a long sermon preached by Alcock at saint Mary's in Cambridge,
occur^. "I. Alcock, divina gratia episcopus Eliensis prima die dominica, 1488,
bonum et blandum sermonem praedicavit in ecclesia B. Mariae Cantabrig. qui
incepit in hora prima post meridiem et duravit in horam tertiam et ultra." He
sometimes, and even in the episcopal character, condescended to sport with his
own name. He published an address to the clergy assembled at Barnwell, under
the title of GALLI CANTUS ad con^ratres suos curatos in synodo apud Barnwell,
25 Sept. 1498. To which is annexed his CONSTITUTION for celebrating certain
feasts in his diocese. Printed for Pinson, 1498. 4to. In the beginning is the
figure of the bishop preaching to his clergy, with two cocks on each side. And
there is a cock in the first page. By the way, Alcock wrote many other pieces.
The HILL OF PERFECTION, from the Latin. For Pinson, 1497. 4to. For Wynkyn de
Word, 1497. 4to. Again, for the same, 1501. 4to. THE ABBEY OF THE HOLY GHOST
that shall be founded and grounded in a clear conscience, in which abbey shall
dwell twenty and nine ladies gh^stly. For the same, 1531. 4to. Again, for the
same, without date, but before 1500. 4to. At the end, "Thus ends without
bost, The Abbey of the holy go^t." [See MSS. Harl. 5272. 3. -- 1704. 9. fol. 32.
b. And MSS. C. C. C. Oxon. 155. And MSS. MORE, 191.] SPOUSAGE OF A VIRGIN TO
CHRIST, 1486. 4to. HOMELIAE VULGARES. MEDITATIONES PIAE. A fragment of a
comment upon the SEVEN PENITENTIAL PSALMS, in English verse, is supposed to be
by bishop Alcock, MSS. Harl. 1704. 4. fol. 13.
, abashed at the sound.
This cock was no more abashed of the fox,
Than is a lion abashed of an ox.
When he went, faded the flower of all the fen;
I boldly swear this cock trod never hen!
Alcock, while living, erected a beautiful sepulchral chapel in his cathedral,
still remaining, but miserably defaced. To which the shepherd alludes in the
lines that follow:

This was the father of things pastoral,
And that well shows his cathedral.
There was I lately, about the midst of May:
Coridon, his church is twenty since more gay
Then all the churches between the same and Kent;
There saw I his tomb and chapel excellent. --
Our parish church is but a dongeon
To that gay church in comparison. --
When I saw his figure lie in the chapel side, etc E^LOG. i. Signat. A. iii.
.
In another place he thus represents the general lamentation for the death of
this worthy prelate: and he rises above himself in describing the sympathy of
the towers, arches, vaults, and images, of Ely monastery.

The prati^ palace by him made in the fen He rebuilt, or greatly improved, the
episcopal palace at Ely.
,
The maids, widows, the wives, and the men,
With deadly dolor were pearsed to the heart,
When death constraynd this shepherd to depart.
Corn, grass, and fields, mourned for woe and pain,
For often his prayer for them obtained rain.
The pleasant flowers for him faded each one. --
The oaks, elm: every sort of dear Beasts, quadrupeds of all kinds. So in the
romance of SIR BEVIS, Signat. F. iii. Rattes and myse and such small dear
Was his meat that seven year.
Whence Shakespeare took, as Dr. Percy has observed, the well-known distich of
the madman in KING LEAR, ACT iii. Sc. 4^ Mice and rats and such small decre
Have been Tom's food for seven long y^er^.
It cannot now be donbted, that Shakespeare in this passage wrote deer, instead
of g^er or cheer, which have been conjecturally substituted by his commentators.

Shrunk under shadows, abating all their chere.
The mighty walls of Ely monastery,
The stones, rocks, and towers semblably,
The marble pillours, and images ech^ one,
Sweet all for sorrow, when this cock was gone, etc EGL. iii.
.
It should be remembered, that these pastorals were probably written while our
poet was a monk of Ely: and although Alcock was then dead, yet the memory of
his munificence and piety was recent in the mo^astery He also compliments
Alcock's prede^essour Moreton, afterward archbishop of Canterbury: not without
an allusion to his troubles, and restoration to favor, under Richard the third
and Henry the seventh. EGL. iii.

And shepherd MORETON, when he dur^t not appear,
How his old servauntes ^ere careful of his chere;
In pain and pleasour they kept fidelity,
Till grace again gave him authority, etc. And again, EGL. iiii.
Micene [Mecenas] and MORETON be dead^ and gone certain.
The Deane of Powles, I suppose dean Colet, is c^lebrated as a preacher, ibid.
As is, "The old friar that wonned in Greenwich," EGL. v.


.

Speaking of the dignity and antiquity of shepherds, and particularly of Christ
at his birth being first seen by shepherds, he seems to describe some large and
splendid picture of the Nativity painted on the walls of Ely cathedral.

I saw them myself well painted on the wall,
Late gasing upon our church cathedral:
I saw great wethers, in picture, and small lambs,
Daunsing, some sleping, some sucking of their dams;
And some on the ground, mesemed, lying still:
Then saw I horsemen appendant of an hill;
And the three kings, with all their company,
Their crowns glistering bright and oriently,
With their presents and gifts mystical:
All this beheld I in picture on the wall EGL. v.
.
Virgil's poems are thus characterised, in some of the best turned lines we
find in these pastorals:

He sunge of fields, and tilling of the ground,
Of sheep and oxen, and battle did he sound;
So shrille he sounded in terms eloquent
I trow his tunes went to the firmament EGL. iv.
.
He gives us the following idea of the sports, spectacles, and pleasures, of
his age.

Some men deliteth beholding men to fight,
Or goodly knights in pleasant apparayle,
Or sturdie soldiers in bright harnes and male Armor and coats of mail.
. --
Some glad is to see these ladies beauteous,
Goodly appointed in clothing sumpt^ous:
A number of people appointed in like wise Apparelled in uniform.

In costly clothing, after the newest gise;
Sportes, disgising Masks, etc^
, fair coursers mount and praunce,
Or goodly ladies and knights sing and dance:
To see fair houses, and curious picture,
Or pleasant hanging Tapestry.
, or sumpteous vesture,
Of silk, of purpure, or gold most orient,
And other clothing diverse and excellent:
Hye curious buildinges, or palaces royal,
Or chapels, temples fair and substanciall,
Images graven, or vaultes curious Roofs, curiously vaulted.
;
Gardeyns, and meadows, or places Houses, Seats.
delicious,
Forests and parkes well furnished with dear,
Cold pleausant streams, or wells fair and clear,
Curious cundytes, etc EGL. ii. I shall here throw together in the Notes, some
traits in these Eclogues of the common customs and manners of the times. A
shepherd, after mentioning his skill in shooting birds with a bow, says, EGL.
i. No shephearde throws the axletr^^ so far.


A gallant is thus described, EGL. ii.

For women use to love them most of all,
Which boldly bosteth, or that can sing and jet;
Which has the maistry oftimes in tournament,
Or that can gambauld, or dance feat and gent.
The following sorts of wine are recited, EGL. ii. As muscadell, caprike,
r^mney, and malmesy,
From Genoe brought, from Greece, or Hungary.


As are the dainties of the table, ibid. A shepherd at court must not think to
eat, -- Swanne, nor heron,
Curlewe, nor crane. --


Again, ibid.

What fish is of favor sweet and delicious, --
Roasted or sodden in sweet herbs or wine;
Or fried in oil, most saporous and fine. --
-- The pasties of a heart. --
The crane, the fesaunt, the pecocke, and curlewe,
The partriche, plover, bit^orn, and heronsewe: --
Seasoned so well in licour redolent,
That the hall is full of pleasant smell and sent.
At a feast at court, ibid.

Slow be the sewers in serving in always,
But swift be they after, taking the meat away:
A special custom is used them among,
No good dishe to suffer on board to be long:
If the dishe be pleasant, either flesh or fish,
Te^ hands at once swarm in the dishe:
And if it be fl^she ten knives shall thou se^
Mangling the flesh, and in the platter flee:
To put there thy hands is peril without fail,
Without a gauntlet or else a glove of mayle.
The two last lines remind us of a saying of Quin, who declared it was not safe
to sit down to a turtle-feast in one of the city-halls, without a basket-hilted
knife and ^ork. Not that I suppose Quin borrowed his bon mots from black letter
books.

The following lines point out some of the festive tales of our ancestors. EGL.
iv.

Yet would I gladly hear some merry FIT
Of Maid Marian, or else of Robin Hood;
Or Bentley's Ale which cha^eth well the blood,
Of Perte of Norwich, or sauce of Wilberton,
Or buckish Toby well-stuffed as a ton.
He mentions Bentley's Ale, which makes me to wink, EGL. ii.

Some of our ancient domestic pastimes and amusements are recorded, EGL. iv.

Then is it pleasure the young maidens among
To watch by the fire the winter-nightes long: --
And in the ashes some plays for to mark,
To cover wardens [pears] for fault of other warke:
To toste white shevers, and to make prophitroles;
And, a^tir talking, oftimes to fill the bowls, etc.
He mentions some musical instrument^, EGL. ii.

-- Methinkes no mirth is scant,
Where no rejoysing of minstrelsie does wan^:
The bagpipe or fiddle to us is d^lectable, etc.
And the mercantile commodities of different countries and cities, EGL. iv.

England has cloth, Bordeus has ^^ore of wine,
Cornwalle has tin, and Lymster wool^s fine.
London has scarlet, and Bristowe pleasant red, etc.
Of songs at feasts, EGL^ iv.

When your fat dishes smoke hot upon your table,
Then laud ye songs and balades magnify,
If they be merry, or written craftily,
Ye clappe your hands and to the making hark,
And one say to another, lo here a proper warke.
He says that minstrels and singers are highly favored at court, especially
those of the French gise. EGL. ii. Also jugglers and pipers, EGL. iv.


.
We have before seen, that our author and Skeleton were rivals. He alludes to
Skeleton, who had been laureated at Oxford, in the following lines.

Then is he decked as poet laureate,
When stinking Thais made him her graduate: --
If they have smelled the arts trivial,
They count them poets hye and heroical E^L. iv.
.
The TOWER OF VIRTUE AND HONOR, introduced as a song of one of the shepherds
into these pastorals, exhibits no very masterly strokes of a sublime and
inventive fancy. It has much of the trite imagery usually applied in the
fabrication of these ideal edifices. It, however, shows our author in a new
walk of poetry. This magnificent tower, or castle, is built on inaccessible
cliffs of flint: the walls are of gold, bright as the sun, and decorated with
old historyes and pictures manyfolde: the turrets are beautifully shaped.
Among its heroic inhabitants are king Henry the eighth, Howard duke of Norfolk,
and the earl of Shrewsbury. LABOR is the porter at the gate, and VIRTUE
governs the house. LABOR is thus pictured, with some degree of spirit.

Fearful is LABOR, without favor at all,
Dreadful of visage, a monster intractable;
Like Cerberus lying at gates infernal;
To some men his look is half intolerable,
His shoulders large for burden strong and able,
His body bristled, his neck mighty and stiff;
By sturdie sinews his joints strong and stable,
Like marble stones his hands be as stiff.
Here must man vanquish the dragon of Cadmus,
Against the Chimere here stoutly must he fight;
Here must he vanquish the fearful Pegasus,
For the golden flece here must he show his might:
If LABOR gainsay, he can nothing be right:
This monster LABOR often changes his figure,
Sometime an ox, a bore, or lion wight,
Plainly he seems thus changes his nature.
Like as Protheus often changes his stature.
* * * * * * * * *
Under his brows he dreadfully does lowre
With glistering eyes, and side-dependant beard,
For thirst and hunger always his chere is sour,
His horned forehead does make faint hearts afeard.
Always he drinks, and yet always is dry,
The sweat distilling with drops abundant, etc.
e EGL. iv.
The poet adds, that when the noble Howard had long boldly contended with this
hideous monster, had broken the bars and doors of the castle, had bound the
porter, and was now preparing to ascend the tower of Virtue and Honor, FORTUNE
and DEATH appeared, and interrupted his progress ^bid.
.

The first modern Latin Bucolics are those of Petrarch, in number twelve,
written about the year 1350 BUCOL^CORUM ECLOGAE XI^.
. The Eclogues of Mantuan, our author's model, appeared about the year 1400,
and were followed by many others. Their number multiplied so soon, that a
collection of thirty-eight modern bucolic poets in Latin was printed at Basil,
in the year 1546 Viz. xxxviii. AUTHOR^^ BUCOLICI, Basil. 1546. 8vo.
. These writers judged this indirect and disguised mode of dialogue, consisting
of simple characters which spoke freely and plainly, the most safe and
convenient vehicle for abusing the corruptions of the church. Mantuan became so
popular, as to acquire the estimation of a classic, and to be taught in
schools. Nothing better proves the reputation in which this writer was held,
than a speech of Shakespeare's pedant, the pedagogue Holofernes. " Fauste,
precor, gelida quando pecus omne sub ulmo One of Mantuan's lines. Farnaby in
his Preface to Martial says, that Fauste precor gelida, was too often preferred
to Arma virumque cano. I think there is an old black letter translation of
Mantuan into English. Another translation appeared by one Thomas Harvey, 16^6.
Mantuan was three times printed in England before the year 1600. Viz. B.
Mantuani Carmelitae theologi ADOLESCENTIA seu BUCOLICA. With the commentary of
Jodocus Badius. Excud. G. Dewes and H. Marshe, 1584. 12mo. Again, for the same,
the same year, 12mo. Again, for Robert Dexter, 1598. 12mo. With Arguments to
the Eclogues, and Notes by John Murmelius, etc.
, and so forth. Ah, good old MANTUAN! I may speak of thee, as the traveller
does of Venice, Vinegia, Vinegia, chi non te v^di, ei non te pregia. Old
MANTUAN! Old MANTUAN! Who understands thee not, loves thee not LOVE'S LAB.
L. ACT iv. Sc. 3.
." But although Barklay copies Mantuan, the recent and separate publication in
England of Virgil's bucolics, by Wynkyn de Word BUCOLICA VIRGILII cum commento
familiari. At the end, Ad juvenes ^ujus Maro^iani operis commendatio. Die vero
viii Aprilis. 4to. And they were reprinted by the same, 1514, and 1516.
, might partly suggest the new idea of this kind of poetry.

With what avidity the Italian and French poets, in their respective languages,
entered into this species of composition, when the rage of Latin versification
had subsided, and for the purposes abovementioned, is an inquiry reserved for
a future period. I shall only add here, that before the close of the fifteenth
century, Virgil's bucolics were translated into Italian Viz. LA BUCOLICA DI
VIRGILIO per Fratrem Evangelistam FOSSA de Cremona ord. servorum. In Venezia,
1494. 4to. But thirteen years earlier we find, Bernardo PULCI nella BUCOLICA di
Virgilio: di Jeronimo BENIVIENI, Jacopo FIORINO Buoninsegni de Sienna: Epistole
di Luca Pulci. In Firenze, per Bartolomeo Miscomini, 1484. A dedication is
per^ixed, by which it appears, that Buoninsegni wrote a PISCATORY ECLOGUE, the
first ever written in Italy, in the year 1468. There was a second edition of
Pulci's v^rsion, La BUCOLICA di VIRGILIO tradotta per Bernardo PULCI con
l'Elegie. In Fiorenza, 1494.
, by Bernardo Pulci, Fossa de Cremona, Benivieni, and Fiorini Buoninsegni.

SECT. VIII.
IT is not the plan of this work to comprehend the Scotch poetry. But when I
consider the close and national connection between England and Scotland in the
progress of manners and literature, I am sensible I should be guilty of a
partial and defective representation of the poetry of the former, was I to omit
in my series a few Scotch writers, who have adorned the present period, with a
degree of sentiment and spirit, a command of phraseology, and a fertility of
imagination, not to be found in any English poet since Chaucer and Lydgate:
more especially as they have left striking specimens of allegorical invention,
a species of composition which appears to have been for some time almost
totally extinguished in England.

The first I shall mention is William Dunbar, a native of Salton in East
Lothian, about the year 1470. His most celebrated poems are The THISTLE AND THE
ROSE, and THE GOLDEN TERGE.

The THISTLE AND THE ROSE was occasioned by the marriage of James the fourth,
king of Scotland, with Margaret Tudor, eldest daughter of Henry the seventh,
king of England: an event, in which the whole future political state of both
nations was vitally interested, and which ultimately produced the union of the
two crowns and kingdoms. It was finished on the ninth day of May in the year
1503, nearly three months before the arrival of the queen in Scotland: whose
progress from Richmond to Edinburgh was attended with a greater magnificence of
parade, processions, and spectacles, than I ever remember to have seen on any
similar occasion See a memoir, cited above, in Leland's COLL. tom. iii. APPEND.
edit. 1770. p. 265. It is worthy of particular notice, that during this
expedition there was in the magnificent suite of the princess a company of
players, under the direction of one John Inglish, who is sometimes called
Johannes. "Among the said lords and the qweene was in order, Johannes and
his company, the menstrells of music, etc." p 267. See also, p. 299. 300.
280. 289. In the midst of a most splendid procession, the princess rode on
horseback behind the king into the city of Edinburgh, p. 287. Afterward the
ceremonies of this stately marriage are described; which yet is not equal, in
magnificence and expense, to that of Richard the second with Isabell of France,
at Calais, in the year 1397. This last-mentioned marriage is recorded with the
most minute circumstances, the dresses of the king and the new queen, the names
of the French and English nobility who attended, the presents, one of which is
a golden cup studded with jewels, and worth three thousand pounds, given on
both sides, the banquets, entertainments, and a variety of other curious
particulars, in five large vellum pages, in an ancient Register of Merton
priory in Surrey, in old French. MSS. LAUD, E. 54. fol. 105. b. Bibl. Bodl.
Oxon. Froissart^ who is most commonly prolix in describing pompous ceremonies,
might have greatly enriched his account of the same royal wedding, from this
valuable and authentic record. See his CRON. tom. iv. p. 226. chapter 78. B.
penult. Paris, 1574. fol. Or lord Berners's Translation, vol. ii. f. 275. cap.
ccxvi. edit. Pinson, 1523. fol.
. It may be pertinent to premise, that Margaret was a singular patroness of the
Scotch poetry, now beginning to flourish. Her bounty is thus celebrated by
Stewart of Lorne, in a Scotch poem, called LERGES OF THIS NEW YEIR DAY, written
in the year 1527.

Grit god relief Great god help, etc.
MARGARET our queen!
For and scho war and scho has been If she continues to do as she has done.

Scho would be larger of lufray Bounty. Fr. L'Ossre.

Than all the laif that I of mean Any other I could speak of.
,
For lerges Largess. Bounty.
of this new-yeir day St. x.
.
Dunbar's THISTLE AND ROSE is opened with the following stanzas, which are
remarkable for their descriptive and picturesque beauties.

Quhen When. Qu has the force of w.
Merche was with variand windis past,
And Apperyll had with her silver shouris
Taken leif Taken Leave.
of Nature, with ane orient blast,
And lusty May, that muddir Mother.
is of flouris
Had maid the birdis to begin their houris Mattin orisons. From Horae in the
missal. So again in the GOLDEN TERGE, St. ii. Where he also calls the birds the
chapel-clarkes of Venus, St. iii. In the COURT OF LOVE, Chaucer introduces the
birds singing a mass in honor of May. Edit. Urr. p. 570. v. 1353. seq. On
May Day, when the lark began to rise,
To MATTINS went the lusty nighingale.
He begins the service with Domine labia. The eagle sings the Venite. The
popingay C^eli ^narrant. The peacock Dominus regnavit. The owl Benedicite. The
Te Deum is converted into T^ Deum AMORIS, and sung by the thrush, etc. etc.
Skeleton, in the BOOK OF PHILIP SPARROW, ridicules the missal, in supposing
various parts of it to be sung by birds. p. 226. edit. Land. 1739, 12mo. Much
the same sort of fiction occurs in Sir David Lyndesay's CO^PLAYNT OF THE
PAPYNGO, edit. ut infr. SIGNAT. B. iii. Suppose the geis and hennis should cry
alarm,
And we sall serve s^cundum usum Sarum, etc.

,
Amang the tendir odouris reid and quhyt,
Quhois harmony to heir it was delyt:
In bed at morrow sleiping as I lay,
Methoct Aurora, with her cristall ene
In at the window lukit Looked.
by the day,
And halsit Hailed.
me with visage pale and grene;
On quhois hand a lark sang, fro the spleen With good will. Loudly.
^
"Awak, luvaris Lovers.
, out of your slemering Slumbering.
,
"Se how the lusty morrow does upspring!"
Methoct fresh May befoir my bed upstude^
In weid Attire.
depaynt of money diverse hew,
Sober, benygn, and full of mansuetude,
In bright atteir of flouris forgit new From Chaucer, MILLER'S TAL^, v. 147. p.
25. Urr. Full brightir was the shining of her hew
Than in the Tower the noble ^orged new.

,
Hevinly of color, quhyt, reid, brown, and blew,
Balmit in dew, and gilt with Phebus' bemys;
Quhil all the house illumynit of her lemys Brightnes^.
.
MAY then rebukes the poet, for not rising early, according to his annual
custom, to celebrate the approach of the spring; especially as the lark has now
announced the dawn of day, and his heart in former years had always, -- glaid
and blissful been
Sangis Songs.
to make undir the levis grene St. iv. See Chaucer's KNIGHT'S TALE, v. 1042. p.
9. Urr. She was arisin, and all ready dight,
For May will have no sluggardy annight:
The season prikkith every gentill heart;
And makith it out of his sleep to sterte,
And says, arise, and do May observaunce, etc.

.
The poet replies, that the spring of the present year was unpromising and
ungenial; unattended with the usual song of birds, and serenity of sky: and
that storms and showers, and the loud blasts of the horn of lord Eolus, had
usurped her mild dominion, and hitherto prevented him from wandering at leisure
under the vernal branches. MAY rejects his excuse, and with a smile of majesty
commands him to arise, and to perform his annual homage to the flowers, the
birds, and the sun. They both enter a delicious garden, filled with the richest
colors and odours. The sun suddenly appears in all his glory, and is thus
described in the luminous language of Lydgate.

The purpour sone, with tendir bemys reid,
In orient bricht as angel did appeir,
Through goldin skyis putting up his heid,
Quhois gilt tressis schone so wondir cleir,
That all the world take comfort far and neir St. viii.
.
Immediately the birds, like the morning-stars, singing together, hail the
unusual appearance of the sunshine.

And, as the blissful sone of cherarchy The hierarchy. See JOB, chapter xxxviii. v.
7. The morning-stars singing together.
,
The fowlis sung throw comfort of the licht;
The burddis did with oppin voices cry,
"O luvaris, fo away thou dully nicht,
"And welcum day that comfortis every wicht.
"Hail May, hail Flora, hail Aurora schene,
"Hail princes Nature, hail Venus luvis queen S^. ix.
.
NATURE is then introduced, issuing her interdict, that the progress of the
spring should be no longer interupted, and that Neptune and Eolus should cease
from disturbing the waters and air.

Dame Nature gaif an inhibitioun their,
To fers Neptune, and Eolus the bauld Bold.
,
Nocht to perturb the wattir nor the air;
And that no schouris Read Scho-u-ris.
nor blastis cawld
Effray should Should hurt.
floris, nor fowlis on the fauld;
Scho bad eke Juno gods of the sky
That scho the hevin should amene and dry St. x.
.
This preparation and suspense are judicious and ingenious; as they give
dignity to the subject of the poem, awaken our curio^ity, and introduce many
poetical circumstances. NATURE immediately commands every bird, beast, and
flower, to appear in her presence; and, as they had been used to do every
May-morning, to acknowledge her universal sovereignty. She sends the roe to
bring the beasts, the swallow to collect the birds, and the yarrow The yarrow
is Achillea, or Millefolium, commonly called Sneeswort. There is no reason for
selecting this plant to go on a message to the flowers; but that its name has
been supposed to be derived from Arrow, being held a remedy for healing wounds
inflicted by that weapon. The poet, to apologize for his boldness in
personifying a plant, has added, "full craftily conjurit scho." St. xii.
to summon the flowers. They are assembled before her in an instant. The lion
advances first, whose figure is drawn with great force and expression.

This awefull beist full terrible was of cheir,
Persing of luke, and stout of countenance,
Right strong of corpse, of fassoun fair but feir Fierce.
,
Lusty of shaip, lycht of deliverance,
Reid of his color as the ruby glance,
In field of gold he stude full mychtely
With flower de lucis sirculit Encircled.
lustely St. xiv.
.
This is an elegant and ingenious mode of blazoning the Scottish arms, which
are a lion with a border, or tressure, adorned with flower de luces. We should
remember, that heraldry was now a science of high importance and esteem. NATURE
lifting up his cluvis cleir, or shining claws, and suffering him to rest on her
knee, crowns him with a radiant diadem of precious stones, and creates him the
king of beasts: at the same time she injoins him to exercise justice with
mercy, and not to suffer his subjects of the smallest size or degree, to be
oppressed by those of superior strength and dignity. This part of NATURE'S
charge to the lion, is closed with the following beautiful stroke, which
indicates the moral tenderness of the poet's heart.

And lat no bowgle with his busteous Boisterous. Strong.
hornis
The meik pluch ox Plough-ox.
oppress for all his pride,
Bot in the yok go peciable him besyd St. xvi.
.
She next crowns the eagle king of fowls; and sharpening his talons like darts
of steel, orders him to govern great and small, the wren or the peacock, with
an uniform and equal impartiality. I need not point out to my reader the
political lessons couched under these commands. NATURE now calls the flowers;
and observing the thistle to be surrounded with a bush of spears, and therefore
qualified for war, gives him a crown of rubies, and says, "In field go forth
and fend the laif Defend the rest.
. The poet continues elegantly to picture other parts of the royal arms; in
ordering the thistle, who is now king of vegetables, to prefer all herbs, or
flowers, of rare virtue, and rich odor: nor ever to permit the nettle to
associate with the flour de lys, nor any ignoble weed to be ranked in
competition with the lily. In the next stanza, where NATURE directs the thistle
to honor the rose above all other flowers, exclusive of the heraldic meaning,
our author with much address insinuates to king James the fourth an exhortation
to conjugal fidelity, drawn from the high birth, beauty, and amiable
accomplishments, of the royal bride the princess Margaret Among the pageants
exhibited at Edinburgh in honor of the nuptials, she was complimented with the
following curious mixture of classical and scriptural history. "Ny to that
cross was a scarfawst [scaffold] made, where was represented Paris and the
three Deesses, with Mercure that gaff him the apyll of gold for to gyffe to the
most fair of the Three, which he gave to Venus. In the scarfawst was also
represented the Salutacion of Gabriell to the Virgyne in saying Ave gratia, and
sens after [next,] the sollempnizacion of the very marriage betwix the said
Vierge [Virgin] and Joseph." Leland, COLL. iii. APPEND. p. 289. ut supr. Not to
mention the great impropriety, which they did not perceive, of applying such a
part of scripture.
.

Nor hald no udir flower in sic denty Dainty. Price.

As the fresche ROSE, of color reid and quhyt;
For gif thou dois If thou do.
, hurt is thine honesty,
Considdering that no flour is so perfyt,
So full of vertew, pleasans, and delyt,
So full of blissfull angelick bewty,
Imperial birth, honor, and dignite St. xxi.
.
NATURE then addresses the rose, whom she calls, "O lusty daughter most
benyng," and whose lineage she exalts above that of the lily. This was a
preference of Tudor to Valois. She crowns the rose with clarefied gems, the
luster of which illumines all the land. The rose is hailed queen by the
flowers. Last, her praises are sung by the universal chorus of birds, the sound
of which awakens the poet from his delightful dream. The fairy scene is
vanished, and he calls to the muse to perpetuate in verse the wonders of the
splendid vision.

Although much fine invention and sublime fabling are displayed in the
allegorical visions of our old poets, yet this mode of composition, by dealing
only in imaginary personages, and by excluding real characters and human
actions, necessarily fails in that chief source of entertainment which we seek
in ancient poetry, the representation of ancient manners.

Another general observation, immediately resulting from the subject of this
poem, may be here added, which illustrates the present and future state of the
Scotch poetry. The marriage of a princess of England with a king of Scotland,
from the new communication and intercourse opened between the two courts and
kingdoms by such a connection, must have greatly contributed to polish the rude
manners, and to improve the language, literature, and arts, of Scotland.

The design of Dunbar's GOLDEN TERGE, is to show the gradual and imperceptible
influence of love, when too far indulged, over reason. The discerning reader
will observe, that the cast of this poem is tinctured with the morality and
imagery of the ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE, and the FLOWER AND LEAF, of Chaucer.

The poet walks forth at the dawn of a bright day. The effects of the rising
sun on a vernal landscape, with its accompaniments, are thus delineated in the
manner of Lydgate, yet with more strength, distinctness, and exuberance of
ornament.

Richte as the star of day began to schyne,
When gone to bed was Vesper and Lucyne,
I raise, and by a rosier Rose-tree.
did me rest:
Upsprang the golden candle matutyne,
With cleir depurit Purified.
bemys chrystallyne,
Glading the mirry fowlis in their nest:
Or Phoebus was in purpour kaip Cape. Ere Phoebus was dressed in his purple robe.
revest,
Upsprang the lark, the hevenis menstral syne Then.
,
In May intill a morrow mirthfullest.
Full angelyk the birdis sang their houris,
Within their courtings Curtains.
grene, within their bouris
Apparrellit quhaite and reid with blumys sweit:
Ennamelit was the field with all cullouris,
The perlit droppis schuke as in silver schouris The pearled drops fell from
the trees like silver showers.
,
While al in balm did branche and levis fleit
Depairt from Phoebus, did Aurora greit,
Her crystal teiris I saw hing on the flouris,
Quhilk he for lufe all drank up with his heit.
For mirth of May, with skippis and with hoppis,
The birdis sang upon the tendir croppis Branches.
,
With curious notes, as Venus' chapell-clarkes:
The rosis reid, now spreiding of their knoppis Knobs. Buds.
,
Were powderit Besprinkled. An heraldic term. See OBSERVATIONS on the FAIRY
QUEEN, ii. p. 158. seq.
bricht with heavenly beryl-droppis,
Throw bemys reid lemyng as ruby sparks;
The skyis rang with schoutyng of the larks,
The purpour hevin owreskalit in silver sloppis Covered with streaks, slips, of
silver.

Owregilt the treis, branchis, levis and barks.
Down thruch the ryss Through the bushes, the trees. Rice, or Ris, is properly
a long branch. This word is still used in the west of England. Chaucer,
MILLER'S TALE, v. 215. p. 26. Urr. edit. And thereupon he had a fair surplice
As white as is the blosome on the rice.
[See supr. vol. i. p. 428.] So in a Scotch poem by Alexander Scott, written
1562. ANCIENT SCOTTISH POEMS, Edinb. 1770. p. 194. Welcum our rubent rois
[rose] upon the rice.
So also Lydgate, in his poem called LONDON LICKPENNY, MSS. Harl. 367. Hot
pescode own [one] began to cry,
Straberys ripe, and cherryes in the RISE.
That is, as he passed through London streets, they cried, hot pease, ripe
strawberries, and cherries on a bough, or twig.
ane revir ran with stremis
So lustely upoun the lykand Pleasant.
lemis,
That all the lake as lamp did leme of licht,
Quhilk shaddowit all about with twynklyng glemis The water blazed like a lamp,
and threw about it shadowy gleams of twinkling light.
;
The bewis Boughs.
baithit war in secound bemis,
Through the reflex of Phoebus visage bricht
On every side the ege raise on hicht The high-raised edges, or bank.
:
The bank was grene, the son was full of bemis,
The streimeirs cleir as stars in frostie nicht.
The crystal cleir, the sapheir firmament,
The ruby skyies of the reid orient,
Kest Cast.
beryl bemis on emerault bewis grene,
The rosy garth Garden.
, depaynt, and redolent,
With purpour, asure, gold, and gowlis Gules. The heraldic term for red.
gent,
Arrayit was, by dame Flora the queen,
Sa nobilly, that joy was for to seen:
The rock The rock, glittering with the reflection of the river, illuminated
as with fire all the bright leaves. Low is flame.
, agane the river resplendent,
As low illuminate all the levis schene ST. i. seq. Compare Chaucer's Morning,
in the KNIGHT'S TALE, v. 1493. p. 12. Urr. The merry lark, messengere of the day,
Salewith in her song the morrow gray;
And fyrie Phoebus rising up so bright
That all the orient laughith at the sight,
And with his stremis dryith in the greves
The silver dropis hanging in the leves.
It is seldom that we find Chaucer indulging his genius to an absurd excess in
florid descriptions. The same cannot be said of Lydgate.
.
Our author, lulled by the music of the birds, and the murmuring of the water,
falls asleep on the flowers, which he calls Flora's mantill. In a vision, he
sees a ship approach, whose sails are like the blossom upon the spray, and
whose masts are of gold bright as the star of day In our old poetry and the
romances, we frequently read of ships supe^bly decorated. This was taken from
real life. Froissart, speaking of the French ^l^et in 1387, prepared for the
invasion of England under the reign of Richard the second, says, that the ships
were painted with the arms of the commanders and gilt, with banners, p^nnons,
and standards, of silk: and that the masts were painted from top to bottom,
glittering with gold. The ship of lord Guy of Tremoyll was so sumptuously
garnished, that the painting and colors cost 2000 French franks, more than 222
pounds of English currency at that time. See Grafton's CHRON. p. 364. At his
second expedition into France, in 1417, king Henry the fifth was in a ship,
whose sails were of purple silk most rich^y embroidered with gold. Speed's
CH^ON. B. ix. p. 636. edit. 1611. Many other instances might be brought from
ancient miniatures and illuminations.
. She glides swiftly through a crystal bay; and lands in the blooming meadows,
among the green rushes and reeds, an hundred ladies clad in rich but loose
attire. They are clothed in green kirtles; their golden tresses, tied only
with gl^ttering threads, flow to the ground; and their snowy bosoms are
unveiled.

Als fresche as flours that in the May upspreids
In kirtills grene, withoutin kell Caul.
or bands
Their bricht hair hung glittering on the strand
In tresis cleir, wypit Bound.
with golden threidis;
With pawpys Paps.
whyt, and middills small as wands ST. vii.
.
In this brilliant assembly, the poet sees NATURE, dam^ Venus queen, the
fr^sche AURORA, May, lady Flora schene, Juno, Latona, Proserpine, Diana goddess
of the chase and woodis grene, lady Clio, Minerva, Fortune, and Lucina. These
michty queen's are crowned with diadems, glittering like the morning star. They
enter a garden. May, the queen of mirthful months, is supported between her
sisters April and June: as she walks up and down the garden, the birds begin to
sing, and NATURE gives her a gorgeous robe adorned with every color under
heaven.

Their saw I NATURE present till To her.
her a gown
Rich to behold, and noble of renoune,
Of every hew that undir the hevin has been
Depaint and braid Broad.
by good proportioun ST. x.
.
The vegetable tribes then do their obeisance to NATURE, in these polished and
elegant verses.

And every blome on branche, and eik on bank,
Opnit, and spread their balmy levis dank,
Full law inclyneand to their queen full cleir,
Whom for their noble nurissing they thank ST. xi.
.
Immediately another court, or groupe, appears. Here Cupid the king presides:

-- a bow in hand ay bent,
And dreadful arrowis groundin scherp and squhair.
Their saw I Mars the god armipotent
Awefull and stirne, strong and corpulent.
Their saw I crabit Crabbed.
Saturn, auld and hair Hoar.
,
His look was lyk for to perturb the air.
Their was Mercurius, wi^e and eloquent,
Of retorik that fund Found.
the floris fair ST. xiii^
.
These are attended with other pagan divinities, Janus, Priapus, Eolus, Bacchus
the glader of the table, and Pluto. They are all arrayed in green; and singing
amorous ditties to the harp and lute, invite the ladies to dance. The poet
quits his ambush under the trees, and pressing forward to gain a more perfect
view of this tempting spectacle, is espied by Venus. She bids her keen archers
arrest the intruder. Her attendants, a groupe of fair ladies, instantly drop
their green mantles, and each discovers a huge bow. They form themselves in
battle-array, and advance against the poet.

And first of all, with bow in hand ay bent,
Came dame BEAUTY, richt as scho wald me schent;
Syne followit all her damosalls in feir,
With many diverse awful instrument Formidable weapons.
:
Into the praiss FAIR HAVING Behavior.
with her went;
Syne Next.
PORTRATOR, PLESANCE, and lusty CHEIR,
Than came RESSOUN, with Schield of gold so cleir,
In plait of mail, as Mars armipotent,
Defendit me that noble Warrio^^
chevellier ST. xvii.
.
BEAUTY is assisted by tender YOUTH with her virgins ying, GREEN INNOCENCE,
MODESTY, and OBEDIENCE: but their resistance was but feeble against the golden
target of REASON. WOMANHOOD then leads on PATIENCE, DISCRETION, STEDFASTNESS,
BENIGN LOOK, MYLDE CHEIR, and HONEST BUSINESS.

Bot RESSOUN bare the Terge with sic constance,
Their scharp essay might do me no deirance Injury.
,
For all their praiss and awful Weapons.
ordinance ST. xix.
.
The attack is renewed by DIGNITY, RENOWN, RICHES, NOBILITY, and HONOR. These,
after displaying their high banner, and shooting a cloud of arrows, are soon
obliged to retreat. Venus, perceiving the rout, orders DISSEMBLANCE to make an
attempt to pierce the Golden Shield. DISSEMBLANCE, or DISSIMULATION, chooses for
her archers, PRESENCE, FAIR CALLING, and CHERISHING. These bring back BEAUTY to
the charge. A new and obstinate conflict ensues.

Thik was the schott of grindin arrowis kene,
Bot RESSOUN, with the Schield of Gold so schene,
Weirly Warily.
defendit quhosoeir assayit:
The awful schour he manly did sustene ST. xxiii.
.
At length PRESENCE, by whom the poet understands that irresistible incentive
accruing to the passion of love by society, by being often admitted to the
company of the beloved object, throws a magical powder into the eyes of REASON;
who is suddenly deprived of all his powers, and reels like a drunken man.
Immediately the poet receives a deadly wound, and is taken prisoner by BEAUTY;
who now assumes a more engaging air, as the clear eye of REASON is growing dim
by intoxication. DISSIMULATION then tries all her arts on the poet: FAIR
CALLING smiles upon him: CHERISHING sooths him with soft speeches: NEW
ACQUAINTANCE embraces him awhile, but soon takes her leave, and is never seen
afterward. At last DANGER delivers him to the custody of GRIEF.

By this time, "God Eolus his bugle blew." The leaves are torn with the blast:
in a moment the pageant disappears, and nothing remains but the forest, the
birds, the banks, and the brook ST. xxvi.
. In the twinkling of an eye they return to the ship; and unfurling the sails,
and stemming the sea with a rapid course, celebrate their triumph with a
discharge of ordinance. This was now a new topic for poetical description. The
smoke rises to the firmament, and the roar is re^echoed by the rocks, with a
sound as if the rainbow had been broken.

And as I did awak of this swowning Dream.
,
The joyful fowlis merrily did sing
For mirth of Phoebus tendir bemis schene.
Sweit was the vapors, soft the morrowing,
Hailsum the vaill Vale.
depaynt with flours ying,
The air intemperit sober and amene;
In whit and red was all the erd besene,
Throw Naturis nobill fresch ennameling
In mirthfull May of every month queen ST. xxviii.
.
Our author then breaks out into a labored encomium on Chaucer, Gower, and
Lydgate. This I choose to recite at large, as it shows the peculiar distinction
anciently paid to those fathers of verse; and the high ideas which now
prevailed, even in Scotland, of the improvements introduced by their writings
into the British poetry, language, and literature Other instances occur in the
elder Scotch poets. See supr. p. 125.
^

O reverend CHAUSER, rose of rhetouris all,
As in our tongue and flour One flower.
imperial
That raise in Britain ever, quha reidis richt Ever rose, or sprung, in
Britain, whos^ reads right.
,
Tho beiris of makin Thou bear of poets.
the triumphs royal,
The fresche enamilit terms celestial:
This matter couth haif illuminit full bricht This subject would have appeared
t^ some advantage, had not, etc.
;
Was thou nocht of our English all the licht,
Surmounting every tongue terrestrial
As far as Mayis morrow dois midnycht.
O moral GOWER, and LYDGATE laureat,
Your suggarit Sugared.
tonguis, and Lips.
lippis aureat^
Been till our To our ears.
eris cause of great delight;
Your angelic mouth most mellifluate
Our ^ude language has cleir illumynat,
And has owregilt our speiche, that imperfyte
Stude, or your goldin pennis schup to wryt Ere your golden pens were shaped to
write.
,
This isle befoir was bair and dissolat Bare and desolate.

Of rhetorik, or lusty fresche Elegant composition.
indyte ST. xxx.
.
This panegyric, and the poem, is closed with an apology, couched in elegant
metaphors, for his own comparative humility of style. He addresses the poem,
which he calls a litill quair.

O know quhat thou of rhetoric has spent;
Of her lusty rosis redolent
Is nane into thy garland set on hicht No fresh and fragrant roses of rhetoric
are placed on high in thy garland.
.
O schame Be ashamed.
thairfor, and draw the out of sicht!
Rude is thy weid Weed. Dress.
, destitute, bair, and rent,
Weill aucht thou be affeirit of the licht ST. xxxi.
!
Dunbar's DANCE has very great merit in the comic style of painting. It
exhibits a groupe of figures touched with the capricious but spirited pencil of
Callot. On the eve of Lent, a general day of confession, the poet in a dream
sees a display of heaven and hell. Mahomet Mahon. Sometimes written Mahoun, or
Mahound. See Mat. Paris. p. 289. ad ann. 1236. And Du Fresne, Lat. Gloss. V.
MAHUM. The christians in the crusades were accustomed to hear the Saracens
swear by their prophet Mahomet: which thence became in Europe another name for
the devil.
, or the devil, commands a dance to be performed by a select party of fiends;
particularly by those, who in the other world had never made confession to the
priest, and had consequently never received absolution. Immediately the SEVEN
DEADLY SINS appear; and present a mask, or mummery, with the newest gambols
just imported from France The original is garmountis. In the Memoir, cited
above, concerning the progress of the princess Margaret into Scotland, we have
the following passage. "The lord of Northumberland m^de his devoir, at the
departing, of gambades and lepps, [leaps,] as did likewise the lord Scrop the
father, and many others that returned again, in taking there congie." p. 281.
[See Notes, supr. p. 253.]
. The first is PRIDE, who properly takes place of all the rest, as by that SIN
fell the angels. He is described in the fashionable and gallant dress of those
times: in a bonnet and gown, his hair thrown back, his cap awry, and ^his gown
affectedly flowing to his feet in large folds.

Let se, quoth he Mahomet.
^ now quha beginis?
With that the fowll Deadly Sinnis
Begouth to l^ip attanis Began to dance at once.
.
And first of all in dance ^as PRIDE,
With hair wyld bak, bonet on side,
Lyk to make vaistie wanis;
And round about him as a quheill Wheel.
,
Hang all in rumpillis Rumples.
to the heill,
His kethat Casaque, Cassock.
for the nanis Nonce. Designedly.
.
Many proud trumpour Deceiver. See Spenser's SIR TROMPART. Or perhaps an empty
fellow, a rattle. Or Trompour may be trumpeter, as in Chaucer's KNIGHT'S TALE,
v. 2673. See Chaucer's CANTERBURY TALES, with the NOTES of the very judicious
and ingenious editor. Land. 1775. vol. iv. p. 231.
with him trippit,
Throw skaldan Scalding.
fyr ay as they skippit
They girnd with hyddous They grinned hideously.
granis ST. ii.
.
Several holy harlots follow, attended by monks, who make great sport for the
devils ST. iii.
.

Heilie Harlottis in hawtain wyis Haughty guise.
,
Come in with money sindrie gyis Gambols.
,
But yet luche nevir Never laughed.
Mahoun:
Quhill priestis cum with bair schevin While priests came with bare-shaven.
nekks,
That all the feynds lewche Laughed.
, and maid gekks Signs of d^^ision.
,
Black-belly, and Bawsy-brown.
Black-belly and Bawsy-brown are the names of popular spirits in Scotland. The
latter is perhaps our ROBIN GOODFELLOW, known in Scotland by the name of
BROWNIE.

ANGER is drawn with great force, and his accompaniments are boldly feigned.
His hand is always upon his knife, and he is followed, in pairs, by boasters,
threateners, and quarrelsome persons, all armed for battle, and perpetually
wounding one another ST. iv.
.

Than IRE come in with sturt Disturbance. Affray.
and strife;
His hand was ay upon his knyfe,
He brandeist lyk a beir:
Bostaris, braggarists, and barganeris,
After him passit in pairis,
All bodin in feir of weir Literally, "All arrayed in feature of war." Bodi^,
and feir of war, are in the Scotch statute-book. Sir David Lyndesay thus speaks
of the s^^te of Scotland during the minority of James the fifth. COMPLAYNT OF
THE PAPYNGO. SIGNAT. B. iii. edit. ut infr. Oppressioun did sa loud his bougill
blaw^
That n^ne durst ride but into feir of weir.
That is, without being armed for battle.
:
In jakkis, stryppis, and bonnettis of steil In short jackets, plates, or
slips, and bonnets of steel. Short coats of mail and helmets.
,
Their leggis were cheyned to the heill Either, chained together. Or, their legs
armed with iron, perhaps iron network, down to the heel.
,
Frawart was their affeir Their business was untoward. Or else, their look
^roward, fierce. Feir i^ feature.
;
Sum upon uder with brands beft Some struck others, their companion^, with
swords.
,
Sum jagit utheris to the heft Wounded others to the quick. To the haft.

With knyvis that scheirp coud scheir Cut sharp.
.
ENVY is equal to the rest. Under this SIN our author takes occasion to lament,
with an honest indignation, that the courts of princes should still give
admittance and encouragement to the whisperers of idle and injurious reports
ST. v.
.

Next in the dance followit INVY,
Filled full of feid Enmity.
and felony,
Hid malice and dispyte;
For pryvie haterit Hatred.
that tratour trymlit Trembled.
,
Him followit money freik dissymlit Dissembling gallant.
,
With feynit wordis quhyte.
And flattereris into men's facis,
And back-byttaris Backbiters.
of sundry racis,
To ley Lie.
that had delight.
With rownaris Rounders, whisperers. To round in the ear, or simply to round,
was to whisper in the ear.
of falls lesingis Falsities.
:
Allace! that courtis of noble kingis
Of tham can nevir be quyte Free.
!
AVARICE is ushered in by a troop of extortioners, and other miscreants,
patronised by the magician Warloch, or the demon of the covetous; who vomit on
each other torrents of melted gold, blazing like wildfire: and as they are
emptied at every discharge, the devils replenish their throats with fresh
supplies of the same liquefied metal ST. vi.
.

SLOTH does not join the dance till he is called twice: and his companions are
so slow of motion, that they cannot keep up with the rest, unless they are
roused from their lethargy by being sometimes warmed with a glimpse of
hellfire ST. vii.
.

Syne SWIRNES, at the seccound bidding,
Come lyk a sow out of a midding Dunghill.
,
Full slepy was his grunyie Snout. Visage.
.
Money sweir bumbard belly-huddroun Lazy, drunken sloven.
,
Money slute daw and slepy duddroun Slothful, idle, spectre.
,
Him servit ay with sounyie Attended on him with care.
.
He drew tham forth intill a chenyie Into a chain.
,
And Belliall, with a brydill reynie A bridle-rein. Thong of leather.
,
Evi^ lascht on the lunyie Lashed them on the loins.
.
In dance they were so slow of feit
They gaif tham in the fire a heit
And maid tham quicker of conyie Apprehension.
.
LUST enters, neighing like a horse "Berand like a bagit horse." The French
baguett^ need not be explained.
, and is led by IDLENESS. When his associates mingle in the dance, their
visages burn red like the turkis-stone ST. viii.
. The remainder of the stanza, although highly characteristical, is too obscene
to be transcribed. But this gave no offense. Their manners were too indelicate
to be shocked at any indecency. I do not mean that these manners had lost their
delicacy, but that they had not yet acquired the sensibility arising from
civilisation. In one of the Scotch interludes of this age, written by a
fashionable court-poet, among other ridiculous obscenities, the trying on of a
Spanish padlock in public makes a part of theatrical representation.

GLUTTONY brings up the rear; whose insatiable rout are incessantly calling out
for meat and drink, and although they are drenched by the devils with draughts
of melted lead, they still ask for more.

Than the fowll monster GLUTTONY,
Of wame Womb. Belly.
unsasiable and gredy,
To dance syn did him dress:
Him followit money fowll drunckhart,
With can and collop, cop Cup.
and quart,
In surfett and excess.
Full many a waistless wally-drag Outcast.
,
With waimis Wombs. Bel^ies.
unweildable did forth wag,
In creische Fat.
that did incress:
Drink, ay they cryit with money a gaip Gape.
,
The feynds gave them hait leid to lap Hot lead to drink, to lap.

Their lovery Desire. Appetite.
was na less ST. ix.
.
At this infernal dance no minstrels played. No GLEEMAN, or minstrel, ever went
to hell; except one who committed murder, and was admitted to an inheritance in
hell by brief of richt, that is, per breve de recto ST. x.
. This circumstance seems an allusion to some real fact.

The concluding stanza is entirely a satire on the highlanders. Dunbar, as I
have already observed, was born in Lothian, a county of the Saxons. The mutual
antipathy between the Scottish Saxons and the Highlanders was excessive, and is
not yet quite eradicated. Mahoun, or Mahomet, having a desire to see a highland
pageant, a fiend is commissioned to fetch Macfadyan; an unmeaning name, chosen
for its harshness. As soon as the infernal messenger begins to publish his
summons, he gathers about him a prodigious crowd of Ersche men; who soon took
up great room in hell. These loquacious termagants began to chatter like rooks
and ravens, in their own barbarous language: and the devil is so stunned with
their horrid yell, that he throws them down to his deepest abyss, and smothers
them with smoke.

Than cried Mahoun for a heleand padyane,
Syn ran a feynd to fetch Makfadayne
Far northwart in a nuke Nook.
:
Be he the correnoth had done schout As soon as he had made the cry of
distress, what the French call a l'aide. Some suppose, that the correnoth, or
corynoch, is a highland tune. In MAK-GREGOR'S TESTAMENT, [MS. infr. ci^at.] the
author speaks of being outlawed by the CORRINOCH, v. 51. The loud CORRINOCH
then did me exile,
Throw Lorne, Argyle, Monteith, and Braidalbane, etc.
That is, The Hue and Cry. I presume, what this writer, in another place, calls
the KING'S-HORN, is the same thing, v. 382. Quhen I have beine aft at the
KINGIS HORN.

,
Ersche men so gadderit him about,
In hell grit rume they tuke:
Thae turmagantis Perhaps the poet does not mean the common idea annexed to
termagant. The context seems to show, that he alludes to a species of
wild-fowl, well known in the highlands, and called in the Scotch statutebook
termigant. Thus he compares the highlanders to a flock of their country birds.
For many illustrations of this poem, I am obliged to the learned and elegant
editor of ANCIENT SCOTTISH POEMS, lately published from Lord Hyndford's
manuscript: and to whom I recommend a task, for which he is well qualified, The
History of Scotch Poetry.
with tag and tatter
Full loud in Ersche begout to clatter,
And rowp Chattered hoarsely.
lyk revin and ruke.
The devil sa devit Deafened.
was with their yell
That in the deepest pot of hell
He smorit them with smoke ST. xi.
.
I have been prolix in my citations and explanations of ^his poem, because I am
of opinion, that the imagination of Dunbar is not less suited to satirical than
to sublime allegory: and that he is the first poet who has appeared with any
degree of spirit in this way of writing since Pierce Plowman. His THISTLE AND
ROSE, and GOLDEN TERGE, are generally and justly mentioned as his capital
works: but the natural complexion of his genius is of the moral and didactic
cast. The measure of this poem is partly that of Sir THOPAS in Chaucer: and
hence we may gather by the way, that Sir THOPAS was anciently viewed in the
light of a ludicrous composition. It is certain that the pageants and
interludes of Dunbar's age must have quickened his invention to form those
grotesque groupes. The exhibition of MORALITIES was now in high vogue among the
Scotch. A Morality was played at the marriage of James the fourth and the
princess Margaret MEMOIR, ut supr. p. 300.
. Mummeries, which they call GYSARTS, composed of moral personifications, are
still known in Scotland: and even till the beginning of this century,
especially among the festivities of Christmas, itinerant maskers were admitted
into the houses of the Scotch nobility.

SECT. XIII.
ANother of the distinguished luminaries, that marked the restoration of
letters in Scotland at the commencement of the sixteenth century, not only by a
general eminence in elegant erudition, but by a cultivation of the vernacular
poetry of his country, is Gawen Douglass. He was descended from a noble family,
and born in the year 1475 Hume, HIST. DOUGL. p. 219.
. According to the practice of that age, especially in Scotland, his education
perhaps commenced in a grammar school of one of the monasteries: there is
undoubted proof, that it was finished at the university of Paris. It is
probable, as he was intended for the sacred function, that he was sent to Paris
for the purpose of studying the canon law: in consequence of a decree promulged
by James the first, which tended in some degree to reform the illiteracy of the
clergy, as it injoined, that no ecclesiastic of Scotland should be preferred to
a prebend of any value without a competent skill in that science Lesl. REB.
GEST. SCOT. Lib. ix.
. Among other high promotions in the church, which his very singular
accomplishments obtained, he was provost of the collegiate church of saint
Giles at Edinburgh, abbot of the opulent convent of Abberbrothrock, and bishop
of Dunkeld. He appears also to have been nominated by the queen regent to the
archbishopric, either of Glasgow, or of saint Andrew's: but the appointment
was repudiated by the pope Thynne, CONTINUAT. HIST. SCOT. 455.
. In the year 1513, to avoid the persecutions of the duke of Albany, he fled
from Scotland into England, and was most graciously received by king Henry the
eighth; who, in consideration of his literary merit, allowed him a liberal
pension Hollinsh. SCOT. 307. -- iii. 872.
. In England he contracted a friendship with Polydore Virgil, one of the
classical scholars of Henry's court Bale, xiv. 58.
. He died of the plague in London, and was buried in the Savoy church, in the
year 1521 Weever, FUN. MON. p. 446. And Stilling^l. ORIG. BRIT. p. 54.
.

In his early years he translated Ovid's ART OF LOVE, the favorite Latin system
of the science of gallantry, into Scottish meter, which is now lost See edit.
Edinb. fol. 1710. p. 483. In the EPISTLE, or EPILOGUE, to Lord Sinclair. I
believe the editor's name is ROBERT FREEBAIRN, a Scotchman. This translation
was first printed at London, 1553. 4to. bl. let.
. In the year 1513, and in the space of sixteen months Lesl. RE^. GEST. SCOT.
lib. ix. p. 379. Romans 1675.
, he translated into Scotch heroics the Eneid of Virgil, with the additional
thirteenth book by Mapheus Vegius, at the request of his noble patron Henry
earl of Sinclair EPILOGUE, ut supr.
. But it was projected ^o early as the year 1501. For in one of his poems
written that year The PALICE OF HONOR. ad calcem.
^ he promises to Venus a translation of Virgil, in atonement for a ballad he
had published against her court: and when the wo^k was finished, he tells Lord
Sinclair, that he had now made his peace with Venus, by translating the poem
which celebrated the actions of her son Eneas EPIL. ut supr.
. No metrical version of a classic had yet appeared in English; except of
Boethius, who scarcely deserves that appellation. Virgil was hitherto commonly
known, only by Caxton's romance on the subject of the Eneid; which, our author
says, no more resembles Virgil, than the devil is like saint Austin PROLOGUE to
the Translation, p. 5. The manuscript notes written in the margin of a copy of
the old quarto edition o^ this translation, by Patrick Junius, which bishop
Nicolson (HIST. LIBR. p. 99.) declares to be excellent, are of no consequence,
Bibl. Bodl. ARCHIV. SELD. B^ 54. 4to. The same may be said of Junius's Index of
obsolete wor^s in this translation, Cod. MSS. Jun. 114. (5225.) Se^ also Mus.
Ashmol. Diverse Scotch words, etc. COD. ASHM. 846. 13.
.

This translation is executed with equal spirit and fidelity: and is a proof,
that the lowland Scotch and English languages were now nearly the same. I mean
the style of composition^ more especially in the glaring affectation of
anglicising Latin words. The several books are introduced with metrical
prologues, which are often highly poetical; and show that Douglas's proper walk
was original poetry. In the prologue to the sixth book, he wishes for the
Sybill's golden bough, to ^nable him to follow his master Virgil through the
dark and dangerous labyrinth of the infernal regions In the PROLOGUE to the
eighth book, the alliterative manner of Pierce Plowman is adopted.
. But the most conspicuous of these prologues is a d^scription of May. The
greater part of which I will insert Page 400.
.

As fresche Aurore, to mychty Tithone spous,
Ischit Issued.
of her saffron bed, and euyr Ivory.
house,
In crammesy Crimson.
clad and granite violate,
With sanguyne cape, the selvage Edge.
purpurate;
Unschet Unshut, i. e. opened.
the wyndois of her large hall,
Spread all with rosis, and full of balm royal.
And eik the hevinly portis cristallyne
Upwarpis brade, the warlde till illumyne.
The twynkling stremouris Streamers.
of the orient
Sched purpour sprayngis with gold and asure meant Streaks mingled with, etc.
^
Eous the stead, with ruby hammys read,
Abouf the seyis liftis forth his head
Of culloure sore, and somedele broun as bery,
For to alichtin and glad our emispery;
The flambe out brastin at the neis thirlis. --
Quhil schortlie, with the blesand Blazing.
torche of day,
Abuleit Fr. Habille. Clothed.
in his lemand Luminous.
fresche array,
Forth of his palice ryall ischit Phoebus,
With golden croun and visage glorious,
Crisp haris Curled locks.
, bricht as chrissolite or thopas;
For quhais hew Whose excessive brightness.
mycht nane behold his face:
The fiery sparkis brasting from his ene,
To purge the air, and gilt the tender grene. --
The auriat phanis Fans, or vanes, of gold.
of his trone soverane
With glitterand glance overspred the octiane Ocean.
;
The large fludis, lemand all of licht,
Bot with ane blenk Only with one glance.
of his supernal sicht,
For to behald, it was ane glore to se
The stabillyt Settled, calmed.
wyndis, and the calmyt se;
The soft sessoun Season.
, the firmament serene;
The loune illuminate are Air without wind, etc.
, and firth Frith.
amene:
The silver-scalit fyschis on the great Sand, gravel.
,
Over thowrt Athwart, across, through.
clear stremes sprinkilland Gliding swiftly, ^ith a tremulous motion, or
vibration, of their tails.
for the hete,
With fynnys schinand broune as synopare Cinnabar.
,
And chesal talis Tails shaped like chissels.
, stourand here and there Swimming swiftly, darting hastily.
:
The new color, alichting Illuminating.
all the landis,
Forgane the stanryis schene Over, upon, over against, the bright gravel, or
small stones, thrown out on the banks of rivers. Hence, the strands were all of
beryl.
, and beriall strandis:
Quhil the reflex of the diurnal bemes
The been bonkis Pleasant banks.
kest full of variant glemes:
And lusty Flora did her blomes sprede
Under the fete of Phoebus fuleart Brilliant, glittering.
stead,
The swardit soyll enbrode with selkouth hewis Bladed with grass, and
embroidered with strange colors.
,
Wod and forest obumbrate with bewis Boughs.
,
Quhais blysful branchis, porturate Portrayed, painted, re^^ected.
on the ground,
With schaddois schene schew rocchis rubicund:
Towris, turrettis, kirnallis Battlements.
, and pynnakillis hie,
Of kirkis, castellis, and ilk fair city,
Stude payntit, every fane, phioll Round tower.
, and stage Story.
,
Apoun the plain ground by thaire awn umbrage Their own shadow.
.
Of Eolus north blastis havand Having.
no dread,
The sule spread her brad bosum on bread The soil, the country, spread abroad
her expansive bosom.
. --
The cornis croppis, and the bear new-brerde New-sprung barley.
,
With gladsum garment revesting the erde Earth.
. --
The variant vesture of the venust vale
Schrowdis the scherand fur Furrow.
, and every fale Turf.

Ouerfrett It is evident our author intends to describe two distinct things,
viz. cornfieldsd, and meadows or pasture-lands: the former in the three first
lines; the varyant vesture, etc, is plainly arab^e, and the fuleis and fyguris
full diverse, are the various leaves and flowers of the weeds growing among the
corn, and making a piece of embroidery. And here the description of cornfieldsd
ends: and that of pasture-lands begins at, The pray bysprent, etc. Pr^y, not as
the printed glossary says, corruptedly for spray, but formed, through the
French, from the Lat. Pratum, and Spryngand Sproutis, rising springs, from the
Ital. spruzzare, spruzz^lare, aspergere.
with fuleis Leaves.
, and fyguris full diverse,
The pray Mead.
bysprent with spryngand sproutis dyspers,
For callour humors on the dewy nycht,
Rendryng sum place the gyrs pylis their licht,
Als fer as catal the lang somerys day
Had in their pasture ete and gnyp away:
And blyssful blossomys in the blomyt ard
Submittis their hedys in the oung sonnys safgard:
Iue leius Ivy-leaves.
rank ouerspred the barmkyn ^ampart.
wall,
The blomit hauthorne cled his pykis all,
Forth of fresche burgeouns Springs.
the wine grapis Young.
ing
Endlang the traileys Trellisses. Espaliers for vines.
did on twistis hing,
The loukit Locked. Enclosed. Gemmed.
buttouns on the gemyt treis
Ouerspredand leuis of naturis tapestryis.
Soft gresy verdoure eftir balmy schouris,
On curland stalkis smyland to their flowris:
Behaldand them sa money diverse hew
Sum piers Red.
, sum pale, sum burnet, and sum blew,
Sum gres, sum gowlis, sum purpure, sum sanguane,
Blanchit or broun, fauch allow money ane,
Sum heuinly colourit in celestial gre,
Sum Watchet.
watty hewit as the haw wally Blue and wavy.
se,
And sum depart in freklis read and quhyte,
Sum bricht as gold with aureate leuis lyte.
The dasy did on Unbraid.
bread her crownel small,
And every flour unlappit in the dale,
In battil gers Grass embattelled.
burgeouns, the ban wart wyld,
The clauir, catcluke, and the cammomylde;
The flourdelyce forth sprede his heuynly hew,
Flower damas, and columbe blak and blew,
Sere downis small on dentilioun Dande^ion.
sprang^
The oung grene Young weeds.
blomit strabery leus amang^
Gimp jereflouris Gilliflowers. Gariophilum, Lat. (...)^ Gr. The Scotch word is
nearer the original. Probably the poet wrote their awi^. See ver. 72. their
awi^ umbrage.
thareon leuis unschet,
^resche prymrois, and the pourpour violet,
The rois knoppis, tetand forth their head,
Began chyp, and kyth their vernale lippis read,
Crysp skarlet leuis sum scheddand both at attanis,
Kest It is observable, that our Poet never once mentions the scent of flowers
^ill he comes to the rose, and never at all the scent of any particular flower,
except the rose, not even of the lily; for I take it, the words, from their
sylkyn croppis, are meant to describe the flowers in general; and the balmy
vapor to be the same with the fr^sche liquour, and the dulce hum^uris quhareof
the b^is wrocht their honey swet^, an exhalation distinct from that which causes
the scent. Afterward redole^t odor, is gen^ral; for he certainly means to
close his description of the vegetable world, by one universal cloud of
fragrance from all nature.
fragrant smell amyd fra goldin granis Seeds.
,
Heavenly lyllyis, with lokkerand toppis quhyte,
Opynnit and schew their creistis redemyte Redeemed. Released, opened. The
glossary says, Decked, Beautiful, from Redimitus, Lat.
,
The balmy vapor from their sylkyn croppis
Distilland halesum sugurat honey droppis,
And sylver schakeris Shakers.
began fra leuis hing,
With crystal sprayngis on the verdure ing:
The plane pouderit with semelie seitis sound,
Bedyit full of dewy peirlys round;
So that ilk burgeon, syon, herb, or flower,
Wox all enbalmit of the fresche liquour,
And baithit hait did in dulce humouris flete,
Quhareof the beis wrocht their honey sweet. --
Swannis That Milton had his eye upon this passage is plain, from his
describing the swan, the cock, and peacock, in this order, and with several of
the attributes that our author has given them. See PARAD. L. vii. 438. seq. --
The SWAN with arched neck
Between her white wings mantling proudly, rows
Her state with oary feet; yet often they quit
The dan^, and rising on stiff pennons, tower
The mid aereal sky: Others on ground
Walked firm: the crested COCK, whose clarion sounds
The silent hours, and the OTHER, whose gay train
Adorns him, color'd with the florid hue
Of rainbows and starry eyes. --

souchis throw o^t the respand Rustling.
redis,
Over all the lochis Lakes.
and the fludis gray,
Sersand by kind ane place quhare they should lay;
Phoebus read foul his curale creist can stere,
Often strekand forth his hekkil crawand clear
Amyd the wortis, and the rutis gent,
Pickland his mete in alayis quhare he went,
His wyffis Toppa and Partolet him by,
As bird al time that hantis bygamy;
The payntit powne Peacock.
paysand with plumys gym,
Kest up his tale ane proud plesand quhile rym Wheel-rim.
,
Ischrowdit in his fedderane bricht and schene,
Schapand the prent of Argois hundredth ene;
Amang the bronys Branches.
of the olyue twistis,
Sere small floulis, wirkand crafty nestis,
Endlang the hedgeis thik, and on rank akis Oaks.

Ilk bird reiosand with their mirthful makis:
In corneris and clear fenesteris of glass
Full besely Arachne weuand was,
To knyt her nettis and her wobbis sle,
Tharewith to cauch the litil mige Gnat.
or fle:
Under the bewis been in lufely valis,
Within fermance and parkis clois of palis,
The bustuous bukkis rakis forth on raw,
Heirdis of hertis throw the thyck wod schaw,
The oung fownys followand the dun days Does.
,
Kiddis skippand throw ronnys eftir raise Roes.
,
In lesuris Leasowes.
and on leyis litill lammes
Full tait and trig socht bletand to their dammes^
On salt stremes wolk Dorida and Thetis,
By rynnand strandis, nymphs and naiades,
Sic as we clepe wenschis and damyssellis,
In gersy grauis wanderand by spring wellis,
Of blomed branchis and flouris quhyte and read
Plettand their lusty chaplettis for their head:
Sum sang ring sangis, ledis, and roundis,
With vocis schil, quhil all the dale resoundis. --
Dame naturis menstralis on that uthyr part,
Their blissful bay intonyng every art,
To beat their amouris of their nychtis bale,
The merle, the mauys, and the nychtingale,
With mirry notis myrthfully forth brist,
Enforsing thaym quha micht do clink it best:
The kowschot Dove.
croudis and pykkis on the rise,
The stirling changis diverse steuynnys nyse Fine tunes.
,
The sparrow chirmis in the wallis clyft,
Goldspink and lintquhite fordynnand the lift Firmament.
,
The gukkow galis Cries. So Chaucer of the nightingale. COUR. L. v. 1357. But
DOMINE LABIA began he cry and GALE.
So the Friar is said to gal^, WIFE OF B. PROL. v. 832.
, and so quhitteris the quale,
Quhil ryveris reirdit Resounded.
, schawis, and every dale,
And tendir twistis trymblit on the treis,
For birdis sang, and bemyng of the beis,
In werblis dulce of heavenly armonyis,
The larkis loud releischand Mounting.
in the skyis,
Louis their lege Praised their Lady NATURE.
with tonys curious;
Bayth to dame Nature, and the fresche Venus,
Rendering hie laudis in their observance,
Quhais suggourit throttis Sugared Throats.
made glade hartis dance,
And al small foulis singis on the spray;
Welcum the lord of licht, and lamp of day,
Welcum fosterare of tendir herbis grene,
Welcum quhikkynnar of flurist flouris schene,
Welcum support of every rute and vane,
Welcum confort of al kind fruit and grane,
Welcum the birdis beild Who build.
apoun the brere,
Welcum master and reulare of the ere,
Welcum welefare of husbandis at the plewis Ploughs.
,
Welcum reparare of woddis, treis, and bewis,
Welcum depaynter of the blomyt medis,
Welcum the lyffe of every thing that spredis,
Welcum storare Restorer.
of all kind bestial,
Welcum be thy bricht bemes gladand al.
The poetical beauties of this specimen will be relished by every reader who is
fond of lively touches of fancy, and rural imagery. But the verses will have
another merit with those critics who love to contemplate the progress of
composition, and to mark the original workings of genuine nature; as they are
the effusion of a mind not overlaid by the descriptions of other poets, but
operating, by its own force and bias, in the delineation of a vernal landscape,
on such objects as really occurred. On this account, they deserve to be better
understood: and I have therefore translated them into plain modern English
prose. In the mean time, this experiment will serve to prove their native
excellence. Divested of poetic numbers and expression, they still retain their
poetry; and, to use the comparison of an elegant writer on a like occasion,
appear like Ulysses, still a king and conqueror, although disguised like a
peasant, and lodged in the cottage of the herdsman Eumaeus.

"Fresh Aurora, the wife of Tithonus, issued from her saffron bed, and ivory
house. She was clothed in a robe of crimson and violet-colour; the cape
vermilion, and the border purple: she opened the windows of her ample hall,
overspread with roses, and filled with balm, or nard. At the same time, the
crystal gates of heaven were thrown open, to illumine the world. The glittering
streamers of the orient diffused purple streaks mingled with gold and azure. --
The steeds of the sun, in red harness of rubies, of color brown as the berry,
lifted their heads above the sea, to glad our hemisphere: the flames burst from
their nostrils: -- While shortly, apparelled in his luminous array, Phoebus,
bearing the blazing torch of day, issued from his royal palace; with a golden
crown, glorious visage, curled locks bright as the chrysolite or topaz, and
with a radiance intolerable. -- The fiery ^parks, bursting from his eyes,
purged the air, and gilded the new verdure. -- The golden vanes of his throne
covered the ocean with a glittering glance, and the broad waters were all in a
blaze, at the first glimpse of his appearance. It was glorious to see the winds
appeased, the sea becalmed, the soft season, the serene firmament, the still
air, and the beauty of the watery scene. The silver-scaled fishes, on the
gravel, gliding hastily, as it were from the heat or sun, through clear
streams, with fins shining brown as cinnabar, and chissel-tails, darted here
and there. The new luster, enlightening all the land, beamed on the small
pebbles on the sides of rivers, and on the strands, which looked like beryl:
while the reflection of the rays played on the banks in variegated gleams; and
Flora threw forth her blooms under the feet of the sun's brilliant horses. The
bladed soil was embroidered with various hues. Both wood and forest were
darkened with boughs; which, reflected from the ground, gave a shadowy luster
to the red rocks. Towers, turrets, battlements, and high pinnacles, of
churches, castles, and every fair city, seemed to be painted; and, together
with every bastion and story, expressed their own shape on the plains. The
glebe, fearless of the northern blasts, spread her broad bosom. -- The
corn-crops, and the new-sprung barley, recloathed the earth with a gladsome
garment. -- The variegated vesture of the valley covered the cloven furrow; and
the barleylands were diversified with flowery weeds. The meadow was besprinkled
with rivulets: and the fresh moisture of the dewy night restored the herbage
which the cattle had cropped in the day. The blossoms in the blowing garden
trusted their heads to the protection of the young sun. Rank ivy-leaves
overspread the wall of the rampart. The blooming hawthorn clothed all his
thorns in flowers. The budding clusters of the tender grapes hung end-long, by
their tendrils, from the trellises. The gems of the trees unlocking, expanded
themselves into the foliage of Nature's tapestry. There was a soft verdure
after balmy showers. The flowers smiled in various colors on the bending
stalks. Some red, etc. Others, watchet, like the blue and wavy sea; speckled
with red and white; or, bright as gold. The daisy unbraided her little coronet.
The grass stood embattelled, with banewort, etc. The seeded down flew from the
dandelion. Young weeds appeared among the leaves of the strawberries. Gay
gilliflowers, etc. The rose buds, putting forth, offered their red vernal lips
to be kissed; and diffused fragrance from the crisp scarlet that surrounded
their golden seeds. Lilies, with white curling tops, showed their crests open.
The odorous vapor moistened the silver webs that hung from the leaves. The
plain was powdered with round dewy pearls. From every bud, scyon, herb, and
flower, bathed in liquid fragrance, the be sucked sweet honey. -- The swans
clamoured amid the rustling reeds; and searched all the lakes and gray rivers
where to build their nests. The red bird of the sun lifted his coral crest,
crowing clear among the plants and rutis gent, picking his food from every
path, and attended by his wives Toppa and Partlet. The painted peacock with
gaudy plumes, unfolded his tail like a bright wheel, inshrouded in his shining
feathers, resembling the marks of the hundred eyes of Argus. Among the boughs
of the twisted olive, the small birds framed their artful nests, or along the
thick hedges, or rejoiced with their merry mates on the tall oaks. In the
secret nook, or in the clear windows of glass, the spider full busily wove her
sly net, to ensnare the little gnat or fly. Under the boughs that screen the
valley, or within the pale-inclosed park, the nimble deer trooped in ranks, the
hearts wandered through the thick woody shaws, and the young fawns followed the
dappled does. Kids skipped through the briers after the roes; and in the
pastures and leas, the lambs, full tight and trig, bleated to their dams. Doris
and Thetis walked on the salt ocean; and Nymphs and Naiads, wandering by
springwells in the grassy groves, plaited lusty chapl^ts for their hair, of
blooming branches, or of flowers red and white. They sung, and danced, etc. --
Meantime, dame Nature's minstrels raise their amorous notes, the ring-dove coo^
and pitches on the tall copse, the starling whistles her varied descant, the
sparrow chirps in the clefted wall; the goldfinch and linnet filled the skies,
the cuckoo cried, the quail twittered; while rivers, shaws, and every dale
resounded; and the tender branches trembled on the trees, at the song of the
birds, and the buzzing of the bees, etc." This Landscape may be finely
contrasted with a description of WINTER, from the Prologue to the seventh book
P. 200. fol. edit.
, a part of which I will give in literal prose.

"The fern withered on the miry fallows: the brown moors assumed a barren mossy
hue: banks, sides of hills, and bottoms, grew white and bare: the cattle looked
hoary from the dank weather: the wind made the red weed waver on the dike: From
crags and the foreheads of the yellow rocks hung great icicles, in length like
a spear^ the soil was dusky and gray, bereft of flowers, herbs, and grass: in
every holt and forest, the woods were stripped of their array. Boreas blew his
bugle horn so loud, that the solitary deer withdrew to the dales: the small
birds flocked to the thick briers, shunning the tempestuous blast, and changing
their loud notes to chirping: the cataracts roared, and every linden-tree
whistled and brayed to the sounding of the wind. The poor laborers went we^
and weary, draggled in the fen. The sheep and shepherds lurked under the
hanging banks, or wild broom. -- Warm from the chimney-side, and refreshed with
generous cheer, I stole to my bed, and laid down to sleep; when I saw the moon,
shed through the windows her twinkling glances, and watery light: I heard the
horned bird, the nightowl, shrieking horribly with crook^d bill from her
cavern: I heard the wild^geese, with screaming cries, fly over the city through
the silent night. I was soon lulled asleep; till the cock clapping his wings
crowed thric^, and the day peeped. I waked and saw the moon disappear, and
heard the jack-daws cackle on the roof of the house. The cranes,
prognosticating tempests, in a firm phalanx, pierced the air with voices
sounding like a trumpet. The kite, perched on an old tree, fast by my chamber,
cried lamentably, a sign of the dawning day. I rose, and halfopening my window,
perceived the morning, livid, wan, and hoary; the air overwhelmed with vapor
and cloud; the ground stiff, gray, and rough; the branches rattling; the sides
of the hills looking black and hard with the driving blasts; the dew-drops
congealed on the stubble and rind of trees; the sharp hailstones, deadly-cold,
hopping on the thatch and the neighboring causeway, etc." Bale, whose titles
of English books are often obscured by being put into Latin, recites among
Gawin Douglass's poetical works, his Narration^s aureae, and Comoediae aliquot
sa^rae xiv^ 58.
Of his NARRATIONES AUREAE, our author seems to speak in the EPILOGUE to
VIRGIL, addressed to his patron lord Sinclair Ut supr. p. 483.
. I have also a strange command [comment] compyld,
To expone strange hystoryes and terms wild.
Perhaps these tales were the fictions of ancient mythology. Whether the
COMOEDIAE were sacred interludes, or MYSTERIES, for the stage, or only sacred
narratives, I cannot determine. Another of his original poems is the PALICE OF
HONOR, a moral vision, written in the year 1501, planned on the design of the
TABLET of Cebes, and imitated in the elegant Latin dialogue De Tranquillitate
Animi of his countryman Florence Wilson, or Florentius Volusenus Lugd. apud
Seb. Gryph. 1543. 4to.
. It was first printed at London, in 1553 In quarto. Again, ^dinb. 1579. 4to.
"When pale Aurora with face lamentable." Douglass also wrote a small Latin
History ^f Scotland. See also a DIALOGUE concerning a theological subject to be
debated between, duos famatos viros, G. Douglas provost of saint Giles, and
master David Cranstoun bachelour of divinity, pre^ixed to John Major's
COMMENTARII in ^rim. Sentent. Paris. 1519. fol.
. The object of this allegory, is to show the instability and insufficiency of
worldly pomp; and to prove, that a constant and undeviating habit of virtue is
the only way to true Honor and Happiness, who reside in a magnificent palace,
situated on the summit of a high and inaccessible mountain. The allegory is
illustrated by a variety of examples of illustrious personages; not only of
those, who by a regular perseverance in honorable deeds gained admittance into
this splendid habitation, but of those, who were excluded from it, by debasing
the dignity of their eminent stations with a vicious and unmanly behavior. It
is addressed, as an apologue for the conduct of a king, to James the fourth; is
adorned with many pleasing incidents and adventures, and abounds with genius
and learning.

SECT. XIV.
WITH Dunbar and Douglass I join Sir David Lyndesay, although perhaps in
strictness he should not be placed so early as the close of the fifteenth
century. He appears to have been employed in several offices about the person
of James the fifth, from the infancy of that monarch, by whom be was much
beloved; and at length, on account of his singular skill in heraldry, a science
then in high estimation and among the most polite accomplishments, he was
knighted and appointed Lion king of arms of the kingdom of Scotland.
Notwithstanding these situations, he was an excellent scholar See the WARKIS OF
THE FAMOUS AND WORTHY KNI^HT SCHIR DAVID LYNDESAY of the Mount, etc. Newly
correctit and vindicate from the former errouris, etc. Pr. by Johne Scott, A.
D. 1568. 4to. They have been often printed. I believe the last edition is at
Edinburgh, 1709. 12mo.
.

Lyndesay's principal performances are The DREME, and The MONARCHY. In the
address to James the fifth, prefixed to the DREME, he thus, with much
tenderness and elegance, speaks of the attention he paid to his majesty when a
child.

When thou was young, I bare thee in mine arm
Full tenderly, till thou begouth to gang Began to walk.
;
And in thy bed often lappit thee full warm
With lute in hand, syne Then.
sweitlie to thee sang.
He adds, that he often entertained the young prince with various dances and
gesticulations, and by dressing himself in ^^igned characters, as in an
interlude So also his COMPLAYNT to the Kingis Grace. SIGNAT. E. iii. -- As an^
chapman bures his pak,
I bure thy grace upon my bak;
And sometimes stridlingis on my nek,
Dansand with many bend and bek. --
And ay quhen thou come from the scule,
Than I behu^it to play the fule. --
I wol thou luffit me better than
Nor now some wife dois her good man.

. A new proof that theatrical diversions were now common in Scotland.

Sumtyme in dansing feirelie I flang,
And sumtyme playand fairsis Playing farces, frolics.
on the ^lure:
And sumtyme like ane feind In the shape of a ^iend.
trans^igurate,
And sumtyme like the gries^^e gaist of Gy The griesly ghost of Guy earl of
Warwick.
,
In diverse formis oftymes dis^igurate,
And sumtyme dissagist full plesandlie Disguised, masked, to make sport.
SIGNAT. D. i. He adds, what illustrates the text, above.

So sen thy birth I have continually
Ben occupyit, and ay to thy plesour,
And sumtyme Sewar, Coppar, and Carvour.
That is, ^ewer, and cupper or butler. He then calls himself the king's secreit
Thesaurar, and chief Cubicular. Afterward he enumerates some of his own works.

I have at lenth the storeis done discryve
Of Hector, Arthur, and gentill Julius,
Of Alexander, and worthy Pompeius.
Of Jason and Medea, all at lenth,
Of Hercules the actis honorable,
And of Sampson the supernatural strength,
And of leil luffaris [lovers] stories amiable;
And oftimes have I ^eineit money fable,
Of Troilus the sorrow and the joy,
And sieges all of Tire, Thebes, and Troy.
The prophecyis of Rymour, Beid, and Marling,
And of money other plesand histories,
Of the reid Etin, and the gyir catling.
That is, the prophecies of Thomas Rymour, venerable Bede, and Merlin. [See
supr. vol. i. p. 74. 75. seq. And MSS. Ashm. 337. 6.] Thomas the RIMOUR, or
Thomas Leirmouth of Erceldoun, seems to have wrote a poem on Sir Tristram. Rob.
BRUNNE says this story would exc^^d all others, If men yt said as made THOMAS.
That is, "If men recited it according to the original composition of Thomas
Erceldoun, or the RIMOUR." See Langtoft's CHRON. Append. Pref. p. 100. vol. i.
edit. Hearne. Oxon. 1725. 8vo. He flourished about 1280. I do not understand,
The reid Etin, and the gyir catling: but gyir is a mask or masquerade. Many of
Lyndesay's Interludes are among Lord Hyndford's manuscripts of Scotch poetry,
and are exceedingly obscene. One of Lyndesay's MORALITIES, called, ANE SATYR
OF THE THREE ESTAITS in commendation of vertew and vytuperation of vice, was
printed at Edinburgh, 1602. This piece, which is entirely in rhyme, and
consists of a variety of measures, must have taken up four hours in the
representation.


.
In the PROLOGUE to the DREME, our author discovers strong talents for high
description and rich imagery. In a morning of the month of January, the poet
quits the copse and the bank, now destitute of verdure and flowers, and walks
toward the sea-beach. The dawn of day is expressed by a beautiful and
brilliant metaphor. By this, fair Titan with his lemis licht
Oer all the land had spread his banner bricht.
In his walk, musing on the desolations of the winter, and the distance of
spring, he meets Flora disguised in a sable robe SIGNAT. D. ii.
.

I met dame Flora in dule weid dissgysit Disguised in a dark garment.
,
Quhilk into May was dulce and delectabill,
With stalwart Violent.
storms her sweitness war supprist,
Her hevinlie hewis war turnid into sabill,
Quhilk umquihle Once, one while.
war to luffaris amiabill.
Fled from the frost the tender flouris I saw
Under dame NATURIS mantill lurking law Low.
.
The birds are then represented, ^locking round NATURE, complaining of the
severity of the season, and calling for the genial warmth of summer. The
expostulation of the lark with Aurora, the sun, and the months, is conceived
and conducted in the true spirit of poetry.

"Allace, AURORE, the syllie lark began cry,
"Quhare has thou left thy balmy liquour sweit,
"That us rejoysit, mounting in the sky?
"Thy sylver dropps are turnit into sleit!
"O fair Phoebus, where is thy holsum heit?
"Quhair art thou, MAY, with JUNE thy sister schene,
"Weill bordourit with dasyis of delight?
"And gentill JULIE, with thy mantill grene
"Enamilit with rosis reid and quhyte?
The poet ascends the cliffs on the seashore, and entering a cavern, high in
the crags, sits down to register in rhyme some merry matter of antiquity. He
compares the fluctuation of the sea with the instability of human affairs; and
at length, being comfortably shrouded from the falling sleet by the closeness
of his cavern, is lulled asleep by the whistling of the winds among the rocks,
and the beating of the tide. He then has the following vision.

He sees a lady of great beauty, and benignity of aspect; who says, she comes
to sooth his melancholy by showing him some new spectacles. Her name is
REMEMBRANCE. Instantaneously she carries him into the center of the earth. Hell
is here laid open It was a part of the old mundane system, that hell was placed
in the center of the earth. So a fragment, cited by Hearne, GLOSSARY Rob.
Glouc. ii. 583. Right so is hell-pitt, as clerks tells,
Amyde the earth and no where else.
So also an old French tract, LIMAIGE DU MONDE, or Image of the world, "Saches
que en la terre est enfer, car enfer ne pourrait estre en si noble lieu comme
est l'air, etc." chapter viii.
; which is filled with popes, cardinals, abbots, archbishops in their
pontifical attire, and ecclesiastics of every degree. In explaining the causes
of their punishments, a long satire on the clergy ensues. With these are joined
bishop Caiphas, bishop Annas, the traitor Judas, Mahomet, Chorah, Dathan, and
Abiram. Among the tyrants, or unjust kings, are Nero, Pharaoh, and Herod.
Pontius Pilate is hung up by the heels. He sees also many duchesses and
countesses, who suffer for pride and adultery. She then gives the poet a view
of purgatory See above, p. 197. seq. I have there mentioned a Vision of Hell,
under the title of OWAYNE MILES. One Gilbertus Ludensis, a monk sent by king
Stephen into Ireland, where he founded a monastery, with an Irish knight called
OEN, wrote De OENI Visione in Purgatorio. See Wendover, apud Mat. Paris, sub
ann. 1153. Reg. Stephan. According to Ware, Gilbertus flourished in the year
1152. SCRIPTOR. HIBERN. p. 111. Among the manuscripts of Magdalene college in
Oxford, are the VISIONES of Tundal, or Tungal, a knight of Ireland. "Cum anima
mea corpus exueret." MSS. Coll. Magd. 53. It is printed in Tinmouth's
SANCTILOGIUM. And in the SPECULUM HISTORIALE of Vincentius Bellovacensis, lib.
xxvii. cap. 88. He is called Fundalus in a manuscript of this piece, Bibl.
Bodl. NE. B. 3. 16. He lived in the year 1149. Ware, ut supr. p. 55. I believe
this piece is in the Cotton library, under the name of TUNDALE, MS. CALI^. A.
12. f. 17. See what is said in Froissart, of the visions of a cave in Ireland,
called saint Patrick's Purgatory. tom. ii. c. 200. Berners's Transl.
.

A little above that dolorous dungeon,
We enterit in ane country full of cair;
Quhare that we saw money one legioun
Gretand and grouland with money ruthful rair Roar.
.
Quhat place is this, quod I, of blis so bair?
Scho answerit and said, Purgatory,
Qhuilk purgis saulis or they cum to glory SIGNAT. D. iii.
.
After some theological reasonings on the absurdity of this intermediate state,
and having viewed the dungeon of unbaptized babes, and the limbus of the souls
of men who died before Christ, which is placed in a vault above the region of
torment, they reascend through the bowels of the earth. In passing, they survey
the secret riches of the earth, mines of gold, silver, and precious stones.
They mount, through the ocean, which is supposed to environ the earth: then
travel through the air, and next through the fire. Having passed the three
elements, they bend toward heaven, but first visit the seven planets The
planetary system was thus divided. i. The Primum Mobile, or first motion. ii.
The cristalline heaven, in which were placed the fixed stars. iii. The twelve
signs of the zodiac. iv. The spheres or circles of the planets in this order:
viz. Saturn, Jupiter^ Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, and lastly the moon, which
they placed in the center of universal nature. Again, they supposed the earth
to be surrounded by three elementary spheres, fire, air, and water. Milton, in
his Elegy on the DEATH OF A FAIR INFANT, makes a very poetical use of the
notion of a primum mobile, where he supposes that the soul of the child hovers
-- Above that high FIRST MOVIN^ SPHERE,
Or in the Elysian fields, etc.
ST. vi. v. 39. See PARAD. L. iii. 483.
. They enter the sphere of the moon, who is elegantly styled, Queen of the sea,
and beauty of the nicht.
The sun is then described, with great force.

Than past we to the spheir of Phoebus bricht,
That lusty lamp and lantern of the hevin;
And glader of the sterris with his licht;
And principal of all the planets sevin,
And sat in myddis of them all full evin:
As roy To be pronounced dissyllabically.
royal rolling in his sphair
Full plesandlie into his goldin chair. --
For to discryve his diadem royal,
Bordourit about with stonis schyning bricht,
His goldin car, or throne imperial,
The four stedis that drawith it full richt, etc SIGNAT. E. i.
.
They now arrive at that part of heaven which is called the CHRYSTALLINE Most
of this philosophy is immediately borrowed from the first chapters of the
Nuremburgh Chronicle, a celebrated book when Lyndesay wrote, printed in the
year 1493. It is there said, that of the water^ above the firmament which were
frozen like crystal, God made the crystalline heaven, etc. fol. iv. This idea
is taken from GENESIS, i. 4. See also saint Paul, EPIST. COR. ii. xii. 2. The
same system is in Tasso, where the archangel Michael descends from heaven,
GIER. LIB. C. ix. ^t. 60. seq. And in Milton, PARAD. L. iii. 481. They pass the
planets seven, and pass the fixed,
And that crystallin sphere, etc.

, and are admitted to the Empyreal, or heaven of heavens. Here they view the
throne of God, surrounded by the nine orders of angels, singing with ineffable
harmony Because the scriptures have mentioned several degrees of angels,
Dionysius the Areopagite, and others, have divided them into nine orders; and
those they have reduced into three hierarchies. This was a tempting subject for
the refining genius of the school-divines: and accordingly we find in Thomas
Aquinas a disquisition, De ordinatione Angelorum secundum Hierarchias et
Ordines. QUAEST. cviii. The system, which perhaps makes a better figure in
poetry than in philosophy, has been adopted by many poets who did not outlive
the influence of the old scholastic sophistry. See Dante, PARAD. C. xxviii.
Tasso mentions, among La grande o^^e del ciel, TREE FOLTE SQUADRE, et ogni
squadra instrutta
In TREE ORDINI gira, etc.
GIER. LIB. xviii. 96. And Spenser speaks of the angels singing in their
TRINALL TRIPLICITIES. FAIR. QU. i. xii. 39. And again, in his Hymn of HEAVENL^
LOVE. See also Sannazarius, DE PART. VIRGIN. iii. 241. Milton perhaps is the
last poet who has used this popular theory. PARAD. L. v. 748. Regions they
passed, and mighty regencies
Of Seraphim, and Potentates, and Thrones,
In their TRIPLE DEGREES. --
And it gives great dignity to his arrangement of the celestial army. See ibid.
supr. 583. -- The empyreal host
Of angels, by imperial summons called,
Innumerable before the Almighty's throne,
Forthwith from all the ends of heaven appeared,
Under their HEIRARCHIES in ORDERS bright. --
Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced,
Standards and gonfalons, twixt van and rear
Stream in the air, and for distinction serve
Of HIEARCHIES, of ORDERS, and DEGREES.
Such splendid and sublime imagery has Milton's genius raised on the problems
of Thomas Aquinas! See also ibid. v. 600. Hence a passage in his Hymn on THE
MORNING OF CHRIST'S NATIVITY is to be illustrated. ST. xiii. v. 131. And with
your ninefold harmony
Make up full concert to the angelike symphony.
That is, the symphony of the nine orders of angels was to be answered by the
ninefold music of the spheres. One Thomas Haywood, a most voluminous dramatic
poet in the reign of James the first, wrote a long poem with large notes on
this subject, called THE HIERARCHY OF ANGELS, printed in folio, at London,
1635. See also Jonson's ELEGY ON MY MUSE, in the UNDERWOOD. p. 260. edit. fol.
Land. 1640.
. Next the throne is the Virgin Mary, the queen of queens, "well cumpanyit with
ladyis of delight." An exterior circle is formed by patriarchs, prophets,
evangelists, apostles, conquerors in the three battles of the world, of the
flesh, and of the devil, martyrs, confessors, and doctors in divinity, under
the command of saint Peter, who is represented as their lieutenant general Ibid.
.

Milton, who feigns the same visionary route with very different ideas, has
these admirable verses, written in his nineteenth year, yet marked with that
characteristical great manner, which distinguishes the poetry of his maturer
age. He is addressing his native language.

Yet I had rather, if I were to choose,
Thy service in some graver subject use;
Such as may make thee search thy coffers round,
Before thou clothe my fancy in fit sound:
Such, where the deep-transported mind may soar
Above the wheeling poles; and at Heaven's door
Look in, and see each blissfull deity
How he before the thunderous throne does lie,
Listening to what unshorn Apollo sings
To the touch of golden wires, while Hebe brings
Immortal nectar to her kingly sire.
Then passing through the spears of watchful fire,
And mistie regions of wide air next under,
And hills of snow, and lofts of piled thunder,
May tell at length how green-eyed Neptune raves,
In heaven's defiance mustering all his waves At a VACATION EXERCISE, etc.
Newton's MILT. ii. p. 11.
.
REMEMBRANCE and the poet, leaving heaven, now contemplate the earth, which is
divided into three parts. To have mentioned America, recently discovered, would
have been heresy in the science of cosmography; as that quarter of the globe
did not occur in Pliny and Ptolemy For the benefit of those who are making
researches in ancient cosmography, I observe that the map of England, mentioned
by Harrison and Hearne, and belonging to Merton college library, appears to
have existed at least so early as the year 1512. For in that year, it was lent
to the dean of Wells, William Cosyn, with a caution of forty shillings.
Registr. Vet. Coll. Mert. fol. 218. b. See its restitution, ibid. fol. 219. b.
. The most famous cities are here enumerated. The poet next desires a view of
Paradise; that glorious garth, or garden, of every flower. It is represented as
elevated in the middle region of the air, in a climate of perpetual serenity
"Paradisus tantae est altitudinis, quod est inaccessibilis secundum Bedam; et
tam altus, quod etheream regionem pertingat, etc." CHRON. NUR. ut supr. f.
viii. b.
. From a fair fountain, springing in the midst of this ambrosial garden,
descend four rivers, which water all the east. It is enclosed with walls of
fire, and guarded by an angel.

The cuntre closit is about full richt,
With wallis hie of hot and birnyng fire,
And straightly kepit by an angel bricht SIGNAT. E. iii.
.
From Paradise a very rapid transition is made to Scotland. Here the poet takes
occasion to lament, that in a country so fertile, and filled with inhabitants
so ingenious and active, universal poverty, and every national disorder, should
abound. It is very probable, that the poem was written solely with a view of
introducing this complaint. After an enquiry into the causes of these
infelicities, which are referred to political mismanagement, and the defective
administration of justice, the COMMONWEALTH OF SCOTLAND appears, whose figure
is thus delineated.

We saw a busteous berne Boisterous fellow.
cum oer the bent Coarse grass.
,
But Without.
horse on fute, als fast as he micht go;
Quhose raiment was all raggit, rewin Riven.
, and rent,
With visage leyne, as he had fastit Lent:
And fordwart fast his wayis he did advance,
With ane richt melancholious countenance:
With scrip on hip, and pyikstaff in his hand,
As he had been purposit to pas fra hame.
Quod I, good man, I wald fane understand,
Geve that ye pleisit If you please.
, to wit Know.
quhat were your name?
Quod he, my sone, of that I think greit schame.
Bot sen thou wald of my name have ane feill,
Forswith they call me JOHN, for what reason I know not, is a name of ridicule
and contempt in most modern languages.
Johne the Comoun weill SI^NAT. F. i.
.
The reply of SIR COMMONWEALTH to our poet's question, is a long and general
satire on the corrupt state of Scotland. The spiritual plelates, he says, have
sent away Devotion to the mendicant friars: and are more fond of describing the
dishes at a feast, than of explaining the nature of their own establishment.
Sensual Pleasure has banished Chastity.
Liberality, Loyalty, and Knightly Valor, are fled, And Cowardice with lords
is laureate.
From this sketch of Scotland, here given by Lyndesay, under the reign of James
the fifth, who acted as a viceroy to France, a Scotch historian might collect
many striking features of the state of his country during that interesting
period, drawn from the life.

The poet then supposes, that REMEMBRANCE conducts him back to the cave on the
seashore, in which he fell asleep. He is awakened by a ship firing a broadside
They spared not the powder nor the stones.
A proof that stones were now used instead of leaden bullets. At first they
shot darts, or carrieaux, i. e. quarrels, from great guns. Afterward stones,
which they called gun-stones. In the BRUT OF ENGLAND, it is said, that when
Henry the fifth, before Hareflete, received a taunting message from the
Dauphine of France, and a ton of tennis-balls by way of contempt, "he anoone
let make tenes balls for the Dolfin [Henry's ship] in all the haste that
they might, and they were great ^ONNESTONES for the Dolfin to play with all."
But this game at tennis was too rough for the besieged, when Henry "playede at
the tenes with his hard ^ONNESTONES, etc." See Strutt's CUSTOMS AND MANNERS OF
THE ENGLISH, vol. ii. p. 32. Land. 1775.
. He returns home, and entering his oratory, commits his vision to verse. To
this is added an exhortation of ten stanzas to king James the fifth: in which
he gives his majesty advice, and censures his numerous instances of misconduct,
with incredible boldness and asperity. Most of the addresses to James the
fifth, by the Scotch poets, are satires instead of panegyrics.

I have not at present either leisure or inclination, to enter into a minute
enquiry, how far our author is indebted in his DREME to Tully's DREAM OF
SCIPIO, and the HELL, PURGATORY, and HEAVEN, of Dante In the Medicean library
at Florence, and the Ambrosian at Milan, there is a long manuscript Italian
poem, in three books, divided into one hundred chapters, written by Matteo
Palmeri, a learned Flo^entine, about the year 1450. It is in imitation of
Dante, in the terza rima, and entitled CITTA DI V^TA, or The City of Life. The
subject is, the peregrination of the soul, freed from the shackles of the body,
through various ideal places and situations, till at length it arrives in the
city of heaven. This poem was publicly burnt at Cortona, because the author
adopted Origen's heresy concerning a third class of angels, who for their sins
were destined to animate human bodies. See Trithem. c. 797. Julius Niger,
SCRIPTO^. FLORENT. p. 404.
.

Lyndesay's poem, called the MONARCHY, is an account of the most famous
monarchies that have flourished in the world: but, like all the Gothic
prose-histories, or chronicles, on the same favorite subject, it begins with
the creation of the world, and ends with the day of judgment In a manuscript at
Lambeth [332.] this poem is said to have been begun Jun. 11, 1556. This is a
great mistake. It was printed Hafn. 1552. 4to.
. There is much learning in this poem. It is a dialogue between EXPERIENCE and
a courtier. This mode of conducting a narrative by means of an imaginary
mystagogue, is adopted from Boethius. A descriptive prologue, consisting of
octave stanzas, opens the poem, in which the poet enters a delightful park
SIGNAT. i. B. A park is a favorite scene of action in our old poets. See
Chaucer's COMPL. BL. KN. v. 39. Toward a park enclosid with a wall, etc.
And in other place^. Parks were anciently the constant appendage of almost
every considerable manerial house. The old patent-rolls are full of licenses
for imparcations, which do not now ^xist.
. The sun clad in his embroidered mantle, brighter than gold or precious
stones, extinguishes the horned queen of night, who hides her visage in a misty
veil. Immediately Flora began to expand,

-- her tapistry
Wrocht by dame NATURE queynt and curiously,
Depaynt with many hundredth hevinlie hewis.
Meanwhile, Eolus and Neptune restrain their fury, that no rude ^ounds might
mar the melody of the birds which echoe^ among the rocks Instead of Pa^nassus
he chooses mount Calvary, and his Helicon is the strea^ which flowed from our
Savior's side on the cross, when he was wounded by Longinus, that is LONGIAS.
This is a fictitious personage in Nicodemus's Gospel. I have mentioned him
before. Being blind, he was restored to sight by wiping his eyes with his hands
which were bloody. See more of him in Chaucer's LAMENTAT. MARY MAGD. v. 176. In
the Gothic pictures of the Crucifixion, he is represented on horseback,
piercing our Savior's side: and in Xavier's Persic History of Christ, he is
called a horseman. This notion arose from his using a spear, or lance: and that
weapon, (...), undoubtedly gave rise to his ideal name of Longias, or Longinus.
He is afterward supposed to have been a bishop of Cesarea, and to have
suffered martyrdom. See Tillemont. ME^OR. HIST. EC^LESIAST. tom. i. pp. 81.
251. And Fabric. APOCR. NOV. T^STAM^ tom. i. p. 261. In the old Greek tragedy
of CHRIST SUFFERING, the CONVERTED CENTURION is expressly mentioned, but not by
this name. Almost all that relates to this person, who could not escape the
^ictions of the monks, has been collected by J. Chapter Wolfius, CUR. PHILOL. ET
CRIT. IN S. EVANGEL. tom. i. p. 414. ii. 984. edit. Basil. 1741. 4to. See also
Hoffman. LEXIC. UNIVERSAL. CONTINUAT. in Voc. tom. i. p. 1036. col. ^. Ba^il.
1683. fol.
.

In the park our poet, under the character of a courtier, meets EXPERIENCE,
reposing under the shade of a holly. This pourtrait is touched with uncommon
elegance and expression.

Into that park I saw appeir
One agit man, quhilk drew me neir;
Quhose berd was weil three quarters lang,
His hair down oer his schulders hang,
The qhylke as any snawe was white,
Quhome to behold I thocht delight.
His habit angellyke of hew,
Of color like the sapheir blew:
Under an holyne he reposit. --
To sit down he requestit me
Under the schaddow of that tree,
To saif me from the sonnis heit,
Amanges the flouris soft and sweit SIGNAT. B. i.
.
In the midst of an edifying conversation concerning the fall of man and the
origin of human misery, our author, before he proceeds to his main subject,
thinks it necessary to deliver a formal apology for writing in the vulgar
tongue. He declares that his intention is to instruct and to be understood, and
that he writes to the people Quharefore to colyearis, carteris, and to cuki^^
To Jok and Thome, my ryme sall be derectit.
SIGNAT. C. i.
. Moses, he says, did not give the Judaic law on mount Sinai in Greek or Latin.
Aristotle and Plato did not communicate their philosophy in Dutch or Italian.
Virgil and Cicero did not write in Chaldee or Hebrew. Saint Jerome, it is true,
translated the bible into Latin, his own natural language; but had saint Jerome
been born in Argyleshire, he would have translated it into Erse. King David
wrote the psalter in Hebrew, because he was a Jew. Hence he very sensibly takes
occasion to recommend the propriety and necessity of publishing the scriptures
and the missal, and of composing all books intended for common use, in the
respective vernacular language of every country. This objection being answered,
which shows the ideas of the times, our author thus describes the creation of
the world and of Adam.

Quhen god had made the hevinnis bricht,
The sone, and moan, for to gyf licht,
The starry hevin, and cristalline;
And, by his sapience divine,
The planerts, in their circles round
Quhirlyng about with merry sound: --
He clad the earth with herbs and treis;
All kind of fischis in the seis,
All kind of best he did prepair,
With foulis fleting in the air. --
When hevin, and earth, and their contents,
Were endit, with their ornaments,
Than, last of all, the lord began
Of most vile earth to make the man:
Not of the lilly or the rose,
Nor cyper-tre, as I suppose,
Nether of gold, nor precious stonis,
Of earth he made flesche, blude, and bonis;
To that intent he made him thus,
That man should nocht be glorious,
And in himself no thing should se
But matter of humilite SIGNAT. C. iii.
.
Some of these nervous, terse, and polished lines, need only to be reduced to
modern and English orthography, to please a reader accustomed solely to relish
the tone of our present versification.

To these may be added the destruction of Jerusalem and Solomon's temple.

Prince Titus with his chivalrie
With sound of trumpe triumphantly,
He enterit in that greit city, etc.
Their was nocht else but tak and slay,
For thence might no man win his way Escape.
.
The stramis of blude ran thruch the streit,
Of deid folk tramplit under feit;
Auld wydowis in the preis were smorit Smothered.
,
Young virgins schamefullie deflorit.
The tempill greit of Solamone,
With money a curious carvit stone,
With perfyt pinnakles on hicht,
Quhilks were richt bewtifull and wicht White.
,
Quharein rich jowells did abound,
They ruscheit f. Rased.
rudely to the ground;
And set, in till their furious ire In their rage.
,
Sanctum Sanctorum into fire SIGNAT. L. iii.
.
The appearance of Christ coming to judgment is poetically painted, and in a
style of correctness and harmony, of which few specimens were now seen.

As fire flaucht hastily glansing A meteor quickly glancing along.
,
Descend shall the most hevinly king;
As Phoebus in the orient
Lichinis Lightens.
in haist to occident,
So plesandlie he shall appeir
Among the hevinlie cloudis cleir. --
The angellis of the ordours nine
Inviron shall his throne divyne. --
In his presence their salbe borne
The signis Representations.
of cross, and croun of thorne^
Pillar, nailis, scurgis, and speir,
With everilk thing that did him deir Dismay. Tormen^.
,
The time of his grym passioun:
And, for our consolatioun,
Appeir sall, in his hands and feit,
And in his side the print compleit
Of his fyve woundis precious
Schyning like rubies radious.
When Christ is seated at the tribunal of judging the world, he adds, Their
sall ane angel blawe a blast
Quhilk sall make all the world aghast SIGNAT. P. iii.
.


Among the monarchies, our author describes the papal see: whose innovations,
impostures, and errors, he attacks with much good sense, solid argument, and
satirical humor; and whose imperceptible increase, from simple and humble
beginnings to an enormity of spiritual tyranny, he traces through a gradation
of various corruptions and abuses, with great penetration, and knowledge of
history SIGNAT. M. iii.
.

Among ancient peculiar customs now lost, he mentions a superstitious idol
annually carried about the streets of Edinburgh.

Of Edingburgh the great idolatry,
And manifest abominatioun!
On their feist day, all creature may see,
They beir ane ald stok-image An old image made of a stock of wood.
throw the town,
With talbrone Tabor.
, trumpet, shalme, and clarioun,
Quhilk has been usit money one yeir bigone,
With priestis, and freris, into processioun,
Siclyke So as.
as Bal was borne through Babylon SIGNAT. H. iii.
.
He also speaks of the people flocking to be cured of various infirmities, to
the auld rude, or cross, of Kerrail SIGNAT. H. i. For allusions of this kind
the following stanza may be cited, which I do not entirely understand. SIGNAT.
H. iii. This was the practick of sum pilgrimage,
Quhen fillokis into Fyfe began to fen
With Jok and Thome than tuke thai their voyage
In Angus to the field chapel of Dron:
Than Kittock their als cadye as ane Con,
Without regard other to syn or schame,
Gave Lowrie leif at la^er to loup on,
Far better had been till have biddin at hame.
I will here take occasion to explain two lines, SIGNAT. I. iii. Nor yet the
fai^ madin of France
Danter of Inglish ordinance.
That is Joan of Arc, who so often daunted or defeated the English army. To
this heroine, and to Penthesilea, he compares Semiramis.
.

Our poet's principal vouchers and authorities in the MONARCHY, are Livy,
Valerius Maximus, Josephus, Diodorus Siculus, Avicen the Arabic physician,
Orosius, saint Jerome, Polydore Virgil, Cario's chronicle, the FASCICULUS
TEMPORUM, and the CHRONICA CHRONICARUM. The FASCICULUS TEMPORUM is a Latin
chronicle, written at the close of the fifteenth century by Wernerus Rolewinck,
a Westphalian, and a Carthusian monk of Cologne; a most venerable volume,
closed with this colophon. "FASCICULUS TEMPORUM, a Carthusiense compilatum in
formam cronicis figuratum usque in annum 1478, a me Nicolao Gatz de Seltztat
impressum See it also among^ SCRIPTOR. GERMAN. per J. Pistorium, tom. i. p. 580.
." The CHRONICA CRONICARUM or CHRONICON MUNDI, written by Hartmannus
Schedelius, a physician at Nuremburgh, and from which our author evidently took
his philosophy in his DREME, was printed at Nuremburgh in 1493 Again, ibid. by
Joh. Schensperger. 1497. fol.
. This was a most popular compilation, and is at present a great curiosity to
those who are fond of history in the Gothic style, consisting of wonders
conveyed in the black letter and wooden cuts. Cario's chronicle is a much more
rational and elegant work: it was originally composed, about the beginning of
the sixteenth century, by Ludovicus Cario, an eminent mathematician, and
improved or written anew by Melancthon. Of Orosius, a wretched but admired
christian historian, who compiled in Latin a series of universal annals from
the creation to the fifth century, he cites a translation. The translatour of
Orosius
In his cronicle wryttis thus SIGNAT. F. ii.
.
I know of no English translation of Orosius, ^nless the Anglo-saxon version by
king Alfred, and which would perhaps have been much more difficult to Lyndesay
than the Latin original, may be called such: yet Orosius was early translated
into French By Philip Le Noir, Paris. 1526. fol.
and Italian By Benaccivoli, Ven. 1528. 4to.
. For the story of Alexander the Great, our author seems to refer to Adam
Davie's poem on that subject, written in the reign of Edward the second See
supr. vol. i. p. 220.
: a work, which I never remember to have seen cited before, and of which,
although deserving to be printed, only two public manuscripts now remain, the
one in the library of Lincoln's inn, and the other in the Bodleian library at
Oxford.

Alexander the conqueror,
Geve thou at lenth wald reid his ring If thou at length would read his reign.
,
And of his cruel conquessing,
In INGLIS TUNGE IN HIS GREAT BUKE,
At lenth his LIFE their thou may luke SIGNAT. K. iii. He also cites Lucan for
Alexander, SIGNAT. L. i. For an account of the riches of pope John, he quotes
Palmerius. SIGNAT. N. i. This must have been Mattheus Palmerius abovementioned,
author of the CITTA DI VITA, who wrote a general chronicle from the fifth
century to his own times, entitled DE TEMPORIBUS, and, I believe, first printed
at Milan, 1475. fol. Afterward reprinted with improvements and continuations.
Particularly at Venice, 1483. 4to. And by Grynaeus at the end of Eusebius, fol.
1570.
.
He acquaints us, yet not from his own knowledge, but on the testimony of other
writers, that Homer and Hesiod were the inventors in Greece, of poetry,
medicine, music, and astronomy SIGNAT. K. iii.
.

EXPERIENCE departs from the poet, and the dialogue is ended, at the approach
of the evening; which is described with these circumstances.

Behald, quhow Phoebus downwart dois descend,
Toward his palice in the occident! --
The dew now donkis Moistens.
the rosis redolent:
The mariguldis, that all day were rejoysit
Of Phoebus heit, now craftily ar closit Are closed.
. --
The cornecraick in the croft, I heir her cry;
The bat, the howlatt Owlet. Owl.
, feebill of their eis,
For their pastyme, now in the evinning flies.
The nichtingaill with myrthfull melody
Her natural notis, peirsit throuch the sky SIGNAT. R.
.
Many other passages in Lyndesay's poems deserve attention. Magdalene of
France, married to James the fifth of Scotland Not inelegantly, he compares
James making frequent and dangerous voyage^ into France to address the
princess, to Leander swimming through the Hellespont to Hero.
, did not live to see the magnificent preparations made for her public entry
into Edinburgh. In a poem, called the DEITH OF QUEEN MAGDALENE, our author, by
a most striking and lively prosopopeia, an expostulation with DEATH, describes
the whole order of the procession. I will give a few of the stanzas.

THEIEF, saw thou not the greit preparativis
Of Edinburgh, the nobill famous town?
Thou saw the people laboring for their livis,
To make triumph with trumpe and clarioun! --
Thou saw makand Making.
rycht costly scaffolding,
Depayntyt weill with gold and asure fine,
Reddie preparit for the upsetting,
With fountanis flowing water cleir and wine:
Disagysit Men, actors disguised.
folkis, like creaturis divyne,
On ilk scaffold to play ane sundry story Plays and pageants acted on
moveable scaffolds.
:
Bot all in greitting To grief.
turnit thou that glory.
Thou saw money ane lusty fresche galland
Weill ordourit for resaiving of their queen,
Ilk craftisman with bent bow in his hand,
Full galeartlie in schort clothing of grene, etc. --
Syne next in ordour passing throw the town,
Thou should have herd the din of instrumentis,
Of tabrone, trumpet, schalme, and clarioun,
With reird Sound.
reboundand throw the elementis;
The heralds with their awful vestimentis,
With maseris Maces.
upon ather of their handis,
To rewle the prois, with burneist silver wandis.
Thou should have hard Heard.
the ornate oratouris,
Makand her hienes salutatioun,
Boith of the clergy town and counsalouris,
With money notable narratioun.
Thou should have seen her coronation,
In the fair abbay of the holy rude,
In presence of ane myrthfull multitude.
Sic banketting, sic awful tournamentis
On horse and fute, that time quhilk should have been,
Sic chapel royal with sic instrumentis,
And crafty music, etc SIGNAT. K. iii.
. --
Exclusive of this artificial and very poetical mode of introducing a
description of these splendid spectacles, instead of saying plainly that the
queen's death prevented the superb ceremonies which would have attended her
coronation, these stanzas have another merit, that of transmitting the ideas of
the times in the exhibition of a royal entertainment The curious reader may
compare "The ordinance of the enter of queen Isabell into the town of Paris,"
in Froissart. Berners's Transl. tom. ii. c. clvii. f. 172. b.
.

Our author's COMPLAYNT contains a curious picture, like that in his DREME, of
the miserable policy by which Scotland was governed under James the fifth. But
he diversifies and enlivens the subject, by supposing the public felicity which
would take place, if all corrupt ministers and evil counselors were removed
from the throne. This is described by striking and picturesque personifications.

Justice holds her swerd on hie,
With her balance of equity. --
Dame Prudence has the by the heid,
And Temperance dois thy brydill leid.
I see dame Force make assistance,
Beirand thy targe of assurance:
And lusty lady Chastity
Has bannischit Sensuality.
Dame Riches takes on the sic cure,
I pray God that she long endure!
That Poverte dar nocht be seen
Into thy house, for both her ene:
But fra thy grace fled money mylis
Amangis the hunteris in the ylis SIGNAT. G. i.
. b I here take occasion to explain the two following lines. Als Jhone Makray,
the kingis fule,
Gat dowbyll garmountis agane the ule.
That is, "The king's fool got two suits of apparel, or garments doubly thick,
to wear at Christmas." SIGNAT. G. i. ule is Christmas. So James the first, in
his declaration at an assembly of the Scotch Kirk at Edinburgh, in 1590, "The
church of Geneva keep Pasche and YULE," that is, ^a^^er and CHRISTMAS.
Calderwood's HIST. CHAPTER SCOT. p. 256. Our author, in The COMPLAYNT OF THE
PAPYNGO, says that his bird sung well enough to be a minstrel at Christmas.
SIGNAT. A. iii. Scho micht have been ane menstrall at the ule.
Thus Robert of Brunne, in his chronicle, speaking of King Arthur keeping
Christmas at York. On gole day mad he fest
With many barons of his geste.
See Hearne's ROB. GLOUC. vol. ii. p. 678. And Leland's ITIN. vol. ii. p. 116.
In the north of England, Christmas to this day is called ule, yule, or you will.
Blount ^ays, "in the northern parts they have an old custom, after sermon or
service on Christmas Day; the people will, even in the churches, cry ule, ule,
as a token of rejoicing, and the common sort run about the streets singing,
"ULE, ULE, ULE,
"Three puddings in a pule,
"Crack nuts, and cry ULE."


DICTION. VOC. ULE. In Saxon the word is gehul, gehol, or geol. In the Welsh
rubric every saint's day is the Will, or Gwl, of that saint: either from a
British word signifying watching, or from the Latin Vigilia, Vigil, taken in a
more extended ^ense. In Wales wyliau or gwyliau hadolig, signifies the
Christmas holidays, where wyla or gwyliau is the plural of will or gwyl.

I also take this opportunity of observing, that the court of the Roman pontiff
was exhilarated by a fool. The pope's fool was in England in 1230, and received
forty shillings of king Henry the third, de do^o regis. MSS. James, xxviii. p.
190.



I know not whether it be worth observing, that playing at cards is mentioned
in this poem, among the diversions, or games, of the court. Thar was no play
but CARTIS and dice SIGNAT. F. iii.
.
And it is mentioned as an accomplishment in the character of a bishop. Bot
geve they can play at the CAIRTIS SIGNAT. G. i.
.
Thus, in the year 1503, James the fourth of Scotland, at an interview with the
princess Margaret in the castle of Newbattle, finds her playing at cards. "The
king came prively to the said castle, and entered within the chammer [chamber]
with a small cumpany^ whare he found the queen playing at the CARDS Leland.
COL^. AP^END. iii. p. 284. ut supr. In our author's TRAGEDY o^ CARDINAL
BETOUN, a soliloquy spoken by the cardinal, he is made to declare, that he
played with the king for three thousand crowns of gold in one night, at cartis
and dice. SIGNAT. I. ii. They are also mentioned in an old anonymous Scotch
poem, Of COVETICE. ANC. SC. ^. ut supr. p. 168. st. iii.

Halking, hunting, and swift horse rynning,
Are changit all in wrangus wynning;
Thar is no play bot cartis and dyce.
Where, by the way, horse-racing is considered among the liberal sports, such
as hawking, and hunting^ and not as a species of gaming. See also, IBID. p.
146. st. v.

Cards are mentioned in a statute of Henry the seventh, xi. Hen. vii. cap. ii.
That is, in 1496. Du Cange cites two Greek writers, who mention card-playing as
one of the games of modern Greece, at least before the year 1498. GLOSS. GR.
tom. ii. V. XAPTIA. p. 1734. It seems highly probable, that the Arabians, so
famous for their ingenuity, more especially in whatever related to numbers and
calculation, were the inventors of cards, which they communicated to the
Constantinopolitan Greeks. Carpentier says, that cards, or folia l^soria, are
prohibited in the STATUTA CRIMIN. Saonae. cap. xxx. p. 61. But the age of these
statutes has not occured to me. SUPPLEM. LAT. GLOSS. Du Cange, V. CARTAE. tom.
i. p. 842.

B^n^dictus Abbas has preserved a very curi^^s edict, which shows the state of
gaming in the christian army, commanded by Richard the first king of England,
and Philip of France, during the crusade in the year 1190. No person in the
army is permitted to play at any sort of game for mon^y, except Knights and
Clergymen; who in one whole day and night shall not, each, lose more than
twenty shillings: on pain of forfeiting one hundred shillings, to the
archbishops of the army. The two kings may play for what they please: but their
attendants, not for more than twenty shillings. Otherwise, they are to be
whipped naked through the army for three days, etc. VIT. RIC. i. p. 610. edit.
Hearn. tom. ii. King Richard is described playing at chess in this expedition.
MSS^ Harl. 4690. And king Rychard stood and play
At the chesse in his galleye.



."

Prophesies of apparent impossibilities were common in Scotland: such as the
removal of one place to another. Under this popular prophetic formulary, may be
ranked the prediction in Shakespeare's MACBETH, where the APPARITION says, that
Birnam-wood shall go to Dusinane. In the same strain, peculiar to his country,
says our author,

Quhen the Bas and the isle of May
Beis set upon the mount Sinay,
Quhen the Lowmound beside Falkland
Beis liftit to Northumberland.
But he happily avails himself of the form, to introduce a stroke of satire.

Quhen Kirkman airnis Earn. Gain.
no dignite,
Nor wyffis no soveranite Ibid. SIGNAT. H. i.
.
The minority of James the fifth was dissipated in pleasures, and his education
most industriously neglected. He was flattered, not instructed, by his
preceptors. His unguarded youth was artfully exposed to the most alluring
temptations Even his governors and preceptors threw these temptations in his
way: a circumstance touched with some humor by our author. Ibid. SIGNAT. G.
Their was few of that garni^oun
That lernit him ane good lessoun. --
Quod one, The devil stik me with ane knyfe,
Bot, Schir, I know ane maid in Fyfe,
Ane of the lustiest wantoun lassis!
Hald thy tunge brother, q^od ane uther,
I know ane fairer be fystene futh^r.
Schir, when ye pl^is to Linlithquow pas,
Their sall ye se ane lusty las.
Now tritill tratill trow low,
Quod the third man, thou dois bot mow;
Quhen his grace cummis to fair Stirling
Their sal he se ane dayis darling.
Schir quod the fourth, tak my counsel,
And go all to the hie bordell,
Their may we loup at liberte
Withoutin any gravite, etc.
Compare Buchanan, HIST. lib. xiv. ad ^in.
. It was in this reign, that the nobility of Scotland began to frequent the
court; which soon became the theater of all those idle amusements which were
calculated to solicit the attention of a young king. All these abuses are
painted in this poem with an honest unreserved indignation. It must not in the
mean time be forgotten, that James possessed eminent abilities, and a love of
literature: nor is it beside our present purpose to observe, that he was the
author of the celebrated ballad called CHRIST'S KIRK ON THE GREEN Printed at
Oxford, by Edm. Gibson, 1691. 4to. with Notes. He died in 1452.
.

The COMPLAYNT OF THE PAPINGO is a piece of the like tendency. In the Prologue,
there is a curious and critical catalogue of the Scotch poets who flourished
about the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries. As the names and
works of many of them seem to be totally forgotten, and as it may contribute to
throw some new lights on the neglected history of the Scotch poetry, I shall
not scruple to give the passage at large, with a few illustrations. Our author
declares, that the poets of his own age dare not aspire to the praise of the
three English poets, Chaucer, Gower, and Lydgate. He then, under the same idea,
makes a transition to the most distinguished poets, who formerly flourished in
Scotland.

Or quho can now the workis contrefait Imitate.

Of KENNEDIE I suppose Walter Kennedie, who wrote a poem in Scottish meter,
whether printed I know not, on the Passion of Christ. MSS. Coll. Gresham, 286.
Some of Kennedie's poems are in MSS. Hynd^ord. The Flyting between Dunba^ and
Kennedy is in the EVERGREEN. See Dunbar, ut supr. p. 77. And ibid. p. 274. And
Kennedy's PRAIS OF AGE, ibid. p. 189. He exceeds his cotemporary Dunbar in
smoothness of versification.
, with termis aureait?
Or of DUNBAR, quha language had at large,
As may be seen intyll his GOLDIN TARGE The poem examined above, p. 264.
?
QUINTYN He flourished about the year 1320. He was driven from Scotland under
the devastations of Edward the first, and too^ refuge ^at Paris. He wrote a
poem, called the Complaint of the Miseri^s of his Country, printed at Pari^,
1511. Dempst. xv. 1034.
, MERSER Merser is celebrated by Dunbar, LAMENT FOR THE DEATH OF THE MAKKARIS,
or POETS. See ANC. SCOTTISH POEMS, ut supr. p. 77. That did in luve so ly^^y
write,
So schort, so quick, of sentens hie.
See, in that Coll^ction, his PERRELL I^ PARAMOURS^ p. 156.
, ROLL Dunbar mentions Rowll of Aberde^n, and Rowll of Corstorphine, "two
bettir ^allowis did no man sie." Ibid. p. 77. In Lord Hyndford's Manuscript [p.
104. 2.] a poem is mentioned, called ROWLL'^ CURSING. ibid. p. 272. There is a^
allusion in this piece to pope Alexander the sixth, who presided from 1492 to
1503.
, HENDERSON Perhaps Robert Henrison. See Dunbar, ubi supr. p. 77. And ibid. p.
98. seq. In MSS. Harl. are, "The moral fabillis of Esope compylit be Maiste^
Robert Henrysount scholmaister of Dumferling, 1571." 3865. 1. He was most
probably a teacher of the youth in the Benedictine convent at Dun^ermline. See
many of his poems, which are of a grave moral turn, in the elegant Scottish
Miscellany just cited.
, HAY I know not if he means Archibald Hay, who wrote a panegyric on Cardinal
Beaton, printed at Paris, 1540. 4to. He also translated the HECUBA of Euripides
from Greek into Latin. MSS. HATTON. But I have seen none of his Scotch poetry.
, and HOLLAND See Dunbar, ut supr. p. 77. His poem, called the HOWLATT, is in
the Manuscripts of Lord Hyndford, and Lord Auchinleck. In this are described,
the "Kyndis of instrumentis, the sportaris, [juglers] the Irish bard, and the
^ule." It was written before the year 1455.
,
Thocht they be deid, their libellis been livand Living.
,
Quhilk to reheirs makis redaris to rejoise.
Allace for one quhilk lamp was of this land,
Of eloquence the flowand balmy strand Stream.
,
And in our Inglis rhetoric the rose,
As of rubeis the carbuncle been chose,
And as Phoebus dois Cynthie precell;
So GAWIN DOUGLAS, bischop of Dunkell,
Had, quhen he was into this land on lyve,
Above vulgar poetis prorogatyve,
Both in practick and speculatioun.
I say no more: good redaris may discryve
His worthy workis, in noumer mo than fyve.
And specially the true translatioun
Of Virgill, quhilk been consolatioun
To cunnyng men to knawe his greit ingyne,
As weill in science natural as devyne.
And in the court been present in their dayis,
That ballatis brevis Write.
lustally and layis,
Quhilkis to our princis daily they do present.
Qho can say more than schir JAMES INGLIS sayis
In ballatis, farsis, and in plesand playis I know nothing of Sir James Ingl^s,
or of his ballads, farces, and pleasant plays. But one John Inglish was master
of a company of players, as we have before seen, at the marriage of James the
fourth. Here is a proof, however, that theatrical representations were now in
high repute in the court of Scotland.
?
Bot CULTROSE has his pen maid impotent,
Kid in cunnyng Yet in knowing.
and practick richt prudent.
And STEWART quhilk desires one statlie style
Full ornate workis daylis dois compyle.
STEWART of Lorne will carp richt curiously See some of his satirical poetry,
ANC. SC. P. p. 151.
,
GALBRAITH, KYNLOICH These two poets are converted into one, under the name of
GABRIELL KINLYCK, in an edition of some of Lyndesay's work^ first turned and
made perfect English, printed at London by Thomas Purfoote, A. D. 1581. p.
105. This edition often omits whole stanzas; and has the most arbitrary and
licentious misrepresentations of the text, always for the worse. The editor, or
translat^r, did not understand the Scottish language; and is, besides, a
wretched writer of English. But the attempt sufficiently exposes itself.
, quhen they tham list apply
Into that art, ar crafty of ingyne.
Bot now of late is start up haistelie,
One cunnyng clarke, quhilk wrytith craftelie:
One plant of poets callit BALLENDYNE I presume this is John Balantyn, or
Ballenden, archdeacon of Murray, canon of Rosse, and clerk of the register in
the minority of James the fifth and his successor. He was a doctor of the
Sorbonne at Paris. G. Con, De duplici statu religionis apud Scotos, lib. ii. p.
167. At the command of James the fifth, he translated the seventeen books of
Hector Boethius's HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. Edinb. by T. Davidson, 1536. fol. The
preface is in verse, "Thou marcyal buke pas to the nobyll prince." Prefixed is
the COSMOGRAPHY of Boethius's History, which Mackenzie calls, A Description of
Albany, ii. 596. Before it is a Prologue, a vision in verse, in which VIRTUE
and PLEASURE address the king, after the manner of a dialogue. He wrote an
addition of one hundred years to Boethius's history: but this does not appear
in the Edinburgh edition: also Epistles to James the fifth, and On the Life of
Pythagoras. Many of hi^ poems are extant. The author of the article BALLENDEN,
in the BIOGRAPHIA BRITANNICA, written more than thirty ago, says, that "in the
large collection of Scottish poems, made by Mr. Carmichael, there were some of
our author's on various subjects; and Mr. Laurence Dundass had several, whether
in manuscript or printed, I cannot say." vol. i. p. 461. His style has many
gallicisms. He seems to have been a young man, when this compliment was paid
him by Lyndesay. He died at Rome, 1550. Dempst. ii. 197. Bale, xiv. 65.
Mackenz. ii. 595. seq.
;
Quhose ornate workis my wit can nocht defyne:
Get he into the court auctorite,
He will precell Quintyn and Kennedie SIGNAT. K.
.
The Scotch, from that philosophical and speculative cast which characterises
their national genius, were more zealous and early friends to a reformation of
religion than their neighbors in England. The pomp and elegance of the
catholic worship made no impression on a people, whose devotion sought only for
solid edification; and who had no notion that the interposition of the senses
could with any propriety be admitted to cooperate in an exercise of such a
nature, which appealed to reason alone, and seemed to exclude all aids of the
imagination. It was natural that such a people, in their system of spiritual
refinement, should warmly prefer the severe and rigid plan of Calvin: and it is
from this principle, that we find most of their writers, at the restoration of
learning, taking all occasions of censuring the absurdities of popery with an
unusual degree of abhorrence and asperity.

In the course of the poem before us, an allegory on the corruptions of the
church is introduced, not destitute of invention, humor, and elegance: but
founded on one of the weak theories of Wickliffe, who not considering religion
as reduced to a civil establishment, and because Christ and his apostles were
poor, imagined that secular possessions were inconsistent with the simplicity
of the gospel.

In the primitive and pure ages of christianity, the poet supposes, that the
Church married Poverty, whose children were Chastity and Devotion. The emperor
Constantine soon afterward divorced this sober and decent couple; and without
obtaining or asking a dispensation, married the Church with great solemnity to
Property. Pope Silvester ratified the marriage: and Devotion retired to a
hermitage. They had two daughters, Riches and Sensuality; who were very
beautiful, and soon attracted such great and universal regard, that they
acquired the chief ascendancy in all spiritual affairs. Such was the influence
of Sensuality in particular, that Chastity, the daughter of the Church by
Poverty, was exiled: she tried, but in vain, to gain protection in Italy and
France. Her success was equally bad in England. She strove to take refuge in
the court of Scotland: but they drove her from the court to the clergy. The
bishops were alarmed at her appearance, and protested they would harbor no
rebel to the Sea of Rome. They sent her to the nuns, who received her in form,
with processions and other honors. But news being immediately dispatched to
Sensuality and Riches, of her friendly reception among the nuns, she was again
compelled to turn fugitive. She next fled to the mendicant friars, who declared
they could not take charge of ladies. At last she was found secreted in the
nunnery of the Burrowmoor near Edinburgh, where she had met her mother Poverty
and her sister Devotion. Sensuality attempts to besiege this religious house,
but without effect. The pious sisters were armed at all points, and kept an
irresistible piece of artillery, called Domine custodi nos.

Within quhose schot, their dar no enemies
Approach their places for dread of dyntis dour Hard dints.
;
Boith nicht and day they work like besie beis Busy bees.
,
For thar defense reddie to stand in stour:
And keip sic watchis on their utter tour,
That dame Sensual with seige dar not assail,
Nor cum within the schot of their artaile Artillery. SIGNAT. C. ii.
.
I know not whether this chaste sisterhood had the delicacy to observe strictly
the injunctions prescribed to a society of nuns in England; who, to preserve a
cool habit, were ordered to be regularly blooded three times every year, but
not by a secular person, and the priests who performed the operation were never
suffered to be strangers MSS. JAMES. xxvi. p. 32. Bibl. Bod^^ Oxon.
.

I must not dismiss this poem, without pointing out a beautiful valediction to
the royal palace of Snowdon; which is not only highly sentimental and
expressive of poetical feelings, but strongly impresses on the mind an image of
the romantic magnificence of ancient times, so remote from the state of modern
manners.

Adieu fair Snawdoune, with thy touris hie,
Thy chapel royal, park, and tabill round Round table. Tournaments.
!
May, June, and July, wald I dwell in the,
War I one man, to heir the birdis sound
Quhilk does again thy royal roche rebound SIGNAT. B. iii.
!
Our author's poem, To the Kingis grace in contemptioun of side taillis, that
is, a censure on the affectation of long trains worn by the ladies, has more
humor than decency Compare a manuscript poem of Occleve, Of Pride and wast
clothing of Lordis men which is aens her astate. MSS. LAUD. K. 78. f. 67. b.
Bibl. Bodl. His chief complaint is against pendent s^eeves, sweeping the
ground, which with their ^ur amount to more than twenty pounds.
. He allows a tail to the queen, but thinks it an affront to the royal dignity
and prerogative that,

Every lady of the land
Should have her taill so side trailland SIGNAT. L. ii.
. --
Quhare ever they go it may be seen
How kirk and calsay they suepe clean Causey. Street. Path.
. --
Kittok that clekkit was yestrene Kitty that was born yesterday.
,
The morn will counterfute the queen.
Ane mureland Moor-land.
Mag that milkid the owis
Claggit Clogged.
with clay above the howis,
In barn, nor byir, scho woll nocht bide
Without her kyrtill taill beside. --
They waist more claith [cloth] within few yeiris
Than wald claith fyftie score of freris SIGNAT. L. iii. He commends the ladies
of Italy for their dece^cy in this article.
.
In a statute of James the second of Scotland ACT. 70.
, about the year 1460, it was ordered, that no woman should come to church or
to market with her face mussaled, that is muzzled, or covered. Notwithstanding
this seasonable interposition of the legislature, the ladies of Scotland
continued muzzled during three reigns As appears from a passage in the poem
before us. Bot in the kirk and market placis
I think they should nocht hide their facis. --
He therefore advises the king to issue a proclamation, Both throw the land,
and Borrowstonis,
To schaw their face, and cut their gownis.
He add^, that this is quite contrary to the mode of the French ladies. Hails
ane Frence lady quhen ye pleis,
Scho will discover^mouth and neis.

. The enormous excrescence of female tails was prohibited in the same statute,
"That na woman wear tails unfit in length." The legitimate length of these
tails is not, however, determined in this statute; a circumstance which we may
collect from a mandate issued by a papal legate in Germany, in the fourteenth
century. "It is decreed, that the apparel of women, which ought to be
consistent with modesty, but now, through their foolishness, is degenerated
into wantonness and extravagance, more particularly the immoderate length of
their petticoats, with which they sweep the ground, be restrained to a moderate
fashion, agreeably to the decency of the sex, under pain of the sentence of
excommunication "Velamina etiam mulierum, quae ad v^recundiam designandam eis
sunt concessa, sed nunc, per insipientiam earum, in lasciviam et luxuriam
excreverunt, et immoderata lo^git^do superpelliceorum, quibus pulverem trab^nt,
ad moder^tum usum, sicut decet verecundiam sexus, per excommunicationis
sententiam cohibeantur." Ludewig, RELIQ. DIPLOM. tom. ii. p. 441.
." The orthodoxy of petticoats is not precisely ascertained in thi^ salutary
edict: but as it excommunicates those female tails, which, in our author's
phrase, keep the kirk and causey clean, and allows such a moderate standard to
the petticoat, as is compatible with female delicacy, it may be concluded,
that, the ladies who covered their feet were looked upon as very laudable
conformists: an inch or two less would have been avowed immodesty; an inch or
two more an affectation bordering upon heresy See Notes to A^C. SC. POEMS, ut
supr. p. 256.
. What good effects followed from this ecclesiastical censure, I do not find:
it is, however, evident^ that the Scottish act of parliament against long tails
was as little observed, as that against muzzling. Probably the force of the
poet's satire effected a more speedy reformation of such abuses, than the
menaces of the church, or the laws of the land. But these capricious vanities
were not confined to Scotland alone. In England, as we are informed by several
antiquaries, the women of quality first wore trains in the reign of Richard the
second: a novelty which induced a well meaning divine, of those times, to write
a tract Contra caudas dominarum, against the Tails of the Ladies See
Collectanea Historica, ex DIC^ION. MS. Thomae Gascoign. Apud Hearne's W.
HEMINGFORD, p. 512.
. Whether or no this remonstrance operated so far, as to occasion the contrary
extreme, and even to have been the distant cause of producing the short
petticoats of the present age, I cannot say. As an apology, however, for the
English ladies, in adopting this fashion, we should in justice remember, as was
the case of the Scotch, that it was countenanced by Anne, Richard's queen: a
lady not less enterprising than successful in her attacks on established forms;
and whose authority and example were so powerful, as to abolish, even in
defiance of France, the ^afe, commodious, and natural mode of riding on
horseback, hitherto practiced by the women of England, and to introduce
side-saddles Chaucer represents his WI^^ OF BATH a^ riding with a pair of
spurs. PROL. v. 475. p. 5. Urr. And on her feet a pair of spurris sharp.

.

An anonymous Scotch poem has lately been communicated to me, belonging to this
period: of which, as it was never printed, and as it contains capital touches
of satirical humor, not inferior to those of Dunbar and Lyndesay, I am tempted
to transcribe a few stanzas For the use of this manuscript I am obliged to the
ingenious Mr. Pennant; whose valuable publications are familiar to every reader
of taste and science.
. It appears to have been written soon after the death of James the fifth V.
162.
. The poet mentions the death of James the fourth, who was killed in the battle
of Flodden-field, fought in the year 1513 V. 78.
. It is entitled DUNCANE LAIDER, or MAKGREGOR'S TESTAMENT "Copied, says my
manuscript, at Taymouth, in September 1769. From a Manuscript in the library
there, ending August 20th, 1490." The latter date certainly cannot refer to the
time when this poem was written.
. The Scotch poets were fond of conveying invective, under the form of an
assumed character writing a will See The Testament of Mr. Andro Kennedy. ANC.
SC. POEMS, ut supr. p. 35.
. In the poem before us, the writer exposes the ruinous policy, and the general
corruption of public manners, prevailing in Scotland, under the personage of
the STRONG MAN Viz. LAIDER.
, that is, tyranny or oppression. Yet there are some circumstances which seem
to point out a particular feudal lord, famous for his exactions and insolence,
and who at length was outlawed. Our testator introduces himself to the reader's
acquaintance, by describing his own character and way of life, in the following
expressive allegories.

My master household was heich Named. Hight.
Oppressioun,
Reif Robbery.
my stewart, that cairit of na wrang Took many a booty.
;
Murthure, Slauchtir Murder, Slaughter.
, aye of ane professioun,
My cubicularis The pages of my bedchamber. Called, in Scotland, Chamber-lads.
has been their yearis lang:
Recept, that often tuik in money ane fang That scrupled to do no wrong.
,
Was porter to the yettis Gates. Yates, Yatt^s.
, to oppin wide;
And Covatice was chamberlane at all tide All times.
.
Conspiracy, Invy, and False Report,
Were my prime counsalouris, leve Beloved.
and dear^;
Then Robbery, the peepill to extort,
And common Thift Theft.
tuke on tham ^a the steir Steer. Steerage. The management.
^
That Treuth in my presince durst not appeir,
For Falsheid had him ay at mortal feid Enmity. Hatred.
,
And Thift brocht Lautie finally to deid Brought Loyalty to death,
^
Oppressioun clikit Good Reule Caught Good Rule. Read cleikit, clecked. CLEIK
is crooked iron, Uncus.
be the hair,
And suddenly in ane preesoun Threw him into prison.
him flang;
And Cruelty cast Piti^ our the stair Over the stairs.
,
Qhuill Innocence was murthurit in that thrang Murdered in the crowd.
.
Than Falsheid said, he maid my house richt strange,
And furnist weill with meikill wrangus geir Furnished it well with much
ill-gotten ^ealth.
,
And bad me neither god nor man to feir V. 15. seq.
.
At length, in consequence of repeated enormities and violations of justice,
Duncane supposes himself to be imprisoned, and about to suffer the extreme
sentence of the law. He therefore very providently makes his last will, which
contains the following witty bequests.

To my CURAT Negligence I resign,
Thairwith his parochinaris Parishioners.
to teache;
Ane ather gift I leif him als condign As good.
,
Sloth and Ignorance sendill Seldom.
for to preche:
The saullis he committis for to bleiche To be bleached. Whitened, or purified.

In purgatory, quhill Till they be washed clean.
thaie be waschin clean,
Pure religion thairbie to sustene.
To the VICAR I leif Diligence and Care
To tak the upmost claith and the kirk kow Part of the pall, taken as a fee at
funerals. The Kirk-kow, or cow, is an ecclesiastical perquisite which I do not
understand.
,
Mair nor More than.
to put the corpse in sepulture:
Have pouir wad six gryis and ane sow If^ the poor have six pigs and one sow.
,
He will have ane to fill his belly fowe His belly full. BELLY was not yet
proscribed as a coarse indelicate word. I^ often occurs in our Translation of
the Bible: and is used, somewhat singularly, in a chapter^act of
Westminster-abbey, so late as the year 1628. The prebendaries vindicate
themselves from the imputation of having reported, that their dean, bishop
Williams, repaired the abbey, "out of the diet, and BELLIES of the
prebendaries, and revenues of our said church, and not out of his own revenues,
etc." Widmore's WESTMINST. ABBEY, p. 213. Append. NUMBER. xii. Land. 1751. Here,
as we now think, a periphrasis, at least another term, was obvious. How
shocking, or rather ridiculous, would this expression appear in a modern
instrument, signed by a body of clergy!
:
His thocht is mair upon the pasche fynis,
Nor the saullis in purgatory that pynis He thinks more of his
Easter-offerings, than of the souls in purgatory. Pasche is paschal. PAIS,
Easter.
.
Oppressioun the PERSON I leif until I leave Oppression to the PARSON, the
proprietor of the great, or rectorial, tithes.
,
Pouir men's corn to hald upon the rig To keep the corn of the poor in the rig,
or rick.
,
Quhill he get the teynd ^lhail at his will Until he g^t the tithe all at his
will.
:
Suppois the barins their bread should go thig Suppose the children should beg
their bread. Barins, or Bearns.
,
His purpois is na kirkis for to big To build no churches.
;
Sa fair an barne-tyme So fair a harvest.
god has him sendin,
This seven years the queir will ly unmendin The choir, or chancel, which, as
the rector, he is obliged to keep in repair. The more tithe he receives, the
less willing ^e is to return a due proportion of it to the church.
^
I leif unto the DEAN Dignite, bot faill Without doubt.
,
With Greit Attendence quilk he sall not miss,
Fra adulteraris [to] tack the buttock-maill A fine for adultery. MAILIS is
dutie^, rents. MAILE-MEN, MAILLERIS, persons who pay rent. Male is Saxon for
tribute or ^^x. Whence Maalman, Saxon, for one paying tribute. See Spelman and
Dufresne, in VV.
;
Gif ane man to ane madin gif ane kiss If a man give a maid one kiss. Chaucer
says of his SOMPNOU^, or Apparitor, PROL. Urr. p. 6. v. 651. He would suffer
for a quart of wine
A good fellow to have his concubine.
See the FREERES TALE, where these ^buses are exposed with much humor. Urr.
edit. p. 87.
,
Get he not geir, thai sall not come to bliss If he does not get his fine, they
will not be saved. GEIR is properly goods^ chattels.
:
His winnyng His profits, in the spiritual court.
is may throw fornicatioun,
Spending it shur with siclike Surely in the same manner.
occupatioun.
I leif unto the PRIOURE, for his part,
Gluttony, him and his monkis to feid,
With far better will to drink ane quart An English gallon.
,
Nor an the bible ane chaptoure To read one chapter.
to reid;
Yet ar thai wyis and subtle into deid Unto death.
,
Feneis them pouir Feign themselves poor.
, and has great sufficence,
And takith wolth away with great patience.
I leif the ABBOT Pride and Arrogance,
With trappit mules in the court to ride To ride on a mule with rich trappings.
Cavendish says, that when cardinal Wolsey went ambassador to France, he rode
through London with more than twenty sumptermules. He adds, that Wolsey "rode
very sumptuously like a cardinal, on a mule; with ^is spare-mule, and his
spare-horse, covered with crimson velvett, and gilt stirrops, etc." MEM. OF
CARD. WOLSEY. edit. Land. 1708. 8vo. p. 57. When he meets the king of France
near Amiens, he mounts another mule, more superbly caparisoned. Ibid. p. 69.
See also p. 192. [See a manuscript of this Life, MSS. LAUD. i. 66. MSS. ARCH.
B. 44. Bibl. Bodl.] The same writer, one of the cardinal's domestics, says that
he constantly rode to Westminster Hall, "on a mule trapped in crimson velvett
with a ^addle of the same." Ibid. p. 29. 30. In the Computus of Maxtoke priory,
in Warwickshire, for the year 1446, this article of expenditure occurs, "Pro
pabulo duarum mularum cum harnesiis domini PRIORIS hoc anno." Again in the same
year, "Pro freno deaurato, cum sella et panno blodii coloris, mulae PRIORIS."
MS. penes me supr. citat. Wiccliffe describes a WORDLY PRIEST, "with fair horse
and jolly, and gay saddles and bridles ringing by the way, and himself in
costly clothes and pelure." Lewis's WICCL. p. 121.
,
Not in the closter to make residence;
It is na honor their for him to bide Continue.
,
But ever for ane bischoprik provyde Look out for a bishopric.
:
For weill ye wat ane pouir benefice,
Of ten thousand markis Marcs.
may not him suffice.
To the BISCHOP his Free will I allege Give, Assign.
,
Because their [is] na man him [dares] to blame;
Fra secular men he will him replege He will order trial in his own court. It
is therefore unsafe to attack him.
,
And weill ye wat the pape is fur fra hame You well know the pope is at a great
distance.
:
To preich the gospel he thinkis schame,
(Supposis sum tym it was his professioun,)
Rather nor for to sit upon the sessioun He had rather sit in parliament.
.
I leif my Flattery, and Falls Dissembling,
Unto the FRERIS, thai sa weill can fleitche Fawn.
,
With mair profit throw ane marriage-making
Nor all the lentrane Or, Lentron. Lent.
in the kirk to preiche Who get more by making one match, than by preaching a
whole Lent. The mendicants gained an establishment in families, and were
consulted and gave their advice in all cases. Chaucer's FREERE Had mad full
many a marriage
Of young women, etc.
PROL. v. 212.
.
Thai gloiss Expound.
the scripture, ever quhen thai teach,
Moer in intent the auditouris to pleiss,
Nor the true word of god for to appeiss Explain. The mendicants not only
perverted the plainest texts of scripture to cover their own fraudulent
purposes, but ^^^en amused their hearers with legends and religious romances.
Wiccliffe, the grand a^tagonist of these orders, says that, "Capped [graduated]
friars that been cleped [called] masters of divinity, have their chamber and
service as lords and kings, and senden out idiots full of covetise to preche,
not the gospel, but chronicles, fables, and lesinges, to plese the people, and
to rob them." Lewis's LIFE OF WICCL. p. 21. xiii.
.
Their These.
gifts that dame Nature has me lent
I have disponit Disposed. Bequeathed.
heir, as ye may see:
It nevir was, nor yet is, my intent,
That true kirkmen get acht belongis to me A true churchman, a christian on the
reformed plan, shall never get any thing belonging to me.
:
But that haulis Whole.
Huredome and Harlottrie,
Gluttony, Invy, Covatice, and Pride,
My executouris I make tham at this tide.
Adieu all friends, quhill Till.
after that we meit,
I cannot tell you quhair, nor in quhat place;
But as the lord dispousis for my spreit,
Quher is the well of mercy and of grace,
That I may [stand] befoirr his godly face:
Unto the devil I leif my synnis Sins^
all,
Fra him thai came, to him agane they fall V. 309. seq.
.
Some readers may perhaps be of opinion, that Makgregor was one of those
Scottish lairds, who lived professedly by rapine and pillage: a practice
greatly facilitated, and even supported, by the feudal system. Of this sort was
Edom o'Gordon, whose attack on the castle of Dunse is recorded by the Scotch
minstrels, in a pathetic ballad, which begins thus.

It fell about the Martinmas,
Qhen the wind blew schril and cauld,
Said Edom o'Gordon to his men,
We maun draw to a hauld:
And quhat a hauld sall we draw to,
My mirry men and me?
We wul gae to the house of the Rhodes,
To see that fair lady Percy's BALL. i. 100.
.
Other parts of Europe, from the same situations in life, afford instances of
the same practice. Froissart has left a long narrative of an eminent robber,
one Amergot Marcell; who became at length so formidable and powerful, as to
claim a place in the history of France. About the year 1380, he had occupied a
strong castle for the space of ten years, in the province of Auvergne, in which
he lived with the splendour and dominion of a petty sovereign^ having amassed,
by pillaging the neighboring country, one hundred thousand francs. His
depredations brought in an annual revenue of twenty thousand floreins.
Afterward he is tempted imprudently to sell his castle to one of the generals
of the king for a considerable sum. Froissart introduces Marcell, after having
sold his fortress, uttering the following lamentation, which strongly paints
his system of depredation, the feudal anarchy, and the trade and traveling of
those days. "What a joy was it when we rode forth at adventure, and sometime
found by the way a rich priour, or merchant, or a route of mulettes, of
Montpellyer, of Narbone, of Lymons, of Fongans, of Tholous, or of Carcassone,
laden with clothe of Brusselles, or peltre ware coming from the fayres, or
laden with spycery from Bruges, from Damas, or from Alysaunder! Whatsoever we
met, all was ours, or else raunsomed at our pleasures. Daily we gate new money;
and the vyllaynes of Auvergne and of Lymosyn daily provided, and brought to our
castle, whete mele, breed [bread] ready baken, otes for our horses and lytter,
good wynes, beffes, and fat mottons, pullayne, and wild foul. We were ever
furnyshed, as though we had been kings. When we rode forth, all the country
trembled for fear. All was ours, going or coming. How took we Carlaste, I
and the Bourge of Company! and I and Perot of Bernoys took Caluset. How did we
scale with little aid the strong castle of Marquell pertayninge to the earl
Dolphyn! I kept it not past fyve days, but I receyved for it, on a fair
table, fyve thousand frankes; and forgave one thousand, for the love of the
earl Dolphyn's children. By my faith, this was a fair and goodly life! etc
See tom. ii. c. 170. f. 115. a. And tom. i. c. 149. f. 73. See also, ib. c..
440. ^. 313. b. Berners's Transl.
."

But on the whole I am inclined to think, that our testator Makgregor, although
a robber, was a personage of high rank, whose power and authority were such, as
to require this indirect and artificial mode of abuse. For the same reason, I
believe the name to be fictitious.

I take this opportunity of observing, that the old Scotch poet Blind Harry
belongs to this period; and, at the same time, of correcting the mistake,
which, in conformity to the common opinion, and on the evidence of Dempster and
Mackenzie, I have committed, in placing him toward the close of the fourteenth
century See supr. vol. i. p. 321. Dempster says he lived in 1361.
. John Major the Scotch historian, who was born about the year 1470, remembered
Blind Harry to have been living, and to have published a poem on the
achievements of Sir William Wallace, when he was a boy. He adds, that he cannot
vouch for the credibility of those tales which the bards were accustomed to
sing for hire in the castles of the nobility The poem as now extant has
probably been reformed and modernised.
. I will give his own words. "Integrum librum Gulielmi Wallacei Henricus, a
nativitate luminibus captus, meae infantiae tempore cudit: et quae vulgo
dicebantur carmine vulgari, in quo peritus erat, conscripsit. Ego autem talibus
scriptis solum in part fidem impertior; quippe qui HISTORIARUM RECITATIONE
CORAM PRINCIPIBUS victum et vestitum, quo dignus erat, nactus est HIST. MAGN.
BRITAN. L. iv. c. xv. f. 74. a. edit. Ascens. 1521. 4to. Compare Hollinsh.
SCOT. ii. p. 414. And Mack. tom. i. 423. Dempst lib. viii. p. 349.
." And that, in this poem, Blind Harry has intermixed much fable with true
history, will appear from some proofs collected by sir David Dalrymple, in his
judicious and accurate annals of Scotland, lately published See p. 245. edit.
1776. 4to.
.

I cannot return to the English poets without a hint, that a well-executed
history of the Scotch poetry from the thirteenth century, would be a valuable
accession to the general literary history of Britain. The subject is pregnant
with much curious and instructive information, is highly deserving of a minute
and regular research, has never yet been uniformly examined in its full extent,
and the materials are both accessible and ample. Even the bare lives of the
vernacular poets of Scotland have never yet been written with tolerable care;
and at present are only known from the meagre outlines of Dempster and
Mackenzie. The Scotch appear to have had an early propensity to theatrical
representations; and it is probable, that in the prosecution of such a design,
among several other interesting and unexpected discoveries, many anecdotes,
conducing to illustrate the rise and progress of our ancient drama, might be
drawn from obscurity.

SECT. XV.
MOST of the poems of John Skeleton were written in the reign of king Henry the
eighth. But as he was laureated at Oxford about the year 1489 See supr. p. 130.
, I consider him as belonging to the fifteenth century.

Skeleton, having studied in both our universities, was promoted to the rectory
of Diss in Norfolk At least before the year 1507. For at the end of his
TRENTALE for old John Clarke, there is this colophon. "Auctore Skeleton rectore
de Dis. Finis, etc. Apud Trumpinton, script. per Curatum ejusdem quinto die
Jan. A. D. 1507." See the PITHY PLEASANT AND PROFITABLE WORKS OF MASTER
SKELETON, reprinted at London, 1736, 12mo. page 272. He was ordained both deacon
and priest in the year 1498. On the title of the monastery de Graciis near the
tower of London. REGISTR. Savage. Episc. Land. There is a poem by Skeleton on
the death of king Edward the fourth, who died A. D. 1483. WORKS, ut supr. p.
100. This is taken into the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES.

Skelton's poems were first printed at London, 1512. 8vo. A more complete
edition by Thomas Marshe appeared in 1568. 12mo. From which the modern edition,
in 1736, was copied. Many pieces of this collection have appeared separately.
We have also, CERTAIN BOOKS OF SKELETON. For W. Bonham, 1547. 12mo. Again, viz.
Five of his poems, for John Day, 1583. 12mo. Another collection for A.
Scolocker, 1582. 12mo. Another of two pieces, without date, for A. Kytson.
Another, viz. MERRY TALES, for T. Colwell, 1575. 12mo. MAGNIFICENCE, a goodly
Interlude and a merry devysed and made by master Skeleton, poet laureate, late
deceased, was printed by Rastell, in 1533. 4to. This is not in any collection
of his poems. He mentions it in his CROWN OF LAUREL, p. 47. "And of
MAGNIFICENCE, a notable matter, etc." Pinson also printed a piece of Skeleton,
not in any collection, "How young scholars now a days emboldened in the fly
blown blast of the much vain glorious, etc." Without date, 4to. There are
also, not in his Works, Epitaph of Jasper duke of Bedford, Land. 4to. And,
Miseries of England under Henry seventh, Land. 4to. See two of his Epitaphs in
Camden's EPITAPHIA REGUM, etc. Land. 1600. 4to. See a distich in Hollinsh. iii.
878. And Stanzas presented to Henry the seventh, in 1488, at Windsor, in
Ashmole's ORD. GART. chap. xxi. SECT. vii. p. 594. A great number of Skelton's
pieces remain unprinted. See MSS. Harl. 367. 36. fol. 101. seq. -- 2252. 51.
fol. 134. seq. MSS. Reg. 18 D. 4 5. MSS. C. C. C. Cambr. G. ix. MSS. Cotton.
VITELL. E. x. 28. And MSS. Cathedr. Linc. In the CROWN OF LAUREL, Skeleton
recites many of his own pieces. p. 47. seq. The soverayne Interlude of Virtue.
The Rosiar. Prince Arthur's creacion. Of Perfidia. Dialogues of Ymaginacion.
The comedy of Achad^mios. Tullis familiars, that is, a translation of Tully's
Familiar Epistles. Of good Advisement. The Recule against Gaguine. See p. 47.
162. The Popingay. A noble pamphelet of soveraintie. The Play of Magnificence,
abovementioned. Matters of Mirth to maistres Margery. The Peregrinacion of
Man's Life, from the French, perhaps of Guillaume, prior of Chalis. [See supr.
p. 120.] But it should be observed, that Pynson printed Peregrinatio humani
generis, 1508. 4to. The triumphs of the red rose, containing many stories
long unremembered. Speculum principis, a manual written while he was creauncer,
or tutor, to Henry the eighth, when a boy. The Tunnyng of Elinour Rummyng. See
p. 123. Colin Clout. See p. 179. John Yve. Joforth Jacke. Verses to maistres
Anne. Epitaph of one Adam a knave. See p. 271. The balade of the mustarde
tarte. The fate of Philip Sparrowe. See p. 215. The grounting of the swyne. The
mournyng of the map^ly rote. A prayer to Moyse's horns. The paiants
[pageaunts] played in joyous guard, that is, in king Arthur's castle, so called
in the romance of MORTE ARTHUR. The fenestrall [window] of castle Angel. The
recule of Rosamundes bower. How dame Minerva first found the olive-tre. The
myller and his joly mate, or wife. Marione clarion. Of the Bonhoms of Ashrige
near Berkhamstead, where is the sange royal of Christ's blood, that is, the
real blood of Christ. He professes to have received many favors from this
monastery. The nation of foles. The book of three fools is printed in his
works, p. 260. Apollo that whirled up his chare. The maiden of Kent. Of lovers
testaments. Of Jollas and Phillis. The book of honorouse astate: Of royal
demenaunce: How to fle sin: How to sp^ke well. How to dye when ye will. A
translation of Diodorus Siculus, out of fresh Latin, that is, of Poggius
Florentinus, containing six books. MS. C. C. C. Camb. viii. 5. Poggius's
version was first printed at Venice, 1476. Caxton in his Preface to Virgil's
ENEIDOS, says that Skeleton "translated diverse other works out of Latin into
Englysh," beside Tully's Epistles, and Diodorus Siculus. Bale mentions his
Invectiva on William Lily the grammarian. I know nothing more of this, than
that it was answered by Lily in Apologia ad Joh. Scheltonum. Pr. "Siccine
vipereo pergis me, etc." The piece of Skeleton most frequently printed was, I
believe, his ELINOUR RUMMYNG, or Rumpkin. The last of the old editions is, in
1624. 4to. In the title page, is the picture of our genial hostess, a deformed
old woman, holding a pot of ale, with this inscription. When Skeleton wore the
laurel crown
My ale put all the alewives down.
See Davies's CRITICAL HISTORY OF PAMPHLETS, p. 28. 86.


. But for his buffooneries in the pulpit, and his satirical ballads against the
mendicants See WORKS, p. 200. 202. etc.
, he was severely censured, and perhaps suspended by Nykke his diocesan, a
rigid bishop of Norwich, from exercising the duties of the sacerdotal function.
Wood says, he was also punished by the bishop for "having been guilty of
certain crimes, AS MOST POETS are AT^. OXO^. i. 2^. seq.
." But these persecutions only served to quicken his ludicrous disposition, and
to exasperate the acrimony of his satire. As his sermons could be no longer a
vehicle for his abuse, he vented his ridicule in rhyming libels. At length,
daring to attack the dignity of cardinal Wolsey, he was closely pursued by the
officers of that powerful minister; and, taking shelter in the sanctuary of
Westminster abbey, was kindly entertained and protected by abbot Islip His
Latin epitaph or elegy on the Death of Henry the seventh, is addressed to
Islip, A. D. 1512. p. 285.
, to the day of his death. He died, and was buried in the neighboring church
of saint Margaret, in the year 1529.

Skeleton was patronised by Henry Algernoon Percy, the fifth earl of
Northumberland, who deserves particular notice here; as he loved literature at
a time when many of the nobility of England could hardly read or write their
names, and was the general patron of such genius as his age produced. He
encouraged Skeleton, almost the only professed poet of the reign of Henry the
seventh, to write an elegy on the death of his father, which is yet extant. But
still stronger proofs of his literary turn, especially of his singular passion
for poetry, may be collected from a very splendid manuscript, which formerly
belonged to this very distinguished peer, and is at present preserved in the
British Museum MSS. Reg. 18 D. 11.
. It contains a large collection of English poems, elegantly engrossed on
vellum, and superbly illuminated, which had been thus sumptuously transcribed
for his use. The pieces are chiefly those of Lydgate, after which follow the
aforesaid Elegy of Skeleton, and some smaller compositions. Among the latter are
a metrical history of the family of Percy, presented to him by one of his own
chaplains; and a prolix series of poetical inscriptions, which he caused to be
written on the walls and ceilings of the principal apartments of his castles of
Lekinfield and Wressil See supr. p. 126. And MSS. C. C. C. Cant. 168. Three of
the apartments in Wressill Castle, now destroyed, were adorned with POETICAL
INSCRIPTIONS. These are called in the manuscript abovementioned, "PROVERBES in
the LODGINGS in WRESSILL."

"The proverbes in the sydis of the innere chamber at Wressill." This is a poem
of twenty-four stanzas, each containing seven lines^ beginning thus,

When it is time of cost and great expens,
Beware of waste and spend by measure:
Who that outrageously makithe his dispens,
Causy the his goods not long to endure, etc.
"The counsel^ of Aristotill, which he gayse to Alexander, king of Massydony;
which are wrytyn in the side of the Utter Chamber above the house in the
Garden at Wresyll." This is in distichs of thirty-eight lines; beginning thus,
"Punyshe moderatly and discretly correct,
"As well to mercy as to justice havynge a respect, etc.


"The proverbis in the side of th'Utter Chamber above of the house in the
gardying at Wresyll." A poem of thirty stanzas, chiefly of four lines, viz.
"Remorde thine ey inwardly,
"Fyx not thy mind on Fortune, that delythe dyversly, etc.


The following apartments in Lekinfield had poetical inscriptions: as mentioned
in the said manuscript. "PROVERBS in the LODGINGS at LEKINGFIELD."

"The proverbis of the garett over the Bayne at Lekyngfelde." This is a
dialogue in 32 stanzas, of four lines, between "the Part Sensatyve," and "the
Part Intellectyve;" containing a poetical comparison between sensual and
intellectual pleasures.

"The proverbis in the garet at the new lodge in the park of Lekingfelde."
This is a poem of 32 stanzas, of four lines, being a discant on Harmony, as
also on the manner of Singing, and playing on most of the instruments then
used: i. e. the Ha^ps, Claricordes, Lute, Virgynall, Clarisymballis, Clarion,
Shawme, Orgayne, Recorder. The following stanza relates to the SHAWME, and
shows it to have been u^ed for the Bass, as the RECORDER was for the Mean or
Tenor.

"A SHAWME makithe a sweet sound for he tunithe BASSE,
"It mountithe not to hy, but kepithe rule and space.
"Yet if it be blown with a too vehement wind,
"It makithe it to misgoverne out of his kind.
"The proverbis in the rooffe of the highest chawmbre in the gardinge at
Leking^elde." If we suppose this to be the room mentioned by Leland, where the
Genealogy was kept; the following jingling reflections on the family motto (in
thirty distichs) will not appear quite so misplaced;

"Esperaunce en Dyex,
"Trust in him he is most true.
"En Dieu esperance,
"In him put thine affiance.
"Esperaunc^ in the world? nay;
"The world varieth every day.
"Esperaunc^ in riches? nay, not so,
"Riches slidithe and sone will go.
"Esperaunce in exaltacion of honor?
"Nay, it widderithe... like a flower.
"Esperaunce in blood and high lynage?
"At most need, bot esy avauntage.
The concluding distich is, "Esperaunce en Die^, in him is all;
"Be thou content and thou art above Fortune's fall."


"The proverbis in the rouse of my Lord Percy closett at Lekyngfelde." A
poetical dialogue, containing instructions for youth, in 142 lines.

"The proverbis in the roufe of my Lordis library at Lekyngefelde." Twentythree
stanzas of four lines, from which take the following specimen:

"To every tale geve thou no credens.
"Prove the cause, or thou give sentens.
"Again the right make no dyffens,
"So have thou a clean conscie^s."
"The counsel of Aristotell, which he gave to Alexander king of Macedony; in
the side of the garet of the gardynge in Lekynfelde." This consists of nine
stanzas, of eight lines: Take the last stanza but one:

"Punish moderatly, and discretly correct,
"As well to mercy, as to justice havynge a respect;
"So shall ye have merit for the punishment,
"And cause the offender to be sorry and penitent.
"If ye be movede with anger or hastynes,
"Pause in your mind and your ire repress:
"Defer vengeance unto your anger asswagede be;
"So shyll ye mynyster justice, and do dew equity."
This castle is also demolished. One of the ornaments of the apartments of the
old castles in France, was to write the walls all over with amorous SONNETS.


. His cultivation of the arts of external elegance appears, from the s^ately
sepulchral monuments which he erected in the minster, or collegiate church, of
Beverly in Yorkshire, to the memory of his father and mother; which are
executed in the richest style of the florid Gothic architecture, and remain to
this day, the conspicuous and striking evidences of his taste and magnificence.
In the year 1520, he founded an annual stipend of ten marcs for three years,
for a preceptor, or professor, to teach grammar and philosophy in the monastery
of Alnewick, contiguous to another of his magnificent castles From the
Receiver's accounts of the earl's estates in Com. Northumb. A. xv. Henr. viii.
A. D. 1527. "SOLUCIONES DENARIORUM per WARRANTUM DOMINI. Et in denariis per
dominum receptorem doctori Makerell Abbati monasterii de Alnewyk solutis, de
exitibus hujus anni, pro solucione vadii unius ^EDAGOGI, ^ive Magistri,
existentis infra Abbathiam predictam, et docentis ac legentis GRAMMATICAM et
PHILOSOPHIAM canonicis et fratribus monasterii predicti, ad x marcas per annum
pro termino iij annorum, virtute unius warran^i, cujus data est apud Wressill
xxm^ die Septembris anno xij Regis predicti, signo manuali ipsius Comitis
signati, et penes ips^m Abbatem remanentis, ultra vj lib. xiij s. iv d. sibi
allocatas anno xiij Henr. viijv^, et vj lib. xiij s. iiij d. similiter sibi
allocatas in anno xiiij ejusdem Regis ut per ii acquietancias inde confectas,
et penes Auditorem remanentes." From EVIDENCES of the PERCY FAMILY, at
Sion-house. C. iii. Number. 5. 6. Communicated by doctor Percy,
. A further instance of his attention to letters and studious employments,
occurs in his HOUSHOLD-BOOK, dated 1512, yet remaining; in which the LIBRARIES
of this earl and of his lady are specified Page 44. P. Cop.
: and in the same curious monument of ancient manners it is ordered, that one
of his chaplains should be a MAKER OF INTERLUDES Page 378. I am indebted to the
usual kindness of Dr. Percy for all the notices relating to this earl. See his
Preface to the HOUSEHOLD BOOK, page xxi. seq.
. With so much boldness did this liberal nobleman abandon the example of his
brother peers, whose principal occupations were hawking and tilting; and who
despised learning, as an ignoble and petty accomplishment, fit only for the
purposes of laborious and indigent ecclesiastics. Nor was he totally given up
to the pursuits of leisure and peace: he was, in the year 1497, one of the
leaders who commanded at the battle of Blackheath against lord Audley and his
partisans; and was often engaged, from his early years, in other public
services of trust and honor. But Skeleton hardly deserved such a patronage I am
informed by a manuscript note in one of Mr. Oldys's books, that Skeleton also
wrote a poem called TITUS AND GESIPPUS. This I believe to be a mistake: for I
suppose he attributes to Skeleton, William Walter's poem on this subject,
mentioned above, p. 238. At the same time I take occasion to correct a mistake
of my own, concerning that piece; which I have inadvertently called, "a
translation from a Latin romance concerning the siege of Jerusalem." ibid.
Titus and Gesippus were famous for their friendship; and their history forms an
interesting novel in Boccacio, the substance of which is this. Gesippus,
falling into poverty, thought himself despised by Titus; and thence growing
weary of life, gave out that he was guilty of a murder just committed. But
Titus knowing the true state of the case, and desiring to save the life of his
friend by losing his own, charged himself with the murder: at which the real
murderer, who stood among the crowd at the trial, was so struck, that he
confessed the fact. All three are saved; and Titus, to repair the broken
fortunes of Gesippus, gives him his sister in marriage, with an ample dower.
Bocc. DECAM. Nov. viii. GIORN. x. This is a frequent example of consummate
friendship in our old poets. In the FAERIE QUEEN, they are placed in the
temple of Venus among the celebrated Platonic friends of antiquity, B. iv. c.
x. st. 27. Myld Titus and Gesippus without pride.
See also SONGS and SONNETTS written by E. G. At the end of lord Surrey's
Works, fol. 114.

O friendship flour of flours, O lively sprite of life,
O sacred bond of blisful peace, the stalworth staunch of life!
Scipio with Lelius did thou conjoin in care: --
GESIPPUS eke with TITE, Damon with Pythias;
And with Menethus son Achill by thee combyned was:
Euryalus and Nisus, etc. etc.
There is a manuscript of some of Skelton's poems in the Cotton library: but
the volume is so much damaged by fire, that they are almost illegible. [Brit.
Mus.] VITELL. E. x. 28.


.

It is in vain to apologize for the coarseness, obscenity, and scurrility of
Skeleton, by saying that his poetry is tinctured with the manners of his age.
Skeleton would have been a writer without decorum at any period. The manners of
Chaucer's age were undoubtedly more rough and unpolished than those of the
reign of Henry the seventh. Yet Chaucer, a poet abounding in humor, and often
employed in describing the vices and follies of the world, writes with a degree
of delicacy, when compared with Skeleton. That Skelton's manner is gross and
illiberal, was the opinion of his cotemporaries; at least of those critics who
lived but a few years afterward, and while his poems yet continued in vogue.
Puttenham, the author of the ART OF ENGLISH POESY, published in the year
1589, speaking of the species of short meter used in the minstrel-romances, for
the convenience of being sung to the harp at feasts, and in CAROLS and ROUNDS,
"and such other light or lascivious poems which are commonly more commodiously
uttered by those buffoons or Vices in plays than by any other person," and in
which the sudden return of the rhyme fatigues the ear, immediately subjoins:
"Such were the rimes of Skeleton, being indeed but a rude railing rimer, and all
his doings ridiculous; he used both short distaunces and short measures,
pleasing only the popular care Lib. ii. chapter ix. p. 69.
." And Meres, in his PALLADIS TAMIA, or WIT'S TREASURY, published in 1598.
"Skeleton applied his wit to skurilities and ridiculous matters: such among the
Greeks were called pantomimi, with us buffoons "Being the second part of WIT'^
COMMONWELTH. By Francis Meres, master of arts of both universities. London,
printed by P. Short, etc. 1598." 12mo. fol. 279. b. The first part is,
"POLITEUPHNIA, Wit's Commonwealth, for Nicholas Ling, 1598," 12mo.
."

^kelton's characteristic vein of humor is capricious and grotesque. If his
whimsical extravagancies ever move our laughter, at the same time they shock
our sensibility. His festive levities are not only vulgar and indelicate, but
frequently want truth and propriety. His subjects are often as ridiculous as
his meter: but he sometimes debases his matter by his versification. On the
whole, his genius seems better suited to low burlesque, than to liberal and
manly satire. It is supposed by Caxton, that he improved our language; but he
sometimes affects obscurity, and sometimes adopts the most familiar phraseology
of the common people.

He thus describes, in the BOOK OF COLIN CLOUTE, the pompous houses of the
clergy.

Building royally
Their mancyons, curiously
With turrettes, and with toures,
With halles, and with boures,
Streching to the stars;
With glass windows and bars:
Hangyng about the walls
Clothes of gold and palles;
Arras of rich arraye,
Fresh as flowers in May:
With dame Dyana naked;
How lystye Venus quaked,
And how Cupide shaked
His darte, and bente his bow,
For to shote a crow
At her tyrly tyrlowe:
And how Paris of Troy
Daunced a l^ge de moy,
Made lustye sport and toye
With dame Helyn the queen:
With such stories by deen By the dozen.
,
Their chambres well be seen.
With triumphs of Caesar, etc. --
Now This is still a description of tapestry.
all the world stares
How they ride in goodly chares,
Conveyed by olyphantes
With lauriat garlantes;
And by unycornes
With their semely horns;
Upon these beasts riding
Naked boys striding,
With wanton wenches winkyng. --
For prelates of estate
Their courage to abate;
From wordly wantonness,
Their chambers thus to dres
With such parfytness,
And all such holiness,
How beit they let down fall
Their churches cathedral The Book of Colin Cloute, p. 205. seq.
.
These lines are in the best manner of his petty measure: which is made still
more disgusting by the repetition of the rhymes. We should observe, that the
satire is here pointed at the subject of these tapestries. The graver
ecclesiastics, who did not follow the levities of the world, were contented
with religious subjects, or such as were merely historical. Rosse of Warwick,
who wrote about the year 1460, relates, that he saw in the abbat's hall at
saint Alban's abbey a suite of arras, containing a long train of incidents
belonging to a most romantic and pathetic story in the life of the Saxon king
Offa, which that historian recites at large J. Ross. WARWIC. HIST. REG. ANGL.
edit. Hearne, p. 64. Hugh de Foliot, a canon regular of Picardy, so early as
the year 1140, censures] the magnificent houses of the bishops, with the
sumptuous paintings, or tapestry, of their chambers, chiefly on the Trojan
story. "Episcopi domos non impares ecclesiis magnitudine construunt. Pictos
del^ctantur habere thalamos: vestiuntur ibi imagines pretiosis colorum
indumentis. -- Trojanorum gestis paries, purpura atque auro vestitur. --
Graecorum exercitui dantur arma. Hectori clypeus datur auro splendens, etc."
Bibl. Bodl. MSS. JAMES. ii. p. 203. But I believe the tract is published in the
Works of a cotemporary writer, Hugo de Sancto-Victore. Among the manuscript
EPISTLES of Gilbert de Stone, a canon of Wells, and who flourished about the
year 1360, there is a curious passage concerning the spirit for fox-hunting
which anciently prevailed among our bishops. Reginald Bryan, bishop of
Worcester, in 1352, thus writes to the bishop of saint David's. "Reverende in
Christo pater et domine, premissa recommendatione d^bita tanto patri. Illos
optimos canes venaticos, duodecim ad minus, quibus non vidimus meliores, quos
nuper, scitis, vestra REVERENDA PATERNITAS repromisit, quotidie expectamus.
Languet namque cor nostrum, donec realiter ad manus n^stras ven^rit
repromissum." He then owns his eagerness of expectation on this occasion to be
sinful; but observes, that it is the fatal consequence of that deplorable
frailty which we all inherit from our mother Eve. He adds, that the foxes, in
his manor of Alnechurch, and elsewhere, had killed most of his rabbits, many of
his capons, and had destroyed six of his swans in one night. "Veniant ergo,
PATER REVERENDE, illae sex Caniculorum copulae, et non tardent, etc." He then
describes the very exquisite pleasure he shall receive, in hearing his woods
echo with the cry of the hounds, and the music of the horns; and in seeing the
trop^ies of the chase affixed to the walls of his palace. MSS. Bibl. Bodl.
SUPER. D. 1. ART. 123. -- MSS. Cotton. VITELL. E. x. 17. [See MSS.] JAMES, xix.
p. 139.]

From a want of the notions of common propriety and decorum, it is amazing to
see the ^trange absurdities committed by the clergy of the middle ages, in
adopting the laical character. Du Cange says, that the deans of many cathedrals
in France entered on the dignities habited in a surplice, girt with a sword, in
boots and gilt spurs, and a hawk on the fist. LATIN. GLOSS. V. DECANUS, tom. i.
p. 1326. See also ibid. p. 79. And tom. ii. p. 179. seq. Carpentier adds, that
the treasurers of some churches, particularly that of Nivernois, claimed the
privilege of ass^sting at mass, on whatever festival they pleased, without the
canonical vestments, and carrying a hawk. And the lord of Sassay held some of
his lands, by placing a hawk on the high altar of the church of Evreux, while
his parish priest celebrated the service, booted and spurred, to the beat of
drum, i^stead of the organ. SUPPL. tom. i. p. 32. Although their ideas of the
dignity of the church were so high, yet we ^ind them sometimes conferring the
rank and title of secular nobility even on the Saints. Saint James was actually
created a BARON at Paris. Thus Froissart, tom. iii. c. 30. "Or eurent ils
affection et devotion d'aller en pelerinage au BARON Saint Jaques." And in
Fabl. (tom. ii. p. 182.) cited by Carpentier, ubi supr. p. 469.

Dame, did il, et je me v^u,
A dieu, et au BARON Saint Leu,
Et s' irai au BARON Saint Jaques.
Among the many contradictions of this kind, which entered into the system of
these ages, the institution of the Knights templars is not the least
extraordinary. It was an establishment of armed monks; who made a vow of living
at the same time both as anchorets and soldiers.


.

In the poem, WHY COME YE NOT TO THE COURT, he thus satirises cardinal Wolsey,
not without some tincture of humor.

He is set so hye
In his ierarchye Hierarchy.
,
Of frantike frenesy,
And folish fantasy,
That in chamber of stars The star chamber. So below, p. 151.

In the ster-chamber he nods and becks.



Al matters there he mars,
Clapping his rod on the board,
No man dare speak a word;
For he has all the saying
Without any renaying,
He rolleth in his Records:
He says, "how say ye my lords?
"Is not my reason good?
"Good! -- even good -- Robin-hood! --
Borne up on every side
With pomp and with pride,
With trump up alleluya The pomp in which he celebrates divine service.
,
For dame Philargyria Love of money.

Has so his heart in hold, etc. --
Adieu Philosophia!
Adieu Theologia!
Welcome dame Simonia Simony.
,
With dame Castimergia The true reading is CASTRIMARGIA, or Gulae
concupiscentia, Gluttony. From the Greek, (...), Ingluvies, helluatio. Not an
uncommon word in the monkish latinity. Du Cange cites an old Litany of the
tenth century, "A Spiritu CASTRIMARGIAE Libera nos domine!" LAT. GLOSS. i. p.
398. Carpentier adds, among other examples, from the statutes of the Cistercian
order, 1375, "Item, cum propter detestabile CASTRIMARGIAE vitium in labyrinthum
vitiorum descendatur, etc." SUPPL. tom. i. p. 862.
,
To drink and for to eat
Sweet ipocras, and sweet meat I have before spoken of Hypocras, or spiced
wine. I add here, that the spice, for this mixture, was served, often
separately, in what they called a spice-plate. So Froissart, describing a
dinner in the castle of Thoulouse, at which the king of France was present.
"After dinner, they took other pastymes in a great chamber, and hereyng of
instruments, wherein the earl of Foiz greatly delyted. Than WINE and SPYCES was
brought. The earl of Harcourt served the king of his SPYCE-PLADE. And sir
Gerard de la Pyen served the duke of Burbone. And sir Monaunt of Noailles
served the earl of Foiz, etc." This was about the year 1360. CHRON. tom. ii.
cap. 164. f. 184. a. Again, ibid. cap. 100^ f. 114. a. "The king alyght^d at
his palis [of Westminster] which was ready apparelled for him. There the king
DRANK and TOOK SPYCES, and his uncles also: and other prelates, lords, and
knights." Lord Berners's TRANSL. In the Computus of Maxtoke priory [MS. supr.
citat.] an. 1447, we have this entry, "Item pro vino cretico cum speciebus et
confectis datis diversis generosis in die sancti Dionysii quando Le fool domini
Monfordes erat hic, et faceret jocositates suas in camera orioli." Here, I
believe, vinum ^reticum is raisinwine, or wine made of dried grapes; and the
meaning of the whole seems to be this. "Paid for raisin wine with comfits and
spices, when sir S. Montford's FOOL was here, and exhibited his merriments in
the oriel-chamber." With regard to one part of the entry, we have again, "Item^
extra cameram vocatam le gestis chamber, erat una litheamina furata in die
sancti Georgii Martiris quando le fool de MONFORDES erat hic."
:
To keep his flesh chaste,
In Lent, for his repaste
He eats capons stewed,
Fesaunt and partriche mewed: --
Spares neither maid ne wife,
This is a postel's life An apostle's. p. 147. He afterward in^inuates, that
the Cardinal had lost an eye by the French disease: and that Balthazar, who had
cured of the same disorder Domingo Lomelyn, one who had won much money of the
king at cards and hasarding, was employed to recover the cardinal's eye. p.
175. In the Bok^ of Colin Clout, he mentions the cardinal's mule, "With gold
all be trapped." p. 188. [See supr. p. 329.]
!
The poem called the BOUGE OF COURT, or the Rewards of a Court, is in the
manner of a pageaunt, consisting of seven personifications. Here our author, in
adopting the more grave and stately movement of the seven lined stanza But in
this stanza he sometimes relapses into the absurdities of his favorite style of
composition. For instance, in SPEAK PARROT, p. 97. Albertus de modo
significandi,
And Donatus, be dryven out of schole;
Prisians head broken now handy dandy,
And Interdidascalos is returned for a fool:
Alexander a gander of Menander's pole,
With da Cansales is cast out of the gate,
And da Racionales dare not show his pate.
Here, by da Cansales, he perhaps means Concilia, or the canon law. By da
Racio^ales he seems to intend Logic. Albertus is the author of the MARGARITA
POETICA, a collection of Flores from the classics and other writers, printed at
Nurenberg, ^472. fol. For Donatus, see vol. i. p. 281. To which add, that
Ingulphus says, in Croyland abbey library, there were many Catones and DONATI,
in the year 1091. HIST. CROYL. Ingulph. Script. Vet. i. p. 104. And that no
person was admitted into the college of Boissy at Paris, founded in 1358, "nisi
DONATUM aut Catonem didicerit." Bull. HIST. UNIV. PARIS. tom. iv. p. 355.
INTERDIDASCALOS is the name of an old grammar. Alexander was a schoolmaster at
Paris about the year 1290, author of the DOCTRINALE PUERORUM, which for some
centuries continued to be the most favorite manual of grammar used in schools,
and was first printed at Venice in the year 1473. It is compiled from Priscian
and in Leonine verse. See Henr. Gandav. SCRIPTORECCLES. cap. lix. This admired
system has been loaded with glosses and lucubrations: but, on the authority of
an eccles^astical synod, it was superseded by the COMMENTARII GRAMMATICI of
Despauterius, in 1512. It was printed in England as early as the year 1503, by
W. de Word. [See supr. p. 168.] Barklay, in the SHIP OF FOOLS, mentions
Alexander's book, which he calls "The old DOCTRINALL with his dis^use and
unper^ite brevitie." fol. 53. b.
, has shown himself not always incapable of exhibiting allegorical imagery with
spirit and dignity. But his comic vein predominates.

RYOTT is thus forcibly and humourously pictured.

With that came RYOTTE rushing al at ones,
A rustie galande Galant.
, to ragged and to rent All over tatters and rags.
;
And on the board he whirled a pair of bones Dice.
,
Quater treye dews he clattered as he went:
Now have at all by saint Thomas of Kente Saint Thomas Becket.
,
And ever he threw, and kyst Cast. He threw I know not what.
I wot nere what:
His here was grown through out of his hat.
Than I behylde how he dysgysed was;
His hedd was heavy for watchinge over night,
His eyes blered, his face shone like a glass;
His gown so short, that it ne cover might
His rompe, he went so all for somer light;
His hose was gardyd with a list of grene There was an affectation of
smartness in the trimming of his hose, Yet, etc.
,
Yet at the knee they broken were I ween.
His cote was checkerd with patches read and blewe,
Of Kyrkbye Kendall See KENDALL-GREEN, in the Glossary to Shakespeare. edit.
1771.
was his short demye Doublet. Jacket.
;
And aye he sange in faith decon thou crewe:
His elbowe bare, he ware his gere so nigh His coat-s^eeve was so short.
^
His nose droppinge, his lips were full dry:
And by his side his whynarde, and his pouche,
The devyll might dance therein for any crouche Page 70. The devil might dance
in his purse without meeting with a single sixpence. C^OUCHE is Cross, a piece
of money so called, from being marked with the cross. Hence the old phrase, to
cross the ^and, for, to give money. In Chaucer's MARCHAUNT'S TALE, when January
and May are married, it is said the priest " Crouchid them, and b^d god should
them bless." v. 1223. Urr. That is, "He crossed the new-married couple, etc."
In the poem before us, RYOTTE says, "I have no coin nor cross." p. 72.
Carpentier mentions a coin, called in Latin CROSATUS, and in old French CROSA^,
from being marked with the Cross. Hence CROISAGE, Fr. for TRIBUTE. V. CROSATUS.
SUPPL. Du Cange, LAT. GLOSS. tom. i. p. 1208. In Shakespeare's TIMON OF ATHENS,
Flavius says, More jewels yet! There is no CROSSING him in's humor,
Else I should tell him -- well -- in faith I should,
When all is spent he would be ^ROSS'D then if he could. --
Act i. Sc. iv. That is, not thwarting him in his humor, but giving him money.
Yet a jingle is intended. So in AS YOU LIRE IT, ii. iv. "Yet I should bear no
CROSS if I did bear you; for I think you have no money in your pu^se." A
CRUZADOE, a Portuguese coin, occurs in Shakespeare.
^
There is also merit in the delineation of DISSIMULATION, in the same poem P.
73.
: and it is not unlike Ariosto's manner in imagining these allegorical
personages.

Than in his hode I saw there faces tweyne;
That one was lene and like a pyned ghost,
That other looked as he would me have slain:
And to me ward as he began for to coost,
When that he was even at me almoost,
I saw a knyfe hid in his one sleve,
Whereon was written this word MISCHEVE.
And in his other sleve methought I saw
A spone of gold, full of honey sweet,
To feed a fool, and for to prey a dawe To catch a silly bird.
, etc.
The same may be observed of the figure of DISDAIN.

He looked hawtie, he set each man at naught;
His gaudy garment with scorns was al wrought,
With indignacyon lyned was his hode;
He frowned as he would swear by cocks blood The Host's oath in Lydgate. See
supr. p. 73.
.
He bote Bitt.
the lyppe, he looked passing coye;
His face was belymmed, as bees had him stounge:
It was no time with him to jape nor toye,
Envye has wasted his lyver and his lounge;
Hatred by the heart so had him wrounge,
That he looked pale as ashes to my syghte:
DISDAIN, I wene, this comberous crab is hyghte. --
Forthwith he made on me a proud assawte,
With scornful look movyd all in mode In anger.
;
He went about to take me in a fawte,
He fround, he stared, he stamped where he stood:
I looked on him, I wend Weened. Thought.
he had be wood Mad.
:
He set the arm proudly under the side,
And in this wise he began with me chyde P. 69.
.
In the CROWN OF LAUREL our author attempts the higher poetry: but he cannot
long support the tone of solemn description. These are some of the most
ornamented and poetical stanzas. He is describing a garden belonging to the
superb palace of FAME.

In an herber See supr. p. 231.
I saw brought where I was;
The birds on the brere sange on every side,
With aleys ensandyd about in compass,
The banks enturfed with singular solas It was surrounded with sand-walks.
,
Enrailed with rosers Rose-trees. See Chaucer's ROMANS R. v. 1651. seq. And our
author, infr. p. 40. The ruddy rosary,
The pretty rosemary, etc.



, and vines engraped;
It was a new comfort of sorrows escaped.
In the mids a cundite, that curiously was cast
With pypes of gold, engushing out streams
Of cristall, the clerenes these waters far past,
Enswimminge with roches, barbilles, and breames,
Whose skales ensilvred again the son beams
Englisterd.....
.....
Where I saw growyng a goodly laurel tree,
Enverdured with leave, continually grene;
Above in the top a bird of Araby,
Men call a Phoenix: her wings between
She bet up a fire with the sparks full kene,
With branches and bows of the sweet olyve,
Whose fragraunt flower was chief preservative
Against all infections with rancour enflamed:
* * * * * * * * * *
It passed all baumes that ever were named,
Or gummes of Saby, so derely that be sold:
There blewe in that garden a soft piplynge cold,
Enbrething of Zephirus, with his pleasant wind;
Al fruits and flowers grew there in their kind.
Dryades there daunsed upon that goodly soil,
With the nine Muses, Pierides by name;
Phillis and Testelis, there tresses with oil
Were newly enbibed: And, round about the same
Grene tree of laurel, much solacious game
They made, with chaplettes and garlandes grene;
And foremost of al dame Flora the queen;
Of somer so formally she foted the dance:
There Cinthius sat, twinklyng upon his harpestringes:
And Jopas his instrument did avaunce,
The poemes and stories ancient in bringes
Of Atlas astrology, etc P. 30. seq.
. --
Our author supposes, that in the wall surrounding the palace of FAME were a
thousand gates, new and old, for the entrance and egress of all nations. One of
the gates is called ANGLIA, on which stood a leopard P. 28.
. There is some boldness and animation in the figure and attitude of this
ferocious animal.

The buyldyng thereof was passing commendable;
Whereon stood a lybbard crowned with gold and stones,
Terrible of countinaunce and passing formidable,
As quickly With as much life.
touched as it were flesh and bones,
As ghastly that glaris Glares.
, as grimly that groans,
As fiersly frownyng as he had been fighting,
And with firm foot he shoke forth his writynge.
Skeleton, in the course of his allegory, supposes that the poets laureate, or
learned men, of all nations, were assembled before Pallas. This groupe shows
the authors, both ancient and modern, then in vogue. Some of them are quaintly
characterised. They are, first, -- Old Quintilian, not with his Institutes of
eloquence, but with his Declamations: Theocritus, with his bucolicall
relacions: Hesiod, the Icononucar I cannot decypher this appellation.
: Homer, the fresh historiar: The prince of eloquence, Cicero: Sallust, who
wrote both the history of Catiline and Jugurth: Ovid, enshryned with the Musys
nine: Lucan Of the popularity of Lucan in the dark ^ges, I have given proofs in
the SECOND DISSERTATION, vol. i. To which I will here add others. The following
passage occurs in Lydgate's PROLOGUE to the LYFF AND PASSIOUN of the blessid
Martyr saint Alboon [Alban] and saint Amphiballus, written in 1439. MSS. Coll.
Trin. Oxon. Number. xxxviii. fol. 1. a. [Never printed.] I not acqueyntyd with
Muses of Mars,
Nor with metris of LUCAN nor Virgile;
Nor with sugared diteys of Cichero,
Nor of Omere to follow the fressh style.
And again, speaking of Julius Caesar, Lydgate refers to Lucan's PHARSALIA,
which he calls the "Records of Lucan." ibid. fol. 2. b. Peter de Blois, in
writing to a professor at Paris, about the year 1170, says, "Priscianus, et
Tullius, Lucanus, et Persius, isti sunt dii vestri." EPISTOL. iv. fol. 3. edit.
1517. fol. Eberhardus Bethuniensis, called GRAECISTA, a philologist who wrote
about the year 1130, in a poem on VERSIFICATION, says of Philip Gualtier,
author of a popular epic poem called ALEXANDREIS, that he shines with the light
of LUCAN. "Lucet Alexander Lucani luce." And of Lucan he observes, "Metro
lucidiore canit." [See supr. p. 167. 168.] It is ^asy to conceive why Lucan
should have been a favorite in the dark ages.
: Statius, writer of Achilleidos: Persius, with problems dif^use: Virgil,
Juvenal, Livy: Ennius, who wrote of marciall war: Aulus Gellius, that noble
historiar: Horace, with his N^w Po^try That is, Horace's ART OF POETRY.
Vinesauf wrote DE NOVA POETRIA. Horace's ART is frequently mentioned under this
title.
: Master Terence, the famous comicar, with Plautus: Sen^ca, the tragedian:
Boethius: Maximian, with his mad diti^s how dotyng age would jape with young
folly His six Elegies De incommodis senectutis. See supr. p. 168. Reinesius
thinks that Maximinian was the bishop of Syracuse, in the seventh century: a
most intimate friend, and the secretary, of pope Gregory the Great. EPIST. ad
Daum. p. 207. These Elegies contain many things superior to the taste of that
p^riod.
: Boccacio, with hi^ volumes great: Quintus Curtius: Macrobius, who treated o^
Scipion's dr^ame: Poggius Florentinus, with many a mad tale Poggius flourished
about the year 1450. By his mad tales, Skeleton means his FACETIAE, a set of
comic stories, very licentious and very popular. See Poggius's WORKS by Thomas
Aucuparius, fol. Argentorat. 1513. f. 157. -- 184. The obscenity contained in
these compositions gave great offense, and fell under the particular censure of
the learned Laurentius Valla. The objections of Valla, Poggius attempts to
obviate; by saying, that Valla was a ^lown, a cynic, and a pedant, without any
idea^ of wit or elegance: and that the FAC^T^AE were universally esteemed in
Italy, France, Spain, Germany, England, and all countries that cultivated pure
Latinity. Poggius's INVECTIVA. Invect. in Laurent. Vallam, f. 82. b. edit. ut
supr.
: a friar of France sir Gaguine, who frowned on me full angrily Robert, or
Rupert, Gaguin, a German, minister general of the Maturines, who died at Paris
1502. His most famous work is COMPENDIUM SUP^R FRANCORUM GESTIS, from Pharamond
to the author's age. He has written, among many other pieces, Latin orations
and poems, printed at Paris in 1498. The history of Skelton's quarrel with him
is not known. But he was in England, as ambassador from the king of France, in
1490. He was a particular friend of dean Colet.
: Plutarch and Petrarch, two famous clerks: Lucilius, Valerius Maximus,
Propertius, Pisander Our author got the name of Pisander, a Greek poet, from
Macrobius, who cites a few of his verses.
, and Vincentius Bellovacensis, who wrote the SPECULUM HISTORIALE. The
catalogue is closed by Gower, Chaucer, and Lydgate, who first adorned the
English language In the book of Philip Sparow, he says, Gower's Englysh^ is
old, but that Chauc^r^s E^glyshe is well allowed: he adds, that Lydgate writes
after an hyer rate, and that he has been censured for his elev^tion of phrase;
but acknowledges, "No man can amend those matters that he has pend." p. 237.
In Ras^all's TERENS, in EN^LISH, printed in the reign of Henry the e^ghth,
these three are mentioned in the Prologue, which is in stanzas, as the only
English poets. Without date^ 4^o.
: in allusion to which part of their characters, their apparel is said to shine
beyond the power of description, and their tabards to be studded with diamonds
and rubies P. 19. seq.
. That only these three English poets are here mentioned, may be con^idered as
a proof, that only these three were yet thought to deserve the name.

No writer is more unequal than Skeleton. In the midst of a page of the most
wretched ribaldry, we sometimes are surprised with three or four nervous and
manly lines, like these.

Riot and Revell be in your court roules,
Mayntenaunce and Mischefe these be men of might,
Extorcyon is counted with you for a knight Ibid. p. 15.
.
Skelton's modulation in the octave stanza is rough and inharmonious. The
following are the smoothest lines in the poem before us; which yet do not equal
the liquid melody of Lydgate, whom he here manifestly attempts to imitate P. 26.
.

Like as the lark upon the fomers day,
When Titan radiant burnisheth his bemes bright,
Mounteth on hye, with her melodious lay,
Of the son shine engladed with the light.
The following little ode deserves notice; at least as a specimen of the
structure and phraseology of a love-sonnet about the close of the fifteenth
century.

TO MAISTRESS MARGARY WENTWORTH,

With margerain Margel^in, the herb Marjoram. Chaucer. ASS. LAD. 56.

And upon that a pot of MARGELAIN.


gentill,
The flower of goodly head Goodlihed. Goodness.
,
Enbrawdered the mantill
Is of your maydenhede Virginity.
.
Plainly I can not gloss In truth, I cannot flatter or deceive. Or, gloss may
be, simply to write.
;
Ye be, as I devine As I imagine. So Chaucer, NON. PR. T. 1381. I can noon
harm of no woman divine.

,
The praty primerose,
The goodly columbyne.
With margerain gentill, etc.
Benyne, courteis, and meke,
With words well devised;
In you, who list to seek,
Be Are.
virtues well comprysed F. 39.
.
With margerain gentill,
The flower of goodly head,
Enbrawdered the mantill
Is of your maydenhede.
For the same reason this stanza in a sonnet to Maistress Margaret Hussy
deserves notice.

Mirry Margaret
As Midsomer flower,
Gentle as faucon,
Or hawke of the tower F. 41. In the king's mews in the tower.
.
As do the following flowery lyrics, in a sonnet addressed to Maistress Isabell
Pennel.

-- Your colowre
Is like the daisy flower,
After the April shower,
Sterre of the morrow graye!
The blossom on the spraye,
The fresh^st flower of May!
Madenly demure,
Of woma^hede the lure! etc P. 41.
.
But Skeleton most commonly appears to have mistaken his genius, and to write in
a forced character, exc^pt when he is indulging his native vein of satire and
jocularity, in the short minstrel-metre abovementioned: which he mars by a
multiplied repetition of rhymes, arbitrary abbreviations of the verse, cant
expressions, hard and sounding words newlycoined, and patches of Latin and
French. This anomalous and motley mode of versification is, I believe, supposed
to be peculiar to our author Perhaps formed from Zanni, or Giovanni, a foolish
character on the Italian stage. See Riccoboni, THEATR. ITAL. chapter ii. p. 14. seq.
. I am not, however, quite certain that it originated with Skeleton.

About the year 1512, Martin Coccaie of Mantua, whose true name was Theophilo
Folengio, a Benedictine monk of Casino in Italy, wrote a poem entitled
PHANTASIAE MACARONICAE, divided into twenty-five parts. This is a burlesque
Latin poem, in heroic meter, checquered with Italian and Tuscan words, and
those of the plebeian character, yet not destitute of prosodical harmony. It is
totally satirical, and has some degree of drollery; but the ridicule is too
frequently founded on obscene or vulgar ideas. Prefixed is a similar burlesque
poem called ZANITONELLA, or the Amors of Tonellus and Zanina I have given
specimens. But the following passage in the Book of C^lin Clout affords ^n
apposite example at one view. p. 186. Of such vagabundus
Speaks totus ^undus.
How some sing let abundus, etc.
Cum ipsis et illis
Qui manent in villis^
Est uxor vel ancilla,
Welcome Jacke and Gilla,
My pretty Petronilla,
And you will be stilla
Yo^ shall have your willa:
Of such pater noster pekes
All the world spekes.

: and a piece is subjoined, with the title of MOSCHEA, or the War with the
Flies and the Ants. The author died in 1544 See his Life, Jac. Phil. Thomasin's
Elog. Patav. 1644. 4to. p. 71.
, but these poems, with the addition of some epistles and epigrams, in the same
style, did not, I believe, appear in print before the year 1554 At Venice, 8vo.
Again, 1564. And, 1613. 8vo.
. Coccaie is often cited by Rabelais, a writer of a cogenial cast See Live. iv.
c. 13. ii. 1. xi. 3.
. The three last books, containing a description of hell, are a parody on part
of Dante's INFERNO. In the preface, or APOLOGETICA, our author gives an account
of this new species of poetry, since called the MACARONIC, which I must give in
his own words. "Ars ista poetica nuncupatur Ars MACARONICA, a Macaronibus
derivata: qui Macarones sunt quoddam pulmentum, farina, caseo, butyro
compaginatum, grossum, rude, et rusticanum. Ideo MACARONICA nil nisi
grossedinem, ruditatem, et VOCABULAZZOS, debet in se continere See Menag.
DICTION. ETYMOL. ORIG. Lang. Franc. edit^ 1694. p. 462. V. MACARONS. And Oct.
Ferrarius, ORIG. ITALIC.
." Vavassor observes, that Coccaie in Italy, and Antonius de Arena in France,
were the two first, at least the chief, authors of the semi-latin burlesque
poetry DICT. LUDR. p. 453.
. As to Antonius de Arena, he was a civilian of Avignon; and wrote, in the year
1519, a Latin poem in elegiac verses, ridiculously interlarded with French
words and phrases. It is addressed to his fellow-students, or, in his own
words, "Ad suos compagnones studiantes, qui sunt de persona friantes, bassas
dansas, in galanti stilo bisognatas, cum guerra Romana, totum ad longum sine
require, et cum guerra Neapolitana, et cum revoluta Genuensi, et guerra
Avenionensi, et epistola ad falotissimam garsam pro passando lo tempos He wrote
also DE BELLO MASSILIENS^.
." I have gone out of my way, to mention these two obscure writers Erythra^us
mentions Bernardinus Stephonius as writing in this way. PINACOTH. i. p. 160.
See also some poems in Baudius, which have a mixture of the Gre^k and Latin
la^guages; and which others have imitated, in German and Latin.
with so much particularity, in order to observe, that Skeleton, their
cotemporary, probably copied their manner: at least to show, that this singular
mode of versification was at this time fashionable, not only in England, but
also in France and Italy. Nor did it cease to be remembered in England, and as
a species of poetry thought to be founded by Skeleton, till even so late as the
close of queen Elizabeth's reign. As appears from the following poem on the
SPANISH ARMADA, which is filled with Latin words.

A SKELTONICALL salutation,
Or condign gratulation,
And just vexation,
Of the Spanish nation;
That in a bravado
Spent many a crusado,
In setting forth the armado
England to envado, etc Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, 1589. 4to. See also
a doggrel piece of this kind, in imitation of Skeleton, introduced into Browne's
SHEPHERD'S PIPE, Land. 1614. 8vo. Perhaps this way of writing is ridiculed by
Shakespeare, MERRY W. OF WINDS. A. ii. Sc. i. Where Falstaff says, "I will not
say, Pity me, it is not a soldier's phrase, but I say love me: by me "Thine own
true knight, by day or night,
"Or any kind of light, with all his might
"With thee to fight. -- "
See also the Interlude of Pyramus and Thisbe, in the MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.
Often printed separately in quarto, (...) a droll for Bartholomew fair, under
the title of BOTTOM THE WEAVER. Skeleton, however, seems to have retained his
popularity till late. For the first part of T. Heywood's twofold play on the
earl of Huntingdon, entitled, "Robert earl of Huntingdon's downfall, afterward
called Robin Hood of merry Sherwoode, with his love to chaste Matilda the lord
Fitzwater's daughter, afterward his fair maid Marian," acted by lord
Nottingham's players, and printed in quarto, at London, in ^601, is introduced
by JOHN SKELETON, poet laureat to king Henry the eighth. The second part,
printed with the former, is introduced by FRIAR TUCK, with whom I am less
acquainted.
.
But I must not here forget, that Dunbar, a Scotch poet of Skelton's own age,
already mentioned, wrote in this way. His TESTAMENT OF MASTER ANDRO KENNEDY,
which represents the character of an idle dissolute scholar, and ridicules the
funeral ceremonies of the Romish communion, has almost every alternate line
composed of the formularies of a Latin Will, and shreds of the breviary, mixed
with what the French call Latin de cuisine See ANT. SCOTTISH POEMS, Edinb.
1770. p. 35. And the Notes of the learned and ingenious editor; who says, tha^
Dunbar's DERGE is a most profane parody on the popish litanies. p. 243.
. There is some humor, arising from these burlesque applications, in the
following stanzas ST. xiii. xiv.
.

In die meae sepulturae,
I will have nane but our awin gang My own merry companions.
,
Et duos rusticos de rure,
Berand ane barrel on a stang A stake.
;
Drinkand and playand cap out, even
Sicut egomet solebam;
Singand and greitand with the stevin With that verse, or stanz^, in the
Psalms, "I have mingled my drink with weeping."
,
Potum meum cum fletu miscebam.
I will no priestis for me sing,
Dies ille, dies irae A hymn on the resurrection in the missal, sung at
funerals.
;
Nar yet no bellis for me ring
Sicut semper solet fieri;
But a bag-pyp to play a spring,
Et unum ale-wisp ante me,
Instead of torchis, for to bring,
Quatuor lag^nas cervisiae
Within the graif to set, fit thing,
In modum crucis juxta me,
To fle the feyndis Instead of a cross on my grave to keep off the devil.
, then hardly sing
De terra plasmasti me A verse in the Psalms. See other instances in Dunbar,
ibid. p. 73. In George Bannatyne's manuscript collection of old Scotch poetry
are many examples of thi^ mixture: the impropriety of which was not perhaps
perceived by our ancestors. Ibid. p. 268. See a very ^^dicrous specimen in
Harsenet's DETECTION, p. 156. Where he mentions a witch who has learned "of an
old wi^e in a chimnies end Pax, max, fax, for a spell; or ^n say sir John of
Grantam's curse for ^he miller's eeles that were stolen. "All you that stolen
the miller's eeles,
"Laudate dominum de coelis,
"And all they that have consented thereto,
"Benedicamus domino."
See a poem on Becket's martyrdom, in Wasse's BIBL. LITER. Number. i. p. 39. Land.
1722. 4to. Hither we must refer the old Caroll on the BOAR'S HEAD, Hearne's
SPICILE^. ad Gul. Neubrig. HIST. vol. iii. p. 740. [See also supr. vol. i. p.
86.] Some of the metrical hymns in the French FETE DE ANE are in Latin and
French. See MERCURE DE FRANCE, Avril. 1725. p. 724. suiv.
.
We must, however, acknowledge, that Skeleton, notwithstanding his scurrility,
was a classical scholar; and in that capacity, he was tutor to prince Henry,
afterward king Henry the eighth: at whose accession to the throne, he was
appointed the royal orator. He is styled by Erasmus, "Britannicarum literarum
decus et lumen See Op. p. 1019. 1021.
. His Latin elegiacs are pure, and often unmixed with the monastic phraseology;
and they prove, that if his natural propensity to the ridiculous had not more
frequently seduced him to follow the whimsies of Walter Mapes and Golias These
two writers are often confounded. See the Second DISSERTATION. James says, that
Golias was not a name adopted by Mapes: but that there was a real writer of
that name, a collection of whose works he had seen. See MSS. [Bibl. Bodl.]
JAMES, i. p. 320. Golias and Mapes appear to have been cotemporaries, and of a
similar genius. The curious reader will find many extracts from their poetry,
which has very great merit in its way, among James's manuscript collections.
The facility of these old Latin rhymers is amazing: and they have a degree of
humor and elegance far exceeding their age.
, than to copy the elegancies of Ovid, he would have appeared among the first
writers of Latin poetry in England at the general restoration of literature.
Skeleton could not avoid acting as a buffoon in any language, or any character.

I cannot quit Skeleton, of whom I yet fear too much has been already said,
without restoring to the public notice a play, or MORALITY, written by him, not
recited in any catalogue of his works, or annals of English typography; and, I
believe, at present totally unknown to the antiquarians in this sort of
literature. It is, The NIGRAMANSIR, a moral INTERLUDE and a pithie written by
Master SKELETON laureate and played before the king and other estatys at
Woodstoke on Palm Sunday. It was printed by Wynkin de Word in a thin quarto,
in the year 1504 My lamented friend Mr. William Collins, whose ODES will be
remembered while any taste for true poetry remains, showed me this piece at
Chichester, not many months before his death: and he pointed it out as a very
rare and valuable curiosity. He intended to write the HISTORY OF THE
RESTORATION OF LEARNING UNDER LEO THE TENTH, and with a view to that design,
had collected many scarce books. Some few of these fell into my hands at his
death. The rest, among which, I suppose, was this INTERLUDE, were dispersed.

In the Mystery of MARIE MAGDALENE, written in 1512, a Heathen is introduced
celebrating the service of Mabound, who is called Saracenorum fortisssmus; in
the midst of which, he reads a Lesson from the Alcoran, consisting of
gibberish, much in the meter and manner of Skeleton. MSS. Digb. 133.


. It must have been presented before king Henry the seventh, at the royal manor
or palace, at Woodstock in Oxfordshire, now destroyed. The characters are a
Necromancer, or conjurer, the devil, a notary public, Simonie Simony is
introduced as a person in SIR PENNY, an old Scotch poem, written in 1527, by
Stewart of Lorne. See ANCIENT SCOTTISH POEMS. Edinb. 1770. 8vo. p. 154. So wily
can sir Peter wink,
And als sir SYMONY his servand,
That now is gydar of the kyrk.
And again, in an antien^ anonymous Scotch poem, ibid. p. 253. At a feast, to
which many disorderly persons are invited, among the rest are, And two lerit
men thairby,
Schir Ochir and schir SIMONY.
That is, sir Usury and sir Simony. SIMONY is also a character in Pierce
Plowman's VISIONS. Pass. sec. fol. viii. b. edit. 1550. Wiccliffe, who
flourished about the year 1350, thus describes the state of Simony in his time.
"Some lords, to colouren their Symony, wole not take for themselves but
keverchief^ for the lady, or a palfray, or a tun of wine. And when some lords
wolden present a good man and able, for love of god and christian souls, then
some ladies been means to have a dancer, a tripper on tapits, or hunter or
hawker, or a wild player of summers gamenes, etc." MSS. C. C. C. Cant. O. 161.
148. There is an old poem on this subject, MSS. Bodl. 48.
, and Philargyria Robert Crowley, a great reformer, of whom more hereafter,
wrote " The Fable of PHILARGYRIA, the great gigant of Great Britain, what
houses were builded, and lands appointed, for his provision^ etc." 1551. 4to.
, or Avarice. It is partly a satire on some abuses in the church; yet not
without a due regard to decency, and an apparent respect for the dignity of the
audience. The story, or plot, is the trial of SIMONY and AVARICE: the devil is
the judge, and the notary public acts as an assessor or scribe. The prisoners,
as we may suppose, are found guilty, and ordered into hell immediately. There
is no sort of propriety in calling this play the Necromancer: for the only
business and use of this character, is to open the subject in a long prologue,
to evoke the devil, and summon the court. The devil kicks the necromancer, for
waking him so soon in the morning: a proof, that this drama was performed in
the morning, perhaps in the chapel of the palace. A variety of measures, with
shreds of Latin and French, is used: but the devil speaks in the octave stanza.
One of the stage-directions is, Enter Balsebub with a Berde. To make him both
frightful and ridiculous, the devil was most commonly introduced on the stage,
wearing a visard with an immense beard Thus in Turpin's HISTORY OF CHARLEMAGNE,
the Saracens appear, "Habentes LARVAS BARBATAS, cornutas, DAEMONIBUS
con^imi^es." c. xviii. And in LEWIS THE EIGHTH, an old French romance of Philip
Mouskes. J ot apries lui une barboire,
Com diable cornu et noire.
There was a species of masquerad^ celebrated by the ecclesiastics in France,
called the SHOW OF BEARDS, entirely consisting of an exhibition of the most
formidable beards. Gregory of Tours says, that the abbess of Poictou was
accused for suffering one of these shows, called a BARBATORIA, to be performed
in her monastery. HIST. lib. x. c. vi. In the EPISTLES of Peter de Blois we
have the following passage^ "Regis curiam sequuntur a^^idue histriones,
candida^rices, aleatores, dulcorarii, caupones, n^bulatores, mimi, BARBATORES,
balatrones, et hoc genus omne." EPIST. xiv. Where, by Barbatores, we are not to
understand Barbers, but mimics, or buffoons, disguised in huge ^earded masks.
In Don Quixote, the barber who personates the squire of the princess
Micomicona, wears one of these masks, "una gran barba, etc." Part. prim. c.
xxvi. ^. 3. And the countess of Trifaldi's squire has "la mas larga, la mas
horrida, etc." Part. sec. c. xxxvi. ^. 8. See OBSERVAT. ON SPENSER, vol. i. p.
24. SECT. ii.

About the eleventh century, and long before, beards were looked upon by the
clergy as a secular vanity; and accordingly were worn by the laity only. Yet in
England this distinction seems to have been more rigidly observed than in
France. Malmesbury says, that king Harold, at the Norman inva^ion, sent spies
into Duke William's camp; who reported, that most of the French army were
prie^ts, because their faces were ^^aved. HIST. lib. iii. p. 56. b. edit.
Savil. 1596. The regulation remain^d among the English clergy at least till the
reign of Henry the eighth: for Longland bishop of Lincoln, at a Visitation of
Oriel college, Oxford, in 1531, orders one of the fellows, a priest, to
abstain, under pain of expulsion, from wearing a beard, and pinked shoes, like
a laic; and not to take the liberty, for the future, of insulting and
ridiculing the governor and fellows of the society. ORDINAT. Coll. Oriel. Oxon.
APPEND. ad Joh. TROKELOW^, p. 339. See Edicts of king John, in Prynne,
LIBERTAT. ECCLES. ANGL. ^om. iii. p. 23. But among the religious, the Templars
were permitted to wear long beards. In the year 1311, king Edward the second
granted letters of safe conduct to his valet Peter Auger, who had made a vow
not to shave his beard; and who having resolved to visit some of the holy
places abroad as a pilgrim, feared, on account of the length of his beard, that
he might be mistaken for a knight-templar, and insulted. Pat. iv. Edw. ii. In
Dugdale's WARWICKSHIRE, p. 704. Many orders about Beards occur in the registers
of Lincoln's End, cited by Dugdale. In the year 1542, it was ordered, that no
member, wearing a BEARD, should presume to dine in the hall. In 1553, says
Dugdale, "such as had beards should pay twelvepence for every meal they
continued them; and every man to be shaven, upon pain of being put out of
commons." ORIG. JURID. cap. 64. p. 244. In 1559, no member is permitted to wear
any beard above a fortnight's growth^ under pain of expulsion for the third
transgression. But the fashion of wearing beards beginning to spread, in 1560
it was agreed at a council, that "all orders before that time made, touching
BEARDS, should be void and repealed." Dugd. ibid. p. 245.


. Philargyria quotes Seneca and saint Austin: and Simony offers the devil a
bribe. The devil rejects her offer with much indignation: and swears by the
foul Eumenides, and the hoary beard of Charon, that she shall be well fried
and roasted in the unfathomable sulphur of Cocytus, together with Mahomet,
Pontius Pilate, the traitor Judas, and king Herod. The last scene is closed
with a view of hell, and a dance between the devil and the necromancer. The
dance ended, the devil trips up the necromancer's heels, and disappears in fire
and smoke In the Mystery of MARY MAGDALENE, just mentioned, one of the
stagedirections is, "Here enters the pryn^e of the devylls in a stage, with
hell onderneth the stage." MSS. DI^B. 133.
. Great must have been the edification and entertainment which king Henry the
seventh and his court derived from the exhibition of so elegant and rational a
drama! The royal taste for dramatic repres^^tation seems to have suffered a
very rapid transition: for in the year 1520, a goodly comedy of Plautus was
played before king Henry the eighth at Greenwich Hollinsh. iii. 850.
. I have before mentioned Skelton's play of MAGNIFICENCE It is in Mr. Garrick's
valu^ble coll^^tion. No date. 4to. Hawkins, in the HISTORY OF MUSIC, has first
printed a Song written by Skeleton, alluded to in the CROWN O^ LAW^^LL, and set
to music by William Corni^^e, a musician of the chapel royal under Henry the
sev^n^h. B. i. chapter i. vol. iii. p. 3. Land. 1776. It begins, Ah, beshrew you,
by my ^ay,
These wanton clerks ar^ nice always, etc.
The same diligent and ingenious inquirer has happily illustrated a passage in
Skelton's description of RIOT. Ibid. B. iii. chapter ix. vol. ii. p. 354. Counter
he could O LUX upon a pot.
That is, this drunken disorderly fellow could play the beginning of the hymn,
O LUX beata Trinitas, a very popular m^lody, ^^d on which many fugues and
canons were anciently composed, on a quartpot at the tavern. See also, ibid. B.
i. chapter vii. p. 90. ii. 1. p. 130.

By the way, the abov^^^ntioned William Cornish has a poem print^d at the end
of Skelton's Works, called a Treatise between Tr^^t^e and I^for^atio^^
containing some anecdotes of the state of ancient music, written while the
author was in the Fleet, in the year 1504. MSS. REG. 18 D. ii. 4. See
Thoresby's LEEDES, for Old musical compositions by several masters, among them
by WILLIAM CORNISH. p. 517. Morley has assigned Cornysh a place in his
Catalogue of English musicians.


.

MORALITIES seem have arrived at their height about the close of the seventh
Henry's reign See supr. p. 206.
. This sort of spectacle was now so fashionable, that John Rastall, a learned
typographer, brother in law to sir Thomas More, extended its province, which
had hitherto been confined, either to moral allegory, or to religion blended
with buffoonery, and conceived a design of making it the vehicle of science and
philosophy. With this view he published, A new INTERLUDE and a merry, of the
nature of the iiii Elements, declaringe many proper points of philosophy
natural and dyvers strange landys, etc Among Mr. Garrick's OLD PLAYS.
[Imperf.] i. vol. 3. It was written about 1510, or rather later. One of the
characters is NATURE naturate: under which title Bale inaccurately mentions
this piece. viii. 75. See Percy, ESS. ENG. STAGE, p. 8. edit. 1767. Who
supposes this play to have been written about 1510, from the following lines,
-- Within this xx yer^
Westwarde be found new lands,
That we never hard tell of before this.
The West Indies were discovered by Columbus in 1492.
. In the cosmographical part of the play, in which the poet professes to treat
of dyvers strange regyons, and of the new found landys, the tracts of America
recently discovered, and the manners of the natives, are described. The
characters are, a Messenger who speaks the prologue, Nature, Humanity, Studious
Desire, Sensual Appetite, a Taverner, Experience, and Ignorance For the sake of
connection I will here mention some more of Rastall'^ pieces. He was a great
writer of INTERLUDES. He has written, "Of GENTYLNESS AND NOBYLYTE. A dyaloge
between the merchant, the knight, and the plowman, disputynge who is a very
gentylman, and how men should come to auctoryte, compiled in manner of an
INTERLUDE. With dyvers TOYS and GESTIS addyd thereto, to make merry pastyme and
disport. J. Rastall me fieri fecit." Printed by himself in quarto, without
date. PR. "O what a great wealth and." Also, "A new Commodyte in Englysh in manner
of an INTERLUDE right elygant and full of craft of rhetoryck: wherein is showed
and dyscrybyd, as well the beute of good propertes of women, as their vices and
evyll conditions, with a moral conclusion and exhortation to vertew. J.
Rastall me imprimi ^ecit." In folio, without date. This is in English verse,
and contains twelve leaves. PR. " Melebea, etc." He reduced a dialogue of
Lucian into English verse, much after the manner of an interlude, viz.
"NECROMANTIA. A Dialogue of Lucyan for his fantasy feigned for a merry pastyme,
etc. -- J. Rastall me ^ieri fecit." It is translated from the Latin, and has
Latin notes in the margin. It may be doubted, whether Rastall was not the
printer only of these pieces. If the printer only, they might come from the
festive genius of his brother sir Thomas More. But Rastall appears to have been
a scholar. He was educated at Oxford; and took up the employment of printing as
a profession at that time esteemed liberal, and not unsuitable to the character
of a learned and ingenious man. An English translation of Terence, called
TERENS in ENGLISH, with a prologue in stanzas, beginning "The famous renown
through the world is spronge," is believed, at least from similarity of type,
to be by Rastall. In quarto, without date. He published, in 1525, The MERRY
GESTYS of one called EDYTH the lyeng wydow. This is a d^scription, in English
rhymes, of the frauds practiced by a fem^le sharper in the neighborhood of
London: the scene of one of her impostures is laid in sir Thomas More's house
at Chelsea. The author, one of her dupes, is Walter Smyth. Empry^ted at London
at the sign of the M^remayde a^ Pollis gate next to Chepesyde by J. Rastall.
fol. It will be sufficient to have given thi^ short incidental notice of a
piece which hardly deserves to be named. Rastall wrote and printed many other
pieces, which I do not mention, as unconnected with the history of our poetry.
I shall only observe further, in general, that he was eminently skilled in
mathematics, cosmography, history, our municipal law, and theology. He died
1536.
.

I have before observed, that the frequent and public exhibition of
personifications in the PAGEAUNTS, which anciently accompanied every high
festivity, greatly contributed to cherish the spirit of allegorical poetry, and
even to enrich the imagination of Spenser And of Shakespeare. There is a
passage in ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA, where the metaphor is exc^edingly beautiful;
but where the beauty both of the expression and the allusion is lost, unless we
recollect the frequency and the nature of these shows in S^akespeare's age. ACT
iv. Sc. xi. I must cite the whole of the context, for the sake of the last
hemistich. Sometime we see a cloud that is dragonish,
A vapor sometime, like a bear or lion;
A towred citadel, a pendant rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
With trees upon it, that nod unto the world
And mock our eyes with air. Thou'st seen these signs,
They are BLACK VESPER'S PAGEANTS. --

. The MORALITIES, which now began to acquire new celebrity, and in which the
same groupes of the impersonated vices and virtues appeared, must have
concurred in producing this effect. And hence, at the same time, we are led to
account for the national relish for allegorical poetry, which so long prevailed
among our ancestors. By means of these spectacles, ideal beings became common
and popular objects: and emblematic imagery, which at present is only
contemplated by a few retired readers in the obsolete pages of our elder poets,
grew familiar to the general eye.

SECT. XVI.
IN a work of this general and comprehensive nature, in which the fluctuations
of genius are surveyed, and the dawnings or declensions of taste must alike be
noticed, it is impossible that every part of the subject can prove equally
splendid and interesting. We have, I fear, been toiling for some time through
materials, not perhaps of the most agreeable and edifying nature. But as the
mention of that very rude species of our drama, called the MORALITY, has
incidentally diverted our attention to the early state of the English stage, I
cannot omit so fortunate and seasonable an opportunity of endeavoring to
relieve the weariness of my reader, by introducing an obvious digression on the
probable causes of the rise of the MYSTERIES, which, as I have before remarked,
preceded, and at length produced, these allegorical fables. In this respect I
shall imitate those map-makers mentioned by Swift, who -- Over inhospitable
downs,
Place elephants for want of towns.
Nor shall I perhaps fail of being pardoned by my reader, if, on the same
principle, I should attempt to throw new light on the history of our theater,
by pursuing this enquiry through those deductions which it will naturally and
more immediately suggest Compar^ vol. i. p. 235.
.

About the eighth century, trade was principally carried on by means of fairs,
which lasted ^everal days. Charlemagne established many great marts of this
sort in France; as did William the conqueror, and his Norman successors, in
England See supr. vol. i. p. 279.
. The merchants, who frequented these fairs in numerous caravans or companies,
employed every art to draw the people together. They were therefore accompanied
by juglers, minstrels, and buffoons; who were no less interested in giving
their attendance, and exerting all their skill, on these occasions. As now but
few large towns existed, no public spectacles or popular amusements were
established; and as the sedentary pleasures of domestic life and private
society were yet unknown, the fair-time was the season for diversion. In
proportion as these shows were attended and encouraged, they began to be set
off with new decorations and improvements: and the arts of buffoonery being
rendered still more attractive by extending their circle of exhibition,
acquired an importance in the eyes of the people. By degrees the clergy,
observing that the entertainments of dancing, music, and mimicry, exhibited at
these protracted annual celebrities, made the people less religious, by
promoting idleness and a love of festivity, proscribed these sports, and
excommunicated the performers. But finding that no regard was paid to their
censures, they changed their plan, and determined to take these recreations
into their own hands. They turned actors; and instead of pro^ane mummeries,
presented stories taken from legends or the bible. This was the origin of
sacred comedy. The death of saint Catharine, acted by the monks of saint
Dennis, rivalled the popularity of the professed players. Music was admitted
into the churches, which served as theaters for the represention of holy
farces. The festivals among the French, called LA FETE DE FOUX, DE L'ANE For a
most full and comprehensive account of these feasts, see "Memoires pour ^ervir
a l'histoire de la FETE DE FOUX, qui se faisoit autrefois dans plu^ieurs
egli^es. Par M. du TILLIOT, gentilhomme ordinaire de son Al^esse royale
Monseigneur le duc de BERRY. A LAUSANNE et a GENEVE, 1741." 4to. Grosthead,
bishop of Lincoln in the eleventh century, orders his dean and chapter to
abolish the FESTU^ A^INORUM, ^um sit vanita^e pl^num, et voluptatibus spurcum,
which used to be annually celebrated in Lincoln cathedral on the feast of the
Circumcision. Grossetesti EPISTOL. xxxii. apud Browne's FASCICUL. p. 331. edit.
Land. 1690. tom. ii. Append. And p. 412. Also he forbids the archdeacons of his
diocese to permit SCOT-ALES in their chapters and synods, (Spelm. Gl. p. 506.)
and other LUDI on holidays. Ibid. Epistol. xxii. p. 314. [See supr. vol. i. p.
247.] See in the MERCURE FRANCOIS for September, 1742, an account of a mummery
celebrated in the city of Besancon in France, by the canons of the cathedral,
consisting of dancing, singing, eating and drinking, in the cloisters and
church, on Easter Day, called B^RGER^TTA, or the SONG OF THE SHEPHERDS; which
remained unabolished till the year 1738. From the RITUAL of the church, page
1930, ad ann. 1582. See Carpentier, SUPPL. Du Cang. LAT. GLOSS. tom. i. p. 523.
in V. And ibid. V. BOCLARE, p. 570.
, and DES INNOCENS, at length became greater favorites, as they certainly were
more c^pricious and absurd, than the interludes of the buffoons at the fairs.
These are the ideas of a judicious French writer, now living, who has
investigated the history of human manners with great comprehension and sagacity.

Voltaire's theory on this subject is also very ingenious, and quite new.
Religious plays, he supposes, came originally from Constantinople; where the
old Grecian stage continued to flourish in some degree, and the tragedies of
Sophocles and Euripides were represented, till the fourth century. About that
period, Gregory Nazianzen, an archbishop, a poet, and one of the fathers of the
church, banished pagan plays from the stage at Constantinople, and introduced
select stories from the old and new Testament. As the ancient Greek tragedy was
a religious spectacle, a transition was made on the same plan; and the
chorusses were turned into Christian hymns See supr. vol. i. p. 244.
. Gregory wrote many sacred dramas for this purpose, which have not survived
those inimitable compositions over which they triumphed for a time: one,
however, his tragedy called (...), or CHRIST'S PASSION, is still extant OP.
Greg. Nazianz. tom. ii. p. 253. In a manuscript cited by Lambeccius, it is
called (...). iv. 22. It seems to have been falsely attributed to Apollinaris,
an Alexandrian, bishop of Laodicea. It is, however, written with les^ elegance
and judgment than most of Gregory's poetical pieces. Apollinaris lived about
the year 370.
. In the prologue it is said to be in imitation of Euripides, and that this is
the first time the Virgin Mary has been produced on the stage. The fashion of
acting spiritual dramas, in which at first a due degree of method and decorum
was preserved, was at length adopted from Constantinople by the Italians; who
framed, in the depth of the dark ages, on this foundation, that barbarous
species of theatrical representation called MYSTERIES, or sacred comedies, and
which were soon afterward received in France Hist. Genesis Addit. p. 13^.
. This opinion will acquire probability, if we consider the early commercial
intercouse between Italy and Constantinople: and although the Italians, at the
time when they may be supposed to have imported plays of this nature, did not
understand the Greek language, yet they could understand, and consequently
could imitate, what they saw.

In defense of Voltaire's hypothesis it may be further observed, that the FEAST
OF FOOLS and of the Ass, with other religious farces of that sort, so common in
Europe, originated at Constantinople. They were instituted, although perhaps
under other names, in the Greek church, about the year 990, by Theophylact,
patriarch of Constantinople, probably with a better design than is imagined by
the ecclesiastical annalists; that of weaning the minds of the people from the
pagan ceremonies, particularly the Bacchanalian and calendary solemnities, by
the substitution of christian spectacles, partaking of the same spirit of
licentiousness. The fact is, however, recorded by Cedrenus, one of the
Byzantine historians, who flourished about the year 1050, in the following
words. "(...) (...). " That is, "Theophylact introduced the practice, which
prevails even to this day, of scandalising god and the memory of his saints, on
the most splendid and popular festivals, by indecent and ridiculous songs, and
enormous shoutings, even in the midst of those sacred hymns, which we ought to
offer to the divine grace with compunction of heart, for the salvation of our
souls. But he, having collected a company of base fellows, and placing over
them one Euthymius, surnamed Casnes, whom he also appointed the superintendant
of his church, admitted into the sacred service, diabolical dances,
exclamations of ribaldry, and ballads borrowed from the streets and brothels
Cedren. COMPEND. HIST. p. 639. B. edit. Paris. 1647. Compare Baron. ANNAL. sub
ann. 956. tom x. p. 752. C. edit. Plantin. Antw. 1603. fol.
." This practice was subsisting in the Greek church two hundred years
afterward: for Balsamon, patriarch of Antioch, complains of the gross
abominations committed by the priests at Christmas and other festivals, even in
the great church at Constantinople; and that the clergy, on certain holidays,
personated a variety of feigned characters, and even entered the choir in a
military habit, and other enormous disguises COMMENT. ad CANON. lxii. SYNOD.
vi. in Trullo. Apud Beverigii SYNODIC. tom. i. Oxon. fol. 1672. p. 230. 231. In
return, he ^orbids the professed players to appear on the ^^age in the habit of
monks. Saint Austin, who lived in the sixth century, reproves the paganising
christians of his age, for their inde^^nt sports on holidays; but it does not
appear, that these sports were celebrated within the churches. "In sanctis
sestivitatibus choros ducendo, cantica luxuriosa et turpia, etc. Isti enim
infelices ac miseri homines, qui balationes ac ^altationes ANTE IPSAS BASILICAS
sanctorum exercere nec metuunt nec erubescunt." SERMON. ccxv. tom. x. opp. S.
Augustine. edit. Froben. 1529. fol. 763. B. See also SERMON. cxcvii. cxcviii. opp.
edit. Benedictin. tom. v. Paris. 168^. p. 904. ^t seq.
.

I must however observe here, what perhaps did not immediately occur to our
lively philosopher on this occasion, that in the fourth century it was
customary to make christian parodies and imitations in Greek, of the best Greek
classics, for the use of the christian schools. This practice prevailed much
under the emperor Julian, who forbad the pagan poets, orators, and
philosophers, to be taught in the christian seminaries^ Apollinaris bishop of
Laodicea, abovementioned, wrote Greek tragedies, adapted to the stage, on most
of the grand events recorded in the old Testament, after the manner of
Euripides. On some of the familiar and domestic stories of scripture, he
composed comedies in imitation of Menander. He wrote christian odes on the plan
of Pindar. In imitation of Homer, he wrote an heroic poem on the history of the
bible, as far as the reign of Saul, in twenty-four books Sozomen (ubi infra)
says, that he compiled a system of grammar, (...), on the christian model.
. Sozomen says, that these compositions, now lost, rivalled their great
originals in genius, expression, and conduct. His son, a bishop also of
Laodicea, reduced the four gospels and all the apostolical books into Greek
dialogues, resembling those of Plato Socrates, iii. 16. ii. 46. Sozomen, v. 18.
vi. 26. Niceph. x. 25.
.

But I must not omit a much earlier and more singular specimen of a theatrical
representation of sacred history, than this mentioned by Voltaire. Some
fragments of an ancient Jewish play on the EXODUS, or the Departure of the
Israelites from Egypt under their leader and prophet Moses, are yet preserved
in Greek iambics In Clemens Alexandrin. lib. i. STROM. p. 344. seq. Eusebius,
PRAEPARAT. EVANG. c. xxviii. xxix. Eustathius ad HEX. p. 25. They are
collected, and translated into Latin, with emendations, by Fr. Morellus, Paris.
1580. See also CORPUS POETAR. GR. TRAGICOR. et COMICOR. Genev. 1614. fol. And
POETAE CHRISTIAN. GRAECI, Paris. 1609. 8vo.
. The principal characters of this drama are Moses, Sapphora, and God from the
Bush, or God speaking from the burning bush. Moses delivers the prologue, or
introduction, in a speech of sixty lines, and his rod is turned into a serpent
on the stage. The author of this piece is Ezekiel, a Jew, who is called (...),
or the tragic poet of the Jews See Scaliger, ad EUSEBIUS. p. 401.
. The learned Huetius endeavors to prove, that Ezekiel wrote at least before
the christian era DEMOMSTRAT. EVANGELIC. p. 99.
. Some suppose that he was one of the seventy, or septuagint, interpreters of
the bible under the reign of Ptolomy Philadelphus. I am of opinion, that
Ezekiel composed this play after the destruction of Jerusalem, and even in the
time of Barocbas, as a political spectacle, with a view to animate his dejected
countrymen with the hopes of a future deliverance from their captivity under
the conduct of a new Moses, like that from the Egyptian servitude See Le Moyne,
OBS. ad VAR. SACR. tom. i. page 336.
. Whether a theater subsisted among the Jews, who by their peculiar situation
and circumstances were prevented from keeping pace with their neighbors in the
culture of the social and elegant arts, is a curious speculation. It seems most
probable, on the whole, that this drama was composed in imitation of the
Grecian stage, at the close of the second century, after the Jews had been
dispersed, and intermixed with other nations.

Boileau seems to think, that the ancient PILGRIMAGES introduced these sacred
exhibitions into France.

Chez nos devots ayeux le theater abhor
Fut long-tems dans la France une plaisir ignore.
De PELERINS, dit on, une troop grossiere
En public a Paris y monta la premiere;
Et sotement zelee en sa simplicite,
Ioua les SAINTS^ la VIERGE, et DIEU, par piete.
Le Savoir, a la fin, dissipant l'Ignorance,
Fit voir de ce projet la devote imprudence:
On chassa ces docteurs prechant sans mission,
On vit renaitre Hector, Andromaque, Ilion ART. POET. cant. iii. 81.
.
The authority to which Boileau alludes in these nervous and elegant verses is
Menest^ier, an intelligent French antiquary Des Represent^ en MUSIQU^. p. 153.
seq.
. The pilgrims who returned from Jerusalem, saint James of Compostella, saint
Baume of Provence, saint Reine, Mount saint Michael, Notre dame du Puy, and
other places esteemed holy, composed songs on their adventures; intermixing
recitals of passages in the life of Christ, descriptions of his crucifixion, of
the day of judgment, of miracles, and martyrdoms. To these tales, which were
recommended by a pathetic chant and a variety of gesticulations, the credulity
of the multitude gave the name of Visions. These pious itinerants traveled in
companies; and taking their stations in the most public streets, and singing
with their staves in their hands, and their hats and mantles fantastically
adorned with shells and emblems painted in various colors, formed a sort of
theatrical spectacle. At length their performances excited the charity and
compassion of some citizens of Paris; who erected a theater, in which they
might exhibit their religious stories in a more commodious and advantageous
manner, with the addition of scenery and other decorations. At length professed
practitioners in the histrionic art were hired to perform these solemn
mockeries of religion, which soon became the principal public amusement of a
devout but undiscerning people.

To those who are accustomed to contemplate the great picture of human follies,
which the unpolished ages of Europe hold up to our view, it will not appear
surprising, that the people, who were forbidden to read the events of the
sacred history in the bible, in which they were faithfully and beautifully
related, should at the same time be permitted to see them represented on the
stage, disgraced with the grossest improprieties, corrupted with inventions and
additions of the most ridiculous kind, sullied with impurities, and expressed
in the language and gesticulations of the lowest farce.

On the whole, the MYSTERIES appear to have originated among the ecclesiastics;
and were most probably first acted, at least with any degree of form, by the
monks. This was certainly the case in the English monasteries In some
regulations given by cardinal Wolsey, to the monasteries of the canons regular
of St. Austin, in the year 1519, the brothers are forbidden to be LUSORES aut
MIMICI, players or mimics. Dugd. Monast. ii. 568. But the prohibition means,
that the monks should not go abroad to exercise these arts in a secular and
mercenary capacity. See ANNAL. BURTONENSES, p. 437. supra citat. p. 205. By the
way, MIMICUS might also literally be construed a player, according to Jonson,
EPI^. 195. -- But the Vice
Acts old iniquity, and in the fit
Of MIMICRY gets the opinion of a wit.

. I have already mentioned the play of saint Catharine, performed at Dunstable
abbey by the novices in the eleventh century, under the superintendence of
Geoffry a Parisian ecclesiastic: and the exhibition of the PASSION, by the
mendicant friars of Coventry and other places. Instances have been given of the
like practice among the French See supra, vol. i. 246.
. The only persons who could read were in the religious societies: and various
other circumstances, peculiarly arising from their situation, profession, and
institution, enabled the monks to be the sole performers of these
representations.

As learning increased, and was more widely disseminated from the monasteries,
by a natural and easy transition, the practice migrated to schools and
universities, which were formed on the monastic plan, and in many respects
resembled the ecclesiastical bodies. Hence a passage in Shakespeare's HAMLET is
to be explained; where Hamlet says to Polonius, "My lord, you played once in
the UNIVERSITY, you say." Polonius answers, "That I did, my Lord, and was
accounted a good actor. -- I did enact Julius Caesar, I was killed in the
capitol ACT. iii. sc. 5.
." Boulay observes, that it was a custom, not only still subsisting, but of
very high antiquity, vetustissima consuetudo, to act tragedies and comedies in
the university of Paris HIST. UNIV. PARIS. tom. ii. p. 226. See also his
History De Patronis quatuor Nationum, edit. 1662.
. He cites a statute of the college of Navarre at Paris, dated in the year
1315, prohibiting the scholars to perform any immodest play on the festivals of
saint Nicholas and saint Catharine. "In festis sancti Nicolai et beatae
Catharinae nullum ludum inhonestum faciant HIST. UNIV. PARIS. tom. iv. p. 93.
Saint Nicholas was the patron of scholars. Hence at Eton college saint Nicholas
has a double f^ast. The celebrity of the Boy-bishop began on St. Nicholas's
day. In a fragment of the cellarer's COMPUTUS of Hyde abbey near Winchester, A.
D. 1397. "Pro ^pulis PUERI C^LEBRANTIS in festo S. Nicholai." That is the
Chorister celebrating mass. MSS. Wulves. Winton. Carpe^tier mentions an
indecent sport, called le VIRELI, celebrated in the streets on the feast of St.
Nicholas, by the vicar and other choral officers of a collegiate church. SUPPL.
Du Cang. LAT. GLOSS. in V. to^. iii. p. 1178.
." Reuchlin, one of the German classics at the restoration of ancient
literature, was the first writer and actor of Latin plays in the academies of
Germany. He is said to have opened a theater at Heidelberg; in which he brought
ingenuous yo^ths or boys on the stage, in the year 1498 "Nunquam ante ipsius
aetatem Como^dia in Germanorum scholis acta fuit, etc." G. Lizelii HISTOR.
POETAR. GERMAN. Francof. et Leips. 1730. 12mo. p. 11.
. In the prologue to one of his comedies, written in trimeter iambics, and
printed in 1516^ are the following lines.

Optans poeta placere paucis versibus,
Sat esse adeptum gloriae arbitratus est,
Si autore se Germaniae SCHOLA luserit
Graecanicis et Romuleis LUSIBUS.
The first of Reuchlin's Latin plays, seems to be one entitled, SERGIUS, SEU
CAPITIS CAPUT, COMOEDIA, a satire on bad kings or bad ministers, and printed in
1508 Phorc^e. 4to. It is published with a gloss by Simlerus his Scholar.
. He calls it his primiciae. It consists of three acts, and is professedly
written in imitation of Terence. But the author promises, if this attempt
should please, that he will write INTEGRAS COMEDIAS, that is comedies of five
acts Fol. x.
. I give a few lines from the Prologue Fol. iv.
.

Si unquam tulistis ad jocum vestros pedes,
Aut si rei aures praebuistis ludicrae,
In hac nova, obsecro, poetae fabula,
Dignemini attentiores esse quam antea;
Non hic erit lasciviae aut libidini
Meretriciae, aut tristi senum curae locus,
Sed histrionum exercitus et scommata.
For Reuch^in's other pieces of a like nature, the curious reader is referred
to a very rare volume in quarto, PROGYMNASMATA SCENICA, seu LUDICRA
PRAEEXERCITAMENTA varii generis. Per Joannem Bergman de Olpe, 1498. An old
biographer affirms, that Conradus Celtes was the first who introduced into
Germany the fashion of acting tragedies and comedies in public halls, after the
manner of the ancients. "Primus comaedias et tragaedias in publicis aulis
veterum more egit VIROR. I^LUST^. VITAE, etc. published by Fischardus, Franco^.
1536. 4to. ^. 8. b. Celtes himself says, in his DE^CRIPT^^ U^BIS NORINBERGAE,
written about 1500, that in the city there was an "AUL^ praetoria, ubi PUBLI^A
^UPTIARUM ET CHOREARUM SPECTACULA celebrantur, hystoriis et ymaginibus
imperatorum et regum nostrorum depicta." Cap. x.
." Not to enter into a controversy concerning the priority of these two obscure
theatrical authors, which may be sufficiently decided for our present
satisfaction by observing, that they were certainly cotemporaries; about the
year 1500, Celtes wrote a play, or masque, called the PLAY OF DIANA, presented
by a literary society, or seminary of scholars, before the emperor Maximilian
and his court. It was printed in 1502, at Nuremberg, with this title, "Incipit
LUDUS DYANAE, coram Maximiliano rege, per Sodalitate^ Litt^rariam Damulianam in
Linzi^ See Conr^di Celtis AMORES, Noring^. 1502. 4to. ad calc. SIGNAT. q.
." It consists of the iambic, hexameter, and elegiac measures; and has five
acts, but is contained in eight quarto pages. The plot, if any, is entirely a
compliment to the emperor; and the personages, twenty-four in number, among
which was the poet, are Mercury, Diana, Bacchus, Silenus drunk on his ass,
Satyrs, Nymphs, and Bacchanalians. Mercury, sent by Diana, speaks the Prologue.
In the middle of the third act, the emperor places a crown of laurel on the
poet's head: at the conclusion of which ceremony, the chorus sings a panegyric
in verse to the emperor. At the close of the fourth act, in the true spirit of
a German show, the imperial butlers refresh the performers with wine out of
golden goblets, with a symphony of horns and drums: and at the end of the play,
they are invited by his majesty to a sumptuous banquet In the colleges of the
Jesuits in Italy this was a constant practice in modern times. Denina says,
that father Granelli's three best tragedies were written, for this purpose,
between 1729, and 1731. chapter v. 9. The ^ragedies of Petavius, Bernardinus and
Stephonius, all Jesuits, seem intended for this use. See Morhoff, POLYHIST.
LITERAR. lib. vii. cap. iii. tom. i. 15. page 1069. edit. ^abric. Lubec. 1747.
4to. Riccoboni relates, that he saw, in the Jesuit's college at Prague, a latin
play acted by the students, on the subject of Luther's heresy^ and the ridicule
consisted in bringing Luther on the stage, with a bible in his hand, quoting
chapter and verse in defense of the reformation.
.

It is more generally known, that the practice of acting Latin plays in the
colleges of Oxford and Cambridge, continued to Cromwell's usurpation. The
oldest notice I can recover of this sort of spectacle in an English university,
is in the fragment of an ancient accompt-roll of the dissolved college of
Michael-house in Cambridge: in which, under the year 1386, the following
expense is entered. " Pro ly pallio brusdato et pro sex larvis et barbis in
comedia." That is, for an embroidered pall, or cloak, and six visors and six
beards, for the comedy Inter MSS. Rawlins. Bib^. Bodl. Oxon.
. In the year 1544, a Latin comedy, called PAMMACHIUS, was acted at Christ's
college in Cambridge: which was laid before the privy council by bishop
Gardener, chancellor of the university, as a dangerous libel, containing many
offensive reflections on the papistic ceremonies yet unabolished MSS. Coll. C.
C. Cant. CATAL. Nasmith. p. 92. This mode of attack was seldom returned by the
opposite party: the catholic worship, founded on sensible representations,
afforded a much better hold for ridicule, than the religion of some of sects of
the reformers, which was of a more simple and spiritual nature. But I say this
of the infancy of our stage. In the next century, fanaticism was brought upon
the English stage with great success, when polished manners had introduced
humor into comedy, and character had taken place of spectacle. There are,
however, two English interludes, one of the reign of Henry the eighth, called
EVERY MAN, the other of that of Edward the sixth, called LUSTY JUVENTUS,
written by R. Weever: the former defends, and the latter attacks, the church of
Rome.
. The comedy of GAMMAR GURTON'S NEEDLE was acted in the same society about the
year 1552. In an original draught of the statutes of Trinity college at
Cambridge, founded in 1546, one of the chapters is entitled, De Proefecto
Ludorum qui IMPERATOR dicitur, under whose direction and authority, Latin
comedies and tragedies are to be exhibited in the hall at Christmas; as also
Sex SPECTACULA, or as many DIALOGUES. Another title to this statute, which
seems to be substituted by another and a more modern hand, is, De Comediis
ludisque in natali Christi exhibendis. With regard to the peculiar business and
office of IMPERATOR, it is ordered, that one of the masters of arts shall be
placed over the juniors, every Christmas, for the regulation of their games and
diversions at that season of festivity. At the same time, he is to govern the
whole society in the hall and chapel, as a republic committed to his special
charge, by a set of laws, which he is to frame in Latin or Greek verse. His
sovereignty is to last during the twelve days of Christmas, and he is to
exercise the same power on Candlemas-day. During this period, he is to see that
six SPECTACLES or DIALOGUES be presented. His fee is forty shillings This
article is struck out from CAP. xxiv. p. 85. MSS. Rawlins. Number. 233. Only that
part of the statute is retained, in which Comedies and Tragedies are ordered to
be acted. These are to be written, or rather exhibited, by the nine lecturers.
The senior lecturer is to produce one: the eight others are charged with four
more. A fine of ten shillings is imposed for the omission of each interlude.
Another ^lause is then ^truck out, which limits the number of the plays to
THR^^, if ^IVE commode exponi non que^^^.
. Probably the constitution of this officer, in other words, a Master of the
Revels, gave a latitude to some licentious enormities, incompatible with the
decorum of a house of learning and religion; and it was found necessary to
restrain these Christmas celebrities to a more rational and sober plan. The
SPECTACULA also, and DIALOGUES, originally appointed, were growing obsolete
when the substitution was made, and were giving way to more regular
representations. I believe these statutes were reformed by queen Elizabeth's
visitors of the university of Cambridge, under the conduct of archbishop
Parker, in the year 1573. John Dee, the famous occult philosopher, one of the
first fellows of this noble society, acquaints us, that by his advice and
endeavors, both here, and in other colleges at Cambridge, this master of the
Christmas plays was first named and confirmed and EMPEROR. "The first was Mr.
John Dun, a very goodly man of person^ habit, and complexion, and well learned
also COMPENDIOUS REHEARSAL of JOHN DEE, etc. written by himself, A. D. 1592.
chapter i. p. 501. 502. APPEND. J. Glastonien^is CHRON. ^dit. Hearne, Oxon. 1726.
." He also further informs us, little thinking how important his boyish
attempts and exploits scholastical would appear to future ages, that in the
refectory of the college, in the character of Greek lecturer, he exhibited,
before the whole university, the (...), or PAX, of Aristophanes, accompanied
with a piece of machinery, for which he was taken for a conjuror: "with the
performance of the scarabeus his flying up to Jupiter's palace, with a man, and
his basket of victuals, on her back: whereat was great wondering, and many vai^
reports spread abroad, of the means how that was effected Ibid. p. 502.
." The tragedy of Jepthah, from the eleventh chapter of the book of JUDGES,
written both in Latin and Greek, and dedicated to king Henry the eighth, about
the year 1546, by a very grave and learned divine, John Christopherson, another
of the first fellows of Trinity college in Cambridge, afterward master, dean
of Norwich, and bishop of Chichester, was most probably composed as a
Christmas-play for the same society. It is to be noted, that this play is on a
religious subject Buchanan has a tragedy on this subject, written in 1554.
Hamlet seems to be quoting an old play, at least an old song, on Jepthah's
story, HAML. ACT ii. Sc. 7. There is an Italian tragedy on this subject by
Benedict Capuano, a monk of Casino. Florent. 1587. 4to.
. Roger Ascham, while on his travels in Flanders, says in one of his Epistles,
written about 1550, that the city of Antwerp as much exceeds all other cities,
as the refectory of saint John's college in Cambridge exceeds itself, when
furnished at Christmas with its theatrical apparatus for acting plays There is
a latin tragedy, ARCHIPROPHETA, five Johannes Ba^tista, written in 1547, by
Nicolas Grimald, one of the first Students of Christ-church, Oxford, which
probably was acted in the refectory there. It is dedicated to the dean, doctor
Richard Cox, and was printed, Colon. 1548. 8vo. This play coincided with his
plan of a rhetoric lecture, which he had set up in the college.
. Or, in his own words, " Quemadmodum aula Johannis, theatrali more ornata,
seipsam post Natalem superat Aschami EPISTOL. p. 126. b. Land. 1581.
." In an audit-book of Trinity college in Oxford, I think for the year 1559, I
find the following disbursements relating to this subject. " Pro apparatu in
comoedia Andria, vii l. ix s. iv d. Pro prandio Principis NATALICII eodem
tempor^, xiii s. ix d. Pro refectione proefectorum et doctorum magis illustrium
cum Bursariis prandentium tempore comoedioe, iv l. vii d." That is, For dresses
and scenes in acting Terence's ANDRIA, for the dinner of the CHRISTMAS PRINCE,
and for the entertainment of the heads of the colleges and the most eminent
doctors dining with the bursars or treasurers, at the time of acting the
comedy, twelve pounds, three shillings, and eight pence. A CHRISTMAS PRINCE, or
LORD OF MISRULE, corresponding to the IMPERATOR at Cambridge just mentioned,
was a common temporary magistrate in the colleges at Oxford: but at Cambridge,
they were censured in the sermons of the puritans, in the reign of James the
first, as a relic of the pagan ritual Fuller, CHAPTER HIST. Hist. of Cambridge, p.
159. edit. 1655. See OBSERVAT. on Spenser, ii. 211. In the court of king Edward
the sixth, George Ferrers, a lawyer, poet, and historian, bore this office at
Greenwich, all the twelve days of christmas, in 1552. "Who so pleasantly and
wis^ly behaved himself, that the king had great delight in his PASTIMES."
Stowe's CHRON. p. 632. Hollingshead says, that "being of better credit and
estimation than commonly his predecessors had been before, he received all
his commissions and warrants by the name of the MASTER OF THE KING'S PASTIMES.
Which gentleman so well supplied his office, both in show of sundry sights and
devices of rare inventions, and in act of diverse INTERI^UDES, and matters of
pastime played by persons, as not only satisfied the common sort, but also
were very well liked and allowed by the COUNCIL, and others of skill in the
like PASTIMES, etc." CHRON. iii. p. 1067. col. 2. 10. The appointment of so
dex^rons and respectable an officer to this department, was a stroke of policy;
and done with a design to give the court popularity, and to divert the mind of
the young king, on the condemnation of Somerset.

In some great families this officer was called the ABBOT OF MISRULE. In
Scotland, where the reformation took a more severe and gloomy turn, these and
other festive characters were thought worthy to be suppressed by the
legislature. See PARL. vi. of queen Mary of Scotland, 1555. "It is statute and
ordained, that in all times cumming, na manner of person be chosen ROBERT HUDE
nor LITTLE JOHN, ABBOT OF UN-REASON, QUEENIS of MAY, nor ^therwise, another in
burgh, nor to landwart, [in the country,] in onie time to cum." And this under
very severe penalties, viz. In burghs, to the chusers of such characters, loss
of Freedom^ with other punishments at the queen's pleasure: and those who
accepted such offices were to be banished the realm. In the country, the
chusers forfeited ten pounds, with an arbitrary imprisonment. "And gif onie
women or ^ther about summer he is [hies, goes,] singand [si^ging]... through
Burrowes and uthers Landward tounes, the women.... ^all be taken^ handled, and
put upon the cuck-stules, etc." See Notes to the PERCY HOUSHOLD-BOOK. p. 441.
Voltaire says, that since the Reformation, for two hundred years there has not
been a ^^ddle heard in some of the cantons of Switze^land.

In the French towns there was L'ABBE DE LIESSE, who in many towns was elected
from the burgesses by the magistrates, and was the director of a^l their public
shows. Among his numerous mockofficers were a herald, and a Maitre d'Hotel. In
the city of Auxerre he was especially concerned to superintend the play which
was annually acted on Quinquagesima Sunday. Carpentier, SUPPL. GLOSS. LAT. Du,
Cange, tom. i. p. 7. V. ABBAS LAETITIAE. See also, i^id. V. CHARAVA^ITUM, p.
923.


. The last article of this dis^ursement shows, that the most respectable
company in the university were invited on these occasions. At length our
universities adopted the representation of plays, in which the scholars by
frequent exercise had undoubtedly attained a considerable degree of skill and
address, as a part of the entertainment at the reception of princes and other
eminent personages. In the year 1566, queen Elizabeth visited the university of
Oxford. In the magnificent hall of the college of Christ Church, she was
entertained with a Latin comedy called MARC^S GEMINUS, the Latin tragedy of
PROGNE, and an English comedy on the story of Chaucer's PALAMON AND ARCITE, all
acted by the students of the university. The queen's observations on the
persons of the last mentioned piece, deserve notice: as they are at once a
curious picture of the romantic pedantry of the times, and of the
characteristical turn and predominant propensities of the queen's mind. When
the play was over, she summoned the poet into her presence, whom she loaded
with thanks and compliments: and at the same time turning to her levee,
remarked, that Palamon was so justly drawn as a lover, that he certainly must
have been in love indeed: that Arcite was a right martial knight, having a
swart and manly countenance, yet with the aspect of a Venus clad in armor:
that the lovely Emilia was a virgin of uncorrupted purity and unblemished
simplicity, and that although she sung so sweetly, and gathered flowers alone
in the garden, she preserved her chastity undeflowered. The part of Emilia, the
only female part in the play, was acted by a boy of fourteen years of age, a
son of the dean of Christ-Church, habited like a young princess; whose
performance so captivated her majesty, that she gave him a present of eight
guineas This youth had before been introduced to the queen's notice, in her
privy chamber at her lodgings at Christ-Church^ where he saluted her in a short
Latin oration with some Greek verses, with which she was so pleased, that she
called in secretary Cecill, and encouraging the boy's modesty with many
compliments and kind speeches, begged him to repeat his elegant performance. By
Wood he is called, summae spei puer. HIST. ANTIQ. UNIV. OXON. lib. i. p. 287.
col. 2. See also ATHEN. OXON. i. 152. And Peck's DESID. CURIOS. vol. ii. lib.
vii. Number. xviii. p. 46. seq.
. During the exhibition a cry of hounds, belonging to Theseus, was
counterfeited without, in the great square of the college: the young students
thought it a real chase, and were seized with a sudden transport to join the
hunters: at which the queen cried out from her box, "O excellent! These boys,
in very troth, are ready to leap out of the windows to follow the hounds Wood.
ATHEN. O^ON. ubi supr.
!" In the year 1564, queen Elizabeth honored the university of Cambridge with
a royal visit For a minute account^ of which, see Peck's DESID. CURIOS. ut
supr. p. 25. Number. ^v. [MSS. Baker. vol. x. 703^. p. 109. Brit. Mus.] The writer
was probably N. Robinson, domestic chaplain to archbishop Parker, afterward
bishop of Bangor. See Wood, ATHEN. OXON. i. col. 696. MS. Baker, ut supr. p.
181. And Parke^'s ANT. BRIT. ECCLES^ p. 14. MATH. Vir ^uit prudens, etc. edit.
1572-3.
. Here she was present at the exhibition of the AULULARIA of Plautus, and the
tragedies of DIDO, and of HEZEKIAH, in English: which were played in the body,
or nave, of the chapel of King's college, on a stage extended from side to
side, by a select company of scholars, chosen from different colleges at the
discretion of five doctors, "especially appointed to set forth such plays as
should be exhibited before her grace Peck, ut supr. p. 36. 39.
." The chapel, on this occasion, was lighted by the royal guards; each of whom
bore a staff-torch in his hand Peck, ibid. p. 36.
. Her majesty's patience was so fatigued by the sumptuous parade of shows and
speeches, with which every moment was occupied, that she could not stay to see
the AJAX of Sophocles, in Latin, which was prepared. Having been praised both
in Latin and Greek, and in prose and verse, for her learning and her chastity,
and having received more compliments than are paid to any of the pastoral
princesses in Sydney's ARCADIA, she was happy to return to the houses of some
of her nobility in the neighborhood. In the year 1583, Albertus de Alasco, a
Polish prince Palatine, arrived at Oxford Supposed to be the person whom
Shakespeare, in the MERCHANT OF VENICE, called the Count Palatine. ACT. i. SC.
i.
. In the midst of a medley of pithy orations, tedious sermons, degrees,
dinners, disputations, philosophy, and fireworks, he was invited to the comedy
of the RIVALES This was in Latin, and written by William Gager, admitted a
student of Christ-Church in 1572. By the way, he is styled by Wood, the best
comedian of his time, that is dramatic poet. But he wrote only Latin plays. His
Latin M^LEAGER was acted at Christ-Church before lord Leicester, sir Philip
Sydney, and other distinguished persons, in 1581. ATH. OXON. i. p. 366. This
Gager had a controversy with doctor John Rainolds, president of Corpus, at
Oxford, concerning the lawfulness of plays: which produced from the latter a
pamphlet, called THE OVERTHROW OF STAGE PLAYS, etc. Printed 1599. Gage^'s
letter, in defense of his plays, and of the students who acted in them, is in
Bibl. Coll. Univ. MSS. ^. 18. It appears by a pamphlet written by one W. Heal,
and printed at Oxford in 1609, that Gager held it lawful, in a public Act of
the university, for husbands to beat their wives.
, and the tragedy of DIDO, which were presented in Christ-Church hall by some
of the scholars of that society, and of saint John's college. In the latter
play, Dido's supper, and the destruction of Troy, were represented in a
marchpane, or rich cake: and the tempest which drove Dido and Eneas to the same
cave, was counterfeited by a snow of sugar, a hailstorm of comfits, and a
shower of rose water Hollinsh. CHRON. iii^ 1355.
. In the year 1605, king James the first gratified his pedantry by a visit to
the same university See PREPARATIONS AT OXFORD, etc. APPEND. L^LANDI COLL. vol.
ii. p. 626. seq. edit. Land. 1774. [MSS. Baker, ut supr. Brit. Mus.] They were
written by one present.
. He was present at three plays in Christ-Church hall: which he seems to have
regarded as childish amusements, in comparison of the more solid delights of
scholastic argumentation. Indeed, if we consider this monarch's insatiable
thirst of profound erudition, we shall not be surprised to find, that he slept
at these theatrical performances, and that he sat four hours every morning and
afternoon with infinite satisfaction, to hear syllogisms in jurisprudence and
theology. The first play, during this solemnity, was a pastoral comedy called
ALBA: in which five men, almost naked, appearing on the stage as part of the
representation, gave great offense to the queen and the maids of honor: while
the king, whose delicacy was not easily shocked at other times, concurred with
the ladies, and availing himself of this lucky circumstance, peevishly
expressed his wishes to depart, before the piece was half finished Ibid. p. 637.
. The second play was VERTUMNUS, which although learnedly penned in Latin, and
by a doctor in divinity, could not keep the king awake, who was wearied in
consequence of having executed the office of moderator all that day at the
disputations in saint Mary's church The queen was not present: but next
morning, with her ladies, the young prince, and gallants attending the court,
she saw an English pastoral, by Daniel, called ARCADIA RE^ORMED. Ibid. p. 642.
Although the anecdote is foreign to our purpose, I cannot help mentioning the
reason, why the queen, during this visit to Oxford, was more pleased to hear
the Oration of the professor of Greek, than the king. "The king heard him
willingly, and the Queen much more; because, she said, she never had h^ard
Greek." Ibid. 636.
. The third drama was the AJAX of Sophocles, in Latin, at which the stage was
varied three times Toward the end of the hall, was a scene like a wall,
"painted and adorned with stately pillars, which pillars would turn about, by
reason whereof, with the help of other painted clothes, their stage did vary
three times in the acting of one tragedy." LEL APPEND. ut supr. p. 631. The
machinery of these plays, and the temporary stages in St. Mary's church, were
chiefly conducted by "one Mr. Jones, a great traveller, who undertook to
furnish them with rare devices, but performed very little to that which was
expected." Ibid. p. 646. Notwithstanding these slighting expressions, it is
highly probable that this was Inigo Jones, afterward the famous architect. He
was now but thirty-three years of age, and just returned into England. He was
the principal Contriver for the masks at Whitehall. Gerrard, in STRAFFORDE'S
LETTERS, describing queen Henrietta's popish chapel, says, "Such a glorious
scene built ov^r the altar! Inigo Jones never presented a more curious piece in
any of the masks at Whitehall. [dat. 1635.] vol. i. page 505.
. "The king was very weary before he came thither, but much more wearied by
it, and spoke many words of dislike Ibid. p. 639.
." But I must not omit, that as the king entered the city from Woodstock, he
was saluted at the gate of saint John's college with a short interlude, which
probably suggested a hint to Shakespeare to write a tragedy on the subject of
Macbeth. Three youths of the college, habited like witches, advancing toward
the king, declared they were the same who once met the two chiefs of Scotland,
Macbeth and Bancho; prophesying a kingdom to the one, and to the other a
generation of monarchs: that they now appeared, a second time, to his majesty,
who was descended from the stock of Bancho, to show the confirmation of that
prediction REX PLATONICUS, five MUSAE RE^NANTES, Oxon. 1607. 4to. p. 18.
. Immediately afterward, "Three young youths, in habit and attire like Nymphs,
confronted him, representing England, Scotland, and Ireland; and talking
dialogue wise, each to the other, of their state, at last concluded, yielding
themselves up to his gracious government LEL. APPEND. ut supr. p. 636.
."

It would be unnecessary to trace this practice in our universities to later
periods. The position advanced is best illustrated by proofs most remote in
point of time; which, on that account, are also less obvious, and more curious.
I could have added other ancient proofs; but I chose to select those which
seemed, from concomitant circumstances, most likely to amuse.

Many instances of this practice in schools, or in seminaries of an inferior
nature, may be enumerated. I have before mentioned the play of ROBIN and
MARIAN, performed, according to an annual custom, by the schoolboys of Angiers
in France, in the year 1392 Supr. i. 245. See more instances, ibid.
. But I do not mean to go abroad for illustrations of this part of our present
inquiry. Among the writings of Udal, a celebrated master of Eton, about the
year 1540, are recited Plures Comediae, and a tragedy de Papatu, on the papacy:
written probably to be acted by his scholars. An extract from one of his
comedies may be seen in Wilson's LOGIKE Written in 1553, p. 69.
. In the ancient CONSUETUDINARY, as it is called, of Eton-School, the following
passage occurs. "Circa festum divi Andreae, ludimagister eligere solet, pro suo
arbitrio, SCENICAS FABULAS optimas et accommodatissimas, quas Pueri feriis
Natalitiis subsequentibus, non sine LUDORUM ELEGANTIA, populo spectante,
public aliquando peragant. -- Interdum etiam exhibet Anglico sermon contextas
fabulas, siquae habeant acumen et leporem Supposed to have been drawn up about
the year 1560. But containing all the ancient and original customs of the
school. MSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bodl.
." That is, about the feast of saint Andrew, the thirtieth day of November, the
master is accustomed to choose, according to his own discretion, such Latin
stage plays as are most excellent and convenient; which the boys are to act in
the following Christmas holidays, before a public audience, and with all the
elegance of scenery and ornaments usual at the performance of a play. Yet he
may sometimes order English plays; such, at least, as are smart and witty. In
the year 1538, Ralph Radcliffe, a polite scholar, and a lover of graceful
elocution, opening a school at Hitchin in Hertfordshire, obtained a grant of
the dissolved friery of the Carmelites in that town: and converting the
refectory into a theater, wrote several plays, both in Latin and English, which
were exhibited by his pupils. Among his comedies were Dives and Lazarus,
Boccacio's Patient Grisilde, Titus and Gesippus See supr. p. 341.
, and Chaucer's Melibeus: his tragedies were, the Delivery of Susannah, the
Burning of John Huss, Job's Sufferings, the Burning of Sodom, Jonas, and the
Fortitude of Judith. These pieces were seen by the biographer Bale in the
author's library, but are now lost Bale viii. 98. ATH. OXON. i. 73. I have seen
an anonymous comedy, APOLLO SHROVING, composed by the Master of
Hadleigh-school, in Suffolk, and acted by his scholars, on Shrove-tuesday, Feb.
7. 1626. printed 1627. 8vo. Published, as it seems, by E. W. Shrove-tuesday, as
the day immediately preceding Lent, was always a day of extraordinary sport and
feasting. So in the song of Justice Silence in Shakespeare, See P. HENRY iv. A.
v. S. 4. It Is merry in hall when beards wag all,
And welcome MERRY SHROVETIDE.
In the Romish church there was anciently a feast immediately preceding Lent,
which lasted many days, called CARNISCAPIUM. See Carpentier, in V. SUPPL. LAT.
GL. Du Cang. tom. i. p. 831. In some cities of France an officer was annually
chosen, called LE PRINCE D'AMOUREUX, who presided over the sports of the youth
for six days before Ash Wednesday. Ibid. V. AMORATUS. p. 195. and V.
CARDINALIS. p. 818. also V. SPINETUM, tom. iii. p. 848. Some traces of these
festivities still remain in our universities. In the PERCY HOUSHOLD-BOOK, 1512,
it appears that the clergy and officers of lord Percy's chapel performed a play
"before his lordship upon Shrowftewesday at night." page 345.
. It is scarcely necessary to remind the reader, that this very liberal
exercise is yet preserved, and in the spirit of true classical purity, at the
college of Westminster It appears anciently to have been an exercise for youth,
not only to act but to write interludes. Erasmus says, that sir Thomas More,
"adolescens COMOEDIOLAS et scripsit et egit." EPISTOL. 447. But see what I have
said of More's PAGEAUNTS, Observat. on Spens. ii. 47. And we are told, that
More, while he lived a Page with archbishop Moreton, as the plays were going on
in the palace during the christmas holidays, would often step upon the stage
without previous notice, and exhibit a part of his own, which gave much more
satisfaction than the whole performance besides. Roper's LIFE AND DEATH OF
MORE, p. 27. edit. 1731. 8vo.
. I believe, the frequency of these school-plays suggested to Shakespeare the
names of Seneca and Plautus as dramatic authors; where Hamlet, speaking of a
variety of theatrical performances, says, "Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light ACT ii. SC. 7.
." Jonson, in his comedy of THE STAPLE OF NEWS, has a satirical allusion to
this practice, yet ironically applied: where CENSURE says, "For my part, I
believe it, and there were no wiser than I, I would have near a cunning
schoolmasters in England: I mean a Cunning-man a schoolmasters; that is, a
conjurour, or a poet, or that had any acquaintance with a poet. They make all
their scholars Play-boyes! Is It not a fine sight to see all our children made
Enterluders? Do we pay our money for this? We send them to learn their
grammar and their Terence, and they learn their playbookes. Well, they talk we
shall have no more parliaments, god bless us! But an we have, I hope Zeal of
the Land Buzzy, and my gossip Rabby Trouble-truth, will start up, and see we
have painful good ministers to keep school, and catechize our youth; and not
teach em to speak Plays, and act fables of false news, etc ACT iii. p. 50.
edit. ^ol. 1631. This play was first acted in the year 1625.
.

In tracing the history of our stage, this early practice of performing plays
in schools and universities has never been considered, as a circumstance
instrumental to the growth and improvement of the drama. While the people were
amused with Skelton's TRIAL OF SIMONY, Bale's GOD'S PROMISES, and CHRIST'S
DESCENT INTO HELL, the scholars of the times were composing and acting plays on
historical subjects, and in imitation of Plautus and Terence. Hence ideas of a
legitimate fable must have been imperceptibly derived to the popular and
vernacular drama. And we may add, while no settled or public theaters were
known, and plays were chiefly acted by itinerant minstrels in the halls of the
nobility at Christmas, these literary societies supported some idea of a stage:
they afforded the best accommodations for theatrical exhibition, and were
almost the only, certainly the most rational, companies of players that existed.

But I mean yet to trespass on my reader's patience, by pursuing this inquiry
still further; which, for the sake of comprehension and connection, has already
exceeded the limits of a digression.

It is perhaps on this principle, that we are to account for plays being acted
by singing-boys: although they perhaps acquired a turn for theatrical
representation and the spectacular arts, from their annual exhibition of the
ceremonies of the boy-bishop; which seem to have been common in almost every
religious community that was capable of supporting a choir In a small college,
for only one provost, five fellows, and six choristers, founded by archbishop
Rotheram in 1481, in the obscure village of Rotheram in Yorkshire, this piece
of mummery was not omitted. The founder leaves by will, among other bequests to
the college, "A Myter for the barne-bishop of cloth of gold, with two knopps of
silver, gilt and enamelled." Hearne's LIB. NIG. SCACC. APPEND. p. 674. 686.
This establishme^t, but with a far greater degree of buffoonery, was common in
the collegiate churches of France. See Dom. Marlot, HISTOIRE de la Metropole de
Rheims, tom. ii. p. 769. A part of the ceremony in the church of Noyon was,
that the children of the choir should celebrate the whole service on Innocent's
day. Brillon, DICTIONAIRE DES ARRETS, Artic. NOYON. edit. de 1727. This
privilege, as I have before observed, is permitted to the children of the choir
of Winchester college, on that festival, by the founder's statutes, given in
1380. [See supr. vol. i. 248.] Yet in the statutes of Eton college, gi^en in
1441, and altogether transcribed from those of Winchester, the chorister-bishop
of the chapel is permitted to celebrate the holy offices on the feast of saint
Nicholas, but by no means on that of the INNOCENTS. -- "In festo sancti
Nicolai, in QUO et NULLATENUS in festo sanctorum INNOCENTIUM, divina officia
(praetur Missae Secreta) exequi et dici permittimus per Episcopum Puerorum, ad
hoc, de eisdem [pueris choristis] annis singulis eligendum." STATUT. Coll.
Etonens. Cap. xxxi. The same clause is in the statutes of King's college at
Cambridge. Cap. xlii. The parade of the mock-bishop is evidently akin to the
Fete des Foux, in which they had a bishop, an abbot, and a precentor, of the
fools. One of the pieces of humor in this last-mentioned show, was to shave
the precentor in public, on a stage erected at the west door of the church. M.
Tilliot, MEM. de la Fete des Foux, ut supr. p. 13. In the Council of Sens, A.
D. 1485, we have this prohibition. "Turpem etiam illum abusum in quibusdam
frequentatum ecclesiis, quo, certis annis, nonnulli cum mitra, baculo, ac
vestibus pontificalibus, more episcoporum benedicu^t, alii ut reges et duces
induti, quod Festum FATUORUM, vel INNOCENTIUM, seu PUERORUM, in quibusdam
regionibus ^uncupatu^, etc." COUNCIL. S^NON. cap. iii. Harduin. ACT. COUNCIL.
Paris. 1714. tom. ix. p. 1525. E. See also ibid. COUNCIL. BASIL. Sess. xxi. p.
1122. E. And 1296. D. p. 1344. A. It is surprising that Colet, dean of saint
Paul's, a friend to the purity of religion, and who had the good sense and
resolution to censure the superstitions and ^opperies of popery in his public
sermons, should countenance this idle farce of the boy-bishop, in the statutes
of his school at saint Paul's; which he founded with a view of establishing the
education of youth on a more rational and liberal plan than had yet been known,
in the year 1512. He expressly orders that his scholars, "shall every
Childermas [Innocents] day come to Paulis churche^ and hear the
CHILDE-BYSHOP'S [of S. Paul's cathedral] sermon. And after, be at the high
mass; and each of them offer a penny to the CHILDE-BYSHOP, and with them the
masters and surveyors of the scole." Knight's LIFE OF CO^ET, (MISCELL. Number. V.
APPEND.) p. 362. I take this opportunity of observing, that the annivers^ry
cu^^om at Eton of going ad Montem, originated from the ancient and popular
practice of these theatrical processions in collegiate bodies.

In ^he statutes of New college in Oxford, founded about the year 1380, there
is the following remarkable passage. "Ac etiam illum LUDUM vilissimum et
horribilem ^ADENDI BA^BAS, qui ^^eri solet i^ nocte praecedente Inceptionis
Magistradorum in Artibus, infra collegium nostrum praedictum, vel alibi in
Universitate praedicta, ubicunque, ipsis [sociis et scolaribus] penitus
interdicimus, ac etiam prohibemus express." RUBR. xxv. Hearne endeavors to
explain this injunction, by supposing that it was made in opposition to the
Wiccli^^ites, who disregarded the laws of scripture; and, in this particular
instance, violated the following text in LEVITICUS, where this custom is
expressly forbidden. xix. 27. "Neither shall thou mar the corners of thy
beard." NOT. ad Joh. Trokelowe. p. 393. Nothing can be more unfortunate tha^
this elucidation of our antiquary. The direct contrary was the case: for the
Wickliffites entirely grounded their ideas of reformation both in morals and
doctrine on scriptural proofs, and often committed absurdities in too precise
and literal an acceptance of texts. And, to say no more, the custom, from the
words of the statute, seems to have been long preserved in the university, as a
mock-ceremony on the night preceding the solemn Act of Magistration. It is
styled LUDUS, a Play: and I am of opinion, that it is to be ranked among the
other ecclesiastic mummeries of that age; and that it has some connection with
the exhibition mentioned above of shaving the Precentor in public.


. I have before given an instance of the singing-boys of Hyde abbey and saint
Swithin's priory at Winchester, performing a MORALITY before king Henry the
seventh at Winchester castle, on a Sunday, in the year 1487. In the accounts of
Maxtoke priory near Coventry, in the year 1430, it appears, that the
eleemosinary boys, or choristers, of that monastery, acted a play, perhaps
every year, on the feast of the Purification, in the hall of the neighboring
castle belonging to lord Clinton: and it is specified, that the cellarer took
no money for their attendance, because his lordship's minstrels had often
assisted this year at several festivals in the refectory of the convent, and in
the hall of the prior, without fee or gratuity. I will give the article, which
is very circumstantial, at length, "Pro jentaculis puerorum eleemosynae
exeuntium ad aulam in castro ut ibi LUDUM peragerent in die Purificationis, xiv
d. Unde nihil a domini [Clinton] thesaurario, quia saepius hoc anno ministralli
castri fecerunt ministralsiam in aula conventus et Prioris ad festa plurima
sine ullo regardo Penes me. supr. citat.
." That is, For the extraordinary breakfast of the children of the almonry, or
singing-boys of the convent, when they went to the hall in the castle, to
perform the PLAY on the feast of the Purification, fourteenpence. In
consideration of which performance, we received nothing in return from the
treasurer of the lord Clinton, because the minstrels of the castle had often
this year played at many festivals, both in the hall of the convent and in the
prior's hall, without reward. So early as the year 1378, the scholars, or
choristers, of saint Paul's cathedral in London, presented a petition to king
Richard the second, that his majesty would prohibit some ignorant and
unexperienced persons from acting the HISTORY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, to the
great prejudice of the clergy of the church, who had expended considerable sums
for preparing a public presentation of that play at the ensuing Christmas S^e
RISE AND PROGRESS, etc. CI^^^ L. vol. ii. p. 118.
. From MYSTERIES this young fraternity proceeded to more regular dramas: and at
the commencement of a theater, were the best and almost only comedians. They
became at length so favorite a set of players, as often to act at court: and,
on particular occasions of festivity, were frequently removed from London, for
this purpose only, to the royal houses at some distance from town. This is a
circumstance in their dramatic history, not commonly known. In the year 1554,
while the princess Elizabeth resided at Hatfield-house in Hertfordshire, under
the custody of sir Thomas Pope, she was visited by queen Mary. The next
morning, after mass, they were entertained with a grand exhibition of
bear-baiting, with which their highnesses were right well content. In the
evening, the great chamber was adorned with a sumptuous suit of tapestry,
called The Hanginge^ of Antioch: and after supper, a play was presented by the
children of Paul's Who perhaps performed the play of HOLOPHERNES, the same
year, after a great and rich maskinge and banquet, given by sir Thomas Pope to
the princess, in the great ^all at Hatfelde. LIFE of sir THO. POPE. SECT. iii.
p. 85.
. After the play, and the next morning, one of the children, named Maximilian
Poines, sung to the princess, while she played at the virginalls MS. ANNAL^S OF
Q. MARIE'S REIGN^. MSS. Cotton. VIT^LL. F. 5. There is a curious anecdote in
Melville's MEMOIRS, concerning Elizabeth, when queen, being surprised from
behind the tapestry by lord Hunsdon, while she was playing on her virginals.
Her majesty, I know not whether in a ^it of royal prudery, or of royal
coquetry, suddenly rose from the instrument and offered to strike his lordship:
declaring, "that she was not used to play before m^n, but when she was solitary
to shun melancholy." MEM. Land. 1752. page 99. Leland applauds the skill of
Elizabeth, both in playing and singing. EN COM. fol. 59. [p. 125. edit. Hearn.]
Aut quid commemor^m quos tu testudine sumpta
Concentus referas melli^luosque modos?

. Strype, perhaps from the same manuscript chronicle, thus describes a
magnificent entertainment given to queen Elizabeth, in the year 1559, at
Nonsuch in Surry, by lord Arundel, her majesty's housekeeper, or
superintendant, at that palace, now destroyed. I choose to give the description
in the words of this simple but picturesque compiler. "There the queen had
great entertainment, with banquets, especially on Sunday night, made by the
said earl: together with a Mask, and the warlike sounds of drums and flutes,
and all kinds of music, till midnight. On Monday, was a great supper made for
her: but before night, she stood at her standing in the further park, and there
she saw a Course. At night was a Play by the Children of Paul's, and their
[music] master Sebastian. After that, a costly banquet, accompanied with drums
and flutes. This entertainment lasted till three in the morning. And the earl
presented her majesty a cupboard of plate ANN. REF. vol. i. chapter xv. p. 194.
edit. 1725. fol.
." In the year 1^62, when the society of parish clerks in London celebrated one
of their annual feasts, after morning service in Guildhall chapel, they retired
to their hall; where, after dinner, a goodly play was performed by the
choristers of Westminster abbey, with waits, and regals, and singing Strype's
edit. of Stowe's SURV. LAND. B. v. p. 231.
. The children of the chapel-royal were also famous actors; and were formed
into a company of players by queen Elizabeth, under the conduct of Richard
Edwards, a musician, and a writer of Interludes, already mentioned, and of whom
more will be said hereafter. All Lilly's plays, and many of Shakespeare's and
Jonson's, were originally performed by these boys Six of Lilly's nine comedies
are entitled COURT-COMEDIES: which, I believe, were written professedly for
this purpose. These were reprinted together, Land. 1632. 12mo. His last play is
dated 1597.
: and it seems probable, that the title given by Jonson to one of his comedies,
called CYNTHIA'S REVELS, first acted in 1605 "by the children of her majesty's
chapel, with the allowance of the Master of the Revels," was an allusion to
this establishment of queen Elizabeth, one of whose romantic names was CYNTHIA
They very frequently were joined by the choristers of saint Paul's. It is a
mistake that these were rival companies; and that because Jonson's POETASTER
was acted, in the year 1601, by the boys of the chapel, his antagonist Decker
got his SATIROMASTIX, an answer to Jonson's play, to be performed, out of
opposition, by those of saint Paul's. Lilly's court-comedies, and many others,
were acted by the children of both choirs in conjunction. It is certain that
Docker sneers at Johnson's interest with the Master of the Revels, in procuring
his plays to be acted so often at court. " Sir Vaughan. I have some
cossen-germans at court shall beget you the reversion of the master of the
king's revels, or else to be his lord of misrule now at Christmas." SIGNAT. G.
3. Dekker's SATIROMASTIX, or the Untrussing of the Humorous Poet. Land. for E.
White, 1602. 4to. Again, SIGNAT. M. "When your plays are misselikt at court,
you shall not cry mew like a pusse-cat, and say you are glad you write out of
the courtier's element." On the same idea the satire is founded of sending
Horace, or Jonson, to court, to be dubbed a poet: and of bringing "the
quivering bride to court in a mask, etc." Ibid. SIGNAT. I. 3.
. The general reputation which they gained, and the particular encouragement
and countenance which they received from the queen, excited the jealousy of the
grown actors at the theaters: and Shakespeare, in HAMLET, endeavors to
extenuate the applause which was idly indulged to their performance, perhaps
not always very just, in the following speeches of Rosencrantz and Hamlet. --
"There is an aerie of little children, little eyases Nest of young hawks.
, that cry out on the top of the question, and are most tyrannically clapped
for it: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages, so they
call them, that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose quills, and dare
scarce come thither. -- Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains them? How
are they escoted Paid.
? Will they pursue the Quality no longer than they can sing, etc ACT. ii. Sc.
vi. And perhaps he glances at the same set of actors in ROMEO AND JULIET, when
a play, or mask, is proposed. ACT i. Sc. v. We'll have no Cupid, hood-winked
with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath. --
Nor a without-book prologue faintly spoke
After the prompter. --

." This was about the year 1599. The latter clause means, "Will they follow the
profession of players, no longer than they keep the voices of boys, and sing in
the choir?" So Hamlet afterward says to the player, "Come, give us a taste of
your quality: come, a passionate speech Ibid. Sc. iii.
." Some of these, however, were distinguished for their propriety of action,
and became admirable comedians at the theater of Blackfriars There is a
passage in STRAFFORDE'S LETTERS, which seems to show, that the dispositions and
accommodations at the theater of Black-friars, were much better than we now
suppose. "A little pique happened betwixt the duke of Lenox and the lord
chamberlain, about a box at a new play in the Blackfriars, of which the duke
had got the key." The dispute was fettled by the king. G. GARRARD to the LORD
DEPUTY. Jan. 25. 1635. vol. i. p. 511. edit. 1759. fol. See a curious account
of an order of the privy council, in 1633, "hung up in a table near Paul's and
Black-fryars, t^ command all that resort to the playhouse there, to send away
their coaches, and to disperse abroad in Paul's churchyard, carter-lane, the
conduit in f^eet-street, etc. etc." Ibid. p. 175. Another of Garrard's letters
mentions a play at this theater, which "cost three or four hundred pounds
setting out; eight or ten suits of new clothes he [the author] gave the
players, an unheard of prodigality!" Dat. 1637. Ibid. vol. ii. 150.

It appears by the Prologue of Chapman's ALL FOOLS, a comedy presented at
Blackfriers, and printed 1605, that only the spectators of rank and quality
sat on the stage.

-- To fair attire the stage
Helps much; for if our other audience se^
You on the stage depart before we end,
Our wits go with you all, etc. --

. Among the children of queen Elizabeth's chapel, was one Salvadore Pavy, who
acted in Jonson's POETASTER, and CYNTHIA'S REVELS, and was inimitable in his
representation of the character of an old man. He died about thirteen years of
age, and is thus elegantly celebrated in one of Jonson's epigrams.

An Epitaph on S. P. a child of queen Elizabeth's chapel.
Weep with me, all you that read
This little story!
And know, for whom a tear you shed
DEATH'S self is sorry.
It Was a child, that so did thrive
In grace and feature,
As HEAVEN and NATURE seemed to strive
Which owned the creature.
Years he numbered scarce thirteen,
When Fates turned cruel;
Yet three filled zodiackes had he been
The Stage's Jewel:
And did act, what now we moan,
Old men so duly;
As, sooth, the PARCAE thought him one,
He played so truly.
So, by error, to his fate
They all consented;
But viewing him since, alas! too late,
They have repent^d:
And have sought, to give new birthe,
In bathes to steep him:
But, being so much too good for earth,
HEAVEN vows to keep him EPI^RAMMES, Epig. cxx.
.
To this ecclesiastical origin of the drama, we must refer the plays acted by
the society of the parish-clerks of London, for eight days successively, at
Clerkenwell, which thenc^ took its name, in the presence of most of the
nobility and gentry of the kingdom, in the years 1390, and 1409. In the
ignorant ages, the parish-clerks of London might justly be considered as a
literary society. It was an essential part of their profession, not only to
sing but to read; an accomplishment almost solely confined to the clergy: and,
on the whole, they seem to come under the character of a religious fraternity.
They were incorporated into a guild, or fellowship, by king Henry the third
about the year 1240, under the patronage of saint Nicholas. It was anciently
customary for men and women of the first quality, ecclesiastics, and others,
who were lovers of church-music, to be admitted into this corporation: and they
gave large gratuities for the support, or education, of many persons in the
practice of that science. Their public feasts, which I have already mentioned,
were frequent, and celebrated with singing and music; most commonly at
Guildhall chapel or college Stowe's SURV. LAND. ut supr. lib. v. p. 231.
. Before the reformation, this society was constantly hired to assist as a
choir, at the magnificent funerals of the nobility, or other distinguished
personages, which were celebrated within the city of London, or in its
neighborhood. The splendid ceremonies of their anniversary procession and
mass, in the year 1554, are thus related by Strype, from an old chronicle. "May
the sixth, was a goodly evensong at Guildhall college, by the Masters of the
CLARKS and their Fellowship, with singing and playing; and the morrow after,
was a great mass, at the same place, and by the same fraternity: when every
clark offered an halfpenny. The mass was sung by diverse of the queen's
[Mary's] chapel and children. And after mass done, every clark went their
procession, two and two together; each having on, a surplice and a rich cope,
and a garland. And then, fourscore standards, streamers, and banners; and each
one that bare them had an albe or a surplice. Then came in order the waits
playing: and then, thirty clerks, singing FESTA DIES. There were four of these
choirs. Then came a canopy, borne over the Sacrament by four of the masters of
the clerks, with staff torches burning, etc ECCLES. MEM. vol. iii. chapter xiii.
p. 121.
." Their profession, employment, and character, naturally dictated to this
spiritual brotherhood the representation of plays, especially those of the
scriptural kind: and their constant practice in shows, processions, and vocal
music, easily accounts for their address in detaining the best company which
England afforded in the fourteenth century, at a religious farce, for more than
a week.

Before I conclude this inquiry, a great part of which has been taken up in
endeavoring to show the connection between places of education and the stage,
it ought to be remarked, that the ancient fashion of acting plays in the inns
of court, which may be ranked among seminaries of instruction, although for a
separate profession, is deducible from this source. The first representation of
this sort which occurs on record, and is mentioned with any particular
circumstances, was at Gray's-inn. John Roos, or Roo, student at Gray's-inn, and
created a sergeant at law in the year 1511, wrote a comedy which was acted at
Christmas in the hall of that society, in the year 1527. This piece, which
probably contained some free reflections on the pomp of the clergy, gave such
offense to cardinal Wolsey, that the author was degraded and imprisoned
Hollinsh. CHRON. iii. 894.
. In the year 1550, under the reign of Edward the sixth, an order was made in
the same society, that no comedies, commonly called Interludes, should be acted
in the refectory in the intervals of vacation, except at the celebration of
Christmas: and that then, the whole body of students should jointly contribute
toward the dresses, scenes, and decorations Dugdale, ORIG. JURID. cap. 67. p.
285.
. In the year 1561, Sackville's and Norton's tragedy of FERREX AND PORREX was
presented before queen Elizabeth at Whitehall, by the gentlemen of the Inner
Temple Printed at London, 1565. 12mo. In one of the old editions of this play,
I think a quarto, of 1590, it is said to be "set forth as the same was showed
before the queen's most excellent majesty, in her highness's court of the
inner temple." It is to be observed, that Norton, one of the authors, was
connected with the law: For the "Approbation of Mr. T. Norton, counselor and
solicitor of London, appointed by the bishop of London," is prefixed to Chapter
Marbury's Collection of Italian Proverbs, Land. 1581. 4to.
. In the year 1566, the SUPPOSES, a comedy, was acted at Gray's-inn, written by
Gascoigne, one of the students. Dekker, in his satire against Jonson above
cited, accuses Jonson for having stolen some jokes from the Christmas plays of
the lawyers. "You shall swear not to bumbast out a new play with the old
lyning of jestes stolen from the Temple-revells SATIROMASTIX, edit. 1602. ut
supr. SIGNAT. M.
." It the year 1632 it was ordered, in the Inner Temple, that no play should be
continued after twelve at night, not even on Christmas-eve Dudg. ut supr. cap.
57. p. 140. seq. also c. 61. 205.
.

But these societies seem to have shone most in the representation of Masks,
a branch of the old drama. So early as the year 1431, it was ordered, that the
society of Lincoln's inn should celebrate four revels It is not, however,
exactly known whether these revels were not simply DANCES: for Dugdale says,
that the students of this inn "anciently had DANCINGS for their recreation and
delight." IBID. And he adds, that in the year 1610, the under barristers, for
example's sake, were put out of commons by decimation, because they offended in
not DANCING on Candlemasday, when the JUDGES were present, according to an
ancient order of the society. Ibid. col. 2. In an old comedy, called CUPID'S
WHIRLIGIG, acted in the year 1616, by the children of his majesty's revels, a
law-student is one of the persons of the drama, who says to a lady, "Faith,
lady, I remember the first time I saw you was in quadragessimo-sexto of the
queen, in a michaelmas term, and I think it was the morrow upon mense
Michaelis, or crastino Animarum, I cannot tell which. And the next time I saw
you was at our REVELLS, where it pleased your ladyship to grace me with a
galliard; and I shall never forget it, for my velvet pantables [pantofles] were
stolen away the whilst." But this may also allude to their masks and plays.
SIGNAT. H. 2. edit. Land. 1616. 4to.
, on four grand festivals, every year, which I conceive to have consisted in
great measure of this species of impersonation. In the year 1613, they
presented at Whitehall a masque before king James the first, in honor of the
marriage of his daughter the princess Elizabeth with the prince Elector
Palatine of the Rhine, at the cost of more than one thousand and eighty pounds
Dugdale IBID. p. 246. The other societies seem to have joined. IBID. cap. 67.
p. 286. See also Finett's PHILOXENIS, p. 8. 11. edit. 1656. and Ibid. p. 73.
. The poetry was by Chapman, and the machinery by Jones Printed LAND. 1614.
4to. "With a description of the whole show, in the manner of their march on
horseback to the court from the Master of the Rolls his house, etc." It is
dedicated to sir E^ Philipps, Master of the Rolls. But we find a masque on the
very same occasion, and at Whitehall, before the king and queen, called The
masque of Grays inn gentlemen and the Inner temple, by Beaumont, in the works
of Beaumont and Fletcher.
. But the most splendid and sumptuous performance of this kind, played by these
societies, was the masque which they exhibited at Candlemas-day, in the year
1633, at the expense of two thousand pounds, before king Charles the first;
which so pleased the king, and probably the queen, that he invited one hundred
and twenty gentlemen of the law to a similar entertainment at Whitehall on
Shrove Tuesday following Dugd. ibid. p. 346.
. It was called the TRIUMPH OF PEACE, and written by Shirley, then a student of
Gray's-inn. The scenery was the invention of Jones, and the music was composed
by William Laws and Simon Ives It was printed, Land. 1633. 4to. The author
says, that it exceeded in variety and richness of decoration, any thing ever
exhibited at Whitehall. There is a little piece called THE INNS OF COURT
ANAGRAMMATIST, or The Masquers Masqued in Anagrams, written by Francis Lenton,
the queen's poet, Land. 1634. 4to. In this piece, the names, and respective
houses, of each masquer are specified; and in commendation of each there is an
epigram. The masque with which his majesty returned this compliment on the
shrove-tuesday following at Whitehall, was, I think, Carew's COELUM
BRITANNICUM, written by the king's command, and played by his majesty, with
many of the nobility and their sons who were boys. The machinery by Jones, and
the music by H. Laws. It has been give^ to Davenant, but improperly.

There is a play written by Middleton about the year 1623, called INNER TEMPLE
MASQUE, or the MASQUE OF HEROES, presented as an ent^rtainm^nt for many worthy
ladies, by the members of that society. Printed, Land. 1640. 4to. I believe it
is the foundation of Mrs. Behn's C^TY-HEIRESS.

I have also seen the MASQUE OF FLOWERS, acted by the students of Gray's Inn, in
the Banqueting House at White Hall, on Twelf^h Night in 1613. It is dedicated
to sir F. Bacon, and was printed, L^nd. 1614. 4to. It was the last of the
courtsolemnities exhibited in honor of Carr, e^rl of Somers^t.


. Some curious anecdotes of this exhibition are preserved by a cotemporary, a
diligent and critical observer of those seemingly insignificant occurrences,
which acquire importance in the eyes of posterity, and are often of more value
than events of greater dignity. "On Monday after Candlemas-day, the gentlemen
of the inns of court performed their MASQUE at Court. They were sixteen in
number, who rode through the streets They went from Ely house.
, in four chariots, and two others to carry their pages and musicians; attended
by an hundred gentlemen on great horses, as well clad as every I saw any^ They
far exceeded in bravery [splendor] any Masque that had formerly been presented
by those societies, and performed the dancing part with much applause. In their
company, was one Mr. Read of Gray's-inn; whom all the women, and some men,
cried up for as handsome a man as the duke of Buckingham. They were well used
at court by the king and queen. No disgust given them, only this one accident
fell: Mr. May, of Gray's-inn, a fine poet, he who translated Lucan, came
athwart my lord chamberlain in the banqueting house At Whitehall.
, and he broke his staff over his shoulders, not knowing who he was; the king
present, who knew him, for he calls him HIS POET, and told the chamberlain of
it, who sent for him the next morning, and fairly excused himself to him, and
gave him fifty pounds in pieces. -- This riding-shew took so well, that both
king and queen desired to see it again, so that they invited themselves to
supper to my lord mayor's within a week after; and the Masquers came in a more
glorious show with all the riders, which were increased twenty, to
Merchant-taylor's Hall, and there performed again STRAFFORDE'S L^TTER^, Garrard
to ^^e Lord Deputy, dat. Feb. 27. 1633. vol. i. p. 207. It is added, "On
ShroveTuesday at night, the king and the lord per^ormed their Masque. The
templars were all invited, and well pleased, etc." See also p. 177. And Fr.
Osborn's TRADIT. MEM. vol. ii. p. 134. WORKS, edit. 1722. 8vo. It seems the
queen and her ladies were experienced actresses: for the same writer says, Jan.
9. 1633. "I never knew a duller Christmas than we had at Court this year; but
one play all the time at Whitehall! -- The queen had some little infirmity,
which made her keep in: only on Twelfth-night, she feasted the king at
Somerset House, and presented him with a play, newly studied, long since
printed, the FAITHFUL SHEPERDESS [of Fletcher] which the king's players acted
in the robes she and her ladies acted their PASTORAL in the last year." Ibid.
p. 177. Again, Jan. 11. 1634. "There is some resolution for a Mask at
Shrovetide: the queen, and fifteen ladies, are to perform, etc." Ibid. p. 360.
And, Nov. 9. 1637. "Here are to be two maskes this winter; one at Christmas,
which the king and the young noblesse do make; the other at Shrovetide, which
the queen and her ladies do present to the king. A great room is now building
only for this use betwixt the guard chamber and the banqueting house, and of
^ir, etc." Ibid. vol. ii. p. 130. See also p. 140. And Finett's PHILOXENIS,
"There being a mask in practice of the queen in person, with other great
ladies, etc." p. 198. See Whitelock, sub. an. 1632. She was [also] an actress
in Davenant's masque of the TEMPLE OF LOVE, with many of the nobility of both
sexes. In Jonson's CLORIDIA at Shrovetide, 1630. -- In Jon^on's Masque called
LOVE FREED FROM IGNORANCE AND FOLLY, printed in 1640. -- In W. Mountagu's
SHE^HEARD^S ORACLE, a Pastoral, printed in 1649. -- In the masque of ALBION'S
TRIUMPH, the Sunday after Twelfth-night, 1631. Printed 1631. -- I^ LUMINALIA,
or The F^stival of Light, a masque, on Shrove-tuesday in 1637. Printed Land.
1637. 4to. -- In SALMACIDA SPOLIA at Whitehall, 1639. Printed Land. 16^9. 4to.
The words, I believe, by Davenant; and the music by Lewis Richard, master of
her majesty's music. -- In TEMPE R^STORED, with fourteen other ladies, on
Shrove-tuesday at Whitehall, 1631. Printed Land. 1631. 4to. The words by
Aurelian Townsend. The king acted in some of these pieces. In the preceding
reign, queen Anne had given countenance to this practice; and, I believe. she
is the first of our queens that appeared personally in this most elegant and
rational amusement of a court. She acted in Daniel's Masque of THE VI^ION OF
THE FOUR GODDESS^S, with eleven other ladies, at Hampton Court, in 1604. Land.
1624. 4to. -- In Jonson's MASQUE OF QUEENS, at Whitehall, in 1609. -- In
Daniel's TETHYS'S FESTIVAL, a Masque, at the creation o^ prince Henry, Jun. 5.
1610. This was called the QUEEN'^ WAKE. Se^ Winwood. iii. 180. Daniel dedicates
to this queen a pastoral tragicomedy, in which she perhaps performed, called
HYMEN'S TRIUMPH. It was presented at Somerset House, where she magnificently
entertained the king on occasion of the marriage of lord Roxburgh. Many others,
I presume, might be added. Among the ENTERTAINMENTS at RUTLANDHOUSE, composed
by Davenant in the reign of Charles the first, there is a DECLAMATION, or
rather Disputation, with music, concerning Public E^tertainment by Moral
R^pres^ntation. The disputants are Diogenes and Ari^^ophanes. I am informed,
that among the manuscript papers o^ the late Mr. Thomas Coxeter, of Trini^y
college in Oxford, an ingenious and inqu^sitive gleaner of anecdotes for a
biogra^hy of English poets, there was a correspondence between sir Fulke
Greville and Daniel the poet, concerning improvements and reformations proposed
to be made in these court-interludes. But this subject will be more fully
examined, and further pursued, in its proper place.

After the Restoration, when the dignity of the old monarchical manners had
suffered a long eclipse from a Calvinistic usurpation, a feeble effort was made
to revive these liberal and elegant amusements at Whitehall. For about the year
1675, queen Catharine ordered Crown to write a Pastoral called CALISTO, which
was acted at court by the ladies Mary and Anne daughters of the duke of York,
and the young nobility. About the same time lady Anne, afterward queen, played
the part of Semandra, in Lee's MITHRIDATES. The young noblemen were instructed
by Better^on, and the princesses by his wife; who perhaps conceived Shakespeare
more fully than any female that ever appeared on the stage. In remembrance of
her theatrical instructions, Anne, when queen, assigned Mrs. Betterton an
annual pension of one hundred pounds. Langb. DRAM. P. p. 92. edit. 1691.
Cibber's APOL. p. 134.

This was an early practice in France. In 1540, Margaret de Valois, queen of
Navarre, wrote Moralities, which she called PASTORALS, to be acted by the
ladies of her court.


." But it was not only by the parade of processions, and the decorations of
scenery, that these spectacles were recommended. Some of them, in point of
poetical composition, were eminently beautiful and elegant. Among these may be
mentioned a masque on the story of Circe and Ulysses, called the INNER TEMPLE
MASQUE, written by William Brown, a student of that society, about the year
1620 Printed from a manuscript in Emanuelcollege at Cambridge, by Tho. Davies.
WORKS of W. Brown, Land. 1772. vol. iii. p. 121. In the dedication to the
Society the author says, "If it degenerate in kind from those other the
society has produced, blame yourselves for not keeping a happier muse." Wood
says that Brown "retiring to the inner temple, became famed there for his
poetry." ATH. OXON. i. p 492.
^ From this piece, as a specimen of the temple-masques in this view, I make no
apology for my anticipation in transcribing the following ode, which Circe
sings as a charm to drive away sleep from Ulysses, who is discovered reposing
under a large tree. It is addressed to Sleep.

THE CHARM.
Son of Erebus and Night!
Hye away, and aim thy flighte,
Where consorte none other foul
Than the batte and sullen owl:
Where, upon the lymber gras,
Poppy and mandragoras,
With like simples not a few,
Hang for ever drops of dew:
Where flows Lethe, without coil,
Softly like a stream of oil.
Hye thee thither, gentle Sleep!
With this Greek no longer keep.
Thrice I charge thee by my wand,
Thrice with moly from my hand
Do I touch Ulysses' eyes,
And with the iaspis. Then arise
Sagest Greek Page 135.
!
In praise of this song it will be sufficient to say, that it reminds us of
some favorite touches in Milton's COMUS, to which it perhaps gave birth. Indeed
one cannot help observing here in general, although the observation more
properly belongs to another place, that a masque thus recently exhibited on the
story of Circe, which there is reason to think had acquired some popularity,
suggested to Milton the hint of a masque on the story of Comus. It would be
superfluous to point out minutely the absolute similarity of the two
characters: they both deal in incantations conducted by the same mode of
operation, and producing effects exactly parallel.

From this practice of performing interludes in the inns of court, we may
explain a passage in Shakespeare: but the present establishment of the context
embarrasses that explanation, as it perplexes the sentence in other respects.
In the SECOND PART OF HENRY THE FOURTH, Shallow is boasting to his cousin
Silence of his heroic exploits when he studied the law at Clement's-inn. "I was
once of Clement's inn, where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet. Sil.
You were called lusty Shallow then, cousin. Shall. I was called any thing, and I
would have done any thing, indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little
John Doit of Staffordshire, etc. You had not four such swinge-bucklers in the
inns of court again. We knew where all the Bona Roba's were, etc. -- Oh, the
mad days that I have spent ACT iii. SC. iii.
!" Falstaff then enters, and is recognized by Shallow, as his brother-student
at Clement'sinn; on which, he takes occasion to resume the topic of his
juvenile frolics exhibited in London fifty years ago. "She Is old, and had Robin
Night work, before I came to Clement's inn. -- Ha, cousin Silence, that thou
had That that this knight and I have seen! Hah, Sir John, etc." Falstaffe's
recruits are next brought forward to be enrolled. One of them is ordered to
handle his arms: when Shallow says, still dwelling on the old favorite theme of
Clement'sinn, "He is not his craft-master, he does not do it right. I remember
at Mile-End Green, when I lay at Clement's-inn, I was then Sir Dagonet in
ARTHUR'S SHOW, there was a little quiver fellow, and he would manage you his
piece thus, etc." Does he mean, that he acted sir Dagonet at Mile-end Green, or
at Clement's-inn? By the application of a parenthesis only, the passage will be
cleared from ambiguity, and the sense I would assign will appear to be just. "I
remember at Mile-end Green, (when I lay at Clement's-inn, I was then Sir
Dagonet in ARTHUR'S SHOW,) there was a little quiver fellow, etc." That is, "I
remember, when I was a very young man at Clement's-inn, and not fit to act any
higher part than Sir Dagonet in the interludes which we used to play in the
society, that among the soldiers who were exercised in Mile-end Green, there
was one remarkable fellow, etc In the text, "When I laid at Clement's inn," i^
lodged, or lived. So Leland. "An old manor place, where in times paste sum of
the Moulbrays LAY for a starte." That is LIVED for a time, or sometimes^ ITIN.
vol. i. fol. 119. Again, "Master Page has translated the House, and now much
LYITH there." Ibid. fol. 121. And in many other places.
." The performance of this part of Sir Dagonet was another of Shallow's feats
at Clement's-inn, on which he delights to expatiate: a circumstance, in the
mean time, quite foreign to the purpose of what he is saying, but introduced,
on that account, to heighten the ridicule of his character. Just as he had told
Silence, a little before, that he saw Schoggan's head broke by ^alstaffe at the
court-gate, "and the very same day, I did fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a
fruiterer, behind Gray's-inn." Not to mention the satire implied in making
Shallow act Sir Dagonet, who was King Arthur's Fool. ARTHUR'S SHOW, here
supposed to have been presented at Clement's-inn, was probably an interlude, or
masque, which actually existed, and was very popular, in Shakespeare's age: and
seems to have been compiled from Mallory's MORTE ARTHUR, or the history of king
Arthur, then recently published, and the favorite and most fashionable romance
That Mile-end green was the place for public sports and exercises, we learn
from Froissart. In the affair of Tyler and Straw he says, "Then the king send
to them that they should all draw to a fair plain place, called Myle-end,
where the people of the city did sport themselves in the somer season." etc.
Berner's TRANSL. tom. i. c. 383. f. 262. a.
.

When the societies of the law performed these shows within their own
respective refectories, at Christmas, or any other festival, a
Christmas-prince, or revel-master, was constantly appointed. At a Christmas
celebrated in the hall of the Middle Temple, in the year 1635, the
jurisdiction, privileges, and parade, of this mock-monarch, are thus
circumstantially described See also Dugd. ORIG. Jurid. p. 15^. where many of
the circumstances of this officer are described at large: who also mentions, at
Lincoln's End, a KING OF THE COCKNEY^ on childermas-day, cap. 64. p. 247.
. He was attended by his lord keeper, lord treasurer, with eight white staves,
a captain of his band of pensioners and of his guard; and with two chaplains,
who were so seriously impressed with an idea of his regal dignity, that when
they preached before him on the preceding Sunday in the Temple church, on
ascending the pulpit, they saluted him with three low bows. He dined, both in
the hall, and in his privy-chamber, under a cloth of estate. The pole-axes for
his gentlemen pensioners were borrowed of lord Salisbury. Lord Holland, his
temporary Justice in Air, supplied him with venison, on demand: and the lord
mayor and sheriffs of London, with wine. On twelfth-day, at going to church, he
received many petitions, which he gave to his master of requests: And, like
other kings, he had a favorite, whom, with others, gentlemen of high quality,
he knighted at returning from church. His expenses, all from his own purse,
amounted to two thousand pounds STRAFFOLDE'S LETTERS, ut supr. vol. i. p. 507.
The writer adds, "All this is done, to make them fit to give the prince ^lector
a royal ent^rtainment, with masks, dancings, and some other exercises of wit in
orations or arraingments, that day they invite him."
. We are also told, that in the year 1635, "On Shrovetide at night, the lady
Hatton feasted the king, queen, and princes, at her house in Holborn. The
Wednesday before, the PRINCE OF THE TEMPLE invited the prince Elector and his
brother to a Masque at the Temple This, I think, was Davenant's TRIUMPHS OF
PRINCE D'AMOUR, written at their request for the purpose, in three days. The
music by H. and W. Laws. The names of the performers are at the end.
, which was very completely fitted for the variety of the scenes, and
excellently well performed. Thither came the queen with three of her ladies
disguised, all clad in the attire of citizens. -- This done, the PRINCE was
deposed, but since the king knighted him at Whitehall Ibid. p. 525. The writer
adds, "Mrs. Basset, the great lace-woman of Cheapside, went foremost, and led
the queen by the hand, etc." See ibid. p. 506.
."

But these spectacles and entertainments in our law-societies, not so much
because they were romantic and ridiculous in their mode of exhibition, as that
they were institutions celebrated for the purposes of merriment and festivity,
were suppressed or suspended under the false and illiberal ideas of reformation
and religion, which prevailed in the fanatical court of Cromwell. The
countenance afforded by a polite court to such entertainments, became the
leading topic of animadversion and abuse in the miserable declamations of the
puritan theologists; who attempted the business of national reformation without
any knowledge of the nature of society, and whose censures proceeded not so
much from principles of a purer morality, as from a narrowness of mind, and
from that ignorance of human affairs which necessarily accompanies the
operations of enthusiasm.

SECT. XVII.
WE are now arrived at the commencement of the sixteenth century. But before I
proceed to a formal and particular examination of the poetry of that century,
and of those that follow, some preliminary considerations of a more general
nature, and which will have a reference to all the remaining part of our
history, for the purpose of preparing the reader, and facilitating our future
inquiries, appear to be necessary.

On a retrospect of the fifteenth century, we find much poetry written during
the latter part of that period. It is certain, that the recent introduction
into England of the art of typography, to which our countrymen afforded the
most liberal encouragement, and which for many years was almost solely confined
to the impression of English books, the fashion of translating the classics
from French versions, the growing improvements of the English language, and the
diffusion of learning among the laity, greatly contributed to multiply English
composition, both in prose and verse. These causes, however, were yet immature;
nor had they gathered a sufficient degree of power and stability, to operate on
our literature with any vigorous effects.

But there is a circumstance, which, among some others already suggested,
impeded that progression in our poetry, which might yet have been expected
under all these advantages. A revolution, the most fortunate and important in
most other respects, and the most interesting that occur^ in the history of the
migration of letters, now began to take place; which, by diverting the
attention of ingenious men to new modes of thinking, and the culture of new
languages, introduced a new course of study, and gave a temporary check to
vernacular composition. This was the revival of classical learning.

In the course of these annals we must have frequently remarked, from time to
time, striking symptoms of a restless disposition in the human mind to rouse
from its lethargic state, and to break the bonds of barbarism. After many
imperfect and interrupted efforts, this mighty deliverance, in which the
mouldering Gothic fabrics of false religion and false philosophy fell together,
was not effectually completed till the close of the fifteenth century. An
event, almost fortuitous and unexpected, gave a direction to that spirit of
curiosity and discovery, which had not yet appeared in its full force and
extent, for want of an object. About the year 1453, the dispersion of the
Greeks, after Constantinople had been occupied by the Turks, became the means
of gratifying that natural love of novelty, which has so frequently led the way
to the noblest improvements, by the introduction of a new language and new
books^ and totally changed the state of letters in Europe But it should be
remembered, that some learned Grecians, foreseeing the persecutions impending
over their country, frequented Italy, and taught their language there, before
the taking of Constantinople. Some Gre^ks, who attended the Florentine council,
and never returned for fear of the Turks, founded the present royal library in
the city of Turenne. In the year 1401, the Greek emperor, unable to resist the
frequent insults of these barbarians, came into England to seek redress or
protection from Henry the fourth. He landed at Dover, attended by many learned
Greeks; and the next day was honorably received at Christ-church priory at
Canterbury, by the prior, Thomas Chyllenden. In a manuscript called SPECULUM
PARVULORUM, lib. 5. c. 30. MSS. Bibl. Lamb^th.
.

This great change commenced in Italy; a country, from many circumstances,
above all others peculiarly qualified and prepared to adopt such a deviation.
Italy, during the darkest periods of monastic ignorance, had always maintained
a greater degree of refinement and knowledge than any other European country.
In the thirteenth century, when the manners of Europe appear to have been
overwhelmed with every species of absurdity, its luxuries were less savage, and
its public spectacles more rational, than those of France, England, and
Germany. Its inhabitants were not only enriched, but enlightened, by that
flourishing state of commerce, which its commodious situation, aided by the
combination of other concomitant advantages, contributed to support. Even from
the time of the irruptions of the northern barbarians, some glimmerings of the
ancient erudition still remained in this country; and in the midst of
superstition and false philosophy, repeated efforts were made in Italy to
restore the Roman classics. To mention no other instances, Alberti Mussato He
was honored with the laurel, and died 1329.
of Padua, and a commander in the Paduan army against the Veronese, wrote two
Latin tragedies, ECERRINIS Printed at Venice, 1636. fol. with his EPISTOLAE,
ELEGI, SOLILOQUIA, ECLOGAE, CENTO OVIDIANUS, Latin History of Italy, and
BAVARUS ad Filium. And in Muratori's RER. ITAL. SCRIPTOR. ^om. x. Mediolan.
1727. P. 1. 123. 569. 769. 785. See also in THESAUR. ITAL. ^om. vi. part. ii.
Lugd. Bat. 1722. Among his inedited works are mentioned, LI^ER DE LIT^ NATURAE
ET FORTUNAE, on Natural Causes and Fate. And three books in heroic verse, on
the War against the Veronese abovementioned. The name and writings of Mussato
were hardly known, till they were brought forward to the public notice in the
ESSAY ON POPE; which I shall not be accused of partiality, as I only join the
voice of the world, in calling the most agreeable and judicious pi^ce of
criticism produced by the present age.
, or the fate of the tyrant Ecerinus of Verona, and ACHILLEIS, on the plan of
the Greek drama, and in imitation of Seneca, before the year 1320. The many
monuments of legitimate sculpture and architecture preserved in Italy, had
there kept alive ideas of elegance and grace; and the Italians, from their
familiarity with those precious remains of antiquity, so early as the close of
the fourteenth century, had laid the rudiments of their perfection in the
ancient arts. Another circumstance which had a considerable share in cl^aring
the way for this change, and which deserves particular attention, was the
innovation introduced into the Italian poetry by Petrarch: who, inspired with
the most elegant of passions, and clothing his exalted feelings on that
delicate subject in the most melodious and brilliant Italian versification, had
totally eclipsed the barbarous beauties of the Provencial troubadours; and by
this new and powerful magic, had in an eminent degree contributed to reclaim,
at least for a time, the public taste, from a love of Gothic manners and
romantic imagery.

In this country, so happily calculated for their favorable reception, the
learned ^ugitives of Greece, when their empire was now destroyed, found shelter
and protection. Hither they imported, and here they interpreted, their ancient
writers, which had been preserved entire at Constantinople. These being eagerly
studied by the best Italian scholars, communicated a taste for the graces of
genuine poetry and eloquence; and at the same time were instrumental in
propagating a more just and general relish for the Roman poets, orators, and
historians. In the mean time a more elegant and sublime philosophy was adopted:
a philosophy more friendly to works of taste and imagination, and more
agreeable to the sort of reading which was now gaining ground. The scholastic
subtleties, and the captious logic of Aristotle, were abolished for the mild
and divine wisdom of Plato.

It was a circumstance, which gave the greatest splendor and importance to
this new mode of erudition, that it was encouraged by the popes: who,
considering the encouragement of literature as a new expedient to establish
their authority over the minds of men, and enjoying an opulent and peaceable
dominion in the voluptuous region of Italy, extended their patronage on this
occasion with a liberality so generous and unreserved, that the court of Rome
on a sudden lost its austere character, and became the seat of elegance and
urbanity. Nicholas the fifth, about the year 1440, established public rewards
at Rome for composition in the learned languages, appointed p^ofessors in
humanity, and employed intelligent persons to traverse all parts of Europe in
search of classic manuscripts buried in the monasteries See "Dominei Georgii
DISSERTATIO de Nich. quinti erga Li^. et Literat. Viros Patroc^nio." Romans 1742.
4to. Added to his LIFE.
. It was by means of the munificent support of pope Nicholas, that Cyriac of
Ancona, who may be considered as the first antiquary in Europe, was enabled to
introduce a taste for gems, medals, inscriptions, and other curious remains of
classical antiquity, which he collected with indefatigable labor in various
parts of Italy and Greece See Fr. Burmanni PRAEFAT. ad Inscription. Gruterian.
Amstel. 1707. fol. Baluz. MISCELL. tom. vi. p. 539. Ant. Augustini DIALOG. DE
NUMI^MAT. ix. xi. Voss. de HISTOR. LAT. p. 809. His ITINERARIUM was printed at
Florence, by L. Mehus, 1742. 8vo. See Leon. Aretini EPISTOL. tom. ii. lib. ix.
p. 149. And GIORNAL. de' Letterati d'Italia. tom. xxi. p. 428. See the
COLLECTION of Inscriptions, by P. Apianus, and B. Amantius, Ingoldstat. 1634.
fol. at the MONUM. GADITAN.
. He allowed Francis Philelphus, an elegant Latin poet of Italy, about 1450, a
stipend for translating Homer into Latin Philelph. EPIST. xxiv. 1. xxxvi. 1. In
the EPISTLE of Philelphus, and in his ten books of SATIRES in Latin verse, are
many curious particulars relating to the literary history of those times.
Venet. fol. 1502. His NICOLAUS, or two books of Lyrics, is a panegyric on the
life and acts of pope Nicholas the fifth.
. Leo the tenth, not less conspicuous for his munificence in restoring letters,
descended so far from his apostolical dignity, as to be a spectator of the
POENULUS of Plautus; which was performed in a temporary theater in the court of
the capitol, by the flower of the Roman youth, with the addition of the most
costly decorations It was in the year 1513, on occasion of Juli^n Medicis,
Leo's brother, being made free of Rome. P. Jovius, HIST. lib. xi. ad calc. And
VIT. LEON. lib. iii. p. 145. Jovius says, that the actors were Roman^^
juventutis lepidissimi. And that several picces of poetry were recited at the
same time. Leo was also present at an Italian comedy, written by cardinal
Bibienna, called CALANDER, in honor of the Duchess of Mantua. It was acted by
noble youths in the spacious apartments of the Vatican, and Leo was placed in a
sort of throne. Jov. in VIT. p. 189.
: and Leo, while he was pouring the thunder of his anathemas against the
h^retical doctrines of Martin Luther, published a bulle of excommunication
against all those who should dare to censure the poems of Ariosto. It was under
the pontificate of Leo, that a perpetual indulgence was granted for rebuilding
the church of a monastery, which possessed a manuscript of Tacitus Paulus
Jovius relates an anecdote of pope Leo the tenth, which shows that some
passages in the classics were studied at the court of Rome to very bad
purposes. I must give it in his own ^ords. "Non caruit ^tiam in^amia, quod
parum honest nonnullos e cubiculariis suis (erant enim ^ tota Italia
nobilissimi) adamare, et cu^ his tenerius atque libere jocari videretur." In
VITA LEONIS X. p. 192.
. It is obvious to observe, how little conformable, this just taste, these
elegant arts, and these new amusements, proved in their consequences to the
spirit of the papal system: and it is remarkable, that the court of Rome, whose
sole design and interest it had been for so many centuries, to enslave the
minds of men, should be the first to restore the religious and intellectual
liberties of Europe. The apostolical fathers, aiming at a fatal and ill-timed
popularity, did not reflect, that they were shaking the throne, which they thus
adorned.

Among those who distinguished themselves in the exercise of these studies, the
first and most numerous were the Italian ecclesiastics. If not from principles
of inclination, and a natural impulse to follow the passion of the times, it
was at least their interest, to concur in forwarding those improvements, which
were commended, countenanced, and authorized, by their spiritual sovereign:
they abandoned the pedantries of a barbarous theology, and cultivated the
purest models of antiquity. The cardinals and bishops of Italy composed Latin
verses, and with a success attained by none in more recent times, in imitation
of Lucretius, Catullus, and Virgil. Nor would the encouragement of any other
European potentate have availed so much, in this great work of restoring
literature: as no other patronage could have operated with so powerful and
immediate an influence on that order of men, who, from the nature of their
education and profession, must always be the principal instruments in
supporting every species of liberal erudition.

And here we cannot but observe the necessary connection between literary
composition and the arts of design. No sooner had Italy banished the Gothic
style in eloquence and poetry, than painting, sculpture, and architecture, at
the same time, and in the same country, arrived at maturity, and appeared in
all their original splendor. The beautiful or sublime ideas which the Italian
artists had conceived from the contemplation of ancient statues and ancient
temples, were invigorated by the descriptions of Homer and Sophocles. Petrarch
was crowned in the capitol, and Raphael was promoted to the dignity of a
cardinal.

These improvements were soon received in other countries. Lascaris, one of the
most learned of the Constantinopolitan exiles, was invited into France by Lewis
the twelfth, and Francis the first: and it was under the latter of these
monarch that he was employed to form a library at Fontainbleau, and to
introduce Greek professors into the university of Paris Du Breul, ANTIQUITEZ de
Paris, live. ii. 1639. 4to. p. 563. Bembi HIST. VE^^T. par. ii. p. 76. And R.
Simon, CRITIQUE de la Bibl. Eccles. par du Pin, tom. i. p. 502. 512.
. Yet we find Gregory Typhernas teaching Greek at Paris, so early as the year
1472 Hody, p. 233.
. About the same time, Antonius Eparchus of Corsica sold one hundred Greek
books to the emperor Charles the fifth and Francis the first Morhoff,
POLYHIST. iv. 6.
, those great rivals, who agreed in nothing, but in promoting the cause of
literature. Francis the first maintained even a Greek secretary, the learned
Angelus Vergerius, to whom he assigned, in the year 1541, a pension of four
hundred livres from his exchequer Du Breul, ibid. p. 568. It is a just remark
of P. Victorius, that Francis the first, by founding beautiful Greek and Roman
types at his own cost, invited many students, who were caught by the elegance
of the impression, to read the ancient books. PRAEFAT. AD COMMENT. in octo
libr. Aristotelis d^ Opt. Stat^ Civitat.
. He employed Julius Camillus to teach him to speak fluently the language of
Cicero and Demosthe^es, in the space of a month: but so chimerical an attempt
necessarily proved abortive, yet it showed his passion for letters Alciati
EPISTOL. xxiii. inter GUDIANAS, page 109.
. In the year 1474, the parliament of Paris, who, like other public bodies,
eminent for their wisdom, could proceed on no other foundation than that of
ancient forms and customs, and were alarmed at the appearance of an innovation,
commanded a cargo of books, some of the first specimens of typography, which
were imported into Paris by a factor of the city of Mentz, to be seized and
destroyed. Francis the first would not suffer so great a dishonor to remain on
the French nation; and although he interposed his authority too late for a
revocation of the decree, he ordered the full price to be paid for the books.
This was the same parliament that opposed the reformation of the calendar, and
the admission of any other philosophy than that of Aristotle. Such was
Francis's solicitude to encourage the graces of a classical style, that he
abolished the Latin tongue from all public acts of justice, because the first
president of the parliament of^ Paris had used a barbarous term in pronouncing
sentence Matagonis de Matagonibus adversus Italogalliam Antonii Matharelli, p.
226.
: and because the Latin code and judicial processes, hitherto adopted in
France, familiarised the people to a base Latinity. At the same time, he
ordered these formularies to be turned, not into good Latin, which would have
been absurd or impossible, but into pure French Varillas, HIST. de Francois I.
livr. ix. page 381.
: a reformation which promoted the culture of the vernacular tongue. He was the
first of the kings of France, that encouraged brilliant assemblies of ladies to
frequent the French court: a circumstance, which not only introduced new
splendor and refinement into the parties and carousals of the court of that
monarchy, but gave a new turn to the manners of the French ecclesiastics, who
of course attended the king, and destroyed much of their monkish pedantry
Brantome, MEM. tom. i. p. 227. Mezerai, HIST. France, sur HEN. III. ^om. iii.
p. 446. 447.
.

When we mention the share which Germany took in the restitution of letters,
she needs no greater panegyric, than that her mechanical genius added, at a
lucky moment, to all these fortunate contingencies in favor of science, an
admirable invention, which was of the most singular utility in facilitating the
diffusion of the ancient writers over every part of Europe: I mean the art of
printing. By this observation, I do not mean to insinuate that Germany kept no
pace with her neighbors in the production of philological scholars. Rodolphus
Langius, a canon of Munster, and a tolerable Latin poet, after many struggles
with the inveterate prejudices and authoritative threats of German bishops, and
German universities, opened a school of humanity at Munster: which supplied his
countrymen with every species of elegant learning, till it was overthrown by
the fury of fanaticism, and the revolutions introduced by the barbarous
reformations of the anabaptistic zealots, in the year 1534 D. Chytraeus,
SAXONIA. ^. iii. p. 80. Trithem. p. 993. De S. E. Et D^ LU^INARI^. GERMAN. p.
239.
. Reuchlin, otherwise called Capnio, cooperated with the laudable endeavors of
Langius by professing Greek, before the year 1490, at Basil See EPISTOL.
CLAROR. VIROR. ad Reuchlin. p. m. 4. 17. Maius, in VITA REUCHLINI, etc. [See
supr. p. 376.]
. Soon afterward he translated Homer, Aristophanes, Plato, Xenophon,
Aeschines, and Lucian, into Latin, and Demosthenes into German. At Heidelberg
he founded a library, which he stored with the choicest Greek manuscripts. It
is worthy to remark, that the first public institution in any European
university for promoting polite literature, by which I understand these
improvements in erudition, appears to have been established at Vienna. In the
year 1501, Maximilian the first, who, like Julius Caesar, had composed a
commentary on his own illustrious military achievements, founded in the
university of Vienna a COLLEGE of POETRY. This society consisted of four
professors: one for poetry, a second for oratory, and two others for
mathematics. The professor of poetry was so styled, because he presided over
all the rest: and the first person appointed to this office was Conradus
Celtes, one of the restorers of the Greek language in Germany, an elegant Latin
poet, a critic on the art of Latin versification, the first poet laureate of
his country, and the first who introduced the practice of acting Latin
tragedies and comedies in public, after the manner of Terence Ce^tes dedicates
his AMOR^S, or Latin Elegies, to Maximilian, in a latin panegyric prefixed; in
which he compliments the emperor, "You who have this year endowed most
liberally the muses, long wandering, and banished from Germany by the calumnies
of certain unskilful men, with a college and a perpetual stipend: having,
moreover, according to a custom practiced in my time at Rome, delegated to me
and my successors, in your stead, the authority of creating and laureating
poets in the said college, etc." PANEG. PRIM. ad Maximilian. IMP. Signat. a.
ii. AMORES, etc. Noringb. 1502. 4to. The same author, in his DESCRIPTION of the
city of Nuremburgh, written in 1501, men^ions it as a circumstance of
importance and a singul^rity, that a person skilled in the Roman literature had
just begun to give lectures in a public building, to the ingenuous youth of
that city, in poetry and o^atory, with a salary of one hundred aurei, as was
the practice in the cities of Italy. Descript. URB. NORINGB. cap. xii.
. It was the business of this professor, to examine candidates in philology;
and to reward those who appeared to have made a distinguished proficiency in
classical studies with a crown of laurel. Maximilian's chief and general design
in this institution, was to restore the languages and the eloquence of Greece
and Rome See the imperial patent for erecting this college, in Freherus's
GERMAN. RERUM SCRIPTOR. VAR. etc. tom. ii. fol. Francof. 1602. p. 237. And by
J. Henry Van Seelen, Lubec. 4to. 1723. And in his SELECT. LITERAR. p. 488. In
this patent, the purpose of the foundation i^ declared to be, "restituere
abolitam prisci saeculi eloquentiam."
.

Among the chief restorers of literature in Spain, about 1490, was Antonio de
Lebrixa, one of the professors in the university of Alacala, founded by the
magnificent cardinal Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo. It was to the patronage of
Ximenes that Lebrixa owed his celebrity See Nic. Anton. BIBL. NOV. HISPAN. tom.
i. p. 104. -- 109.
. Profoundly versed in every species of sacred and profane learning, and
appointed to the respectable office of royal historian, he chose to be
distinguished only by the name of the grammarian L. Vives, de Causis
CO^^UPTARUM ART. ii. p. 72.
; that is, a teacher of polite letters. In this department, he enriched the
seminaries of Spain with new systems of grammar, in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew;
and, with a view to reduce his native tongue under some critical laws, he wrote
comparative lexicons, in the Latin, Castilian, and Spanish languages. These, at
this time, were plans of a most extraordinary nature in Spain; and placed the
literature of his country, which, from the phlegmatic temper of the inhabitants
was tenacious of ancient forms, on a much wider basis than before. To these he
added a manual of rhetoric, compiled from Aristotle, Tully, and Quintilian:
together with commentaries on Terence, Virgil, Juvenal, Persius, and other
classics. He was deputed by Ximenes, with other learned linguists, to
superintend the grand Complutensian edition of the bible: and in the conduct of
that laborious work, he did not escape the censure of heretical impiety for
exercising his critical skill on the sacred text, according to the ideas of the
holy inquisition, with too great a degree of precision and accuracy See Alvarus
Gomesius de VITA XIMENIS, lib. ii. page 43. Nic. Anton. ut supr. p. 109.
Imbonatus, BIBL. LATINOHEBR. p. 315.
.

Even Hungary, a country by no means unifo^mly advanced with other parts of
Europe in the common arts of civilisation, was illuminated with the distant
dawning of science. Mattheo Corvini, king of Hungary and Bohemia, in the
fifteenth century, and who died in 1490, was a lover and a guardian of
literature See Petr. Jaenichii NOTIT. BIBLIOTH. THORUNIENSIS, p. 32. Who has
written a DISSERTATION D^ meritis Matthiae Corvini in r^m literariam.
. He purchased innumerable volumes of Greek and Hebrew writers at
Constantinople and other Grecian cities, when they were sacked by the Turks:
and, as the operations of typography were now but imperfect, employed at
Florence many learned librarians to multiply copies of classics, both Greek and
Latin, which he could not procure in Greece See Joh. Alex. Brassicani PRAE^AT.
AD SALVIANUM, Basil. 1530. fol. And MADERUS DE BIBLIOTHECIS. p. 145. 149.
. These, to the number of fifty thousand, he placed in a tower, which he had
erected in the metropolis of Buda Anton. Bon^inii RER. HUNGAR. Decad. iv. lib.
7. p. 460. edit. 1690.
: and in this library he established thirty amanuenses, skilled in painting,
illuminating, and writing: who, under the conduct of Felix Ragusinus, a
Dalmatian, consummately learned in the Greek, Chaldaic, and Arabic languages,
and an elegant designer and painter of ornaments on vellum, attended
incessantly to the business of transcription and decoration Belius, APPARAT. AD
HISTOR. HUNGAR. Dec. i. cap. 5.
. The librarian was Bartholomew Fontius, a learned Florentine, the writer of
many philological works Among other things, he wrote Commentaries on Persius,
Juvenal, Livy, and Aristotle's POETIC^. He translated Phalaris's Epistles into
the Tuscan language, published at Florence 1491. Crescimbeni has placed him
among the the Italian po^ts. Lambeccius says, that in the year 1665, he was
sent to Buda by the emperor Leopold, to examine what remained in this library.
After repeated del^ys and difficulties, he was at length permitted by the Turks
to enter the room: where he saw about four hundred books, printed, and of no
value, dispersed on the floor, and covered with dust and filth. Lambeccius
supposes, that the Turks, knowing the condition of the books, were ashamed to
give him admittance. COMMENT. DE BIBL. VINDOBON. lib. ii. c. ix. p. 993.
, and a professor of Greek and oratory at Florence. When Buda was taken by the
Turks in the year 1526, cardinal Bozmanni offered for the redemption of this
inestimable collection, two hundred thousand pieces of the Imperial money: yet
without effect, for the barbarous besiegers defaced or destroyed most of the
books, in the violence of seizing the splendid covers and the silver bosses and
clasps with which they were enriched COLLECTIO Madero-Schmidiana, ACCESS. i. p.
310. seq. Belius, ut supr. tom. iii. p. 225.
. The learned Obsopaeus relates, that a book was brought him by an Hungarian
soldier, which he had picked up, with many others, in the pillage of king
Corvino's library, and had preserved as a prize, merely because the covering
retained some marks of gold and rich workmanship. This proved to be a
manuscript of the ETHIOPICS of Heliodorus; from which, in the year 1534,
Obsopaeus printed at Basil the first edition of that elegant Greek romance In
the PREFACE. See Neandri PRAEFAT. AD GNOMOLOG. Stobaei, p. 27.
.

But as this incidental sketch of the history of the revival of modern
learning, is intended to be applied to the general subject of my work, I hasten
to give a detail of the rise and progress of these improvements in England: nor
shall I scruple, for the sake of producing a full and uniform view, to extend
the enquiry to a distant period.

Efforts were made in our English universities for the revival of critical
studies, much sooner than is commonly imagined. So early as the year 1439,
William Byngham, rector of Saint John Zachary in London, petitioned king Henry
the sixth, in favor of his grammar scholars, for whom he had erected a
commodious mansion at Cambridge, called GOD'S HOUSE, and which he had given to
the college of Clare-hall: to the end, that twenty-four youths, under the
direction and government of a learned priest, might be there perpetually
educated, and be from thence transmitted, in a constant succession, into
different parts of England, to those places where grammar schools had fallen
into a state of desolation Ubi scholae grammaticales existunt de^olatae." Pat.
Hen. vi. ann. reg. xvii. p. 2. membr. 16.
. In the year 1498, Alcock bishop of Ely founded Jesus College in Cambridge,
partly for a certain number of scholars to be educated in grammar Rymer,
Foeder^ xii. 653. We find early establishments of this sort in the colleges of
Paris. In the year 1304, queen Jane founded the college of Navarre, at Paris,
for thirty theologists, thirty artists, and twenty GRAMMARIANS, who are also
called Enfans escholiers en grammaire. They are ordered to hear lectiones,
[lessons] materias, et versus, prout in scholis grammati^alibus consu^vit.
Boul. HIST. ACAD. PARIS. vol. iv. p. 74. But the college of AVE MARIA, at
Paris, founded in 1339, is for a Master and six boys only, from nine to sixteen
years. Boul. ibid. p. 261. The society of Metton college, in Oxford, founded in
1272, originally maintained in the university such boys as claimed kindred to
the founder, bishop Walter de Merton, in grammar learning, and all necessaries,
sometimes till they were capable of taking a degree. They were placed in
Nunhall, adjoining to the college on the ea^^. "Expens. factae per Thomam de
Herlyngton, pro pueris de genere fundatoris a fest. Epiph. usque ad fest. S.
Petri ad vincula, 21 Edw. iii. A. D. 1347." -- " Item, in filo albo et viridi,
et ceteris pertinenciis, ad reparationem vestium tam artistarum quam
GRAMMATICORUM, vid. Item, Mag. Joh. Cornubiens^ pro salario SCHOLAE, in tertio
quadragesimali, xd. Et hostiario [u^her] suo, ii d. ob. Item, Mag. Joh.
Cornubiensi pro tertio estivali, xd. Et hostiario suo. ii d. ob." A. Wood, MS.
Coll. Merton COLLECTAN. [Cod. MSS. Ballard. Bibl. Bodl. 46.]
. Yet there is reason to apprehend, that these academical pupils in grammar,
with which the art of rhetoric was commonly joined, instead of studying the
real models of style, were chiefly trained in systematic manuals of these
sciences, filled with unprofitable definitions and unnecessary distinctions:
and that in learning the arts of elegance, they acquired the barbarous
improprieties of diction which those arts were intended to remove and reform.
That the foundations I have mentioned did not produce any lasting beneficial
effects, and that the technical phraseology of metaphysics and casuistry still
continued to prevail at Cambridge, appears from the following anecdote. In the
reign of Henry the seventh, that university was so destitute of skill in
latinity, that it was obliged to hire an Italian, one Caius Auberinus, for
composing the public orations and epistles, whose fee was at the rate of
twenty-pence for an epistle MSS. Bibl. C. C. C. Camb. MISCELL. P. p. 194.
O^^icium magistri Glom^rioe. I observe here, that Giles du Vadis, or Aegidius
Dewes, successively royal librarian at Westminster, to Henry the seventh and
eighth, was a Frenchman. The last king granted him a salary for that office, of
ten pounds, in the year 1522. Priv. Sig. 13 Henr. viii. O^^ic. Pell. He was
preceptor in French to Henry eighth, prince Arthur, princess Mary, the kings of
France and Scotland, and the marquis of Exeter. Stowe, LONDON, p. 230. Among
other things of the sort, he wrote at the command of Henry, An Introductorie
for to learn to read, to prononnce, and to sp^ak French truly compyled for the
princess Mary. Land. p. Waley, 4to. [See Pref. Palsgrave's LESCLAIRCISSMENT].
He died in 1535.
. The same person was employed to explain Terence in the public schools "Quod
fecit admodum frigide, ut ea erant tempora." Lib. Matt. Archiep. Parker, MSS.
BAKER, MSS. Harl. 7046. f. 125, 6.
. Undoubtedly the same attention to a futile philosophy, to unintelligible
elucidations of Scotus and Aquinas, notwithstanding the accessions accruing to
science from the establishment of the Humfredian library, had given the same
tincture to the ordinary course of studies at Oxford. For, about the year 1468,
the university of Oxford complimented Chadworth bi^hop of Lincoln, for his care
and endeavors in restoring grammatical literature, which, as they represent,
had long decayed and been forgotten in that seminary Registr. Univ. Oxon. FF.
[EPISTOL. ACAD.] fol. 254. The Epistles in this Register, contain many local
anecdotes of the restoration of learning at Oxford.
.

But although these gleams of science long struggled with the scholastic cloud
which inveloped our universities, we find the culture of the classics embraced
in England much sooner than is supposed. Before the year 1490, many of our
countrymen appear to have turned their thoughts to the revival of the study of
classics: yet, chiefly in consequence of their communications with Italy, and,
as most of them were clergymen, of the encouragements they received from the
liberality of the Roman pontiffs Such of our countrymen as wrote in Latin at
this period, and were entirely educated at home without any connections with
Italy, wrote a style not more classical than that of the monkish latin
annalists who flourished two or three centuries before. I will instance only in
Ross of Warwick, author of the HISTORIA REGUM ANGLIAE, educated at Oxford, an
ecclesiastic, and esteemed an eminent scholar. Nor is the plan of Ross's
History, which was finished so late as the year 1483, less barbarous than his
latinity; for in writing a chronicle of the kings of England, he begins,
according to the constant practice of the monks, with the creation and the
first ages of the world, and adopts all their legends and fables. His motives
for undertaking this work are exceedingly curious. He is speaking of the method
of perpetuating the memories of famous men by statues: "Also in our churches,
tabernacles in stonework, or niches, are wrought for containing images of this
kind. For instance, in the new work of the college of Windsor, [i. e. saint
George's chapel,] such tabernacles abound, both within and without the
building. Wherefore, being ^requested, about the latter end of the reign of
king Edward the fourth, by the venerable master Edward Seymor, Master of the
Works there, and at the desire of the said king, to compile a history of those
kings and princes who have founded churches and cities, that the images placed
in those niches might appear to greater advantage, and more effectually
preserve the names of the persons represented; at the instance of this my
brother-student at Oxford, and especially at the desire of the said most noble
monarch, as also to exhilarate the minds of his royal successors, I have
undertaken his work, etc." Edit. Hearne, Oxon. 1745. p. 120. 8vo.
. Millyng, abbot of Westminster, about the year 1480, understood the Greek
language: which yet is mentioned as a singular accomplishment, in one, although
a prelate, of the monastic profession Leland, in V. One Adam Eston, educated at
Oxford, a Benedictine monk of Norwich, and who lived at Rome the greatest part
of his life, is said to have written many pieces in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
He died at Rome, in the year 1397. Tanner, p. 266. Leland mentions John Bate, a
Carmelite, of York, about the year 1429, as a Greek scholar. Scriptor. BATUS.
. Robert Flemmyng studied the Greek and Latin languages under Baptista Guarini
at Ferrara; and at his return into England, was preferred to the deanery of
Lincoln about the year 1450 Wood, HIST. UNIV. OXON. ii. 62. Wharton, APPEND. p.
155. Bate, viii. 21.
. During the reign of Edward the fourth, he was at Rome; where he wrote an
elegant Latin poem in heroic verse, entitled LUCUBRATIONES TIBURTINAE, which he
inscribed to pope Sixtus his singular patron Printed at Ferrara, 1477. 8vo. In
two book^. He was prothonotary to pope Sixtus. In this poem he mentions
Baptista Platina, the librarian at Rome; who, together with most of the Italian
scholars, was his familiar friend. See Carbo's funeral Oration on Guarini. I
know not whether one John Opicius, our countryman as it seems, and a Latin
poet, improved his taste in Italy about this time: but he has le^t some copies
of elegant Latin verses. MSS. COTTON. VESPAS. B. iv. One is, De regis H^nrici
s^^ timi in Galliam progressu. It begins, "Bella canant alii Trojae,
prostrataque dicant." Another is, De ejusdem laudibus sub pratextu rosae
purpureae, a dialogue between Mopsus and Melibeus. One of the poems, On
Christmas, has the date 1497.
. It has these three chaste and strong hexameters, in which he describes the
person of that illustrious pontiff.

Sane, quisquis in hunc oculos converterit acr^is,
In facie vultuque viri sublime videbit
Elucere aliquid, majestatemque verendam.
Leland assures us, that he saw in the libraries of Oxford a Greco-Latin
lexicon, compiled by Flemmyng, which has escaped my searches. He left many
volumes, beauti^ully written and richly illuminated, to Lincoln college in
Oxford, where he had received his academical education Lel. ibid.
. About the same period, John Gunthorpe, afterward, among other numerous and
eminent promotions, dean of Wells, keeper of the privy seal, and master of
King's hall in Cambridge, attended also the philological lectures of Guarini:
and for the polished latinity with which he wrote EPISTLES and ORATIONS,
compositions at that time much in use and request, was appointed by king Edward
the fourth Latin secretary to queen Anne, in the year 1487 Pat. 7. Edw. iv. m.
2. Five of his ORATIONS before illustrious personages ars extant, MSS. Bodl.
NE. F. ii. 20. In the same manuscript are his ANNOTATIONES quaedam CRITICAE in
v^rba quaedam apud poetas citata. He gave many books, collected in Italy, to
Jesus college at Cambridge. Lel. COLL. iii. 13. He was ambassador to the king
of Castile, in 1466, and 1470. Rymer, FOED. xi. 572. 653. Bale mentions his
Diver^i generis CARMINA. viii. 42. And a book on Rhetoric.
. The manuscripts collected in Italy, which he gave to both the universities of
England, were of much more real value, than the sumptuous silver image of the
virgin Mary, weighing one hundred and forty-three ounces, which he presented to
his cathedral of Wells Registr. Eccles. Wellens.
. William Gray imbibed under the same preceptors a knowledge of the best Greek
and Roman writers: and in the year 1454, was advanced by pope Nicholas the
fifth, equally a judge and a protector of scholars, to the bishopric of Ely
Wharton, ANGL. SACR. i. 672.
. This prelate employed at Venice and Florence many scribes and illuminators
One of those was Antoninus Marius. In Baliol college library, one of bi^hop
Gray's manuscripts has this entry. "Antonius Marii silius Florentinus civis
transcripsi ab originalibus exemplaribus, 2 Jul. 1448. etc." MSS. lxviii. [Apud
MSS. Langb. BAL. p. 81.] See Leland. COLL. iii. p. 21.
, in preparing copies of the classics and other useful books, which he gave to
the library of Baliol college in Oxford Leland, COLL. ut supr. p. 61.
, at that time esteemed the best in the university. John Phrea, or Free, an
ecclesiastic of Bristol, receiving information from the Italian merchants who
trafficked at Bristol, that multitudes of strangers were constantly crouding to
the capitals of Italy for instruction in the learned languages, passed over to
Ferrara; where he became a fellow-student with the prelate last mentioned, by
whose patronage and assistance his studies were supported Among Phrea's
EPISTLES in Baliol library, one is PRECEPTORI SUO GUARINO, whose epistles are
full of encomiums on Phreas, MSS. Bal. Coll. Oxon. G. 9. See ten of his
epistles, five of which are written from Italy to bishop Gray, MSS. Bibl. Bodl.
NE. F. ii. 20. In one of these he complains, that the bishop's remittances of
money had failed, and that he was obliged to pawn his books and clothes to Jews
at Ferrara.
. He translated Diodorus Siculus, and many pieces of Xenophon, into Latin He
also translated into latin Synesius's PANEGYRIC ON BALDNESS. Printed, Basil.
1521. 8vo. [Whence Abraham Flemming made his English translation, London,
1579.] Leland mentions some flowing latin heroics, which he addressed to his
patron Tipto^t, earl of Worcester, in which Bacchus expostulates with a goat
gnawing a vine. COLL. iii. 13. And SCRIPTOR. PHREAS. His COSMOGRAPHIA MUNDI is
a collection from Pliny. Leland, COLL. iii. p. 58. See MSS. Br. Twyne, 8. page
285.
. On account of the former work, he was nominated bishop of Bath and Wells by
pope Paul the second, but died before consecration in the year 1464 S^e Leland,
COLL. iii. 58. Wood, HIST. UNIV. OXON. ii. 76.
. His Latin Epistles, five of which are addressed to his patron the bishop of
Ely, discover an uncommon terseness and facility of expression. It was no
inconsiderable testimony of Phrea's taste, that he was requested by some of his
elegant Italian friends, to compose a new epitaph in Latin elegiacs for
Petrarch's tomb: the original inscription in monkish rhymes, not agreeing with
the new and improved ideas of Latin versification See Leland, COLL. iii. 13.
63. Leland says that he had the new epitaph, Novum ac ^legans. SCRIPTOR.
Phreas. "Tuscia me genuit, etc."
. William Selling, a fellow of All Souls college in Oxford, disgusted with the
barren and contracted circle of philosophy taught by the irrefragable
professors of that ample seminary, acquired a familiarity with the most
excellent ancient authors, and cultivated the conversation of Politian at
Bononia Leland, CELLINGUS.
, to whom he introduced the learned Linacer Id. ITIN. vi. f. 5.
. About the year 1460, he returned into England; and being elected prior of
Christ-Church at Canterbury, enriched the library of that fraternity with an
inestimable collection of Greek and Roman manuscripts, which he had amassed in
Italy Wood, HIST. UNIV. OXON. ii. 177. In a monastic OBITARY, cited by Wharton,
he is said to be, "Latina quoque et GRAECA lingua apprime institutus." It is
added, that he adorned the library over the prior's chapel with exquisite
sculptures, and furnished it with books, and that he glazed the south side of
the cloisters of his monastery, for the use of his studious brethren, placing
on the walls new TEXTS, or inscriptions, called CAROLI, or carols. ANGL. Sacr.
i. p. 145. ses.
. It has been said, that among these books, which were all soon afterward
accidentally consumed by fire, there was a complete copy of Cicero's Platonic
system of politics DE REPUBLICA This is asserted on the authority of Leland.
SCRIPTOR. ut supr. [See supr. p. 218.] Cardinal Pole expended two thousand
crowns in searching for Tully's Six Books DE REPUBLICA in Poland, but without
success. EPISTOL. Aschami ad Sturm. dat. 14 Sept. 1555. lib. i. p. 99. And
Sturmius, in a letter to Ascham [dat. 30 Jan. 1552.] says, that a person in his
neighborhood had ^lattered him with a promise of this inestimable treasure.
Barthius reports, that they were in the monastery of Fulda, on vellum, but
destroyed by the soldiers in a pillage of that convent. Christiani Feustell.
MISCELLAN. p. 47. Compare Mabillon. MUS. ITALIC. tom. i. p. 79. IsaacBullart
relates, that in the year 1576, during the siege of Moscow, some noble Polish
officers, accompanied by one Voinuskius, a man profoundly skilled in the
learned languages, made an excursion into the interior parts of Muscovy; where
they found, among other valuable monuments of ancient literature, Tully's
REPUBLIC, written in golden letters. ACAD. Art. Scient. tom. p. 87. It is to be
wished, that the same good fortune which discovers this work of Cicero, will
also restore the remainder of Ovid's FASTI, the lost Decads of Livy, the
ANTICATONES of Caesar, and an entire copy of Petronius.
. King Henry the seventh sent Selling in the quality of an envoy to the king
of France: before whom he spoke a most elegant Latin oration From his EPITAPH.
. It is mentioned on his monument, now remaining in Canterbury cathedral, that
he understood Greek. Doctor theologus Selling, GRAECA atque Latina
Lingua perdoctus. --
This is an uncommon topic of praise in an abbot's epitaph. William Grocyn, a
fellow of New college at Oxford, pursued the same path about the year 1488: and
having perfected his knowledge of the Greek tongue, with which he had been
before tinctured, at Florence under Demetrius Chalcondylas and Politian, and at
Rome under Hermolaus Barbarus, became the first voluntary lecturer of that
language at Oxford, before the year 1490 Wood, HIST. UNIV. OXON. i. 246. Se^
Fiddes's WOLSEY, p. 201.
. Yet Polydore Virgil, perhaps only from a natural partiality to his county,
affirms, that Cornelius Vitellus, an Italian of noble birth, and of the most
accomplished learning, was the first who taught the Greek and Roman classics at
Oxford ANGL. HISTOR. lib. xxvi. p. 610. 30. edit. Basil. 1534. fol. But he
seems to have only been schoolmaster of Magdalen or New-college. See Nic.
Harpsfield, HIST. ECCLES. p. 651. who says, that this Vitellius spoke his first
oration at Newcollege. "Qui primam suam ora^ionem in collegio Wiccamensi
hab^it."
. Nor must I forget to mention John Tiptoft, the unfortunate earl of Worcester;
who, in the reign of Henry the sixth, rivalled the most learned ecclesiastics
of his age, in the diligence and felicity with which he prosecuted the politer
studies. At Padua, his singular skill in refined Latinity endeared him to pope
Pius the second, and to the most capital ornaments of the Italian school See
Ware, SCRIPT. HIBERN. ii. 133. Camd. BRIT. p. 436. And the Funeral Oration of
Ludovico Carbo, on Guarini.
. His Latin Letters still remain, and abundantly prove his abilities and
connections In this correspondence, four letters are written by the earl, viz.
To Laurence More, John Fre or Phrea, William Atteclyff, and Magister Vincent.
To the earl are letters of Galeotus Martius, Baptista Guarini, and other
anonymous friends. MSS. Eccles. Cathedr. Lincoln.
. He translated Cicero's dialogue on FRIENDSHIP into English Printed by Caxton,
1481. fol. Leland thinks, that the version of Tully de Senectute, printed also
by Caxton, was made by this earl. But this translation was made by William of
Wyrcestre, or William Botoner, an eminent physician and antiquary, from the
French of Lawrence Premierfait, and presented by the translator to bishop
Wayn^lete, Aug. 20, 1473. See MSS. Harl. 4329. 2. 3. Typtoft also translated
into English two elegant Latin ORATIONS of Banatusius Magnomontanus, supposed
to be spoken by C. Scipio and C. Flaminius, who were rivals in the courtship of
Lucretia. This version was printed by Caxton, with Tully's two DIALOGUES
abovementioned. He has left other pieces.
. He was the common patron of all his ingenious countrymen, who about this
period were making rapid advances in a more rational and ample plan of study;
and, among other instances of his unwearied liberality to true literature, he
prepared a present of chosen manuscript books, valued at five hundred marcs,
for the increase of the Humphredian library at Oxford, then recently instituted
EPIST. Acad. Oxon. 259. Registr. F ^. ^. ^^^. I suspect, that on the earl's
execution, in 1470, they were never received by the university. Wood, ANTIQ.
Un. Oxon. ii. 50. Who adds, that the earl meditated a benefaction of the same
kind to Cambridge.
. These books appear to have been purchased in Italy; at that time the grand
and general mart of ancient authors, especially the Greek classics As the Greek
language became fashionable in the course of erudition, we find the petty
scholars affecting to understand Greek. This appears from the following passage
in Barclay's SHIP OF FOOLS, written, as we have seen, about the end of the
fifteenth century:

Another boasts himself that has been
In Greece at schools, and many other land;
But if that he were apposed Examined.
well, I wene
The Greeks letters he scant does understand.
Edit. 1570. ut supr. fol. 185. a. With regard to what is here suggested, of
our countrymen resorting to Greece for instruction, Rhenanus acquaints us, that
Lily, the famous grammarian, was not only intimately acquainted with the whole
circle of Greek authors, but with the dome^^ic life and familiar conversation
of the Greeks, he having lived some time in the island of Rhodes. PRAEFAT. ad
T. Mori EPIGRAM. edit. Basil. 1520. 4to. He staid at Rhodes five years. This
was about the year 1500. I have before mentioned a Translation of Vegetius's
TACTICS, written at Rhodes, in the year 1459, by John Newton, evinently one of
our countrymen, who perhaps studied Greek there. MSS. LAUD. Bibl. Bodl. Oxon.
K. 53. It must however be remembered, that the passion for visiting the holy
places at Jerusalem did not cease among us till late in the reign of Henry the
eighth. See The pilgrimage of sir Richard Torky^gton, parson of Mulberton in
Norfolk, to Jerusalem, An. 1517. Catal. MSS. vol. 2. 182. vol. 2. William Wey,
fellow of Eton college, celebrated mass cum cantu organico, at Jerusalem, in
the year 1472. MSS. James, Bibl. Bodl. vi. 153. See his ITINERARIES, MSS. Bibl.
Bodl. NE. F. 2. 12. In which are also some of his English rhymes on The Way to
Jerusalem. He went twice thither.

Barclay, in the same stanza, like a plain ecclesiastic, censures the
prevailing practice of going abroad for instruction; which, for a time at
least, certainly proved of no small detriment to our English schools and
universities.

But thou, vain boaster, if thou will take in hand
To study Knowledge.
cunning, and ydelnes despise,
Th'royalme of England might for thee suffice: --
In England is sufficient discipline,
And noble men endowed with science, etc.
And in another place, ibid. fol. 54. a.
One runs to Almayne, another into France,
To Paris, Padua.
Padway, Lombardy, or Spain;
Another to Bononia.
Bonony, Rome, or Orleaunce,
To Cayns, to C^en and Tholou^e.
Tholous, Athens, or Cologne in Germany.
Colayne:
And at the last returns home again,
More ignorant. --
Yet this practice was encouraged by some of our bishops, who had received
their education in English universities. Pace, one of our learned countrymen, a
friend of Erasmus, was placed for education in grammar and music in the family
of Thomas Langton, bishop of Winchester; who kept a domestic school within the
precincts of his palace, for training boys in these sciences. "Humaniores
literas (says my author) tanti estimabat, ut domestica schola pueros ac juvenes
ibi erudiendos curavit, etc." The bishop, who took the greatest pleasure in
examining his scholars every evening, observing that young Pace was an
extraordinary proficient in music, thought him capable of better things; and
sent him, while yet a boy, to the university of Padua. He afterward studied at
Bononia: for the same bishop^ by Will, bequeaths to his scholar, Richard Pace,
studying at Bononia, an exhibition of ten pounds annually for seven years. See
Pace's TRACTATUS de fructu qui ex doctrina percipitur, edit. Basil, 1517. 4to.
p. 27. 28. In which the author calls himself bishop Langton's a man^ minister.
See also Langton's Will, Cur. Praerog. Cant. Registr. MOON. qu. 10. Bishop
Langton had been provost of queen's college at Oxford, and died in 1501. At
Padua Pace was instructed by Cuthbert Tunstall, afterward bishop of Durham,
and the giver of many valuable Greek books to the university of Cambridge; and
by Hugh Latimer. TRACTAT. ut supr. p. 6. 99. 103. Leland, COLL. iii. 14.

We find also archbishop Wareham, before the year 1520, educating at his ow^
expense, for the space of twelve years, Richard Croke, one of the first
restorers of the Greek language in England, at the universities of Paris,
Louvain, and Leipsic: from which returning a most accomplished scholar, he
succeeded Erasmus in the Greek professorship at Cambridge. Croke dedicated to
archbishop Wareham his INTRODUCTIONES IN RUDIMENTA GRAECA, printed in the shop
of Eucharius Cervicornius, at Cologne, 1520.

With regard to what has been here said concerning the practice of educating
boys in the families of our bishops, it appears that Grosthead, bishop of
Lincoln in the thirteenth century, educated in this manner most of the nobility
in the kingdom, who were placed there in the character of pages: "Filios
Nobilium procerum regni, quos secum habuit DOMICELLOS." Joh. de Athona. in
CONSTIT. OTTOBON. Tit. 23. in VOC. BARONS. Cardinal Wolsey, archbishop of
York, educated in his house many of the young nobility. Fiddes's WOLSEY, p.
100. See what is said above of the quality of pope Leo's CUBICULARII, p. 411.
Fiddes cites a record remaining in the family of the earl of Arundel, written
in 1620, which contains instructions how the younger son of the writer, the
earl of Arundel, should behave himself in the family of the bishop of Norwich,
whither he is sent for education as page: and in which his lordship observes,
that his grandfather the duke of Nor^olk, and his uncle the earl of
Northampton^ were both bred as pages with bishopps. Fiddes, ibid. RECORDS. No.
6. c. 4. page 19. Sir Thomas More was educated as a page with cardinal Moreton,
archbishop of Canterbury, about 1490, who was so struck with his genius, that
he would often say at dinner, This child here waiting at table is so very
ingenious, that he will one day prove an extraordinary man. Mori UTOP. cited by
Stapleton, p. 157. 138. And Roper's MO^E, p. 27. edit. ut supr.


. For the Turkish emperors, now seated at Constantinople, particularly Bajazet
the second, freely imparted these treasures to the Italian emissaries, who
availing themselves of the fashionable enthusiasm, traded in the cities of
Greece for the purpose of purchasing books, which they sold in Italy: and it
was chiefly by means of this literary t^affic, that Cosmo and Laurence of
Medici, and their munificent successors the dukes of Florence, composed the
famous Florentine library Many of them were sent into Italy by Laurence of
Medicis, particularly John Lascaris. Varillas says, that Bajazet the second
understood Averroes's commentaries on Aristotle. ANECDOT. de Florence, p. 183.
P. Jovii ELOG. c. xxxi. p. 74. Lascaris also made a voyage into Greece by
command of Leo the tenth; and brought with him some Greek boys, who were to be
educated in the college which that pope had founded on mount Quirinal, and who
were intended to propagate the genuine and native pronunciation of the Greek
tongue. Jov. ut supr. c. xxxi.
.

It is obvious to remark the popularity which must have accrued to these
politer studies, while they thus paved the way to the most opulent and
honorable promotions in the church: and the authority and estimation with
which they must have been surrounded, in being thus cultivated by the most
venerable ecclesiastics. It is indeed true, that the dignified clergy of the
early and darker ages were learned beyond the level of the people The inferior
clergy were in the mean time extremely ignorant. About the year 1300, pope
Boniface the eighth published an edict, ordering the incumbents of ecclesiastic
benefices to quit their cures for a certain time, and to study at the
universities. [S^e his ten CONSTITUTIONES, in the BULLARIUM MAGNUM of Laertius
Cherubinus, tom. i. p. 198. seq. Where are his Erectiones studioru^ g^neralium
in civitate Firmana, Romae, et Avenione, A. D. 1303.] Accordingly our episcopal
registers are full of licenses granted for this purpose. The rector of
Bedhampton, Hants, being an accolite, is permitted to study for seven years
from the time of his institution, in lit^rarum s^ientia, on condition that
within one year he is made a subdeacon, and after seven ^ears a deacon and
priest. Mar. 5. 1302. Registr. PONTISSAR. Winton. fol. 38. Another rector is
allowed to study for seven years, in loco quem eligit et ubi viget studium
generale, 16 kal. Octobr. 1303. ibid. fol. 40. Another receives the same
privilege, to study at Oxford, Orleans, or Paris, A. D. 1304. ibid. fol. 42.
Another, being desirous of study, and able to make a proficiency, is licenced
to study in aliquo studio transmarino, A. D. 1291. ibid. fol. 84. This,
however, was three years before Boniface became pope. Another is to study per
terminum constitutionis novell^^, A. D. 1302. ibid. fol. 37. b. But these
dispensations, the necessity of which proves the illiteracy of the priests,
were most commonly procured for pretence^ of absence or neglect. Or, if in
consequence of such dispensations, they went to any university, they s^^m to
have misspent their time there in riot and idleness, and to have returned more
ignorant than before. A grievance to which Gower alludes in the VOX CLAMANTIS,
a poem which presents some curious pictures of the manners of the clergy, both
secular and monastic. cap. xvii. lib. 3. MSS. Coll. Omn. Anim. Oxon. xxix. Hic
loquitur de R^ctoribus illis, qui sub episcopo licentiati fingunt se ire
scolas, ut sub nomine vir^utis vitia corporalia frequentent.

Et sic Ars nostrum Curatum reddit inertem,
De longo studio fert nihil inde domum:
Stultus i^i venit, sed stul^ior inde redibit, etc.
By Ars we are here to understand the scholastic sciences, and by Curatus the
bebene^iced priest. But the most extraordina^y anecdote of incompetency which I
have seen, occurs so late as the year 1448. A rector is instituted by Waynslete
bishop of Winchester, on the presentation of Merton priory in Surrey, to the
parish of Sherfield in Hampshire. But previously he takes an oath before the
bishop, that on account of his insufficiency in letters, and d^^ault of
knowledge in the superintendence of souls, he will learn Latin for the two
following years; and at the end of the first year he will submit himself to be
examined by the bishop, concerning his progress in grammar; and that, if on a
second examination he should be found desicient, he will resign the benefice.
Registr. WAYNFLETE. Winton^ fol. 7. In the Statutes of New College at Oxford,
given in the year 1386, o^e of the ten chaplains is ordered to learn grammar,
and to be able to writ^; in order that he may be qualified for the arduous task
of as^isting the treasurers of the society in transcribing their Latin
evidences. STATUT. Coll. Nov. RUBRIC. 58. In the statutes of Bradgare college
in Kent, given in 1398, it is required that the governor of the house, who is
to be a priest, should read well, construe Latin well, and fing well, sciat
b^ne leger^, been cons^ruere, et been cantare. Dugd. MONAST. tom. iii. Eccles.
Collegiat. p. 118. col. 2. At an epis^opal visitation of saint Swithin's priory
at Winchester, an ample society of Benedict^^es, bishop William of Wykeham
orders the monastery to provide an INFORMATOR, or Latin preceptor, to teach the
priests, who performed the service in the church without knowing what they were
uttering and could not attend to the common stops^ to read grammatically, Feb.
8. 1386. MSS^ Harl. 328. These, indeed. were not secula^ prie^ts: the instance,
however, illustrates what is here thrown together.

Wiccliffe says, that the beneficed priests of his age "kunnen [know] not the
ten commandments, ne read their sauter, ne understand a verse of it." LIFE of
Wiccli^^e, p. 38. Nor were even the bishops of the fourteenth century always
very eminently qualified in literature of either sort. In the year 1387, the
bishop of Worcester informed his clergy, that the Lollards, a set of reformers
whose doctrines, a few ^anatical extravaganci^^ excepted, coincided in many
respects with the present rational principles of protestantism, were f^llowers
of MAHOMET. Wilkins, COUNCIL. tom. iii. p. 202. [See supr. p. 190. in the NOTES.]

But at this time the most shameful grossness of manners, partly owing to their
celibacy, prevailed among the clergy. In the statutes of the college of saint
Mary Ottery in Devonshire, dated 1337, and given by the founder bishop
Grandison, the following injunction occurs. "Item statuimus, quod nullus
Canonicus, Vicarius, vel Secundarius, pueros choristas [collegii] secum
pernoctare, aut in lectulo cum ipsis dormire, faciat seu permittat." Cap. 50.
MS. apud Archiv. Wulves. Winton. And what shall we think of the religious
manners and practices of an age, when the following precautions were thought
necessary, in a respectable collegiate church, consist^ng of a dean and six
secular canons, amply endowed? "Statutum est, quod siquis convictus fuerit de
peccato Sodomitico, vel art magica, etc." From the statutes of Stoke-Clare
college, in Suffolk, given by the dean Thomas Barnesley, in the year 1422.
Dugd. MONAST. ut supr. p. 169. col. 1.

From these horrid pictures let us turn our eyes, and learn to set a just value
on that pure religion, and those improved habits of life and manners, which we
at present enjoy.


. Peter de Blois, successively archdeacon of Bath and London, about the year
1160, acquaints us, that the palace of Becket, archbishop of Canterbury, was
perpetually filled with bishops highly accomplished in literature: who passed
their time there, in reading, disputing, and deciding important questions of
the state. He adds, that these prelates, although men of the world, were a
society of scholars: yet very different from those who frequented the
universities, in which nothing was taught but words and syllables, unprofitable
subtleties, elementary speculations, and trifling distinctions EPIST. Petr.
Blesens. vi. fol. 3. a. OPERA. edit. Paris. 1519. fol.
. De Blois was himself eminently learned, and one of the most distinguished
ornaments of Becket's attendants. He tells us, that in his youth, when he
learned the ARS VERSIFICATORIA, that is, philological literature, he was
habituated to an urbanity of style and expression: and that he was instituted,
not in idle fables and legendary tales, but in Livy, Quintus Curtius,
Suetonius, Josephus, Trogus Pompeius, Tacitus, and other classical historians
EPIST. cii. fol. 49. b.
. At the same time he censures with a just indignation, the absurdity of
training boys in the frivolous intricacies of logic and geometry, and other
parts of the scholastic philosophy; which, to use his own emphatical words,
"Nec domi, nec militiae, nec in foro, nec in claustro, nec in ecclesia, nec in
curia, nec alicubi prosunt alicui Ibid. That is, "Which are of no real use or
service, at home, in the camp, at the bar, in the cloister, in the court, in
the church, or indeed in any place or situation whatsoever."
." The Latin Epistles of De Blois, from which these anecdotes are taken, are
full of good sense, observations on life, elegant turns, and ingenious
allusions to the classics. He tells Jocelyne, bishop of Salisbury, that he had
long wished to see the bishop's two nephews, according to promise: but that he
feared he expected them as the Britons expected king Arthur, or the Jews the
Messiah EPIST. li. fol. 24. a.
. He describes, with a liveliness by no means belonging to the archdeacons of
the twelfth century, the difficulties, disappointments, and inconveniences, of
paying attendance at court "Ut ad ministeriales curiae redeam, apud forinsecos
janitores biduanam forte gratiam aliquis multiplici obsequio merebitur. --
Regem dormire, aut aegrotare, aut esse in consiliis, mentientur. -- Ostiarios
camerae confundat altissimus! Si nihil dederis ostiario actum est. Si nihil
attuleris ibis, Homer^, for as. Post primum Cerberum, tibi superest alius
horribilior Cerbero, Briareo terribilior, nequior Pygmalione, crudelior
Minotauro. Quantacunque tibi mortis necessitas, aut discrimen exhaeredationis
incubat, non intrabis ad regem." EPIST. xiv. fol. 8. b.
. In the course of his correspondence, he quotes Quintilian, Cicero, Livy,
Sallust, Seneca, Virgil, Quintus Curtius, Ovid, Statius, Suetonius, Juvenal,
and Horace, more frequently and familiarly than the fathers Latin and French,
the vernacular excepted, were the only languages now known. Foliot bishop of
London, cotemporary with De Blois and Becket, was esteemed, both in secular and
sacred literature, the most consummate prelate of his time. Becket, EPISTOL.
lib. iii. 5. Walter Mapes, their cotemporary, giving Foliot the same character,
says he was TRIUM peritissimus linguarum Latinae, Gallicae, Anglicae, et
lucidissime disertus in singulis. Apud. MSS. JAMES, xiv. p. 86. Bibl. Bodl. [EX
NUGIS CURIAL.]
. Horace seems his favorite. In one of the letters, he quotes a passage
concerning Pompey the Great, from the Roman History of Sallust, in six books,
now lost, and which appears at present only in part among the fragments of that
valuable historian "De magno Pompeio refert Sallustius, quod cum alacribus
saltu, cum velocibus cursu, cum validis vecte certabat, etc. etc." EPIST. xciv.
fol. 45. a. Part of this passage is cited by Vegetius, a favorite author of the
age of Peter de Blois. De RE MILIT. lib. i. c. ix. It is exhibited by the
modern editors of Sallust, as it stands in Vegetius.
. In the NUGAE CURIALIUM of MAPES, or some other manuscript Latin tract written
by one of the scholars of the twelfth century, I remember to have seen a
curious and striking anecdote, which in a short compass shows Becket's private
ideas concerning the bigottries and superstitious absurdities of his religion.
The writer gives an account of a dinner in Becket's palace; at which was
present, among many other prelates, a Cistercian abbot. This abbot engrossed
almost the whole conversation, in relating the miracles performed by Robert,
the founder of his order. Becket heard him for some time with a patient
contempt; and at length could not help breaking out with no small degree of
indignation, And these are your miracles!

We must however view the liberal ideas of these enlightened dignitaries of the
twelfth century under some restrictions. It must be acknowledged, that their
literature was clogged with pedantry, and depressed by the narrow notions of
the times. Their writings show, that they knew not how to imitate the beauties
of the ancient classics. Exulting in an exclusive privilege, the certainly did
not see the solid and popular use of these studies: at least they did not
choose, or would not venture, to communicate them to the people, who on the
other hand were not prepared to receive them. Any attempts of that kind, for
want of assistances which did not then exist, must have been premature; and
these lights were too feeble to dissipate the universal darkness. The writers
who first appeared after Rome was ravaged by the Goths, such as Boethius,
Prudentius, Orosius, Fortunatius, and Sedulius, and who naturally, from that
circumstance, and because they were Christians, came into vogue at that period,
still continued in the hands of common readers, and superseded the great
originals. In the early ages of Christianity a strange opinion prevailed, in
conformity to which Arnobius composed his celebrated book against the gentile
superstitions, that pagan authors were calculated to corrupt the pure theology
of the gospel. The prejudice however remained, when even the suspicions of the
danger were removed. But I return to the progress of modern letters in the
fifteenth century.

SECT. XVIII.
SOON after the year 1500, Lillye, the famous grammarian, who had learned Greek
at Rhodes, and had afterward acquired a polished Latinity at Rome, under
Johannes Sulpicius and Pomponius Sabinus, became the first teacher of Greek at
any public school in England. This was at saint Paul's school in London, then
newly established by dean Colet, and celebrated by Erasmus; and of which
Lillye, as one of the most exact and accomplished scholars of his age, was
appointed the first master Knight, LIFE of Colet, p. 19. Pace, abovementioned,
in the Epistle dedica^ory to Colet, before his Treatise De fructu qui ex
Doctrina percipitur, thus compliments Lillye, edit. Basil. ut supr. 1517. p.
13. "Ut politiorem Latinitatem, et ipsam Romanam linguam, in Britanniam nostram
introduxisse videatur. -- Tanta [ei] ^ruditio, ut extrusa barbary, in qua
nostri adolescentes solebant fere aetatem consumere, etc." Erasmus says, in
1514, that he had taught a youth, in three years, more Latin than he could have
acquired in any school in England, n^ Liliana quidam ^xcepta, not even Lillye's
excepted. EPISTOL. 165. p. 140. tom. iii.
. And that ancient prejudices were now gradually wearing off, and a national
taste for critical studies and the graces of composition began to be diffused,
appears from this circumstance alone: that from the year one thousand five
hundred and three to the reformation, there were more grammar schools, most of
which at present are perhaps of little use and importance, founded and endowed
in England, than had been for three hundred years before. The practice of
educating our youth in the monasteries growing into disuse, near twenty new
grammar schools were established within this period: and among these, Wolsey's
school at Ipswich, which soon fell a sacrifice to the resentment or the avari^e
of Henry the eighth, deserves particular notice, as it rivalled those of
Winchester and Eton. To give splendour to the institution^ beside the scholars,
it consisted of a dean, twelve canons, and a numerous choir Tanner, NOTIT. MON.
p. 520.
. So attached was Wolsey to the new modes of instruction, that he did not think
it inconsistent with his high office and rank, to publish a general address to
the schoolmasters of England, in which he orders them to institute their youth
in the most elegant literature "Elegantissima literatura." Fiddes's WOLSEY.
COLL. p. 105.
. It is to be wished that all his edicts had been employed to so liberal and
useful a purpose. There is an anecdote on record, which strongly marks Wolsey's
character in this point of view. Notwithstanding his habits of pomp, he once
condescended to be a spectator of a Latin tragedy of DIDO, from Virgil, acted
by the scholars of saint Paul's school, and written by John Rightwise, the
master, an eminent grammarian Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. 15. See what is said of this
practice, supr. p. 386.
. But Wolsey might have pleaded the authority of pope Leo the tenth, who more
than once had been present at one of these classical spectacles.

It does not however appear, that the cardinal's liberal sentiments were in
general adopted by his brother prelates. At the foundation of saint Paul's
school abovementioned, one of the bishops, eminent for his wisdom and gravity,
at a public assembly, severely censured Colet the founder for suffering the
Latin poets to be taught in the new structure, which he therefore styled a
house of pagan idolatry "Episcopum quendam, et eum qui habetur a
SAPIENTIORIBUS, in magno hominum Conventu, nostram scholam blasphemasse,
dixisseque, me erexisse rem inutilem, imo malam, imo etiam, ut illius verbis
utar, Do^um Idololatri^e, etc." [Coletus Erasmo. Land. 1517.] Knight's LIFE OF
COL^T, p. 319.
.

In the year 1517, Fox, bishop of Winchester, founded a college at Oxford, in
which he constituted, with competent stipends, two professors for the Greek and
Latin languages STATUT. C. C. C. Oxon. dat. Jun. 20. 1517. CAP. xx. fol. 51.
Bibl. Bodl. MSS LAUD. I. 56.
. Although some slight idea of a classical lecture had already appeared at
Cambridge in the system of collegiate discipline At Christ's college in
Cambridge, where, in the ^tatutes given in 1506, a lecturer is established;
who, together with logic and philosophy is ordered to read, "vel ex poetarum,
vel ex oratorum operibus." Cap. xxxvii. In the statutes of King's at Cambridge,
and New college at Oxford, both much more ancient, an instructour is appointed
with the general name of INFORMATOR only, who taught all the learning then in
vogue. ROTUL. COMPUT. vet. Coll. Nov. Oxon. "Solut. Informatoribus sociorum et
scolarium, iv l. xiis. ii d."
, this philological establishment may justly be looked upon, as the first
conspicuous instance of an attempt to depart from the narrow plan of education,
which had hitherto been held sacred in the universities of England. The course
of the Latin professor, who is expressly directed to extirpate BARBARISM from
the new society "Lector seu professor artium humaniorum... BARBARIEM a nostro
alveario exstirpet." STATUT. ut supr.
, is not confined to the private limits of the college, but open to the
students of Oxford in general. The Greek lecturer is ordered to explain the
best Greek classics: and the poets, historians, and orators, in that language,
which the judicious founder, who seems of have consulted the most intelligent
scholars of the times, recommends by name on this occasion, are the purest, and
such as are most esteemed even in the present improved state of ancient
learning. And it is at the same time worthy of remark, that this liberal
prelate, in forming his plan of study, does not appoint a philosophy-lecturer
in his college, as had been the constant practice in most of the previous
foundations: perhaps suspecting, that such an endowment would not have
coincided with his new course of erudition, and would have only served to
encourage that species of doctrine, which had so long choked the paths of
science, and obstructed the progress of useful knowledge^

These happy beginnings in favor of new and a rational system of academical
education, were seconded by the auspicious munificence of cardinal Wolsey.
About the year 1519, he founded a public chair at Oxford, for rhetoric and
humanity, and soon afterward another for teaching the Greek language; endowing
both with ample salaries Wood, HIST. Univ. Oxon. i. 245. 246. But see Fiddes's
WOLSEY, p. 197.
. About the year 1524, king Henry the eighth, who destroyed or advanced
literary institutions from caprice, called Robert Wakefield, originally a
student of Cambridge, but now a professor of humanity at Tubingen in Germany,
into England, that one of his own subjects, a linguist of so much celebrity,
might no longer teach the Greek and oriental languages abroad: and when
Wakefield appeared before the king, his majesty lamented, in the strongest
expressions of concern, the total ignorance of his clergy and the universities
in the learned tongues; and immediately assigned him a competent stipend for
opening a lecture at Cambridge, in this necessary and neglected department of
letters Wakefield's ORATION DE LAUDIBUS TRIUM LINGUARUM, etc. Dated at
Cambridge, 1524. Printed for W. de Word, 4to. Signa^^ C. ii. See also FAST.
A^ad. Lovan^ by Val. Andreas, p. 284. edit. 1650.
. Wakefield was afterward a preserver of many copies of the Greek classics, in
the havoc of the religious houses. It is recorded by Fox, the martyrologist,
as a memorable occurrence ACT. MON. fol. 1192. edit. 1583.
, and very deservedly, that about the same time, Robert Barnes, prior of the
Augustines at Cambridge, and educated at Louvain, with the assistance of his
scholar Thomas Parnell, explained within the walls of his own monastery,
Plautus, Terence, and Cicero, to those academics who saw the utility of
philology, and were desirous of deserting the Gothic philosophy. It may seem at
first surprising, that Fox, a weak and prejudiced writer, should allow any
merit to a catholic: but Barnes afterward appears to have been one of Fox's
martyrs, and was executed at the stake in Smithfield for a defense of
Lutheranism.

But these innovations in the system of study were greatly discouraged and
opposed by the friends of the old scholastic circle of sciences, and the
bigoted partisans of the catholic communion, who stigmatized the Greek
language by the name of heresy. Even bishop Fox, when he founded the Greek
lecture abovementioned, that he might not appear to countenance a dangerous
novelty, was obliged to cover his excellent institution under the venerable
mantle of the authority of the church. For as a seeming apology for what he had
done, he refers to a canonical decree of pope Clement the fifth, promulged in
the year 1311, at Vienne in Dauphine, which enjoined, that professors of Greek,
Hebrew, and Arabic, should be instituted in the universities of Oxford, Paris,
Bononia, Salamanca, and in the cout of Rome "Quem praeter^a in nostro Alveario
collocavimus, quod SACROSANCTI CANONES commodissime pro bonis literis, et
imp^imis christianis, instituerunt ac jusserunt, cum in ha^ universitate
Oxoniensi, perinde ac paucis aliis celeberrimis gymnasiis, nunquam desiderari."
STATUT. C. C. C. Oxon. ut supr. The words of this statute which immediately
follow, deserve notice here, and require explanation. "Nec tamen Eos hac
ratione excusatos volumus, qui Gra^cam lectionem in co SUIS IMPENSIS su^^entare
debent." By Eos, he means the bishops and abbots of England, who are the
persons particularly ordered in pope Clement^s injunction to sustain these
lectures in the university of Oxford. Bishop Fox, therefore, in founding a
Greek lecture, would be understood, that he does not mean to absolve or excuse
the other prelates of England from doing their proper duty in this nec^^sary
business. At the same time a charg^ on their negligence s^^ms to be implied.
. It was under the force of this ecclesiastical constitution, that Gregory
Typhernas, one of the learned Greek exiles, had the address to claim a stipend
for teaching Greek in the university of Paris Naud. i. 3. p. 234. This was in
1472.
. We cannot but wonder at the strange disagreement in human affairs between
cause and effect, when we consider, that this edict of pope Clement, which
originated from a superstitious reverence annexed to two of these languages,
because they composed part of the superscription on the cross of Christ, should
have so strongly counteracted its own principles, and proved an instrument in
the reformation of religion.

The university of Oxford was rent into factions on account of these bold
attempts; and the advocates of the recent improvements, when the gentler
weapons of persuasion could not prevail, often proceeded to blows with the
rigid champions of the schools. But the facetious disposition of sir Thomas
More had no small share in deciding this singular controversy, which he treated
with much ingenious ridicule See, among other proofs, his E^ISTOLA Scholasticis
quibusdam Trojanos se appellantibus, published by Hearne, 1716, 8vo.
. Erasmus, about the same time, was engaged in attempting these reformations at
Cambridge: in which, notwithstanding the mildness of his temper and conduct,
and the general luster of his literary character, he met with the most
obstinate opposition. He expounded the Greek grammar of Chrys^loras in the
public schools without an audience Erasmi EPIST. Ammonio, dat. 1512. Ep. 123.
Op. tom. iii. p. 110.
: and having, with a view to present the Grecian literature in the most
specious and agreeable form by a piece of pleasantry, translated Lucian's
lively dialogue called ICAROMENIPPUS, he could find no student in the
university capable of transcribing the Greek with the Latin Ibid. EPIST. 139.
dat. 1512. p. 120. Henry Bullock, called Bovillus, one of E^asmus's friends,
and much patronised by Wolsey, printed a Latin translation of Lu^ian, (...), at
Cambridge, 1521, quarto.
. His edition of the Greek testament, the most commodious that had yet
appeared, was absolutely proscribed at Cambridge: and a programma was issued in
one of the most ample colleges, threatening a severe fine to any member of the
society, who should be detected in having so fantastic and impious a book in
his possession Ibid. EPIST. 148. dat. 1513. p. 126.
. One Henry Standish, a doctor in divinity and a mendicant friar, afterward
bishop of saint Asaph, was a vehement adversary of Erasmus in the promotion of
this heretical literature; whom he called in a declamation, by way of reproach,
Graeculus ist^, which soon became a synonymous appellation for an heretic See
Erasmi O^ERA. tom^ ix. p. 1440. Even the priests, in their confessions of young
scholars, cautioned against this growing evil. "Cave a Gr^^cis ne fias
haereticus." Erasm. ADAG. Op. ii. 993.
. Yet it should be remembered, that many English prelates patronised Erasmus;
and that one of our archbishops was at this time ambi^ious of learning Greek
Erasm. EPIST. 301.
.

Even the public diversions of the court took a tincture from this growing
attention to the languages, and assumed a classical air. We have before seen,
that a comedy of Plautus was acted at the royal palace of Greenwich in the year
1520. And when the French ambassadors with a most splendid suite of the French
nobility were in England for the ratification of peace in the year 1514, amid
the most magnificent banquets, tournaments, and masks, exhibited at the same
palace, they were entertained with a Latin interlude; or, to use the words of a
cotemporary writer, with such an "excellent Interlude made in Latin, that I
never heard the like; the actors apparel being so gorgious, and of such strange
devices, that it passes my capacity to relate them Cavendish, MEM. Card.
Wolsey, p. 94. edit. 1708. 8vo.
."

Nor was the protection of king Henry the eighth, who notwithstanding he had
attacked the opinions of Luther, yet, from his natural liveliness of temper and
a love of novelty, thought favorably of the new improvements, of
inconsiderable influence in supporting the restoration of the Greek language.
In 1519, a preacher at the public church of the university of Oxford, harangued
with much violence, and in the true spirit of the ancient orthodoxy, against
the doctrines inculcated by the new professors: and his arguments were
canvassed among the students with the greatest animosity. But Henry, being
resident at the neighboring royal manor of Woodstock, and having received a
just detail of the merits of this dispute from Pace and More, interposed his
uncontrovertible authority; and transmitting a royal mandate to the university,
commanded that the study of the scriptures in their original languages should
not only be permitted for the future, but received as a branch of the
academical institution Erasm. E^IST. 380. tom. iii.
. Soon afterward, one of the king's chaplains preaching at court, took an
opportunity to censure the genuine interpretations of the scriptures, which the
Grecian learning had introduced. The king, when the sermon was ended, to which
he had listened with a smile of contempt, ordered a solemn disputation to be
held, in his own presence: at which the unfortunate preacher opposed, and sir
Thomas More, with his usual dexterity, defended, the utility and excellence of
the Greek language. The divine, who at least was a good courtier, instead of
vindicating his opinion, instantly fell on his knees, and begged pardon for
having given any offense in the pulpit before his majesty. However, after some
slight altercation, the preacher, by way of making some sort of concession in
form, ingenuously declared, that he was now better reconciled to the Greek
tongue, because it was derived from the Hebrew. The king, astonished at his
ridiculous ignorance, dismissed the chaplain, with a charge, that he should
never again presume to preach at court Ibid. p. 408.
. In the grammatical schools established in all the new cathedral foundations
of this king, a master is appointed, with the uncommon qualification of a
competent skill in both the learned languages Statuimus praeterea, ut per
Decanum, etc. unus [Archididascalus] "eligatur, Latin et Gra^ce doctus, bonae
famae, etc." STATUT. Eccles. Roffens. cap. xxv. They were given Jun. 30, 1545.
In the same st^tute the second master is required to be only Latin doctus. All
the statutes of the new cathedrals are alike. It is remarkable, that Wolsey
does not order Greek to be taught in his school at Ipswich, founded 1528. See
Strype, ECCL. MEM. i. Append. xxxv. p. 94. seq.
. In the year 1523, Ludovicus Viv^s, having dedicated his commentary on
Austin's DE CIVITATE DEI to Henry the eighth, was invited into England, and
read lectures at Oxford in jurisprudence and humanity; which were countenanced
by the presence, not only of Henry, but of queen Catharine and some of the
principal nobility Twyne, APOL. lib. ii.. 210. seq. Probaby he was patronised
by Catharine as a Spaniard.
. At length ancient absurdities universally gave way to these encouragements.
Even the vernacular language began to be cultivated by the more ingenious
clergy. Colet, dean of saint Paul's, a divine of profound learning, with a view
to adorn and improve the style of his discourses, and to acquire the graces of
an elegant preacher, employed much time in reading Gower, Chaucer, and Lydgate,
and other English poets, whose compositions had embellished the popular diction
Erasm. EPISTOL. Jodoco Jonae. Ibid. Jun. 1521.
. The practice of frequenting Italy, for the purpose of acquiring the last
polish to a Latin style both in eloquence and poetry, still continued in vogue;
and was greatly promoted by the connections, authority, and good taste, of
cardinal Pole, who constantly resided at the court of Rome in a high character.
At Oxford, in particular, these united endeavors for establishing a new course
of liberal and manly science, were finally consummated in the magnificent
foundation of Wolsey's college, to which all the accomplished scholars of every
country in Europe were invited; and for whose library, transcripts of all the
valuable manuscripts which now fill the Vatican, were designed Wood, HIST.
UNIV. OXON, i. 249.
.

But the progress of these prosperous beginnings was soon obstructed. The first
obstacle I shall mention, was, indeed, but of short duration. It was however an
unfavourable circumstance, that in the midst of this career of science, Henry,
who had ever been accustomed to gratify his passions at any rate, sued for a
divorce against his queen Catharine. The legality of this violent measure being
agitated with much deliberation and solemnity, wholly engrossed the attention
of many able philologists, whose genius and acquisitions were destined to a
much nobler employment; and tended to revive for a time the frivolous
subtleties of casuistry and theology.

But another cause which suspended the progression of these letters, of much
more importance and extent, ultimately most happy in its consequences, remains
to be mentioned. The enlarged conceptions acquired by the study of the Greek
and Roman writers seem to have restored to the human mind a free exertion of
its native operations, and to have communicated a certain spirit of enterprise
in examining every subject: and at length to have released the intellectual
capacity of mankind from that habitual subjection, and that servility to
system, which had hitherto prevented it from advancing any new principle, or
adopting any new opinion. Hence, under the concurrent assistance of a
preparation of circumstances, all centering in the same period, arose the
reformation of religion. But this defection from the catholic communion,
alienated the thoughts of the learned from those pursuits by which it was
produced; and diverted the studies of the most accomplished scholars, to
inquiries into the practices and maxims of the primitive ages, the nature of
civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the authority of scripture and
tradition, of popes, councils, and schoolmen: topics, which men were not yet
qualified to treat with any degree of penetration, and on which the ideas of
the times unenlightened by philosophy, or warped by prejudice and passion, were
not calculated to throw just and rational illustrations. When the bonds of
spiritual unity were once broken, this separation from an established faith
ended in a variety of subordinate sects, each of which called forth its
respective champions into the field of religious contention. The several
princes of christendom were politically concerned in these disputes; and the
courts in which poets and orators had been recently caressed and rewarded, were
now filled with that most deplorable species of philosophers, polemical
metaphysicians. The public entry of Luther into Worms, when he had been
summoned before the diet of that city, was equally splendid with that of the
emperor Charles the fifth Luther, Op. ii. 412. 414.
. Rome in return, roused from her deep repose of ten centuries, was compelled
to vindicate her insulted doctrines with reasoning and argument. The profound
investigations of Aquinas once more triumphed over the graces of the Ciceronian
urbanity; and endless volumes were written on the expediency of auricular
confession, and the existence of purgatory. Thus the cause of polite literature
was for awhile abandoned; while the noblest abilities of Europe were wasted in
theological speculation, and absorbed in the abyss of controversy. Yet it must
not be forgotten, that wit and raillery, drawn from the sources of elegant
erudition, were sometimes applied, and with the greatest success, in this
important dispute. The lively colloquies of Erasmus, which exposed the
superstitious practices of the papists, with much humor, and in pure Latinity,
made more protestants than the ten tomes of John Calvin. A work of ridicule was
now a new attempt: and it should be here observed, to the honor of Erasmus,
that he was the first of the literary reformers who tried that species of
composition, at least with any degree of popularity. The polite scholars of
Italy had no notion that the German theologists were capable of making their
readers laugh: they were now convinced of their mistake, and soon found that
the German pleasantry prepared the way for a revolution, which proved of the
most serious consequence to Italy.

Another great temporary che^k given to the general state of letters in England
at this period, was the dissolution of the monasteries. Many of the abuses in
civil society are attended with some advantages. In the beginnings of
reformation, the loss of these advantages is always felt very sensibly: while
the benefit arising from the change is the slow effect of time, and not
immediately perceived or enjoyed. Scarce any institution can be imagined less
favorable to the interests of mankind than the monastic. Yet these seminaries,
although they were in a general view the nurseries of illiterate indolence, and
undoubtedly deserved to be ^uppressed under proper restrictions, contained
invitations and opportunities to studious leisure and literary pursuits. On
this event therefore, a visible revolution and decline in the national state of
learning succeeded. Most of the youth of the kingdom betook themselves to
mechanical or other illiberal employments, the profession of letters being now
supposed to be without support and reward. By the abolition of the religious
houses, many towns and their adjacent villages were utterly deprived of their
only means of instruction. At the beginning of the reign of queen Elizabeth,
Williams, speaker of the house of commons, complained to her majestry, that
more than an hundred flourishing schools were destroyed in the demolition of
the monasteries, and that ignorance had prevailed ever since Strype, ANN. REF.
p. 292. sub ann. 1562. The greater abbeys appear to have had the direction of
other schools in their neighborhood. In an abbatial Register of Bury abbey
there is this entry. "Memorand. quod. A. D. 1418. 28 Jul. Gulielmus abbas
contulit regimen et magisterium scholarum grammaticalium in villa de Bury S.
Edmundi magistro Johanni Somerset, artium et grammaticae professori, et
baccalaur^o in medicina, cum annua pensione xl. solidorum." MS. Cotton. TIBER.
B. ix. 2. This John Somerset was tutor and physician to king Henry the sixth,
and a man of eminent learning. He was instrumental in procuring duke Humphrey's
books to be conveyed to Oxford. Registr. Acad. Oxon. EPIST. F. 179. 202. 218.
220. And in the foundation of King's college at Cambridge. MSS. COTT. JULIUS,
F. vii. 43.
. Provincial ignorance, at least, became universal, in consequence of this
hasty measure of a rapacious and arbitrary prince. What was taught in the
monasteries, was not always perhaps of the greatest importance, but still it
served to keep up a certain degree of necessary knowledge I do not, however,
lay great stress on the following passage, which yet deserves attention, in
Rosse of Warwickshire, who wrote about the year 1480: "To this day, in the
cath^drals and some of the greater collegiate churches, or monasteries,
[quibusdam nobilibus collegiis,] and in the houses of the four mendicant
orders, useful lectures and disputations ar^ kept up; and such of their members
as are thought capable of degrees, ar^ sent to the universities. And in towns
where there are two or more fraternities of mendicants, in each of these ar^
held, every week by turns, proper exercises of scholars in disputation." HIST.
REG. ANGL. edit. Hearne, p. 74. [See supr. p. 340.]
. Nor should it be forgot, that many of the abbots were learned, and patrons of
literature; men of public spirit, and liberal views. By their connections with
parliament, and the frequent embassies to foreign courts in which they were
employed, they became acquainted with the world, and the improvements of lif^:
and, knowing where to choose proper objects, and having no other use for the
superfluities of their vast revenues, encouraged in their respective circles
many learned young men. It appears to have been customary for the governors of
the most considerable convents, especially those that were honored with the
mitre, to receive into their own private lodgings the sons of the principal
families of the neighborhood for education. About the year 1450, Thomas
Bromele, abbot of the mitred monastery of Hyde near Winchester, entertained in
his own abbatial house within that monastery, eight young gentlemen, or
gentiles pueri, who were placed there for the purpose of literary instruction,
and constantly dined at the abbot's table. I will not scruple to give the
original words, which are more particular and expressive, of the obscure record
which preserves this curious anecdote of monastic life. "Pro octo gentilibus
pueris apud dominum abbatem studii causa perhendinantibus, et ad mensam domini
victitantibus, cum garcionibus suis ipsos comitantibus, hoc anno, xvii l. ix s.
Capiendo pro... From a fragment of the COMPUTUS CAMERARII Abbat. Hidens. in
Archiv. Wulves^ apud Winton, ut supr.
" This, by the way, was more extraordinary, as William of Wykeham's celebrated
seminary was so near^ And this seems to have been an established practice of
the abbot of Glastonbury: "whose apartment in the abbey was a kind of
well-disciplined court, where the sons of noblemen and young gentlemen were
wont to be sent for virtuous education, who returned thence home excellently
accomplished HIST. and ANTIQ. of GLASTON^URY, Oxon. 1722. ^vo. p. 98.
." Richard Whiting, the last abbot of Glastonbury, who was cruelly executed by
the king, during the course of his government, educated near three hundred
ingenuous youths, who constituted a part of his family: b^side many others whom
he liberally supported at the universities Reyner, APOSTOLAT. BENEDICT. Tract.
i. sect. ii. p. 224. Sanders de SCHISM. page 176.
. Whitgift, the most excellent and learned archbishop of Canterbury in the
reign of queen Elizabeth, was educated under Robert Whitgift his uncle, abbot
of the Augustine monastery of black canons at Wellhow in Lincolnshire: who,
"says Strype, had several other young gentlemen under his care for education
Strype's WHITGIFT, b. i. chapter i. p. 3.
." That, at the restoration of literature, many of these dignitaries were
eminently learned, and even zealous promoters of the new improvements, I could
bring various instances. Hugh Farringdon, the last abbot of Reading, was a
polite scholar, as his Latin epistles addressed to the university of Oxford
abundantly testify Registr. Univ. Oxon. F. F. fol. 101. -- 125.
. Nor was he less a patron of critical studies. Leonard Coxe, a popular
philological writer in the reign of Henry the eighth, both in Latin and
English, and a great traveller, highly celebrated by the judicious Leland for
his elegant accomplishments in letters, and honored with the affectionate
correspondence of Erasmus, dedicates to this abbot, his ART OR CRAFT OF
RHETORIC, printed in the year 1524, at that time a work of an unusual nature
See Leland, COL^ECTAN. vol. 5. p. 118. vol. 6. p. 187. And ENCOM. p. 50. edit.
1589. Erasm. EPISTOL. p. 886.
. Wakefield abovementioned, a very capital Greek and oriental scholar, in his
DISCOURSE ON THE EXCELLENCY AND UTILITY OF THE THREE LANGUAGES, written in the
year 1524, celebrates William Fryssell, prior of the cathedral Benedictine
convent at Rochester, as a distinguished judge and encourager of critical
literature Cited above, p. 124.
. Robert Shirwoode, an Englishman, but a professor of Greek and Hebrew at
Louvaine, published a new Latin translation of ECCLESIASTES, with critical
annotations on the Hebrew text, printed at Antwerp in 1523 Quarto.
This, in an elegant Latin epistle, he dedicates to John Web, prior of the
Benedictine cathedral convent at Coventry; whom he styles, for his singular
learning, and attention to the general cause of letters, MONACHORUM DECUS. John
Batmanson, prior of the Carthusians in London, controverted Erasmus's^
commentary on the new Testament with a degee of spirit and erudition, which was
unhappily misapplied, and would have done honor to the cause of his antagonist
Theodor. Petreus, BIBL. CARTHUS. edit. Col. 1609. p. 157.
. He wrote many other pieces; and was patronised by Lee, a learned archbishop
of York, who opposed Erasmus, but allowed Ascham a pension Ascham, EPISTOL.
lib. ii. p. 77. a. edit. 1581. [See also iii. p. 86. a.] O^ the death of the
archbishop, in 1544, Ascham desires, that a part of his pension then due might
be paid out of some of the archbishop's greek books: one of these h^ wishes may
be Aldus's DECEMBER RHETORES GR^^CI, a book which he could not purchase or procure
at Cambridge.
. Kederminster, abbot of Winchcombe in Gloucestershire, a traveller to Rome,
and a celebrated preacher before king Henry the eighth, established regular
lectures in his monastery, for explaining both scriptures in their original
languages; which were so generally frequented, that his little cloister
acquired the name and reputation of a new university "Non aliter quam si
fuisset altera NOVA UNIVERSITAS, tametsi exigua, claustrum Wynchelcombense tun^
temporis se h^b^ret." From his own HISTORIA, as below. Wood, HIST. Univ. OXON.
i. p. 248. There is an Epistle from Colet, the learned dean of St. Paul's, to
this abbot, concerning a passage in saint Paul'^ E^ISTLES, first printed by
Knight, from the original manuscript at Cambridge. Knight's LIFE, p. 311.
. He was master of a terse and perspicuous Latin style, as appears from a
fragment of the HISTORY OF WYNCHCOMB ABBEY^ written by himself Printed by
Dugdale, before the whol^ of the original was destroyed in the fire of London.
MONAST. i. 188. But a transcript of a part remains in Dodsworth, MSS. Bibl.
Bodl. lxv. 1. Compare A. Wood, ut^ supr. and ATHEN. OXON. i. 28.
. His erudition is attested in an epistle from the university to king Henry the
eighth Registr. Univ. Oxon. F^. fol. 46.
. Longland, bishop of Lincoln, the most eloquent preacher of his time, in the
dedication to Kederminster, of five quadragesimal sermons, delivered at court,
and printed by Pinson in the year 1517, insists largely on his SINGULARIS
ERUDITIO, and other shining qualifications.

Before we quit the reign of Henry the eighth, in this review of the rise of
modern letters, let us turn our eyes once more on the universities; which yet
do not always give the tone to the learning of a nation It ought not here to be
unnoticed, that the royal library of the kings of England, originally
subsisting in the old palace at Westminster, and lately transferred to the
British Museum, received great improvements under the reign of Henry the
eighth; who constituted that elegant and judicious scholar, John Leland, his
librarian, about the year 1530. Tanner, BIBL. page 475. Leland, at the
dissolution of the monasteries, removed to this royal repository a great number
of valuable manuscripts; particularly from saint Austin's abbey at Canterbu^y.
SCRIPT. BRIT. p. 299. One of these was a manuscript given by Athelstan to that
convent, a HARMONY of the FOUR GOSPELS. Bibl. Reg. MSS. i. A. xviii. See the
hexasthic of Leland prefixed. See also SCRIPT. BRIT. ut supra, V. ATHEL^TANUS.
Leland says, that he placed in the PALATINE library of Henry the eighth the
COMMENTARII IN MATTHAEUM of Claudius, Bede's disciple. Ibid. V. CLAUDIUS. Many
of the manuscripts of this library appear to have belonged to Henry's
predecessors; and if we may judge from the splendor of the decorations, were
presents. Some of them bear the name of Humphrey duke of Gloucester. Others were
written at the command of Edward the fourth. I have already mentioned the
librarian of Henry the seventh. Bartholomew Traheron, a learned divine, was
appointed the keeper of this library by Edward the ^ixth, with a salary of
twenty marcs, in the year 1^49. See Rymer's FoeD. xv. p. 351. Under the reign
of Eli^abeth, Hentzner, a German traveller, who saw this library at Whitehall
in 1598, says, that it was well furnished with Greek, Latin, Italian, and
French books, all bound in velvet of different colors, yet chiefly red, with
clasps of gold and silver; and that the covers of some were adorned with pearls
and precious stones. ITINERAR. Germaniae, Angliae, etc. Noringb. 1629. 8vo. p.
188. It is a great mistake, that James the first was the first of our kings who
founded a library in any of the royal palaces; and that this establishment
commenced at St. James's palace, under the patronage of that monarch. This
notion wa^ first propagated by Smith in his life of Patrick Junius, Vit.
QUORUND. etc. Land. 1707. 4to. pp. 12. 13. 34. 35. Great part of the royal
library, which indeed migrated to St. James's under James the first, was partly
sold and dispersed, at Cromwell's accession: together with another inestimable
part of its furniture, 12000 medals, rings, and gems, the entir^ collection of
Gorlaeus's DACTYLIOTHECA, purchased by prince Henry and Charles the first. It
must be allowed, that James the first greatly enriched this library with the
books of lord Lumley and Casaubon, and sir Thomas Roe's manuscripts brought
from Constantinople. Lord Lumley's chiefly consisted of lord Arundel's, his
father in law, a great collector at the dissolution of monasteries. James had
previously granted a warrant to sir Thomas Bodley, in 1613, to choose any books
from the royal library at Whitehall, over the Queen's Chamber. [RELIQ. BODL. p.
Hearne, p. 205. 286. 320.]
. In the year 1531, the learned Simon Grynaeus visited Oxford. By the interest
of Claymund, president of Corpus Christi college, an admirable scholar, a
critical writer, and the general friend and correspondent of the literary
reformers, he was admitted to all the libraries of the university; which, he
says, were about twenty in number, and amply furnished with the books of
antiquity. Among these he found numerous manuscripts of Proclus on Plato, many
of which he was easily permitted to carry abroad by the governors of the
colleges, who did not know the value of these treasures During his abode in
England, having largely experie^ced the boun^y and advice of sir Thomas^ More,
he returned home, fraught with materials which he had long sought in vain, and
published his PLATO^ viz. "Platonis Opera, cum commentarii^ Procli in Timaeum
et Politica, Basil. 1534." fol. See the EPISTLE DEDICATORY to sir Thomas More.
He there mentions other pi^ces of Proclus, which he saw at Oxford.
. In the year 1535, the king ordered lectures in humanity, institutions which
have their use for a time, and while the novelty lasts, to be founded in those
colleges of the university, where they were yet wanting: and these injunctions
were so warmly approved by the scholars in the largest societies, that they
seized on the venerable volumes of Duns Scotus and other irrefragable
logicians, in which they had so long toiled without the attainment of
knowledge, and tearing them in pieces, dispersed them in great triumph about
their quadrangles, or gave them away as useless lumber See Dr. Layton's letter
to Cromwell. Strype's ECCL. MEM. i. 210.
. The king himself also established some public lectures with large endowments
Wood, HIST. Univ. Oxon. i. 26. ii. 36.
. Notwithstanding, the number of students at Oxford daily decreased: insomuch,
that in 1546, not because a general cultivation of the new species of
literature was increased, there were only ten inceptors in arts, and three in
theology and jurisprudence Wood, ibid. sub anno.
.

As all novelties are pursued to excess, and the most beneficial improvements
often introduce new inconveniences, so this universal attention to polite
literature destroyed philosophy. The old philosophy was abolished, but a new
one was not adopted in its stead. At Cambridge we now however find the ancient
scientific learning in some degree reformed, by the admission of better systems.

In the injunctions given by Henry to that university in the year 1535, for the
reformation of study, the dialectics of Rodolphus Agricola, the great favorite
of Erasmus, and the genuine logic of Aristotle, are prescribed to be taught,
instead of the barren problems of Scotus and Burlaeus Collier, ECCLES. HIST.
vol. ii. p. 110.
. By the same edict, theology and causuistry were freed from many of their old
encumbrances and perplexities: degrees in the canon law were forbidden; and
heavy penalties were imposed on those academics, who relinquished the sacred
text, to explain the tedious and unedifying commentaries on Peter Lombard's
scholastic cyclopede of divinity, called the SENTENCES, which alone were
sufficient to constitute a moderate library. Classical lectures were also
directed, the study of words was enforced, and the books of Melancthon, and
other solid and elegant writers of the reformed party, recommended. The politer
studies, soon afterward, seem to have risen into a flourishing state at
Cambridge. Bishop Latimer complains, that there were now but few who studied
divinity in that university SERMONS, etc. p. 63. Land. 1584. 4to. Sermon before
Edward the sixth, in the year 1550. His words are, "It would pity a man's
heart to hear that I hear of the state of Cambridge: what it is in Oxford I
cannot tell. There be few that study divinity but so many a^ of necessity must
furnish the colleges."
. But this is no proof of a decline of learning in that seminary. Other
pursuits were now gaining ground there; and such as in fact were subservient to
theological truth, and to the propagation of the reformed religion. Latimer
himself, whose discourses from the royal pulpit appear to be barbarous beyond
their age, in style, manner, and argument, is an example of the necessity of
the ornamental studies to a writer in divinity. The Greek language was now
making considerable advances at Cambridge, under the instruction of Cheke and
Smith; notwithstanding the interruptions and opposition of bishop Gardener, the
chancellor of the university, who loved learning but hated novelties, about the
proprieties of pronunciation. But the controversy which was agitated on both
sides with much erudition, and produced letters between Cheke and Gardener
equal to large treatises, had the good effect of more fully illustrating the
point in debate, and of drawing the general attention to the subject of the
Greek literature Ascham. EPISTOL. ut modo infr. p. 65. a. Ascham calls
Gardener, "omnibus literarum, prudentiae, consilii, authoritatis, praesidiis
ornatissimus, absque ha^ u^a re ess^t, literarum et academiae nostrae patronus
amplis^imus." But he says, that Gardener took this measure, "quorundam
invidoru^ ho^inum precibus victus." ibid. p. 64. b.
. Perhaps bishop Gardiner's intolerance in this respect was like his
persecuting spirit in religion, which only made more heretics. Ascham observes,
with no small degree of triumph, that instead of Plautus, Cicero, Terence, and
Livy, almost the only classics hitherto known at Cambridge, a more extensive
field was opened; and that Homer, Sophocles, Euripides, Herodotus, Thucydides,
Demosthenes, Xenophon, an Isocrates, were universally and critically studied
Strype's CRANMER, p. 170. Ascham. EPISTOL. L. ii. p. 64. b. 1581.
. But Cheke being soon called away to the court, his auditors relapsed into
dissertations on the doctrines of original sin and predestination; and it was
debated with great obstinacy and acrimony, whether those topics had been most
successfully handled by some modern German divines or saint Austin Ascham.
E^IST. lib. ii.
. Ascham observes, that at Oxford, a decline of taste in both languages was
indicated, by a preference of Lucian, Plutarch, and Herodian, in Greek, and of
Seneca, Gellius, and Apuleius, in Latin, to the more pure, ancient, and
original writers, of Greece and Rome EPISTOL. lib. i. p. 18. b. Dat. 1550.
edit. 1581.
. At length, both universities seem to have been reduced to the same deplorable
condition of indigence and illiteracy.

It is generally believed, that the reformation of religion in England, the
most happy and important event of our annals, was immediately succeeded by a
flourishing state of letters. But this was by no means the case. For a long
time afterward an effect quite contrary was produced. The reformation in
England was completed under the reign of Edward the sixth. The rapacious
courtiers of this young prince were perpetually grasping at the rewards of
literature; which being discouraged or despised by the rich, was neglected by
those of moderate fortunes. Avarice and zeal were at once gratified in robbing
the clergy of their revenues, and in reducing the church to its primitive
apostolical state of purity and poverty See Collier's ECCL. H^ST. Records,
lxvii. p. 80.
. The opulent see of Winchester was lowered to a bare title: its amplest
estates were portioned out to the laity; and the bishop, a creature of the
protector Somerset, was contented to receive an inconsiderable annual stipend
from the exchequer. The bishopric of Durham, almost equally rich, was entirely
dissolved. A favorite nobleman of the court occupied the deanery and
treasurership of a cathedral with some of its best canonries B^rnet, R^F. P.
ii. 8.
. The ministers of this abused monarch, by these arbitrary, dishonest, and
imprudent measures, only provided instruments, and furnished arguments, for
restoring in the succeeding reign that superstitious religion, which they
professed to destroy. By thus impoverishing the ecclesiastical dignities, they
countenanced the clamours of the catholics; who declared, that the reformation
was apparently founded on temporal views, and that the protestants pretended to
oppose the doctrines of the church, solely with a view that they might share in
the plunder of its revenues. In every one of these sacrilegious robberies the
interest of learning also suffered. Exhibitions and pensions were, in the mean
time, subtracted from the students in the universities Wood, s^b ann. 1550.
See also Strype's CRANMER, Append. N. xciii. p. 220. viz. A Letter to secretary
Cecil, dat. 1552.
. Ascham, in a letter to the marquis of Northampton, dated 1550, laments the
ruin of grammar schools throughout England; and predicts the speedy extinction
of the universities from this growing calamity EPISTOL. lib. un. COMMENDAT. p.
194. a. Land. 1581. "Ruinam et interitum publicarum scholarum, etc." -- "Quam
gravis haec universa scholarum calamita^, etc." See p. 62. b. p. 210. a.
. At Oxford the public schools were neglected by the professors and pupils, and
allotted to the lowest purposes Wood, ut supr. p. 273.
. Academical degrees were abrogated as antichristian Catal. MSS. ANGL. fol.
edit. 1697^ in Hist. Bibl. Bodl. Prefat.
. Reformation was soon turned into fanaticism. Absurd refinements, concerning
the inutility of human learning, were superadded to the just and rational
purgation of christianity from the papal corruptions. The spiritual reformers
of these enlightened days, at a visitation of the last-mentioned university,
proceeded so far in their ideas of a superior rectitude, as totally to strip
the public library, established by that munificent patron Humphrey duke o^
Gloucester, of all its books and manuscripts See supr. p. 44.
.

I must not, however, forget, as a remarkable symptom of an attempt now
circulating to give a more general and unreserved diffusion of science, that in
this reign, Thomas Wilson, originally a fellow of King's college in Cambridge,
preceptor to Charles and Henry Brandon dukes of Suffolk, dean of Durham, and
chief secretary to the king, published a system a rhetoric and of logic, in
English First printed in the reign of Edward the sixth. See Preface to the
second edition of the RHETORIC, in 1560. He translated the three Olynthiacs,
and the four Philippic^, of Demosthenes, from the Greek into English. Land.
1570. 4to.
. This display of the venerable mysteries of the latter of these arts in a
vernacular language, which had hitherto been confined within the sacred pale of
the learned tongues, was esteemed an innovation almost equally daring with that
of permitting the service of the church to be celebrated in English: and
accordingly the author, soon afterward happening to visit Rome, was
incarcerated by the inquisitors of the holy see, as a presumptuous and
dangerous heretic.

It is with reluctance I enter on the bloody reign of the relentless and
unamiable Mary; whose many dreadful martyrdoms of men eminent for learning and
piety, shock our sensibility with a double degree of horror, in the present
softened state of manners, at a period of society when no po^entate would
inflict executions of so severe a nature, and when it would be difficult to
find devotees hardy enough to die for difference of opinion. We must, however,
acknowledge, that she enriched both universities with some considerable
benefactions: yet these donations seem to have been made, not from any general
or libe^al principle of advancing knowledge, but to repair the breaches of
reformation, and to strengthen the return of superstition. It is certain, that
her restoration of popery, together with the monastic institution, its proper
appendage, must have been highly pernicious to the growth of polite erudition.
Yet although the elegant studies were now beginning to suffer a new relapse, in
the midst of this reign, under the discouragement of all these inauspicious and
unfriendly circumstances, a college was established at Oxford, in the
constitution of which, the founder principally inculcates the use and necessity
of classical literature; and recommends it as the most important and leading
object in that system of academical study, which he prescribes to the youth of
the new society In the year 1554.
. For, beside a lecturer in philosophy appointed for the ordinary purpose of
teaching the scholastic sciences, he establishes in this seminary a teacher of
humanity. The business of this preceptor is described with a particularity not
usual in the constitutions given to collegiate bodies of this kind, and he is
directed to exert his utmost diligence, in tincturing his auditors with a just
reli^h for the graces and purity of the Latin language "Latini sermonis ornatu
et elegantia imbuendos diligenter curabit, etc." Statut. Coll. Trin. Oxon. cap.
iv. Again, "Cupiens et ego Collegii mei juventutem in primis Latini sermonis
Purita^e ac ingenurarum artium rudimentis, convenienter erudiri, etc." Ibid.
cap. xv.
: and to explain critically, in the public hall, for the space of two hours
every day, the Offices, De Oratore, and rhetorical treatises of Cicero, the
institutes of Quintilian, Aulus Gellius, Plautus, Terence, Virgil, Horace,
Livy, and Lucan; together with the most excellent modern philological treatises
then in vogue, such as the ELEGANCIES of Laurentius Valla, and the MISCELLANIES
of Politian, or any other approved critical tract on oratory or versification
Ibid. cap. xv. A modern writer in dialectics, Rodolphus Agricola, is also
recommended to be explained by the reader in philosophy, together with
Aristotle.
. In the mean time, the founder permits it to the discretion of the lecturer,
occasionally to substitute Greek authors in the place of these Ibid. cap. xv.
It may be also observed here, that the philosophy reader is not only ordered to
explain Aristotle, but Plato. Ibid. cap. xv. It appears by implication in the
close of this statute, that the public lectures of the university were now
growing usel^ss, and dwindling into mere matters of form, viz. "Ad hunc modum
Domi meos LECTIONIBUS er^diri cupiens, ^os a publicis in Academia lectionibus
avocar^ nolui. -- Verum, si temporis tractu, et magistratuum i^curia, adeo a
primario instituto degenerent Magi^^rorum regentium Lectiones ordinariae, ut
inde null^, aut admodum exigua, auditoribus acc^dat utilitas, etc. Ibid. cap.
xv.
. He moreover requires, that the candidates for admission into the college be
completely skilled in Latin poetry; and in writing Epistles, then a favorite
mode of composition Ibid. cap. vii.
, and on which Erasmus D^ RATIONE CONSCRIBENDI EPI^TOLAS.
, and Conradus Celtes the restorer of letters in Germany About the year 1500.
At Ba^^l, 1522. It was reprinted at Cambridge by Siberch, and dedicated to
archbishop Fisher, 1521. 4to.
, had each recently published a distinct systematical work. He injoins, that
the students shall be exercised every day, in the intervals of vacation, in
composing declamations, and Latin verses both lyric and heroic ^bid. cap. xv.
Every day after dinner "Aliquis scholarium, a Praefidente aut Lectore Rhetorico
jussus, de themate quodam propo^ito, ad edendum ing^nii ac profectus sui
specimen, diligenter, orn^t^, ac breviter, dicat, etc." Ibid. ^ap. x.
: and in his prefatory statute, where he describes the nature and design of his
foundation, he declares, that he destines the younger part of his
establishment, not only to dialectics and philosophy, but to the more polite
literature "Caeteri autem, scholare^ nuncupati, POLITIORI^US Literis, etc."
Ibid. cap. i.
. The statutes of this college were submitted to the inspection of cardinal
Pole, one of the chief protectors of the revival of polite letters in England,
as appears from a curious passage in a letter written by the founder, now
remaining; which not only displays the cardinal's ideas of the new erudition,
but shows the state of the Greek language at this period. "My lord Cardinals
grace has had the overseeinge of my statutes. He much lykes well, that I have
therein ordered the Latin tongue [Latin classics] to be read to my scholars.
But he advyses me to order the Greek to be more taught there than I have
provided. This purpose I well like: but I fear the times will not bear it now.
I remember when I was a young scholar at Eton About the year 1520.
, the Greek tongue was growing apace; the study of which is now alate much
decaid Dated 1556. See LIFE of sir Thomas Pope, p. 226.
." Queen Mary was herself eminently learned. But her accomplishments in letters
were darkened or impeded by religious prejudices. At the desire of queen
Catharine Parr, she translated in her youth Erasmus's paraphrase on saint John.
The preface is written by Udall, master of Eton school: in which he much
extolls her distinguished proficience in literature Land. 1548. fol.
. It would have been fortunate, if Mary's attention to this work had softened
her temper, and enlightened her understanding. She frequently spoke in public
with propriety, and always with prudence and dignity.

In the beginning of the reign of queen Elisabeth, which soon followed, when
the return of protestantism might have been expected to produce a speedy change
for the better, puritanism began to prevail; and, as the first fervours of a
new sect are always violent, retarded for some time the progress of ingenuous
and useful knowledge. The scriptures being translated into English, and every
man assuming a right to dictate in matters of faith, and to choose his own
principles, weak heads drew false conclusions, and erected an infinite variety
of petty religions. Such is the abuse which attends the best designs, that the
meanest reader of the new Testament thought he had a full comprehension of the
most mysterious metaphysical doctrines in the christian faith; and scorned to
acquiesce in the sober and rational expositions of such difficult subjects,
which he might have received from a competent and intelligent teacher, whom it
was his duty to follow. The bulk of the people, who now possessed the means of
discussing all theological topics, from their situation and circumstances in
life, were naturally averse to the splendour, the dominion, and the opulence of
an hierarchy, and disclaimed the yoke of episcopal jurisdiction. The new
deliverance from the numerous and burdensome superstitions of the papal
communion, drove many pious reformers into the contrary extreme, and the rage
of opposition ended in a devotion entirely spiritual and abstracted. External
forms were abolished, as impediments to the visionary reveries of a mental
intercourse with heaven; and because the church of Rome had carried ceremonies
to an absurd excess, the use of any ceremonies was deemed unlawful. The love of
new doctrines and a new worship, the triumph of gaining proselytes, and the
persecutions which accompanied these licentious zealots, all contributed to fan
the flame of enthusiasm. The genius of this refined and false species of
religion, which defied the salutary checks of all human authority, when
operating in its full force, was attended with consequences not less pernicious
to society, although less likely to last, than those which flowed from the
establishment of the ancient superstitions. During this unsettled state of
things, the English reformed clergy who had fled into Germany from the menaces
of queen Mary, returned home in great numbers: and in consideration of their
sufferings and learning, and their abilities to vindicate the principles of a
national church erected in opposition to that of Rome, many of them were
preferred to bishoprics, and other eminent ecclesiastical stations. These
divines brought back with them into England those narrow principles concerning
church government and ceremonies, which they had imbibed in the petty states
and republics abroad, where the Calvinistic discipline was adopted, and where
they had lived like a society of philosophers; but which were totally
inconsistent with the nature of a more extended church, established in a great
and magnificent nation, and requiring an uniform system of policy, a regular
subordination of officers, a solemnity of public worship, and an observance of
exterior institutions. They were, however, in the present circumstances,
thought to be the most proper instruments to be employed at the head of
ecclesiastical affairs; not only for the purpose of vindicating the new
establishment by argument and authority, but of eradicating every trace of the
papal corruptions by their practice and example, and of effectually fixing the
reformation embraced by the church of England on a durable basis. But,
unfortunately, this measure, specious and expedient as it appeared at first,
tended to destroy that constitution which it was designed to support, and to
counteract those principles which had been implanted by Cranmer in the reformed
system of our religion. Their reluctance or refusal to conform, in a variety of
instances, to the established ceremonies, and their refinements in theological
discipline, filled the church with the most violent divisions; and introduced
endless intricate disputations, not on fundamental doctrines of solid
importance to the real interests of christianity, but on positive points of
idle and empty speculation, which admitting no elegance of composition, and
calling forth no vigor of abilities, exercised the learning of the clergy in
the most barbarous and barren field of controversial divinity, and obstructed
every pursuit of polite or manly erudition. Even the conforming clergy, from
their want of penetration, and from their attachment to authorities,
contributed to protract these frivolous and unbecoming controversies: for if,
in their vindication of the sacerdotal vestments, and of the cross of baptism,
instead of arguing from the jews, the primitive christians, the fathers,
councils, and customs, they had only appealed to common sense and the nature of
things, the propriety and expediency of those formalities would have been much
more easily and more clearly demonstrated. To these inconveniences we must
add, that the common ecclesiastical preferments were so much diminished by the
seizure and alienation of impropriations, in the late depredations of the
church, and which continued to be carried on with the same spirit of rapacity
in the reign of Elisabeth, that few persons were regularly bred to the church,
or, in other words, received a learned education. Hence, almost any that
offered themselves were, without distinction or examination, admitted to the
sacred function. Insomuch, that in the year 1560, an injunction was directed to
the bishop of London from his metropolitan, requiring him to forbear ordaining
any more artificers and other illiterate persons who exercised secular
occupations Strype's GRINDAL. B. i. chapter iv. b. 40.
. But as the ^vil was unavoidable, this caution took but little effect Numerous
illuminated artificers began ^arly to preach and write in defense of the
reformed religion. The first mechanic who left his lawful calling to vindicate
the cause of the catholics, was one Miles Hoggard, a shoemaker or hosier, of
London; who, in the reign of queen Mary, wrote a pamphlet entitled, The
Displaying o^ prote^^ants, and ^^ondry their practices, etc. Land. 1556. 12mo.
This piece soon acquired importance, by being answered by Lawrence Humphries,
and other eminent reformers. He printed other pieces of the same tendency. He
was likewise an English poet; and I am glad of this opportunity of mentioning
him in that character, as I could not have ventured to give him a place in the
series of our poetry. He wrote the MIRROR of LOVE, Land. 1555. 4to. Dedicated
to queen Mary. Also the PATHWAY to THE TOWER of PERFECTION^ Land. 1556. 4to.
with some other pieces.
. About the year 1563, t^ere were only two divines, and those of higher rank,
the president of Magdalen college Doctor Lawrence Humphreys, mentioned in the
last note. Of whom it will not be improper to observe further in this place,
that about the year 1553, he wrote an Epistola de Grecis literis et Homeri
lectione et imitatione ad praesidem et socios collegii Magdalenae, Oxon. In the
CORNUCOPIA of Hadrian Junius, Basil. 1558. fol.
, and the dean of Christ Church, who were capable of preaching the public
sermons before the university of Oxford Wood, ut supr. i. 285.
. I will mention one instance of the extreme ignorance of our inferior clergy
about the middle of the sixteenth century. In the year 1570, Horn, bishop of
Winchester, enjoined the minor canons of his cathedral to get by memory, every
week, one chapter of saint Paul's epistles in Latin: and this formidable task,
almost beneath the abilities of an ordinary schoolboy, was actually repeated
by some of them, before the bishop, dean, and prebendaries, at a public
episcopal visitation of that church Registr. Horn, Episc. Winton. fol. 80. b.
. It is well known that a set of homilies was published to supply their
incapacity in composing sermons: but it should be remembered, that one reason
for prescribing this authorized system of doctrine, was to prevent preachers
from disturbing the peace of the church by disseminating their own novel and
indigested opinions.

The taste for Latin composition in the reign of Elisabeth, notwithstanding it
was fashionable both to write and speak in that language, was much worse than
in the reign of Henry the eighth, when juster models were studied, and when the
novelty of classical literature excited a general emulation to imitate the
Roman authors. The Latinity of Ascham's prose has little elegance. The
versification and phraseology of Buchanan's Latin poetry are splendid and
sonorous, but not marked with the chaste graces and simple ornaments of the
Augustan age. One is surprised to find the learned archbishop Grindal, in the
statutes of a school which he founded, and amply endowed, recommending such
barbarous and degenerate classics as Palingenius, Sedulius, and Prudentius, to
be taught in his new foundation Strype's GRINDAL. B. ii. chapter xvii. p. 312. This
was in iu 1583.
. These, indeed, were the classics of a reforming bishop: but the well-meaning
prelate would have contributed much more to the success of his intended
reformation, by directing books of better taste and less piety. That classical
literature, and the public institution of youth, were now in the lowest state,
we may collect from a provision in archbishop Parker's foundation of three
scholarships at Cambridge, in the year 1567. He orders that the scholars, who
are appointed to be elected from three the most considerable schools in Kent
and Norfolk, shall be "the best and aptest scholars, well instructed in the
grammar, and, if it may be, such as can make a verse Blomefield's NORFOLK, ii.
224.
." It became fashionable in this reign to study Greek at court. The maids of
honor indulged their ideas of sentimental affection in the sublime
contemplations of Plato's Phaedo: and the queen, who understood Greek better
than the canons of Windsor, and was certainly a much greater pedant than her
successor James the first, translated Isocrates Ascham's SCHOLEMASTER, p. 19.
b. edit. 1589. And EPISTOL. lib. i. p. 19. ut supr.
. But this passion for the Greek language soon ended where it began: nor do we
find that it improved the national taste, or influenced the writings, of the
age of Elisabeth.

All changes of rooted establishments, especially of a national religion, are
attended with shocks and convulsions, unpropitious to the repose science and
study. But these unavoidable inconveniences last not long. When the liberal
genius of protestantism had perfected its work, and the first ^anaticisms of
well-meaning but misguided zealot^ had subsided, every species of useful and
elegant knowledge recovered its strength, and arose with new vigor.
Acquisitions, whether in theology or humanity, were no longer exclusively
confined to the clergy: the laity eagerly embraced those pursuits from which
they had long been unjustly restrained: and, soon after the reign of Elisabeth,
men attained that state of general improvement, and those situations with
respect to literature and life, in which they have ever since persevered.

But it remains to bring home, and to apply, this change in the sentiments of
mankind, to our main subject. The customs, institutions, traditions, and
religion, of the middle ages, were favorable to poetry. Their pageaunts,
processions, spectacles, and ceremonies, were friendly to imagery, to
personification and allegory. Ignorance and superstition, so opposite to the
real interests of human society, are the parents of imagination. The very
devotion of the Gothic times was romantic. The catholic worship, besides that
its numerous exterior appendages were of a picturesque and even of a poetical
nature, disposed the mind to a state of deception, and encouraged, or rather
authorized, every species of credulity: its visions, miracles, and legends,
propagated a general propensity to the Mavelous, and strengthened the belief
of specter, demons, witches, and incantations. These illusions were heightened
by churches of a wonderful mechanism, and constructed on such principles of
inexplicable architecture as had a tendency to impress the soul with every
false sensation of religious fear. The savage pomp and the capricious heroism
of the baronial manners, were replete with incident, adventure, and enterprise:
and the intractable genius of the feudal policy, held forth those
irregularities of conduct, discordancies of interest, and dissimilarities of
situation, that framed rich materials for the minstrel-muse. The tacit compact
of fashion, which promotes civility by diffusing habits of uniformity, and
therefore destroys peculiarities of character and situation, had not yet
operated upon life: nor had domestic convenience abolished unwieldy
magnificence. Literature, and a better sense of things, not only banished these
barbarities, but superseded the mode of composition which was formed upon them.
Romantic poetry gave way to the force of reason and inquiry; as its own
enchanted palaces and gardens instantaneously vanished, when the christian
champion displayed the shield of truth, and baffled the charm of the
necromancer. The study of the classics, together with a colder magic and a
tamer mythology, introduced method into composition: and the universal ambition
of rivalling those new patterns of excellence, the faultless models of Greece
and Rome, produced that bane of invention, IMITATION. Erudition was made to act
upon genius. Fancy was weakened by reflection and philosophy. The fashion of
treating every thing scientifically, applied speculation and theory to the arts
of writing. Judgment was advanced above imagination, and rules of criticism
were established. The brave eccentricities of original genius, and the daring
hardiness of native thought, were intimidated by metaphysical sentiments of
perfection and refinement. Setting aside the consideration of the more solid
advantages, which are obvious, and are not the distinct object of our
contemplation at present, the lover of true poetry will ask, what have we
gained by this revolution? It may be answered, much good sense, good taste, and
good criticism. But, in the mean time, we have lost a set of manners, and a
system of machinery, more suitable to the purposes of poetry, than those which
have been adopted in their place. We have parted with extravagancies that are
above propriety, with incredibilities that are more acceptable than truth, and
with fictions that are more valuable than reality.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS IN THE First and Second VOLUME.
*** The Binder is directed to place EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS at the End of
the Second Volume.

EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS. VOL. I.
DISSERTATION I.
SIGNAT. a. fol. verse. Not. a. lin. For "Pocock," READ "Erpenius."

Signat. c 2. fol. verse. lin. 3. READ "Vienne."

Signat. e. Not. q. lin. 4. For "101," READ "92."

Signat. g. lin. 3. For "mulsorum," READ "mulso seu."

Ibid. lin. 4. READ "Woton."

Signat. h 2. lin. 20. Before "composed," INSERT "not."

DISSERTATION II.
SIGNAT. a. fol. verse. lin. 24. READ "Fryesby."

Signat. b. lin. 7. READ "Roger."

Ibid. lin. antep. and pen. READ "Bukdene, 10 jun."

Ibid. Not. x. lin. 2. READ "vii.".

Signat. b 2. fol. verse. lin. ult. For "monks," READ "canons."

Signat. b 4. Not. o. lin. 9. READ "son."

Signat. c 3. lin. 19. READ "Vitalian." So again fol. verse. lin. 5.

Signat. e 4. fol. verse. lin. 22. READ "York."

Signat. f. 2. lin. 9. READ "priory of Dunstable."

Signat. f. 4. Not. x. lin. ult. READ "Hall."

Signat. g. fol. verse. lin. 15. READ "1270." [In Tanner's date, (viz. MLXX) cc
had probably slipped out at the Press.]

Signat. i. Notes, col. 2. lin. 10. READ "Martyrologium Ovidii de fastis."

Signat. i. 4. Not. m. lin. 1. DELE "Monostichon."

Signat. k. 2. fol. verse. to Note f. ADD, "But see Wood, Hist. et Antiq. Univ.
Oxon. i. 46. a."

PAGE 1. Not. b. lin. 1. For "4," READ "24."

Page 3. l. 7. For "even the lower class of people," READ "the nobility."

Page 6. lin. 17. After "language," INSERT "Among the Records of the Tower, a
great revenue-roll, on many sheets of vellum, or MAGNUS ROTULUS, of the Duchy
of Normandy, for the year 1083, is still preserved; indorsed, in a coevel hand,
ANNO AB INCARNATIONE DNI Mo LXXXo IIIo APUD CADOMUM [Caen] WILLIELMO FILIO
RADULFI SENESCALLO NORMANNIE. This most exactly and minutely resembles the
pipe-rolls of our exchequer belonging to the same age, in form, method, and
character. Ayloffe's CALENDAR of ANT. CHART. Pref. p. xxiv. edit. Land. 1774.
4to.

Page 8. Not. g. lin. 13. READ "Flacius Illyricus."

Page 11. to the last Note ADD, "The secular indulgences, particularly the
luxury, of a female convent, are intended to be represented in the following
passage of an ancient poem, called A Disputation between a crystene mon and a
Jew, written before the year 1300. MS. VERNON, fol. 301. [See vol. ii. p. 231.]

Till a Nonneri they came,
But I know not the name;
There was money a derworthe Dear-worthy.
dame
In dyapre dear Diaper fine.
:
Squieres Squires. Attendants.
in vche side,
In the wones Rooms. Apartments.
so wide:
Hur schul we long Shall we long.
abide,
Auntres Adventures.
to hear.
Thene swithe Swiftly. Immediately.
spekethe he,
Til a ladi so fre,
And bids that he welcum be,
"Sire Water my feere My Companion. My Love^ He is called afterward, "Sire
[Sir] Walter of Berwick."
."
There was bords Tables.
i clothed clean
With schire Sheer. Clean.
clothes and schene,
Seththe Or Sith, i. e. often.
a wasschen Washed.
, i wene,
And went to the sete:
Rich metes was forth brouht,
To all men that good thouht:
The christian mon would nouht
Drink nor ete.
There was wyn full clear
In money a feir masere Mazer. Great cup.
,
And other drynkes that weore dear,
In coupes Cups.
full great:
Siththe was schewed him by
Murththe and munstralsy Afterward there was sport and minstrelsy.
,
And preyed hem do gladly,
With ryal rechet i. e. Recept. Reception. But see Chaucer's ROMANS R. v. 6509.
Him, would I comfort and rechete.
And TR. CRESS. iii. 350.
.
By the bordes up they stood, etc.
Page 13. l. 15. READ "Ciclatoun ant purpel pal."

Page 14. to Not. k. ADD, "The LIVES OF THE SAINTS in verse, in Bennet library,
contain the martyrdom and translation of Becket, NUMBER. clxv. This manuscript is
supposed to be of the fourteenth century. Archbishop Parker, in a remark
prefixed, has assigned the composition to the reign of Henry the second. But in
that case, Becket's translation, which did not happen till the reign of king
John, must have been added. See a specimen in Mr. Nasmith's accurate and
learned CATALOGUE of the Bennet manuscripts, page 217. Cantab. 1777. 4to. There
is a manuscript of these LIVES in Trinity college library at Oxford, but it has
not the Life of Becket. MSS. NUMBER. LVII. In Pergamen. fol. The writing is about
the fourteenth century. I will transcribe a few lines from the LIFE OF SAINT
CUTHBERT. f. 2. b.

Seint Cuthberd was ybore here in Engelonde,
God dude for him meraccle, as e scholleth understand.
And well ong child he was, in his eigtethe ere,
Wit children he pleyde at balle, that his felawes were:
That com go a lite child, it thot three er old,
A sweet creature and a fair, yt was myld and bold:
To the ong Cuthberd he ede, seen brother he sede,
Ne thench not such ydell game for it ne ote not be thy deed:
Seint Cuthberd ne tok no eme to the childis read
And pleyde forth with his felawes, al so they him bid.
Tho this onge child y se that he his red forsok,
A down he fell to ground, and great del to him to tok,
It by began to weep sore, and his honden wrynge,
This children had all del of him, and bysened hare pleyinge.
As that they couthe hy gladede him, sore he began to siche,
At even this onge child made del y siche,
A welaway, quoth seint Cuthbert, why wepes thou so sore
if we the haveth ot mysdo we ne scholleth na more.
Thanne spoke this onge child, sore hy wothe beye,
Cuthberd it falls not to the with onge children to pleye,
For no such idell games it ne comes the to worche,
When god has y proveyd the an heved of holy cherche.
With this word, me nyste whidder, this ong child went,
An angel it was of heven that our lord thuder sent.
Saxon letters are used in this manuscript. I will exhibit the next twelve
lines as they appear in that mode of writing; together with the punctuation.

tho by began seint Cuthberd. for to weep sore
He made his fader and frendis. set him to lore
So that he servede both nyt and day. to plese god the more
And in his oughede nyt and day. of servede godis ore
tho he in grettere elde was. as the bok us has y sed
It by fell that seint Aydan. the bisschop was ded
Cuthberd was a field with schep. angeles of heven he se
the bisschopis soul seint Aydan. to heven bear on he
Allas sede seint Cuthberd. fool each am to long
I nell this schep no longer keep. a fonge hem who so a fonge
He went to the abbeye of Germans. a gray monk he there bycom
Great joye made all the covent. tho he that abbyt nom, etc."
The reader will observe the constant return of the hemistichal point, which I
have been careful to preserve, and to represent with exactness; as I suspect,
that it shows how these poems were sung to the harp by the minstrels. Every
line was perhaps uniformly recited to the same monotonous modulation, with a
pause in a midst: just as we chant the psalms in our choral service. In the
psalms of our liturgy, this pause is expressed by a colon: and often, in those
of the Roman missal, by an asterisc. The same mark occurs in every line of this
manuscript; which is a folio volume of considerable size, with upwards of fifty
verses in every page.

Page 18. Not. x. lin. 3. Instead of "Saint Dorman," READ "The Seven Sleepers."

Page 30. to Not. d. ADD, "In the same style, as it is manifestly of the same
antiquity, the following little descriptive song, on the Approach of Summer,
deserves notice. MSS. HARL. 978. f. 5.

Sumer is i cumen,
Lhude sing cuccu:
Grows sed, and blows med,
And springs the wde nu.
Sing, cuccu, cuccu.
Awe bleteth after lomb,
Louth after calve cu;
Bulluc sterteth,
Bucke verteth:
Murie sing, cuccu:
Well sings thu cuccu;
Ne swik thou never nu.
That is, "Summer is coming: Loud sing, Cuckoo! Grows seed, and blows mead,
and springs the wood now. Ewe bleateth after lamb, loweth cow after calf;
bullock starteth, buck verteth Goes to harbor among the fern.
: merry sing, Cuckoo! Well singest thou, Cuckoo, Nor cease to sing now." This
is the most ancient English song that appears in our manuscripts, with the
musical notes annexed. The music is of that species of composition which is
called Canon in the Unison, and is supposed to be of the fifteenth century.

Page 47. ADD to Not. e. "Compare Tanner in JOANNES CORNUBIENSIS, who recites
his other pieces. BIBL. p. 432. Notes, f. g.

Page 50. Not. q. For "hills," READ "halls."

Page 59. l. 9. For "monk," READ "canon."

Page 62. Not. l. lin. 7. READ "Johnston."

Page 68. Not. n. lin. 1. DELE "absurdly." And l. 3. DELE "It is a catapult or
battering ram."

Page 68. Ibid. Notes, col. 2. After lin. 4. INSERT, "See infr. p. 72. MANGONEL
also signified what was thrown from the machine so called. Thus Froissart." Et
avoient les "Brabancons de tres grans engines devant la ville, qui gettoient
pierres de faix et mangoneaux jusques en la ville." Live. iii. c. 118. And in
the old French OVIDE cited by Borel, TRESOR. in V.

Onques pour une tor abatre,
Ne oit on Mangoniaux descendre
Plus briement ne du ciel destendre
Foudre pour abatre un clocher.
Ibid. ibid. After lin. 17. ADD, "The use of artillery, however, is proved by a
curious passage in Petrarch, to be older than the period to which it has been
commonly referred. The passage is in Petrarch's book de REMEDIIS UTRIUSQUE
FORTUNAE, undoubtedly written before the year 1334. "G. Habeo machinas et
balistas. R. Mirum, nisi et glandes aeneas, quae flammis injectis horrisono
sonitu jaciuntur. -- Erat haec pestis nuper rara, ut cum ingenti miraculo
cerneretur: nunc, ut rerum pessimarum dociles sunt animi, ita communis est, ut
quodlibet genus armorum." Lib. i. DIAL. 99. See Muratori, ANTIQUITAT. Med. Aev.
tom. ii. col. 514. Cannons are supposed to have been first used by the English
at the battle of Cressy, in the year 1346. It is extraordinary that Froissart,
who minutely describes that battle, and is fond of decorating his narrative
with wonders, should have wholly omitted this circumstance. Muskets are
recited as a weapon of the infantry so early as the year 1475. "Quilibet
peditum habeat balistam vel bombardam." LIT. Casimiri iii. an. 1475. LEG.
POLON. tom. i. p. 228. These are generally assigned to the year 1520.

Page 72. l. 6. READ "sueynes."

Page 73. to l. 21. ADD this Note, "The rhymes here called, by Robert de
Brunne, Couwee, and Enterlacee, were undoubtedly derived from the Latin rhymers
of that age, who used versus caudati et interlaqueati. Brunne here professes to
avoid these elegancies of composition, yet he has intermixed many passages in
Rhyme Couwee. See his CHRONICLE, p. 266. 273. etc. etc. And almost all the
latter part of his work from the Conquest is written in rhyme enterlacee, each
couplet rhyming in the middle, as well as the end. As thus, MSS. HARL. 1002.

Plausus Graecorum lux caecis et via claudis Incola caelorum virgo dignissima
laudis.

The rhyme Baston had its appellation from Robert Baston, a celebrated Latin
rhymer about the year 1315. The rhyme strangere means uncommon. See CANTERBURY
TALES, vol. 4. p. 72. seq. ut infr. The reader, curious on this subject, may
receive further information from a manuscript in the Bodleian library, in which
are specimens of METRA Leonina, cristata, cornuta, recriproca, etc. MSS. LAUD.
K. 3. 4to. In the same library, there is a very ancient manuscript copy of
Aldhelm's Latin poem De Virginitate et Laud Sanctorum, written about the year
700, and given by Thomas Allen, with Saxon glosses, and the text almost in
semi-saxon characters. These are the two first verses. Metrica tyrones nunc
promant carmina casti,
Et laudem capiat quadrato carmine Virgo.
Langbaine, in reciting this manuscript, thus explains the quadratum carmen.
"Scil. prima cujusque versus litera, per Acrostichidem, conficit versum illum
Metrica tyrones. Ultima cujusque versus litera, ab ultimo carmine ordine
retrogardo numerando, hunc versum facit. "Metrica tyrones nunc promant carmina
casti."
[Langb. MSS. v. p. 126.] MSS. DIGB. 146. There is a very ancient tract, by one
Mico, I believe called also LEVITA, on Prosody, De Quantitate Syllabarum, with
examples from the Latin poets, perhaps the first work of the kind. Bibl. Bodl.
MSS. Bodl. A. 7. 9. See J. L. Hocker's CATAL. MSS. Bibl. Heidelb. p. 24. who
recites a part of Mico's Preface, in which he appears to have been a
grammatical teacher of youth. See also Dacheri SPICILEG. tom. ii. p. 300. b.
edit. ult.

Page 85. Not. d. After "peresse," INSERT, "In this manuscript the whole title
is this. "Le ROSSIGNOL, ou la pensee Jehan de Hovedene clerc la roine
d'Engleterre mere le roi Edward de la naissance et de la mort et du relievement
et de lascension Jesu Crist et de lassumpcion notre dame." This manuscript was
written in the fourteenth century.

Page 86. INSERT at the Beginning of Not. f. "Among the learned Englishmen who
now wrote in French, The Editor of the CANTERBURY TALES mentions Helis de
Guincestre, or WINCHESTER, a translator of CATO into French. [See vol. ii. p.
169.] And Hue de Roteland, author of the Romance, in French verse, called
Ipomedon, MSS. Cott. VESP. A. vii. [See vol. i. p. 169.] The latter is also
supposed to have written a French Dialogue in meter, MSS. Bodl. 3904. La
pleinte par enter mis Sire Henry de Lacy Count de Nichole [Lincoln] et Sire
Wauter de Byblesworth pur la croiserie en la terre seinte. And a French
romantic poem on a knight called CAPANEE, perhaps Statius's Capaneus. MSS.
Cott. VESP. A. vii. ut supr. It begins, Qui bons countes viel entendre.


See "The CANTERBURY TALES of CHAUCER. To which are added An ESSAY upon his
LANGUAGE and VERSIFICATION, an INTRODUCTORY DISCOURSE, and NOTES. Land. 1775. 4
vol. 8vo." This masterly performance, in which the author has displayed great
taste, judgment, sagacity, and the most familiar knowledge of those books
which pecuculiarly belong to the province of a commentator on Chaucer, did not
appear till more than half of my Second Volume was printed.

Page 88. Not. k. ADD "And at Bennet college, Number. L. 1. It begins, Ki veut oir
chauncoun damur."


Ibid. Not. m. l. 11. READ "Davench."

Page 99. Not. q. READ "Them."

Page 108. l. 1. ADD this Note to "Edward." It appears that king Edward the
first, about the year 1271, took his HARPER with him to the Holy Land. This
officer was a close and constant attendant of his master: for when Edward was
wounded with a poisoned knife at Ptolemais, the harper, cithareda suus, hearing
the struggle, rushed into the royal apartment, and killed the assassin. CHRON.
Walt. Hemingford, cap. xxxv. p. 591. Apud V HISTOR. ANGLIC. SCRIPTOR. vol. ii.
Oxon. 1687. fol.

Page 111. ADD to last Note, "Geoffrey of Vinesauf says, that when king Richard
the first arrived at the Christian camp before Ptolemais, he was received with
populares Cantiones, which recited Antiquorum Praeclara Gesta. IT. HIEROSOL.
cap. ii. p. 332. ibid.

Page 112. Before "commenced," INSERT "and that it."

Page 113. ADD to Not. i. "On a review of this passage in Hoveden, it appears
to have been William bishop of Ely, chancellor to king Richard the first, who
thus invited minstrels from France, whom he loaded with favors and presents to
sing his praises in the streets. But it does not much alter the doctrine of the
text, whether he or the king was instrumental in importing the French minstrels
into England. This passage is in a Letter of Hugh bishop of Coventry, which see
also in Hearne's Benedictus Abbas, vol. ii. p. 704. sub ann. 1191. It appears
from this letter, that he was totally ignorant of the English language. ibid.
p. 708. By his cotemporary Gyraldus Cambrensis, he is represented as a monster
of injustice, impiety, intemperance, and lust. Gyraldus has left these
anecdotes of his character, which show the scandalous grossness of the times.
"Sed taceo quod ruminare solet, nunc clamitat Anglia tota, qualiter puella,
matris industria tam coma quam cultu puerum professa, simulansque virum verbis
et vultu, ad cubiculum belluae istius est perducta. Sed statim ut exosi illius
sexus est inventa, quanquam in se pulcherrima, thalamique thorique deliciis
valde idonea, repudiata tamen est et abje^ta. Unde et in crastino, matri filia,
tam flagitiosi facinoris conscia, cum Petitionis effectu, terrisque non modicis
eandem jure haereditario contingentibus, virgo, ut venerat, est restituta.
Tantae nimirum intemperantiae, et petulantiae fuerat tam immoderatae, quod
quotidie in prandio circa finem, pretiosis tam potionibus quam cibariis ventre
distento, virga aliquantulum longa in capite aculeum praeferente pueros nobiles
ad mensam ministrantes, eique propter multimodam qua fungebatur potestatem in
omnibus ad nutum obsequentes, pungere vicissim consueverit: ut eo indicio,
quasi signo quodam secretiore, quem fortius, inter alios, atque frequentius sic
quasi ludicro pungebat, etc. etc." De VIT. GALFRID. Archiepiscop. Ebor. Apud
Whart. ANGL. SACR. vol. ii. p. 406. But Wharton endeavors to prove, that the
character of this great prelate and statesman in many particulars had been
misrepresented through prejudice and envy. Ibid. vol. i. p. 632.

It seems the French minstrels, with whom the Song of ROLAND originated, were
famous about this period. Muratori cites an old history of Bologna, under the
year 1288, by which it appears, that they swarmed in the streets of Italy. "Ut
CANTATORES FRANCIGENARUM in plateis comunis ad cantandum morari non possent."
On which words he observes, "Colle quali parole sembra verosimile, che sieno
disegnati i cantatore del favole romanze, che spezialmente della Franzia erano
portate in Italia." DISSERT. ANTICHIT. Ital. tom. ii. c. xxix. p. 16. In
Napoli, 1752. He adds, that the minstrels were so numerous in France, as to
become a pest to the community; and that an edict was issued about the year
1200, to suppress them in that kingdom. Muratori, in further proof of this
point, quotes the above passage from Hoveden; which, as I had done, he
misapplies to our king Richard the first. But, in either sense, it equally
suits his argument. In the year 1334, at a feast on Easter Sunday, celebrated
at Rimini, on occasion of some noble Italians receiving the honor of
knighthood, more than one thousand five hundred HISTRIONES are said to have
attended. "Triumphus quidem maximus fuit ibidem, etc. -- Fuit etiam multitudo
HISTRIONUM circa mill quingentos et ultra." ANNAL. CAESENAT. tom. xiv. RER.
ITALIC. SCRIPTOR. col. 1141. But their countries are not specified. In the year
1227, at a feast in the palace of the archbishop of Genoa, a sumptuous banquet
and vestments without number were given to the minstrels, or Joculatores, then
present, who came from Lombardy, Provence, Tuscany, and other countries.
Caffari ANNAL. GENUENS. lib. vi. p. 449. D. Apud Tom. vi. ut supr. In the year
774, when Charlemagne entered Italy and found his passage impeded, he was met
by a minstrel of Lombardy, whose song promised him success and victory.
"Contigit JOCULATOREM ex Longobardorum gente ad Carolum venire, et CANTIUNCULAM
A SE COMPOSITAM, rotando in conspectu suorum, cantare." Tom. ii. P. 2. ut supr.
CHRON. MONAST. NOVAL. lib. iii. cap. x. p. 717. D.

To recur to the origin of this Note. Rymer, in his SHORT VIEW OF TRAGEDY, on
the notion that Hovede^ is here speaking of king Richard, has founded a theory,
which is consequently false, and is otherwise but imaginary. See p. 66. 67. 69.
74. He supposes, that Richard, in consequence of his connection with Raimond
count of Toulouse, encouraged the heresy of the Albigenses; and that therefore
the historian Hoveden, as an ecclesiastic, was interested in abusing Richard,
and in in^inuating, that his reputation for poetry rested only on the venal
praises of the French minstrels. The words quoted are, indeed, written by a
churchman, although not by Hoveden. But whatever invidious turn they bear, they
belong, as we have seen, to quite another person; to a bishop who justly
deserved such an indirect stroke of satire, for his criminal enormities, not
for any vain pretensions to the character of a Provencial songster.

Page 114. l. 15. For "second," READ "third."

Page 15. l. 4. To "Robert Borron" ADD this Note, "In Bennet college library at
Cambridge, there is an English poem on the SANGREAL, and its appendages,
containing forty thousand verses. MSS. LXXX. chart. The manuscript is imperfect
both at the beginning and at the end. The title at the head of the first page
is ACTA ARTHURI REGIS, written probably by Joceline, chaplain and secretary to
archbishop Parker. The narrative, which appears to be on one continued subject,
is divided into books, or sections, of unequal length. It is a translation made
from Robert Borron's French romance called LANCELOT, abovementioned, which
includes the adventure of the SANGREAL, by Henry Lonelich Skynner, a name which
I never remember to have seen among those of the English poets. The diction is
of the age of king Henry the sixth. Borel, in his TRESOR de Recherches et
Antiquitez Gauloises et Francoises, says, "Il y'a un Roman ancien intitule LE
CONQUESTE DE SANGREALL, etc." Edit. 1655. 4^o. V. GRAAL. It is difficult to
determine with any precision which is Robert Borron's French Romance now under
consideration, as so many have been written on the subject. [See vol. i. p.
134.] The diligence and accuracy of Mr. Nasmith have furnished me with the
following transcript from Lonelich Skynner's translation in Bennet college
library.

Thanne passes forth this storye with all
That is cleped of some men SAINT GRAAL
Also the SANK RYAL iclepid it is
Of mochel people with owten mys
Now of all this story have I mad an end
That is schwede of Celidoygne and now forthere to wend
And of anothir brawnche most we be gynne
Of the storye that we clepen prophet Merlynne
Wiche that Master ROBERT of BORROWN
Out of Latin it transletted hol and soun
Onlich into the langage of Frawnce
This story he drowgh be adventure and chance
And does Merlynne insten with SANK RYAL
For the ton story the tothir medlyth withal
After the satting of the forseid ROBERT
That somtym it transletted in Middilerd
And I as an unkonneng man trewely
Into Englisch have drawn this storye
And thowgh that to ow not plesyng it be
it that full excused e would haven me
Of my neclegence and unkonnenge
On me to taken swich a thing
Into owre modris tongue for to endite
The swettere to sown to more and lyte
And more cler to our undirstondyng
Thanne owthir Frensh other Latin to my supposing
And therefore at the end of this storye
A pater noster e wolden for me preye
For me that HERRY LONELICH hyhte
And greteth owre lady full of myhte
Hartelich with an ave that e her bid
This process the bettere I myhte proceed
And bringen this book to a good end
Now thereto Jesu Crist grace me send
And than an end there offen myhte be
Now good Lord grant me for charity
Thanne Merlyn to Blasye came anon
And there to him he seide thus son
Blasye thou schalt suffren great pain
This storye to an end to bringen certain
And it schall I suffren mochel more
How so Merlyn quod Blasye there
I schall be sowht quod Merlyne tho
Out from the west with messengeris mo
And they that scholen comen to seken me
They have maad sewrawnce I tell the
Me forto slen for any thing
This sewrawnce have they mad to her king
But when they me sen and with me speak
No power they schol have on me to ben a wreke
For with hem hens most I gone
And thou into other parties schalt well son
To hem that have the holy vessel
Which that is icleped the SAINT GRAAL
And wete thou well and ek forsothe
That thou and ek this storye both
Full well beherd now schall it be
And also beloved in many contre
And has that will known in sertaygne
What kings that weren in great Bretaygne
Sithan that Cristendom thedyn was browht
They scholen hem find has so that it sawht
In the storye of BRWTTES book
There scholen e it find and e weten look
Which that MARTYN DE BEWRE translated here
From Latin into Romaunce in his manner
But leve me now of BRWTTES book
And aftyr this storye now let us look.
After this latter extract, which is to be found nearly in the middle of the
manuscript, the scene and personages of the poem are changed; and king Enalach,
king Mordrens, Sir Nesciens, Joseph of Arimathea, and the other heroes of the
former part, give place to king Arthur, king Brangors, king Loath, and the
monarchs and champions of the British line. In a paragraph, very similar to the
second of these extracts, the following note is written in the hand of the
text, Henry Lonelich Skynner, that translated this book out of Frenshe into
English, at the instaunce of Harry Barton.

The QUEST OF THE SANGREAL, as it is called, in which devotion and necromancy
are equally concerned, makes a considerable part of king Arthur's romantic
history, and was one grand object of the knights of the Round Table. He who
achieved this hazardous adventure was to be placed there in the siege
perilous, or seat of danger. "When Merlyn had ordained the round table, he
said, by them that be fellows of the round table the truth of the SANGREALL
shall be well known, etc. -- They which heard Merlyn say so, said thus to
Merlyn, sithence there shall be such a knight, thou should ordain by thy
craft a siege that no man should sit therein, but he only which shall pass
all other knights. -- Then Merlyn made the siege perilous, etc." Caxton's MORT
D'ARTHUR, B. xiv. cap. ii. Sir Lancelot, who is come but of the eighth degree
from our lord Jesus Christ, is represented as the chief adventurer in this
honorable expedition. Ibid. B. iii. c. 35. At a celebration of the feast of
Pentecost at Camelot by king Arthur, the Sangreal suddenly enters the hall,
"but there was no man might see it nor who bare it," and the knights, as by
some invisible power, are instantly supplied with a feast of the choicest
dishes. Ibid. c. 35. Originally LE BRUT, LANCELOT, TRISTAN, and the SAINT GREAL
were separate histories; but they were so connected and confounded before the
year 1200, that the same title became applicable to all. The book of the
SANGREAL, a separate work, is referred to in MORTE ARTHUR. "Now after that the
quest of the SANCGREALL was fulfylled^ and that all the knights that were
left alive were come again to the Round Table, as the BOOK OF THE
SANCGREALL makethe mention, than was there great joye in the court. And
especially king Arthur and queen Guenever made great joye of the remnaunt that
were come home. And passing glad was the king and queen of sir Lancelot and
sir Bors, for they had been passing long away in the quest of the
SANCGREALL. Then, as the Frenshe book says, sir Lancelot, etc." B. xviii.
cap. 1. And again, in the same romance. "When sir Bors had told him [Arthur]
of the adventures of the SANCGREALL, such as had befallen him and his felawes,
-- all this was made in great books, and put in almeryes at Salisbury." B.
xvii. cap. xxiii The romance says, that king Arthur "made great clerks com
before him that they should cronicle the adventures of these good knygtes."
[See supr. vol. i. p. 336.]
. The former part of this passage is almost literally translated from one in
the French romance of TRISTAN, Bibl. Reg. MSS. 20 D. ii. fol. antep. "Quant
Boort ot conte laventure del Saint Graal teles com eles esloient avenues, eles
furent mises en escrit, gardees en lamere de Salibieres, don't Mestre GALTIER
MAP l'estrest a faist son livre du Saint Graal por lamor du roy Herri son
sengor, qui fist lestoire tralater del Latin en romanz See supr. vol. ii. p.
235.
." Whether Salisbury, or Salibieres is, in the two passages, the right reading,
I cannot ascertain. [But see Not ^. p. 117. vol. ii.] But in the royal library
at Paris there is "Le Roman de TRISTAN ET ISEULT, traduit de Latin en Francois,
par Lucas chevalier du Gast pres de Sarisberi, Anglois, avec figures."
Montfauc. CATAL. MSS. Cod. Reg. Paris. Cod. 6776. fol. max. And again Cod.
6956. fol. max. "Liveres de TRISTAN mis en Francois par Lucas chevalier sieur
de chateau du Gat There is printed, "Le Roman du noble et vaillant Chevalier
Tristan fills d^ noble roy M^liadus de Leonnoys, par Luce, chevalier, seigneur
du chastea^ de Gast. Rouen, 1489. fol."
." [See supr. vol. i. p. 115. Notes.] Almeryes in the English, and l'Amere,
properly aumoire in the French, mean, I believe, Presses, Chests, or Archives.
Ambry, in this sense, is not an uncommon old English word. From the second part
of the first French quotation which I have distinguished by Italics, it
appears, that Walter Mapes, a learned archdeacon in England, under the reign of
king Henry the second, wrote a French SANGREAL, which he translated from Latin,
by the command of that monarch. Under the idea, that Walter Mapes was a writer
on this subject, and in the fabulous way, some critics may be induced to think,
that the WALTER, archdeacon of Oxford, from whom Geoffrey of Monmouth professes
to have received the materials of his history, was this Walter Mapes, and not
Walter Calenius, who was also an eminent scholar, and an archdeacon of Oxford.
[See vol. i. p. 65.] Geoffrey says in his Dedication to Robert earl of
Gloucester, "Finding nothing said in Bid or Gildas of king Arthur and his
su^cessours, although their actions highly deserved to be recorded in writing,
and are orally celebrated by the British bards, I was much surprised at so
strange an omission. At length Walter, archdeacon of Oxford, a man of great
eloquence, and learned in foreign histories, offered me an ancient book in the
British or Armorican tongue; which, in one unbroken story, and an elegant
diction, related the deeds of the British kings from Brutus to Cadwallader. At
his request, although unused to rhetorical flourishes, and contented with the
simplicity of my own plain language, I undertook the translation of that book
into Latin." B. i. chapter i. See also B. xii. chapter xx. Some writers suppose, that
Geoffrey pretended to have received his materials from archdeacon Walter, by
way of authenticating his romantic history. These notices seem to disprove that
suspicion. In the year 1488, a French romance was published, in two magnificent
folio volumes, entitled, HISTOIRE de ROY ARTUS et des CHEVALIERS de la TABLE
RONDE. The first volume was printed at Rouen, the second at Paris. It contains
in four detached parts, the Birth and Achievements of king Arthur, the Life of
Sir Lancelot, the Adventure of the Sangreal, and the Death of Arthur, and his
Knights. In the body of the work, this romance more than once is said to be
written by Walter Map or Mapes, and by the command of his master king Henry.
For instance, tom. ii. at the end of PARTY DU SAINT GRAAL, Signat. d d i. "Cy
fine Maistre GUALTIER MAP son traittie du Saint Graal." Again, tom. ii. LA
DERNIERE PARTY, chapter i. Signat. d d ii. "Apres ce que Maistre GUALTIER MAP eut
tractie des avantures du Saint Graal, assez sou^isamment, sicomme il luy
sembloit, il fut ad adviz au ROY HENRY SON SEIGNEUR, que ce quil avoit fait ne
debuit soufrire sil ne racontoys la fin de ceulx don't il fait mention. -- Et
commence Maistre Gualtier en tell manier ceste derniere party." This derniere
party treats of the death of king Arthur and his knights. At the end of the
second tome there is this colophon. "Cy fine le dernier volume de La Table
Ronde, faisant mention des fais et proesses de monseigneur Lancelot du Lac et
dautres plusieurs nobles et vaillans hommes ses compagnons. Compile et extraict
precisement et au just des vrayes histoires faisantes de ce mention par
tresnotable et tresexpert historien Maistre GUALTIER MAP, et imprime a Paris
par Jehan du Pre. Et lan du grace, mil. cccc. iiiixx. et viii. le xvi jour du
Septembre." The passage quoted above from the royal manuscript in the British
Museum, where king Arthur orders the adventures of the Sangreal to be
chronicled, is thus represented in this romance. "Et quant Boort eut compte
depuis le commencement jusques a la fin les avantures du Saint Graal tells
comme ils les avoit veues, etc. Si fist le roy Artus rediger et mettre par
escript aus dictz clers tout ci que Boort avoit compte, etc." Ibid. tom. ii. La
Party du SAINT GRAAL, chapter ult. Just before it is said, "Le roy Artus fist
venir les CLERCS qui les aventures aux chevalliers mettoient en escript." As in
MORT D'ARTHUR.
At the end of the royal manuscript ^t Paris, [Cod. 6783.] entitled LANCELOT DU
LAC mis en Francois par Robert de Borron par le commandment de Henri roi
d'Angleterre, it is said, that Messire Robert de Borron translated into French,
not only LANCELOT, but also the story of the SAINT GRAAL li tout du Latin du
GAUTIER MAP. But the French antiquaries in this sort of literature are of
opinion, that the word Latin, here signifies Italian; and that by this LATIN of
Gualtier Mapes, were are to understand English versions of those romances made
from the Italian language. The French History of the SANGREAL, printed at Paris
in folio by Gallyot du Pre in 1516, is said, in the title, to be translated
from Latin into French rhymes, and from thence into French prose by Robert
Borron. This romance was reprinted in 1523.

Caxton's MORTE ARTHUR, finished in the year 1469, professes to treat of
various separate histories. But the matter of the whole is so much of the same
sort, and the heroes and adventures of one story are so mutually and
perpetually blended with those of another, that no real unity or distinction is
preserved. It consists of twenty-one books. The first seven books treat of king
Arthur. The eighth, ninth, and tenth, of sir Trystram. The eleventh and twelfth
of sir Lancelot But at the end, this twelfth book is called the the second
book of SIR TRYSTRAM. And it is added, "But here is no rehersall of the third
book [of SIR TRISTRAM."]
. The thirteenth of the SAINGRAL, which is also called sir Lancelot's Book. The
fourteenth of sir Percival. The fifteenth, again, of sir Lancelot. The
sixteenth of sir Gawaine. The seventeenth of sir Galahad. [But all the four
last mentioned books are also called the historye of the holy Sancgreall.] The
eighteenth and nineteenth of miscellaneous adventures. The two last of king
Arthur and all the knights. Lwhyd mentions a Welsh SANGREALL, which, he says,
contains various fables of king Arthur and his knights, etc. ARCHAEOLOG. BRIT.
Tit. vii. p. 265. col. 2. MORTE ARTHUR is often literally translated from
various and very ancient detached histories of the heroes of the round table,
which I have examined; and on the whole, it nearly resembles Walter Map's
romance abovementioned, printed at Rouen and Paris, both in matter and
disposition.

I take this opportunity of observing, that a very valuable vellum fragment of
LE BRUT, of which the writing is uncommonly beautiful and of high antiquity,
containing part of the story of Merlin and king Vortigern, covers a manuscript
of Chaucer's ASTROLABE, lately presented, together with several oriental
manuscripts, to the Bodleian library, by Thomas Hedges, esquire, of Alderton in
Wiltshire: a gentleman possessed of many curious manuscripts, and Greek and
Roman coins, and most liberal in his communications.

Page 119. ADD to Not. x. "Among Crynes's books in the Bodleian library is a
copy of king Richard's romance, printed by W. de Word in 1509. CR. 734. 8vo.
This edition was in the Harleian library.

Page 120. Notes. l. 13. col. 2. After "sixth," ADD "By the way, it appears
from this quotation, that there was an old romance called WADE. Wade's Bote is
mentioned in Chaucer's MARCHAUNTS TALE, v. 940. p. 68. Urr. And eke these old
wivis, god it wot,
They connin so much craft in Wadis bote.
Again, TROIL. CRESS. iii. 615. He song, she plaide, he told a tale of Wade.
Where, says the glossarist, "A romantic story, famous at that time, of one
WADE, who performed many strange exploits, and met with many wonderful
adventures in his Boat Guigelot." Speght says, that Wade's history was long and
fabulous.

Page 126. ADD to Not. c. 1. 9. "See Preface to Hearne's Rob. of Gloucester, p.
lx. And Strype's ANNALS, ii. p. 313. edit. 1725. Where Stowe is mentioned as an
industrious collector of ancient chronicles. In the year 1568, among the proofs
of Stowe's attachment to popery, it was reported to the privy council by
archbishop Grindal, that "he had a great sort of foolish fabulous books of old
print, as of sir DEGORY, sir TRYAMOUR, etc. A great parcel also of old-written
English chronicles, both in parchment and paper." See Strype's GRINDALL. B. i.
chapter xiii. page 125. And APPEND. Number. xvii."

Page 127. Not. d. l. 2. After "Latin," ADD "romance." In Lincoln's End library
there is a poem entitled BELLUM TROJANUM, Number. 150. Pr.

Sichen god hade this world wroght.
Page 128. l. 7. DELE the first "of."

Page 129. l. 3. READ "Olynthian."

Page 131. l. 21. Not. col. 1. After "fables," ADD "See Wolfii Bibl. Hebr. i.
468. ii. 931. iii. 350. iv. 934."

Page 143. Not. p. ADD "Among the Bennet manuscripts there is ROMANZ DE GUI DE
WARWYK. Number. L. It begins, Puis cel tems ke deus fu nez.
This book belonged to Saint Augustin's abbey at Canterbury. With regard to the
preceding romance of BEVIS, the Italians had Buovo d'Antona, undoubtedly from
the French, before 1348. And Luhyd recites in Welsh, Ystori Boun o Hamtun.
ARCHAEOL. p. 264.

Page 147. Not. d. l. 2. DELE "Treatise on Monarchy." Afterward READ "that
piece."

Page 154. to l. ^4. ADD this Note, "It is "One and twenti inches about." So
doctor Farmer's manuscript, purchased from Mr. Martin's library. See supr. p.
121. Not. g. This is in English.

Page 156. ADD to Not. y. "Or perhaps, By the lift, is, through the air. See
Lie in Junius, V. LIFT.

Page 157. l. 15. READ "Comnena."

Page 158. Not. i. l. 17. READ "area."

Page 161. ADD to Not. q. "In the wardrobe-roll of prince Edward, afterward
king Edward the second, under the year 1272, the masters of the horse render
their accounts for horses purchased, specifying the colors and prices with the
greatest accuracy. One of them is called, "Unus equus FAVELLUS cum stella in
front, etc." Hearne's JOANN. DE TROKELOWE. Praef. p. xxvi. Here favellus is
interpreted by Hearne to be honeycomb. I suppose he understands a dappled or
roan horse. But FAVELLUS, evidently an adjective, is barbarous Latin for
FALVUS, or fulvus, a dun or light yellow, a word often used to express the
color of horses and hawks. See Carpentier, SUPPL. Du Fresne LAT. GLOSS. V.
FAVELLUS. tom. ii. p. 370. It is hence that king Richard's horse is called
FAVEL. From which word PHANUEL, in Robert de Brunne, is a corruption.

Page 165. Not. k. l. 3. READ "paytrell."

Page 170. to "coral" in l. 16. ADD this Note, "I do not perfectly understand
the materials of this fairy palace. The walls thereof were of cristall
And the summers of coral.
But Chaucer mentions coral in his temple of Diana. KNIGHTS TALE, v. 1912.
And northward, in a touret on the wall,
Of alabastre white, and red coral,
An oratorie rich for to see.


Carpentier cites a passage from the romance De Troyes, in which a chamber of
al^baster is mentioned. SUPPL. LAT, GLOSS. Du Cange, tom. i. p. 136.

En celle chamber n'oit noienz,
De chaux, d'areine, de cimenz,
Enduit, ni moillerons, ni emplaistre,
Tot entiere fut alambastre.
Page 175. ADD to Not. w. "The etymologists have been puzzled to find the
derivation of an oriel-window. A learned correspondent suggests, that ORIEL is
Hebrew for Lux mea, or Dominus illuminatio mea.

Page 180. to Not. ^. ADD, "Cloth of Rennes seems to have been the finest sort
of linen. In the old manuscript MYSTERY, or religious comedy, of MARY
MAGDALENE, written in 1512, a GALANT, one of the retainers to the groupe of the
Seven Deadly Sins, is introduced with the following speech.

Hof, Hof, Hof, a frysch new galaunt!
Ware of thryft, ley that a down:
What mean ye, syrrys, that I were a merchant,
Because that I am new com to town?
With praty.... would I feign round,
I have a shert of reyns with sleves peneaunt,
A lase of sylke for my lady Constant --
I woll, or even, be shaven for to seem young, etc.
So also in Skelton's MAGNIFICENCE, a Morality written much about the same
time. f. xx. b.

Your skin, that was wrapped in shertes of raynes,
Now must be storm ybeten. --
Page 186. Not. n. READ "Ne wist."

Page 190. Not. col. 1. lin. 7. After "Robert," ADD "The French prose romance
of ROBERT LE DIABLE, printed in 1496, is extant in the little collection, of
two volumes, called BIBLIOTHEQUE BLEUE. It has been translated into other
languages: among the rest into English. The English version was printed by
Wynkyn de Word. The title of one of the chapters is, How god sent an angel
to the hermyte to show him the penance that ^e should gyve to Robert for his
sins. -- "If that Robert will be shryven of his sins, he must keep and
counterfeite the ways of a fool and be as he were dombe, etc." It ends thus^
Thus ends the life of Robert the devyll
That was the servaunte of our lord
And of his condycyons that was full evyll
Emprinted in London by Wynkyn de Word.


The volume has this colophon. "Here ends the life of the most ferefullest
and unmercyfullest and myschevous Robert the devil which was afterward called
the servaunt of our Lord Jhesu Christ. Emprinted in Fletestrete in [at] the
sign of the son by Wynkyn de Word." There is an old English MORALITY on
this tale, under the very corrupt title of ROBERT CICYLL, which was represented
at the HighCross in Chester, in 1529. There is a manuscript copy of the poem,
on vellum, in Trinity college library at Oxford, MSS. Number. LVII. fol.

Page 197. to l. 15. ADD this Note; "I know not if by sire Jovyn he means
Jupiter, or the Roman emperor called Jovinian, against whom saint Jerome wrote,
and whose history is in the GESTA ROMANORUM, c. 59. He is mentioned by Chaucer
as an example of pride, luxury, and lust. SOMP. T. v. 7511. Verdier (in V.)
recites a Moralite on Jovinian, with nineteen characters, printed at Lions,
from an ancient copy in 1581, 8vo. With the title L'Orgueil et presomption de
l'Empereur JOVINIAN. But Jovyn being mentioned here with Plotoun and Apollin,
seems to mean Jove or Jupiter; and the appellation, SIRE, perhaps implies
father, or chief, of the heathen gods.

Page 200. to the Note ADD, "Margaret countess of Richmond was a justice of
peace."

Page 208. to Not. c. ADD "I make no apology for adding here an account of the
furniture of a CLOSET at the old royal palace of Greenwich, in the reign of
Henry the eighth; as it throws light on our general subject, by giving a lively
picture of the fashions, arts, amusements, and modes of life, which then
prevailed. From the same manuscript in the British Museum. "A clock. A glass
of steel. Four battle axes of wood. Two quivers with arrows. A painted
table, [i. e. a picture.] A pair of balance [balances], with waights. A case
of tynne with a plot. In the window [a large bowwindow], a round mapp, A
standinge glass of steel in ship. -- A branche of flowers wrought upon wyre.
Two pair of playing tables of bone. A pair of chesmen in a case of black
lether. Two birds of Araby. A gonne [gun] upon a stock wheeled. Five paxes
[crucifixes] of glass and wood. A tablet of our lady and saint Anne. A
standinge glass with imagery made of bone. Three pair of hawks gloves, with
two lined with velvett. Three combe-cases of bone furnished. A night-cappe of
black velvett embrawdered. Sampson made in alablaster. A piece of unicorne's
horn. Littel boxes in a case of wood. Four littel coffres for jewels. A horn
of ivorie, A standinge dial in a case of copper. A horne-glasse. Eight cases
of trenchers. Forty four dogs collars, of sondrye making. Seven lyans of
silk. A purse of crymson satin for a..... embrawdered with gold. A round
painted table with the image of a king. A foldinge table of images. One pair
of bedes [beads] of jasper garnyshed with lether. One hundred and thirty eight
hawks hoodes. A globe of paper. A map made like a scryne. Two green boxes
with wrought coral in them. Two boxes covered with black velvett. A reed
tipped at both ends with gold, and bolts for a turony bow Perhaps Tyrone in
Ireland.
. A chair of joined work. An elle of synnamounde [cinnamon] stick tipped with
sylver. Three ridinge rods for ladies, and a yard [rod] of blake tipped with
horn. Six walkyng staves, one covered with silk and gold. A blake satten-bag
with chesmen. A table with a cloth [a picture] of saint George embrawdered. A
case of fine carved work. A box with a bird of Araby. Two long cases of black
lether with pedegrees. A case of Irish arrows. A table, with words, of Jhesus.
A target. Twenty-nine bows." MSS. Harl. 1419. fol. 58. In the GALLERY at
Greenwich, mention is made of a "Map of England." Ibid. fol. 58. And in
Westminster-palace "a Map of Hantshire." fol. 133. A proof that the
topography of England was now studied. Among various HEADS of Furniture, or
stores, at the castle of Windsor, such as HORNS, GYRDELLES, HAWKS HOODS,
WEAPONS, BUCKLERS, DOGS COLLARS, and AIGLETTES, WALKINGSTAVES are specified.
Under this last HEAD we have, "A Cane garnished with sylver and gilte, with
astronomy upon it. A Cane garnished with gold havinge a perfume in the top,
undre that a dial, with a pair of twitchers, and a pair of compasses of
gold and a foot reule of gold, a knife and the file, the afte [the handle of
the knife] of gold with a whetstone tipped with gold, etc." fol. 407.

Ibid. Notes, col. 1. To l. 25. ADD "It is in this romance of Sir BEVYS, that
the knight passes over a bridge, the arches of which are hung round with small
bells. Signat. E iv. This is an oriental idea. In the ALCORAN it is said, that
one of the felicities in Mahomet's paradise, will be to listen to the ravishing
music of an infinite number of bells, hanging on the trees, which will be put
in motion by the wind proceeding from the throne of God. Sale's KORAN, Prelim.
Disc. p. 100. In the enchanted horn, as we shall see hereafter, in le Lai du
Corn, the rim of the horn is hung round with a hundred bells of a most musical
sound.

Page 219. REFER Not. o. to ilome in the text.

Page 220. to l. 18. ADD this Note. In the Lincoln's End manuscript it is,
Diverse is this myddel erde.
Hospit. Linc. MSS. N. 150.

Page 221. Not. f. READ "Aurifrigium."

Ibid. Not. col. 1. l. 2, For "Ethiope," READ "Europe." So MS. Hospit. Linc.

Page 232. Not. g. l. antep. READ "Hubert." [See Leland. SCRIPT. BRIT. p. 228.
And a Note in the editor's first Index, under GULIELMUS DE CANNO.]

Page 248. l. 8. READ "canonical."

Page 255. Not. s. READ "238."

Page 265. To l. 11. ADD this Note, "Much about the same period, Lawrence
Minot, not mentioned by Tanner, wrote a collection of poems on the principal
events of the reign of king Edward the third, preserved in the British Museum.
MSS. Cotton. GALB. E. ix.

Page 276. Not. u. READ "360."

Page 277. ADD to Not. z. "Or, Cousin."

Page 278. ADD to Not. f. "See below, p. 300."

Page 279. l. 18. To the word "Wy" ADD this Note. "Wy is probably Weyhill in
Hampshire, where a famous fair still subsists.

Page 289. Not. d. READ "Austins."

Page 292. For "John," READ "Thomas."

Page 298. Not. READ "p. 40."

Ibid. DELE Not. ^. And SUBSTITUTE "Robartes men, or Roberdsmen, were a set of
lawless vagabonds, notorious for their outrages when PIERCE PLOWMAN was
written, that is, about the year 1350. The statute of Edward the third [an.
reg. 5. c. xiv.] specifies "diverse manslaughters, felonies, and robberies, done
by people that be called Roberdesmen, Wastours, and drawlatches." And the
statute of Richard the second [an. reg. 7. c. v.] ordains, that the statute of
king Edward concerning Roberdsmen and Drawlacches shall be rigorously observed.
Sir Edward Coke [INSTIT. iii. 197.] supposes them to have been originally the
followers of Robert Hood in the reign of Richard the first. See Blackstone's
COMM. B. iv. chapter 17. Bishop Latimer says, that in a town where he intended to
preach, he could not collect a congregation, because it was Robinhoodes day.
"I thought my rochet would have been regarded, though I were not: but it would
not serve, it was feign to give place to Robinhoodes men." SERMONS, fol. 74. b.
This expression is not without an allusion to the bad sense of Roberdsmen.

Page 299. To l. 4. ADD this Note. "In the LIBER PAENITENTIALIS there is this
injunction, "Si monachus per EBRIETATEM vomitum fecerit, triginta dies
paeniteat." MSS. JAM. V. 237. Bibl. Bodl.

Page 300. ADD to Not. p. "Most of the printed copies read praid. Hearne, in a
quotation of this passage, reads yrad. GUL. NEWBRIG. p. 770. He quotes an
edition of 1553. "Your name shall be richly written in the windows of the
church of the monastery, which men will READ there for ever." This seems to be
the true reading.

Ibid. Not. m. Before "Painted," INSERT "Must be." Mote is often used in
Chaucer for must.

Page 301. l. antep. READ "ycorven."

Page 302. DELE Not. p. And SUBSTITUTE, "By Merkes of merchauntes we are to
understand their symbols, ciphers, or badges, drawn or painted in the windows.
Of this passage I have received the following curious explication from Mr.
Cole, rector of Blechley in Bucks, a learned antiquary in the heraldic art. "
Mixed with the arms of their founders and benefactors stand also the MARKS of
tradesmen and merchants, who had no Arms, but used their Marks in a Shield like
Arms. Instances of this sort are very common. In many places in Great Saint
Mary's church in Cambridge such a SHIELD of MARK occurs: the same that is to be
seen in the windows of the great shop opposite the Conduit on the Market-hill,
and the corner house of the Petty Curry. No doubt, in the reign of Henry the
seventh, the owner of these houses was a benefactor to the building, or glasing
Saint Mary's church. I have seen like instances in Bristol cathedral; and the
churches at Lynn are full of them." -- In an ancient system of heraldry in the
British Museum, I find the following illustration, under a shield of this sort.
"Theys be none armies, but a MARK as MARCHAUNTS use, for every mane may take
hyme a Mark, but not armies, without an herawde or purcyvaunte." MSS. Harl.
2259. 9. fol. 110.

Ibid. Not. ^. ADD "But perhaps we should read HURNES, interpreted, in the
short Glossary to the CREED, CAVES, that is, in the present application,
niches, arches. See GLOSS. Rob. Glouc. p. 660. col. i. HURN, is angle, corner.
From the Saxon P^n, Angulus. Chaucer FRANKEL. T. Urr. p. 110. v. 2677. Seeking
in every halke [nook], and every herne.
And again, CHAN. YEM. Prol. p. 121. v. 679. Lurking in hernis and in lanis
blind.
Read the line, thus pointed. Housed in HURNES hard set abouten.
The sense is therefore. "The tombs were within lofty-pinnacled tabernacles,
and enclosed in a multiplicity of thickset arches." HARD is close or thick.
This conveys no bad idea of a Gothic sepulchral shrine.

Ibid. DELE Not. ^.

Ibid. l. antep. For "often," READ "of ten."

Page 303. l. antep. READ "quentelyche."

Page 309. Not. ^. l. 1. READ "140."

Page 317. ADD to Not. ^. "The Holy Virgin appears to a priest who often sung
to her, and calls him her joculator. MSS. JAMES. xxvi. p. 32.

Page 321. l. 23. READ "1594."

Page 339. Not. s. ADD "Perhaps by Cenes, Froissart means SHENE, the royal
palace at Richmond.

Page 343. l. 10. READ "Gloucestershire."

Ibid. Not. g. l. 1. READ "Glanville." And ADD at the end "See Lewis's
WICCLIFFE, p. 66. 329. And Lewis's HISTORY of the TRANSLATIONS of the BIBLE, p.
66.

Page 346. l. 17. After "Lucca in," INSERT, "1570. The title of Granucci's
prose THESEIDE is this, THESEIDE di Boccacio de ottava Rima nuovamente ridotta
in prosa per Nicolao Granucci di Lucca. In Lucca appresso Vinzenzza Busdraghi.
MDLXX. In the DEDICAZIONE to this work, which was printed more than two hundred
years ago, and within one hundred years after the Ferrara edition of the
THESEIDE appeared, Granucci mentions Boccacio's work as a TRANSLATION from the
barbarous Greek poem cited below. DEDICAZ. fol. 5. "Volendo far cosa, que non
sio stata fatta da loro, pero mutato parere mi dicoli a ridurre in prosa questo
Innamoramento, Opera di M. Giovanni Boccacio, quale egli transporto DAL GRECO
in octava rima per compiacere alla sua Fiametta, etc." Lib. SLONIAN. 1614.
Brit. Mus.

Page 349. l. 5. After "Theseid," INSERT "The writer has translated the
prefatory epistle addressed by Boccacio to the Fiametta.

Ibid. l. 10. READ "1453."

Page 350. ADD to the last Note. "In the edition of the GESTA ROMANORUM,
printed at Rouen in 1521, and containing one hundred and eighty-one chapters,
the history of Apollonius of Tire occurs, chapter 153. This is the first of the
additional chapters.

Page 352. To Not. r. ADD "The translation of FLORES and BLANCAFLORE in Greek
iambics might also be made in compliment to Boccacio. Their adventures make the
principal subject of his PHILOCOPO: but the story existed long before, as
Boccacio himself informs us, L. i. p. 6. edit. 1723. Flores and Blancaflore are
mentioned as illustrious lovers by Matfres Eymengau de Bezers, a poet of
Languedoc, in his BREVIARI D'AMOR, dated in the year 1288. MSS. REG. 19 C. i.
fol. 199. This tale was probably enlarged in passing through the hands of
Boccacio. See CANTERB. T. iv. p. 169.

Ibid. ADD to Not. t. "I am informed, that Dr. George's books, amongst which
was the Greek Theseid, were purchased by Lord Spencer.

Ibid. Not. c. l. 3. READ "Tzetzes."

Page 357. l. 7. ADD this Note. "Boccacio's situations and incidents,
respecting the lovers, are often inartificial and unaffecting. In the Italian
poet, Emilia walking in the garden and singing, is seen and heard first by
Arcite, who immediately calls Palamon. They are both equally, and at the same
point of time, captivated with her beauty; yet without any expressions of
jealousy, or appearance of rivalry. But in Chaucer's management of the
commencement of this amor, Palamon by seeing Emilia first, acquires an
advantage over Arcite, which ultimately renders the catastrophe more agreeable
to poetical justice. It is an unnatural and unanimated picture which Boccacio
presents, of the two young princes violently enamoured of the same object, and
still remaining in a state of amity. In Chaucer, the quarrel between the two
friends, the foundation of all the future beautiful distress of the piece,
commences at this moment, and causes a conversation full of mutual rage and
resentment. This rapid transition from a friendship cemented by every tie, to
the most implacable hostility, is on this occasion not only highly natural, but
produces a sudden and unexpected change of circumstances, which enlivens the
detail, and is always interesting. Even afterward, when Arcite is released
from the prison by Perithous, he embraces Palamon at parting. And in the fifth
book of the THESEIDE, when Palamon goes armed to the grove in search of Arcite,
whom he finds sleeping, they meet on terms of much civility and friendship, and
in all the mechanical formality of the manners of romance. In Chaucer, this
dialogue has a very different cast. Palamon at seeing Arcite, feels a cold
sword glide throughout his heart: he starts from his ambuscade, and instantly
salutes Arcite with the appellation of false traitor. And although Boccacio
has merit in discriminating the characters of the two princes, by giving
Palamon the impetuosity of Achilles, and Arcite the mildness of Hector; yet
Arcite by Boccacio is here injudiciously represented as too moderate and
pacific. In Chaucer he returns the salute with the same degree of indignation,
draws his sword, and defies Palamon to single combat. So languid is Boccacio's
plan of this amor, that Palamon does not begin to be jealous of Arcite, till
he is informed in the prison, that Arcite lived as a favorite servant with
Theseus in disguise, yet known to Emilia. When the lovers see Emilia from the
window of their tower, she is supposed by Boccacio to observe them, and not to
be displeased at their signs of admiration. This circumstance is justly omitted
by Chaucer, as quite unnecessary; and not tending either to promote the present
business, or to operate in any distant consequences. On the whole, Chaucer has
eminently shown his good sense and judgment in rejecting the superfluities,
and improving the general arrangement, of the story. He frequently corrects or
softens Boccacio's false manners: and it is with singular address he has often
abridged the Italian poet's ostentatious and pedantic parade of ancient history
and mythology.

Page 357. l. 21. READ "sharp."

Page 359. l. 14. For "boris," READ "beris."

Page 360. Not. c. l. 11. For "wend," READ "wonde."

Page 362. l. ult. DELE "court."

Page 363. ADD to end of Note, col. 2. "But to be more particular as to these
imitations.

Ver. 900. p. 8. Urr. edit. A company of ladys twey and twey, etc.
Thus Theseus, at his return in triumph from conquering Scythia, is accosted by
the dames of Thebes, Stat. THEB. xii. 519.

Jamque domos patrias, Scythicae post aspera gentis
Praelia, laurigero subeuntem Thesea curru
Laetifici plausus, etc. etc.
Paulum et ab insessis moestae Pelopeides aris
Promovere gradum, seriemque et dona triumphi
Mirantur, victique animo rediere mariti.
Atque ubi tardavit currus, et ab axe superbo
Explorat causas victor, poscitque benigna
Aure preces; orsa ante alias Capaneia conjux,
Belliger Aegide, etc.
Chaucer here copies Statius, (v. 861, -- 966.) KN. T. from v. 519. to v. 600.
THEB. See also ibid. 465. seq.

V. 930. p. 9. Here in the Temple of the goddess Clemence, etc.
Statius mentions the temple of Clemency as the asylum where these ladies were
assembled, THEB. xii. 481. Urbe fuit media, nulli concessa potentum
Ara deum, mitis posuit Clementia sedem, etc.


V. 2947. Ne what jewillis men into the fire cast, etc.
Literally from Statius, THEB. vi. 206. Ditantur flammae, non unquam opulentior
illa
Ante cinis; crepitant gemmae, etc.
But the whole of Arcite's funeral is minutely copied from Statius. More than a
hundred parallel lines on this subject might be produced from each poet. In
Statius the account of the trees felled for the pyre, with the consternation of
the Nymphs, takes up more than twenty-four lines. v. 84. -- 116. In Chaucer
about thirteen, v. 2922. -- 2937. In Boccacio, six stanzas. B. xi. Of the three
poets, Statius is most reprehensible, the first author of this ill-placed and
unnecessary description, and who did not live in a Gothic age. The statues of
Mars and Venus I imagined had been copied from Fulgentius, Boccacio's favorite
mythographer. But Fulgentius says nothing of Mars: and of Venus, that she only
stood in the sea on a couch, attended by the Graces. It is from Statius that
Theseus became a hero of romance.

Page 366. l. antep. "READ "laughith." And ADD this Note. "For Orient, perhaps
Orisount, or the horison, is the true reading. So the edition of Chaucer in
1561. So also the barbarous-Greek poem on this story, (...). Dryden seems to
have read, or to have made out of this mispelling of Horison, ORIENT.

Page 370. l. 8. READ "buske."

Page 372. l. antep. For "at," READ "al."

Page 374. l. 20. READ "forto."

Page 375. l. 6. READ "This."

Page 376. ADD to Not. in col. 1. "AMILED is from the French EMAIL, or ENAMEL.
This art flourished most at Limoges in France. So early as the year 1197, we
have "Duas tabulas aeneas superauratas de labor Limogiae." Chart. ann. 1197.
apud Ughelin. tom. vii. ITAL. SACR. p. 1274. It is called Opus Lemnoviticum, in
Dugdale's MON. iii. 310. 313. 331. And in Wilkins's COUNCIL. i. 666. where two
cabinets for the host are ordered, one of silver or of ivory, and the other de
opere Lemovicino. SYNOD. WIGORN. A. D. 1240. And in many other places. I find
it called Limaise, in a metrical romance, the name of which I have forgot,
where a tomb is described, And yt was, the Romans says,
All with gold and limaise.
Carpentier [V. LIMOGIA.] observes, that it was anciently a common ornament of
sumptuous tombs. He cites a Testament of the year 1327, "Je lais huit cent
livres pour fair deux tombs hautes et levees de l' EUVRE de LIMOGES." The
original tomb of Walter de Merton, bishop of Rochester, erected in his
cathedral about the year 1276, was made at Limoges. This appears from the
accounts of his executors, viz. "Et computant xl l. v s. vi d. liberat.
Magistro Johanni Linnomcensi, pro tumba dicti Episcopi Roffensis, scil. pro
Constructione et carriagio de Lymoges ad Roffam. Et xl s. viii d. cuidam
Executori apud Lymoges ad ordinandum et providendum Constructionem dictae
Tumbae. Et x s. viii d. cuidam garcioni eunti apud Lymoges quaerenti dictam
tumbam constructam, et ducenti eam cum dicto Mag. Johanne usque Roffam. Et xxii
l. in materialibus circa dictam tumbam defricandam. Et vii marcas, in
ferramento ejusdem, et carriagio a Londin. usque ad Roff. et aliis parandis ad
dictam tumbam. Et xi s. cuidam vitriario pro vitris fenestrarum emptarum juxta
tumbam dicti Episcopi apud Roffam." Ant. Wood's MS. MERTON PAPERS, Bibl. Bodl.
COD. BALLARD. 46.

Page 378. l. 9. READ "preis."

Page 383. l. 4. READ "Petrarch having desired his friend Guy de Gonzague to
send him some new piece, he sent him, etc."

Page 385. l. 2. To the word Boccacio, ADD this Note. "Boccacio's FILOSTRATO
was printed in quarto at Milan, in 1488. The title is, "Il FYOLOSTRATO, che
tracta de lo innamoramento de TROILO a GRYSEIDA: et de molte altre infinite
battaglie. Impresso nella inclita cita de Milano par magistro Uldericho
Scinzenzeler nell anno M. CCCCLXXXXVIII. a di xxvii di mese Septembre." It is
in the octave stanza. The editor of the CANTERBURY TALES informs me, that
Boccacio himself, in his DECAMERON, has made the same honorable mention of
this poem as of the THESEIDA: although without acknowledging either for his
own. In the Introduction to the Sixth Day, he says, that "Dioneo insieme con
Lauretta de TROILE ET DI CRISEIDA cominciarono cantare." Just as, afterward,
in the conclusion of the Seventh Day he says, that the same "Dioneo et Fiametta
gran pezzi cantarono insieme D'ARCITA ET DI PALAMONE." See CANTERB. T. vol. iv.
p. 85. iii. p. 311. Chaucer appears to have been as much indebted to Boccacio
in his TROILUS AND CRESSEIDE, as in his KNIGHTS TALE. At the same time we must
observe, that there are several long passages, and even episodes, in TROILUS,
of which no traces appear in the FILOSTRATO. Chaucer speaks of himself as a
translator out of Latin, B. ii. 14. And he calls his author LOLLIUS, B. i. 394.
-- 421. and B. v. 1652. The latter of these two passages is in the PHILOSTRATO:
but the former, containing Petrarch's sonnet, is not. And when Chaucer says, he
translates from Latin, we must remember, that the Italian language was called
Latino volgare. Shall we suppos^, that Chaucer followed a more complete copy of
the FILOSTRATO than that we have at present, or one enlarged by some officious
interpolator? The Parisian manuscript might perhaps clear these difficulties.
In Bennet library at Cambridge, there is a manuscript of Chaucer's TROILUS,
elegantly written, with a frontispiece beautifully illuminated, LXI.

Ibid. l. 16. READ "sike, and efte to."

Page 387. l. 5. READ "alofte."

Ibid. l. 15. READ "lo which a deed!"

Page 388. l. 14. READ "Bradwardine." So also, p. 421. l. 2. infr.

Page 389. Not. k. l. 3. READ "B. iii."

Ibid. ibid. l. 2. col. 2. For "Thomas a Beckett," READ "Thomas Becket." So
also, p. 14. l. 13. p. 85. l. 15. p. 397. l. 4. p. 445. l. 12. [For this, see
H. Wharton's Letter at the end of Strype's CRANMER, p. 526.]

Ibid. ibid. l. 5. col. 2. READ "B. ii. v. 526."

Page 390. Not. ^. l. 3. READ "own."

Page 392. l. 21. READ "parlirs."

Ibid. Not. z. READ "iii."

Ibid. l. 25. READ "William Thomas." And ADD this Note. "Chaucer's Life in
Urry's edition. William Thomas digested this Life from collections by Dart. His
brother, Dr. Timothy Thomas, wrote or compiled the Glossary and Preface to that
edition. See Dart's WESTMINST. ABBEY, i. 86. Timothy Thomas was of Christ
Church Oxford, and died in 1751.

Page 401. l. 18. For "Seraphic," READ "Angelic."

Page 403. l. 9. READ "mede."

Page 407. Not. f. ADD "The same fiction is in Caxton's TROY BOOK. "Upon the
pinnacle or top of the tower he made an image of copper and gave him in his
hand a looking-glass, having such virtue, that if it happened that any
ships came to harm the city suddenly, their army and their coming should
appear in the said looking-glass." B. ii. chapter xxii.

Page 408. Not. i. l. 1. col. 2. READ "Gallic."

Page 413. To Not. h. l. 2. ADD, "Mahomet believed this foolish story, at least
thought it fit for a popular book, and has therefore inserted it in the
Alcoran. See Gray on HUDIBRAS, part i. cant. i. v. 547.

Page 415. ADD to l. 15. this Note. "The bridle of the enchanted horse is
carried into the tower, which was the treasury of Cambuscan's castle, to be
kept among the jewels. Thus when king Richard the first, in a crusade, took
Cyprus, among the treasures in the castles are recited precious stones, and
golden cups, together with " Sellis aureis frenis et calcaribus." Galfr.
Vinesauf. ITER. HIEROSOL. cap. xli. p. 328. VET. SCRIPT. ANGL. tom. ii.

Page 416. ADD to Not. r. "It may be doubted whether Boccacio invented the
story of Grisilde. For, as the late inquisitive and judicious editor of THE
CANTERBURY TALES observes, it appears by a Letter of Petrarch to Boccacio,
[OPP. Petrarch. p. 540 -- 7. edit. Basil. 1581.] sent with his Latin
translation, in 1373, that Petrarch had heard the story with pleasure, many
years before he saw the Decameron. vol. iv. p. 157.

Page 417. To l. 9. ADD, "And in Bennet college library with this title.
"HISTORIA ^ive FABULA de nobili Marchione WALTERIO domino terrae Saluciarum,
quomodo duxit in uxorem GRISILDEM pauperculam, et ejus constantiam et
patientiam mirabiliter et acriter comprobavit: quam de vulgari sermon
Saluciarum in Latinum transtulit D. Franciscus Petrarcha." CLXXVII. 10. fol.
76. Again, ibid. CCLXXV. 14. fol. 163. Again, ibid. CCCCLVIII. 3. with the date
1476, I suppose, from the scribe. And in Bibl. Bodl. MSS. LAUD. G. 80.

Ibid. Not. w. l. 2. After "Bonne^ons," INSERT, "This is the whole title. "Le
MYSTERE de Griseldis, Marquis d^ Saluces, mis en rhyme francoise et par
personnaiges." Without date, in quarto, and in the Gothic type. In the
colophon, Cy finist la vie de Griseldis, etc.

Page 419. l. 2. After "growth," INSERT, "The story of the cock and the fox is
evidently borrowed from a collection of Esopean and other fables, written by
Marie a French poetess, whose LAIS are preserved in MSS. HARL. ut infr. see f.
139. Beside the absolute resemblance, it appears still more probable that
Chaucer copied from Marie, because no such fable is to be found either in the
Greek Esop, or in any of the Latin Esopean compilations of the dark ages. See
MSS. HARL. 978. f. 76. All the manuscripts of Marie's fables in the British
Museum prove, that she translated her work "de l'Anglois en Roman." Probably
her English original was Alfred's Anglo-Saxon version of Esop modernised, and
still bearing his name. She professes to follow the version of a king; who, in
the best of the Harleian copies, is called LI REIS ALURED. MSS. HARL. 978.
supr. citat. She appears, from passages in her LAIS, to have understood
English. See Chaucer's CANTERB. TALES, vol. iv. p. 179. I will give her
Epilogue to the Fables from MSS. JAMES. viii. p. 23. Bibl. Bodl.

Al finement de cest escrit
Qu' en romanz ai treite e dit
Me numerai pour remembrance
Marie ai nun sui de France
Pur cel estre que clerc plusur
Prendreient sur eus mun labeur
Ne voit que null sur li sa die
Eil feit que fol que sei ublie
Pur amur le cunte Wllame
Le plus vaillant de null realm
Meinlemir de ceste livre feire
E des Engleis en romanz treire
Esop apelum cest livre
Quil translata e fist escrire
Del Gru en Latin le turna
Le Reiz Alurez que mut lama
Le translata puis en Engleis
E jeo lai rimee en Franceis
Si cum jeo poi plus proprement
Ore pri a dieu omnipotent, etc.
Page 420. l. 18. READ "beke."

Page 421. To Not. t. ADD, "The ludicrous adventure of the Pear Tree, in
JANUARY AND MAY, is taken from a collection of Fables in Latin elegiacs,
written by one Adolphus in the year 1315. Leyser. HIST. POET. MED. AEVL. p.
2008. The same fable is among the Fables of Alphonse, in Caxton's ESOP.

Page 425. l. 15. For "in," READ "is."

Page 427. l. 9. READ "perlid."

Page 428. Not. n. l. 2. READ "be went." [So the edit. in 1561.]

Ibid. To Not. q. ADD, " Calcei fenestrasti occur in ancient Injunctions to the
clergy. In Eton-college statutes, given in 1446, the fellows are forbidden to
wear, sotularia rostrata, as also caligae, white, red, or green. CAP. xix. In a
chantry, or chapel, founded at Winchester in the year 1318, within the cemitery
of the Nuns of the Blessed Virgin by Roger Inkpenne, the members, that is, a
warden, chaplain and clerk, are ordered to go "in meris caligis, et sotularibus
non rostratis, nisi forsitan botis uti voluerunt." And it is added, "Vestes
deferant non fibulatas, sed desuper clausas, vel brevitate non notanda^."
REGISTR. Priorat. S. Swithini Winton. MS. supr. citat. Quatern. 6. Compare
Wilkins's COUNCIL. iii. 670. ii. 4.

Page 429. l. 3. READ "Oxenforde."

Ibid. l. 6. READ "song sometime a loud."

Page 430. Not. q. l. ^. After "DISSERRAT. i." ADD, "It is not my intention to
enter into the controversy concerning the cultivation of vines, for making
wine, in England. I shall only bring to light the following remarkable passage
on that subject from an old English writer on gardening and farming. "We might
have a reasonable good wine growyng in many places of this realm: as
undoubtedly we had immediately after the Conquest; till partly by
slothfulness, not liking any thing long that is painful, partly by civil
discord long continuyng, it was left, and so with time lost, as appears by a
number of places in this realm that keep still the name of Vineyardes: and
upon many cliffes and hills, are yet to be seen the roots and old remaynes
of Vines. There is besides Nottingham, an ancient house called Chilwell, in
which house remains yet, as an ancient monument, in a Great Wyndowe of
Glass, the whole Order of planting, pruyning, [pruning,] stamping and pressing
of vines. Beside, there [at that place] is yet also growing an old vine, that
yields a grape sufficient to make a right good wine, as was lately proved. --
There has, moreover, good experience of late yeears been made, by two noble
and honorable barons of this realm, the lord Cobham and the lord Wylliams of
Tame, who had both growyng about their houses, as good wines as are in many
parts of France, etc." Barnabie Googe's FOUR BOOKS OF HUSBANDRY, etc. Land.
1578. 4to. TO THE READER.

Page 431. To Not. k. ADD, "But both Boccacio and Chaucer probably borrowed
from an old CONTE, or FABLIAU, by an anonymous French rhymer, De Gombert et des
deux Clers. See FABLIAUX et CONTES, Paris, 1756. tom. ii. p. 115. -- 124. The
SHIPMAN'S TALE, as I have hinted, originally came from some such French
FABLEOUR, through the medium of Boccacio.

Ibid. To Not. b. ADD, "It is entitled BURNELLUS, sive Speculum stultorum, and
was written about the year 1190. See Leyser. POET. MED. AEVI. p. 752. It is a
common manuscript. Burnell is a nickname for Balaam's ass in the Chester
WHITSUN PLAYS. MSS. HARL. 2013.

Page 432. Not. l. l. 4. After "Cambridge," INSERT, "There is, however,
Abington, with a mill-stream, seven miles from Cambridge.

Ibid. Not. n. l. 9. READ "881."

Ibid. l. 14. READ "Salarii."

Page 436. To Not. c. ADD "The Prioresse's exact behavior at table, is copied
from ROMANS ROSE, 14178. -- 14199. Et bien se guard, etc.
To speak French is mentioned above, among her accomplishments. There is a
letter in old French from queen Philppa, and her daughter Isabell, to the
Priour of Saint Swithin's at Winchester, to admit one Agnes Patshull into an
eleemosynary sisterhood belonging to his convent. The Priour is requested to
grant her, "Une Lyvere en votre Maison dieu de Wyncestere et estre un des
soers," for her life. Written at Windesor, Apr. 25. The year must have been
about 1350. REGISTR. Priorat. MS. supr. citat. Quartern. xix. fol. 4. I do not
so much cite this instance to prove that the Priour must be supposed to
understand French, as to show that it was now the court language, and even on a
matter of business. There was at least a great propriety, that the queen and
princess should write in this language, although to an ecclesiastic of dignity.
In the same Register, there is a letter in old French from the queen Dowager
Isabell to the Priour and Convent of Winchester; to show, that it was at her
request, that king Edward the third her son had granted a church in Winchester
diocese, to the monastery of Leedes in Yorkshire, for their better support, "a
trouver sis chagnoignes chantans tous les jours en la chapele du Chastel de
Ledes, pour laime madame Alianore reyne d'Angleterre, etc." A. D. 1341. Quatern
vi.

The Prioresse's greatest oath is by Saint Eloy. I will here throw together
some of the most remarkable oaths in the Canterbury Tales. The HOST, swears by
my father's soul. Urr. p. 7. 783. Sir THOPAS, by ale and bread. p. 146. 3377.
ARCITE, by my pan, i. e. head. p. 10. 1167. THESEUS, by mighty Mars the red.
p. 14. 1749. Again, as he was a true knight. p. 9. 961. The CARPENTER'S wife,
by saint Thomas of Kent. p. 26. 183. The SMITH, by Christ's foot. p. 29. 674.
The CAMBRIDGE SCHOLAR, by my father's kinn. p. 31. 930. Again, by my croune,
ib. 933. Again, for gods benes, or benison. p. 32. 965. Again, by seint
Cuthberde, ib. 1019. Sir JOHAN of BOUNDIS, by seint Martyne. p. 37. 107.
GAMELYN, by goddis book. p. 38. 181. GAMELYN'S brother, by saint Richere. ibid.
273. Again, by Cristis ore. ib. 279. A FRANKELEYN, by saint Jame that in Galis
is, i. e. saint James of Galicia. p. 40. 549. 1514. A PORTER, by Goddis berde.
ib. 581. GAMELYN, by my hals, or neck. p. 42. 773. The MAISTIR OUTLAWE, by the
good rode. p. 45. 1265. The HOST, by the precious corpus Madrian, p. 160. 4.
Again, by saint Paulis bell. p. 168. 893. The MAN of LAW, Depardeux. p. 49.
39. The MERCHANT, by saint Thomas of Inde. p. 66. 745. The SOMPNOUR, by goddis
armis two. p. 82. 833. The HOST, by cockis bonis. p. 106. 2235. Again, by
naylis and by blood, i. e. of Christ. p. 130. 1802. Again, by saint Damian. p.
131. 1824. Again, by saint Runion. ib. 1834. Again, by Corpus domini. ib. 1838.
The RIOTTOUR, by Goddis digne bones. p. 135. 2211. The HOST, to the Monk, by
your father kin. p. 160. 43. The MONK, by his porthose, or breviary. p. 139.
2639. Again, by God and saint Martin. ib. 2656. The HOST, by armis, blood and
bonis. p. 24. 17.

Page 438. l. 14. READ "man."

Page 440. l. 8. READ "unyd."

Page 441. l. 10. READ "Peripatetic."

Ibid. Not. n. l. 2. READ "L. ii."

Page 442. l. ult. READ "Pits."

Page 443. Not. col. 1. l. 6. After "249," ADD, "See Freind's HIST. OF PHYSIC,
ii. 257.

Ibid. Not. w. l. 3. READ "quaestum."

Ibid. l. 5. For "foreign writers," READ "English students abroad." ADD to the
end of the Note, "See more of Gilbertus Anglicus, ibid. p. 356.

Page 445. l. 16. READ "Watte." And ADD as a Note, "So edit. 1561. See
Johnson's Dictionary, in MAGPIE.

Page 446. l. 5. For "to," READ "the."

Page 447. Notes, col. 2. l. 2. READ "298."

Page 449. To Not. d. ADD, "The gulf and castle of Satalia are mentioned by
Benedictus Abbas, in the crusade under the year 1191. "Et cum rex Franciae
recessisset ab Antiochet, statim intravit gulfum SATHALIAE. -- SATHALIAE
Castellum est optimum, unde gulfus ille nomen accepit; et super gulfum illum
sunt duo Castella et Villae, et utrumque dicitur SATALIA. Sed unum illorum est
desertum, et dicitur Vetus SATALIA quod piratae destruxerunt, et alterum Nova
SATALIA dicitur, quod Manuel imperator Constantinopolis firmavit." VIT. ET
GEST. HENR. et RIC. ii. p. 680. Afterward he mentions Mare Graecum, p. 683.
That is, the Mediterranean from Sicily to Cyprus. I am inclined, in the second
verse following, to read "Greek sea." Leyis is the town of Layas in Armenia.

Page 450. l. 16. For "in," READ "is."

Ibid. l. ult. READ "Sheff."

Ibid. Not. ^. l. 3. READ "chivauchie."

Page 452. l. 10. DELE "in."

Ibid. Not. s. READ "447."

Page 453. Note, col. 2. l. 14. READ "full."

Page 454. Not. b. l. 9. READ "Tapiser." And in the next line, "Chanon's."

Page 458. l. 19. ADD this Note to "Provence." "The ingenious editor of the
CANTERBURY TALES treats the notion, that Chaucer imitated the Provencial poets,
as totally void of foundation. He says, "I have not observed in any of his
writings a single phrase or word, which has the least appearance of having been
fetched from the South of the Loire. With respect to the manner and matter of
his compositions, till some clear instance of imitation be produced, I shall be
slow to believe, that in either he ever copied the poets of Provence; with
whose works, I apprehend, he had very little, if any acquaintance." Vol. i.
APPEND. PREF. p. xxxvi. I have advanced the contrary doctrine, at least by
implication: and I here beg leave to explain myself on a subject materially
affecting the system of criticism that has been formed on Chaucer's works. I
have never affirmed, that Chaucer imitated the Provencial bards; although it is
by no means improbable, that he might have known their tales. But as the
peculiar nature of the Provencial poetry entered deeply into the substance,
cast, and character, of some of those French and Italian models, which he is
allowed to have followed, he certainly may be said to have copied, although not
immediately, the matter and manner of these writers. I have called his HOUSE OF
FAME originally a Provencial composition. I did not mean that it was written by
a Provencial troubadour: but that Chaucer's original was compounded of the
capricious mode of fabling, and that extravagant style of fiction, which
constitute the essence of the Provencial poetry. As to the FLOWER AND THE
LEAF, which Dryden pronounces to have been composed after their manner, it is
framed on the old allegorising spirit of the Provencial writers, refined and
disfigured by the fopperies of the French poets in the fourteenth century. The
ideas of these fablers had been so strongly imbibed, that they continued to
operate long after Petrarch had introduced a more rational method of
composition.

Page 462. Not. q. BEGIN this Note with "Compare" in the preceding Note.

Page 463. Not. col. 1. To the end of l. 8. ADD, "The groundwork of DOLOPATHOS
is a Greek story-book called SYNTIPAS, often cited by Du Cange, whose copy
appears to have been translated from the Syriac. See GLOSS. MED. et INFIM.
Graecitat. -- IND. Auctor. p. 33. Among the Harleian manuscripts is another,
which is said to be translated from the Persic. MSS. HARL. 5560. Fabricius
says, that Syntipas was printed at Venice, lingua vulgari. BIBL. GR. x. 515. On
the whole, the plan of SYNTIPAS appears to be exactly the same with that of LES
SEPT SAGES, the Italian ERASTO, and our own little story book the SEVEN WISE
MASTERS: except that, instead of Dioclesian of Rome, the king is called CYRUS
of PERSIA; and, instead of one Tale, each of the Philosophers tells two. The
circumstance of Persia is an argument, that SYNTIPAS was originally an oriental
composition. See what is collected on this curious subject, which is intimately
concerned with the history of the invention of the middle ages, by the learned
editor of the CATERBURY TALES, vol. iv. p. 329. There is a translation, as I am
informed by the same writer, of this Romance in octosyllable verse, probably
not later than the age of Chaucer. MSS. COTTON. GALB. E. ix. It is entitled
"The Process of the seven Sages," and agrees entirely with LES SEPT SAGES DE
ROME in French prose. MSS. HARL. 3860. See also MSS. C. C. Coll. Oxon. 252. in
membran. 4to. The Latin book, called HISTORIA SEPTEM SAPIENTUM ROMAE, is not a
very scarce manuscript: it was printed before 1500. I think there are two old
editions among More's books at Cambridge. Particularly one printed in ^^arto at
Paris, in 1493.

Page 466. Notes, col. 2. l. 1. Instead of "All this while," READ "Speght
supposes that." To the end ADD, "See Le dit de la fleur de lis et de la
Marguerite, by Guillaume Machaut, ACAD. INSCRIPT. xx. p. 381. x. 669. infr.
citat. On the whole, it may be doubted whether, either Froissart, or Chaucer,
means Margaret, countess of Pembroke. For compare APPEND. PREF. CANTERB. TALES,
vol. i. p. xxxiv. I add, that in the year 1547, the poetical pieces of Margaret
de Valois, queen of Navarre, were collected and published under the title of
MARGUERITE de la Marguerites des Princesses, tres illustre Royne de Navarre, by
John de la Hay, her valet de chamber. It was common in France, to give the
title of MARGUERITES to studied panegyrics, and flowery compositions of every
kind, both in prose and verse.

VOL. II.
PAGE 5. ADD to Not. k. "The nations bordering upon the Jews, attributed the
miraculous events of that people, to those external means and material
instruments, such as symbols, ceremonies, and other visible signs or
circumstances, which by God's special appointment, under their mysterious
dispensation, they were directed to use. Among the observations which the
oriental Gentiles made on the history of the Jews, they found that the Divine
will was to be known by certain appearances in precious stones. The Magi of the
east, believing that the preternatural discoveries obtained by means of the
Urim and Thummim, a contexture of gems in the breast plate of the Mosaic
priests, were owing to some virtue inherent in those stones, adopted the
knowledge of the occult properties of gems as a branch of their magical system.
Hence it became the peculiar profession of one class of their Sages, to
investigate and interpret the various shades and coruscations, and to explain,
to a moral purpose, the different colors, the dews, clouds, and imageries,
which gems, differently exposed to the sun, moon, stars, fire, or air, at
particular seasons, and inspected by persons particularly qualified, were seen
to exhibit. This notion being once established, a thousand extravagancies
arose, of healing diseases, of procuring victory, and of seeing future events,
by means of precious stones and other lucid substances. See Plin. NOT. HIST.
xxxvii. 9. 10. These superstitions were soon ingrafted into the Arabian
philosophy, from which they were propagated all over Europe, and continued to
operate even so late as the visionary experiments of Dee and Kelly When king
Richard the first, in 1191, took the isle of Cyprus, he is said to have found
the castles filled with rich furniture of gold and silver, "necnon lapidibus
pretiosis, et plurima^^ vi^tut^m habentibus." G. Vines. ITER. HIEROSOL. cap.
xli. p. 328. Hist. Anglic. SCRIPT. vol^ ii. Oxon. 1687.
. It is not in the mean time at all improbable, that the Druidical doctrines
concerning the virtues of stones were derived from these lessons of the Magi:
and they are still to be traced among the traditions of the vulgar, in those
parts of Britain and Ireland, where Druidism retained its latest
establishments. See Martin's WEST. ISLES, p. 167. 225. And Aubrey's MISCELL. p.
128. Land. 8vo.

Page 31. ADD, "In lord Gower's library, there is a thin oblong manuscript on
vellum, containing some of Gower's poems in Latin, French, and English. By an
entry in the first leaf, in the handwriting, and under the signature, of
Thomas lord Fairfax, Cromwell's general, an antiquarian, and a lover and
collector of curious manuscripts He gave twenty-nine ancient manuscripts to the
Bodleian library, one of which is a beautiful manuscript of Gower's Confessio
Aman^is. When the Record-tower in S. Mary's abbey at York was accidentally
blown up in the grand rebellion, he offered rewards to the soldiers who could
bring him fragments of the scattered parchments. Luckily, however, the numerous
original evidences lodged in this repository had been just before transcribed
by Roger Dodsworth; and the transcripts, which formed the groundwork of
Dugdale's MONASTICON, consisting of for^y-nine large folio volumes, were
bequeathed by Fairfax to the same library. Fairfax also, when Oxford was
garrisoned by the parliamentary forces, exerted his utmost diligence in
preserving the Bodleian library from pillage; so that it suffered much less,
than when that city was in the possession of the royalists.
, it appears, that this book was presented by the poet Gower, about the year
1400, to Henry the fourth; and that it was given by lord Fairfax to his friend
and kinsman sir Thomas Gower knight and baronet, in the year 1656. By another
entry, lord Fairfax acknowledges to have received it, in the same year, as a
present, from that learned gentleman Charles Gedde esquire, of saint Andrews in
Scotland: and at the end, are five or six Latin anagrams on Gedde, written and
signed by lord Fairfax, with this title, "In NOMEN venerandi et annosi Amici
sui Caroli Geddei." By king Henry the fourth it seems to have been placed in
the royal library: it appears at least to have been in the hands of king Henry
the seventh, while earl of Richmond, from the name Rychemond, inserted in
another of the blank leaves at the beginning, and explained by this note,
"Liber Henrici septimi tunc Comitis Richmond, propria manu scripsit." This
manuscript is neatly written, with miniated and illuminated initials: and
contains the following pieces. I. A Panegyric in stanzas, with a Latin prologue
or rubric in seven hexameters, on king Henry the fourth. This poem, commonly
called Carmen de pacis Commendatione in laudem Henrici quarti, is printed in
Chaucer's WORKS, edit. Urr. p. 540. -- II. A short Latin poem in elegiacs on
the same subject, beginning, "Rex coeli deus et dominus qui tempora solus."
[MSS. COTTON. OTHO. D. i. 4.] This is followed by ten other very short pieces,
both in French and English, of the same tendency. -- III. CINKANTE BALADES, or
Fifty Sonnets in French. Part of the first is illegible. They are closed with
the following epilogue and colophon.

O gentile Engleterre a toi iescrits,
Pour remembrer ta joy qest nouelle,
Qe te survient du noble Roy Henris,
Par qui dieus ad redreste ta querele,
A dieu purceo prient et cil et celle,
Qil de sa grace, au fort Roi corone,
Doignit peace, honor, joy et prosperity.
Expliciunt carmina Johis Gower que Gallice composita BALADES dicuntur. -- IV.
Two short Latin poems in elegiacs. The First beginning, "Ecce patet tensus ceci
Cupidinis arcus." The Second, "O Natura viri potuit quam tollere nemo." -- V. A
French poem, imperfect at the beginning, On the Dignity or Excellence of
Marriage, in one book. The subject is illustrated by examples. As no part of
this poem was ever printed, I transcribe one of the stories.

Qualiter Jason uxorem suam Medeam relinquens, Creusam Creontis regis filiam
sibi carnaliter copulavit. Verum ipse cum duobus filiis suis postea
infortunatus periit.

Li prus Jason qeu lisle de Colchos
Le toison dor, pour laid de Medee
Conquist don't il donour portoit grant loos
Par tout le monde encourt la renomee
La joefne dame oue soi ad amenee
De son pays en Greece et lespousa
Ffreinte espousaile dieus le vengera.
Quant Medea meulx qui de etre en repos
Ove son mari et qelle avoit port
Deux fills de luy lors changea le purpos
El quelle Jason permer fuist oblige
Il ad del tout Medeam refuse
Si prist la ^^le au roi Creon Creusa
Ffrenite espousaile dieux le vengera.
Medea qot le coer de dolor cloos
En son corous et ceo fuist grant pite
Sas joefnes fills queux et jadis en clos
Veniz ses costees ensi com forseue
Devant ses oels Jason ele ad tue
Ceo qeu fuist fait pecche le fortuna
Ffrenite espousaile dieux le vengera.
Toward the end of the piece, the poet introduces an apology for any
inaccuracies, which, as an Englishman, he may have committed in the French
idiom.

Al universite de tout le monde
JOHAN GOWER ceste Balade evoie;
Et si ieo nai de Francois faconde,
Pardonetz moi qe ieo de ceo forsvoie.
Jeo suis Englois: si quier par tiele voie
Estre excuse mais quoique mills endie
L'amour parfait en dieu se justify.
It is finished with a few Latin hexameters, viz. "Quis sit ve^ qualis sacer
order connubialis." This poem occurs at the end of two valuable folio
manuscripts, illuminated and on vellum, of the CONFESSIO AMANTIS, in the
Bodleian library, viz. MSS. FAIRFAX, iii. And NE. F. 8. 9. Also in the
manuscript at All Souls college Oxford, MSS. xxvi. described and cited above.
And in MSS. HARL. 3869. In all these, and, I believe, in many others, it is
properly connected with the CONFESSIO AMANTIS by the following rubric. "Puisqu'
il ad dit CIDEVANT en ENGLOIS, par voie dessample, la sotie de cellui qui par
amors aimie par especial, dirra ore apres en FRANCOIS a tout le mond en
general une traitie selonc les auctors, pour essemplar les amants mariez, etc."
It begins, Le creature du tout creature.


But the CINQUANTE BALADES, or fifty French Sonnets abovementioned, are the
curious and valuable part of lord Gower's manuscript. They are not mentioned by
those who have written the life of this poet, or have catalogued his works. Nor
do they appear in any other manuscript of Gower which I have examined. But if
they should be discovered in any other, I will venture to pronounce, that a
more authentic, unembarrassed, and practicable copy than this before us, will
not be produced: although it is for the most part unpointed, and obscured with
abbreviations, and with those mispellings which flowed from a scribe
unacquainted with the French language.

To say no more, however, of the value which these little pieces may derive
from being so scarce and so little known, they have much real and intrinsic
merit. They are tender, pathetic, and poetical; and place our old poet Gower in
a more advantageous point of view than that in which he has hitherto been
usually seen. I know not if any even among the French poets themselves, of this
period, have left a set of more finished sonnets: for they were probably
written when Gower was a young man, about the year 1350. Nor had yet any
English poet treated the passion of love with equal delic^cy of sentiment, and
elegance of composition. I will transcribe four of these balades as correctly
and intelligibly as I am able: although I must confess, there are some lines
which I do not exactly comprehend.

BALADE XXXVI.
Pour comparer ce jolif temps de Maij,
Jeo dirrai semblable a Paradis;
Car lors chantoit et merle et papegai,
Les champs sont vert, les herbs sont floris;
Lors est Nature dame du paijs:
Don't Venus poignt l'amant a tiel assai,
Qencontre amor nest qui poet dire Nai.
Quant tout ceo voi, et que ieo penserai,
Coment Nature ad tout le mond suspris,
Don't pour le temps se fait mino^e et gai,
Et ieo des autres suis souleni horspris,
Com al qui sanz amie est v^ais amiss,
Nest pas mervaile lors si ieo mesmai,
Qencontre amor nest qui poet dire Nai.
En lieu de rose, urtie cuillerai,
Don't mes chapeals ferrai par tiel devis,
Qe tout joy et confort ieo lerrai,
Si celle soul e^ qui iai mon coer mis,
Selonc le poni^ qe iai sovent req^i^,
Ne deigne alegger les griefs mals qe iai,
Qencontre amor nest qui poet dire Nai.
Pour pite querre et pourchacer i^tris,
Va ten balade ou ieo tenvoierai,
Qore en certain ieo lai tresbien apris
Qencontre amor nest qui poet dire Nai.
BALADE XXXIV.
Saint Valentin, l'Amour, et la Nature,
Des touts oiseals ad en government,
Don't chascun deaux, semblable a sa mesure^
Un compaigne honest a son talent
Eslist, tout dun accord et dun assent,
Pour celle soul^ laist a covenir;
Toutes les autres car nature aprent
Ou li coers est le corpse falt obeir.
Ma doulce Dame, ensi ieo vou^ assure,
Qe ieo vous ai eslieu semblablement,
Sur toutes autres estes a dessure
De mon amor si tresentierement,
Qe riens y falt pourquoi ioiousement,
De coer et corpse ieo vous voldrai servir,
Car de reason cest une experiment,
Ou li coers est le corpse falt obeir.
Pour remembrer iadis celle aventure
De Alceone et ceix enseinent,
Com dieus muoit en oisel lour figure,
Ma volente serroit tout tielement
Qe sans envy et danger de la gent,
Nous porroions ensemble pour loisir
Voler tout francs en votre esbatement
Ou li coers est le corpse falt obeir.
Ma belle oisel, verse qui mon pensement
Seu vole ades sanz null contretenir
Preu cest escript car ieo sai voirement
Ou li coers est le corpse falt obeir.
BALADE XLIII.
Plustricherous qe Jason a Medee,
A Deianire ou q' Ercules estoit,
Plus q' Eneas q' avoit Dido lassee,
Plus qe Theseus q' Adriagne Ariadne.
amoit,
Ou Demophon qut Phillis oubliot,
Te trieus, helas, qamer iadis soloie,
Don't chanterai desore en mon endroit
Cest ma dolor qe fuist amicois ma joie.
Unques Ector qama Pantasilee Penthesilea.
,
En tiele haste a Troie ne sarmoit,
Qe tu tout mid nes deniz le lit couche
Amiss as toutes quelques venir doit,
Ne poet chaloir mais qune femme y soit,
Si es comun plus qe la halte voie,
Helas, qe la fortune me decoit,
Cest ma dolor qe fuist amicois ma joie.
De Lancelot Sir Lancelot's intrigue with Geneura, king Arthur's queen, and sir
Tristram with Bell Isoulde, incidents in Arthur's romance, are made the subject
of one of the stories of the French poem just cited, viz. Commes sont la
cronique et listoire
De Lancelot et Tristrans ensement, etc.

si fuissetz remember,
Et de Tristans, com il se countenoit,
Generides This name, of which I know nothing, must be corruptly written.
, Fflorent Chaucer's WIFE OF BATHES TALE is founded on the story of Florent, a
knight of Rome, who delivers the king of Sicily's daughter from the
enchantments of her stepmother. His story is also in our author's CONFESSIO
AMANTIS, Lib. iii. fol. 48. a col. 1. seq. Lib. viii. fol. 175. a col. 2. seq.
And in the GESTA ROMANORUM. [See supr. p. 31.] Percy [NUM. 2.] recites a
Romance called L^ ^ONE FLORENCE DE ROME, which begins^ A^ far as men ride or
gone.
I know not if this be Shakespeare's Florentius, or Florentio, TAM. SHR. i. 5.
Be she as foul as was FLORENTIUS' love.

, par Tonope That is Partenope, or Parthenopeus, one of Statius's heroes, on
whom there is an old F^ench romance. [See supr. vol. i^ p. 123.]
,
Chascun des ceaux sa loialte gardoit;
Mais tu, helas, qest ieo qe te forsvoit
De moi qa toi iamais mill iour falsoie,
Tu es a large et ieo sui en destroit,
Cest ma dolor qe fuist amicois ma joie.
Des toutz les mals tu qes le plus maloit,
Ceste compleignte a ton oraille envoie
Sante me laist, et langour me recoit,
Cest ma dolor qe fuist amicois ma joie.
BALADE XX.
Si com la nief, quant le fort vent tempeste,
Pur halte mier se torna ci et la,
Ma dame, ensi mon coer manit en tempeste,
Quant le danger de vo parrole orra,
Le nief qe votre bouche soufflera,
Me fait sigler sur le peril de vie,
Qest en danger falt quil mera supply.
Rois Ulyxes, sicom nos did la Geste,
Verse son paiis de Troie qui sigla,
Not tiel paour du peril et moleste,
Quant les Sereines en la mier passa,
Et la danger de Circes eschapa,
Qe le paour nest plus de ma party,
Qest en danger falt quil mera supply.
Danger qui tolt damour tout la feste,
Unques un mot de confort ne sona,
Ainz plus cruel qe nest la fiere best
Au point quant danger me respondera.
La chiere port et quant le nai dirra,
Plusque la mort mestoie celle oie
Qest en danger falt quil mera supply.
Verse vous, ma bone dame, horspris cella,
Qe danger manit en votre compainie,
Cest balade en mon message irra
Qest en danger falt quil mera supply.
For the use, and indeed the knowledge, of this manuscript, I am obliged to the
unsolicited kindness of Lord Trentham; a favor which his lordship was pleased
to confer with the most polite condescension.

Page 31. Notes, col. 2. l. 5. ADD, "A Greco-barbarous translation of the
romance of APOLLONIUS OF TIRE was made by one Gabriel Contianus (...). Perhaps
(...).
, a Grecian, about the year 1500, as appears by a manuscript in the imperial
library at Vienna Lambecc. CATAL. BIBL. CAESAR. Nesselii SUPPL. tom. i. p. 341.
MSS. Graec. CCXLIV. (Vind. et Norinb. 1690. fol.) Pr. "(...)." Fin. "(...),
etc." This is in prose. But under this class of the imperial library, Nesselius
recites many manuscript poems in the Greco-barbarous meter of the fifteenth
century or thereabouts, viz. The Loves of Hemperius; Description of the city of
Venice; The Romance of Florius and Platzflora; The Blindness and Beggary of
Belisarius; The Trojan War; Of Hell; Of an Earthquake in the Isle of Crete,
etc. These were all written at the restoration of Learning in Italy. [See vol.
i. p. 348. 350.]
; and printed at Venice in 1503. [See vol. i. p. 350.] Salviati, in his
Avvertimenti, mentions an Italian romance on this subject, which he supposes to
have been written about the year 1330. Lib. ii. c. 12. Velser first published
this romance in Latin at Ausburgh, in 1595. 4to. The story is here much more
elegantly told, than in the GESTA ROMANORUM. In Godfrey of Viterbo's PANTHEON,
it is in Leonine verse. There has been even a German translation of this
favorite tale, viz. "Historia APPOLLONII TYRIAE et Sidoniae regis ex Latino
sermon in Germanicum translata. August. Vindel. apud Gintherum Zainer, 1471.
fol." At the end is a German colophon, importing much the same.

Page 41. Not. p. DELE "author of the Lives of the Dramatic Poets." [The author
of the ACCOUNT OF THE ENGLISH DRAMATIC POETS, was Gerard the son of doctor
Langbaine, provost of Queen's college, Oxford. This book was first published
under the title of MOMUS TRIUMPHANS, Land. 1687. 4to. Five hundred copies were
quickly sold; but the remainder of the impression appeared the next year with a
new title, A new Catalogue of English Plays, containing comedies, etc. Land.
1688. 4to. The author at length digested his work anew with great accessions
and improvements, which he entitled as above, AN ACCOUNT OF THE ENGLISH
DRAMATICK POETS, etc. Oxon. 1691. 8vo. This book, a good groundwork for a new
publication on the same subject and plan, and which has merit as being the
first attempt of the kind, was reprinted by Curl, with flimzy additions, under
the conduct of Giles Jacob, a hero of the Dunciad, Land. 1719. 8vo. Our author,
after a classical education, was first placed with a bookseller in London; but
at sixteen years of age, in 1672, he became a gentleman commoner of University
college in Oxford. His literature chiefly consisted in a knowledge of the
novels and plays of various languages; and he was a constant and critical
attendant of the play houses for many years. Retiring to Oxford in the year
1690, he died the next year; having amassed a collection of more than a
thousand printed plays, masks, and interludes.]

Page 54. Notes, col. 2. l. 19. ADD, "The most ancient complete French copy of
LA DANSE MACABRE was printed in folio at Lions, in 1499, together with some
other short spiritual pieces, under the title La Grand DANSE MACABRE des ^ommes
et des femmes historiee, avec de beaux dits en Latin et huitains en Francois,
etc. To this work Erasmus alludes in the third book of his RATIO CONCIONANDI,
where he says, "Quin et vulgares rhetoristae censuerunt hoc decus, qui interdum
versibus certo numero comprehensis, pro clausula, accinunt bre^em et argutam
sententiam, velut in Rhythmis quos Gallus quispiam edidit in CHOREAM MORTIS."
tom. v. Opp. page 1007. Naude calls this allegory, "Chorea ab eximio Macabro
edita." MASCUR. p. 224. I believe the first Latin edition, that of Pierre
Desrey which I have mentioned, was printed at Troyes in 1490, not 1460. The
French have an old poem, partly on the same idea, LA DANSE DES AVEUGLES, under
the conduct of Love, Fortune, and Death, written by Pierre Michault, about the
year 1466. See MEM. ACAD. INSCRIPT. et BELL. LET. ii. 742. And Goujet, BIBL. FR.
ix. 358. In De Bure's BIBLIOGRAPHIE INSTRUCTIVE, an older but less perfect
edition of Le Danse Macabre is recited, printed at Paris in 1486, for Guyot
Merchant. fol. In this edition the French rhymes are said to be by Michel
Marot. tom. i. p. 512. number. 3109. BELL. LETTR. He has catalogued all the
ancient editions of this piece in French, which are many. Pierre Desrey
abovementioned wrote a French romance called LA GENEALOGY, on Godfrey of
Bouloign. Paris, 1511. fol.

Page 103. To Not. ^. ADD, "These BRITISH LAIS, of which I have given specimens
at the beginning of the FIRST DISSERTATION, and of which sir LAUNFAL is one,
are discovered to have been translated into French from the language of
Armorican Bretagne, about the thirteenth century, by Marie a French poetess,
who made the translation of ESOP abovementioned. See CANT. T. vol. iv. p. 165.
edit. 1775. But Marie's was not the only Collection of BRITISH LAIS, in French:
as appears, not only from the EARL of TOULOUSE, but by the romance of EMARE, a
translation from the French, which has this similar passage, St. ult. This is
on of Brytayne lays
That was used of old days.
MSS. Cotton. CALIG. A ii. fol. 69. (see f. 70.) The SONG of SIR GOWTHER is
said by the writer to be taken from one of the Lays of Brytayne: and in
another place he calls his story the first Lay of Britanye. MSS. REG. 17 B.
xliii. Chaucer's FRANKELEIN'S TALE was also a Bretagne Lay, Urr. p. 107. In the
Prologue he says,

The old gentill Bretons in their days
Of diverse aventoures madin their Lays,
Rymeyed first in their own Breton tongue,
Which layis with there instruments they song.
Here he translates from Marie, although this story is not in her manuscript,
viz. fol. 181. Li auntien Bretun curteis.
But in his DREME, he seems to have copied her LAY of ELIDUS. [See Diss. i.] To
the British Lais I would also refer LA LAI DU CORN, which begins, De un
aventure ci avint
A la court del bon rei Artus.
MSS. DIGB. 86. Bibl. Bodl. membran. 4to. It probably existed before the year
1300. The story, which much resembles the old French metrical romance, called
LE COURT MANTEL, is slightly touched in MORTE ARTHUR. ii. 33. A magical horn,
richly garnished, the work of a fairy, is brought by a beautiful boy riding on
a fleet courser, to a sumptuous feast held at Carleon by king Arthur, in order
to try the fidelity of the knights and ladies, who are in number sixty
thousand. Those who are false, in drinking from this horn, spill their wine.
The only successful knight, or he who accomplishes the adventure, is Garaduc or
Cradok. I will here give the description of the horn.

-- Un dauncel More properly written daunzel, or danzel. As in the old French
romance of GARIN. Et li danzel que Bues ot norris.
And in other places. So our king Richard the first, in a fragment of one of
his Provencial sonnets. E lou donzel de Thuscana.
"For Boys Tuscany is the couutry." In Spanish, Lo Donz^ll. See Andr. Bosch,
Dels Titols de honor de Cathalanya. L. iii. c. 3.. 16. In some of these
instances, the word is restrained to the sense of Squire. It is from the Latin
DOMICEL^US. Froissart calls Richard the second, when prince of Wales, "Le jeune
Damoisel Richart." tom. i. c. 325.
,
Mout avenaunt et bell,
Seur un cheval corant,
En palleis vint eraunt:
En sa main tont un COR
A quatre bendel de or,
Ci com etoit diveure
Entaillez de ad trifure Or rather trifore. Undoubtedly from the ^atin
trif^rium, a rich ornamented edge or border. The Latin often occurs under
Dugdale's INVENTORY of saint Paul's, in the MONASTICON, viz. "Morsus [a buckle]
W. de Ely argenteus, cresta ejus argentea, cum TRIFORIO ext^rius aureo et
lap^llis ins^tis, etc." tom. iii. ECCL. CATH, p. 309. TRIFORIATUS repeatedly
occurs in the same page, as thus. "Morsus Petri de Blois TRIFORIATUS de auro."
-- "Medio circulo [of a buckle] aurato, TRIFORIATO, inserto grossis lapidibus,
etc."

-- "Cum multis lapidibus et perlis insitis in limbis, et quadraturis
TRIPHORATUS aureis," etc. etc. ibid. p. 309. et seq. It is sometimes written
TRIFORIA. As, "Pannus cujus campus purpureus, cum xiv listis in longitudine ad
modum TRIFORIAE contextis." ibid. p. 326. col. 2. TRIFURE, in the text, may be
literally interpreted jewel-work. As in CHRON. S. Dion. tom. iii. Collect.
Histor. Franc. p. 183. "Il^estoient de fin or esmere et aourne de tres riches
pierres precieuses d' uere [oeuvre] TRIPHOIRE." Which Aimon calls, "g^mmisque
ornata Opere inclusorio," that is, work consisting of jewels set in. De GEST.
FRANC. Lib. ii. cap. ix. p. 44. G. edit. Paris. 1603. fol.


,
Peers ici ont assizes,
Qu en le or furent mises,
Berreles et sardoines,
Et riches calcedoines;
Il fu fust de ollifaunt,
Ounques ne ni si grant,
Ne si fort, ne si bell,
Desus ont un anel,
Neele de ad argent,
Eschelettes il ont cent
Perfectees de or fin,
En le tens Constantin,
Les fist une Fee,
Qu preuz ert, et senee,
E le corn destina
Si cum vous orres ja:
Qu sour le corn ferroit
Un petit de soun doit,
Ses eschelettes cent
Sounent tant doucement,
Qu harp ne viele
Ne deduit de pucelle,
Ne Sereigne du mer
Nest tele desconter.
These lines may be thus interpreted. "A boy, very graceful and beautiful,
mounted on a swift horse, came into the palace of king Arthur. He bore in his
hand a horn, having four bandages of gold; it was made of ivory, engraved with
trifoire: many precious stones were set in the gold, beryls, sardonyces, and
rich chalcedonies: it was of elephant [ivory]: nothing was ever so grand, so
strong, or so beautiful: at bottom was a ring [or rim] wrought of silver; where
were hanging an hundred little bells, framed of fine gold, in the days of
Constantine, by a Fairy, brave and wise, for the purpose which ye have just
heard me relate. If any one gently struck the horn with his finger, the hundred
bells sounded so sweetly, that neither harp nor viol, nor the sports of a
virgin, nor the sirens of the sea, could ever give such music." The author of
this Lai is one Robert Bikez, as appears by the last lines; in which the horn
is said still to be seen at Cirencester. From this tale came Ariosto's
ENCHANTED CUP, ORL FURIOS. xlii. 92. And Fontaine's LA COUPE ENCHANTEE. From
the COURT MANTEL, a fiction of the same tendency, and which was common among
the Welsh bards, Spenser borrowed the wonderful virtues and effects of his
FLORIMEL'S GIRDLE, iv. 5. 3. Both stories are connected in an ancient Ballad
published by Percy. vol. iii. p. 1.

In the Digby manuscript, which contains La Lai du Corn, are many other curious
chansons, romantic, allegorical, and legendary, both in old French and old
English. I will here exhibit the rubrics, or titles, of the most remarkable
pieces, and of such as seem most likely to throw light on the subjects or
allusions of our ancient English poetry. Le Romaunz Peers Aunfour [Alfonse]
coment il aprist et chastia son fills belement. [See Notes to CANTERB. T. p.
328. vol. iv.] De un demi ami. -- De un bon ami enter. -- De un sage homme et
de i fol. -- De un gopil et de un mul. -- De un ^oi et de un clerc. -- De un
homme et de une serpente et de un gopil. -- De un roi et de un versifiour. --
De ii clercs escoliers. -- De un prodome et de sa male femme. -- Del engine de
femme del nelons. -- Del espee autre engine de femme. -- De un roy et de un
fableour. -- De une veille et de une lisette. -- De la gile de la per e el pin.
-- De un prodfemme bone cointise. [Pr. "Un Espagnol ceo vy counter.] -- De ii
menestreus. [i. e. Minstrels.] -- De une roy et de Platoun. -- De un vilein de
i lou et de un gopil. -- De un roy fol large. -- De maimound mal esquier. -- De
Socrates et de roi Alisaundre. -- De roi Alisaundre et de i philosophe. -- De
un philosofel et del alme. -- Ci commence le romaunz de Enfer, Le Sounge Rauf
de Hodenge de la voie denfer. [Ad calc. "Rauf de Hodeng, saunz mensounge, -- Qu
cest romaunz fist de sun song." See Verdier, BIBL. FR. ii. 394. v. 394. Paris,
1773.] -- De un vallet qui soutint dames et dammaisales. -- De Romme et de
Gerusalem. -- La lais du corn. -- Le fabel del gelous. -- Ci comence la
bertournee. -- La vie de un vaillet amerous. -- De iiii files... [Pr. "Un rois
estoit de grant pouer."] -- How Jheu Crist herewede hell, etc. [See vol. ii.
p. 207.] -- Le xv singnes [signes] de domesday. [Pr. "Fifteen toknen ich
tellen may." Compare vol. i. p. 219.] -- Ci comence la vie seint Eustace ci ont
nom Placidas. [Pr. "All that loves gods lore
"Old and young less and more."
See MS. VERNON, fol. 170. ut supr.] -- Le diz de seint B^rnard. [Pr. "the
blessinge of hevene king."] -- Vbi sont ci ant^ nos fuerount. [In English.] --
Chauncon de nostre dame. [Pr. "Stond well mother ounder rode."] -- Here begins
the saw^ of seint Bid priest. [Pr. "Holy ghost thy migtee.] -- Coment le
saunter notre dame fu primes cuntrone. [Pr. "Luedi sweet and mild."] -- Les...
peines de enfen. [Pr. "Oiez Seynours une demand."] -- Le regret de Maximian.
[Pr. "Herkeneth to mi ron." MSS. HARL. 2253. f. 82. See vol. i. p. 32.] -- Ci
comence le cuntent par enter le mavis et la russinole. [Pr. "Somer is cum^n
with love to tonne." See vol. i. p. 30.] -- Of the fox and of the wolf. [Pr. "A
vox gone out of the wode go."] -- Hending the hend^. [MSS. HARL. 2253. 89. fol.
125.] -- Les proverbes del vilain. -- Les miracles de seint NICHOLAS. --
Ragemon le bon. -- Chancun del secle. [In English.] -- Ci commence le fabl^ et
la courtise de dame siri... [Pr. "As I com by an way."] -- Le noms de un leure
Engleis. [i. e. The names of the Hare in English.] -- Ci comence la vie nostre
dame. -- Ci comence le doctrinal de enseignemens de curteisie. -- Ci comence
les Aves noustre dame. -- De ii chevalers torts ke plenderent aroune. -- Bonne
prieur a nostre seigneur Jhu Crist. -- Ci comence lescrit de ii dames. -- Hic
incipit carmen inter corpus et animam. [A Dialogue in English verse between a
body laid on a bier and its Soul. Pr. "Hon on.... stude I stod an lutell escrit
to here."] -- Ci commence la maner^ que le amor est pur assaier. [Pr. "Love is
soft, love is sweet, love is goed swear."] -- Chauncon de noustre seigneur.
This manuscript seems to have been written about year 1304. Ralph Houdain,
whose poem called VISION D'ENFER it contains^ wrote about the year 1230.

The word, LAI, I believe, was applied to any subject, and signified only the
versification. Thus we have in the Bodleian library La LUMERE AS LAIS, par
Mestre Pierre de Feccham. Verai deu omnipotent
Kestes fin et commencement.
MSS. BODL 399. It is a system of theology in this species of meter.

Page 121. To Not. q. ADD, "In Jean Petit's edition in 1535, and perhaps in
that of 1485, of Premierfaict's translation of the DECAMERON, it is said to be
translated from Latin into French. But Latin here means Italian. Hence a
mistake arose, that Boccacio wrote his DECAMERON in Latin. The Italian, as I
have before observed, was anciently called Il volgare Latino. Thus the French
romance of MELIADUS DE LEONNOIS is said to be translate du LATIN, by Rusticien
de Pisa, edit. Par. 1532. fol. Thus also GYRON LE COURTOIS is called a version
from the Latin. [Supr. vol. ii. p. 117.] M. de la Monnoye observes, "Que quand
on trouve que certains VIEUX ROMANS ont ete traduits de LATIN en Francois, par
Luces de Salesberies, Robert de Borron, Rusticien de Pisa, ou autres, cela
signify que c' a ete D'ITALIEN en Francois." REM. au BIBL. FR. du La Croix du
Maine, etc. tom. ii. p. 33. edi^. 1772. [See supr. ADDIT. ad p. 15. i.]
Premierfaict's French DECAMERON, which he calls CAMERON, is a most wretched
caricature of the original.

Page 148. Not. col. 2. l. 4. For "1115," READ "1015."

Page 153. To Not. c. ADD, "I have received some notices from the old registers
of saint Ewin's church at Bristol, anciently called the MINSTER, which import,
that the church pavement was washed against the coming of king Edward. But this
does not at all prove or imply that the king sat at the great mynsterr window
to see the gallant Lancastrian, Baldwin, pass to the scaffold; a circumstance,
and a very improbable one, mentioned in Rowlie's pretended poem on this
subject. The notice at most will prove only, that the king assisted at mass in
this church, when he came to Bristol. Nor is it improbable, that the other
churches of Bristol were cleaned, or adorned, at the coming of a royal guest.
Wanter, above quoted, is evidently wrong in the date 1463, which ought to be
1461, or 1462.

Page 156. Notes, col. 2. To l. 9. ADD "I have observed, but for what reason I
know not, that saint Ewin's church at Bristol was called the minster. I,
however, suspect, that the poet here means Bristol cathedral. He calls, with
his accustomed misapplication of old words, Worcester cathedral the minster of
our lady, infr. p. 160. But I do not think this was a common appellation for
that church. In Lydgate's LIFE OF SAINT ALBAN, Minster is used in its first
simple acceptance. MSS. Coll. Trin. Oxon. Number. xxxviii. fol. 19. -- Saint
Albone
Of that mynstre leyde the first stone.
That is, of saint Alban's monastery.

Page 164. To the end of the Section, ADD, "What is here said of Rowlie, was
not only written, but printed, almost two years before the correct and complete
edition of his Poems appeared. Had I been apprised of that publication, I
should have been much more sparing in my specimens of these forgeries, which
had been communicated to me in manuscript, and which I imagined I was imparting
to my readers as curiosities. I had as yet seen only a few extracts of these
poems; nor were those transcripts which I received, always exact. Circumstances
which I mention here, to show the inconveniences under which I labored, both
with regard to my citations and my criticisms. These scanty materials, however,
contained sufficient evidence to convince me, that the pieces were not genuine.

The entire and accurate collection of Rowlie's now laid before the public, has
been so little instrumental in inducing me to change my opinion, that it has
served to exemplify and confirm every argument which I have produced in support
of my suspicions of an imposition. It has likewise afforded some new proofs.

Those who have been conversant in the works even of the best of our old
English poets, well know, that one of their leading characteristics is
inequality. In these writers, splendid descriptions, ornamental comparisons,
poetical images, and striking thoughts, occur but rarely: for many pages
together, they are tedious, prosaic, and uninteresting. On the contrary, the
poems before us are every where supported: they are throughout, poetical and
animated. They have no imbecillities of style or sentiment. Our old English
bards abound in unnatural conceptions, strange imaginations, and even the most
ridiculous absurdities. But Rowlie's poems present us with no incongruous
combinations, no mixture of manners, institutions, customs, and characters.
They appear to have been composed after ideas of discrimination had taken
place; and when even common writers had begun to conceive, on most subjects,
with precision and propriety. There are indeed, in the BATTLE OF HASTINGS, some
great anachronisms; and practices are mentioned which did not exist till
afterward. But these are such inconsistencies, as proceeded from fraud as well
as ignorance: they are such as no old poet could have possibly fallen into, and
which only betray an unskilful imitation of ancient manners. The verses of
Lydgate and his immediate successors are often rugged and unmusical: but
Rowlie's poetry sustains one uniform tone of harmony; and, if we brush away the
asperities of the antiquated spelling, conveys its cultivated imagery in a
polished and agreeable strain of versification. Chatterton seems to have
thought, that the distinction of old from modern poetry consisted only in the
use of old words. In counterfeiting the coins of a rude age, he did not forget
the usual application of an artificial rust: but this disguise was not
sufficient to conceal the elegance of the workmanship.

The BATTLE OF HASTINGS, just mentioned, might be proved to be a palpable
forgery for many other reasons. It is said to be translated from the Saxon of
Turgot. But Turgot died in 1015, and the battle of Hastings was fought in 1066.
We will, however, allow, that Turgot lived in the reign of the Conqueror. But,
on that supposition, is it not extraordinary, that a cotemporary writer should
mention no circumstances of this action which we did not know before, and which
are not to be found in Malmsbury, Ordericus Vitalis, and other ancient
chroniclers? Especially as Turgot's description of this battle was professedly
a detached and separate performance, and at least, on that account, would be
minute and circumstantial. An original and a cotemporary writer, describing
this battle, would not only have told us something new, but would otherwise
have been full of particularities. The poet before us dwells on incidents
common to all battles, and such as were easily to be had from Pope's HOMER. We
may add, that this piece not only detects itself, but demonstrates the
spuriousness of all the rest. Chatterton himself allowed the first part of it
to be a forgery of his own. The second part, from what has been said, could not
be genuine. And he who could write the second part was able to write every line
in the whole collection. But while I am speaking of this poem, I cannot help
exposing the futility of an argument which has been brought as a decisive
evidence of its originality. It is urged, that the names of the chiefs who
accompanied the Conqueror, correspond with the Roll of Battle-Abbey. As if a
modern forger could not have seen this venerable record. But, unfortunately, it
is printed in Hollinshead's Chronicle.

It is said that Chatterton, on account of his youth and education, could not
write these poems. This may be true; but it is no proof that they are not
forged. Who was their author, on the hypothesis that Rowlie was not, is a new
and another question. I am, however, of opinion that it was Chatterton. For if
we attend only to some of the pieces now extant in a periodical magazine, which
he published under his own signature, and which are confessedly of his
composition, to his letters now remaining in manuscript, and to the testimony
of those that were acquainted with his conversation, he will appear to have
been a singular instance of a prematurity of abilities; to have acquired a
store of general information far exceeding his years, and to have possessed
that comprehension of mind, and activity of understanding, which predominated
over his situations in life, and his opportunities of instruction. Some of his
publications in the magazines discover also his propensity to forgery, and more
particularly in the walk of ancient manners, which seem greatly to have struck
his imagination. These, among others, are ETHELGAR, a Saxon poem in prose;
KENRICK, translated from the Saxon; CERDICH, translated from the Saxon; GODRED
CROVAN, a Poem, composed by Dothnel Syrric king of the isle of Man; The HIRLAS,
composed by Blythyn, prince of North Wales; GOTHMUND, translated from the
Saxon; ANECDOTE of CHAUCER, and of the ANTIQUITY of CHRISTMAS GAMES. The latter
piece, in which he quotes a register of Keinsham NUNNERY, which was a priory of
Black canons, and advances many imaginary facts, strongly shows his track of
reading, and his fondness for antiquarian imagery. In this monthly collection
he inserted ideal drawings of six achievements of Saxon heraldry, of an
inedited coin of queen Sexburgeo, wife of king Kinewalch, and of a Saxon
amulet; with explanations equally fantastic and arbitrary. From Rowlie's
pretended parchments he produced several heraldic delineations. He also
exhibited a draught by Rowlie of Bristol castle in its perfect state. I very
much doubt if this fortress was not almost totally ruinous in the reign of
Edward the fourth. This draught, however, was that of an edifice evidently
fictitious. It was exceedingly ingenious; but it was the representation of a
building which never existed, in a capricious and affected style of Gothic
architecture, reducible to no period or system.

To the whole that is here suggested on this subject, let us add Chatterton's
inducements and qualifications for forging these poems, arising from his
character, and way of living. He was an adventurer, a professed hireling in the
trade of literature, full of projects and inventions, artful, enterprising,
unprincipled, indigent, and compelled to subsist by expedients.

Page 165. To Not. b. ADD, "In the British Museum, there is a poem entitled, "A
CRISTEMASSE GAME made by master BENET how God Almighty seyde to his apostelys
and echeon of them were baptiste and none knew of other." The piece consists of
twelve stanzas, an apostle being assigned to each stanza. Probably master
Benet is Benedict Burgh. MSS. HARL. 7333. This is saint Paul's stanza. Doctor
of gentiles, a perfect Paul,
By grace convertid from thy great error,
And cruelte, changed to Paul from Saul,
Of faith and troth most perfyte prechoure,
Slain at Rome undir thilke emperor
Cursyd Nero, Paul sit down in thy place
To the ordained by purveaunce of grace.


Page 169. To Not. u. ADD, "In Bennet college library, there is a copy of the
French CATO by Helis of Winchester, MSS. ccccv. 24. fol. 317. It is entitled
and begins thus. Les Distiches Morales de CATON mises en verse par Helis de
Guyncestre. Ki vout saver la faitement
Ki Catun a sun fiz a prent,
Si en Latin nel set entendre,
Jci le pot en rumainz In romance. In French.
aprendre,
Cum Helis de Guyncestre
Ki deu met a se destre
La translate si fatemente.
Cod. membran. 4to. The transcript is of the fourteenth century. Compare
Verdier, BIBL. FRANC. tom. iii. p. 288. edit. 1772. In the Latin Chronicle of
of Anonymus Salernitanus, written about the year 900, the writer mentions a
description in Latin verse of the palace of the city of Salerno, but laments
that it was rendered illegible through length of time: "Nam si unam paginam
fuissemus nacti, comparare illos [versus] profecto potuissemus Maroni in
voluminibus, CATONIQUE, ^ive profecto aliis Sophistis." cap. xxviii. col. 195.
B. tom. ii. P. ii. SCRIPTOR. RER. ITAL. Mediolan. 1726.

Page 173. To Not. g. Add, "But the same lines occur in the Prologue to
Hampole's Speculum Vitae, or MIRROR OF LIFE, as it has been called, written
about the year 1350. [See MSS. BODL. 48. p. 47. a. Bibl. Bodl. And ibid. MSS.
LANGB. 5. p. 64.] From which, that those who have leisure and opportunity may
make a farther comparison of the two Prologues, I will transcribe a few more
dull lines. Latin als, I trow, can nane
Bot thase that it of scole hane taken,
Some can frankes and latin
That hanes used covrte and dwelled theryn,
And some can o latin a party
That can frankes bot febely,
And some understands in inglys
That can another latin ne frankys,
Bot lered and lewed alde and young
All understands inglysche tongue:
Their fore I halde it maste syker thon
To schew that langage that ilk a man konne,
And for all lewed men namely
Thet can no manner of clergy,
To kenne thanne what ware maste need,
Ffor clerks can bathe se and read, etc.
This poem, consisting of many thousand verses, begins with the spiritual
advantages of the Lord's Prayer, of its seven petitions, their effects, etc.
etc. And ends with the seven Beatitudes, and their rewards. [See supr. vol. i.
p. 265. Not. ^.] These are the two concluding lines. To whylk bliss he us bring
That on the cross for us all would hyng.
This is supposed to be a translation from a Latin tract, afterward printed at
Cologne, 1536. fol. But it may be doubted, whether Hampole was the translator.
It is, however, most probably of the fourteenth century.

Page 189. To l. 22. ADD this Note, "The passion for versifying every thing was
carried to such a height in the middle ages, that before the year 1300,
Justinian's Institutes, and the code of French jurisprudence, were translated
into French rhymes. There is a very antien^ edition of this work, without date,
place, or typographer, said to be corrected, par plusieurs docteurs and
souverains legistes, in which are these lines, J' ay, par paresse, demoure
Trop longuement a commencer
Pour Institutes romancer.
See Menage, OBS. sur LE LANG. FR. P. prem. chapter 3. Verdier and La Croix, iii.
428. iv. 160. 554. 560. BIBL. FR. edit. 1773.

Page 191. To Not. o. ADD, "Another proof which ascertains this reading of the
controverted passage in HAMLET, occurs in the romance of MORTE ARTHUR. When sir
Lancelo^ was dying, "when he was howseled and eneled, and had all that a
christian man ought to have, he praid the bishop, that his fellows might bear
his body unto Joyous Guard, etc." B. xxi. cap. xii.

Page 199. To Not. q. ADD, "These highly painted infernal punishments, and joys
of Paradise, are not the invention of the author of the KALENDRIER. They are
taken, both from M. Paris, and from Henry of Saltry's Description of saint
Patrick's PURGATORY, written in 1140, and printed by Messingham in his
FLORILEGIUM INSULAE SANCTORUM, etc." Paris, 1624. fol. cap. vi. etc. p. 101.
See Bibl. Bodl. MSS. BODL. 550. [See vol. ii. p. 298.] Messingham has connected
the two accounts of M. Paris and H. de Saltry, with some interpolations of his
own. This adventure appears in various manuscripts. No subject could have
better suited the devotion and the credulity of the dark ages.

Page 200. Notes, col. 2. l. 31. ADD, "To the reign of king Henry the sixth we
may also refer a poem written by one Richard Sellyng, whose name is not in any
of our biographers. MSS. HARL. f. 38. a. It is entitled and begins thus,
Evidens to be ware and good covnsayle made now late by that honorable squier
Richard Sellyng. Loo this is but a simple tragedy,
Ne thing lyche un to hem of Lumbardye,
Which that Storax wrote unto Pompeie,
Sellyng makes this in his manner,
And to John Shirley now sent it is
Ffor to amend where it is amiss.
He calls himself an old man. Of this honorable squier I can give no further
account. John Shirley, here mentioned, lived about the year 1440. He was a
gentleman of good family, and a great traveller. He collected, and transcribed
in several volumes, which John Stowe had seen, many pieces of Chaucer, Lydgate,
and other English poets. In the Ashmolean Museum, there is, A book cleped the
Abstracte Brevyare compyled of diverse balades, roundels, virilays, tragedyes,
envoys, complaints, moralities, stories, practysed and eke devysed and
ymagined, as it shows ^ere followyng, collected by John Shirley. MSS. 89. ii.
In Thoresby's library was a manuscript, once belonging to the college of Selby,
A most pyteous cronycle of thorribil death of James Steward, late king of
Scotys, naught long agone prisoner in England in the times of the kings Henry
the fifte and Henry the sixte, translated out of Latin into our mothers
English tongue by your simple subject John Shirley. Also, The book clepyd Les
bones meures translated out of French by your ^umble serviture John Shirley of
London, MCCCCXL, comprised in v parts. The first party spekith of remedy
that is against the sevyn deadly sins. 2. The estate of holy church. 3. Of
princes and lords temporal. 4. Of comone people. 5. Of death and universal
dome. Also, his Translation of the Sanctum Sanctorum, etc. DUCAT. LEOD. p. 530.
A preserver of Chaucer's and Lydgate's works deserved these notices. The late
Mr. Ames, the industrious author of the HISTORY OF PRINTING, had in his
possession a folio volume of English Ballads in manuscript, composed or
collected by one John Lucas about the year 1450.

Page 204. ADD to the Note, "The most splendid spectacle of this sort which
occurs in history, at least so early as the fourteenth century, is described by
Froissart, who was one of the spectators. It was one of the shows at the
magnificent entrance of queen Isabell into Paris, in the year 1389. The story
is from the crusade against Saladin. I will give the passage from lord
Berners's Translation, printed by Pinson in 1523. "Than after, under the
mynster of the Trinyte, in the street, there was a stage, and thereupon a
castle. And along on the stage there was ordained the PASS OF KING SALHADYN,
and all their deeds in Personages: the christian men on the one part, and the
Sarazins on the other part. And there was, in Personages, all the lords of
name that of old time had been armed, and had done any feats of arms at the
PASS OF SALHADYNE, and were armed with such armure as they than used. And
thanne, a lyttel above them, there was in Personages the French king and the
twelve Peers of France armed, with the blason of their arms. And when the
French queen's lytter was come before this stage, she rested there a season.
Then the Personages on the stage of king Rychard departed fro his company,
and went to the French king, and demanded license to go and assail the
Sarazins; and the king gave him [them] leave. Thanne king Richard returned
to his twelve companyons. Thanne they all set them in order, and incontynente
went and assailed Salhadyne and the Sarazins. Then in sport there seemed a
great bataile, and it endured a good space. This pageaunt was well regarded."
CRON. tom. ii. c. 56. fol. clxxii. col. i. By the two kings, he means Philip of
France, and our king Richard the first, who were jointly engaged in this
expedition. It is observable, that the superiority is here given to the king of
France.

Page 212. Notes, col. 1. To l. 2. ADD, "In the Bodleian manuscript (BODL.
638.) this poem, with manifest impropriety, is entitled the TEMPLE OF BRAS. It
there appears in the midst of many of Chaucer's poems. But at the end are two
poems by Lydgate, THE CHAUNSE OF THE DYSE, and RAGMANY'S ROLL. And, I believe,
one or two more of Lydgate's poems are intermixed. It is a miscellany of old
English poetry, chiefly by Chaucer: but none of the pieces are respectively
distinguished with the author's name. This manuscript is partly on paper and
partly on vellum, and seems to have been written not long after the year 1500.

Page 241. l. 2. For "1494," READ "1470."

Ibid. l. 11. For "1497," READ "1488." And ADD this Note, "With this title,
"Sebastiani Brandt NAVIS STULTIFERA Mortalium, a vernaculo ac vulgari sermon
in Latinum conscripta, per JACOBUM LOCHER cognomine Philomusum Suevum cum
figuris. Per Jacobum Zachoni de Romano, anno 1488." 4to. In the colophon, it is
said to have been jampridem traducta from the German original by Locher; and
that this Latin translation was revised by the inventor Brandt, with the
addition of many new FOOLS^ A second edition of Locher's Latin was printed at
Paris, in 1498. 4to. There is a French prose translation by Jehan Drouyn, at
Lions, 1498. fol. In the royal library at Paris, there is a curious copy of
Barklay's English SHIP OF FOLYS, by Pinson, on vellum, with the woodcuts: a
rarity not, I believe, to be found in England.

Ibid. To Not. k. ADD, "In verse. From which the French prose translation was
made the next year.

Page 247. To the end of Not. d. ADD, "Bishop Alcock's CASTLE OF LABOR was
translated into English from a French poem by Octavien de S. Gelais, a bishop^
and an eminent translator of the classics into French at the restoration of
learning. Viz. "Le CHASTEAU DE LABOR en rhyme francoise, auquel est contenu
l'adresse de riches et chemin de pauvrete, par Octavien de S, Gelais, etc.
Paris, Gallyot du Pre, 1536. 16mo." Our highest efforts of poetry at this
period were translations from the French. This piece of S. Gelais was also
translated into English rhymes by one Done, or dominus, James: the same perhaps
who made the following version, "Here begins the ORCHARDE OF SYON: in the
which is contained the revelation of saint Catherine of Seen, with ghostly
fruytes and presyous plants for the health of man's soul. Translated by Dane
James. Prynted at the cost of master Richard Sutton esquyre, Steward of the
monastery of Syon, 1519." For Wynkyn de Word, in folio, with fine Gothic cuts
in wo^d. Thi^ Master Richard Sutton, steward of the opulent monastery of Sion
near London, was one of the founders of Brasenose college in Oxford.

Page 258. ADD. to Not. a. "The presents at this marriage ascertain a doubtful
reading in Chaucer, viz. "UN NOUCHE pr. ccc livr. -- It. un rich NOUCHE. -- UN
NOUCHE priz de cynk centz marcz." -- In the CLERKE'S TALE, Grisilde has a crown
"full of ouchis great and small." The late editor acquaints us, that the best
manuscripts read nouchis. -- In the same Note, For "a golden cup, READ "a
collar of gold," colere d'or.

Page 288. ADD to Not. z. "In Chaucer's CUCKOWE^ AND NIGHTINGALE, the latter is
said to GREDE, v. 135. p. 544. Urr. And that for that skill ocy ocy I GREDE.
That is, I cry. Ital. Gridare. The word is used with more propriety, in Adam
Davie's GEST OF ALEXANDER, written in 1312. fol. 55. col. 2. [See supr. i. 220.]

Averil is meory, and longith the day,
Ladies loven solas and play,
Swaynes justis, kny^tis turnay,
Syngith the nytyngale, GREDETH the Jay.
Page 289. ADD this Note, "In the last-mentioned excellent old poem, Autumn is
touched with these circumstances. fol. 95. col. 2.

In time of hervest merry it is ynou,
Peers and apples hongeth on bou,
The hayward blows his horn,
In everych field ripe is corn,
The grapes hongen on the vine,
Sweet is true love and fine;
King Alisaunder a morrow ^rist,
The son dryveth away the mist,
Fforth he went far into Ynde
Moo mervayles for to find.
Page 299. To the first Note ADD, "There is a manuscript, Of a knight, called
SIR OWEYN, visiting saint Patrick's Purgatory, Bibl. Bodl. MSS. BODL. 550. MSS.
Cott. NERO. A. vii. 4. [See ad p. 199.] This piece was written by Henry, a
Cistercian monk of Saltry in Huntingtonshire. See T. Messingham, FLORILEG. p.
86. seq. In the Catalogue of the library of Sion monastery, which contained
fourteen hundred volumes, in Bennet library, it is falsely attributed to Hugo
de Saltereia. MSS. C. C. C. C. XLI. The Fr^nch have an ancient spiritual
romance on this favorite expedition, so fertile of wonders, entitled, "Le
VOYAGE du Puys Saint Patrix, auquel lieu on voit les peines du Purgatoire et
aussi les joys de Paradis, Lion, 1506. 4to."

Page 342. Notes, col. 2. l. 13. ADD, "Boccacio borrowed the story of Titus and
Gesippus from the GESTA ROMANONUM, or from Alphonsus, FAB. ii. There is another
Latin history of these two friends, probably a translation from Boccacio by Fr.
M. Bandello, and printed at Milan in 1509. An exceedingly scarce book. "Titi
Romani et Hegesippi Atheniensis Historia in Latinum versa per Fr. Mattheum
Bandellum Castronovensem. MEDIOLANI, Apud Gotard de Ponte, 1509. 4to."

I take this opportunity of pointing out another source of Boccacio's TALES.
Friar Philip's story of the GOOSE, or of the Young Man who had never seen a
Woman, in the Prologue to the fourth day of the DECAMERON, is taken from a
spiritual romance, called the HISTORY OF BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT. This fabulous
narrative, in which Barlaam is a hermit and J^s^phat a king of India, is
supposed to have been originally written in Greek by Johannes Damascenus. The
Greek is no uncommon manus^^^pt. See MSS^ LAUD. C. 72. It was from the old
Latin translation, which is mentioned by Vincent of Beavais, that it became a
favorite in the dark ages. The Latin, which is also a common manuscript, was
printed so early as the year 1470. It has often appeared in French. A modern
Latin version was published at Paris in 1577. The legendary historians, who
believed every thing, and even Baronius, have placed Barlaam and Josaphat in
their catalogues of confessors. Saint Barlaam and saint Josaphat occur in the
METRICAL LIVES OF THE SAINTS. MSS. BODL. 72. fol. 288. b. This history seems to
have been composed by an oriental Christian: and, in some manuscripts, is said
to have been brought by a monk of saint Saba into the holy city from Ethiopia.
Among the Baroccian manuscripts there is an OFFICE in Greek for these two
supposed saints. Cod. xxi.

Page 357. To Not. c. ADD, "These are the only editions I have seen of
Cocciae's work. De Bure says, the first edition was in 1517. See his curious
catalogue of Poets Latins modernes facetieux, vulgairement appelles
MACARONIQUES. BIBL. INSTRUCT. Bell. Let. tom. i.. 6. p. 445. seq.

Ibid. DELE Not. i. And INSERT, "I believe one of the most popular of Arena's
Macaronic poems, is his MEIGRA Enterprisa Catiloqui Imperatoris, printed at
Avignon in 1537. It is an ingenious pasquinade on Charles the fifth's
expedition into France. The date of the Macaronic Miscellany, in various
languages, entitled, MACHARONEA VARIA, and printed in the Gothic character,
without place, is not known. The authors are anonymous; and some of the pieces
are little comedies intended for representation. There is a Macaronic poem in
hexameters, called POLEMO-MIDDINIA by Drummond of Hawthornden, printed with
Notes, and a preface on this species of poetry, by Gibson at Oxford, 1691. 4to.

Page 358. ADD to the last Note, "Friar Tuck is. h^wever, mentioned in
Skelton's play of MAGNIFICEN^^. f. 5. b.

Another b^d^ shave half my berde,
And boys to the pylery began me pluck,
And would have made me FREER TUCKE
To preche out of the pylery hole.
Page 363. After the last sentence, INSERT, "The only copy of Skelton's moral
comedy of MAGNIFICENCE now remaining, printed by Rastal, without date in a thin
folio, has been most obligingly communicated to me by Mr. Garrick; whose
valuable collection of old Plays is alone a complete history of our stage. The
first leaf and the title are wanting. It contains sixty folio pages in the
black letter, and must have taken up a very considerable time in the
representation. [See p. 336. supr.] The substance of the allegory is briefly
this. MAGNIFICENCE becomes a dupe to his servants and favorites, Fansy,
Counterfe^ Countenance, Crafty Conveyance, Clokyd Colusion, Courtly Abusion,
and Folly. At length he is seized and robbed by Adversyte, by whom he is given
up as a prisoner to Poverte. He is next delivered to Despare and Mischefe, who
offer him a knife and a halter. He snatches the knife, to end his miseries by
stabbing himself; when Good Hope and Redress appear, and persuade him to take
the rubarbe of repentance with some gostly gummes, and a few drammes of
devocyon. He becomes acquainted with Circumspeccyon, and Perseverance, follows
their directions, and seeks for happiness in a state of penitence and
contrition. There is some humor here and there in the dialogue, but the
allusions are commonly low. The poet hardly ever aims at allegorical painting,
but the the figure of POVERTY is thus drawn, fol. xxiii. a.

A, my bonys ache, my lymmys be sore,
A less I have the cyatyca full evil in my hyppe,
A less where is youth that was wont for to skyppe!
I am lowsy, and vnlykynge, and full of scurffe,
My color is tawny-coloured as a turffe:
I am POVERTY that all men does hate,
I am baytyd with doggys at every mannys gate:
I am raggyd and rent, as ye may se,
Full few but they have envy at me.
Now must I this carcass lift up,
He dyned with DELIGHT, with POVERTE he must sup.
The stage-direction then is, "Hic accedat at levandum MAGNIFICENCE." It is not
impossible, that DESPARE offering the knife and the halter, might give a
distant hint to Spenser. The whole piece is strongly marked with Skelton's
manner, and contains every species of his capricious versification Counterfeit
Countenance says, f. vi. a. But now will I --
In bastard ryme of doggreil gyse
Tell you where of my name does rise.

. I have been prolix in describing these two dramas, because they place Skeleton
in a class in which he never has yet been viewed, that of a Dramatic poet. And
although many MORALITIES were now written, yet these are the first that bear
the name of their author. There is often much real comedy in these ethic
interludes, and their exemplifications of Virtue and Vice in the abstract,
convey strokes of character and pictures of life and manners. I take this
opportunity of remarking, that a MORALITY-MAKER was a professed occupation at
Paris. Pierre Gringoire is called, according to the style of his age,
Compositeur, Historien et Facteur de Mysteres, ou Comedies, in which he was
also a performer. His principal piece, written at the command of Louis the
twelfth, in consequence of a quarrel with the pope and the states of Venice, is
entitled, Le JEU du Prince de Sots et Mere Sotte, joue aux Halles de Paris. It
was printed at Paris in 1511. See Mons. l'Abbe Goujet, BIBL. FRANC. tom. xi. p.
212.

Page 372. To Not. w. ADD, "The author of this Jewish tragedy seems to have
belonged to that class of Hellenistico-Judaic writers of Alexandria, of which
was the author of the apocryphal BOOK OF WISDOM: a work originally written in
Greek, perhaps in meter, full of allusions to the Greek poets and customs, and
containing many lessons of instruction and consolation peculiarly applicable to
the distresses and situation of the Jews after their dispersion.

Page 375. l. 6. ADD, "The tragedy called JULIUS CAESAR, and two comedies, of
Jaques Grevin, a learned physician, and an elegant poet, of France, were first
acted in the college of Beauvais at Paris, in the years 1558 and 1560. BIBL.
VERDIER, ut supr. tom. ii. p. 284. La Croix du Maine, i. p. 415. seq.

Page 376. To Not. k. ADD, "There is also a work attributed to Conradus Celtes,
containing six Latin plays in imitation of Terence, under this title,
"HROSVITE, illustris virginis et Monialis Germanae, Opera: nempe, COMOEDIAE SEX
IN AEMULATIONEM TERENTII, Octo Sacrae Historiae versibus compositae, necnon
Panegyricus, etc. NORINBERGAE, sub privilegio Sodalitatis Socraticae, anno
1501. fol."

END OF EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS IN THE FIRST AND SECOND VOLUME.
INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME OF WARTON'S History of English Poetry.
A. B. C. of Aristotille, 200 Abbas, Benedictus, 317 Abbey of the Holy Ghost, by
Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 249 Abelard and Eloisa, Epistles of, 112, 168 Abyndon,
Thomas, 40 Achademios, a Comedy, by Skeleton, 336 Achilleis, a Tragedy, by
Alberti Mussato, 409 Acuparius, Thomas, 241 Adam and Eve, their Sufferings and
Repentance, Death and Burial, 179 Aegidius Romanus, 39, 40, 108 After
Dionysius, 49 Africanus, Julius, 10 Agricola Rodolphus, 450, 455 Agynkourte,
Battallye of, and Seyge of Har^lett, 36 Ahasuerus and Esther, a Poem, 178 Ajax
of Sophocles, translated into Latin, 385. Ailward, Simeon, 41 Alasco, Albertus
de, 383 Alba, a Pa^toral Comedy, 384 Albertus Magnus, 117, 136 Albion's
Triumph, a Masque, 401 Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 249, 419 Alcuine, 168 Aldred, an
English Monk, 112 Alexander, Life of, by Calli^tines, 8 by Adam Davie 312, 338,
339. Alexander de Villa Dei, 168 Alexander, a Schoolmaster at Pisa, 347
Alesandreid, by Philip Gualtier de Chatillon, 168 Alfred, King, 32, 208, 311
Alfred of Beverly, 177 All Fools, a Comedy, by George Chapman, 394 Almagest, by
Ptolemy, 23 Almenhusen, Conrade Von, Game of Chess, translated into German by,
41 Alphabet of Birds, by Stephen Hawes, 211 Alphonsus, Peter, 19 Alyngton, Sir
Giles, 248 Ambro^ius, 10 Amergot Marcell. Account of, 333 Amon or Hamon, and
Madocheus or Mordecai, Story of, a Poem, 178 Andalus the Blake, 69 70 Andria of
Terence, 380 Anglicus Bartholomew, 116 Ann Queen of Richard 2nd, 326 Antioch,
John de, 115 Antiochus, Tale of, 15, 16 Antoine le Macon, 121 Antio^hus
Epiphanes, 21 Antiochus, a Latin Poem, by Joseph of Exeter, 96 Antonio de
Beccaria, 49 Antonio de Lebrixa, 416 Antonio and Arena, 357 Apolli^aris, Bishop
of Laodicea, 368, 371 Apollo shroving, a Comedy, by John Hawkins, 387
Appollonius, 31 Appolyne, King of Thyre, 31 Aquinas, Thomas, 39, 74, 300
Aretine, Leonard, 48 Ariosto, 411 Aristarchus, 24 Architrenius, by John
Hanville, 168 Aristophanes, 379. Translated into Latin by Reuchlen, 415 Arms
et de Chevallerie, Livres de fais d', by Christi^a of Pisa, 115 Arnobius Caius,
420 Aristotle, 7, 8, 22, 39, 40, 6^, 109, 119, 196, 200, 228, 307, 338, 339,
410, 414, 417, 450, 455. Aristotle's Poli^iques, or Discourse of Government
translated by Aretine, 48. Oeconomicks into French, by Laurence, 62 Arthuri
Assertio, by Leland, 19, Arthure, Prince, the Ancient Order Society, etc. of,
in Verse, 19 Creacion of, by Skeleton, 336 Arthur, King, 231, 235, 316 Art of
Versification, a Latin Poem, by Eberhardus Bethuniensis, 167 Arundel,
Archbishop, 3 As you like it, by Shakespeare, 349 Ascham, Roger, 380, 447, 453,
460 Ashmole's Theatrum Chemicum, 9, 135, 137 Asinus Penitentiarius, 206
Assaillant, l', a French Romance, 121 Assembly of Fowls, by Chaucer, 212
Assembly of Ladies, by Chaucer, 212, 218 Asser, Bishop of St. David's, 32
Attecliff, William, 426 Avianus Flavius, 167 Aulularia of Plautus, exhibited
before Queen Elizabeth at Cambridge, 383 Aurora, or History of the Bible
allegorised, by Petrus de Riga, 168 Ausonius, 167
B
Bacon, Roger, 5, 7, 115, 136 Badby, 192 Bade, Joce, Brandts ship of Fools,
translated into French, by, 241 Badius Jodocus, his Commentary on Mantuan, 256
Balatyn, or Ballendyn, John, 321 Bale, John, 188, 387, 388 Ballades et
Rondelles l'art de dictier, 112 Balsamon, Patriarch of Antioch, 370 Banastre,
or Banester, Gilbert, 138 Barbatoria, or Show of Beards, 362 Barbarus
Hermolaus, 425 Barclay, Alexander, 174, 176, 237, 240 to 256, 347, 426, 427
Barlaam, 70, 71 Barnes, or Berners, Julyana, 171, 172 Basset, Mrs. 406 Baston,
132 Bate, John, 421 Batmanson, John, 447 Battles plusiers des Rois d' Israel
(...) contre les Philistines et Assyriens, 217 Beaumont, 399 Beccaria, Antonio
de, 49 Becket, Thomas of, Legend of, 108, 190, 429, 432 -- Life of by Herbert
Borham, translated into English Rymes by Laurence Wade, 238. Into French by
Langtoft, ibid. Bid, 10, 177, 199 Bedford, Jasper, Duke of, Epitaph on, by
Skeleton, 336 Belleperche, 21 Bellovacensis Vincentius, 68, 299, 353 Behn, Mrs.
399 Benivieni, Jeronimo, 256 Bennet, 222 B^noit, Thomas, 99, 111. Metrical
Romance of the Dukes of Normandy, by, 235, 238 Bercheur, Peter, Livy translated
into French, by, 113 Bergeretta, or the Song of Shepherds, a Mummery,
celebrated in the City of Besancon, 368 Bergman, Johannes, 376 Bernard, Andrew,
132 Bernardinus, 377 Berners or Barnes Julyana, 171, 172 Bestiare, a set of
Metrical Fables from Esop, 108 Bethuniensis Eberhardus, 352. Latin Poem on the
Art of Versification, by, 167 Bibienna, Cardinal, 411 Bible, 217, 220, 417.
Heroic Poem on the History of, by Appolinaris, 371. Translated into Latin by
Saint Jerome, 24. M^trical Versio^ of, 108, 109. History of, allegorised in
Latin Verse, by Petrus de Riga, 168 Blind Harry, 334 Blois, Peter of, 75, 119,
352, 362, 428, 430, 431 Boarde, or Board, Andrew, 134, 135 Boccaccio, 13, 25,
47, 52, 67, 69, 70, 71, 84, 121, 191, 215, 223, 341, 353, 387 Boccus and
Sidrake, a Romance, 101, 102, Bo^^hius, 4, 32, 33, 76, 111, 125, 208, 305, 321,
353, 432 Boilea^, 373 Boke^ham, Osbern, 138 Borron, Robert, 13, 117 Bosham,
H^rb^rt, 239 Botoner, William, 119, 426 Bottom the Weaver, 358 Bouge of Court,
by Skeleton, 347, 348, 349, 350 Boulay, 37^ Bo^illus, or Bullock, Henry, 438
Bouquassiere, by Jean de Courci, 118 Boxhornius, 166 Boy, Bishop, Ceremony of
the, 375, 389^ 390, 391 Bozmanni, Cardinal, 418 Bradshaw, Henry, 176 to 188
Bradwardine, 7 Braham, John, 81 Brandt, S^bastian, 241, 247 Brandon, Charles
and Henry, 453 Bromele, Abbot of Hyde Monastery, 44^ Brown, Poet, 358, 401,
402, 403 Brunetto, 116 Brut, Romance of, 69 Bryan Reginald, 344 Brytayne little,
and Ponthus and Galyce, 227 Buchannan, 380, 461 Bullock, Henry, 438 Bulloker,
William, 171 Bulman, John, 130 Buoninsegni Fiorini, 356 Burgh, Benedict, 68,
165, 170, 171 Burlacus, 450 Byngham, William, 419 Byrchensau, Maurice, 12^, 130
C
Ca^sar's Commentaries, translated into French by Jean D^ Chesne, 119 Cairels
Elias, a Troubadour of Perigord, 236 Calander, an I^alian Comedy, by Bibie^n^^
411 Calisto, a Masque, by Crown, 402 Callot, 272 Calvin, 321, 443 Camped^n,
Hugh, or Caumpeden, Roma^c^ of Boccus and Sidrake, by, 101 Camillus Julius, 413
Canning, William, 135, 139. See Rowlie or Chatterton Can^erbury Tales, by
Chau^er, -- Knight^s Tale, 75, 273 -- Man of Law^^^ Tal^, 30 -- Marchaunt^^
Tale, 348 -- Miller^s Tale, 266 -- Nonnes Priest's Tale, 218 -- Wife of Bathe's
Tale, 30 Candidus Petrus, 48, Capella Marcianus, 75, 168 Capellanus, Joannes,
34 Capg^ave, John, 45, 46 Capuano, Benedict, 380 Cards and Card-playing,
Account of, 317 Carew, Thomas, 399 Cario's Chronicle, 311 Carlisle, Alexander,
Seriant of the Minstrillis unto King Edward 4th, 134 Carmelian, Peter, 248
Carnotensis Bernardus, 168 Carr, Earl of Somer^et, 399 Carols, 211 Cassianus,
110, 111 Cassiodorus, 11 Castelione, Lapus de, 19, 49 Casulis, Jacobus de, 39,
40, 111 Castle of Honor, 199 Castle of Labor, a Poem, by Barclay, 200, 247
Catharine, Saint, Play of, acted by the Monks of St. Dennis, 367, 374 Cato's
Morals, ^ranslated, 165, 166, 167, 169 ^axton, 11, 41, 92, 115, 166, 170, 194,
1^5, 211, 228 Cedrenus, 369 Ce^^i, Philip, 13 Celtes Conradus, an early
Dramatic Wri^er and Latin Poet, 376, 377, 415, 416, 455 Cerisier, 33 Chadworth,
Bishop of Lincoln, 420 Chalcondylas Demetrius, 425 Chapman, George, Dramatic
Poet, 394, 399 Charette^ le Roman, d^ la, 13 Charles the Fifth, 413 Chartier,
Alain, 52 Chat^erton, 139 to 164 Chaucer, 1, 5, 11, 25, 26, 29, 33, 43, 44, 50,
51, 74, 125, 165, 169, 176, 211, 212, 218, 224, 231, 257, 259, 266, 271, 318,
329, 348, 353, 441 Chaundler, Thomas, 34 Chess, Game of, 40, 41, 96 Chester,
Foundation of the Abbey of, a Poem, by Bradshaw, 178, 179 Chester Mysteries, or
Whitsun Plays, Account of, 179, 180, 207, 209 Chorle and the Bird, a Poem, by
Lidgate, 224 Christ, the History of the Childhood of, a Poem, 175, 176. A Poem
on the Passion of, by Walter Kennedie, 319 Christ's Dialogues in Hell, 207
Christ's Passion, a Tragedy, by Gregory Nazianzen, 368 Christi descensus ad
Inferos, a Religious Drama, 206, 388 Christi de Passione, 19 Christi Gesta
Salvationis, 208 Chris^'s Kirk on the Green, a Poem, 318 Christ, Spousage of a
Virgin to, by Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 249 Christian and Jew, Metrical Dialogue
between, by Sidonius, 168, 231 Christopherson, John, Latin Tragedy of Jeptha,
by, 379 Christina of Pisa, 67, 85. Morale Proverbes, of, by Widville, Earl of
Rivers, 138 Christmas, a Latin Poem, on, by John Opicius, 422 Chronica
Chronicorum, by Theodoric Engelhusen, 13, 311 Chronica Novella, by Herman
Korner, 20 Chronica d^Isodoro, 11 Chronicles of England, by Caxton, 11
Chronicles of the Kings of England, 177 Chronicon breve, by Cassiodorus, 11
Chrysoloras 48, 438 Church, Daniel, 170 Church, the Figure of our Mother holy,
oppressed by the French King, a Poem by Barclay, 247 Cicero, 22, 24, 68, 115,
120, 124, 218, 305, 306, 352, 413, 417, 424, 451, 455. Translated by Lawrence
Premierfait, 62, 119. Dialogue on Friendship, translated into English by
Tipstoft, Earl of Worcester, 426. Familiar Epistles, translated by Skeleton, 336
Circe and Ulysses, Masque on the Story of, by William Brown, 401, 402, 403
Citta di Vita, by Matteo P^lmeri, 305, 312 City Heiress, by Mrs. Behn, 399
Clamund, 449 Coccaie Martin, 356, 357^ Cockneys, King of the, 405 Co^lum
Britannicum, a Mas^ue, by Thomas Carew, 399 Coldwell, or Colvil, George, 35
Colet, Dean, 434, 441, 447 Colin Clout, by Skeleton, 337, 342, 343, 344 College
of Poetry, founded in the University of Vienna, by Maximilian the First, 415
Cologne, three Kings of, 174 Colona or Columna, 116 Colvil, or Coldwell,
George, 35, Com^diae Sacrae, by G^win Douglas, 293 Comestor, Peter, 108, 179
Complaynt of the Papyngo, 259, 274, 315, 318, 319 Compound of Alchemie, by
George Ripley, 137 Comus, a Masque, by Milton, 403 Concubranus, MS. Life of,
244 Confessio Amantis, by Gower, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 228, 248 Consolation of Lovers,
211 Consolation of Philosophy, by Boethius, translated into various Languages,
32, 33, 34 Consolation of the Monks, by Eccard, 33 Consolation of Theology, by
John Gerson, 33 Conversion of Swerers, by Stephen Hawes, 210 Corbian, Pierre,
194, 222 Corbichon, John, 116 Corderoy, Mathurine, 169 Cornish, Thomas, 240.
William, a Poet and Musician, 363, 364, 365 Corvini, Mattheo, King of Hungary,
417 Cosmographia Mundi, by John Phrea, 423 Cosmographie, le premier livre de
la, in Verse, by John Mallard, 132 Cossa, Jean, 118 Cosyn, William, Dean of
Wells, 302 Covetice, an old Scots Poem, 316 Court of Love, by Chaucer, 259
Coventry Plays, 53, 201, 207 Courci, Jean de, 118 Courteauisse, Jean de, 118
Cox, Dr. Richard, 380 Coxe, Leonard, 446 Coxeter, Thomas, 401 Cranstoun, David,
294 Crescentiis, Peter de, 116 Croke, Richard, 427 Crophill, John, 196 Crown of
Laurel, by Skeleton, 336, 350, 351, 352 Crowley, Robert, 361 Cupid's Whirligig,
a Comedy, 398 Cursor Mundi, 24 Curteis, William, Abbot of Bury, 55 Cynthia's
Revels, by B. Jonson, 393, 394 Cyriac of Ancona, 411 Cyropedia of Xenophon,
translated, 115, 415, 423, 451
D
D^nce of Death, by Lydgate, 53. In German Rymes, by Macaber, 54. Translated
into Latin, by Petrus Desrey, 54 Dancing, Account of, 398, Daniel, Prophet, 22
Daniel Arnaud, a Troubadour, 60, 223, 235 Daniel, Samuel, 401 Dante, 22, 23,
52, 66, 118, 216, 219, 235, 300, 305, 357 Dares, Phrygius, 68, 90, 109
Davenant, Sir William, 401 Davie, Adam, 11, 312 David's Harp, Part of the
Harmony of, 19 David and Bathsheba, 25 David, King, 307 Davies^ Critical
History of Pamphlets, 337 Dawes Oegidius, see Dewes Dead Man's Song, 199 Death,
Dance of, by Lidgate, 53. Translated, 54 Death, Divine Poem on, by Michael
Kildare, 200 Decameron of Boccaccio, translated into French by Laurence, 62 De
Cis, or Thri, an old French Poet, 33 Decker, Thomas, 393 Dee John, 379 De
Harnes, Michael Turpins Charlemagne, translated by, 109 Delight of the Soul, by
Hawes, 211 De Lyra, Nicholas, 46 De Monte, Petrus, 48 Demosthenes, 413.
Translated into German and English, 451, 453 Dempster, 334 Dewes Oegidius,
Preceptor in French to Henry Eighth, and Prince Authur, etc. 420 De Presles
Raoul, 110 Desrey Petrus, 54 De Thri, or de Cis, an old Fr^nch Poet, 33 Diana,
Latin Play of, by Conradus Celtes, 376, 377 Dictys Cretensis, 68 Dido, Play of,
exhibited before Queen Elizabeth at Cambridge, 383, 384. Before Cardinal
Wolsey, 434 Didymus, 24 Diodorus Siculus, translated by John Phrea, 337, 423
Dion Cassius, 10 Dionysius the Areopagite, 300 Dispucation or Complaynt of the
Heart thorough pierced with the lokynge of the Eye, Little Treatise called, 199
Disputation between a Christian Man and a Jewe, a Poem, 231 Dives and Lazarus, a
Play, by R. Radcliffe, 387 Doctrinale Puerorum, 347 Dolce Lodovico, 11 Donatus,
24 Dorman, Saint, 175 Douglas Gawen, or Gawin, 280 to 294, 320 Dreme, by Sir
David Lyndesay, 295, 296, 297 Dumb Shows, Account of, 203, 204 Du Chesne, Jean,
119 Dufour, Antoine, 117 Dun, John, first Master of the Revell^, 379 Dunbar,
William, 257 to 279, 358, 359 Duncane Laider, or Makgregor's Testament, a Poem,
326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332 Du Vignay, 40
E
Easter, a Play, 207 Eccard's Imi^ation of Boe^hius' Consolation of Philosophy,
33 Ecerrinis, or the Fate of the Tyrant Ecerrinus of Verona, a Tragedy, by
Alberti Mussato, 409 Eccle^ia^tes, Latin Translation of, by Robert Shirwoode,
447 Edda, 198 Edmund, Saint, History of, by Lydgate, 55, 56, 57 Edward the
second, Poem on, 193 Edward the fourth, and the Tanner of Tamworth, delectable
History of, 138 Edwardi de Karnarvon, Lamentatio gloriosi Regis quam edidit
tempore suae in^arcerationis, translated into English Verse by Fabian, 191, 192
Edwards, Richard, a Dramatic Writer, 393 Edyth, the merry Gestys of one called,
the lying Wydow, by Walter Smith, 365 Eirene of Aristophanes, 379 Eginhart, 109
Eglogues by Barclay, 248 to 252 Elinour Rummyng, the Tunnyng of, by Skeleton,
337 Elizabeth, Queen, 382, 461 Engelh^sen, Theodoric, 13 Enniu^, 353 Eparchus
Antonius, 413 Ephiloquorus, 20 Erasmus, 169, 360, 427, 433, 438, 443, 446, 447,
455, 456 Earl of Toulouse, Romance of, 103, 104, 105 Esdras, 20, Esop's Fables,
108, 319 Ester and Ahasuerus, a Poem, 178 Eston, Adam, 421 Every Man, an
Interlude, 378 Euripedes, 319, 368, 371, 451 Eusebius, 10, 11, 208 Eutropius,
109 Exemplar of Virtue, by Hawes, 211 Exodus (Play on) in Greek lambicks, by
Ezekiel, a Jew, 371, 372
F
Fabian, Robert, 191, 192, 193 Faithful S^epherdess, by Fletcher, 402,
Falcandus, 217 Falconry, Account of, 221, 222 Fall of Princes, by Lydgate, 61,
83^ Farmor, Mr. 221, Farringdon Hugh, Abbot of Reading, 446 Ferrers, George,
381 Ferrex and Porrex, a Play, by Sackville, 398 Ferron John, Liber Moralis de
ludo Scaccorum, of Jacobus de Casulis, translated into French, by, 40 Fete de
Foux, 367, 369, 389 Fete de Ane, 360, 369 Feylde, Thomas, 219 Field, Master of
Fotheringay Castle, 167 Filo^trato di Boccaccio, 25 Firmius Julius, 221 Fl^e
from the Press, a Poem, said to be by Skogan, 135 Flemmyng, Robert, 421.
Abraham, 423 Fletcher, John, Dramatic Writer, 401, 402 Flies and Ants, War
with, or Mos^h^a, 356 Florinus, 168 Flower and Leaf, by Chaucer, 26, 29, 264
Flowers, Masque of, 399 Foliot, Hugh de, Bishop of London. 344, 431 Folengio,
Theophile, 356 Fontius Bartholomew, 416 Fontaine, 206 Fools, Feast of, 367,
369, 389 Fox, Bishop of Winchester, 203, 434, 436, 437 Francis first of France,
413, 414, Francis, Dauphin of France, Epithala^^um on, by Andrew Bermad, 133
Fredegaire, 109 Free, or Phrea, John, 423, 424, 426, Freebairn, Robert, 281
French, an Introductorie for to learn to read, etc. compyled for the Use of the
Princess Mary, by Oegidus Dewes, 420 Frigidilles, 20 Froissart, 267, 299, 332,
333 Frontinus, 119 Fryssell, William, 446,
G
Gager, Dr. William, 383 Gaguini, Robert, 353 Galbraith, 320 Galen, translated
by Jean Tourtier, 120 Galfridus, 168 Gallopes, Jean, 120, 121 Gammer Gurton's
Needle, a Play, 378 Gand, Henry de, 39 Garlandia, Johannes de, 168 Gascoigne,
George, Poet, 165, 398 Gauchi, Henri de, 109 Gellius Aulus, 353 Geminus Marcus,
a Latin Comedy, 382 Genealogy of the Gods, by Boccaccio, 228 Genesis,
Commentary on, by John Capgrave, 45 Gentylness and Nobylyte, an Interlude, by
Rastall, 364 Geoffry of Monmouth, 69 Gerard Antoine, 121 Gerson, John, 33
Gervais of Tilbury, 121 Gesta, Alexandri, 16 Gesta Romanorum, 12, 14, 15, 18,
31 Gesta Salvationis nostri Jesus Christi, 208 Geta Hosidius, 168 Giffard, John,
221 Gilbert de Stone, 344 Gloucester, Foundation of the Abbey of, a Poem, by
William Malverne, 178 Gloucester, Latin Poem on the Abbot of, by Kildare, 200
God and the penitent Soul, M^trical Dialogue between, by W. Lichfield, 106
Godefroy de Leigny, 13 Godefroy of Bologne, 116 Godfrey of Viterbo, 10 Godfrey,
a Priest of Sussex, Tale of, 206 Godfricus, 10 Godrich, a Hermit, 193 God's
Promises, by Bale, 388 Golden Legend, 41 Golden Terge, by W. Dunbar, 257, 258,
264 to 279 Goliath, Psalm on the Slaughter of, 217 Golias, 360 Goscelinus, 189,
190, Goulain, John, 111 Gower, John, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, to 26, 34, 50, 125, 224,
228, 248, 271, 318, 353 429, 441 Grandison, Bishop of Exeter, 242 Graund amoure
et la Bell P^cell, see Pastime of Pleasure Gray, 245. William, Bishop of Ely,
423 Grammaticus, 76 Gregory, Pope, the Great, 22 Gregory of Tours, 21, 76, 109,
176 Greville Fulk, Lord Brook, 402 Grimoald, or Grimalde Nicholas, Play on St.
John the Baptist, by, 380 Grindall, Archbishop, 461 Grisilde, Patient, a Play,
by R. Radcliffe, 387 Grocyn, William, 425 Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, 32,
367, 368, 428 Grynaeus, Simon, 448 Gualtier de Chatillon, 168, 352 Guerre, Jean
de, 121 Guarini, Baptiste, 421, 422, 426 Guiart de Moulins, 108 Guido de
Colonna, 74, 81, 82, 90, 91, 97, 116 Guigemar, Lay of, 215 Guillaume, Prior of
Chalis, 120, 337 Guillaume le Roy, 33 Guiscard and Sismond, by W. Walter, 238
Gunther, 168 Gunthorpe, John, 422, 426 Guy, Earl of Warwick, 166 Gyron le
Courtois, a Romance, 117
H
Hamlet, Play of, 374, 380, 383, 393 Hanville, John, 168 Harding, John, 125,
126, 127 Harflett, Seige of, and Battle of Agynkourte, 36 Harmony of the four
Gospels, 448 Harrowing of Hell, by Christ, au Interlude, 207 Harvey, Thomas,
Mantuan translat^d by, 256 Hawes, Stephen, 210 to 237 Hawking, Account of, 221,
and Hunting, Poem on, by Julyana Barnes or Berners, 171, 172 Hay, Archibald,
319 Heal, William, 384, Heber's Romance of the seven Sages of Greece, 109
Hector, Life and Death of, 81 Hegisippus, 10 Heliodorus, Account of a MS. of,
418 Helis and Guincester, 169, Henderson, 319 Henry the Fourth, Play of, 403
Henry the Fourth, Balade to, by Gower, 34 Henry the Fifth, Account of, 35, 36,
Henry the Sixth, Legend of, 190 Henrici Septimi de progressu in Galliam, 420
Henry the Sevent^ (...) of, by Andrew (...) -- Elegy on, by Skeleton, 338.
Miseries of England under, a Poem, by Skeleton, 336 Henry the Eighth, 254, 436,
439. Panegyric on, by Whittington, 131. Address to, by Andrew Bernard, 133. A
joyful Meditation of all England, etc. on the Coronation of, in English Verse,
by Stephen Hawes, 211 Henrysount, Robert, the moral Fabilis of Esope compylit
by, 319 Hentzner, 448 Herbert, W^lliam, 194 Hermes Bird, a Poem, 137, 224
Herodotus, 21, 451 Hesdin, Simon de, 114 Heywood, Thomas, 301, 358 Hezekiah,
Play of, exhibited before Queen Elizabeth at Cambridge, 383 Hickscorner, an
Interlude, 208 Hierarchy of Angels, by T. Heywood, 301 Higden, Ranulph or
Ralph, 177, 179 Hilcher, Paul Christan, 54 Hill of Perfection, by Alcock,
Bishop of Ely, 249 Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rheims, 33 Hippocrass, or spiced
Wine, Account of, 346 Hippocrates, 22. Translated by Jean Tourtier, 120
Historia Aurea, by John of Tinmouth, 189 Hodgkins, 210 Holcot, Robert, 40
Holland, Joseph, 211 Holme, Randal, 179 Holophernes, Play of, 392 Homiliae
Vulgares, by Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 249 Homer, 68, 83, 352, 451. Iliad and Part
of the Odyssey translated into Latin ^rose by Leontius Pilatus, 84 -- Into
French Verse by Juques Miles, 84 -- Into Latin by Francis Philelphus, 411, 415
Horace, 352, 431 House of Fame, by Chaucer, 83, 212 Howard, Duke of Norfolk,
254, 255 Hugh de Foliot, 344, 431 Hugh de Sancto Victore, 344 Hugh of
Caumpeden, see Campeden Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester 44 to 49, 453 Humphri^s,
Laurence, 459, 460 Hunte, Gualter, 108 Hunting, Account of, 221 Huss, John, the
Tragedy of, by R. Radclisse, 387 Hussy, Maistress Margare^, a Poem by Skeleton,
355 Hymen's Triumph, by Samuel Daniel, 401
I
Jack Hare, 228 Jack Wat, that could pull the Lining out of a black boll, a
Poem, by Lidgate, 228 Jacob and his twelve Sons, History of, 199 Jacobus de
Vitriaco, 96 Jacobus de Voragine, 41 Jaloux Chatie, a Tale by Raimond. Vidal de
Basaudin, a Troubadour, 220 James the First, (of Scotland) 125. The Second, (of
Scotland) 324. The Fourth, (of Scotland) 357, 294, 316, The Fifth, (of
Scotland) 317, 318. The Sixth, (of Scotland) 384, 461 Idoyne and Amadas,
Romance of, 24 Jeptha, the Tragedy of, in Latin and Greek, by John
Christopherson, 379 Jeranchie, by John de Pentham, 113 Jerome, 11, 24 Jew and
Christan, Metrical Dialogue between, by Sidonius, 168 Image of the World, 298
Imperator Ludorum, Account of, 378, 379 Inner Temple, Masque by Middleton, 399.
By William Brown, 401, 402 Inns of Court Annagrammatist, or the Masquers
m^squed, in Anagram, by Francis Lenton, 399 Infortunio, 192 Inglish, John, 257,
258. Sir James, a Poet, 320 Interludes by Sir D. Lyndesay, 298 Joan of Ar^, 310
Job's Suffering, a Tragedy on, by Radcliffe, 387 Jocelyne, Bishop of Salisbury,
431 John De Meun, 4, 67, 111, 112, 236 John of Waldenly, 172 John of Tinmouth,
55, 189 John of Salisbury, 39, 75, 112, 118, 167, 205, 206 John the Chaplain,
34 Johnson, Richard, Author of the seven Champions, 230, 253 Jonas, a Tragedy,
by R. Radcliffe, 387 Jones, Inigo, 385, 399 Jonson, Benjamin, 301, 374, 388,
393, 394, 401 Joos, Dan, Legend on, by Lydgate, 58 Joseph of Arimathea, Life
of, 200 Joseph of Exeter, 96 Josephus, 10, 20, 118, 311 Jovius Paulus, 216
Islip, Abbot, 338 Isocrates, 451, 461 Isodorus, 11, 68, 168 Israel, plusieur
Batailles des rois d^, contre les Philistines et Assyriens, 217 Judith,
Fortitude of, a Trag^dy, by Radcliffe, 387 Ives, Simon, 399 Julian, Cardinal of
St. Angelo, Greek MS. of, 218 Julius and the poor Knight, Story of, 16 Junius
Patrick, 281 Justinian, 96 Juvenal, 353
K
Kalandre in English, by Lydgate, 166 Calendar of Shepherds, 195, 196, 197,
198 Kay, John, Poet Laureat to Edward the Fourth, 128 Kederminster, Abbot of
Winchecombe, 447 Kennedie, Walter, 319 Kildare, Michael, 200 Kinnedy, Andro,
Testament of, by Dunbar, 326, 358, 359 King's Complaint, by James the First of
Scotland, 125 King's Fool, and Lucius, King of Rome, Story of, 16 Kircher, 8
Knights Templars, Account of, 345 Korner Herman, 20 Kymes, Gilbert, 47
Kynloich, 320
L
Lambwell, Romance of, see Launval Lancelot, Romance of, 12, 13, 24, 117, 235
Langius Rodolphus, a Latin Poet, 415 Langbaine, Gerard, 41 Langtoft, Peter, 239
Langley, Thomas, Monk of Hulm, 129 Langton, Bishop of Lich^ield, 216, 427
Lapidaire, a Poem from the Latin of Marbodeus, 108 Lapus de Castellione, 19, 49
Lascaris, John, 428 Latimer, Hugh, 427, 450 Latin Plays, Account of, 375, 376,
377 Launval. Romance of, 102 Laurence or Laurent de Premierfait, 61, 62
Laureate, Poet, Account of the first, 128, 131, 132, 133 Laws, William, 399
Leander's Italia, 70 Lear, King, by Shakespeare, 250 Lebrixa, Anton^o de, 416
Lee, Archbishop of York, 447 Le Fevre, Jean, 115 Le Feure Rauol, 81 Legend of
good Women, by Chaucer, 165 Legenda Aurea, translated by John du Vignay, 111
Leigny, God^roy de, 13 Leirmouth, Thomas, 298 Leland, 38, 218, 446, 448
Lelarmoner, or Lelarmor, John, 167 Lenton, Francis, 399 Leontius Pilatus, 70,
84 Letter of Cupid, a Poem by Occleve, 34 Leofric, Bishop of Exeter, 208
Leonard of Arezzo, 118 Lewis the Eighth, a Romance, 362, the Twelfth, 413
Lichfield, William, 106 Lidgate, see Lydgate Liess l'Abbe de, or the Abbot of
Jollity, 381 Lilly, William, Grammarian, 337, 426, 433 Lilly, John, Dramatic
Writer, 393 Lieu Girardus, 15 Life of our Lady, by Lydgate, 57, 58, 59 Linac^r
or Linacre, 424 Livy, 49, 113, 114, 118, 122, 311, 353, 430, 455 Lollius, 96
Lombard, Peter, 450 Lomclyn Domingo, 347 London Lickpenny, by Lidgate, 266
London, Panegyric on the City of, by Fabia^, 192 Longland, Bishop of Lincoln,
362, 447 Lord's Prayer, Latin Elegiac Paraphras^ on. by John Mallard, 132 Love
freed from Ignorance and Folly, a Masque, by B. Jonson, 401 Lover and a Jay,
Dialogue between, by Thomas Feylde, 219 Love's Labor Lost, by Shakespeare, 236
Lucan, 114, 167, 352 Lucas or Luce, 117 Lucian, a Dialogue of, reduced into
English Verse by John Rastall, 364. Icrominippus of, translated by Erasmus, 438
Lucillius, 353 Lucius King of Rome, and the King's Fool, Story of, 16 Ludensis
Gilbertus, a Monk, 298 Ludus Scaccorum, by Jacobus de Casulis, 40 Ludus
Pascalis, 207 Lully Raymond, 136, 225 Luminalia, or the Festival of Light, a
Masque, 401 Lusty Juventus, an Interlude, by R. Weever, 378 Luther, Martin,
411, 442. Latin Play on the Subject of the Heresy of, 377 Luxembourgh, Jean de,
120 Lycurgus, Story of, 75 Lydgate, 8, 19, 41, 48, 51 to 180, 166, 170, 171,
193, 200, 201, 210, 211, 219, 224, 228, 237, 257, 266, 271, 318, 352, 353, 441
Lyndsay, Sir David, 259, 274, 295 to 324 Lyra, Nicholas de, 46 Little Treatise,
called the Dysputacyon, or Complaynt of the Heart thorough perced with the
lokynge of the Eye, 199
M
Maccabee, Judas, H^story of, 21 Macaber, Dance of Death, in German R^ymes, by,
54 Macbeth, Play of, 385 Mace, 109 Macer, 22, 167 Mackenzie, 334 Macon, Antoine
le, 121 Macrobius, 218, 353 Madely, William de, 190 Magnus Jacobus, 121
Magnificence, a goodly Interlude and a merry, by Master Skeleton, 336, 337
Magdalene, Marie, Mystery of, 361, 363 Magdalene, Queen, Poem on the Death of,
313 Magnamontanus Banatusius, 426 Maier, Michael, 135 Maillorie, Sir Thomas,
235 Major, John, 334 Makgreggor's Testament, or Dunean Laider, a Poem, 278, 326
to 332 Mallard, John, 132 Malverne, William, 178 Mamerot, Sebastian, Mancini,
Dominic, 247 Mantuan, 247, 255, 256 Mandeville, or Maunderville, 223, 230
Mapes, Gualter, or Walter de, 235, 360, 431 Marbodeus, 108, 168 Marcianus, 75,
76 Marcell Amergot, an eminent Robber, Account of, 332, 337 Marcellinus
Amineanus, 15 Marchion of Arezzo, 93 Margaret, Queen, Wife of Henry Seventh,
200 Marie, a French Poetess, 215 Marius Antonius, a famous Scribe and
Illuminator, 423 Martius Galeotus, 426 Mary Magdalen, Mystery of, 361, 363
Mary, Queen, 456 Masks, Account of, 398, 399 Master of the Revells, Account
of, 378, 379, 405 Matthaeus of Vendosme, 168 Maurilianus Pamphilus, 130, 168
Maximianus, 167, 353 Maximilian the First, 415 Maximus Valerius, 16, 19, 45,
311, 353. Translated by Simon de Hesdin, 114 May, Translator of Lucan, 400
Maymonde, the froward Tale of, by Lydgate, 228 Medea and Jason, History of, 13.
Tragedy of, by Geta, 168 Medici, Laurenzo de, 428. Cosmo de, 428 Meditationes
Piae, by Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 249 Medula, by Ripley, 138 Medwall, Henry,
Interlude of Nature, by, 238, 364 Megacosm and Microcosm, by Sylvester, 168
Melancthon, 311 Memoriae Seculorum, or the Pantheon, by Godsrey of Viterbo, 9,
10, 16 Melibaeus, a Play, by Radcliffe, 387 Meleager, Latin Play, by Dr.
William Gager, 383 Menander, 20, 371 Menestrier, 373 Merchant of Venice,
Shakespeare's Play of the, 16, 17, 18, 19, 383 Meres, 341 Merry Wives of
Windsor, by Shakespeare, 358 Merser, 319 Metaphrastes, Symeon, 190
Metriftench^ridion, by John Seguard, 129 Meun, John de, 4, 67, 111, 112, 236
Microcosm, by Sylvester, 168 Middleton, Thomas, Dramatic Writer, 399 Michael De
Harnes, 109 Midsummer Night's Dream, Play of, 358 Miles Owayne, a Poem, 192,
198 Millemete, Walter de, 7 Milet, Jaques, 84 Miller's Tale, by Chaucer, 169
Millot, Mr. 215, 230 Millyng, Abbot of Westminster, 421 Milton, 13, 286, 299,
300, 301, 403 Minstrells, Account of, 105, 106, 134, 174, 175 Mirror for
Magistrates, 192 Mirror of Good Manners, by Alexander Barclay, 240, 247
Mirror of Love, by Miles Hoggard, 460 Miseriae Curialunn, by Aeneas Silvius,
248 Misrule, Lord of, 380. Abbot of, 381 Mithridates, a Play, by N. Le^, 402
Monte, Petrus de, 48 Mopsus and Melibeus, Dialogue between, by John Opicius,
422 Moralities, 279, 360, 361, 362, 363, 364 More, Sir Thomas, 364, 365, 387,
428, 438, 439, 440, 449. Laure^ce, 426 Morlier, 40 Mor^erius, Abraham, 169
Morton, John, Archbishop of Canterbury, 238. An Augustine Friar, 121 Moschea,
or the War with Flies and Ants, 356 Moses, 307 Mouskes, Philip, 362 Mummeries,
Account of, 204 Muratori, 10 Mussato Alberti, a Dramatic Writer, 409 Mysteries,
Account of, 199 to 209, 294, 369, 374, 391
N
Nangis, Guillaume de, 114 Narrationes Aurea^, by Gawin Dougla^, 293
Nassyngton, William of, 172, 173, 176 Nature a goodly Interlude, compylyd by
Master Henry Medwall, 238, 364 Nazianzen, Grego^y, 368 Necham, Alexander, 76
Necroman^ia, by John Rastall, 364, 365 Newton, John, 116, 427 Niccols, William,
192 Nicholas, Saint, 375. Pope, the Fisth, 410, 411 Nicholas de Lyra, 47
Nicodemus, Leg^^d of, 208 Nicolson, Bishop, 281 Nigramans^r, a Moral
Interlude, and a Pithie by Master Skeleton, 361, 362, 363 Nigro, Andalus de,
69, 70 Normandy, Metrical Chronicle of the Dukes of, by Master Benoit, 225, 238
Northern Mother's Blessing, a Poem, 238 Northumberland, Fifth Earl of, 337,
339, 340 Norton, John, 135, 136. Thomas, 398 Not Brown Maid, 138 Nugae
Curialium, by Walter de Mapes, 431 Nuremburgh Chronicle, 300, 311 Nykke, Bishop
of Norwich, 337
O
Obsopaeus, 418 Occleve, 9, 34, 41, 50, 324 Octavian, Romance of, 173 Odo or
Odobonus, 167 Odoricus, 111 Oedipus and Jocasta, 76 Oeni de Vis^one in
purgatorio, 298 Offa, King, Life of, 344 Olynthiacs of Demosthenes, translated
into English by Thomas Wilson, 453 Olpe, Bergman de, 376 Opicius, a Latin Poet,
422 Oresme, Nicholas de, 115, 116 Orosius, 10, 311 Osma, Don Bernardo Obispo
de, 40 Othea a Hector, L'Epitre d', by Christina of Pisa, 85 Overthrow of Stage
Plays, by Dr. Rainolds, 383, 384 Ovid, 2, 12, 24, 96, 167, 212, 213, 352, 360.
Elegiacs of, copied by Gower, 2. Metamorphoses of, 12, 45, translated by
Guillaum de Nangis, 114, 119. Art of Love, translated by Gawin Douglas, 281.
Eneid, by G. Douglas, 281 Owayne, Miles, a Poem, 192, 298
P
P. S. ^ Child of Queen Elizabeth's Chapel, Epitaph on, by Ben Jonson, 395
Pace, Richard, 427, 439 Pageants, Account of, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203,
204, 365 Palladis Tamia, or Wit's Treasury, 342 Palemon and Arcite, Comedy of,
382 Palice of Honor, by Gawin Douglas, 294 P^lingenius, 461 Palmerius,
Mattheus, 118, 305, 312 Pa^sgrave, John, 247 Pammachius, a Latin Comedy, acted
at C. C. C. 1544, -- 337 Pandas, 20 Pandulph, 20 Pantalcone, or a Chronicle
compiled by the Monks of Pantaleon, 10 Pantheon, or Memoriae Seculorum, by
Godfrey of Viterbo, 9, 10, 16 Paris, Matthew, 198 Parker, Archbishop, 379, 461
Parlyament of Devylles, 199 Parnel's Hermit, 208 Parr, Queen Catherine, 456
Pastime of Pleasure, by Hawes, 212, 219, to 227, to 233 Pathway to the Toure of
Perfection, by Miles Hoggard, 460 Patrick's Cave, Legend of, 199 Pedegrees of
British Kings, 177 Peeris, William, 126 Pelerin, L'Ame de, 120 Pennant, 326
Pennel, Maistresse Isabel, Poem on, by Skeleton, 355, 356 Penny, Sir, a Poem,
361 Pentham, Jean de, 113 P^rcy, Henry Algernoon, Fifth Earl of Northumberland,
Account of, 338, 339, 340 Pergamo, Philip de, 169 Perusinus Paulus, 75 Persius,
353 Petavius, a Jesuit, 377 Peter of Blois, 75, 119, 352, 362, 428, 430, 431
Peter of Poitou, 218 Petra^ch, 84, 113, 114, 116, 132, 235, 253, 255, 409, 413.
A new Epitaph, in Latin Elegiacs, composed by John Phrea for the Tomb of, 424
Petronylla, Life of, a Poem, 200 Petrus de Monte, 48 Phalaris' Epistles,
translated into Tuscan, by Bartholomew Fontius, 418 Phantasiae Macaronicae, by
Theophilo Folergio, 356 Philargyria, the great Gigant of Great Britain, Fable
of, by Robert Crowley, 316 Philip Sparrow, by Skeleton, 243, 259 Philelphus,
Francis, and Historian, 44 Phonurgia, 8 Phrea, or Free, John, Bishop of Bath
and Wells, 423, 424, 426 Pierce Plowman, 179, 279, 282, 361 Pindar, 371
Pisander, 353 Piscatory Eclogue by Fiorino Buoninsegni, 256 Planudes Maximus,
Boethius translated into Greek by, 33, 169, 218 Platina Baptista, 422 Plato,
22, 48, 76, 307, 371, 410, 415, 449, 455, 461 Plautus, 353, 411, 439, 451
Players, a Company of, under the Direction of John Inglish, at the Marriage of
James Fourth of Scotland with Margaret Tudor, 257, 258 Plays, French, Account
of, 110. English Origin of, 366. Overthrow of Stage Plays, 381, 384 Pliny, 302
Plowman, Pierce, 179, 279, 282, 361 Plutarch, 353 Poenulus of Plautus, 411
Poetaster, a Play, by B. Jonson, 393, 394 Poetical Inscriptions on the Walls of
Wressell and Lekingfield Castle, 339 Poines Maximilian, one of the Children of
Paul's, 392 Poggio, 115, 169, 337, 353 Poli^iano Angelo, 424, 425, 455
Poli^rati^on of John of Salisbury, 167 Ponthus and Sidonia, an old French
Romance, 226 Ponthus and Galyce, and Little Brytayne, History of, 227 Popi^jay,
a Poem, by Skeleton, 337 P^rphyrogenitus, Constantine, 191 Premierfait,
Lawrence, 119, 121, 426 Presles Raoul de, 110 Prick of Divine Love, 117 Pride
and wast Clothing of Lordis Men, a Poem, by Occleve, 324 Proclus, 449 Prodicus,
245 Progne, Latin Tragedy of, 382 Progymnasmata Scenica, seu Ludicra
Praeexercitamenta varii Generis. per Johann^m Bergman de Olpe, 376 Propertius,
353, Prosper, 11 Protestants displaying of their sundry Practices, by Miles
Hoggard, 459 Prudentius, 461 P^^lms, translation of the first, 2^, 19. Seven
Penitential, Fragment of a Comment on, supposed to be written by Alcock, Bishop
of Ely, 249 Ptolemy, 302 Pulci Bernardo, 256 Puttenham, 341
Q
Quadripartitum of Ptolemy, translated by Nicholas D'Oresme, 116 Queens, Mosque
of, by Ben Jonson, 401 Quin, the Comedian, Anecdote of, 253 Quintilian, 352,
417, 453 Quintus Curtius, translated into French, 119, 353, 430, 431 Quintyn,
319
R
Rabelais, 357 Radcliffe, Ralph, 387 Rainold's, Dr. John, 383 Ragusinus Felix,
417 Raphael, 413 Rastall, John, 353, Account of, 364, 365 Raoul Le Feure, 92
Reason and Sensuality, by Lidgate, 225 Reuchlin, an early Dramatic Writer, 375,
376 Rhetoric, Art or Craft of, by Leonard Come, 446 Rhodes, Latin History
of the Seige of, by John Kay, 128 Richard the First, 317 Richard the Second,
258, 325 Richard Lewis, Master of Music, 401 Riga, Petrus de, ^68 Rightwise,
John, Master of St. Paul's School, 434 Ripley, George, 135, 136, 137 Rippe
Gui^laume, 119 Rivales, a Latin Play, by Dr. W. Gager, 383 Robert de Brunne,
316 Robert of Gloucester, 127 Robert Earl of Huntingdon, Downfall of, a Play,
358 Robin Hood and Little John, 237, 381 Robin and Marian, Play of, 386
Robinson N. Bishop of Bangor, 382 Rolewinch Wernerus, 311 Romain Henri, 118
Roman de la Rose, by John de Meun, 4 Romanus Egidius, 96 Romaunt of the Rose,
by Chaucer, 218, 264 Romeo and Juliet, Tragedy of, 394 Romuleon, 114, 119 Roos,
or Roo, John, 397 Rosiar, by Skeleton, 336 Rosse, J. 344, 421 Rotherham,
Archbishop, 389 Rouroy, Jean de, 119 Rowls' Cursing, a Poem, 319 Rowlie's
Poems, 139 to 164, 219 Rufinus, 21
S
Sackville Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, 398 Saint Alboon and Saint Amphiballus, by
Lidgate, 352 Saint Austin, 110, 111 Saint Bernard, Lamentations of, 117 Saint
Catherine, Life of, by Bar^lay, 247 Saint Edmund, History of, by Lidgate, 55,
56, 57 Saint Etheldred, Life of, by Barclay, 247, 177, 189 Saint Frideswide,
110 Saint Graal, Romance of, by G^alter de M^pes, 235 Saint George, Life ^f,
247 Saint Gregory's Homilies, translated, Saint Hugh, Martyrdom of, in Frenc^
110 Verse, 108 Saint Jerome, 11, 24, 117, 307 Saint John's Descent into H^ll, a
Greek Homily on, by Eusebius Alexandrinus, 208 Saint John, Erasmus' Paraphrase
on, translated by Queen Mary, 456 Saint Julian, 198 Saint Margaret, 247 Saint
Thomas of Becket, 138, 238 Saint Radegunda, ^^fe, 200 S^int Sexburgh, 177, 189
Saint Wolfade, Life of, by Gilbert de Stone, 190 Saint Werburgh, Life of, in
Verse, by Bradshaw, 176, 180 to 188, 189 Saints, Lives of the, 189. Poem on,
200 Salmacida Spolia, a Masque, 401 Salpicius Claudius, 20 Salust, 114,
translated by Barclay, 247, 352 Samson and Dalil^, 25 Sardanapulus, Story of,
16 Satiromastix, a Play by Decker, 393 Schedelius Hartmanuus, 311 Scholastica
Historia, by Peter Comestor, 108 Scogan, John, 134 Scogin's Jests, 135 Scot
Ales, and other Ludi on Holidays forbade, by Bishop Grosthead, 368 Scotland,
Latin History of, by Gawin Douglas, 294 Scotus Duns, 449 Secretum secretorum
Aristotelis, 7, 8. Transl^ted into English, 9 Seculorum Memoriae, or the
Pantheon, by Godfrey of Vi^erbo, 9, 10, 16 Sedulius, 461 S^guard John, Latin
Poet, 129 Sellyng William, 424, 425 Seneca, 74, 118, 167, 353 Sergius, seu
capitis ca^ut Comaedia, by Reuchli^, 375 Seven Champion^, History of, by R.
Johnson, 230 Seven Deadly Sins, Poem on the Dance of, by Dunbar, 273 Seven
Sages of Greece, Romance of, by Hebers, 109 Seven Sleepers, Martyrdom of the,
175. Life of the, translated by Syrus, 176 Shakespeare, 5, 16, 22, 221, 236,
250, 256, 349, 358, 365, 374, 383, 385, 387, 393, 402, 403 Shepherd's Calendar,
195, 196, 197, 198 Show of Beards, 362 Shirly James, 399 Shirwoode Robert, 446
Ship of Fools, by Alexander Barclay, 237, 240 to 247, 347, 426 Siculus
Diodorus, 423 Sidonia and Ponthus, an old French R^mance, 226 Sidonius, 168
Sidrac, Romance of, 101, 132 Siege of Thebes, by Lidgate, 61 Sigismunda and
Guiseard, versified, by W. Walter, 238 Silen^iarius Paulu^, 223 Silkestede,
Prior, 217 Simle^us, 375 Simony, Trial of, by Skeleton, 388 Sincerus,
Theophilus, 40 Sinclair, Lord, 293 Sir Bevis, Romance of, 250 Sir Isembras,
Romance of, 173, 174 Sir Lancelot du La^, Romance of, 12, 13, 24, 235 Sir
Penny, a Poem, by Stewart of Lorne, 361 Sir Tristram and Bell Isolde, 14 Sismund
and Guis^ard, by Wal^er, 238 Skeleton, John, 130, 132, 176, 243, 247, 253, 259.
Life of, 336 to 362, 388 Skogan, 135 Smyth, Walter, 365 Socr^tes, 25 Sodom, the
Burning of, a Tragedy, by Radcliffe, 387 Solinus, 10, 20 Solomon, 25 Somnium
Scipionis of Tully ^ranslated, 218 Somerset, John, 444 Sophocles, 368, 451
Soulechart, Denis, 112 Spectacle of Lovers, by W. Walter, 238 Speculum
Christiani, 193 Speculum Eccl^siae, 111, 168 Speculum Historiale, 299 Speculum
Meditantis, by Gower, 2 Speculum Mundi, 109 Speculum Parvulorum, 408 Speculum
Regiminis, by Philip de Pergamo, 170 Speculum Regum, 10 Speculum Stultorum, 206
Spenser, Edmund, 192, 238, 273, 301, 365 Spousage of a Virgin to Christ, by
Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 249 Standish Henry, Bishop of St. Asaph, 437 Stanley
Family, Poem on the Antiquity of, 200 Staple of News, by Ben Jonson, 388
Statius, 74, 96, 352 Stephonius, 357, 377 Stewart of Lorne, 258, 320, 361
Stone, Gilbert de, 190 Strabo, 10 Suetonius, 10 Suron, Henri de, 112 Sulpicius,
Johannes, 433 Supposes, by Gas^oigne, 398 Susannah, Delivery of, a Play, by
Radcliffe, 387 Sylvester or Bernardus Carnotensis, 168 Symeon Metaphrastes, 190
Symeon, a Friar Minor, 216 Synesius, 423
T
Tacitus, 411, 430 Tarquin and his Son Arrous, Story of, 16 Tasso, 300
Tedbaldus, 170 Tempe restored, a Masque, 401 Temple of Glass, by Stephen Hawes,
210 to 215 Temple of Love, a Mosque by Davenant 401 Templum Chrystallinum, by
Stephen Hawes, 212 Terence, 119, 353, 380, 417, 420, 431 Termegis, 20, 21
Testament of Love, by Chaucer, 29, 33 Tethy's Festival, a Masque, by S. Daniel,
401 Theatrum Chemicum, by Ashmole, 9, 135^ 137 Thebes, Story of, by Lidgate, 71
Theocritus, 352 Theodosius, 208 Theodulus, 167 Theophylact, 369, 370 Thesied of
Boccaccio, 215, 223 Thibaud de Vernon, 108 Thig^onville, William de, 20 Thistle
and the Rose, by W. Dunbar, 257 to 264, 279 Toulouse Er^e of, Romance, 103,
104, 105 Three Kings of Cologne, 174 Thucidides, 451 Thurkhill, 198 Tibu^tinae
Lucubratione^, a Latin Poem in Heroic Verse, by Robert Flemmyng, 422
Tignonville, Guillaume d^, 120 Tilliot, M. du, 367 Timon of Athens, by
Shakespeare, 349 ^inmouth, John of, 55, ^89 Tiptof^, Earl of Worcester, 119,
423, 425, 426 Titus and Gesippus, by W. Walter, 238 341 Titus and Gesippus, a
Play, by R. Radcliffe, 387 Tobiad, or Book of Tobit paraphrased by Mattheus of
Vendosme, 168 Tonellus and Zanina, Amors of, 356 Torkyngton Sir Richard, his
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, 427 Toure of Virtue and Honor, by Barclay, 248, 254
Tourtier Jean, Hippocrates and Galen translated by, 120 Townsend Aurelian, 401
Traheron Bartholomew, 448 Tragedy of Princes that were letcherous, by Lydgate,
62 ^^esor, by Pierre Corbian, 222, 225 Trevet, Nicholas, his Commentary on
Sen^ca's Tragedies, 74 Trevisa, John, 39, 67, 115 Trinity and Unity, Treatise
on the, and translated by William of Nassyngton, 172 Trismegistus, 23 Tristram,
Romance of, 14. Triumph of Peace, by James Shirley, 399 Troilus and Cressida,
by Chaucer, 25, 226 Trou^he and Information, a Treatise between, by William
Cornish, 365 Troy, Romance of, by Guido de C^lonna, 12. Translated into Italian
by Philipp Ceffi, 13. Translated by Lidgate, 61, 81, 92, 93, to 99. By Caxton,
228 Tundal or Tungal, the Visions of, 299 Tunstall, Cuthbert, Bishop of Durham,
427 Turpyn, 208 Twety, William, 221 Twici Guillaume, grand Huntsman to King
Edward Second, 221 Typhernas Gregory, 413, 437
V
Valla Laurentius, 48, 84 V^^^is, Margaret de, (...) Vanity of Riches, a Poem,
by Michael Kildare, 200 Vasque de Lucerie, 115 Udall, 386, 456 Vegius Mapheus,
281 Vegetius, 113, 115. Translated by John Newton, 427, 431 Venerie L'Art de,
par Guillaume Twici, 221 Ventadour Bernard, a Troubadour, 215 Vergerius
Angelus, Secretary to Francis First, 413 Vertumnus, a Latin Play, 384 Vetula
De, translated by Jean Le Fevre, 115, 130 Victor Aurelius, 11 Vidal Raimond, a
Troubadour, 220 Vignay, Jean de, 111 Vincent de Beauvais, 112, 113 Vincent
Magister, 426 Vir^li Le, a Sport celebrated on the Feast of St. Nicholas, 375
Virgil, Aeneid of, 15, 25. Translated by Gawin Douglas, 212, 213. By
Guillaumele Roy, 33, 121, 122, 167, 307, 353. Bucolics, translated into Italian
by Bernardo Pulci, Fossa de Cremona Benivi^ni, and Fiorni Buoninsegni, 356.
Commentary on, by Antonio de Lebrixa, 417 Virgil, the Necromancer, Life of, 229
Virgil, Polydore, 281, 425 Virgin Mary, Epithalamium on, by Johannes de
Garlandria, 168. Hymns to, 193, 194. Seven Joys of the blessed Virgin, in
English Rhyme, 192 Virtue, an Interlude, by Skeleton, 336 Visions of the four
G^ddesses, a Masque, by Samuel Daniel, 401 Vitellus Cornelius, 425 Viterbo,
Godfrey o^, 10 Vitri, Philip de, 115 Vitriaco, Jacobus de, 41, 111 Vives
Ludovicus, 410 Ulysses and Circe, Masque of, by W. Brown, 401, 402 Voinuskius,
425 Voltaire, 368 Volusenus Florentius, 294 Voragine, Jacobus de, 41, 111 Vox
Clamantis, by Gower, 2, 429 Upton, Nicholas, 172
W
Wade, Lawrence, a Benedictine Monk, 238 Wakefield Robert, 124, 436 446
Waldenby John of, 172 Wallace Sir William, 334, Walter de Millemete, 7 Walter
William, Boccaccio's Story of Guiscard and Sigismunda versified by, 238 Walton
John, 34 Walton Bertram, Satirical Poem on the Nuns, by, 165 Watson John,
Author of Speculum Christiani, 129, 193 Waynflete Bishop, 426 Way to thrist,
238 Web John, 447 We^ver R. 378 Wentworth, Maistress Margary, Poem on, by
Skeleton, 354, 355 We^burgh, Saint, Life of, 180 Wey William, 427 Whetehamstede
John, Abbot of St. Albans, 46, 47, 53 White Friars of Drogheda, Poem on, by
Michael Kildare, 200 Whitgift, 446 Whiting Richard, 445 -- or Whyting, 200
Whitsun Plays, Account of, 179, 180, 207, 209 Whittington, Poet Laureate, 130,
131 Why come y^ not to court? a Poem, by Skeleton, 345, 346, 347 Wiccliffe, 173,
330, 331, 361, 430 Widville, or Wydville, Earl of River^, 20, 138 William de
Thig^onville, ^0 William of Malmsbury, 191 William of Nassyngton, 172, 173, 176
Williams, Speaker of the House of Commons, Time of Elizabeth, 444 Wilson
Florence, or Florentinus Volusenus, 294 Wilson Thomas, Preceptor to Charle^ and
Henry Brandon, Dukes of Su^folk, 386, 453 Wi^chcomb Abbey, History of, by
Kederminster, 447 Winter Night's Vision, by Niccols, 19^ Wircker, 206 Wit's
Treasury, or Palladis Tamia, 342 Wolsey, Cardinal, 131, 330, 337, 345, 374,
397, 398, 428, 433, 434 Wood, An^h^ny, 219 Work of Sapience, by Caxton, 194
Wressel Castle adorned with Poe^ical I^scrip^ions, 338 Wykeham, William of,
445,
X
Xenophon's Cyropedia, translated into French by Vasque de Lucerie, 115.
Translated into Latin, by R^uchlin, 415. By John Phrea, 423, 451 Ximenes,
Cardinal, 416
Z
Zamoren^is Rodericus, 54 Zanitonella, or the Amors of Tonellus and Zania, a
Poem, 356 Zeno Apostolo, an Italian Dramatic Writer and Poet 132 Zoroa^ter, 22

