THE POETICAL CALENDAR. VOL. IV. FOR APRIL.

THE POETICAL CALENDAR.

CONTAINING A COLLECTION Of scarce and valuable PIECES OF POETRY: With Variety
of ORIGINALS AND TRANSLATIONS, BY THE MOST EMINENT HANDS.

Written and Selected By FRANCIS FAWKES, M.A. And WILLIAM WOTY.

IN TWELVE VOLUMES.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed by DRYDEN LEACH; For J. COOTE, at the King's Arms, in
Paternoster Row. MDCCLXIII.

THE POETICAL CALENDAR.
APRIL. AN ODE.
TO woo green April, lo the sun
That very form (which Jove put on
To bear Europa from her native land)
Assumes to win the queen of showers!
A new-blown primrose decks her hand,
Her taper waist a zone of flowers;
Like a young widow she appears
Shining through shades, and beautiful in tears.
Now genial nature every seed
Opens to grace the vernal mead,
The lark now ventures up the sapphire skies,
Though Zephyr shakes his madid wing,
Yet warmth awakes the embryo flies
To creep, and meet parental spring:
When lo! a shower of drizzling rain,
Or drowns, or drives them to their nests again!
Prolific mists over every rill
Preside, and shade the distant hill;
A tepid moisture gladdens every root,
The husbandmen now pole and bind
The hops, and bid the tendrils shoot,
Thus guarded from the southern wind,
While every vegetative power
Imbibes young April's soft balsamic shower.
Mark! how each month's unwearied toil
Successive clothes, or strips the soil!
From heat to cold they traverse through the sky,
And yet unerring is the plan,
And regular from hot to dry
The calendar of social man!
In no one track the steps appear,
Yet all to one united center steer.
W.

AN ODE.
STern winter now, by spring repressed,
Forbears the long-continued strife,
And nature, on her naked breast,
Delights to catch the gales of life.
Now, over the rural kingdom roves
Soft Pleasure with her laughing train,
Love warbles in the vocal groves,
And vegetation paints the plain.
Unhappy! whom to beds of pain
Arthritic tyranny consigns,
Whom smiling nature courts in vain,
Though rapture sings, and beauty shines.
Yet, though my limbs disease invades,
Her wings imagination tries,
And bears me to the peaceful shades,
Where -- 's humble turrets rise.
Here stop, my soul, thy rapid flight,
Nor from the pleasing groves depart,
Where first great nature charmed my sight,
Where wisdom first informed my heart.
Here let me through the vales pursue
A guide, a father, and a friend;
Once more great nature's works review,
Once more on wisdom's voice attend.
From false caresses, causeless strife,
Wild hope, vain fear, alike removed,
Here let me learn the use of life,
Then best enjoyed, when most improved.
Teach me, thou venerable bower,
Cool meditation's quiet seat,
The generous scorn of venal power,
The silent grandeur of retreat.
When Pride, by guilt, to greatness climbs,
Or raging factions rush to war,
Here let me learn to shun the crimes
I cannot prevent, and will not share.
But, lest I fall by subtler foes,
Bright wisdom, teach me Curio's art,
The swelling passions to compose,
And quell the rebels of the heart.
SPRING. AN ODE.
BY W. WOTY.
Redeunt jam gramina campis,
Arboribusque comae.
HOR.
A Gain the blossomed hedge is seen;
The turf again is dressed in smiling green:
Again the lark ascends the sky,
Winnows the air, and lessens on the eye.
The swallow, that the meads forsook,
Revisits now, and skims along the brook.
The daw to steeple-top up-springs,
And the rook spreads his ventilating wings.
The feathered tribe, on every spray,
Chant lively carols to the vernal day.
Each lengthening morn's diurnal light
Beams fresher beauties on the raptured sight.
The leaves hang clustering on the trees,
And Health comes riding on the tepid breeze;
Wherever the goddess fans her way,
Creation feels her universal sway.
The garden moist with April showers,
Teems with a family of laughing flowers.
Not even a ray, or drop of rain,
But what impregnates, or that shines in vain:
Yet though the bounteous hand of heaven,
All good, this liberality has given,
Beyond our wishes amply kind,
Ingratitude still stains the human mind:
Man sees around celestial power,
And thankless tastes the blessings of each hour:
He reaps the produce of the plains,
And meanly thinks it tribute for his pains.
Fond wretch! the sordid thought forbear,
Nor to thy narrow self confine thy care;
For know, the Deity who gives today,
Tonight may blast thy crops, and snatch thy soul away.
TO A YOUNG LADY ON HER BIRTHDAY, BEING THE FIRST OF APRIL.
LET others write for by-designs,
I seek some moral in my lines,
Which whosoever reads must bear,
Or great, or learned, or young, or fair;
Permit me then, with friendly lay,
To moralize your April day.
Checkered your native month appears
With sunny gleams, and cloudy tears;
It Is thus the world our trust beguiles,
Its frowns as transient as its smiles;
Nor pain nor pleasure long will stay,
For life is but an April day.
Health will not always last in bloom,
But age or sickness surely come;
Are friends beloved? why fate must seize
Or these from you, or you from these:
Forget not earnest in your play,
For youth is but an April day.
When piety and fortune move
Your heart to try the bands of love,
As far as duty gives you power,
Guiltless enjoy the present hour:
Gather your rose-buds while you may,
For love is but an April day.
What clouds soever without are seen,
Oh, may they never reach within!
But virtue's stronger fetters bind
The strongest tempest of the mind:
Calm may you shed your setting ray,
And sunshine end your April day.
STANZAS ON THE SPRING.
NOW from the southern climes returning spring
Breathes fragrant odours over the enameled ground,
The feathered warblers flutter on the wing,
And with their notes the embowering woods resound.
The rising sun, when first he gilds the plains,
Receives the tribute of the sylvan throng,
And Philomela, fraught with tragic strains,
Tunes, to the full-orb'd moon, her plaintive song.
Now blithsome Colin, with his oaten reed,
Delights the listening swains in glade or grove;
While Corydon, in yonder yellow mead,
To Amaryllis tells his tale of love.
At evening hour the nymphs and swains advance,
And ranged in order on the plain are seen,
In various orbs revolve the rustic dance,
And beat with measured pace the level green.
The purple violet scents the mossy hill,
And rich in bloom the fragrant hawthorn blows;
While, near the margin of some brawling rill,
The cowslip brightens, and the daisy glows.
The lawns, the mountains, and the vocal woods,
The groves with leaves adorned, the fields with flowers,
The hills, the valleys, and the crystal floods,
Rejoice, and seem to hail the vernal hours.
Hark! how the birds in consort raise their notes;
And sweetly chant the renovated lay,
It Is nature's impulse tunes their warbling throats,
To hail thee, Flora, goddess of the May.
To thee of old, on fair Ausonia's plains,
(With ease and wealth by godlike Titus blessed)
The blooming virgins, and the jovial swains,
Poured the full bowl, and pil'd the annual feast.
And still to thee, in fair Britannia's isle,
When each revolving year renews the spring;
(Beneath great George! while ease and plenty smile)
My swelling lyre shall annual tribute bring.
Hail, Flora! goddess, hail! to thee belong
Those strains Theocritus of old essayed;
Be thine the lays; be thine the tuneful song
Of every British swain, and every beauteous maid.
INSCRIPTION FOR AN HERMITAGE.
FOnd man, retire to this lone cell,
And bid the busy world farewell:
Ah! quit the city's noisy scene
For pleasures tranquil and serene;
Seek in this calm, this sweet recess
The rose-lip'd cherub, happiness,
That haunts the hermit's mossy floor,
And simple peasant's rural door.
How pleasing is yon oak's brown shade?
The spreading beech, the adjacent glade;
The crystal streams that smoothly glide;
The warbling thrush at even-tide!
Fond man, here sweetly may thou spend
Thy fleeting days, nor fear thy end:
Stealing through life, as through the plain
Yon rill flows silent to the main.
Here (when in russet vest the morn
Walks over the mountain or the lawn)
Thy early orisons begin,
And live secure from woe and sin;
Here too, at evening's sober hour,
Adore the great almighty power,
The sovereign ruler of the skies,
For ever just, and good, and wise.
ANACREONTIC. ON THE SPRING.
AS over the varied meads I stray,
Or trace through winding woods my way,
While opening flowers their sweets exhale,
And odours breathe in every gale;
Or, stretched beneath the beechen shade,
Descry from far the sunny glade;
Where sage Contentment builds her seat,
And Peace attends the calm retreat;
My soul responsive hails the scene,
Attun'd to joy and peace within:
But musing on the liberal hand
That scatters blessings over the land;
That gives for man, with power divine,
The earth to teem, the sun to shine;
My grateful mind with rapture burns,
And pleasure to devotion turns.
THE AFRICAN PRINCE, NOW IN ENGLAND, TO ZARA AT HIS FATHER'S COURT.
WROTE IN THE YEAR MDCCXLIX.
PRinces, my fair, unfortunately great,
Born to the pompous vassalage of state,
Whenever the public calls, are doomed to fly
Domestic bliss, and break the private tie.
Fame pays with empty breath the toils they bear,
And love's soft joys are changed for glorious care.
Yet conscious virtue, in the silent hour,
Rewards the hero with a nobler dower.
For this alone I dared the roaring sea,
Yet more, for this I dared to part with thee.
But while my bosom feels the nobler flame,
Still unreprov'd, it owns thy gentler claim.
Though virtue's awful form my soul approves,
It Is thine, thine only, Zara, that it loves.
A private lot had made the claim but one,
The prince alone must love, for virtue, shun.
Ah! why, distinguished from the happier crowd,
To me the bliss of millions disallowed?
Why was I singled for imperial sway,
Since love and duty point a different way?
Fixed the dread voyage, and the day decreed,
When, duty's victim, love was doomed to bleed,
Too well my memory can those scenes renew,
We met to sigh, to weep our last adieu.
That conscious palm, beneath whose towering shade
So often our vows of mutual love were made;
Where hope so often anticipated joy,
And planned of future years the blessed employ;
That palm was witness to the tears we shed,
When that fond hope, and all those joys were fled.
Thy trembling lips, with trembling lips, I pressed,
And held thee panting to my panting breast.
Our sorrow, grown too mighty to sustain,
Now snatched us, fainting, from the sense of pain.
Together sinking in the trance divine,
I caught thy fleeting soul, and gave thee mine.
O! blessed oblivion of tormenting care!
O! why recalled to life and to despair?
The dreadful summons came, to part -- and why?
Why not the kinder summons but to die?
To die together were to part no more,
To land in safety on some peaceful shore,
Where love's the business of immortal life,
And happy spirits only guess at strife.
" If in some distant land my prince should find
" Some nymph more fair, you cried, as Zara kind" --
Mysterious doubt! which could at once impart
Relief to mine, and anguish to thy heart.
Still let me triumph in the fear expressed,
The voice of love that whispered in thy breast;
Nor call me cruel, for my truth shall prove
'Twas but the vain anxiety of love.
Torn from thy fond embrace, the strand I gain,
Where mourning friends inflict superfluous pain;
My father there his struggling sighs suppressed,
And in dumb anguish clasped me to his breast,
Then sought, concealed the conflict of his mind,
To give the fortitude he could not find;
Each life-taught precept kindly he renewed,
" Thy country's good, said he, be still pursued!
" If, when the gods shall here my son restore,
" These eyes shall sleep in death, to wake no more;
" If then these limbs, that now in age decay,
" Shall mouldering mix with earth's parental clay;
" Round my green tomb perform the sacred rite,
" Assume my throne, and let thy yoke be light;
" From lands of freedom glorious precepts bring,
" And reign at once a father and a king."
How vainly proud, the arrogantly great
Presume to boast a monarch's godlike state!
Subject alike, the peasant and the king,
To life's dark ills, and care's corroding sting.
From guilt and fraud, that strikes in silence sure,
No shield can guard us, and no arms secure.
By these, my fair, subdued, thy prince was lost,
A naked captive on a barbarous coast.
Nurtured in ease, a thousand servants round,
My wants prevented, and my wishes crowned,
No painful labors stretched the tedious day,
On downy feet my moments danced away.
Wherever I looked, officious courtiers bowed,
Wherever I passed, a shouting people crowd;
No fears intruded on the joys I knew,
Each man my friend, my lovely mistress you.
What dreadful change! abandoned and alone,
The shouted prince is now a slave unknown;
To watch his eye, no bending courtiers wait,
No hailing crowds proclaim his regal state;
A slave, condemned, with unrewarded toil,
To turn, from morn to eve, a burning soil.
Fainting beneath the sun's meridian heat,
Roused by the scourge, the taunting jest I meet:
Thanks to thy friends, they cry, whose care recalls
A prince to life, in whom a nation falls!
Unwholesome scraps my strength but half sustained,
From corners gleaned, and even by dogs disdained;
At night I mingled with a wretched crew,
Who by long use with woe familiar grew;
Of manners brutish, merciless and rude,
They mocked my sufferings, and my pangs renewed;
In groans, not sleep, I passed the weary night,
And rose to labor with the morning light.
Yet, thus of dignity and ease beguiled,
Thus scorned and scourged, insulted and reviled,
If heaven with thee my faithful arms had blessed,
And filled with love my intervals of rest,
Short though they were, my soul had never known
One secret wish to glitter on a throne;
The toilsome day had heard no sigh of mine,
Nor stripes, nor scorn, had urged me to repine.
A monarch still beyond a monarch blessed,
Thy love my diadem, my throne thy breast;
My courtiers, watchful of my looks, thy eyes
Should shine, persuade, and flatter, and advise;
Thy voice my music, and thy arms should be --
Ah! not the prison of a slave in me!
Could I with infamy content remain,
And wish thy lovely form to share my chain?
Could this bring ease? forgive the unworthy thought,
And let the love that sinned atone the fault.
Could I, a slave, and hopeless to be free,
Crawl, tamely recent from the scourge, to thee?
Thy blooming beauties could these arms embrace?
My guilty joys enslave an infant race?
No: rather blast me lightnings, whirlwind tear,
And drive these limbs in atoms through the air;
Rather than this, O! curse me still with life,
And let my Zara smile a rival's wife:
Be mine alone the accumulated woe,
Nor let me propagate my curse below.
But, from this dreadful scene, with joy I turn;
To trust in heaven, of me let Zara learn.
The wretch, the sordid hypocrite, that sold
His charge, an unsuspecting prince, for gold,
That justice marked, whose eyes can never sleep,
And death, commissioned, smote him on the deep.
The generous crew their port in safety gain,
And tell my mournful tale, nor tell in vain;
The king, with horror of the atrocious deed,
In haste commanded, and the slave was freed.
No more Britannia's cheek, the blush of shame,
Burns for my wrongs, her king restores her fame:
Propitious gales, to freedom's happy shore,
Waft me triumphant, and the prince restore;
Whatever is great and gay around me shine,
And all the splendour of a court is mine.
And knowledge here, by piety refined,
Sheds a blessed radiance over my brightening mind;
From earth I travel upward to the sky,
I learn to live, to reign, yet more, to die.
O! I have tales to tell, of love divine --
Such blissful tidings! they shall soon be thine.
I long to tell thee, what, amazed, I see,
What habits, buildings, trades, and polity!
How art and nature vie to entertain
In public shows, and mix delight with pain.
O! Zara, here, a story like my own,
With mimic skill, in borrowed names, was shown;
An Indian chief, like me, by fraud betrayed,
And partner in his woes an Indian maid.
I cannot recall the scenes, it is pain too great,
And, if recalled, should shudder to relate.
To write the wonders here I strive in vain,
Each word would ask a thousand to explain.
The time shall come, O! speed the lingering hour!
When Zara's charms shall lend description power;
When placed beside thee in the cool alcove,
Or through the green Savannahs as we rove,
The frequent kiss shall interrupt the tale,
And looks shall speak my sense, though language fail.
Then shall the prodigies, that round me rise,
Fill thy dear bosom with a sweet surprise;
Then all my knowledge to thy faithful heart,
With danger gained, securely I Will impart.
Methinks I see thy changing looks express
The alternate sense of pleasure and distress;
As all the windings of my fate I trace,
And wing thy fancy swift from place to place.
Yet where, alas! has flattering thought conveyed
The ravished lover with his darling maid?
Between us still unmeasured oceans roll,
Which hostile barks infest, and storms control.
Be calm my bosom, since the unmeasured main,
And hostile barks, and storms, are God's domain:
He rules resistless, and his power shall guide
My life in safety over the roaring tide;
Shall bless the love that is built on virtue's base,
And spare me to evangelize my race.
Farewell! thy prince still lives, and still is free:
Farewell! hope all things, and remember me.
ZARA, AT THE COURT OF ANAMABOE, TO THE AFRICAN PRINCE NOW IN ENGLAND.
SHould I the language of my heart conceal,
Nor warmly paint the passion that I feel,
My rising wish should groundless fears confine,
And doubts ungenerous chill the glowing line,
Would not my prince, with nobler warmth, disdain
That love, as languid, which could stoop to feign?
Let guilt dissemble -- in my faithful breast
Love reigns unblam'd, and be that love confessed.
I give my bosom naked to thy view,
For what has shame with innocence to do?
In fancy, now, I clasp thee to my heart,
Exchange my vows, and all my joys impart.
I catch new transport from thy speaking eye; --
But whence this sad involuntary sigh?
Why pants my bosom with intruding fears?
Why from my eyes distill unbidden tears?
Why do my hands thus tremble as I write?
Why fades thy loved idea from my sight?
O! art thou safe on Britain's happy shore,
From winds that bellow, and from seas that roar?
And has my prince -- (Oh, more than mortal pain!)
Betrayed by ruffians, felt the captive's chain?
Bound were those limbs ordained alone to prove
The toils of empire, and the sweets of love?
Hold, hold! Barbarians of the fiercest kind!
Fear heaven's red lightning -- it is a prince ye bind;
A prince, whom no indignities could hide,
They knew, presumptuous! and the gods defied.
Wherever he moves let love-join'd reverence rise,
And all mankind behold with Zara's eyes!
Thy breast alone, when bounding over the waves
To freedom's climes, from slavery and slaves;
Thy breast alone the pleasing thought could frame
Of what I felt, when thy dear letters came:
A thousand times I held them to my breast,
A thousand times my lips the paper pressed:
My full heart panted with a joy too strong,
And "Oh my prince!" died faltering on my tongue:
Fainting I sunk, unequal to the strife,
And milder joys sustained returning life.
Hope, sweet enchantress, round my lovesick head
Delightful scenes of blessed delusion spread.
" Come, come, my prince! my charmer! haste away;
" Come, come, I cried, thy Zara blames thy stay.
" For thee the shrubs their richest sweets retain;
" For thee new colors wait to paint the plain;
" For thee cool breezes linger in the grove,
" The birds expect thee in the green alcove;
" 'Till thy return the rills forget to fall,
" 'Till thy return, the sun, the soul of all! --
" He comes, my maids, in his meridian charms,
" He comes refulgent to his Zara's arms:
" With jocund songs proclaim my love's return;
" With jocund hearts his nuptial bed adorn.
" Bright as the sun, yet gentle as the dove,
" He comes, uniting majesty and love." --
Too soon, alas! the blessed delusion flies;
Care swells my breast, and sorrow fills my eyes.
Ah! why do thy fond words suggest a fear? --
Too vast, too numerous, those already here!
Ah! why with doubts torment my bleeding breast,
Of seas that storms control, and foes infest?
My heart, in all this tedious absence, knows
No thoughts but those of seas, and storms, and foes.
Each joyless morning, with the rising sun,
Quick to the strand my feet spontaneous run:
" Where, where is my prince! what tidings have ye brought?"
Of each I met with pleading tears I sought.
In vain I sought -- some, conscious of my pain,
With horrid silence pointed to the main;
Some with a sneer the brutal thought expressed,
And plunged the dagger of a barbarous jest;
Day followed day, and still I wished the next,
New hopes still flattered, and new doubts perplexed;
Day followed day, the wished tomorrow came;
My hopes, doubts, fears, anxieties the same.
At length -- "O Power Supreme! whoever thou art,
" Thy shrine the sky, the sea, the earth, or heart;
" Since every clime, and all the unbounded main,
" And hostile barks, and storms, are thy domain,
" If faithful passion can thy bounty move,
" And goodness sure must be the friend of love,
" Safe to these arms my lovely prince restore,
" Safe to his Zara's arms, to part no more.
" O! grant to virtue thy protecting care,
" And grant thy love to love's availing prayer,
" Together then, and emulous to praise,
" A flowery altar to thy name we'll raise;
" There, first and last, on each returning day,
" To thee our vows of gratitude we'll pay."
Fool that I was, to all my comfort blind,
Why, when thou went, did Zara stay behind?
How could I fondly hope one joy to prove,
'Midst all the wild anxieties of love?
Had fate, in other mold, thy Zara formed,
And my bold breast in manly friendship warmed,
How had I glowed exulting at thy side!
How all the shafts of adverse fate defied!
Or yet a woman, and not nerv'd for toil,
Oh! that with thee I Would turned a burning soil!
In the cold prison had I lain with thee,
In love still happy, we had still been free;
Then fortune, braved, had owned superior might,
And pined with envy, while we forced delight.
Why should thou bid thy love remember thee?
Thine all my thoughts have been, and still shall be.
Each night the cool Savannahs have I sought,
And breathed the fondness of enamored thought;
The curling breezes murmured as I sighed,
And hoarse, at distance, roared my foe the tide:
My breast still haunted by a motley train,
Now doubts, now hopes prevailed, now joy, now pain.
Now fixed I stand, my spirit fled to thine,
Nor note the time, nor see the sun decline;
Now roused I start, and winged with fear I run,
In vain, alas! for it is myself I shun.
When kindly sleep its lenient balm supplied,
And gave that comfort waking thought denied;
Last night -- but why, ah Zara! why impart
The fond, fond fancies of a lovesick heart?
Yet true delights on fancy's wings are brought,
And love's soft raptures realiz'd in thought --
Last night I saw, methinks I see it now --
Heaven's awful concave round thy Zara bow;
When sudden thence a flaming chariot flew,
Which earth received, and fix white coursers drew;
Then -- quick transition -- did thy Zara ride,
Borne to the chariot -- wondrous -- by thy side:
All glorious both, from clime to clime we flew,
Each happy clime with sweet surprise we view.
A thousand voices sung -- "All bliss betide
" The prince of Lybia, and his faithful bride."
" It Is done, it is done" resounded through the skies,
And quick aloft the car began to rise;
Ten thousand beauties crowded on my sight,
Ten thousand glories beamed a dazzling light.
My thoughts could bear no more, the vision fled,
And wretched Zara viewed her lonely bed. --
Come, sweet interpreter, and ease my soul;
Come to my bosom, and explain the whole.
Alas! my prince -- yet hold, my struggling breast!
Sure we shall meet again, again be blessed.
" Hope all, thou say, I live, and still am free;"
Oh then prevent those hopes, and haste to me.
Ease all the doubts thy Zara's bosom knows,
And kindly stop the torrent of her woes. --
But, that I know too well thy generous heart,
One doubt, than all, more torment would impart;
It Is this, in Britain's happy courts to shine,
Amidst a thousand blooming maids, is thine --
But thou, a thousand blooming maids among,
Art still thyself, incapable of wrong;
No outward charm can captivate thy mind,
Thy love is friendship heightened and refined;
It Is what my soul, and not my form inspires,
And burns with spotless and immortal fires.
Thy joys, like mine, from conscious truth arise,
And, known these joys, what others can thou prize?
Be jealous doubts the curse of sordid minds,
Hence, jealous doubts, I give ye to the winds. --
Once more, O come! and snatch me to thy arms!
Come, shield my beating heart from vain alarms!
Come, let me hang enamored on thy breast,
Weep pleasing tears, and be with joy distressed!
Let me still hear, and still demand thy tale,
And, often renewed, still let my suit prevail!
Much still remains to tell and to enquire,
My hand still writes, and writing prompts desire;
My pen denies my last farewell to write,
Still, still, "return," my wishful thoughts indite:
Oh hear, my prince, thy love, thy mistress call,
Think over each tender name, and hear by all.
Oh pleasing intercourse of soul with soul,
Thus, while I write, I see, I clasp thee whole;
And these kind letters trembling Zara drew,
In every line shall bring her to thy view.
Return, return, in love and truth excel;
Return, I write; I cannot add Farewell.
ABELARD TO ELOISA. The editor of Poems by eminent ladies in two vol. 12mo.
printed for R. Baldwin in 1755. have ascribed this poem to mrs. Madan, and paid
her handsome compliments upon it; whereas mr. Pattison, late of Sidney Coll.
Camb. is undoubtedly the author; it being printed among his poems, which were
published A.D. 1728. In the memoirs of his life prefixed to his poems, page 42.
there is likewise a letter dated York, Oct. 20. 1726. wherein this poem is
mentioned as Pattison's, and much commended.

BY MR. WILLIAM PATTISON.
IN my dark cell, low prostrate on the ground,
Mourning my crimes, thy letter entrance found;
Too soon my soul the well-known name confessed;
My beating heart sprung fiercely in my breast:
Through my whole frame a guilty transport glowed,
And streaming torrents from my eyes fast flowed.
O Eloisa! art thou still the same?
Do thou still nourish this destructive flame?
Have not the gentle rules of peace and heaven
From thy soft soul this fatal passion driven?
Alas! I thought thee disengaged and free;
And can thou still, still sigh and weep for me?
What powerful deity, what hallowed shrine,
Can save me from a love and faith like thine?
Where shall I fly, when not this awful cave,
Whose rugged feet the surging billows lave;
When not these gloomy cloister's solemn walls,
Over whose rough sides the languid ivy crawls;
When my dread vows in vain their force oppose,
Opposed to love -- alas! how vain are vows!
In fruitless penitence I wear away
Each tedious night; each sad revolving day
I fast, I pray; and, with deceitful art,
Veil thy dear image from my tortured heart:
My tortured heart conflicting passions move,
I hope, despair, repent -- yet still I love.
A thousand jarring thoughts my bosom tear,
For thou, not God, O Eloise art there.
To the false world's deluding pleasures dead,
Nor longer by its wandering fires misled,
In learned disputes harsh precepts I infuse,
And give that counsel I want power to use.
The rigid maxims of the grave and wise
Have quenched each milder sparkle of my eyes;
Each lovely feature of this well-known face,
By grief reversed, assumes a sterner grace.
O Eloisa! should the fates once more,
Indulgent to my view, thy charms restore!
How would thou from my arms with horror start,
To miss the form familiar to thy heart!
Naught could thy quick, thy piercing judgment see,
To speak thy Abelard -- but love of thee.
Lean abstinence, pale grief, and haggard care,
The dire attendants of forlorn despair,
Have Abelard the young, the gay, removed,
And in the hermit sunk the man you loved.
Wrapped in the gloom these holy mansions shed,
The thorny paths of penitence I tread;
Lost to the world, from all its interests free,
And torn from all my soul held dear in thee.
Ambition, with its train of frailties gone,
All love, all forms forgot, but thine alone.
Amid the blaze of day, the dusk of night,
My Eloisa rises to my sight:
Veiled, as in Paraclete's secluded towers,
The wretched mourner counts the lagging hours;
I hear her sighs, see the swift-falling tears,
Weep all her griefs, and pine with all her cares.
O vows! O convents! your stern force impart,
And frown the melting phantom from my heart:
Let other sighs a worthier sorrow show;
Let other tears, for sin, repentant flow:
Low to the earth my guilty eyes I roll,
And humble to the dust my contrite soul.
Forgiving power! thy gracious call I meet,
Who first empowered this rebel heart to beat;
Who through this trembling, this offending frame,
For nobler ends diffused life's active flame:
O change the temper of this laboring breast,
And form anew each beating pulse to rest!
Let springing grace, fair faith, and hope remove
The fatal traces of destructive love;
Destructive love from its warm mansion tear,
And leave no tracks of Eloisa there.
Are these the wishes of my inmost soul?
Would I its softest, tenderest sense control?
Would I this touched, this glowing heart refine
To the cold substance of that marble shrine?
Transformed like these pale swarms that round me move
Of blessed insensibles -- who know not love?
Ah! rather let me keep this hapless flame;
Adieu, false honor! unavailing fame!
Not your harsh rules, but tender love supplies
The streams that gush from my despairing eyes:
I feel the traitor melt around my heart,
And through my veins with treacherous influence dart.
Inspire me, heaven! assist me grace divine!
Aid me, ye saints! unknown to crimes like mine;
You who on earth serene all griefs could prove,
All but the torturing pangs of hopeless love:
A holier rage in your pure bosoms dwelt,
Nor can you pity what you never felt.
A sympathizing grief alone can cure;
The hand that heals must feel what I endure:
Thou Eloise alone can give me ease,
And bid my struggling soul subside to peace;
Restore me to my long-lost heaven of rest,
And take thyself from my reluctant breast.
If crimes like mine could an allay receive,
That blessed allay thy wondrous charms must give:
Thy form, that first to love my heart inclined,
Still wanders in my lost, my guilty mind:
I saw thee as the new-blown blossoms fair,
Sprightly as light, and soft as summer's air;
Bright as their beams thy eyes a mind disclose,
While on thy lips gay blushed the fragrant rose:
Wit, youth, and beauty, in each feature shone,
Pressed by my fate, I gazed -- and was undone!
There died the generous fire, whose vigorous flame
Enlarged my soul, and urged me on to fame;
Nor fame, nor wealth, my softened heart could move,
My heart, insensible to all but love!
Snatched from myself my learning tasteless grew,
Vain my philosophy opposed to you.
A train of woes succeed, nor should we mourn
The hours which cannot, ought not to return.
As once to love I swayed thy yielding mind,
Too fond, alas! -- too fatally inclined!
To virtue now let me thy breast inspire,
And fan with zeal divine the holy fire;
Teach thee to injured heaven, all-chang'd, to turn,
And bid thy soul with sacred raptures burn.
O that my own example could impart
This noble warmth to thy soft trembling heart!
That mine, with pious undissembled care,
Might aid the latent virtue struggling there!
Alas I rave! nor grace, nor zeal divine,
Burns in a breast overwhelmed with crimes like mine.
Too sure I find, while I the tortures prove
Of feeble piety, conflicting love,
On black despair my forced devotion built,
Absence, to me, has sharper pangs than guilt.
Ah! yet, my Eloise, your charms I view,
Yet breathe my sighs, my tears yet pour for you;
Each weak resistance stronger knits my chain,
I sigh, weep, love, despair, repent -- in vain.
Haste, Eloisa, haste, your lover free,
Amidst your warmer prayers, O think of me!
Wing with your rising zeal my grovelling mind,
And let me mine from your repentance find:
Ah! labor, strive, your love, yourself control,
The change will sure affect my kindred soul;
In blessed consent our purer sighs shall grieve,
And heaven assisting shall our crimes forgive.
But if unhappy, wretched, lost, in vain,
Faintly the unequal combat you sustain;
If not to heaven you feel your bosom rise,
Nor tears refined fall contrite from your eyes;
If still your heart its wonted passions move,
If still, to speak all pains in one -- you love,
Deaf to the weak essays of living breath,
Attend the stronger eloquence of death.
When that kind power this captive soul shall free,
(Which only then can cease to dote on thee)
When gently sunk to my eternal sleep,
The Paraclete my peaceful urn shall keep;
Then, Eloisa, then your lover view,
See his quenched eyes no longer fixed on you;
From their dead orbs that tender utterance flown,
Which first to yours my heart's soft tale made known;
This breast no more (at length to ease consigned)
Pant like the waving aspin in the wind;
See all my wild, tumultuous passions over,
And you, amazing change! beloved no more;
Behold the destined end of human love --
But let the sight your zeal alone improve:
Let not your conscious soul, to sorrow moved,
Recall how much, how tenderly I loved;
With pious care your fruitless grief restrain,
Nor let a tear your sacred veil profane;
Nor even a sigh on my cold urn bestow,
But let your breast with newborn raptures glow;
Let love divine frail mortal love dethrone,
And to your mind immortal joys make known;
Let heaven relenting strike your ravished view,
And still the bright, the blessed pursuit renew;
So with your crimes shall your misfortunes cease,
And your racked soul be calmly hushed to peace.
ROSAMOND TO HENRY.
AN EPISTLE.
BY THE SAME.
Qualis populea moerens Philomela sub umbra
Flet noctem, ramoque sedens miserabile carmen
Integrat, et moestis late loca questibus implet.
VIRG. GEORG.
FRom these lone shades, and ever-gloomy bowers,
Once the dear scenes of Henry's softer hours!
What tender strains of passion can impart
The pangs of absence to an amorous heart!
Far, far too faint the powers of language prove,
Language that slow interpreter of love!
Souls paired like ours, like ours to union wrought,
Converse by silent sympathy of thought;
O then, by that mysterious art, divine
The wild impatience of my breast by thine!
And, to conceive what I would say to thee,
Conceive, my love, what thou would say to me!
As in the tenderness of soul I sigh,
Methinks I hear thy tender soul reply;
And as in thought, over heaps of heroes slain,
I trace thy progress on the fatal plain,
Perhaps thy thought explores me through the grove,
And, softening, steals an interval of love;
In the deep covert of a bowering shade
Describes my posture -- languishingly laid!
Now, sadly solac'd with the murmuring springs,
Now, melting into tears, the softest things!
And how the feigned ideas all agree!
So bowers the shade, so melt my tears for thee!
Here, as in Eden, once we blissful lay,
How often night stole, unheeded, on the day!
Our soft-breath'd raptures charmed the listening grove,
And all was harmony, for all was love!
But hark! the trumpet sounds! see discords rise!
It Is honor calls; from me my Henry flies!
Honor, to him, more bright than Rosamonda's eyes!
Not thus my honor with his passion strove,
His sighs I pitied, and indulged his love:
He then cried, "honor was an empty name,
" And love a sweeter recompense than fame."
Oh! had I lived in some obscure retreat,
Securely fair, and innocently sweet;
How had I blessed some humble shepherd's arms!
How kept my fame as spotless as my charms!
Then had thou never beheld these eyes of mine,
Nor they bewailed the fatal power of thine!
Dear fatal power! to me for ever dear --
Fixed in my tender breast, and rooted there!
For ever in my tender breast remain --
And be for ever a delightful pain!
With what surprise those glories first I viewed,
That in one moment my whole heart subdued!
With such resistless beams, so fierce they shone,
Not such the dazzling radiance of thy crown!
Sent from thy crown I never felt a dart;
The lover, not the monarch, won my heart:
Nor ever the monarch with such charms appears,
As when the lover's softened dress he wears:
As when he, silent, deigns my breast to seek,
And looks such language as no tongue can speak.
Whenever my crimes (if love a crime can be,
If it is a crime to live, and die for thee!)
In hideous forms arise, and cloud my soul,
One thought of Henry can that gloom control:
No more my breast alternate passions move,
The frosts of honor melt before the fires of love.
Again I must repeat that fatal hour,
Which snatched my Henry from his Woodstock bower;
When mad Bellona, with tumultuous cries,
The hero roused, and drowned the lover's sighs.
Stretched on my downy couch at ease I lay,
And sought by reading to beguile the day;
With amorous strains I soothed a grateful fire,
And all the woman glowed with soft desire.
'Till, as I wished, I heard the vocal breeze
Proclaim my Henry rustling through the trees;
O'erjoy'd, I ran to meet thy longing arms,
And taste a dear remembrance of thy charms;
But soon I saw some sad concealed surprise,
Fade on thy cheeks, and languish on thine eyes;
Through each dissembled smile a sorrow stole,
And whispered out the secret of thy soul.
What this could mean uncertain to divine;
No fault I knew, yet feared some fault was mine.
But soon thy love dispelled those airy fears,
Dispelled alas! -- but brought too solid cares.
For as with hands, entwined in hands, we walked,
Of Love, and hapless lovers, still thou talked:
Thy tears of pity answered each sad moan,
And in their seeming miseries wept thy own.
" I cannot leave her!" -- I o'erheard thee say, --
Pierced to the soul, I sunk, and died away.
What art restored me, thou alone can tell,
For thy kind arms embraced me as I fell.
My opening eyes fixed on thy beauties hung,
And my ears drank the cordial of thy tongue.
Again my thoughts return with killing pain,
Within thy arms I sink, and swoon again:
Again thou do my sweet physician prove,
From death to life alternately I move,
Now dead by anguish, now revived by love.
But when, without disguise, the truth I found,
My agonizing sorrows knew no bound:
My locks I tore; then all-intranc'd I lay,
'Till by degrees my grief to words gave way,
And soft I cried, -- "oh! stay, my Henry stay.
" One moment more! -- add yet, -- and yet, a kiss! --
" Oh! give me thine, and take my soul in this!
" Farewell! -- perhaps, farewell for ever! -- oh!
" Who can sustain so dire a weight of woe?"
Ah! wretched maid! -- alas! a maid no more!
No herbs that spotless title can restore!
Ah! who shall now protect thy injured fame?
Who shield thy weakness from the assaults of shame?
Who lull thy anxious soul to balmy rest,
If Henry, dearest Henry, flies thy breast?
Yet, though he flies, your wings, ye angels, spread,
And hover guardians over my Henry's head!
Who knows, but this kind prayer is poured too late,
And he already struggles with his fate?
Already wounded, pants, and gasps in death,
And Rosamonda is his latest breath?
Propitious heaven! vouchsafe a gracious ear!
Grant these be only phantoms of my fear:
Heaven still is gracious, if true suppliants pray!
And lo! -- the foul chimeras fleet away!
Transporting prospects to my wishes rise,
Beam on my soul, and brighten in my eyes!
He lives! he lives! I see his banner spread,
And laurels wreathed round the gay victor's head!
Ye winds! convey the news to Albion's floods!
Ye floods! resound it to the joyous woods!
Ye joyous woods! your tuneful choirs prepare
To hail my hero from the toils of war!
Delusive scenes! too beautiful to stay!
They fade in visionary streaks away.
Alas! no lovely Henry now is nigh!
His genius took his form to sooth my eye.
No more I seem his melting voice to hear!
Peace! babbling fountains! nor abuse my ear.
Ye flowers! ye streams! ye gales, no longer move!
For ah! how strong is fancy joined with love!
O! frail inconstancy of mortal state!
One hour dejected, and the next elate!
Raised by false hopes, or by false fears deprest,
How different passions sway the human breast!
Now smiling pleasures with fair charms invite,
Now frowning horrors with black trains affright.
Future distrusts the present joys control,
And fancy triumphs over the reasoning soul.
As 'mid the trees I solitary rove,
The trees awake some image of my love:
Wherever their arms in amorous foldings join,
My longing arms I spread to fold in thine.
The beauteous flowers thy face reflected bear,
(If flowers in beauty may with thee compare)
Their wafted fragrancies thy breath inspire,
And my soul kindles with ideal fire!
The thick-weav'd shades, and grove in circling grove,
Are emblems of the eternity of love.
My blushing guilt the crimson roses paint,
And I, like roses, unsupported faint:
Like theirs my youthful charms (if charms) consume,
For love, a closer canker, eats my bloom.
How blessed might other nymphs survey these scenes,
Fountains, and shades, and hills, and flowery greens?
Prospects on prospects might detain the sight,
And still variety give new delight.
But I, with thee, should find in deserts ease;
Without thee, not even Paradise could please:
Wilds, by thy presence, gardens would appear;
Gardens are wilds, since Henry is not here.
Let grottos sink, or porticos arise,
Heedless I view them with unpleasur'd eyes:
Their mantling umbrage cools the noonday fire,
But what can cool a lover's fierce desire?
In the deep bosom of a darksome shade,
By baleful yew and mournful cypress made,
A widow-turtle weeps her ravished love,
And sorrowfully solaces the grove;
Sometimes my passion I aloud disclose;
The widowed turtle, answering, cooes her woes.
Bred by my hand, my sorrow's sad relief,
A little linnet learns to sigh my grief;
Taught by my voice, and by obedience tame,
The pretty lisper whistles Henry's name:
Perched on my head the sylvan siren sings,
And tunes the harsher notes of gurgling springs.
Embosom'd in a vale, thou know the shade,
Fast by the murmurs of a soft cascade;
There, while one night full beams of Cynthia play,
(Warm was the night) with wanderings tired, I lay,
Till, by degrees, the falling waters closed
My eyelids, and my wearied limbs reposed.
Sudden the fairy monarch I behold,
Near he approached, and thus my fate foretold:
('It Was the same Oberon, that once we saw
Circle the green, and give his dancers law,)
" Unhappy nymph! thy beauty is thy crime --
" And must such beauty perish in its prime!
" No more great Henry shall enjoy those charms,
" Nor thou ill-fated fair adorn his arms!
" Cropped like an opening rose, thy fall I fear!
" But rise and supplicate the vengeance near."
Then (as methought) I waked with threatened woes,
Emerging from thick shades a phantom rose:
One hand sustained a short, but naked sword, --
And one a golden bowl with poison stored:
The jealous queen the frowning form expressed,
It spoke, and aimed the dagger at my breast.
" Arise! nor ask thy crime -- but choose thy fate,
" Know prayers are vain -- repentance is too late!
" Vengeance is mine -- Here! drink this poisoned bowl,
" Or this keen dagger drinks thy guilty soul!"
It ceased: convulsions in my bosom strove,
My curdling blood scarce in stiff tides could move.
Thrice I cried, "Henry!" with a feeble sound,
And thrice I started at the sad rebound!
Even echo now grew frightful: with surprise
Trembling I lay, nor dared unveil my eyes,
'Till warbling birds proclaimed the morning light,
And told me, 'twas a vision of the night;
Yet not the morn could chase my gloomy care,
But winds and trees alarmed my soul with fear;
While waving boughs, that in the sunbeams played,
Seemed to show daggers in each pointed shade.
Why was I formed with such a coward mind?
The sport of shadows, or a rustling wind!
Nerves, better strung, did manly spirits warm,
Glad would I part with every female charm,
Then, cased in steel, the front of battle dare,
And, with great Henry, rouse the soul of war!
This arm should guard the hero from the foe,
Repel the storm, or intercept the blow;
And should my weakness in the warrior fail,
The soft-beseeching woman should prevail;
For thee I Would sooth each proud insulting foe,
And melt him with petitionary woe;
With thee in every hardy hazard join,
In dangers save thy life to make it mine;
By night compose thy harrass'd head to rest,
And hush it on the pillow of my breast;
With patient eyes eternal vigils keep,
And court good angels to protect thy sleep.
Alas! in vain I urge my frustrate will,
I find myself a feeble woman still;
The feeble woman to my breast returns,
For Henry's gone, and Rosamonda mourns!
O! see my eyes their streaming anguish pour,
O! hear my sighs increase the swelling shower;
What can I more than shed my tears and sighs?
Poor woman's strength alone in weakness lies.
But whither is ungoverned fancy flown?
Thoughts of impossibilities be gone!
Guilt claims no miracles, nor heaven conspires
To aid my crimes, and fan my lawless fires.
Life irksome grows; detested is the light,
And my soul dreads the visions of the night.
Swift let me to some hallowed convent go! --
Can I for ever Henry leave? -- ah! no: --
But O lost innocence! -- I lost a name: --
O honor! -- broken is the bubble, fame.
Are my sins monstrous? do invented crimes,
Alike unknown to past or present times,
Demand red vengeance? some peculiar curse? --
Crowds stand recorded for the same, -- or worse.
Have I, unpitying, heard the poor complain,
Or seen the wretched weep, and weep in vain?
Have I my flame feigned for a sordid end?
Ever wronged a foe, or ever betrayed a friend?
Not to my charge such crimes has malice brought,
Love, only love, is my unbounded fault:
A fault, that sure may heaven to pity move,
Since half of heaven ('it is said) consists in love.
Ah! foolish nymph! -- Here, view the queen! the laws! --
But there view Henry as the enchanting cause!
By such a cause the priestess would retire,
And quit the vestal for a nobler fire.
I will again the immortal powers implore;
Brave Henry for Britannia's sake restore!
In him she lives, to him her joys are due,
And only sends her earliest thanks to you.
But O! my lord, my darling lord, beware!
Tempt not too bold the dangers of the war!
Think, when thou see the fate-impelling dart,
O! think it aimed at Rosamonda's heart!
Were but each breast as soft as mine, no more
Should tumults rise, or martial thunders roar:
Heroes should scorn the glories of the field,
And the famed laurel to the myrtle yield:
For sweeter passions sweeter strifes inspire,
And love alone should set the soul on fire.
May then these eyes in tears no longer mourn,
But cheerful hail their Henry's wished return!
O! swift, victorious, hush the war's alarms!
Swift, if thy Rosamonda boasts some charms,
Fly on the wings of love and conquest to her arms!
HENRY TO ROSAMOND.
AN EPISTLE.
BY THE SAME.
SHall then his beauteous Rosamonda mourn,
Nor Henry's soul the soft complaint return?
O cease, my fair! I deeply feel thy smart,
And all thy sorrows double in my heart:
Far from my breast, ye scenes of war! remove,
Far from my breast be every scene but love;
Soft rising thoughts as when, in Woodstock-bowers,
Joyful, we loved away the laughing hours.
Now midnight rest relieves the soldier's care,
Hushed are the drums, and every voice of war;
Faint gleam the fires along the dewy field,
And faint the noise that sleeping coursers yield;
Yet love, the lordly tyrant of my breast,
Alarms my soul, and interrupts my rest;
In vain a nation's cares the monarch move,
For ah! far greater is the monarch love!
Warm from my lips thy tender letter lies,
And every word is magic to my eyes;
Weeping, I read, and hear thy soft-breath'd woes,
And all the warrior in the lover lose:
Then I by fancy vanished joys restore,
Feast on false love, and act part pleasures over;
Fancy can sooth my soul with pleasing dreams,
While tented Gallia bowery Woodstock seems;
Led by delusive steps, in thought, I rove
Through well known greens, and every winding grove;
There, happily on some flowery bank reclined,
My sweet-reposing Rosamonda find;
When thou (for then thy secret thoughts I see)
In pious slumbers breathe thy soul to me;
Dissolved with joy, and feasting on thy charms,
I clasp thee in imaginary arms;
And then -- ah then! -- I seem sincerely blessed --
Then only Rosamonda knows the rest --
O glories! empires! crowns! how weak ye prove,
If thus out-rivall'd by a dream of love!
O love! what joys thy real sweets bestow,
When even their shadows can transport me so!
O bliss extatic! blessed relief from cares!
Thus let me lose my soul in softer wars!
Be love's transporting sighs my sweet alarms,
Nor worlds, but Rosamonda crown my arms!
In her alone my full desires agree,
Her charms are empires, glories, all to me!
ABELARD TO ELOISA.
BY THE LATE MR. CAWTHORNE, MASTER OF TUNBRIDGE-SCHOOL.
ARGUMENT.
Abelard and Eloisa flourished in the twelfth century: they were two of the
most distinguished persons of their age in learning and beauty, but for nothing
more famous than for their unfortunate passion. After a long course of
calamities, they retired each to a several convent, and consecrated the
remainder of their days to religion. It was many years after this separation,
that a letter of Abelard's to a friend, which contained the history of his
misfortunes, fell into the hands of Eloisa: this occasioned those celebrated
letters (out of which the following is partly extracted), which give so lively
a picture of the struggles of grace and nature, virtue and passion.

MR. POPE.

AH, why this boding start? this sudden pain,
That wings my pulse, and shoots from vein to vein?
What mean, regardless of yon midnight bell,
These earth-born visions saddening over my cell?
What strange disorder prompts these thoughts to glow?
These sighs to murmur, and these tears to flow?
It Is she, it is Eloisa's form restored,
Once a pure saint, and more than saints adored:
She comes in all her killing charms confessed,
Glares through the gloom, and pours upon my breast,
Bid heaven's bright guard from Paraclete remove,
And drags me back to misery and love.
Enjoy thy triumphs, dear illusion! see
This sad apostate from his God to thee;
See, at thy call, my guilty warmths return,
Flame through my blood, and steal me from my urn.
Yet, yet, frail Abelard! one effort try,
Ere the last lingering spark of virtue die;
The deadly charming sorceress control,
And spite of nature tear her from thy soul.
Long has that soul in these unsocial woods,
Where anguish muses, and where horror broods,
From love's wild visionary wishes strayed,
And sought to lose thy beauties in the shade,
Faith dropped a smile, devotion lent her fire,
Woke the keen pang, and sanctified desire;
Led me enraptured to the blessed abode,
And taught my heart to glow with all its God.
But oh, how weak fair faith and virtue prove!
When Eloisa melts away in love!
When her fond soul impassioned, rapt, unveiled,
No joy forgotten, and no wish concealed,
Flows through her pen as infant softness free,
And fiercely springs in ecstasies to me.
Ye heavens! as walking in yon sacred fane
With every seraph warm in every vein,
Just as remorse had roused an aching sigh,
And my torn soul hung trembling in my eye,
In that kind hour thy fatal letter came,
I saw, I gazed, I shivered at the name;
The conscious lamps at once forgot to shine,
Prophetic tremors shook the hallowed shrine;
Priests, censers, altars from thy genius fled,
And heaven itself shut on me while I read.
Dear smiling mischief! art thou still the same,
The still pale victim of too soft a flame?
Warm, as when first with more than mortal shine
Each melting eye-ball mixed thy soul with mine?
Have not thy tears for ever taught to flow,
The glooms of absence, and the pangs of woe,
The pomp of sacrifice, the whispered tale,
The dreadful vow yet hovering over thy veil,
Drove this bewitching fondness from thy breast?
Curbed the loose wish, and formed each pulse to rest?
And can thou still, still bend the suppliant knee
To love's dead shrine, and weep and sigh for me?
Then take me, take me, lock me in thy arms,
Spring to my lips, and give me all thy charms:
No, fly me, fly me, spread the impatient sail,
Steal the lark's wing, and mount the swiftest gale;
Skim the last ocean, freeze beneath the pole;
Renounce me, curse me, root thee from thy soul;
Fly, fly, for justice bares the arm of God;
And the grasped vengeance only waits his nod.
Are these my wishes? can they thus aspire?
Does phrenzy form them, or does grace inspire?
Can Abelard, in hurricanes of zeal,
Betray his heart, and teach thee not to feel?
Teach thy enamored spirit to disown
Each human warmth, and chill thee into stone?
Ah, rather let my tenderest accents move
The last wild tumults of unholy love!
On that dear bosom trembling let me lie,
Pour out my soul, and in fierce raptures die,
Rouse all my passions, act my joys anew,
Farewell, ye cells! ye martyred saints! adieu:
Sleep conscience, sleep! each awful thought be drowned,
And sevenfold darkness veil the scene around.
What means this pause, this agonizing start?
This glimpse of heaven quick-rushing through my heart?
Methinks I see a radiant cross displayed,
A wounded savior bleeds along the shade;
Around the expiring God bright angels fly,
Swell the loud hymn, and open all the sky:
O save me, save me, ere the thunders roll,
And hell's black caverns swallow up my soul.
Return, ye hours! when guiltless of a stain,
My strong-plum'd genius throb'd in every vein,
When warmed with all the Egyptian fanes inspired,
All Athens boasted, and all Rome admired;
My merit in its full meridian shone,
Each rival blushing, and each heart my own.
Return, ye scenes! ah no, from fancy fly,
On time's stretched wing, till each idea die,
Eternal fly, since all that learning gave
Too weak to conquer, and too fond to save,
To love's soft empire every wish betrayed,
And left my laurels withering in the shade.
Let me forget, that while deceitful fame
Grasped her shrill trump, and filled it with my name,
Thy stronger charms, empowered by heaven to move
Each saint, each blessed insensible to love,
At once my soul from bright ambition won,
I hugged the dart, I wished to be undone;
No more pale science durst my thoughts engage,
Insipid dullness hung on every page;
The midnight lamp no more enjoyed its blaze,
No more my spirit flew from maze to maze:
Thy glances bade philosophy resign
Her throne to thee, and every sense was thine.
But what could all the frosts of wisdom do,
Opposed to beauty, when it melts in you?
Since these dark, cheerless, solitary caves,
Death-breathing woods, and daily-opening graves,
Misshapen rocks, wild images of woe,
For ever howling to the deeps below;
Ungenial deserts, where no vernal shower
Wakes the green herb, or paints the unfolding flower;
The imbrowning glooms these holy mansions shed,
The night-born horrors brooding over my bed,
The dismal scenes black melancholy pours
Over the sad visions of enanguish'd hours;
Lean abstinence, wan grief, low-thoughted care,
Distracting guilt, and hell's worst fiend, despair,
Conspire, in vain, with all the aids of art,
To blot thy dear idea from my heart.
Delusive, sightless god of warm desire!
Why would thou wish to set a wretch on fire?
Why lives thy soft divinity where woe
Heaves the pale sigh, and anguish loves to glow?
Fly to the mead, the daisy-painted vale,
Breathe in its sweets, and melt along the gale;
Fly where gay scenes luxurious youths employ,
Where every moment steals the wing of joy;
There may thou see, low prostrate at thy throne,
Devoted slaves and victims all thy own:
Each village-swain the turf-built shrine shall raise,
And kings command whole hecatombs to blaze.
O memory! ingenious to revive
Each fleeting hour, and teach the past to live,
Witness what conflicts this frail bosom tore!
What griefs I suffered! and what pangs I bore!
How long I struggled, labored, strove to save
An heart that panted to be still a slave!
When youth, warmth, rapture, spirit, love, and flame,
Seized every sense, and burnt through all my frame;
From youth, warmth, rapture, to these wilds I fled,
My food the herbage, and the rock my bed.
There, while these venerable cloisters rise
Over the bleak surge, and gain upon the skies,
My wounded soul indulged the tear to flow
Over all her sad vicissitudes of woe;
Profuse of life, and yet afraid to die,
Guilt in my heart, and horror in my eye,
With ceaseless prayers, the whole artillery given
To win the mercies of offended heaven,
Each hill, made vocal, echoed all around,
While my torn breast knocked bleeding on the ground.
Yet, yet, alas! though all my moments fly
Stained by a tear, and darkened in a sigh;
Though meagre fasts have on my cheek displayed
The dusk of death, and sunk me to a shade,
Spite of myself the still-impoisoning dart
Shoots through my blood, and drinks up all my heart;
My vows and wishes wildly disagree,
And grace itself mistakes my God for thee.
Athwart the glooms, that wrap the midnight sky,
My Eloisa steals upon my eye;
For ever rises in the solar ray,
A phantom brighter than the blaze of day:
Wherever I go, the visionary guest
Pants on my lip, or sinks upon my breast;
Unfolds her sweets, and, throbbing to destroy,
Winds round my heart in luxury of joy;
While loud hosannas shake the shrines around,
I hear her softer accents in the sound;
Her idol-beauties on each altar glare,
And heaven much-injur'd has but half my prayer:
No tears can drive her hence, no pangs control,
For every object brings her to my soul.
Last night, reclining on yon airy steep,
My busy eyes hung brooding over the deep;
The breathless whirlwinds slept in every cave,
And the soft moon-beam danced from wave to wave;
Each former bliss in this bright mirror seen,
With all my glories, dawned upon the scene,
Recalled the dear auspicious hour anew,
When my fond soul to Eloisa flew:
When, with keen speechless ecstasies oppressed,
Thy frantic lover snatched thee to his breast,
Gazed on thy blushes armed with every grace,
And saw the goddess beaming in thy face;
Saw thy wild, trembling, ardent wishes move
Each pulse to rapture, and each glance to love.
But lo! the winds descend, the billows roar,
Foam to the clouds, and burst upon the shore,
Vast peals of thunder over the ocean roll,
The flame-wing'd lightning gleams from pole to pole.
At once the pleasing images withdrew,
And more than horrors crowded on my view;
Thy uncle's form, in all his ire arrayed,
Serenely dreadful stalked along the shade,
Pierced by his sword, I sunk upon the ground,
The spectre ghastly smiled upon the wound;
A group of black infernals round me hung,
And tossed my infamy from tongue to tongue.
Detested wretch! how impotent thy age!
How weak thy malice! and how kind thy rage!
Spite of thyself, inhuman as thou art,
Thy murdering hand has left me all my heart;
Left me each tender, fond affection, warm,
A nerve to tremble, and an eye to charm.
No, cruel, cruel, exquisite in ill,
Thou thought it dull barbarity to kill;
My death had robbed lost vengeance of her toil,
And scarcely warmed a Scythian to a smile:
Sublimer furies taught thy soul to glow
With all their savage mysteries of woe;
Taught thy unfeeling poniard to destroy
The powers of nature, and the source of joy;
To stretch me on the racks of vain desire,
Each passion throbbing, and each wish on fire;
Mad to enjoy, unable to be blessed,
Fiends in my veins, and hell within my breast.
Aid me, fair faith! assist me, grace divine!
Ye martyrs! bless me, and ye saints! refine,
Ye sacred groves! ye heaven-devoted walls!
Where folly sickens, and where virtue calls;
Ye vows! ye altars! from this bosom tear
Voluptuous love, and leave no anguish there:
Oblivion! be thy blackest plume displayed
Over all my griefs, and hide me in the shade;
And thou, too fondly idolized! attend,
While awful reason whispers in the friend;
Friend, did I say? immortals! what a name?
Can dull, cold friendship, own so wild a flame?
No; let thy lover, whose enkindling eye
Shot all his soul between thee and the sky,
Whose warmths bewitched thee, whose unhallowed song
Called thy rapt ear to die upon his tongue,
Now strongly rouse, while heaven his zeal inspires,
Diviner transports, and more holy fires;
Calm all thy passions, all thy peace restore,
And teach that snowy breast to heave no more.
Torn from the world, within dark cells immured,
By angels guarded, and by vows secured,
To all that once awoke thy fondness dead,
And hope, pale sorrow's last sad refuge, fled;
Why will thou weep, and sigh, and melt in vain,
Brood over false joys, and hug the ideal chain?
Say, can thou wish, that, madly wild to fly
From yon bright portal opening in the sky,
Thy Abelard should bid his God adieu,
Pant at thy feet, and taste thy charms anew?
Ye heavens! if, to this tender bosom wooed
Thy mere idea harrows up my blood;
If one faint glimpse of Eloise can move
The fiercest, wildest agonies of love;
What shall I be, when, dazzling as the light,
Thy whole effulgence flows upon my fight?
Look on thyself, consider who thou art,
And learn to be an abbess in thy heart;
See, while devotion's ever-melting strain
Pours the loud organ through the trembling fane,
Yon pious maids each earthly wish disown,
Kiss the dread cross, and crowd upon the throne:
O let thy soul the sacred charge attend,
Their warmths inspirit, and their virtues mend;
Teach every breast from every hymn to steal
The seraph's meekness, and the seraph's zeal;
To rise to rapture, to dissolve away
In dreams of heaven, and lead thyself the way,
Till all the glories of the blessed abode
Blaze on the scene, and every thought is God.
While thus thy exemplary cares prevail,
And make each vestal spotless as her veil,
The eternal spirit over thy cell shall move
In the soft image of the mystic dove;
The long-lost gleams of heavenly comfort bring,
Peace in his smile, and healing on his wing;
At once remove affliction from thy breast,
Melt over thy soul, and hush her pangs to rest.
O that my soul, from love's cursed bondage free,
Could catch the transports that I urge to thee!
O that some angel's more than magic art
Would kindly tear the hermit from his heart!
Extinguish every guilty sense, and leave
No pulse to riot, and no sigh to heave.
Vain fruitless wish! still, still, the vigorous flame
Bursts, like an earthquake, through my shattered frame;
Spite of the joys that truth and virtue prove,
I feel but thee, and breath not but to love;
Repent in vain, scarce wish to be forgiven;
Thy form my idol, and thy charms my heaven.
Yet, yet, my fair! thy nobler efforts try,
Lift me from earth, and give me to the sky;
Let my lost soul thy brighter virtues feel,
Warmed with thy hopes, and winged with all thy zeal.
And when, low-bending at the hallowed shrine,
Thy contrite heart shall Abelard resign;
When pitying heaven, impatient to forgive,
Unbars the gates of light, and bids thee live;
Seize on the auspicious moment ere it flee,
And ask the same immortal boon for me.
Then when these black, terrific scenes are over,
And rebel nature chills the soul no more;
When on thy cheek the expiring roses fade,
And thy last lustres darken in the shade;
When armed with quick varieties of pain,
Or creeping dully slow from vein to vein,
Pale death shall set my kindred spirit free,
And these dead orbs forget to dote on thee;
Some pious friend, whose wild affections glow
Like ours, in sad similitude of woe,
Shall drop one tender, sympathizing tear,
Prepare the garland, and adorn the bier;
Our lifeless relics in one tomb enshrine,
And teach thy genial dust to mix with mine.
Mean while, divinely purged from every stain,
Our active souls shall climb the etherial plain,
To each bright cherub's purity aspire,
Catch all his zeal, and pant with all his fire;
There, where no face the glooms of anguish wears,
No uncle murders, and no passion tears,
Enjoy with heaven eternity of rest,
For ever blessing, and for ever blessed.
THE ORIGIN OF DOUBT.
WHen Jove at first from nothing called forth all,
And various beings filled this pendant ball,
In rank superior to our boasted race,
Subaltern gods, now seldom seen, had place:
Immortal these, but of a doubtful birth,
And all with man joint sojourners on earth.
Sacred, to some bright nymph, was every tree,
To Naiads brooks, to Nereids all the sea.
By Jove in mercy to her care consigned
Reason, bright empress! claimed the human mind.
Not the pure radiance that resides above,
And guides the councils of immortal Jove,
But humbler far, though honored with the name,
And less in power, in essence though the same.
With Man coeval Time began to be,
Formed from an atom of eternity.
Earth's genial power produced a giant-son,
Ignorance his name, a wretch beloved of none:
From these derived, a motley race began,
Not kind with kind commixing, as in man.
Time, in the youth of all that vigorous power
Which still sustains him in his waining hour,
Smit with fair Reason bright in blooming charms,
Clasped the consenting goddess in his arms;
Nor barren joys the fond embrace bestows,
A lovely daughter hence, fair Knowledge, rose;
Favored by both, of Time and Reason bred,
The father nursed her, and the mother fed;
Her charms improving as her stature grew,
Unknown desired, and loved by all who knew:
Truth's radiant hand adorned her form with care,
And Virtue, fondly smiling, called her fair.
Fast, by the foot of proud Parnassus stood,
Remote from vulgar view, a sacred wood,
Here Contemplation keeps her hallowed court,
And young Ideas on the breezes sport,
Celestial truths in holy dreams are taught,
And busy Silence plumes the wings of Thought.
Here Knowledge, sheltered from the noontide ray,
Frequent was wont with chaste delight to stray.
Yet none, not deities, if born below,
The fates exempt from violence and woe;
For here as once she sat in thought profound,
Her mind in heaven, her eyes upon the ground,
And mused on man's free will, Jove's fixed decrees,
On choice, on prescience which all future sees,
On acts impelled by motives strong as fate,
Rewarded, punished, in an endless state,
On chance, necessity, effect and cause,
Great nature's end, and truth's eternal laws,
Lo! the huge form of Ignorance appeared,
Whom known by instinct, she by instinct feared.
With terror winged the virgin flies the place,
The monster follows with unequal pace:
Though, fired with brutal rage, he perseveres,
The widening distance half dispelled her fears;
When now, too much elated with her speed,
Her lifted eyes no more her footsteps heed,
She stumbles, falls, the ravisher is nigh;
It Is vain to plead, impossible to fly:
His idiot form compressed the trembling maid,
And his rude joys profaned the conscious shade;
But from the loathed embrace the pregnant dame
Conceived a son, and Doubt (when born) his name,
Fond of his mother's virtues to partake,
Who shuns and hates him for his father's sake.
SOME LINES OCCASIONED BY A SERIES OF THEOLOGICAL ENQUIRIES.
SHall man, who blindly wanders nature through,
Dark and impervious to his nearest view;
Shall he, to God, his eye presumptuous turn,
And hope from whence, and what he is, to learn!
O! first and last! O! greatest, wisest, best!
To thee be still my prayers and praise addressed,
Nor let me boast that I to ask am free,
How He now is, who never began to be;
How love immense, that formed creation's plan,
Could unexerted lie, till time began;
Or if all nature's works and all their laws
Are coeternal with their parent-cause,
Spontaneous beaming with dependent ray,
As from the sun the light that gives the day;
If all the vast immensity of space
Is filled with beings of an endless race;
Or, if some narrower bounds the work confine,
And why thus bounded love and power divine;
Whence the deep shades of sin and sorrow came,
And evil mingled with the general frame;
Why spread the dark dominions of the grave,
Or why I wish more virtue than I have.
These secret things to none but Thee are known,
Veiled in the darkness that surrounds thy throne.
O! let my soul be still content to know
Thy love, thy wisdom rules the world below.
Secure, my lot the blessing or the rod,
To find a father where I trace the God;
While hope by thee permitted looks on high,
And, as her portion, meditates the sky,
Safe in the path which terminates above,
Secured from wandering, while I walk by love. --
O! brighter still illume the social flame,
Thy shining image! in my filial frame;
By just gradation let my love ascend,
All else my neighbors, thou alone my friend.
TO SIR HUMPHRY MACKWORH, ON THE MINES, LATE OF SIR CARBERY PRICE.
BY THE LATE MR. YALDEN.
WHat spacious veins enrich the British soil,
The various ores, and skilful miner's toil;
How ripening metals lie concealed in earth,
And teeming Nature forms the wondrous birth;
My useful verse, the first, transmits to fame,
In numbers tuned, and no unhallowed flame.
O generous Mackworth! could the muse impart
A labor worthy thy auspicious art;
Like thee succeed in paths untrod before,
And secret treasures of the land explore;
Apollo's self should on the labor smile,
And Delphos quit for Britain's fruitful isle.
Where fair Sabrina flows around the coast,
And aged Dovey in the ocean's lost,
Her lofty brows unconquered Britain rears,
And fenced with rocks impregnable appears;
Which like the well-fix'd bars of nature show,
To guard the treasures she conceals below.
For Earth, distorted with her pregnant womb,
Heaves up to give the forming embryo room:
Hence vast excrescencies of hills arise,
And mountains swell to a portentous size.
Louring and black the rugged coast appears,
The sullen earth a gloomy surface wears;
Yet all beneath, deep as the center, shines
With native wealth, and more than India's mines.
Thus erring Nature her defects supplies,
Indulgent often to what her sons despise:
Often in a rude, unfinished form, we find
The noblest treasure of a generous mind.
Thrice happy land! from whose indulgent womb,
Such unexhausted stores of riches come!
By heaven beloved! formed by auspicious fate,
To be above thy neighboring nations great!
Its golden sands no more shall Tagus boast,
In Dovey's flood his rivall'd empire's lost;
Whose waters now a nobler fund maintain,
To humble France, and check the pride of Spain.
Like Egypt's Nile the bounteous current shows,
Dispersing blessings wheresoe'er it flows;
Whose native treasure's able to repair
The long expenses of our Gallic war.
The ancient Britons are a hardy race,
Averse to luxury and slothful ease;
Their necks beneath a foreign yoke never bowed,
In war unconquered, and of freedom proud;
With minds resolved they lasting toils endure,
Unmixed their language, and their manners pure.
Wisely does nature such an offspring choose,
Brave to defend her wealth, and slow to use.
Where thirst of empire never inflames their veins,
Nor avarice, nor wild ambition reigns:
But, low in mines, they constant toils renew,
And through the earth their branching veins pursue.
As when some navy on the Iberian coast,
Chased by the winds, is in the ocean lost;
To Neptune's realms a new supply it brings,
The strength designed of European kings:
Contending diverse would the wreck regain,
And make reprisals on the grasping main:
Wild in pursuit they are endangered more,
Than when they combated the storms before.
The miner thus through perils digs his way,
Equal to theirs, and deeper than the sea;
Drawing, in pestilential steams, his breath,
Resolved to conquer, though he combats death.
Night's gloomy realms his pointed steel invades,
The courts of Pluto, and infernal shades:
He cuts through mountains, subterraneous lakes,
Plying his work, each nervous stroke he takes
Loosens the earth, and the whole cavern shakes.
Thus, with his brawny arms, the Cyclops stands,
To form Jove's lightning with uplifted hands;
The ponderous hammer with a force descends,
Loud as the thunder which his art intends;
And as he strikes, with each resistless blow
The anvil yields, and Aetna groans below.
Thy famed inventions, Mackworth, most adorn
The miner's art, and make the best return:
Thy speedy sails, and useful engines, show
A genius richer than the mines below.
Thousands of slaves unskilled Peru maintains;
The hands that labor still exhaust the gains:
The winds, thy slaves, their useful succor join,
Convey thy ore, and labor at thy mine;
Instructed by thy arts, a power they find
To vanquish realms, where once they lay confined.
Downward, my muse, direct thy steepy flight,
Where smiling shades, and bounteous realms invite;
I first of British bards invoke thee down,
And first with wealth thy graceful temples crown,
Through dark retreats pursue the winding ore,
Search nature's depths, and view her boundless store;
The secret cause in tuneful measures sing,
How metals first are framed, and whence they spring.
Whether the active sun, with chymic flames,
Through porous earth transmits his genial beams;
With heat impregnating the womb of night,
The offspring shines with its paternal light:
On Britain's isle propitiously he shines,
With joy descends, and labors in her mines.
Or whether, urged by subterraneous flames,
The earth ferments, and flows in liquid streams;
Purged from their dross, the nobler parts refine,
Receive new forms, and with fresh beauties shine.
Thus fluid parts, unknowing how to burn,
With cold congealed, to solid metals turn:
For metals only from devouring flame
Preserve their beauty, and return the same;
Both art and force the well-wrought mass disdains,
And 'midst the fire its native form retains.
Or whether by creation first they sprung,
When yet unpois'd the world's great fabric hung:
Metals the basis of the earth were made,
The bars on which its fixed foundation's laid:
All second causes they disdain to own,
And from the Almighty's Fiat sprung alone.
Nature in specious beds preserves her store,
And keeps unmixed the well-compacted ore;
The spreading root a numerous race maintains
Of branching limbs, and far-extended veins:
Thus, from its watery store, a spring supplies
The lesser streams that round its fountain rise;
Which bounding out in fair meanders play,
And over the meads in different currents stray.
Methinks I see the rounded metal spread,
To be ennobled with our monarch's head:
About the globe the admired coin shall run,
And make the circle of its parent sun.
How are thy realms, triumphant Britain, blessed!
Enriched with more than all the distant west!
Thy sons, no more betrayed with hopes of gain,
Shall tempt the dangers of a faithless main,
Traffic no more abroad for foreign spoil,
Supplied with richer from their native soil.
To Dovey's flood shall numerous traders come,
Employed to fetch the British bullion home,
To pay their tributes to its bounteous shore,
Returning laden with the Cambrian ore.
Her absent fleet Potosi's race shall mourn,
And wish in vain to see our sails return;
Like misers heaping up their useless store,
Starved with their wealth, amidst their riches poor.
Wherever the British banners are displayed,
The suppliant nations shall implore our aid:
Till thus compelled, the greater worlds confess
Themselves obliged, and succored by the less.
How Cambria's mines were to her offspring known,
Thus sacred verse transmits the story down:
Merlin, a bard of the inspired train,
With mystic numbers charmed the British plain;
Beloved by Phoebus, and the tuneful nine,
His song was sacred, and his art divine:
As on Sabrina's fruitful banks he stood,
His wondrous verse restrained the listening flood;
The stream's bright Goddess raised her awful head,
And to her cave the artful shepherd led.
Her swift-descending steps the youth pursues,
And rich in ore the spacious mountain views.
In beds distinct the well-rang'd metals lay,
Dispersing rays, and counterfeiting day.
The silver, shedding beams of orient light,
Struck with too fierce a glare his aching sight;
Like rising flames the ruddy copper showed,
And spread its blushes over the dark abode:
Profuse of rays, and with unrivaled beams,
The liquid silver flowed in restless streams:
Nor India's sparkling gems are half so bright,
Nor waves above, that shine with heavenly light;
When thus the Goddess spoke; harmonious Youth,
Revered for numbers fraught with sacred truth!
Beloved by heaven! attend while I relate
The fixed decree, and dark events of fate.
Concealed these treasures lie in nature's womb,
For future times, and ages yet to come.
When many long revolving years are run,
A hero shall ascend the British throne,
Whose numerous triumphs shall Augusta grace,
In arms renowned, adored for plenteous peace.
Beneath his sway a generous youth shall rise,
With virtues blessed, in happy councils wise;
Rich with the spoils of learning's various store,
Commanding arts, yet still acquiring more.
He, with success, shall enter this abode,
And nature trace in paths before untrod;
The smiling offspring from her womb remove,
And with her entrails glad the realms above.
O youth, reserved by more auspicious fate,
With famed improvements to oblige the state!
By wars impoverished, Albion mourns no more,
Thy well-wrought mines forbid her to be poor:
The earth, thy great exchequer, ready lies,
Which all defect of failing, funds supplies;
Thou shall a nation's pressing wants relieve,
Not war can lavish more than thou can give.
This, Mackworth, fixes thy immortal name,
The muse's darling, and the boast of fame;
No greater virtues on record shall stand,
Than thus with arts to grace, with wealth enrich the land.
A POEM, SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF A DEARLY BELOVED AND ONLY DAUGHTER, WHO DIED
IN THE ELEVENTH YEAR OF HER AGE.
WROTE BY HER MOURNING FATHER.
A Common theme a flattering muse may fire,
To raise our passions, though she sung for hire;
And may our praises or our pity steal,
By feigning transports, which she does not feel;
But when the song from native love proceeds,
And paints the anguish of a heart that bleeds;
The mourning muse exerts superior skill,
And dips in tears the inconsolable quill;
Our bosoms then with rising sorrows glow,
And grief spontaneous will from nature flow.
Ah! what is life, that thoughtless wish of all?
A drop of honey, in a draught of gall;
A half existence, or a waking dream;
A bitter fountain with a muddy stream;
A tale, a shadow, a delusive sound,
That Is lost with mourning, and with sorrow found;
A fading landscape, painted upon clay,
The source of care, and idol of a day;
The sweet deluder of a restless mind,
Which, if 'twas lost, how few would wish to find!
Untimely thus, the infant-budding rose,
By some rude hand is cropped before it blows;
Away the little soul of fragrance flies,
And blooming beauty unregarded dies,
Snatched from the parent stem where once it grew,
Embalmed in odours, and the morning dew.
Can I be dumb, when Love and Nature cries,
And I have lost the darling of my eyes?
Though it is in vain to wish for her return,
Yet all the ties of Nature bid me mourn.
If thou can still the unrelenting sea,
And make the jarring elements agree;
Or cause the tide to cease to ebb and flow;
Or hinder the descent of hail and snow;
If thou can stop the thunder's dreadful roar,
Or cause the billows not to lash the shore;
If thou can lull a hurricane to sleep;
Then may thy words persuade me not to weep.
O! give me leave, but to lament her fall,
As David mourned for Jonathan and Saul;
When on mount Gilboa (O unhappy day!)
They to Philistia fell a shameful prey:
Or (if it may with innocence be done)
As he lamented Absalom his son;
When in the anguish of his soul he cried,
" Would God, my son, I in thy place had died!"
Then lend your aid (if any such there be,
That loved a child, or mourn for one like me)
Let your kind sighs with me in concert join,
And add your sympathizing tears to mine,
That may in streams to swelling rivers flow,
Until those rivers to a deluge grow.
But if there is none commiserates my case,
And in no breast compassion finds a place,
Let not your censures add to my concern,
Nor slight the cause that moves me thus to mourn.
If you are void of trouble, free from pain,
Add not to mine, nor wonder I complain.
I know the stroke is from the hand divine,
To whom I may complain; though not repine.
Though I deplore my loss, and wish it less,
Yet I will kiss the rod, and acquiesce;
A Savior's blood shall supersede my fears,
And love paternal justify my tears.
When Death at first besieged this little fort,
The feeble outworks were the tyrant's sport;
A fever made the first attack in form,
And then convulsions took it soon by storm.
Succors without were weak, like those within,
The guards were sickly, and the walls were thin;
In bad repair the gates and citadel,
And then no wonder that so soon it fell;
Death's icy hands the lovely fabric spoiled;
He got a victim, but I lost my child. --
Five mournful days with trembling hand and heart,
I played the whole artillery of art;
Five nights I past in sorrow, like the day,
And almost mourned my own sad life away;
But when the most, that art could do, was tried,
Her lease of life was cancelled, and she died: --
" She died," -- the conscious, whispering winds reply,
And I (unhappy father!) saw her die!
I saw her die! -- Can I the deed forgive?
How can I bear to say I did -- and live!
Though long her reason suffered an eclipse,
No sinful word proceeded from her lips;
Though sore oppressed with agonizing pain,
She uttered nothing indiscreet, or vain;
Which gives me hopes her soul was washed from sin,
And grace abounding was at work within.
Whilst nature yet maintained a doubtful strife,
And death sat brooding on the verge of life:
Even then -- when all the hopes of life were fled,
I and the angels waiting round her bed,
(They to conduct her to the realms of day,
And I, to weep, to sigh, to mourn, to pray,)
I kissed her lips, I wiped her dying face,
And took the father's and the nurse's place;
With bleeding heart I heard her dying groans,
And met with equal agony, her moans:
Each sigh was as a dagger in my heart,
We knew we must, but oh! were loath to part!
I mourned, I wept, I gave a loose to grief,
And had recourse to all things for relief;
But all in vain -- the last effort I make,
I gave -- but oh! she had not strength to take:
Her fluttering pulse with intermission played,
And then her heart its palpitation stayed;
And thus through all the forms of death she past;
'Till with a sigh she gently breathed her last.
But who can paint the horror, or the power
Of nature's conflict in so dark an hour?
The wound was such, that time can never heal,
No balm can cure it, and no art conceal.
May that sad day be banished from the year,
Or clothed in sable, if it must appear!
Or, may the sun withdraw his beams at noon,
And solid darkness veil the stars and moon!
May all the sands be stagnant in the glass,
And (as that hour returns) refuse to pass!
All clocks be dumb, and time forget to fly,
And may all nature be as sad as I!
Let mourning in its blackest dress appear!
And she be never named, without a tear!
Oh! where are now those dear obedient hands,
So pleased to execute my whole commands?
Where are those feet, so early taught to run?
As lightning swift, unwearied as the sun?
Where now those arms, that with such passion strove
To clasp my neck, and stifle me with love?
Where now those lips, where mine were fond to dwell,
Or where that breath, that ravished with the smell?
Where is that tongue, whose prattle charmed mine ears?
Where fled the hopes of my declining years?
Where is that face, so pleasant when she smiled?
Or where is the woman acting in the child?
Where those dear eyes, that with such sweetness shone?
Or rather, where are all my comforts gone?
Where is that heart, so near to truth allied,
That never disobeyed -- but when she died?
Where is that breast, where virtue once did grow,
As roses sweet, and white as falling snow?
They Are buried all in the voracious grave,
Where kings are levelled with the meanest slave.
The wise and great, when there they make their bed,
Are equaled with the wretch that begs his bread;
But there the wicked can no more oppress,
And there the weary find a calm recess;
And this does all my expectations crown,
That I to her shall there go quickly down.
Till then, this hope shall mitigate my woe,
And dry those tears that now profusely flow,
That when by heaven's command I quit the stage,
Bowed down by time, and quite fatigued with age;
My bones shall rest in quiet by her side,
Like a fond bridegroom sleeping by his bride;
'Till the last day shall both to life restore,
When Death shall die, and Time shall be no more.
This distant view does equal pleasure give,
As now my soul is conscious that I live.
And thou that once wast my delight and pride,
In whom I hoped to have a nurse and guide,
When feeble age should bow my hoary head,
And pain or sickness fix me to my bed,
If I may, guiltless, call upon thy name,
And ask a boon, without incurring blame:
Though thou art happy now amongst the blessed,
Indulge thy mourning father's last request.
When some kind angel from this world below,
Shall bring the news (for sure the angels know)
And shall to thee and kindred spirits tell,
That mine has orders to forsake her shell;
And be transplanted to the realms of light,
Where faith and hope are swallowed up in sight,
Do thou with heavenly raptures meet my ghost,
On the utmost limits of that happy coast;
And thence attend me to the throne of grace,
To view my Savior's reconciled face,
And taste of joys, ineffable and new;
Till then, my little saint, adieu, adieu.
ON THE PHYSICAL CAUSE OF THE DEATH OF KING GEORGE THE SECOND.
Through grief to death men often have stole,
And baffled all the physic art;
Dissection seldom found the hole,
Or showed before a broken heart.
That this of royal George the case
With men can never gain belief,
More like the opposite it was,
Since joy can kill as well as grief.
With length of years and glory crowned,
As blithe he viewed his valiant bands,
Death, dealing secretly the wound,
From future conquests stopped his hands.
" Enough of years, enough of fame,
" While thou did wield the conquering sword,"
Cries Death, "Leave something to proclaim
" The worth and praise of George the third.
" His be the glorious task to end,
" And bid war's cruel horrors cease,
" The freedom of mankind defend,
" And bless a jarring world with peace."
J.T.

CORYDON. A PASTORAL.
TO THE MEMORY OF WILLIAM SHENSTONE, ESQUIRE.
BY J. CUNNINGHAM.
COme, shepherds, we'll follow the hearse.
And see our loved Corydon laid;
Though sorrow may blemish the verse,
Yet let the sad tribute be paid.
They called him the pride of the plain:
In sooth he was gentle and kind;
He marked in his elegant strain
The graces that glowed in his mind.
On purpose he planted yon trees,
That birds in the covert might dwell:
He cultured his thyme for the bees;
But never once rifled their cell.
Ye lambkins that played at his feet,
Go bleat -- and your master bemoan:
His music was artless and sweet,
His manners as mild as your own.
No verdure shall cover the vale,
No bloom on the blossoms appear,
The sweets of the forest shall fail,
And winter encompass the year;
No birds in our hedges shall sing,
(Our hedges so vocal before!)
Since he that should welcome the spring,
Can greet the gay season no more.
His Phillis was proud of his praise,
And poets came round in a throng;
They listened -- and envied his lays;
But which of them equaled the song?
Ye shepherds, henceforward be mute,
For lost is the pastoral strain:
So give me my Corydon's flute,
And thus -- let me break it in twain!
MORNING.
BY THE SAME.
IN the barn the tenant cock,
Close to Partlet perched on high,
Briskly crows, (the shepherd's clock)
And proclaims the morning nigh.
Swiftly from the mountain's brow,
Shadows, nursed by night, retire;
And the peeping sunbeam now
Paints with gold the village-spire.
Now the pine-tree's waving top
Gently greets the morning gale;
And the new-wak'd kidlings crop
Daisies round the dewy vale.
Philomel forsakes the thorn,
Plaintive where she prates at night;
And the lark, to greet the morn,
Soars beyond the shepherd's sight.
From the clay-built cottage-ridge,
See the chattering swallow spring!
Darting through the one-arch'd bridge,
Quick she dips her dappled wing.
Lo, the busy bees employed!
Restless till their task be done!
Now from sweet to sweet, uncloy'd,
Sipping dew before the sun.
Trickling through the crevic'd rock,
See the silver stream distill!
Sweet refreshment for the flock,
When it is sun-drove from the hill!
Ploughmen, for the promised corn
Ripening over the banks of Tweed,
Anxious hear the huntsman's horn,
Softened by the shepherd's reed.
Sweet, oh sweet, the warbling throng,
On the white emblossom'd spray!
All is music, mirth, and song,
At the jocund dawn of day.
NOON.
BY THE SAME.
FErvid now the sunbeam glows,
Drinking deep the morning gem:
Not a dew-drop's left the rose,
To refresh her parent stem.
By the brook the shepherd dines,
From the fierce meridian heat
Sheltered by the branching pines,
Pendent over his grassy seat.
See, the flocks forsake the glade,
Where uncheck'd the sunbeams fall,
Sure to find a pleasing shade,
By the ivy'd abbey wall.
Echo, in her airy round
Over the river, rock, and hill,
Cannot catch a single sound,
Save the clack of yonder mill.
Cattle court the breezes bland,
Where the streamlet wanders cool;
Or with languid silence stand
Midway in the marshy pool.
But from mountain, dell, or stream,
Not a fluttering zephyr springs;
Fearful left the piercing beam
Scorch its soft, its silken wings.
Not a leaf has leave to stir;
Nature's lulled, serene and still;
Quiet even the shepherd's cur,
Sleeping on the heath-clad hill.
Languid is the landscape round,
Till the fresh descending shower
Kindly cools the thirsty ground,
And revives each fainting flower.
Now the hill, the hedge, is green,
Now the warbler's throat's in tune;
Blithsome is the vernal scene,
Brightened by the beams of noon.
EVENING.
BY THE SAME.
AS the plodding ploughman goes
Homeward, (to the hamlet bound)
Giant-like his shadow grows,
Lengthened over the level ground.
Over the mead the bullock strays
Free -- the furrowed task is done;
And the village windows blaze,
Burnished by the setting sun.
Mark him, from behind the hill,
Strike the purple-painted sky;
Can the pencil's mimic skill
Copy the refulgent dye?
Where the rising forest spreads
Round the time-decaying dome,
To their high-built airy beds
See the rooks returning home!
As the lark, with varied tune,
Carrols to the evening, loud,
Mark the mild resplendent moon
Breaking through a parted cloud!
Now the hermit howlet peeps
From the barn, or twisted brake,
And the curling vapor creeps
Over the lilly-border'd lake:
As the trout, in speckled pride,
Playful, from its bosom springs,
To the banks a ruffled tide
Verges in successive rings.
Tripping through the silken grass,
Over the path-divided dale,
See, the rose-complexion'd lass
With the well-pois'd milking-pail!
Linnets with unnumber'd notes,
And the cuckoo bird with two,
Tuning sweet their mellow throats,
Bid the setting sun adieu.
ON MAY.
WROTE IN APRIL MDCCLXI.
BY THE SAME.
THE virgin, when softened by May,
Attends to the villager's vows;
The birds sweetly bill on the spray,
And poplars embrace with their boughs.
On Ida bright Venus may reign,
Adored for her beauty above;
We shepherds, that live on the plain,
Hail May as the mother of love.
From the west, as it wantonly blows,
Fond zephyr caresses the pine;
The be steals a kiss from the rose,
And willows and woodbines entwine:
The pinks by the rivulet's side,
That border the vernal alcove,
Bend downwards to kiss the soft tide,
For May is the mother of love.
May tinges the butterfly's wing;
He flutters in bridal array:
If the larks and the linnets now sing,
Their music is taught them by May,
The stock-dove, recluse with her mate,
Conceals her fond bliss in the grove;
And murmuring seems to repeat,
That May is the mother of love.
The goddess will visit you soon;
Ye virgins, be sportive and gay;
Get your pipes, oh ye shepherds, in tune,
For music must welcome the May.
Would Damon have Phillis prove kind,
And all his keen anguish remove,
Let him tell a soft tale, and he will find,
That May is the mother of love.
CONTRASTE TO MRS. CARTER'S ODE TO WISDOM.
NOW see my goddess, earthly born,
With smiling looks, and sparkling eyes,
And with a bloom that shames the morn
New risen in the eastern skies!
Furnished from nature's boundless store,
A nymph of pleasure's laughing train,
Stranger to all the wise explore,
She proves all far-sought knowledge vain.
Untaught as Venus, when she found
Herself first floating on the sea,
And laughing begged the Tritons round
For shame to look some other way:
And unaccomplish'd all as Eve
In the first morning of her life,
When Adam blushed, and asked her leave
To take her hand, and call her Wife.
Yet there is something in her face,
Though she is unread in Plato's lore,
Might bring even Plato to disgrace,
For leaving precepts taught before:
And there is magic in her eye,
Though she is unskilled to conjure down
The pale moon from the affrighted sky,
Would draw Endymion from the moon:
And there are words that she can speak,
Most easy to be understood,
More sweet than all the heathen Greek
By Helen talked, when Paris wooed:
And she has raptures in her power,
More worth than all the flattering claim
Of learning's unsubstantial dower,
In present praise, or future fame.
Let me but kiss her soft warm hand,
And let me whisper in her ear
What Knowledge would not understand,
And Wisdom would disdain to hear:
And let her listen to my tale,
And let one smiling blush arise,
Best omen that my vows prevail!
I Will scorn the scorn of all the wise.
ON THE ROYAL NUPTIALS.
BY JOSEPH SPENCE, M.A. REGIUS-PROFESSOR OF MODERN HISTORY.
AT length the gallant navy from afar
Rises in prospect, with expanded wings
Improving the kind gale, so long delayed;
And wins in pompous pride her easy way
To Albion's shore, charged with the precious freight
Of England's dearest hopes, and George's love.
Not so desired, nor with such treasure fraught,
Arrives the wealthy convoy, from the coast
Of Ceylon or Golconda; laden deep
With spicy drugs, barbaric gems, and gold.
Nor he who circled in his daring course
The globe entire, old Ocean's utmost round,
Brought back so rich a prize, though with the spoils
Of proud Iberia loaded he returned;
Or captive in his halsers when he dragged
The vanquished Gallic fleets; as now he brings,
More welcome, from Germania's friendly shore.
Hail kindred regions, dear parental soil,
Saxonian plains! where deep Visurgis flows,
Where Leina's doubly-honour'd waters glide,
Where mighty Albis draws his humid train!
England to you with grateful homage pays
Filial obeisance meet: to you she owes
Her name, her tribes, her generous race; to you
Her first, her latest blessings. Forth from you
Issued our sires, old Woden's highborn sons;
Great Woden deemed a god, with uncouth rites
By his rude offspring worshipped: they their course
Adventurous steered to these alluring shores.
First Hengist, valiant chief; nor yet less wise
Than valiant: he the Cantian would obtained,
His new domain; yielded by social league,
Or won by fair Rowena's conquering charms.
Next Ella, Cerdic, and the intrepid race
Of Anglians from Eydora's northern stream,
Poured in their numerous hosts: nor British prowess,
Nor Merlin's spells, nor Arthur's puissant sword,
Hight Caliburn, famed in romantic tale,
Could long withstand the impetuous onset bold
Of our great sires in battle. Soon they raised
On Britain's ruins seven imperial thrones;
Seven thrones conjoined at length in Cerdic's race:
From whose high source the stream of regal blood,
Through the long line of English monarchs, flows
Down to the illustrious house of Lunenbourg,
From ancient Brunswic named, (Brunswic, the seat
Primeval of Saxonian chieftains old)
To George, great heir of Anglo-Saxon kings.
And Thou, Saxonia's brightest ornament
Erewhile, now England's boast, and highest pride,
Welcome to these congenial shores; to this
Ambiguous land, another Saxony.
See thine own people, thy compatriot tribes,
With heartfelt joy, and zealous loud acclaim,
Thy blessed arrival hail. Though severed long
From their original soil, on foreign stock
Though grafted, not degenerate: still within
Works the wild vigor of the parent root.
Rough, hardy, brave; by force intractable,
Or lawless rule; patient of equal sway;
With civil freedom tempering regal power.
Be this thy better country; nor regret
Thy natal plains, though dear: here thou shall find
What largely shall o'erpay thy loss. Lo! here
Thy Parent, Brother, Friend, all charities
Comprised in one, thy consort, with fond wish,
Expects thee; sceptered George, with every grace
Adorned; yet more renowned for virtue's praise,
Faith, honor, in green years wisdom mature,
True majesty with awful goodness crowned.
He shall assuage thy grief: his thoughtful breast,
Studious of England's glory and Europe's weal,
Thou in return shall sooth with tender smiles,
Endearing blandishment, and equal love.
Nor shall, heaven's gift, fruit of the genial bed
Be wanting; pledge of public happiness
Secure; dear source of long domestic joys.
Here shall thou reign, a second Caroline;
Diffusing from the throne a milder ray,
Soft beauty's unexpressive influence sweet.
Prompt to relieve the oppressed; to wipe away
The widow's tears; to call forth modest worth;
To cherish drooping virtue: patroness
Of science and of arts; friend to the muse,
Of every grateful muse the favorite theme.
Hail, sovereign lady, dearest dread! accept
Even now this homage of the officious muse,
That on the verge extreme of Albion's cliff
With gratulation thy first steps prevents,
Though mean, yet ardent; and salutes thine ear
With kindred accents in Teutonic lays.
EPISTLE TO A LADY.
BY THE REV. MR. P.
OH, born to bless some youth unknown,
F --, thy beauties all will own;
Yet all who know you will confess
Your beauty than your merit less.
One who deserves you would you choose?
Accept this offering of my muse:
She paints -- ah, hardly paints from life, --
Him, who alone should call you wife,
That dear, dear name in which are joined
All that can charm or sooth the mind.
Let me, my fair, direct your choice,
For that alone is my advice.
Rules for behavior I Will not give,
Those from an abler hand receive,
For them to Lyttleton attend,
He, though a poet, is a friend,
And trust me, I, my gentle dame,
Although no poet, am the same.
Would you be happy? -- Yes, you would:
Then let the favored youth be good,
Else every tender thought remove,
Where there is no virtue, far be love,
But where bright glows that heavenly flame,
Virtue and love become the same.
Scorning the pert, the dull, the vain,
The wretch who thirsts for sordid gain,
Let fair sincerity and truth
Adorn thine only-favour'd youth,
To these humility be joined,
That fairest virtue of the mind.
Mark well his looks: let them impart
The genuine fondness of the heart,
That ever in the looks appears
A fondness formed of hopes and fears.
Mark his behavior: love inspires
Respectful awe amidst its fires,
His trembling hand to yours when joined,
Speaks the soft awe that fills his mind,
His words, his actions should proclaim
A pure, a true, and real flame.
Be sure let cheerfulness divine
Inspire the heart that is made for thine,
For that, when joined with manly sense,
Pleasures perpetual will dispense.
These virtues let us now unite
To place them in the fairest light,
And see how lovely they will appear: --
He must be good, must be sincere,
Be true, be humble, and his love
Be pure as virtue may approve,
Respectful fondness must he show,
And round him cheerfulness must throw
Her pleasing light, her beams divine,
To make his virtues brighter shine.
Thus have I drawn the ideal man
That may deserve deserving * * *.
And know you none whom this is like?
None where resemblance strong may strike?
Or is there this distinguished one? --
Be he or not as yet unknown
Have him, my lovely maid, or none.
On foreign or on English ground
If this deserving youth be found,
In whom these merits all combine,
Bring him to me to make him thine:
I Will exercise my magic powers,
And date from thence your happiest hours.
But if, rejecting my advice,
As fancy's form, and over-nice,
To one unlike you will give your charms,
And take the unworthy to your arms,
Trust me, my office I Will decline;
The hateful deed shall never be mine,
Merit, with all its charms, to give
Where there is no merit to receive.
ON THE DEATH OF A YOUNG LADY.
AET. XIX. WRITTEN MDCCLIX.
BY THE SAME.
DAughter of God, Religion, lend thine aid,
Descend, descend, all-powerful as thou art,
From thy bright throne above, celestial maid,
Pour thy soft balm upon the sorrowing heart.
Say, sweet restorer, who could ever know
A wound like that for which our sorrows pour?
Did ever mourners feel sincerer woe?
Or deeper grief thy sovereign help implore?
Glowed not her heart with pure devotion warm?
There were pure faith and holy love impressed;
Was she not good as hope itself could form?
Spoke not her open looks a spotless breast?
She was -- oh come, Religion, heavenly fair!
Loose these dire bonds that fix us to the earth;
Not what she was, but what she is, declare,
And paint the glories of her second birth.
Paint her ascending to the etherial height,
Where hymning saints her blessed arrival greet,
Paint her pure spirit clad in robes of light,
With trembling joy before the mercy-seat.
Exhaustless splendour beams around the throne,
While from the midst God's awful voice is heard --
" Servant of God, well done: thy faith is known,
" Eternal glories be the great reward."
Oh words of rapture! which seraphic lyres
Harmonious catch, and in their strains return;
The stranger spirit glows with heavenly fires,
And boundless joys within her bosom burn;
A rose-lip'd angel, Purity divine,
(Bright is her form, and white her flowing vest,
Around her beams celestial ceaseless shine,
And those on whom she smiles are ever blessed:)
Leads the young seraph to a glorious throne,
Presents a golden harp and starry wreath;
There ever shall she dwell in bliss unknown,
There ever the Almighty's praises breathe.
THE CIT'S COUNTRY BOX.
THE wealthy cit, grown old in trade,
Now wishes for the rural shade;
And buckles to his one-horse chair
Old Dobbin, or the foundered mare;
While wedged in closely by his side
Sits madam, his unwieldy bride,
With Jacky on a stool before 'em;
And out they jog in due decorum.
Scarce past the turnpike half a mile,
How all the country seems to smile!
And as they slowly jog together,
The cit commends the road and weather;
While madam doats upon the trees,
And longs for every house she sees;
Admires its views, its situation,
And thus she opens her oration.
" What signify the loads of wealth,
" Without that richest jewel health?
" Excuse the fondness of a wife,
" Who doats upon your precious life:
" Such ceaseless toil, such constant care
" Is more than human strength can bear.
" One may observe it in your face --
" Indeed, my dear, you break apace:
" And nothing can your health repair,
" But exercise, and country air.
" Sir Traffic has a house, you know,
" About a mile from Cheney Row:
" He Is a good man, indeed, it is true,
" But not so warm, my dear, as you:
" And folks are always apt to sneer --
" One would not be outdone, my dear."
Sir Traffick's name so well applied,
Awaked his brother merchant's pride;
And Thrifty, who had all his life
Paid utmost deference to his wife,
Confessed, her arguments had reason;
And by the approaching summer season
Draws a few hundreds from the stocks,
And purchases his country box.
Some three or four miles out of town,
(An hour completely brings you down,)
He fixes on his choice abode,
Not half a furlong from the road:
And so convenient does it lay,
The stages pass it every day:
And then so snug, so mighty pretty,
To have a house so near the city:
Take but your places at the Boar,
You're set down at the very door.
Well then, suppose 'em fixed at last,
White-washing, painting, scrubbing past;
Hugging themselves in ease and clover,
With all the fuss of moving over:
Lo! a new heap of whims are bred,
And wanton in my lady's head.
" Well, to be sure, it must be owned
" It is a charming spot of ground:
" So sweet a distance for a ride;
" And all about so countrified!
" 'Twould come to but a trifling price
" To make it quite a paradise.
" I cannot bear those nasty rails,
" Those ugly, broken, moldy pales:
" Suppose, my dear, instead of these,
" We build a railing all Chinese.
" Although one hates to be exposed,
" It Is dismal to be thus enclosed.
" Rural retirement, pray, do you term it?
" Lard, it is living like a hermit.
" One hardly any object sees --
" I wish you would fell those odious trees;
" 'Twould make a much more cheerful scene --
" I Am tired with everlasting green.
" Objects continual passing by
" Were something to amuse the eye:
" But to be pent within the walls,
" One might as well be at St. Paul's.
" Our house beholders would adore,
" Was there a level lawn before;
" Nothing its views to incommode,
" But quite laid open to the road;
" While every traveller in amaze
" Should on our little mansion gaze,
" And, pointing to the choice retreat,
" Cry, that is Sir Thrifty's country-seat."
No doubt her arguments prevail,
For madam's taste can never fail.
Blessed age! when all men may procure
The title of a connoisseur;
When the noble and ignoble herd
Are governed by a single word;
Though, like the royal German dames,
It bears an hundred christian names:
As Genius, Fancy, Judgment, Gout,
Whim, Caprice, Je ne scai quoi, Virtu:
Which appellations all describe
Taste, and the modern tasteful tribe.
Now bricklayers, carpenters, and joiners,
With Chinese artists and designers,
Produce their schemes of alteration
To work this wondrous reformation.
The useful dome, which secret stood
Embosom'd in the yew-trees wood,
The traveller with amazement sees
Changed to a temple tout Chinese,
With many a bell and tawdry rag-on,
And crested with a sprawling dragon.
A wooden arch is bent astride
A ditch of water four feet wide,
With angles, curves, and zigzag lines
From Halfpenny's exact designs.
In front a level lawn is seen,
Without a shrub upon the green;
Where taste would want its first great law,
But for the skulking sly Ha-Ha;
By whose miraculous assistance
You gain a prospect two fields distance.
And now from Hyde-park Corner come
The gods of Athens and of Rome:
Here squabby Cupids take their places
With Venus and the clumsy Graces;
Apollo there, with aim so clever,
Stretches his leaden bow for ever;
And there, without the power to fly,
Stands, fixed a tip-toe, Mercury.
The villa thus completely graced,
All own, that Thrifty has a taste:
And madam's female friends and cousins,
With common-council-men, by dozens,
Flock every Sunday to the seat,
To stare about them, and to eat.
THE FALL OF CHLOE'S JORDAN.
BY THE LATE MR. JOHN PHILIPS, AUTHOR OF CIDER, A POEM.
OF wasteful havoc and destructive fate
I sing the tragic scene, a mournful tale;
Yet call no slaughtering hero to my aid
To strew my bloodless verse with mangled foes;
A torrent spilt, but not of human gore,
Ruin deformed, but not of man erect.
O heaven-born muse (for muse I must invoke,
Or mistress fair, for fashion or for need)
Deign to describe the memorable fall
Of Chloe's Jordan; so by mortals named
The vessel was, however uncouth the sound,
But veiled by modest maids in gentler terms:
Like Rome, the mistress of the world, it fell,
From its own greatness only not secure.
Say first, what colors stained its vaulted sides,
Lest harmless bards mistake the important truth,
And speak as fancy leads, or rhyme directs;
And he that terms it white as silver swans,
And spotless innocence, and new-fallen snow
That spreads its plumes on Atlas bleaky head,
Shall suffer blemish in the wrong compare.
Another humorous sports and jeers its hue
Earthly and coarse, of substance indigest:
How often are men, by devious error led
To wander various, wide alike from truth!
A sickly-pale languish'd on the inner round,
Such as betrays the want of lovesick maids,
Foe to the rosy cheek, and coral lip,
But flies the lusty touch of warmer man,
And beauty re-assumes its native seat.
Smooth were its sides, but from the bottom rose
A manly head embossed, for hero meant,
No question, famed for arms and antique stem.
Such honors the well-meaning vulgar pay
To fame of gallant men, and waste their skill
On high-hung signs, and earth of homely hue.
What blushes did the virile image cost
The harmless maid, fearful lest so employed,
The amorous stone should soften into life:
As erst Pygmalion's marble mistress changed
Her Parian substance by less motive swayed.
Without, the cerulous dye bestrew'd the urn,
And on the swelling surface, Flora's pride,
The lilly, and the gaudy tulip smiled,
Fed with the briny nectar it contained.
One handle held the vessel, arched and smooth,
But for its weighty office far unfit:
Here weakness lurked in comely form disguised,
Hence the sad source and root of all our woe:
Imprudent man too often trusts his fate
To one smooth friend, who shrinks when nearly tried.
The unsuspecting fair-one never failed
At morn and eve to dew its spacious womb,
At morn her first, at eve her latest act:
How often has it flowed with maiden streams
Famed for rare virtues, and but seldom found!
'Twas with this magic stream Diana spread
The branchy horns on bold Actaeon's brow:
The well e'er-since a secret power retains
On human foreheads antlers to convey.
'Twas now the heavy period fixed by fate
Hastened apace with evil mischief fraught.
It Is true, no comet streamed terrific blaze,
Nor thunder-crack sinistrous roared aloud;
Not but a crazy sound gave certain proof
Of hidden crack, foreboding wider wounds,
Yet escaped suspicion: foresight ever fails
When unavoided ruin is decreed.
The feeble sun, arrayed with lifeless flames,
Inn'd at the bearded Goat, and drove his car
Extinguished heavy half the tour of heaven,
And winter, keen of breath, blew shivering cold
Around the globe, and hid the voluble streams:
Some to the chimney's warm protection fly,
And fright the sooty earth with sooty tale
Of sprite nocturnal, or adventurous knight:
Some bid defiance to the inclement air,
Fired with the juicy flame of old Falern.
Amidst a jovial crew fair Chloe quaff'd
With loud carouse, till sated nature craved
Timely relax, distent with liquid pain.
Alone, she lifts the Jordan to her aid,
And strait a hideous din 'gan roar aloud,
Wave dashed on wave, deluge on deluge rolled,
And curled the circling eddy to the brim.
Whole cataracts at once discharged fell down
With violent gush, and drove the deep cascade:
Till weary of its load the laboring urn
Flew from its hold, a horrid burst ensues,
And mangled limbs bestrew the bruised floor.
Not louder roars the three-edg'd bolt of heaven
When formed by Vulcan, or when thrown by Jove.
Forth from the hideous shreds a tepid sea
Rolls angry foam, and smokes along the plain.
Part of the stream, with slow and silent pace,
Sunk unobserved in narrow crannies lost:
Part murmurs crowding at the portal wide
Which opes the mazy way, that winding leads
To the ancient race of earth: protected mice,
The race exiguous, uninur'd to wet,
Their mansions quit, and other countries seek.
Thus fell the Jordan, that had long withstood,
Firm and resolved, the shock of mighty waves,
Which lost their strength, and dashed her shores in vain.
Till, at the approach of one impetuous tide,
Fate took the occasion, and confirmed its doom.
So the famed Edistone near Plymouth Fort
(Sure mark to wandering ships and lost at night)
Contemned the billows tumbling round its sides,
And mocked their sports, till on a fatal night
The wind blew loud, the enraged ocean roared,
And plunged the Pharos in the vast abyss.
DR. CONYERS TO DR. EVANS BURSAR, ON CUTTING DOWN SOME FINE COLLEGE-TREES.
INdulgent Nature to each kind bestows
A secret instinct to discern its foes;
The timorous goose avoids the ravenous fox,
Lambs fly from wolves, and pilots shun the rocks;
The rogue a gibbet, as his fate, foresees,
And bears the like antipathy to trees.
THE WANDERING BEAUTY.
BY THE LATE MR. JOHN HUGHES.
THE graces and the wandering loves
Are fled to distant plains,
To chase the fawns, or in deep groves
To wound admiring swains.
With their bright mistress there they stray,
Who turns her careless eyes
From daily triumphs; yet each day
Beholds new triumphs in her way,
And conquers while she flies.
But see! implored by moving prayers,
To change the lover's pain,
Venus her harnessed doves prepares,
And brings the fair again.
Proud mortals, who this maid pursue,
Think you she will ever resign?
Cease, fools, your wishes to renew,
Till she grows flesh and blood like you,
Or you like her divine.
HYMN ON THE APPROACH OF MAY.
QUeen of the laughing flower! whose lovely waist
Fair Spring entwines with her brocaded zone,
Arrayed most gorgeous in thy rainbow vest,
With joy descend from thy celestial throne.
Bright, on the skirt of yon cerulean cloud,
In splendid majesty I see her sail,
With lavish hand she fills the lap of earth,
And with her breath perfumes the fanning gale.
Now Flora puts her greenest mantle on,
And Phoebus darts a more enlightening beam,
Rearing his stately neck, the silver swan
Floats lighter on the warm redundant stream.
The stream-redundant, fed by gushing springs,
Curls to the pressure of the tepid breeze:
Feeling the force of renovated life,
Nod the green summits of the neighboring trees.
Sits on its thorn the crimson-blushing rose
And smiles, oh May! to meet thy brilliant eye;
Rude grows the lilly, and unfolds its breast,
White as the fleece, that decks the vernal sky.
The swallow twitters on the chimney top;
The merry martin builds her plaited nest;
And, closed within the covert of the hedge,
The loud thrush swells his many-spotted breast.
Perched on yon slender pile of bavin-wood,
Too proud to mingle with the fowl below,
Expands the peacock his eye-glittering tail,
Still brighter, as he waves it to and fro.
In this soft season Cupid strings his bow,
And aims his fatal arrows at the heart:
Stung to the quick, the virgin feels the wound,
Yet nourishes the new, the pleasing smart.
In yonder mead the lusty rustic aids
The bonny milkmaid with her cleanly pail,
And ever and anon he charms her air
With "lovely Bett," or "Nanny of the Vale."
In nature's artless language he reveals,
True to the blushing maid, his genuine flame:
A lovelier hue adorns her comely face:
How far more different is the blush of shame!
The nymph, approving of his love sincere,
Consents the nuptial union shall be tied:
The rites performed, what ecstasies ensue!
He the gay bridegroom, she the happy bride.
Peace, guardian Peace, sits smiling at their door,
Wherever they walk, Contentment marks the way:
Constant Good Humor clothes their honest minds,
And every morning of their life is May.
ODE TO HEALTH.
DAughter of Exercise! at whose command
Mirth spreads a smile upon the cheek of Care:
At whose re-kindling breath
Sickness looks up, and lives:
Say! where (for much thy haunts I long to woo)
Shall I thy joy-infusing presence hail,
Amidst what sylvan scenes,
Or unfrequented plains?
Say! when the roseate finger of the morn
Points out the glories of her short-lived reign,
Shall I thy steps pursue,
Climbing the mountain's side,
From whose tall brow, in eminence superb,
Fair Nature views her fruitful vales below,
While Phoebus darts around
His oriental eye?
Or shall I trace thy vestige over the heath,
Where, in derision of the florist's aid,
Shoots up, untaught by art,
The voluntary flower?
For well, it is known, that often upon the heath
In contemplation, devious art thou seen,
Or panting up the steep
Of un-imprinted hill.
Or, when cool evening, in her floating vest,
Sweeps over the lawns, diffusing shadowy pomp,
And bids the sun recline
On Amphitrite's-breast,
I will attend thee to the solemn grove,
Where love stands registered on every tree,
Where the rook rocks his young,
And Echo learns to caw.
Or, standing on the margent of the stream,
I will survey thee on the passive wave,
Then press the liquid bed,
To meet thy naiad kiss.
O tell me, nymph, thy chosen residence,
Be it on mountain top, or forest wild,
And I will consecrate
A temple to thee there.
A SONG FOR THE PARK AT HIGH MALL.
BY A LADY.
YE foplings, and prigs, and ye wou'd-be-smart things,
Who move in wide commerce's round,
Pray tell me from whence this absurdity springs,
All orders of rank to confound.
What means the bag-wig, and the soldier-like air,
On the tradesman obsequious and meek?
Sure sabbaths were meant for retirement and prayer
To amend the past faults of the week.
The youth, to whom battles and dangers belong,
May call a fierce look to his aid;
Lace, bluster, and oaths, and a sword an ell long,
Are samples he gives of his trade;
But you on whom London indulgently smiles,
And whom counters should guard from all ills,
Should slily invade with humility's wiles,
Lest splendour deter us from bills.
Old Gresham, whose statue adorns the Exchange,
Displays the true cit to our view,
And silently frowns on a conduct so strange,
So remote from your interests and you;
Then learn from his gesture grave, decent, and plain,
To copy fair Prudence's rules,
For Frugality's garb will conceal your vast gain,
And secure you the plunder of fools.
The ease of a court, and the air of a camp,
Are graces no cit can procure:
Vide Moliere's Gentleman Citizen.
Mons. Jourdain still trots in the Spittlefields tramp,
Nor can Heart the grown aukwardness cure.
Thus, if apes of the fashion St. James's you crowd,
Pressing onwards in spite of all stops,
The Mall you may fill, and be airy and loud,
But, trust me, you will never fill your shops.
VERSES WRITTEN IN A BLANK LEAF IN LORD ORRERY'S REMARKS ON THE LIFE OF DEAN
SWIFT.
BY THE SAME.
HAil noble Critic! whose pervading mind
The dazzling beams of genius cannot blind:
Whose steady eye, and equal hand detects,
In spite of wit, humanity's defects;
O say! what cause impelled thee thus to scan
Foibles that shame the Dean, and sink the man?
The sacred veil, whose texture genius wrought,
To shade from public view each latent fault,
Long consecrate its wondrous power retained,
Though Envy raged, and Faction stalked unchain'd;
But, what no foe had dared, (though malice fired)
Thy cooler warmth, O friendship! has inspired;
For thee alone reserved the arduous task,
Severely thus his errors to unmask.
Ah hapless Swift! whose nakedness of mind
Another Ham displays to all mankind;
Arise! and vindicate thy injured fame,
Arise! and curse the author of thy shame:
Avenge this flagrant breach of friendship's rules,
Change nature's laws, and curse his race with fools.
PROLOGUE TO THE GRATEFUL FAIR, A COMEDY INTENDED FOR THE STAGE.
BY MR. SMART.
IN ancient days (as jovial Horace sings)
When laurell'd bards were lawgivers and kings,
Bold was the comic muse, without restraint,
To name the vicious, and the vice to paint;
The enlivened picture from the canvas flew,
And the strong likeness crowded on the view.
Our author practices more general rules,
He is no niggard of his knaves and fools:
Both small and great, both dull and pert he shows,
That every gentleman may pick and choose.
The laws dramatic though he scarcely knows
Of time and place, and all the piteous prose,
Which pedant Frenchmen snuffle through their nose.
Fools! -- who prescribe what Homer should have done,
Like tattling watches they correct the sun.
Critics -- like posts -- undoubtedly may show
The way to Pindus -- but they cannot go.
For to delight and elevate the mind,
To heaven-directed genius is assigned.
When-e'er immortal Shakespeare's works we read,
He wins the heart, before he strikes the head.
Swift to the soul the piercing image flies
More swift than Celia's wit, or Celia's eyes,
More swift than some romantic traveller's thought,
More swift than British fire, when William fought.
Fancy precedes and conquers all the mind,
Deliberating judgment slowly lags behind,
Comes to the field with blunderbuss and gun,
Like heavy Falstaff, when the work is done,
Fights, when the battle's over, with wondrous pain
By Shrewsbury clock -- and nobly slays the slain.
But critic censures are beneath his care,
Who strives to please the honest and the fair:
Their approbation is much more than fame,
He speaks -- he writes -- he breathes not -- but for them.
ON MOTHER GRIFFITHS.
THE race of critics, till of late, were graced
With reading, learning, judgment, sense, and taste:
And none ever dared usurp that noble name,
But who, as authors, had established fame;
By envy never, nor by spite misled,
And, though strict judges, they were still well-bred:
But now, oh shame to Britain, and the muse!
Dame Griffiths writes her infamous Reviews,
Who to no requisite can make pretense
Of learning, genius, judgment, taste, or sense;
Yet with the rancour of a cursed elf,
She damns all works -- but what she prints herself:
Thus modern Methodists, with foolish pride,
Save their own sect, and deem all damned beside;
To cobler-parsons weaver-priests succeed,
And preach that Gospel which they cannot read.
TAURUS.

CONTENTS.
APril. An ode, Page 1 An ode, 3 Spring. An ode, 5 To a lady on her birthday,
7 Stanzas on the spring, 9 Inscription for an hermitage, 11 Anacreontic on the
spring, 12 African prince to Zara, 13 Zara to the African prince, 20 Abelard to
Eloisa. By Pattison, 27 Rosamond to Henry, 34 Henry to Rosamond, 45 Abelard to
Eloisa. By Cawthorne, 47 The origin of doubt, 60 On theological enquiries, 63
To Sir Humphry Mackworth, on the mines, 65 Elegy on the death of a daughter, 73
On the physical cause of the late king's death, 80 Corydon. A pastoral, 81
Morning, 83 Noon, 85 Evening, 87 On May, 86 Contraste to an ode to wisdom, 91
On the royal nuptials, 93 Epistle to a lady, 97 On the death of a lady, 100 The
cit's country box, 102 The fall of Chloe's jordan, 107 On cutting down some
trees, 111 The wandering beauty, 112 Hymn on the approach of May, 113 Ode to
health, 116 Song for the Park at high Mall, 118 Verses on lord Orrery's remarks
on dean Swift, 120 Prologue to the Grateful Fair, 121 On mother Griffiths, 123
END OF VOL. IV.

