THE LIFE OF SIR THOMAS POPE, FOUNDER OF TRINITY COLLEGE OXFORD. CHIEFLY
COMPILED FROM ORIGINAL EVIDENCES.

WITH AN APPENDIX OF PAPERS, NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.

THE SECOND EDITION, CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.

BY THOMAS WARTON, B.D. FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, AND F.S.A.

LONDON. PRINTED FOR THOMAS CADELL IN THE STRAND. MDCCLXXX.

PREFACE.
BIOGRAPHERS, in the pursuit of information, are naturally betrayed into minute
researches. The curiosity of the reader is seldom proportioned to that of the
writer in this species of composition. Every incident, relating to a favorite
character which the mind has long contemplated with attention, acquires
importance. On these principles we may venture to found a plausible excuse, for
the many trifling discoveries, and intricate discussions of insignificant
circumstances, with which personal history so much abounds.

To this apology, which every biographer has a right to plead, the writer of
the following memoirs presumes he possesses a peculiar claim, arising from his
situation and connections. He describes the life of a person, whom the
strongest principles of gratitude, implanted in early years, have habitually
taught him to regard with united veneration and affection. Under these
circumstances, the slightest events appear interesting; and the most frivolous
anecdotes of such a life are investigated with a pleasing enthusiasm.

In the mean time, a want of materials might have justly been here alleged, in
extenuation of an objection so constantly urged against works of this kind. It
will readily be granted, that to record the lives of men who have adorned their
country by monuments of munificence, is a tribute indispensably due to public
merit, and which cannot without public injustice be witheld. But to discharge
this duty even imperfectly, and by those means, however inadequate, which the
utmost exertions of diligent enquiry can afford, is less unpardonable than to
neglect it entirely. When we cannot recover a perfect portrait of our friend
and our benefactor, we must be contented with a few faint outlines. Abundance
only implies rejection; and where but little can be collected, it is necessary
to retain every thing. We must acquiesce in anecdotes of inconsiderable
consequence, while those of more importance cannot be procured.

These inconveniences might have easily been prevented. But our ancestors had
no regard for futurity. They trusted the remembrances of their heroes to chance
and tradition; or rather, to the laborious investigation of a distant
posterity. For it is the task of modern times to commemorate, if they cannot
imitate, the conspicuous examples of antiquity; and to compose the panegyric of
those virtues which exist no more. Inquisitive leisure is not the lot of
earlier eras. Ages of action are succeeded by ages of enquiry.

But that species of enquiry which properly belongs to the biographer, seems,
in point of time, to be posteriour to that which forms the province of the
historian. It does not grow fashionable till late: it begins to be the
favorite amusement of cultivated nations at their most polished periods. When
the more important and extensive stores of historical information have been
exhausted, the growing spirit of curiosity, which increases in proportion as it
is gratified, still demands new gratifications; it descends to particularities,
and delights to develope circumstances of a subordinate nature. After many
general histories have been written, inquisitive minds are eager to explore the
parts of what they have hitherto surveyed at large. The ardour of research,
which gathers strength from contraction, is exerted on distinct periods; and at
length personal history commences. Characters before only represented in the
gross, and but incidentally exhibited or superficially displayed, now become
the subject of critical disquisition, and a separate examination. Occurences
neglected or omitted by the historian, form materials for the biographer: and
men of superior eminence are selected from the common mass of public
transactions in which they were indistinctly grouped, and delineated as
detatched figures in a single point of view.

Nor was it till late after the restoration of literature, that biography
assumed its proper form, and appeared in its genuine character. The Lives which
were compiled at some distance after that period, are extremely jejune and
defective performances. The first which approached to perfection were those of
Peireskius, by Peter Gassendus, and of Melancthon, by Camerarius. It was long,
before the perseverance of investigation connected with precision, the patient
toil of tracing evidences, authenticating facts, and digesting scattered
notices, grew into a science: in a word, before the accuracy of the antiquarian
was engrafted on the researches of the biographer. The masterly Life of William
of Wykeham will best explain and illustrate these reflections: a work which I
choose to produce as an example on this occasion, not only because it is here
produced as an example with a peculiar degree of propriety, but because it is a
pattern of that excellence in this mode of writing, which I mean to
characterise and recommend.

As sir Thomas Pope bore some share in the national transactions of his time,
to relieve the dryness of personal and local incidents, I have endeavored to
render these pages in some measure interesting to general readers, by dilating
this part of my performance, and by sometimes introducing historical
digressions, yet resulting immediately from the tenor of my subject. Amongst
these, I flatter myself that my relation of the persecutions of the princess
Elizabeth may merit some attention: of which I have thrown together a more
uniform and circumstantial detail than has yet appeared, with the addition of
several anecdotes respecting that transaction not hitherto published.

On the whole I may venture to affirm, that I have at least attempted to make
my work as entertaining as possible. My materials have not always been of the
most brilliant kind; but they are such, as have often enabled me to enliven and
embellish my narrative by presenting pictures of ancient manners, which are
ever striking to the imagination.

I have before hinted, that my resources for compiling this history were
slender and insufficient. From books I could obtain scarce any information.
Indeed, my chief assistance has been derived from manuscript authorities. I
have not however in this respect found the success I wished. Yet I have
carefully consulted every record that seemed likely to illustrate my subject;
and my references will show, that I have searched a variety of authentic
instruments, preserved in the British Museum, the chapel of the Rolls, and
other repositories of valuable originals. Of these the more important are
printed at large in the Appendix.

Among my references to manuscript authorities, two sometimes occur which
require explanation. These are, MSS. Cotton. Vitellius, F. 5. MSS. Strype. And,
MSS. F. Wise.

In the year 1709, that industrious and accurate annalist Mr. John Strype,
communicated to doctor Arthur Charlett, master of University college,
originally fellow of Trinity college, an account of the Funeral of sir Thomas
Pope See Ballard's Coll. of Letters, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. fol. xv. page 31. Letter
from Strype to Charlett, dated Lowlayton, Essex, Apr. 20. 1709. See LIFE, infr.
p. 178.
. This account Strype had transcribed from a manuscript of the Cotton library,
which he perpetually cites in in his ECCLESIASTICAL MEMOIRS, marked Vitellius,
F. 5 In a letter from Strype to Charlett, dat. ibid. Apr. 5. 1709. MSS. ut
supr. vol. xv. p. 31. "The kindness you bear to the foundation of Trinity
college, makes me inquisitive into the Founder's place of burial, which you
find mentioned in my ANNALS, [p. 3. edit. i.] Though I cannot easily recollect
every manuscript and particular place in them whence I have compiled every part
of the history. Yet it occurs to me, that sir THOMAS POPE's Funeral, with the
time and place, as also the rest of pages 30, 31, [viz.] the funerals in those
pages mentioned, were taken from the volume, VITELLIUS F. 5. in the Cotton
library, which is a certain brief journal of funeral^, and as well of diverse
other occurrences, beginning at the year 1550, written, as it seems, by some
herald, or other diligent observer of his own times. There the writer sets down
all the particular ceremonies, the solemnities, and mourners, at that knight's
interment. Which if you have any desire to know, I will transcribe out of my
notes and send you." This is an original. Then follows the letter before
referred to, which is not the original, but a transcript by the late Mr.
Rawlins of Pophills in Gloucestershire, who became possessed of Charlett's
extensive correspondence. See APPEND. p. 458. infr.
. Soon afterward it appears that Strype sent to Charlett, perhaps at his
request, a few other notices relating to sir Thomas Pope, extracted from the
same manuscript. The late learned Mr Francis Wise, keeper of the archives,
Radclivian librarian, and fellow of Trinity college, at Oxford, copied all the
transcripts, about four or five in number, which Strype on this occasion had
made from the Cotton manuscript, by permission of Charlett, among whose curious
and numerous papers they were kept; and by Mr. Wise they were thus communicated
to me. Fortunately for the present undertaking, the extracts had been made by
Strype before the fire happened in the Cotton library, then placed in
Ashburnham house at Westminster, by which fatal accident this valuable volume
was particularly damaged; and, as far as I can judge from a cursory inspection,
most of the leaves, if not all, containing Strype's extracts, were either
destroyed or obliterated But see APPEND. Numb. xxviii.
. The reader is therefore desired to observe, that the reference, viz. MSS.
Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype, signifies Strype's transcripts from thence
See pp. 46. 86. 89. 91.
. But whenever this Cotton manuscript is cited without the addition of MSS.
Strype, the reader will remember, that such citations were faithfully
transcribed by myself from that manuscript volume, now belonging to the British
Museum.

Mr. Wise also transcribed, and communicated to me, two or three other papers
from doctor Charlett's collections, beside those of Strype which I have just
mentioned See pp. 185. 189. And APPEND. Numb. xxix.
. These I have called MSS. F. Wise Since my first edition, among the manuscript
papers of the Rev. Thomas Wilkes, D.D. fellow of Trinity college, Oxford, and
who died rector of Rotherfield Greys in Oxfordshire, in 1745, I have met with
other notices by Mr. Wise, which are now first inserted in this edition, and
are also styled, MSS. F. Wise. These Mr. Wise seems to have had chiefly from
Dr. Charlett's collections, and the family-papers of the late sir Harry
Pope-Blount.

As to Charlett's collections, I learn that he derived many of his notices and
informations on this subject, from Mr. Josiah How, a fellow of the college; a
short account of whom will not be superfluous, as it may tend to establish
their credit. He was born at Crendon in Bucks, and elected Scholar of Trinity
college, June 12, 1632. Registr. Coll. fol. 68. b. Admitted Fellow, being then
bachelor of Arts, May 26, 1637. Ibid. fol. 72. b. By Hearne he is called, "a
very great cavalier and loyaliss, and a most ingenious man." Rob. Glouc. GLOSS.
p. 669. He appears to have been a general and an accomplished scholar, and in
polite literature esteemed one of the ornaments of the university. In 1644, he
preached before king Charles the first at Christ-church cathedral Oxford. The
sermon was printed, and in red letters, by the king's special command. Only
thirty copies were printed. One was purchased, in 1723, by Hearne from Dr.
Charlett's library: the same, and that perhaps the only one extant, which is
now among Rawlinson's Books in the Bodleian. See Hearne's MSS. COLL. vol. 102.
p. 8. Charlett bought this rarity many years before, at the high price of five
shillings. Ibid. vol. 51. p. 176. In 1646, he was created Bachelor of Divinity
by decree of the king, among others who were complimented with that degree for
having distinguished themselves as preachers before the Court at Oxford. He was
soon afterward ejected from his Fellowship by the presbyterians, but not in
the general expulsion in 1648, according to Walker, SUFF. CLERG. p. 134. Being
one of the Bursars of the college and foreseeing its fate, having resolved at
the same time never to acknowledge the authority of Cromwell's visitors, he
retired, in the beginning of the year 1648, to a college-estate in
Buckinghamshire, carrying with him many rentals, rolls, papers, and other
authentic documents, belonging to his office. He was invited to return to the
college by Dr. Harris the new presbyterian President, on a promise, that if he
would quietly give up the official books, his submission to the visitors should
be dispensed with, and he should be permitted to retain his fellowship without
molestation. Harris by this artifice having recovered the books, immediately
signed an order for Howe's expulsion; pretending to have received an unexpected
injunction from the visitors, and professing his regret at being obliged to
remove so valuable a member from the foundation. Hearne, MSS. COLL. vol. 89. p.
195. He was restored to his fellowship in 1660. He has a Copy of recommendatory
English verses prefixed to the folio edition of Beaumont and Fletcher, printed
in 1647. Another to Thomas Randoph's POEMS, reprinted at Oxford, in 1640.
Another to Cartwright's COMEDIES and POEMS, at Oxford, 1651. These pieces in
the witty epigrammatic style which then prevailed, have uncommon acuteness, and
highly deserve to be revived. Some others have perhaps escaped me. In those I
have mentioned, he appears in company with Denham, Waller, Jonson, Corbett,
Brom, Shirley, Main, and others the most ingenious men of those times, who
were of his intimate acquaintance. Wood says that he wrote a copy of English
verses, which were much applauded, spoken before the duke and duchess of York,
in 1683, at Trinity college. MSS. Mus. Ashmol. fol. 57. D. 19. He lived forty
two years, greatly respected, after his restitution, and arriving at the age of
ninety, died fellow of the college, where he constantly resided, Aug. 28, 1701.
He is interred, under a small marble lozenge, with a short inscription, in the
college-chapel. Hearne says, that "he lived so retiredly in the latter part of
his life, that he rarely came abroad; so that I could never see him, though I
have often much desired to have a sight of him." GLOSS. ut supr. p. 670.
Compare Wood, ATH. OXON. ii. f. 56. And LIFE of BATHURST, pp. 154. 211.


. Other references will easily be understood, as care has been taken to give
them with equal exactness and perspicuity.

I must not here omit, what I am much honored in mentioning, that this work is
greatly indebted to the friendship of the bishop of Worcester; who most
obligingly condescended to favor me with some valuable communications, from
the family papers of his lordship's father, the earl of Guildford.

THE LIFE OF Sir THOMAS POPE.
SECT. I.
THOMAS POPE was born at Dedington in Oxfordshire, about the year 1508 Computed
from his age at the year of his death.
, and at the end of the reign of king Henry the seventh.

His parents were William and Margaret Pope E Statut. coll. Trin. Oxon. cap.
xiii. "Majestatem tuam oramus, O beata Trinitas, ut animarum Margarete uxoris
Fundatoris nostri, et Gulielmi et Margarete parentum ejusdem, etc."
, who lived at Dedington Visitation of Oxfordshire, by Ric. Lee, Portcullis
Marshall to Clarencieux King at Arms, A.D. 1570. MSS. in Mus. Ashmol. Oxon.
Codd. A. Wood. 4to. 8522. 60. page 32.
: but the family, which seems at least to have been that of a gentleman, was
originally seated in Kent, before the reign of Edward the third Ex stemmate
Pope, MSS. in rotulo praegrandi pergamen. penes honoratiss. Francisc. com. de
Guildford. By which it likewise appears, that the said William Pope was the
only son of John, second son of Thomas Pope, and Grace Sampson his wife.
. William appears to have been married to a former wife, named Julian Edmondes
Lee's MS. visitation ut supr. ibid. And MS. pedigree of Pope, manu A. Wood,
inter MSS. Rawlins. bibl. Bodl. Compared with evidence occurring hereafter. One
John Edmondes of Dedington, is mentioned in Ashmole's Berkshire, who, as I
collect, was her uncle. iii. 285. As also in Lee's MSS. ut supr. page 41. Her
father was probably Robert Edmondes, one of the executors of William Pope's
will. Append. Numb. I. John Edmondes is also a subscribing witness to an
Instrument, Append. No. XXII. John Edmondes, the elder, is mentioned in an
indenture of lands between Sir T. Pope, and Trinity college, Oxon. dat. Jun.
26. 1558. In registr. prim. fol. 20.
. His second wife, Margaret, mother of THOMAS POPE, was the daughter of Edmund
Yate, of Stanlake in Oxfordshire From Lee's MS. visitation, ut supr. page 51.
Compared with pedigr. MSS. Rawlins. According to Lee, Edmund Yate of Stanlake
was third son and heir of Richard Yate of Charney, co. Berks. He married
Margaret, daughter of John Cornwall of Stanlake. See the pedigree of Yate of
Charney, which is not altogether exact, in Ashmole's Berkshire, iii. 321.

Wood says, that Margaret Pope, in the text, was the daughter of -- Yate of
Stanford in Wootton-hundred in Oxfordshire. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 301.
But no such place occurs in that hundred. Ashmole, Berks. iii. 295. mentions
Yate of Stanford, Berks; which place Wood seems to have confounded with
Sandford, a village in Wootton-hundred. Many of the family of Yate appear to
have lived in, and about, the villages of Charney, Buckland, and Stanford,
Berks, and Stanlake, Oxfordshire; places all of the same neighborhood. What
still further confirms my supposition, that Wood is mistaken, and that the said
Edmund Yate, of Stanlake, was Margaret Pope's father, is; that Peter Yate of
Stanlake, whom Sir Thomas Pope in a letter, dat. 1557, calls his cousin,
appears to have been a tenant to Trinity college, Oxford. In indentur. dat.
Jul. 3. 1556. I find likewise one Barthol. Yate, co. Berks, who I presume was
of some of the places abovementioned, or from that neighborhood, elected
scholar of the said college, in 1569. Ex registr. prim. dicti coll. fol. 34.
But it would be needless, end trifling, to multiply proofs.


: and after the death of William Pope, she was again married, to John Bustarde
of Adderbury in the same county Ex epitaph. infra citat.
. Beside the abovementioned THOMAS, the principal subject of these papers, the
said William and Margaret had one son, John; and three daughters, Elisabeth,
Julian, and Alice Lee's MSS. visitat. ut supr. 32. And from evidences occurring
hereafter.
: concerning all which I shall speak more at large hereafter.

William and Margaret Pope seem to have lived in a decent and creditable
condition, as may be collected from the bequests of William's will; which also
partly shows the circumstances in which his eldest See Append. I.
son was left. He bequeathes his land to be divided between his wife and his
son THOMAS I find that Sir Thomas Pope sold the manor of Dedington, with other
possessions in the neighborhood, to K. Henry viii. by indent. dat. Mar. 21.
an. reg. 36. But the premises were no-paternal estate of the Popes; having
been granted to Sir Thomas Pope, but a few years before, as parcel of the
priory of Bicester, viz. Pat. 28. Hen. viii. Test. Feb. 11. par. 5.
: one hundred pounds to the said THOMAS, and forty pounds to each daughter: a
stipend to a priest to sing for his soul one year in the church of Dedington,
in which he directs his body to be buried: three shillings and four-pence,
respectively, to the torches, the bells, Saint Thomas's beam, and our Lady's
beam, in the said church: six shillings and four-pence to Clifton chapel near
Dedington: three shillings and four-pence to the mother church of Lincoln; and
to each of his god-children a sheep. He died in the year 1523 From the probate
of his will, Append. No. I.
. By an inquisition taken after his death, it appears, that he possessed
estates, at Whitehill and Hooknorton in Oxfordshire, of the yearly value of six
pounds See Append. No. *XII.*
. Margaret has wife survived him many years, and died on the twenty-fifth day
of August, 1557 She is buried in the chancel of Wroxton church, with this
epitaph on a brass plate: Here lies under this stone buried Margart Bustarde,
widow, sometime the wif of William Pope of Dedington in the county of Oxford,
Gent. and afterward married to John Bustarde, Gent. dwellinge at Atterbury in
the said county: which William and Margaret were father and mother to Sir
Thomas Pope Knight, and John Pope, Esquire. And the said Margaret departed out
of this world the xxv day of August an. dni. 1557, and hops to rise and lyve
again with Christ eternally.


, at Wroxton, in Oxfordshire, where she seems to have lived during the latter
part of her life with her younger son, John Ex indentura quadam quadripartit.
in Thesauriario Coll. Trin. Oxon.
; her second husband, John Bustarde, dying in the year 1534 From his monument
at Adderbury, Co. Oxon. See Append. No. XXVI.
.

Their son THOMAS received the first rudiments of grammatical learning at the
public school of the neighboring town of Banbury; at that time a celebrated
school, and kept by Thomas Stanbridge of Ma dalen college in Oxford, an eminent
instructor of youth He died 1522. Wood Ath. Oxon. Vol. 1. f. p. 26. col. 2. Ed.
ii. and p. 18. col. 1
, brother of John Stanbridge, who compiled a famous grammar, called
Stanbridge-grammar Hugh Oldham, Bishop of Exeter, about the year 1518, founded
a school at Manchester, and appointed the masters to teach grammar after the
use, manner, and form, of the school at Banbury in Oxfordshire; where Thomas
Stanbridge taught the grammar composed by John Stanbridge. ibid. Oxford
Bishops, p. 658. col. 1. And Wood's School-Notes, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. 8518, 56.
Manchester.
. From hence he was removed to Eton college For this we have his own testimony,
in the statutes of his college at Oxford. "Ex scholis Etonensi, vel
Banburiensi, in quibus Ipse olim in grammaticae rudimentis educatus eram." Cap.
vii.
: but I do not find that he completed his education at either of our
universities.

It seems most probable, that he was immediately sent from Eton school to some
of the inns of court. I believe, to Gray's-inn. That he was bred to the law is
certain; and there is undoubted evidence that he was employed, while very
young, in some of the inferior offices of the court of chancery Apud Lit. pat.
Hen. vii. an reg. 29. inf. citat. viz. "Grandes labores, laudabiliaque
obsequia, quae dilectus nobis THOMAS POPE, attendens negociis nostris in
Cancellaria nostra predicta multipliciter impendebat, indiesque impendere
intendebat, merito contemplantes, etc." See Append. No. V.
. And that he was originally destined, and regularly trained, to this
profession, may be conjectured from his handwriting; many specimens of which
remain in his college at Oxford. Nor is it improbable, that he might be placed
in his youth, for some time at least, under the superintendence and instruction
of some skilful practitioner in the law, perhaps a master in chancery; as in
his will he bequeathes to his old master's son, master Croke One Richard Croke
is made comptroller and supervisor of the hanaper, in 1529, with a yearly fee
of x. l. Bill. signat. Hen. viii. anno reg. 20. Sep. 19. He has also more
grants in the law, under other years of the same king.
, his black satin gown faced with Luserne-spots The spotted fur of a Russian
animal, called a Lucern, anciently much in use and esteem. I find it mentioned
in the will of Sir John Wallop, an eminent captain and statesman in the reign
of Henry viii. May 22. 1551. "To the Sergeant of the kings herthoundes my
gown furrid with lucernes." Registr. Buck. qu. 24. cur. Praer. Cant. It is
specified in our ancient statutes. See the word in Beaumont and Fletcher, vol.
ii. p. 399.
. This Croke or Crook, his supposed Master, seems to have been the chief of
the six clerks in chancery who was ordered by Sir Thomas More, for the
satisfaction of the judges, and his own justification, to make a docquet of all
the Injunctions which he had given to the law courts during the time of his
chancellorship More's Life, by M. T. M. p. 218. 4to.
.

But whatever was our young adventurer's situation in early life, it is
remarkable that a person of his obscure family and inconsiderable fortune,
should so soon recommend himself to public notice, and gain access even to the
royal favor. Vigorous abilities, and an active mind, easily surmounted all
obstacles; and he quickly became a successful candidate in the pursuit of
riches and honor.

What was the first step to his advancement in life, and whether it arose from
the friendship of some private patron, from any distinguished merit in his
profession, a peculiar cast for business in general, or a lucky concurrence of
all these causes, cannot be precisely determined, although from what follows it
may be partly conjectured. He was not much more than twenty-seven years of age,
when he had sufficient address or interest to procure an appointment to
offices, which seem to have been alternately bestowed upon Henry's most eminent
favorites, and the most popular characters of those times Fuller in his quaint
manner, observes concerning him, "I behold him as fortunae suae fabrum; the
smith, who by God's blessing, hammered out his own fortune without any
patrimonial advantage." Worthies of England, Article London, p. 223. edit. 1662.
.

Having been early initiated, as I before observed, in the business of
chancery, on the fifth day October, 1533, he was constituted by letters patent
of Henry the eighth, clerk of the briefs in the star chamber at Westminster See
Append. No. IV.
, On the fifteenth day of October in the same year, he received by letters
patent of the same king, a reversionary grant of the office of clerk of the
crown in chancery. Of this post, very soon afterward, he became actually
possessed; with an annual fee of twenty pounds from the hanaper, and also a
robe with fur at the feasts of Christmas and Pentecost from the king's great
wardrobe Pat. 29. Hen. viii. par. 5. See Append. No. V.
.

On the thirteenth day of November 1535, he was constituted, by the king's
letters patent, warden of the mint, exchange, and coinage, in the tower of
London, on the voluntary resignation, in his favor, of John Coppynger, page of
the great wardrobe Pat. 26. Hen. viii. par. 2. See Append. No. III. See more of
John Coppynger, ibid. in the Notes.
. How long he continued in this office I have not learned. It seems, however,
that he had quitted it within eight years, and, as I suppose, for some more
valuable consideration For in the British Museum, there is, "Compotus Johannis
Brown, custodis Cambii, etc. a primo die Jul. an. reg. Hen. viii. 34.". MSS.
Harl. 698. -- 12.
. On the twenty-third day of December, 1536, he was likewise by letters patent
appointed, to exercise jointly with William Smythe, the office of clerk of all
the briefs in the star chamber at Westminster Pat. 26. Hen. viii. par. 1.
Append. No. IV.
.

On February the twenty-eighth, 1538, he obtained, at his own instance, a new
royal license for exercising the office of clerk of the crown in conjunction
with John Lucas Pat. 29. Hen. viii. ut supr.
, who was afterward, in the reign of Edward the sixth, an eminent
crown-lawyer, and employed by that prince in many important commissions Strype,
Eccl. Mem. ii. 498. And ibid. B. ii. Chapter xxix. pass.
. The first of these grants he perhaps obtained by the recommendation of Sir
Thomas More; who presiding as Lord Chancellor in the court abovementioned,
where Sir Thomas Pope was employed when a young man, might have taken
particular notice of his promising diligence and abilities; and from which
circumstance, a lasting friendship and intimacy between them both, as will be
shown hereafter, seems to have originally commenced. Although there is equal
reason to suppose, as it will likewise appear in its proper place, that he was
in no less favor and esteem with Sir Thomas More's successor, the Lord
Chancellor Thomas lord Audley; under whose immediate inspection and authority
he exercised the office of clerk of the crown, and clerk of the briefs in the
star chamber: and to both of which departments, as I presume, he must have been
appointed by Lord Chancellor Audley's nomination Lord Audley was appointed Lord
Keeper, May 20, 1532, on the resignation of Sir T. More: And Lord Chancellor,
Jan. 26, 1533. Rym. Foed. xiv. 435, 446. Dugd. Chron. Ser. page 82. Both
offices, I apprehend, were in the appointment of the Chancellor, as the clerk
of the crown is at present: although they passed in the king's name. The
star chamber was a branch of chancery. Among Tanner's manuscripts there is an
instrument, without date, but while Audley was chancellor, relating to the
monastery of Furness, in Sir T. Pope's handwriting. MSS. TANNER. 164. f. 44.
Bibl. Bodl.
.

But these appointments were soon succeeded by one of much greater consequence.
For in the year 1536, he was constituted, by the king, Treasurer of the Court
of augmentations of the king's revenue, on its first establishment by act of
parliament Statut. Hen. viii. An. 27. Cap. xxvii. See STATUTES by Berthelette,
in two vol. Land. 1543. See vol. ii. ibid. 1551. fol. xli. b.
.

The principal design of this court was for estimating the lands of the
dissolved monasteries, vested in the Crown, and for receiving their revenues.
It had moreover full power and authority to sell the monastic possessions for
the king's service From the act.
. It was so called from the increase which the royal revenue received, by this
new acquisition of property. All persons holding leases and pensions, by former
grants, from any convent, exhibited their titles before this court, and their
pretensions were allowed in proportion to their validity. And although the
governors of the religious houses, foreseein their fate, often contrived
immediately before the dissolution of their respective societies, to forge new
contracts or indentures in favor of their friends or kindred, few frauds of
this kind took effect. For the court seems to have been very vigilant in
preventing and exposing such specious impostures Fuller Ch, Hist. B. vi. p. 349.
.

The officers of this court were a Chancellor, it is superior, a Treasurer
abovementioned, who was the second officer, a solicitor, ten auditors,
seventeen recievers, with others, belonging to the inferior departments. It was
a court of record, and possessed of two seals From the Act of parl. ut sup.
.

The Treasurer's office appears to have been a post of considerable profit and
distinction, and of equal trust and importance. He was ranked with the
principal officers of state in the reign of Henry the eighth. For by statute of
the same, he was privileged, together with the chancellor of the said court,
the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, the treasurer of the king's chamber,
the chancellor of the court of first Fruits and Tenths, the master of the
king's wards and liveries, the groom of the stole, the warden of the cinque
ports, and other honorable personages, respectively, to retain in his house
one chaplain having a benefice with cure of souls, who should not be compelled
to residence Statut. Hen. viii. an. 33. c. xxviii. And 21. xiii.
. The Treasurer was allowed a limited annual salary for the exercise of his
office; as also perquisites for such sums of money as he paid to the patentees
of any office, fee, or annuity, granted under the seal of the court: and also,
for such disbursements as he made to any other persons, by virtue of the king's
warrant or bill assigned, or by bill assigned and subscribed by the chancellor,
and one other officer.

These fees were regulated according to the practice of the court of the duchy
of Lancaster Ex Statut. ut supr.
. The allowance of Sir John Williams, afterward Lord Williams of Tame,
Treasurer of this court in the reign of Edward the sixth, was 320 l. A sum,
which I presume, was then the full value of this place Fuller Chapter Hist. b. vi.
p. 348. edit. 1651. In lieu of this salary, queen Mary granted Sir J. Williams
a pension of the same value, when he quitted the treasurership. Dugd. Bar. ii.
393. edit. 1675.
: but which, although very considerable, was much inferior to the emoluments of
the same office, when in the possession of Sir Thomas Pope.

The Treasurer at his admission was sworn before the chancellor, that he would
reasonably and honestly procure the king's profit, administer justice to the
poor as well as the rich, faithfully keep and expend the king's treasure, and
exhibit a true declaration of it without concealment. The receivers were
ordered to pay into his hands the whole rents of all the dissolved monasteries:
concerning which he accounted annually before the chancellor and two auditors.
The chaneellor, Treasurer, attorney, and solicitor, or any two of them were
entrusted with power or license to act without the king's warrant Ex Statut. ut
supr.
.

On the dissolution of any greater abbey, some of the auditors, who were
employed in riding to survey the manors and lands of the court, repaired
thither, and were lodged and accommodated in the house Thus at the abbey of
Evesham, some of the principal lodgings are ordered to be "reserved for the
king's officers of the court of augmentations when they shall repair thither,
etc." Stevens, Monast. i. 402.
; for the purpose of acquiring intelligence, and of transacting the necessary
business relating to the several estates, with more convenience and certainty.
The first chancellor of this court was Sir Richard Rich, afterward lord Rich,
and lord high chancellor of England Dugd. Bar. ii. 387. Sir Edward North
appears to have been chancellor of that court in 1545. From the dedication of
Sir Thomas Elliot's book, entitled, Preservative against Death. Land. 1545.
12mo.
.

Sir Thomas Pope held the treasurership of this court about five years, and was
succeeded by Sir Edward North Dugd. Ibid. p. 394.
, privy counselor and executor to Henry the eighth, and created a baron by
queen Mary. About the same time he was appointed master, or treasurer, of the
jewel-house in the tower English Baronett. iv. 666. edit. 1741. From the
information of Sir Henry Pope-Blount, cited in the margin. But this does not
appear by the patents.
. The yearly stipend of this office, when in the possession of Thomas lord
Cromwell, about five years before, was fifty pounds Dugd. ut supr. p. 370.
.

It would have broken the thread of my narrative, if I had before observed,
that in 1535, June the twenty-sixth, beginning now to rise in the world, he
received from Barker, otherwise garter king at arms, a patent for a new coat of
arms, to be borne by him and his posterity Penes honoratis. Francisc. com. de
Guildford. See Append. No. II.
; which are the same that are now borne by Trinity college in Oxford: viz.
Party per pale, or and azure, on a cheveron between three gryphons heads
erased, four fleur de lys, all countercharged He ordered them to be placed in
painted glass, twice in the hall, and twice in the President's lodgings, of
that college. These escocheons were done by James Nicholson, glass-painter of
London, each, at 6s. 8d. From a Loose Paper, in Thesaur. Coll. Trin. Oxon. I
presume they were destroyed under the administration of the presbyterians.
. To which it may be added here, that in the latter end of the following year,
viz. 1536, on the fifteenth day of October, he was knighted by Henry eighth In
an instrument, in Thesaurar. coll. Trin. Oxon. dated 20 Dec. 1539. 31. Hen.
viii. he is styled, "Egregius vir magister Thomas Pope, Thesaurarius cur.
augment. etc." In another, ibid. dated 28 Jan. 34. Hen. viii. he is called
miles. But Dugdale styles him knight, in 1539. Warw. p. 416. b.
, amid the solemnities attending the creations of the earl of Southampton, and
the gallant Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, afterward the famous duke of
Somerset. At which time Henry Howard, afterward the celebrated and unfortunate
earl of Surrey, also received the honor of knighthood Brit. Mus. MSS. Cotton
Claudius. C. 3. fol. 127. b.
.

A few years after the erection of the court of augmentations abovementioned,
the king perceiving that his exigencies required more expeditious returns of
money than the annual revenues of the dissolved monasteries could produce, was
necessitated to sell by one extensive commission a very considerable part of
their lands, for the purpose of raising present supplies. By this step the
court of augmentations was soon diminished. The causes depending in it became
few and inconsiderable, and the crownprofits arising from thence decreased;
it is officers were numerous, and their pensions ample. On these considerations
he was induced to dissolve it; which he did by letters patent only: and on the
second of January, 1546, created by the same letters patent, a new court of
augmentations, on a different and more confined plan.

In an original rough draught of this new establishment In the British Museum.
MSS. Harl. 600. 1.
, Sir Thomas Pope is nominated, by the king, master of the woods of the court
on this side the river Trent, and Sir John Williams, Treasurer. The other
principal patentofficers, recited in the instrument, are Sir Edward North, who
is appointed chancellor, Sir Walter Mildmay, and Sir Thomas Moyle, general
surveyors, Robert Henneage master of the woods beyond Trent, Richard Goodricke,
attorney, and John Gosnold, solicitor. The rest are Geoffry Gates, and John
Arnscott, surveyors of the woods on each side Trent, and Richard Duke. The two
masters of the woods on each side Trent, are styled the fourth officers. At
this time Sir Thomas Pope was one of the king's privy-counsellors He is styled
in the said instrument, "our trusty and well belovyd counsaillor." fol. 18. b.
The first notice I have found of his being a privy counselor, occurs in Pat.
36. Hen. viii. par. 11. Test. Mar. xxi. This was in 1545. Where he is called,
"dilectus et fidelis consliarius noster."
The total sum of yearly fees belonging to this court, on its second reduced
establishmemt, amounted to 7249l. 10s. 3d. Fuller, Chapter hist. vi. p. 349.
.

In the year 1553, the last of the reign of Edward the sixth, the first effort
was made for the actual abolition of this court, which by degrees was become
burdensome, and at length superfluous. Accordingly, the same year, at Mary's
accession Statut. Mar. i. cap. x. But I find a renewal of Sir Richard
Sackville's patent to the chancellorship of this court on queen Mary's
accession. Pat. 1. Mar. Test. Jan. xx. par. 2. Sackville was chancellor at the
death of Edward vi. He was constituted pat. 1. Edw. vi. Test. Aug. ii. par. 2.
on North's resignation.
it was incorporated into the exchequer See Statut, Edw. vi. 7. C. ii.
. Soon afterward followed a grand sale of lands, which formerly came within
the cognizance of this court, and continued in possession of the crown, under
the conduct of commissioners; one of which was the chancellor of the exchequer.
This appears from three valuable manuscript volumes in the British Museum Viz.
liber primus de lez rates ann. 2, 3. Phil. Mar. fol. And the two following
volumes, fol. MSS. Harl. 606, 607, 608. They are the originals.
, which the learned and accurate Wanley supposed to have belonged to the court
of augmentations. But this could not be the case, as the first of them was made
and begins so late as the year 1557, four years after the abolition of that
court. They were however compiled in consequence of that institution, and may
be considered among the last remains of its records The CHAMBER of the court of
augmentations was afterward converted into the chamber of the court of wards,
now long since dissolved. Edward vi. at his coronation, when he came from
York-Place, is said to have robed himself in the chamber of the court of
augmentations, "now called the court of wards," before he went into
Westminster Hall. TIME's STOREHOUSE, B. 5. chapter xix. page 502. fol. 1619. The
chamber near the Exchequer, where the augmentation-records are at present
reposited, is not the same. Which was the court of wards, and consequently,
which was the augmentation court, will appear, by comparing the following
passage of Stowe, who wrote in the reign of queen Elisabeth. "At the upper end
of the great [Westminster] hall by the King's Bench, is a going up to a great
chamber called the Whitehall, wherein is now kept the court of wards and
liveries, and adjoining thereto is the court of requests." Survey Land. p. 892.
edit. 1616. The chamber therefore within or adjoining to Westminster Hall, at
the upper end, and called the Whitehall, was the COURT OF AUGMENTATIONS.
.

It is commonly supposed, and it has been said in general terms, that Sir
Thomas Pope was appointed one of the commissioners, or visitors, under
Cromwell, for dissolving the religious houses. It is indeed true, that he was
one of those, into whose hands the seal of the magnificent and opulent abbey of
Saint Alban's was surrendered on the fifth day of December, 1539, by the last
abbot, Richard Stevenache Stevens's Monasticon, i. 264. Weever's Fun. mon. p.
112. edit. 1631.
. This however is the only instance I can find, that he was ever concerned in
this sort of business. His name does not appear among the persons specially
appointed by Cromwell for this purpose; whose names are recited by Dugdale
Warwickshire, p. 800, seq.
from an authentic manuscript in the Cotton Library. Nor does his name occur in
the private commissions, which, after a diligent search, I have seen relating
to this matter; nor in any instruments of resignation, letters of advice to the
visitor general, memorials, or other authentic papers, concerning the
visitation or suppression of any monastery. My opinion is therefore, that he
was only occasionally employed at Saint Alban's, as being one of the principal
officers in the court of augmentations, as the place was in the neighborhood
of London, and as the surrender of so famous an abbey was an affair of some
importance. Thus we find that the priory, now the dean and chapter, of
Canterbury, was not dissolved in the ordinary way; it being thought necessary,
that the archbishop of Canterbury, the master of the rolls, Walter Henley
attorney and Nicholas Bacon solicitor of the augmentation-court with four
others, should be sent thither, to take the resignation of the prior and monks
Somner's CANTERBURY, by Batteley, Append. p. 118. It was 31. Hen. viii.
. However, if it can be proved, that he was ever engaged on other occasions in
these violent proceedings of an avaricious and arbitrary prince, it may at the
same time be fairly presumed, that in an employment which afforded so many
obvious temptations to fraud, oppression and rapacity, he behaved with singular
decency, moderation, and honor. Of this we have the impartial evidence of a
prejudiced historian. For Fuller, who is remarkably severe on the visitors in
general, and who is seldom sparing of his invectives, wherever he can discover
the slightest foundation for abuse, mentioning Sir Thomas Pope as an agent in
these affairs, immediately subjoins: "However, by all the printed books of that
age, he appears one of a candid carriage; and in this respect stands sole and
single by himself. That of the abbey-lands which he received, he refunded a
considerable proportion for the building and endowing Trinity college in Oxford
Worthies. London, p. 223.
." And in another place, he mentions him with honor on the same subject. "But
the most pleasant object to entertain us at this time in England, is the
beholding of two fair and fresh foundations in Oxford; the one Trinity college,
built by Sir Thomas Pope, principal visitor at the dissolution of abbeys This
is a mistake, as we have before seen.
. Now as none were losers employed in that service, so we find few refunding
back to charitable uses; and perchance this man alone the thankful Samaritane
who made a public acknowledgement Church-Hist. B. viii. p. 39.
." At the surrender of Saint Alban's Abbey, he preserved by his interest, and
particular application to the king, the noble conventual church now standing,
and made parochial From the information of the late Sir Harry Pope-Blount, of
Tittenhanger in Hertfordshire.
: one of the earliest and most venerable monuments of Norman architecture
remaining in England It was built by Paulin, the fourteenth abbot, a Norman,
about the Year 1080.
.

On the whole, the circumstance of his having received grants of the lands of
the monasteries, seems to have occasioned the mistaken supposition that he was
frequently and professedly concerned as a Commissioner in the dissolution of
their foundations. That his prodigious property was accumulated in consequence
of the destruction of the religious houses, is not denied: and the lucky
opportunity of raising an estate from this grand harvest of riches which now lay
open before him, seems to have diverted his thoughts from making a fortune by
the law; a profession which he most probably would have otherwise continued to
cultivate with the greatest success, and in which he might have undoubtedly
claimed the most opulent and distinguished stations. I could give a minute
detail, from the most authentic evidences, of the grants of abbey-land, which
he recieved during the reign of Henry the eighth; but it may suffice to observe
in more general terms, that before the year 1556, he appears to have been
actually possessed of more than thirty manors in Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire,
Warwickshire, Derbyshire, Bedfordshire, Herefordshire, and Kent; beside other
considerable estates, and several advowsons. Some of these possessions were
given him by Henry the eighth; but the greatest part was acquired by purchase
while he was connected with the court of augmentations See Dugdale's
Warwickshire. And from the patents.
. Many of his estates were bought of Queen Mary Ex muniment. coll. praedict.
And lib. prim. lez rates, ann. 3, 4. Phil. Mar. MSS. Harl. 606. 257. fol. 114.
In the British Museum, ut supr. And lib. secund. 607. 1. fol. 1. -- 13. fol. 7.
b. ibid. In the charter of foundation for his college at Oxford, dat. Mar. iv.
1554, are recited twenty-seven manors and thirteen advowsons: beside
impropriations and pensions. With all which he is licensed to enfeoff the
college. Two years afterward, viz. May 1, 1556, in the statutes of the
college, he recites thirty-five manors. Cap. vi. Afterward he made other
acquisitions.
.

But let us suppose, what indeed cannot be proved, that Sir Thomas Pope was one
of Cromwell's visitors in the affair of the monasteries. For although I have
insinuated above, that these visitors were not on all occasions entirely
justifiable in their proceedings, I am yet inclined to think, that their
conduct and behavior were in general less blameable than has been commonly
represented.

It is no wonder, that the monks should load those whom they esteemed the
instruments of their ruin with many calumnies; all which were studiously
propagated and heightened by their advocates of the catholic persuasion. And it
should at the same time be remembered, that the king's injunctions, under which
they acted, were extremely severe; insomuch, that many fraternities desired
their houses might be rather entirely suppressed, than reformed under such
rigorous conditions.

With regard to the vices and disorders Even in the Nunneries, where, among the
softer sex, some degree of delicacy, at least of decorum, might have justly
been expected, the lowest vices, not to insist on the more criminal
irregularities, were too often practiced. In the Benedictine convent of Rumsey,
in Hamshire, at a visitation by Bishop Fox, held in the year 1506, Joyce Rows
the abbess is accused of immoderate Drinking, especially "tempore nocturno;"
and of inviting the nuns to her chamber every evening, for the purpose of these
excesses, "post completorium." The nuns are also forbidden to have such
frequent and familiar access, at undue times, to the house of the bailiff or
chief hind of the monastery, whence unfavourable suspicions have arisen; and
the said bailiff himself is ordered, no more to frequent the chambers of the
abbess or nuns. Some of them are enjoined to abstain "a societate sacerdotum;"
and the abbess in particular is commanded to avoid all communications with
Seculars; especially with some whose names are expressly mentioned, and who are
known to have "accessum et recursum ad Eam." One of the injunctions to the nuns
in general is, " Quoa sint sobriae, et se abstineant a potu post Completcrium."
Apud Registr. Fox, Episc. Wint. Lib. i. fol. 42. b. This was a rich convent,
and filled with ladies of the best families.
, which they pretended to have detected in the monasteries, their reports
sometimes perhaps deserve credit, as those enormities are too naturally and
unavoidably connected with the monastic institution. In this, as in all other
cases of that sort, mutual opposition produced mutual obloquy.

Nor should it be forgotten, that the visitors gave a favorable report of some
houses. They interceded earnestly for the nunnery of God-stowe in Oxfordshire:
declaring that the nuns were strict in their lives; and alleging that the
suppression of this house would prove an irreparable inconvenience, as most of
the young ladies of the best families of that county were sent thither for
education Burnet. Reformat. i. 238. This was common in other nunneries. Tanner,
from the accounts of the cellaress of Carhow near Norwich, gives us a curious
specimen of what was received "pro perhendinationibus" or the board of young
ladies, and their servants, for education. " Rec. de dom. Margeria Wederley
perhendinant. ibid. xi septimanas, xiii. s. iv. d. Pro mensa unius famulae
dictae Margeriae per iii. septimanas, viii. d. per sept. etc." NOT. MON. fol.
pref. p. xxxii. [Ex orig. Rot. nunc in Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Tanner.]
. From the abbey of saint Edmondsbury in Suffolk they wrote to Cromwell, that
they could find nothing scandalous in the Abbot or any member of the convent
Burnet, ibid. 236.
. After surveying the stately and ancient abbey of Glastonbury, they
recommended it to the Lord Privy seal, that the buildings, at least, might be
suffered to remain undemolished; representing, that the structure in general of
this monastery was so magnificent, that it might very properly be spared, and
easily be converted into a palace for the king Willis's Mitr. Abb. i. 109.
. Gyffard, in particular, one of the visitors, petitioned in the strongest
terms for the absolute continuance of the monastery of Woolstrope in
Lincolnshire. I will insert the words of his letter to Cromwell; not only
because they contain an unexpected instance of candor, compassion, and
honesty, but as they preserve a curious picture of a well-regulated religious
house, of the second magnitude, at that period. "The governor thereof
[Woolstrope] is a very good husband for the house, and well beloved of all
the inhabitants thereunto adjoynynge: -- a right honest man, having right
religious persons, being prests of right good conversacion, and lyvynge
relygiously: having such qualities of virtue as we have not found the like in
no place. For there is not one religious person there, but that he can and does
use, either embrotheryng, writing books with very fair hand, making their
own garments, carving, paynting, or graffing [graving]. The house without any
slander or ill fame, and standinge very solitary: keepinge such
hospitality, that, except singular good provysion, it could not be manytened
with half so much land more as they may spend. Such a number of the pore
inhabitants nigh thereunto daily relieved, that we have not seen the like,
havinge no more lands than they have. God be even my judge, as I do write unto
you the troth. Which very pity causes me to write. The premises considered,
I beseech you to be a mean to the king's majesty, for the standinge of the
said Wolstrope Strype Eccl. Mem. i. 255. From the former part of this letter,
not printed by Strype, it appears, that the king had been disgusted at the
favorable representation made by Gyffard and his associates, of this and other
monasteries: but that his Majesty's displeasure did not prevent him from
telling the truth. "And forasmuch as of late my fellows and I wright untoo Mr.
Chancellor of the augmentacions, in the favor of thabbey of saint James, and
the nunnerie of Catesbie in Northamptonshire: which letters be showed unto the
kynge's highness in the favor of those howses, where the kyngis highness was
displeased, as he said to my servaunt, saying, that it was like that we had
receyved rewards, which caused us to wright as we did; which might putt me in
fear to wright: notwithstanding the sure knowledge that I have had allway in
your indifferens, gyveth me boldness to wright to you in the favor of the
house of Woolstrope. The Governor thereof, etc." Dat. Jun. xix. 1537. Brit.
Mus. MSS. Cott. Glaud. E. iv. fol. 213. The letter about Catesby will be cited
below.
." The same commissioner, with three others of his associates in the
visitation, pleaded in the same benevolent strain for the nunnery of Catesby in
Northamptonshire. "This house we found in very perfett order. The priores a
sure, wise, discreet, and very relygious woman; with ix nunnys under her
obedyence, as relygious and devout, and with as good obedyence as we have in
time paste seen, or belyke shall see. The seid house standyth in such a quarter
much to the releff of the king's people, and his grace's pore subjects their
[there] likewise moo relieved. -- Wherefore if yt should please the kyng's
highness to have any remorse, that any such religious house shall stand; we
think his grace cannot appointe any house more mete to show his most gracious
charity and pitey over than on the said house of Catesby Strype ibid. who has
printed it incorrectly from Bibl. Cotton, MSS. Cl. iv. fol. 209. Brit. Mus. see
other letters of the like kind in Collier, Eccl. hist. p. 2. b. iii. page 156.
." I find also Gyffard interceding in the same manner for the nunnery of
Polesworth in Warwickshire. "Wherein is an abbes named dame Alice Fitzherbert,
of the age of lx years, a very sad, discreate, and religyous woman: -- and
in the same house, under her rule, are xii virtuous and religyous nonnes, and
of good conversation. -- Wherefore ye might do a right good and merytorious
deed, to be medyatour to the kyng's highness for the said house to stand and
remain unsuppressed. -- And in the town of Polesworth are xliv tenements, and
never a plough but one Nor was it likely there should be another, while the
nunnery remained. The truth is, wherever there was a monastery, idleness was
encouraged, and the usual incitements to labor and industry were superseded.
: the resydue be artifycers, laborers, and victellers, and live in effect by
the said house, and the repair and resort that is made to the gentylmens
children and studiountes, that there do life, to the nombre sometime of xxx and
sometime xl and more; that their be right virtuously brought upp, etc. Written
at Maxstocke beside Coventree the xxviii day of July MSS. Cotton. Claud. E. iv.
ut supr. fol. 210. b.
." [1537.] Many others of the commissioners also showed a compassionate concern
for the religious at their expulsion, in providing them proper pensions,
according to their age, infirmities, or other circumstances of distress Strype,
ubi supr. seq. Willis Mitr. Abb. etc. Dr. London, one of the visitors, thus
writes to lord Cromwell about the monastery of De La Pre near Northampton.
"Besechinge your lordship to be good lord unto herre [the abbess] and to herre
poor sisters in their pensions." MSS. Cotton. ut supr. fol. 208.
.

In the reign of Henry the eighth, Sir Thomas Pope was employed in various
services and attendances about the court. He was appointed Perhaps as clerk of
the crown.
, April 21, 1544, together with Sir Edward North, afterward Lord North, to
convey the great seal of England, being resigned by the lord chancellor Audley
then indisposed, to the king at his new palace of Westminster, who delivered it
into the custody of Sir Thomas Wriothessey "Memorandum, quod die Lunae, viz.
vicesimo primo die Aprilis, anno regni Domini nostri Henrici octavi, dei
gratia, Angliae, etc, tricesimo quinto: Thomas Audeley miles, dominus Audeley
de Walden, tunc Cancellarius Angliae, infirmitate corporis debilitatus, magnum
sigillum.... praefato domino regi, per Edvardum North militem, et Thomam Pope
militem, misit; qui quidem Edvardus, et Thomas Pope, sigillum illud, in quadam
baga de albo corio inclusum, et sigillo dicti Dom. cancellarii munitum, regiae
magestati apud Palatium suum novum Westmonasteriense, in camera sua privata....
in presentia Thomae Henneage militis, et Antonii Denny armigeri, praesentarunt
et obtulerunt: humiliter supplicantes.... eandem regiam magestatem, quatenus
idem D. rex sigillum suum praedictum recipere et acceptare dignetur. Super quo
dictus D. rex sigillum illud, per manus ipsorum Edvardi et Thomae Pope, recepit
et acceptavit, etc. etc." Rymer, Foed. Tom. xv. p. 20. Super deliberatione
magni sigilli.
. There is a circumstance relating to this resignation which is not mentioned
by any of our historians. For the king committed the seal to Sir Thomas
Wriothesley, with the title of keeper, only during the indisposition of lord
Audley; with the reservation of reinstating him in the chancellorship on his
recovery Rymer, ibid.
. In 1547, he seems to have been summoned and examined by the privy council,
concerning certain treasonable expressions which had dropped from Thomas duke
of Norfolk, afterward condemned with lord Surrey but not executed, in
reference to the Act of Uses Herbert's Hist. Hen. viii. p. 564. edit. 1649. The
historian says, " One Thomas Pope informed the council, etc." It may therefore
be doubted whether he means sir Thomas Pope. But it is the same in Masters's
Text of this history, in Jesus college library. MSS. No. 2098. 79. vol. 3.
. He was a singular and most intimate friend of sir Thomas More, who seems to
have taken early notice of him, as I before hinted, when a young man in the
court of chancery; and was sent by the king, to notify to that illustrious
sufferer in the cause of mistaken conscience, the hour appointed for his
execution.

As the interview between these two friends, on this important occasion, is
memorable and interesting, I shall insert it at length.

On the fifth day of July See More's WORKS. fol. 1537. page 1457.
, 1535, he waited on sir Thomas More, then under condemnation in the Tower,
early in the morning; and acquainted him that he came by command of the king
and council, to bring his unfortunate friend the melancholy news, that he must
suffer death before nine of the clock the same morning, and that therefore he
should immediately begin to prepare himself for that aweful event. Upon this
message, More, without the least surprise or emotion, cheerfully replied;
"Master Pope, I most heartily thank you for your good tidings. I have been much
bound to the king's highness for the benefits of his honors that he has most
bountifully bestowed upon me; yet am I more bound to his grace, I assure you,
for putting me here, where I have had convenient time and space to have
remembrance of my end. And so help me god. Most of all am I bound unto him,
that it has pleased his majesty so shortly to rid me out of the miseries of
this wicked world." Then Pope subjoined, that it was the king's pleasure that
at the place of execution he should not use many words. To this More answered,
that he was ready to submit to the king's commands; and added, "I beseech you
good Mr. Pope, to get the king to suffer my daughter Margaret to be present at
my burial." Pope assured him that he would use his utmost interest with the
king for this purpose: and having now finished his disagreeable commission, he
solemnly took leave of his dying friend, and burst into tears. More perceiving
his concern, said with his usual composure; "Quiet yourself, good Mr. Pope, and
be not discomforted; for I trust that we shall one day in heaven see each other
full merrily, where we shall be sure to live and love together in joyful bliss
eternally Roper's Life of More, by T. Hearne, 4. 57.
." But this method of consolation proving ineffectual, More to divert the
melancholy of his friend, and to dismiss him in better spirits, called for a
glass; and applying it as an urinal, he held it up to the light, and with the
prophetic air of a sagacious physician gravely declared, "This man might have
lived longer if it had pleased the king Thomae Mori Vita et Exitus: by J. H.
gent. Land. 1652. page 127.
."

In consequence of sir Thomas Pope's intercession with the king, agreeably to
More's earnest and dying request, his favorite daughter, Margaret Roper, and
others of his family were permitted to be present at his interment, which was
performed immediately after the execution in the chapel of the Tower. But
Margaret afterward, and probably by the same interest, begged the body of the
king, and deposited it on the south side of the choir of the church of Chelsea,
where a monument, with an inscription written by himself, had been erected some
time before. This affectionate daughter, whose resolution equals her pity, also
found means to procure her father's head, after it had remained, ignominiously
stuck on a pole, on London bridge, for fourteen days. For this daring fact she
was apprehended and imprisoned; but declaring in her defense before the privy
council, that she had bought it that it might not in the end become food for
fishes in the Thames, she was discharged Weever Fun. Mon. 505, 506, 522.
Biograp. Brit. MORE. page 3165.
. However she carefully preserved it for some time in a leaden box, till an
opportunity offered of conveying it to Canterbury, where she placed it in a
vault belonging to her husband's family, under a chapel adjoining to saint
Dunstan's church in that city Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. 39.
.

SECT. II.
IN the reign of Edward the sixth, when the religious and political affairs of
the kingdom took another turn, and all public business fell into the hands of
new ministers and managers, sir Thomas Pope did not comply with the times. He
was appointed to no office, nor enjoyed any favor in this reign. He received
indeed some grants of land from the crown about the first year of this king,
with Cranmer archbishop of Canterbury, the duke of Somerset, the earl of
Warwick, the marquis of Northampton, and several other principal persons of the
court. But these grants were made for past services, and in consideration of
other claims due from the deceased king Strype Eccl. Mem. ii. 78. -- Some of
the particulars may perhaps be seen in pat. 1. Edw. vi. test. Jul. 24. par. 4.
-- Likewise, in this reign, sir Richard Leigh is licenced to alienate a manor
to sir T. Pope, pat. 1. Edw. vi. test. Maii 27. par. 7. -- Sir T. Pope is
licenced to alienate a pasture in Bermondsey to Will. Gerrard, pat. 2. Edw. vi.
test. Jan. 16. par. 3. -- Sir T. Pope is licenced to alienate the manor of
Broughton, co. Oxon. to William Godolphin and Henry Boothe, pat. 5. Edw. vi.
test. Sept. 17. par. 7. These are all the patents, of any sort, which he
received in this reign.
.

The unlimited authority, and arbitrary dominion of Henry, had kept both
protestants and papists in subjection. Under such a government they both acted
uniformly, and neither party presumed to claim any apparent superiority. But
upon the decease of that uncontrollable monarch, the people discovered their
real sentiments without reserve, and protestantism manifestly began to be the
prevailing religion. The protector Somerset, who had long been a secret
partisan of the reformers, on the accession of young Edward, publicly declared
his intention of forwarding and establishing the reformation. In this scheme he
was happily seconded by most of the privy council, who after the fall of
Southampton seem entirely to have deserted the catholic communion. The
protector wisely took care that all persons to whom he entrusted the education
of the young king, should be attached to these rational principles; and
preferred and encouraged those alone that appeared active in this profession.

Thus most of the courtiers, yet more perhaps in general from lucrative views
than from real conviction, became converts to the predominant party: amongst
which, however, I do not find sir Thomas Pope. This, at least, shows a
steadiness and uniformity of mind in those days of change, which afford such
frequent instances of occasional compliance.

Nor let it be deemed any inconsistency of character, that he, though a rigid
papist, should have been in the preceding reign an agent for suppressing the
monasteries, and a receiver of their possessions. For the demolition of these
houses was not an act of the church but of the state. It was prior to the
reformation of religion, and effected by a king and parliament of the popish
communion. It was even confirmed by the parliament of queen Mary Statut, 1, 2.
Phil. Mar. cap. viii. inf. citat.
.

Very few papists wrote or remonstrated against the destruction of these
societies. Without the least impeachment of their principles, or suspicion of
apostasy, several others, the strictest members of the catholic persuasion, and
the most respectable characters of those times, among which, to mention no
more, was the duke of Norfolk, accepted grants of the conventual estates.

Even the clergy thought it no sacrilege to share in these acquisitions. The
dean and chapter of Litchfield, and the abbot and convent of Westminster, made
no scruple of receiving manors alienated from other religious corporations See
Tanner's Notit. Mon. fol. edit. pref. p. xxxix.
, lately dissolved. Burnet tells us Ref. i. 251.
, that bishop Gardener was remarkably vehement in declaiming against the
monasteries; and that in many of his sermons he commended the king for
supperssing them See Fox, vol. ii. p. 426.
. Queen Mary, in the very first year of her reign, made grants of the site of
twenty religious houses, and of very large quantities of abbey-land Tanner, ubi
supr.
. The bishops and clergy in a catholic convocation, 1554, petitioned that the
pope would not insist on a restitution of the ecclesiastical revenues, but
rather confirm them to those lords and gentlemen by whom they had been obtained
Wilkins's Councils. iv. 10t.
. And it is notorious, that some of the popish bishops were no less alienators
of their episcopal endowments Tanner ubi supr. And Collier Eccl. hist. xi. 324,
306. Heylin p. 121.
, than many other bishops of the protestant church proved afterward, in the
reigns of Edward the sixth and Elizabeth. The bishop of Chichester, in opening
the disputation of Henry the eighth with Lambert, in Westminster Hall, ranked
the king's disincorporation of the monks with his rejection of the sea of Rome,
his abolition of idolatrous adoration, and the introduction of the English
bible; as a matter of an external nature, and in no respect interfering with
the essentials of the catholic communion See MSS. C. C. C. C. cxxvii. 5.
. The monastic institution was no part of the papistic theology. Undoubtedly
the suppression of the convents facilitated the admission of protestatism: but
it was evidently undertaken on other principles.

When queen Mary succeeded to the throne, sir Thomas Pope was again taken into
favor, and soon afterward constituted one of the queen's privy counselors
Hollingshead. iii. 1159. Speed, 854.
. He is likewise said to have been appointed cofferer to the household MSS.
Rawlins. bibl. Bodl. History of Oxfordshire, Wroxton. But it does not appear by
the patents. And Richard Freston is made cofferer, pat. 3, 4. Phil. Mar. par. 2.
.

But before I proceed further in this reign, it may be proper to obviate some
seeming difficulties and inconsistences, by premising, on what security sir
Thomas Pope, together with many others, held his church-revenues, under a
bigoted catholic queen, and upon the restoration of the popish religion. By
way of procuring new concessions in favor of Rome, and to prevent unseasonable
alarms, at the beginning of this reign, both the queen and the pope had given
repeated assurances that the church and abbey lands should remain, forever
unreclaimed, in the hands of their present possessors Heylin Eccle. rest. p. 41.
. But that the tenure of these possessions should not be fixed on so precarious
a foundation as that of mere promises, in 1554, an act of parliament was
passed; which, while it restored the pope's authority, gave absolute security
to the proprictors of the ecclesiastical estates, entirely confirmed their
title beyond the power of resumption, and, at the same time, exempted them from
the danger of spiritual censures Statut. 1, 2. Phil. Mar. cap. viii.
. In the mean time, that this measure might receive the fullest sanction,
cardinal Pole, who was invested by the pope with legantine jurisdiction,
ratified the parliament's decree: and, that the dispensation might be still
more ample and effectual, in consequence of his master's commission, the legate
ensured even the property of future acquisitions of church lands to the present
receivers Ibid. And Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 159. seq. See also Harl. miscell.
vii. p. 264, 266.
.

Thus, an equivalent was granted on both sides. The nobility and gentry were
settled in the quiet enjoyment of their estates; and the pope, although most
essentially weakened by the alienation of that wealth on which his power so
much depended, was reinstated in his supremacy over the church.

During this reign sir Thomas Pope was often employed in commissions of
consequence. On the twenty-ninth day of July, 1553, he was commissioned by the
council, together with sir Arthur Darcy, and others Burghley's State papers, by
Haynes, p. 162.
, to apprehend lord Russel, Anthony Brown of Essex, and several accomplices
concerned in the duke of Northumberland's insurrection; who, on the death of
Edward, had raised an army with an intent to place the lady Jane Gray on the
throne, before Mary was proclaimed queen. The duke himself had been apprehended
some little time before. For after many fruitless efforts, and vain
expectations of a reinforcement, he suddenly changed his principles, dismissed
his troops, and tamely submitted to proclaim queen Mary with all external
demonstrations of triumph and satisfaction. Being immediately arrested by the
earl of Arundel, he fell on his knees and abjectly begged his life Burnet, Ref.
ii. 239.
.

In the same year, on the twenty-third day of February, I find him directed by
the council, together with lord Rich, the master of the rolls, the lieutenant
of the Tower, and others, to appoint a certain number of the council, who
should constantly remain, and dispatch business, at London Q Mary's council
book, MSS. Harl. Brit. mus. 643.
. For the court, whom the privy council always followed and attended, was often
held at different palaces in the country; as at Oatelands, Richmond, Greenwich,
and other places In the reign of Henry the eighth, the principal places of the
royal residence in the country were Richmond, Hampton court, Wird or, Eltham,
and Woodstock. In a book of Injunctions for that king's household, given by
Cardinal Wolsey, it is at these five palaces only, when the king is present,
that the solemnities of the Chapel and Hall are ordered to be kept. MSS. Laud.
K. 48.
. At the same time he is commanded, with the same persons, to give orders for
victualling and furnishing the Tower of London Council book.
. There was another commission, the same year, directed by the queen to sir
Richard Southwell, and others, for inspecting the office of ordinance, and
examining the state of ammunition in the Tower Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 33.
. By which it appears, that this department had been greatly neglected in the
foregoing reign; or that the queen was willing to take the proper precautions
against any future attack on her title, from her factious and discontented
subjects. The same year, on the twenty-ninth day of October, he was appointed,
with the lord treasurer, the earl of Arundel, lord Rich, sir Francis
Englefield, and several others, to examine certain offenders taken in
Northumberland's rebellion, and to assess their fines Burghley's State papers,
ut supr. p. 193.
. Soon afterward, in the beginning of 1554, I find him present, together with
sir Philip Denny, sir Thomas Brydges, and others, when sir Thomas Wyat, and his
desperate associates, after their rash and abortive enterprise, were led
prisoners into the tower of London. On which occasion sir Thomas Pope severely
reproached Brett, one of the principal rebels, for his complicated cowardice
and treachery. A charge which the prisoner could not but acknowledge with much
shame and confusion. For Brett, being the captain of a detachment of archers in
the queen's service, had privately revolted with all his party at a time of
danger, and joined Wyat's army MSS. Annale of queen Marie her reign. MSS.
Harl. 194. Brit Mus. -- This, and other particulars, have been transeribed by
Stowe. Annals, ed. 1615. p. 621. col. 2. -- The manuscript adds, that during
the skirmish of Charing Cross in which Wyat was taken, "there stood upon the
leads [of the white tower] the marquis of Northampton, sir Nicholas Poines,
Sir Thomas Pope, master John Seimer, and others." This passage is also
transcribed by Stowe. This manuscript formerly belonged to Stowe, who drew from
it great part of queen Mary's reign: yet omiting many passages. It is cited by
sir Simonds D'Ewes, to whom it afterward belonged, in his tract, entit.
Primitive Practice for preserving Truth. Land. 1645. 4to. He says it was
written "by a courtier under queen Mary, -- the very autograph being in my
library, written with his own hand." p. 13.
.

In the same year, sir Thomas Pope was one of the champions at a magnificent
justing exhibited before the queen at Westminster. On which occasion the horses
were richly caparisoned with red velvet and silver bosses, and the helmets of
the knights were plumed with ostrich-feathers. Many Spanish noblemen were
present MSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype.
.

On the fifteenth of March, 1554, he was constituted, with sir Robert
Rochester, comptroller of the household, sir Richard Southwell, sir Thomas
Cornwallis, sir Edmund Peckham, and sir Edward North, knights, a commissioner,
for examining, adjusting, and balancing the accounts of sir Thomas Gresham, who
was agent to the queen at Antwerp for taking up money of the merchants of that
city Rymer's Foed. tom. xv. p. 371. Pro Thoma Gresham de commissariis ad
computa examinanda. "Mary by the grace of God, etc. To our right trusty and
wel-belovid counsaillors, sir Rob. Rochester, comptroller of our house, sir
Rich. Southwell, knight, sir Thomas Cornwallis, knight, and to our trusty and
right wel-belovid sir Edward North, and sir Thomas Pope, knights, Greetinge....
We having special trust and confidence in your approvid fidelities, wisdoms,
and circumspections, etc."
. The commissioners are ordered to examine, allow, and determine all receipts,
payments, charges, and discharges, declarations, or employments, of sir Thomas
Gresham, or his agents; to assign him, by deduction, an allowance of twenty
shillings per day, with all incidental expenses: and finally to acquit and
discharge the said sir Thomas Gresham: to charge and discharge all allowances
and defalcations in stating the account, according to their wisdom and
discretion, either of moneys taken up for Edward the sixth, or for the present
queen. For this business sir Thomas Pope was admirably qualified, from that
knowledge and experience in stating extensive and complicated accounts, which
he must have acquired while he was concerned in the court of Augmentations. And
for the same reason, in the succeeding reign, sir Walter Mildmay was deputed by
the lords, to make a general inquisition of the royal revenue Strype. Ann. Ref.
i. 13. sect. ii.
.

This expedient of borrowing money at an exorbitant interest of the merchants
of Antwerp, was a measure which Mary was obliged to put in practice more than
once Council-book. MSS. Brit. Mus. ut supr.
. And it had been to her honor, if she had used no worse. For indeed the chief
object of government, which for some time engaged her attention, was to raise
large sums by the most irregular methods, or to extort money from her subjects.
She sometimes endeavored to recruit her exhausted exchequer by retrenching the
public expenses at home. She demolished several forts on the river below
Gravesend, which were filled with superfluous garrisons; she broke all the body
guards, half the band of pensioners, the gentlemen of the stables, and the
pages of honor: and proposed to disband the hundred archers of the guard. But
to frugality she added oppression, and her unhappy necessities frequently
compelled her to the most violent and unjustifiable experiments. She levied
sixty thousand marks from seven thousand yeomen, and thirty-six thousand pounds
from the merchants. This was exacted, because they had not contributed to a
former loan of sixty thousand pounds levied on a thousand persons, in whose
compliance, either on account of their loyalty or their riches, she firmly
confided. But that tax not being found sufficient, she exacted a general loan
of an hundred pounds each, on all who possessed an annual income of twenty
pounds. This imposition obliged many of the gentry to reduce their domestic
expenses, and to dismiss many of their servants, that they might, at least more
prudently, comply with her commands. And as these servants, having no means of
subsistence, by too common a transition from that state of idleness, betook
themselves to theft and robbery, the queen knew no better method of redressing
the grievance, than to publish a proclamation, obliging their former masters to
take them back to their services. In order to gratify the city of London for
past favors, and to engage them to assist her with future supplies, she issued
an edict, at their instance, prohibiting for four months, the exportation of
English clothes into Flanders. By this iniquitous combination, a good market
was procured in that country for such as had already sent thither large
quantities of that sort of merchandise Carte, iii. 330, 331, 337, 341.
.

Her extravagancies proved a perpetual obstruction to the commercial interests
of the kingdom. Her own bigottry was not always a sufficient restraint on her
conscience, to prevent her from exposing to sale the revenues See supr. page 40.
of that church, in defense of which she had sacrificed in the flames so many
victims. But it would be endless and impertinent here, to mention at large her
multiplied extortions; and the various imprudent or fraudulent schemes, which
her exigencies invented for obtaining money. It may be sufficient to add, that
these expedients were employed, not to carry on an expensive war, for she was
in profound peace with all the world; nor to promote the national welfare by
any new establishments or improvements: but to satisfy the unjust demands of a
husband, who slighted her love, neglected her interests, and solely consulted
his own convenience.

On this occasion one cannot help observing the weakness of the human mind
under the most powerful and importunate of passions. Mary regarded her husband
Philip with all the fondness and solicitude of an uncertain lover. This
attachment produced strange contradictions in her sentiments and behavior. She
was naturally too phlegmatic to be profuse; yet, from a penurious and
economical habit of mind, she suddenly became rapacious and expensive. She
persecuted the reformed with the most barbarous severities, yet alienated the
riches assigned to support her favorite superstitions. In this situation, she
was at once deserted by that cold and stoical inflexibility which distinguishes
her character; and the sedate and gloomy queen suffered herself to be betrayed
into greater inconsistencies of conduct, than even the most unaccountable
caprice of her father Henry could have dictated.

Before the reign of queen Mary, it was the common practice with our English
princes to have recourse to the city of Antwerp for voluntary loans; and we
generally find their credit so low, that they were obliged to engage the city
of London to join in the security. But this business seems never to have been
so effectually conducted as by that public-spirited and enterprizing merchant,
sir Thomas Gresham, who began to be employed in this agency by Edward the sixth
See Burghley's State papers, by Haynes, p. 185. And Ward's Life of Gresham, p.
7.
. He was likewise employed by queen Elizabeth for the same purpose; one of
whose first steps, at her accession, was to procure money. She sent Gresham to
Antwerp to borrow two hundred thousand pounds, in order to enable her to reform
the coinage, at that time extremely debased. But, as a most sensible and acute
historian observes Hume, hist. Eliz. p. 731. edit. 410.
, she was so impolitic as to make herself an innovation in the coin; by
dividing a pound of silver into sixty-two shillings, instead of sixty, the
former standard.

In the year 1557, on the eighth of February, sir Thomas Pope was joined by the
queen, in a famous commission for the more effectual suppression of heretics
Burner's Reformation, Coll. of records, part. ii. b. ii. p. 311. "Having
special trust and confidence in your fidelities, wisdoms, and discretions, etc."
, in concert with Bonner, bishop of London, Thirlby, bishop of Ely, the Lords
Windsor and North, secretary Bourne, sir John Mordaunt, sir Francis Englefield,
sir Edward Waldegrave, sir Nicholas Hare, sir Roger Cholmeley, sir Richard
Read, sir Thomas Stradling, sir Rowland Hill, sergeant Rastall, Cole, dean of
saint Paul's, William Cook, Thomas Martin, John Story, and John Vaughan,
doctors of law, and William Roper and Ralph Cholmeley, esquires. These
commissioners were empowered to enquire after all persons suspected of
heretical opinions: to search for and seize seditious and heterodox books,
either exposed to sale, or secreted in private houses: to investigate and
examine concealments, contempts, conspiracies, and calumnies, against the
government. They were ordered to detect those persons who refused to preach the
sacrament of the altar, to hear mass, to take holy bread or holy water, to
frequent their respective public churches, and to assist in the solemn
processions. They were likewise privileged to summon what witnesses they judged
most proper, and to tender oaths to the parties prosecuted, for answering such
questions as might be deemed most convenient for discovering the truth, In this
injunction however, there is a remarkable clause of restraint upon the
commissioners. For it is expressly commanded, that if any person brought before
them for heretical doctrines or opinions, should still obstinately persist in
his error, "He should immediately be committed to his ordinary, there to be
used according to the spiritual and ecclesiastical laws."

Bishop Burnet, whose imagination was perpetually haunted with the horrors of
popery, supposes, that something more dreadful was intended by this commission
than appears at first sight, and that it was undoubtedly designed as the
tribunal of an Inquisition in England Hist. Ref. ii. 347.
. But a superficial reader may plainly perceive, that there is nothing of the
form, process, or power, of an Inquisition contained in this instrument. The
commissioners receive no authority to try heterodoxy, nor to put the offenders
upon making an act of faith. On the contrary, they are directed to deliver up
all delinquents to the ordinary. And even here the process is to be regulated
by the laws of the church. These circumstances seem sufficiently to exclude the
idea of an inquisitorial tribunal. For the proceedings of the commissioners,
however rigorously they might have been conducted, were not unlimited and
arbitrary; but finally determinable by the proper ecclesiastical officer, who
was himself controlled by the spiritual constitutions of the land, which did
not at least on this occasion, receive any degree of extension. The zealous
bishop makes the matter still more alarming, where he tells us, that in support
of such measures, "he finds it said, that some advised that courts of
inquisition, like those in France and Spain, might be set up in England Ubi
supr. p. 346.
." But he does not inform us by whom this is said, nor can I find this advice
in any of our historians. Even Fox, who omits nothing that can expose the
papists, who has studiously recorded all the idle reports of the times, and who
supposed that the papists worshipped one god and the protestants another He
thus rallies the devotion of the people, for praying for Mary's happy delivery
of a child, "Cry up louder you priests, peradventure YOUR GOD IS ASLEEP. Vol.
iii. p. 116.
, is silent on this important subject. And indeed if we consider the queen's
late expostulation with the pope, in which she declared her resolution of
maintaining the prerogative and the constitution When the Pope would have
obtruded a new legate, in the place of cardinal Pole, and while he was actually
on his journey to England, the queen absolutely refused his admission into the
kingdom. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 403.
; if we recollect that Philip's confessor, Alphonsus, expressly declaimed
against persecutions in the pulpit, by the king's own desire Neal's Hist. Pur.
i. 99. Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 239. Heylin, p. 56. Burnet, Ref. ii. 305.
: and if to these reasons we add the distinguished lenity, moderation, and
candor of cardinal Pope; this project of an English inquisition must appear
altogether improbable.

But whatever was the real state of the case, we find that the commissioners,
sensible that persecution naturally counteracts its own purpose, and averse to
measures which might probably end in the most inhuman punishments, did little
or nothing in this business Heylin, ubi supr.
: especially as to the detection of prohibited books. For so inactive were
they, that on the sixth of June, 1558, the queen was obliged to publish a
proclamation Heylin, ubi supr. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 459.
; in which she complains, that not only numberless seditious and treasonable
treatises, were printed at home and dispersed without control, but even
imported from abroad. As the provocation was great, so the proclamation is
conceived in the most despotic and unconstitutional terms. It sets forth,
amonst other extraordinary menaces, that if those persons who find such
unlawful books do not immediately destroy them, they shall be reputed rebels,
and executed accordingly by martial law. The queen indeed had some reason for
complaint, and for substituting somewhat more effectual in the place of her
former commission by this recent injunction. For during the actual subsistence
and authority of that commission, Knox and Goodman printed, and imported from
Geneva, a piece entitled, The first Blast of the Trumpet against the monstrous
Regimen of Women Genev. 8vo. 1558.
. In this performance, which is full of paradox and enthusiasm, they call the
queen Traitress, Bastard, Proserpine; with other terms of illiberal and
ridiculous abuse. Goodman also published about the same time, How superior
Powers ought to be obeyed of their Subjects, and wherein they may be lawfully
by God's Word disobeyed and resisted Genev. 16to. 1558. printed by John
Crispin. Unluckily, Mary herself while princess, in 1548, yet certainly without
any heretical intention, had published a piece, which of course fell under the
censure of this commission. It was a translation of Erasmus's paraphrase on St.
John, and done by desire of queen Catharine Parr. The preface is written by
Udall, master of Eton-school; in which he much extolls, and I believe not
without reason, Mary's proficience in literature.
. But these treatises, written chiefly for the gratification of Calvin then
living at Geneva, were not more invectives against the invincible bigottries of
Mary, and the gross absurdities of popery, than they were openly subversive of
all established government and religion. Just before, a book of very pernicious
tendency had appeared Collier, Eccl. Hist. p. ii. p. 404.
, called a Treatise of politic Power Supposed to be written by Poynett, the
deprived bishop of Winton. infra citat. Stowe reports, that Poynett was in
Wyatt's army; but that finding that enterprise likely to miscarry, he fled, and
embarked for Germany, where he joined has reformed brethren, the religious
exiles. Stowe, Ann. per Howes, p. 620.
. Plays and enterludes ridiculing the queen's person and government were
exhibited Council book. MSS. Harl. and Strype. Burnet.
. Libels and satires were thrown into the houses of the privy counselors; and
even dropped in the queen's own chamber.

Amongst other pasquinades, there were prints, or pictures, representing her
majesty, naked, meager, withered, and wrinkled, with every aggravated
circumstance of deformity that could disgrace a female figure, seated in a
regal chair; a crown on her head, surrounded with M. R. and A. in capital
characters. In the first of these was written, in small letters, Maria, in the
second regina, and in the third Anglioe. The additional figures were a great
number of Spaniards sucking her. Underneath, in Italian characters, were
legends, signifying that the Spaniards had sucked her to skin and bone; as also
specifying minutely the money, rings, jewels, and other presents, with which
she had secretly gratified her husband Philip. The queen was highly incensed at
this insolent and popular piece of ridicule; especially as she suspected some
of her own council, who alone were privy to these transactions, and acquainted
with her secrets Carte, iii. 331.
.

With regard to the persecutions of this reign, which occasioned the commission
in which Sir Thomas Pope was concerned, relating to the suppression of
heretics, we will allow that the queen and her friends had suffered, what they
thought the most injurious treatment; and, no doubt, when power returned into
their hands, were but too naturally disposed to retaliate in their own way.
These oppressions, perhaps injudiciously conducted, prepared the way for
popery: just as the severities of Mary, at the succession of Elisabeth made the
protestants more violent against the papists. In the reign of Henry the eighth,
the monasteries were destroyed, and the wealth of the church, in which it is
strength consisted, was dissipated. Three of the abbots, in the course of that
transaction, were unjustly put to death Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 164.
. Six bishops, amongst which were Mary's favorites, and the great champions of
her religion, Bonner and Gardener, were deprived, insulted, and imprisoned,
during the reign of Edward the sixth See Heylin, Eccles. Rest. sub. ann. 1551.
. In the same reign, the queen, while princess, was absolutely forbidden to
hear mass; a misfortune, in her ideas, almost equal to the loss of life See
MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. 6195. 26. "Mary had rather loss her life than part with
the mass."
: and her friends who privately interposed to defeat the execution of this
dreadful interdiction, were sent to the Tower Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 253. seq.
.

But as no religion can expiate, so no provocation can justify, no resentment
can excuse, that uninterrupted series of deliberate barbarity which marks every
page of her unprosperous annals with martyrdoms, hardly to be paralleled in the
pagan persecutions of primitive christianity. If in the two preceding reigns,
many venerable prelates of Mary's communion had been injuriously treated, or
even put to death, for conscientious disobedience, yet none of them were
inhumanly dragged to the flames like the meek Latimer or the learned Ridley. It
is also allowed, that to burn heretics was an established doctrine of the
catholic religion. But in what age of the same religion, or in what country,
were these punishments ever executed with so many circumstances of cruelty? Her
attempt to restore the monasteries, however conformable to her system, was a
measure, which tended only to bring back national poverty with national
superstition: for it is certain, that Henry's distribution of the monastic
revenues into private hands, although dictated by selfish and fordid motives,
founded the present greatness of England. In the mean time it will be but
charitable to grant, that her private life was confessedly blameless and
unblemished. I will not say whether it was her fault or her unhappiness, that
the constancy of her attachments seldom met with suitable returns of gratitude
and affection. In this at least some goodness of heart appears, that nothing
affected her so much, as the unkindness of those whom she best loved. She
possessed a firmness of mind, which deserved better times; and a vigor of
understanding, which was impeded by religious prejudices. Her merits, whatever
they were, seem to have been overlooked in her misfortunes: and as the latter
were aggravated, so the former were obliterated, by that blaze of prosperity
which surrounded the succeeding reign.

SECT. III.
IN the year 1555, the princess Elizabeth, afterward queen, having been before
treated with much insolence and inhumanity, was placed under the care and
inspection of sir Thomas Pope Fox, edit. 1684. iii. 798. Speed, etc.
. Mary cherished that antipathy to the certain heiress of her crown and her
successor, which all princes who have no children to succeed naturally feel.
But the most powerful cause of Mary's hatred of the princess, with whom she
formerly lived in some degree of friendship Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 14. 17. 82.
At queen Mary's coronation, the lady Elizabeth rode in the first chariot, with
lady Anne of Cleves, after the queen's litter, in the procession from the tower
to Westminster. Strype, ib. 36. See also Hollingsh. Chron. iii. 1152. col. 1.
, seems to have arisen from Courtney, earl of Devonshire.

The person, address, and other engaging accomplishments He was polite,
studious, and learned; an accurate master of the languages, skilled in the
mathematics, painting, and music. He lived a prisoner in the tower, from
fourteen to twenty-six years of age; when he was set at liberty by queen Mary,
at her accession. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 339.
of this young nobleman, had made a manifest impression on the queen Burnet,
Ref. ii. 255.
. Other circumstances also contributed to render him an object of her
affection; for he was an Englishman, and nearly allied to the crown; and
consequently could not fail of proving acceptable to the nation. The earl was
no stranger to these favorable dispositions of the queen toward him Goodwyn,
p. 339.
. Yet, he seemed rather to attach himself to the princess; whose youth and
lively conversation had more prevailing charms than the pomp and power of her
sister Burnet, Ref. ii. 273. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 352, 362.
. This preference not only produced a total change in Mary's sentiments which
regard to the earl, but forced her openly to declare war against Elizabeth.

The ancient quarrel between their mothers remained deeply rooted in the
malignant heart of the queen Camden, Eliz. per Hearne, i. Apparatus, page 19.
: and she took advantage from the declaration made by parliament in favor of
Catharine's marriage Statut. Mar. i. cap. i.
, to represent her sister's birth as illegitimate. Elizabeth's inclination to
the protestant religion still further heightened Mary's aversion: it offended
her bigottry, disappointed her exspectations, and disconcerted her politics.
These causes of dislike, however, might perhaps have been forgotten by degrees,
or, at least, would have ended in secret disgust. But when the queen found that
the princess had obstructed her designs in a matter of the most interesting
nature; female resentment, founded on female jealousy, and exasperated by
pride, could no longer be suppressed.

So much more forcible, and of so much more consequence in public affairs, are
private feelings, and the secret undiscerned operations of the heart, than the
most important political reasons. Monsieur Noailles, however, the French
ambassador at the court of England during this period, with the true dignity of
a mysterious statesman, seems unwilling to refer the queen's displeasure to so
slight a motive: and assigns a more profound intrigue as the foundation of
Courtenay's disgrace. Domestic incidents operate alike in every station of
life; and often form the greatest events of history. Princes have their
passions in common with the rest of mankind.

Elizabeth being now become the public and avowed object of Mary's aversion,
was openly treated with much disrespect and insult. She was forbidden to take
place, in the presence chamber, of the countess of Lenox and the duchess of
Suffolk, as if her legitimacy had been dubious Goodwyn.
. This doctrine had been insinuated by the chancellor Gardener, in a speech
before both houses of parliament Sess. sec. ann. prim. Mar.
. Among other arguments enforcing the necessity of Mary's marriage, he
particularly insisted on the failure of the royal lineage; artfully remarking,
that none of Henry's descendants remained, except the queen, and the princess
Elisabeth Avoiding the term sister. Amb. de Noailles, apud Carte, iii. 310.
. Her friends were neglected or affronted. And while her amiable qualifications
every day drew the attention of the young nobility, and rendered her
universally popular, the malevolence of the vindictive queen still increased.
The princess therefore thought it most prudent to leave the court: and before
the beginning of 1554, retired to her house at Ashridge in Hertfordshire
"Wherein our most worthy and ever famous queen Elisabeth lodged as in her
own, being then a more stately house, at the time of Wyatt's attempt in
queen Maryes day." Norden's Description of Hartfordshire, written 1596. page
12. edit. 1723.
.

In the mean time, Sir Thomas Wyat's rebellion, abovementioned, broke out, in
opposition to the queen's match with Philip of Spain. It was immediately
pretended, that the princess Elisabeth, together with lord Courteney, was
privately concerned in this dangerous conspiracy, and that she had held a
correspondence with the traitor Wyat. Accordingly See Hollingshed's Chron. iii.
1151. seq. From Fox.
, sir Edward Hastings, afterward lord Loughborough, sir Thomas Cornwallis, and
sir Richard Southwell, attended by a troop of horse, were ordered to bring her
to the court. They found the princess sick, and even confined to her bed, at
Ashridge Amb. de Noailles, whose papers are cited by Carte, calls this a
favorable illness. "Since, he adds, it seems likely to save Mary from the crime
of putting her sister to death by violence." Carte, iii. 306.
. Notwithstanding, under pretense of the strictness of their commission, they
compelled her to rise: and, still continuing very weak and indisposed, she
proceeded in the queen's litter by slow journies to London Her manner of coming
to London is thus described in a manuscript chronicle, often cited hereafter,
"The same time and day, between four and fyve of the cloak at night, my lady
Elisabeth's grace came to London, through Smithfielde, untoo Westminster, with
c. velvet cotts after her grace. And her grace rod in a charytt opyn on both
sides: and her grace [had] ryding after her a 100. in cotts of fine read
gardyd with velvett; and so through fletstrete unto the court through the
queen's garden, her grace being sick." MSS. Cotton, Vitell. F. 5.
. At the court, they kept her confined and without company, for a fortnight:
after which, bishop Gardener, who well knew her predominant disposition to
cabal and intrigue, with nineteen others of the council, attended to examine
her concerning the rebellion of which she was accused. She positively denied
the accusation. However they informed her, it was the queen's resolution the
should be committed to the Tower, till further enquiries could be made
Hollingshead, ut supr.
. The princess immediately wrote to the queen, earnestly entreating that she
might not be imprisoned in the Tower, and concluding her letter thus: "As for
that Traitor Wiat, he might paraventur write me a letter; but on my faith I
never receved any from him. And as for the copy of my letter sent to the
French king, I pray God confound me eternally, if ever I sent him word,
message, token, or letter, by any menes Camden's Eliz. per Hearne, vol i.
editor. praefat. p. 78.
" Her oaths, and her repeated protestations of innocence were all ineffectual.
She was conveyed to the tower, and ignominiously conducted through the
Traitor's gate May 18. As MSS. Cott. Vitell. F. 5.
.

At her first commitment, only three men and three women of the queen's
servants, were appointed for her attendants. But even these were forbidden to
bring her meat; and she was waited on, for this purpose, by the lieutenant's
servants, or even by the common soldiers. But afterward, two yeomen of her
chamber, one of her robes, two of her pantry and ewry, one of her buttery, one
of her cellar, another of her larder, and two of her kitchen, were allowed, by
permission of the privy council, to serve at her table. No stranger, or
visitor, was admitted into her presence. The constable of the tower, sir John
Gage, treated her very severely, and watched her with the utmost vigilance.
Many of the other prisoners, committed to the same place on account of the
rebellion, were often examined about her concern in the conspiracy: and some of
them were put to the rack, by way of extorting an accusation. Her innocence
however was unquestionable: for although Wyat himself had accused her, in hopes
to have saved his own life by means of so base and scandalous an artifice, yet
he afterward denied that she had the least knowledge of his designs; and lest
those denials which he made at his examinations might be insidiously
suppressed, and his former depositions alleged against her adopted in their
stead, he continued to make the same declarations openly on the scaffold at the
time of his execution Hollingshead, ut supr.
,

There was a pretense, much insisted on by Gardener, that Wyat had conveyed to
her a bracelet, in which the whole scheme of the plot was enclosed. But Wyat
acquitted her of this and all other suspicions Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 97.
. After a close imprisonment of some days, by the generous intercession of lord
Chandois, lieutenant of the tower, it was granted that she might sometimes walk
in the queen's lodgings Concerning these apartments in the Tower, see the very
judicious and ingenious Mr. Walpole's Historic Doubts concerning Richard the
Third.
, in the presence of the constable, the lieutenant, and three of the queen's
ladies; yet on condition that the windows should be shut. She then was indulged
with walking in a little garden, for the sake of fresh air: but all the
shutters which looked toward the garden were ordered to be kept close.

Such were their jealousies, that a little boy of four years old who had been
accustomed every day to bring her flowers, was severely threatened if he came
any more; and the child's father was summoned and rebuked by the constable. But
lord Chandois being observed to treat the princess with too much respect, he
was not any longer entrusted with the charge of her; and she was committed to
the custody of sir Henry Bedingfield, of Oxburgh in Norfolk He was firmly
attached to the queen's interests. Beside his Government of the Tower, he was
knight marshal of the queen's army, captain of her guards, vice-chamberlain to
the queen, and a privy counselor. She also granted him a yearly pention of 100
l. for life, and part of the forseited estate of sir Thomas Wyat. Blomefield's
Norfolk, iii. 481. He is often, by mistake, written Beningfield, Benfield, etc.
, a person whom she had never seen nor knew before. He brought with him a new
guard of one hundred soldiers, clothed in blue; which the princess observing,
asked with her usual liveliness, If lady Jane's scaffold was yet taken away?

About the end of May she was removed from the tower under the command of sir
Henry Bedingfield, and lord Williams of Them, to the royal manor or palace at
Woodstock MSS. Cotton. Vitel. F. 5. "The xx day of May my lady Elisabeth, the
queen's sister, came out of the tower, and took her barge at the tower-wharffe
and so to Rychmond, and from thens unto Wyndsor, and so to Wodstoke."
. The first night of her journey she lay at Richmond; where being watched all
night by the soldiers, and all access of her own private attendants utterly
prohibited, she began to be convinced, that orders had been given to put her
privately to death. The next day she reached Windsor, where she was lodged in
the Dean's house near saint George's collegiate chapel. She then passed to lord
Williams's seat at Ricot in Oxfordshire, where she lay; and "was very
princely entertained both of knights and ladies." But Bedingfield was highly
disgusted at this gallant entertainment of his prisoner. During their journey,
lord Williams and another gentleman playing at chess, the princess accidentally
came in, and told them she must stay to see the game played out; but this
liberty Bedingfield would not permit Hollingshead, ut supr.
.

Arriving at Woodstock, she was lodged in the gatehouse of the palace; in an
apartment remaining complete within these fifty years with it is original arched
roof of Irish oak, curiously carved, painted blue sprinkled with gold, and to
the last retaining it is name of Queen Elizabeth's chamber The old royal manor,
or palace, at Woodstock, was besieged in the grand rebellion, and much damaged
in the siege. The furniture was afterward sold, and the buildings portioned
out by Cromwell, or his agents, to three persons. Two of them, about 1652,
pulled down their portions for the sake of the stone. The third suffered his
part to stand, which consisted of the gatehouse in which the princess Elizabeth
was imprisoned, and some adjoining ruinous buildings. After the rebellion, lord
Lovelace turned this gatehouse into a dwelling house, and lived in it for many
years. As to its adjoining ruins, persons now living remember standing, a noble
porch, and some walls of the hall; the walls and magnificent window; of the
chapel; several turrets at proper dista ces; and could trace out many of the
apartments. Sir John Vanbrugh, while Blenheim palace was building, had taste
enough to lay out 2000 l. in keeping up the ruins. But afterward lord
treasurer Godolphin observed to Sarah, dutchess-dowager of Marlborough, that a
pile of ruins in the front of so sine a seat, was an unseemly object, all the
old buildings, and amongst the rest, the princess Elizabeth's gatehouse, were
entirely demolished and erased. Aubrey, the antiquarian, acquaints us that in
the old hall there were two rows of pillars, as in a church; and that the
arches were of the zigzag Norman shape. He has left us in his manuscript,
Drawings of the windows in the larger apartments, and in the chapel and hall.
Aubrey's CHRONOLOGIA ARCHITECTONICA, MSS. in Mus. Ashmol. Oxon. fol. page 7. Of
fair Rosamond's Bower, which literally signifies no more than a chamber, and
which was a kind of pleasure-house on the south-west side of the old palace,
some ruinous remains are still remembered: particularly, an apartment over
Rosamond's-well. This well, which is a large, clear, and beautiful spring,
paved and fenced about the inside with stone, was undoubtedly a bath, fountain,
or reservoir, for the convenience of the Bower, or perhaps of the palace. The
author of the history of Allchester, written 1622, tells us, that "the ruins of
Rosamond's Bower are still to be seen against the court-gate." Apud Kennet's
PAROCH. ANTIQ. p. 694. Henry vii. built much here: particularly the front and
principal gate of the palace. On this gate was his name, and an English rhyme,
importing that he was the founder. Wake's REX PLATONICUS, edit. Oxon. 1607.
page 6. 4to. It was a favorite seat of our kings, who all resided here from
Henry I. to Charles I. Queen Elisabeth in particular, notwithstanding her
imprisonment here, perhaps on that account, was remarkably fond of living at
this palace: and she became a considerable benefactress to the town of
Woodstock. I have a small etching of a prospect of the Princess Elizabeth's
chamber and its adjoining ruins; done, a few years before they were destroyed,
in 1714, by J. Whood.
. Hollingshead gives us three lines which she wrote with a diamond on the glass
of her window; and Hentzner, in his itinerary of 1598 Edit. Noriberg. 1629.
page 215.
, has recorded a sonnet, which she had written with a pencil on her window
shutter. In the Bodleian Library at Oxford Inter MSS. 242. 12mo. In the same
library is a translation by the princess Elizabeth into Latin, of an Italian
sermon of Occhini. Calligraphy was a requisite accomplishment of those times,
and it is accordingly written, on vellum, with uncommon elegance, in her own
hand. It is dedicated in Latin, to her brother king Edward, to whom she sends
it as a newyear's gift. The dedication is dated Enfield, December xxx. Bibl.
Bodl. Arch. D. 115. 8vo.
, there is an English Translation of saint Paul's Epistles, printed in the
black letter, which the princess used while she was here imprisoned; in a blank
leaf of which, the following paragraph, written with her own hand, and in the
pedantry of the times, yet remains. "I walk many times into the pleasant
fields of the holy scriptures; where I pluck up the goodliesome herbs of
sentences by pruning, eat them by reading: chawe them by musing: and lay them
up at length in the hie seat of memory, by gathering them together. That so
having tasted the sweetenes, I may the less perceave the bitterness of this
miserable life." The covers are of black silk; on which she had amused hesself
with curiously working, or embossing, the following inscriptions and devices in
gold twist. On one side, on the border, or edge, CAELUM PATRIA. SCOPUS VITAE
XPVS. CHRISTO VIVE. In the middle a heart; and about it, ELEVA COR SURSUM IBI
UBI E. C. [i. e. est Christus.] On the other side, on the border, BEATUS QUI
DIVITIAS SCRIPTURAE LEGENS VERBA VERTIT IN OPERA. In the middle a star, and
about it, VICIT OMNIA PERTINAX VIRTUS E. C. [i. e. Elisabethae Captivae; or,
Elisabetha Captiva.] One is pleased to hear these circumstances, trifling and
unimportant as they are, which show us how this great and unfortunate lady, who
became afterward the heroine of the British throne, the favorite of her
people, and the terror of the world, contrived to relieve the tedious hours of
her pensive and solitary confinement. She had however little opportunity for
meditation or amusement. She was closely guarded: yet sometimes suffered to
walk into the gardens of the palace. In this situation, says Hollingshead, "no
marvel, if she hearing upon a time out of her gardin at Woodstocke a certain
milkmaide singing pleasantly, wished herself to be a milkmaide, as she was;
saying that her case was better, and life merrier This circumstance has given
occasion to an elegant ballad by Shenstone.
."

After being confined here for many months, she procured a permission to write
to the queen: but her importunate keeper Bedingfield intruded, and overlooked
what she wrote Hollingshead ut supr.
. At length, king Philip interposed, and begged that she might be removed to
the court When she came to the crown, says Hollingshead, she discharged
Bedingsield from the court, telling him, that whenever she should happen to
have a state-prisoner who required to be "hardly handled and strictly kept,"
she would send for him. Hollingshead, p. 117. col. 2. But there is some reason
to suspect, that Fox, from whom Hollingshead transcribes, has aggravated, in
his account, sir Henry's usage of the princess. After she was queen, he was
very often at court, and her majesty visited him in a progress, 1578. And
though she frequently called him her Jailer, yet this seems rather to have been
a term of royal familiarity than of contempt. Though I doubt not that he
treated the princess with no great compassion or delicacy; a circumstance which
reslects honor on her forgiveness. See Blomesield's Norfolk, iii. 481.
. But this sudden kindness of Philip, who thought Elisabeth a much less
obnoxious character than his father Charles the fifth had conceived her to have
been, did not arise from any regular principle of real generosity, but partly
from an affectation of popularity He affected to treat the princess with much
respect. In an examination, cited by Hollingshead, it appears, that
accidenttally passing her in a chamber of the palace, he paid her such
obeisance as to fall with one knee to the ground, notwithstanding his usual
state and solemnity. Chron. iii. 1160. col. 1.
; and partly from a refined sentiment of policy, which made him foresee, that
if Elisabeth was put to death, the next lawful heir would be Mary queen of
Scots already betrothed to the dauphin of France, whose succession would for
ever join the sceptres of England and France, and consequently crush the
growing interests of Spain Camden, Eliz. per Hearne, vol. i. Apparatus, page
21. However, it is said, that out of gratitude for her preservation, she
constantly kept Philip's picture by her bedside; even to her death,
notwithstanding his perfidy after she became queen. Ballard's Mem. of L.
ladies, p. 217.
.

In her first day's journey, from the manor of Woodstock to lord Williams's at
Ricot, a violent storm of wind happened; insomuch, that her hood and the attire
of her head were twice or thrice blown off. On this, she begged to retire to a
gentleman's house then at hand: but Bedingfield's absurd and superabundant
circumspection refused even this insignificant request; and constrained her,
with much indecorum, to replace her head-dress under a hedge near the road. The
next night they came to Mr. Dormer's, at Winge, in Buckinghamshire; and from
thence to an inn at Colnebroke, where she lay. At length she arrived at
Hampton Court, where the court then resided, but was still kept in the
condition of a prisoner. Here bishop Gardener, with others of the council,
frequently persuaded her to make a confession, and submit to the queen's mercy.
Dissimulation appears to have been a conspicuous feature in Elisabeth's
character. One night, when it was late, the princess was unexpectedly summoned,
and conducted by torch light to the queen's bedchamber: where she kneeled down
before the queen, declaring herself to be a most faithful and true subject. She
even went so far, as to request the queen to send her some catholic treatises,
which might confirm her faith, and inculcate doctrines different from those
which she had been taught in the writings of the reformers. The queen seemed
still to suspect her sincerity: but they parted on good terms. During this
critical interview, Philip had concealed himself behind the tapestry, that he
might have seasonably interposed, to prevent the violence of the queen's
passionate temper from proceeding to any extremities Hollingshead ut supr.
.

One week afterward she was released from the formidable parade of guards and
keepers Burnet, Fox, Speed, etc.
. A happy change of circumstances ensued; and she was permitted to retire with
sir Thomas Pope Master Gage, who is called the queen's gentleman usher, or
master of the ceremonies, is said by Fox and others, to have been joined with
sir Thomas Pope in this appointment. But he seems to have acted only as an
assistant or inferior. Probably this was sir Edward Gage, to whom the queen
granted in 1556, thirty retainers. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480. Sir John Gage
was constable of the tower; and died in 1556. Anstis, Regist. Gart. i. 423.
Notes. He [Sir John] was also chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster.
chamberlain of the household, and a privy counselor. Anstis, ibid.
to Hatfield-house in Hertfordshire, then a royal palace The present noble
structure was erected by Robert, first earl of Salisbury, about 1610. James the
first exchanged Hatfield, with lord Salisbury, for Theobalds. It orginally
belonged to the bishops of Ely, and was built by bishop Morton about 1480. The
chapel was consecrated in 1^15. See Le Neve, Prot. Bish vol. 1, 2. page 144.
Peacham tells us, that this chapel was adorned with paintings, by Butler, and
other eminent artists. GENTLEMAN's EXERCISE, Lib. i. c. 3. "Robert earl of
Salisbury, lord high treasurer of England, who as he favoreth all learning and
excellencies, so he is a principal patron of this art; having lately employed
M. Butler and many other excellent artists for the beautyfying his houses,
especially his chapel at Hatfield." page 310. edit. 1661.
. At parting the queen began to show some symptoms of reconciliation: she
recommended to her sir Thomas Pope, as a person with whom the princess was well
acquainted, and whose humanity, prudence, and other valuable qualifications
were all calculated to render her new situation perfectly agreeable See Thomas
Heywood's ENGLAND's ELIZABETH. Land. 12mo. 1631. p. 20^
; and at the same time she presented her with a ring worth seven hundred crowns
Catte, iii. 326.
.

But before I proceed further in this part of my narrative, I stop to mention a
circumstance unnoticed by our historians: which is, that sir Thomas Pope in
conjunction with others, had some concern about the person of the princess
Elizabeth, even when she first retired from the court, in disgrace, to her
house at Ashridge; and before her troubles commenced, occasioned by Wyat's
rebellion; all which I have already related at large. When that rebellion broke
out, Mary wrote to the princess then sick at Ashridge, artfully requesting her
immediate attendance at the court. Elizabeth's governors at this time, whose
names are no where particularly mentioned, waiting every day for her recovery,
very compassionately declared it unsafe yet to remove her. And the princess
herself in the mean time, signified by letter her indisposition to the queen;
begging that her journey to the court might be deferred for a few days, and
protesting her abhorrence of Wyat's seditious practices. Her governors
likewise, on their parts, apprehending that this tenderness toward their
mistress might be interpreted in a bad sense, dispatched a letter to bishop
Gardener, lord chancellor; acquainting him with her condition, and avowing
their readiness to receive the queen's commands. An original draught or copy of
this letter in Sir Thomas Pope's own hand, with several corrections and
interlineations by the same, is now preseved in the British Museum Brit. Mus.
Bibl. Cotton. MSS. Titus. B. ii. fol. 159. After it, follows the letter from
the privy council to sir Thomas Pope, cited below. The paper which contains
both is endorsed, " Minute of the lady Elizabeth's Officers to the Queen's
counsall." The letter here mentioned in the text, begins thus.

"It may please your good lordship. That albeit we attend on my lady
Elizabethes grace our mistres, in hope of her amendment to repair toward the
queens highness, whereof we have as yet none apparaunt likelyod of health; yet
consideringe this daungerouse world, the perilous attemptes and the naughty
endeavors of the rebels, which we daily here of against the queens highness
our sovereigne lady, we do not forgeate our most bounden dewty, nor yet our
readynes in word and deed to serve her highness by all the ways and means
that may stand in us, both from her grace our mistres, and of our own parts
also. Which thing although my lady's grace our said mistres has tofore this
signified unto the queens highness, of her behalffe, by message; it might
nevertheles seame to your good lordship, and the lords of the council, some
negligence, that we did not make you also privy herunto. We have therefore
thought it our deuties to declare this unto your lordship, etc." The whole is
printed in Strype's Mem. Eccl. iii. 83. From MSS. Petyt, Now in the
Inner Temple library. Strype says only, that it was written by the lady
Elizabeth's governors; or, "by those that had the care and government of her."
Among the princess Elisabeth's domestics or attendants was John Astley, one of
Roger Ascham's literary friends, and to whom many of his Latin letters are
written. Prefixed to Ascham's very sensible English political tract on the
AFFAIRS OF GERMANY, and addressed to Astley, is an English letter, dated
1553, from Astley to Ascham, in which the latter speaks feelingly of their
frequent agreeable conversations on learned subjects at Hatfield-house. Ascham
was preceptor to the princess. Sir Thomas Pope, in a fragment of a letter to
the president of Trinity-college Oxford, and dated Hatfield, says, that he had
procured an Office in the Tower of London for Master Asteley. Probably this is
the same person. Ascham in some of his Epistles complains, that he was unjustly
driven from his tuition of Elisabeth, in a consequence of a party formed
against him in the family of the princess. My principal reason for mentioning
these particulars is to show, that sir Thomas Pope could not have been one of
Ascham's enemies on this occasion; for, had that been the case, it is not very
probable that he should promote Ascham's friend. He was husband of Catharine
Asteley, the governess of the princess. See below, p. 99. Ascham mentions this
Catharine Asteley in very respectable terms, in a Letter to the princess, on
the death of her tutor Grindall. "Hunc dolorem, magis apud te renovando augere,
quam consolando leni^re vererer, nisi perspecta esset mihi prudentia tua, sic
consiliis prudentissimae Feminae dominae Catharinae Astleae munita, etc."
EPIST. Lib. ii. p. 95. a. edit. 1581. See also ibid. p. 89. b. This Astely was
made master of the Jewel house at queen Elisabeth's accession, with a salary of
fifty pounds. Decembr. 23. LIT. PAT. i. Eliz. He wrote a treatise on
HORSEMANSHIP, printed without his name, in 1586. 4to. By the way, it appears
from what has been said, that the princess before her final settlement at
Hatfield under sir Thomas Pope's care, was occasionally shifted about to
various royal seats, of which Hatfield was one.


: from which circumstance it is manifest that he was at this time one of these
governors or attendants; but in what department or capacity, I know not.
However it is evident that he was removed from this charge, when the princess,
notwithstanding her infirm state of health, was hurried up to the court by
Southwell, Cornwallis, and Hastings: nor do we find, that from that time he had
the least concern with her during her imprisonment in the tower and at
Woodstock, and the rest of those undeserved persecutions, which preceded her
enlargement and final removal to Hatfield.

To this lady sir Thomas Pope behaved with the utmost tenderness and respect:
residing with her at Hatfield, rather as an indulgent and affectionate
guardian, than as an officious or rigorous governor. Although strict orders
were given that the mass alone should be used in he family, yet he connived at
many protestant servants, whom she retained about her person British View of
the State of the church of England, etc. Written in the year 1608. Land. 1653.
12mo. p. 45. He adds, that when his mother was dismissed, her own father durst
not take her into his house. p. 46.
. Yet Sir John Harrington says, that his father, a protestant, was imprisoned
in the tower for twelve months, and fined one thousand pounds, for carrying a
letter to the princess, and expressing his good wishes for her prosperity: and
that, as if the heresy of a maid of honor could do any great harm, his mother,
who was one of her favorite attendants, was removed from that situation, as a
professed heretic, by the command of bishop Gardener Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii.
216.
.

Nor was sir Thomas Pope wanting on proper occasions, in studiously showing her
such marks of regard and deference as her station and quality demanded. This
appears from the following anecdote, which also marks his character See Append
Numb. XV.
.

Two of the fellows of Trinity college in Oxford, just founded by him, had
violated one of it is strictest statutes, and were accordingly expelled by the
president, and Society. Upon this they repaired to their founder, then at
Hatfield with the princess Elisabeth, humbly petitioning a readmittance into
his college. Sir Thomas Pope probably was not a little perplexed on this
occasion; for although disposed to forgiveness, yet he was unwilling to be the
first who should openly countenance or pardon an infringement of laws which
himself had made. But perceiving a happy opportunity of adjusting the
difficulty, by paying at the same time a handsome compliment to the princess,
with much address he referred the matter to her gracious arbitration; and she
was pleased to order, that they should immediately be restored to their
fellowships. In consequence of this determination, he wrote the following
letter to the President of the college. Master President, with my hertie
commendations,
Albeit Sympson and Rudde The two delinquents.
have committed such an offense, as whereby they have justly deserved, not
only for ever to be expulsed out of my collegge, but also to be ponished
besides in such sort as others might fere to attempt the like: nevertheless,
at the desire, or rather commandment, of my lady Elizabeth her grace; and at
my wiffes request, who has both sent and written to me very earnestly; and in
hope this will be a warnyng for them to lyve in order hereafter: I am content
to remytt this fault, and to dispense with them towching the same. So always,
that they openly in the hall, before all the fellows and scolers of the
collegge, confess their faults; and besides pay such fine, as you with
others of the collegge shall think meat. Which being don, I will the some be
recorded in some book; wherein I will have mention made, that for this fault
they were clean expelled the collegge; and at my lady Elizabeth her graces
desire, and at my wiffes request they were receyved into the house again.
Signifying, that if any shall hereafter commyt the like offense, I am fully
resolved there shall no creature living, the queen's majesty except who may
command me, cause me to dispense withal. Assuring you, I never did any thing
more against my heart, then to remytt this matter: the ponishment whereoff to
the extremyte, I beleve would have don more good, then in this form to be
endyd; as knows the holy ghost, who keep you in health. Written at hatfelde
the xxiith of August, anno 1556.

Your own assuredly, THO. POPE.
[ P.S.] Sir, I require you above all things, have a special regard there be
peace and concord in my collegge Ex autograph. in Thesaur. coll. Trin. Oxon.
Superscribed " To his loving friend, Mr. Slythurst, president of Trynitie
Collegge in Oxford." And in registr. prim. ejusdem coll. fol. xvi. b.
.






Nor did sir Thomas Pope think it inconsistent with his trust, to gratify the
princess on some occasions with the fashionable amusements of the times; even
at his own expense, and at the hazard of offending the queen. This we learn
from a passage in a curious manuscript chronicle MSS. Cotton. fol. Vitellius.
F. 5. Brit. Mus. MSS. Strype. See Append. Numb. XXVIII.
. "In Shrovetide, 1556, sir Thomas Pope made for the lady Elisabeth all at his
own costs, a great and rich maskinge in the great halle at Hatfelde; where
the pageaunts were marvellously furnished. There were tha^ twelve minstrels
antickly disguised; with forty-six or more gentlemen and ladies, many of them
knights or nobles, and ladies of honor, apparelled in crimsin satin,
embrothered upon with wrethes of gold and garnished with bordures of hanging
perle. And the devise of a castle of clothe of gold, set with pomegranates
about the battlements, with shields of knights hanging therefrom, and six
knights in rich harneis turneyed. At night the cuppboard in the halle was of
twelve stages mainlie furnished with garnish of gold and silver vessul, and a
banquet of seventie dishes, and after a voidee of spices and suttleties with
thirty spyse plates, all at the chardgis of sir Thomas Pope. And the next day
the play of HOLOPHERNES. But the queen percase mysliked these folliries, as by
her letters to sir Thomas Pope hit did appear, and so their disguisinges were
ceased."

The princess was notwithstanding sometimes suffered to make excursions, partly
for pleasure, and partly for paying her compliments at court: and on these
occasions she was attended in a manner suitable to her rank. Strype tells us,
from the same manuscript journal of memorable occurrences, written about those
times Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 444, 445.
, that on February the twenty-fifth, 1557, "The lady Elizabeth came riding from
her house at Hatfield to London, attended with a great company of lords, and
nobles, and gentlemen, unto her place, called Somerset-place beyond
Strond-bridge, to do her duty to the queen. And on the twenty-eighth she
repaired unto her grace at Whitehall with many lords and ladies." And again, in
March, the same year. "Aforenoon the lady Elizabeth's grace took her horse and
rode to her palace of Shene; with many lords, knights, ladies, and gentlemen,
and a goodly company of horse Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 336.
". In April the same year, she was escorted from Hatfield to Enfield-chase, by
a retinue of twelve ladies clothed in white satin on ambling palfries, and
twenty yeomen in green, all on horse back, that her grace might hunt the heart.
At entering the chase, or forest, she was met by fifty archers in scarlet boots
and yellow caps, armed with gilded bows; one of whom presented her a
silver-headed arrow, winged with peacock's feathers. Sir Thomas Pope had the
devising of this show. By way of closing the sport, or rather the ceremony, the
princess was gratified with the privilege of cutting the throat of a buck
Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Cotton. MSS. Strype ut supr.
. In the same month she was visited by the queen at Hatfield: when the great
chamber was adorned with a sumptuous suit of tapestry, called the Hanginge of
the siege of Antioch, and after supper a play was performed by the choir-boys
of Saint Paul's MSS. Ibid. See HIST. ENG. POETRY. ii. 392.
.

In the summer of the same year, the princess paid a visit to the queen at
Richmond. She went by water from Somerset-place in the queen's barge; which was
richly hung with garlands of artificial flowers, and covered with a of canopy
green sarcenet wrought with branches of eglantine in embroidery, and powdered
with blossoms of gold. In the barge she was accompanied by sir Thomas Pope, and
four ladies of her chamber. Six boats attended on this procession, filled with
her highness's retinue, habited in russet damask and blue embroidered satin
tasselled and spangled with silver, with bonnets of cloth of silver plumed with
green feathers. She was received by the queen in a sumptuous pavilion, made in
form of a castle, with cloth of gold and purple velvet, in the labyrinth of the
gardens. The walls, or sides of the pavilion were chequered into compartments,
in each of which was alternately a lily in silver and a pomegranate in gold.
Here they were entertained at a royal banquet; in which was introduced a
sottletie A curious devise in cookery or confectionary.
of a pomegranate-tree bearing the arms of Spain. There were many minstrels,
but no masking or dancing. Before the banquet, the queen was long in
consultation with sir Thomas Pope. In the evening the princess with all her
company returned, as they came, to Somerset-place; and the next day retired to
Hatfield MSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype, ut supr.
. During her residence at Hatfield, the princess was also present at a royal
Christmas, kept with great solemnity by the queen and king Philip at
Hampton Court. On Christmas-eve, the great hall of the palace was illuminated
with a thousand lamps curiously disposed. The princess supped at the same table
in the hall with the king and queen, next the cloth of state: and after supper,
and served with a perfumed napkin and plates of confects by the lord Paget. But
she retired to her ladies, before the revels; masking, and disguisings began.
On saint Stephen's day she heard mattins in the queen's closet adjoining to the
chapel, where she was attired in a robe of white satin, strung all over with
large pearls. On the twenty ninth day of December, she sat with their
majesty's and the nobility at a grand spectacle of justing, when two hundred
spears were broken. Half of the combatants were accoutred in the Almaine, and
half in the Spanish fashion Vitell. F. 5. Cotton. MSS. Strype, ut supr.
. Thus our chronicler, who is fond of minute description. But these and other
particularities, insignificant as they seem, which he has recorded so
carefully, are a vindication of Queen Mary's character in the treatment of her
sister: they prove, that the princess, during her residence at Hatfield, lived
in splendour and affluence, that she was often admitted to the diversions of the
court, and that her present situation was by no means a state of oppression and
imprisonment, as it has been represented by most of our historians.

We have before seen that sir Thomas Pope, during his attendance on this lady,
was engaged in the foundation of his college. An undertaking of such a nature,
could not fail of attracting the attention of the young Elisabeth; whose
learned education and present situation naturally interested her in the
progress of a work so beneficial to the increase of her favorite pursuits, and
carried on by one with whom she was so nearly connected. Accordingly this
subject was often matter of conversation between them, as appears from part of
a letter written by sir Thomas Pope: which also still further proves the
friendly terms on which they lived together. "The princess Elisabeth her grace,
whom I serve here, often askyth me about the course I have devysed for my
scollers: and that part of mine estatutes respectinge study I have shown to
her, which she likes well. She is not only gracious, but most learned, as ye
right well know Dat. Hatfield, 1556. To the President. Ex Autograph. ubi supr.
Ascham, in one of his Latin Epistles, gives the following interesting account
of Elisabeth's progress in literature, when she was very young, under the year
1550. Among the learned daughters of Sir Thomas More, he says, the princess
Elisabeth saines like a star of distinguished luster; deriving greater glory
from her virtuous disposition, and literary accomplishments, than from the
dignity of her exalted birth. I was her preceptor in Latin and Greek for two
years. She was but little more than sixteen, when she could speak French, and
Italian, with as much fluency and propriety as her native English. She speaks
Latin readily, justly, and even critically. She has often conversed with me in
Greek, and with tolerable facility. When she transcribes Greek or Latin,
nothing can be more beautiful than her handwriting. She is excellently skilled
in music, although not very fond of it. She has read with me all Cicero, and
great part of Livy. It is chiefly from those two authors alone, that she has
acquired her knowledge of the Latin langnage. She begins the day with reading a
portion of the Greek testament, and then studies some select Orations of
Isocrates and the tragedies of Sophocles. From these authors, I was of opinion,
that she would adorn her style with the most elegant diction, enrich her mind
with the most suitable precepts, and frame her high station of life to every
fortune. For her religious instruction, after the Scriptures, she adds to the
classics Saint Cyprian and the Common Places of Melancthon, with other writers
of that school, who teach purity of doctrine with elegance of expression. In
every composition, she is very quick in pointing out a far-fetched word, or
affected phrase. She cannot endure those absurd imitators of Erasmus, who mince
the whole latin Language into proverbial maxims. She is much pleased with a
Latin Oration naturally arising from its subject, and written both chastely and
perspicuously. She is most fond of translations not too free, and with that
agreeable clash of sentiment which results from a judicious comparison of
opposite or contradictory passages. By a diligent attention to these things,
her taste is become so refined, and her judgment so penetrating, that there is
nothing in Greek, Latin, and English composition, either extravagant or exact,
carless or correct, which she does not in the course of reading accurately
discern; immediately rejecting the one with disgust, and receiving the other
with the highest degree of pleasure. Ascham. EPISTOL. Lib. i. p. 18. a. edit.
Land. 1581.
."

While sir Thomas Pope was concerned in this superintendance of the princess,
he received a letter from Heath, archbishop of York and lord chancellor, the
bishops of Rochester and Ely, lord Arundel, and sir Henry Jernegan, dated July
the thirtieth, 1556, by which it appears, that the privy council placed much
confidence in his penetration and address, and greatly depended on his skilful
management of her highness at this critical period.

In consequence of Wyat's unsuccessfull attempt, new efforts were made to
foment a second insurrection. Many of Wyat's adherents, of which the principal
was one Dudley Ashton, had fled into France where they were well entertained.
Ashton being connected with both kingdoms sent over from France one Cleyberye,
a condemned person, who pretended to be the earl of Devonshire. The
conspirators at the same time, in the letters and proclamations which they
dispersed, made use of the lady Elisabeth's name, and propagated many
scandalous insinuations against her reputation and honor Strype Eccl. mem.
iii. 336.
. They proceeded so far, as at Ipswich to proclaim lord Courteney and the
princess, king and queen of England Carte iii. 327.
. In how licentious a manner her character was abused, appears from a curious
manuscript paper preserved in the British Museum, entitled, "A relation how one
Cleber, 1556, proclaimed the lady Elisabethe queen, and her beloved bedfellow,
lord Edward Courtneye, king MSS. Harl. 537. 25.
." It was thought proper that the truth of this affair should be made known to
the princess; and as the communication of it was a matter of some delicacy, and
that misrepresentations might be prevented, the council abovementioned order
sir Thomas Pope, "Because this matter is spread abroad, and that paradventure,
many constructions and discourses will be made thereof, we have thought meet to
signify the whole circumstances of the case unto you, to be by you opened to
the lady Elisabeth's grace at such time as ye shall think most convenient. To
the end it may appear unto her, how little these men stick, by falsehood and
untruthe, to compass their purpose: not letting, for that intent to abuse the
name of her grace, or any others: which their devises nevertheless are (god be
thanked) by his goodness discovered from time to time, to their majesty's
perseverance, and confusion of their enemies. And so we bid you hertily well to
fare. From Eltham the xxxth of July, 1556. Your loving friends, etc Burnet Hist
Ref. RECORDS. Numb. xxxiii. page 314. And Hist. p. 351.
."

In consequence of sir Thomas Pope's explanation, the queen herself wrote a
letter to the princess, in which she expressed her abhorrence and disbelief of
these infamous forgeries. It was answered by the princess, who declared her
detestation of the conspirators, and disclaimed the least knowledge of their
malicious designs. Undoubtedly having suffered so severely, and perhaps
unjustly, in the affair of Wyat, she judged it expedient to clear her character
even from the most improbable suspicions. Commissioners were immediately
appointed for examining into this conspiracy, sir Francis Englefield the
comptroller, sir Edward Waldegrave, sir Henry Jernegan, sir Edward Hastings,
and Cordall the queen's solicitor; and several of the parties were
apprehended, and condemned at Guildhall Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 336, 337.
. When war was next year proclaimed against France, this secret concurrence of
the French court, with the machinations of Dudley Ashton and his accomplices,
was expressly specified, amongst other articles in the declaration Camden,
Eliz. per Hearne. i. Apparat. page 22.
.

Soon afterward, Eric king of Sweden sent by his ambassador, a message
secretly to the princess at Hatfield, with a proposal of marriage. King Philip
had just before proposed to the queen to marry her to the duke of Savoy Strype,
Eccl. Mem., iii. 317.
; with a view perhaps of retaining the duke who was an able general, in his
interests against France, with which Philip was at this time engaged in open
hostilities. This proposal of the king of Sweden she wisely rejected, because
it was not conveyed to her by the queen's directions. But to this objection the
ambassador answered, that the king of Sweden his master, as a man of honor and
a gentleman, thought it most proper to make the first application to herself:
and that having by this preparatory step obtained her consent, he would next,
as a king, mention the affair in form to her majesty. But the final answer of
princess was an absolute denial: and she desired the messenger to acquaint his
master, that as she could not listen to any proposals of that nature, unless
made by the queen's advice or authority; so she could not but declare, that if
left to her own will, she would always prefer a single condition of life. The
affair soon came to the queen's ears; who sending for sir Thomas Pope to court,
received from him an entire account of this secret transaction; ordering sir
Thomas at the same time to write to the princess, and acquaint her how much she
was satisfied with this prudent and dutiful answer to the king of Sweden's
proposition. Sir Thomas Pope very soon afterward returned to his charge at
Hatfield; when the queen commanded him, not only to repeat this approbation of
the conduct of the princess relating to the proposed match from Sweden, but to
receive from her own mouth the result of her sentiments concerning it; and at
the same time to take an opportunity of sounding her affections concerning the
duke of Savoy, without mentioning his name. The imperial ambassadors
Mountmorency lord of Courieres, and Bouchard, were still in England, waiting
for the event of the latter negotiation Carte, iii. 307.
. For the Emperor Charles the fifth See Hume, Hist. iii. 386. seq. Ed. 4to. And
Dr. Robertson's masterly History of Charles the fifth.
, who was now become her friend, and had before interested himself in her
favor, was anxious, by such an important connection, to form a potent and
lasting alliance between the British and Imperial crowns. But I shall insert
sir Thomas Pope's letter, written in consequence of this commission, to the
queen or council; by which he seems perfectly to have understood Elisabeth's
real thoughts and disposition.

First after I had declared to her grace, how well the quene's majesty liked
of her prudent and honorable answer made to the same messenger; I then opened
unto her grace the effects of the said messengers credence: which after her
grace had hard, I said, the queens highness had sent me to her grace, not only
to declare the same, but also to understande how her grace liked the said
motion. Whereunto after a little pause taken, her grace answered in form
following. Master Pope, I require you, after my most humble commendacions to
the queen's majesty, to render untoo the same like thanks, that it pleased her
highness of her goodness, to conceive so well of my answer made to the same
messenger; and herwithal, of her princely consyderation, with such speed to
command you by your letters to signyfie the same untoo me: who before remained
wonderfully perplexed, fering that her majesty might mistake the same: for
which her goodness I acknowledge myself bound to honor, serve, love, and obey
her highness, during my liffe. Requyring you also to say untoo her majesty,
that in the king my brothers time, there was offered me a very honorable
marriage or two: and ambassadors sent to treat with me touching the same Viz.
in 1552, the eldest son of the king of Denmark, Heylin, Eccl. Rest. ELIZ. p. 99.
; whereupon I made my humble suite untoo his highness, as some of honor yet
livinge can be testimonies, that it would like the same to give me leave, with
his graces favor, to remain in that estate I was, which of all others best
lyked me or pleased me She was not however perfectly satisfied with this state,
at that time; as appears from many curious anecdotes of her early coquetry with
lord Thomas Seymour, high admiral, who married Catharine Parr, widow of Henry
viii. Burghley's State Papers, vol. i. by Haynes. p. 96. " From the confession
of Thomas Parrye her cofferer. I do remember also she [ Catharine Ashley] told
me, that the admiral loved her but too well, and had done so a great while:
and that the queen was jealouse on her and him, insomuche, that one time the
queen suspecting the often access of the admiral to the lady Elizabeth's
grace, came suddenly upon them, when they were all alone, he having her in his
arms. From the confession of Catharine Ashley, her waiting women, or
governess. She says at Chelsy he would come many mornyngs into the said lady
Elizabeth's chamber, before she were ready, and sometime before she did rise. --
And if she were in her bed, he would put open the curteyns, and bid her good
morrow, etc. And one morning he strave to have kissed her in bed. -- At
Hanworth, in the garden, he wrated with her, and cut her gown in an hundred
pieces, being black cothes. An other time, at Chelsey, the Lady Elizabeth
hearing the pryvie-lock undo, knowing that he would come in, ran out of her bed
to her maidens, and then went behynd the curteyn of the bed, etc. -- At
Seymour-place,... he did use a while to come up every morning in his
nyght-gowne, barelegged in his slippers, where he found commonly the lady
Elizabeth up at her book. -- At Hanworth, the queen told this examinate, that
my lord admiral looked in at the galery wyndow, and se my lady Elizabeth cast
her arms about a man's neck. The which heryng, this examinate inquired for it
of my lady's grace, who denied it weepyng, and bad ax all her women. They all
denied it. And she knew it could not be so, for there came no man but Gryndall,
the lady Elizabeth's scholemaster. Howbeit, thereby this examinate did suspect,
that the queen was jelous betwixt them; and did but feyne this, to thentente
that this examinate should take more head, and be, as it were, in watch
betwixt her and my lord admiral. She says also, that Mr. Ashley, her
husband, has diverse times given this examinate warnyng to take heed, for he
did fere that the lady Elizabeth did ber some affection to my lord admiral,
she semyd to be well plesed therewith, and sometime she would blush when he were
spoken of." Ibid. p. 99. This was in 1548. Parrye was afterward made treasurer
of her household.
. And in good faith, I pray you say untoo her highness, I am even at this
present of the same mind, and so intend to continewe with her majesty's
favor: and assuringe her highness, I so well like this estate, as I persuade
myself there is not any kind of liffe comparable unto it. And as concerning
my lyking the said mocion made by the said messenger, I beseech you say unto
her majesty, that to my remembrance I never hard of his master before this
time; and that I so well like both the message and the messenger, as I shall
most humbly pray God upon my knees, that from henceforth I never hear of the
one nor the other: assure you, that if it should eftsoon repair unto me, I
would forbear to speak to him. And were there nothing else to move me to
mislyke the mocion, other than that his master would attempt the same, without
making the queen's majesty privy thereunto, it were cause sufficient.

And when her grace had thus ended, I was so bold as of myself to say unto her
grace, her pardon first required, that I thought few or none would beleve, but
that her grace could be right well contented to marry, so there were some
honorable marriage offered her by the queen's highness, or her majesty's assent.
Whereunto her grace answered, What I shall do hereafter I know not: but I
assure you upon my truth and fidelity, and as God be merciful unto me, I am
not at this time otherways minded, than I have declared unto you; no, though I
were offered the greatest prince in all Europe. -- And yet percase the queen's
majesty may conceive this In MSS. Harl. [ut inf.] it is, "this my answer
rather, etc." As if it was the speech of the princess continued.
rather to proceed of a maidenlie shamefastnes, than upon any such certain
determination.

THOMAS POPE Brit. Mus. MSS. Harl. 444. 7. viz. "The lady Elizabeth her graces
answer made at Hattfield, the xxvi of April 1558, to sir T. Pope knt. being
sent from the queen's majesty to understand how her grace lyked of the mocyon
of marryage, made by the king ellect of Swethelandes messenger." fol. 28. See
also the same, ibid. MSS. Cotton, Vitell. xii. 16. 8. It is also among Petyt's
Manuscripts, now in the Library of the Inner Temple: from whence it is
incorrectly printed by Burnet, ubi supr. No. 37. p. 325. See ibid. Hist. p. 361.
.


Courtney earl of Devonshire being now dead He was imprisoned in
Fotheringay-castle, on suspicion of being concerned with the princess Elisabeth
in Wyat's rebellion. Being released, he traveled into Italy, and died at
Padua, aged thirty. He was the last earl of Devonshire, of the noble family of
Courtenay. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 338, 339. Some say he was poisoned.
, the queen grew less jealous of the princess, and seemed almost perfectly
reconciled. In November, 1556, she was invited to court; and accordingly came
to London with much parade "The xxviiith day of November, came ryding through
Smythfelde and Old Balee, and through Fleet Street, unto Somersett-plase, my
good lade Elisabeth's grace the queen's sister; with a grate company of velvett
cotts and chains, her graces gentyllmen: and aftyr, a grate company of her
men, all in redd cotts gardyd with a brod guard of blake velvett and cutts,
etc." Vitell. MSS. Cott. F. 5. ut supr. Strype cites a part of this passage,
Eccl. Mem. iii. 309.
. The principal reason of this invitation, was formally to propose to her in
person a marriage with Philibert Emanuel, the duke of Savoy, which sir Thomas
Pope, by the queen's commands, had before hinted at a distance, as we have seen
in the preceding letter. This proposal the princess declined; but disguised her
refusal with the same earnest professions of her unchangeable devotion to a
state of virginity, which she had before made to sir Thomas Pope on account of
the Swedish match. Great court was paid to the princess during her abode at
Somerset House Carte, iii. 331.
. Her amiable condescension, obliging address, and agreeable conversation,
procured her new interests and attachments, and even engaged the best part of
the lords of the council in her favor.

Her beauty perhaps had no great share in these acquisitions; such as it was,
it still retained some traces of sickness, and some shades of melancholy,
contracted in her late severe but useful school of affliction.

She found however that retirement best suited her circumstances, as it did her
inclinations; and although she had been invited to pass the whole winter in
London, after a short stay of one week only, she returned to her former
situation at Hatfield "Her grace did loge at her plase [Somerset house] till
the iii day of Dessember. The third day of Dessember came ryding from her plase
my lady Elisabeth's grace from Somerset plase down Fleetstrete, and through Old
Bailee and Smythfelde, etc. And so her grace took her way toward
byshopehatfeld plase." MSS. Cott. Vittell. F. 5. ut supr.
.

One should have expected that the queen would have parted in disgust with the
princess, at this rejection of a match, recommended by Philip, and so
convenient to his purposes. But it appears, that the queen was extremely
backward in promoting her husband's desire of marrying Elisabeth to the duke of
Savoy. On this account, Philip employed Alphonsus, a franciscan friar, his
confessor, to confer with her majesty on the subject of this marriage. She told
him, that she feared, without consent of parliament, neither her husband
Philip, nor the nation would be benefited by this alliance. She added, that she
could not in point of conscience press this match upon her sister; meaning
perhaps that it would be unjust, to force the princess to be married, after her
resolute declarations against wedlock; or improper and dishonorable, to match
her beneath the dignity of a crowned head. The theological reasonings of
Alphonsus were too refined for the understanding, or too weak for the
conscience, of the queen, who still remained inflexible in her former opinion.
Upon this, Philip wrote to her in his usual authoritative style, advising her
to examine her own conscience, and to consider whether her opinion was founded
in truth or in obstinacy; adding, that if the parliament opposed his request,
he should lay the blame upon her Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 317. seq.
. The queen, in her answer, begged that he would, at least, defer the matter
till he returned into England: and that then he might have a better opportunity
of judging, what attention her reasons deserved. That otherwise, she should
live in jealousy of his affections, a state of mind to her worse than death;
but which, to her great disquietude, she had already began to feel. She
observed, with many expressions of deference to his superior judgment and
authority, that, whatever her conscience might have determined, the matter
could not be possibly brought to any speedy conclusion, as the duke would be
immediately ordered into the field.

This letter which is in French, and printed by Strype Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii.
Append. Numb. LVI.
, is no less a specimen of her implicit submission to Philip, than the whole
transaction is, at the same time, an instance of that unconquerable
perseverance which the queen exerted on certain occasions. Philip persisted in
his design: and with a view to accomplish it more effectually, dispatched into
England the duchess of Parma and the duchess of Lorraine, whom he commissioned
to bring back with them the princess Elisabeth into Flanders. Philip was in
love with the duchess of Lorain; and the splendour of her table and retinue,
which she was unable to support of herself, made the queen extremely jealous.
She was therefore, whatever her companion might have been, a very improper
suitress on this occasion. The queen would not permit the two duchesses to
visit the princess at Hatfield; and every moment of their stay gave her
infinite uneasiness. But they both soon returned, without success Carte, iii.
338.
.

Perhaps the growing jealousy of the queen, a passion which often ends in
revenge against the beloved object, might at least have some share in dictating
this opposition to Philip Philip, while abroad, had shown her so many marks of
indifference, and had trifled with her so frequently about his return to
England, that once, in a fit of rage, she tore his picture. Carte, ibid. 329.
. At length the remonstrances of the queen, and the repeated disapprobation of
the princess, prevailed; and it is certain, whatever Mary's real motives might
be, that the proposal was suddenly laid aside. But Mary so far concurred with
Philip's measures, as the next year to declare war against France Yet the
public finances were at this time so low, that she could not procure a single
vote from her privy council for the declaration of war: and she therefore
threatened to dismiss them all from the board, and to appoint counselors more
obsequious. Hume, iii. 391. ed. 4to.
; in which the duke of Savoy was Philip's chief commander at the battle and
siege of saint Quintin Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 317. Hollingshead, Chron. iii.
1134. col. 1, 2.
.

As to the king of Sweden, he afterward, in the year 1561, renewed his
addresses to Elisabeth, when she was queen of England: at which time, he sent
her a royal present of eighteen large pyed horses, and two ships laden with
riches Strype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 271.
. At the same time, some stationers of London had published prints of her
majesty Elisabeth and the king of Sweden in one piece. This liberty, as it was
called, gave great offense to the queen, who ordered secretary Cecil to write
to the lord mayor of London, enjoining him diligently to suppress all such
publications; as they implied an agreement of marriage between their majesty's.
Cecil takes occasion to add, "her majesty hitherto cannot be induced, whereof
we have cause to sorrow, to allow of any marriadg with any manner of person
Burghley's State Papers, by Haynes. p. 367.
." Soon afterward the king of Sweden was expected to pay the queen a visit at
Whitehall; and it is diverting to observe the perplexity and embarrassment of
the officers of state about the manner of receiving him at court, "the queens
majesty being a maid. Ibid. p. 371.
."

But she still persisted in those vows of virginity which she had formerly made
to sir Thomas Pope at Hatfield; and constantly refused not only this, but other
advantageous matches. One of them was with the Duke D'Alenzon, whom she
refused, yet after some deliberation, because he was only a boy of seventeen
years of age, and she almost in her fortieth year Camd. ELIZ. p. 269. per
Hearne.
. A husband, I suppose, although a young one, would have been at that time
perhaps inconsistent with her private attachments; and the formalities of
marriage might have laid a restraint on more agreeable gallantries with the
earl of Essex and others, Bail Dict. Artic. ELIZABETH.
assigns a curious physical reason for Elisabeth's obstinate perseverance in a
state of virginity.

The four last years of queen Mary's reign, which the princess Elisabeth passed
at Hatfield with sir Thomas Pope, were by far the most agreeable part of her
time during that turbulent period. For although she must have been often
disquieted with many secret fears and apprehensions, yet she was here perfectly
at liberty, and treated with a regard due to her birth and expectations. In the
mean time, to prevent suspicions, she prudently declined interfering in any
sort of business, and abandoned herself entirely to books and amusements
Burnet, Hist. Ref. ubi supr. p. 363.
. The pleasures of solitude and retirement were now become habitual to her
mind; and she principally employed herself in playing on the lute or virginals,
embroidering with gold and silver, reading Greek, and translating Italian. She
was now continuing to profess that character which her brother Edward gave her,
when he used to call her his sweet sister Temperance Camd. Eliz. per Hearne,
APPARAT. vol. i. p. 14.
. But she was soon happily removed to a reign of unparalleled magnificence and
prosperity.

Upon the accession of the new queen, who was resident at Hatfield when her
sister Mary died on November the seventeenth, 1558, it does not appear that sir
Thomas Pope was continued in the privy council. This circumstance may justly be
interpreted to his honor. Elisabeth, to prevent an alarm among the partisans of
the catholic communion, had prudently retained thirteen of Mary's privy
counselors. These were, Heathe, archbishop of York, and lord chancellor; the
marquis of Winchester, lord treasurer; the earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury,
Pembroke, and Derby; the lords Clinton, and Howard; sir Thomas Cheyney, sir
William Petre, sir John Mason, sir Richard Sackville, and Doctor Wootton, dean
of York and Canterbury Burnet, Reformat. ii. 375.
. But most of these had complied with all the changes which were made in the
national religion since the latter end of Henry's reign; and were such
dexterous adepts in the fashionable art of adapting their principles to the
variable complexion of the times, that they were still employed in every new
revolution.

SECT. IV.
WE have now done with sir Thomas Pope's political character; and are entering
on that most memorable circumstance of his life, before incidentally mentioned,
by which he secured immortality to his name, and conferred a perpetual
emolument on his country; I mean, the foundation of Trinity college in Oxford.
His good sense and good disposition led him to reflect, that he could not
bestow a competent proportion of those riches which he had so largely received,
with greater propriety, utility, and generosity, than in the service of the
public. I shall therefore make no apology for delivering at large a history of
his proceedings in forming and completing this liberal design.

And perhaps there are some of my readers, who will be more pleased to view him
in the milder and more amiable light of the father of ingenuous education,
dispensing rewards to science and virtue, than in the more active yet turbulent
scenes of public life, diversified only by the vain vicissitudes of human
affairs, or fraught with the crimes and misfortunes of mankind.

About the year 1290, Richard de Hoton, prior, and the monks, of the cathedral
convent of Durham, erected a college in the northern suburbs of Oxford, for the
education of the novices of their monastery; to which it was considered as an
appendage See grant in the Appendix, Numb. VI. Which, as it probably contains
the first and early separation of the ground on which Trinity college now
stands, with its precincts, or of the greatest part of these, to the purposes
of learning, was thought too curious to be omitted among the original papers.
. This was afterward increased, with the addition of revenues and books, by
Richard of Bury, bishop of Durham, in the year 1345. It was at length entirely
rebuilt, more effectually established, and more amply endowed, for eight
benedictine monks and eight secular students, in the year 1370, by the
munificence of Thomas Hatfield, bishop of the same see The monks were allowed
annually ten pounds each, and the seculars five mar^s. It is remarkable, that
the stipend of these monks is treble to most of the fellowships then in Oxford.
. About the year 1541, this college was dissolved by Henry the eighth See
Stevens's Monast. vol. i. p. 343. from MSS. A. Wood.
: at which time, all its estates, its site, precinct, chapel, bellfry,
buildings of all sorts, with the entire appurtenances of the same, were granted
by the king to his new dean and chapter of Durham cathedral, which, as I
presume, they now possess See Append. Numb. *VII*.
. Its site only reverted to the crown; for Edward the sixth, in the seventh
year of his reign, by letters patent dated February the fourth, 1552 See
Append. Numb. VIII.
, granted the site of this college to George Owen, of Godstowe, the king's
physician, and William Martyn, gentleman.

On this ground sir Thomas Pope determined to found his intended college.
Accordingly, by indenture, dated February the twentieth, 1554 See Append. Numb.
IX.
, he purchased the premises of the said Owen and Martyn. In the same year he
obtained from Philip and Mary a royal license, or charter, dated March the
eigthth, 1554 See Append. Numb. X.
, empowering him to create and erect a certain college within the university of
Oxford, consisting of one president a priest, twelve fellows, four of whom
should be priests, and eight scholars This Number he afterward increased to
twelve.
: and liberally and sufficiently to endow the same and their successors with
certain manors, lands, and revenues. In the same charter, and with the estates
and possessions therein recited, he likewise obtains license of the king and
queen to found and endow a school at Hokenorton in the county of Oxford, to be
called Jesus Scolehouse; and to give statutes as well to the college, as to the
first and second masters of the said school "Ac eciam ulterius damus et
concedimus eidem Thomae Pope, militi, plenariam facultatem et auctoritatem
condendi et sanciendi, pro bono regimine dictorum COLLEGII et SCOLAE, ac
terrarum, tenementorum, hereditamentorum, bonorum et catallorum, eorundem,
quecunque statuta, ordinationes, et regulas, per dictos, Presidentem Socios et
Scholares, Archididascalum, Hypodidascalum, et eorum quemlibet, observanda,
etc." EX CHART. ut supr.
. On the twentyeighth day of March, 1555, by deed so dated See Append. Numb. XI.
, he declares his actual erection and establishment of the said college: and
consigns the site and place abovementioned, to Thomas Slythurste, S.T.B.
President: Stephen Marks, A.M. Robert Newton, John Barwyke, James Bell, Roger
Crispin, John Richardson, Thomas Scotte, George Sympson, Bachelors of Arts,
Fellows: And John Arden, John Comporte, John Perte, and John Langsterre,
Scholars. In the morals, learning, and studious diligence of all which persons,
he therein declares that he much confides. Reserving to himself, at the same
time, the right of nominating the remainder.

With this deed the founder himself, the same day, came to Oxford; and in
consequence of it, in his own person delivered possession of the college to the
said President, Fellows, and Scholars, in the presence of John Warner,
vice chancellor of the university, warden of All Souls college, and archdeacon
of Cleveland, and of Ely He was also or had been, professor of Physic in
Oxford, and prebendary of Winchester and Salisbury. He died Dean of Winchester.
A small History of All Souls college occurs in his handwriting, about the year
1560, in Cod. MSS. Rawlins. 236. fol. Bibl. Bodl.
; Owen Oglethorp, president of Magdalene, and dean of Windsor Afterward bishop
of Carlisle: in which character he crowned queen Elizabeth.
; Robert Morwent, president of Corpus Christi; Walter Wryght, archdeacon of
Oxford; John Brown, canon of Windsor See Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. F. p. 65. edit 2.
; Edmund Powel, esquire Of Sandford, near Oxford.
, Edward Love, John Bylling, Simon Perrot, John Heywood, Henry Bryan, Arthur
Yeldard, John Myleward, John Edmundes, John Beresford, Ralph Dodmer, John
Lawrence, Bartholomew Plott, Humfrey Edmundes Indorsed on the instrument cited
Append. Numb. XI.
, gentlemen, and many others Many of these persons occur in different parts of
these memoirs; and their characters, and connections with sir Thomas Pope, are
explained in their proper places.
. In consequence of this last-mentioned deed, by an instrument dated the same
day and year, Thomas Slythurste appoints Stephen Marks and Robert Newton, his
lawful attorneys, to enter, in his name and stead, into a certain message or
building, with its appurtenances, in Oxford, called Trinity college, of the
foundation of sir Thomas Pope, knight; and of the same to take full and
peaceable possession; and to keep and retain it for the uses and purposes of
the said Thomas Slvthurste, according to the force, form, and effect, of a
certain grant made to him and others by the said sir Thomas Pope See Append.
Numb. XII.
.

In May following, the founder furnished his college with necessaries and
implements of every kind Ex indent. dat. Maii 5. ii. iii. Phil. Mar. In
Thesauriar. et Registr. prim. Coll. fol. 5.
. To the library in particular he gave no inconsiderable collection of valuable
and costly books, both printed and manuscript Ibid.
. But above all, he adorned the chapel, as appears by a deed dated the fifth of
May, 1555 See Append. Numb. XVI.
, with silver vessels, embroidered vestments, copes of tissue, crosses, and
illuminated missals The altars of the chapel were dedicated the following year,
as appears from the following entry, in Comp. Burff. 1556, anno primo Coll.
"Sol. pro Obsoniis datis Dom. Episcopo Glocestrensi et Ministris ejus in
consecratione altarium, xviij s. x d. ob."
. The next year, he transmitted to the society a body of statutes, dated the
first of May, 1556. On the eighth of the same month, he gave them one hundred
pounds for a stock to begin with Ex acquietantia in Registro primo, fol. 6. b.
. Matters being thus duly prepared and adjusted, and his endowment See an
instrument signed with his own hand, viz. " A Valewe of all the Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditamentes, which I Sir Thomas Pope, Knighte, Founder of
Trinity college within the Universitie of Oxford, have given to the
Presidente, Fellows, and Scholars, of the same, and to their Successors for
ever. As well at the first Erection of the college, as hereafter followithe,
etc." Ad. Calc. vet. Libri Statutor. in pergamen. penes Praesid. fol. 109. b.
etc.
of the college consisting of manors, lands, and impropriations, having
effectually taken place before or upon the feast of the annunciation, 1556
Comput. Burss. anno primo Coll.
; the first president, fellows, and scholars, nominated by himself, were
formally and actually admitted within the chapel, on the thirtieth day of May,
being the eve of Trinity Sunday, the same year, yiz. 1556. They were all, the
graduates at least, taken from different colleges in Oxford; except one, who
was of Cambridge. Their names, dignities, colleges, degrees, counties, and
appointments in the new society, as far as notices have occurred, are here
specified See Append. Numb. XIII.
.

PRESIDENT. Thomas Slythurste, S.T.B. Canon of Windsor. County, Berkshire.
FELLOWS. Arthur Yeldarde, Fellow of Pembroke-Hall, in Cambridge, A.M.
Northumberland. -- Appointed philosophy-lecturer by the founder. Stephen
Marks, Fellow, and Rector, of Exeter College, in Oxford, A.M. Cornwall. --
Appointed vice president by the founder. John Barwyke, of Magdalen College, in
Oxford, A.M. Devonshire. -- Appointed dean by election. James Bell, Scholar of
Corpus Christi College, in Oxford, A.B. Somersetshire. -- Appointed
rhetoric-lecturer by election. John Richardson, Scholar of Queen's College, in
Oxford, A.B. Cumberland. -- Appointed bursar by election. George Sympson,
Scholar of Queen's College, in Oxford, A.B. Cumberland. George Rudde, Scholar
of Queen's College, in Oxford, A.B. Westmoreland. Thomas Scotte, Scholar of
Queen's College, in Oxford, A.B. Cumberland. Roger Cryspin, Fellow of Exeter
College, in Oxford, A.B. Devonshire. Roger Evens, A.B. Cornwall. John Perte,
A.B. Warwickshire. -- Appointed bursar by election. Robert Bellamie, of Exeter
College, in Oxford, A.B. Yorkshire.
SCHOLARS. John Langsterre, of Brasen-Nose College, in Oxford, A.B. Yorkshire.
Reginald Braye, A.B. Bedfordshire. John Arden, or Arderne, Oxfordshire. John
Comporte, Middlesex. Robert Thraske, Somersetshire. William Saltmarshe,
Yorkshire. John Harrys, Gloucestershire. -- -- -- One Starkie was also
nominated; but he not appearing, Edmund Hutchins, the founder's nephew, was
admitted in his room by the founder's mandate, October. 3. Registr. Coll. prim.
fol. 3. b. And Registr. Kettell. citat. apud Append. Numb. XXV.
.

On saint Swithin's day, being the fifteenth of July, in the same year, the
founder paid a visit to his college. He was accompanied by the bishops of
Winchester and Ely, and other eminent personages. He dismounted from his horse
at the college gate, where he was received by the president, who stood at his
stirrup. At entering the gates he was saluted in a long and dutiful oration by
the vice president: after which the bursars offered him a present of
embroidered gloves. From thence he was conducted with the rest of the company
into the president's great chamber: the fellows and scholars standing on either
side, as he passed along the court. Having viewed the library and Grove, they
proceeded to dinner in the hall, where a sumptuous entertainment was provided.
The president sat on the left hand of the founder, yet at some distance, and
the rest of the guests, and the society, were placed according to their rank,
and in their proper order. There were twelve minstrels present in the hall; and
among other articles of provision on this occasion, four fat does, and six
gallons of Muscadel, are mentioned. The whole expense of the feast amounting to
xij l. xiij s. ix d. After dinner they went to evening mass in the chapel,
where the president celebrated the service, habited in the richest cope: and
the founder offered at the altar a purse full of angels. They then retired to
the Bursary; where the founder paid into the hands of the Bursars all the costs
incurred by this visit: and gave them besides, at the same time, a silver
goblet gilt, which being filled with hypocrasse, he drank to the Bursars, and
to all the company present. He then departed toward Windsor: but before he
left the college, gave with his own hands, to each of the scholars, one marc
See Append. Numb. XXIX.
.

In November following, I find a letter to the president from the founder; in
which, as likewise in eighteen others written afterward Fourteen of these
letters are the originals in his own hand, preserved in the treasury of the
college. The rest are copies in the first register.
, are many marks of his attention to the affairs and economy of his college,
and of his solicitude about settling every article of the new foundation in
the most effectual manner: as also of his readiness to assist on all necessary
occasions. In the letter just mentioned, among several other particulars, he
tells the president, in consequence of a conversation which had lately passed
between them both at Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire, by what expedient certain
extraordinary expenses of the college, in the late visitation Concerning which
I find the following entries, in Comp. Burss. 1556. "EXPENSAE EQUITANTIUM. --
Sol. per dum. Perte in equitando ad fundatorem primo. ij s. ij d. -- Sol. dom.
Bellamie equitanti ad Mag. Love [the founder's receiver] ut certiorem cum
redderet de adventu visitatorum, et pro expensis propriis. xj d. -- Sol. pro
obsoniis, aliisque rebus, pro visitatcribus reverendissimi Cardi alis Pole.
xxiv s. ix d. Sol. in regardo ministris visitatorum. xxv s." -- For an account
of this visitation, see Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon Lib. i. p. 278. col. ii.
The visitors were Brooks bishop of Gloucester, Cole dean of Saint Paul's,
Morwent president of Corpus, Wright archdeacon of Oxford, and Ormanet the
pope's datary. Their design was to restore the pope's authority in the
university, and to eject all students who were disaffected to the catholic
ceremonies. The visitation seems to have ended in burning a considerable number
of English bibles, and in removing the body of Peter Martyr's heretical wife
from the cathedral of Christchurce.
of the university by the deputies of cardinal Pole, and in some other
instances, should be discharged. He commissions him to thank master Rawes, a
canon of Windsor He lies buried under the fourth arch of the south i will, on the
choir side, of St. George's chapel, at Windsor, with a plate of brass on his
grave, much injured; having the figure of a priest in a canon's mantle, with
St. George's arms on his left shoulder, with this inscription.

Orate pro anima Magistri Thomae Rawes hujus sacri collegii Canonici, qui obiit
xii. die Maii anno dni millesimo quingentesimo quinquagesimo sexto. Cujus anime
propicietur deus. Amen.

In Rymer's FOED. Tom. xv. p. 463. is queen Mary's grant of his canonry to
Richard Brewarne, canon of the first stall of Christ Church, Oxford, dated May
24, 1557, in which instrument he is called "nuper defunctus." According to
Frithe's Catalogue of canons of Windsor, in Ashmole's Berkshire, vol. iii. p.
260. he was also vicar of Wantage, Co. Berks. His books, consisting of near
fifty volumes in folio, came to the college in 1557. He was of Oxford, where he
occurs determining in Arts, 1518. Wood MSS. Ashmol. E. 6.


, for a present of books intended for the library. He desires the president
would bargain for him with master Freere William Freer, of the city of Oxford,
whose father Edward married Anne the daughter of John Bustarde, second husband
of the founder's mother. Lee's MSS. Visitation, ut supr. page 24. I find one
Thomas Freer, admitted Probat. Soc. of Trin. coll. Jun. ix. 1560. Dioces. Land.
-- Registr. coll. prim. I find also the following article, in Comp. Burss.
1561. -- 2.

"Sol. xxvii. November. pro expens. Dni Freer perferentis collegii literas et
librum statutorum ad episcopum Wynton, vij. s. viij d.

He was afterward M.D. and gave to the college-library, in 1566, a beautiful
and valuable MS. on vellum, in solio, of Gregory Nazianzen. Edward Freer,
abovementioned, was buried in the church of All Saints Oxon. Jan. 27, 1564.
Registr. Parcchial. eccles. praedict.


, for one thousand load of stone, to be carried to the college for beginning a
wall round the Grove. He talks of having moved my lord cardinal Pole's grace,
for license for three of the fellows to preach "Concerning License for Mr.
Marks, Mr. Yeldard, and Mr. Barwyke, to preach, I have already moved my lord
Cardinall's grace;; who answered the bushop might give license: but
understonding syns by Mr. Yeldard the contrary, I shall eftsoon move his grace
therein." Queen Mary, Aug. 29, 1555, commissioned Gardener bishop of
Winchester, Lord Chancellor, to grant Licenses for preaching. Rym. Foed. xv.
337. See form of a license for this purpose in Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii.
RECORDS, Numb. 78. page 82.
: a matter concerning which very rigid injunctions had been published, at the
restoration of the catholic religion by queen Mary. He mentions having sent to
the college, for the service of the chapel, two pair of censers of one fashion,
two cruets, two candlesticks for the high altar, one ship, and one pax of
ivory: "trusting, or it be long, ye shall have the like things of sylver." He
adds, and forasmoch as it is evil carriage of my organes this winter, Mr.
White Sir Thomas White, who at this time was engaged in founding St. John's
college. I find him entertained at Trinity college more than once, viz. in
Comp. Burff. Coll. Trin. 1562. -- 3.

"Sol. ex bellariis insumptis in Fundatorem Collegii sancti Johannis, iiij s.
ix d." And again the same year, "In datis Fundatori Collegii sancti Johannis
cum viseret collegium."

The two founders seem to have been intimately acquainted and connected; as
appears not only from this, but from another passage, in the letter before us.
"Mr. [Sir] Thomas White and I ar almost at a point with sir John Master for his
wood; and I believe shall conclude for the same within this ii. or iii. days."


, at my request, is content you shall have [keep] his littell organs till the
beginning of somer Accordingly, his own being received, sir Thomas Whyte's
organ was returned to St. John's college, as appears from Comp. Burff. coll.
Trin. 1556. -- 7. viz. "Sol. pro organorum ad Collegium sancti Johannis
vectura, iiij d."


, when I may convey mine to you without hurtyng them. And because ye write, ye
have great need of a standing cup to drink wine in; Mr. Sowtherne's See an
account of him, Append. Numb. XIII. Notes.
money shall be bestowed in ii. standing cups gilt with covers, or else in
one fair stonding cupp with a cover, and ii. sylver saltes with a cover; and
if they come to more money, I will pay the same myself. Ye shall receive by
master Yeldard a rentall of all such lands as I have given your college;
which, till I appoint more scollers, as, god suffering I intend shortly, is a
just proportion to bear all the charges of your college. And thus beseeching
you with my hertie commendacions to all the fellowers and scollers of my
college, desiring the same to remember me with their prayers, I bid you
farewell. Written at Clerkynwell the xxviith of November, 1556.

Your assured loving friend, THOMAS POPE Ex autograph.
.




From other letters, written to the president, it appears that during his
lifetime he paid all the university expenses of degrees, regencies and
determinations, for the fellows and scholars I find him paying, at once, to
Proceeders of his college, perhaps for the whole year, the sum of vj l. xiij s.
iv d. From letter, dat. St. Thomas's day, at Tyttenhanger, without the year.
.

On the twentieth of January 1557, he sent to the college for the second time
See Append. Numb. XVII.
, and again on the twelfth of April following for the third time See Append.
Numb. XVIII.
, various articles of costly furniture for the chapel and hall, consisting of
rich copes, service books, etc. as before; and several pieces of silver plate.
The whole quantity of plate which he gave them at these three several times, is
as follows. A standing cup of silver gilt, with a cover, embossed with
pomegrantes The Pomegranate first became an ornament on silver plate,
particularly on silver embossed standing cups, in the reign of Henry vii. It
was in compliment to prince Arthur who matched with Spain. Among the badges on
his tomb in Worcester Cathedral, Pomegranates are introduced with his father's
portcullis and fleur de lis. In the reign of Henry viii. who married Catharine
of Spain, Arthur's widow, they were often used as an ornament in the furniture
of masks and pageants, exhibited for the entertainment, and in honor, of the
queen. See Hollingshed, Chron. iii. 802, 807, 808, 839, etc. Hence they became
also a decoration in architecture; as in the turrets of the great gate of
Christ Church, at Oxford, built by Wolsey. They were again revived, and grew
very fashionable, in the reign of queen Mary, after her marriage with Philip of
Spain.
, and a sheaf of arrows, weighing thirty-three ounces. Two gilt saltes,
weighing thirty-nine ounces. Three cups of silver gilt, weighing more than
thirty-one ounces. Twelve silver spoons beside one before sent, parcel-gilt,
with knobs of sculpture. These were for the hall. For the chapel they received,
two cruets of silver gilt, weighing nine ounces. An holy-water-stop and
aspergoire of silver parcel-gilt, weighing more than eighteen ounces. A sacring
bell of silver gilt, weighing five ounces. A pax of silver gilt, with a
crucifix, and the images of Mary and John, weighing near seventeen ounces. Two
pair of censers, for frankincense, of silver parcel-gilt, weighing seventy
ounces. A ship of silver with a spoon for frankincense, parcel-gilt, weighing
near eighteen ounces. Two chapel-basons of silver parcel-gilt weighing more
than thirty seven ounces. A fair cross of silver gilt, with images of Mary and
John, garnished with crystal and precious stones, with a foot of silver gilt,
weighing together, beside the crystal and stones, twenty-four pounds and five
ounces. Two candlesticks of silver, for the high altar, parcel-gilt, weighing
near thirty-two ounces. A monstrans of silver gilt, weighing twenty-one ounces.
A patin with a chalice of silver gilt, weighing twenty ounces. Another patin
with a chalice of silver parcelgilt, weighing thirteen ounces. A pipe of silver
parcel-gilt, weighing thirteen ounces. He gave them besides, by his last will,
several other pieces of plate, for the service of the hall, which I shall
enumerate hereafter.

In September, 1557, he made considerable additions to the foundation; on the
tenth of which month, he conveyed With a condition of exchange: and he
afterward exchanged them for possessions of greater value in Essex and
Gloucestershire, 1558. ADDITAM. ut infr. fol. 115.
, or rather confirmed to the Society the manors of Dunthorp and Seawell in
Oxfordshire. With these new revenues he ordains and endows five obits, or
dirges, yearly to be sung and celebrated as festivals, in his college
"ADDITAMENTUM ex liberalitate dom. Thome Pope, Fundatoris collegii sanctae et
individuae Trinitatis, in universitate Oxon. post erectionem dicti collegii;
tam pro augendo numero scholarium, quam pro aliis rebus in eodem peragendis."

"Cum, haud multum post collegii mei erectionem, ingente tum et insolita rerum
omnium caritate et penuria, misere ubique saeviente; Ego de exequiis et
hujusmodi aliis rebus statuendis, quae oblivione in initio erant praetermissae,
nonnulla praeterea alumnis meis perquam necessaria deesse adhuc viderem:
Perpetuam ejusdem collegii mei perdurationem conservationemque in omnibus ex
animo cupiens atque volens, precedenti Beneficio meo hoc insuper addidi, etc."
-- "Dat. in Aedibus meis Clarkenwell, September. 10. 1557." ADDITAM. ad calc.
libri Statutorum. fol. 97. Notwithstanding, he had before thought of many of
these particulars. They were not, however, till now, fully and effectually
established.


. These are, for queen Mary and her most noble progenitors, on the day of the
assumption of the holy virgin; for dame Margaret his late wife, and Alice his
daughter, deceased, on the day of the conception of the holy virgin; for dame
Elizabeth his present wife, on the day of the nativity of the holy virgin; and
for William and Margaret, his father and mother, on the day of the annunciation
of the holy virgin. And on Jesus day, the seventh of August, he appoints an
Obit or dirge By deed dat. December. xxiv, 1 Eliz. 1558, he likewise founded a
dirge on the same day, in the church of Much-Waltham in Essex; for which he
gave a pension of xxvjs. viijd. to Bryan Needham, vicar of Much-Waltham, and to
his successors, "That the said Bryan Nedeham, and his successoures, shall yerly
for ever, upon the feast day of Jesus in the monthe of August, say, or cause to
be said, one Dirige; and the next day following one Mass, for the soul of sir
Thomas Pope, and all christian sowles: And after the said mass fynished, that
then the said Bryan Nedeham, and his successoures, shall ymmediatelie gyve unto
fyve poor folks, which shall be present at the said Dirige and Mass, to pray
for the soul of the said sir T. Pope, and all christian sowles to every of
them, four-pence." -- "Sig. S. and D. in the Pr. of John Bersford, and John
Milward." In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon. I find the said Bryan Needham
supplicating for the degree of M.A. at Oxford in the year 1556. Registr. I.
Congreg. et Convoc. fol. 169. a. fol. 160. b. In Turri Scholarum.
, annually to be celebrated, as well during his life, as after his decease, for
himself and all christian souls. At which time, during his dirge and mass, he
orders that twelve poor men and twelve poor women shall be present in the
chapel, and afterward receive each a competent allowance of money, bread, and
drink, within the college at the entrance into the hall: and after the mass of
his obsequie was sung Registr. Coll. ut supr. fol. 14. seq.
, that bread and drink be annually distributed the same day among the poor
prisoners in Oxford. From the same revenues he likewise grants a weekly
allowance to the said prisoners; with various other improvements, and
augmentations of former appointments. And because he once intended to found a
School at Hokenorton in Oxfordshire; with the endowment intended for that
purpose, he now founds from these lands, four additional scholars in his
college: By which judicious alteration of his original plan, the number of the
scholars was increased to twelve, and equalled to that of the fellows. He tells
us that he rejected the scheme of founding a school "Cum ante annos aliquot
decreveram, unam perpetuam ac liberam SCHOLAM apud Hokenorton, in com. Oxon.
erigere et stabilire; ejusque rei Licentia, quemadmodum et fundandi mei
collegii, ab illustriss. Phil. et Mar. etc. mihi facta sit. -- Atque a
gravissimis prudentissimisque hominibus, Reipublicae me consultius facturum sit
indicatum, si numerum scholarium Oxoniae jam multum diminutum, ac indies magis
magisque deficientem, augerem ac restaurarem, quam si hujusmodi Scholarum
multiplicarem numerum; praesertim cum constet in oppidis illi loco vicinis,
varias Scholas, easque doctis ornatas instructoribus, ob discipulorum
accedentium paucitatem, non fatis frequentatas. Illorum rationibus atque
confilio ductus, etc." EX ADDITAMENTO, ut supr. He first intended to found this
school at Dedington, his native town. For an account of it, see Append. No. XIV.
as an appendage to the college, being persuaded that it would prove more
beneficial to the public, to restore in some measure, and increase the number
of scholars in the university of Oxford, of late much diminished and still
continuing to decay, than to multiply the number of grammar schools; especially
as those situated in the neighborhood of the place abovementioned, although
properly filled with learned masters, were so little frequented and encouraged.

In December, the same year Indent. dat. Dec. 1. 1557. Registr. prim. fol. 16.
b. And Append. XXIII. XXIV.
, he declares his intention of building a commodious edifice at Garsington near
Oxford, to which the society might retire in time of pestilence, then no
uncommon malady. For this purpose, in case he should not accomplish it in his
lifetime, as he intended, he left by his will five hundred marks, and the
building, consisting of a fair quadrangle of stone, was accordingly raised
after his death See articles of his will, infr. Great part of it has been
demolished, as useless. One range, or side, of the building now remains;
containing an arched entrance, with many large apartments having arched
windows, and the kitchen at one end with a spacious fire place as in our
colleges. It was not completely finished till 1570. Ex comp. Burss. 1570. -- 1.
.

When sir Thomas Pope had founded his college, the university of Oxford
complimented him with their letters of thanks and acknowledgment, in
consideration of his having added a new college to the former number; which
were delivered to the founder by the president The letter was accompanied with
a present of rich gloves, viz. Ex comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1556. -- "Sol. per
dom. Bellamie pro deferendis LITERIS et CHIROTHECIS ab universitate ad
praesidem pro Fundatore. ij s. xj d." -- The president, I suppose, was then in
London, waiting for this purpose. Bellamie is one of the fellows. See Append.
Numb. XXV. Article, BELLAMIE. In a Computus of Dr. W. Tresham, commissary of
the university in the aforesaid year, I find the following article, viz. " Here
folowith other charges which I William Tresham as commissarie have leyde out
for the universitie of Oxford sithence the xxiitie day of April an. dni 1556.
-- ITEM for gloves sent to sir THOMAS POPE, and my lady his wife, with letters
of thankesgiving from the universitie, vj s. viij d." Among the auditors of
this computus are Thomas White, Walter Wryght, Thomas Slythurst, and Robert
Morwent. Ex orig. in Bibl. Bodl. Codd. MSS. A. Wood.
. Indeed they had no small reason, at this time, to acknowledge with pleasure
and gratitude this accession to their constitution. Heylin very justly remarks,
that queen Mary, in rebuilding the public schools at Oxford "gave encouragement
to two worthy gentlemen to add two new colleges to the former, Trinity and
saint John's. Had it not been for these Foundations, there had been nothing in
this reign to have made it memorable, but only the misfortunes and calamities
of it Eccles. Restaurat. Hist. of Q. Mary. p. 84.
." He might have added, that this liberality could not have been conferred at a
more seasonable time on the university. And of this sir Thomas Pope was very
sensible, as we have before seen, when he substituted an additional number of
academical students in the place of a grammar school.

But that it may further appear, how much these encouragements were now wanted,
it will be necessry to look backwards upon the state of learning in England,
particularly at Oxford; and from thence to trace its progress, and the causes
of its decline, down to the times with which we are concerned. An enquiry not
less instructive than entertaining, and naturally connected with the present
subject.

About the close of the fifteenth century, a taste for polite letters, under
the patronage of the popes, began to be revived in Italy. But these liberal
pontiffs did not consider at the same time that they were undermining the papal
interest, and bringing on the Reformation. This event is commonly called the
Restoration of Learning; but it should rather be styled the restoration of good
sense and useful knowledge. Learning there had been before, but barbarism still
remained. The most acute efforts of human wit and penetration had been exerted
for some centuries, in the dissertations of logicians and theologists; yet
Europe still remained in a state of superstition and ignorance. What philosophy
could not perform, was reserved to be completed by classical literature, by the
poets and orators of Greece and Rome, who alone could enlarge the mind, and
polish the manners. Taste and propriety, and a rectitude of thinking and
judging, derived from these sources, gave a new turn to the general system of
study: mankind was civilized, and religion was reformed. The effects of this
happy revolution by degrees reached England.

We find at Oxford, in the latter end of the fifteenth century, that the
university was filled with the jargon and disputes of the Scotists and
Thomists; and if at that time there were any scholars of better note, these
were chiefly the followers of Wicliffe, and were consequently discountenanced
and persecuted. The latin style then only known in the university, was the
technical language of the schoolmen, of casuists, and metaphysicians. At
Cambridge, about 1485, nothing was taught but Alexander's Parva Logicalia, the
trite axioms of Aristotle, which were never rationally explained, and the
profound questions of John Scotus Erasm. Epist. H. Bovillo. dat. Roffae. 1516.
. At length some of our countrymen, the principal of which were Grocyn,
Latymer, Lillye, Linacer, Tunstall, Pace, and sir Thomas More, ventured to
break through the narrow bounds of scholastic erudition, and went over into
Italy with a design of acquiring a knowledge in the Greek and Latin languages.
Leland. ENCOM. page 74. edit. 4to. 1589. viz. Omnes Italiam petierunt sydere
fausto,
Et nituit Latiis terra Britanna Scholis.

. The Greek, in particular, was taught there with much perfection and purity,
by many learned Greeks who had been driven from Constantinople. In 1488, Grocyn
and Linacer left Oxford, and studied Greek at Florence under the instruction of
Demetrius Chalcondylas, and Politian; and at Rome under Hermolaus Barbarus Wood
Ath. Oxon. i. 15, 19, 20. See Stapleton de tribus THOMIS. cap. i.
. Grocyn returned an accomplished master in the Greek, and became the first
lecturer of that language at Oxford, but without any settled endowment Wood.
Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 246.
. Elegance of style began now to be cultivated, and the study of the most
approved ancient writers became fashionable.

In 1496, Alcock bishop of Ely, founded Jesus college in Cambridge, partly for
a certain number of scholars to be educated in grammar See Lit. Pat. Hen. vii.
quod Johannes Episcopus Eliens. fundare possit quoddam collegium de uno
magistro, et sex sociis, et certo numero scholarium in Grammatica erudiendorum.
Rymer. Foed. xii. 633. and Knight's Life of Colet, p. 19.
. Degrees in grammar, or rhetoric, had been early established at Oxford. But
the pupils of this class studied only systems of grammar and rhetoric, filled
with empty definitions and unnecessary distinctions, instead of the real models
Walter de Merton, in the statutes of Merton college at Oxford, appoints a
grammarian in that society. "Sit etiam in ipsa congregatione grammaticus unus,
qui studio grammaticae totaliter vacet. -- Et eorum qui studio grammaticae
fuerint applicati curam habeat: et ad ipsum etiam provectiores in dubiis suae
facultatis sine rubore habeant regressum, etc." Statut. coll. Mert. cap. ii.
These statutes were given in August, A.D. 1274.
. In 1509, Lillye, the famous grammarian, who have learned Greek at Rhodes, and
afterward improved himself in latin at Rome under Johanes Sulpitius and
Pomponius Sabinus, was the first teacher of greek at any public School in
England. This was at saint Paul's school in London then newly established, and
of which Lillye was the first Master Knight's Life of Colet, p. 19.
. And that ancient prejudices were subsiding apace, and a national taste for
critical studies and the graces of composition began to be diffused, appears
from this circumstance alone; that from the year 1502, to the reformation,
within the space of thirty years, there were more grammar schools founded and
endowed in England than had been for three hundred years before Knight ubi
supr. p. 100.
. Near twenty grammar schools were instituted within this period; before which
most of your youth were educated at the monasteries It is not to be doubted,
that William of Wykeham's ample foundation at Winchester, formed on a plan
perfectly original, and that of Henry vi. at Eton, its transcript, were very
conducive, although distant, instruments in preparing and facilitating this
great work. And indeed long before the period at which we began, William of
Wainflete, sensible of the expediency of grammar learning, had founded two
considerable schools. -- John Leland, or Leilont, taught grammar in
Peckwater-inn at Oxford, of which he was principal, about the reign of Henry
vi. He wrote a Grammar, which I have seen, in the black letter, entitled
GRAMMATICA NOVA. Prefixed are some recommendatory epigrams " Carmeliani
poctae." One of these is entitled " In reverendum dominum Gulielmum episcopun
Wintoniensem." That is, William of Waynflete. It is closed with this distich:
Hoc opus auctor enim, te persuadente, Joannes
Edidit, etc.


Whence it appears that John Leland, the author, wrote this Grammar by the
advice and encouragement of William of Waynflete; probably while the latter was
master of Winchester school, as Leland died in the year 1428.


.

In 1517, that wise prelate and bountiful patron, Richard Fox, founded his
college Statut. C. C. C. Oxon. dat. Jun. xx, 1517. Cap. xx. fol. 51. Bibl.
Bodl. MSS. Laud. I. 56.
at Oxford, in which he constituted, with competent salaries, two lectures for
the latin and greek languages Beside a third in theology.
. This was a new and noble departure from the narrow plan of academical
education It is not however to be forgotten here, that at the foundation of
Christ's college in Cambridge a lecturer was established, who, together with
logic and philosophy, is ordered to read "vel ex poetarum vel oratorum
operibus." Cap. xxxvii. These statutes were given in the year 1506. In the
statutes of King's at Cambridge, and New college at Oxford, both much more
ancient, an instructor is appointed by the general name of Informater only, who
taught all the learning then in vogue.
, The course of the latin lecturer was not confined to the college, but open to
the students of Oxford in general. He is expressly directed to drive barbarism
from the new college "Lector seu professor artium humaniorum... barbariem e
nostro alveario extirpet."
. And at the same time it is to be remarked, that Fox does not appoint a
philosophy-lecturer in his college, as had been the practice in most of the
previous foundations; perhaps thinking, that such an institution would not have
coincided with his new system of doctrine, and that it would be encouraging
that species of science which had hitherto blinded men's understandings, and
kept them so long in ignorance of more useful knowledge. The greek lecturer is
ordered to explain the best greek classics; and those which the judicious
founder, who seems to have consulted the most capital scholars of his age,
prescribes on this occasion, are the purest, and such as are most esteemed at
this day.

These happy beginnings were seconded by the munificence of cardinal Wolsed.
About the year 1519, he founded a public chair at Oxford for rhetoric and
humanity; and soon afterward another for the greek tongue: endowing both with
ample stipends Wood Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 245, 246.
. But these innovations in the plan of study were greatly discouraged and
opposed by the scholastic bigots, who called the greek language heresy. Even
bishop Fox when he founded the greek lecture abovementioned, was obliged to
cover his excellent institution under the venerable mantle of the authority of
the church, lest she should seem to countenance a dangerous novelty. For he
gives it as a reason, or rather as an apology, for this new lectureship, that
the sacred canons had commanded, that a knowledge of the greek tongue should
not be wanting in public seminaries of education "Quem praeterea in nostro
alveario collocavimus, quod sacrosancti canones commodissime pro bonis literis
et imprimis christianis instituerunt ac jusserunt, eum in hac universitate
Oxon. perinde ac paucis aliis celeberrimis gymnasiis, nunquam desyderari. Nec
tamen eos hac ratione excusatos volumus, qui Graecam lectionem in ea suis
impensis sustentare bebent." Statut. C. C. C. ut supr. By these sacri canones
he means a decree of the council of Vienne; which enjoined that professors of
Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic should be instituted in the universities of Oxford,
Paris, Bononia, Salamanca, and the court of Rome. Gregory Typhernas, one of the
learned greek fugitives, about the year 1472, offered to teach greek in the
university of Paris, and asked a stipend for his labor, under this canon.
Naud. apud Hod. de Graec. illustr. lib. ii c. 3. page 234. See also Hod. ibid.
page 233.
. The university of Oxford was rent into factions on account of these attempts;
and the defenders of the new erudition, from disputations, often proceeded to
blows with the rigid champions of the schools. But these animosities were soon
pacified by the persuasion and example of Erasmus, who was about this time a
student in saint Mary's college at Oxford, opposite to New-Inn Wood Hist. Antiq
univ. Oxon. i. 237.
. At Cambridge however, which, in imitation of Oxford, had adopted greek,
Erasmus found greater difficulties. He tells us himself that at Cambridge he
read the greek grammar of Chrysoloras to the bare walls Epist. cxxiii. Ammonio
dat. 1511. tom. iii. p. 140. Opp.
: and that having translated Lucian's dialogue called Icaro-menippus, he could
find no person in the university able to transcribe the greek with the latin
Epist. cxxxix. dat. 1512. Ibid. p. 120.
. His edition of the greek testament was entirely proscribed there; and a
decree was issued in one of the most considerable colleges, ordering that if
any of the society was detected in bringing that impious and fantastic book
into the college, he should be severely fined Epist. cxlviii. H. Bovillo. dat.
1513. Ibid. p. 126.
. One Henry Standish, a doctor in divinity and a mendicant friar, afterward
bishop of saint Asaph, was a vehement opponent of Erasmus in this heretical
literature; calling him in a declamation, by way of reproach, Graeculus iste,
which afterward became a synonymous term for an heretic Knight's Life of
Colet. p. 14. See Erasm. Op. tom. ix. 1440.
.

But neither was Oxford, and for the same reasons, entirely free from these
contracted notions. In 1519, a preacher at saint Mary's church harangued with
much violence against these pernicious teachers, and his arguments occasioned
no small ferment among the students. But Henry the eighth, who was luckily a
patron of these improvements, being then resident at the neighboring royal
manor of Woodstock, and having received a just state of the case from Pace and
More, immediately transmitted his royal mandate to the university, ordering
that these studies shoud not only be permitted but encouraged Erasm. epist.
ccclxxx. ut inf.
. Soon afterward one of the king's chaplains preaching at court, took an
opportunity to censure the new, but genuine, interpretations of scripture which
the grecian learning had introduced. The king, when the sermon was ended, which
he heard with a smile of contempt, ordered a solemn disputation to be held, in
the presence of himself; at which the preacher opposed, and sir Thomas More
defended, the use and excellence of the greek tongue. The divine, instead of
answering to the purpose, fell upon his knees, and begged pardon for having
given any offense in the pulpit. After some little altercation, the preacher,
by way of a decent submission, declared that he was now better reconciled to
the greek tongue, because it was derived, from the hebrew. The king, amazed at
his ignorance, dismissed him, with a charge that he should never again presume
to preach at court Erasm. epist. P. Mosellano. dat. 1519. ccclxxx. page 408.
tom. iii.
. In the grammar-schools established in all the new cathedral foundations of
this king, a master was appointed with a competent skill not only in the latin,
but likewise in the greek language "Statuimus praeterea, ut per Decanum, etc.
unu^ [ Ardididas^^^^^] eligatur, latin et Gr^^e doctus, bo^ae famae, etc."
Statut. eccles. cathedr. Roffens. cap. xxv. They were given Jun 30, 1545. In
the same statute, the second master is required to be only Latin doctus. It is
remarkable, that cardinal Wolsey does not order greek to be taught in his
school at Ipswich, founded 1528. See Strype's Eccl. Mem. i. Append. xxxv. page
94. seq.
. This was an uncommon qualification in a schoolmaster.

At length ancient absurdities universally gave way to these encouragements:
and at Oxford in particular, these united efforts for establishing a new system
of rational and manly learning were finally consummated in the magnificent
foundation of Wolsey's college, to which all the Learned of Europe were invited.

But these auspicious improvements in the state of learning did not continue
long. A change of the national religion soon happened, and disputes with the
Lutherans ensued, which embroiling the minds of learned men in difference of
opinion, disunited their endeavors in the cause of literature, and diverted
their attention to other enquiries.

Many of the abuses in civil society are attended with some advantages. In the
beginnings of reformation, the loss of these advantages is always felt very
sensibly; while the benefit resulting from the change, is the slow effect of
time, and not immediately percieved or enjoyed. Scarce any institution can be
imagined less favorable to the interests of mankind than the monastic. Yet a
great temporary check given to the progress of literature at this period, was
the dissolution of the monasteries. For although these seminaries were in
general the nurseries of illiterate indolence, and undoubtedly deserved to be
destroyed, yet the still contained invitations and opportunities to studious
leisure and literary pursuits. On this important event therefore, a visible
revolution and decline in the state of learning succeeded. Most of the youth of
the kingdom betook themselves to mechanical or other illiberal employments, the
profession of letters being now supposed to be without support and reward. By
the abolition of the religious houses, many towns and their adjacent villages
were utterly deprived of their only means of instruction. What was taught in
the monasteries was perhaps of no great importance, but still it served to keep
up a certain degree of necessary knowledge. Hence provincial ignorance became
almost universally established.

Nor should we forget, that several of the abbots were persons of public
spirit: by their connection with parliament, they became acquainted with the
world; and knowing where and how to choose proper objects, and having no other
use for the superfluity of their vast revenues, encouraged, in their respective
circles, many learned young men.

It is generally thought, that the reformation of religion, the most happy and
important event of modern times, was immediately succeeded by a flourishing
state of learning. But this, in England at least, was by no means the case; and
for a long time afterward an effect quite contrary was produced. Yet, in 1535,
the king's visitors ordered lectures in humanity to be founded in those
societies at Oxford where they were yet wanting: and these injunctions were so
warmly seconded and approved by the scholars in the largest colleges, that they
seized on the venerable volumes of Duns Scotus, and other irrefragable
logicians, and tearing them in pieces, dispersed them in great triumph about
their quadrangles, or gave them away as useless lumber See Dr. Layton's Letter
to Cromwell. Strype's Eccl. Mem. i. 210.
. The king himself also established some public lectures, with large endowments
Wood. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 261. col. 1. ii. 36. col. 2.
. Notwithstanding, the number of students at Oxford daily decreased: insomuch
that, in 1546, there were only ten inceptors in arts, and three in
jurisprudence and theology Wood. ibid. sub. anno.
.

In the mean time, the greek language flourished at Cambridge, under the
instruction of Cheke and Smyth Strype's Lives of Cheke and Smyth.
; notwithstanding the unreasonable interposition of their chancellor, bishop
Gardener, about pronunciation. But Cheke being soon called up to court, both
universities seem to have been reduced to the same deplorable condition of
indigence and illiteracy Roger Ascham acquaints us, that about this time, the
doctrines of Original Sin and Predestination were much canvassed at Cambridge.
But he laments, that in these enqui^^^ they followed Pigb^^^, whom yet he much
commends, rather than saint Austin. Asch. Epistol. lib. ii.
.

During the reign of Edward the sixth, whose minority, which promised many
virtues, was abused by corrupt counselors and rapacious courtiers, little
attention was paid to the support of literature. Learning was not the fashion
of the times: and being discouraged or despised by the rich who were
perpetually grasping at its rewards, was neglected by those of moderate
fortunes. Avarice and zeal were at once gratified in robbing the clergy of
their revenues, and in reducing the church to its primitive apostolical state
of purity and poverty See Collins's Eccl. Hist. Records, 67. page 80.
. A favorite nobleman of the court held the deanery and treasurership of a
cathedral, with some of its best canonries: while his son enjoyed an annual
income of three hundred pounds from the lands of a bishopric Burnet, Ref. P.
ii. 8.
. In every robbery of the church, the interests of learning suffered.
Exhibitions and pensions were subtracted from the students in the universities
See Wood ibid. sub. ann. 1550. seq. See also a letter to secr. Cecyl. dat.
1552. In Strype's Life of Cranmer, Append. Numb. xciii. p. 220.
. At Oxford the public schools were neglected by the professors and scholars,
and allotted to the lowest purposes "In scholis artium pannos exsiccabant
mulierculae lotrices." Wood, ibid. p. 273. col. 2.
. All academical degrees were abrogated as antichristian Catal. MSS. totius
Angliae. sol. edit. 1697. In Hist. Bibl. Bodl. ibid. Praef.
. The spiritual reformers of those enlightened days proceeded so far, as to
strip the public library, established and enriched by that noble patron
Humphrey duke of Gloucester, of all its books and manuscripts; to pillage the
archives, and disannul the privileges of the university Wood, ut supr.
. From these measures many of the colleges were in a short time entirely
deserted.

His successor, queen Mary, took pains to restore the splendour of the
university of Oxford. Unamiable as the was in her temper and conduct, and
inflexibly bigoted to the glaring absurdities of catholic superstition, she
protected, at least by liberal donations, the interests of learning. She not
only contributed large sums for rebuilding the public schools, but moreover
granted the university three considerable impropriations. In her charter
reciting these benefactions, she declares it to be her determined resolution,
to employ her royal munificence in reviving its ancient luster and discipline,
and recovering its privileges. These privileges she reestablished with the
addition of fresh immunities See Wood, ut supr. i. 274. 278. ii. 17. 426. She
gave also to Trinity college in Cambridge, where she rebuilt the chapel,
ccclxxvj l. per annum. Fuller Hist. Cambr. p. 122. l'arker's Scel. Cant. ed.
Hearne, p. 245. And to Christ-Church, Oxon lxxiv l. viij s. iv d. per annum.
Strype Ann. Ref. iv. 243. Willis, Cathedr. Oxford. page 429.

Sanders flourishes on this subject, in his usual declamatory strain. "Ita ergo
academia, et reliqua respublica, ab hercseos faecibus, quantum tam brevi
potuit, spatio, purgati^, restituuntur et ornantur passim ecclesiae, alta ia
eriguntur et consecrantur, COLLEGIA NOVA amplissima dote fundantur,
coenobia.... reaedificantur." De Schism. Angel. edit. Col. Agrippin. 1628. lib.
ii. page 246. It is true, that she refounded, or founded anew, some
considerable monasteries: reestablished saint Patrick's cathedral in Dublin,
the bishopric of Durham, and the hospital of the Savoy. She restored to the
clergy the first fruits and tenths, impropriations, and many estates alienated
from diverse episcopal sees. Burnet, Ref. ii. 340. Collier. Eccl. Hist. ii.
398. Biogr. Brit. artic. Basnet. Strype's Grindal, p. 158. Willis's Cathedrals,
Durham. Stat. 2. 3. Phil. Mar. cap. iv. Ashmole's Berks. ii. 426. Heylin, etc.


: and for these good offices the university decreed for her, and her husband
Philip, an anniversary commemoration Wood, ut supr. i. 278. col. 2.
. I need not recall to the reader's memory, that sir Thomas Pope, and sir
Thomas White, were still more important benefactors by their respective
foundations. Without all these favors, although they did not perhaps produce an
immediate improvement, the university would still have continued to decay: and
they were at least a balance, at that time, on the side of learning, against
the pernicious effects of returning popery.

In the beginning of the reign of Elisabeth, which soon followed, when
protestantism might have been expected to produce a speedy change for the
better, puritanism began to prevail, and for some time continued to retard the
progress of ingenuous and useful knowledge. The English reformed clergy, who
during the persecutions of queen Mary had fled into Germany, now returned in
great numbers'; and in consideration of their sufferings and learning, many of
them were preferred to eminent stations in the church. They brought back with
them those narrow principles about church government and ceremonies, which they
had imbibed, and which did well enough, in the petty states and republics
abroad, where they lived like a society of philosophers; but which were
inconsistent with the genius of a more extended church, established in a great
and magnificent nation, and requiring a settled system of policy, and the
observance of external institutions. However, they were judged proper
instruments to be employed at the head of ecclesiastical affairs, by way of
making the reformation at once effectual. But unluckily this measure, specious
as it appeared at first, tended to draw the church into the contrary extreme.
In the mean time their reluctance or absolute refusal to conform, in many
instances, to the established ceremonies, and their speculative theology, tore
the church into violent divisions, and occasioned endless absurd disputes,
unfavorable to the progress of real learning, and productive of an illiterate
clergy, at least unskilled in liberal and manly science.

In fact, even the common ecclesiastical preferments had been so much
diminished by the seizure and alienation of impropriations, in the late
depredations of the church, which were not yet ended, that few persons were
regularly bred to the church, or, in other words, received a learned education.
Hence almost any that offered themselves, were without distinction admitted to
the sacred function. Insomuch, that in 1560, an injunction was directed to the
bishop of London from his metropolitan, ordering him to forbear ordaining any
more artificers, and other unlearned persons who had exercised secular
occupations Strype's Life of Grindal. b. i. chapter 4. page 40.
. But as the evil was unavoidable, this caution took but little effect. About
the year 1563, there were only two divines, the dean of Christ Church, and the
president of Magdalene college, who were capable of preaching the public
sermons at Oxford Wood, ut supr. i. 285.
. Many proofs have been mentioned of the extreme ignorance of our clergy at
this time: to which I shall add one, which is curious and new. In 1570, Horn
bishop of Winchester enjoined the Minor canons of his cathedral to get by
memory, every week, one chapter of saint Paul's epistles in latin: and this
task, beneath the abilities of an ordinary schoolboy, was actually repeated by
some of them, before the bishop, dean, and prebendaries, at a public episcopal
visitation of that church Registr. Horn, Episcop. Winton. sol. 80. b.
.

The taste for latin composition, and it was fashionable both to write and
speak in that language, was much worse than in the reign of Henry the eighth,
when juster models were studied. One is surprised to find the learned
archbishop Grindal, in the statutes of a school which he founded and amply
endowed, prescribing such strange classics as Palingenius, Sedulius, and
Prudentius, to be taught in the new seminary Strype's Life of Grindal. B. ii.
chapter 17. page 312. This was A.D. 1583.
. Much has been said about the passion for reading Greek which prevailed in
this reign. But this affectation was confined to the queen, and a few others:
and here it went no farther than ostentation and pedantry. It was by no means
the national study; nor do we find that it improved the taste, or influenced
the writings, of that age. But I am wandering beyond the bounds which I first
prescribed to this necessary digression.

Yet I must add an observation or two. In government, many shocks must happen
before the constitution is perfected. In like manner, it was late in the reign
of Elisabeth, before learning, after its sinews had been relaxed by frequent
changes and commotions, recovered its proper tone, and rose with new vigor,
under the genial influence of the protestant religion. And it may be further
remarked, that, as all novelties are pursued to excess, and the most beneficial
improvements often introduce new inconveniences, so this influx of polite
literature destroyed philosophy. On this account, sir Henry Savile, in the
reign of James the first, established professors at Oxford for astronomy and
geometry; because, as he declares in the preamble of his statutes, mathematical
studies had been totally deserted, and were then almost unknown in, England See
Rym. Foed. xvii. 217. It is observable, that he entirely interdicted the
teaching of judicial astrology to his professor of Astronomy. Statut. Savil.
cap. ii. These statutes are dated Aug. 11. 1619.
. Logic indeed remained; but that science was still cultivated, as being the
basis of polemical theology, and a necessary instrument for conducting our
controversies against the church of Rome.

SECT. V.
IN the year 1556, sir Thomas Pope having now finished the foundation of his
college, made his last Will Registr. Cheyney, qu. 10. 86. In cur. Praerogat.
Cant.
, which is dated the sixth of February the same year, he being then no more
than forty-seven years of age. Of the several bequests and appointments
contained therein, and in the codicil annexed dated the twelfth of December
1558, I shall insert a summary The probate is dated May vi. 1559. About three
month after his death. Before Dr. Walter Haddon, keeper of the spiritualities
and commissary, in the vacancy of the arch. bishopric.
.

He desires to be buried in the church of saint Stephen's Walbrook, London, in
the tomb, or vault, in which his first wife dame Margaret, and his daughter,
were interred. His funeral to be without pomp, "or hearse of wax," and only two
tapers of virgin wax with branches, to burn on his hearse, in the church of the
parish in which he shall happen to die, for the space of one week.

He gives "black cootes or gowns," to all his executors, his retainers, his
household servants; and all such of his overseers, friends, and kindred, as
shall happen to be in his house at the time of his decease.

He bequeaths xx l. or more to be distributed in alms to the Poor, in general,
at his burial: and at the same time, xl s. besides, to twenty poor men, and as
many poor women, in parricular, with "a gown of good mantill fryse each:" and
when his obsequies were finished, v l. more at least, to be distributed in
alms. He gives also xx s. to a discreet preacher for two funeral sermons: one
to be preached in the church of the parish in which he shall die; and the other
in the church of saint Stephen's Wallbrook, at the time of his interment.

To the prisons of Newgate, Ludgate, Counter of Bread-street, Poultry-Counter,
the Fleet, King's Bench, Marshalsea, New Counter in Southwark, Gate House,
saint Alban's, and Hertford, xviij l. To be given within one month after his
death.

To several of his kindred ccccccclxxxiij l. v s. and xl. marks Amongst others,
he leaves to the children of William Hyde, of Denchworth, co. Berks, xx l. He
is buried in the church of Denchworth; where on a brass-plate it is said, that
he and his wife Margery had xxx children. He was related to sir T. Pope, by
means of Hyde marrying into Yate of Berks. This I chiefly mention, to confirm
what is said above, page 2. concerning the family of sir Thomas Pope's mother.
See Ashmole's Berks. iii. 322. There is another William Hyde, who died 1567,
with Alice his wife, buried in the same church. They had ten children.
. Beside certain smaller bequests to some others.

To his cousin Jane Hankes one new gilt standing cup of silver, with a cover,
weighing twenty-five ounces. To his son in law John Basford, or Beresford, the
third part of all his "My harneys."
armor "and artillery That is Bows and arrows, and perhaps cross bows,
lances, guns, etc. See Ascham's TOXOPHIL. f. 19. a. edit 1571. But the word
ARTILLERY, that is Ars telaria, as appears from many other passages in Ascham,
was originally and properly restrained to the Bow and Arrow. Compare Engl.
Bibl. i. SAM. xx. 38. 40. And Maundrell's TRAVELS, p. 19. Sund. Mar. 7. See
also Du Cange, GL. Lat. V. ARTILLARIA. edit. 1733.
," his best gauntlets and target, and his best horse.

To Mr. Thomas Abrydge, "his stele saddill gilte, and all the harnes of crymsyn
velvett belonging to the same." To mistress Staveley, his mother in law, and to
three others of his kindred, each, a fair new cup, or bowl, of silver, weighing
each twenty ounces. To his son in law, John Dodmer, fifty angels to make him a
chain; and his mother's picture in the bracelet of gold, "which I ware about my
arm, and the ring of gold hanging at the same; which bracelett was the first
tokyn that ever his mother gave me."

To nine of his servants by name, lviij l. xiij s. iv d. Beside gratuities to
all the rest of his servants, of every sort, living in his house at the time of
his decease To many of them, v l. To others, vj l. xiij s. iiij d. To None,
less than xl s.
. Praying his executors, that if his wife should not find it convenient to
retain them after his death, they would help the said servants to some
worshipful man's service But he permits all his servants to remain, and to be
maintained, in his house, for one quarter of a year after his death; in which
time they may provide themselves with other services.
.

To Trinity college in Oxford, by him founded, c l. for building a wall round
the Grove of the said college.

To the said college five hundred marcs for building at Garsington near Oxford
He repeats this charge to his wife at the end of his Will. "I beseech my good
wife most heartily, that in case I do not in my life make a House for my Scolers
of my College to repare thereto at Garsington in sickness time, that she will in
as convenyent speed, etc."
, a house to accommodate the said college, in time of the plague at Oxford; in
case he should not live to accomplish the same: And then charging his wife, if
the said sum should not be found sufficient, as he believes and intends it to
be, fully to supply the defect.

To the said college, beside those which he before gave for the service of the
hall, the following pieces of silver plate, viz. Three goblets gilt, weighing
together threescore and three ounces. Six plain cups gilt, each with one
handle, weighing together seventyseven ounces and an half. Three other goblets
parcel gilt, with covers, weighing sixty ounces. Thirteen spoons, one
completely gilt, weighing together forty ounces and an half. All the foregoing
to be new made. He likewise bequeathes to the said college, the largest of his
standing cups with a cover, completely gilt, weighing twentythree ounces and a
half. Also one of his basins and ewers parcel-gilt, weighing threescore and
fifteen ounces They were received May 25, 1564. Ex acquietant. in Regist. prim.
fol. 22.
.

To the Nuns of the convent of Syon v l. To the Friars Observants in the chapel
of the Holy Cross at Greenwich, v l. To the Black Friars at London, v l.

To saint Bartholomew's hospital in West-Smithfield, cc l. To be bestowed in
constructing a conduit for conveying water to the said hospital. Otherwise, to
be expended in purchasing an estate of x l. per annum, for providing coats,
shirts, and gowns, for the sick and poor at their first reception into the
house "For such as from time to time shall enter into the said hospital, being
diseased and wanting the same things at their enter."
.

To the repair of the church of Clerkenwell, London, xl l. To Wallbrook church
for opening the vault therein for his sepulture, xx s. To the vicar of
Clerkenwell church, x s. And to the vicar of Ridge in Hertfordshire, x s.

To John Heyward See Append. Numb. IX. In the Notes.
, his "true frynd," one of his gowns of silk. To Mr. Croke, his old master's
son, his gown of black satin faced with luserne spots He is painted in such a
gown by Hans Holbein. At Trinity college, there are five portraits of him, all
of the same dimensions, dress, and attitude. A sixth, a most high-finished old
portrait, was lately given by the college to the picture gallery at Oxford,
instead of another now in the library. One of these six, and the oldest, came
to the college 1596. Ex Comp. Anni. Another is mentioned as hanging in the
chapel 1634. Ex Comp. Anni. One of all these which is now in the Hall, was
painted by Francis Potter, a curious mechanic and mathematician, and a member
of the college, about 1637. Another, mentioned above, was painted in 1665, at
the expense of the college, for the picture gallery. This is now in the college
library. Another lately purchased, a copy of Holbein, the painter unknown, is
in the Bursary. There is a seventh at Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire. They are
all supposed to be copies from a valuable picture by Hans Holbein, in the
possession of lord Guildford at Wroxton. It is not, however, quite improbable
that Holbein might have painted some of the supposed copies. -- Sir Thomas Pope
sat to Hans Holbein, for his picture, in the chamber within the gallery
gate house at Whitehall, designed by Hans Holbein, and lately demolished. Hans
Holbein painted many of his pictures in this chamber, which was used by king
Henry the eighth as a study or library.
To lord Vaulx, c l. To sir Nicholas Shirley, l l. in abatement of cccl l.
owed, and payable at Midsummer next. Beside debts forgiven to some of his poor
relations.

To Mr. Gerrard, the queen's attorney general, one ring of fine gold. To Thomas
Slythurste, clerk, president of Trinity college aforesaid, one ring of fine
gold. Another to Sir Arthur Darcy, knight. Each ring to weigh one ounce, with
the initials of his name on one side, and a Death's head on the other.

To the children of several poor tradesmen and others, xxx l. and five marcs.

Of this his last will and testament, he constitutes his wife Elisabeth, his
most true and assured friend Nicholas Bacon, esquire, afterward sir Nicholas,
and his wife's brother, William Blunt, esquire, Executors. He also appoints his
most trusty, worshipful and loving friends, sir Thomas Cornewallys, knight,
comptroller of the king's and queen's household, sir Francis Englefield, knight,
sir Edward Waldegrave, knight, sir Richard Southwell, knight, sir Robert
Southwell, knight, William Cordall, esquire, solicitor general to the king and
queen, Richard Goodryck, esquire, John Wyseman, esquire, and Antony Wait,
gentleman, overseers of the same. To each of the said overseers he gives a ring
of gold, of the fashion of those beforementioned. To Nicholas Bacon, one of
his executors, he gives his whistle, shaped like a dragon He is painted by Hans
Holbein with a whistle hanging to his chain, shaped like a mermaid.
, and set with stones, which he commonly wore at his chain John de Veer, earl
of Oxford, by Will dat. Apr. 10, 1508, devises his "chain with the whistell,
having six score and one links, weighing xcviii ounces, to be sold." Registr.
FETTYPLACE, Cur. Praer. qu. 11. -- Sir Edw. Howard by will, dat. 1512,
bequeathes to "sir Charles Brandon the roope of bowed nobles that he wore his
great whistle by, and to the kings grace his great whistle." Ibid. qu. 18.
About the year 1519, Hall mentions the earl of Surrey "on a great coursir
richely trapped, and a great whistle of gold set with stones and perle,
hanging at a great and massy chain baudrick-wise." Hall's CHRONICLES, p. 65.
a. The curious Mr. Anstis endeavors to prove, by these and other instances,
that the Whistle was the badge, or emblem, of admirals. ORDER of the Garter,
ii. 121. But it is certain, from the passage in the text, and other places,
that it was often indiscriminately used. It was perhaps even a common ornament.
Robert Arderne, a gentleman of Oxfordshire, bequeathes his best whistle, silver
and gilt: and his second whistle, silver and gilt. Aug. xx. 1593. Registr. Cur.
Cancel. Oxon. G G. fol. 203.
. To his other executor, William Blount, he gives xl angels, to make him a
chain He heartily desires the said executors, and overseers, "not to way my
simple gifts any other than as a remembrance of my unfayned good will and
disposition toward them in my life time." He at first had bequeathed to each
of the Overseers "a fair jugge of silver," to be new made, weighing xxiv
ounces: With a death's head in a roundell, and the initials of his name, graven
on the covers. But this bequest was afterward altered in the codicil, as in
the text.
.

To Elisabeth his wife, and Executrix, whom he declares ever to have found,
honest, true, faithful, loving, and obedient, he bequeathes the residue of his
moveable goods, leases and debts: praying her heartily that she would bestow
part of the same among the Poor "Being heartily sorry I am able to give her no
more, to recompens her most honest, obedient, and womanly behavior toward me
in my life time, which has been such as well has meryted a thousand times more
than I am able any way to give her, etc."
. He commissions his said wife, to furnish Trinity college aforesaid, with
copes, vestments, and ornaments for divine service, and household necessaries.
But all these things he completely accomplished himself, in his own lifetime,
as has been already related. He requires his said wife, in case John Pope, his
only brother, should be without a male heir when Elisabeth Pope, daughter of
the said John, marries, to bestow ccc marcs, otherwise bequeathed to the said
Elisabeth Pope for a marriage-portion, in deeds of charity.

As to his estates, not settled on Trinity college, he wills that they should
remain, as is expressed and covenanted in a certain pair of quadripartite
indentures, dated April the first, 1554 In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon.
Saepius citat. Between sir Thomas Pope, and Elisabeth his wife, on the one
part; And sir Arthur Darcy, Richard Catelyn sergeant at law, deceased, Richard
Goodrick, and Antony Wait, on the other. Dat. April i. i Phil. Mar.
. By which indentures it appears, that the principal demises of the same were
made to Elisabeth his wife, John Pope his brother, John Edmondes his uncle, and
Edmund Hutchins his nephew But in case of nonperformance of covenants and
conditions therein specified, he orders many of them to be given to "king Henry
the eighth's house of poor in West-Smithfield," i. e. saint Bartholomew's
hospital; to which he actually bequeathed, as above, 200 l. After his death, an
inquisition was taken of all his lands and possessions, at Chipping-Norton,
com. Oxon. In which the said quadrip. indenture is recited.
.

He further wills, that all manors, lands, tenements, and hereditaments,
whatsoever, by him lately given to the president, fellows, and scholars, of
Trinity college aforesaid, shall for ever remain under the first assurances by
which they were by him settled upon the said college; without interruption or
claim of heirs, executors, and assigns, or disturbance of any other person
claiming in in their right, name, or title.

During the time of founding his college, he chiefly resided at Clerkenwell,
London From his letters to the college. And other evidences. ibid.
, within the dissolved priory of Black nuns In a deed of dame Elis. Paulett,
dated Feb. i. 35 Eliz. infra-citat. This mansion is called the "capital
message and scyte of the late dissolved monastery of Clerkenwell." It was
granted him by queen Mary, Pat. Phil. Mar. an. 3, 5. Febr. i. par. 4. "Rex et
Regin. concess. T. Pope, et al. Pardonationem alienationis pro scitu monasterii
de Clerkinwell in com. Middl." In an indenture dat. May xxx, 1538. 30 Hen.
viii. he is styled Thomas Pope of London, esquire.
: to the repair of the conventual church of which, being left standing at the
dissolution, he gave the sum of forty pounds See page 163. supr.
. The buildings and site of this religious house, containing fourteen acres,
had been granted by king Henry in 1545, to sir William Henley and sir John
Williams Weever, Fun. Mon. p. 428. Tanner Not. Mon. fol. p. 299.
. In the country, he lived much at Tyttenhanger, in the parish of Ridge, in
Hertfordshire The Statutes of his college are dated there.
; which had been the country-seat of the abbots of saint Alban's, and was
conveyed to sir Thomas Pope by Henry the eighth, in the last year of his reign,
1547, but not confirmed to him till by letters patent of Edward the sixth,
dated July the twenty-fourth, in the following year Liber secundus de Les
Rates, ann. 3, et 4. Phil. Mar. fol. MSS. Harl. 607. 1. fol. 1. Brit. Mus. --
See also pat. Edw. vi. an. 1. Jul. xxiv. par. 4. Where the grant specifies
"Scitum Capitalis mansionis de Tyttenhanger, ac Manerium de Tyttenhanger, etc."
. However, it appears that he bought this estate of Queen Mary, June the
sixteenth, 1557, for twenty years purchase Ibid. MSS. Harl.
: notwithstanding, in a deed dated 1555, he styles himself of Tyttenhanger See
Append. Numb. XI.
, and in the charter of his college, 1554, mentions Tyttenhanger as one of his
manors. The house was built by John Moot, one of the abbots of saint Alban's,
in 1405 Willis Mitr. Abb. i. 22.
, and much enlarged and adorned by his successors, particularly the learned and
munificent John Whethamstede, in the reign of Henry the sixth Weever Fun. Mon.
p. 565. edit. 1631.
. The chapel was an elegant edifice: and the wainscott, behind the stalls, was
beautifully painted with a series of the figures of all the saints who bore the
name of John. The windows were enriched with painted glass, which sir Thomas
Pope brought hither from the choir of saint Albans abbey, when that church was,
by his interposition, preserved from total destruction. Sir Thomas Pope also
erected over the vestibule of the great hall a noble gallery for wind-music
From the Information of Sir Harry Pope-Blount, ut supr.
. This house was so large, that in the year 1528, King Henry the eighth and his
queen, with their retinue, removed hither from London, during the continuance
of the Sweating sickness Hollinsh. Chron, vol. iii. p. 906. 10. col. 2.
. But this ancient and stately mansion was entirely pulled down, and that which
is now standing built in its place, about 1654, by sir Henry Blount, the famous
traveller Engl. Baronet. iv. 669. edit. 1741.
. Of this county, and of Essex, sir Thomas Pope was twice sheriff, in the years
1552, 1557 Chauncy's Hertfordshire, p. 23. Fuller, WORTHIES, p. 31. says, that
as to their Sheriff, Hertfordshire and Essex were united till the ninth of
Elisabeth, 1567.
.

I must not here forget, that the learned and candid John de Feckenham, the
last abbot of Westminster, and a great friend to the princess Elisabeth, about
the reign of Edward the sixth, often visited sir Thomas Pope, at
Tyttenhanger-house; who never suffered him to depart without a present. Once in
particular he gave Feckenham, at parting, a purse filled with twelve angels,
his picture in enamel, a silver crucifix studded with precious stones, and a
large missal richly ornamented with thirty-six historical pictures From the
information of sir Harry Pope-Blount, ut supr.
. On the mention of Feckenham, I observe here, perhaps out of place, that Sir
Thomas Pope is said to have joined with abbot Feckenham in an application to
queen Mary, to spare the life of sir John Cheek; in consideration of Cheek's
eminent learning and integrity, and on condition that he would renounce the
heresies of the reformation MSS. F. Wise.
. It is certain that this admirable scholar, the restorer of the Greek tongue,
would otherwise have been executed in the flames. Yet he did not long survive
the remorse of a recantation. His own conscience had all the severities of a
martyrdom.

To resume the course of our narrative. He seems also, for some time, and so
early at least as 1546, to have been settled at Bermondsey in Southwark Ex
indentura dat. May xiii. 38. Hen. viii. MSS. F. Wise. -- He also styles himself
of Bermondsey, in a deed without date: which however appears to have been made
after 7 Edw. vi. In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. The earliest notice of his
connection with this place appears from the Patents. Pat. Hen. viii. an. 33.
Jan. xvi. par. 5. Edward Powell is licensed to alienate a message in
Bermondsey to Thomas Pope, knight. This year the monastery there was dissolved.
; at which place, and in the neighborhood, he had acquired a very considerable
property Pat supra citat.
. Here, as I conjecture, he built a house on the ruins of the dissolved abbey
of Cluniac monks which he probably purchased of his friend sir Robert, or sir
Richard, Southwell, to one of whom that monastery was granted at the
dissolution Tanner, Not. Mon. fol. p. 535.
. This house, which Stowe calls "a goodly house builded of stone and timber,"
afterward came into the possession of the earls of Suffex Stowe ubi supr. p.
344. Aubrey's Surrey. V. 39.
.

What was sir Thomas Pope's last illness, or the particular circumstances of
his death, I have not found. It is not improbable, but that he was carried off
by a pestilential fever, which began to rage with uncommon violence in the
autumn of the year 1558, and before the end of the succeeding winter, seized
three parts in four of the people of England Cooper's, or Lanquette's
Chronicle, 4to. 1560. p. 377.
; destroying in the general devastation, thirteen bishops, and several other
persons, both men and women, of the most eminent rank and quality Godwyn, p.
340. Engl. edit. 1630. Stowe, by Howes, 634. Strype, Ann. Ref. i. 30, 31.
. His last letter to his college, which having established by his munificence,
he lived near five years to protect and assist with his patronage, is dated
August the eighth, 1558 Registr. prim Coll. praedict. fol. 23. b.
. While he meditated further benefactions for the increase of its endowment See
Append. No. XXV. Under JOHN PERTE.
, he died the twenty-ninth day of January following, 1559, on Sexagesima
Sunday, at his house in Clerkenwell, in the fiftieth year of his age From an
inscription on his Picture, in Trin. coll. -- And Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ.
Oxon. ii. 301. col. 2.
.

He was magnificently buried, with the following solemnities MSS. Cotton.
Vitell. F. 5. In the British Museum. See Append. Numb. XXVIII.
. His body was first carried to the church of Clerkenwell in London, where it
was laid under a hearse, or shrine, illuminated with wax tapers, for the space
of one week. On the seventh day of February, began his funeral procession to
the church of saint Stephen's Wallbrook: to which he was conveyed with a
standard, a Coat, a penon or banner of arms, a target, helmet, sword, and four
dozen of arms, with twelve for the branches of wax tapers, and six for the
body, or shrine. He was attended by two heralds at arms, Clarencieux and York.
The first bore the coat, and the latter the helmet and crest. Twenty poor men
and twenty poor women, carried torches. The men were clothed in mantle frieze
gowns, and the women in A sort of white veil, often mentioned as part of the
mourning-dress of women, at ancient funerals. See Strype, ECCL. MEM. iii. 385.
rails, which he gave them. Sir Richard Southwell, and sir Thomas Stradling,
knights, and diverse gentlemen and others, all in black, where mourners, to the
number of sixty or more. All his house at Clerkenwell, and the church, were
hung with black, with escotcheons of his arms. After the heralds had offered
the sword, target, coat, and helmet at the high altar, and other ceremonies
were performed, the company returned back to his house to a banquet, where they
were refreshed with spiced bread and wine. The next day followed his morrow
mass, in the said church; at which were three Songs, two being pricked songs,
and the third the mass of requiem, all sung by the Clerks of London. He was
then buried; after which they went back to his house to dinner, "being, as my
manuscript says, a very great dinner, and plenty of all things." Then followed
a great dole of alms distributed among the Poor.

Stowe insinuates, that he was interred in the north i will of the choir of
Wallbrook church. Here was a vault, in which before had been buried his wife
Margaret, his daughter Alice, and Anne Pope his sister in law. Stowe adds the
following inscription, which was evidently placed there before his death, and I
suppose immediately upon the decease of dame Margaret. It was destroyed with
the old church. Hic jacet Thomas Pope Primus Thesaurarius Augmentationum, et
domina Margareta uxor ejus, quae quidem Margareta obiit xvi Jan. MDXXXVIII Fol.
edit of Stowe's Survey. 1633. p. 245.
.

But in 1567, eight years after his death, his body and the body of dame
Margaret aforesaid, were removed from saint Stephen's Wallbrook to the chapel
of Trinity college in Oxford; where they were again interred on the north side
of the altar, under a stately tomb of good gothic workmanship, on which are the
recumbent figures of sir Thomas Pope in complete armor, and of his second wife
Elisabeth, large as the life, in alabaster, with this inscription.

Hic jacent corpora Thome Pope militis fundatoris hujus collegii Trinitatis et
domine Elizabethe et Margarite uxoris ejus. Qui quidem Thomas obiit xxix. die
Ianuarii, M.D. LVIII.

Quod tacitum velis nemini dixeris It originally stood within a grate of iron.
Arms, etc. by Lee, ut inf. f. 74. The greatest part of its elegant workmanship
is now concealed, and the effect of the whole destroyed, by an alcove,
corresponding to another on the opposite side: both which, considered in a
general view, are most injudiciously introduced, and are perhaps the only
blemishes of the present beautiful chapel.
. That the body of the founder was actually removed hither, appears
unquestionably from the Will of Elizabeth his second wife, who desires
expressly to be buried in a vault or tomb in Trinity college chapel in Oxford,
"wherein lies the corpse of my late good husband sir Thomas Pope Infra citat.
." This is also further confirmed from the testimony of Anthony Wood: who in
the Appendix subjoined to his History of the University of Oxford, containing
omissions and mistakes of the translator in the Text of that elaborate work,
observes; that notwithstanding the inscription in saint Stephen's Wallbrook,
his Translator, according to the original English copy, ought to have expressly
inserted, in the place where sir Thomas Pope's burial is mentioned, "Sed
sepultus fuit in capella coll. S.S. Trinitatis In Appendic. Hist. Antiq. Oxon.
p. 447. Although this point needs no further authentication, I will add part of
a letter written from Strype to Dr. Charlett, master of University college,
Oxford. "The funeral of sir Thomas Pope, as it is set down in the Cotton
volume, [see Append.] I mentioned to you in my last, you shall have at the foot
of this letter. His body, I find, was soon removed from Clerkenwell [Walbroke]
to the college which he founded, and honored deservedly with a monument
there." Dated Low-Layton, April xx, 1709. This letter, as I am informed by the
very learned and communicative Dr. Ducarrell, was given by Dr. Charlet to Dr.
Dobson, president of Trinity college. The same, being the original, is now in
the Bursary of Trinity college. A copy of it is among Cod. MSS. Ballard. Bibl.
Bodl. vol. xv. 31.
". In the mean time, it is extraordinary that no mention should be recorded of
this Removal of the founder's body in any register of the college. That this
tomb in the college chapel was standing in the year 1567, at least, that the
founder was then removed thither, may be fairly concluded from the two
following entries in the computus of the Bursars of that year, and they are the
only notices that any where occur concerning it, viz. "Sol. Mar. 10. tribus
Operariis laborantibus per quatuor dies in sacello circa sepulcrum fundatoris,
x s. xiij d.

"Sol. pro quinque modiis calcis circa sepulcrum fundatoris, ij s. xj d. Comp.
Burss. 1566. -- 7.
.



This monument was probably given by Elizabeth his second wife in her
lifetime. It was certainly erected after his death, viz. after 1559, as the
inscription, which is wrought in large gothic characters out of the substance
of the stone, minutely specifies the date of his decease. Elizabeth survived
her husband more than thirty years; and, if at all, she must have erected it
before 1567, when it appears to have existed. But of this I shall have occasion
to bring further evidences.

SECT. VI.
I Now proceed to throw some collateral light on sir Thomas Pope's history, by
giving a detached and distinct account of his brothers, sisters, wives, and
friends: most of which have already been occasionally mentioned in the course
of this narrative.

His brother John Pope, who was one of his heirs, and to whom he granted large
estates, appears to have been settled at Wroxton in Oxfordshire, in the reign
of Edward the sixth Ex Indentur. dat. Aug. 1. 5 Edw. vi. Wroxton was a priory
of Augustine Canons. See Append. Numb. XVII.
. I find John purchasing of Henry the eighth, in the year 1544, estates
belonging to the dissolved canons of Kenilworth in Warwicshire, for 1501 l. 13
s. 8 d Dugd. Warw. p. 474.
. In the same year he recieved a grant of the site of the house of Franciscan
friars at Lincoln Tanner's Not. Mon. fol. p. 281.
: as also, jointly with others, the site of the black friars at Beverly in
Yorkshire Ibid. p. 689.
. In 1545, he received some lands belonging to the priory of Bileigh in Essex
Newc, Rep. ii. 610.
. I could give many more instances from the patents, and privy seals. I find
him often entertained at Trinity college, Oxford: and once with his second wife
Elizabeth Brockett Comp. Burss. 1561. -- 2. "Sol. pro vino, pyris, aliisque
bellariis, insumptis in Magistrum Pope visitantem collegium. ij s. vj d.

Comp. 1562. -- 3. "Sol. ex cerasis, fragis, vino, potu, et saccaro, datis
Magistro Pope et uxori ejus visentibus collegium. iij s. x d.

Comp. 1562. -- 3. "Sol. 7 Mart. pro vino, pomis, etc. datis Magistro Pope
visenti collegium. xviij d.

Comp. 1563. -- 4. "Sol. 23 Feb. ex bel^ariis insumptis in Magistrum Pope
visentem collegium. xviij d. d.

Comp. 1564. -- 5. "Sol. in bellariis Magistro Pope, et quibusdam advenis,
visentibus collegium. xxij d.

Comp. 1568. -- 9. "Allocat. in epulis Magistri Pope et Magistri Billinge in
temp. fessionum. iij s. viij d.

Comp. 1572. -- 3. "Allocat. pro epulis pro Magistro Johanne Pope fratre
fundatoris quum hic nos inviseret. vj s. vij d. ob.

Comp. 1573. -- 4. "Allocat. in epulis pro Magistro Pope fratre fundatoris
invisente collegium. vj s. viij d.

Comp. 1581. -- 2. "Allocat. in epulis pro Magistro Pope. x s. vj d."


. He was three times married. But as a further account of him, his marriages,
issue, and their descendants, would take up too much of our time here, and on
other accounts requires a more minute and separate consideration, these
particulars shall form an article for the Appendix Numb. XXVI.
.

Sir Thomas Pope's sisters were Alice, Elizabeth, and Julian, as I before
observed. Alice was married to Edward Love, gentleman, of Aynhoc, in
Northamptonshire; Ex Evident. in Coll. antedict.
whose name often occurs in the affairs of Trinity college aforesaid about the
time of its foundation, and who appears to have acted as the founder's receiver
in Oxfordshire and other counties Registr. prim. dicti Coll. fol. 7. b. Et
alibi. See Append. Numb. XXI. in the Notes. Among Rawlinson's ancient original
charts, there is an indenture, by which John, Prior of Nottley Abbey in Bucks,
and his convent, lease their appropriate parsonage of Stokelyne to this Edward
Love, for sixty one years. Dat. in Dom. Capitul. Mar. 6. A.D. 1524. MSS.
Rawlins. Bibl. Bod. 1322. CHAPTER ult. in pergamen. The lessee is herein discharged
from an annual pension, which the convent paid from the said church to saint
Frideswyd's priory at Oxford.
. She died 1534, and they are both buried in the church of Stoke-Lyne near
Bicester in Oxfordshire, with an inscription on a brass-plate Over this
inscription are the images of a man in armor, and of a woman, both kneeling
before desks: behind him five boys, and behind her three girls. Over their
heads, Delicta juventutis nostrae et ignorantias ne memineris domine. Arms,
viz. Quart. A lion ramp. with a cross patee on his shoulder. LOVE.

Parti p. fess indent. in chief 3 martlets.. LOVE. ut supra.

Impal. Erm. a fess chequee, a crescent for a difference. ARDEN.


One of their daughters, Elizabeth, was married to Simon Parrot, or Perrot,
fellow of Magd. coll. Oxon. Who are both buried, with an inscription on a
brass-plate, in saint Peter's. Oxon. For this Simon Parrot, see Wood, Hist. et
Antiq. ii. 59. and ib. 421. And Smith's Annals Univ. coll. p. 247. See also
Append. Numb. XXI. The name of one Parrot, undoubtedly this Simon Parrot, often
occurs in papers and accounts relating to the affairs of Trinity college, at
its foundation, viz. Append. Numb. XVII. "Three antiphoners of parchmente
bought by Mr. Parrot for the queere." And Comp. Burss. 1556. -- 7. "Sol. pro
Campanae secundo reportatione a Magistro Parrot." That a person, at least of
this name, was one of the founder's agents in this business, with Edward Love,
I find in other articles: and from the following passage of one of the
founder's letters to the president, 27 Nov. 1550. "In your next letters send me
a bill declaring, particularly, such books, and other things, as ye have
receyved either from me or else of Mr. Perrot." See supr. p. 117.


. Elizabeth his second sister was married to Richard Hutchins, of
Chipping-Norton in the same county, and afterward to John Orpewood of the same
place By the first she had one son Edward, or Edmund: and four daughters, Anne,
Bridget, Jane, and Mary. By the second, two daughters, Frances and Winifred. Ex
testam. T. P. And Lee's MSS. Visit. Oxf. f. 32.
. The third sister Julian was, as I conjecture, a nun at Godstowe; and upon the
dissolution of that convent, received a grant of an annual pension of vj l.
xiij s. iv d Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. 179. And Append. ibid. 23.
. which she continued to possess, 1553. This is a larger pension than was
usual: which probably she got by the interest of her brother sir Thomas Pope.
And this is more probable, as among other notices, it appears from an
indorsement on a fragment of a rental of that nunnery in the handwriting of
sir Thomas Pope, that on their dispersion, he gave a gratuitous donation of
forty marcs to twelve of its nuns, who were friendless and born in Oxfordshire
I know not exactly whether it is of Godstowe or Bicester Priory, both in
Oxfordshire. Of the latter, in the Bursary of Trinity college, are two
beautiful Audit rolls on vellom, one of the year 1393, the other of 1443.
. She, if the same, was however married, before the year 1556, to Henry Bryan
of Cogges in Oxfordshire Testam. Dom. T. Pope.
, who seems to have been but in moderate circumstances Comp. Burss. 1562. -- 3.
"Sol. in vino insumpt. in Magistrum Breanum de Cogges. 24 Jun. xiij d.

Comp. 1569. -- 70. "Sol. pro prandio Magistri Bryan fratris domini fundatoris.
xij d.


.

As to the wives of sir Thomas Pope, he was three times married. His first wife
was Elisabeth Gunston, from whom he was divorced by Richard Gwent, doctor of
decrees, archdeacon of London, and principal official in the court of
Canterbury, July the eleventh 1536, by the authority of the king and parliament
Collectan. MSS. F. Wise.
. His second wife was Margaret Dodmer, widow, to whom he was married at London,
July the seventeenth, 1536 From sir T. Pope's BREVIARY This Breviary Aubrey had
intended to place in its proper repository, Trinity college Library; but having
conceived some prejudice against Dr. Bathurst the president, he changed his
design and gave it to the Ashmolean. From his LETTER to A. Wood, dat. 1674.
Cod. BAIL. Bibl. Bodl. vol. xiv.
, written and illuminated, given by John Aubrey the Antiquarian to the
Ashmolean Museum. No. 55. In it, among others, are the following entries.

"Memorand. quod Margaretta uxor Thomae Pope equitis obiit die Lunae viz. xvio.
die Januarii, A. Dni M.D. xxxviii. circa horam decimam ejusdem diei
postmeridianam, et sepulta erat die dominical. sequent. in ecclia Sti Stephani
in Walbroke.

"Alicia filia Thomae Pope nata erat die dominicae, viz. xvi. die Aprilis, Ao.
xxviiio. dom. H. viii. circa horam nonam ejusdem die post meridiem, Ao. Dom.
M.D. xxxvii.

"Matrimonium inter Thomam Pope primarium Thesaurarium augment. Revent. coronae
Dom. R. et Dnam Margaretam Dodmer, Viduam, solemnizatum erat in London. xvii.
die Julii Ao. xxviii. Dom. Hen. viii. Anno Dni. M.D. xxxvi. to. -- Quod tacitum
velis nemini dixeris. -- THOMAS POPE, Miles.


, by license from archbishop Cranmer, authorized by parliament for this purpose
"Authoritate Parliamenti ad infra scripta fulcitus." Collectan. MSS. F. Wise.
Ex Licent.
. Margaret Dodmer's maiden name was Townsend, and she was a native of Stamford
in Lincolnshire So indorsed on the said license.
. She was the relict of Ralph Dodmer, mercer and sheriff of London, 1524;
afterward knighted At Yorke-place, 21 Hen. viii. MSS. Bibl. Cott. Claud. c. 3.
fol. iii. The same sir Ralph Dodmer was also major of the staple at
Westminster, 23. Feb. 23 Hen. viii. Madox, Formul. Angl. page 20.
, and mayor of London, 1529 Stowe's Survey of London. Edit. fol. 1633. p. 580,
579. He was also sheriff of London 1529. See edit. 1599. 4to. p. 444, 445.
Ralph's father was Henry, of Pickering-Leigh, Yorkshire. Stowe, ibid.
. She was married to the said Ralph, by license from cardinal Wolsey, dated
November the twentieth, 1527 Collectan. MSS. F. Wise.
. By this sir Ralph Dodmer, she had two sons Ralph and John, both living 1554
Ex indentura quadripartit. praedict. -- John is mentioned in Testam. T. P. 1556.
, and two daughters, Ann and Mary These two daughters, with the two sons
aforesaid, are all mentioned in a grant of lands to sir T. Pope, pat. 28. Hen.
viii Test. Mar. i. par. 5. -- "Prolibus Rad. Dodmer militis, civis London." Sir
T. Pope, in his will, requests his executors, etc. "to help to set forward"
the children of his late wife Marg. Dodmer, "which be fryndless." -- Stowe
informs us that, "near Thames street is Grantham lane, so called of John
Grantham sometime mayor and owner thereof, whose house was very large and
strong, builded of stone, as appears by gates arched yet remaining. Ralph
Dodmer first a brewer, than a mercer, mayor 1529, dwelled there, and kept his
mayoralty in that house, etc." SURVEY, ut supr, edit. 1599. p. 183.
. By sir Thomas Pope, her second husband, she had only one daughter Alice, born
April the sixteenth, 1537 From sir T. Pope's BREVIARY, ut supr.
, who died very young. Lee, in a book of arms, chiefly of Oxfordshire, drawn by
himself in 1574, gives us the arms of Dodmer impaling Pope, from an escocheon
of painted glass in a window at Trinity college, since destroyed with many
others: viz. Four lozenges meeting in point, gules, between four roses of the
same: Upon a chief, gules, a wheat sheaf between two annulets, Or Mus. Ashmol.
Oxon. MSS. Codd. A. Wood. D. 14. page 74. His arms are not tricked (as those of
other knights are) in the manuscript cited above, viz. Claud. c. 3. fol. 111.
bibl. Cotton.
. But these arms do not agree with an engraving of the arms of sir Ralph Dodmer
given by Stowe Ubi supr.
, With this lady Margaret, sir Thomas Pope seems to have lived in the greatest
harmony and happiness; for in his Will he mentions with much affection, "her
womanly behavior, truth, and honesty, used toward me," and makes this the
sole cause of his kind remembrances and gifts to her son; beseeching his
executors, and honorable friends, to treat all her children as his own. She
died the sixteenth day of January, 1538 From sir T. Pope's BREVIARY, supr. And
her Tomb.
.

His third wife, who deserves more particular notice, was Elizabeth the
daughter of Walter Blount, esquire, of Blount's Hall in Staffordshire, and Mary
his wife, descended from the illustrious family of Dudley Sutton, of which were
the famous, John Dudley duke of Northumberland, and Robert earl of Leicester.
The said Elizabeth when married to sir Thomas Pope, was relict of Anthony
Basford, or Beresford, esquire, of Bentley in Derbyshire, by whom she had an
only son John The true name is Beresford, as appears from a pedigree of the
family in MSS. Visitation of Derbyshire, taken by Flower and Glover, 1562, fol.
25. b. Mus. Ashmol. Codd. Ashmol. 728. As also from a deed recited above, where
John Beresford, probably her son, mentioned in the text, is a subscribing
witness. I likewise find one Beresford, perhaps the same, buried as it seems in
the college, 1567. Comp. Burss. ut supr. An. 1566. -- 7. "Alloc. in prancium
famulis dominae fundatricis cum persolverentur justa Magistro Beresford, x s.



This respectable family came originally from Staffordshire, where is a village
so called: and flourishes still in Derbyshire. See Visitation of Staffordshire,
in 1963, and 1664. By Dugdale Norr. Herald. MSS. Coll. Armor. C. 36. fol. 114.
And Lodge, Peer. Ireland, ii. 210. ed. 1754. As to her son John, the founder
sent him to Trinity college, Oxford, to be educated under Arthur Yeldard one of
the fellows: with a letter printed in Append. Numb. XXV. In another letter, to
the president, the founder desires the lecturers, "to tech him and to read him
Erasmus pistells and Tully's pistells, which he shall learn to translate well."
He is a witness to the codicil of sir T. Pope's will.


. It is said by one who knew her well Dr. Ralph Kettell, president of the
college. See Append. Numb. XXX.
, that sir Thomas Pope was induced to marry this lady principally on account of
her charitable disposition, and and other excellent qualifications; and that
she heartily concurred with her husband's pious intention of founding a
college. They were married by license from archbishop Cranmer, the first of
January, 1540 MSS. Collectan. F. Wise.
. They had no issue. After the death of sir Thomas Pope in January 1559, she
was married, for the third time, before or in December following As appears
from Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1560. -- 1. viz. "Sol. December. i. pro pari
Chirothecarum dat. dom. Powlett et dominae fundatrici. xvj s.

This present, I presume, was a compliment on their marriage.


, to sir Hugh Powlett of Hinton saint George in Somersetshire: concerning whose
life and character, it may not perhaps be thought too great a digression to
mention some few particulars.

Sir Hugh Powlett was the son of sir Amias Powlett knight, of whom it is
remembered, that having incurred the displeasure of cardinal Wolsey, to produce
a reconciliation, he re-edified the gate of the middle temple, where he was
treasurer, in a most superb manner, introducing among other decorations, the
cardinal's arms, cognizance, and badges Dugd. Orig. Jurid. p. 188. In the
British museum, there is a translation of a French romance into English,
entitled L' Histoire de la Duckesse de Savoye, by sir Hugh Powlett. Par Hagues
le fills des Mons. Aim Powlett, etc. MSS. Harl. 1215. 4to. It is probably one
of his juvenile exercises in the French language.
. Sir Hugh, during the reign of Henry the Eighth, was much in favor with that
king. He was invited, in 1537, with the principal nobility, to attend the
magnificent baptism of prince Edward Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 5.
. He was knighted for his gallant services against the French in the wars of
that reign: particularly for his behavior at taking the Brey, at the siege of
Boloigne, in the presence of the king Collins, Peer. iii. 223. ed. 2. He was
knighted October. 18. 1536. MSS. Cotton. Claud. iii. c. fol. 127. b.
He was treasurer of the king's army at the siege of Boloigne Falle's Jersey,
edit. 1694. p. 91.
. In consideration of these merits, he was rewarded by Henry the eighth with
several grants of manors and lands Collins, ut supr.
. By that king he was likewise appointed surveyor of the rents of the dissolved
monastery of Glastonbury May ii. Priv. Sig. Ann. 37. Hen. viii.
. In the third year of Edward the sixth, he was knightmarshal of the army
commanded by lord Russel lord privy seal, and sent against the rebels of
Cornwall and Devonshire, whom he totally defeated Hollingshed, Chron. iii. 1026.
. For these services he was, the year following, appointed, for life, governor
of the isle of Jersey and Mount-Orgueil-castle Pat. 4. Edw. vi. Test. Mar. xx^
par. 9. In Q. Mary's council-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr. are many letters to him
from the privy council, relating to this office.
. In 1551, the fifth year of the lastmentioned king, he was installed knight of
the garter, at a chapter held in the royal palace of Greenwich Anstis, Order of
the Garter, vol. ii. 446.
. In 1559, the the first year of queen Elizabeth, the privy council constituted
him vice president of the marches of Wales, in the absence of lord Williams,
president trype's Ref. i. 23.
. In 1563, he was made governor of Havre de Grace Fall, ibid.
, then in the hands of the English. The next year, he was one of the principal
commanders who so bravely defended Newhaven against the French. On this
occasion, when Montmorency, constable of France, sent a trumpet to the earl of
Warwick summoning him to surrender, sir Hugh Powlett was deputed by the earl to
assure the Constable, that the English were prepared and resolved to suffer the
last extremity before they would yield the town, without the queen's express
orders. And when the English army was at length so miserably reduced by a
pestilence, that her majesty in compassion to those gallant soldiers who still
survived, gave directions to lord Warwick to deliver up the place; sir Hugh
Powlett was the chief of the commissioners who conducted the conferences with
the constable of France for the capitulation Stowe, per Howes, 665. Camden.
Eliz.
. He was in a word, beside the character of singular prudence and integrity,
one of the most intrepid and experienced officers of his time See Burghley's
State-papers, by Haynes, p. 407. Stowe ut supr. 653.
. He was father, by a former wife, of sir Amias Powlett Fall, ibid.
, a privy counselor and an eminent statesman, in the reign of queen Elizabeth
In the year 1586, Mary queen of Scots was committed to his custody. This trust
he so honorably discharged, that when secretary Walsingham persuaded him to
suffer one of his servants to be bribed by the agents of the queen of Scots,
for the sake of better intelligence, he rejected the proposal with indignation.
Camd. ELIZ. ed. Hearne, ii. 533. 488. Fuller's WORTHIES. Somersetshire. I find
him, before he was knighted, visiting the fellows and scholars of Trinity
college, Oxford, at Garsington, in time of the plague. Comp. Burss. 1571. -- 2.
"Alloc. pro epulis quo tempore Magistre Amisius Powlett veniebat ad collegium
Garsingtoniae. iv s. iv d. q."

Lord Bacon, when very young, attended him on an embassy into France, Dugd.
Bar. ii. 438. See Strype's Ann. Ref. iii. 360. Where is a letter written to him
by the queen, with her own hand, superscribed, to my faithful Amyas, and in
which she calls him, my Amyas. Compare Hearne, ROB. GLOUC. p. 673. seq. And
MSS. Harl. 6994. 29. 30. And Ballard's LEARNED LADIES. In ADD. and CORR.


. Sir Hugh died in 1571, being then representative in parliament for the county
of Somerset Willis, Notit. Parl. p. 94.
, and without issue by this lady.

This Lady, whom we must now call Dame Elizabeth Powlett, did not, however,
from her new connection discontinue that previous and natural attachment,
which, in the character of foundress, she bore to the foundation of her former
husband sir Thomas Pope. She possessed indeed no small jurisdiction over the
transactions of the society: for the founder had delegated to her the authority
of nominating it is scholars, and presenting to it is advowsons, during life
Once, by the same authority, she nominated a president. See Append. Numb. XXV.
It appears, however, that the college once rejected her nomination to a
scholarship, and chose another candidate. Upon this she appealed to Cooper
bishop of Winchester, the visitor, who superseded the person elected by the
college, and decreed that her nomination should take place. Aug. ii. 1592.
Registr. prim. dict coll. fol. 48. b.
. And this power, yet with some interruptions Particularly, from 1563 to 1578
inclusive, it does not appear by the register, that she used her privilege of
nominating to the scholarships. But she afterward resumed it. She sometimes
nominated the fellows.
, she continued to exercise till her death Registr. prim. coll. antedict.
passim.
. Nor was she wanting in proper marks of affection to a place, to which she was
by the strongest ties so nearly related. She engaged her husband, sir Hugh
Powlett, to join with her in protecting the interests of the college. She
added, in part, to the founder's endowment, after his death, the rectory of
Ridge in Hertfordshire, and the advowson to the vicarage Ex indentur. dat.
April. 1. 22 Eliz. apud coll. praedict. See Append. Numb. XXX. And registr.
prim. fol. 46.
. She freely fulfilled the founder's unlimited charge, in which she was bound
to finish the house at Garsington abovementioned; the cost of it having
exceeded the five hundred marcs which he specified by will for that purpose:
and accordingly we find her, from time to time, advancing without reserve, the
necessary supplies of timber and money Viz. the sum of 28 l. 9 s. 3 d. in 1566.
Ex Registr. in 4to. ut supr. And Comp. 1566. -- 6. Beside timber in 1561. -- 2.
and 1564. Ex Comp. et Registr. praedict. She also glased the house. Comp. 1570.
-- 1. "Sol. pro expens. Magistri Praesidis et magistri Chambrelen proficisc.
Londinum ad dom. fundatricem and parandum vitrum pro domo apud Garsington. xxx
s. v d." Glass, at this time, was neither a cheap nor a common commodity. The
glasing of a large building was a considerable work.
. She appears often to have interested herself in the affairs of the society,
and to have lent her assistance and advice on many occasions: for which she
frequently received their testimonies of respect and regard From the following
articles, among many others.

Comp. Burss. 1560. -- 1. "Sol. pro expens. Magistri Praesidis equitantis ad
dom. fundatricem de visitatione futura. xxxix s. vj d."

Comp. 1563. -- 4. "Sol. Maii 24. pro expens. Magistri praesidis et duorum
famulorum dominae fundatricis venientium Londino, circa necessaria collegii
negotia, et Magistri Praesidis illuc eadem de causa profecti. xx s. x d. s vij
d."

Comp. 1563. -- 4. "Sol. Jan. 27. ex pari chirothecarum dat. doni. fundatrici.
iv s. iv d.

Comp. 1566. -- 7. "Alloc. in prandium famulis dom. fundatricis. x s.

Comp. 1568. -- 9. "Sol. pro duobus paribus chirothecarum missis ad domini
Powlett et fundatricem. x s. s. ob. q.

Comp. 1569. -- 70. "Sol. pro chircthecis missis ad dom. fundatricem. vj s.

Comp. 1570. -- 1. "Sol. pro epulis famuli fundatricis. iij s. ix d.

Comp. 1574. -- 5. "Dat. famulo fundatricis adferenti ferinam. ij s.

Comp. 1579. -- 80. "Sol. pro chirothecis dom. episcopi Wynton, et dominae
fundatricis. xviij s. vj d.

Comp. 1589. -- 90. "Sol. Magistro praesidi proficiscenti ad dom. fundatricem.
iij l. xv s. v d.

Comp. 1590. -- 1. "Sol. pro chirothecis dom. fundatricis. vj s. s.

In a letter written to her by the society, dated June xvii. 1573. they tell
her, "Wysshyng you heartily that it would pleasse your ladyship to visytt your
college, and us your daily orators, now in your journey down into
Summersettsnyre, which thing would be a great comsorte to us all." In
Thesauriar. praedict. I have seen a sermon, preached at St. Paul's, dedicated
to this Lady, by Bartholomew Chamberleyn, an eminent preacher, and fellow of
the college. Land. 8vo. 1589. [One Mr. Chamberlayne of Oxford occurs among many
eminent divines who preached in the Churcst of Stevington, [f. Berks,] from
A.D. 1573, to 1578. MSS. Harl. 2396. 123. f. 157.]


Once I find her present at the college in 1565, viz. " Sol. pro Refectione
data Fundatrici, liij s. iiij d Comp. Burss. 1565.
." Sir Edward Hoby, an eminent statesman and scholar, in the reigns of queen
Elizabeth and James the first, styles her in a latin epistle MS. To Dr. Ralph
Kettell, abovementioned. Dat. 1613. In Bibliothec. Coll. antedict.
, "praenobilis heroina;" and adds the great obligation she had conferred upon
him in admitting into the college, Bernard Adams Schol. Maii 30. 1583. Soc.
Jun. 3. 1588. E Registr. prim. -- Consecrat. Episc. Limericens. 1604. Wood,
Ath. Oxon. i. 730. Hoby's words are, "Arctiori etiam vinculo constrinxit
praenohilis heroina Fundatrix vestra, quo tempore Bernardum Adamum, nunc
Limbricensem Episcopum, pro amore in me suo, in Albo vestro conscripsit,
sustentavit, aluit." I find this notice occurring, concerning bishop Adams, in
Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1619. -- 20. "Exp. quar do collegium recepit rev. in
Christo patr. Episcop. Limbricens. iij l. i s. vij d." Ware says, that Adams
adorned his cathedral with a new organ, and other costly furniture. PRAESUL.
HIBERN. p. 189. His picture, a good old portrait on board, is at Trinity
college.

When queen Elisabeth visited Oxford, 1566, a book was presented to her
majesty, by Nele, the Hebrew Professor, entitled Collegiorum Scholarumque
Publicarum Acad. Oxon. Topographica Delineatio. With verses under each. Under
TRINITY COLLEGE are the following lines, some of which particularly respect
this lady, as a patroness of her husband's foundation. Urbis at egresso jam
maenia, proxima seeds
Occurrit, THOMAE sumptibus aucta POPI:
Quam sacro-sanctae Triados cognomen habere
Jussit inauratus Miles, Equestre Decus.
Hujus adhuc teneros Foetus pia matter adauget
Conjux, tam digno Conjuge digna suo.
Vid: H. Dodwelli Parm. equestr. by Hearne, page 142. And J. Bereblock's
Relation of the queen's visit to Oxford, apud Hist. Ricard. ii. per Hearne, p.
283. See also Miles Windfore's EUROPAEI ORBIS ACADEMIAE, Land. 1590. A copy of
these pictures and verses is in the archives of the Bodleyan Library, probably
the same which was presented to the queen. The verses were written by Nele; and
the buildings delineated by John Bereblock abovementioned, a fellow of Exeter
college.


, afterward bishop of Limerick. Sir Hugh Powlett assisted the college with his
patronage, in a troublesome and expensive lawsuit against lord Rich, and
enabled them to overthrow their powerful antagonist About 1561. From a latin
epistle of the college to him, dat. Jun. xiv. 1566. ut infr.
. He generously gave them a present of twenty pounds in silver, in 1566, for
finishing the stone wall round their Grove For these things they tell him,
"Maximum quod a nobis dari potuit munus, Dominationi tuae detulimus: ut primas
tu quidem post FUNDATOREM nostrum, cujus lauds nulla oblivionis aerugine
exedi, nullis unquam sordibus obsolescere poterunt, inter omnes qui de nobis
benemetendo nominis immortalitatem consequuntur, tuo jure teneres." From the
same latin epistle. It is addressed "Ornatissimo viro et patrono nostro
dignissimo D. HUGONI PAULETT." In Thesaur. ut supr. In the lawsuit, they
acknowledge themselves assisted, "tuo consilio et industria."
. I find him entertained with them on Trinity Sunday the preceding year From a
foul copy of the said latin epistle.
. I find him also visiting them 1567, viz. " Allocat. Jun. xxviii. pro dapibus
domini Paulett visentis collegium, vj s. viij d. Item pro cerasis et vino eodem
tempore, ij s. iv d. [ix s.] Comp. Burss. 1566. -- 7.
.

But I proceed to some other particulars concerning Dame Elizabeth Powlett. In
the year 1560, she placed in rich painted glass in a window of the choir, or
chancell, of the church of Broadwell in Oxsordshire, an image of the Holy
Trinity, with the figures of herself and Sir Thomas Pope Probably the reason
why she did not place here the figure of her present husband Sir Hugh Powlett,
rather than that of Sir Thomas Pope, was because this picture was intended as a
memorial of the college to which the church belonged. In the large old mansion
house at Filkins, a hamlet of Broadwell, pulled down about fifty years ago,
there were on the spouts the initials E. P. for Elisabeth Powlett, and the date
1592.
, both kneeling in their heraldic surcoats of arms. But this window was removed
or destroyed the following year by own her command, being censured as
superstitious MSS. F. Wife.
. In the following year, she gave a great clock to the late conventual church
of Clerkenwell in London MSS. F. Wife.
. This was a considerable benefaction, and not unworthy to be mentioned here;
as clocks, if of any size, were at that time uncommon and very expensive. In
1564, she placed a new pair of organs, with a picture of the Passion of Saint
Sebastian, in the chapel of Tytten-hanger-house MSS. F. Wife. This article, and
the two foregoing, I believe, were communicated to Mr. Wife by the late sir
Harry Pope-Blount, who seems to have had them from some family papers or
memoirs.
. In the year 1592, being desirous of perpetuating her affection to her native
town of Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire, by the memorial of some public
benefaction, she gave an annuity of fifteen pounds issuing from her estate in
Clerkenwell, and all her lands and possessions at Bentley in Derbyshire, for
improving the salaries of the first and second masters of the free school, and
also for the perpetual maintenance of five poor women, aged and unmarried, in
that town Ex indentura, dat. 1 Feb. 35 Eliz. apud Burton praedict. By this
benefaction, the schoolmaster is to receive yearly, iij l. And the usher vj l.
The poor women are provided with a lodging each: fuel, with other necessaries;
one frieze gown, one apron, one smock, and xxvj s. viij d. in money, yearly.
She refers to these charities in her will.
. At length this pious and respectable lady having lived to a very great age,
died the following year 1593, on the twenty-seventh day of October, at
Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire From Wood's original English of History and
Antiquities of the University of Oxford, MSS. Autograph. olim in Archivis Univ.
Oxon. Nunc Bibl. Bodl. -- She chiefly lived at Tyttenhanger and Clerkenwell.
There are three of her letters to Trinity college; the first of which is dated
Tyttenhanger, Sept. 23. 1559. Registr. prim. fol. 24. b. The second,
Tyttenhanger, Sept. 5. 1570. Ibid. fol. 23. The third, Clerkenwell, Jun. 12.
1590. fol. 46. Ibid. In the year 1578, she was visited at Tyttenhanger by queen
Elizabeth, in a royal progress. Blomefield's NORFOLK. iii. 481. See also
Strype. ANN. REP. ii. p. 542. ed. 2. And W. Lilly's LIFE, p. 11. edit. 1774.
. When her body was carried from thence, to be buried at Oxford, five pounds in
money, and large provisions of meat and drink were distributed to the Poor, at
the gate of Tyttenhanger-house Ex testam.
. On the first of November following, the corpse arrived at Oxford, where, not
so much on account of her rank, as in regard to that public relation which her
former husband sir Thomas Pope bore to the university, it was laid in state, in
saint Mary's church Wood, MSS. ut supr.
. The next day it was conveyed with proper solemnity to Trinity college,
attended by the president, fellows, and scholars of the same, all clothed in
mourning at her own charge Ex testam.
; where with great pomp she was interred in the chapel, with sir Thomas Pope
and his former wife Margaret. Three pennons, containg impalements of all her
three husbands, Beresford, POPE, and Powlett, were hung up over the tomb From
MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. Number. 1724.
. Twenty-five of the poorest women which could be found in Oxford, were ordered
to be present at the interment, habited in black gowns of frieze. On this
occasion, a sumptuous dinner was provided in the hall of the college, for the
whole society, and attendants of the funeral. The remains of the entertainment
were distributed to the poor at the college-gate, and five pounds in money. At
the same time, a legacy of ten shillings was delivered to each of the scholars.
All this was by her own directions Ex testam.
. She bequeathed xj l. v s. to several prisons: and to every single prisoner at
Oxford one stone of beef. To the poorest and most diseased patients in the
hospital of saint Bartholomew "Amongst the poorest, most sicklye and diseased
people within that house."
in West-Smithfield, xl s. to be delivered to each of them respectively, within
one week after her decease. Among other bequests to her honorable friends and
relations, she leaves, to lord keeper Puckeringe a standing cup with a cover,
of silver gilt. To lord treasurer Burleigh a ring of gold garnished with a
diamond, pointed upwards and downwards, which was sometime the ring of lord
keeper sir Nicholas Bacon, and by him sold to sir Arthur Darcy, who sold the
same to sir Thomas Pope for one hundred pounds. To the earl of Ormond her black
ambling horse. Thomas earl of Ormond lord high treasurer of Ireland, and the
queen's General in the Irish rebellion. See Carte's ORMOND, vol. i. INTRODUCT.
p. liii. edit. fol. 1736.
To the countess of Warwick, aunt of sir Philip Sydney, two long cushions of
red cloth of gold, for the furniture of a bow window; and an ewer of silver,
suitable to the basin which she gave her at the last "New years tide," for a
new year's gift She was Anne, daughter of Francis earl of Bedford, third wife
of Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick, high in favor with queen Elisabeth, and who
died in 1595. Dugdal. WARW. p. 339. See the large inscription on this earl's
tomb in the Virgin Mary's chapel at Warwick. To his countess, the same that is
mentioned in the text, sir Philip Sydney bequeathed one of his best jewels, in
1589. See MEM. prefixed to Collins's SYDNEY-PAPERS, p. 111. And ibid. p. 42.
She is often mentioned in the SYDNEY-PAPERS, and on important occasions. She
died in 1603. Collins's MEM. ut supr. p. 42. See Norden's HARTFORDSHIRE, p. 20.
Strype, REF. iii. 598. Ames, HIST. PRINT. p. 425.
. To lady Stafford, lady of the queen's privy chamber, a candlestick of silver,
weighing twenty two ounces, suitable to two others before given Mary daughter
of Edward earl of Darby, wife of Edward, Baron lord Stafford. See Dugdal.
BARON. i. 171.
. To lady Scudamore, a very fair casting bottle of silver gilt, weighing
fifteen ounces This lady occurs more than once in the SYDNEY-PAPERS. -- Rowland
White to Sir Robert Sydney, 1597. "Upon sunday in the afternoon, my Lady
Skudamore got the QUEEN to read your letter, who asked of her how yt came to
her hands. She answered, that my lady Sidney desired her to delyver yt to her
majesty from her husband. Do you know the contents of it, said the queen?
No, madam, said she. When her majesty said, here is much ado about the CINQUE
PORTS. I demanded of my lady Skudamore, what she observed in her majesty while
she was a reading of it: who fayd, she read yt all over with two or three
pughs." vol. ii. p. 97. Again, White to sir Robert Sydney, 1599. "Yesterday the
countess of Leicester sent to the queen a curious fine gown, which was
presented by Lady Skudamore, etc." ibid. p. 174. Some of the court history of
this family is probably couched under the adventures of SIR SCUDAMORE in
Spenser's FAERIE QUEEN.
. To her sister lady Sydenham, a nest of silver bowls, two trencher Salts of
silver, and her bed, with all its rich furniture, of cloth of A light red. See
Steevens's SHAKESPEARE, vol. i. p. 62, 63. edit. 1779. Dr. Board, in his
DIETARIE OF HEALTH, written in 1541, says, under the chapter of APPAREL, "in
^omer use to wear a skarlet petycote of stamel or linsie wolsie." chapter viii.
stamel color Ex testam. dat. April. xvi. 1593. Probat. Feb. viii. 1594. In
Registro Dixey, 83. 15. Cur. Praerog. Cant. The executors are, William Weston,
Pope Blount, Edward Blount, and Edward Blount.
. These particulars acquaint us with her connections, and show the manners of
the times.

She had two brothers; William Blount He married Frances, one of the three
daughters of Edward Love, and Alice his wife, sister of sir Tho. Pope
abovementioned. He was settled at Osberston, co. Leicester, and dying 1592.
Nov. xxvi. was buried in the church of Ridge, the parish church of
Tyttenhanger, co. Hertford. See Burton's. Leicestershire. p. 210. 211.
an executor, with Nicholas Bacon, of sir Thomas Pope's will: and Walter
Blount, nominated a scholar of Trinty college, Oxford, by the founder, and
admitted January the ninth, 1557 Registr. prim. fol. 4. See Append Numb. XXV.
He left the college soon afterward, as appears from the following extract of
one of the founder's letters. "I am content to dispens with my wiffs brother
for his scholars rome, which I do the rather, for that I believe he meant to
lose his rome [place] by his absens. I would he should be broken of some part of
his wit; assuringe you from henceforth I will for no man's pleassure living
break my statutes, neither in that, nor in any other point. For when I shall
goo about to break my estatutes in my own life, how may I hope to have them
kept after I am gone?" To the President, without Date. But my chief reason for
citing this passage, is to show his impartiality and disinterestedness, and at
the same time his resolution and prudence, in keeping up the statutes of his
college which he had once given, even against the benefit and convenience of
his own relations, and in a case where he might have acted just as he pleased.
. Her sisters were Mary, Anne and Ellen Ex Test. T. P. -- Mary was married to
-- Sidenham knight, perhaps sir George, of Comb Sydenham, co. Some. as appears
by Anne Blount's epitaph in the church of Clerkenwell. Stowe's SURVEY, edit.
1618. p. 819. Also from lady Powlett's Will; and these notices in Comp. Burss.
coll. Trin.

Comp. 1574. -- 5. "Sol. pro duobus paribus chirothecarum pro domina fundatrice
et domino Sydenham. xj s.

Comp. 1573. -- 4. "Alloc. pro cena Magistri Sydenham, fratris fundatricis, nos
invisentis. v s.

Ellen, as I guess, was married to -- Goodwyn. Anne, buriad as above, died
unmarried.


William Blount's heir Thomas He was knighted by James I. at Theobalds, 1603.
And offered by him the dignity of a baronet. Collins's Bar. iv. 667. -- He
occurs matriculated of Trin. coll. Oxon. by the name of Thomas Pope-Blount,
Aet. 18. Nov. xi. 1574. Wood MSS. Mus. Ashm. E. 5.
, who was settled at Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire about 1593, prefixed Pope to
the name of Blount, in remembrance of sir Thomas Pope; as many of his lineal
descendants have done.

Of this family of Blount there were afterward three eminent writers: sir
Henry Blount knight, sir Thomas Pope-Blount knight, and baronet, and Charles
Blount, esquire. Concerning whom a few words may not be perhaps impertinent or
unacceptable. Sir Henry Blount was admitted a gentleman-commoner of Trinity
college Oxford, in 1615 Ex Registro in 4to. apud Coll. Trin. supr. citat. I
find his elder brother Thomas, admitted with him a CONVICTOR of the superior
rank. ibid. Thomas quitted the college in 1615. Henry in 1619. ibid.
, under the tuition of the learned Robert Skynner one of the fellows,
afterward successively bishop of Bristol, Oxford, and Worcester, in the
fourteenth year of his age: where, at that early period of life, he attracted
the peculiar attention and esteem of the society, more from his own personal
and intrinsic accomplishments, his amiable disposition, lively conversation,
engaging address, genius, and taste for polite literature, than from his family
connections, and his near relation to the founder Wood, ATH. OXON. ii. 712.
. In 1636, He published his VOYAGE INTO THE LEVANT, which became exceedingly
popular, and was frequently reprinted. But to say the truth, this little work
is the voyage of a skeptic: it has more of the philosopher than the traveller,
and would probably never have been written, but for the purpose of insinuating
his religious sentiments. Yet his reflections are so striking and original, and
so artfully interwoven with the thread of his adventures, that they enliven,
instead of embarrassing, the narrative. He has the plausible art of coloring
his paradoxes with the resemblance of truth. So little penetration had the
orthodox court of Charles the first, that merely on the merit of this book, he
was appointed one of the band of Pensioners For some of his other pieces, see
Wood's ATH. OXON. ii. 712. And Langbaine's DRAM. POETS, p. 327.
. Sir Thomas Pope-Blount his eldest son was born in 1649, and was educated
under his father's inspection. His CENSURA CELEBRIORUM AUTHORUM, which is a
compilation of great erudition and labor, is well known to the critic and the
literary historian. Niceron unfortunately compares the CENSURA with Baillet's
JUGEMENT DES SAVANS MEMOIRES pour servir, etc. tom. xxiii. p. 399.
. But Baillet has the vanity and injustice to report the opinions of other
writers in his own words: our author has the modesty and fidelity to transcribe
and to cite his authorities. His ESSAYS on various subjects are learned and
judicious, and they have the ease and freedom, without the singularity, of
Montaigne. Another of his works, which has been superseded by those who have
used its materials, is REMARKS ON POETRY. Of this piece it will be sufficient
to say, that it was honored with the approbation of lord Mulgrave, the most
elegant critic of the author's age. Charles Blount, or Pope-Blount, esquire,
second son of sir Henry abovementioned, inherited his father's philosophy. From
an abhorence of superstition, he appears to have adopted the most distant
extremes of the theistic system. His ANIMA MUNDI, ORACLES OF REASON, LIFE OF
APPOLLONIUS TYANAEUS, and DIANA OF THE EPHESIANS, written with great learning,
sagacity, wit, and force of reasoning, are the consolation of infidels, and are
melancholy monuments of admirable abilities abused in the defense of a futile
but dangerous cause See the MISCELLANEOUS WORKS of Charles Blount, published by
Charles Gildon in 1693. And Wood, ubi supr.
. In conformity to these principles, he died by his own hand in 1693. Bail has
inaccurately represented the affecting story of his death Artic. APOLLONIUS
TYANAEUS. The true story is this. Mr. Blount, on the death of his wife, fell in
love with her sister, a lady of great beauty and accomplishments: she was not
insensible to his attachment, but was scrupulous about the legality of marrying
her sister's late husband. On his application to the most learned civilians,
and the archbishop of Canterbury, he was informed, that such a match could not
take place. On this, the lady positively refused her consent, and Mr. Blount in
a fit of despair shot himself through the head. The wound not immediately
proving mortal, he lived five days: during which time, he received no
fustenance or medicines but from the hands of the lady, who attended him with
the most sympathetic tenderness till his last moments. This account I received
from the late sir Harry Pope-Blount, baronet, the last of the family, and a
diligent and faithful antiquary.
.

I close my account of Dame Elizabeth Powlett, and her nearer relations, with a
few words concerning the antiquity and dignity of her family. Its ancestor was
Le Blound lord of Guisnes in Normany, whose sons Robert and William le Blound,
both entered England with William the conqueror. William was one of the
captains in that expedition, and quartered, with other Norman knights, on the
monks of Ely. Robert was created by the conqueror, baron of Ixworth in Suffolk;
in which county he received a grant of thirteen lordships. Gilbert, his son,
founded an Augustine priory at Ixworth, in the reign of William Rufus, which he
endowed with fourteen knights fees. One of Gilbert's descendants was killed at
the battle of Jews, in the reign of Henry the third, where he was
standard bearer to Mountford earl of Leicester. In the progress of it is
descent, this family numbers many persons of singular eminence and high station
See Peacham's COMPLETE GENTLEMAN, edit. 1661. page 230. And Eng. Baronet. iv.
665. 675. 576. And ii. 367.
; and is, besides, nobly connected by marriages. On the sides of the tomb in
Trinity college chapel abovementioned, are two coats: Pope impaling Quarterings
of Blount, viz. Barry, Nebule of six, Or, and sable; And of Roger de Sutton,
ancestor of Elizabeth's mother, viz. A lion rampant. This is one coat. The
other consists of quarterings of Blount, Of the said Roger de Sutton; and, Of
Nicholas de Wichard lord of the manor of Osberston aforesaid in the reign of
Henry the third, marrying into the said Roger, viz. Azure, a cheveron Argent,
between three martlets See Burton's Leicestershire, p. 211.
Or. These arms are an additional and evident proof, that Dame Elizabeth
Powlett erected this monument; in decorating which, she was so studious to
introduce the ensigns and honors of her own family There is an old portrait of
lady Powlett, in the Bursary at Trinity college, painted, as I judge from the
drapery and the age of the countenance, about the middle of Q. Elisabeth's
reign; by which she appears to have been handsome. This picture was in the
college at least before 1613. It is mentioned in Comp. Burss. coll. 1612. --
13. I have been told that this picture was painted by sir Antonio More,
portrait and history painter to Philip and Mary. Several of his pictures were
in the collection of king Charles the first, and at sir Philip Sydenham's at
Brympton in Somersetshire, a family (as we have seen) nearly related to Lady
Powlett. More had one hundred ducats for his common portraits. He died in 1575.
I rather think this picture is a copy of an original by More.
.

SECT. VII.
IT may be necessary to speak of sir Thomas Pope's friends, and of those with
whom he seems to have maintained any particular intimacy, connection, or
intercourse: notwithstanding most of their names have before occurred
incidentally. These were sir Thomas More, lord Audley, sir Richard Southwell,
sir Thomas Stradling, sir Nicholas Bacon, sir Thomas Cornewallys, sir Francis
Englefield, sir Robert Southwell, sir Edward Waldegrave, William Cordall,
esquire, Richard Gooderick, John Wyseman, sir Arthur Darcy, sir Gilbert
Gerrard, lord Vaulx, sir Thomas Brydges, cardinal Pole, Thirlby bishop of Ely,
sir Thomas White, lord Williams of Them, White bishop of Winchester, and
Thomas Slythurste, president of Trinity college so often mentioned.

I need not repeat his last interview with sir THOMAS MORE: of whom it will be
sufficient to add here, that he was the greatest ornament of the English nation
at the restoration of polite literature; that he was a man whose life and death
are equal prodigies, and whose valuable virtues and untimely fate are alike
admired and lamented Erasmus who always preserved the highest opinion of More,
has, with great elegance and truth, drawn his character at full length, EPIST.
447. See also 605. More was among Erasmus's most intimate friends.
. THOMAS lord AUDLEY, made lord high chancellor of England on sir Thomas More's
resignation in 1533, was probably sir Thomas Pope's particular patron, and
perhaps not a little instrumental toward his rise in the world, as has been
already hinted. In how great confidence and esteem sir Thomas was held by lord
Audley, is further manifested, from his being appointed, with sir Edward North,
and two others, an executor of lord Audley's will Registr. Allen. Cur. Praerog.
qu. i. dat. April. xix. 1544
; in which, among several other directions, they are requested to deliver, the
next new year's day after his decease, one hundred pounds to the king; from
whom the testator professes to have received all his reputations and benefits
He bequeathes the residue of his plate, goods, and chattels, to lady Elizabeth
his wife, sir Edward North, and sir THOMAS POPE, knights, and his servants
Edmond Martyn and Thomas Harbor. And "the sum of cclj l. to either of the said
sir Edward and sir THOMAS."
. Few of the favorites of Henry the eighth appear to have more successfully
recommended themselves to their sovereign than lord Audley. But although by his
perseverance in the business of the Divorce, and the dissolution of the
monasteries, he so gratified the kings private views, as "to sustain, according
to his own declaration, much damage and infamy;" yet the best historians admit,
that he opposed the dangerous designs of his arbitrary master in a matter of
the highest importance. In 1539, many severe acts were made, in which those
styled the six bloody articles were included; and the prerogative was carried
to such an enormous height, that the king's proclamation was allowed to attain
the force of a law. It does not very plainly appear who were his majesty's
principal counselors in this affair: but we are assured, by concurrent and
undoubted authorities, that the rigorous execution of those laws which the king
had at first intended, was prevented by the spirited interposition of lord
Audley See BIOGRAPH. BRIT. Vol. i. AUDLEY.
. But I forbear entering further into the history of this distinguished
statesman and lawyer; who bore so considerable and so public a share in the
most important transactions of the reign of Henry the eighth. I shall only add,
that with sir Thomas Pope, he was an encourager of literature; and the founder,
or restorer, of Magdalen college in Cambridge Fuller, Hist. Cambr. page 120.
. Sir RICHARD SOUTHWELL was one of the chief mourners at sir Thomas Pope's
burial. He was educated at Bennet college in Cambridge, and from thence removed
to the inns of court Strype, Eccl. Mem. i. 385.
. He was summoned, in 1537, with many lords and knights, to attend the baptism
of prince Edward Ibid. ii. 5.
. He was a visitor at the dissolution of religious houses Rymer, Foed. xiv. 558.
, privy counselor to Henry the eighth, and an executor of his will Master's
History of C. C. C. C. p. 373.
. In 1545, although a strict catholic, he protected, in his house called the
Charter House at London, his tutor at Cambridge, one John Loud, a polite
scholar, who was persecuted for heresy, being a friend to his literature
notwithstanding his religion Strype, ut supr. i. 386.
. When sir Thomas More was committed to the tower, he was sent by the king,
with Rich the sollicitor-general, to take away More's books See this whole
transaction in the STATE TRIALS.
. Henry the eighth left him by will two hundred pounds Rymer, Foed. xv. 117.
. In the reign of Edward the sixth, he was appointed one of the counselors to
the young king, during his minority Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 457.
. In 1551, he was concerned with lord Wriothesley, and others, in bringing
about the fall of the protector Somerset; who was become odious to the people
on accont of his ambitious views, and the riches he had amassed in plundering
the revenues of the church and crown. But in consequence of this intrigue,
which was deemed a faction, he was imprisoned, but pardoned. At the accession
of Mary, he received a grant from the queen of an annual pension of one hundred
pounds This affair is related, perhaps with some partiality, in an old treatise
entitled, "A short treatise of politic power and of the true obedience, etc.
Compyled by D. J. P. B. R. VV. 1556." 12mo. It is supposed to be written by
Doctor John Poynet bishop of Rochester, then of Winchester. See signat. iiii.
The book appears to be printed abroad. See supr. p. 58.
, for his services in opposing the duke of Northumberland who disputed her
title, and was accordingly beheaded for rebellion Rymer, Foed. xv. 355.
. In the same reign, 1553, he was master of the ordinance and armory Viz. Maii
2. Lit. Pat. Mar. an. reg. i. Par. 4. With a salary of cc marcs.
; the nature of which, at that time, appears from the following warrant,
requiring him to deliver, "toward the furniture of the band of horsemen,
appointed presently to attend upon her Grace, these parcells of armor; four
hundred demi lances, with all their furniture, five hundred corseletts, one
hundred and fifty shirtes of mail, with morions to the same." Afterward
mention is made of "two hundred bows, with sheffs of arrows, two gross of
bowstringes, fifty partisans [halberds] and five hundred pikes Burghley's State
Papers, p. 166. 169.
." In 1554, the queen gave him a license for forty retainers See Eccl. Mem.
iii. 480.
, an honor only granted to persons of uncommon distinction. In this reign he
was also one of the privy council, and repeatedly joined in the most important
commissions Burghley's Pap. ut supr. passim. And Strype, Rymer, etc.
; one of which he executed in conjunction with sir Thomas Pope. In the first
year of queen Elizabeth, he was continued master of the ordinance and armory;
when he made suit to the lords, that he might exhibit a declaration of the
state of his office, and of the military stores then remaining in his
posession. In a letter to Slythurste, the first president of Trinity college,
dated Whitmonday 1558, sir Thomas Pope proposes to place his son in law John
Beresford abovementioned, a student in his college, and concerning whose
success in life he appears to have been very sollicitous, as a page with sir
Richard Southwell, and his brother sir Robert, "to learn there among his [sir
Richard's] childern, the Latin tongue, the French tongue, and to play at wepons
Sir Richard Southwell's children were placed, in his own house, under the care
of John Loud. Of whom he used to say, "He will make my boy, like himself, too
good a Latinist, and too great a heretic." Stype, Eccl. Mem. i. 386.

Tusser the poet, in his HUSBANDRY, mentions sir Richard Southwell, as a most
bountiful patron. Edit. 1593, 4to. page 159.


." These at this time, were probably the sole and complete accomplishments of a
gentleman. Sir THOMAS STRADLING Knighted Feb. 17. 3 Edw. vi. MSS. Cotton.
Claud. C. 3. fol. 190.
, another of the chief mourners at sir Thomas Pope's funeral, was of saint
Donat's castle in Glamorganshire. When queen Mary succeeded to the crown In the
reign of Henry viii. the king grants "Thomae Stradlyng, uni Dapiferorum suorum,
officium Bedelli" of certain lordships in Glamorganshire, etc. Bill. Signat.
Hen. viii. An. 17. Sept. 19.
, 1553, he was appointed, with others, a muster-master to the queen's army
Burghley's State Papers, p. 158.
, and a commissioner for the marches of Wales Ibid. 201.
. In the same year he was representative in parliament for East-Grinstead in
Sussex; and, the following year for Arundel in the same county Willis, Notit.
Parl. p. 30. 38.
. In 1558, he was joined with sir Thomas Pope, and others, in a commission,
before mentioned at large, for the suppression of heretics See supr. p. 52.
. He was father of sir Edward Stradling, remarkable in the reign of Elizabeth,
for his critical skill in the British language, and his patronage of the Welsh
antiquarian literature See Joannis Stradlingi EPIGRAMMATUM libri quatuor. Land.
1607, 8vo. He was nephew to sir Edward. lib. i. page 3. See also Wood's ATH.
OXON. i. 350, 351.
. Sir Thomas Stradling magnificently repaired the ancient castle of saint
Donat's As appears from an epitaph upon him in Stradling's epigrams, where are
the following lines. p. 10. Hic Donataea quondam fulgebat in arce,
Castra diu proavis nobilitata suis.
Omnia quae vincit, castra haec absumpserat aetas,
Hujus at ingenio paene novata vides.

; and built saint Mary's chapel, adjoining to saint Donat's church, in which he
was buried Wood, ut supr.
.

Sir NICHOLAS BACON, one of the executors of sir Thomas Pope's will, in which
he likewise remembers him with a token of affection, calling him moreover "his
most true and assured friend," was sir Thomas Pope's neighbor at Gorhambury
near saint Alban's; where he built in 1566, a beautiful house, which still
remains a monument of ancient magnificence and manners, with much of its
original furniture and decorations In Aubrey's MSS. LIVES, Mus. Ashmol. is a
particular description of it. -- It is now destroyed, 1779.
. He was likewise solicitor Batteley's edition of Somner's CANTERBURY. App. p.
118. Birch's Mem. of Q. Elizabeth, i. 10.
, while sir Thomas was treasurer, of the first court of Augmentations. During
the reign of Henry the eighth, having enjoyed many marks of royal favor, more
from virtuous industy than from mean submission, he was made by queen
Elizabeth, 1559, lord keeper of the great seal, and a privy counselor Dugd.
Bar. ii. 437. And Orig. Jurid. Chron. ser. p. 90.
. In these stations, he behaved with that wisdom and integrity which their
importance and dignity required. To this character it may be superfluous to
add, what alone might supply the place of a prolix panegyric, that he was the
father of Francis lord Verulam.

Sir THOMAS CORNEWALLYS, one of the Overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will, all
whom he styles his most trusty and loving friends, was sheriff of Norfolk just
before queen Mary's accession, where he raised a considerable force against
those disaffected and factious subjects who opposed her title. For this
seasonable and serviceable assistance, he was immediately made one of her privy
council, treasurer of Calais Viz. Maii 7. Lit. pat. 1 Mar. par. 7.
, and comptroller of her household Dugd. BAR. ii. 480. And from his monument in
the church of Brom, co. Suffolk. See Wever, FUN. MON. p. 764.
. When it was debated in council to send the princess Elizabeth out of the
kingdom, in order that she might be excluded from the succession, he boldly
dissuaded the queen from a proceeding at once unjust and imprudent Camden's
Eliz. edit. Hearne. Vol. i. APPARATUS, p. 21.
. Sir FRANCIS ENGLEFIELD, a second overseer of sir Thomas Pope's will, and
joined with him in a commission, was knighted by Edward the sixth Dugdale's
Warw. ed. 2. ii. 891.
, but afterward imprisoned in the Tower by the protector Somerset, because he
concurred with sir Edward Waldegrave, and others, in suppressing the commands
of the privy council for the prohibition of mass in the family of his mistress
the princess Mary, with whom he then resided at Copped-hall in Essex Strype,
Eccl. Mem. ii. 253. seq.
. But when Mary, succeeded to the throne, he was constituted a
privy-counsellor, constable of Windsor castle, and master of the great wardrobe
Burnet, Ref. ii. 308. Collins Peer. iii. 259. ed. 2. -- And Lit. pat. Mar. an
reg. i. par. 6. Et ibid. par. 10.
. She also granted him one hundred retainers Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.
. In the reign of Elizabeth, he left the kingdom, and retiring into Spain,
became a zealous advocate to king Philip in favor of Mary queen of Scots
Strype, Ann. Ref. i. 371.
. But Elizabeth, highly provoked at the insolence of a man who presumed to
plead the cause of a lady more beautiful than herself, commanded him to be
outlawed and attainted See case in Coke's Reports, p. vii. fol. 11. -- And
Strype, Ann. Ref. ii. 26. 538. iii. 246, etc.
. This bigoted knight was much offended at the singular forbearance and
indulgence shown to the celebrated Roger Ascham, whom he looked upon as a most
dangerous heretic, during the rigid reign of queen Mary: but there are papers
to prove, that it was principally by sir Thomas Pope's influence and earnest
interposition, that Englefield was persuaded to abandon a violent prosecution
which he had commenced against Ascham See Strype's Life of Sir T. Smyth, p. 65.
I was informed by the late sir Harry Pope-Blount, that a most valuable portrait
of Roger Ascham, painted by Hans Holbein, was removed from Tyttenhanger-house,
about the reign of king William. This had undoubtedly been placed there by sir
Thomas Pope. See supr. p. 81.
. Sir ROBERT SOUTHWELL, another of the overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will, and
brother to sir Richard, was made master of the rolls, 1542, by Henry the eighth
Dugd. Orig. Jurid. Chron. Ser. p. 85.
, and continued in that office till about the middle of Edward the sixth, 1550
Ibid. p. 89.
. In 1542, he was representative in parliament for the county of Surrey, and
often afterward for the county of Kent, and several boroughs, in the reigns of
Edward and Mary Willis, Notit. Parl. p. 7, 20, 21, 27, 49, 56.
. He was a receiver of abbey lands from Henry the eighth Tanner, Notit. Mon.
fol. edit. p. 228, 535, 560.
. He died in November, 1559 Strype, Ann. Ref. i. 193.
. Queen Mary granted him twenty retainers Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.
. He was appointed a delegate and commissary in the first year of queen Mary,
with many civilians, and others of the first honor and quality, for the
restitution of bishop Bonner Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 23. See also ibid. 289.
. He was one of the attorneys, while sir Thomas Pope was treasurer, of the
court of augmentations Weever, Fun. Mon. page 109.
. Sir EDWARD WALDEGRAVE, another of the overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will,
was a principal officer in the household of the princess Mary, and committed to
close imprisonment to the Tower, with sir Francis Englefield, and sir Robert
Rochester, for omitting to forbid the celebration of mass in her house Strype,
Eccl. Mem. ii. 253. seq.
. The princess when she succeeded to the crown, had him much in esteem; and in
consideration of his sufferings and unshaken constancy, she constituted him a
privy-counsellor, master of the great wardrobe Viz. Jan. 16. Lit. pat. Mar. an.
reg. 1. par. 2.
, and chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster Collins, Peer. iii. 553. ed. 2.
. He was created knight of the carpet, by lord Arundel, the day following her
majesty's coronation Collins, ibid. But see Strype, ut supr. iii. Append. p. 11.
. He was appointed one of the executors of cardinal Pole's will; in which the
cardinal assigns him a gratuity of fifty pounds Life of Pole, P. ii.
. In the year 1561, he was ordered, with his lady, to the Tower, for hearing
mass in his family Strype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 233.
. Strype, in the spirit of his honest simplicity, tells us Ibid.
, that "this knight and his lady had the character of very good alms-folks, in
respect of their great liberality to the Poor." Three other Overseers of sir
Thomas Pope's will were sir William Cordall, Richard Gooderyke, and John
Wyseman. Sir WILLIAM CORDALL was lent reader of Lincoln's inn, 1553 Dugd. Orig.
Jurid. p. 252. col. 2.
, and afterward frequently governor of that house Ibid. 260. col. 1.
. In the same year he was appointed sollicitor-general, by queen Mary Ibid.
Chron. Ser. p. 81. -- In the patent he appears to have belonged to the court of
Augmentations. Lit. pat. Mar. an. reg. 1. par. 8.
; and in 1557, master of the rolls Dugd. ibid. p. 91.
. Sir Thomas Pope mentions him in this capacity, in a letter to the president
of his college, dated at Clerkenwell, on Whitmonday, 1558. "I shall buy of the
master of the rolls, ii fair manors with two advowsons in Lyncolnshere which
I entende to gyve to my collegge, etc Ex Orig. These. coll. Trin. ut supr.
." He was one of Mary's privy counselors Council-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr.
, who granted him the privilege of twelve retainers Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.
. He was one of the executors of cardinal Pole's will, with a bequest of fifty
pounds Life of Pole, P. ii.
. He was likewise an executor, and is styled a beloved friend, of the great
earl of Dorset Ex testam. 8 Eliz. apud Collins Peer i. 517. ed. i.
. In 1558 he was speaker of the house of Commons Willis, Not. Parl. SPEAKERS,
page 113.
. The mastership of the rolls he kept late in the reign of Elizabeth, with much
respect, till 1581 Dugd. ubi supr. p. 97.
. William Lambarde's famous book, entitled ARCHAIONOMIA or system of Saxon
laws, translated into Latin, and printed at London in 1568, is dedicated to
this sir William Cordall; and in the dedication, the learned editor
acknowledges the many obligations and encouragements he had received from sir
William's patronage in the prosecution of that valuable work. Abraham Fleming
also dedicates his translation of The General Doctrine of Earthquakes to this
worthy patron Land. 1580. 8vo.
. He is said to have been a great encourager of Saxton, who published maps of
England, in the reign of queen Elizabeth Hearne's coll. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. vol.
123. p. 143.
. He was appointed visitor of saint John's college in Oxford, during life, by
the founder sir Thomas White; and is supposed to have drawn up the statutes of
that society by the founder's desire His arms were in the windows of the chapel
and hall of saint John's college. Hutton's Collections, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. p.
202. In Museol. Bibl. They have been long since destroyed. There is a curious
old picture of him, in saint John's college, by one Cornelius de Zeem. These
statutes are digested from those of New-College in the same University.
. He lived at Long-Melford in Suffolk Collins, Peer. ii. 266. ed. i. He sounded
a hospital, at Long-Melford, for a warden and twelve brethren. Strype's PARRER,
p. 23. B. i. chapter vi.
: and, in 1578, gave example for the magnificent feasting of queen Elizabeth in
that county; into which her majesty was received by three troops, one of two
hundred young gentlemen clothed in white velvet, another of three hundred
gentlemen of the county apparelled in black velvet coats and costly chains, and
a third of fifteen hundred attendants well mounted on horseback Hollingshed,
Chron. iii. 1287. Compare Weever, p. 748. And Camd. ELIZ. vol. ii. p. 322.
edit. Hearne.
. RICHARD GOODERYKE appears to have been a lawyer of great eminence; and his
name is frequently mentioned, with other chief lawyers and noblemen, in various
commissions and proclamations, during the reigns of Henry the eighth, Edward,
Mary, and Elizabeth Strype, Eccl. Mem. and Ann. passim.
. Leland, in the ENCOMIA Principum ac illustrium aliquot et eruditorum in
Anglia virotum ENCOMIA, etc. edit. 1589. qu. page 108. In the preface to
Ascham's SCHOLEMASTER, printed 1589, sir Richard Sackville at a conference with
Ascham about education, mentions, "our dear friend, good master Goodericke,
whose judgment I cold well believe, etc." This is perhaps the same.
of illustrious persons, compliments him when a young man, for his promising
virtues and abilities; and from thence infers his future reputation in the
profession of the law Ad RICARDUM GOCDERICIUM.
Magnificum retines, GODERICI candide, nomen,
Quod vel Saxonicum recte idioma probat.
Sic bonus ac dives diceris jure latino;
Moribus hoc nomen convenit omne tuis.
Nominis illa tui, tam bella notatio non te
Constituit ditem, constituitve bonum.
Splendida felicem te virtus reddidit una,
Macte hac virtute, et dona beata feres.
Causidico sic sama foro tua, lausque nitebit,
Et te patronum percolet ipse cliens.
Nec sic contentus virtuti imponere morem,
Suspice doctrinae lumina clara piae.
Illa tuas possunt ad coelum tollere lauds,
Te quoque per niveas condecorare notas.

. He was an attorney Rym. Foed. xv. 334.
, while sir Thomas Pope was master of the woods, of the second court of
Augmentations. Edward the sixth, in 1551, granted him an annuity of one hundred
pounds Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 498.
. He was often a representative in parliament Willis, Notit. Parl. pp. 12. 73.
91.
. He was born in Yorkshire 1524 Collins, Bar. ii. 259.
, and was high sheriff of that county 1579 Drake's Eborac. p. 354.
. He was nearly related to Goodryke bishop of Ely, high chancellor of England
Collins, ubi supr. See Strype's CRANMER, p. 221.
. JOHN WYSEMAN Sir Thomas Pope is licenced to alienate to this John Wyseman,
and others, the manors of Ditton, Brampton, and Syflington, in Kent. Pat. Phil.
Mar. 3. 4. Test Apr. 9. Par. 8.
was of Canfield-Hall in Essex Collins, Peer. p. 530. Waldegrave. Ed. ii.
. I find him one of the commissioners for certifying to Henry the eighth, the
value of all the monastic and other spiritual foundations in the county of
Essex In the instrument he is styled Auditor. I suppose of the exchequer, or
augmentation office. Dated 26 Hen. viii. Jan. 30. MSS. Tanner. Bibl. Bodl.
. He was a member of parliament, in 1554, for Malden in Essex: and in the
following year, for East-Grinstead in Sussex Willis Not. Parl. p. 42. 51.
.

Sir ARTHUR DARCY, to whom sir Thomas Pope bequeathes a valuable memorial in
his will, and with whom he was joined in a commission, is said to have been "a
soldier of great fidelity and trust Letter of sir Ph. Hoby in Burghley's State
papers, ut supr. p. 125.
." Upon information given to Henry the eighth, that the emperor Charles the
fifth had threatened war against England, in 1532, and by some secret
negotiations, engaged James the fourth of Scotland to his assistance; he
entered Scotland with an army, and wasted the country. In the same year he was
deputed captain of the Isle of Jersey; and afterward, in 1551, by Edward the
sixth, lieutenant of the tower of London Dugd. Bar. i. 374. seq. And MSS. Harl.
Brit. Mus. 284. -- 61. fol. 94. He was made knight of the garter at Greenwich,
Apr. 23. 6 Edw. vi. Anstis, Ord. Gart. i. 446.
. He was moreover an encourager of polite learning, then beginning to grow
fashionable, as we learn from Leland; who addresses a copy of verses to him in
the ENCOMIA Leland calls him, Doctrinae eximium POLITIORIS
Cultorem.
-- p. 36. edit. ut supr,


; and says, that sir Arthur Darcy was present, and countenanced him when he
presented, in 1545, his new years gift to the King Leland, ibid.
. Sir GILBERT GERARD, to whom sir Thomas Pope also leaves a memorial, was
autumnal reader of Gray's-inn, 1553 Dugd. Orig. Jurid. p. 293. col. 2.
; and in the following year, treasurer of that society with Nicholas Bacon
Ibid. p. 298. col. 1.
. He was appointed, by queen Elizabeth, at her accession, 1559, attorney
general Ibid. Chron. Ser. p. 91.
, and on the death of sir William Cordall, in 1588, master of the rolls Dugd.
ubi supr. p. 97.
; in which station he remained till 1594 Ibid. p. 99. He was knighted at
Greenwich, 1579. 5 Jul. MSS. Cotton. Claud, C. 3. fol. 245. b.
, when he probably died. The memorable William Herbert, earl of Pembroke,
appointed him in 1569, with others his good lords and friends, an overseer of
his will, with a reward of fifty pounds, to be given him in money, plate, or
jewels Registr. LION. Cur. Praer. Cant. qu. 15.
. WILLIAM Lord VAULX, of Harwedon, to whom sir Thomas Pope leaves a legacy of
one hundred pounds, was summoned to parliament 1557. He founded an hospital at
Irtlingburgh in Northamptonshire Dugd. Bar. ii. 305.
. In 1582, he was accused before lord Burghley and sir Walter Mildmay, and
heavily fined, for harboring Campion the jesuit, but was afterward reconciled
to the queen Strype, Ann. Ref. iii. 126. And MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. 859. 4.
. Notwithstanding this popish attachment, he was one of the noblemen appointed
to conduct her majesty from Hatfield to London, on the Death of her sister Mary
Strype, ibid i. Append. p. 3.
. Sir THOMAS BRYDGES, to whom, by the name of Mr. Thomas Abrydge, sir Thomas
Pope also bequeathes a remembrance, was brother to John first earl of Chandois
See Strype. (...). iii. 64. 478.
. In Mary's reign he was lieutenant of the Tower of London Both sir John and
sir Thomas Bridges, knights, occur lieutenants of the tower in Q. Mary's reign.
Baker's Collectan. ex MSS. Camden. Brit. Mus. 7033. Vol. vi. page 341. As was
Edmund, the second earl. Dugd. Bar ii. 395. See Hollingshead, iii. 1099 1100.
1103. In one of which places sir John is put for sir Thomas.
. Fox mentions a friendly religious conference between him, secetary Bourne,
and Bishop Ridley, in the Tower Martyrol. ii. 1297.
. When the princess Elizabeth was confined in the tower, he saved her life, by
detecting and communicating a plot which bishop Gardener is said to have
contrived for her immediate execution Hollingsh. ut supr. page 1130.
. When he led, as lieutenant of the tower, lady Jane Gray to the scaffold, he
begged her to bestow on him some small present, which he might keep as a
perpetual memorial of her Ibid. 1100.
. She gave him her tablebook, where she had just written three sentences on
seeing her husband's headless body carried back to the tower in a cart. They
were written one in Greek, another in Latin, and a third in English Heylin,
167. But by mistake he says it was sir John Gage. See what is said of sir
Thomas Brydges, supr. p. 45. And of John lord Chandois, p. 69. It may be added,
that this Thomas, or sir, Bridges, who was of Cornebury in Oxfordshire, occurs
in a grant of lands to sir T. POPE, Pat. 31. Hen. viii. par. 4. And sir Thomas
Bridges is mentioned as one of the gentlemen of Oxfordshire, present at
Cranmer's execution. Strype's Cranmer, page 384. b. iii. chapter 21. I presume he
had some appointment in the court of Henry viii. For he attended at the funeral
of the king; on which occasion he bore the dragon-standard between two
sergeants at arms with their maces. Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. Append. Numb. x. He
was a considerable sharer of abbey lands in Oxfordshire, with Sir T. POPE;
particularly of the lands of the monastery of Bruerne: As appears by the patent
above cited. In his Will, he mentions the Mansion House of Bruerne; which, I
suppose, was the monastery. Also the demesnes of that house, and several of its
estates. In the same will he bequeathes to lord Chandois twenty corslets: to
his son Henry the rest of armor, and his best chain of gold. To lord Gray of
Wilton, in consideration of his loss by being apprehended at Gynes, 50l.
TESTAM. Th. Brydges. dat. October. 18, 1559. Probat. Feb. 13, 1559. In. Cur.
Praerog. Cant. registr. Melersh, qu. 13. He received from Edward vi. a grant of
the abbey of Keinsham near Bristol. Tanner's Not. Mon. edit. fol. page 469.
. That sir Thomas Pope was nearly connected with CARDINAL POLE, appears from
passages in his letters. I have before mentioned his application to the
cardinal, for obtaining a license for three of his fellows to preach. Sir
Thomas Pope in a letter to the president of his college, 1558, speaks of
procuring a prebend for one Heywood, and adds, "my lord cardinals Grace and my
lord of Elie [Thirlby] are both willing." In another letter to the same, dated
1557, he says, "Towching Mr. Heywood's recompens, I would be glad to understonde
what he would have; and theruppon would make my suit to my lord cardinall's
Grace, and my lord of Elie, accordingly This Mr. Heywood was Richard Hayward,
rector of Garsington, in Oxfordshire, to which he was presented by the crown
about August, 1556. Rym. Foed. xv. p. 442. The next year sir Thomas Pope
purchased the said rectory of Philip and Mary, and annexed it to the
presidentship of Trinity college. This application to cardinal Pole, and the
bishop of Ely, was undoubtedly to dispossess Hayward, by procuring him some
equivalent, that the president might immediately succeed to the rectory. Which
appears to have been done, yet not without some difficulty, nor in consequence
of these applications. Registr. prim. coll. Trin. fol. 122. b. Arthur Yeldard,
President, was instituted to this rectory, on the resignation of R. Haywood,
Sept. 8. 1562. REGISTR. Episcopat. Oxon. SEDE VACANT. fol. 219.
." In another to the same, and on the same business, without date, he says, "my
lord cardinall's grace has promised me a prebend of xx l." In another to the
same, dated July the ninth, 1558, he tells the president, that if his son in
law John Beresford, or Basford, mentioned above, then at Trinity college,
should prove a good proficient in the latin tongue, "I will not fail to sue to
my lord cardinall's grace for him:" in order that he "might, as is said in
another letter, attend upon his grace." Of the cardinal's character it will
be sufficient to observe, that he is more endeared to posterity by private
virtues and amiable qualifications, than ennobled by birth and dignities.
Instead of imbruing his hands in the blood of martyrs, and loading the
consciences of mankind with arbitrary decrees and unnatural edicts, he
corresponded with learned men, and introduced into England the pure and useful
elegancies of classical composition I have before referred the reader to Wood's
HISTORY and ANTIQUITIES of the university of Oxford, for an account of Pole's
visitation of the university. I will here add an anecdote relating to that
transaction not mentioned by Wood. The cardinal finding saint Mary's college,
(where Erasmus had studied, but which had been dissolved as a seminary for
various monasteries of augustine canons,) although very ruinous, a place which
might be made convenient for the reception of students, ordered it to be
repaired and fitted up for that purpose, Sept. 17. 1556. Accordingly, a
principal was appointed to it: yet on condition, that he should resign his
office, in case the cardinal should ever be disposed to convert the said
college into a house of religious. The principal's name was Alexander Elcocke,
A.M. But John Wait lord of the soil of the said college refused entry to the
new principal into the premises, "ut paret cubicula studiosis." Registr. Cur.
Cancel. Oxon. GG. fol. 63. in Archiv. Univ. Oxon. I know not what was the
immediate consequence of this proceeding: but it is certain that neither of the
cardinal's schemes took effect. Erasmus in some of hi^ Epistles speaks
feelingly of the repose which he enjoyed, and the felicity with which he
prosecuted his studies, for two years, in this retired house. The chapel, no
inelegant fabric, containing the curious monuments of the founder Thomas Holden
and his wife, together with the cloister, was not completely demolished till
the year 1656. Nothing now remains but a part of the gatehouse, which fronts
westward.
. Sir Thomas Pope submitted to the cardinal the statutes of his college, as
appears from a letter to the President: which, while it pays a compliment to
the cardinal's taste, likewise illustrates what has been before observed about
the state of literature at this period. "My lord cardinall's grace has had the
overseeinge of my statutes. He much lykes well that I have therein ordered the
latin tongue The classics.
to be read to my scholars. But he advyses me to order the greek to be more
taught there, than I have provided. This purpose I well like: but I fear the
times will not bear it now Vid. supr. p. 156.
. I remember when I was a young scholar at Eton, the greek tongue was growing
apace: the study of which is now alate much decaid To the president. dat.
Hatfield. 1556.
." The passages in the letters above cited likewise inform us, how far sir
Thomas Pope was connected with THIRLBY, bishop of Ely See also Append. Numb.
xix.
. He was constituted the first, and only bishop of Westminster by Henry the
eighth Burnet, Ref. Records. i. 246.
. He was, by Edward the sixth, translated to Norwich, and afterward by queen
Mary to Ely; by whom he was also appointed a privy counselor Goodwyn, ut supr.
p. 333.
, and joined in commission with sir Thomas Pope and others for the suppression
of heretics See supr. p. 52.
. By all these princes he was much esteemed for his experience in political
affairs, and frequently employed as an envoy to foreign courts. In the reign of
Elizabeth he was ejected and imprisoned for persevering in popery; but was
afterward received into the family of archbishop Parker, who, not more on
account of his former dignity, than of his learning, candor, and affability,
treated him with due respect and humanity Goodwyn, ubi supr.
. WHITE, bishop of Winchester, became the first visitor of Trinity college in
Oxford. It is reasonable to suppose, that sir Thomas Pope's real motive for
appointing the bishops of Winchester to be visitors of his college, originated
from Gardener, who was the bishop of Winchester when the foundation was
projected; and who, moreover, had been governor of a college at Cambridge; was
now chancellor of that university, a learned civilian, a scholar of the first
rank, an eminent patron of literature Gardiner's literary character has been
commonly overlooked in his political, and is rarely regarded or acknowledged.
He was admirably skilled in the Greek language, at a time when it was
cultivated in England only by a few neglected scholars. His ideas of pure
Latinity were refined to a fault; and he carried his notions of the chaste
Roman phraseology to such a nicety, as to be esteemed a Ciceronian by his
cotemporaries. Leland, the most polite classical writer in England at that
period, congratulates some of his elegant friends, on their being educated in
the college over which Gardener presided at Cambridge; and which, under such a
governor, had become the seat of eloquence and of the choir of the Muses.
Leland also characterises Gardener by the epithet DISERTUS, or the master of
genuine Latinity; and calls him the restorer of classical composition, and the
study of philology, at Cambridge. EXCOM. p. 100. edit. 1589. Leland paid these
compliments before Gardener was a bishop, and when there were no temptations to
flattery. Many of Ascham's terse Latin epistles are addressed to this prelate:
in which, his distinguished learning, his solicitude for the revival of
ancient letters, and his general patronage, are repeatedly displayed in the
highest yet unaffected terms of panegyric. In one of these, Ascham expresses
his great satisfaction, that Gardener, who excells all others in critical
discernment, had so warmly approved his TOXOPHILUS, then just published, and
written with a view to teach a just English style; and desires that the bishop,
pro eo amore quo literas et earum cultores unice amplecteris, would recommend
that book to the king. Lib. ii. p. 85. b. edit. 1581. In another, he thanks the
bishop for honoring him with so many marks of notice and attention, when he
came, an unknown and obscure academic, to court. He recommends a tutor to the
duke of Norfolk's nephew; and wishes that Gardener, who is so eminent a judge
and protector of literary merit, would ratify the choice. Ibid. p. 92. a. In a
third, lamenting the untimely death of king Edward the sixth, he petitions
Gardener among other requests, to intercede with queen Mary, for the
continuance of his pension originally granted by king Henry the eighth, as a
reward for his TOXOPHILUS: professing his confidence in the bishop's known
erudition, authority, liberality, prudence, and activity, to quiet the
distractions which not only the civil but literary state of the kingdom would
probably suffer, from that unexpected and calamitous event. Ibid. p. 154. b.
Dat. 1553. In the next, he presents the bishop, then just released from
imprisonment in the TOWER at the accession of Mary, with a Greek TRANSLATION of
the PSALMS, probably the METAPHRASE of APOLLINARIUS: enforcing the propriety of
his present by observing, that it was written in a language in which the bishop
so much delighted, and that poetry had been his chief amusement during the
tedious hours of his late confinement. Ibid. p. 157. b. See also, p. 65. a.
With the next, dated 1554, as a slender remembrance of the numerous favors he
had recently received, he sends the bishop an ancient golden Roman coin. Ibid.
p. 163. a. In three or four others, evidently written during the reign of Mary,
he complains of many unjust taxations and oppressive exactions, imposed by some
late innovators on the university of Cambridge; supplicating the assistance of
Gardener as their CHANCELLOR, and expatiating largely on his accustomed
indefatigable endeavors to support the rights and promote the honor of the
university. Ibid. p. 194. b. seq. In another letter, to one of Margaret Roper's
learned daughters, dated 1554, Ascham speaks of being called from Cambridge by
the special favor and appointment of bishop Gardener, to serve the queen in
the very liberal office of Latin secretary. Ibid. p. 162. b. In a letter to the
learned Sturmius, dated at Greenwich 1555, he declares, "I would not exchange
the Office of Latin Secretary for any situation in life. Bishop Gardener has
treated me with the greatest kindness and indulgence in this affair: and I can
hardly say, whether Lord Pagett has shown more readiness in naming me to the
queen, or the bishop in pleading my cause and recommending my character. There
are some who have endeavored to stop the course of the bishop's benevolence,
on account of my religious principles, but without effect. I therefore am
deeply indebted to his humanity, and it is a debt which I willingly owe. I am
indeed but one among many who have experienced his generosity. I have often
thought of talking to him about your noble work of the ANALYTICS. For I well
know his predilection to polite letters, and think his patronage would be of
service on this occasion, etc." Ibid. p. 45. b. seq. It appears also, that
Gardener procured from queen Mary for Ascham, a renewal of the royal pension
for his TOXOPHILUS, with the annual addition of ten pounds. IBID. ibid. p. 45.
b. And Grant's VITA, p. 21. Ascham's LATIN. EPIST. edit. Oxon 1703. By the same
interest, Ascham was suffered to keep his fellowship and public orator's place
at Cambridge, during a long absence from the university, while he was Latin
secretary and abroad in Germany. Ibid. p. 22. Nor was Ascham the only learned
protestant whom Gardener countenanced in the reign of queen Mary. Throughout
the persecutions of that unhappy period, he permitted Sir Thomas Smith, one of
the restorers of Greek, and secretary of state in the reign of Edward the
sixth, to enjoy the comforts of a studious retirement with a pension of one
hundred pounds. Strype's SMITH, p 60. seq. I forbear to enlarge on Gardiner's
high celebrity as a civilian and canonist: and shall only add on that head,
that Henry the eighth would take no step in the business of his divorce,
however eager for a decision, till Gardener could be consulted, who was absent
at Rome. I suspect he was but moderately skilled in scholastic theology.
, and bore the greatest sway in all civil and ecclesiastical affairs. But
Gardener dying while the statutes were yet under consideration, and White
succeeding to the bishopric, although not confirmed till after they were
actually delivered to the new society Gardener died in November. 1555. The
statutes of Trinity college were given May i. 1556. The bulle of pope Paul iv.
for Whyte's translation and inthronisation is dated, Pride. Non. Jul. 1556. He
was inthroned Sept. 21. 1556. Registr. WHITE, Episc. Winton. fol. 1. a. seq.

Some say, that upon Gardiner's decease it was intended cardinal Pole should
hold the sea of Winton with that of Canterbury in commendam. But this scheme
being found unpopular or impracticable, White was bound to pay Pole yearly 1000
l. out of his episcopal revenues, for the better support of the cardinal's
dignity. See Wood, Athen. Oxon. i. 132. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 387. Goodwyn
de Praesul. ut supr.


, the founder by this unexpected change of circumstances was not so far reduced
to a state of indetermination and indifference, as to wish to depart from his
appointment. Sir Thomas Pope in a letter to the president of the college, dated
May the twenty-sixth, 1558, acknowledges a very particular favor, which "my
lord of Wynchester and others the commissioners for spiritual matters," had
promised to grant him for the college. In another letter, dated the same year,
to the same, he says "my lord of Wynchester has been sick with me at
Tyttenhanger, but now returns to the corte. He has promised to give his
coat-armur for the great glas-windowe there in my hall I presume in the hall of
his house at Tyttenhanger. It was customary for guests of rank, after a long
visit, to give an escocheon of their arms in painted glass to the bow-window of
the hall. An estimate of the price of painted glass, particularly of ARMS, in
the preceding century, may be partly gathered from the following disbursement
for painting the ARMS of bishop William of Wykeham, founder of New-college
Oxford, in windows of the churches of Newton-Longueville, Whaddon, and
Great-Horwood, Bucks. "Solutum VITRIARIO de Aylsbury pro ARMIS domini
fundatoris positis in Ecclesiis de Newnton, Whaddon, et Horwoode, xiij s. iiij
d." Comp. Burss Collegii Novi Oxon. A.D. 1479. See supr. p. 16.
." In a manuscript greek psalter on vellum, in the college library, I find the
following entry in sir Thomas Pope's own hand. " Mem. that the reverend father
in god, John bushop of Wynton gave me three books. THO. POPE See Append. Numb.
XXIX.
." White, who was first schoolmaster A.D. 1534. Tanner, Bibl. 761.
, and afterward warden of Winchester college A.D. 1541. Willis, Mitr. Abb. i.
333.
, was made successively bishop of Lincoln Consecrat. April. 1. 1554. Le Neve,
Fast. p. 141.
and Winchester See supr. p. 237.
by queen Mary Goodwyn, p. 300.
. He was a man of learning and eloquence He was not an inelegant latin poet. As
a specimen of his latin poetry, he has left DIACOSIO-MARTYRION, sive ducentorum
virorum testimonia de veritate corporis, etc. Land. 4to. in aed. R. Cali. 1553.
See also his verses on the marriage of Philip and Mary, Hollinsh. Chron. iii
1120. Wood, ubi supr. mentions one book of latin epigrams, MS. Fox has
preserved many of his disputations, orations, etc. Fox and Pits, according to
custom, have both equally gratified their respective prejudices in representing
the character of this prelate. Pits says, "Erat sane vir pietate et doctrina
conspicuus. Acutus poeta, orator eloquens, Theologus solidus, concionator
nervosus." Angl. Script. Parifiis, 1619. page 763. The learned and candid
archbishop Parker styles him, "ambitiosissimus antistes." Antiq. Eccl. page
527. edit. Drake.
; but his religious prejudices of course disqualified him from retaining his
preferments after the first year of Elizabeth; who was much offended at the
panegyric which he too liberally bestowed on Mary, when he preached at her
funeral Council-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr. viz. Jan. 19. 1559. See Wood, Ath.
Oxon. i. 131. seq. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. App. 277. who has printed the sermon.
; and soon afterward commanded him to be imprisoned for making a public
appearance in his pontifical vestments Strype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 145.
. He had also incurred no small share of the queen's displeasure for his
behavior at the solemn conference held in Westminster Hall, before her
majesty, the privy council, and both houses of parliament; at which, with three
other catholic bishops, he was appointed to dispute against a select number of
the reformed party See Strype, ibid. chapter 5.
. He was a benefactor to both Wykeham's colleges To New College, Oxon. he gave
the manor of Hall-place in Hampshire. Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 131.
To Winchester college he gave his mitre and crosier, a silver goblet gilt, a
basin and ewer of silver, a rich carpet, with other valuable presents. E
Registr. Benef. coll. Winton. In the warden's lodgings at Winchester, there was
lately a bedchamber, with a curious old pannelled cieling; having in each
compartment a cipher of the initials of Whyte's name, and of king Henry viii.
It was put up by him in that reign. His epitaph, written by himself, remains on
a large brass plate, under which he intended to de buried, in the antechapel of
the college. But dying 11. Jan. 1559, he was interred in his cathedral.
in which he had the happiness to be educated. Of sir Thomas Pope's intimacy
with sir THOMAS WHITE, the founder of saint John's college in Oxford, I have
before mentioned proofs See supr. p. 124.
. And to these evidences we may add, that their interests and attachments
tended the same way: for we find sir Thomas White affording signal services to
queen Mary against the rebel Wyat and his followers, while lord mayor of London
Hollinshed, Chron. iii. 1096.
; in consequence of which, he was knighted by the queen MSS. Rawlins. Bibl.
Bodl.
. But a similitude of undertakings for the propagation of letters might
otherwise have naturally produced a friendship between sir Thomas White and sir
Thomas Pope; as they were both, at the same time, employed in the same acts of
public and literary beneficence. Lord WILLIAMS of THEM generously concurred
with sir Thomas Pope in treating the princess Elizabeth, amidst her unmerited
and oppressive persecutions, with proper regard See supr. p. 71.
. He is mentioned in a letter of sir Thomas Pope to the president of Trinity
college It is without date. Lord Williams is mentioned in another of his
letters concerning a purchase.
: "I would be glad to learn whether my lord Williams and Mr. Ashfeld Probably
sir Edmund Ashfield of Tame co. Oxon.
, gave the ii Buckes to my college at the [act] commensement." Lord Williams
having enjoyed many eminent favors from Henry the eighth, and Edward the sixth,
was by queen Mary created a baron in reward for his faithful services at her
accession. He continued to receive fresh honors from queen Elizabeth, and was
appointed president of the council in the principality of Wales Dugd. Bar. ii.
393.
. Bishop Ridley, when bound to the stake, requested lord Williams then present,
to solicit queen Mary, that the episcopal leases which he had granted, while
bishop of London, to many poor tenants, might remain and be confirmed. This was
the sole anxiety that disquieted the composure of the dying martyr. But lord
Williams promised to recommend this petition to the utmost of his power, and it
was accordingly performed Fuller's Worthies, p. 109. Fox, Martyrolog.
.

It is natural to suppose, that sir Thomas Pope was nearly connected with
several other persons of eminence and distinction in the courts of Henry the
eighth and queen Mary. That he was in high confidence and esteem with the
latter, may, beside many other arguments, be concluded from a passage in the
statutes of his college: by which it appears, that he expected her majesty, who
professed herself so zealous a patroness to the university, together with king
Philip, would honor the college with a royal visit Statut. coll. Trin. Oxon.
"Nisi quando forsan Angliae Reges et Reginae, eorumve primogeniti, Collegium
invisere dignabuntur: quos sic quidem advenientes, cum omni honor et obsequio
excipiendos praecipio et statuo." cap. xxvi.
.

But among his friends I must not forget to mention THOMAS SLYTHURSTE See more
of him in Append. Numb. XXV.
, whom he appointed the first President of his college; and had before probably
preferred, by his interest with the queen, to a canonry of Windsor. He seems to
have conceived a high opinion of Slythurste's learning and prudence; whom, from
the trust committed to his charge, we reasonably may imagine to have been a
person of distinguished worth and abilities. In a general Address to the new
society, annexed to the statutes of the college, he particularly compliments
the president for his remarkable moderation of temper, his eminent learning,
experience, prudence, and probity; observing moreover, in justification of his
choice, that he should have acted in vain, if he had not added to the benefit
of his foundation such a governor, so properly qualified in every requisite
accomplishment; one completely fitted for the difficult and critical task of
conducting the first beginnings of a recent institution, and to whom therefore,
borrowing the character of a father in that of a founder, he with pleasure
entrusted the education of his children. On various occasions, sir Thomas Pope
appears to have placed the greatest confidence in his friendship, advice, and
judgment. Many of the founder's letters to Slythurste contain free
consultations about adjusting the endowment, amending the statutes In the first
copy of the statutes, dated 1556, signed by the founder, are several erasures
and interlineations in the hand of Slythurste, made by the consent and
authority of the founder: and the text of this copy thus corrected, is that
which is now in use. Many of these alterations appear to have been made in this
book, between them both at Tyttenhanger, or Clerkenwell, as I collect from a
letter from the founder to the vice president, dat. 28. Jan. 1557, in which he
says, that he shall send by the president, an altered and improved copy of his
statutes, which he had ordered to be forthwith engrossed in parchment. In
another letter to the president, dat. 25. Feb. 1557, the founder tells him, "I
trust ye will not forget to make an INDEX CAPITULORUM STATUTORUM, which we
forgott when we were together." In this copy, corrected by Slythurste's hand,
London, the place from which they were originally dated, is struck out for
TYTTENHANGER. The altered and improved copy, mentioned above, engrossed on
parchment, and signed with his own hand throughout, with the ADDITAMENT
annexed, appears to have been delivered to the society, but with the original
date of 1556 preserved, in, or soon after, April, 1558. See his letter, Append.
Numb. XXV. Under JOHN PERTE.
, and regulating other articles of his young society; and sometimes relate to
the domestic concerns of his own family. I find him frequently visiting the
founder at Clerkenwell and Tyttenhanger. The sudden revolution, however, of
religion, at the accession of queen Elizabeth, prevents us from knowing much
more of his chaaracter and behavior in this situation: for in September, 1559,
he was ejected from his headship by the Queen's visitors, and committed a
prisoner to the Tower of London; where he died of grief, 1560, partly for the
death of his honored friend and munificent patron the founder, and partly for
the loss of his preferments.

SECT. VIII.
AN anecdote equally ridiculous and scandalous, has been propagated by Antony
Wood, highly injurious to the honor of sir THOMAS POPE; which, notwithstanding
it appears at first sight strongly to confute itself, I shall here examine and
disprove Although possessed of the proper information and evidence, I had long
ago, and for many reasons resolved, never to enter into a particular discussion
of this idle calumny. But as, since the appearance of my first edition of this
work, it has been circulated both in conversation, and by more biographers than
one, as a pleasant ancedote, I could no longer forbear using the means in my
power of exposing its falsity and futility.
It originated from Henry Cuffe, the famous secretary of the unfortunate earl
of Essex, who was executed, soon after his master, in 1601.

Cuffe, being a boy of the most promising abilities and uncommon proficiency in
literature, was sent at fifteen years of age, by Lady Elizabeth Powlett, often
mentioned above, from Hinton saint George in Somersetshire, to Trinity college
in Oxford, where he was elected scholar on the twentyfifth of May, 1578
REGISTR. PRIM. fol. 37. b.
. Within five years he was admitted fellow, May 30, 1583 Ibid. fol. 42.
. But even in this situation, the same discontented and arrogant spirit, which
afterward hurried him to an ignominious end, could not be suppressed. Soon
after his admission, when he was now not more than twenty years of age, and in
the year of his probation, he endeavored to defame his founder by a false
insinuation, which savored alike of petulance and ingratitude; and which, had
it been true, deserved animadversion. The matter being reported to Lady Powlett
the foundress, she transmitted a mandate to the college, ordering him to be
instantly removed from his fellowship. This we learn from the words of the
college register. " Resignante CUFFO, et locum Litteris Fundatricis dante Ibid.
fol. 42. b.
." The cause of his amotion is twice mentioned by the Oxford antiquary. In the
ATHENAE he says, that Cuffe "was forced to resign his fellowship of Trinity
college, for speaking certain matters though true, which redounded to the great
discredit of the FOUNDER ATHEN. OXON. vol. i. col. 307. edit. 2.
." In another place, however, he tells the whole story without reserve, and
produces his authority. "Doctor Bathurst told me that our Cuffe was of Trinity
college, and expelled from thence upon this account: the founder, sir Thomas
Pope, would, whersoever he he went visiting his friend, steal one thing or
other he could lay his hands on, put it in his pocket, or under his gown. This
was supposed rather an humor than of dishonesty. Now Cuffe, upon a time, with
his fellows being merry, said, a pox this is a poor beggarly college indeed,
the plate that our founder stole would build such another, which coming to the
President's ears, he was thereupon ejected See Hearne's LIB. NIG. SCAC. p. 593.
." The reader must have already noticed the glaring inconsistency of these two
curious narratives. In the first, sir Thomas Pope, is by implication at least,
represented as a thief: in the next, his dishonesty is softened into humor and
jocularity. That the whole is a misrepresentation, and a jumble of
circumstances, appears from an original paper in the handwriting of Doctor
Bathurst. "Secretary Cuffe was expelled from a fellowship of Trinity college,
on this account. Our founder, when upon a visit, would often carry away a
silver cup under his gown for the joke-sake, sending it back the next day to
laugh at his friend. Cuffe being merry at ANOTHER COLLEGE with some of his boon
companions, said, A pox this is a beggarlie college indeed, the plate that our
founder stole would build another as good. These words being told to the
President, he was ejected. This I have often heard from my predecessor doctor
president Kettell who was contemporarie with Cuffe BATHURST PAPERS, MSS. In the
possession of the late Mr. Pain, canon of Wells.
." In the margin, Bathurst has recorded the name of the other college, which
Cuffe was pleased to treat in such terms of contempt, and which needs not here
to be mentioned. Indeed, it was no part of the accusation against Cuffe, that,
as Wood's context insinuates, his pleasantry led him to depreciate the
buildings of his founder: but that he wantonly converted one of his practical
jokes, a species of humor not uncommon among our festive ancestors, into a
petty larceny. On the whole, we now perceive that Wood has inaccurately related
this story from a casual conversation with Bathurst, which he remembered as
imperfectly. As to Cuffe, I know not whether he still continued at Oxford after
this ejection. But having great address, and much real merit, about three years
afterward, that is in the year 1586, he was chosen fellow of Merton college.
Being an admirable Grecian, he was about the same time made professor of Greek
in the university. It was in this department, that he assisted Columbanius in
the first edition of Longus's elegant PASTORAL ROMANCE, which was printed at
Florence in 1598 COLL. MSS. T. Hearne, vol. xiii. p. 236. Columbanius says in
the Dedication, p. ii. "Qua in re operam mihi suam, non ingratam iliam quidem,
navarunt viri omnium literatissimi atque officiosissimi Herricus CUFFUS Anglus,
etc."
. He was no less eminent as a logician and a disputant. His intimate friend
Camden, to whose BRITANNIA, at its first appearance, he prefixed an excellent
Greek epigram, characterizes Cuffe, as a man of exquisite learning and genius,
but of a factious and perverse temper Camd. ELIZ. p. 869. edit. Hearn.
. Notwithstanding the severe check he received at Trinity college, he
generously presented to the library there several volumes. Perhaps some readers
will be candid enough to think, that his expulsion from this society was rather
owing to an unguarded vivacity of disposition, than to any malignity of mind.
Our historians say, that the earl of Essex, who began, after a tedious
confinement, to feel the dangers of his situation, dismissed Cuffe from his
service and family, for turbulence and insolence Camden, ubi supr. p. 827. 833.
. Essex was unfortunate in not having before perceived these qualities, in a
man who shared so much of his confidence.

SECT. IX.
FROM a recapitulation of what has been said, the following character of sir
THOMAS POPE arises. He appears to have been a man eminently qualified for
business; and although not employed in the very principal departments of state,
he possessed peculiar talents and address for the management and execution of
public affairs. His natural abilities were strong, his knowledge of the world
deep and extensive, his judgment solid and discerning. His circumspection and
prudence in the conduct of negociations entrusted to his charge, were equalled
by his fidelity and perseverance. He is a conspicuous instance of one, not bred
to the church, who without the advantages of birth and patrimony, by the force
of understanding and industry, raised himself to opulence and honorable
employments. He lived in an age when the peculiar circumstances of the times
afforded obvious temptations to the most abject desertion of principle: and few
periods of our history can be found, which exhibit more numerous examples of
occasional compliance with frequent changes. Yet he remained unbiassed and
uncorrupted amid the general depravity. Under Henry the eighth, when on the
dissolution of the monasteries, he was enabled by the opportunities of his
situation to enrich himself with their revenues by fraudulent or oppressive
practices, he behaved with disinterested integrity; nor does a single instance
occur upon record which impeaches his honor. In the succeeding reign of Edward
the sixth, a sudden check was given to his career of popularity and prosperity:
he retained his original attachment to the catholic religion; and on that
account, lost those marks of favor or distinction which were so liberally
dispensed to the sycophants of Somerset, and which he might have easily secured
by a temporary submission to the reigning system. At the accession of Mary, he
was restored to favor; yet he was never instrumental or active in the tyrannies
of that queen which disgrace our annals. He was armed with discretionary powers
for the suppression of heretical innovations; yet he forbore to gratify the
arbitrary demands of his bigoted mistress to their utmost extent, nor would he
participate in forwarding the barbarities of her bloody persecutions. In the
guardianship of the princess Elizabeth, the unhappy victim of united
superstition, jealousy, revenge and cruelty, his humanity prevailed over his
interest; and he less regarded the displeasure of the vigilant and unforgiving
queen, than the claims of injured innocence. If it be his crime to have
accumulated riches, let it be remembered, that he consecrated a part of those
riches, not amid the terrors of a deathbed, nor in the dreams of old age, but
in the prime of life, and the vigor of understanding, to the public service of
his country; that he gave them to future generations, for the perpetual support
of literature and religion.

FINIS.
APPENDIX. CONTAINING Original EVIDENCES and PAPERS. NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.

CONTENTS OF THE APPENDIX.
NUMB. I. THE last will of William Pope of Dedington, father of sir Thomas
Pope. Dat. 1523. NUMB. *II*. An Inquisitio post Mortem, etc. NUMB. II. Grant of
arms to Thomas Pope of Dedington. Dat. 1535. NUMB. III. Grant to Thomas Pope,
from Henry viii. of warden of the mint, etc. in the Tower. Dat. 1535. NUMB. IV.
Grant from Henry viii. to Thomas Pope, for exercising, with W. Smyth, the
office of clerk of the Crown. Dat. 1536. NUMB. V. Grant to Thomas Pope, and
John Lucas, from Henry viii. of clerk of the Crown. Dat. 1538. NUMB. VI. The
charter of Mabill, abbess of Godstowe, "made to God and our lady, and to saint
Cuthberte, and to the priour and convente of Dureham, from a certain diche
thurte over in Bewmonte," circ. 1286. NUMB. VII. Grant from Henry viii. of
Bernard college, with half the grove of Durham college, to the dean and chapter
of Christ Church, Oxford. Dat. 1548. NUMB. *VII*. Part of the Charter of
foundation of the Dean and Chapter of Durham cathedral, 1541. NUMB. VIII. Grant
of Durham college in Oxford, to G. Owen and W. Martyn, from Edward vi. Dat.
1553. NUMB. IX. Purchase of Durham college aforesaid, by sir Thomas Pope, of G.
Owen and W. Martyn. Dat. 1554. NUMB. X. Preamble of Letters Patent from Philip
and Mary, for founding Trinity college at Oxford. Dat. 1554. NUMB. XI. Part of
the charter of establishment of the said college, in consequence of the
foregoing letters patent. Dat. 1555. NUMB. XII. Letter of attorney from Thomas
Slythurste, for taking possession of a certain message in Oxford, called
Trinity college. Dat. 1555. NUMB. XIII. Admission of the first president,
fellows, and scholars, of the said college, May xxx. 1556. NUMB. XIV.
Conditions relating to the foundation of a free grammar school at Dedington,
co. Oxon. by sir Thomas Pope. Dat. 1555. NUMB. XV. Account of a petition
referred to the princess Elizabeth at Hatfield, by sir Thomas Pope, 1556. NUMB.
XVI. An indenture, made May v. 1555, "witnessing that the president, fellows,
and scholars of Trinity college, Oxford, have received, of their Founder, such
parcells of church playte and ornaments of the church as hereafter followethe."
NUMB. XVII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus missis per Dominum fundatorem
tam ad ornatum sacelli quam aulae. Dat. 1557. NUMB. XVIII. Indentura de
ornamentis et jocalibus missis per Dominum fundatorem ad collegium tertia vice.
Dat. 1557. NUMB. XIX. Bishop Horne's letter to the said college, concerning the
removal of superstitious ornaments from the chapel. Dat. 1570. NUMB. XX. Letter
from Q. Elizabeth's commissioners, relating to the business of the
last-mentioned letter. Dat. 1570. NUMB. XXI. Compositio collegiorum, coll.
Magd. et coll. Trin. Oxon. Dat. 1559. NUMB. XXII. Articles relating to certain
buildings and utensils of Wroxton Priory, co. Oxon. Dat. 1537. NUMB. XXIII.
Rate of the purchase of the rectory of Garsington, co. Oxon. by sir Thomas
Pope, from Philip and Mary, under certain considerations. Dat. 1557. An
extract. NUMB. XXIV. An instrument concerning the recession of Trinity college
from the university, to Garsington aforesaid, in time of the plague, 1577.
NUMB. XXV. Account of the first president, fellows, and scholars of Trinity
college, Oxford, NOMINATED by sir Thomas Pope, and admitted May xxx. 1556. And
of such Others as were afterward NOMINATED by the same authority. NUMB. XXVI.
Account of the marriages and descendants of John Pope, esquire, of Wroxton.
NUMB. XXVII. Pedigree of the family of POPE. NUMB. XXVIII. Account of sir
Thomas Pope's burial, 1559, from a Manuscript in the Cotton library, Brit. Mus.
NUMB. XXIX. Visit of the founder to Trinity college, Oxon. 1556. NUMB. XXX. Dr.
Ralph Kettel's testimonial of dame Elizabeth Paulet.
NUMB. I. The last Will of William Pope of Dedington, father of sir Thomas
Pope, Dat. 1523 Mus. Ashmol. MSS. D. 15. 4to. page 31. b. Inter Codd. A. Wood,
Manu. Rad. Sheldon. Et Registr. Bodefelde, Cur. Praerog. qu. vii..
.
IN the name of our Lord, Amen. The second day of February in the year of
our lord one thousand five hundredth and twenty. I WILLIAM POPE, hole of
mind, make my will in this manner. First, I bequeathe my soul to allmighty god
to his blissed mother Mary: and my body to be buried in the parish church of
Dadington. To the mother church of Lincoln iij s. iiij d. My land, my wiffe
to have the one halffe of the rent, and the rest to be kept to the use of my
son till he be of lawful age. Item, I bequeathe to THOMAS POPE an hundredth
more; and to every daughter forty pownde: and if enie of them dye, their
part to remain to other. And to have a priest synginge one year. And my
wyffe and my son to occupy my holdinges, the which I hold now, as long as
she is widow, and after, THOMAS POPE to have the occupying and thuse of them.
And the residew of my goods I gyve and bequeathe to THOMAS POPE my son,
Margarett my wyffe, Roberte Edmondes, and Richard Swifte, mine executours, to
dispose for the welthe of my soul; and master William Farmer to be overseer
to the performaunce of my will. Item, I bequeathe to the torchis, the bellis,
our lady beam, saint Thomas beam, to everyche one of them, iij s. iiij d.
Item, to Clifton chapel, vj s. viiij d. Item, to every godchilde a schepe.

Praesentib. temp. lecturae supradicti Testam. Willielmo Farmer, vicario de
Dadington. Joanne Smith, et Thoma Anne.
Proved before the Commissaries of Cardinal Wolsey, and William Wareham,
archbishop of Canterbury, in the cathedral church of saint Paul, London, May
11, 1523.
NUMB. *II*. An INQUISITIO POST MORTEM relating to the estate of William Pope,
father of sir THOMAS EX INQUISIT. POST MORTEM in Anglia, Temp. Hen. viii. MSS.
Rawlins. Number. 1386. Bibl. Bodl. fol.
.
POPE. Terrae et possessiones Will. Pope in Com. Oxon. Duo messuagia, sex
virgatae terrae, december acrae prati, viginti acrae pasturae, et tres acrae bosci
cum pertin. in Whithill, tent. de dom. rege, ut de hundredo suo de Wotton, pro
redditu xij d. per annum, et secta ad curiam hundredi praedicti. Et valent per
ann. in omnibus exitibus, ultra reprisas, lx s. Prout per quandam Inquisitionem
inde compertam apud Oxon, xvo die Septembr. anno dicti domini regis xvo, coram
Roberto Woodcock armigero, escheatore ibidem, (virtute brevis ejusdem regis de
diem clausit extremum, eidem escheatori post mortem Willielmi Pope directi: qui
obiit xvio die Marcii, anno dicti dom. regis xiiiio: cujus filius et haeres
propinquior est Thomas Pope, aetatis xvi annorum et amplius,) before
continetur. Dicta Messuagia, quatuor virgatae terrae, december acrae prati,
viginti acrae pasturae, et tres acrae bosci, cum pertin. in Hokenorton,
tenentur de Carolo duce Suffolciae, ut de manerio suo de Hokenorton, per quae
servicia ignoratur. Et valent in omnibus exitibus ultra reprisas, ut per dictam
Inquisitionem, lx s. De quibus quidem praemissis, quidam Rogerus Lupton et alii
fuerunt seisiti sicut de feodo, ad usum Willielmi Pope et haeredum, sicut in
dicta Inquisitione before patet See supr. p. 5. 265.
.

SUMMA totalis valoris terrarum et possessionum nuper Willielmi Pope in
Comitatu praedicto, vi. l. NUMB. II. Grant of Arms to Thomas Pope, esquire,
dat. Jun. 26. 1535 Ex Orig. penes Honoratiss. Francisc. Com. de Guidford.
.
TO all present and to come, thies present letters receyving or heyring. I
Christofore Berker, esquier, alias gartier chief and principal king of arms
of Englishmen, send due humble recommendation and greeting. Equite willith, and
reason ordainith, that men virtuose and of commendable disposicion and lyvyng,
be by their merits renoumed and had in perpetual memory, for their good name
and fame. And not all oonly they in their parsons in this mortal life so bryef
and transitory; but also, after them, Those that of their bodies shall come,
discende, and procreate, to be in all placys of honnour and worship, with
other, renoumed and ennobled by showing certain ensigns and demonstracions of
honnour and nobles: That is to wit, the Blason of Arms Helm and Crest, with
their appertenaunces: to the intent, that by their ensample other shall the
more enforce them perseverantly to use their time in deeds of honnour and
worship, and other virtuouse works, to obteyn and get the renoume of ancient
nobleness in their ligne and posterite. And therefore, I the said gartier
principal king of arms, which not all-only by common renoume, but also by the
report and witness of sundry noble gentilmen of name and of arms, with other
credable and noble parsons, am verily informed and advertysed: That THOMAS
POPE, of Dodyngton in the county of Oxenford, esquire, has long continued in
Virtue, so that he has deserved, and is well worthy, he and his posterity to
be in all places of honnour and worship renoumed, compted, nombred, admitted,
accepted and receyved, into the nombre, and of the company, of other ancient
gentilman; And for the remembrance and consideracion of the same his Virtue,
Gentilness, and Ability; By authorite and power unto mine office annexed and
attributed, have devised, ordained, and assigned, unto and for the said THOMAS
POPE, and his Posterity, the Arms, Helm, and Creste, in manner and form
following. THAT IS TO SAY, Party per pale, gold and asure, a chiveron thereon 4
flourdeluces, between 3 griffons heddes rasyd counterchangyd on the field.
Upon his Crest, 2 dragons heddes indorsant, rasyd, a crownette abowte their
necks langued counterchaunged, set on a wreathe gold and vert, the mantlets
gueules doubled silver botoned gold,....... TO HAVE and to hold, unto the said
THOMAS POPE, and to his Posterity, with their due difference to to be revested
to their honor for evermore. In witness whereof, I the said gartier principal
king of arms, have signed these presents with mine own hand, and set
thereto the seall of mine Office, with the seall of mine Arms. GIVEN at London
the 26th day of June, in the year of our lord god 1535, and of reighn of our
sovereign lord king Henry the eighth, by the grace of God king of England and
of France, defensor of the feith, lord of Irelande, and in earth under Christ
the supreme head of the church of England, the 27th year In lord Guildford's
Pedigree of POPE, which is on parchment beginning with "Thomas Pope Com. Cant.
Armiger," before or about the reign of Edward the third, and continued below
sir Thomas Pope, a different coat of arms, curiosly depicted, is affixed to
each person throughout; without any insertion at the proper place, or
continuance afterward, of the new coat granted in this instrument. However it
is evident that the family had no real title to that ancient coat, otherwise
sir Thomas Pope would never have procured a new grant of arms: and it appears
from tombs and painted glass at Wroxton, that the family after him constantly
used this new coat granted by Barker, xxvii. Hen. viii.

Christopher Barker who grants this patent, was famous in his office. Carte
says, that he proclaimed Q. Mary in Cheapside, 1553. But this is a mistake; for
he died Jan. 2. -- iii Ed. vi. Anstis, ORD. GART. ii. 378. Compare Carte, HIST.
iii. 285.


.

NUMB. III. Grant from Henry the eighth to Thomas Pope, gent. of Warden of the
Mint, etc. in the Tower, Nov. 13. 1535 Sec. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. An. Reg.
26to. Ex Orig. in Capella Rotulorum.
.
Pro Th. Pope, De Concessione.
REX
omnibus ad quos, etc. SALUTEM.
Cum Henricus nuper rex Angliae septimus, pater noster carissimus, de gratia
sua speciali, per Literas suas patentes gerentes datum vicesimo quinto die
Septembris, anno regni sui primo, dederit et concesserit dilecto sibi Willielmo
Stafford In the British Museum may be seen, "Particule Compoti Willelmi
Stafford Armigeri, Custodis Cambii et Monete infra Turrim London. viz. de Auro
et Argento ibidem operatis, fabricatis, et monetatis, a festo S. Michaelis
Archangeli, Anno 14 RR. Henrici vii. usque festum S. Michaelis Archangeli, Anno
16to." MSS. Harl. 698. 29. p. 76. See also. -- 30. page 62.
tam officium Custodis Cambii et Monete infra Turrim suam London, quam
Custodiam Cunagiorum auri et argenti infra Turrim predictam et alibi infra
regnum suum Anglie; habend. et occupand. Officium et Custodiam illam per se vel
per suum sufficientem deputatum, aut suos sufficientes deputatos, a vicesimo
secundo die Augusti tunc ultimo preterito, ad terminum vite ipsius Willielmi;
percipiendo in et pro dictis Officio et Custodia vadia, ultimo Edwardi tercii,
et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum Anglie, annis, eisdem Officio et Custody
debita et consueta, de exitibus et proficuis Cambii et Monete, et Cunagiorum,
predictorum, provenientia, per manus suas proprias, una cum omnibus feodis,
proficuis, regardis, commoditatibus, domibus, mansionibus, jurisdictionibus,
libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis, eisdem Officio et Custody, seu eorum
alteri, qualitercunque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et
forma prout aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium et Custodiam praedicta,
tempore prefati dni Edwardi tercii, aut aliquo alio tempore, melius tenuit et
occupavit, tenuerunt et occupaverunt, ac in eisdem percepit et perceperunt,
prout in eisdem literis patentibus before apparet. CUMQUE eciam Nos, per alias
literas nostras patentes gerentes datum duodecimo die Augusti, anno regni
nostri septimo, de gracia nostra speciali, dederimus et concesserimus dilecto
Servienti nostro Johanni Copynger But I find an absolute grant of this office
made to him three years before, Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 4. April. vi.
I find also the following grants made to the said John Copynger within the
fifteen first years of Henry viii. viz. -- Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 1
April. x. He, with James Worsley, has from the king, certain tenements within
the parish of saint Austin, in London, ad placitum. -- Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii.
an. reg. 3. November. xiii. He has the office Ballivi Dominii de Grays-thurk, co.
Essex, ad vitam. -- Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 6. Octobr. xix. He has
the office Clerici Exituum Curiae de Banco, cum vadio, x l. -- Priv. Sigill.
Hen. viii. an. reg. 6. November. xxvii. He has the office Custodis Parci de
Ockley co. Gloucestr. -- Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 8. Maii. xx. He has
the office of keeper of the king's wardrobe within the castle of Nottingham, ad
vitam. He being then " Pagetius Garderobe nostre." -- Bill. Signat. Hen. viii.
an. reg. 8. Febr. xii. He being de Hospitio nostro, has a special pardon. --
Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 9. Octobr. xvii. He has a special pardon. --
Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 10. Jul. xvi. He has the office of keeper of
the king's wood de Chestenwoode co. Cant. cum. vadio ii d. per diem ad vitam.
-- Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 15. Decembr. 12. The king grants to John
Copynger Grometto robarum suarum, custodiam placeae vocat. Bridewell cum
Pertin. juxta Civit. London. cum vad. iv d. per diem ad vitam, from the
revenues of the duchy of Cornwall. -- Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 7.
Febr. viii. Thomas Ryder, and John Copynger, have grant of a corrody within the
monastery of Milton in Dorsetshire.

What was the stipend of the Gardianus Monetae in Turri, does not appear. But
John Brown has an annuity of xviij l. vj s. viij d. in consideration of
resigning this office. Priv. Sigill. xxiv. Maii, an. 36. Hen. vii.


generoso, ac pagetto officii nostre garderobe robarum, tam Officium predictum
Custody Cambii et Monete infra turrim nostram London, quam Custodiam
cunagiorum auri et argenti infra Turrim predictam et alibi infra regnum nostrum
Anglie predictum, habend et occupand. Officium et Custodiam illam, per se vel
per suum sufficientem deputatum, aut per suos sufficientes deputatos,
quandocumque primo et proxime idem officium, seu custodia, per mortem predicti
Willielmi, aut per sursum reddicionem predictarum literarum patencium, seu
quocumque alio modo, vacare contigisset, pro termino vite ipsius Johannis;
percipiendo annuatim, in et pro dictis Officio et Custodia, vadia, ultimo
Edwardi tercii, et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum Angliae, annis, eisdem
Officio et Custody debita et consueta, de exitibus et proficuis Cambii et
Monete ac cunagii predictorum provenientia, per manus suas proprias, una cum
omnibus feodis, proficuis, regardis, commoditatibus, domibus, mansionibus,
jurisdictionibus, libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis eidem Officio et Custody,
et eorum alteri, qualitercumque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, in tam amplis
modo et forma prout aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium et Custodium
predicta, tempore prefati dni Edwardi tercii, aut aliquo alio tempore, melius
tenuerit et occupaverit, tenuerint et occupaverint, ae in eisdem percepit et
perceperint, prout in eisdem literis nostris patentibus before apparet. AC JAM
intelleximus, quod prefatus Gulielmus Stafford mortuus est; cujus pretextu
prefatus Johannes Copynger officium predictum, virtute literarum nostrarum
predictarum, adhuc exercuit et occupavit, et ad presens exercet et occupat: Ac
modo prefatus Johannes Copynger in voluntate existit literas predictas, sibi in
forma predicta factas, nobis restituere in cancellariam nostram, ibidem
cancellandas; ea intencione quod nos alias literas nostras patentes de officio
predicto ac ceteris premissis, Dilecto nobis THOME POPE, Generoso, pro termino
vite ipsius THOME, concedere dignaremur. Nos premissa considerantes, pro eo
quod litere patentes, dicto Johanni, ut premittitur, fact, ad presens
cancellate existunt, de gracia nostra speciali, necnon in consideracione very
et fidelis servicii, nobis per predictum THOMAM antehac impensi, et imposterum
impendendi, dedimus et concessimus, ac per presents damus et concedimus, eidem
THOME, tam predictum officium Custody Cambii et Monete infra Turrim nostram
London, quam predictam Custodiam Cunagiorum auri et argenti infra Turrim
predictam, et alibi infra regnum nostrum Anglie: Habend. et occupand. Officium
et Custodiam illam per se, vel per sufficientem deputatum suum aut per suos
deputatos sufficientes, a festo sancti Michaelis ultimo preterito ad terminum
vite ipsius THOME: Percipiendo, in et pro dicto Officio et Custodia, vadia
ultimo Edwardi tercii et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum Anglie, annis,
eisdem Officio et Custody debita et consueta de exitibus et proficuis Cambii
et Monete, ac Cunagiorum predictorum, provenientia, per manus suas proprias,
una cum omnibus feodis, proficuis, regardis, commoditatibus, domibus,
mansionibus, jurisdictionibus, libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis, eisdem
Officio et Custody, seu earum alteri, qualitercumque pertinentibus sive
spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et forma prout aliquis alius, sive aliqui
alii, Officium et Custodiam predicta, tempore prefati Edwardi tercii, aut
aliquo alio tempore, melius tenuit et occupavit, tenuerunt et occupaverunt, ac
in eisdem percepit et perceperunt. Eo quod expressa mencio, etc. IN CUJUS, etc.
T. R. apud Westmon. xiii. die Novembr.

P. ipsum Regem et de dat. predict. etc.
Concordat cum Orig. in Capella Rotul. HEN. ROOKE, Cler. Rotul. (1764.)

NUMB. IV. Grant from Henry the eighth to Thomas Pope and William Smyth Another
patent is herein recited, by which the said king granted to THOMAS POPE the
office of clerk of the briefs in the star chamber. an. reg. 24. Octobr. v. viz.
A.D. 1533.
, for their joint exercise of the office of Clerk of the briefs in the
star chamber. December. 23. 1536 Prim. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. Anno Reg. 26.
Ex Orig. in Capell. Rot.
.
De Concess. pro Thoma Pope, et Will. Smyth.
REX
omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem.
CUM nos per literas nostras patentes, quarum dat. est quinto die Octobris,
anno regni nostri vicesimo quarto, inter alia fecerimus, constituerimus, et
ordinaverimus, dilectum nobis THOMAM POPE, clericum omnium singulorum brevium
et processuum nostrorum, coram nobis et concilio nostro in camera nostra
Stellata apud Westmonasterium, tam ad sectam nostram, quam ad sectam alicujus
ligeorum nostrorum, et aliorum quorumcunque, faciendorum et retornandorum; viz.
quod idem THOMAS extunc de tempore in tempus, durante vita sua, per se vel per
sufficientem deputatum suum sive sufficientes deputatos suos, omnia et singula
brevia de subpena, attachiamenta, commissiones, tam ad examinandos testes, quam
ad recipiendas responsiones; nec non ad quascumque materias finaliter
determinandas, quam alias commissiones quascumque, injunctiones, brevia de
executione judicii, et alios processus quoscumque, cujuscumque nominis generis
seu nature forent, coram nobis et consilio nostro apud Westmon. retornatos, seu
quoquo modo ibidem per decretum consilii nostri predicti qualitercunque
emanantes, seu per dicti consilii nostri decretum ibidem faciendos, Scriberet,
faceret, et componeret, et cujuslibet [cuilibet] hujusmodi brevium et
processuum nomen suum apponeret seu apponi faceret; ita quod nullus clericus
cancellarie nostre predicte, neque aliquis alius in scribendo seu faciendo
hujusmodi brevia seu processus, seu aliqua eorumdem, quoquomodo se
intromitteret, seu intromitterent, sine licentia ipsius THOME POPE. Habend.
occupand. gaudend. et exercend. officium predictum prefato THOME POPE, per se,
vel sufficientem deputatum suum, sive deputatos suos sufficientes, durante vita
sua, cum vadiis et feodis Edmund Martyn and Thomas Powle were appointed to this
office, with an annual fee of xx l. Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 38.
, pro hujusmodi brevibus et processibus faciendis, ab antiquo debitis et
consuetis absque aliquo compoto, seu aliquo alio, proinde nobis vel heredibus
nostris reddendo, solvendo, seu faciendo, prout in eisdem literis nostris
predictis inter alia before continetur. ET QUIA prefatus THOMAS in voluntate
existit, literas nostras predictas, sibi in forma predicta factas, quoad dictum
Officium clerici omnium et singulorum brevium et processuum nostrorum, coram
nobis et consilio nostro in camera nostra Stellata apud Westmon. faciendorum et
retornandorum, nobis in cancellariam nostram restituere ibidem cancellandas; ea
intencione, quod nos alias literas nostras patentes prefato THOME POPE, ac
cuidam Willielmo Smyth, de dicto Officio clerici processuum nostrorum
predictorum in forma sequenti concedere dignaremur: Nos, pro eo quod litere
nostre predicte quoad dictum Officium clerici processuum nostrorum predict.
prefato THOME POPE fact, ad presens cancellate existunt, de gratia nostra
speciali ac ex certa sciencia et mero motu nostris, fecimus, constituimus,
ordinavimus ipsos THOMAM POPE et Willielmum Smyth et eorum alterum diutius
viventem, clericos omnium et singulorum brevium et processuum nostrorum coram
nobis et concilio nostro in Camera nostra Stellata apud Westmon. tam ad sectam
nostram quam sectam alicujus ligeorum nostrorum et aliorum quorumcunque
faciendorum et retornandorum: viz. quod idem THOMAS POPE et Williemus Smyth, et
eorum diutius vivens, ex nunc de tempore in tempus durante vita sua per se vel
per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive sufficientes deputatos suos, omnia et
singula, brevia de subpena, attachiamenta, commissiones, tam ad examinandos
testes ad recipiend. responsiones, necnon ad quascunque materias finaliter
determinandas, quam alias commissiones quascunque cujuscumque nominis, generis,
seu nature, fuerint, coram nobis et consilio nostro apud Westmon. retornat. seu
quoquomodo ibidem per decretum consilii nostri predicti faciend. vel e dicto
consilio nostro extra predictam cameram Stellatam per decretum consilii nostri
predicti qualitercumque emanantes, seu per dicti consilii nostri decretum
ibidem faciendas, scribant, faciant, et componant, et cujuslibet [cuilibet]
hujusmodi brevium, et processuum nomina sua propria, vel nomen eorum alterius
apponant seu apponat, vel faciat; ita quod nullus clericus cancellarie nostre
predicte, neque aliquis alius in scribendo seu faciendo hujusmodi brevia vel
processus, seu aliqua eorundem, quoquomodo etc. intromittant vel intromittat,
sine licencia ipsorum THOME POPE et Willielmi Smyth. Habend. occupand. gaudend.
et exercend. officium predictum prefatis THOME POPE et Willielmo Smyth, et
eorum alteri diutius viventi, per se vel per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive
deputatos suos sufficientes, durante vita ipsorum THOME POPE et Willielmi
Smyth, et eorum diutius viventis, cum vadiis et feodis pro hujusmodi brevibus
et processibus faciendis ab antiquo debitis et consuetis, absque aliquo compoto
seu aliquo alio, proinde nobis vel heredibus nostris reddendo solvendo seu
faciendo. Et ulterius de uberiori gracia nostra, dedimus et licentiam
concessimus prefato Willielmo Smyth, quod ipse omnia et singula brevia,
processus, necnon literas nostras patentes quoscunque, ac alios processus
quoscunque cujuscumque nominis generis seu nature fuerint in eadem curia
cancellarie nostre faciendos, ex nunc durante vita sua predicta, nomine suo
proprio, vel nomine magistri rotulorum, aut nomine alicujus magistri de curia
cancellarie nostre predicte pro tempore existentis, ad libitum suum seribere,
facere, et componere possit et valeat licite et impune, absque molestatione,
contradictione, seu impedimento, magistri rotulorum cancellarie nostre pro
tempore existentis, seu alicujus alterius person, sive aliquarum aliarum
personarum quarumcunque, in curia cancellarie nostre predicte nunc existentis,
aut in posterum fiendi; processibus officii clerici corone ejusdem cancellarie
nostre, sex clericorum cancellarie nostre predicte ac clericorum de parva baga
ejusdem cancellarie nostre quoquomodo pertinentibus sive spectantibus duntaxat
exceptis. Et hoc absque fine seu feodo magno et parvo in hanaperio cancellarie
nostre predicte proinde reddendo, solvendo, seu faciendo. Et quod expressa
mencio de vero valor annuo, aut de certitudine premissorum, seu eorum
alicujus, aut de aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos prefatis THOME POPE et
Willielmo Smyth ante haec tempora factis in presentibus minime facta existit,
aliquo statuto actu ordinacione provisione seu restrictione inde in contrarium
habito, facto, ordinato, sive proviso: aut aliqua alia re causa vel materia
quacumque in aliqua re non obstante. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Westmon.
vicesimo tercio die Decembr.

Per ipsum regem, et data predicta auctoritate parliamenti.
Concordat cum Orig. in Capell. Rot. HEN. ROOKE. (1764.)

NUMB. V. Grant from Henry the eighth to Thomas Pope and John Lucas, of Clerk
of the Crown in Chancery Specifying a former grant of the same made to Thomas
Pope alone, October. xv. 1533. an. reg. 24.
, February xxviii. 1538 Quint. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. An. Reg. 29o. Ex
Orig. in Capel. Rotul.
.
Pro Thoma Pope, et Joh. Lucas, de Concessione ad Vitam.
REX
omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem.
CUM NOS decimo quinto die Octobris, anno regni nostri vicesimo quarto per
literas nostras patentes, recitantes in eisdem, quod nos per alias literas
patentes, quarum quedam date fuerunt sexto die Marcii, anno regni nostri tercio
decimo de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa sciencia et mero motu nostris,
dederimus et concesserimus dilecto nobis Radulpho Pexall Bill. Signat. Hen.
viii. an. reg. 6. Decembr. xvi. and an. reg. 4. The said Rad. Pexall, and Edith
his wife, have specialem liberationem. -- Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 11.
April. xvi. The king appoints the said Ralph Feodarium suum co. Suthamton. --
Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 15. Septembr. xvi. He has a grant of a
corrody within the monastery of Thetford. -- Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg.
16. Mar. vi. He is made Clerk of the Crown. -- Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an.
reg. 19. [ Sine D. Men's.] He has license "quod ipse pannos laneos latos, ac
pannos laneos vocat. Kerseys, ac quoscunque pannos, plumbum, etc. unde custume
et subsidia ad summam cccc l. attingent, solvendo custumas ad finem an. quinque
post estimacionem, etc. possit emere, etc." I find a grant of the priory of
Bradenstocke to one Richard Pexall. Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 38.
Octobr. viii.
Officium Clerici Corone Cancellarie Anglie: habend. occupand. et exercend.
Officium illud eidem Radulpho ad terminum vite sue, per se, vel per
sufficientem deputatum suum, sive per sufficientes deputatos suos, cum omnibus
juribus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et emolumentis, eidem Officio
qualitercumque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et forma
prout Johannes Tanworth, Galsridus Marten, et Thomas Ive, temporibus Edwardi
quarti, nuper regum Anglie, ac Willielmus Porter nuper Officium illud habens
tempore nostro, separatim tenuerint, occupaverint, et exercuerint: ac eciam
viginti libras annuas prefato Radulpho, pro occupatione et exercicio Officii
predicti, dederimus et concesserimus, per predictas literas nostras patentes,
habend. et singulis annis percipiend. prefato Radulpho, durante vita sua, de
exitibus, proficuis, et revencionibus Hanaperii Cancellarie nostre predicte,
per manus custodis ejusdem Hanaperii pro tempore existentis, prout dicti
Johannes Tanworth, Galfridus Marten, et Thomas Ive, temporibus predictis, ac
Clemens Clerk tempore bone memory dni Henrici regis patris nostri, ac dictus
Willielmus Porter tempore nostro, in Officio predicto, separatim tenuerunt, et
perceperunt: necnon Liberatam Vesturam et Furruram In the regin of Edward the
fourth, the expenee of furring the liveries or robes of the fellows of New
college, Oxford, for one year, is very considerable. Rot. Comp. COLL. NOV.
Oxon. A.D. 1479. "SOLUTIO PRO FURRURA. Et Sol. pro lv sociis pro Furrura hoc
anno, xviij l. vj s. viij d." The following notices also show the very general
and early use of this article of dress, with its prices. COMP. Coll. Winton.
A.D. 1399. "CUSTUS CONSANGUINEORUM DOMINI. -- In stipendio j pelliparii
furrantis ij togas de albo russetto [for two scholars] erga festum Omnium
Sanctorum viij d. In ij novis furruris emptis pro eisdem simul cum stipendio
pelliparii furrantis ij togas de Liberata [Livery] DOMINI Episcopi [fundatoris]
erga festum Natalis Domini iij s. x d." COMP. Coll. Winton. A.D. 1396.
"LIBERATA. Et in xxj furruris albis emptis pro LIBERATA Capellanorum [the
fellows] VALECTORUM et BALLIVORUM erga festum Natalis Domini xxxj s. vj d." --
COMP. ibid. A.D. 1394. -- "LIBERATA. Et in iiij furruris emptis pro LIBERATA
Willielmi Pope [steward] et iij serviencium Collegii (pret. furrure xviij d.)
vj s." -- Milton, in COMUS, uses the word fur for robe in general, in
consequence of its constantly making a part of the scholastic habit. ver. 707.

-- Doctors of the stoic Furr.

The poet means, those morose and unfeeling teachers, who wear the gown which
distinguishes the sect of the stoic philosophers.


, prout Ricardus Sturgyon et Thomas Ive, tempore bone memory dni Henrici sexti
nuper regis Anglie progenitoris nostri, et dictus Willielmus Porter tempore
nostro, tenuerunt et perceperunt, habend. et percipiend. annuatim prefato
Radulpho, pro termino vite sue, ad magnam Garderobam nostram, per manus
custodis ejusdem Garderobe nostre pro tempore existentis, erga festa Natalis
Domini et Pentecostis, prout in literis illis before continebatur: GRANDES
labores, laudabiliaque obsequia, quae dilectus nobis THOMAS POPE, attendens
negociis nostris in Cancellaria nostra predicta multipliciter impendebat,
indiesque impendere intendebat, merito contemplantes; de gracia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa sciencia, et mero motu nostris, dederimus et
concesserimus prefato THOME POPE, inter alia, predictum Officium Clerici Corone
Cancellarie Anglie, habend. occupand. et exercend. Officium illud eidem THOME
POPE, ad terminum vite sue, per se, vel per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive
sufficientes deputatos suos, cum omnibus juribus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et
emolumentis, eidem Officio qualitercumque pertinentibus sive spectantibus,
immediate post mortem, dimissionem, sursum reddicionem, seu forisfacturam
ipsius Radulphi, vel quam cito Officium illud ad manus nostras quocumque alio
modo devenire contigisset, ac eciam viginti libras annuas prefato THOME POPE,
pro occupacione et exercicio Officii predicti, dederimus et concesserimus, per
easdem literas nostras patentes, habend. et singulis annis percipiend. prefato
THOME POPE, durante vita sua, immediate post mortem, dimissionem, sursum
reddicionem, seu sorisfacturam, ipsius Radulphi, vel quam cito Officium illud
ad manus nostras quocumque alio modo devenire contigisset, de exitibus,
proficuis, et revencionibus, Hanaperii Cancellarie nostre predicte, per manus
custodis ejusdem Hanaperii pro tempore existentis, necnon Liberatam Vesturam et
Furruram, habend. et annuatim percipiend. prefato THOME POPE, pro termino vite
sue, ad magnam Garderobam nostram, per manus custodis ejusdem Garderobe nostre
pro tempore existentis, erga festa Natalis Domini et Pentecostis, immediate
post mortem, dimissionem, sursum reddicionem, seu forisfacturam ipsius
Radulphi, aut quam cito Officium illud ad manus nostras quocumque alio modo
devenire contigisset, in tam amplis modo et forma prout predictus Radulphus
Officium predictum tunc habens, seu aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium
predictum ante ea tempore habens, seu habentes, habuisset seu percepisset, vel
percepissent, in et pro exercicio ejusdem, prout in literis nostris patentibus
predictis, datis decimo quinto die Octobris anno regni nostri vicesimo quarto
supradicto, before continetur. Ac postmodum dictus Radulphus diem suum clausit
extremum; quo pretextu, Officium illud ad prefatum THOMAM POPE, virtute
literarum nostrarum patencium predictarum, devenit; ipseque in Officium
predictum, post mortem predicti Radulphi intravit, illudque exercuit et
occupavit, et adhuc occupat, juxta tenorem literarum nostrarum predictarum:
Quas quidem literas nostras patentes, eidem THOME POPE de Officio predicto
factas, prefatus THOMAS POPE in voluntate existit nobis in Cancellariam
nostram, quoad Officium predictum necnon omnia et singula premissa idem
Officium concernentia, restituere, ibidem cancellandas; ea intencione, quod nos
alias literas nostras patentes de Officio illo eidem THOME POPE et cuidam
Johanni Lucas concedere dignaremur. Nos premissa considerantes, ac pro eo quod
litere patentes predicte, prefato THOME POPE in forma predicta fact, ad
presens cancellate existunt, de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia et
mero motu nostris, dedimus et concessimus, ac per presents damus et
concedimus, prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas dictum Officium Clerici Corone
Anglie; ipsosque, et eorum Utrumque, Clericos Corone Cancellarie Anglie
facimus, constituimus, et ordinamus, per presents: Habend. occupand. et
exercend. Officium illud eisdem THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas, ad terminum vite
ipsorum THOME POPE et Johannis Lucas, et eorum alterius diutius viventis, per
se, vel per eorum alterum, aut per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive deputatos
suos sufficientes, cum omnibus juribus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et
emolumentis, eidem Officio qualitercumque pertinentibus five spectantibus: Ac
eciam viginti libras annuas prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas, pro
occupacione et exercicio Officii predicti damus et concedimus per presents:
Habend. et singulis annis percipiend. prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas,
durante vita ipsorum THOME POPE et Johannis Lucas, et eorum alterius diutius
viventis, de exitibus, proficuis, et revencionibus, Hanaperii, pro tempore
existentis: Necnon liberatam vesturam et Furruram, habend. et annuatim
percipiend. prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas, pro termino vite ipsorum
THOME POPE et Johannis Lucas, et eorum alterius diutius viventis, ad magnam
Garderobam nostram, per manus custodis ejusdem Garderobe nostre pro tempore
existentis, erga festa Natalis Domini et Pentecostis, in tam amplis modo et
forma prout predictus Radulphus, seu aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium
predictum ante haec tempore habens, seu habentes, tenuerit sive perceperit,
tenuerunt vel perceperunt, in et pro exercicio Officii predicti: Et hoc absque
fine seu foedo, magno vel parvo, in Hanaperio Cancellarie nostre, seu alibi, ad
opus nostrum proinde reddendo, solvendo, aut faciendo. Eo quod expressa mencio,
etc. IN CUJUS, etc. T. R. apud Westmon. xxviii. die Februarii.

Per ipsum Regem, etc.
Concordat cum Orig. in Capella Rotul. HEN. ROOKE, Cler. Rotul. (1764.)

NUMB. VI. The Charter of Mabill Abbess of Godstowe Her name was Mabile Wafre.
She was the eighth abbess, and presided about the year 1286. Willis, Mitr. Abb.
ii. 178.
, made to God and our lady and to saint Cuthberte, and to the Priour and
Convent of Dureham, from a certain diche thurte over in Bewmounte From the
Chartulary of the Nunnery of Godstow. MSS. Rawlins. 1300. fol. Bibl. Bodl.

Viz. All the charters and evidences of the said nunnery, from the foundation,
abstracted into English, by "a pore brother and welwysher to the good Abbes of
Godestowe, dame Alice Henly, and to all her covent." Alice Henly, or Alice of
Henly, was abbess about 1464. Temp. Edw. iv. In the prologue or preface, (fol.
1.) the writer says, that he translates their register, or ledger book, into
English, for the benefit of religious women, who are not supposed to understand
Latin. It is the original, on vellum. -- Tanner, (NOT. MON. fol. p. 423.)
informs us, that this curious manuscript formerly belonged to sir James Ware,
and afterward to Henry earl of Clarendon. The nuns are here often called
Mynchons. So the nunnery at Littlemore near Oxford, is called the Minchery,
that is, the MINCHIONRY, or house of nuns. Hearne gives another interpretation
of Minchery. HIST. ANTIQ. GLASTONB. Pref. p. xxi. edit. 1722. It was customary
for the bishops in their visitations of the religious houses, to deliver their
Injunctions, not only to the monks, but even to the female convents, drawn up
in the Latin language; which the nuns understood just as well as their Latin
leases, and had therefore a fair excuse for not observing. Sometimes, however,
but very early, they were given to the nunneries in French.


.
THE sentence of this charter is, that Mabile Abbess of Godstowe, and the
convent of the same place, with one assent and consent, yave, etc. to god, and
to our lady saint Maria, and to saint Cuthberte, and to the priour and convent
of Dureham, and to there successoures, or their assigns, all what so ever they
were, all there arable londs, the which they had fro a diche thurte over in
Bewmonte Some antiquaries suppose that Oxford was a Roman City, called
BELLOSITUM: an hypothesis almost as chimerical as the fable of Brutus being the
founder of the university. The truth is, King Henry the first gave his palace
at Oxford, the Norman or French appellation BEAUMONT. This was soon latinised
into BELLOSITUM: which at length became a name for the town in general. Others
pretend, that the original ancient university which flourished before king
Alfred's time, was styled BELLOSITUM, and that it stood detached from the
present, in or about Saint Giles's field. This is another fiction of the monks,
which originated after the eleventh century.
, that is to say, fro the land of Philipp Ho Burgeys of Oxenforde, unto the
land that was of Roger Semer, in the same tilthe Tillage. A field.
, in the subarbis of Oxenforde; whereof three acres lie beside the land of
Walter Bost of the north part, and one acre lies of the southe part of the
land of the said Walter Bost, bitwene the land of Thomas Jews and the land
of the same Roger Semer: and one head of all the said land buttith to the
walls Of the city.
toward the west, and another head buttith unto the kyngis hye way of
Bewmonte, toward the est. Also with vi penyworth of yearly rent to be taken of
one acre of the land of Thomas Jews, with the tithes of the same acre, and
the tithes of an acre of Walter Boste in the same tylthe; with all his
pertynantis, longyng Belonging.
both to the land, and to the rent and tithes. They willed also and granted
to the same priour and covent aforesaid, that they should have whatsoever right
they had in void grounds beside Aula Periculosa.
Peralowse Hall in Horsemonger street Where a large stone-edifice now stands
called Kettel-Hall; built by Dr. Ralph Kettel, president of Trinity college,
about 1615. For building this Kettel-hall, a house was pulled down inhabited by
George Cawfield, recorder of Oxford, who was buried in saint Mary Magdalene's
church, xx. October 1603. MSS. Wood, Mus. Ashm. Collectan. e Registr. Parochial.
Civitat. Oxon. D. 5. 4to. During Cromwell's usurpation, such of the academics
as had been famous for acting plays in the late king's time, used to act plays
by stealth in this Hall. Wood's LIFE, vol. 2. p. 148. edit. 1772.
. To be had and to be hold to the priour and convent of Dureham, and to there
successoures or there assigns, All of Them, and there church of Godstowe, freely,
quyetly, holy, well, and in pease, for ever; with all liberties, eschetes,
customs, tithes, eysementis Easments.
, with entryngis and going owte, and suits of court; and all other things and
actions in only wise longyng to the said land, rent and tithes, with all there
pertynantis. Yelding thereof yearly to them, and to there successoures, or to
their assigns whosoever the be, x s. of silver, and at michelmasse v s. of
silver, for all servyce, customs, exactions, sutis of courts, and secular
demaundes. And if hit happen the said priour and convent, and there
successoures, or any manner assigns of them, to be behind, of [or] to fail in
the payment of the said yearly rent, (that god forbede;) the foresaid priour
and convente grauntith for them and their successoures, and all manner of
assigns, that hit should be well lawful to the foresaid abbess and convente
of Godstowe and to there successoures, or mynystris or servauntis, whosoever
the be, to enter, destrayne, and nyme To take for a pledge. To seize. See
Dufresue, LAT. GL. V. Namium, Namiare, etc. And Lye's Sax. Goth. Dictionary, V.
Niman.
, all tenements that they had, or might have, in the subarbis of Oxenforde
toward the north fro the the fornamed diche thurte over Bewmounte, unto
Horsemonger street also; and all the lands aforesaid, from day unto day, for
the foresaid yearly x s. without any again saying Gainsaying.
or let of the foresaid priour, covente, successors, or assigns, whosoever
they be, tille hit were fully satisfied to the said abbess and covente of
Godestowe, and to there successoures and assigns, all of the forsaide rent.
And the foresaid abbess and covente of Godestowe, and there successoures,
warrantized, aquyted, and defended for the forsaide rent of x s. all the
foresaid lands, six penyworthe of yearly rent, and tithes of ii acres of
Walter Bost, and Thomas Jews, with all there pertynantis as hit is said before,
to the foresaid priour and covente of Durham, and to there successoures, and to
there assigns, against all men and women. Furthermore, the said abbess and
covente of Godestowe willed and granted for them and there successoures, or
assigns, which soever they should be, that they should be quyte from yevyng
all tithes, both of more and less Great and Small Tithes.
, in the forsaid covente for ever. And for this gift, etc. the foresaid prior
and covente yaf to them aforehandes xx mark of sterlyngis. In witness of all
those thyngis, etc. The original is in Thesauriar. coll. Div. Joh. Bapt. Oxon.
among other instruments of Godstowe nunnery. In an abstract from which, Wood
gives the names of the witnesses, viz. "Phil. de Ho, tunc Majori Oxon. Henr.
Howayne, Johan. de Ho, Will. le Specer, Tho. Sowey." Mus. Ashm. 8513. -- Philip
de Ho, O, or Eu, occurs mayor of Oxon, 1276, 1286, 1295, 1296, 1299. A. Wood's
Cat. of Mayors, etc. of Oxford, page 66. seq. MSS. ut supr. D. 7.

About the same time, two plots of ground lying in Magdalene parish, were
confirmed to them by the convent of saint Frideswide's. [See Br. Twyne, MSS. 8.
p. 259.] And in 1291, their precincts and possessions were enlarged by grants
of more ground lying in and about their house. Wood's CITY of Oxford, MSS. Mus.
Ashmol. All this they enjoyed till their dissolution.




NUMB. VII. Grant from Henry the eighth of Barnard College, with half the Grove
of Durham College, to the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church, Oxford, December.
11. 1548 In Capell. Rot.
.
REX, etc. Salutem, sciatis quod nos, de gracia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
sciencia et mero motu nostris, Dedimus et concessimus, ac per praesentes damus
et concessimus, decano et capitulo ecclesie cathedralis Christi Oxon, ex
fundatione nostra, inter multa alia Totum illum scitum, septum, circuitum,
ambitum, et precinctum, totius illius collegii, vulgaritur nuncupati BARNARDES
COLLEGE Bernard college, (now saint John's) was inhabited by students, under
that name, in the year 1549; and, as I conjecture, two or three years
afterward. I find a Manciple of Bernard college suing for battles in the
vice-chancellor's court, 1549. Registr. cur. cancel. Oxon. G G. fol. 37. Its
last prefect, called Provisor, before its endowment by sir Thomas White, was
Dr. Kennall. It had been an academical convent of Bernardines, built by
archbishop Chichely. Pat. ann. 15. Henr. vi. membr. 24. [A.D. 1437.] The king
sets forth, that whereas Henry [Chicheley] archbishop of Canterbury intends to
found "quoddam congruum et notabile mansum collegiale, in honorem
gloriosissimae virginis Mariae sanctique Bernardi, in vico vulgariter nuncupato
Northgates street, vel saltem prope dictum vicum, in parochia sanctae Mariae
Magdalenae, juxta et extra portam borealem villae Oxon, in solo ipsius
archiepiscopi continente quinque acras terrae vel circiter, quae de nobis
tenentur in capite, etc." In a roll, in the Court of augmentations, the site
and garden of Bernard college containing two acres, with all its edifices, and
the garden of Durham college, is valued at xx s. per ann. Pyx. S. FRIDESWYDE.
OXON.
in civitate nostra Oxon, cum suis juribus membris, et pertinenciis universis;
Ac omnia et singula domos, edificia, structuras, ortos, pomeria, gardina,
stagna, vivaria, terras, et solum nostra, infra dictum scitum, septum,
circuitum, ambitum, seu precinctum, dicti collegii vocati BARNARDES COLLEGE,
existentia; ac omnia et singula, muros, menia, fossata, parietes, et cetera
inclosamenta quecunque, eundem scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum seu
precinctum, ambientia aut quocunque modo includentia: Ac eciam Dimidium, sive
Medietatem, totius illius Horti collegii vocati Durham College in parochia
sancte Marie Magdalene in suburbiis dicte civitatis Oxon, collegio vocato
Durham College dudum spectantis et pertinentis: Habend. tenend. et gaudend.
predictum scitum, et cetera Premissa predicta, eisdem Decano et capitulo, et
successoribus suis imperpetuum. Test R. apud Westmon. xi. die Decembris, anno
R. Hen. octavi xxxviii.

NUMB. *VII*. Part of the Charter of foundation of the Dean and Chapter of
Durham cathedral, given by King Henry the eighth, A.D. 1541 In Archivis Eccl.
Cathedr. Dunelm. MS. Et in Capell. Rotul. viz. Lit. Pat. Henr. viii. ann. reg.
33.
.
"DAMUS etiam, ac per praesentes concedimus, praefato Decano et Capitulo, totum
illud scitum, circuitum, ambitum, et praecinctum, cujusdam nuper Collegii
vocati Duresme College infra villam Oxon, in com. nostro Oxon. Ac totam illam
ecclesiam sive capellam, campanile, coemeterium, ejusdem nuper collegii, una
cum omnibus domibus, aedificiis, pomariis, gardinis, hortis, et solo, tam intra
quam extra, juxta et prope scitum, ambitum, et praecinctum ejusdem nuper
collegii. Ac totum illud tenementum in HAMBOROWE in dicto com. nostro Oxon Ac
totam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nostram de FRAMPTON in com nostro Lincoln.
Ac totam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nostram de RODINGTON in com. nostro
Nottingham. Ac omnes illas rectorias et ecclesias nostras de FISHLAKE, BOSSAL,
et BRANTINGHAM, in com. nostro Ebor. Ac quandam annuitatem five annualem
redditum quatuor librarum exeuntium et annuatim percipiendarum de rectoria five
ecclesia nostra de NORTH ALLERTON in dicto com. nostro Ebor, ad festa
Annunciationis beatae MARIAE VIRGINIS et sancti MICHAELIS ARCHANGELI, annuatim
solvendum. Ac totam illam pensionem, five annuum redditum, sedecim librarum
exeuntium et annuatim percipiendarum de VICARIO de NORTH ALLERTON praedicti pro
tempore existente. Quae quidem rectoriae, annuitates, et pensiones praedictae
dicti nuper Collegii, praedicto nuper MONASTERIO sancti Cuthberti Dunelmensis
praedicti spectabant et pertinebant, aut parcellae et possessiones ejusdem
nuper COLLEGII et dicti nuper MONASTERII extiterunt Durham College, after its
dissolution, was inhabited for some time by Walter Wryght archdeacon of Oxford,
who presided in it over a few students. But before or about the year 1552, it
was totally desolated, and the buildings being entirely neglected, began to be
ruinous. Wood, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. D. 3. page 208. See also Registr. CUR.
CANCEL. Oxon. G G. sol. 55. 68. 76. And Stevens, MONAST. i. 343. Also, APPEND.
Numb. viii. Wood tells us, that before the reign of Edward the sixth,
"Collegium vero Dunelmense et Bernardinum [now saint John's college] vacua
paene jacebant.... unde canilia lustra, joco populari, vocabantur: usquedum
THOMAE POPE et THOMAE WHITE militum, pietate, latisundiis esient locupletata."
HIST. ANTIQ. Univ. Oxon. i. 281. col. 1. [From Br. Twyne, MSS. ARCHIV. Oxon. 8.
fol. 235. 4to.] And Camden BRITANN. p. 271. DOBUN. edit. 1607. fol. viz.
"Nostra itidem memoria, ut novis etiam beneficiis Musas complecterentur, Thomas
Pope vir ordinis equestris Dunelmense collegium, et Thomas White civis
senatorque Londinensis, et equestris itidem ordinis, Bernardi collegium, quae
suis ruderibus sepulta jacuerunt, excitarunt, novis aedificiis instaurarunt,
latifundiis locupletarunt, et novis nominibus exornarunt. Hoc enim S. Joanni
Baptistae, illud Sacrosanctae Trinitati dicarunt." Doctor T. Cay thus speaks of
Durham college, in a passage which for the elegance of its latinity alone
deserves to be transcribed. "Fuit aula illa de qua mentio est apud eundem
Aungervillium, aula Dunelmensis, intra paucos annos Collegium Dunelmense, et
hodie Collegium Trinitatis, vocata. Hanc bonus ille episcopus primus erexit,
constructa inibi bibliotheca optimis libris referta, ceteraque ibi disposuit
juxta formam illam a se in PHILOBIBLO descriptam, qui deinceps habitus est
ejusdem fundator. Donec regnante Ricardo ejus appellationis secundo, Ricardus
Hatefelde episcopus item Dunelmensis ordinaret, ut secularibus aulae
Aungervillianae Scholasticis certus monachorum Dunelmensium numerus
adjungeretur, qui Oxoniam, studendi causa, Prioris semper Dunelmensis nutu
perpetuis post temporibus amandaretur, domumque revocaretur. His ita prospectum
est ab Hatefeldo ut datis abunde ad illorum sustentationem redditibus, sine
ullis monasterii impensis ibi studerent. Quo beneficio ita sibi monachos
demeruit, ut, oblivioni tradito Aungervillii nomine, solus ille collegii
fundator usque ad monasteriorum eversionem haberetur. Hodie tamen insigne
MUSAEUM sub nomine, ut dixi, Trinitatis, a bonae memoriae Domino Thoma Pope
equestris ordinis viro resuscitatum; qui id long quam antea praestantius,
atque adeo studiosis quos frequentes alit commodius effecit. In ejus collegii
bibliotheca, postremis Henrici octavi annis, vidi ac perlegi hunc Aungervillii
librum cui PHILOBIBLI titulum indidit, eundem ipsum indubie, quem ipsemet
bibliothecae illi vivus contulerat." Thomae Caii VINDICIAE Antiquitat. Acad.
Oxon. edit. Hearne, Oxon. 1730. vol. ii. page 432.


." * CATALOGUE of the WARDENS of DURHAM COLLEGE.

The governors of this house were not styled Wardens, but Priors, till the
foundation was fully settled. They were appointed by the Priors of the
cathedral-convent of Durham.

I. JOHN OF BEVERLY occurs about the year 1333. See Stevens, MONAST. i. p. 340.
Twyne, APOL. ACAD. OXON. p. 170. edit. 1609. II. WILLIAM APPULBY was appointed
by John of Hemingburgh, Prior of Durham, Aug. 14. 1404. Stevens, ubi supr. He
was buried in the college. Wood, MSS. Mus. ASHMOL. D. 19. 4to. It may be
doubted whether he was the second. III. THOMAS ROME occurs in 1413. Stevens,
ibid. He was Prior of Pershore in Worcestershire. Reyner, p. 175. He was buried
in Durham-college. Wood, MSS. ut supr. IV. WILLIAM EBCHESTER, D.D. occurs about
the year 1440. Stevens, ubi supr. He was made Prior of Durham in 1446, and
dying in 1456, was buried in his church. Wharton, ANGL. SACR i. 777. See RITES
OF DURHAM CATHEDRAL, etc. by I. D. 1672. p. 50. V. ROBERT EBCHESTER. He was
made bachelor of divinity, Dec. 24. 1469. Being then styled Gardianus Collegii
Durelm. Wood, MSS. Mus. ASHM. D. 3. fol. 126. Compare Stevens, ubi supr. p.
343. col. z. He was made Prior of Durham in 1478, and died and was buried there
in 1484. Wharton, ut supr. p. 778. 789. RITES OF DURHAM, ut supr. p. 51. VI.
THOMAS SWAWELL occurs in 1502. Stevens, ut supr. p. 342. He was made doctor in
divinity, in 1501. Wood, FAST. OXON. i. p. 4. VII. THOMAS CASTLE occurs in
1511. Stevens, ubi modo supr. He was made bachelor of divinity at Oxford in
1510. Wood, MSS. Mus ASHMOL. D. 3. fol. 15. And D.D. in 1511. Wood, FAST. i.
18. 20. He must not be confounded with Thomas Castle, who died Prior of Durham
in 1519. Wharton, ut supr. p. 781. VIII. HUGH WHITHEAD succeeded Castle in
1512. Proceeded bachelor of divinity at Oxford Mar. 14. 1511. Wood, ATH. OXON.
Fast. i. 17. See also MSS. Wood, E. 9. ubi supr. viz. OPPON. in THEOLOGY.
Created Doctor, May 13. 1513. ATH. OXON. i. Fast. 20. Appointed Prior of Durham
in 1524. During his priorate, which he held twenty four years, he rebuilt many
houses at Bear-park; and at Pittintown erected a new hall called the Prior's
hall, with other edifices annexed. He was the last Prior of Durham; and, on the
change of the foundation by Henry the eighth, was constituted the first Dean in
1541. He died in 1547, and was buried in the church of the Minories at London.
Wharton, ubi supr. p. 782. Wood, ATH. OXON. i. Fast. 20. Willis's Cathedrals,
DURHAM, p. 252. RITES of DURHAM, p. 92. IX. EDWARD HENMARSH occurs in 1527.
Stevens, ut supr. p. 342. He was made S.T.B. in 1513. ATH. OXON. i. Fast. p.
20. See Wood, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. D. fol. 177. 180. He probably presided till the
final Dissolution of this college in 1540.



NUMB. VIII. Grant of Durham College in Oxford, from Edward the sixth, to
George Owen, and William Martyn. Dat. Feb. iv. 1553 Ex copia quadam abbreviat.
In Thesauriario Coll. Trin. Oxon. Compared with the original by sir Thomas Pope.
.
EDWARDUS sextus dei gratia, etc. omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis, quod
nos in consideratione boni, very, fidelis, et acceptabilis servicii, per
servientem nostrum dilectum, Georgium Owen, armigerum, unum medicorum
nostrorum, etc. de gratia nostra speciali, etc. Dedimus et concessimus, etc.
prefato Georgio Owen, etc. Ac etiam totum illud messuagium, sive nuper
Collegium nostrum, vocatum DURHAM COLLEGE, in univ. Oxon. Ac totum illud
Scitum, Circuitum, Ambitum, et Precinctum dicti nuper collegii vocati DURHAM
COLLEGE in univ. Oxon. predicta, cum suis juribus, membris, et pertinenciis,
universis: Ac omnia et singula, domos, edificia, ortos, pomaria, gardinos,
terras, tenementa, et solum nostrum, infra dictum scitum, circuitum, seu
precinctum ejusdem nuper collegii existentia, ac modo, vel nuper, in tenura
sive occupatione Walteri Wryght About the year 1540, he was principal of
Peckwater-inn at Oxford. In 1543, he was made archdeacon of Oxford, while the
cathedral subsisted at Oseney. Installed a prebendary of Winchester cathedral,
Jan xi. 1559. A prebendary of North-Grantham in the church of Salisbury. He was
several times a commissary, and visitor, of the university of Oxford. Wood,
ATH. i. F. 63. Willis's CATHEDRALS, cath. Oxford, p. 447. Gale's WINCHESTER, p.
119. On the ruin or demolition of Durham college, where he lived a few years
after its dissolution, he retired to Exeter college, where he died, May x.
1561. viz. "D. pientissimus Walterus Wryght, mortem obiit in suo infra
collegium nostrum, cubiculo, anno posteriore [viz. 1561.] x. Maii. Et voti
compos, in sacra aede B.M. in Oxon. sepultus est. Qui ex testamento nobis dono
dedit craterem unum deauratum, septem libris ponder. cum iii. libr. in
pecunia." E REGISTR. coll. Exon. Oxon. fol. 76.
, doctoris in jure civili, vel assignatorum suorum: Necnon omnes illos boscos
nostros, et arbores nostras, vulgariter nuncupatas ELMES, crescentes et
existentes in le BACKSIDE dicti nuper collegii, vocati DURHAM COLLEGE, et
eidem nuper collegio dudum spectantes et pertinentes: Ac terram, fundum, et
solum, eorundem boscorum et arborum, habend. tenend. et gaudend. etc. ac
praedictum scitum dicti nuper collegii, prefato Georgio Owen, et Willielmo
Martyn, ac haeredibus et assignatis ipsius Georgii imperpetuum I have before
observed [LIFE, page 115.] that all the estates of Durham college, together
with its site here specified, were granted by Henry viii. May xii. 1541, to the
new dean and chapter of Durham. The said estates still remain in the possession
of that cathedral. But how or when the said site reverted to the crown, so as
to be granted by Edward the sixth to Owen and Martyn, I know not; unless this
resumption was made, when the bishopric of Durham was dissolved by Edward the
fixth, An. reg. vii. 1552.
. Tenend. etc. etc. ac praedictum scitum dicti nuper collegii, etc. de nobis,
haeredibus et successoribus nostris, in socagio, ut de Honor nostro de EWELME
in dicto com. nostro Berks In Oxfordshire. These inaccuracies are not uncommon
in ancient instruments.
. per fidelitatem tantum, et non in capite. Ac reddend. annuatim nobis, etc. de
et pro praedicto scitu et terris dicti nuper collegii vocati DURHAM COLLEGE,
viginti sex solidos et octo denarios legalis monetae Angliae, etc. ad festum
sancti Michaelis archangeli singulis annis solvendos, pro omnibus redditibus,
serviciis, et demandis quibuscunque, proinde nobis, haeredibus, vel
successoribus nostris, quoquomodo reddendis, solvendis, vel faciendis, etc. In
cujus Rei, etc. Test meipso apud Westmon. quarto die Feb. anno regni nostri
septimo.

" Exam. et concordat cum Liter. pat. remanent. penes dom. G. Owen. THO. POPE
Manu sua.
."
Jur. in Officio Lege, Officina.
Johannis Pycharell auditoris ibid Sc. Scaccarii.
.
NUMB. IX. Purchase of Durham college aforesaid, by sir Thomas Pope, of G. Owen
and W. Martyn. Dat. Feb. xx. 1554 Thesaur. ut supr.
.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus, ad quos haec praesens carta nostra indentata
pervenerit, Georgius Owen, armiger, unus medicorum regis et reginae GEORGE OWEN
was a man of great learning, and eminent in his profession. He was successively
physician to Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, and Philip and Mary. He
attended Henry on his deathbed, who made him a witness to his last will, in
which he bequeathed him 100 l. He was also present at the death of Edward the
sixth, and attended the princess Elizabeth in her imprisonment. Leland has
complimented him in his ENCOMIA of the learned men of those times. Edit. 1589.
p. 96. He died 1558. Beside the grant of Durham college from Edward the sixth,
he received with its adjoining estates a grant of the nunnery of Godstowe, near
Oxford; the buildings of which he converted into a dwelling house, with some
few alterations and improvements.
, et Willielmus Martyn, generosus, salutem in domino sempiternam. Sciatis nos
prefatos G. Owen, et W. Martyn, pro quadam competenti pecuniae summa nobis per
THOMAM POPE de Tyttenhanger in Co. Hertf. militem, prae manibus been et
fideliter persoluta, unde fatemur nos et quemlibet nostrum fore plenarie
satisfact. et content. eundemque Thomam Pope, militem, heredes, et
administratores suos inde acquietat. et exornerat. esse per praesentes, Dedisse
et concessisse, et praesenti carta confirmasse prefato Thomae Pope, militi,
totum illud messuagium, five nuper collegium nostrum, vocatum Dyrram College in
univ. Oxon. Ac totum illum scitum, circuitum, ambitum et praecinctum nostrum,
dicti nuper collegii, vocati Dyrram College in univ. Oxon. predicta; cum suis
juribus, membris, et pertinenciis universis: Ac omnia et singula, domos,
edificia, ortos, pomaria, gardina, terras, tenementa, et solum nostrum, infra
dictum scitum, septum, circuitum, seu praecinctum, ejusdem nuper collegii
existentia, ac modo, vel nuper in tenura five occupatione Walteri Wryght,
doctoris in jure civili, vel assignatorum suorum: Necnon omnes illos boscos
nostros, et arbores nostras, vulgariter vocatas Elmes, crescentes et existentes
in le Backside dicti nuper collegii vocati Dyrram College, et eidem nuper
collegio dudum spectantes et petinentes: Ac terram, fundum, et solum nostrum
eorundem boscorum et arborum The grove of Durham college was much larger at the
dissolution of the said college, than at the time of this purchase. Part of it
was rented by Bernard College, now saint John's. Bernard college was dissolved
by Henry the eighth, who gave the said college and its appurtenances, together
with a part, called half, of Durham college grove, to his new cathedral of
Christ church, 1545. This part, or half, I presume, was that which had been
rented, as above, by Bernard college, and was therefore considered, at the time
of this donation, as its usual appendage. In the year 1555. sir Thomas White,
purchasing from Christ-church the said Bernard college, purchased likewise of
the same, the part or half of Durham college grove abovementioned. This part,
or half, is what now makes the outer grove, and perhaps much more, of saint
John's college. See Wood, Hist. Ant. ii. 252. -- Stevens, Monast. ii. 53. Wood,
MSS. Mus. Ashm. 8513. -- And especially, Numb. VII. Append. Thus the outlet, or
grove, in the text, included only what remained to Durham college after the
aforesaid aliena ion made by Henry the eighth. When Trinity college and saint
John's were founded, the two founders jointly erected the stone wall which now
separates the groves, or gardens, of the two colleges. That this was done by
agreement between them both, I collect from the words of a letter from sir
Thomas Pope, to the president, dat. Jul. xxiv. 1557, in which, he desires the
president to bespeak for him, a certain large quantity of stone, "for so much I
think I shall occupy for my part of Mr. [sir Thomas] White's wall."
Afterward, sir T. Pope surrounded the whole grove of Trinity college with a
stone-wall: and I find expended thereon cxx, l. The stone was purchased of
William Freere of Oxford, who, with Agnes his wife, got possession of the
houses called Dominican and Franciscan Friars at Oxford, soon after their
dissolution, and demolishing the buildings fold the materials. See LIFE, p.
125. And Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. i. page 66. col. 2. William's
elder brother Edward was afterward settled at Water-Eaton near Oxford. Arms in
the windows of the house of Mr. Freer, at Oxford, are described by Lee, 1575.
ARMS, etc. Mus. Ashmol. MSS. Codd. A. Wood. D. 14.
: Ac reversionem et reversiones quascunque omnium ac singulorum praemissorum,
et cujuslibet inde parcellae, necnon redditus et annualia proficua quaecunque
refervata super quibuscunque dimissionibus et concessionibus de praemissis, seu
de aliqua inde parcella factis: Adeo plene, libere, et integre, ac in tam
amplis modo et forma, prout illustrissimus princeps, nuper rex Edwardus, ejus
nominis sextus, praedictum messuagium sive collegium et cetera singula premissa
nobis prefato G. Owen et W. Martyn, ac heredibus et assignatis Mei prefati
Georgii imperpetuum, per literas suas patentes, sub magno sigillo suo Angliae
confectas, gerentes datum apud Westmon. iv. Feb. anno nuper regni sui septimo,
dedit et concessit. Adeo plene ac libere et integre, ac in tam amplis modo et
forma, prout praedictum messuagium sive collegium ac cetera premissa modo
habemus seu tenemus, virtute et vigore literarum patentium praedictarum dicti
nuper dom. regis, aut aliter quocumque modo. Habend. tenend. et gaudend.
predictum messuagium sive collegium vocatum Dyrram College in dicta univ. Oxon.
et caetera premissa, cum eorum pertinentiis universis prefato THOMAE POPE,
militi, heredibus, et assignatis suis, ad solum Opus et Usum ipsius THOMAE
POPE, militis, haeredum et assignatorum suorum, imperpetuum. Tenend. per
redditus et servicia inde prius debita et de jure consueta. Et nos vero
praefatus G. Owen, ac W. Martyn, ac haeredes et assignati Mei praefati Georgii,
dictum messuagium sive collegium vocatum Dyrrham College, et caetera
praemissa, cum pertinentiis praefato THOMAE POPE, ac haeredibus et assignatis
suis, contra nos et haeredes nostros warrantizabimus et imperpetuum defendemus
per praesentes. Et cum per praedictas lit. pat. quidam annualis redditus
viginti sex solidorum et duorum denariorum reservatus sit, annuatim solvendus
dicto nuper regi haeredibus et successoribus suis, sicut ibidem before
apparet, Sciatis me prefatum G. Owen, convenisse et concessisse per praesentes,
pro me, haeredibus, executoribus, ac administratoribus meis cum praefato THOMA
POPE, haeredibus et assignatis suis, non modo quod eos et eorum quemlibet
indempnes et sine dampno et detrimento de solucione dicti redditus, et
cujuslibet inde parcellae, de caetero imperpetuum servabo, ac de omnibus
oneribus et incumberantiis quibuscunque dictum collegium et caetera praemissa,
seu eorum aliquod concernentibus per ipsos Georgium et Willielmum, seu eorum
alterum, antehac habit. fact. aut praemissis, sed etiam, quod quandocunque et
quoties contigerit, dictum redditum, seu aliquam inde parcellam, levari de
praedicto collegio, situ et caeteris praemissis praeconcessis seu de aliqua
inde parcella, quod tunc et toties, ego praefatus Georgius, et haeredes ac
assignati mei forisfaciemus praedicto THOMAE haeredibus et assignanatis suis
quadraginta Solidos nomine Paenae: Et quod tunc et toties been licebit
praedicto Thomae Pope haeredibus et assignatis suis, in omnia maneria, terras,
tenementa, et haereditamenta mea infra com. Oxon. et Berks. intrare, et
distringere, tam pro praedictis redditu, seu arreragiis ejusdem, aut aliqua
inde parcella, sic ut praefertur, aliquo tempore posthac de eodem collegio, et
caeteris, praemissis, levatis, quam pro forisfactura paenae praedictae,
levatis, quam ac pro omnibus expensis et costagiis per eundem THOMAM POPE,
haeredes, vel assignatos suos, per circa et concernentibus solucionem dicti
redditus, paenae, aut arreragionem ejusdem, sustinendis ac solvendis: Et
districtiones sic captas abducere et asportare, et penes se retinere, quousque
idem THOMAS POPE, haeredes et assignati sui, sint inde plenarie satisfacti et
contenti. Sciatis insuper, nos prefatos G. Owen, et W. Martyn, fecisse,
ordinasse, constituisse, deputasse, et in loco nostro posuisse dilectos nobis
in Christo, Willielmum Hemerford Concerning whom I find nothing more, than that
he was of Oxford; where he took the degree of A.B. in December, 1558, as
Cape^^^us secularis. Also Mar. xx, 1541, the degree of master of arts. MSS. A.
Wood, Mus. Ashmol. E. 29. And E. 6.
, theologiae bachalarium, Johannem Heywood Probably the same whom sir T. Pope
calls, in his Will, his "true frynd," and to whom he bequeathes a memorial.
See LIFE, p. 164. John Heywood is also one of the witnesses to the codicil of
said Will.
, Edwardum Love, et Johanem Milwarde Sir T. Pope, in his Will, calls this John
Milwarde his Clerk, and leaves him a legacy of xx l. He appears to have been
related to Dame Elizabeth Powlett, widow of sir T. Pope, and was probably of
her neighborhood in Derbyshire. Ex Testam. More of the name are mentioned in
her Will. William and Robert are witnesses to her deed of gift at Burton upon
Trent. LIFE, p. 200. Sir T. Pope, in a letter to the president of his college,
without date, speaks of "Henry Milwarde my friend:" and one of that name occurs
among the first FAMULI of the college at the foundation. Comp. Burss. 1556. --
7. As to the said John Milwarde, mentioned in the text, he was, beside what has
been already said, one of the witnesses to the codicil of sir T. Pope's will.
He was also a witness to the instrument concerning the dirge at Much-Waltham.
LIFE, p. 132. On sir T. Pope's death he became steward, or receiver, to sir
Hugh Powlett. Registr. prim. coll. Trin. fol. 24. b. In 1561, December. vii, the
said college appointed him their attorney in a certain lawsuit, calling him in
their Appointment, "Joannem Milwarde generosum, clarissimi Hugonis Paulet
militis famulum." Registr. ut supr. fol. 29. He occurs often as an agent
between the said college and Dame Powlett the foundresse; as I collect from
these articles, viz. Comp. Burss. 1561. -- 2. "Sol. pro uno pari chirothecarum
dat. Mag. Joh. Milwarde ex mandato praesidis et officiariorum, ij s. iv d." --
Comp. 1563. -- 4. "Sol. Jul. xxii. pro cena mag. Milwarde adferentis mandatum a
domina fundatrice de lustranda porcione silvae, ij s. viij d." Again in the
same year. "Sol. pro epulis insumptis in mag. [Simon.] Parrett, etc. et Joannem
Milwarde, v s. viij d." He sometimes acted as deputy-steward to Dame Elizabeth
Powlett. I find him more than once, presenting a new year's gift to the
college; and as late as 1582. He also occurs on some other occasions. One
Arderne Milwarde is elected schol. coll. Trin. e com. Oxon. in 1583. Ex
registr. That the family was of Derbyshire, as above hinted, I conclude from
the following entry. "Henricus Milwarde filius Johannis de Snitterton, co.
Derb. etc." Ex Registr. in pergamen. ab Ao. 1665. fol. 7.
, generosos, nostros veros et legitimos attornatos, conjunctim etdivisim, ad
intrandum et ingrediendum in praedictum messuagium, sive collegium et caetera
praemissa et in quamlibet inde parcellam, ac plenam et pacificam posessionem
statum et seisinam inde, vice et nominibus nostris, capiendum: Et post
hujusmodi possessionem statum et seisinam inde sic captam et habitam, deinde
eadem ad dandum et deliberandum praefato THOMAE POPE, militi, aut suo in ea
part attornato, secundum vim, formam, et effectum hujus presentis carte
nostre: Ratum ac firmum habentes, et habituri, totum et quicquid attornati
nostri fecerint, seu eorum aliquis fecerit, in premissis. IN CUJUS rei
testimonium huic presenti carte indentate parts praedicte sigilla sua
alternatim apposuerunt. DATUM vicesimo die Februarii, Annis regnorum Philippi
et Mariae, etc. etc. primo et secundo It appears, that in process of time, the
pension of xxvj s. viij d. herein mentioned, remained unpaid into the exchequer
for several years, through the neglect of the heirs or assigns of George Owen:
insomuch, that the payment of the same fell on the new college, to the amount
of about twenty pounds. Whereupon, on due representation. James the first
orders Abbot archbishop of Canterbury, Williams bishop of Lincoln, and lord
keeper, and Andrews bishop of Winchester, "out of his gracious and princely
care of the good of all colleges," to direct a precept to the said heirs,
requiring them forthwith to repair to the president; and to make full
satisfaction for the past, and entirely to relieve the college for the future.
Which they did, by an instrument dated at Whitehall, Feb. xix. 1622. and signed
with their own hands. In Thesauriar. coll. Trin.
.

Per me GEORGIUM OWEN. WILLIELMUS MARTYN.


NUMB. X. Preamble of Letters Patent, from Philip and Mary, for founding
Trinity College at Oxford. Dat. Mar. viii. 1554. -- 5 These. ut supr. in Cist.
Et in 1. Part. Orig. de Ann. 1, 2. Phil. et Mar. In Offic. Rememorat. Scaccar.
Et inter Lit. Pat. Phil. et Mar. Ann. Reg. 1, 2. Part. 5. In Capel. Rotul.
.
PHILIPPUS et Maria, dei gratia, rex et regina Angliae, Franciae, Neapolis,
Jerusalem, et Hiberniae, fidei defensores, principes Hispaniarum et Siciliae,
archiduces Austriae, duces Mediolani, Burgundiae et Brabantiae, comites
Haspurgiae, Flandriae, et Tirolis, omnibus ad quos praesentes literae
pervenerint salutem. Cum praedilectus et fidelis consiliarius noster THOMAS
POPE, miles, instinctu charitatis, divina praeveniente gratia, in animum
induxerit quoddam COLLEGIUM de uno praesidente, presbitero, et de duodecem
sociis, graduatis, quorum quatuor semper erunt presbyteri, ac de octo
scholaribus, infra universitatem nostram Oxon, in quadam domo sive messuagium
vulgariter vocato Derham College, a^ infra et scitum et precinctum ejusdem, de
novo erigere, creare, et in tempus perpetuum stabilire, in honorem sanctae et
individuae TRINITATIS, et dei omnipotentis gloriam: Ac etiam unam liberam
Scolam, infra villam de Hokenorton, vel alibi infra com. Oxon. in honorem
nominis JESU, vulgariter vocandam Jesus Scolehowse: Ac idem Collegium,
maneriis, terris, redditibus, et proventibus, ex sua munificentia, ad
sufficientem sustentationem eorundem Collegii et Schole, liberaliter dotare, ac
ornamentis, utensilibus, et aliis bonis convenientibus, sufficienter ornare, in
maximum scolarium literis ibidem incumbenitum solamen et incitamentum,
optimumque omnibus simile posthac imitandum praebens exemplum; ac etiam in
communem utilitatem omnium subditorum nostrorum: Nosque igitur, ut haec sua
devota intentio debitum et perpetuum, nostra regia mediante auctoritate et
facultate, sortiatur effectum, ad humilem petitionem ejusdem THOMAE, etc. etc.
etc.

Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmon. octavo die Marcii, annis regnorum nostrorum
primo et secundo. Per ipsos Reg. et Regin Signed HARE, i. e. sir Nicholas Hare,
master of the rolls.
.
NUMB. XI. Part of the CHARTER of ESTABLISHMENT of the said college, in
consequence of the foregoing Letters Patent. Dat. Mar. xxviii. 1555 In
Thesauriar. praedict.
.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc scriptum pervenerit. Thomas Pope, de
Tyttenhanger in com Hertf. miles, salutem in domino sempiternam. Sciatis, quod
ego prefatus THOMAS, licentia regia ad omnia et singula subscripta perficienda
primitus habita et obtenta, prout per literas suas patentes, gerentes datum
apud Westmon. octavo die Marcii, annis regnorum suorum primo et secundo,
before liquet et apparet: Ad dei omnipotentis gloriam, ac in honorem sanctae
et individuae Trinitatis, per praesentes, virtute licenciae praedictae, erigo,
creo, stabilio, et fundo, unum collegium de uno praesidente presbytero,
duodecem sociis graduatis, quorum quatuor erunt presbiteri, ac de octo
scholaribus, perpetuis duraturis temporibus infra scitum et praecinctum
cujusdam domus meae, vulgariter vocatae Derham College, situatae et existentis
infra univ. Oxon. Et ulterius volo et ordino, quod idem collegium, sic per me
creatum et erectum, Collegium sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate
Oxon. ex fundatione Thomae Pope militis, nuncupabitur et appellabitur. Et ut
collegium praedictum de personis congruis et convenientibus adimpleatur et
decoretur; sciatis, Me prefatum Thomam Pope, de moribus, doctrina ac industria,
dilecti mihi in Christo Thome Slythurst, clerici, sancte Theologiae Baccalarei,
et caeterorum hic per me nominandorum, plurimum confidentem; constituisse et
ordinasse prefatum Thomam Slythurst primum et modernum praesidentem presbyterum
dicti collegii: et Stephanum Marks, artium magistrum, Robertum Newton At this
time fellow of Exeter college. The next year, viz. xvii. Oct. 1557, he was
elected annual rector of the said house. Wood MSS. Mus. Ashm. E. 29. Afterward
he was elected the second perpetual rector of that college, Nov. ii. 1570. This
office he resigned Oct. iv. 1578. Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 94. col. 2.
, Joannem Barwyke, Jacobum Bell, Rogerum Crispyn, Johannem Rychardeson, Thomam
Scotte, Georgium Sympson, artium baccalareos, primos et modernos socios et
scholares dicti collegii: et Johannem Arden, Johannem Comporte, Johannem Perte,
et Johannem Langsterre, primos et modernos scholares ejusdem collegii:
Reservans mihi, et executoribus meis, authoritatem et plenam potestatem
nominandi et eligendi residuos socios et scholares, usque ad completionem
numeri in licentia regia contenti. -- Sciatisque ulterius, ut omnia et singula
premissa debitum et perpetuum sortiantur effectum, quod ego Thomas Pope, do, ac
per praesentes concedo, eisdem praesidenti, sociis, et scholaribus, totum illud
messuagium (sive nuper collegium) meum, vocatum Derham college in univ. Oxon.
ac totum illum scitum, etc. adeo plene, libere, integre, ac in tam amplis modo
ac forma, prout praedictum messuagium -- nuper habui, virtute ac vigore
perquisitionis inde per me factae de Georgio Owen, etc. etc The remainder, in
which it is specified that they shall be a body politic in nomine and re,
shall plead and be impleaded, with other privileges usual in forms of this
kind, is therefore omitted. Together with a Grant of new Lands, etc.
.

Dat. Mar. xxviii. 1, 2. Phil. Mar.
Sub Sigillo et Manu Dom. THOMAE POPE.
NUMB. XII. Letter of Attorney from Thomas Slythurste, for taking possession of
a certain message in Oxford, called Trinity College. Dat. Mar. xxiii. 1555
Thesauriar. ut supr.
.
NOVERINT universi per praesentes, me Thomam Slythurste, Canonicum sive
Prebendarium libere capelle sancti Georgii martyris infra castrum regium de
Wyndesore in com Barks. sacre theology bacalarium, feciffe, constituisse, et
in loco meo posuisse, dilectos mihi in Christo Stephanum Marks, artium
magistrum, et Robertum Newton, artium bacalarium, meos veros et legitimos
attornatos conjunctim et divisim, ad intrandum et ingrediendum, pro me, vice et
nomine meo, in unum messuagium cum pertinenciis suis universis in univ. Oxon.
vocatum Collegium sancte et individue Trinitatis in univ. Oxon. praedicta, ex
fundatione venerabilis viri Thome Pope, militis, ac plenam et pacificam
possessionem et seisinam inde capiendam: et post hujusmodi seisinam sic inde
receptam et habitam, eandem ad meum proprium usum retinend. et custodiend.
secundum vim, formam et effectum cujusdam donationis, Mihi et aliis fact per
prefatum venerarabilem Thomam Pope, militem, ut per eandem donationem inde
confectam, cujus Dat. xxviii. die mensis Martii annnis reg. Phil. et Mar. reg.
et regin. prim. et sec. manifest liquet et apparet. Caeteraque omnia ac
singula quae in premissis, vel circa ea, necessaria fuerint seu quomodolibet
oportuna, vice et nomine meo facienda, exequenda, et finienda, adeo plenarie ac
integre prout facere possem seu deberem, si in premissis personaliter
interessem. Ratum gratumque habens et habiturus, totum et quicquid dicti mei
attornati conjunctim et divisim meo nomine fecerint in premissis per
praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium, sigillum meum apposui. Dat. apud Chalfont
sancti Petri, xxviii. Marcii, annis regnor. Phil. et Mar. etc. primo et secundo.

Per me THOMAM SLYTHURSTE Manu et sigill. ipsius.
.

NUMB. XIII. Admission of the first President, Fellows, and Scholars, of the
said college, on the Eve of Trinity-Sunday, May, xxx, 1556 Registr. prim. dict.
coll. fol. 1. a.
.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Sciatis, quod anno domini millesimo quingentesimo
quinquagesimo sexto, tricesimo die mensis Maii, qui eo anno vigilia
sanctissimae Trinitatis extitit, in presentia Mri Roberti Morwent I find the
same person, at the time of founding saint John's college, employed by sir T.
White, xviii. Jun. 1, 2. Phil. Mar. to take possession of Bernard college, and
its appurtenances, just before granted from Christ Church to the said sir
Thomas White for the foundation of saint John's college. Collectan. MSS. Wood,
Mus. Ashmol. 8513. -- He was nominated one of the first fellows of C. C. C. by
bishop Fox, the founder, and appointed by him, perpetual vice president. He
died 1558. Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 232. He was eminent for his
learning, and a singular encourager of literature. Fulman, in his manuscript
corrections of Wood's HIST. and ANTIQ. OXON. informs us, that Morwent was
appointed by bishop Fox to succeed Claymond, the first president of that
college, without election. MSS. Mus. Ashmol. D. 9. 4to. page 40.
, praesidis collegii Corporis Christi in univ. Oxon. et notarii publici
infrascripti, ac aliorum quorum nomina inferius in hoc instrumento continentur:
Magister Thomas Slythurste, sacrae theologiae bacalarius, et canonicus
prebendarius liberae capellae regis et reginae in castro suo de Wyndesore,
oriundus ex com. Berks. Sarum dioces. primus PRAESES nominatus ac assignatus
collegii sanctissimae et individuae Trinitatis in univ. Oxon. praedicta, ex
fundatione venerabilis viri domini THOMAE POPE militis, juramentum subiit in
Sacello dicti collegii de Officio PRAESIDIS rite et fideliter ibidem
administrando; magistro Roberto Morwent praedicto hujusmodi juramentum, virtute
literarum sibi a Fundatore missarum ac ibidem palam et public lectarum,
exigente. Forma autem juramenti ab eodem praestiti de verbo in verbum sequitur.
Ego Thomas Slythurste, etc, etc. Qui quidem PRAESES sic juratus, eisdem die,
loco, et anno, a magistris, Arthuro Yeldarde, com. Northumberl. Dioces. Dunelm.
et Stephano Marks, com. Cornub. Dioces. Exon. -- in facultate artium
magistris: Et magistro Joanne Barwyke, com. Devon. Dioces. Exon. in facultate
artium inceptore: et dominis Joanne Bell, com. Somerset. Bath. et Well. Dioces.
-- Joanne Richardson, com. Cumberland. Dioces. Carliol. -- Georgio Rudde, com.
Westmoreland. Dioces. Dunelm. -- Thoma Scotte, com. Cumberland. Dioces.
Carliol. -- Rogero Crispyn, com. Devon. Dioces. Exon. -- Roberto Evans, com.
Cornub. Dioces. Exon. -- Joanne Perte, com. Warwic. Dioces. Litchf. et Cov. --
Roberto Bellamie, com. et Dioces. Eboraci, artium bacalariis, et in SOCIOS
dicti collegii per prefatum Fundatorum nominatis et ascitis, juramentum ad
SOCIORUM Officium, juxta statutorum dicti collegii normam, been et fideliter
praestandum, exigebat. Tenor autem juramenti ab ipsis tunc praestiti sic habet.
Ego. etc. etc. Eodem etiam die, sine temporis intervallo domini Johannes
Langsterre, com. et Dioces. Ebor. annos natus novemdecim ad festum divi Joannis
Baptistae proxime precedens, et Reginaldus Braye, com. Bedford. Dioces.
Lincoln. annorum octodecim ad festum divi Johannis praedictum, artium
bacalarii: Joannes Arden, com. et Dioces. Oxon. annorum octodecim ad festum
Pasche proxime precedens, Joannes Comporte, com. Middlesex. Dioces. London.
annorum octodecim ad initium quadragesime precedentis, Robertus Thraske, com.
Somerset. dioces. Exon. annorum octodecim ad festum purificationis precedens,
Gulielmus Saltmarshe, com. et dioces. Ebor. annorum octodecim ad festum divi
Lucae precedens, et Jacobus Harrys, com. Glouc. dioces. Bristol. annorum
septemdecim ad festum divi Johannis Baptistae precedens, in facultate artium
students non graduati, in SCOLARES dicti collegii per Fundatorem nominati et
asciti; dicto Praesidi juramentum, de officio SCOLARIUM in ipso collegio
humiliter et prompte per ipsos et ipsorum quemlibet praestando, dederunt, in
hunc qui sequitur modum. Ego. etc. etc. Sociis autem et Scholaribus sic
juratis, ad OFFICIARIORUM electionem processum est pro anno illo instanti. In
qua quidem electione, magister Marks ad VICE-PAESIDENTIS officium, ex mandato
domini Fundatoris deputatus est: magister Barwyke in DECANUM, dominus
Richardson ac dominus Perte, in BURSARIOS, per electionem assumpti sunt:
magister Yeldarde, ex Domini Fundatoris voluntate LECTORIS PHILOSOPHICI,
dominus Bell, LECTORIS RETORICI, per electionem, onera suscipiunt. Horumque
singuli, juxta statuta de suo cujusque fideliter obeundo officio, corporale
juramentum dederunt, in presentia omnium Sociorum et Scholarium. His demum ita
peractis, prefatus magister Robertus Morwent, Praesidis et Officiariorum
manibus sigillum commune collegii, a Fundatore prius acceptum et apud se
interea temporis reservatum, tradidit: quo in collegii Gazophilacio firmiter
reposito, dictus Praeses, Socii, et Scolares, vespertinas preces, cum cantu et
nota, solemniter sactissimae Trinitati ea nocte persolverunt. Ac in crastino,
matutinas, et alias diei horas, una cum missa honorifice celebrarunt. Inter
cujus quidem missae solennia, habita est a Praeside concio ad populum This
SERMON, (improperly styled ad populum,) of the first President, was in the
hands of Dr. Charlett: and I find the following short extract from it, among
the papers of Mr. Wise. [MSS. F. Wise.] "Jam vero quibus orationis praeconiis
oportunam venerabilis admodum FUNDATORIS nostri MUNIFICENTIAM praedicare
pergam, qui caducam hujus Academiae famam redintegrare, fortunasque bonarum
literarum collapsas in solidum revocare, COLLEGIUM novum stabiliendo,
proventusque et possessiones ampliter elargiendo, ut videtis, obnixe laborat?
Studiorum tantae jam nunc, et antea fuerunt angustiae, ut de artibus et
scientiis penitus actum esset, nisi hujus unius auctoritate, prudentia, gratia,
voluntate, liberalitate, res nostrae constitissent. Id quod vivus etiamnum
valensque praestitit: horum beneficiorum testis oculatus ipse futurus. Quam
magnis et praemiis et commodis ex ejus insigni pietate studia nunc
instaurabimus, hi parietes quasi pleno disertoque ore loquuntur. Taceo hoc in
loco, ubi tot ejus ALUMNOS eruditione celebres aspicio, ut literatos homines
unice semper amaverit, et muneribus et favore complexus assidue fuerit, VIR
amplissimus, et ipse literis ac doctrinis rite excultus. Pariter etiam
novistis, quam largus est in pauperes et egenos, in rebus gerendis dexter,
strenuus, et officiosus, religionis avitae tenax, etc." No great credit is due
to professed panegyrics. But these commendations are neither extravagant, nor
unsupported by facts.
, qui frequens illuc et multus confluxerat gratulabundus, et omnia fausta
nascenti collegio exoptaturus. Qui quidem universus, una cum collegiorum
praesidibus, splendido et magnifico, eo die, excepti sunt convivio. Et ut hinc
facile conjiciatur, quanto cum applausu et gratulatione exordium sumpserit hoc
collegium; ac praeterea ut optime meriti beneficiorum suorum memoria, ac debita
laud, non fraudentur: visum est hic, in perpetuum rei monumentum, commemorare,
quaenam donaria a quamplurimis munificis viris, in ipsius veluti crepundiis,
acceperit hoc collegium. Primo, a venerabili sacerdote, magistro Thoma Sothern
Thomas Southern was elected fellow of Magdalene college, Oxford, about 1500,
and occurs as such at a visitation of that college by bishop Fox, in 1506. He
is otherwise called one of Ingledew's chaplains there, with a salary of ten
mar^^. Registr. Fox. Winton. lib. ii. fol. 44, 51, b. 52. b. et seq. He was
elected boreal proctor of the university, of Oxford, May 2, 1511. Wood, Hist.
Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 417. He was also fellow of Eton college, in 1512.
Willis, MSS. collectan. co. Bucks. fol. No. 23. in bibl. Bodl. He was
instituted vicar of Modbury, co. Devon. Mar. 17. 1517, at the presentation of
Eton college. registr. Oldham, Exon. This vicarage he resigned in 1523.
registr. Veysey, Exon. He was instituted rector of Farringdon, co. Hants, Jun.
5. 1519, being then styled A.M. at the presentation of Hugh Oldham, bishop of
Exeter: which rectory he resigned in 1524. registr. Fox. Winton. lib. iv. fol.
15. b. and lib. v. fol. 168. He was made treasurer of Exeter cathedral, May 8,
1531. Le Neve's Fasti, p. 91. He was appointed, by the name of "Thomas Sothern
clerk," a commissioner, with others, for suppressing heresies in the diocese
of Exeter, Feb. 16, 1556. Wilkins, Council. iii. 140. He died in 1557. Wood.
Athen. Oxon. i. f. 8. His will is dated April 30, 1556. Proved Jul. 24, 1557.
In registr. Wrestley. qu. 25. cur. praerog. Cant. The legacy mentioned in the
text proved to be a mistake. By the said will, he bequeathes the sum of xiij l.
vj s. viij d. to the fabric of Exeter cathedral; and orders the whole choir of
the church to attend his obsequies: from whence it may be concluded that he was
buried in his cathedral. He likewise founds an obit in the said church.
Ingledew's chaplains, or fellows, abovementioned, were restrained to natives of
the diocese of York and Durham.
, ecclesiae cathedralis Exoniensis Thesaurario, See LIFE, p. 127.
viginti libras aureas monetae optimae, dono accepit; ultra quinquaginta libras,
quas eidem post mortem suam, per testamentum legaverat. Deinde, ad convivium in
ipso sanctissimae Trinitatis die splendidius ac liberalius faciendum, Mag.
Edovardus Love The founder's brother in law, and steward, See LIFE, p. 182.
These things, I presume, he sent by the founder's orders.
, generosus, collegio misit cunicellos quadraginta octo, agnos tres, capones
novemdecim, porcellos tres, anserulos quatuordecim, pipiones quinquies
duodenas, damas duos, et vitulum unum: Dominus Georgius Gyfforde George Gyfford
occurs dubbed a knight of the carpet, by queen Mary, the day following her
coronation, in the chamber of presence at Westminster. MSS. Dugd. Mus. Ashm. B.
173. A visitor of the monasteries. Dugd. Warw. p. 800. A supervisor of
chantries in com. Bucks, 1549. Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. 38. He interceded with
lord Cromwell for the preservation of the monastery of Wolstrope, and other
houses, which he visited. See LIFE, p. 27. He was buried, Jan. 7, 1557,
according to Strype, with much magnificence. Eccl. Mem. iii. 389. He was of
Buckinghamshire; of which county he was a representative in queen Mary's first
parliament held at Oxford, 1554. Willis, Not. parl. ed. 1730. p. 89. Compare
MISCELLANEOUS ANTIQUITIES, pp. 37. 40. Numb. i. Printed at Strawberry Hill,
1772. 4to.
, miles, cunicellos viginti quatuor, et pullos gallinaceos duodecem: Magister
Crocker The founder mentions him in a letter to the president, 15 Feb. 1557. "I
have sent you by Mr. Crocker your Cross with a case." He was probably of
Hook-Norton, co. Oxon. See Strype's Annals, Vol. iv. 123. N. 79. App. One John
Crocker, esquire of Hook-norton, is mentioned by Dugdale, presenting to the
church of Warmington, in Warwickshire, Sept. 10, 1554. WARWICKSHIRE, p. 417.
Many of the name are buried in Hook-Norton church. Particularly John Croker,
1568. See also Lee's Visitation, MSS. ut supr. p. 26. I find Sir Edward North
alienating to John Croker the manor of Melcomb, co. Oxon. Licent. Alienat. 7
Feb. 35 Hen. viii. Part. 18.
, generosus, dimidiatum bovem, et agnum unum: Magister Edmundes The founder's
uncle. See LIFE, p. 2.
, generosus, damam unum, et vitulum unum: Magister Antonius Ardern The
founder's relations. See LIFE, p. 121. 183. He mentions John Arden of
Cottisford, co. Oxon. in his will. And in Comp. Burss. 1587. -- 8. I find,
"Sol. magistro Seller equitanti Kirtleton cum xeniolo ad Mag. Ardern. iv d.
[This was Antony (See Registr. PERROT, infra citat^ NUMB. xxi. fol. 112. a.)
.] s.

This name is often written Arden. It was an ancient family, originally of
Warwickshire. Dugd. Warw. and MSS. Lee, Visit. Oxfordsh. I cannot find out
"Panes sex solidorum," but suppose it was some species of manchet. In lord
Guilford's pedigree of POPE, Arden occurs very early.


generosus, vitulum dimidiatum, anserulos duos, porcellum unum, et caponem
unum: Magister Ricardus Ardern, generosus, panes sex solidorum: Magister Platte
Or Plotte. Bartholomew Plotte of Sparsholt, in Berkshire, appears to have
married the founder's uncle's daughter. Ashmole's Berks. iii. 285.
, generosus, ovem unam, et anserulos duos: Magister Yates A college tenant, and
one of the founder's mother's relations. See LIFE, p. 2. and Indentur. in
Registr. prim. coll. fol. 13.
, generosus, ovem unam: Orpewoode Alice Orpwood, mother of Rob. Parrot, whose
descendants were connected with Northly, died 1558. See LIFE, p. 183. and App.
XXI.
de Northlea ovem unam: Brianus de Cogges Both, the founder's brothers in law,
and, I suppose his tenants or retainers. See LIFE, p. 184.
anserulos duos, et pullos duos: Magistra Irishe In whose house Cranmer and
Ridley were confined, at Oxford; her husband, a vintner, being mayor of the
city. Ridley particularly mentions her in a letter, dat. May 31, 1555, but with
no very favorable circumstances. "Viro, in cujus aedibus ego custodior, uxer
dominatur -- vir ipse, Irischius nomine, satis mitis est omnibus: uxori vero
plusquam obsequentissimus." Ridley's LIFE of Ridley, 589, 663. -- She was
buried in St. Martin's church, Oxon. 1556. MSS. Wood. Bib. Bodl. Rawl.
, oppidana, lagenam vini unam: Magister Furse I find Thomas Furs, or Firse,
senior bailiff of the city, 1556. Wood's Cat. of Mayors, etc. MSS. Mus. Ashm D.
7. -- p. 118. I find also John Bridgeman, senior bailiff, 1531. ibid. with
Wood's note, in marg. that he married Mary the sister of sir Thomas White,
founder of St. John's, p. 114.
, oppidanus, lagenam vini unam: Magister Bridgeman Bridgeman was perhaps a
vintner of the city of Oxford, as were Furse and Irishe, here also mentioned.
Registr. Cur. Cancel. Oxon. notat. GG. fol. 32. "Feb. iii. 1548. Quo die
compar. personaliter, Magister Edmundus Iry^^e, etc. etc. Thomas Furse, etc.
etc. and in the presens of them all, Mr. Chauncellor did decreye, that they and
every of them shall sell red wine, claret wine, and white wine, after xiiij
d. the gallon. And all other, selling the same wynes within the city of
Oxforde, shall selle after the same rate." ARCHIV. Univ. Oxon.
, oppidanus, dimidiatam vini lagenam, cum fragis. Convivio autem finito
Concerning this feast, I find the following articles, Comp. Burss. 1556. "Sol.
in regardo famulis diversorum generosorum apportantibus a dominis suis missa
munera, et aliis occupatis in curandis cibis, aliisque negotiis, in die sancte
Trinitatis. xviij s. v d. s. v d.



At ancient feasts it was the custom for friends to send in presents of
provision. Thus at the inthronisation-feast of archbishop Wareham, in 1504. "In
Expensis necessariis, unae cum regardis datis diversis personis venientibus cum
diversis exhenniis." Batteley's CANTERBURY. Land. 1703. Append. Suppl. p. 28.


, et actis Altissimo gratiis, decedentes hospites et extranei omnes, Sociis et
Scolaribus suum collegium been precantes relinquunt; aptum post quietem
adeptam, futurum musis ac bonis literis domicilium It appears however that
although the whole number, one scholar excepted, was first admitted in a formal
and legal manner on this day, that ten fellows and seven scholars had lived in
the college, and received all emoluments and allocations, for nine weeks
before, viz. from the feast of the Annunciation preceding, with which day the
first Computus begins. In which nine weeks, I find also, "Sol. pro quatuor
diebus pietanciae in septimana Paschae praecedentis, viz pro ipso die Paschae,
et tribus feriis sequentibus. xxvj. s. viij. d. s viij. d.

And although this Computus ends at Michaelmas following, I find, "Sol. pro uno
die pietantiae anticipato ex mandato Fundatoris, viz. pro obitu Fundatoris in
mense novembris futuro [die 16.]

Which obit was afterward appointed to the seventh of August, on which it is
still continued. And though the obit for his wife Margaret was then on Jan. 16,
yet they kept it within the time of this Account. viz Term. ii Septim i. "Sol.
pro uno die pietantiae, viz. pro obitu Domine Margarete uxoris nostri
Fundatoris. vj s. viij d.



This Computus begins with the feast of the Annunciation, and ends with the
Michaelmas following. Some articles are charged for one term, or quarter, that
is from Trinity to Michaelmas, and some for the whole half year, viz. "Sol.
lectori philosophico per annum dimidiatum..... uno termino.... uno termino...
et tertia part precedentis... ab initio collegii usque ad fest. S. Michaelis
archangeli proxime seq. per xvii Septimanas....

From all which circumstances, taken together, it is manifest, that they were
resident, though perhaps not fully settled, in the college, before the formal
admission specified in this instrument.


.

ACTA sunt haec, eo quo scribuntur modo, Anno Dom. praedict. necnon die et
mense praedictis, in presentia publici notarii subscripti, et Magistrorum
Roberti Morwent, Arthuri Yeldarde, testium meorum, et aliorum plurimorum. Et
ego, etc. [ Deest nomen notarii.]

NUMB. XVI. Conditions relating to the intended Foundation of a free
Grammar School, at Dedington, Co. Oxon. by Sir Thomas Pope Ex Indentura
quadripart. Dat. April 1. 1, 2. Phil. et Mar. 1555. In Thesauriar. praedict.
.
"THE said president, fellows, and scholars, [ of Trinity college Oxford,]
shall yearly for evermore give and pay unto one hable person, well and
sufficiently learned and instructed in gramer and humanity, which shall be
SCHOLE-MASTER of and at a frescole, to be called Thesus Scole of the foundation
of the said sir Thomas Pope, to be erected at Dedington in the said county of
Oxon, and to teach children gramer and humanity there freely, for his yearly
salarye and wages, xx marks, of good and lawful money: And to one other hable
and learned person in gramer to be USHER within the said freschole, yearly viii
l of good and lawful money, to teach children likewise there freely. The same
several salaries and wages to be paid to the said scolemaster and usher
yearly, at two terms in the year: that is to say, at the feast of
Thannunciacion of our lady saint Marie and saint Mighell Tharchaungell, or
within one quarter of a year next after any of the said feasts, by even
portions. And that the said scolemaster and usher, after the erection of the
said scole, to be in the said scole, as is aforesaid, shall be from time to
time for ever named and appointed by the president, fellows, and scollers, of
the said college, and of their successoures or the most part of them. And the
said scolemaster and usher so to be named and appoyntyd, to have and enjoye the
said offices of scolemaster and ushershipp during life; unless some fawlt,
offense, or notable crime, be committed or don by any of them, and sufficiently
proved against any of them, that then upon such fawlt or crime so committed or
don, and proved, as is aforesaid, the party commyttinge such fawlt, offense,
or crime, to lose his said rome, and a new to be named for him, as is
aforesaid. And the said scolemaster, and usher and scollers, that shall be in
the said scole, to be further and otherwise ordered concerning the order and
rules of the said Scole, and good contynuaunce thereof, as shall be appointed by
the said sir Thomas Pope in his life, or after his death by the said dame
Elisabeth his wife, within the statutes of the said college, or by any other
writing sealed and subscribed by the hands of either of them. And the residew
of the said revenues and profitts [ besides certain other uses] for the charge
of the reparacions of the said scolehouse and other reasonable charges that
such of the said college as shall yearlie survey the said scolehouse, for the
performance of the good orders therein to be continualie kept, shall be put
unto, about the said survey. -- "

NUMB. XV. Account of a petition referred to the princess Elisabeth at
Hatfield, by sir Thomas Pope, in August, 1556 Registr. prim. Coll. praedict.
fol. 7. a.
.
AD futuram rei memoriam, atque ut alienis periculis edocti praesentes ac
futuri hujus collegii socii ac scolares, cautius quod ad statutorum
observantiam pertinet sese gerere discant. Sciatis, quod vicesimo die Augusti,
anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo quinquagesimo sexto, et hujus collegii anno
primo; Dominus Geogius Sympson, lector philosophicus, et Dominus Georgius
Rudde, artium bachalarii, et dicti collegii socii, ob violatum statutum De
muris noctu non scandendis, juxta ejusdem statuti exigentiam perpetuae
amotionis et expulsionis a collegio poena fuisse punitos, sine spe regressus
quam ullo modo in eodem habebant reliquam. Unde ad venerabilem virum Dominum
Thomam Pope, dicti collegii Fundatorem, tanquam ad Sacram Anchoram, confugere
conati, de perpetrato crimine impunitatem, aut saltem poenae mitigationem,
suppliciter petituri. Aegre tandem, ac nonnisi mediantibus ac intercedentibus
excellentissima principe Domina Elizabetha, serenissimae Mariae sorore, cui
tunc ab intimis consiliis dictus Fundator fuit, ac etiam propria conjuge,
praenobili femina Domina item Elizabetha, exauditi sunt. Atque ita datis
literis ad mag. Thomam Slythurste, tum collegii sui Praesidem, dicti duo
bachalarii public in communi collegii aula, crimen suum coram omnibus tum
sociis tum scolaribus agnoscentes, in societatem denuo recepti sunt: indicta
illis per dictum praesidem et officiarios mulcta viz. vj. s. viij. d. ad duas
cortinas bombycinas emendas, pro Summi Altaris, in Sacello collegii, ampliori
ornatu. Literarum autem proditarum tenor de verbo in verbum ad hunc qui
sequitur modum se habet Inserted in LIFE, page 84.
.

NUMB. XVI. An indenture made May 5, 1556, "witnessing that the president,
fellows, and scholars of Trinity college Oxford, have received of their
founder, such parcells of church playte and ornaments of the church, as
hereafter followethe E Registro praedict. fol. 8. a.
."
FFYRST, a chalice with a patent [paten] gilt, weyingee xx. oz. iii. quarters
Of all the plate given by the founder, this is the only piece now remaining.
All that he gave, enumerated in various parts of this work, was either
abolished as superstitious in the year 1570, this piece excepted, or granted to
king Charles the first in the year 1642. It is well known that all the colleges
in Oxford contributed their plate to that monarch's necessities. A laudable and
very seasonable proof of loyalty, but much regretted by the lovers of ancient
art, as it destroyed many valuable specimens of curious workmanship not
elsewhere preserved, in an article which our magnificent ancestors carried to a
most superb and sumptuous excess. -- I take this occasion of mentioning here
two pieces of plate formerly belonging to the said college, granted with the
rest to king Charles, which would at present have been great curiosities: their
inscriptions are thus recorded. "Poculum collegii S. et individuae Trinitatis
Oxon. ex dono Joannis Denham unici filii Joannis Denham militis et unius
baronum scaccarii. 1631." 17 oz This was Denham the poet, author of COOPER's
HILL, etc. The other was inscribed, "Ex dono Jacobi Harrington equitis aurati
filii natu maximi et hujus collegii comm." 13 oz. dim. 3. d. No date. This was
Harrington, author of the OCEANA. [Ex quadam schedul. in thesauriar. Coll.
antedict.] Who little suspected, that this innocent memorial of gratitude to
the place of his education, would be converted into a contribution, however
inconsiderable, for the support of royalty.
. Item, one other chalice with a patent Paten.
, parcel gilt, poz. xiii. oz. di. Item, a pipe of sylver, parcel gilt, poz.
xiii. oz. di. Item a pax of ivory garnyshed with sylver and gilt, and set with
counterfeete stones. Item, a chappel-crosse of copper, with Marye and John, and
a foot to the same, gilt. Item, a pair of censors of copper. Item, ii. pair of
latten candlestickes for the altar. Item, a holy water-stop of latten. Item ii
crewettes of tynne. Item a pint bottell of tynne for the chapel. Item a deske
to lay a mass book upon, pained grene. Item, a lectorne Properly a desk for
reading the lessons. Lutrin Fr.
of waynscott for the quere [choir.] Item, ii. fair antyphoners Antiphonarium.
Lat.
of parchmente lymned Illuminated.
with gold. Item, a fair legeant Or LECTIONARY, which contained all the
lessons, whether from scripture, or other books, which were directed to be read
in the course of the year. Rot. Comp. Coll. Winton. A.D. 1479. MS. "Pro
reparacione magne Legende, iij s. iv d.
[legend] of parchmente lymned with gold. Item, iiii. grayles The Grail or
Gradual contained all that was sung by the choir at high-mass.
of parchmente lymned with gold. Item a rector chori of parchmente lymned with
gold. Item, a fair mass book of parchmente lymned with gold, and covered with
black velvette. Item, a mass-booke of parchmente covered with leather. Item, a
psalter for the quere printed with note. Item a suite of vestmentes of red
clothe of tissue orphrysed with needle work, with iii. albes, stoles, and
fannels See Dusresne, LAT. GLOSS. V. FANO vel PHANO.
, agreeable to the same. Item, ii. copes of red clothe of tyssue, orphrysed
with needle work, and a running orphrise of green clothe tyssue. Item, ii.
copes of yellowe baudkyn, woven with scallopshells, orphrised with grene clothe
of tyssue. Item, a suite of vestmentes of blewe velvette, orprised with needle
work, with albes stoles and fannels agreeable to the same. Item, a suite of
vestmentes of red clothe of bawdkyn, orphrised with needle-worke, with albes,
stoles, and fannells, agreeable to the same. Item, a suite of vestmentes of red
bawdkyn, woven with birds. orphrised with blewe bawdkyn, with albes, stoles,
and fannels, agreeable to the same. Item, a cope of blewe baudkyn, woven with
sons [suns], orphrised with needle work. Item, a cope of red bawdkyn woven
with birds of gold, orphrised with needle-worke. Item, a cope of white damask
with flowers of gold, orphrised with needleworke. Item, a vestment of white
damask orphrised with needle work, with an albe, stole, and fannell, to the
same. Item, a vestmente of black velvette for a mass of requiem In marg.
"Note the albe, stole, and fannel to the black vestmente is lacking, which
shall be sent."
. Item, a vestment of blewe grogreyn I know not exactly the meaning of this
word, but it is used in the INVENTORY of the goods of Curtess bishop of
Chichester, who died in 1587. "One silk grograine gown faced with velvet. --
Another grograine gown, etc." Strype, ANN. REF. vol. i. B. i. chapter 26. page
332. edit. 1728. I suppose it to be from the French gros grain, and that
grogram is its corruption.
powdered with crowns of needleworke, with albe, etc. Item, a vestmene of
white satin of Brydges [Bruges], with a grene cross of satin of Bridge,
powdered with flowers, with albe, etc. Item, a vestment of white..... for Lent,
with an albe, etc. Item a vestmente of white fustion for Lent having a cross
of read [red] fustion, with an albe, etc. Item, ii. alter-clothes for the high
alter; that is to say, i. for the upper part, and i. for the nether part, of
checker bawdkyn, pained Striped or edged. In the romance of IWAIN AND GAWAYN
(MSS. Cott. GALB. E. xi.) we have this apposite passage.

"And with a mantell sche me clad. It was of purpur fair and fine. And the
pane of rich ermine." That is, The border was of ermine.


with crymson velvette, powdered with flowers and angels of gold, Item, ii.
like alter-clothes for the said alter of blewe bawdkyn, pained with red
velvette woven with books of gold. Item ii. like alter-clothes, for the said
alter, of white satin of Brydges, powdered with birds of gold. Item, ii.
nether alter-clothes for the alters in the Body of the chapel, of read
bawdekyn woven with flowers and castles of gold, and payned with white damask,
and green Bruges.
brydge-satten powdered with drops of velvette, and Jesus of gold. Item, the
upper and nether clothe for the Sepulcher The following appointment occurs in
the Founder's ADDITAMENTUM before-cited. fol. ult. "Volo, ut duodecim denarii
annuatim concedantur, ad SEPULCRUM DOMINI in sacello collegii mei, in die
Parasceves et VIGILIA PASCHAE, pernoctantibus et vigilantibus, ad laborum
suorum ea in re compensationem." See an account of a pompous SEPULCHER of this
sort made for Radcliffe-church at Bristol, in 1470, in Walpole's ANECD. PAINT.
vol. i. page 45. edit. i. -- Rot. Comp. Coll. Wint. 1395. MS. "Et in i.
carpentario conducto per ii. dies ad faciendam domum SEPULCRI in choro, etc. vj
d."
, pained with white and red brydge-satten. Item, a hearse clothe of black
fustion of Naples powdered with images, birds, and rolls of needle-worke,
with a cross of white fustion, and the dove in the myddest, of needle-worke.
Item, a clothe for the Sacrament of white taffata edged with bone work and
tassels of gold. Item, a corporas caise [case] of blewe cloth of gold, and
read velvette, with Jesus on it of stole-worke of gold wherein is also a fine
corporas. Item, i. other corporas case of read bawdkyn wherein is also a fine
corporas. Item, ii. other corporas cases, whereof the one is of taffata, and
other of white fustion, in every of which cases is also a fine corporas. Item a
clothe of canvasse to lie upon the high alter iii. yerdes long. Item, ii.
lynnen clothes to lay upon the altars in the Body of the chapel, cont. iii.
else and a quarter the piece. Item, iiii. Towelles for the High altar, and
iiii. towelles for the nether altars "Quatuordecim Tualliae de panno lineo pro
summo altari, etc. -- Quinque parvae Tualliae pro manibus tergendis." [Coll.
Winds.] Dugd. Mon. iii. Eccl. Coll. p. 85. col. 2. "Duo Abstersoria de panno
lineo ad extergendum digitos post perfusionem in majori altari." Dugd. Append.
Hist. Eccl. S. Paul. p. 217. -- Rot. Comp. Coll. Winton. MS. 1395. "Et in xi
ulnis de panno de Westnale emptis per dictum Thesaurarium [de Wolvesey] et
liberatis collegio xix die Marcii pro tuelli^ altarium capellae, v s. iij d."
. Item, ii. cusshens, of read sylke for the chapel woven with flowers of
gold. Item, a great waynscot coffer to put in all the ornaments aforesaid. ALL
which parcells, etc. IN witness, whereof, etc.

Moreover, the within named president, fellows, and scholars, have received of
the said sir Thomas Pope, their founder, ii. processionalls, and a gospel book.

NUMB. XVII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus missis per dominum
Fundatorem, tam ad ornatum Sacelli quam Aulae, Jan. xx. 1577 Registr. ut supr.
fol. 17. 2.
.
FFIRSTE, a ffayre cope of read sylke lyned with taffata, and having images of
gold wrought upon the same, the orphises [orphreis] being needleworke, and
having a narrow cape. Item, i. vestment of red velvette, with a Cross of gold
of stoleworke, and ymbrawdered with flower de luces, angels, and spread eagles
of gold, with stole, and ffannell of black velvette, with an albe; belonginge
to a vestment of black velvett, which is mentioned in the ffirst indenture
made by the college, declaringe the receyte of the ffirst church-stuffe and
playte, and the lack of the said stole, fannel, and albe, noted in the margent
of the said indenture. Item, a vestment of blewe silk lyned with taffata, and
woven with burdes and flowers of Colen [Cologn Or, Colonia in Italy.
] gold, with stole, etc. Item, a rich clothe or canapye to hang over the
blessed sacrament on the altar made with cypers Q. Cyprus-lawn. "Quinque
aurifrygia, quorum tria sunt OPERE CYPRENSI nobilissimo, et unum est de opere
Anglicano." Lib. Anniv. BASILIC. VATICAN. apud Rubeum in VIT. Bonifacii. viii.
PP. p. 345. Also Carpentier's SUPPL. GL. Cang. tom. i. col. 391. "Unum pluviale
de canceo rubeo cum aurifrixio de opere CYPRENSI."

Milton's cyprus lawn, in IL PENSEROSO, is written cipres, in the first edition.


, and perled with gold, and frynged with sylver, being hemmede with a lace of
silk and gold. Item, a fair canapye to carry over the blessed sacrament upon
Corpus Christi day, made of yalowe silk, velvet, and clothe of gold
fryngede. Item, iiii. painted staves to carry the said canapye upon. Item, a
ffaire corporas case of clothe of gold, and a fine lynen clothe within the
same. Item, one other fair rich corporas case, with images of gold of both
sides, having a border about the same on both sides, garnished with seed perle;
on the one side of which corporas case is our Lady and her son on
horseback, and on the other side our lady and her son sittinge in a
chair, and a fine lynnen clothe within the same. Item, one other corporas case
of red silk and gold, with a fine lynnen clothe In marg. "The clothe promised
but not sent."
within the same. Item, ii. fair quyshions of red silk, and flowers of gold
wrought in the same, for the chapel. Item, a fair payr of Organs In the
college-statutes the following clause occurs, "In die Veneris Officium de
Nomine Jesu, in die Sabbati vero, de benedicta Virgin matre, cum cantu et
organis solemniter septimanatim celebrari debere statuo." And in the same
statute it is injoined. "Primas ac secundas vesperas, completoria, et matutinas
et altas missas, ac processiones, devote ac distinct, cum cantu et nota,
secundum consuetudinem et usum ecclesiae cathedralis Sarum, celebrent et
cantent." Cap. xii. De Horis canonicis, Missis et aliis suffragiis dicendis, de
mode in Choro sedendi. [See LIFE, p. 129.] The organ, mentioned in the text,
was removed from the chapel, where it stood over the screen, into the bursary,
about the year 1645. At length, under the administration of the presbyterians,
it totally disappeared. After the parliamentary ORDINANCE made in the year
1644, it is extraordinary, that the magnificent organ on the north side of the
chapel of saint John's college, Oxford, (which continued in use till the year
1768,) should have been suffered to remain: more especially, as it had been
erected under the patronage of archbishop Laud; and as Cromwell's visitors had
ordered sir William Paddy's donation for founding the choral service in that
chapel, to be entirely applied to the augmentation of the President's salary.
Original Register of the Visitation of univ. Oxon. A.D. 1648. MS. Archiv. Oxon.
4to. At New-college, the organ, given by William Port in the year 1458, which
stood at the stall-end of the north side of the ch^ir near the vestry,
supported by wooden pillars, was destroyed in the year 1646. Wood's manuscript
English History of the University of Oxford, vol. ii. fol. 245. The present
organ in that chapel was erected in the year 1663. But the beautiful screen, on
which it is placed, without any design of supporting an organ, was constructed
in the year 1636: and in the same year, continues Wood, "the old stalls and
deskes being pulled down, those that are now standing were set up; and the
wainscott adorned with curious painting, containing the figures of apostles,
saints, etc." MS. ibid. fol. 246.
, which, with the carryage from London to Oxford, cost x l A new organ was
bought, in 1529, for the new, large and beautiful church of Holbech in
Lincolnshire, for 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. Stukeley's ITIN. CURIOS. p. 20. Gray,
archdeacon of Berks, bequeathed 4 l. in 1521, to St. Mary's church at Oxford,
for a new payr of organs. Registr. univ. Oxon. Archiv. A. 166. fol. 66.
According to Dugdale, an organ was purchased for the church of Sutton-Colfield
in Warwickshire, by Vesey bishop of Exeter in the reign of Henry the eighth, at
the cost of 14 l. 2 s. 8 d. WARWICKSH. p. 667. In the year 1439, a new organ
was made for the choir of Merton-college, by William Wootton, organ-builder at
Oxford, for the sum of 28 l. Ant. Wood's MERTON-PAPERS, MS. Bibl. Bodl. [Cod.
BALLARD.] Whethamstede abbot of Saint Alban's, about the year 1450, gave to his
church a pair of organs; for which, and their erection, he expended fifty
pounds. No organ in any monastery of England was comparable to this instrument,
for its tone and workmanship. CHRON. WHETHAMST. per Hearne, vol. ii. p. 539.
About the year 1476, Thomas Wyrcester, abbot of Hyde near Winchester, gave
eight marcs and a horse, to purchase an organ for his church. "Octo marcas et
unum equum bonum pro novis organis musicalibus." MSS. ARCHIV. WOLVES. apud
Winton.
. Item, a deep bayson of puter to stand in the body of the chapel instede of
a font. Item, a fair staff to carry the best cross withal, covered and
garnished with copper and gilt. Item, a shipp of puter to putt in frankenfence.
Item, a pair of crewettes of pewter. Item, a pax of every [ivory]. Item ii.
fair bell candlestickes of latten, to set tallow candles in upon the altar.
Item, iii. Antiphoners of parchmente, bought by Mr. Parret for the queere.
Item, ii. processionalls and a gospell-boke, which were contained in the
backside of the said first indenture made by the college for receipt of the
first plate and ornaments of the church. Item, ii. altar clothes, the one for
the upper part, and the other for the nether part of the altar, paned with
red clothe of tyssue and purple-velvett, rychlie imbrowdered with angels and
skitchins [escutcheons] of the passion. Item, a deskeclothe paynede with
bawdkyn of sundry collers and edgede with white. Item, a cope of black silk
with stripes of gold, having a rich orphes.

Item, a stondinge cup of silver gilt, with a cover graven with the pommegranet
and a sheiff of arrows, poz. xxxiii. oz. Item, ii, gilte saltes without a
cover, poz xxxix. oz. iii. quarters. Item, iii. plain drynkin potts of silver
gilt, whereof one has a cover, poz. xxxi. oz, iii. quarters. Item, ii.
crewettes of silver gilt, poz. ix. oz. Item, a holie-water stop and a
sprinkell of silver, parcel gilt, poz. xviii. oz. iii. quarters. Item, a
sacringe bell of silver gilte, poz. v. oz. quarter. Item, a pax of silver gilt,
with a crucifix and Mary and John, poz. xvi. oz. iii. quarters. Item, ii. pair
of silver sensers, parcel gilt, poz. lxx, oz. Item. a ship of silver with a
little spone for frankensens A species of Censer. See Dugd. Mon. iii. 276.
311. 294. Ibid. Eccl. Coll. 84.
, parcel gilt, poz. xvii. oz. di. Item, ii. chapel baysens of silver,
parcel gilte, poz. xxxvii. oz. di. Item, a ffaire cross of silver and gilte
with Marye and John, garnyshede with crystal and stones, with a foot of
silver and gilt to the same, weinge together, besides the garnyshing of
crystal and stones, xxiiii. l. v. oz. Item, ii. candlestickes of silver
parcel gilte, poz. xxxi. oz. iii. quarters. All which parcells, etc. In
witness whereoff, etc.

Added in the register, ad calc. instrumenti.
Item, receved from the Founder, iii. March, a baner of grene sylke, wrapped
in grene bokram, with ii. knoppes gylted for the same. -- Item, receeived the
second day of Aprile, an image of Christ's resurrection, with a case for the
same having lock and kaye. Item, receved from our said founder the vi. day of
Aprile, a deske-clothe of dyversecoloured sylke.

NUMB. XVIII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus, missis per dominum
Fundatorem ad collegium tertia vice. April. 12, 1557 Registr. fol. 10.
.
FFIRST, two tunicles for a diacon and sub diacon of white satin with flowers
of gold, with albes, stoles and parrys to the same to match with the vestment
of white damask -- [ before received.] Item, a banner clothe for the Cross,
of grene sarcenett; on the one side whereoff is painted the Trinity, and on
the other side our Lady. Item, a crucifix of woodde, painted, with the four
evangelistes, to set at the Entry of the Queere Choir.
in the said college. Item, one image of wood of the ressurection painted, to
set upon the altar at Easter; and a box, lyned with cotton with a lock and
kaye to putt the same image in. Item, ii. books of parchment lymned with gold;
the one of which, being a gospellar, is covered on the one side with sylver,
and havinge a crucifix on the same copper and gilte: And the other book, being
a pistoler Epistoler. For the Epistle.
, is likewise covered on the one side with sylver, having upon the same an
image of St. Paul being sylver and gilte. Item, a fair cope of clothe of
gold, with an orphrese That is an embroidered edging. From AURIFRASIUM,
corrupted from AURIFRISIUM, properly perhaps AURIPHRIGIUM. Fr. Orfray. Hence
the Italian fregiato d' oro, that is, as our elder poets express the phrase,
fretted with gold. Ariosto has, "D' ORO FREGIATA l' armatura," ORL. FUR. xxv.
97. And, "Ricche di gioie, e ben FREGIATA D' ORO," Ibid. xxxviii. 78. Menage
supposes AURIPHRYGIUM to be "Phrygian work or embroidery in gold." It is
certain that PHRYGIUM is used simply and substantively for this sort of
ornament in a robe. "Obtulit S. Benedicto planetam [a Cope] aureis PHRYGIIS,
mensium 12 signa infra habentibus, ornatam." Leo Ostiens. CHRON. CAS. Lib. ii.
c. 24. In Chaucer's DREME of CHAUCER, PHRYGIUS is written FREGIUS, v. 1070.
Some difficulty is thrown on this specious etymology by the Anglosaxon verb
(...), to adorn.
of clothe of sylver, and a running orphrese embrodered. Item, a vestment and
ii. tunicles of clothe of sylver, having orphreses of clothe of gold, and a
running orphrese embrodered, as the cope has, with fair fine new albes,
stoles, phannells, and gyrdles, for the same, with iii. bags of lynen clothe to
put the same in. Item, a fair canapie of blue clothe of gold, paned with rich
read tynsell, with rhredes of gold and a fair fringe of sylke, and the
inside of the valence lyned with satin of Bridges. Item, a hearse-clothe of
the same blue clothe of gold and red tynsell frynged with sylke. Item, six
albes furnished for Boys to carye candlestickes and sensors, whareof two of
them be hymmede Hemmed.
with clothe of gold, of the same clothe of gold that the cope before
remembered is of. Item, ii. tunicles of white Brydges saten, orphresed with
grene Brydges saten, for such to wear as shall carye the cross and
holie-water stop. Item, ii. fair copes of tyssue, with fair orpheses of
nedleworke. Item, a cope of blewe baudkin with flowers of gold, and with an
orphrese of yelowe tyssue, havinge a running orphese of red velvet. Item,
another fair cope of white damask with angels and arch-angells of gold,
havinge a fair orphese of needle work. Item a fair vestment and two tunicles
belonging to the same, of the same read clothe of tyssue that the ii copes
before remembered are of, having orpheses of needleworke and arms upon the
same, and having new albes, stoles, and parrys belonging to the same. Item, a
deske-clothe made of old church stuff of sundry sorts. Item, a quission to
lay the cross on in the Sepulcher, made of iiii. scochyns wherein arms are
wrought. Item, a monstrans A box for relics, or the Sacrament.
of sylver gilt, poz. xxi. oz. ALL which parcells of plate, books, and
ornaments, etc. In witness, etc.

Ad calc. instrumenti, in Registr.
Item, Receyved from our founder, in the month of June, 1558, these books
followinge. In primis, Josephus Graece. One book [volume] of St. Beede's
works. Another, entitled Sanctiones Ecclesiasticae. One other of St. Justines
works the martyr. And one Greek Psalter covered with clothe of gold. Item
syx processionalls printed. -- Item, two clothes of payned velvett for the
sepulcher. Item, two clothes of saten Brydges for the low alters. Item, eight
sconsys. Item, a bible in English, with a Psalter, and a.... book. Item ii
books of common prayer Mass Book.
in latten See Numb. XIX.
.

NUMB. XIX. Bishop Horne's Letter to Trinity college concerning the Removal of
superstitious ornaments from the chapel Registr. fol. 138. b.
. Dat. 1570 Soon after the Act of Uniformity had been promulged in 1558, in the
first year of queen Elisabeth, instead of removing the fopperies of the ancient
worship, or at least suffering them gradually to wear away by time and neglect,
this society appears to have spared no expense to retain and renew these solemn
toys. This may be gathered from the following articles in Comp. Burss. 1560, --
1.

"Sol. pro quatuor ulnis panni vocati Fetwich pro altaribus, ij s. vij d. ob.
-- Sol. pro clavis exiguis ad eadem pendilia [curtains] affigenda, ij d. --
Sol. pro longis lathes quae inserviebant circa pendilia altarium, xxij d. --
Sol. pro ulna canabei panni ex qua fiebant pendilia supra ostium CRUCIFIXORII,
xj d. ob." The last article is for a curtain to hang over the little
folding-doors which enclosed the CRUCIFIX standing on the principal altar.


.
To the worshipful my loving friends the president and fellows of Trynitie
college in Oxford.
AFTER my hearty commendations: Whereas I am informed that certain monuments
tending to idolatry and popish or devils service, as Crosses, Censares, and
such like fylthie stuff used in the idolatrous temple, more meter for the same
than for the house of god, remaynethe in your college as yet undefaced; I am
moved thereby to judge great want of good will in some of you, and no less
negligence in other some, as in being so remiss to perform your duties
toward god, and obedience unto the prince. Wherefore I can do no less, as in
respect of my Office and Care I have of you, but very earnestly forthwith,
upon the receite hereof, will you to deface all manner such trashe, as in the
church of Christ is so noisome and unseemlie; and to convert the matter
thereof to the godly use, profett, and behoof of your house. And further to
have in mind the motion made by the graunde commissioners Notwithstanding this
Injunction, I find Bishop Horn visiting the college, by his commissary, G.
Acworth, L.L.D. four years before, Nov. 19, 1566, who finds "Nihil reformatione
dignum." Registr. Horn, fol. 52.

I shall give some other instances of his reforming genius, from his said
Register, penes Officiar. Episc. Winton.

INJUNCTIONS, among others, At a Visitation of the Cathedral of Winchester,
Oct. 2, 1571. Reg. ut supr. fol. 83.

" Item, That the roode loft in the body of church be mured upp, and some
parcel of scriptur be written there. Item, That the tabernacles of images now
standing void in the body of the church may be taken away, or filled upp,
and the places made plane. Item, That all images of the Trinitye in the glass
windows, or other places of the church, be putt out and extinguished,
together with the stone cross in the churche-yarde. Item, That the inventorye
of all the church stuff, as copes, vestiments, albes, chalices, pixes,
service books, and such other whatsoever, be brought and exhibited to the
ordinarye within two months next after, with a certificate of all the images
that were in the church."

At a Visitation of Winchester College, Oct. 2. 1571. fol. 88. seqq. " Item,
That the organs be no more used in servycetyme, and the stipende for the
orgayne-player, and that which was allowed to a chapplen to say mass in the
chapel in the cloister, shall be hereafter turned to some other godly use and
necessary purpose in the college chapel. Item, The prayers which the
choristers use dailye to say in lattyn in fromons Fromond's.
chapel, shallbe no mor used, but instead thereof some other prayers, or
psalmodie. Item, That for the sermons aforesaid, to be preached by the warden
and fellows, there be a decent pulpit made removeable, and to be set upp by
the greces beneath the communion table for the sermon time; and that the
rood-lofte be taken down to a competent height for hindering the hearers. Item,
That the holy communion shall be ministered in the said college, without any
cope having images or pictures."

At a Visitation of New college in Oxford, Aug. 29, 1567. fol. 65. " Item, Ut
tabulata inter chorum capellae et navem ejusdem amoveantur et prosternantur,
usque ad altitudinem sedilium ejusdem chori, et ut omnes et singulae imagines
ibidem olim stantes igni committantur. Item, Ut amotis tegminibus orientalis
partis chori ejusdem capelle, parietes ibidem obumbrentur plane, dealbentur, et
sententie sacre scripture ibidem scribantur. -- Neque socii, scholares, aut
ministri chori, se convertant in divinis, more papistico, ad orientem, cum
cantatur Gloria Patri." Against the eastern wall of this magnificent chapel
over the altar, the pride of Gothic architecture was richly displayed in
imagery, niches, pinnacles, groupes of tracery, and other sumptuous ornaments
of curious workmanship. These were destroyed or defaced by this injunction of
bishop Horn; who not only removed the statutes, but broke or filled up the
niches, and reduced the whole, which must have formed a beautiful and
characteristical termination of the visto from the choir-door, to a plain
superficies of plaster and whitewash. This wall, or screen, is thus described
by the founder in the statutes of the college. STATUT. COLL. Nov. Rubr. lxiii.
" Item, quia in intermedio capitali sive transversali muro capelle nostri
collegii supradicti, ubi quidam murus lapideus inter ipsam capellam et aulam
ipsius collegii mediare noscitur ac eciam separare; ymago sanctissime ac
individue Trinitatis, patibulum sancte crucis, cum ymagine crucifixi, beat
Marie virginis, sanctorumqu^ plurium aliorum ymagines, sculpture, fenestre
vitree, ac picture vary, monnullaque alia opera sumptuosa, ad dei laudem
gloriam et honorem ipsiusque matris predicte, subtiliter fabricata, variisque
coloribus perornata, devotissime situantur, ac multipharie collocantur, etc."
In the year 1695, in refitting the altar and its environs, it was found that
much of this ancient Gothic workmanship still remained under the surface of the
wall, covered with a thick coat of cement or plaster, in tolerable
preservation. See LIFE of A. Wood. vol. ii. p. 392. edit. 1772.

To return to Horn. That he might contribute all the assistance in his power,
toward purging away the dregs of popery, I find him while bishop of
Winchester, very frequently visiting, his cathedral, Winchester college, New
college, Magdalene, Corpus Christi, and Trinity, colleges, in Oxford; but St.
John's not once. Ex Registr. Horn, praedict. He began this business the year
after his entrance into the bishopric. At Trinity college he visited in
person, 24 Sept. 1561, when I find expended upon him in dinner, wine, and
gloves, iv l. ix s. x d. Afterward the following notices occur. Comp. Burss.
Coll. Trin. 1565. -- 6. "Alloc. in epulis datis commissario episcopi Winton.
visitanti collegium, die Sept. [Nov.] 19, 1566. xl s.

Comp. 1575. -- 6. "Sol. 6. Jul. 1576. Apparatori D. Episcopi Wynton. adferenti
literas citatorias. v s. s. l. ij s. ij d. qu.



Horn was a learned man, but a zealous and active puritan. While Dean of
Durham, in the reign of Edward vi. he demolished many very elegant and very
harmless monuments of ancient art, in that noble cathedral. The author of a
curious book, entitled Ancient Rites of the Church of Durham, Land. 1672. p.
122. written by one who lived while the monastery subsisted, tells us, that he
destroyed the history of St. Cuthbert beautifully painted in glass throughout
the cloyster-windows. This havoc, he adds, was made by dean Horn, "who could
never abide any ancient monuments, acts, or deeds."


. If any do make doubt of your statutes, in that part, as some more obstinate
than zealous may do; I do signifye unto you, That I have perused the statutes,
and do find, that, the same well considered, and the words thereof truly
interpreted, you may lawfully without infringinge of any part thereof,
deface the same abuses, and receave the commodity that may be had thereof, to
thuse of your house. So trustinge to hear shortly that the same shall be
accomplished effectualie, I wish to you all the increase of the grace of gods
holy spirit.

From Waltham, the xixth day of July, 1570. Your loving friend, ROBERT [HORNE]
WINTON See the next Article.
.

NUMB. XX. Letter from Queen Elizabeth's Commissioners relating to the Business
of the last-mentioned Letter, dat. 1570 Ibid. fol. 139.
.
To the president, fellows, and scollers, of Trynitie college, Oxford.
WE will and command you, by virtue of the Queen's majesty's commission to us
directed, that before the xiith day of Julye next ensuenge the date hereof,
you cause to be defaced all the church Plate and church Stuff, belonging to
your college; in such sort, that it never may be used again, as it has
bin. Otherwise, as to you shall seem best, to the most profett and behoffe of
your said college. And that you so do it, as either one of her Majesty's
commissioners may se it; or you the president, by your oath, testify to us, or
our colleagues, to be done, according to the tenor hereof, the next court day
after the day abovementioned. Returnyng then again this our Precept with you.
Whereof fail you not, as you will answer to the contrary at your perrel
However, a few months before, they demolished the stonealtars in the chapel,
and placed in their stead, a communiontable, etc. as appears by the following
entries. Comp. Burss. 1569. -- 70. "Sol. lapicidinis per duos dies in" sacello
laborantibus. iv s. iv d. communionis mensa et pluteis in sacello, xj s.



Soon afterward, the Metrical psalms, after the plan of Geneva, growing
fashionable, I find the first mention of the following article. Comp 1575. --
6. "Expos. a decano pro sex libris psalmorum in usum sacelli. xij s."




. This xxviii. June, 1570. Thomas Cooper, L. Humfrie, H. Westphalinge, W. Cole
The queen's commissioners for abolishing popish superstition in the university
of Oxford. They sat in the divinity chapel, in Christ-church cathedral. Cooper
was dean of Gloucester, afterward bishop of Winchester. Humphrey was president
of Magdalene. Westphalinge was canon of Christ-church, afterward bishop of
Hereford. Cole was president of C. C. C. Oxon. See Wood Hist. Antiq. univ.
Oxon. i. 291. Godwyn informs us, that Westphalinge was a person of such
consummate gravity, that during a familiar acquaintance with him for many
years, he never once saw him laugh. -- " Nunquam in risum viderim solutum." De
Praesul. ed. 1616. page 546. ed. 4to. His arms are elegantly painted in the
great window of the Chapter House at Christ-church, with an Inscription, and
the date 1601.
.

NUMB. XXI. Compositio quaedam Collegiorum, Coll. Magd. et Coll. Trin. Oxon.
Dat. Feb. 26, 1558 In Thesauriar. Coll. Trin. et Registr. prim. fol. 22. b. Et
Muniment. Coll. Magd.
.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus, ad quos hoc praesens scriptum indentatum
pervenerit: Nos Thomas Coveney, praesidens collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae in
universitate Oxon. et scholares ejusdem collegii, salutem in domino
sempiternam. Cum Alicia Daughter of Robert Gardener, mentioned below, of
Sunningwell, Berkshire, and Alice Orpewood. See p. 327.
PARRET, nuper de parochia sancti Petri in orient Oxon. vidua, ac bonae
memoriae matrona, ejusque Dat. fuit testamentum 21 Mar. 1556. Probat. 4 Jul.
1556. Offic. Testam. Oxon.
testamenti unicus executor SIMON PARRET In the British Museum are manuscript
letters of one Simon Parrett, certainly not the same, dat. Oxon. 1582.
concerning a new edition of Fox's Book of Martyrs, written to Fox. MSS. Harl.
416.
, generosus, nuper praedicti collegii socius, ob magnae devotionis fervorem, et
affectionem in praefatum collegium, inter se dederint, et manibus suis propriis
tradiderint, partim Owino Oglethorpe nuper praesidenti collegii praedicti, et
scholaribus ejusdem collegii, partim nobis praefato Thomae Coveney nunc
praesidenti dicti collegii, et scholaribus ejusdem collegii, centum viginti et
quatuor libras bonae ac legalis monetae Angliae, ad emendum et perquirendum
terras et redditus ad verum annuum valorem sex librarum, ultra omnes reprisas,
quas vocant, habend. et tenend. nobis praefatis praesidenti et scholaribus
collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae in universitate Oxon. et successoribus nostris,
in perpetuum; ad effectus quosdam pios infra-scriptos: praecipue vero, pro
perpetuis duabus Exhibitionibus in dicto collegio fundandis, et aliis non minus
piis, quam necessariis, sustentationibus pauperum scholarium studentium in
dicto collegio. Nos igitur, praefati praefidens et scholares, tam insigni
pietate moti, rursus nec ferentes tam pium desiderium praefatorum ALICIAE et
SIMONIS effectu spoliari, nec defunctam sua extrema voluntate fraudari, sed
mandatum ejus ad effectum perducere conantes; praefatam summam, vel saltem
majorem ejus partem, quadruplo erogavimus in emptionem terrarum, nuper de
Roberto Radborne de Stanlake in com. Oxon. perquisitarum, et reliquam summam,
prout opportunitas se offeret, in similes usus applicabimus. Quos quidem
redditus sex librarum per annum, nos praefati praesidens et scholares
promittimus, et per praesentes obligamus nos et successores nostros, ad
specialem requisitionem praefati SIMONIS PARRET, Praesidenti Sociis et
Schclaribus Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate Oxon. ex
fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, quod nos et successores nostri deinceps
perpetuis futuris temporibus, deo volente, colligemus, exponemus, et solvemus,
vel solvi faciemus, per manus bursariorum dicti collegii, secundum voluntatem
praedictae ALICIAE, ad hunc qui sequitur modum. IN PRIMIS, promittimus, et
obligamus nos et successores nostros, quod deinceps in perpetuum erit unus
sociorum dict collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae in universitate Oxon. sacris
initiatus, viz. presbiter bonae conversationis integraeque famae, qui orabit
pro animabus ROBERTI PARRET et ALICIAE uxoris ejus, SIMONIS PARRET et
ELISABETHAE uxoris ejus, Johannis Kele et Edmundi Kele, Roberti Gardenar et
Aliciae uxoris ejus, et pro animabus omnium Fidelium defunctorum, bis singulis
hebdomadis, cum celebraverit Missam. Qui quidem presbiter recipiet in sine
cujuslibet anni termini december solidos, de praedictis sex libris; viz. in toto
per annum, et sic de anno in annum, quadraginta solidos. Cujus electio ac
praefectio deinceps erit penes praesidentem praedicti collegii B. Mariae
Magdalenae pro tempore existentem, si domi fuerit, vel si intra unum mensem ad
dictum collegium redierit post recessum, decessum, obitum, resignationem, vel
deprivationem, praedicti socii, sic ad hanc electionem admissi. Quod si
praesidens ultra mensem abfuerit a praedicto collegio, tum penes
vice-praesidentem erit novum sufficere presbiterum in vacantis locum.
Tenebiturque admittendus ad hanc exibitionem, eodem die, aut saltem intra tres
dies immediate sequentes ejus admissionem, hanc COMPOSITIONEM legere. INSUPER,
nos praefati praesidens et scholares obligamus nos et successores nostros ad
celebrandas Exequias dominica secunda post festum Paschatis quo die obiit
praefatus ROBERTUS PARRET, et missam die sequenti singulis annis in perpetuum,
pro animabus supranominatorum, cum expressione nominum eorum. Et ad
distribuendos viginti solidos inter praesidentem dicti collegii et socios
ejusdem, qui interfuerint exequiis et missae praedictis solummodo: nisi forte
praesidens, aut sociorum aliquis abfuerit in negotiis collegii; in quo casu
nolumus eorum aliquem sua fraudari portione. Necnon ad solvendum Choristis
dicti collegii, vel eorum locum tenentibus, quinque solidos et quatuor
denarios; et Praeceptori eorum sexdecim denarios, singulis annis in perpetum.
Et ulterius promittimus, quod eodem die quo celebrabitur Missa pro animabus
supranominatorum, tresdecim solidi et quatuor denarii insumentur in uberiorem
refectionem praesidentis et scholarium praedictorum, prout fieri consuevit in
exequiis aliorum Benefactorum dicti collegii. Decernimus etiam, ut qui admissus
sit ad hanc exhibitionem, singulis annis, eodem die celebrabit Missam, et
vocabitur Capellanus ALICIAE PARRET. Item, quod communi campanario, more
Oxoniae solito, pro animabus praedictorum public proclamanti, in die dictarum
Exequiarum, annuatim dabuntur quatuor denarii, pro labor ejus. Praeterea, nos
praefati praesidens et scholares obligamus nos et successores nostros, per
praesentes, quod deinceps singulis annis ad terminum viginti annorum, primo die
Maii, quo die obiit praefata ALICIA, nos praefati praesidens et scholares, et
successores nostri, deliberabimus viginti solidos capellano sic electo; ut is,
et unus Gardianorum ecclesiae sancti Petri in orient Oxon. singulis annis, in
exequiis celebrandis in parochia praedicta sancti Petri pro animabus
praedictorum, juxta eorum discretionem, singulis annis, durante termino
praedicto, distribuant et erogent in pios usus: viz. in necessarios sumptus
Exequiarum et Missae, et in sustentationem Indigentium commorantium in dicta
parochia sancti Petri. Et ulterius decernimus, quod elapsis viginti annis, et
debitis factis distributionibus in parochia praedicta, quod extunc nos praefati
praesidens et scholares, singulis annis imperpetuum, deliberabimus, per manus
bursariorum praedicti collegii, viginti solidos alicui socio dicti collegii,
vel scholari, eligendo et nominando, more capellani praedicti, ad orandum pro
animabus praedictorum. Praeterea ordinavimus, quod residuum sex librarum
praedictarum remaneat ad opus et usum dicti collegii imperpetuum. POSTREMO, ut
COMPOSITIO et haec praesens Ordinatio firma sit et perpetua, nullisque injuriis
antiquanda, nos praefati praesidens et scholares concedimus per praesentes, pro
nobis et successoribus nostris imperpetuum; quod si per nos praefatum
praesidentem et scholares, vel successores nostros, steterit, quo minus haec
Ordinatio non plenarie fuerit satisfacta, sed incuria vel culpa nostra aut
exhibitiones non solvantur, vel defunctis Justa non persolvantur, vel
distributiones omittantur; quod tunc, quoties id contigerit, been licebit
Praesidenti Sociis et Scholaribus Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in
universitate Oxon. ex fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, imperpetuum, in omnes
terras nostras, nuper perquisitas de praefato Roberto Radborne in Stanlake
praedicta, intrare et distringere, districtionesque sic captas licite
asportare, abducere, effugare, et penes se retinere, ac ad eorum usum recipere
et habere, ad tantum valorem quanti valoris fuerit onus sive exhibitio dicti
socii vacantis supra tempus limitatum, aut distributio ulla, ut superius
constituitur, omissa. IN CUJUS rei testimonium, uni parti hujus scripti
indentati penes nos praefatos praesidentem et scholares collegii B. Matiae
Magdalenae in universitate Oxon et successores nostros remanenti, Praesidens
Socii et Scholares Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate
Oxon. ex fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, Sigillum suum commune apposuerunt; et
alteri parti hujus scripti indentati, penes praefatos Praesidentem Socios et
Scholares Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate Oxon. ex
fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, et successores eorum, remanenti, nos praefati
praesidens et scholares collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae Oxon. Sigillum nostrum
commune apposuimus. DATUM xxvi. die februarii, anno regni serenissimae nostrae
principis Elisabethae, dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Reginae,
fidei defensoris, etc. primo By another instrument, mutually given as above,
bearing date Sept. 1, 1579, this Composition, on account of the reformation of
religion, was altered, as it is to this day observed by Magdalene college. In
Registr. Coll. Trin. prim. fol. 40. Et in Munim. Coll Trin. et Magd. ut supr.
-- Wood is mistaken in saying, that this Alicia Parret was the wife of Simon,
for she was his mother. Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 190. But he afterward
corrected the mistake, Athen. Oxon. i. fast. 23. col. 1. Vide Lee's MSS.
Visitat. Oxfordsh. pp. 12, 13. In the altered Composition, where mention is
made of the distributio in choristas, it is added, "Quia dictus Robertus
Perott, al. Parret, pater dicti Simonis, fuit olim praeceptor choristarum in
dicto collegio." He was an eminent musician for his time; and graduated in
music at Oxford, before the year 1515. And dying April 21, 1550, aged 72, was
buried in the church of St. Peter in the East at Oxford. The same Robert Perrot
was a sharer of abbey-land, and bought Rewley abbey at Oxford on the
dissolution. Wood, MSS. Cit. Oxf. No. 8491. Mus. Ashm. He also occurs receiver
general of the archdeaconry of Buckingham, in 1534, Willis, Cath. Oxf. p. 119.
He was also receiver of rents for Christ-church, Oxford, in the twenty-sixth
year of Hen. viii. MSS. in Offic. Primit. He is mentioned, in lord Williams's
Charter for founding Thame-school in Oxfordshire, dated 1574, to have been
receiver of the rents for Littlemore Pri^ry near Oxford. Compare LIFE, p. 117,
183. and Append. Numb. IX. in the notes. And p. 327. notes. Also Wood, FAST.
Oxou. i. 69, 70. And Morton's Northamptonsh. p. 460.

But a curious authentic manuscript has lately been communicated to me,
containing various evidences and notices of the family of Perrot: the following
extracts from which will confirm or correct what is here, or has been before in
other parts of this work, either imperfectly or erroneously observed concerning
the said family. viz. "fol. 5. b. Simon Parret is made n tarry public, 22 May,
1546. -- fol. 7. a. S. Parret is constituted registrar of Bucks, with a fee of
five marks and a robe annually, 20 Jul. 1547. -- fol. 3. a. S Parret, of
Oxford, gentleman, is appointed steward of diverse manors, to dame Elizabeth
Pope, widow, 20 Jan. 1559. -- fol. 6. b. He is made, by Edward the sixth,
bailiff of the chantrylands within the county of Oxon, 2. Feb. 1550, with a fee
of v l. vj s. viij d. -- fol. 111. b. He, then aged xxxvi years, marries
Elizabeth Love of Aynhoe, 28 Sept. 1550. -- fol. 78. b. He sells his lease of
the parsonage of Stoke-lyne to his brother in law Edward Love, 1561. -- fol. 7.
a. His son Simon comes to a court at Northleigh, co. Oxon. 1568. -- fol. 111.
a. He dies aged 71, 24 Sept. 1584, and is buried in St. Peter's church in the
East at Oxford. -- fol. 111. a. His wife Elizabeth, married at nineteen years
of age, and by whom he has nineteen children, dies in 1572, and is buried in
the said church -- fol. 72. a. Robert Parret of Oxford esquire, [the musician]
father of the first Simon, occurs in 1349. -- fol. 12. a. Robert's will is
dated 18 Apr. 1550, he being then of St. Peter's, Oxon. Therein he gives to his
wife Alice his patent of 4 marcs annually from the king, ending with the life
of G. Pigott. In the same he mentions his son Simon. -- fol. 111. b. He dies 21
Apr. following, buried ibid. -- fol. 13. a. The will of the said Alice is dated
21 Mar. 1556. Therein she mentions Elizabeth the wife of her son Simon, to whom
she gives her best cassocke of clothe and satin kyrtell. She dies [Alice] 2
Jul. 1558. -- fol. 111. b. The same Alice, mother of the said Simon, daughter
of Alice Orpewood, dying 1558, is buried in the said church. -- fol. 37. a.
Articles of marriage between Simon Parret [the younger] and Avis White, dated
1573." MS. fol. olim Gulielmi Perrot, armig. de Nerthleigh co. Oxon. Nunc penes
me, ex dono R. V. Joannts Price, Pro^^bibl. Bodl.

On the whole it appears, that Simon, fellow of Magdalene college, mentioned in
this instrument, who married Elisabeth Love, was the person whose name occurs
in papers and accounts (See LIFE, 183.) at the foundation of Trinity college,
and who was the founder's agent.

The manor of Northleigh aforesaid, being parcel of Nettley abbey in Hampshire,
was granted to sir Thomas Pope and his heirs in the year 1545, by patent of
Henry the eighth, anno regn. 36. Jul. 28. par. 8. From him it descended to his
widow dame Elisabeth. Late in the reign of queen Elisabeth, it appears to have
been vested in the descendants of Robert Parrot, or rather Perrot,
abovementioned; whose son Simon, as we have seen, married Elisabeth Love, sir
Thomas Pope's niece. Wood [Ath. Oxon. i. Fast. 23. ut supr.] is mistaken in
saying, that the said Robert, the founder of this family in Oxfordshire, was
the second son of George Perrot of Haroldston near Haverford west in
Pembrokshire. It is proved from better authority, that he was born at Hacknes
in the North riding of Yorkshire. MS. REGISTR. PARROT, ut supr. fol. 111. b.
The family of Perrot lived at Northleigh, in their ancient capital mansion
house, till within these few years: but are now extinct, at least in the lineal
succession. This estate was lately purchased by the duke of Marlborough.


. [1558. -- 9]

NUMB. XXII. Articles relating to certain Buildings and Utensils of Wroxton
Priory in Oxfordshire, soon after the Dissolution. Dat. Aug. 16, 1537 In
Thesaur. Coll. Trin. praedict. Manu Dom. Thomae Pope. Where are several
original instruments relating to this monastery. The most ancient (not yet
printed) are the two following, being nearly coeval with the foundation.

I. "Universis sancte matris ecclesie filiis literas istas suspecturis vel
audituris, magister MICHAEL BELET salutem in domino. Noverit universitas
vestra, quod ego dedi et concessi domine abbatisse de GODESTHOUGH et monialibus
ibidem deo servientibus, redditum quadraginta solidorum annuatim percipiendorum
ad duos terminos: scil. viginti solidos ad octabas Pentecostes, et viginti ad
octabas sancti Martini in hyeme. Quos predictos quadraginta solidos predicte
moniales recipiant annuatim per manum prioris et canonicorum de WROKSTAN:
quibus ego assignavi certum redditum in certo loco ad certum terminum in
manerio meo de Sychestan. Ut sine omni impedimento possint eos percipere, et
predictis monialibus reddere ad predictos terminos. Feci et predictos
canonicos........ in periculo animarum suarum, et jurare, visis sacro-sanctis,
quod sine dolo et fraud, omni impedimento et occasion cessante, solvant
predictum redditum predictis monialibus: Ut autem haec mea donatio et concessio
rata sit et firma, presens scriptum sigilli mei munimine roboravi. Hiis
testibus, domino Rad. de sancto Amando, dom. Joh. de Bruchton, Alex. de Barton,
Herveo Belet, Philip de Merula, Roberto de Sychestan. Rob. Parvo de Wroxton,
Rob. de Cercedene, Nich de Wroxstan, et multis aliis." No date. cum sigill.
Michael Belet founded the monastery early in the reign of Henry the third,
about the year 1230.

II. "Universis sancte matris ecclesie filiis literas istas visuris vel
audituris. HUGO, Prior loci sancte Marie de WROKESTAN, et totus conventus qui
ibidem serviunt deo et beat Marie, Salutem in domino. Noverit universitas
vestra, quod nos obligamus nos et successores nostros in perpetuum, ad
reddendum abbatisse et conventui de Godestowe annuatim quadraginta solidos
argenti: scil. viginti solidos ad octabas sancti Martini in hyeme et viginti ad
octab. Pentecostes. Quos quadraginta solidos patronus noster magister MICHAEL
BELET assignavit nobis percipiendos in manerio suo de Sichestan: ubi ipse dedit
nobis december libratas terre. Sicut carta ejus testatur quam habemus. Et
predictam obligationem multis modis secimus, quia juravimus in animas nostras
quod predictam solutionem trium marcarum sine fraud et occasion, cessante
omni contradictione et impedimento, faciemus ad predictos terminos: et sigillo
nostro conventuali, quod huic scripto appensum est, confirmavimus: sub pena
viginti solidorum pro quolibet defectu si contingat. Subjecimus etiam nos
specialiter in hac part jurisdictioni episcopi Lincoln, qui fuerit pro
tempore, et similiter Archidiacono Oxon: ut illi duo, vel unus little, possit
nos sine omni contradictione compellere ad predictam solutionem, et ad penam si
fuerit commissa. Et quicunque electus fuerit in priorem, jurabit quod fideliter
hanc obligationem observabit. Hiis testibus, domino Nicolao rectore eclesie de
Brocktun, dom. Bernardo vicario eclesie de Blokkesham, Jacobo de Hawntya tunc
senescallo de Godestowe, Petro le Butelir de Mildecamb, Henr. de Lingitre, Rad.
de Middletun, Will. de Heddindun, Henr. Meryet, et aliis." With the seal of the
monastery; reversed with Saint Michael killing the dragon, and exergue
ELEEMOSINA MICHAELIS BELET. Hugh was the second prior, and died before the year
1263.

Our next original instrument, in point of antiquity, is a charter of Henry the
ivth, granting free warren to Richard the prior, and his convent, in the manors
of, Wroxton Oxfordshire, Thorpe Underwood Northamptonshire, and Siston
Lincolnshire, "Hiis testibus, Th. Cantuar, H. Ebor, R. London, H. Wynton, Th.
Dunolm, N. Bathon. et Wellens, Henr. principe Wall. filio nostro primogenito,
carissimo consanguineo nostro, Edwardo Duce Ebor, Thoma Arundell, Ric. War. et
Rad. Westmorl. comitibus, Thoma Beaufort cancellario nostro, Joh. Stanley
senescallo hospicii nostri, et Mag. Joh. Prophet custode privati sigilli
nostri, ac aliis. Dat. etc. decimo die octobr. ann reg. nostri duodecimo." A.D.
1410. with the broad seal in green wax.

Here is also a charter of King John (printed by Dugdale) recited by inspeximus
of Henry the fourth, ann. regn. 12. Octobr. 25. cum magn. sigill. [See Dugdal.
Mon. ii. p. 326. 50.] This inspeximus recites a charter of Richard the second,
who cites Edward the third, who cites Henry the third his father, who cites
John his father. In this inspeximus Edward the third confirms the previous
charters. "Hiis testibus, J. Archiep. Cant. W. Winton. episc. Thesaurar.
nostro. Henr. com. Lancastr. Will. de Bohun. com. Northampt. Henr. de Percy,
Thoma Wake de Lydell, Ric. Talebott senescallo hospicii nostri, et aliis. Dat.
per manum nostram apud Westmon. 26. die Jan. ann. reg. 22." A.D. 1348.

From these evidences, Willis's list of the priors of this monastery might be
enlarged or authenticated, viz. HUGH occurs Prior, ut supr. -- RICHARD, ut
supr. -- THOMAS GROVE, without date. -- WILLIAM BRADDENHAM, A.D. 1490. Also
Feb. 1, 5 Hen. vii. -- RICHARD, 1504. For, Dec. 6, that year, T. Sidnall
Capellanus de Wroxstan, by will, bequeaths to the said Richard and his convent
many legacies: particularly his body to be buried in the conventual church
before the great cross, and one pound of wax to burn before the cross in the
parochial church of Wroxstan. -- THOMAS SMITH, ann. 4. 7. 20. Hen. viii. He
continued to the dissolution. See Willis MITR. ABB. ii. p. 188, 334. Concerning
the abovementioned pension of forty shillings, paid by this monastery to
Godstowe nunnery, I find the following original instrument, made in 1539. "This
byll made the xxist day of October, the xxxth year of the reign of our
soueraign lord king Henry the viiith, witnesses, that I Richard Gwent clerk,
Deane of the Arches, have received of Thomas Pope esquier, thirty pounds
sterlyng, to the use of Dame Kateryn Bukley, Abbes of the monastery of Godstowe
in the county of Oxford, and the convent of the same, for the purches of a
certain annuytie of xl s. by year going out of certain lands and tenements,
etc. being parcel of the possessions of the late monastery of Wroxton in the
said county. In witness whereof, I have subscrybed this byll with my own hond,
the day and year above written, per Me RICHARD GWENT." In the Bursary of
Trinity college Oxford. Where is also a Release for the same by the said
abbess, with the beautiful seal of Godstowe abbey appendant. Catharine Bukley,
or Bulkley, was the last abbess. See her Letter to lord Cromwell, complaining
of the injustifiable proceedings of Dr. London, who came with a pretended
commission for dissolving her convent. Burnet. REF. vol. iii. p. 130. REC. Number.
54. I also find [Thesaur. Coll. Trin.] a fragment of a letter from her, to sir
Thomas Pope, desiring him to intercede with lord Cromwell on this business. See
supr. LIFE, p. 184.


.
HEreafter ensues, as well certain buildyngs belonging to the late Monastery
of Wroxtone sold by William Rayneseford, esquier, to Thomas Pope, esqyer, the
xvith day of August, Ao. xxix. [Hen. viii.] as also certain utensils belonging
to the said monastery, being sold unto the said William Raynesford by our
Souveraigne lord the king's officers. That is to say. First, the Wall of the
Church on the outside next the cloister from the foot of the great window
downwards. Item, The south i will joining to the dorter Dormitory.
, with ii. litell isles north est from that joining to the same i will. Item, The
dorter, with the roffe thereof. Item, The ffrater house on both sides.
IMPLEMENTS and UTENSILS. Item, The condyte as it is, with all the Led thereto
belonging. Item, ii. brass Potts in the Kichyn to sithe mete in. Item, In the
Brewhowse ii. great ledes ffast set in a frame. ii. small ledes set in
curbes. One great troffe of led set in the ground.



All which implements before rehearsed, I the said William Raynseford
covenenteth and promyseth by these presents at such time as I shall leve the
ffarme which I now hold of the said Thomas Pope in Wroxton, to leve well and
sufficyently repaired and mainteyned, and in as good case as they be now at the
making of these presents.

THO. POPE. W. RAYNESFORD Of Great-Tew, in Oxfordshire.
.


Witness at the making thereof John Edmondes He occurs supr. See LIFE, p. 117,
326.
, gent. John Marshall. Richard Hochynson He received a grant of lands with Sir
T. Pope, pat. 30, Hen. viii. par. 8. supr. citat.
. John Ridley. and John Menefye.
NUMB. XXIII. Rate of the Purchase of the Rectory of Garsington It was given by
Richard ii. to the cell of the holy Trinity at Wallingford, Berks, ann. reg.
15. Feb. 9. A.D. 1392. -- Anthony South prior, and the convent of the said
cell, presented William Dayfote, bachelor in decrees, to the said rectory:
saving a pension of 100 s. due to themselves, and of 40 s. due to S.
Frideswides, at Oxford. Dat. in dom. capit. Jun. 4. 1479. E. Registr. Mon. S.
Albani. MSS. Tanner. Bibl. Bodl. fol. This priory was annexed to S. Alban's
abbey. It was granted to Cardinal Wolsey: but by forfeiture reverted to the
crown.
, in Oxfordshire by Sir Thomas Pope, from Philip and Mary, under certain
Considerations. Jan. 22, 1557. An Extract E Lib. sec. Les Rates, 3, 4. Phil.
Mar. British Mus. MSS. Harl. 607. fol. 7. b. ut supr.
.
PHILIP and MARIE.
By the King and Queen. --

Forasmoche as Sir THOMAS POPE, knighte, as as we are credybly informed,
entendeth, if he might purchase the said parsonage, to gyve the same to the
presydent fellows and scollers of Trinity college in the universitie of
Oxford, and to their successors for ever, and at his chardge to erect an house
there, for the said president, fellows, and scollers, to repose them in, when
any plage shall happen within the said universitie: We mindinge the furtherance
of that good act, and therwithal consideringe the Buyldinge of the same house
will be no little chardge to the said Sir Thomas, are pleased, etc. etc. Dat. 22
Jun. 1557.

NUMB. XXIV.
In the year 1577, when a mortal epidemical distemper In the Statutes of
Trinity college, given in 1556, the Founder allows a salary of vj l. xiij s. iv
d. to the President, if removed and rendered incapable of serving his office,
propter infirmitatem contagiosam, quae nunc videtur perpetua futura. Cap.
xviii. This disease, I presume, was the Sweating Sickness.
prevailed at Oxford, the College retired to the aforesaid house at Garsington
E Registr. prim. Coll. Trin. Oxon. fol. 144. a. They likewise had before
retired hither in the year 1570, or the next, the plague then raging at Oxford.
Ex Comp. 1570, -- 1. In which plague six hundred persons died at Oxford. Wood,
Hist. Antiqu. Univ. Oxon. i. 291. In this house they lived as at the college,
and performed here, not only the collegiate, according to their own statutes,
but all academical exercises necessary for their degrees, by permission of the
university. In the Computus of the last-mentioned year, I find many curious
particulars relating to their manner of living in this retirement, and to the
general distress of the times. Among others, more than once, this article --
"Sol. pro armis ad tuendam domum. viz. iii. black [iron] bylles. iiij s. vj d."
Again, 1570. -- 1. -- "Pro carta ad usum Bursariorum apud Garsington. -- Pro
epulis peregrinorum, pistoris aliorumque potum adferentium. -- Pro equo Mag.
Orpwoode euntis ad Abington ad parandum panem et potum pro collegio apud
Garsington. -- Pro expensis ejusdem apud Woodstocke et apud Kidlington variis
temporibus circa panem et potum parandum pro iis qui remanent Oxoniae." It
appears that they carried with them, from the college, to this place, proper
necessaries and utensils, not only for their kitchen and buttery, but also for
divine service. This was by the founder's directions; who moreover leaves this
restriction, "Reliqua vero jocalia, et vasa argentea, tam sacelli quam aulae
usui a me concessa, et alia ornamenta majoris pretii, in alium tutiorem locum
infra universitatem Oxoniensem, curabunt perferenda." ADDITAM. ad statut. ut
supr. fol. 104. During this secession, they are also directed to leave four
persons in the college, "ad tutiorem collegii custodiam." Ibid. Concerning whom
this article often occurs. Comp. 1570. -- 1. Pro antidoto contra pestem ad usum
eorum qui domi remanserunt. v s.iv d. --

Also, Datum N. pro labor suo in custodiendis Januis, et aliter, tempore
pestis.....

And, Oct. 25. Sol. T. C. pro labor suo in proficiscendo hebdomadatim, pro
december hebdomadis, Woodstockiam, ad emenda obsonia pro iis qui domi remanent. --

By which last article, as in some preceding, it appears, that it was unsafe,
or perhaps impossible, to purchase provisions at Oxford, in this calamitous
season. Again, in the same year. "Pro expens. Mag. Orpewood et Chambrelen apud
Woodstocke quando solvebant pecuniam pistori, et confirmabatur pactum cum eodem
pro pane et potu pro Collegio [apud] Oxon." I find a great reparation of this
house, 1596. Ex Comp. Anni. In the year 1603, the plague broke out again at
Oxford, when they probably retired hither as before. But the chief notice that
occurs, under that year, concerning it, is, Alloc. pro expens. tempore pestis,
xiij l. iij s. iv d.



In the year 1563, the plague raging at Oxford, before this house was finished,
I find them retiring to Woodstock, where they hired houses for their
accommodation. About which singular migration I have extracted these entries,
from Comp. 1563-4. Sol. per totum tempus pestis pro praeservantibus mithridato
et pillulis, diversis temporibus, xij s. x d. s. iv d s. d. s. ix d. generalem]
faciendum....




: relating to which occasion the following very singular instrument, dat. April
3, 1577, still remains.
Instrument concerning the Recession of Trinity College from the University to
Garsington aforesaid, in time of the Plague, 1577.
TO all christian people to whom this present writing shall come to be read
or hard. Arthur Yeldarde president of the college of the holy and undivided
Trinity in the universitie of Oxforde, of the ffoundation of Sir Thomas Pope,
knight. and the fellows and scollers of the same college, send greeting in our
lord god everlasting. Know ye, that we the said president, fellows and
scollers, have appointed, constituted, and assigned, and do by these presents
ap. cons. and ass. Thomas Blocksome, of Garsington in the Countye of Oxforde,
butcher, to provide and bye for us so many calfes, and the same to kill, as
shall serve to our necessary use for the said college and company there,
from the making hereof, unto the ffirst day of June next folowinge the date
hereof: prayinge all justices of peace, and and others the queen's majesty's
officers, quietlye to permit the said Thomas Blocksome to carye, drive and
pass through their libertyes, with all such Wares as he shall bye [buy] for
such purpose before named. In witness whereoff, we the said president,
fellows, and scollers, have set our common seal to these presents, the
third day of April in the year of our sovereign lady Elizabeth, by the
grace of God, queen of England, Ffraunce and Ireland, defenderesse of the
faith, the xixth. [1577. In an exhibitory bill, or schedule, of expenses for
their removal this year, as it seems, mention is made of carrying the Cl^ck
from the college-hall to Garsington-house. Also for carriage of surplices. viz.
"Sol. operariis pro vectura linostoliorum Mag. Praesidis, Sociorum, et
Scholarium, ad ecclesiam de Garsington." And the two following articles occur.
"Pro lectis et hospitiis extra domum pro firmariis [farmers] aliisque in
Computo Bursariorum et Ballivorum tento apud Garsington hoc anno." -- "Pro
luminibus in choro ecclesiae de Garsington, xvij s. iv d."
]

NUMB. XXV. Account of the first PRESIDENT, FELLOWS, and SCHOLARS, of Trinity
College, Oxford, nominated by Sir THOMAS POPE, and admitted May 30, 1556. And
of such others as were afterward nominated by the same Authority.
FIRST PRESIDENT.
THOMAS SLYTHURSTE.
BORN in Berkshire. He took the degree of A.B. at Oxford, Feb. 27, 1529 Wood,
Extracts from Regg. univ. Oxon. MSS. Mus. Ashm. E. 6.
. He determined in the same term Id. Ib. F. 14.
. Made M.A. at Oxford, Feb. 25, 1533 Id. Ib. E. 29. where it is not said that
he was incorporated M.A. These extracts from the Univ. Regg. were made by Wood,
after the publication of Hist. et Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
. These are sufficient proofs that he was educated at Oxford; but in what
college is uncertain. Probably at Brazen-nose, or Magdalen. Antony Wood
affirms, that he was incorporated Master of Arts from Cambridge Hist. et Antiq.
ii. 295. col. 1. But he retracts this assertion in his English MS. copy of that
work; and owns that he had applied a reference, belonging to Yeldarde
nextmentioned, to Slythurste.
. But no such person occurs taking any degree in that university In Registr.
Univ. Cant. And Dr. Richardson's MS. index to Cambridge graduates from 1500.
See also the last note.
. He was admitted at Oxford B.D. Nov. 21, 1543 Wood Athen. Oxon, fast. 67. col.
1. [In Sion College library there is a quarto manuscript entitled FASTI
CANTABRIGIENSES ab ann. 1500 ad ann. 1658.]
. He was instituted Feb. 11, 1545, to the vicarage of Chalfont St. Peter's,
Bucks, at the presentation of Robert Drury, esquire MSS. Br. Willis, spectant.
ad Co. Bucks, No. xii. part 2. page 12. fol. In Bibl. Bodl.
; and on the decease of Robert Harrison Willis, ibid. He is buried in the
church, with this Inscription. "Of your charity pray for the sowl of Sir Robert
Harison sum time vycar of this church and of lyttyl Myssenden which decessid
the xxv day of August, Ao. Dni. M^ V^ XLV. whose sowl God pardon."
. On Feb. 21, 1554, he supplicated for the degree of D.D. et Oxford Wood MSS.
ut supr. E. 9. But no mention occurs of the supplication under the year in his
FASTI. It is thus entered in the registr, "Quatenus studium in eadem facultate
per 20 annos hic et alibi, etc." Registr. I. fol. 149. a.
, which he never took. He was created canon of Windsor by letters patent of
Queen Mary, Apr. 2, 1554 Rymer, Foed. xv. page 382. col. 2. But he did not
succeed to the canonry of Richard Arche, deprived; as Willis observes in MS.
notes on Le Neve's FASTI, MSS. Willis, Bibl. Bodl. For see Rymer, ubi supr. 365.
. He was instituted, Feb. 13, 1555. to the rectory of Chalfonte St. Giles's
Bucks at the presentation of William Sothold MSS. Willis, spect. ad co. Bucks.
No. 33. fol. ubi supr.
; and on the death Willis, ibid.
of William Franklyn, fellow of King's college Cambridge Frithe's Catal. MS.
decan. et canon. Vinsor.
, prebendary of York and Lincoln Willis, CATHEDR. York, p. 165. And Lincoln, p.
199.
, archdeacon Ibid. Durham. p. 259.
and chancellor Rymer, Foed. xix. 282.
of Durham, master of St. Giles's Willis, ibid.
hospital at Kepyer near Durham, and dean of Windsor MSS. Frithe, ut supr.
. He was installed president of Trinity College Oxford, according to the
founder's nomination, May 30, 1556. About the same time he resigned the
vicarage of Chalfonte St. Peter's For Edm. Dorman occurs vicar in 1557. Willis,
MSS. ut supr. No. 33.
. I find him appointed, by the convocation of the university of Oxford, with
others, Nov. 11, 1556, to regulate or supervise the exercises in theology, on
the election of cardinal Pole to the chancellorship Registr. I. Congr. et Conv.
fol. 163. b. Select delegates are also appointed for other services "dispicere
quid in unaquaque re optimum fuerit." See also fol. 166. b.
. He was deprived of the presidentship of Trinity college by queen Elisabeth's
visitors in September, 1559. On which, being committed to the Tower of London,
he died there, about 1560 Wood. Hist. et antiq. ut supr. ii. 295. col. 1.
.

Richard Slythurst, with Thomas Broke, was made keeper of the park of Ewelme,
Oxfordshire, by license from Henry viii. with a fee of ij d. per diem, Apr. 24,
1513 Priv. sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 4. Apr. 24.
. William Slythurst received a lease from Henry viii. of certain possessions in
Watlington, Oxfordshire, Jan. 27, 1522 Bill. signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 13.
Jan. 27. "Ad finem 21 annorum. reddendo [regi] annuatim, liij s. iiij d. And
xiij s. iv d." -- Part of these possessions is called " le heyhouse Milpole."
. Another Richard Slythurst, of Berkshire, and of Brasennose college Oxford,
occurs taking the degree of M.D. at Oxford, 1566 Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 9. Some
of his dispensations for the said degree are granted, amongst others, "ut
crearetur doctor ante adventum reginae, et paratus sit ad disputandum coram
illa." Ex Registr. Univ. ibid. citat.
. He was a physician at Oxford, and died there in the parish of St. Peter in
the East, 1586 Wood, ibid. Et ex Testam. dat. 20. Jan. 1586. Prob. 23. Feb.
seq. Registr. Act. cur. cancellar. Oxon. GG. fol. 253.
. Another Richard Slythurst also was fellow of Magdalene college in Oxford, and
supplicated for the degree of B.D. in 1543 Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 5. compared
with MSS. E. 9.
. John Slythurst was a monk of the monastery of Missenden, Bucks, and a priest,
1539 Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. p. 31. I likewise find one Henry Slythurste
presented to the vicarage of Dedham, co. Essex, by the bishop of London, October.
11, 1555. Newcourt, Repertor. ii. p. 210.
. Probably these persons were all of the family of THOMAS SLYTHURST, the
subject of this article; some of them being connected with his neighborhood in
the country, and others with the university of Oxford: Especially, as the Name
is very singular It is sometimes written Slighurst; as in a Will, where Thomas,
the subject of this article, is remembered, dat. 1553. In registr. testam.
archidiaconat. Buckingh. temp. regin. Mar. His ejection from his preferments is
mentioned by Sanders, VISIBIL. MONARCH. lib. vii. p. 668. edit. 1592. fol.
. He certainly had a brother, named John From an entry in a book in the library
of Trinity college, viz. POLYANTHEA, Basil. 1512, fol. given, among others, by
Thomas Slythurst the president.
; whom I conclude to have been the monk abovementioned.

FIRST FELLOWS.
1. ARTHUR YELDARD.
Born at Houghton-Strother near the river Tyne, in the county of Tindall, in
Northumberland Registr. prim. coll. Trin fol. 1. b. et 25.
. He was educated in grammar and singing, as a boy of the almonry, or
chorister, in the Benedictine convent, now the Dean and chapter, of Durham MSS.
F. Wise.
. He became afterward one of the masters or assistants of Rotheram college in
Yorkshire Ibid. For an account of this college, see Hearne's Lib. Nig. SCACC.
p. 683. It had a provost, three fellows, six choristers, two masters in
grammar, and another in music.
. He was admitted a sizar of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, 1544 Lib. Matric. univ.
Cant. Where his name is spelt Yeldart.
. He took the degree of A.B. in January 1547 Registr. Univ. Cant. et Collectan.
MSS. V. rev. et doctiss. Gul. Richardson, coll. Eman. Mag.
, and was elected fellow of Pembroke-Hall before 1550 Collectan. MSS. mag.
Atwood, olim aul. Pemb. soc.
. He occurs junior treasurer of that house 1551 In bishop Wren's manuscript
HISTORIOLA of the master and fellows of Pembroke-hall, collected, as it seems,
about 1624, these notices occur concerning Arthur Yeldard. " Yelder vel
Yelderd. Northumbranus, artium baccalaureus, et thesaurarius junior, anno 1551.
Post biennium desiit nominari. Illud nomen nunc forte pronuntiamus Geldar: --
ARTHURUS YELDAR ei nomen est. SS. theologiae doctor, et secundus praefectus
collegii SS. Trinitatis apud Oxonienses, etc."MSS. penes magistr. aul. Pembr.
Cant.
. He took the degree of M.A. in the same university 1552 Registr. Univ. Cant.
et collectan. MSS. D. Richardson, ut supr.
. At Pembroke-hall he became tutor to Henry and Antony, sons to sir Antony
Denny See Dedication, infra citat. Notes. Denny was the only person of the
court, who dared to inform king Henry the eighth of the probability of his
approaching Death, and one of the executors of that king's will.
, who were matriculated Nov. 27. 1552 Lib. Matric. univ. Cant.
. He afterward attended these young gentlemen on their travels Sed Dedication,
infra citat. not.
. While at Cambridge, for his better support in study, he received an annual
exhibition from the princess, afterward queen, Mary, by the hands of Dr.
Francis Mallet, her chaplain and confessor, the last master of Michaelhouse in
Cambridge, and, beside other promotions in the church, dean of Lincoln Tanner
Bibl. page 504.
. In the year 1553, he appears to have been at Dilling in Flanders See
Dedication, infra citat. not.
: but he certainly did not go abroad, as Wood insinuates Hist. Antiq. Univ.
Oxon. i. 2S2. col. 2.
, on account of the reformation of religion in the reign of Edward the sixth;
durall which it is manifest that he was resident at Cambridge. He seems to have
left the kingdom on account of his two pupils above mentioned; with whom he
traveled, as I have before observed. In the first year of queen Mary, 1553,
while at Dilling, he translated from greek into latin, Documenta quaedam
admonitoria Agapeti diaconi Autograph. MSS. Brit. Mus. -- Inter. MSS. Bibl.
Reg. 7. D. iv.
. It is dedicated to the queen; and in the dedication, dated at Dilling, he
mentions her majesty's many rare accomplishments; in particular, her knowledge
of the latin and greek tongues To confirm and illustrate this and other
passages in the text, I give the following Extracts from this Dedication. --
"Ut difficillimis his christianae reipublicae temporibus, charitate ubique
frigescente, vera religione oppressa et prope extincta, atque (ut uno verbo
dicam) rebus omnibus fere ad summam desperationem adductis; eam nobis [D. O.
M.] donavit REGINAM, quae ita est omni scientiarum cognitione exculta, ita et
Graece quae rara est in saemina virtus, et Latin docta, ut in paucissimis
Viris par similisque doctrina inveniatur; ut nulla his fere in rebus ei
admonitore sit opus. Quippe quae omnium praeclarorum principum exempla quae
quidem literis continentur, ad mores recte formandos pertinentia, in promptu
habeat, eorumque optima semper in rebus gerendis imitetur et exprimat. Quae,
etiam ab infantia, ita pietatis semper et very cultus divini fuit studiosa; ut
ob vitae sanctitatem, quantum homines conjectura assequi possunt, digna fit
adeo judicata, ad quam Religio hoc toto fere regno exulans, tanquam in portum
profugeret, etc." -- "Quum ergo viderem admonitorias hasce Agapeti Sententias,
et breves et nervosas, a nemine hactenus quod sciam digne donatas Latinitate;
et statuissem aliquo grati animi indicio significare, me non esse immemorem
beneficiorum, a Celsitudine tua per manus Doctoris MALLETTI acceptorum, quibus
CANTABRIGIAE juvenis in studiis alebar: Judicavi eas esse dignas in quibus ita
elaborarem, etc" -- "Restat ergo, ut immortales gracias Majestati tuae habeam
perpetuo, quod Discipulos meos mihi a parentibus erudiendos traditos, nobiles
illos quidem summaeque spei adolescentulos DENNEIOS, et patre et matre jam
orbatos, tanto amore prosequuta fueris, eorumque tutelam tam charam habueris,
ut ne matter quidem indulgentius illorum incolumitati providere potuisset, quam
est a te provisum: Quae, etsi eam ipsis longinquas regiones petendi facultatem
annuere non es dedignata, quam parents in vita saepe promiserant; tamen id
omnino permittere noluit pietas tua eximia, antequam et Puerorum educationem
exploraveras, et de tutorum etiam fide quorum curae commissi sunt accurate
inquisiveras. Verumenimvero hujus tantae in illos indulgentiae uberrimi, deo
favente, brevi percipientur fructus: Quum, tua providentia, scientiarum
linguarumque variarum cognitione ornati, et multarum rerum usu atque
experientia instructi, Viri in patriam redibunt; Majestatique tuae et
reipublicae huic florentissimae ea fide servient, qua Patri tuo primum, deinde
Fratri, regibus aeterna memoria dignissimis, servivit ipsorum pater
prudentissimus ANTHONIUS DENNEIUS miles. Quod ut fiat, non modo precibus
asiiduis D. O. M. urgebo, verum etiam ipse opera et industria mea, quantum
potero, juvabo." -- "Datum DALLANCIAE duodecimo Die December. Anno regni tui
augustiss. primo." Inscribed, "MARIAE, Angliae, Fsranciae et Hyberniae, Reginae
serenissimae, ARTHURUS YELDARDUS Salutem optat aeternam."
. A manuscript of this piece is in the royal library, now part of the British
Museum; and is the same that was presented to queen Mary. He translated into
Greek Sir Thomas More's CONSOLATORY DIALOGUE AGAINST TRIBULACION, written in
the year 1534, and in the TOWER of London MS. F. Wise. Who says he had seen it
among the curious manuscripts of Mr. Farmer of Tusmore in Oxfordshire. But it
is not, I believe, to be found there at present. More's book is supposed by
some to have been translated from the Latin of one Hungarus: and was printed at
Antwerp by John Fowler in 1573. 12mo.
. On the foundation of Trinity college at Oxford, he was admitted, by the
founder's nomination, a fellow of the same, May 30, 1556, and was incorporated
M.A. in that university, Nov. 12, the same year Wood Ath. Oxon. i. f. 85.
. The circumstance of his having been patronised in his studies at Cambridge by
the princess Mary who was now queen, and his connection with the family of
Denny, must have been instrumental to this nomination. He appears to have been
in high favor and esteem with the founder; who appointed him the first
philosophy-lecturer in his college, yet permitted him to be absent, and to
serve that office by deputy, for many months Ex Comp. Burss. 1556.
. I have before taken notice Supr. p. 188.
, that the founder placed his son in law, John Beresford, at Trinity college,
under the tuition All the Convictores admitted into the college, are ordered to
be placed under the tuition of one of the fellows. It seems also, that these
were attended by their private preceptors. For in the Statutes of the college,
where mention is made of the number of Convictores to be admitted, it is
immediately added, "cum DIDASCALIS suis ipsos comitantibus." Cap. x.
of this learned and experienced preceptor: to whom on that occasion, he sent
the following letter. Mr. Yelder, with my right herty commendations.
I send to you my son Mr. Basford, whom with the rest committed to your charge
I require you so to instruct as theye may proffytt in learning: ffor doing
whereoff ye shall not find me unthankful. I will not forget you, so soon as I
shall see convenyent time. and thus fare ye well. Written at London the xiiith
of July, anno 1557.

Your loving ffrend, THO. POPE Ex Autograph. ubi supr.
.


He wrote latin prose with great elegance and perspicuity. He seems to have
been employed in the verbal composition of the college-statutes; for the
founder in a letter to the president, Nov. 26, 1556, orders a reward to
"Master Yeldard, in consideration of the pains he took to pen my statutes."
On the deprivation of Slythurste, the first president, abovementioned, 1559, he
was presented, with Stephen Marks, mentioned in the next article, to Dame
Elisabeth Pope, the foundress; who nominated him president, and he was
accordingly admitted Sept. 26, 1559 Wood says, "Visitatorum jussu successit."
Hist. Ant. univ. Oxon. i. 282. But this is a mistake; for he was regularly and
duly nominated and admitted. Registr. praedict. fol. 24.
, to the great satisfaction of the society From their letter to the foundress,
ibid. In which they say, that both the candidates are, "most worthy the
office, both for the meyntenaunce of good and godly livinge, and also for the
commeditie of the coledge in politic affairs." The foundress, in her answer,
says, she has chosen him, trusting "it shall be for the comoditie of the
coledge, and also for all your comfrethe and quietness." ibid. fol. 24. b.
. He took the degree of B.D. Jun. 24, 1563 Wood Ath. Oxon. i. Fast. 92.
. And of D.D. Feb. 15, 1565 Ibid. 95.
. He was presented by the same Dame Elisabeth, Feb. 12, 1571, to vicarage of
Much-Waltham in Essex The next person presented to the same, but by the
president and fellows of Trinity college, Oxon. was Nicholas Yeldard; I
suppose, his brother, but not of the college, Sept. 10, 1574. Registr. prim.
coll. fol. 29. b. And Newcourt, Repertor. ii. 632. Afterward the same dame
Elisabeth made over the advowson, pro hac vice, to the said Arthur Yeldard, and
he presented Rob. Palmer, not a fellow, October. 6, 1585. Registr. Grindall,
episc. London. And Newcourt, ut supr. 633.
. In September, 1566, he disputed in divinity before queen Elisabeth, during
her magnificent reception at Oxford; Juel, bishop of Salisbbury, being the
moderator MSS. Baker. vol. vi. p. 141. b. Brit. Mus. Harl. MSS. 7033.
He was appointed, Jul. 13, 1580, by the earl of Leicester, vice chancellor of
the university Wood, Hist. antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 429.
. I find him commissioned, Jun. 10, 1583, with four other Doctors, to recieved
Albertus de Lasco a prince of Poland, accompanied by lord Leicester and other
nobles, at their public entry into Oxford: who were entertained in the
university for the four following days, with sumptuous banquets, disputations,
orations, sermons, and two plays presented in Christ Church hall Ibid. i. 299.
Hollinsh. Chron. iii. 1355.
. In the year 1576, he was empowered, in conjunction with others, to correct
and reform the whole body of the statutes of the university Wood, Hist. antiq.
univ. Oxon. i. 294 col. 1.
. He continued president of the college thirty nine years, four months and
three days Registr. prim. dicti coll. fol. 53.
. He died Feb. 2, 1598-9 Ibid.
, and was buried in the chapel of the college As I collect from the following
articles in Comp. Burss. 1598-9. "Sol. operariis et caenae funebri desuncti
praesidentis, et pro jentaculis sociorum proficisc. ad episcopum Winton, et pro
caena eorundem post reditum. xl s. ob. q. d. ly bellman. ij d.




. He has a copy of latin verses, among others of the capital scholars of those
times, viz. Alexander Nowell, Herbert Westphalinge, Thomas Bodley, George
Buchanan, etc. at the end of Humphreys's Life of bishop Jewel, 1573 Johannis
Juelli Vita, etc. Land. 4to.
. He has likewise a latin poem prefixed to John Case's Speculum Moralium
Quaestionum, Oxon. 1585. It appears that he died very old, by another latin
copy of verses Of which he says, Quae dolor atque amor extorsere seni meditanti.

His will is dated Jan. 8, 1598. Proved April 16, 1599. Apod Registr. Actor.
cur. cancellar. Oxon. GG. fol. 178. b. archiv. acad. Oxon. It contains nothing
remarkable. He leaves all his effects, of every kind, to Eleanor his wife; whom
he likewise appoints executrix. Except that he bequeathes six volumes of the
Centuriae Magdeburgenses to the college library.


written by him, in a collection of Oxford verses, on the death of Sir Richard
Unton Entitled, "Funebria nobilissimi et praestantissimi equitis D. HENRICI
VNTONI ad Gallos bis legati regii, etc. a. Musis Oxonienfibus apparata, 1596.
4to." It was made and published by Doctor Robert Wright, fellow of Trinity
college, Oxford, afterward bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. Who has also
prefixed a good latin preface. Wood (ATH. Oxon. ii. 1137.) does not mention
this publication by Dr. Wright. The collection is closed with two copies by
Wright; the last of which, being in a fingular strain, and much superior to the
taste of those times, I am tempted to insert. Haec, Untone, tuo cecinere in
funere musae
Oxonides, tristes munera ad inserias:
Oxonides musae, quarum es nutritus in ulnis:
Heu, teneras lacrymarum imbre rigante genas!
Quae tibi postremo nostri pro munere amoris,
Curavi in memores jam reserenda typos.
Accipiant Iaeti manes studia ista tuorum,
At tu, patron o dulcis, ave atque vale!
By the former of these two copies, it appears, that Wright accompanied sir
Henry Unton, in one of his embassies into France, to the French king's camp at
Lasere, in which sir Henry died, 1595. See Ashm. BERKSH. i. 190. iii. 313. In
Thomas Newton's ENCOMIA, printed 1589, is an epigram addressed, "Ad
eruditissimum virum ROBERTUM WRIGHTUM nobilissimi Essexiae comitis samulum
primarium." p. 124. This I judge to be the same Robert Wright; especially from
the two concluding lines. Ubera cui Charites dant, et favet innuba Pallas,
Quemque beat docta doctus Apollo chely.


Dr. Robert Wright was born at Saint Alban's, and elected scholar of Trinity
college, Oxford, aged fifteen, jun. 7. 1574. Registr. Coll. prim. f. 36.
Fellow, being then bachelor of Arts, May 25, 1581. Ibid. f. 39. He was
successively chaplain to queen Elisabeth, and king James the first. He was
presented, by lord keeper Egerton, to the rectory of Brixton Deverel in
Wiltshire, Nov. 29. 1596. MS. Tanner, ad Wood's ATHEN. ii. 1135. He was
instituted Rector of Hayes in Middlesex, on the presentation of William lord
Pembroke, Apr. 4. 1601. Admitted Dec. 21. in the same year canon residentiary
and treasurer of Wells. He was also vicar of Sunning in Berkshire, and Rector
of Bourton upon the Water in Gloucestershire. See Newc. REPERTOR. i. 641. In
1613 he was appointed the First Warden of Wadham college, by the foundress dame
Dorothy Wadham. In 1622, consecrated bishop of Bristol; and in 1632, translated
to the sea of Lichfield and Coventry. Prynne say, that bishop Wright placed a
"goodly crueisixe in a frame with the pictures of men and women devoutly
praying to it," above the altar in Litchfield cathedral, and that he was
greatly concerned in composing the late canons, oaths, etc. That at Bristol, he
sued the Dean and chapter for opposing him in placing Images in the cathedral,
and other churches, there. That he introduced many superstitious innovations at
Bristol "to humor Canterbury [Laud,] by whose means he was translated to
Coventry and Litchfield." Antipathie of the English Lordly Prelacie, etc. Land.
1641. 4to. chapter v. page 292. chapter vi. BRISTOLL.

In 1641. he was one of the protesting bishops, with eleven more: and before
his committment to the Tower, spoke an eloquent oration at the bar of the House
of Commons, which is extant. He died in the year 1643, at his palace at
Eccleshall while it was besieged by the rebels. Of this venerable prelate there
is preserved a good old portrait on board at Trinity college, concerning which
the following notice occurs, COMP. Burss. coll. Trin. 1632. -- 3. "Pro imagine
episcopi Lichfieldensis adornanda, xvj s." At sir Charles Adderley's house in
Warwickshire, there was a picture of bishop Wright, with a long inscription.
ANTIQUITIES OF LITCHFIELD CATHEDR. Land. 1717. page 51. Another belonging to
sir John Davies at Bear Court in Berkshire, Ashm. BERKSH. ii. 337. (See also
ibid. 397.) There is another at Wadham-college.


.

2. STEPHEN MARKS.
Born in Cornwall. He was a fellow of Exeter college, Oxford, where he took the
degree of A.B. 1552 Wood. MSS. ut supr. E. 5.
. Made A.M. Jul, 11, 1554 Id. ib. E. 29.
. On October. 17, 1555, he was elected rector of the said college, then an annual
office, and held by the fellows Id. D. 2. page 306.
. In the year of his rectorship he was admitted, as above, a fellow of Trin.
coll. Oxon. May 30, 1556. At the same time he was appointed vice president of
the same by the founder. He was in nomination for the presidentship with Arthur
Yeldard, in Sept. 1559, on the deprivation of Slythurste; as was observed in
the preceding article. He supplicated for the degree of B.D. October. 10, 1559
Registr. I. Congreg. et Conv. fol. 185.
. He had quitted his fellowship before the end of the year 1560 Ut patet ex
Registr. coll. prim. fol. 140.
.

3. JOHN BARWYKE.
Born in Devonshire. He was of Magdalene college, Oxford. He appears to have
been recommended to the founder by Alexander Belsire, the First President of
Saint John's MSS. F. Wise. Formerly fellow of New college, and canon of Christ
Church.
. Took the degree of A.B. 1549. And of M.A. April 27, 1556 Wood, MSS. Ib. D. 6.
And E. 29. One John Barwicke was ordained an Accolyte in Baliol college chapel,
Mar. 9, 1554. Being then SCHOLARIS collegii Magdalenae. REGISTR. Rob. King,
Episcop. Oxon. f. 80. Also a John Barwicke occurs, at the same time and place,
ordained Subdeacon, he being then bachelor of arts and fellow of Magdalene
college. Ibid. By the way, it appears from this register, which begins 1543,
that bishop King, the first bishop of Oxford and last abbot of Oseney, usually
held his ordinations in Capella Manerii de Thame-Parke.
. Admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. by nomination as above. At the same time
appointed dean by election. He quitted his fellowship about the year 1565 Comp.
Burss. 1564-5.
.

4. JAMES BELL.
Born in Somersetshire. Was scholar of C. C. C. Oxon, where he took the degree
of B.A. 1551 Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6. and Athen. Oxon. i. f. 75.
. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. At the same time
appointed rhetoric-lecturer by election. He left his fellowship about
Michaelmas, in the year of his admission Registr. KETTELL. viz. cui tit.
"ALUMNI illi quos venerabilis vir, THOMAS, cognomento POPE, ordinis militaris,
in hoc domicilio alendos statuit: et non solum ipsorum victui moribusque
prospexit, verum etiam ut bona ingenia bonis artibus et disciplinis
imbuerentur, ad sinceram Christi Religionem populo Christi strenue
commendandam, impense curavit." Apud Coll. Trin. in pergamen. fol. It was drawn
up by Dr. Kettel, president; and continued, by him, from the foundation to the
year 1602, inclus. The original draught of this Register, in Kettel's own hand,
is in the Ashmolean Museum, codd. A. Wood, 8490. fol. 28. with many
interpolations, corrections, and additions, in the hand of its collector. This
last-mentioned copy of the said register, which seems to have been given to A.
Wood by Dr. Buthurst, president, is here cited, and will be often afterward,
in the course of this article of the APPENDIX.
, and suddenly became a zealous assertor of the reformation; in defense of
which he published several pieces, here enumerated. A translation of Luther's
treatise of Christian Liberty. Land. 1579. 8vo. A translation of John Fox's
Sermon of the Evangelical Olive. Land. 1578. A translation of Fox's Sermon
preached at the Christening of a certain Jew at London, 1577. 16mo. A
translation of Fox's and Haddon's Answer apologetical to Hierome Osorius his
slanderous Invective. 1581. 4to See Strype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 433.
. A translation of Fox's Pope confuted. Land. 1580. 4to. In the preface of this
last piece, the translator, Bell, mentions his happy conversion to
protestantism from popery. "I wandered long in the selfsame mizmaze, nooseled
therein by the grayheaded of that school, whose countenance carried me from my
Christ to the swinstie of the Sorbone, which had swalowed me up, if the Lord
had not prevented me betimes." In the same, he takes notice of being "taxed by
a friend with apostasy." Wood calls our author "a great admirer of John Fox,
the martyrologist Athen. Oxon. i. 232.
." Among the manuscripts of the royal library, now in the British Museum, is
one entitled, James Bell's account of Caecilia princess of Sweeden her
traveling into England, 1564, dedicated to Q. Elisabeth 17. C. XXIX. charta.
. He was installed, Feb. 13, 1595, into the prebend of Holcombe in the
cathedral church of Wells; and October. 11, the same year, into the prebend of
Comb in the same church Tanner, BIBL. page 95.
. Tanner, having mentioned Bell's preferments at Wells, adds, "Hic Jacobus Bell
mihi videtur ille Somersetensis, qui primo scholaris collegii Corporis Christi
Oxon, beccalaureus artium admissus A. 1551, et postea sub finem mensis Maii, A.
1556, socius collegii Trinitatis electus. Refragari tamen videtur aetas."
Tanner means, that he was rather too old, to have lived to take these
preferments. But he might be admitted at the university, as was anciently the
custom, very young: and, beside the circumstance of his county, his sudden
departure from the college, and the history of his religious principles, all
taken together, render it highly probable that he was the same person.

5. JOHN RICHARDSON.
Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's college I know not if scholar is
here the proper style. Nor do I fully comprehend the system of the ancient
foundation of Queen's college. But the members are thus distinguished in the
establishment of an Obit in the chapel there, dated Oct. 6. 1538. The provost
if present is to receive ij s. "Every fellow and scoler being present, xx d.
Every chaplayne, vj d. Every master of the children, vj d. Every child of
the taberd, iiij d. Every clerk of the chapel, iiij d. Every poyr [poor]
child, ij d. Archiv. Coll. Regin. Oxon. [MSS. Ed. R. MORES, fol. 116.]" And in
another Obit, dated Febr. 21. 1516. "To every fellow, chaplayne, master of the
children, and to the children of the house, the clerks of the chapel, and to
every scoler being poyr child, etc." Ibid. [MSS. ut supr. fol. 113.]
, Oxford; where he took the degree of B.A. in March 1553 Wood, MSS. ut supr. D.
6. and E. 5. He was ordained subdeacon, ratione studii ultra decennium
continuati, in Oxford cathedral, Sept. 19. 1556. Registr. Episc. Oxon. fol. 90.
. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. At the same time
appointed bursar by election. He had quitted the college before the end of 1560
Ex Comp. Burss.
. He was afterward, as I collect, instituted to be rectory of St. Savior's,
in York, 1567, where he died 1591 Drake's Ebor. p. 311.
.

6. GEORGE SYMPSON.
Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's college, Oxford; where he took the
degree of B.A. in March, 1553 Wood, Ibid.
. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. Made M.A. Jul. 8,
1558 Wood, MSS. E. 29.
. He was ejected for popery about 1561, and ordered, with others, not to be
seen within twenty miles of either of the universities, under severe penalties
See Strype, Ann. Ref. iv. 275. compared with MSS. Kettel. supr. citat.
.

7. GEORGE RUDDE.
Born in Westmoreland. Was scholar of Queen's college, Oxford; where he took
the degree of B.A. in March, 1553 Wood, D. 6. E. 5.
. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He was made M.A.
Jul. 8, 1558 Wood, MSS. E. 29.
. He quitted his fellowship about Easter, in 1563 MSS. Kettel.
.

8. THOMAS SCOTTE.
Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's college, Oxford; where he took the
degree of B.A. Jul. 5, 1554 Wood, E. 6. and E. 5.
. Admitted, from thence, fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He took the
degree of M.A. Jul. 6, 1556 Id. E. 29.
. He was elected one of the proctors of the university, Apr. 25, 1560 Wood,
Hist. antiq. ii. 426.
. But the same year, or very soon afterward, he was ejected from his
fellowship, with others, for refusing the oath of supremacy to queen Elisabeth
Ibid. i. 284.
.

9. ROGER CRISPIN.
Born in Devonshire. Elected fellow of Exeter college, Oxford, 1550 Wood, MSS.
D. 2. p. 42.
, where he took the degree of B.A. Dec. 8, 1554 Ibid. D. 6. This person, and
some others of Exeter college, recited in these two LISTS of the FIRST FELLOWS
and SCHOLARS, were recommended to the Founder by John Holyman, the second
bishop of Bristol in 1554, originally fellow of New-college, then a monk of
Reading abbey, and afterward, on the dissolution of his monastery, a retired
student in Exeter college till about 1553. MSS. F. Wise. In an Epistle to the
University of Oxford, dated 1530, from Hugh Faringdon abbot of Reading, he is
characterised as a theologist and a preacher of great erudition. Registr. FF.
fol. 101, 102. Alexander Belsire his cotemporary in New-college, and the First
President of Saint John's, was his intimate friend to his death. Dying in 1558,
he bequeathed several books to the library of Winchester college. -- For the
character of abbot Hugh Faringdon, abovementioned, Holyman's patron, see HIST.
ENGL. POETR. vol. ii. p. 446. And Willis, MITR. ABB. i. 161. See also Wood,
HIST. ANTIQ. Univ. Oxon. i. 252. a. ii. 95. b. 136. a.
. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He took the degree
of M.A. Jul. 8, 1558 Wood, MSS. E. 29.
. He quitted his fellowship about the feast of All Saints in 1562 MSS. Kettel.
The following article occurs concerning him in the beginning of the same year,
Comp. Burss. 1591-2. "Solut. 16 Jan. pro expens. magistri Crispin equitantis ad
Londinum ad emenda salsamenta et halecia pro quadragesima, x s.
.

10. ROGER EVANS.
Born in Cornwall. Perhaps of Exeter college. I find nothing of him in the
university registers, or elsewhere, but that he was admitted when A.B. a fellow
as above; and that he left his fellowship at the end of 1559 Registr. MSS. Rad.
Kettel. ut supr.
, I suppose on the accession of Elisabeth, and the change of religion.

11. JOHN PERTE.
Born in Warwickshire. Took the degree of A.B. May 8, 1556 MSS. Wood, ut supr.
D. 6.
. Admitted fellow of Trin. coll. by the founder's nomination, as above.
Admitted, at the same time, one of the bursars by election. I find him often
mentioned in the founder's letters, as employed in transcribing the
college-statutes This is the oldest copy now remaining in the college; except
the original one, signed and sealed by the founder. It is on parchment. The
next, in point of antiquity, is one sent to the bishop of Winchester, which is
also on parchment, and bears the following inscription prefixed.

"Reverendiffimo in Christo patri, et dignissimo patrono protectorique nostro
unico, domino Episcopo Winton."

"QUOD per hos december annos subinde desideravit amplitudo vestra, clarissime
PRAESUL, curavimus tandem effectum dare. Humillime offerimus exemplar
STATUTORUM illorum, quae injunxit nobis beatae memoriae FUNDATOR noster
fingularis, dominus THOMAS POPE, miles; et quorum observantiae invigilat
feliciter eximia vestra sollicitudo. Unaque cum ipsis, nosmet, nostrum statum
fidemque nostram, vestrae, colendissime ANTISTES, fidissimae tutelae, favorique
benignissimo, unanimiter et supplicissime cupimus esse in perpetuum concreditos
et commendatos. Dat. Oxon. April 1. A.D. 1609, Vestrae amplitudini devotissime
devincti, Praes. et Soc. Coll. Trin. Oxon. etc." [Compare p. 125. supr. Note,
g. And p. 248. Note, a] In the beginning of Cromwell's usurpation, on the
dissolution of the bishoprics, this copy was returned to the college, by the
deprived bishop Morley, where it now remains.


. He left the college in 1558 Registr. Ketell.
, being, as I suspect, removed for turbulence and contumacy. It appears by the
founder's letters, that he had excited and encouraged a faction in the college,
under pretense that the statutes were unreasonably strict By the same letters
it appears, that he was ordered to appear before the founder, I suppose, at
London; and to bring with him his objections to the statutes drawn out in form,
which now remain. These objections the founder intended to lay before the deau
of St. Paul's: this was Dr. Henry Cole, who also was, or had been, warden of
New college Oxford, provost of Eton, prebendary of saint Paul's and Salisbury,
archdeacon of Ely, and vicar general of the spiritualties under Cardinal Pole.
He was likewise an eminent civilian, and joined in a commission with Sir Thomas
Pope. He is celebrated as a classical scholar in Leland's ENCOM. p. 79. edit.
1589.

Ascham has left this testimony of Cole's literature and humanity. "Tantum ego
et communi omnium voci de tua eruditione, et frequenti Morysini sermoni de tua
humanitate, semper tribui, doctissime humanissimeque Cole, ut imperitus ipse si
te non colerem, et inhumanus si non amarem, merito videri possim." Epistol. R.
Ascham. lib. iii. Asch. Colo. edit. Land. 1581. p. 154 b 12mo. with a present
of Aristaeas, etc. Sir Richard Morysine, or Morison, here mentioned, was one of
Ascham's most distinguished literary friends, a great friend to the
Reformation, and sent by Henry the eighth, and his successor, an ambassador to
the emperor Charles the fifth. He died, an exile for religion, at Strasburgh
in 1556.


. This affair seems to have given the founder much uneasiness and concern; and
he frequently speaks of it in his letters to the president. At length, it
occasioned the following address in form to the whole society.

To his lovinge ffriends the fellows of Trinity college in Oxforde.
With my hearty commendations. As I was not a little greved of the report of
late made unto me, that, contrary to my expectations, there should be any such
lyghtness among you, as not to approve those my Statutes which I sent you;
being drawn and collectede, as well out of the good orders of other colleges,
as also by the advice and cownsell of diverse most sage and wise heddes; and
that for the rigor of them, as it was termed, most part of you would
wantonlie forsake my college, and the Benefit you had by me there: So fyndinge
by letters coming from diverse of you, the same report to be untrue; have
conceived better opinion of you, occasioninge me the lose to repent my Charge,
which I have, and shall In a letter from him to the president, dat. Whitmonday,
1558, he says, "I shall by [buy] of the master of the Rolls ii. ffaier manors
with ii. advowsons in Lyncolnshere, which I entende to gyve to my collegge."
Amongst others, he might perhaps here mean this intended donation; which,
however, never took effect. I suppose, on account of the founder's death, which
happened a few months afterward. In another letter, from and to the same,
without date, but written 1558, he promises to assure to the college three
other advowsons with all convenient speed. But, I suppose, for the reason
abovementioned, they never came to the college.
, bestow among you. And as I cannot but much commend and allow the stayed
wit and mature discretion of those among you, which do declare themselves
content with such my Ordinances as I gave unto you, whom as occasion shall
serve I must allwaye think worthy to be had in my memory; so I require you
All, quietly to receive these Statutes which I eftsoon Forthwith, or again.
send you, sealed and subscribed with my hand See note in page 248.
: myndinge not for any man's pleasure, hereafter, to alter and change any of
them. Signifieinge the gryeffes that have been exhibited unto me by some of
you; and [that] being perused and seen of diverse honorable, wise, and learned
men, with the Statutes thereunto appertayninge Additamentum. See ibid.
, [they] are in no wise " Lyked -- to be altered." i. e. No alteration is
approved or lyked.
lyked or thought mete to be altered. Wherefore, if any among you cannot
persuade himself to be content with these my Orders and Decrees, I hartyly
require the same, without disturbance, to gyve place unto such others as will
obedientlie lyve under the same; and, when he shall see his time, to depart
from my said college, which to do he shall have my good will and favor. And
thus praying you to have me in remembrance, with your prayers to God, I bid you
all farewell. Written at London, the xxvth of April, 1558.

Your loving ffrende, T. POPE E Registr. primo coll. praedict. fol. 16. b.
.


* When this person was removed from his fellowship, the founder intended,
partly on the recommendation of cardinal Pole, to place in his room the learned
William Alan, a name equally celebrated among the catholics, and proscribed by
the protestants. But that design did not take effect: he being promoted about
the same time, and probably by the interest of sir Thomas Pope, to a canonry in
the cathedral of York MSS. F. Wise, ut supr.
. Alan was an able controversialist in defense of the declining doctrines of
the church of Rome: educated at Oriel college, and about the year 1556,
appointed Principal of saint Mary's HALL, and elected one of the proctors of
the university of Oxford. Upon the accession of queen Elisabeth, he retired to
Louvain, where he wrote his famous book on PURGATORY and PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD,
which abounds in rhetoric more than argument, and contains much ingenious
declamation and sophistry. Soon afterward he returned to England, where he
published many specious apologies for his religion, which he dispersed with
great art and industry. But the treatise just mentioned was the basis of his
polemical reputation. As he wrote chiefly for the conviction of his countrymen,
most of his compositions are in English; and are not inelegant specimens of
style, at a time when the state of our language was rude and unsettled. A solid
old English critic pronounces one of Alan's tracts to be "a princely, grave,
and flourishing piece of natural and exquisite English Bolton's HYPERCRIT. iv..
2.
." Being again driven abroad, he was rewarded with a canonry in each of the
churches of Cambray and Rheims. At length standing high in the esteem of pope
Sixtus the fifth, he was constituted a Cardinal, and archbishop of Mechlin in
Brabant Wood, ATH. Oxon. i. 268. And his LIFE, written by Nich. Fitzerbert.
Antw. 1621. 8vo.
. It is not the least of his dignities, and it is a proof of the universality
of his literature, that he was librarian of the Vatican Miraeus, SCRIPT. SAEC.
xvi. p. 68.
. His activity was indefatigable in the support of his profession. He was a
principal instrument in establishing the English catholic seminaries at Doway
and Rheims, and several others in Spain and Italy. His intemperate papistic
zeal, which he imprudently carried into the dangerous politics of the times,
and which prompted him to circulate seditious papers in England to prepare the
way for the Spanish invasion, was censured even by those of his own intolerant
persuasion. He died aged only sixty three years, in 1594 Wood, ut supr. Pits.
792.
. Virtue had a curious cast of his head, from an original medallion.

12. ROBERT BELLAMIE.
Born in Yorkshire. Of Exeter college, as I collect. Took the degree of B.A.
May 8, 1556 Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6.
. He was admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, viz. May 30, 1556. I
find him nominated one of the first fellows of St. John's college, Oxford, by
sir Thomas White, the founder, in his charter, dat. Mar. 7, 1557-8 MSS. Catal.
Gr. Higgs, ut inf.
. This appointment he did not, however, accept; for he occurs one of the
bursars of Trinity college 1565 Comp. Burss. 1564-5. And Registr. PERROT, supr.
citat. (Numb. xxi.) fol. 112. a.
. He took the degree of M.A. May 28, 1560 Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 8.
. He afterward proceeded in physic; and, as I suppose by dispensation, took
the degree of M.B. Dec. 16, 1562 Ibid.
. On Jun. 23, 1571, he took the degree of M.D. having quitted his fellowship
1565, and removed to St. John's college, as an independent member Wood Ath. i.
f. 105.
. Higgs, in his catalogue of fellows of St John's college, mentions him as one
of the first fellows of the same; but Wood, in the margin, says he was fellow
of Trinity college MSS. Mus. Ashm. F. 28. fol. 204. b.
. Wood also omits him in his first fellows of St, John's; where he was only
nominated, and never admitted Hist. Ant. ii. 303.
. In Nov. 1589, he was made master of Shireburne hospital, near Durham, by
bishop Hutton; who, in a letter to the lord Treasurer, calls him "an honest
man, a preacher and a physician; to have charge both of the souls and bodies of
the poor, impotent, sick, persons of that hospital Dat. March, 1590. apud
Strype, Ann: iv. p. 15.
." On October. 31, 1573, he was installed canon of the third stall of Durham
cathedral. He was also rector of Houghton in the bishopric of Durham Willis,
CATHEDRALS. cath. Durham, p. 266, 278, 280.
. He was living 1590 Hutton's letter in Strype, ubi supr. Willis, ut supra,
says. by mistake, that he died 1588. One Robert Bellamie occurs a seminary
priest in 1588. Strype, iii. 260. ut supr.
. He is characterised, with others of the church of Durham, in a latin
manuscript poem, preserved among Wood's papers in the Ashmolean Museum,
entitled ITER BOREALE 8553. 91. It has marginal notes by the author. Concerning
this Robert Bellamie, the same, as I presume, I find the following entry in the
Register of the University. "April 10, 1562. Suplicat Robertus Bellamie A.M.
quatenus graciose cum eo dispensetur ut amplius proelegere non teneatur. Causa
est, quia tot et tantis negotiis domi impeditur ut nullo pacto praelegere
possit. CONCESS. modo substituat alium. Non observat conditionem." Registr.
Congr. et Conv. I. fol. 203. a.
, written by Dr. Richard Eedes, canon of Christ Church, Oxon, and afterward
dean of Worcester. This journey was taken 1584.

FIRST SCHOLARS.
1. JOHN LANGSTERRE. [or Langaster i. e. Lancaster.
.]
Born in Yorkshire. Of Brasen-nose college, Oxford, where he took the degree of
B.A. Mar. 26, 1556 Wood, MSS. D. 6.
. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. May 30, 1556. Aetat. 19. Made
probationer fellow, by the founder's mandate, Dec. 25, 1556 Registr. prim.
coll. fol. 4. b.
, and actual, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558 Registr. ibid. fol. 4. b. His
year of probation was protracted by the founder's command, who says in a letter
to the president, "Concering sir Langester's year of probation I will he be
ordered therein according to the statutes." Dat. 27 Nov. 1556.
. Made M.A. May 15, 1560 Wood, MSS. E. 29.
. He quitted his fellowship about the year 1563 Comp. Burss. 1562-3.
.

2. REGINALD BRAYE.
Born in Bedfordshire, and descended from sir Reginald Bray of Eton-Bray in
that county, famous in the reign of Edward the fourth Lee's VISIT. Oxv. 1574.
ut supr. page 45.
. Took the degree of A.B. at Oxford, May 8, 1556 Wood, MSS. D. 6.
. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, aged 18. He left the college
in Hilary term the same year MSS. Kettel.
.

3. JOHN ARDEN. [or Ardern.]
Born in Oxfordshire, and of an ancient and respectable family settled at
Cottisford, or Kirtlington. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above,
Aet. 18. Related to the founder See supr. p. 327.
. Left the college about Michaelmas, in 1558 MSS. Kettel.
. Afterward he gave eighteen volumes or more to the library In which he is
styled ARMIGER.
.

4. JOHN COMPORTE.
Born in Middlesex. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. Aet. 18. He
took the degree of A.B. May 23, 1558 Wood, MSS. E. 6.
. Made probationer fellow, by the founder's mandate, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7,
1558 Registr. coll. ut supr. fol. 4. b.
. He left his fellowship in the end of the year 1560 MSS. Kettel.
. He gave to the library Robert Holcot upon the Sentences Fol. See Lib. Benef.
bibl. coll. Trin. in pergam.
.

5. ROBERT THRAKSE.
Born in Somersetshire. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, Aet.
18. He left the college about Michaelmas 1558 MSS. Kettel.
, having taken the degree of A.B. the same year, Feb. 1 Wood, MSS. E. 6.
.

6. WILLIAM SALTMARSHE.
Born in Yorkshire. He seems to have been first of Brazen-nose college MSS.
Wood, E. 6. in Marg. sub. an. 1558.
. Admitted scholar of Trinity college. Oxon. by the founder's nomination, as
above, aged 18. Took the degree of A.B. May 23, 1558 MSS. Wood, E. 6. scil. ut
supr.
. Made probationer fellow, by the founder's mandate, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7,
1558 Registr. coll. fol. iv. 6.
. He took the degree of M.A. December. 1, 1562 MSS. Wood, E. 29.
. He is mentioned in the Will In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon.
of Edward Hyndmer, a fellow of the college Admis. schol. Jun. 4, 1561, soc.
1568, Jun. 7. Registr.
, and a memorable benefactor to the library, viz. "I bequeathe to my old good
friend sir Henry Saville, knight, warden of Merton college in Oxford, my
houpe gold ring; and to Mr. Thomas Allen my old friend and fellow in Trinity
college, but now of Gloucester-halle, my gold ringe with deaths head
inameled, which was sometime our friend Mr. Saltmarshes This will is dat.
November. 15, 1607.
." I conjecture, that he was inclined to the catholic persuasion; not only from
his connections with this Edward Hyndmer It seems probable that this Edward
Hyndmer had a strong tendency to the catholic persuasion, from the circumstance
of his quitting his fellowship when he ought to have taken orders. He was
admitted M.A. on December. 4, 1570, and left the college about 1576. MSS. Wood,
E. 29. and Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1575-6. I likewise find in a book of his
private accounts, made long after he left the college, "Expended for a
BREVIARIE, xvi s." In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. He appears to have lived many
years in the family of sir Robert Dormer, at Winge in Bucks. Ex chartis, ibid.
By his will, mentioned in the text, and written with his own hand, he leaves to
sir Robert Dormer, "iij spurr-royalls and a double duckatt," as a small
remembrance of great favors received from him. To lady Elisabeth Dormer, "my
honorable mistress," two twentyshilling pieces; and to their son, sir William
Dormer, forty shillings in angels. He bequeathes legacies to all sir Robert
Dormer's servants by name. He leaves to Trinity college, legacies to the amount
of 157 l. 14 s. part of which was expended in furnishing the library with
book-cases. [Ex Chart. ibid. et Comp. Burss.] Likewise to the library, a great
number of books; many of them French and Italian. To the poor of the parish of
Winge, v l. He appoints the fellows of Trinity college, aforesaid, executor, of
his will; and sir Henry Saville, "my very honorable friend," overseer. He
desires to be buried in the chapel of Trinity college; but by a discretionary
power left with his executors, he was interred in the church of Winge, Aug. 20,
1618.. Ex chart. ut supr. He was near eighty years of age when he died, and was
born in Westmoreland. Registr. coll. Trin. In the said Will, he remembers many
of his relations, of his own name, living at Kirkbie-Stephen in Westmoreland.

He was in high favor with the foundress: as appears from the following entry,
written by Ralph Bathurst, fellow, afterward president of Trinity college,
Oxford, in a blank leaf of Budden's LIFE OF BISHOP WAINFLET, edit. 1602, in the
library of that college. " Bibliothecae coll. Trin. Oxon. libellum hunc inter
alics complures legavit D. EDWARDUS HINDMER. Quo procurante, auctor ejus,
Johannes BUDDENUS, Scholaris locum ex gratia dominae fundatricis apud nos
obtinuit, A.D. 1583. Inde post annos aliquammultes ad praelectoris philosophici
munus a Magdalenensibus electus, banc Wainfleti sui (...) edidit. Quam egregii
viri D. Job. BOWMAN et D. Fr. FIELD, colleg^i nostri tunc temporis socii,
ejusque ibidem coaetanei, prout in registro collegii patet, elogiis poeticis
exornarunt. R. B. 1655." Budden, Waynflet's biographer, was first of Merton
college: where he was taken particular notice of by sir Henry Saville, who
recommended him to his friend Edward Hyndmer abovementioned, as a proper
candidate for a scholarship of Trinity college. To which he was elected May 30,
1583. After five years, intending to study the civil law, he left Trinity
college, and retired to Gloucester-hall; chiefly for the conversation of the
learned Thomas Allen, mentioned in this article. Afterward he was appointed
philosophy-reader in Magdalene college, principal of New Inn-Hall, king's
professor of civil law, and principal of Broadgates-hall. He wrote some other
pieces. He died 1620.

About the same time, and for the ame reason, I find one Thomas Warren, fellow
of Trinity college, retiring to Glocester-hall. [Schol. Jun. 14, 1568. Soc.
Jun. 3. 1572. Registr. Kettel.] The motives for his recession, hinted above,
expressly appear from the following entry concerning him. Registr. Thesauriar.
4to. " Post susceptum gradum Art^um Magistri anno quarto [1579] recessit ad
aulam Glocestrensem." He was afterward buried in the chapel of Trinity
college, April 28, 1598. Wood's Collectan. e Parochial. Registr. Oxon. Paroch.
S. Thom^. Mus. Ashmol. D. 5. George Blackwell also, fellow of the said college,
receded to Glocester-hall, "where he was held in good repute by Edm. Rainolds
and Thomas Allen, the two learned seniors," about 1568. Wood. Ath. Oxon. i. p.
382. Numb. 449. [See Lel. Itin. ii. 105. edit. 1745] Afterward he went to
Rome: where, by Henry Cardinal Cajetane he was constituted arch-presbyter of
the English clergy at Rome, and by Pope Clement the eighth, notary of the
apostolic see, in the year 1598. He was intimately connected with Garnet,
provincial of the jesuits in England. See Camd. Elizab. p. 900. edit. Hearn.
His works, recited by Woe d, are learned, and were much esteemed by those of his
persuasion. He is mentioned more than once by Casaubon, as the friend and
coadjutor of Garnet, in a long epistle which contains many curious anecdotes of
Garnet's history, not elsewhere to be found. Casaub. Epistol. -- Epist. 624.
Frontoni Duc. Dat. ^ondin. 1611. edit. 1656. p. 762, 796. He returned to
England in 1607, and died in London 1612. [Schol. Ma^^ 27, 1562. Soc. Jun. 18,
1565. Com. Middl.]


, and Thomas Allen, the famous mathematician and antiquarian, but because he
left his fellowship about the year 1566, when he must have been called, by the
statutes of his house, to take Orders Comp Burd coll. Trin. 1566-7.
. It is not improbable, that he retired to Gloucester hall, or Hart-hall; both
which places, particularly the first, were the receptacles, about this time, of
such fellows of colleges, as could not, on account of their private attachment
to popery, consistently or conscientiously retain their fellowships. I find
him, about the year 1570, visiting Trinity college with Leonard Fitzimmonds,
mentioned below, who had quitted his fellowship of that college, and retired to
Heart hall, for this reason As did Thomas Allen, abovementioned, to
Gloucester-hall, (...) his Life by Campbell, in the Biographia Brit. vol. ^.
(...) Hearne's L^^ N^^ SCACC. Praefat. p. xxx.. x. And Wood. ACH. OXON. i. col.
54^, 106, 174, 467, 485. F. 248. Allen gave some manuscripts to the Bodleian
library. One of them is (...) ^^vitate Dei, to which is added Gregorii Moralia
in (...). MSS. Bodl. 198. The history of this venerable volume is curious, and
deserves to be developed at large. It is beautifully written on vellum in
folio; and originally belonged to Robert Grosthead bishop of Lincoln in the
thirteenth century, in whose hand are many notes in the margins. Grosthead gave
it to the convent of Friars Minors at Oxford. These Friars gave it to the
famous theologist Thomas Gascoigne, under their seal, about the year 1433.
Gascoigne presented it to Durham college at Oxford, and at length Allen placed
it in the Bodleian library. At the end of this manuscript there is a long note
written by Gascoigne, which Tanner has printed, Bibl. p. 311. All the books
belonging to the library of Richard de Bury in Durham college, were dispersed
soon after the dissolution of that house. Some were removed to the Humfredian
library, and others to Baliol college; but the greater part became the property
of Doctor Owen, to whom Durham college was granted. Archbishop Parker procured
many Saxon manuscripts of Doctor Owen. In the Cotton library, there is a volume
consisting of a collection of charters, and other ancient writings, transcribed
by Jocelyn, Parker's chaplain: who has inserted this note at many of the
pieces. The archbishop of Canterbury had this charter from Dr. Owen. At some
others, The copy of this Dr. Tallot had of Dr. Owen. VITELL. D. 7. Robert
Talbot, the annotator on Antoninus, was employed by the archbishop to collect
ancient manuscripts, chiefly Saxon. Many of Parker's books, now in Bennet
college library at Cambridge, appear to have belonged to Talbot. The
archbishop's principal collector was Bateman, another of his chaplains; who
says, that he "gathered within four years, under his graces commission, six
thousand seven hundred books." Bateman's DOOM warning all men to judgment, etc.
Land. 1581. 4to. page 400. It should not be forgotten here, that Thomas Langley
bishop of Durham, by will dated Dec. 17. 1437, gave a large legacy of books to
the library of Durham college. Wharton ANGL. SACR. i. p. 776. As did John
Longland bishop of Lincoln, who died in 1547. Tanner, BIBL. 485. But the
college was dissolved, before that bequest could take place. I should speak
here of Bury. This prelate was one of the earliest English restorers of
literature. Of his PHILOBIBLON, I have spoken at large in the SECOND
DISSERTATION prefixed to the first volume of the HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY. He
held some of the highest offices both in church and state under Edward the
third, whose education he had superintended. In the year 1331, he was sent by
that king to Avignon, to negotiate some business with the pope. Rymer, FOED.
ii. 59. He there lodged in the house of cardinal Colonne, where Petrarch at
that time also resided. Petrarch embraced the fortunate opportunity of
consulting this learned Englishman, then only a private ecclesiastic, about the
situation of the ancient Thule, supposed to be one of the British islands: for
the geography of antiquity was one of Petrarch's favorite studies. Being
without his books, of which he had amassed a prodigious collection, he promised
to transmitt to Petrarch the best information he could obtain on this subject,
after his return to England. What had immediately given rise to Petrarch's
curiosity about this island, probably was Giraldus's fabulous account of Thule,
in his MIRABILIA HIBERNIAE, a work just published, and recently translated into
French by John of Meun, author of the Romaunt de la Rose. Petrarch wrote
frequently to Richard of Bury to know the result of his promised enquiries
about Thule: but, perhaps in consequence of Bury's important occupations, never
received any answer. See Petrarchae EPISTOL. iii. 1. In this epistle, Petrarch
calls Bury, "Virum ardentis ingenii nec literarum inscium, abditarumque rerum
supra fidem curiosum." The ingenious author of LA VIE DE PETRARQUE, thinks that
Petrarch's letters to Bury are now in some library of England. Tom. i. Live. ii.
p. 169. Amst. 1764. 4to. I have searched for this treasure, but without
success. See Wharton, ANGL. SACR. i. 765. Leland and his transcriber Trithemius
are mistaken in what they have asserted about Petrarch's correspondence with
this prelate. From what is here said, may be also corrected two slight mistakes
in the French ENCYCLOPEDE, under the article BIBLIOTHEQUE.


.

"Alloc. pro epulis Mag. Saltmarshe et Mag. Fitzimmonds, xx d" Comp. Burss. ut
supr. 1569-70.
.

7. JOHN HARRYS.
Born in Gloucestershire. Related to the founder From the will of Edmund
Hutchins, mentioned in the next article.
. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon as above, Aet. 17. Admitted probationer
fellow on Trinity Sunday, 1559 MSS. Kettel.
. He left the college about the latter end of the same year Ibid.
.

8. EDMUND HUTCHINS.
Born in Oxfordshire. the founder's nephew, and one of his heirs See supr. p.
122. 168. In a letter to the president without date, from Tyttenhanger, he
says, "I beseech you see tha^ Mr. Basford and Huchyns apply their study."
. Admitted scholar of Trin coll. Oxon. October, 3, 1556, by the founders mandate
Registr. coll. fol. iii. b. "per authoritatem et mandatun venerabilis viri dom.
Thomae Pope militis, coll. praedicti fundatoris, ad supplendum octonarium in
eodem collegio numerum, ascitus." He is placed here on account of the last
mentioned circumstance. For the time of his admission does not strictly
correspond with that of the seven preceding.
, Aet. 22. He quitted the college about Christmas 1558 MSS. Kettel.
. He lived at Dumbleton in Gloucestershire, where he was Lord of the Manor, and
married the Daughter of Thomas Cocks, esquire Atkyns's Gloucestershire, p. 406.
. By his will, dat Jan. 28. 44 Eliz. and proved soon afterward, he left to
Trinity college aforesaid the advowson to the church of Dumbleton. Also
estates, worth per ann. 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. part of which the said college was
annually to pay to certain charitable uses, and to have the residue In
Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon.
. But his coheirs claiming the premises, the whole benefaction was set aside
by a decree of chancery Registr. prim. fol. 124. b. et chartis in Thesauriar.
antedict. -- His pedigree is in Mus. Ashmol. Codd. Ashm. 836. page 67.
. He left besides, other charitable bequests to places with which he was
connected. He was a benefactor to the library, in 1592. On a buttress, on the
south side of the college Facing the north-side of the Chapel of Baliol college.
, the following memorial of him remains, cut in the stone. "Jesu have M. O. E.
HUTCHINS." 1558. i. e. Jesus have meryc on Edmund Hutchins.

Afterward, as places became vacant, the FOUNDER nominated the five following
SCHOLARS One of whom he nominated to a fellowship.
.

.... PIGGOTT.
No notice of him occurs in the register. But such a person was scholar 1557
Comp. Burss. 1556-7. See supr. p. 366.
, and I presume was nominated by the founder; who mentions him with great
regard in a letter to the president, dat. Whitmonday, "1558. Understandinge...
that sir Pigott woll at Trynite Sunday next yield upp his ffellowship
[scholarship] and nevertheless desires to remain in the college as a
sojorner; I have thought good, for that he is honest and a vertuos young man, to
desire you he may remain in his chamber as a sojorner, and that he be well
entreatyd in everye condition: for to be plain with you, I entende as soon as
he shall be priest, to have him in my house if I may." And again, in another
to the same, dat. 25 May, 1558. "If Pigott depart, then may the pore boy for
whom the bishopp of Bristowe's chanceller makes suit, be preferryd to his
rome: but in any case let Pigott be a comoner in the house." Accordingly he
quitted the foundation, 1558.

WALTER BLOUNT.
Born at Blount's Hall, in Staffordshire. The founder's nephew. Admitted
scholar Jan. 9, 1556. Aet. 18 Registr. coll. fol. 4.
. He left the college about Michaelmas, 1558 MSS. Kettel. See supr. p. 204.
. This was the last instance in which the founder ordered any person to be
admitted, except at the statutable time of election. Concerning which he tells
the president in a letter, dat. 27 Nov. 1556. "When my wiffs brother is ons
placed, I woll for no man's suit the statutes of my college be broken in that
point: and that the election shall always be upon Trynytie Sunday." One
Gualter Blount, esquire, is returned a Justice of the peace for Worcestershire,
"as very honest and religious," among the rest of that county, by Freake the
bishop, to the lord Treasurer, Oct. 6, 1587 Strype Ann. Ref. iii. App. 174. One
Walter Blount occurs a seminary priest, 1588. Ibid. p. 260.
.

RICHARD SOUTHERN.
Born at Exeter. Admitted scholar on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558. Aet. 16
Registr. fol. 68. b.
. I presume he was a relation of Thomas Southern, the treasurer of Exeter
cathedral, mentioned above. In a letter to the president, dat. 27, Nov. 1556,
the founder says, "Mr. Sowtherne shall have his scholar placed as soon as any
rome [place] is void, and one man sped to whom I have made promise." And in
another to the same, dat. 24 Jul. 1557, he says, "I am sorye to here your
vice president is sick, but I hope in god he shall shortly rere his health; for
which as I shall pray, so I require you tell him, I am content young Sowtherne
shall be at the scoler's commens, his ffrends peyinge for the same, till he can
be placyd in my collegge." He left the college, 1560.

FRANCIS BUTLER.
Born at Bristol. Admitted scholar the same day. Aet. 17 Registr. ibid.
. The founder, beside what is mentioned in the article of Piggott, mentions him
in a letter to the president, dated Whitmonday preceding, "I will that the pore
scholar of Bristow, for whom Mr. Dalby William Dalby was presented to the
rectory of Littleton, Bristol. Dioces. 1556. He was made prebendary of Bristol,
1558, being then chancellor of that diocese. He was ejected from his
preferments by Q. Elizabeth. Rym. Foed. xv. 450. And Willis, Cathedr. Bristol.
p. 788. The bishop of Bristol was Holyman, mentioned above, p. 400.
... labor, be admytted. Mr. Dalbye is the bisshoppes chanceller, and a man to
whom I am beholdinge; and the poor man he laboreth for is very towardlye, and
his ffryndes not habell to find him to scole." He left the college 1560 MSS.
Kettel.
. The sudden departure of this person, and some others, about this time, it may
be supposed, was owing to the change of religion at the accession of queen
Elizabeth.

LEONARD FITZSYMONS.
Born at Dublin Registr. prim. coll. Trin. fol. 4.
. Was chapel-clerk of C. C. C. Oxon Wood, Ath. Oxon i. 199.
. Being a native of Ireland, he was, from thence, admitted scholar, not only by
the nomination, but by the dispensation, of the founder, on Trinity Sunday
abovementioned, and at the earnest suit of Thomas Marshall, the second dean of
Christchurch, in 1558, aged seventeen Registr. ut supr. And MSS. F. Wise.
Marshall had been a fellow of C. C. C. Oxon.
. He took the degree of A.B. the next year, 1559, May 8 Wood, ubi supr. F. 88.
. By the same authority, without having passed through the usual year of
probation, he was admitted actual fellow, on Trinity Sunday, June 9, 1560 It is
said in the Register, "per dispensationem venerabilis et praepotentis militis
Thomae Pope." fol. 26.
. He took the degree of M.A. May 4, 1563. But being averse to the rites and
Orders of the church of England, he retired to Hart-hall about 1571 Rather 1570.
, and afterward became a popish priest Wood, ubi supr. And F. 92.
. Hollinshed, from Stanihurst, calls him "a deep and pithie clerk, well seen
in the Greek and Latin tongue, sometime fellow of Trinity college in
Oxford, perfect in the mathematicals, and a paynefull student in divinity
Chron. vol. i. p. 41. c. vii. Stanihurst's words are "profundus clericus, qui
utrasque linguas, theologiam et mathematicam, admodum calluit et coluit."
Descript. Hibern. cap. vii.
." Wood acquaints us, that he was eminent for his learning in Ireland in 1580,
and that he published several pieces, the titles of which are unknown. He seems
to have died in Ireland, where he probably spent the latter part of his life
Wood, ubi supr. i. 199. And Tanner, Bibl. p. 285.
. He had a brother educated at Cambridge, and afterward beneficed in Ireland
Stanihurst, ubi supr.
. To mathematics he joined a knowledge of music, as appears from the following
article in Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1561-2. "Solut. dom. Fitzsimmons pulsanti
organa per annum, xx s The statutable salary, although he was a fellow of the
college. In consequence of the dissolution of the monasteries, and of the
reformation of religion, church music received an almost irreparable blow. Few
were then educated at least to the mechanical part of the profession; and when
the splendour of the popish worship was restored, after a long intermission, by
queen Mary, it was difficult to procure instrumental practitioners, properly
qualified to assist at the solemnities of the mass. Under these circumstances
in order to facilitate and secure so precarious an acquisition, Sir Thomas Pope
found it necessary to provide in his statutes, that there should be constantly
one person admitted into the society, competently skilled in music, who might
be able to execute the office of organist to the college. That this was the
case, the provision itself seems to imply; as well as the reason which the
founder expressly suggests for it, and the manner in which it is worded. "Hic
autem, quoniam opus est, et maxim convenit, ut per hanc electionem provideatur
nequando dictum Collegium ORGANORUM PULSATORE sit destitutum, nec talis ubique
inveniri possit facile, liberam dictis electoribus potestatem facio et
permitto, unum aliquem talem de quocunque possint loco eligendi, qui ludendi
organis peritus, et in grammaticae etiam rudimentis competenter eruditu^, in
dictorum scholarium numerum, modo sit pauper, admittatur; et organa in dictis
festis, aliasque in officiis divinis, more in ecclesiis consueto, pulsare
tenebitur: nisi Sociorum quisquam id praestare muneris melius noverit et
poterit." STATUT. coll. Trin. cap. vii. In the Additament, where the salary
mentioned in the text is assigned, he is likewise obliged, "Scholares ad
cantandum in choro idoneos reddere."

I am not in the mean time ignorant, that anciently in our foundations of
churches and colleges, no separate or distinct officer, by the name of
organist, was ever appointed. This duty was subordinate, and appears to have
been commonly performed by one of the clerks. In the statutes of Corpus Christi
college at Oxford, given in 1517, two chapel-clerks are established, one of
whom is also to be the Organorum pulsator. Cap. xvii. The first instance of the
mention of an Organ in any collegiate statutes which I have had the opportunity
to examine, occurs in those of Eton college, made about the year 1440. Where
one of the four clerks who is appointed to instruct the choristers, is moreover
ordered jubilare organis. Cap. x. Here also, for the first time, Cantus
organicus is mentioned. In the new cathedral-foundations of king Henry the
eighth, a master or teacher of the finging-boys is appointed: and besides, he
is to be "cantandi, et organa pulsandi, peritus." Statut. Eccles. Roffens. dat.
A.D. 1545. Cap. xxii. At New college Oxford, King's at Cambridge, and
Winchester-college, in each of which are ample choirs, there is no provision by
statute, not even for an Informator Choristarum. Although such an officer
occurs in the early rolls of New-college. At Magdalen college Oxford, founded
about the year 1459, there is also no mention of an organist: but it is
enjoined that one of the chaplains, or clerks, or some other skillful person,
shall educate the choristers in the plain chant and pricked song. Cardinal
Wolsey in the statutes of his college at Oxford, given 1525, mentions a
music-master, not by the name of an organist, who is to be musicae peritissmus.
MSS. JAMES, vol. vii. p. 89. Bibl. Bodl. In the year 1446, the abbot and
conve^t of Muchelney in Somersetshire, granted a corrody of five marks, with
seven gallons of ale, and seven loaves called le old myches, every week, and a
gown and four loads of wood annually, to Ralph Drake cantor, or chanter, pro
servitio nobis in illa sciencia musica; and on condition, that he attend the
choir every day, and teach four boys, and one of the monks, or as many as
chose, to play on the organ. Hearne's AD. DOMERH. vol. 1. APPEND. PRAEF. p.
lxxxii. edit. Oxon. 1727. In a catalogue of the service-books of saint Paul's
cathedral, taken in the year 1295, Liber Organorum occurs more than once. Dugd.
Hist. p. 220. By which, I believe, we are not to understand any species of
music-books for that instrument. The Organ was so essential a circumstance of
divine worship, that the mass, and other holy offices, were called Organum.
Charpentier, SUPPL. Gloss. Lat. Du Cange. tom. iii. p. 89. in V.

To recur to the first part of this note. There is a curious passage in
Erasmus's Annotations on the New Testament, written about the year 1512, which
admirably displays the state of our church-music, just before the Reformation,
EPIST. Corinth. i. xiv. 19. [Opp. Tom. vi. C. 731. N. 26.] "We have introduced
into the churches, a certain elaborate and theatrical species of music,
accompanied with a tumultuous diversity of voices. All is full of trumpets,
cornets, pipes, fiddles, and singing. We come to church as to a playhouse. And
for this purpose, ample salaries are expended on organists, and societies of
boys, whose whole time is wasted in learning to sing. Not to mention the vast
revenues which the church squanders away in the stipends of singing-men, who
are commonly great drunkards, buffoons, and chosen from the lowest of the
people. These fooleries are become so agreeable, that the monks, especially in
ENGLAND, think of nothing else. To this end, even in the Benedictine
MONASTERIES OF ENGLAND, many youths, boys, and other vocal performers, are
sustained; who, early every morning, sing to the organ the mass of the Virgin
Mary with the most harmonious modulations of voice. And the bishops are obliged
to keep choirs of this sort in their families."


.

* In the year 1559, nine scholars were admitted; and in the same year, the
founder's institution of four ADDITIONAL scholars took place. My foregoing list
of the first eight, would have been incomplete, without some mention of the
first four ADDITIONAL scholars; which are included in the following nine
scholars It is remarkable, that no mention is made at all of the four first, in
the college register: nor of the scholarships of four others, (fellows)
afterward mentioned. This defect, as will appear by the references, I have
supplied from Registr. Kettel. Which is founded on evidences equally authentic,
and still remaining.
, admitted in the year 1559: concerning each of which, I shall therefore
subjoin an account, however short and imperfect.

LEONARDE PERSEY, [or Piercic.]
He left the college, 1562 MSS. Kettel. Not in Registr. coll.
.

... WOOD.
He left the college, 1560 Ibid. Not in Reg.
.

... DOWLE, [or Dowlie.]
He left the college the same year Ibid. Not in Reg.
.

.... PRINCE.
He left the college, 1562 Ibid. Not in Reg.
.

RICHARD BASSET MSS. Kettel. ex Comp. burss. 2. non in registr. ut schol.
.
Born in Yorkshire. Afterward admitted probationer fellow, by nomination of
the foundress, Jun. 4, 1561 Registr. fol. 27.
.

CHRISTOPHER WHARTON MSS. Kettel. ut supr. non in registr. ut schol.
.
Born in Yorkshire. Afterward admitted probationer fellow by nomination, and
dispensation, of the foundress, his county being full, May 26, 1562 "Qui
virtute literarum domine fundatricis admissus erat, alias admitti non potuit ex
eo quod numerus ejusdem comitatus erat completus. Registr. fol. 26. b.
. Soon after I find the following entry in Registr. cur. cancel. Oxon. GG.
supr. citat. fol. 89. "Nomina [cum tutoribus] scholasticorum degentium in
domibus privatis, 1562. -- Bartholomaeus Chamberlayne, dominus Wharton tutor."
Bartholomew Chamberlayne was perhaps a fellow of Trinity college afterward,
mentioned p. 195, 196. And his tutor, the subject of this article. These tutors
did not live with their pupils in the private houses; the latter attended upon
the former, who for the most part were fellows of colleges, occasionally for
instruction, etc.
the year 1564, he left his fellowship, being averse to the religion and orders
of the church of England; and retiring to the college at Doway, an expedient
not uncommon at this time, was made a catholic priest. He then returned to
England, and officiated in that character; being in high reputation and esteem
for his learning and piety, among those of his own persuasion See Thoresby's
Leedes. p. 521.
. At length being imprisoned for the public exercise of his proscribed
function, and for disclaiming the queen's supremacy, he was executed at York,
in the sixtieth year of his age, Mar. 28. 1600 Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. F. p. 93.
col. 1. And Worthington's Catalogus Martyrum pro Religione Catholica in Anglia
occisorum. Edit. 1614. 8vo. page 43. where he is called, " Collegii Duaci
alumnus."
.

JOHN HALSEY MSS. Kettel. ut supr. non in registr. ut schol.
, [or Haulsei.]
Born in Hertfordshire. I find him nominated one of the first fellows of St.
John's college Oxford, by the founder, sir Thomas White, in his charter, dated
Mar. 28, 1557-8 Wood, Hist. antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 303. col. 2. And Catal. soc.
coll. di. Jo. Bapt. Oxon. per Griffin Higges. MSS. Mus. Ashmol. F. 28. fol.
204. supra citat.
, at which time he seems to have been convictor, or commoner, in Trinity
college Wood, ut supr.
. It appears, however that he did not accept of this offer at St. John's
college, being elected scholar of Trinity college, the following year, 1559.
Afterward admitted probationer fellow of the same, May 26, 1562 Registr. ut
supr. fol. 26. b.
.

EDWARD TREWEL MSS. Kettel. ex Comp. 2. Burss. ut supr. non in Registr. ut supr.
.
Born in Hertfordshire. Afterward admitted probationer fellow, by nomination
of the foundress, Jun. 9, 1560 Registr. ut supr. fol. 26.
.

THOMAS ORPEWOODE MSS. Kettell. ut supr.
.
Born in Oxfordshire. The founder's nephew or near relation See p. 327.
. Afterward admitted probationer fellow, by nomination of the foundress, Jun.
6, 1563 Registr. ut supr. fol 3. "Ex nominatione piae ac venerabilis dominae
Pope, uxoris Thomae Pope militis, Fundatoris jam defuncti." Although she was
now married to sir Hugh Paulet.
.

NUMB. XXVI. Account of the Marriages, and Descendants, of John Pope, of
Wroxton, esquire.
JOHN POPE, only brother to sir Thomas Pope, was settled at Wroxton in
Oxfordshire, in or before the reign of Edward the sixth; where he was buried
Jun. 24, 1583 Registr. parochial. de Wroxton, co. Oxon. See also Registr.
PARRET, (citat. supr. Numb. xxi.) fol. 6. b. fol. 3. a.
. He was married thrice. His first wife, was, as I conjecture, Anne Staveley Ex
testamento Dom. T. Pope.
, daughter of -- Staveley of Bignell Concerning this family of Staveley, I find
that William Staveley, lord of the manor of Bignell, who died 1498, bequeathes
his body to be buried in the church of Bicester, co. Oxon. and was a benefactor
to Bicester priory. By Alice his wife he had George, William, John, Mary, and
Isabell. The said George, 16 Hen. viii. leaves provision for certain masses,
etc. in University college. Kennet's PAROCH. ANTIQ. p. 680. seq. And Wood Hist.
antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 59. col. 2. Willis recites an epitaph to Thomas Giffard
of Twiford, co. Bucks, marrying Mary, daughter of William Staveley of Bignell,
who died 1450. Hist. of Bucks, p. 335. One of the name is buried in Bicester
church, with the date 1485. What is here said of the Staveley family, corrects
a passage in Leland, ITIN. vii. fol. 8. "There is buried in the quier of the
paroche church of Burcester, one William Standley, esquier, lord of Bygnelle,
etc." Read Staveley. I take this opportunity of observing that Leland mentions
sir T. Pope twice, Itin. vol. iv. P. ii. page 91, 59. edit. 1744.
in the said county. She died before 1554 Ex indentur. quadripartit. supr.
citat.
, and was buried in St. Stephen's, Wallbrook See p. 167.
; leaving one daughter, Elizabeth, to whom sir Thomas Pope bequeathed 300 marks
for her portion in marriage Ex testam. dom. T. P.
, and who married, 1573, Edward Blount, of Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire
From articles of agreement relating thereto, dat. Febr. 15. 14 Eliz. -- Edward
Blount occurs in dame Eliz. Paulet's will, and, I suppose, was her nephew.
. The said John Pope's second wife was Elizabeth Lee's MSS. Visitat. ut supr.
page 32. And from other evidences.
, daughter of sir John Brockett, of Brockett-Hall at Hatfield in Hertfordshire
See Chauncy's Hertf. p. 312. John Brockett receives, with others, parcel of
the possessions of St. Bartholomew's priory in London, at the dissolution.
Ibid. 324. Sir John Brockett, knt. is member of parliament for Hertsordshire,
1553. Willis, Not. parl. ed. ii. p. 27. He was knighted 1 Edw. vi. Feb. 22.
MSS. Cotton. Claud. C. 3. fol. 172. b.
, to whom he was married before 1554 She is mentioned in Indentur.
quadripartit. supr. citat.
. His third wife was Jane, daughter of sir Edmund Wyndham, of Somersetshire, by
whom he had no issue She is buried in the church of Fellbridge in Norfolk, with
this epitaph. "Here lies the body of Jane Conningsbie, widdowe, and one of
the daughters of sir Edmond Windham, knt. deceased: first married to John Pope
in the county of Oxford, esquire, and after his decease to Humphrie
Conningsbie, esquire. She departed this life without issue of her body, the xx
day of November, in the year of our Lord 1608, and of her age 67." The said
Humphrie Conningsbie was of Hampton Court, co. Hereford. She must have been
married to John Pope between 1573 and 1583. See CAT. of Mr. West's Books, p.
220. Number. 4299.
.

But by the second wife, Elizabeth Brockett, the said John Pope had issue three
sons, Thomas, George, and William; and six daughters, Georgia, Penelope, Mary,
Susannah, Anne, and Jane Lee's MSS. Visit. ut supr. -- Registr. Wroxton. --
Registr. in 4to. in Thesauriar. coll. Trin. -- And MSS. Pedigr. Rawlins.
. Thomas died an infant 1564 Registr. Wroxton.
. George appears to have studied one year under the tuition of John Sellar B.D.
Afterward in 1597 rector of Ickford in Buckinghamshire.
, in Trinity college, Oxford, which he left May 3, 1587, having been admitted
in the rank of convictor primi ordinis Ex registr. quodam in 4to. in These.
coll. Trin. supr. citat.
. But he died soon afterward. The only surviving son, and heir, William, in
1573 Registr. Wroxton.
, and at fourteen years of age, was admitted, a convictor primi ordinis, into
the aforesaid college, Jul. 7, 1587, which he quitted April 12, 1591 Ex
Registr. in 4to ut supr.
. He was entered a student in Gray's-Inn, 1594 MSS. Harl. 1912. page 60.
. On the arrival of James the I. in England, he was created in the great
gallery of St James's palace, Jul. 24, 1603, a knight of the bath The ceremony
of this creation is thus described by Howes, Stowe's continuator. "Sunday the
twenty-foure [1603] was performed the solempnity of knights of the bath riding
honorably from St. James to the court, and made show with their squires and
pages about the Tilte-yarde; and after went into the park of St. James, and
there lighted all from their horses, and went uppe to the king's majesty's
presence in the gallerie where they received the order of knighthood of the
bathe." Stowe's Ann. by Howes, page 827. But see Anstis, who says this creation
was on the day of the king's coronation, viz. Jul. 25. Knighthood of the Bath,
App. page 57.

There is an old play addressed to this sir WILLIAM POPE, written by Barnaby
Barnes. It is a tragedy, entitled the DEVIL's CHARTER, on the story of pope
Alexander the sixth; acted before James the first on Candlemas night, and
printed Land. 1607. quarto. "Dedicated to the honorable and his very dear
friends sir W. Herbert, and sir W. Pope, knights, associates in the noble order
of the Bath." This author Barnes wrote Four books of OFFICES about Princes,
etc. Land. 1606, fol. Also A divine century of spiritual sonnets, Land. 1595.
Sir William Herbert, here mentioned, was afterward earl of Pembroke, and
Chancellor of the university of Oxford. He was himself a writer of poetry, and
published a book of poems. Some of his sonnets were set to music by Henry
Laws. Pembroke college is named after him.


: and on May 22, 1611, a baronet, by the style of sir William Pope of Wilcott
William Pope of Wilcott, occurs high sheriff of Oxfordshire, 43 Eliz. --
Fuller's Worth. page 344. edit. 1662. The manor of Wilcott, or Wivilcote, is
said by Plott to have been anciently the head of a barony; and he supposes that
one of its barons is buried in the neighboring church of Northieigh. See
Plott's Oxf. chapter x.. 134. p. 154. But the person there interred, with his wise,
both whose recumbent figures, large as life, and richly habited, are on a
beautiful alabaster tomb within an elegant chantry, is.... Wilcotes, or
Willycotes, esquire. They have both a collar of esses, but no baronial badges:
and from the style of the architecture, I take this chautry not to be older
than Henry the sixth. The family were indeed lords of the manor of Wilcott; and
they were of great note in Oxfordshire, but now long since extinct. See
Kennet's Paroch. Antiq. p. 561. 527. Their escocheon was an eagle's head with
wings. The two figures on the tomb just mentioned, which are as large as life,
I take to be John and Alicia Wilcott, whose daughter Elizabeth married into
Raynesford of Great-Tew in this county, and whose arms appeared in the windows
of the manorhouse there, with this remarkable inscription. " John Wylcotes et
alicia uror ejus, ob. 1400 et Temel." i. e. 1401. or 1410. Leland says,
"WIVELCOTE, alias WILCOTE, a knight that was owner of the lordship of Tew, and
dwelled in the manner place there, is buried in a fair tumbe of marble in Tewe
church." ITIN. iv. f. 16. page 14. edit. 1744. Compare Hearne's TROKELOWE,
Append. p. 329. 334. In the church of Great Tew, if I recollect right, there is
a tomb, perhaps the same, with the Cross of Raynesford and the Eagle of Wilcott.
in Oxfordshire Dugd. Ancient use of bearing arms, etc. 1682. page 82.
. Afterward, October. 16, 1629 Pat. Car. I. an. reg. 4. part 39.
, he was made by Charles I. baron of Bellturbett, and earl of Down, in
Ireland. On occasion of the last mentioned dignity, supporters were granted to
the ancient coat by Segar, otherwise garter king at arms, on the twenty-third
of December following MSS. F. Wise.
. He died Jul. 2, 1631 Ex tumul. apud Wroxton.
, at Wroxton, and was buried in the church, on the north side of the altar,
under an alabaster monument of elegant and costly workmanship, on which are the
recumbent figures of himself and his lady, large as life. This monument was
made by Nicholas Stone From Mr. Virtue.
. He left by will to Trinity college, Oxford, one hundred pounds Comp. Burss.
coll. Trin. 1630-1. Bursariis Antonio Farrington et GULIELMO CHILLINGWORTH.
, and a beautiful edition of Ortelius's Geography, printed 1584 Ex lib.
benefactor. Liblioth. coll. Trin.
. He married in 1595, or in the year following See Collins, Peer. iii. p. 60.
ed. i.
, Anne, daughter of sir Owen Hopton, lieutenant of the tower of London, and
relict of Henry lord Wentworth, baron of Nettlestead MSS. pedigr. Rawlins. And
from empalements in painted glass at Wroxton. At the same place there is a fine
old portrait of sir Owen Hopton, dated 1590. His daughter, Anne landy
Wentworth, as mentioned in the text, had by her former husband, lord Wentworth,
two sons, Thomas and Henry. They were both sent together to Trinity college,
Oxford, and matriculated November. 12, 1602. Thomas, lord Wentworth, being 11,
and his brother Henry 8 years of age. Collectan. e lib. Matric. MSS. A. Wood.
Mus. Ashm. D. 1. In the college-computus of that year, viz. 1601-2, I find the
following entry. "Sol. pro chirothecis magistri Pope, xxxij s." This, I
suppose, was a compliment to their father-in-law William Pope, when he brought
the boys to the college. Thomas, now fourteen years old, appeared among the
young nobility of the university, in the choir of Christ church cathedral,
before James the first and his queen, in the year 1605. Wake's REX PLAT. p. 35.
edit. 1607. In 1610, he was made knight of the Bath, at the creation of prince
Henry. He was in high favor with James I. And by Charles I. with whom he was
in equal esteem, he was created earl of Cleveland. His loyalty and intrepidity
make a conspicuous figure in the grand rebellion. Dugd. BAR. iii. 310. col. 2.
Lady Anne, abovementioned, also by her first husband left a daughter, Jane,
married to sir John Finett, knight, of Westkele in Kent, who was sent an envoy
into France, 1619, and knighted the next year. In 1626, he was constituted
master of the ceremonies to Charles the first, having been assistant-master in
the foregoing reign, during which office, he wrote a book, now very scarce,
entit. FINETTI PHILOXENIS, Some choice observations, etc. which contains a
curious description of the ceremonies of an age of ceremony. See Collins, ut
supr. -- Birch's Pr. Henry, p. 192. -- Wood's Ath. Oxon. i. F. 270. -- See also
the PHILOXENIS, p. 167, 199. edit. 1656. 8vo. This book has been translated
into German.

At lord Guilford's, abovementioned, there is a picture large as life, of Anne
lady Wentworth, and her three children, Thomas, Henry, and Jane, which she had
by her first husband, lord Wentworth. It is painted by Vansomer, 1596.


She died at Wroxton, and was buried there May 10, 1625 Registr. Wroxton.
. In the reign of James I. the said William, lord Down, built a large
mansion house at Cogges in Oxfordshire, now partly standing, on the site and
ruins of the priory, dissolved by Henry VI MSS. Wood, Mus. Ashm. E. 1. 4to. p.
45.
. He likewise built from the ground, and finished in the year 1618 Date ibid.
in the hall. -- In the year 1600, I find him living at Hook-norton, ^ Oxon. Ex
chart^ in thesaur. cell. praedict. This was in a house built by the Brandons
dukes of Suffolk. The manor of Hook-norton now belonging to the bishopric of
Oxford, was granted to sir Thomas Pope, by Pa^. 1. Mar. regin. Test. J^n. 2^.
par. 5. "Cum pertin^^tiis in com. Oxon. (...)."
, the present mansion house at Wroxton; where his love of the Arts appears in
the east-window of of the chapel, the glass of which he caused to be decorated,
in 1623, by Van Ling From the window.
, with histories from the new testament, and family Arms Among the beautiful
fragments of old painted glas^, with inscriptions, in lord Temple's Gothic
temple, at (...), is a pane inscribed sir WILLIAM POPE and A^^E Ho^^^^; which,
I suppose, came from this (...).
. At this place, but probably in the old abbey house Which stood in the Garden
on the east side of the present house.
, he was visited by James I. in a progress; where he entertained the king with
the fashionable and courtly diversions of hawking and bear-baiting. At the same
time his lady having been lately delivered of a daughter, the babe was
presented to the king, holding the following humorous epigram in her hand, with
which his majesty was highly pleased It is supposed to have been written by Dr.
Richard Corbet the^ a young (...) of Christ Church, Oxon. afterward Bishop of
Norwich. "In 1605, he was (...) out of the (...) in the university, (...)
tempore, showed. Afterward entering into holy Ordere, he became a most quaint
preacher, and therefore much followed by (...). At length being made one of the
chaplains to his majesty king James the first, who highly rai^ed him for his
fine fancy and preaching, (...), was by his (...) promoted, etc." WOOD, (...)
Oxon. i. col. (...). Corbet, however, was a man of real wit, and possessed a
vein of high humor, which would have pleased a more delicate (...) than that
of James. His POLTICA (...) were printed in 1647.
.

See this little mistres here,
Did never sit in Peter's chair,
Or a triple crown did wear;
And yet she is a Pope.
No benefice she ever sold,
Nor did dispense with sin's for gold;
She hardly is a sev'nnight old,
And yet she is a Pope.
No king her feet did ever kiss,
Or had from her worse look than this:
Nor did she ever hope,
To saint one with a rope;
And yet she is a Pope.
A female Pope youll say, a second Joan;
No sure -- she is POPE Innocent or none Fuller's WORTHIES, LONDON, page 223.
Ed. 1662. At Wroxton there is a very curious picture of prince Henry while a
boy. The date is 1603, and the prince's age is marked 11. But he was then only
9. Virtue could not discover the printer. He is represented large as life,
(...) the (...) of a stag after hunting. At some little distance is sir John
Harrington, a youth, the prince's intimate friend, as appears by his arms hung
up in a tree. This piece was probably painted to compliment some boyish
achievement in hunting performed by the prince; for, almost from his infancy,
he was remarkably fond of hunting. In the great hall of the old royal palace at
Woodstock, where he resided, there was preserved a prodigious pair of stag's
horns, with an inscription importing that the stag was hunted and killed by
prince Henry. Probably the prince accompanied the king at this visit.
.
Before I speak particularly of his Children, I return to his sisters
abovementioned. Of whom, Anne, the eldest, married John Spurling, esquire, of
Baldock in Hertfordshire MSS. Pedigr. of POPE, penes honoratiss. com. de
Guildford. -- In the herald's office, there are two or three pedigrees of this
family. But they are in general false and defective. That which I have cited,
as being among MSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bedl. Manu A. Wood. seems to be taken from
one of these. Perhaps the most correct one in that office, is G. 3. 26. OFFIC.
ARM. They have been obligingly compared for me by Ralph Bigland, esquire,
Somerset-herald, and examined by Mr. Astle of the Paper Office.
. Georgia was born at Wroxton, 1563 Registr. Wroxton. Where it is said that
George Carleton, esquier, was her godfather. He was of Brightwell, in
Oxfordshire, and related to this family by marrying Elisabeth, daughter of sir
John Brockett, son of sir John Brockett, mentioned above. See Chauncy's Hertf,
p. 313.
, and married Robert Raynesford, esquire, of Staverton in Northamptonshire MSS.
Wood, Mus. Ashmol. E. 1. page 115.
. Jane, the third, married Francis Combs, esquire, of Hempstead in
Hertfordshire MSS. pedigr. of POPE, penes honoratiss. com. de Guildford. Their
son Francis Comb, was gentleman-commoner of Trinity college, Oxford, under the
tuition of Mr. John Bowman, which he quitted in 1602. LIB. CAUT. in quarto. He
was an elegant scholar, especially in the Greek tongue. The books which he left
to Trinity college library, are a proof of his taste and learning. He died in
1641, and lies buried at Hempstead in Hertfordshire. See Salmon's
HERTFORDSHIRE, pp. 95. 116. edit. fol. 1728. His numerous benefactions are
recorded on his wife's monument in the southern chancel of the church of Abbats
Langley in Hertfordshire.
. Penelope was born 1568 Registr. Wroxton. Where it is said that Edward
Boughton was her godfather. He was of Lawford in Warwickshire, and married
Susannah a daughter, as it seems, of the first sir John Brockett. Dugd. Warw.
p. 66. From Chauncy it appears, that sir Nicholas Barrington, who died 1521,
married Elisabeth, a daughter of sir John Brockett, afterward married to
William Boughton, esquire. Hertf. p. 367.
. Mary was born 1569 Registr. Wroxton. Her godfather, Anthony Bustard, to whom
sir Thomas Pope bequeathes by will x l. He was the son of John Bustarde, second
husband to sir Thomas Pope's mother Margaret, buried in a chapel on the south
side of Adderbury church, near Deddington, in Oxfordshire, with this
inscription on a large monument of stone. "Nere unto this tomb lies buried
the bodies of John Bustarde esquire and Elizabeth his wife, and Jane Bustarde
wife to Anthony Bustarde, son and heir to the said John: which John had by
the said Elizabethe xvii children. And the said John dyed anno dom. 1534. The
said Elizabeth anno 1517, and the said Jane anno 1568." Arms above. On a --
between 3 roundells, 3 bustardes, a board. ingr. The same impal. a cheveron
ingr. between 3 unicorn's heads erased. See LIFE. p. 5. In the same church is a
monument erected by the said Anthony to his daughter Mary, and her husband
Edward More who died 1586. Of the daughters of the said John: -- Joanne marries
William Chauncey, esquire, of Edgcote, co. Northampt. who died 1585. She dies
1571. Hist of Northamptonsh. i. 119. Christian marries Edward Wilmot of Witney,
co. Oxon. and, afterward, William Bury of Culham, co. Berks. MSS. Wood, ut
supr. E. 1. page 21. Anne marries Edward Friar, esquire, of the city of Oxford.
See supr. p. 307. I find one John Bustarde, a subscribing witness to an
instrument in Trinity college, Oxon. dat. Apr. 1. 22 Eliz. Also one John
Bustarde of Oxfordshire, a fugitive for popery. Strype's Refermat. ii. App.
103. John Bustarde is also removed from New college, Oxon. 1560. Wood. Ant.
283. The father of John Bustarde, buried in Adderbury church, as above, if not
the same, is perhaps John Bustarde mentioned in the will of Rich. Fox, of
Bereford St. Michael's, co. Dorset. dat. May 31, 1502. In which the said
Richard Fox leaves to the guild of Deddington, xx s. To buying a bell for ths
church there, xij s. To the light of our lady of pity there, that is, of the
holy virgin holding our savior in her arms after his crucifixion, sometimes
called the image of Pite, vj s. viij d. With other benefactions and bequests.
The residue of his goods to be disposed of for his children by Rich. Fox, and
JOHN BUSTARDE. Ex Registr. Blaymir. qu. 15. cur. praer. Cant Unless Dodynton in
Somersetshire be here intended. The earliest notice I find of the name is in 7
Edw. ii. 1313, when one John Bustarde is pardoned as an adherent to Thomas earl
of Lancaster, concerned in the death of Pierce Gaveston. Rym. Foed. iii. 444.
Gaveston was detained a prisoner at Deddington for some days before his
execution near Warwick. Dugd. Bar. ii. 44. One William Bustard, S.T.B who
probably was of this family, was appointed one of the priests of the chantry of
Guy-cliff, near Warwick, Jul. 29, 1520. -- Priv. sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg.
11. Jul. 29. Also Robert Bustard is presented to the vicarage of Newenham by
St. Alban's abbey, 24 Feb. 1468. Registr. Mon. S. Alban. John Bustard of
Oxfordshire, appears as a fugitive for religion, about the middle of
Elisabeth's reign. Peck's DESID. CURIOS. lib. ii. ad calc. -- On mentioning the
name of Freer in this note, I take this opportunity of inserting the following
notice concerning William Freer, [see p. 307.] extract^d from the Journal book
of expenses of building Cardinal Wolsey's college, now Christ Church, Oxford.
MSS. Br. Twyne, notat. 8. archiv. Oxon. p. 351. It is ann. 20 Hen. viii. "Paid
to William Freer of Oxford, for the new making, mendinge, and repairinge of
the high way leadinge between Bollshipton and THE CROSS standing upon
Heddington-hills, for the more speedy conveyance of stone, timber, and lyme, to
be carried from sundry places to the said work, over and above, xv l. paid
by the hands of Mr. Nicholas Townly, master of the works, as by a book of
parcells thereof made by the said William Freer, then being surveyour of the
said works, does plainly appear at large, -- xxxiv l. viij s. v d."


. Susannah, the second, was married, Nov. 12, 1583, to Daniel Danvers, of
Culworth in Northamptonshire Registr. Wroxton.
.

I now return to the issue of the aforesaid William Pope first earl of Down,
and his countess, Anne. These were two sons, William and Thomas: and one
daughter, Anne Inscript. sepulchral. ibid. Perhaps the infant presented to king
James.
, who died, as appears, unmarried, and was buried at Wroxton, Jul. 13, 1629
Registr. ibid.
. As to the sons, William Pope, ancestor of Henry earl of Litchfield, was born
at Wroxton, 1596 Ibid.
. He was knighted by James I. at the royal manor of Woodstock, Jul. 28, 1616
MSS. Dugdale. Mus. Ashmol. R. fol. 215.
. He was married, 1615, in St. Margaret's church Westminster, to Elisabeth
Registr. Wroxton.
, eldest daughter of sir Thomas Watson, knight, of Halstead in Kent A memorable
benefactor to the church of Halstead, 1610: adorning it with a beautiful
painted window, steeple, porch, etc. In the same church is a stone to the
memory of lady Watson his wife, placed there by Thomas Pope, second earl of
Down, her grandson. See Harris's Kent, p. 141, 142. And Philpot's Villare
Cant. p. 177. Whose mistakes are here corrected.
. He died in 1624, while his father William was yet living, and was buried,
Aug. 29, at Wroxton Registr. Wroxton.
. His relict afterward married sir Thomas Pennistone, knight and baronet, of
Cornwell in Oxfordshire MSS. Pedigrees in Mus. Ashmol. fol. F. 2. page 102.
. The said William and Elizabeth Pope had issue three sons, Thomas, William,
and John; and two daughters, Anne and Elizabeth Ex Testamento Avi, Gulielmi
Pope, dat. Dec. 31, 1630. when they were all living.
. Anne born at Wroxton, 1617 Registr. Wroxon.
, married sir Samuel Danvers, baronet, of Culworth aforesaid MSS. pedigr.
Rawlins. ut supr. Collins is here corrected, Peer. ii. 383. Ed. i. And Hist.
Northamptonshire, i. 164.
. They had a son christened Pope, who gave a large embossed silver goblet to
Trinity college, Oxford, which lately preserved the following Inscription. Ex
dono Pope Danvers, filii unici Samuelis Danvers de Culworth in agro Northampton
baronetti, ex matris part Fundatoris consanguinei, et hujus collegii primi
ordinis commensalis, an. dom. 1662. The younger sister, Elizabeth, born at
Halstead, December. 19, 1618 Registr. Wroxton.
, was married to George Raleigh, esquire, of Farmborough in Warwickshire MSS.
Pedigr. Rawlins.
. To return to their Brothers abovementioned, Thomas, William, and John. Of
William I find no more than his name recited in his grandfather's will: and
that he was born at Cogges, Jan. 11, 1624 Registr. Cogges.
. John was also born at Cogges Nov. 2, 1623, where his father resided Registr.
Wroxton. Mrs. [i. e. Lady] Elizabeth Pope of Cogges, occurs in 1636, in
Registr. PARRET, [citat. supr. Numb. xxi.] fol. 106. b. This must have been
their mother.
. Of Thomas I must speak more at large, whom I therefore mention last.

He was born at Cogges, 1622 Registr. Wroxton.
. At the age of nine years, on the death of his grandfather William, viz. Jul.
1631, he became a baronet, and second earl of Down, by succession. He was
educated at home under a careful tutor Wood, Ath. Oxon. ii. 543.
; and in June, 1639, was matriculated a nobleman of Christ Church, Oxford MSS.
Wood, collectan. e lib. matric. ut supr. -- See also Laud's Chancellorship, p.
190. seq.
. He married Lucy, daughter of John Dutton, esquire, of Sherborne in
Gloucestershire And not Elisabeth, as Wood says, Ath. Oxon. ubi supr. See
Atkyns's Gloucestershire, p. 377, 378, 646. Elisabeth married John Colt,
esquire. Atkyns, ibid.
. She died Apr. 6, 1656, and lies buried in the church of Cubberley, near
Cheltenham, in the said county Inscript. sepulchral. ibid.
. Having suffered severely for his activity in the royal cause during the grand
rebellion, insomuch that he was compelled to sell his house and estate at
Cogges, he left the kingdom about the beginning of Cromwell's usurpation
Whitelock mentions a fine imposed on the earl of Down, by the parliament,
assigned to the garrison at Abingdon, in 1645. Memor. p. 186. Other evidences
specify a fine of 6000 l. These confiscations were often granted to the
presbyterian ministers, for the better support of enthusiastic prayer, and of
sermons which had no end.
: and making an advantage of his persecutions, took the opportunity of
improving himself by visiting foreign countries In his distresses, Trinity
college, Oxford, granted him sums of money, as appears by a schedule in the
college-Treasury. "Mem. A.D. 1647, Given to the earl of Down, post finitum
COMPUTUM, by order of Mr. President and Officers, 145 l. 13 s. 4 d." And in the
following year, the college gave a present to sir Thomas Pope, knight, his
UNCLE, afterward a baronet, and in 1660, the third earl of Down,
hereaftermentioned, who was also a considerable sufferer in the royal cause.
viz. COMP. BURSS. 1648. "Concess. domino Thomae Pope, xlv l." One is surprised
at those donations, under the government of doctor Robert Harris, Cromwell's
presbyterian President. But Harris was a man of candor, and I believe a
majority of the old loyal fellows still remained.
. About the time of the restoration he returned home; and dying at Oxford MSS.
Wood, ut supr. No. 8466. 4. page 100.
, December. 28, 1660, was interred before the altar in the church of Wroxton,
with the following inscription, which further illustrates his character, and
confirms many particulars here mentiond.

H. S. E. Vir, in quo nihil desideres praeter vitam diuturnam: cui ad eximiam
corporis elegantiam, et miram felicitatem ingenii, accessit morum integritas,
et rerum scientia non vulgaris. In quo eminere posset erga patriam affectus,
nisi quod par esset ejus in amicitiis fides. In omnibus recti et aequi
observantissimus; super caetera, in regem pius. Quem postquam a perduellibus
nefario bello lacessitum, justissimis sed male felicibus juvisset armis;
afflictis jam domi rebus, in exteras regiones proficiscitur: Inter quas, ubi
quae Europaei mundi humaniores sunt parts non incurius aut frustra
perlustrasset; reversus in patriam, quum illic etiam serenissimum principem
tanto patre dignum, Haeredem reducem vidisset laetus; saltem (quod unum
reliquum erat) charissimae filiae dominae Elizabethae Born at Cogges, April 15,
1645. Registr. Cogges.
cum domino Francisco Henrico Lee de Ditchley, baronetto, auspicatissimas
feliciter celebrasset nuptias, (quia jam spes omnes sic suas impleverat,)
diuturni pervicaciis morbi patientia superatis, non illibenter sato cessit.

Anno Dom. 1660. -- Dec. 28. Aet. 39. They had one only daughter, Elizabeth,
who married sir Francis Henry Lee, baronet, of Ditchley in Oxfordshire Ex
epitaph. modo citat.
, by whom she had two sons, Edward-Henry, created earl of Litchfield by Charles
II Collins, Peer. ii. 390. Ed. i.
, grandfather by this match to Henry earl of Litchfield, chancellor of the
university of Oxford: and Francis-Henry, a gentleman-commoner of Trinity
college aforesaid Ex Registr. in Pergamen. coll. Trin. ab ann. 1683. fol. 6.
. She was afterward married to Robert earl of Lindsey Registr. praedict. And
MSS. Wood, modo citat. -- Wood in another MS. mentions Philip Bertie, a younger
son of Rob. earl of Lindsey, of Trin. coll. who speaks a copy of English
verses, in the theater at Oxford, 1683, to the duke and duchess of York, the
lady Anne, etc. They were written by Creech, then A.B. of Wadham college, and
are printed in EXAMEN POETICUM, or vol. iii. of Miscellany Poems. D. 19. 4to.
page 56. MSS. Mus. ASHM. In Monmouth's Rebellion, in the year 1685, the same
Philip Bertie, being half-nephew to the Earl of Abingdon then Lord Lieutenant
of Oxfordshire, was Captain of a company chiefly of his own college, in the
militia of the University, which he trained in Trinity college grove. Wood,
MSS. ibid. page 76. b. Under that year, I find the following notices relating
to this business in Comp. Burss. Coll. Trin. Oxon. viz. 1685. "Dat. Tubicinibus
Comitis de Abingdon, x s." Again, "Pro armamentis Collegii expoliendis et
emendandis, xvi s." -- And, "Pro festivis ignibus [bonfires] post devictos
rebels, i l. xij s. x d." In the same COMPUTUS are disbursements for horses
hired to serve against the rebels.

These notices relating to the troops raised by the university of Oxford in
Monmouth's rebellion, remind me of a curious anecdote concerning Smith's famous
Ode entitled POCOCKIUS, which I give from MSS. COD. BALLARD, vol. xix. Letter
104. "In Monmouth's REBELLION, the university of Oxford raised a regiment for
the King's service, and Christ Church and Jesus college made one Company, of
which lord Norris, since earl of Abingdon, was captain: who presented Mr. Urry
a Corporal [Serjeant] therein with a halbard. Upon Dr. Pocock's death, Mr. Urry
lugged Captain Rag [Smith] into his chamber in Peckwater, locked him in, put
the key in his pocket, and ordered his bedmaker to supply him with necessaries
through the window, and told him he should not come out, till he made a copy of
verses on the Doctor's death. The sentence being irreversible, the captain made
the ODE, and sent it with this Epistle to Mr. Urry, who was a well built man,
and large limbed: who [Smith] thereupon had his release." Pococke died in 1691.
Urry, a student of Christ-church, was the editor of Chaucer. The EPISTLE, here
mentioned, is a ludicrous prose analysis of the ODE, beginning Opusculum tuum,
Halberdarie amplissime, etc. and is lately printed in Dr. Johnson's ENGLISH
POETS. vol. 4. p. 62. The writer of this anecdote is Mr. William Brom of
Ewithington in Herefordshire, who died, aged 82, in 1745. He was of Merton
college Oxford, an excellent scholar, and a very learned antiquary: intimately
acquainted with Smith and Urry, and with Lord Oxford, John Philips, etc. In one
of his LETTERS he says, that Philips dedicated and sent to him the SPLENDID
SHILLING in manuscript, and that he sent Philips in return a pound of tobacco.
Ibid. LET. 78. Compare LETTERS, 72. 74.


. Of this lady there is a capital picture at lord Litchfield's at Ditchley, by
sir Peter Lely.

I now return to Thomas Pope, the second son of William first earl of Down,
uncle to Thomas abovementioned the second earl, and ancestor to Francis the
present lord Guildford. He was born 1598 At Wroxton there is a picture, dated
1606, of William Pope, aged 10, and of his brother Thomas, here mentioned, aged
8.
. He was knighted by Charles I. at the royal manor of Woodstock, Aug. 1, 1625
MSS. Dugdale, Mus. Ashmol. R. fol. 232.
. He married at Wroxton, Apr. 20, 1636, Beata, Daughter of Sir Henry Poole of
Saperton in Gloucestershire, baronet Registr. Wroxton. There is a valuable
portrait of this lady at Wroxton, by the second Vansomer.
. He appeared in arms for the royal cause. On the death of his nephew Thomas,
he became by succession, December. 28, 1660, a baronet, and third earl of Down.
He died Jan. 11, 1667, and was buried at Wroxton: as was his countess Beata,
Jul. 18, 1678 Registr. Wroxton.
. They had three sons, Thomas, Henry, and a second Henry; and five daughters,
Elenor, Anne, Beata, Frances, and Finetta. Thomas was born, 1640, and on the
death of his father, Jan. 11, 1667, became by succession a baronet, and fourth
and last earl of Down There are pictures at Ditchley of the two last earls of
Down.
. These dignities he enjoyed but a few months; for he died May 18, 1668
Registr. Wroxton.
, and was buried with his ancestors, in a vault under the chancel at Wroxton.
The first Henry was born Apr. 11, 1643, and died an infant Ibid.
. The second Henry was born Jan. 27, 1645 Ibid.
, and died at Oxford in Trinity college, where he was a student, aged 19, Jun.
20, 1665 Ex Tumul. ibid. I find the countess of Down, his mother, making a
present to the college, " in memoriam filii sui Dni Henrici Pope hujus collegii
comm. defuncti." Registr. ibid. in pergamen. ab ann. 1665, fol. 46. Where she
is called, by mistake, Elisabetha instead of Beata.
. Of the daughters, Elenor died an infant 1637 Registr. Wroxton.
. Anne was born 1637 Ibid.
, and married sir Edward Boughton, baronet, of Lawford in Warwickshire MSS.
Pedigr. Rawlins.
. Beata, born 1639, was married Febr. 15, 1668, to William Soames, esquire, of
Thurlowe in Suffolk Registr. Wroxton.
. Frances, born 1647, was married March 5, 1671, to sir Francis North,
afterward lord keeper, and lord North of of Guildford Ibid.
; and from this match, grandfather to the present Francis lord North and
Guildford. She died Nov. 15, 1678 Ex Epitaphio.
, and was buried at Wroxton; where is an epitaph on her monument, written by
Dr. Henry Paman, public orator of the university of Cambridge, who is said to
have been well acquainted with her amiable character North's Life of lord
keeper North, 4to. p. 84.
. The youngest daughter, Finetta, was married May 4, 1674, to Robert Hyde,
esquire Registr. Wroxton. See Wood, Ath. Oxon. ii. 543. -- f. 235.
, son of Alexander Hyde, bishop of Salisbury Whose elder brother Laurence Hyde,
esquire, of Heal near Salisbury, married MARY the daughter of ANTONY WARTON,
rector of Bremor in Hamshire, about the reign of Charles the first, and great
grandfather to the father of the author of this work. This lady, when a widow,
for many days concealed and accommodated in her house at Heal, aforesaid, king
Charles the second after his hazardous flight from the battle of Worcester, in
the year 1651, and furnished the means for his escape into France. At the
restoration, the king gave her a very valuable picture of himself, when a boy,
a half-length, painted by Vandyck, and now in the possession of my brother
doctor Warton of Winchester. See Clarendon's HIST. vol. iii. p. 331. edit. fol.
1704.
. Thus by the death of male issue, and marriage of the female, this family and
name, at least in this branch, became extinct soon after the restoration of
Charles the second.

For from what is here collected on this subject, it must appear, that our
great poet, ALEXANDER POPE, was related to this family only by some collateral
branch. I have mentioned all the male issue, and their marriages; except the
marriages of John and William, two younger sons of sir William Pope knight, of
Cogges: both which, I suspect, died young; but if ever married, either of them
may reasonably be supposed rather too young The eldest of them, John, was born
Nov. 2, 1623. If it can be proved that he was the father of the elder Alexander
Pope, it will follow that Thomas Pope, second earl of Down, was his uncle: and
consequently, that sir Thomas Pope, the founder of Trinity college, was the
poet's uncle, to a high degree. It may perhaps be trifling to mention, that
ALEXANDER POPE occurs twice as a name in this family, in, and about, Temp. Edw.
iii. -- MSS. Pedigr. penes honoratiss. com. de Guildford.
to have been the father of the elder Alexander Pope, who was born 1642 Ex
Epitaphio.
. Besides, had the poet been descended from either of these two younger sons,
the title of earl of Down could not have failed during his own and his
father's lifetime. Mr. Pope tells us, that, his "Father [Alexander] was of a
gentleman's family in Oxfordshire, the head of which was the earl of Down,
whose sole heiress married the earl of Lindsey. His mother was the daughter of
W. Turnor of York: She had three brothers, one of whom was killed, anothes died
in the service of king Charles." Notwithstanding what I have here said, I
imagine that Mr. Pope alludes to Thomas Pope the second earl of Down, whose
epitaph I have given, no less than to his mother's brothers, in the following
lines. Of gentle blood, part shed in honor's cause,
While yet in Britain honor had applause,
EACH PARENT sprung Warb. POPE, iv. 43. ed. 1752.
--


And on the whole from my researches on this head I am inclined to determine,
that our poet was descended from a branch of this family, viz. POPE of
DEDINGTON Thomas Pope, grandfather of William Pope, sir Thomas Pope's father,
had seven sons: William, the eldest, married Jane Bond. MSS. Pedigr. modo
citat. penes honoratiss. comde Guildford.
, which settled at Ginge, near Wantage in Berkshire. They have still, or lately
had, in the family, which I believe has now lost the name of Pope, a picture of
sir Thomas Pope, and escocheons of his arms.

For the convenience of the reader, the following short Scheme, being a
comprehensive recapitulation of what has been said, both here and in the LIFE,
concerning this family, with some improvements, is annexed.

NUMB. XXVII.
GULIELMUS Pope de Dedington, co. Oxon. Genesis ob. 1523. Habuit Filium
primogenitum THOMAM POPE, MIL. FUNDATOREM COLL. TRIN. OXON. 1554. on. 1558.
JAN. 29. Qui habuit Fratrem unicum, praeter tres Sorores, JOHANNEM Pope de
Wroxton, co. Oxon. Armig. ob. 1583. Habuit Filium, praeter duos alios, et sex
Filias, GULIELMUM Pope, not. 1573. factum Equit. de Baln. 1603. Baronett. 1611.
Comitem de Down, 1629. ob. 1631. Habuit Filios duos, praeter unicam Filiam,
MAJOREM, GULIELMUM Pope, not. 1596. factum mil. 1616. ob. vivo Gulielmo Patre,
1624. Habuit filium, praeter alios, et duas filias, THOMAM Pope, not. 1622.
baronett. et com. sec. de Down, mortuo avo GULIE^MO, 1631. ob. 1660. Habuit
unicam filiam, et haeredem, ELISABETHAM Pope, nuptam D. FRANCISCO - HENRICO Lee
de Ditchley, co. Oxon. Baronetto Renuptam Roberto Comiti de Lindsey.
. Habuere filium, praeter alium, EDWARDUM-FRANCISCUM Lee, Baronett. factum
comitem de Litchfield, 1674. ob. 1716. GEORGIUM-HENRICUM Lee. com. de
Litchfield, 1716, ob. 1743. GEORGIUM-HENRICUM Lee, com. de Litchfield. 1743.
Nuper academiae Oxon. honoratissimum cancellarium, 1772.
MINOREM, THOMAM Pope, not. 1598. factum mil. 1625. baronett. et com. tert. de
Down, mortuo THOMA nepote, 1660. ob. 1668. Habuit filium, praeter duos alios
et filias quinqne, THOMAM Pope, not. 1640. com. quart. et ult. de Down, 1668.
ob. eod. anno. Qui habuit in cohaeredem, una cum duabus e siliabus praedictis,
FRANCISCAM Pope, not. 1647. ob, 1678. Nuptam D. FRANCISCO North, facto baroni
de Guildford, 1683. ob. 1685. Habuere filium, praeter tres alios, et filias
duas, FRANCISCUM North, bar. de Guildford, 1685. ob. 1729. FRANCISCUM North,
bar. de Guildford, 1729. com. 1752. Hodie superstitem, 1772. Titulis omnibus et
honoribus majorem.

NUMB. XXVIII. Account of Sir Thomas Pope's Burial, 1559 From MSS. Cotton. fol.
Vitellius, F. 5. Brit. Mus. It is a journal of occurrences chiefly in and about
London, by a cotemporary and a curious observer, from 4 Edw. vi. to 5 Eliz.
viz. 1563. This article is almost the only one, of any length, now remaining
clear and legible in the whole manuscript; which in many parts is burnt to a
cinder, and otherwise much injured.
.
"THE vi day of ffebruary whent to the church to be beried at Clarkenwell This
is inaccurately said. The body only laid in state in the church of Clerkenwell.
sir Thomas Pope knight, with a standarde, a cott Coat.
, pennon of arms, a targett, ellmett and sword, and iiii dosen of arms, and
xii for the branchys, and vi for the body, of bokeram: and ii harolds Heralds.
of arms, Mr. Clarenchus Clarencieux.
and Mr. York. Mr. Clarenchus bare the cott, and Mr. York bare the helmett
and crest. The gayff xl mantyll ffrys gowns [to] xx men and xx women: the xx
men bare torchys, the women ii and ii together, with rayles. And ii grett whyt
branchys and iv branchys [of] taperys of wax; garnissshed with arms and with
iv dosen of pensels. Sir Richard Sowthwell, knight, and sir Thomas Stradling,
and dyvers oders morners in blake, to the number of lx and mo in blake. And all
the howsse and the church with blake and arms: And aftyr, to the playse to
drink with spyse-brede and wine So at abbot Islip's funeral in Westminster
abbey, 1532. The dirge being sung, they were entertained with "spiced bread,
suckett, marmylate, spiced plate, and diverse sorts of wine." Widmore's WEST.
ABBEY, p. 208.
. And the morrow mass iii songs, with ii pryke songs, and the iii [third] of
Requiem, with the clerks of London A society of singers who were hired to
assist on these occasions. See HIST. ENGL. POETR. ii. p. 396.
. And after, he was beried: And that done, to the playse to dener; for there was
a grett dener, and plente of all things, and a grett doll of money See LIFE,
p. 178. From this passage Strype drew what is mentioned in his ANNALS. VIZ.
"And sir Thomas Pope, a great man with the former queen [Mary,] buried with
much much magnificence in Clerkenwell." [r. Walbroke.] Vol. i. p. 32. Land.
1725.
."

NUMB. XXIX. Account of the Founder's Visit to Trinity College Oxford, on St.
Swithin's Day, 1556 MSS. Wise. This paper was transcribed by the late Rev.
Francis Wise, fellow of Trinity college, and Radclivian librarian, from the
original, which was in the possession of the learned Dr. Arthur Charlett,
master of University college, and formerly fellow of Trinity college. It was
written in the hand of Dr. Arthur Yeldard, the second president of Trinity
college; and seemed to be intended for an entry in the college-register, where
it does not appear. Mr. Wise told me, that he saw other original papers
relating to Trinity college in Dr. Charlett's library. Dr. Charlett seems to
have made these collections for a work which he left behind him in manuscript,
entitled, "An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Presidents, Fellows, Scholars, and
Benefactors of Trinity college, Oxford, to the year 1692." This catalogue was
in the hands of Mr. Rawlins, of Pophills in Gloucestershire, but is not now to
be found. See what is said of it in Hearne's MSS. Collections, vol. 130. page
110. sub. ann. Bibl. Bodl. cod. Rawlins. And compare LIFE, p. 178. in the
notes. In a letter from Dr. Richard Rawlinson to Mr. George Ballard, author of
the LEARNED LADIES, dated Jun. 16, 1751, is the following passage. "Since my
last, I call to mind that our friend Mr. Rawlins actually sold some of his MSS.
Particularly I remember a large folio of Miscellanies [miscellaneous papers]
mostly relating to Oxford, and partly in Dr. Charlet's hand, sold to Mr. Tailor
of Worcestershire: as also a copy of Wood's Antiquities of Oxford, Latin, with
originals [interpolations] by Mr. Wood himself, etc." LETTERS, Cod. Ballard.
vol. ii. LET. 138. folio. Bibl. Bodl.


.
SCIANT posteri, quod ad collegium venit D. Fundator in festo Sancti Swithini,
A.D. 1556. Ei ab equo descendenti adstitit ad frena magister Praesidens: et
mox, in porta collegii, oratione satis longa et officii plena exceptus est a
magistro Marks, vice-praesidente; ubi etiam humiliter eidem obtulerunt et
donarunt bursarii cirothecas aurifrigiatas. Dein ad magnam praesidentis cameram
eunt, sociis et scholaribus utrinque stantibus. Comitabantur autem D.
Fundatorem episcopi Wintoniensis But he was not yet inthroned. He had custody
of the Temporalities, 16 Maii, 1556. Rym. Foed. xv. 437. And the license of
election is dated Jul. 16. ib. 441. See supr. LIFE, p. 237.
et Eliensis, aliique plures ex aula magnates. Postquam Bibliothecam et
Arbustum lustraverant, ad prandium in magna aula collegii processum est: ubi
laute et opipare convivium instruebatur, ad laevum D. Fundatoris, paulo tamen
distantius, adsidente Praesidente, ac dein ordine caeteris. In hoc convivium,
in quo aderant etiam duodecim ministralli, et afferebantur inter alia plurima
quatuor pingues damae, necnon octo lagenae Muscadeli, allocabant bursarii xij
l. xiv s. ix d. Quin et pro cirothecis xxiv s. xj d. Post, ad missam
vespertinam in choro capellae praesens erat dictus D. Fundator, cum episcopis
et aliis, ubi divina celebrabat Praesidens optima capa indutus Who is ordered
to celebrate "in festis magis duplicibus, et principalibus, et in die
Exequiarum mearum, totum diei Officium ac Missam, cum diacono et subdiacono."
STATUT. Coll. Trin. Cap. xiii.
. Et obtulit D. Fundator unam bursam plenam Angelorum. Hujus autem diei totas
expensas statim ante discessum, pro sua munificentia, rependebat integre D.
Fundator in manus bursariorum, in scaccario computi, una cum Leg. Cypho.
ciffo argenteo deaurato. Dictus autem ciffus statim ibidem implebatur vino
mediato Legend. f. medicato.
, vocato Ipocrasse, et ex eo sine mora propinabat D. Fundator Bursariis et
aliis praesentibus. Ac denique divertebat eo vespere versus Windlesoram. Ac
dedit D. Fundator unicuique scholarium propria manu unum marcam.

NUMB. XXX. Testimonium de Dom. Elisabetha Paulet, D. Thomae Pope uxore
secunda. A Radulpho Kettell conscriptum Manu sua, inter chartas manuscriptas A.
Wood, Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Viz. A loose paper inserted in A. Wood's MS. ENGLISH
History of the University of Oxford, tom. ii. fol. 388. Dr. Ralph Kettel was
president of Trinity college, and an excellent governor, for near fifty years.
He had been fellow and scholar of the college for fourteen years, during the
lifetime of this lady. His family lived in her neighborhood, at King's
Langley in Hertfordshire. She probably sent him to the college, where he was
admitted scholar, Jun. 16, 1579. Registr. prim. fol. 30. He was chaplain to
Bilson bishop of Winchester, and to lady Walsingham, widow of the Secretary. A
good old portrait of him, in a brown furred gown, is in the college. Aubrey
says, that his picture was drawn by Mr. Bathurst, one of the foundation of
Trinity college, from memory three years after his death, which was a strong
likeness. SURREY, tom. v. p. 406. His Life, but with many mistakes and
absurdities, is among Aubrey's manuscript LIVES in the Ashmolean Museum.

The following anecdote is recorded of Dr. Kettel, which I relate, because it
is imperfectly told by Aubrey, and as it marks the times. While president, it
was his custom to attend daily the DISPUTATIONS in the college-hall, on which
occasion he constantly wore a large black-furred muff. Before him stood an
hourglass, brought by himself into the hall, and placed on a table, for
ascertaining the time of the continuance of the exercise, which was to last an
hour at least. One morning, after Cromwell's soldiers had taken possession of
Oxford, a halberdier rushed into the hall during this ceremony, and plucking
off our venerable doctor's muff, threw it in his face; and then with a stroke
of his halberd broke the hourglass in pieces. The doctor, though old and
infirm, instantly seized the soldier by the collar, who was soon overpowered by
the assistance of the disputants. The halberd was carried out of the hall in
triumph before the doctor; but the prisoner, with his halberd, was quickly
rescued by a party of soldiers, who stood at the bottom of the hall, and had
enjoyed the whole transaction. MS. Papers of Dr. Bathurst.


.
"ELIZABETHA, inter clarissimas foeminas, ob corporis animique praestantes
dotes, ingenium, multiplicem cognitionem, sermonis facundiam, morum
integritatem, pietatem, et munificentiam merito celebranda, orta ex BLOUNTORUM
splendida familia in comitatu Staffordiensi de Burton ad Trent, connubio
tradita est ANTONIO BASFORD, viro inter armigeros insigni. Qui, suscepto filio
unico JOANNE Basford, ELIZABETHAM reliquit superstitem, fama vitaque adeo
celebrem, ut venerabilis Fundator noster THOMAS POPE, tunc temporis, opibus,
dignitate, et gratia, apud omnes ordines plurimum pollens, hanc sibi consortem
dignissimam adsciverit. Quae jam denuo conjux facta, propendebat admodum in
opera quaeque insigniora; inter quae collegium hoc meritissime reponimus. Ad
quod fundandum, omni conatu et suasu Fundatorem nostrum continuo adhortata est.
Unde evenit, ut ubi A. 1558 Sc. 1558-9.
, Januarii 29, dominica Sexagesima, a Clerkenwell ad electos suos spiritus deus
dictum THOMAM transtulerit, ELIZABETHAM autem ad plebis suae Christianae summum
solatium superesse voluerit, Fundator huic summam auctoritatem et potestatem in
nos, Alumnos ipsius, demandaverit. Hinc, magis magisque illustris, et conspicua
omnigenis virtutibus, nupsit venerabili atque inter splendidos militaris
ordinis viros egregio, HUGONI POWLETT Somersetensi. Ita nuperrime Domina
Powlett appellari coepit, apud George-Hinton inter Somersetenses, apud
Tittenhanger inter Hartfordienses, et apud Clerkenwell inter suburbanos
Londinenses, celeberrima. Hujus memoriam singulari cum pietate et observantia
recolimus, collegii hujus alumni: cum ob auctotatem, quam ei, quousque in vivis
esser, Fundator contulit; tum ob munificentiam, quam dum vixit exercuit in nos:
quaque ad rem literariam confirmandam, et rem familiarem amplificandam,
quotannis in perpetuum gaudere hoc collegium voluit electa Domina The
circumstances of her whole benefaction where these. Richard Blount of London I
find one Richard Blount, admitted a gentleman-commoner, Jan. 31. 1579. And
leaving the college, Feb. 28. 1581. E Libro primo Cautionum.
, esquire, her nephew, bequeathed by will 100 l. to maintain an exhibitioner in
the said college. On his death, dame Elisabeth Powlet covenanted with Blount's
executors, to give to the said college, in consideration of the said sum of 100
l. to her made over, the rectory of Ridge in Hertfordshire, for the maintenance
of the said exhibitioner, and for the purposes mentioned in the text. She added
also, in the contract, the advowson to the vicarage of Ridge, now lost. "For
the great affection, good will, and favor, which she the same dame Elisabeth
bears toward the said college, being founded by her late dear husband sir
Thomas Pope." Ex Indentur. Dat. April 1, an. 22 Elizab. Regin. A.D. 1581.

This Memoir was probably drawn up by Dr. Kettel, as was the preceding
narrative of the Founder's Visit to the College, by Dr. Yeldard, with an
intention of inserting it in the collegeregister: but, like that, it was
mislaid or forgotten, and never entered. See p. 458. supr. in the notes. The
manuscript seems to have been procured by Antony Wood from Dr. Ralph Bathurst,
who became possessed of many of Dr. Kettel's papers.


. Utcunque enim veneranda matrona, hinc a Tyttenhanger A. 1593, 27 Octobris, ad
superos concesserit; accesserunt tamen ad Lectoris philosophici et rhetorici
stipendia duplicanda, atque ad Focalium onus sublevandum, in annos singulos
december librae, ex ejusdem larga beneficentia."

FINIS.

