THE BEAUTIES OF ENGLISH POESY. SELECTED BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH. IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for WILLIAM GRIFFIN, in Catharine Street in the Strand. 1767.
[P. 6s. B.]

PREFACE.
MY Bookseller having informed me that there was no collection of English
Poetry among us, of any estimation, I thought a few Hours spent in making a
proper selection would not be ill bestowed. Compilations of this kind are
chiefly designed for such as either want leisure, skill, or fortune, to choose
for themselves; for persons whose professions turn them to different pursuits,
or who, not yet arrived at sufficient maturity, require a guide to direct their
application. To our youth, particularly, a publication of this sort may be
useful; since, if compiled with any share of judgment, it may at once unite
precept and example, show them what is beautiful, and inform them why it is so:
I therefore offer this, to the best of my judgment, as the best collection
that has yet appeared: though, as tastes are various, numbers will be of a very
different opinion. Many perhaps may wish to see in it the poems of their
favorite Authors, others may wish that I had selected from works less
generally read, and others still may wish, that I had selected from their own.
But my design was to give a useful, unaffected compilation; one that might tend
to advance the reader's taste, and not impress him with exalted ideas of mine.
Nothing so common, and yet so absurd, as affectation in criticism. The desire
of being thought to have a more discerning taste than others, has often led
writers to labor after error, and to be foremost in promoting deformity. In
this compilation I run but few risques of that kind; every poem here is well
known, and possessed, or the public has been long mistaken, of peculiar merit:
every poem has, as Aristotle expresses it, a beginning, a middle, and an end,
in which, however trifling the rule may seem, most of the poetry in our
language is deficient: I claim no merit in the choice, as it was obvious, for
in all languages the best productions are most easily found. As to the short
introductory criticisms to each poem, they are rather designed for boys than
men; for it will be seen that I declined all refinement, satisfied with being
obvious and sincere. In short, if this work be useful in schools, or amusing in
the closet, the merit all belongs to others; I have nothing to boast, and, at
best, can expect, not applause, but pardon.

OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.
THE Rape of the Lock Page 1 The Hermit Page 29 Il Penseroso Page 39 L'Allegro
Page 46 An Elegy written in a Country Churchyard Page 53 London; in imitation
of the Third Satire of Juvenal Page 59 The School-mistress Page 69 Cooper's
Hill Page 81 Eloisa to Abelard Page 95 An Epistle from Mr. Philips to the Earl
of Dorset Page 108 A Letter from Italy to the Right Honorable Charles Lord
Hallifax Page 111 Alexander's Feast, or the Power of Music; an Ode Page 119 An
Ode for Music on St. Cecilia's Day Page 127 The Shepherd's Week Page 133 Mac
Flecknoe Page 167 Poetry; a Rhapsody Page 175 The use of Riches Page 193 From
the Dispensary Page 225 Selim, or the Shepherd's Moral, an Eclogue Page 239
Hassan; or the Camel-driver Page 242 Agib and Secander Page 250 Abra, or the
Georgian Sultana Page 247 The Splendid Shilling Page 255 A Pipe of Tobacco; in
Imitation of Six several Authors Page 261
THE BEAUTIES OF ENGLISH POESY.
The Rape of the Lock.
This seems to be Mr. Pope's most finished production, and is, perhaps, the
most perfect in our language. It exhibits stronger powers of imagination, more
harmony of numbers, and a greater knowledge of the world, than any other of
this poet's works: and it is probable, if our country were called upon to show
a specimen of their genius to foreigners, this would be the work here fixed
upon.

WHAT dire offense from amorous causes springs,
What mighty contests rise from trivial things,
I sing -- This verse to CARYL, Muse! is due:
This, even Belinda may vouchsafe to view:
Slight is the subject, but not so the praise,
If She inspire, and He approve my lays.
Say what strange motive, Goddess! could compel
A well-bred Lord t'assault a gentle Belle?
O say what stranger cause, yet unexplor'd,
Could make a gentle Belle reject a Lord?
In tasks so bold, can little men engage,
And in soft bosoms dwells such mighty rage?
Sol through white curtains shot a timorous ray,
And ope'd those eyes that must eclipse the day:
Now lap-dogs gave themselves the rouzing shake,
And sleepless lovers, just at twelve, awake:
Thrice rung the bell, the slipper knocked the ground,
And the pressed watch returned a silver sound.
Belinda still her downy pillow pressed;
Her guardian SYLPH prolonged the balmy rest:
'Twas He had summoned to her silent bed
The morning dream that hovered over her head.
A youth more glittering than a birth-night beau,
(That even in slumber caused her cheek to glow)
Seemed to her ear his winning lips to lay,
And thus in whispers said, or seemed to say.
Fairest of mortals, thou distinguished care
Of thousand bright inhabitants of air!
If ever one Vision touch thy infant thought,
Of all the Nurse and all the Priest have taught;
Of airy Elves by moonlight shadows seen,
The silver token, and the circled green,
Or virgins visited by Angel-pow'rs,
With golden crowns and wreaths of heavenly flowers;
Hear and believe! thy own importance know,
Nor bound thy narrow views to things below.
Some secret truths, from learned pride concealed,
To Maids alone and children are revealed:
What though no credit doubting Wits may give,
The Fair and Innocent shall still believe.
Know, then, unnumbered Spirits round thee fly,
The light Militia of the lower sky:
These, though unseen, are ever on the wing,
Hang over the Box, and hover round the Ring.
Think what an equipage thou have in air,
And view with scorn two Pages and a Chair.
As now your own, our beings were of old,
And once enclosed in Woman's beauteous mould;
Thence, by a soft transition, we repair
From earthly vehicles to these of air.
Think not, when Woman's transient breath is fled,
That all her vanities at once are dead;
Succeeding vanities she still regards,
And, though she plays no more, o'erlooks the cards.
Her joy in gilded Chariots, when alive,
And love of Ombre, after death survive.
For when the Fair in all their pride expire,
To their first Elements their Souls retire:
The sprites of fiery Termagants in Flame
Mount up, and take a Salamander's name.
Soft yielding minds to Water glide away,
And sip, with nymphs, their elemental tea.
The graver Prude sinks downward to a Gnome,
In search of mischief still on Earth to roam.
The light Coquettes in Sylphs aloft repair,
And sport and flutter in the fields of air.
Know farther yet; whoever, fair and chaste,
Rejects mankind, is by some Sylph embraced:
For Spirits, freed from mortal laws, with ease
Assume what sexes and what shapes they please.
What guards the purity of melting maids,
In courtly balls, and midnight masquerades,
Safe from the treacherous friend, the daring spark,
The glance by day, the whisper in the dark,
When kind occasion prompts their warm desires,
When music softens, and when dancing fires?
It Is but their Sylph, the wise Celestials know,
Though Honor is the word with Men below.
Some nymphs there are, too conscious of their face,
For life predestined to the Gnomes embrace.
These swell their prospects and exalt their pride,
When offers are disdained, and love denied:
Then gay ideas crowd the vacant brain,
While Peers, and Dukes, and all their sweeping train,
And Garters, Stars, and Coronets appear,
And, in soft sounds, Your Grace salutes their ear.
It Is these that early taint the female soul,
Instruct the eyes of young Coquettes to roll,
Teach infant cheeks a bidden blush to know,
And little hearts to flutter at a Beau.
Often, when the world imagine women stray,
The Sylphs through mystic mazes guide their way,
Through all the giddy circle they pursue,
And old impertinence expel by new.
What tender maid but must a victim fall
To one man's treat, but for another's ball?
When Florio speaks, what virgin could withstand,
If gentle Damon did not squeeze her hand;
With varying vanities, from every part
They shift the moving Toy-shop of their heart;
Where wigs with wigs, with sword-knots sword-knots strive,
Beaux banish beaux, and coaches coaches drive.
This erring mortals Levity may call,
Oh blind to truth! the Sylphs contrive it all.
Of these am I, who thy protection claim;
A watchful sprite, and Ariel is my name.
Late, as I ranged the crystal wilds of air,
In the clear Mirror of thy ruling star
I saw, alas, some dread event impend,
Ere to the main this morning sun descend;
But heaven reveals not what, or how, or where:
Warned by the Sylph, oh pious maid, beware!
This to disclose is all thy guardian can:
Beware of all; but, most, beware of Man!
He said; when Shock, who thought she slept too long,
Leaped up, and waked his mistress with his tongue.
'Twas then, Belinda, if report say true,
Thy eyes first opened on a Billet-doux;
Wounds, Charms, and Ardors, were no sooner read,
But all the Vision vanished from thy head.
And now, unveiled, the Toilet stands displayed,
Each silver vase in mystic order laid.
First, robbed in white, the Nymph intent adores,
With head uncovered, the Cosmetic powers.
A heavenly image in the glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her eyes she rears;
The inferior Priestess, at her altar's side,
Trembling, begins the sacred rites of Pride.
Unnumber'd treasures open at once, and here
The various offerings of the world appear;
From each she nicely culls, with curious toil,
And decks the Goddess with the glittering spoil.
This casket, India's glowing gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box.
The Tortoise here and Elephant unite,
Transformed to combs, the speckled and the white.
Here files of pins extend their shining rows,
Puffs, Powders, Patches, Bibles, Billet-doux.
Now awful beauty puts on all its arms;
The fair each moment rises in her charms,
Repairs her smiles, awakens every grace,
And calls forth all the wonders of her face:
Sees by degrees a purer blush arise,
And keener lightnings quicken in her eyes.
The busy Sylphs surround their darling care,
These set the head, and those divide the hair;
Some fold the sleeve, whilst others plait the gown;
And Betty's praised for labors not her own.
Not with more glories, in the etherial plain,
The sun first rises over the purpled main,
Than, issuing forth, the rival of his beams
Launched on the bosom of the silvered Thames.
Fair Nymphs, and well-dress'd Youths, around her shone,
But every eye was fixed on her alone.
On her white breast a sparkling Cross she wore,
Which Jews might kiss, and Infidels adore.
Her lively looks a sprightly mind disclose,
Quick as her eyes, and as unfix'd as those;
Favors to none, to all she smiles extends;
Often she rejects, but never once offends.
Bright as the sun, her eyes the gazers strike,
And, like the sun, they shine on all alike.
Yet graceful ease, and sweetness void of pride,
Might hide her faults, if Belles had faults to hide:
If to her share some female errors fall,
Look on her face and you will forget 'em all.
This nymph, to the destruction of mankind,
Nourished two Locks which graceful hung behind
In equal curls, and well conspired to deck,
With shining ringlets, the smooth ivory neck.
Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains,
And mighty hearts are held in slender chains.
With hairy springes we the birds betray,
Slight lines of hair surprise the finny prey,
Fair tresses men's imperial race ensnare,
And beauty draws us with a single hair.
The adventurous Baron the bright locks admired;
He saw, he wished, and to the prize aspired.
Resolved to win, he meditates the way,
By force to ravish, or by fraud betray;
For when success a lover's toil attends,
Few ask, if fraud or force attained his ends.
For this, 'ere Phoebus rose, he had implored
Propitious heaven, and every power adored;
But chiefly Love -- to Love an Altar built,
Of twelve vast French Romances, neatly gilt.
There lay three garters, half a pair of gloves,
And all the trophies of his former loves.
With tender billet-doux he lights the pyre,
And breathes three amorous sighs to raise the fire.
Then prostrate falls, and begs, with ardent eyes,
Soon to obtain, and long possess the prize:
The powers gave ear, and granted half his prayer,
The rest, the winds dispersed in empty air.
But now secure the painted vessel glides,
The sunbeams trembling on the floating tides:
While melting music steals upon the sky,
And softened sounds along the waters die;
Smooth flow the waves, the Zephyrs gently play,
Belinda smiled, and all the world was gay.
All but the Sylph -- with careful thoughts oppressed,
The impending woe sat heavy on his breast.
He summons strait his Denizens of air;
The lucid squadrons round the sails repair:
Soft over the shrouds aerial whispers breathe,
That seemed but Zephyrs to the train beneath.
Some to the sun their insect-wings unfold,
Waft on the breeze, or sink in clouds of gold;
Transparent forms, too fine for mortal sight,
Their fluid bodies half dissolved in light.
Loose to the wind their airy garments flew,
Thin glittering textures of the filmy dew,
Dipped in the richest tincture of the skies,
Where light disports in ever-mingling dies,
While every beam new transient colors slings,
Colors that change whenever they wave their wings,
Amid the circle on the gilded mast,
Superior by the head, was Ariel placed;
His purple pinions opening to the sun,
He raised his azure wand, and thus begun.
Ye Sylphs and Sylphids, to your chief give ear,
Fay, Fairies, Genii, Elves, and Demons hear!
Ye know the spheres, and various tasks assigned
By laws eternal to the aerial kind.
Some in the fields of purest ether play,
And bask and whiten in the blaze of day;
Some guide the course of wandering orbs on high,
Or roll the planets through the boundless sky.
Some, less refined, beneath the moon's pale light
Pursue the stars that shoot athwart the night,
Or suck the mists in grosser air below,
Or dip their pinions in the painted bow,
Or brew fierce tempests on the wintry main,
Or over the glebe distill the kindly rain.
Others on earth over human race preside,
Watch all their ways, and all their actions guide:
Of these the chief the care of Nations own,
And guard with arms divine the British throne.
Our humbler province is to tend the Fair,
Not a less pleasing, though less glorious care;
To save the powder from too rude a gale,
Nor let the imprisoned essences exhale;
To draw fresh colors from the vernal flowers;
To steal from rainbows ere they drop in showers,
A brighter wash; to curl their waving hairs,
Assist their blushes, and inspire their airs;
Nay often, in dreams, invention we bestow,
To change a Flounce, or add a Furbelow.
This day, black Omens threat the brightest Fair
That ever deserved a watchful spirit's care;
Some dire disaster, or by force, or slight;
But what, or where, the fates have wrapped in night.
Whether the nymph shall break Diana's law,
Or some frail China-jar receive a flaw;
Or stain her honor, or her new brocade;
Forget her prayers, or miss a masquerade;
Or lose her heart or necklace at a ball;
Or whether heaven has doomed that Shock must fall.
Haste then, ye spirits! to your charge repair:
The fluttering fan be Zephyretta's care;
The drops to thee, Brillante, we consign;
And, Momentilla, let the watch be thine;
Do thou, Crispissa, tend her favorite Lock;
Ariel himself shall be the guard of Shock.
To fifty chosen Sylphs, of special note,
We trust the important charge, the Petticoat:
Often have we known that sevenfold fence to fail,
Though stiff with hoops, and armed with ribs of whale;
Form a strong line about the silver bound,
And guard the wide circumference around.
Whatever spirit, careless of his charge,
His post neglects, or leaves the fair at large,
Shall feel sharp vengeance soon overtake his sins,
Be stopped in vials, or transfixed with pins;
Or plang'd in lakes of bitter washes lie,
Or wedged whole ages in a bodkin's eye:
Gums and Pomatums shall his flight restrain,
While, clogged, he beats his silken wings in vain;
Or Alum styptics, with contracting power,
Shrink his thin essence like a shrivel'd flower:
Or, as Ixion fixed, the wretch shall feel
The giddy motion of the whirling mill,
In fumes of burning Chocolate shall glow,
And tremble at the sea that froths below!
He spoke; the spirits from the sails descend;
Some, orb in orb, around the nymph extend;
Some third the mazy ringlets of her hair;
Some hang upon the pendants of her ear;
With beating hearts the dire event they wait,
Anxious, and trembling for the birth of Fate.
Close by those meads, forever crowned with flowers,
Where Thames with pride surveys his rising towers,
There stands a structure of majestic frame,
Which from the neighboring Hampton takes its name.
Here Britain's statesmen often the fall foredoom
Of foreign Tyrants, and of Nymphs at home;
Here thou, great Anna! whom three realms obey,
Do sometimes counsel take -- and sometimes tea.
Hither the heroes and the nymphs resort,
To taste awhile the pleasures of a Court;
In various talk the instructive hours they past,
Who gave the ball or paid the visit last:
One speaks the glory of the British Queen,
And one describes a charming Indian screen;
A third interprets motions, looks, and eyes;
At every word a reputation dies.
Snuff, or the fan, supply each pause of chat,
With singing, laughing, ogling, and all that.
Meanwhile, declining from the noon of day,
The sun obliquely shoots his burning ray;
The hungry judges soon the sentence sign,
And wretches hang that Jurymen may dine;
The merchant from the Exchange returns in peace,
And the long labors of the toilet cease.
Belinda now, whom thirst of fame invites,
Burns to encounter two adventurous Knights,
At Ombre singly to decide their doom,
And swells her breast with conquests yet to come.
Strait the three bands prepare in arms to join,
Each band the number of the sacred nine.
Soon as she spreads her hand, the aerial guard
Descend, and sit on each important card:
First Ariel perched upon a Matadore,
Then each according to the rank he bore;
For Sylphs, yet mindful of their ancient race,
Are, as when women, wondrous fond of place.
Behold, four Kings in majesty revered,
With hoary whiskers and a forky beard;
And four fair Queens, whose hands sustain a flower,
The expressive emblem of their softer power;
Four knaves in garbs succinct, a trusty band;
Caps on their heads, and halberts in their hand;
And party-colored troops, a shining train,
Drawn forth to combat on the velvet plain.
The skilful nymph reviews her force with care:
Let Spades be trumps! she said, and trumps they were.
Now move to war her sable Matadores,
In show like leaders of the swarthy Moors.
Spadillio first, unconquerable Lord!
Led off two captive trumps, and swept the board.
As many more Manillio forced to yield,
And marched a victor from the verdant field.
Him Basto followed; but his fate, more hard,
Gained but one trump, and one Plebeian card.
With his broad sabre next, a chief in years,
The hoary Majesty of Spades appears,
Puts forth one manly leg, to sight revealed,
The rest, his many-colour'd robe concealed*
The rebel Knave, who dares his prince engage,
Proves the just victim of his royal rage.
Even mighty Pam, that Kings and Queens o'erthrew,
And mowed down armies in the fights of Lu,
Sad chance of war! now, destitute of aid,
Falls undistinguished by the victor Spade!
Thus far both armies to Belinda yield;
Now to the Baron fate inclines the field.
His warlike Amazon her host invades,
The imperial consort of the crown of Spades.
The Club's black tyrant first her victim died,
Spite of his haughty mien, and barbarous pride:
What boots the regal circle on his head,
His giant limbs in state unwieldy spread;
That long behind he trails his pompous robe,
And, of all monarchs, only grasps the globe?
The Baron now his Diamonds pours apace;
The embroidered King who shows but half his face,
And his refulgent Queen, with powers combined,
Of broken troops an easy conquest find.
Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts, in wild disorder seen,
With throngs promiscuous strew the level green.
Thus, when dispersed, a routed army runs,
Of Asia's troops, and Afric's sable sons,
With like confusion different nations fly,
Of various habits, and of various dye,
The pierced battalions, disunited, fall,
In heaps on heaps; one fate o'erwhelms them all.
The Knave of Diamonds tries his wily arts,
And wins (oh shameful chance!) the Queen of Hearts.
At this, the blood the virgin's cheek forsook,
A livid paleness spreads over all her look;
She sees, and trembles at the approaching ill,
Just in the jaws of ruin, and Codille.
And now (as often in some distempered state)
On one nice trick depends the general fate.
An Ace of Hearts steps forth: the King, unseen,
Lurked in her hand, and mourned his captive Queen:
He springs to vengeance with an eager pace,
And falls like thunder on the prostrate Ace.
The nymph exulting fills with shouts the sky;
The walls, the woods, and long canals reply.
O thoughtless mortals! ever blind to fate,
Too soon dejected, and too soon elate.
Sudden, these honors shall be snatched away,
And cursed for ever this victorious day.
For lo! the board with cups and spoons is crowned,
The berries crackle, and the mill turns round;
On shining Altars of Japan they raise
The silver lamp; the fiery spirits blaze:
From silver spouts the grateful liquors glide,
While China's earth receives the smoking tide:
At once they gratify their scent and taste,
And frequent cups prolong the rich repast.
Strait hover round the fair her airy band;
Some, as she sipp'd, the fuming liquor fanned,
Some over her lap their careful plumes displayed,
Trembling, and conscious of the rich brocade.
Coffee (which makes the politician wise,
And see through all things with his half shut eyes)
Sent up in vapors to the Baron's brain
New stratagems, the radiant Lock to gain.
Ah cease, rash youth! desist ere it is too late,
Fear the just Gods, and think of Scylla's fate!
Changed to a bird, and sent to flit in air,
She dearly pays for Nisus' injured hair!
But, when to mischief mortals bend their will,
How soon they find fit instruments of ill?
Just then, Clarissa drew, with tempting grace,
A two-edged weapon from her shining case:
So ladies, in Romance, assist their knight,
Present the spear, and arm him for the fight.
He takes the gift with reverence, and extends
The little engine on his fingers ends;
This just behind Belinda's neck he spread,
As over the fragrant steams she bends her head.
Swift to the Lock a thousand Sprites repair,
A thousand wings, by turns, blow back the hair;
And thrice they twitch'd the diamond in her ear;
Thrice she looked back, and thrice the foe drew near.
Just in that instant anxious Ariel sought
The close recesses of the Virgin's thought;
As on the nosegay in her breast reclined,
He watched the ideas rising in her mind,
Sudden he viewed, in spite of all her art,
An earthly lover lurking at her heart.
Amazed, confused, he found his power expired,
Resigned to fate, and with a sigh retired.
The Peer now spreads the glittering forfex wide,
TO enclose the Lock; now joins it, to divide.
Even then, before the fatal engine closed,
A wretched Sylph too fondly interposed;
Fate urged the sheers, and cut the Sylph in twain,
(But airy substance soon unites again)
The meeting points the sacred hair dissever
From the fair head, for ever, and for ever!
Then slashed the living lightning from her eyes,
And skreams of horror rend the affrighted skies.
Not louder shrieks to pitying heaven are cast,
When husbands, or when lap-dogs breathe their last;
Or when rich China vessels, fallen from high,
In glittering dust, and painted fragments lie!
Let wreathes of triumph now my temples, twine,
(The victor cried) the glorious prize is mine!
While fish in streams, or birds delight in air,
Or in a coach and six the British fair,
As long as Atalantis shall be read,
Or the small pillow grace a Lady's bed,
While visits shall be paid on solemn days,
When numerous wax-lights in bright order blaze,
While nymphs take treats, or assignations give,
So long my honor, name, and praise shall live!
What Time would spare, from Steel receives its date,
And monuments, like men, submit to fate!
Steel could the labor of the Gods destroy,
And strike to dust the imperial towers of Troy;
Steel could the works of mortal pride confound,
And hew triumphal arches to the ground.
What wonder, then, fair Nymph! thy hairs should feel
The conquering force of unresisted steel?
But anxious cares the pensive Nymph oppressed,
And secret passions labored in her breast.
Not youthful kings in Battle seized alive,
Not scornful virgins who their charms survive,
Not ardent lovers robbed of all their bliss,
Not ancient ladies when refused a kiss,
Not tyrants fierce that unrepenting die,
Not Cynthia when her manteau's pinned awry,
Ever felt such rage, resentment, and despair,
As thou, sad Virgin! for thy ravished Hair.
For, that sad moment when the Sylphs withdrew,
And Ariel, weeping, from Belinda flew,
Umbriel, a dusky, melancholy sprite,
As ever sullied the fair face of light,
Down to the central earth, his proper scene,
Repaired, to search the gloomy Cave of Spleen.
Swift on his sooty pinions flits the Gnome,
And in a vapor reached the dismal dome.
No cheerful breeze this sullen region knows,
The dreaded East is all the wind that blows.
Here, in a grotto sheltered close from air,
And screen'd in shades from day's detested glare,
She sighs for ever on her pensive bed,
Pain at her side, and Megrim at her head.
Two handmaids wait the throne: alike in place,
But differing far in figure and in face.
Here stood Ill Nature like an ancient maid,
Her wrinkled form in black and white arrayed;
With store of prayers, for mornings, nights, and noons,
Her hand is filled! her bosom with lampoons.
There Affectation, with a sickly mien,
Shows in her cheek the roses of eighteen,
Practiced to lisp, and hang the head aside,
Faints into airs, and languishes with pride,
On the rich quilt sinks with becoming woe,
Wrapped in a gown, for sickness, and for show.
The fair-ones feel such maladies as these,
When each new night-dress gives a new disease.
A constant Vapor over the palace flies;
Strange phantoms rising as the mists arise;
Dreadful, as hermits dreams in haunted shades,
Or bright, as visions of expiring maids.
Now glaring siends, and snakes on rolling spires,
Pale specter, gaping tombs, and purple fires:
Now lakes of liquid gold, Elysian scenes,
And crystal domes, and Angels in machines.
Unnumber'd throngs on every side are seen,
Of bodies changed to various forms by Spleen.
Here living tea-pots stand, one arm held out,
One bent; the handle this, and that the spout:
A pipkin here, like Homer's Tripod, walks;
Here sighs a jar, and there a goose-pye talks;
Men prove with child, as powerful fancy works,
And maids, turned bottles, call aloud for corks.
Safe passed the Gnome through this fantastic band,
A branch of healing Spleen-wort in his hand.
Then thus addressed the Power -- Hail wayward Queen!
Who rule the sex to fifty from fifteen:
Parent of vapors, and of female wit,
Who give the hysteric, or poetic fit,
On various tempers act by various ways,
Make some take physic, others scribble plays;
Who cause the proud their visits to delay,
And send the godly in a pet to pray.
A Nymph there is, that all thy power disdains,
And thousands more in equal mirth maintains.
But oh! if ever thy Gnome could spoil a grace,
Or raise a pimple on a beauteous face,
Like Citron-waters matrons cheeks inflame,
Or change complexions at a losing game;
If ever with airy horns I planted heads,
Or rumpled petticoats, or tumbled beds;
Or caused suspicion when no soul was rude,
Or discomposed the head-dress of a Prude;
Or ever to costive lap-dog gave disease,
Which not the tears of brightest eyes could ease:
Hear me, and touch Belinda with chagrin;
That single act gives half the world the spleen.
The Goddess, with a discontented air,
Seems to reject him, though she grants his prayer.
A wondrous Bag with both her hands she binds,
Like that where once Ulysses held the winds;
There she collects the force of female lungs,
Sighs, sobs, and passions, and the war of tongues.
A Vial next she fills with sainting fears,
Soft sorrows, melting griefs, and flowing tears.
The Gnome rejoicing bears her gifts away,
Spreads his black wings, and slowly mounts to day.
Sunk in Thalestris' arms the Nymph he found,
Her eyes dejected, and her hair unbound.
Full over their heads the swelling bag he rent,
And all the Furies issued at the vent.
Belinda burns with more than mortal ire,
And fierce Thalestris fans the rising fire.
O wretched maid! she spread her hands and cried,
(While Hampton's echoes, Wretched maid! replied)
Was it for this you took such constant care
The bodkin, comb, and essence to prepare?
For this your locks in paper durance bound,
For this with torturing irons writhed around?
For this with fillets strained your tender head,
And bravely bore the double loads of lead?
Gods! shall the ravisher display your hair,
While the Eops envy, and the Ladies stare!
Honor forbid! at whose unrivaled shrine,
Ease, pleasure, virtue, all our sex resign.
Methinks already I your tears survey,
Already hear the horrid things they say,
Already see you a degraded toast,
And all your honor in a whisper lost!
How shall I, then, your helpless fame defend?
'Twill, then, be infamy to seem your friend!
And shall this prize, the inestimable prize,
Exposed through crystal to the gazing eyes,
And, heightened by the diamond's circling rays,
On that rapacious hand for ever blaze!
Sooner shall grass in Hyde-park Circus grow,
And wits take lodgings in the sound of Bow;
Sooner let earth, air, sea, to Chaos fall,
Men, monkeys, lap-dogs, parrots, perish all!
She said! then raging to Sir Plume repairs,
And bids her beau demand the precious hairs:
Sir Plume (of amber snuff box justly vain,
And the nice conduct of a clouded cane)
With earnest eyes, and round unthinking face,
He first the snuff box opened, then the case,
And thus broke out -- "My Lord, why, what the "devil?
"Z -- ds! damn the Lock! before Gad, you must be "civil!
"Plague on it! it is past a jest -- nay, pr'ythee, pox,
"Give her the hair" -- he spoke, and rapp'd his box.
It grieves me much (replied the Peer again)
Who speaks so well should ever speak in vain.
But by this Lock, this sacred Lock I swear,
(Which never more shall join its parted hair;
Which never more its honors shall renew,
Clipped from the lovely head where late it grew)
That while my nostrils draw the vital air,
This hand, which won it, shall for ever wear.
He spoke, and speaking, in proud triumph spread
The long-contended honors of her head.
But Umbriel, hateful Gnome! forbears not so;
He breaks the Vial, whence the sorrows flow.
Then see! the Nymph in beauteous grief appears,
Her eyes half-languishing, half-drown'd in tears;
On her heaved bosom hung her drooping head,
Which, with a sigh, she raised; and thus she said:
For ever cursed be this detested day,
Which snatched my best, my favorite curl away!
Happy! ah ten times happy had I been,
If Hampton Court these eyes had never seen!
Yet am not I the first mistaken maid
By love of courts to numerous ills betrayed.
Oh had I rather unadmir'd remained
In some lone isle, or distant northern land;
Where the gilt chariot never marks the way,
Where none learn Ombre, none ever taste Bohea!
There kept my charms concealed from mortal eye,
Like roses, that in deserts bloom and die.
What moved my mind with youthful Lords to roam?
O had I stayed, and said my prayers at home!
'Twas this the morning Omens seemed to tell;
Thrice from my trembling hand the patch-box fell;
The tottering China shook without a wind;
Nay, Poll sat mute, and Shock was most unkind!
A Sylph, too, warned me of the threats of Fate,
In mystic visions, now believed too late!
See the poor remnants of these slighted hairs!
My hands shall rend what even thy rapine spares:
These in two sable ringlets taught to break,
Once gave new beauties to the snowy neck;
The sister-lock now fits uncouth, alone,
And in its fellow's fate foresees its own;
Uncurl'd it hangs, the fatal sheers demands,
And tempts, once more, thy sacrilegious hands.
Oh had thou, cruel! been content to seize
Hairs less in sight, or any hairs but these!
She said: the pitying audience melt in tears.
But Fate and Jove had stopped the Baron's ears.
In vain Thalestris with reproach assails!
For who can move when fair Belinda fails?
Not half so fixed the Trojan could remain,
While Anna begged, and Dido raged in vain.
Then grave Clarissa graceful waved her fan;
Silence ensued, and thus the Nymph began.
Say, why are Beauties praised and honored most,
The wise man's passion, and the vain man's toast?
Why decked with all that land and sea afford,
Why Angels called, and Angel-like adored;
Why round our coaches crowd the white-glov'd Beaux,
Why bows the side-box from its inmost rows?
How vain are all these glories, all our pains,
Unless good sense preserve what beauty gains:
That men may say, when we the front-box grace,
Behold the first in virtue, as in face!
Oh! if to dance all night, and dress all day,
Charmed the smallpox, or chased old age away;
Who would not scorn what housewife's cares produce,
Or who would learn one earthly thing of use?
To patch, nay ogle, might become a Saint;
Nor could it, sure, be such a sin to paint.
But since, alas! frail beauty must decay,
Curled or uncurl'd, since Locks will turn to gray;
Since painted, or not painted, all shall fade,
And she who scorns a man must die a maid;
What, then, remains, but well our power to use,
And keep good humor still, whatever we lose?
And trust me, Dear, good humor can prevail,
When airs, and flights, and screams, and scolding fail.
Beauties in vain their pretty eyes may roll;
Charms strike the sight, but merit wins the soul.
So spoke the Dame, but no applause ensued;
Belinda frowned; Thalestris called her Prude.
To arms, to arms! the fierce Virago cries,
And, swift as lightning, to the combat flies.
All side in parties, and begin the attack;
Fans clap, silks rustle, and tough whalebones crack;
Heroes and Heroines shouts confusedly rise,
And base and treble voices strike the skies.
No common weapon in their hands are found;
Like Gods they fight, nor dread a mortal wound.
So, when bold Homer makes the Gods engage,
And heavenly breasts with human passions rage;
Against Pallas, Mars; Latona, Hermes arms;
And all Olympus rings with loud alarms:
Jove's thunder roars, heaven trembles all around,
Blue Neptune storms, the bellowing deeps resound:
Earth shakes her nodding towers, the ground gives way,
And the pale ghosts start at the flash of day!
Triumphant Umbriel, on a sconce's height,
Clapped his glad wings, and sat to view the fight:
Propp'd on their bodkin spears, the sprites survey
The growing combat, or assist the fray.
While through the press enraged Thalestris flies,
And scatters death around from both her eyes,
A Beau and Witling perished in the throng,
One died in metaphor, and one in song.
"O cruel Nymph! a living death I bear,"
Cried Dapperwit, and sunk beside his chair.
A mournful glance Sir Fopling upwards cast,
"Those eyes are made so killing" -- was his last.
Thus on Maeander's flowery margin lies
The expiring Swan, and, as he sings, he dies.
When bold Sir Plume had drawn Clarissa down,
Chloe stepped in, and killed him with a frown;
She smiled to see the doughty hero slain,
But, at her smile, the Beau revived again.
Now Jove suspends his golden scales in air,
Weighs the men's wits against the Lady's hair;
The doubtful beam long nods from side to side;
At length the wits mount up, the hairs subside.
See fierce Belinda on the Baron flies,
With more than usual lightning in her eyes:
Nor feared the Chief the unequal fight to try,
Who sought no more than on his foe to die.
But this bold Lord, with manly strength endu'd,
She with one finger and a thumb subdued:
Just where the breath of life his nostrils drew,
A charge of Snuff the wily virgin threw;
The Gnomes direct, to every atom just,
The pungent grains of titillating dust.
Sudden, with starting tears each eye overflows,
And the high dome re-echoes to his nose.
Now meet thy fate, incensed Belinda cried,
And drew a deadly bodkin from her side.
(The same, his ancient personage to deck,
Her great-great-grandsire wore about his neck,
In three scal-rings; which, after melted down,
Formed a vast buckle for his widow's gown:
Her infant grandame's whistle next it grew;
The bells she gingled, and the whistle blew;
Then in a bodkin graced her mother's hairs,
Which long she wore, and now Belinda wears.)
Boast not my fall (he cried) insulting foe!
Thou by some other shall be laid as low.
Nor think, to die dejects my lofty mind:
All that I dread is leaving you behind!
Rather than so, ah let me still survive
And burn in Cupid's flames -- but burn alive.
Restore the Lock! she cries; and all around
Restore the Lock! the vaulted roofs rebound.
Not fierce Othello in so loud a strain
Roared for the handkerchief that caused his pain.
But see how often ambitious aims are crossed,
And chiefs contend till all the prize is lost!
The Lock, obtained with guilt, and kept with pain,
In every place is sought, but sought in vain:
With such a prize no mortal must be blessed;
So heaven decrees! with heaven who can contest?
Some thought it mounted to the Lunar sphere,
Since all things lost on earth are treasured there.
There hero's wits are kept in ponderous vases,
And Beaux in snuff-boxes and tweezer-cases.
There broken vows, and deathbed alms are found,
And lovers hearts with ends of ribband bound,
The courtier's promises, and sick man's prayers,
The smiles of harlots, and the tears of heirs,
Cages for knats, and chains to yoke a flea,
Dried butterflies, and tomes of casuistry.
But trust the Muse -- she saw it upward rise,
Though marked by none but quick, poetic eyes:
(So Rome's great founder to the heavens withdrew,
To Proculus alone confessed in view)
A sudden Star, it shot through liquid air,
And drew behind a radiant tail of hair.
Not Berenice's Locks first rose so bright,
The heavens bespangling with disheveled light.
The Sylphs behold it kindling as it flies,
And, pleased, pursue its progress through the skies.
This the Beau-monde shall from the Mall survey,
And hail with music its propitious ray.
This the blessed Lover shall for Venus take,
And send up vows from Rosamonda's lake.
This Partridge soon shall view in cloudless skies,
When next he looks through Galilaeo's eyes;
And hence the egregious wizard shall foredoom
The fate of Louis and the fall of Rome.
Then cease, bright Nymph! to mourn thy ravished hair,
Which adds new glory to the shining sphere!
Not all the tresses that fair head can boast,
Shall draw such envy as the Lock you lost.
For, after all the murders of your eye,
When, after millions slain, yourself shall die;
When those fair suns shall set, as set they must,
And all those tresses shall be laid in dust,
This Lock, the Muse shall consecrate to fame,
And 'midst the stars inscribe Belinda's name.
THE HERMIT.
This poem is held in just esteem, the versification being chaste, and
tolerably harmonious, and the story told with perspicuity and conciseness. It
seems to have cost great labor, both to Mr. Pope, and Parnell himself, to
bring it to this perfection. It may not be amiss to observe, that the fable is
taken from one of Dr. Henry Moore's Dialogues.

FAR in a wild, unknown to public view,
From youth to age a reverend Hermit grew;
The moss his bed, the cave his humble cell,
His food the fruits, his drink the crystal well:
Remote from man, with God he passed the days,
Prayer all his business, all his pleasure, praise.
A life so sacred, such serene repose,
Seemed heaven itself, till one suggestion rose;
That vice should triumph, virtue vice obey;
This sprung some doubt of providence's sway:
His hopes no more a certain prospect boast,
And all the tenor of his soul is lost:
So when a smooth expanse receives, impressed,
Calm nature's image on its watery breast,
Down bend the banks, the trees depending grow,
And skies beneath with answ'ring colors glow:
But if a stone the gentle sea divide,
Swift ruffling circles curl on every side,
And glimmering fragments of a broken sun,
Banks, seas, and skies, in thick disorder run.
To clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,
To find if books, or swains, report it right;
(For yet by swains alone the world he knew,
Whose feet came wandering over the nightly dew)
He quits his cell; the Pilgrim-staff he bore,
And fixed the Scallop in his hat before;
Then with the sun a rising journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each event.
The morn was wasted in the pathless grass,
And long and lonesome was the wild to pass;
But when the southern sun had warmed the day,
A youth came posting over a crossing way;
His raiment decent, his complexion fair,
And soft in graceful ringlets waved his hair.
Then, near approaching, Father, hail! he cried,
And hail, my Son, the reverend fire replied;
Words followed words, from question answer flowed,
And talk of various kind deceived the road;
'Till each with other pleased, and loath to part,
While in their rage they differ, join in heart:
Thus stands an aged elm in ivy bound;
Thus youthful ivy clasps an elm around.
Now sunk the sun; the closing hour of day
Came onward, mantled over with sober gray;
Nature in silence bid the world repose;
When, near the road, a stately palace rose:
There, by the moon, through ranks of trees they pass,
Whose verdure crowned their sloping sides of grass.
It chanced the noble master of the dome,
Still made his house the wandering stranger's home:
Yet still the kindness, from a thirst of praise,
Proved the vain flourish of expensive ease.
The pair arrive: the livery'd servants wait;
Their lord receives them at the pompous gate,
The table groans with costly piles of food,
And all is more than hospitably good.
Then led to rest, the day's long toil they drown,
Deep sunk in sleep, and silk, and heaps of down.
At length it is morn, and, at the dawn of day,
Along the wide canals the Zephyrs play;
Fresh over the gay parterre the breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring wood to banish sleep.
Up rise the guests, obedient to the call:
An early banquet decked the splendid hall;
Rich, luscious wine a golden goblet graced,
Which the kind master forced the guests to taste.
Then, pleased and thankful, from the porch they go;
And, but the landlord, none had cause of woe;
His cup was vanished; for, in secret guise,
The younger guest purloin'd the glittering prize.
As one who spies a serpent in his way,
Glist'ning and basking in the summer ray,
Disordered stops to shun the danger near,
Then walks with faintness on, and looks with fear:
So seemed the sire, when, far upon the road,
The shining spoil his wily partner showed.
He stopped with silence; walked with trembling heart,
And much he wished, but durst not ask to part:
Murmuring he lifts his eyes, and thinks it hard,
That generous actions meet a base reward.
While thus they pass, the sun his glory shrouds,
The changing skies hang out their sable clouds;
A sound in air presaged approaching rain,
And beasts to covert scud across the plain.
Warned by the signs the wandering pair retreat,
To seek for shelter at a neighboring seat.
'Twas built with turrets, on a rising ground,
And strong, and large, and unimprov'd around;
Its owner's temper timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a desert there.
As near the miser's heavy doors they drew,
Fierce rising gusts with sudden fury blew;
The nimble lightning, mixed with showers, began,
And over their heads loud rolling thunder ran.
Here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
Driven by the wind, and battered by the rain.
At length some pity warmed the master's breast,
('It Was then his threshold first received a guest)
Slow, creaking, turns the door, with jealous care,
And half he welcomes in the shivering pair;
One frugal faggot lights the naked walls,
And nature's fervor through their limbs recalls:
Bread of the coarsest sort, with eager wine,
(Each hardly granted) served them both to dine;
And, when the tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready warning bid them part in peace.
With still remark the pond'ring Hermit viewed,
In one so rich, a life so poor and rude;
And why should such, within himself he cried,
Lock the lost wealth a thousand want beside?
But what new marks of wonder soon took place
In every settling feature of his face;
When from his vest the young companion bore
That cup, the generous landlord owned before,
And paid, profusely, with the precious bowl,
The stinted kindness of his churlish soul.
But now the clouds in airy tumult fly,
The sun emerging opes an azure sky;
A fresher green the smelling leaves display,
And, glittering as they tremble, cheer the day:
The weather courts them from the poor retreat,
And the glad master bolts the wary gate.
While hence they walk, the pilgrim's bosom wrought
With all the travail of uncertain thought;
His partner's acts without their cause appear;
'Twas there a vice, and seemed a madness here:
Detesting that, and pitying this, he goes,
Lost and confounded with the various shows.
Now night's dim shades again involve the sky,
Again the wand'rers want a place to lie,
Again they search, and find a lodging nigh.
The soil improved around, the mansion neat,
And neither poorly low, nor idly great:
It seemed to speak its master's turn of mind,
Content, and, not for praise, but virtue, kind.
Hither the walkers turn, with weary feet,
Then bless the mansion, and the master greet:
Their greeting fair, bestowed with modest guise,
The courteous master hears, and thus replies:
Without a vain, without a grudging heart,
To him who gives us all, I yield a part;
From him you come, for him accept it here,
A frank and sober, more than costly cheer.
He spoke, and bid the welcome table spread,
Then talked of virtue till the time of bed,
When the grave household round his hall repair,
Warned by a bell, and close the hours with prayer.
At length the world, renewed by calm repose,
Was strong for toil, the dappled morn arose;
Before the pilgrims part, the younger crept
Near the closed cradle, where an infant slept,
And writhed his neck; the landlord's little pride,
O strange return! grew black, and gasp'd, and died.
Horror of horrors! what! his only son!
How looked our hermit when the fact was done;
Not hell, though hell's black jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue fire, could more assault his heart.
Confused, and struck with silence at the deed,
He flies, but, trembling, fails to fly with speed.
His steps the youth pursues: the country lay
Perplexed with roads, a servant showed the way;
A river crossed the path; the passage over
Was nice to find; the servant rode before;
Long arms of oaks an open bridge supplied,
And deep the waves beneath the bending glide.
The youth, who seemed to watch a time to sin,
Approached the careless guide, and thrust him in;
Plunging, he falls, and, rising, lifts his head,
Then, flashing, turns, and sinks among the dead.
Wild, sparkling rage, inflames the father's eyes,
He bursts the bands of fear, and madly cries,
Detested wretch -- But scarce his speech began,
When the strange partner seemed no longer man:
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet;
His robe turned white, and flowed upon his feet;
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair;
Celestial odours breathe through purpled air;
And wings, whose colors glittered on the day,
Wide at his back the gradual plumes display.
The form etherial bursts upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
Though loud, at first, the pilgrim's passion grew,
Sudden he gazed, and wist not what to do;
Surprise in secret chains his words suspends,
And in a calm his settling temper ends.
But silence here the beauteous angel broke,
(The voice of music ravished as he spoke.)
Thy prayer, thy praise, thy life, to vice unknown,
In sweet memorial rise before the throne:
These charms success in our bright region find,
And force an Angel down, to calm thy mind!
For this commissioned, I forsook the sky;
Nay, cease to kneel -- thy fellow servants I.
Then know the truth of government divine,
And let these scruples be no longer thine.
The maker justly claims that world he made;
In this the right of providence is laid;
Its sacred majesty through all depends
On using second means to work his ends:
It Is thus, withdrawn in state from human eye,
The Power exerts his Attributes on high,
Your actions uses, nor controuls your will,
And bids the doubting sons of men be still.
What strange events can strike with more surprise,
Than those which lately struck thy wondering eyes?
Yet, taught by these, confess the Almighty just,
And, where you cannot unriddle, learn to trust!
The great, vain man, who fared on costly food,
Whose life was too luxurious to be good;
Who made his ivory stands with goblets shine,
And forced his guests to morning draughts of wine,
Has, with the cup, the graceless custom lost;
And still he welcomes, but with less of cost.
The mean, suspicious wretch, whose bolted door
Never moved in duty to the wandering poor;
With him I left the cup, to teach his mind,
That heaven can bless, if mortals will be kind.
Conscious of wanting worth, he views the bowl,
And feels compassion touch his grateful soul.
Thus artists melt the sullen oar of lead,
With heaping coals of fire upon its head;
In the kind warmth the metal learns to glow,
And, loose from dross, the silver runs below.
Long had our pious friend in virtue trod,
But now the child half-wean'd his heart from God;
(Child of his age) for him he lived in pain,
And measured back his steps to earth again.
To what excesses had his dotage run?
But God, to save the father, took the son.
To all but thee, in fits he seemed to go,
(And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow)
The poor fond parent, humbled in the dust,
Now owns, in tears, the punishment was just.
But now had all his fortune felt a wreck,
Had that false servant sped in safety back?
This night his treasured heaps he meant to steal;
And what a fund of charity would fail!
Thus heaven instructs thy mind: this trial over,
Depart in peace, resign, and sin no more.
On sounding pinions here the youth withdrew,
The sage stood wondering as the seraph flew.
Thus looked Elisha, when, to mount on high,
His master took the chariot of the sky;
The fiery pomp ascending, left the view;
The prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The bending hermit here a prayer begun,
"Lord! as in Heaven, on earth thy will be done."
Then, gladly turning, sought his ancient place,
And passed a life of piety and peace.
IL PENSEROSO.
I have heard a very judicious critic say, that he had an higher idea of
Milton's style in poetry, from the two following poems, than from his Paradise
Lost. It is certain the imagination shown in them is correct and strong. The
introduction to both in irregular measure is borrowed from the Italians, and
hurts an English ear.

HENCE vain deluding joys,
The brood of folly without father bred,
How little you bested,
Or fill the fixed mind with all your toys?
Dwell in some idle brain,
And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess,
As thick and numberless
As the gay motes that people the sunbeams,
Or likest hovering dreams,
The fickle pensioners of Morpheus train.
But hail thou Goddess, sage and holy,
Hail divinest Melancholy,
Whose saintly visage is too bright
To hit the sense of human sight,
And, therefore, to our weaker view,
O'er-laid with black, staid wisdom's hue;
Black, but such as in esteem
Prince Memnon's sister might beseem,
Or that starred Ethiop queen that strove
To set her beauties praise above
The Sea-Nymphs, and their powers offended:
Yet thou art higher far descended,
Thee bright-hair'd Vesta long of yore
To solitary Saturn bore;
His daughter she (in Saturn's reign,
Such mixture was not held a stain)
Often, in glimmering bowers and glades
He met her, and in secret shades
Of woody Ida's inmost grove,
While yet there was no fear of Jove.
Come pensive Nun, devout and pure,
Sober, steadfast, and demure,
All in a robe of darkest grain,
Flowing with majestic train,
And sable stole of Cyprus lawn,
Over thy decent shoulders drawn.
Come, but keep thy wanted state,
With even step and musing gait,
And looks commercing with the skies,
Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes:
There held in holy passion still,
Forget thyself to marble, till
With a sad leaden downward cast
Thou fix them on the earth as fast:
And join with thee calm Peace, and Quiet,
Spare Fast, that often with Gods does diet,
And hears the Muses in a ring,
Ay round about Jove's altar sing:
And add to these retired Leisure,
That in trim gardens takes his pleasure;
But first, and chiefest, with thee bring,
Him that yon soars on golden wing,
Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne,
The cherab Contemplation;
And the mute silence hist along,
'Less Philomel will deign a song,
In her sweetest, saddest plight,
Smoothing the rugged brow of night,
While Cynthia checks her dragon yoke
Gently over the accustomed oak;
Sweet bird, that shunn'st the noise of folly,
Most musical, most melancholy!
Thee, chauntress, often, the woods among,
I woo, to hear thy even-song;
And, missing thee, I walk unseen
On the dry smooth-shaven green,
To behold the wandering moon,
Riding near her highest noon,
Like one that had been led astray
Through the Heaven's wide pathless way,
And often, as if her head she bowed,
Stooping through a fleecy cloud.
Often, on a plat of rising ground,
I hear the far-off Curfew sound,
Over some wide-water'd shore,
Swinging slow with sullen roar;
Or, if the air will not permit,
Some still removed place will fit,
Where glowing embers through the room
Teach light to counterfeit a gloom,
Far from all resort of mirth,
Save the cricket on the hearth,
Or the bellman's drowsy charm,
To bless the doors from nightly harm:
Or let my lamp, at midnight hour,
Be seen in some high lonely tower,
Where I may often out-watch the Bear,
With thrice great Hermes, or unsphere
The spirit of Plato, to unfold
What worlds, or what vast regions, hold
The immortal mind, that has forsook
Her mansion in this fleshly nook:
And of those demons that are found
In fire, air, flood, or underground,
Whose power has a true consent
With planet, or with element.
Sometime let gorgeous tragedy,
In sceptered pall, come sweeping by,
Presenting Thebes, or Pelops line,
Or the Tale of Troy divine,
Or what (though rare) of later age
Ennobled has thy buskined stage.
But, O sad Virgin, that thy power
Might raise Musaeus from his bower,
Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing
Such notes, as, warbled to the string,
Drew iron tears down Pluto's cheek,
And made Hell grant what love did seek.
Or call up him that left half told
The story of Cambuscan bold,
Of Camball, and of Algarsife,
And who had Canace to wife,
That owned the virtuous ring and glass,
And of the wondrous horse of brass,
On which the Tartar king did ride;
And if ought else great bards beside
In sage and solemn tunes have sung,
Of tourneys and of trophies hung,
Of forests, and enchantments drear,
Where more is meant than meets the ear,
Thus, night, often see me in thy pale career,
Till civil-suited morn appear,
Not trickt and frounct as she was wont
With the Attic boy to hunt,
But, kercheft in a comely cloud,
While rocking winds are piping loud,
Or, ushered with a shower still,
When the gust has blown its fill,
Ending on the rustling leaves,
With minute drops from off the eaves.
And, when the sun begins to fling
His flaring beams, me, Goddess, bring
To arched walks of twilight groves,
And shadows brown, that Sylvan loves,
Of pine, or monumental oak,
Where the rude ax, with heaved stroke,
Was never heard the nymphs to daunt,
Or fright them from their hallowed haunt.
There, in close covert, by some brook,
Where no profaner eye may look,
Hide me from day's garish eye,
While the be, with honey'd thigh,
That at her flowery work does sing,
And the waters murmuring,
With such consort as they keep,
Entice the dewy feathered sleep;
And let some strange mysterious dream
Wave at his wings, in aerie stream
Of lively portraiture displayed,
Softly on my eyelids laid:
And, as I wake, sweet music breathe
Above, about, or underneath,
Sent by some Spirit to mortals good,
Or the unseen Genius of the wood.
But let my due feet never fail
To walk the studious cloisters pale,
And love the high embowed roof,
With antic pillars massy proof,
And storied windows richly dight,
Casting a dim religious light.
There let the pealing organ blow,
To the full voic'd quire below,
In service high, and anthems clear,
As may, with sweetness, through mine ear,
Dissolve me into ecstasies,
And bring all Heaven before mine eyes.
And may, at last, my weary age
Find out the peaceful hermitage,
The hairy grown and mossy cell,
Where I may sit, and rightly spell
Of every star that Heaven does show,
And every herb that sips the dew;
Till old experience do attain
To something like prophetic strain.
These pleasures, Melancholy give,
And I with thee will choose to live.
L'ALLEGRO.
HENCE, loathed Melancholy,
Of Cerberus and blackest Midnight born,
In Stygian cave forlorn,
Amongst horrid shapes, and shrieks, and sights unholy,
Find out some uncouth cell,
Where brooding darkness spreads his jealous wings,
And the night raven sings;
There, under ebon shades, and low-brow'd rocks,
As ragged as thy locks,
In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell.
But come, thou goddess fair and free,
In Heaven yclep'd Euphrosine,
And, by men, heart-easing Mirth,
Whom lovely Venus, at a birth,
With two sister graces more,
To ivy-crowned Bacchus bore;
Or whether (as some sages sing)
The frolic wind that breathes the spring,
Zephyr with Aurora playing,
As he met her once a maying;
There, on beds of violets blue,
And fresh blown roses washed in dew,
Filled her with thee, a daughter fair,
So buxom, blithe, and debonair.
Haste thee, nymph, and bring with thee
Jest, and youthful Jollity,
Quips, and Cranks, and wanton Wiles,
Nods, and Becks, and wreathed Smiles,
Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
And love to live in dimple sleek;
Sport, that wrinkled Care derides,
And Laughter, holding both his sides.
Come, and trip it as you go,
On the light fantastic toe;
And, in thy right hand, lead with thee
The mountain nymph, sweet Liberty;
And, if I give thee honor due,
Mirth, admit me of thy crew,
To live with her, and live with thee,
In unreproved pleasures free;
To hear the lark begin his flight,
And, singing, startle the dull night
From his watch-tow'r in the skies,
Till the dappled dawn does rise;
Then to come, in spite of sorrow,
And, at my window, bid good morrow,
Through the sweet-briar, or the vine,
Or the twisted eglantine:
While the cock, with lively din,
Scatters the rear of darkness thin,
And to the stack, or barn-door,
Stoutly struts his dames before:
Often listening how the hounds and horn
Chearly rouse the slumbering morn,
From the side of some hoar hill,
Through the high wood echoing shrill:
Some time walking, not unseen,
By hedge row elms, on hillocks green,
Right against the eastern gate,
Where the great sun begins his state,
Robbed in flames and amber light,
The clouds in thousand liveries dight,
While the plowman, near at hand,
Whistles over the furrowed land,
And the milk-maid sings blithe,
And the mower whets his scythe,
And every shepherd tells his tale
Under the hawthorn in the dale.
Strait mine eye has caught new pleasures
Whilst the landscape round it measures,
Russet lawns, and fallows gray,
Where the nibbling flocks do stray.
Mountains, on whose barren breast
The laboring clouds do often rest;
Meadows, trim with daisies pied,
Shallow brooks, and rivers wide.
Towers and battlements it sees
Bosomed high in tufted trees,
Where, perhaps, some beauty lies,
The Cynosure of neighboring eyes.
Hard by a cottage chimney smokes,
From betwixt two aged oaks,
Where Corydon and Thyrsis, met,
Are at their savory dinner set,
Of herbs, and other country messes,
Which the neat handed Phillis dresses;
And then, in haste, her bower she leaves,
With Thestylis to bind the sheaves;
Or, if the earlier season lead,
To the tanned haycock in the mead.
Sometimes, with secure delight,
The upland hamlets will invite,
When the merry bells ring round,
And the jocund rebecs sound
To many a youth, and many a maid,
Dancing in the checkered shade;
And young and old come forth to play
On a sunshine holy day,
Till the live-long daylight fail;
Then to the spicy nut-brown ale,
With stories told of many a feat,
How fairy Mab the junkets eat,
She was pincht and pulled, she said,
And he by fryar's lanthorn led;
Tells how the drudging goblin swet
To earn his cream-bowl duly set,
When in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
His shadowy flale had thrash'd the corn
That ten day-lab'rers could not end;
Then lies him down the lubbard fiend,
And stretched out all the chimney's length,
Basks at the fire his hairy strength,
And, crop-full, out of doors he flings,
Ere the first cock his matin lings.
Thus done the tales, to bed they creep,
By whispering winds soon lulled asleep.
Towered cities please us then,
And the busy hum of men,
Where throngs of knights and barons bold,
In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold,
With store of ladies, whose bright eyes,
Rain influence, and judge the prize
Of wit, or arms, while both contend
To win her grace, whom all commend.
There let Hymen often appear
In saffron robe, with taper clear,
And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
With mask, and antique pageantry,
Such fights as youthful poets dream
On summer eves, by haunted stream.
Then to the well-trod stage anon,
If Johnson's learned sock be on,
Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy's child,
Warble his native wood-notes wild.
And ever, against eating cares,
Lap me in soft Lydian airs,
Married to immortal verse,
Such as the meeting soul may pierce,
In notes with many a winding bout
Of linked sweetness, long drawn out,
With wanton heed, and giddy cunning,
The melting voice through mazes running,
Untwisting all the chains that tie
The hidden soul of harmony;
That Orpheus self may heave his head
From golden slumber on a bed
Of heapt Elysian flower, and hear
Such strains as would have won the ear
Of Pluto, to have quite set free
His half regained Eurydice.
These delights if thou can give,
Mirth, with thee I mean to live.
AN ELEGY, Written in a Country Church Yard.
This is a very fine poem, but overloaded with epithet. The heroic measure with
alternate rhyme is very properly adapted to the solemnity of the subject, as it
is the slowest movement that our language admits of. The latter part of the
poem is pathetic and interesting.

THE Curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly over the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
And drousy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that, from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
The moping owl does to the Moon complain
Of such, as, wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient, solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-trees shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow, twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care:
Nor children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their surrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await, alike the inevitable hour:
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
If Memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where, through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault,
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can Honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flattery soothe the dull cold ear of death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire:
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of Time, did never unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem, of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that, with dauntless breast,
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest;
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their lot forbad: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind;
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
With incense, kindled at the muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool, sequestered vale of life,
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhimes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to dye.
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing, lingering, look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires:
Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who, mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If, chance, by lonely Contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
"Often have we seen him, at the peep of dawn,
Brushing, with hasty steps, the dews away,
To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
There, at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
That wriths its old fantastic roots so high,
His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
Hard by yon wood, now smiling, as in scorn,
Mutt'ring his wayward fancies, he would rove;
Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
One morn I missed him on the 'custom'd hill,
Along the heath, and near his favorite tree:
Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he.
The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
Slow through the churchyard path we saw him borne.
Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay,
Engraved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn."
THE EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown;
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to misery all he had, a tear;
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
(...) LONDON. In Imitation of the Third Satire of JUVENAL.
This poem of Mr. Johnson's is the best imitation of the original that has
appeared in our language, being possessed of all the force and satirical
resentment of Juvenal. Imitation gives us a much truer idea of the ancients
than even translation could do.

THOUGH grief and fondness in my breast rebel,
When injured Thales bids the town farewell,
Yet still my calmer thoughts his choice commend,
I praise the hermit, but regret the friend;
Who now resolves, from vice and London far,
To breathe in distant fields a purer air,
And, fixed on Cambria's solitary shore,
Give to St. David one true Briton more.
For who would leave, unbrib'd, Hibernia's land,
Or change the rocks of Scotland for the Strand?
There none are swept by sudden fate away,
But all, whom hunger spares, with age decay:
Here malice, rapine, accident, conspire;
And now a rabble rages, now a fire:
Their ambush here relentless ruffians lay,
And here the fell attorney prowls for prey:
Here falling houses thunder on your head,
And here a female atheist talks you dead.
While Thales waits the wherry that contains
Of dissipated wealth the small remains,
On Thames's bank in silent thought we stood,
Where Greenwich smiles upon the silver flood.
Struck with the seat that gave Eliza birth,
We kneel, and kiss the consecrated earth;
In pleasing dreams the blissful age renew,
And call Britannia's glories back to view;
Behold her cross triumphant on the main,
The guard of commerce and the dread of Spain.
Ere masquerades debauched, excise oppressed,
Or English honor grew a standing jest.
A transient calm the happy scenes bestow,
And, for a moment, lull the sense of woe.
At length awaking with contemptuous frown,
Indignant Thales eyes the neighboring town.
Since worth, he cries, in these degenerate days,
Wants even the cheap reward of empty praise;
In those cursed walls, devote to vice and gain,
Since unrewarded science toils in vain;
Since hope but sooths to double my distress,
And every moment leaves my little less;
While yet my steady steps no staff sustains,
And life still vigorous revels in my veins;
Grant me, kind heaven, to find some happier place,
Where honesty and sense are no disgrace;
Some pleasing bank, where verdant osiers play,
Some peaceful vale, with nature's painting gay;
Where once the harrass'd Briton found repose,
And safe, in poverty, defied his foes:
Some secret cell, ye powers indulgent, give:
Let -- live here; for -- has learned to live.
Here let those reign, whom pensions can incite
To vote a patriot black, a courtier white;
Explain their country's dear-bought rights away,
And plead for pirates in the face of day;
With slavish tenets taint our poinson'd youth,
And lend a lie the confidence of truth.
Let such raise palaces, and manors buy,
Collect a tax, or farm a lottery,
With warbling eunuchs fill a licensed stage,
And lull to servitude a thoughtless age.
Heroes proceed! what bounds your pride shall hold?
What check restrain your thirst of power and gold?
Behold rebellious virtue quite overthrown,
Behold our fame, our wealth, our lives your own.
To such, a groaning nation's spoils are given,
When public crimes inflame the wrath of heaven:
But what, my friend, what hope remains for me,
Who start at theft, and blush at perjury?
Who scarce forbear, though Britain's court he sing,
To pluck a titled poet's borrowed wing;
A statesman's logic unconvinc'd can hear,
And dare to slumber over the Gazetteer;
Despise a fool in half his pension dressed,
And strive in vain to laugh at H -- y's jest.
Others with softer smiles, and subtler art,
Can sap the principles, or taint the heart;
With more address a lover's note convey,
Or bribe a virgin's innocence away.
Well may they rise, while I, whose rustic tongue
Never knew to puzzle right, or varnish wrong,
Spurned as a beggar, dreaded as a spy,
Live unregarded, unlamented die.
For what but social guilt the friend endears?
Who shares Orgilio's crimes, his fortune shares:
But thou, should tempting villainy present,
All Marlb'rough hoarded, or all Villiers spent,
Turn from the glittering bribe thy scornful eye,
Nor sell for gold, what gold could never buy,
The peaceful slumber, self-approving day,
Unsullied fame, and conscience ever gay.
The cheated nation's happy favorites see;
Mark whom the great caress, who frown on me.
London! the needy villain's general home,
The common sewer of Paris and of Rome,
With eager thirst, by folly or by fate,
Sucks in the dregs of each corrupted state;
Forgive my transports on a theme like this;
I cannot bear a French metropolis.
Illustrious Edward! from the realms of day
The land of heroes and of saints survey;
Nor hope the British lineaments to trace,
The rustic grandeur, or the surly grace,
But, lost in thoughtless ease, and empty show,
Behold the warrior dwindled to a beau;
Sense, freedom, piety, refined away,
Of France the mimic, and of Spain the prey.
All that at home no more can beg or steal,
Or like a gibbet better than a wheel;
Hissed from the stage, or hooted from the court,
Their air, their dress, their politics import;
Obsequious, artful, voluble, and gay,
On Britain's fond credulity they prey.
No gainful trade their industry can 'scape,
They sing, they dance, clean shoes, or cure a clap;
All sciences a fasting Monsieur knows,
And bid him go to hell, to hell he goes.
Ah! what avails it, that, from slavery far,
I drew the breath of life in English air;
Was early taught a Briton's right to prize,
And lisp the tales of Henry's victories;
If the gulled conqueror receives the chain,
And flattery subdues when arms are vain?
Studious to please, and ready to submit,
The supple Gaul was born a parasite:
Still to his interest true, wherever he goes,
Wit, bravery, worth, his lavish tongue bestows;
In every face a thousand graces shine,
From every tongue flows harmony divine.
These arts in vain our rugged natives try,
Strain out with fault'ring dissidence a lie,
And gain a kick for awkward flattery.
Besides, with justice this discerning age
Admires their wondrous talents for the stage:
Well may they venture on the mimic's art,
Who play from morn to night a borrowed part;
Practiced their master's notions to embrace,
Repeat his maxims, and reflect his face;
With every wild absurdity comply,
And view each object with another's eye;
To shake with laughter ere the jest they hear,
To pour, at will, the counterfeited tear,
And, as their patron hints the cold or heat,
To shake in Dog Days, in December sweat.
How, when competitors like these contend,
Can surly virtue hope to fix a friend?
Slaves, that with serious impudence beguile,
And lie without a blush, without a smile;
Exalt each trifle, every vice adore,
Your taste in snuff, your judgment in a whore;
Can Balbo's eloquence applaud, and swear
He gropes his breeches with a monarch's air.
For arts like these preferred, admired, caressed,
They first invade your table, then your breast;
Explore your secrets with insidious art,
Watch the weak hour, and ransack all the heart;
Then soon your ill-plac'd confidence repay,
Commence your lords, and govern or betray.
By numbers, here, from shame or censure free,
All crimes are safe, but hated poverty.
This, only this, the rigid law pursues;
This, only this, provokes the snarling muse.
The sober trader, at a tattered cloak,
Wakes from his dream, and labors for a joke;
With brisker air the silken courtiers gaze,
And turn the varied taunt a thousand ways.
Of all the griefs that harrass the distressed,
Sure the most bitter is a scornful jest;
Fate never wounds more deep the generous heart,
Than when a blockhead's insult points the dart.
Has Heaven reserved, in pity to the poor,
No pathless waste or undiscovered shore?
No secret island in the boundless main?
No peaceful desert yet unclaim'd by Spain?
Quick let us rise, the happy seats explore,
And bear oppression's insolence no more.
This mournful truth is every where confessed,
SLOW RISES WORTH, BY POVERTY DEPRESSED:
But here more slow, where all are slaves to gold,
Where looks are merchandise, and smiles are sold;
Where, won by bribes, by flatteries implored,
The groom retails the favors of his lord.
But hark, the affrighted crowd's tumultuous cries
Roll through the streets and thunder to the skies;
Raised from some pleasing dream of wealth and power,
Some pompous palace or some blissful bower,
Aghast you start, and scarce with aching sight
Sustain the approaching fire's tremendous light;
Swift from pursuing honors take your way,
And leave your little All to flames a prey;
Then through the world a wretched vagrant roam;
For where can starving merit find a home?
In vain your mournful narrative disclose,
While all neglect, and most insult your woes.
Should Heaven's just bolts Orgilio's wealth confound,
And spread his flaming palace on the ground,
Swift over the land the dismal rumor flies,
And public mournings pacify the skies;
The laureate tribe in servile verse relate,
How virtue wars with persecuting fate;
With well-feign'd gratitude the pension'd band
Refund the plunder of the beggared land.
See! while he builds, the gaudy vassals come,
And crowd with sudden wealth the rising dome;
The price of boroughs and of souls restore;
And raise his treasures higher than before.
Now blessed with all the baubles of the great,
The polished marble, and the shining plate,
Orgilio sees the golden pile aspire,
And hopes from angry Heaven another fire.
Could thou resign the park and play, content,
For the fair banks of Severn or of Trent;
There might thou find some elegant retreat,
Some hireling senator's deserted seat!
And stretch thy prospects over the smiling land,
For less than rent the dungeons of the Strand;
There prune thy walks, support thy drooping flowers,
Direct thy rivulets, and twine thy bowers;
And, while thy beds a cheap repast afford,
Despise the dainties of a venal lord.
There every bush with nature's music rings,
There every breeze bears health upon its wings;
On all thy hours security shall smile,
And bless thy evening walk and morning toil.
Prepare for death if here at night you roam,
And sign your will before you sup from home.
Some fiery fop, with new commission vain,
Who sleeps on brambles till he kills his man;
Some frolic drunkard, reeling from a feast,
Provokes a broil, and stabs you for a jest.
Yet even these heroes, mischievously gay,
Lords of the street, and terrors of the way;
Flushed as they are with folly, youth and wine,
Their prudent insults to the poor confine;
Afar they mark the flambeau's bright approach,
And shun the shining train, and golden coach.
In vain these dangers past, your doors you close,
And hope the balmy blessings of repose:
Cruel with guilt, and daring with despair,
The midnight murderer bursts the faithless bar;
Invades the sacred hour of silent rest,
And plants, unseen, a dagger in your breast.
Scarce can our fields, such crowds at Tyburn die,
With hemp the gallows and the fleet supply.
Propose your schemes, ye senatorian band,
Whose ways and means support the sinking land;
Lest ropes be wanting in the tempting spring,
To rig another convoy for the k -- g.
A single jail, in Alfred's golden reign,
Could half the nation's criminals contain;
Fair justice, then, without constraint adored,
Held high the steady scale, but deep'd the sword;
No spies were paid, no special juries known;
Blessed age! but ah! how different from our own!
Much could I add, but see the boat at hand,
The tide, retiring, calls me from the land:
Farewell! -- When youth, and health, and fortune spent,
Thou fly'st for refuge to the Wilds of Kent;
And tired, like me, with follies and with crimes,
In angry numbers warn'st succeeding times;
Then shall thy friend; nor thou refuse his aid,
Still foe to vice, forsake his Cambrian shade;
In virtue's cause once more exert his rage,
Thy satire point, and animate thy page.
THE SCHOOL-MISTRESS. In Imitation of SPENCER.
This poem is one of those happinesses in which a poet excels himself, as there
is nothing in all Shenstone which any way approaches it in merit; and, though I
dislike the imitations of our old English poets in general, yet, on this minute
subject, the antiquity of the style produces a very ludicrous solemnity.

AH me! full sorely is my heart forlorn,
To think how modest worth neglected lies;
While partial Fame does with her blasts adorn
Such deeds alone as pride and pomp disguise;
Deeds of ill sort, and mischievous emprize:
Lend me thy clarion, goddess! let me try
To sound the praise of merit, ere it dies!
Such as I often have chanced to espy,
Lost in the dreary shades of dull obscurity.
In every village marked with little spire,
Embower'd in trees, and hardly known to fame,
There dwells, in lowly shed, and mean attire,
A matron old, whom we school-mistress name;
Who boasts unruly brats with birch to tame;
They grieven sore, in piteous durance pent,
Awed by the power of this relentless dame;
And oft-times on vagaries idly bent,
For unkempt hair, or task unconn'd, are sorely shent.
And all in sight does rise a birchen tree,
Which Learning near her little dome did stowe;
Whilom a twig of small regard to see,
Though now so wide its waving branches flow;
And work the simple vassals mickle woe;
For not a wind might curl the leaves that blew,
But their limbs shudder'd, and their pulse beat low;
And, as they looked, they found their horror grew,
And shaped it into rods, and tingled at the view.
So have I seen (who has not, may conceive)
A lifeless phantom near a garden placed;
So does it wanton birds of peace bereave,
Of sport, of song, of pleasure, of repast;
They start, they stare, they wheel, they look aghast;
Sad servitude! such comfortless annoy
May no bold Briton's riper age ever taste!
Ne superstition clog his dance of joy,
Ne vision empty, vain, his native bliss destroy.
Near to this dome is found a patch so green,
On which the tribe their gambols do display;
And at the door impris'ning board is seen,
Lest weakly wights of smaller size should stray;
Eager, perdie, to bask of sunny day!
The noises intermixed, which hence resound,
Do learning's little tenement betray:
Where sits the dame, disguised in look profound,
And eyes her fairy throng, and turns her wheel around.
Her cap, far whiter than the driven snow,
Emblem right meet of decency does yield:
Her apron died in grain, as blue, I trow,
As is the hare-bell that adorns the field:
And in her hand, for scepter, she does wield
Tway birchen sprays; with anxious fear entwined,
With dark distrust, and sad repentance filled;
And steadfast hate, and sharp affliction joined,
And fury uncontrolled, and chastisement unkind.
Few but have ken'd, in semblance meet portrayed,
The childish faces of old Eol's train;
Libs, Notus, Auster: these in frowns arrayed,
How then would fare or earth, or sky, or main,
Were the stern god to give his slaves the rein?
And were not she rebellious breasts to quell,
And were not she her statutes to maintain,
The cot no more, I ween, were deemed the cell,
Where comely peace of mind, and decent order dwell.
A russet stole was over her shoulders thrown;
A russet kirtle fenced the nipping air;
'Twas simple russet, but it was her own;
'Twas her own country bred the flock so fair;
'Twas her own labor did the fleece prepare;
And, sooth to say, her pupils, ranged around,
Through pious awe, did term it passing rare;
For they in gaping wonderment abound,
And think, no doubt, she been the greatest wight on ground.
Albeit ne flattery did corrupt her truth,
Ne pompous title did debauch her ear;
Goody, good-woman, gossip, n'aunt, forsooth,
Or dame, the sole additions she did hear;
Yet these she challenged, these she held right dear:
Ne would esteem him act as might behove,
Who should not honored eld with these revere:
For never title yet so mean could prove,
But there was eke a mind which did that title love.
One ancient hen she took delight to feed,
The plodding pattern of the busy dame;
Which, ever and anon, impelled by need,
Into her school, begirt with chickens, came;
Such favor did her past deportment claim;
And, if neglect had lavished on the ground
Fragment of bread, she would collect the same;
For well she knew, and quaintly could expound,
What sin it were to waste the smallest crumb she found.
Herbs too she knew, and well of each could speak
That in her garden sipp'd the silv'ry dew;
Where no vain flower disclosed a gaudy streak;
But herbs for use, and physic, not a few,
Of gray renown, within those borders grew:
The tufted basil, pun-provoking thyme,
Fresh baum, and mary-gold of cheerful hue;
The lowly gill, that never dares to climb;
And more I fain would sing, disdaining here to rhyme.
Yet euphrasy may not be left unsung,
That gives dim eyes to wander leagues around;
And pungent radish, biting infant's tongue;
And plantain ribb'd, that heals the reaper's wound;
And marj'ram sweet, in shepherd's posie found;
And lavender, whose spikes, of azure bloom,
Shall be, ere-while, in arid bundles bound,
To lurk amidst the labors of her loom,
And crown her kerchiefs clean, with mickle rare perfume.
And here trim rosmarine, that whilom crowned
The daintiest garden of the proudest peer;
Ere, driven from its envied site, it found
A sacred shelter for its branches here;
Where, edged with gold, its glittering skirts appear.
O wassel days! O customs meet and well!
Ere this was banished from its lofty spear:
Simplicity then sought this humble cell,
Nor ever would she more with Thane and lordling dwell.
Here often the dame, on sabbath's decent eve,
Hymned such psalms as Sternhold forth did mete;
If winter 'twere, she to her hearth did cleave;
But in her garden found a summer seat:
Sweet melody! to hear her then repeat
How Israel's sons, beneath a foreign king,
While taunting foe-men did a song entreat,
All, for the nonce, untuning every string,
Up hung their useless lyres -- small heart had they to sing.
For she was just, and friend to virtuous lore,
And passed much time in truly virtuous deed;
And, in those elfins' ears, would often deplore
The times, when truth by popish rage did bleed;
And tortious death was true devotion's meed;
And simple faith in iron chains did mourn,
That nould on wooden image place her creed;
And lawny saints in smould'ring flames did burn:
Ah! dearest Lord, forefend, thilk days should ever return.
In elbow chair, like that of Scottish stem
By the sharp tooth of cank'ring eld defaced,
In which, when he receives his diadem,
Our sovereign prince and liefest liege is placed,
The matron sat; and some with rank she graced,
(The source of children's and of courtier's pride!)
Redressed affronts, for vile affronts there passed;
And warned them not the fretful to deride,
But love each other dear, whatever them betide.
Right well she knew each temper to descry;
To thwart the proud, and the submiss to raise;
Some with vile copper prize exalt on high,
And some entice with pittance small of praise;
And other some with baleful sprig she 'frays:
Even absent, she the reins of power does hold,
While with quaint arts the giddy crowd she sways;
Forewarned, if little bird their pranks behold,
'Twill whisper in her ear, and all the scene unfold.
Lo now with state she utters the command!
Eftsoons the urchins to their tasks repair;
Their books, of stature small, they take in hand,
Which with pellucid horn secured are;
To save, from finger wet, the letters fair:
The work so gay, that on their back is seen,
St. George's high achievements does declare;
On which thilk wight that has y-gazing been,
Kens the forthcoming rod, unpleasing sight, I ween!
Ah luckless he, and born beneath the beam
Of evil star! it irks me whilst I write!
As erst the bard by Mulla's silver stream,
Often, as he told of deadly dolorous plight,
Sighed as he sung, and did in tears indite.
For, brandishing the rod, she does begin
To loose the brogues, the stripling's late delight!
And down they drop; appears his dainty skin,
Fair as the furry coat of whitest ermilin.
O ruthful scene! when, from a nook obscure,
His little sister does his peril see:
All playful as she sat, she grows demure;
She finds full soon her wonted spirits flee;
She meditates a prayer to set him free:
Nor gentle pardon could this dame deny,
(If gentle pardon could with dames agree)
To her sad grief that swells in either eye,
And wrings her so that all for pity she could die.
Nor longer can she now her shrieks command;
And hardly she forbears, through aweful fear,
To rushen forth, and, with presumptuous hand,
To stay harsh justice in its mid career.
On thee she calls, on thee her parent dear!
(Ah! too remote to ward the shameful blow!)
She sees no kind domestic visage near,
And soon a flood of tears begins to flow;
And gives a loose, at last, to unavailing woe.
But ah! what pen his piteous plight may trace?
Or what device his loud laments explain?
The form uncouth of his disguised face?
The pallid hue that dies his looks amain?
The plenteous shower that does his cheek distain?
When he, in abject wise, implores the dame,
Ne hops aught of sweet reprieve to gain;
Or when from high she levels well her aim,
And, through the thatch, his cries each falling stroke proclaim.
The other tribe, aghast, with sore dismay,
Attend, and conn their tasks with mickle care:
By turns, astony'd, every twig survey,
And, from their fellow's hateful wounds, beware;
Knowing, I wist, how each the same may share;
'Till fear has taught them a performance meet,
And to the well-known chest the dame repair;
Whence often with sugared cates she does 'em greet,
And gingerbread y-rare; now, certe, doubly sweet!
See to their seats they hye with merry glee,
And in beseemly order sitten there;
All but the wight of bum y-galled, he
Abhors bench, and stool, and fourm, and chair;
(This hand in mouth y-fix'd, that rends his hair;)
And eke with snubs profound, and heaving breast.
Convulsions intermitting! does declare
His grievous wrong; his dame's unjust behest;
And scorns her offered love, and shuns to be caressed.
His face besprent with liquid crystal shines,
His blooming face, that seems a purple flower,
Which low to earth its drooping head declines,
All smeared and sullied by a vernal shower.
O the hard bosoms of despotic power!
All, all, but she, the author of his shame,
All, all, but she, regret this mournful hour:
Yet hence the youth, and hence the flower, shall claim,
If so I deem aright, transcending worth and fame.
Behind some door, in melancholy thought,
Mindless of food, he, dreary caitif, pines;
Ne for his fellow's joyaunce cares aught,
But to the wind all merriment resigns,
And deems it shame, if he to peace inclines;
And many a sullen look ascance is sent,
Which for his dame's annoyance he designs;
And still the more to pleasure him she is bent,
The more does he, perverse, her haviour past resent.
Ah me! how much I fear lest pride it be!
But if that pride it be, which thus inspires,
Beware ye dames, with nice discernment see
Ye quench not too the sparks of nobler fires:
Ah! better far than all the muses' lyres,
All coward arts, is valor's generous heat;
The firm fixed breast which fit and right requires,
Like Vernon's patriot soul, more justly great
Than craft that pimps for ill, or flowery false deceit.
Yet nursed with skill, what dazzling fruits appear!
Even now sagacious foresight points to show
A little bench of heedless bishops here,
And there a chancellor in embryo,
Or bard sublime, if bard may ever be so,
As Milton, Shakespeare, names that never shall die!
Though now he crawl along the ground so low,
Nor weeting how the muse should soar on high,
Wishes, poor starv'ling elf! his paper-kite may fly.
And this, perhaps, who, cens'ring the design,
Low lays the house which that of cards does build,
Shall Dennis be! if rigid fates incline,
And many an epic to his rage shall yield;
And many a poet quit the Aonian field;
And, sour'd by age, profound he shall appear,
As he who now with 'sdainful fury thrilled
Surveys mine work; and levels many a sneer,
And furls his wrinkly front, and cries, " What stuff is here?"
But now Dan Phoebus gains the middle sky,
And liberty unbars her prison-door,
And, like a rushing torrent, out they fly;
And now the grassy cirque han covered over
With boisterous revel-rout and wild uproar;
A thousand ways in wanton rings they run,
Heaven shield their short-lived pastimes, I implore!
For well may freedom, erst so dearly won,
Appear to British elf more gladsome than the sun.
Enjoy, poor imps! enjoy your sportive trade;
And chase gay flies, and cull the fairest flowers,
For, when my bones in grass-green sods are laid;
For never may ye taste more careless hours
In nightly castles, or in ladies bowers.
O vain to seek delight in earthly thing!
But most in courts, where proud ambition towers!
Deluded wight! who weens fair peace can spring
Beneath the pompous dome of kesar or of king.
See in each sprite some various bent appear!
These rudely carol most incondite lay;
Those sauntering on the green, with jocund leer
Salute the stranger passing on his way;
Some builden fragile tenements of clay;
Some to the standing lake their courses bend,
With pebbles smooth at duck and drake to play;
Thilk to the huxter's sav'ry cottage tend,
In pastry kings and queens the allotted mite to spend.
Here, as each season yields a different store,
Each season's stores in order ranged been;
Apples with cabbage-net y-cover'd over,
Galling full sore the unmoney'd wight, are seen;
And goose-b'rie clad in liv'ry red or green;
And here, of lovely dye, the cath'rine pear,
Fine pear! as lovely for thy juice, I ween:
O may no wight ever pennyless come there,
Lest, smit with ardent love, he pine with hopeless care!
See! cherries here, ere cherries yet abound,
With thread so white in tempting posies tied,
Scattering like blooming maid their glances round,
With pampered look draw little eyes aside;
And must be bought, though penury betide.
The plumb all azure, and the nut all brown,
And here, each season, do those cakes abide,
Whose honored names the inventive city own,
Rend'ring through Britain's isle Salopia's praises known.
Admired Salopia! that, with venial pride,
Eyes her bright form in Severn's ambiant wave,
Famed for her loyal cares in perils tried,
Her daughters lovely, and her striplings brave:
Ah! midst the rest, may flowers adorn his grave,
Whose art did first these dulcet cates display!
A motive fair to learning's imps he gave,
Who chearless over her darkling region stray;
'Till reason's morn arise and light them on their way.
COOPER's HILL.
This poem, by Denham, though it may have been exceeded by later attempts in
description, yet deserves the highest applause, as it far surpasses all that
went before it: the concluding part, though a little too much crowded, is very
masterly.

SURE there are poets which did never dream
Upon Parnassus, nor did taste the stream
Of Helicon; we, therefore, may suppose
Those made not poets, but the poets those.
And, as courts make not kings, but kings the court,
So, where the muses and their train resort,
Parnassus stands; if I can be to thee
A poet, thou Parnassus art to me.
Nor wonder, if (advantaged in my flight,
By taking wing from thy auspicious height)
Through untrac'd ways and airy paths I fly,
More boundless in my fancy than my eye;
My eye, which, swift as thought, contracts the space
That lies between, and first salutes the place
Crowned with that sacred pile, so vast, so high,
That, whether it is a part of earth, or sky,
Uncertain seems, and may be thought a proud
Aspiring mountain, or descending cloud;
Paul's, the late theme of such a Mr. Waller.
muse, whose flight
Has bravely reached and soared above thy height:
Now shall thou stand, though sword, or time, or fire,
Or zeal, more fierce than they, thy fall conspire;
Secure, whilst thee the best of poets sings,
Preserved from ruin by the best of kings.
Under his proud survey the city lies,
And, like a mist, beneath a hill does rise;
Whose state and wealth, the business and the crowd,
Seems, at this distance, but a darker cloud:
And is, to him who rightly things esteems,
No other in effect than what it seems;
Where, with like haste, though several ways they run,
Some to undo, and some to be undone;
While luxury and wealth, like war and peace,
Are each the other's ruin, and increase;
As rivers lost in seas, some secret vein
Thence reconveys, there to be lost again.
Oh happiness of sweet retired content!
To be at once secure, and innocent.
Windsor the next (where Mars with Venus dwells,
Beauty with strength) above the valley swells
Into my eye, and does itself present
With such an easy and unforced ascent,
That no stupendous precipice denies
Access, no horror turns away our eyes;
But such a rise, as does at once invite
A pleasure, and a reverence from the sight.
Thy mighty master's emblem, in whose face
Sat meekness, heightened with majestic grace;
Such seems thy gentle height, made only proud
To be the basis of that pompous load,
Than which, a nobler weight no mountain bears,
But Atlas only, which supports the spheres.
When nature's hand this ground did thus advance,
'Twas guided by a wiser power than Chance;
Marked out for such an use, as if 'twere meant
TO invite the builder, and his choice prevent.
Nor can we call it choice, when, what we choose,
Folly or blindness only could refuse.
A crown of such majestic towers does grace
The gods great mother, when her heavenly race
Do homage to her; yet she cannot boast,
Among that numerous and celestial host,
More heroes than can Windsor; nor does Fame's
Immortal book record more noble names.
Not to look back so far, to whom this isle
Owes the first glory of so brave a pile,
Whether to Caesar, Albanact, or Brute,
The British Arthur, or the Danish Knute,
(Though this, of old, no less contest did move,
Than when, for Homer's birth, sev'n cities strove)
(Like him in birth, thou should be like in fame,
As thine his fate, if mine had been his flame)
But whosoe'er it was, nature designed
First a brave place, and then as brave a mind.
Not to recount those several kings, to whom
It gave a cradle, or to whom a tomb,
But thee (great Edward III. and the Black Prince.
Edward) and thy greater son,
(The lillies which his father wore he won)
And thy Queen Philip.
Bellona, who the consort came
Not only to thy bed, but to thy fame,
She to thy triumph led one captive The kings of France and Scotland.
king,
And brought that son, which did the second bring.
Then did thou found that order (whether love
Or victory thy royal thoughts did move)
Each was a noble cause, and nothing less
Than the design, has been the great success:
Which foreign kings, and emperors esteem
The second honor to their diadem.
Had thy great destiny but given thee skill
To know, as well as power to act, her will,
That, from those kings who then thy captives were,
In aftertimes should spring a royal pair,
Who should possess all that thy mighty power,
Or thy desires, more mighty, did devour;
To whom their better fate reserves whatever
The victor hopes for, or the vanquished fear;
That blood, which thou and thy great grandsire shed,
And all that since these sister nations bled,
Had been unspilt, had happy Edward known
That all the blood he spilt had been his own.
When he that patron chose, in whom are joined
Soldier and martyr, and his arms confined
Within the azure circle, he did seem
But to foretell, and prophesy of him,
Who to his realms that azure round has joined,
Which nature for their bound at first designed:
That bound, which, to the world's extremest ends,
Endless itself, its liquid arms extends:
Nor does he need those emblems which we paint,
But is himself the soldier and the saint.
Here should my wonder dwell, and here my praise,
But my fixed thoughts my wondering eye betrays
Viewing a neighboring hill, whose top of late
A chapel crowned, 'till, in the common fate,
The adjoining abbey fell: (may no such storm
Fall on our times, where ruin must reform.)
Tell me, my muse, what monstrous dire offense,
What crime, could any Christian king incense
To such a rage? Was It luxury, or lust?
Was he so temperate, so chaste, to just?
Were these their crimes? They were his own much more:
But wealth is crime enough to him that is poor;
Who, having spent the treasures of his crown,
Condemns their luxury to feed his own.
And yet this act, to varnish over the shame
Of sacrilege, must bear Devotion's name.
No crime so bold, but would be understood
A real, or, at least, a seeming good.
Who fears not to do ill, yet fears the name,
And free from conscience, is a slave to fame.
Thus, he the church at once protects, and spoils:
But princes' swords are sharper than their styles.
And thus to the ages past he makes amends,
Their charity destroys, their faith defends.
Then did religion, in a lazy cell,
In empty, airy contemplations dwell;
And, like the block, unmoved lay: but ours,
As much too active, like the stork devours.
Is there no temperate region can be known,
Betwixt their frigid, and our torrid, zone?
Could we not wake from that lethargic dream,
But to be restless in a worse extreme?
And, for that lethargy, was there no cure,
But to be cast into a calenture?
Can knowledge have no bound, but must advance
So far, to make us wish for ignorance;
And rather in the dark to grope our way,
Than, led by a false guide, to err by day?
Who sees these dismal heaps, but would demand
What barbarous invader sacked the land?
But when he hears, no Goth, no Turk, did bring
This desolation, but a Christian king;
When nothing but the name of Zeal appears,
'Twixt our best actions, and the worst of theirs,
What does he think our sacrilege would spare,
When such the effects of our devotions are?
Parting from thence, 'twixt anger, shame, and fear,
Those for what is past, and this for what is too near;
My eye, descending from the hill, surveys
Where Thames among the wanton valleys strays.
Thames, the most loved of all the ocean's sons
By his old sire, to his embraces runs,
Hasting to pay his tribute to the sea,
Like mortal life to meet eternity.
Though with those streams he no resemblance hold,
Whose foam is amber, and their gravel gold;
His genuine and less guilty wealth t'explore,
Search not his bottom, but survey his shore;
Over which he kindly spreads his spacious wing,
And hatches plenty for the ensuing spring:
Nor then destroys it with too fond a stay,
Like mothers which their infants overlay;
Nor, with a sudden and impetuous wave,
Like profuse kings, resumes the wealth he gave.
No unexpected inundations spoil
The mower's hopes, or mock the ploughman's toil:
But, godlike, his unwearied bounty flows;
First loves to do, then loves the good he does.
Nor are his blessings to his banks confined,
But free and common as the sea, or wind;
When he to boast, or to disperse his stores,
Full of the tributes of his grateful shores,
Visits the world, and, in his flying towers,
Brings home to us, and makes both Indies ours;
Finds wealth where it is, bestows it where it wants,
Cities in deserts, woods in cities plants.
So that to us no things, no place is strange,
While his fair bosom is the world's exchange.
O could I flow like thee, and make thy stream
My great example, as it is my theme!
Though deep, yet clear, though gentle, not yet dull;
Strong, without rage, without overflowing, full.
Heaven her Eridanus no more shall boast,
Whose fame in thine, like lesser currents, lost,
Thy nobler streams shall visit Jove's abodes,
To shine among the stars, and bathe the gods:
Here nature, whether more intent to please
Us or herself, with strange varieties,
(For things of wonder give no less delight
To the wise maker's, than beholder's sight:
Though these delights from several causes move;
For so our children, thus our friends we love)
Wisely she knew the harmony of things,
As well as that of sounds, from discord springs.
Such was the discord, which did first disperse
Form, order, beauty, through the universe;
While dryness, moisture, coldness heat resists,
All that we have, and that we are, subsists.
While the steep horrid roughness of the wood,
Strives with the gentle calmness of the flood,
Such huge extremes when nature does unite,
Wonder from thence results, from thence delight.
The stream is to transparent, pure, and clear,
That, had the self-enamour'd youth gazed here,
So fatally deceived he had not been,
While he the bottom, not his face, had seen.
But his proud head the airy mountain hides
Among the clouds; his shoulders, and his sides,
A shady mantle clothes; his curled brows
Frown on the gentle stream, which calmly flows,
While winds and storms his lofty forehead beat:
The common fate of all that is high or great.
Low at his foot a spacious plain is placed,
Between the mountain and the stream embraced:
Which shade and shelter from the hill derives,
While the kind river wealth and beauty gives;
And in the mixture of all these appears
Variety, which all the rest indears.
This scene had some bold Greek, or British bard,
Beheld of old, what stories had we heard,
Of fairies, satyrs, and the nymphs their dames,
Their feasts, their revels, and their amorous flames?
It Is still the same, although their airy shape
All but a quick poetic sight escape.
There Faunus and Sylvanus keep their courts,
And thither all the horned host resorts,
To graze the ranker mead; that noble herd,
On whose sublime and shady fronts is reared
Nature's great masterpiece, to show how soon
Great things are made, but sooner are undone.
Here have I seen the king, when great affairs
Gave leave to slacken and unbend his cares,
Attended to the chase by all the flower
Of youth, whose hopes a noble prey devour:
Pleasure with praise, and danger they would buy,
And wish a foe that would not only fly.
The stag, now conscious of his fatal growth,
At once indulgent to his fear and sloth,
To some dark covert his retreat had made,
Where nor man's eye, nor Heaven's should invade
His soft repose; when the unexpected sound
Of dogs, and men, his wakeful ear does wound:
Roused with the noise, he scarce believes his ear,
Willing to think th'illusions of his fear
Had given this false alarm, but straight his view
Confirms, that more than all he fears is true.
Betrayed in all his strengths, the wood beset,
All instruments, all arts of ruin met;
He calls to mind his strength, and then his speed,
His winged heels, and then his armed head;
With these to avoid, with that his fate to meet:
But fear prevails, and bids him trust his feet.
So fast he flies, that his reviewing eye
Has lost the chasers, and his ear the cry;
Exulting, 'till he finds, their nobler sense
Their disproportioned speed does recompense;
Then curses his conspiring feet, whose scent
Betrays that safety which their swiftness lent.
Then tries his friends among the baser herd,
Where he so lately was obeyed and feared,
His safety seeks: the herd, unkindly wise,
Or chases him from thence, or from him flies;
Like a declining statesman, left forlorn,
To his friends pity, and pursuers scorn,
With shame remembers, while himself was one
Of the same herd, himself the same had done.
Thence to the coverts, and the conscious groves,
The scenes of his past triumphs, and his loves;
Sadly surveying where he ranged alone
Prince of the soil, and all the herd his own;
And, like a bold knight errant, did proclaim
Combat to all, and bore away the dame;
And taught the woods to echo to the stream
His dreadful challenge, and his clashing beam.
Yet faintly now declines the fatal strife;
So much his love was dearer than his life.
Now every leaf, and every moving breath,
Presents a foe, and every foe a death.
Wearied, forsaken, and pursued, at last,
All safety in despair of safety placed;
Courage he thence resumes, resolved to bear
All their assaults, since it is in vain to fear.
And now, too late, he wishes, for the fight,
That strength he wasted in ignoble flight:
But, when he sees the eager chase renewed,
Himself by dogs, the dogs by men pursued,
He strait revokes his bold resolve, and more
Repents his courage, than his fear before;
Finds that uncertain ways unsafest are,
And doubt a greater mischief than despair.
Then to the stream, when neither friends, nor force,
Nor speed, nor art avail, he shapes his course;
Thinks not their rage so desperate, to assay
An element more merciless than they.
But, fearless, they pursue, nor can the flood
Quench their dire thirst; alas, they thirst for blood.
So toward a ship the oar-finn'd galleys ply,
Which wanting sea to ride, or wind to fly,
Stands but to fall revenged on those that dare
Tempt the last fury of extreme despair.
So fares the stag among the enraged hounds,
Repels their force, and wounds returns for wounds.
And as a hero, whom his baser foes
In troops surround, now these assail, now those,
Though prodigal of life, disdains to die
By common hands; but, if he can descry
Some nobler foe approach, to him he calls,
And begs his fate, and then contented falls.
So when the king a mortal shaft lets fly
From his unerring hand, then, glad to die,
Proud of the wound, to it resigns his blood,
And stains the crystal with a purple flood.
This a more innocent, and happy chase
Than when of old, but in the self-same place,
Fair Liberty, pursued, and meant a prey
To lawless power, Runnimede; where that great charter was first sealed.
here turned, and stood at bay.
When in that remedy all hope was placed,
Which was, or should have been at least, the last.
Here was that charter sealed, wherein the crown
All marks of arbitrary power lays down:
Tyrant and slave, those names of hate and fear,
The happier style of king and subject bear:
Happy, when both to the same center move,
When kings give liberty, and subjects love.
Therefore not long in force this charter stood;
Wanting that seal, it must be sealed in blood.
The subjects armed, the more their princes gave,
The advantage only took, the more to crave:
'Till kings, by giving, give themselves away,
And even that power, that should deny, betray.
"Who gives constrained, but his own fear reviles,
Not thank't, but scorned; nor are they gifts, but spoils."
Thus kings, by grasping more than they could hold,
First made their subjects, by oppression, bold:
And popular sway, by forcing kings to give
More than was fit for subjects to receive,
Ran to the same extremes; and one excess
Made both, by striving to be greater, l^ss.
When a calm river, raised with sudden rains,
Or snows dissolved, overflows the adjoining plains,
The husbandmen with high-rais'd banks secure
Their greedy hopes, and this he can endure.
But if with bays and dams they strive to force
His channel to a new, or narrow, course;
No longer, then, within his banks he dwells,
First to a torrent, then a deluge, swells:
Stronger and fiercer by restraint he roars,
And knows no bound, but makes his power his shores,
ELOISA TO ABELARD.
The harmony of numbers in this poem is very fine. It is rather drawn out to
too tedious a length, although the passions vary with great judgment. It may be
considered as superior to any thing in the epistolary way; and the many
translations which have been made of it into the modern languages, are, in some
measure, a proof of this.

IN these deep solitudes and awful cells,
Where heav'nly-pensive contemplation dwells,
And ever-musing melancholy reigns;
What means this tumult in a vestal's veins?
Why rove my thoughts beyond this last retreat?
Why feels my heart its long-forgotten heat?
Yet, yet I love! -- From Abelard it came,
And Eloisa yet must kiss the name.
Dear, fatal name! rest ever unreveal'd,
Nor pass these lips in holy silence sealed:
Hide it, my heart, within that close disguise,
Where, mixed with God's, his loved idea lies:
O write it not, my hand -- the name appears
Already written -- wash it out, my tears!
In vain lost Eloisa weeps and prays,
Her heart still dictates, and her hand obeys.
Relentless walls! whose darksome round contains
Repentant sighs, and voluntary pains:
Ye rugged rocks! which holy knees have worn;
Ye grots and caverns, shagg'd with horrid thorn!
Shrines! where their vigils pale-ey'd virgins keep,
And pitying saints, whose statues learn to weep!
Though cold like you, unmoved and silent grown,
I have not yet forgot myself to stone.
All is not Heaven's, while Abelard has part,
Still rebel Nature holds out half my heart;
Nor prayers, nor fasts, its stubborn pulse restrain,
Nor tears, for ages taught to flow in vain.
Soon as thy letters, trembling, I unclose,
That well-known name awakens all my woes.
Oh name for ever sad! for ever dear!
Still breathed in sighs, still ushered with a tear.
I tremble, too, wherever my own I find,
Some dire misfortune follows close behind.
Line after line my gushing eyes overflow,
Led through a sad variety of woe;
Now warm in love, now withering in my bloom,
Lost in a convent's solitary gloom!
There stern Religion quenched the unwilling flame,
There died the best of passions, Love and Fame.
Yet write, oh write me all, that I may join
Griefs to thy griefs, and echo sighs to thine.
Nor foes nor fortune take this power away;
And is my Abelard less kind than they?
Tears still are mine, and those I need not spare,
Love but demands what else were shed in prayer;
No happier task these faded eyes pursue;
To read and weep is all they now can do.
Then share thy pain, allow that sad relief;
Ah, more than share it, give me all thy grief.
Heaven first taught letters for some wretch's aid,
Some banished lover, or some captive maid;
They live, they speak, they breathe what love inspires,
Warm from the soul, and faithful to its fires,
The virgin's wish without her fears impart,
Excuse the blush, and pour out all the heart,
Speed the soft intercourse from soul to soul,
And waft a sigh from Indus to the Pole.
Thou know how guiltless first I met thy flame,
When Love approached me under Friendship's name;
My fancy formed thee of angelic kind,
Some emanation of the All-beauteous Mind.
Those smiling eyes, attemp'ring every ray,
Shone sweetly lambent with celestial day.
Guiltless I gazed; Heaven listened while you sung;
And truths divine came mended from that tongue.
From lips like those what precept failed to move?
Too soon they taught me 'twas no sin to love:
Back through the paths of pleasing sense I ran,
Nor wished an Angel, whom I loved a Man.
Dim and remote the joys of saints I see;
Nor envy them that Heaven I lose for thee.
How often, when pressed to marriage, have I said,
Curse on all laws but those which love has made!
Love, free as air, at sight of human ties,
Spreads his light wings, and in a moment flies.
Let wealth, let honor, wait the wedded dame,
August her deed, and sacred be her fame;
Before true passion all those views remove,
Fame, wealth, and honor! what are you to love?
The jealous god, when we profane his fires,
Those restless passions in revenge inspires,
And bids them make mistaken mortals groan,
Who seek in love for aught but love alone.
Should at my feet the world's great master fall,
Himself, his throne, his world, I Would scorn 'em all;
Not Caesar's empress would I deign to prove;
No, make me mistress to the man I love.
If there be yet another name more free,
More fond than mistress, make me that to thee!
Oh! happy state, when souls each other draw,
When love is liberty, and nature law;
All then is full, possessing, and possessed,
No craving void left aching in the breast:
Even thought meets thought, ere from the lips it part,
And each warm wish springs mutual from the heart.
This sure is bliss (if bliss on earth there be)
And once the lot of Abelard and me.
Alas how changed! what sudden horrors rise!
A naked lover bound and bleeding lies!
Where, where was Eloise? her voice, her hand,
Her poniard had opposed the dire command.
Barbarian, stay! that bloody stroke restrain;
The crime was common, common be the pain.
I can no more; by shame, by rage suppressed,
Let tears and burning blushes speak the rest.
Can thou forget that sad, that solemn day,
When victims at yon altar's foot we lay?
Can thou forget what tears that moment fell,
When, warm in youth, I bade the world farewell?
As, with cold lips, I kissed the sacred veil,
The shrines all trembled, and the lamps grew pale:
Heaven scarce believed the conquest it surveyed,
And saints with wonder heard the vows I made.
Yet then, to those dread altars as I drew,
Not on the cross my eyes were fixed, but you:
Not grace, or zeal, love only was my call;
And if I lose thy love, I lose my all.
Come, with thy looks, thy words, relieve my woe;
Those, still, at least, are left thee to bestow.
Still on that breast enamored let me lie,
Still drink delicious poison from thy eye,
Pant on thy lip, and to thy heart be pressed;
Give all thou can -- and let me dream the rest.
Ah no! instruct me other joys to prize,
With other beauties charm my partial eyes,
Full in my view set all the bright abode,
And make my soul quit Abelard for God.
Ah think, at least, thy flock deserves thy care,
Plants of thy hand, and children of thy prayer.
From the false world in early youth they fled,
By thee to mountains, wilds, and deserts led.
You raised these hallowed walls; the desert smiled,
And paradise was opened in the wild.
No weeping orphan saw his father's stores
Our shrines irradiate, or emblaze the floors;
No silver saints, by dying misers given,
Here bribed the rage of ill-requited Heaven;
But such plain roofs as piety could raise,
And only vocal with the Maker's praise.
In these lone walls (their day's eternal bound)
These moss-grown domes with spiry turrets crowned,
Where awful arches make a noonday night,
And the dim windows shed a solemn light;
Thy eyes diffused a reconciling ray,
And gleams of glory brightened all the day.
But now no face divine contentment wears,
It Is all blank sadness, or continual tears.
See how the force of others prayers I try,
(O pious fraud of amorous charity!)
But why should I on other's prayers depend?
Come thou, my father, brother, husband, friend!
Ah let thy handmaid, sister, daughter, move,
And all those tender names in one, thy love!
The darksome pines that over yon rocks reclined,
Wave high, and murmur to the hollow wind,
The wandering streams that shine between the hills,
The grots that echo to the tinkling rills,
The dying gales that pant upon the trees,
The lakes that quiver to the curling breeze;
No more these scenes my meditation aid,
Or lull to rest the visionary maid.
But, over the twilight groves and dusky caves,
Long-sounding isles, and intermingled graves,
Black Melancholy sits, and round her throws
A death-like silence, and a dread repose;
Her gloomy presence saddens all the scene,
Shades every flower, and darkens every green,
Deepens the murmur of the falling floods,
And breathes a browner horror on the woods.
Yet here for ever, ever must I stay;
Sad proof how well a lover can obey!
Death, only death, can break the lasting chain;
And here, even then, shall my cold dust remain;
Here all its frailties, all its flames resign,
And wait 'till it is no sin to mix with thine.
Ah wretch! believed the spouse of God in vain,
Confessed, within, the slave of love and man.
Assist me, Heaven! but whence arose that prayer?
Sprung it from piety, or from despair?
Even here, where frozen chastity retires,
Love finds an altar for forbidden sires.
I ought to grieve, but cannot what I ought;
I mourn the lover, not lament the fault;
I view my crime, but kindle at the view,
Repent old pleasures, and solicit new;
Now, turned to Heaven, I weep my past offense;
Now think of thee, and curse my innocence.
Of all affliction taught a lover yet,
It Is, sure, the hardest science to forget!
How shall I lose the sin, yet keep the sense,
And love the offender, yet detest the offense?
How the dear object from the crime remove,
Or how distinguish penitence from love?
Unequal task! a passion to resign,
For hearts so touched, so pierced, so lost as mine!
Ere such a soul regains its peaceful state,
How often must it love, how often hate!
How often hope, despair, resent, regret,
Conceal, disdain, -- do all things but forget?
But let Heaven seize it, all at once it is fired;
Not touched, but rapt; not wakened, but inspired!
Oh come! oh teach me nature to subdue,
Renounce my love, my life, myself -- and you.
Fill my fond heart with God alone, for he
Alone can rival, can succeed to thee.
How happy is the blameless vestal's lot?
The world forgetting, by the world forgot:
Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind!
Each prayer accepted, and each wish resigned;
Labor and rest, that equal periods keep;
"Obedient slumbers, that can wake and weep;"
Desires composed, affections ever even;
Tears that delight, and sighs that waft to heaven.
Grace shines around her with serenest beams,
And whispering angels prompt her golden dreams.
For her the unfading rose of Eden blooms,
And wings of seraphs shed divine perfumes,
For her the spouse prepares the bridal ring,
For her white virgins hymenaeals sing,
To sounds of heavenly harps she dies away,
And melts in visions of eternal day.
Far other dreams my erring soul employ,
Far other raptures, of unholy joy:
When, at the close of each sad, sorrowing day,
Fancy restores what vengeance snatched away,
Then conscience sleeps, and leaving nature free,
All my loose soul unbounded springs to thee.
O cursed, dear horrors of all-conscious night!
How glowing guilt exalts the keen delight!
Provoking demons all restraint remove,
And stir within me every source of love.
I hear thee, view thee, gaze over all thy charms,
And round thy phantom glue my clasping arms.
I wake: -- no more I hear, no more I view,
The phantom flies me, as unkind as you.
I call aloud; it hears not what I say:
I stretch my empty arms; it glides away.
To dream once more I close my willing eyes;
Ye soft illusions, dear deceits, arise!
Alas, no more! methinks we wandering go
Through dreary wastes, and weep each other's woe,
Where, round some mouldering tower, pale ivy creeps,
And low-brow'd rocks hang nodding over the deeps.
Sudden you mount, you beckon from the skies;
Clouds interpose, waves roar, and winds arise.
I shriek, start up, the same sad prospect find,
And wake to all the griefs I left behind.
For thee the fates, severely kind, ordain
A cool suspense from pleasure and from pain;
Thy life a long dead calm of fixed repose;
No pulse that riots, and no blood that glows.
Still as the sea, ere winds were taught to blow,
Or moving spirit bade the waters flow;
Soft as the slumbers of a saint forgiven,
And mild as opening gleams of promised heaven.
Come, Abelard! for what have thou to dread?
The torch of Venus burns not for the dead.
Nature stands checked; Religion disapproves;
Even thou art cold -- yet Eloisa loves.
Ah hopeless, lasting flames! like those that burn
To light the dead, and warm the unfruitful urn.
What scenes appear wherever I turn my view?
The dear ideas, where I fly, pursue,
Rise in the grove, before the altar rise,
Stain all my soul, and wanton in my eyes.
I waste the Matin lamp in sighs for thee,
Thy image steals between my God and me,
Thy voice I seem in every hymn to hear,
With every bead I drop too soft a tear.
When from the censer clouds of fragrance roll,
And swelling organs lift the rising soul,
One thought of thee puts all the pomp to flight,
Priests, tapers, temples, swim before my sight:
In seas of flame my plunging soul is drowned,
While Altars blaze, and Angels tremble round.
While prostrate here in humble grief I lie,
Kind, virtuous drops just gathering in my eye,
While praying, trembling, in the dust I roll,
And dawning grace is opening on my soul:
Come, if thou dare, all charming as thou art!
Oppose thyself to Heaven; dispute my heart;
Come, with one glance of those deluding eyes
Blot out each bright idea of the skies;
Take back that grace, those sorrows, and those tears;
Take back my fruitless penitence and prayers;
Snatch me, just mounting, from the blessed abode;
Assist the fiends, and tear me from my God!
No, fly me, fly me, far as Pole from Pole;
Rise Alps between us! and whole oceans roll!
Ah, come not, write not, think not once of me,
Nor share one pang of all I felt for thee.
Thy oaths I quit, thy memory resign;
Forget, renounce me, hate whatever was mine.
Fair eyes, and tempting looks (which yet I view!)
Long loved, adored ideas, all adieu!
O Grace serene! oh Virtue heavenly fair!
Divine oblivion of low-thoughted care!
Fresh blooming Hope, gay daughter of the sky!
And Faith, our early immortality!
Enter each mild, each amicable guest;
Receive and wrap me in eternal rest!
See in her cell sad Eloisa spread,
Propt on some tomb, a neighbor of the dead.
In each low wind methinks a Spirit calls,
And more than Echoes talk along the walls.
Here, as I watched the dying lamps around,
From yonder shrine I heard a hollow sound.
"Come, sister, come!" (it said, or seemed to say)
"Thy place is here, sad sister, come away!
Once, like thyself, I trembled, wept, and prayed,
Love's victim then, though now a sainted maid:
But all is calm in this eternal sleep;
Here grief forgets to groan, and love to weep,
Even superstition loses every fear:
For God, not man, absolves our frailties here."
I come, I come! prepare your roseate bowers,
Celestial palms, and ever-blooming flowers.
Thither, where sinners may have rest, I go,
Where flames refined in breasts seraphic glow:
Thou, Abelard! the last sad office pay,
And smooth my passage to the realms of day;
See my lips tremble, and my eye balls roll,
Suck my last breath, and catch my flying soul!
Ah no -- in sacred vestments may thou stand,
The hallowed taper trembling in thy hand,
Present the Cross before my lifted eye,
Teach me, at once, and learn of me, to die.
Ah then, thy once-lov'd Eloisa see;
It will be, then, no crime to gaze on me.
See from my cheek the transient roses fly!
See the last sparkle languish in my eye!
'Till every motion, pulse, and breath be over;
And even my Abelard be loved no more.
O Death all-eloquent! you only prove
What dust we dote on, when it is man we love.
Then, too, when fate shall thy fair frame destroy,
(That cause of all my guilt, and all my joy)
In trance extatic may thy pangs be drowned,
Bright clouds descend, and Angels watch thee round,
From opening skies may streaming glories shine,
And Saints embrace thee with a love like mine.
May one kind grave unite each hapless name,
And graft my love immortal on thy fame!
Then, ages hence, when all my woes are over,
When this rebellious heart shall beat no more;
If ever chance two wandering lovers brings
To Paraclete's white walls and silver springs,
Over the pale marble shall they join their heads,
And drink the falling tears each other sheds;
Then sadly say, with mutual pity moved,
"O may we never love as these have loved!"
From the full choir, when loud Hosannas rise,
And swell the pomp of dreadful sacrifice,
Amid that scene if some relenting eye
Glance on the stone where our cold relics lie,
Devotion's self shall steal a thought from Heaven,
One human tear shall drop, and be forgiven.
And sure, if fate some future bard shall join
In sad similitude of griefs to mine,
Condemned whole years in absence to deplore,
And image charms he must behold no more;
Such if there be, who loves so long, so well;
Let him our sad, our tender story tell!
The well-sung woes will sooth my pensive ghost;
He best can paint 'em who shall feel 'em most.
AN EPISTLE, FROM Mr. PHILIPS to the Earl of DORSET.
The opening of this poem is incomparably fine.
The latter part is tedious and trifling.
Copenhagen, March 9, 1709.
FROM frozen climes, and endless tracts of snow,
From streams that northern winds forbid to flow;
What present shall the Muse to Dorset bring,
Or how, so near the Pole, attempt to sing?
The hoary winter here conceals from sight
All pleasing objects that to verse invite.
The hills and dales, and the delightful woods,
The flowery plains, and silver streaming floods,
By snow disguised, in bright confusion lie,
And, with one dazzling waste, fatigue the eye.
No gentle breathing breeze prepares the spring,
No birds within the desert region sing.
The ships, unmoved, the boisterous winds defy,
While rattling chariots over the ocean fly.
The vast Leviathan wants room to play,
And spout his waters in the face of day,
The starving wolves along the main sea prowl,
And to the moon in icy valleys howl.
For many a shining league the level main
Here spreads itself into a glassy plain:
There solid billows, of enormous size,
Alps of green ice, in wild disorder rise.
And yet but lately have I seen, even here,
The winter in a lovely dress appear.
Ere yet the clouds let fall the treasured snow,
Or winds begun through hazy skies to blow,
At evening a keen eastern breeze arose;
And the descending rain unsullied froze.
Soon as the silent shades of night withdrew,
The ruddy morn disclosed at once to view
The face of nature in a rich disguise,
And brightened every object to my eyes:
For every shrub, and every blade of grass,
And every pointed thorn, seemed wrought in glass,
In pearls and rubies rich the hawthorns show,
While through the ice the crimson berries glow.
The thick-sprung reeds the watery marshes yield,
Seem polished lances in a hostile field.
The stag, in limpid currents, with surprise,
Sees crystal branches on his forehead rise.
The spreading oak, the beech, and towering pine,
Glazed over, in the freezing ether shine.
The frighted birds the rattling branches shun,
That wave and glitter in the distant sun.
When, if a sudden gust of wind arise,
The brittle forest into atoms flies:
The crackling wood beneath the tempest bends,
And in a spangled shower the prospect ends;
Or, if a southern gale the region warm,
And, by degrees, unbind the wintry charm,
The traveller a miry country sees,
And journies sad beneath the dropping trees.
Like some deluded peasant Merlin leads
Through fragrant bowers, and through delicious meads;
While here enchanted gardens to him rise,
And airy fabrics there attract his eyes,
His wondering feet the magic paths pursue;
And, while he thinks the fair illusion true,
The trackless scenes disperse in fluid air,
And woods, and wilds, and thorny ways appear:
A tedious road the weary wretch returns,
And, as he goes, the transient vision mourns.
A LETTER FROM ITALY, To the Right Honorable CHARLES LORD HALIFAX. In the Year
MDCCI.
Few poems have done more honor to English genius than this. There is in it a
strain of political thinking that was, at that time, new in our poetry. Had the
harmony of this been equal to that of Pope's versification, it would be
incontestibly the finest poem in our language; but there is a dryness in the
numbers which greatly lessens the pleasure excited both by the poet's judgment
and imagination.

WHILE you, my lord, the rural shades admire,
And from Britannia's public posts retire,
Nor longer, her ungrateful sons to please,
For their advantage sacrifice your ease;
Me into foreign realms my fate conveys,
Through nations fruitful of immortal lays,
Where the soft season and inviting clime
Conspire to trouble your repose with rhyme.
For wheresoe'er I turn my ravished eyes,
Gay gilded scenes and shining prospects rise,
Poetic fields incompass me around,
And still I seem to tread on Classic ground;
For here the Muse so often her harp has strung,
That not a mountain rears its head unsung,
Renowned in verse each shady thicket grows,
And every stream in heavenly numbers flows.
How am I pleased to search the hills and woods
For rising springs and celebrated floods!
To view the Nar, tumultuous in his course,
And trace the smooth Clitumnus to his source;
To see the Mincio draw his watery store
Through the long windings of a fruitful shore,
And hoary Albula's infected tide
Over the warm bed of smoking sulphur glide.
Fired with a thousand raptures I survey
Eridanus through flowery meadows stray,
The king of floods! that rolling over the plains
The towering Alps of half their moisture drains,
And proudly swollen with a whole winter's snows,
Distributes wealth and plenty where he flows.
Sometimes, misguided by the tuneful throng,
I look for streams immortalized in song,
That lost in silence and oblivion lie,
(Dumb are their fountains and their channels dry)
Yet run for ever by the Muse's skill,
And in the smooth description murmur still.
Sometimes to gentle Tiber I retire,
And the famed river's empty shores admire,
That, destitute of strength, derives its course
From thrifty urns and an unfruitful source;
Yet sung so often in poetic lays,
With scorn the Danube and the Nile surveys;
So high the deathless muse exalts her theme!
Such was the Boyne, a poor inglorious stream,
That in Hibernian vales obscurely strayed,
And, unobserved, in wild meanders played;
'Till by your lines and Nassau's sword renowned;
Its rising billows through the world resound,
Wherever the Hero's godlike acts can pierce,
Or where the fame of an immortal verse.
Oh could the Muse my ravished breast inspire
With warmth like yours, and raise an equal fire,
Unnumber'd beauties in my verse should shine,
And Virgil's Italy should yield to mine!
See how the golden groves around me smile,
That shun the coast of Britain's stormy isle,
Or, when transplanted and preserved with care,
Curse the cold clime, and starve in northern air.
Here kindly warmth their mounting juice ferments
To nobler tastes, and more exalted scents:
Even the rough rocks with tender myrtle bloom,
And trodden weeds send out a rich perfume.
Bear me, some God, to Baia's gentle seats,
Or cover me in Umbria's green retreats;
Where western gales eternally reside,
And all the seasons lavish all their pride:
Blossoms, and fruits, and flowers together rise,
And the whole year in gay confusion lies.
Immortal glories in my mind revive,
And in my soul a thousand passions strive,
When Rome's exalted beauties I descry,
Magnificent in piles of ruin lie.
An amphitheatre's amazing height
Here sills my eye with terror and delight,
That on its public shows Unpeopled Rome,
And held Uncrowded nations in its womb:
Here pillars rough with sculpture pierce the skies:
And here the proud triumphal arches rise,
Where the old Romans deathless acts displayed,
Their base degenerate progeny upbraid:
Whole rivers here forsake the fields below,
And, wondering at their height, through airy channels flow.
Still to new scenes my wandering Muse retires;
And the dumb show of breathing rocks admires;
Where the smooth chisel all its force has shown,
And softened into flesh the rugged stone.
In solemn silence, a majestic band,
Heroes, and Gods, and Roman Consuls, stand,
Stern tyrants, whom their cruelties renown,
And emperors, in Parian marble frown;
While the bright dames, to whom they humbly su'd,
Still show the charms that their proud hearts subdued.
Fain would I Raphael's godlike art rehearse,
And show the immortal labors in my verse,
Where, from the mingled strength of shade and light,
A new creation rises to my sight,
Such heavenly figures from his pencil flow,
So warm with life his blended colors glow,
From theme to theme with secret pleasure tossed,
Amidst the soft variety I Am lost:
Here pleasing airs my ravished soul confound
With circling notes and labyrinths of sound:
Here domes and temples rise in distant views,
And opening palaces invite my Muse.
How has kind Heaven adorned the happy land,
And scattered blessings with a wasteful hand!
But what avail her unexhausted stores,
Her blooming mountains, and her sunny shores,
With all the gifts that Heaven and earth impart,
The smiles of nature, and the charms of art,
While proud Oppression in her valleys reigns,
And Tyranny usurps her happy plains?
The poor inhabitant beholds in vain
The redd'ning Orange and the swelling grain:
Joyless he sees the growing oils and wines,
And in the Myrtle's fragrant shade repines:
Starves, in the midst of nature's bounty cursed,
And in the laden vineyard dies for thirst.
Oh Liberty, thou goddess heavenly bright,
Profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight!
Eternal pleasures in thy presence reign,
And smiling Plenty leads thy wanton train;
Eased of her load Subjection grows more light,
And Poverty looks cheerful in thy sight;
Thou make the gloomy face of Nature gay,
Giv'st beauty to the Sun, and pleasure to the Day.
Thee, goddess, thee Britannia's isle adores;
How has she often exhausted all her stores,
How often, in fields of death, thy presence sought,
Nor thinks the mighty prize too dearly bought!
On foreign mountains may the Sun refine
The grape's soft juice, and mellow it to wine,
With Citron groves adorn a distant soil,
And the fat Olive swell with floods of oil:
We envy not the warmer clime, that lies
In ten degrees of more indulgent skies,
Nor at the coarseness of our Heaven repine,
Though over our heads the frozen Pleiads shine:
It Is Liberty that crowns Britannia's isle,
And makes her barren rocks and her bleak mountains smile.
Others with towering piles may please the sight,
And in their proud aspiring domes delight;
A nicer touch to the stretched canvass give,
Or teach their animated rocks to live:
It Is Britain's care to watch over Europe's fate,
And hold in balance each contending state;
To threaten bold presumptuous kings with war,
And answer her afflicted neighbor's prayer.
The Dane and Swede, roused up by fierce alarms,
Bless the wise conduct of her pious arms:
Soon as her fleets appear, their terrors cease,
And all the northern world lies hushed in peace.
The ambitious Gaul beholds with secret dread
Her thunder aimed at his aspiring head,
And fain her godlike sons would disunite
By foreign gold, or by domestic spite:
But strives in vain to conquer or divide,
Whom Nassau's arms defend and counsels guide.
Fired with the name, which I so often have found
The distant climes and different tongues resound,
I bridle in my struggling Muse with pain,
That longs to launch into a bolder strain.
But I Have already troubled you too long,
Nor dare attempt a more adventurous song.
My humble verse demands a softer theme,
A painted meadow, or a purling stream;
Unfit for Heroes; whom immortal lays,
And lines like Virgil's, or like yours, should praise.
ALEXANDER's FEAST; OR, THE POWER OF MUSIC. AN ODE, In Honor of St. CECILIA's
Day.
This ode has been more applauded, perhaps, than it has been felt; however, it
is a very fine one, and gives its beauties rather at a third, or fourth, than
at a first, perusal.

I.
'TWAS at the royal feast, for Persia won,
By Philip's warlike son:
Aloft, in awful state,
The godlike hero sat
On his imperial throne:
His valiant peers were placed around;
Their brows with roses and with myrtles bound.
(So should desert in arms be crowned:)
The lovely Thais by his side,
Sat like a blooming eastern bride,
In flower of youth and beauty's pride.
Happy, happy, happy pair!
None but the brave,
None but the brave,
None but the brave deserve the fair.
CHORUS.
Happy, happy, happy pair!
None but the brave,
None but the brave,
None but the brave deserves the fair.
II.
Timotheus placed on high
Amid the tuneful quire,
With flying fingers touched the lyre:
The trembling notes ascend the sky,
And heavenly joys inspire.
The song began from Jove;
Who left his blissful seats above,
(Such is the power of mighty love.)
A dragon's fiery form belied the god:
Sublime on radiant spires he rode,
When he to fair Olympia pressed:
And while he sought her snowy breast:
Then, round her slender waist he curled,
And stamped an image of himself, a sovereign of the world.
The listening crowd admire the lofty sound.
A present Deity they shout around:
A present Deity the vaulted roofs rebound:
With ravished ears
The monarch hears,
Assumes the god,
Affects to nod,
And seems to shake the spheres.
CHORUS.
With ravished ears
The monarch hears,
Assumes the god,
Affects to nod,
And seems to shake the spheres.
III.
The praise of Bacchus then the sweet musician sung;
Of Bacchus, ever fair, and ever young:
The jolly god in triumph comes;
Sound the trumpets, beat the drums;
Flushed with a purple grace,
He shows his honest face;
Now gives the hautboys breath; he comes, he comes.
Bacchus, ever fair and young,
Drinking joys did first ordain:
Bacchus' blessings are a treasure,
Drinking is the soldier's pleasure;
Rich the treasure,
Sweet the pleasure;
Sweet is pleasure after pain.
CHORUS.
Bacchus' blessings are a treasure;
Drinking is the soldier's pleasure;
Rich the treasure,
Sweet the pleasure;
Sweet is pleasure after pain.
IV.
Soothed with the sound the king grew vain;
Fought all his battles over again;
And thrice he routed all his foes; and thrice he slew the slain.
The master saw the madness rise;
His glowing cheeks, his ardent eyes;
And, while he Heaven and earth defied,
Changed his hand, and checked his pride.
He chose a mournful muse,
Soft pity to infuse:
He sung Darius, great and good,
By too severe a fate,
Fallen, fallen, fallen, fallen,
Fallen from his high estate,
And welt'ring in his blood:
Deserted at his utmost need,
By those his former bounty fed:
On the bare earth exposed he lies,
With not a friend to close his eyes.
With down-cast looks the joyless victor sat,
Revolving in his altered soul
The various turns of chance below;
And, now and then, a sigh he stole;
And tears began to flow.
CHORUS.
Revolving in his altered soul
The various turns of chance below;
And, now and then, a sigh he stole;
And tears began to flow.
V.
The mighty master smiled, to see
That love was in the next degree:
'Twas but a kindred sound to move;
For pity melts the mind to love.
Softly sweet, in Lydian measures,
Soon he soothed his soul to pleasures.
War, he sung, his toil and trouble;
Honor, but an empty bubble:
Never ending, still beginning,
Fighting still, and still destroying:
If the world be worth thy winning,
Think, O think it worth enjoying.
Lovely Thais sits beside thee,
Take the good the gods provide thee.
The many rend the skies with loud applause;
So Love was crowned, but Mu^ic won the cause.
The prince, unable to conceal his pain,
Gazed on the fair
Who caused his care,
And sighed and looked, sighed and looked,
Sighed and looked, and sighed again:
At length, with love and wine at once oppressed,
The vanquished victor sunk upon her breast.
CHORUS.
The prince, unable to conceal his pain,
Gazed on the fair
Who caused his care,
And sighed and looked, sighed and looked,
Sighed and looked, and sighed again:
At length, with love and wine at once oppressed,
The vanquished victor sunk upon her breast.
VI.
Now strike the golden lyre again:
A louder yet, and yet a louder strain.
Break his bands of sleep asunder,
And rouse him, like a rattling peal of thunder.
Hark! hark! the horrid sound
Has raised up his head,
As awaked from the dead,
And, amazed, he stares around.
Revenge, Revenge, Timotheus cries,
See the furies arise:
See the snakes that they rear,
How they hiss in their hair,
And the sparkles that flash from their eyes!
Behold a ghastly band,
Each a torch in his hand!
Those are Grecian ghosts, that in battle were slain,
And unbury'd remain
Inglorious on the plain.
Give the vengeance due
To the valiant crew.
Behold how they toss their torches on high,
How they point to the Persian abodes,
And glittering temples of their hostile gods!
The princes applaud, with a furious joy;
And the king seized a flambeau, with zeal to destroy;
Thais led the way,
To light him to his prey,
And, like another Helen, fired another Troy.
CHORUS.
And the king seized a flambeau, with zeal to destroy;
Thais led the way,
To light him to his prey,
And, like another Helen, fired another Troy.
VII.
Thus, long ago,
Ere heaving bellows learned to blow,
While organs yet were mute;
Timotheus, to his breathing flute
And sounding lyre,
Could swell the soul to rage, or kindle soft desire.
At last divine Cecilia came,
Inventress of the vocal frame;
The sweet enthusiast, from her sacred store,
Enlarged the former narrow bounds,
And added length to solemn sounds,
With nature's mother-wit, and arts unknown before,
Let old Timotheus yield the prize;
Or both divide the crown;
He raised a mortal to the skies;
She drew an angel down.
GRAND CHORUS.
At last divine Cecilia came,
Inventress of the vocal frame;
The sweet enthusiast, from her sacred store,
Enlarged the former narrow bounds,
And added length to solemn sounds,
With nature's mother-wit, and arts unknown before.
Let old Timotheus yield the prize,
Or both divide the crown;
He raised a mortal to the skies;
She drew an angel down.
ODE FOR MUSIC ON ST. CECILIA's DAY.
This ode has by many been thought equal to the former. As it is a repetition
of Dryden's manner, it is so far inferior to him. The whole hint of Orpheus,
with many of the lines, have been taken from an obscure Ode upon Music,
published in Tate's Miscellanies.

I.
DESCEND, ye Nine! descend and sing;
The breathing instruments inspire;
Wake into voice each silent string,
And sweep the sounding lyre!
In a sadly-pleasing strain
Let the warbling lute complain:
Let the loud trumpet sound,
'Till the roofs all around
The shrill echoes rebound:
While, in more lengthened notes, and slow,
The deep, majestic, solemn organs, blow.
Hark! the numbers, soft and clear,
Gently steal upon the ear;
Now louder, and yet louder rise,
And fill with spreading sounds the skies;
Exulting in triumph now swell the bold notes,
In broken air, trembling, the wild music floats;
'Till, by degrees, remote and small,
The strains decay,
And melt away,
In a dying, dying fall.
II.
By Music, minds an equal temper know,
Nor swell too high, nor sink too low.
If in the breast tumultuous joys arise,
Music her soft, assuasive voice applies;
Or, when the soul is pressed with cares,
Exalts her in enlivening airs.
Warriors she fires with animated sounds;
Pours balm into the bleeding lover's wounds;
Melancholy lifts her head,
Morpheus rouzes from his bed,
Sloth unfolds her arms and wakes,
Listening Envy drops her snakes;
Intestine war no more our passions wage,
And giddy factions hear away their rage.
III.
But, when our country's cause provokes to arms,
How martial music every bosom warms!
So, when the first bold vessel dared the seas,
High on the stern the Thracian raised his strain,
While Argo saw her kindred trees
Descend from Pelion to the main.
Transported demigods stood round,
And men grew heroes at the sound,
Enflamed with glory's charms:
Each chief his sev'n-fold shield displayed,
And half unsheathed the shining blade:
And seas, and rocks, and skies rebound
To arms, to arms, to arms!
IV.
But when through all the infernal bounds,
Which flaming Phlegeton surrounds,
Love, strong as Death, the Poet led
To the pale nations of the dead,
What sounds were heard,
What scenes appeared,
Over all the dreary coasts!
Dreadful gleams,
Dismal screams,
Fires that glow,
Shrieks of woe,
Sullen moans,
Hollow groans,
And cries of tortured ghosts!
But hark! he strikes the golden lyre;
And see! the tortured ghosts respire!
See, shady forms advance!
Thy stone, O Sisyphus, stands still,
Ixion rests upon his wheel,
And the pale specter dance!
The furies sink upon their iron beds,
And snakes, uncurl'd, hang listening round their heads.
V.
By the streams that ever flow,
By the fragrant winds that blow
Over the Elysian flowers;
By those happy souls who dwell
In yellow meads of Asphodel,
Or Amaranthine bowers;
By the heros' armed shades,
Glittering through the gloomy glades;
By the youths that died for love,
Wandering in the myrtle grove,
Restore, restore Eurydice to life:
Oh take the husband, or return the wife!
He sung, and Hell consented
To hear the Poet's prayer;
Stern Proserpine relented,
And gave him back the fair.
Thus song could prevail
Over death, and over hell,
A conquest how hard and how glorious?
Though fate had fast bound her
With Styx nine times round her,
Yet music and love were victorious.
VI.
But soon, too soon, the lover turns his eyes:
Again she falls, again she dies, she dies!
How will thou now the fatal sisters move?
No crime was thine, if it is no crime to love.
Now under hanging mountains,
Beside the falls of fountains,
Or where Hebrus wanders,
Rolling in meanders,
All alone,
Unheard, unknown,
He makes his moan;
And calls her ghost,
For ever, ever, ever lost!
Now with furies surrounded,
Despairing, confounded,
He trembles, he glows,
Amidst Rhodope's snows:
See, wild as the winds, over the desert he flies;
Hark! Haemus resounds with the Bacchanals cries --
Ah see, he dies!
Yet even in death Eurydice he sung,
Eurydice still trembled on his tongue,
Eurydice the woods,
Eurydice the floods,
Eurydice the rocks and hollow mountains rung.
VII.
Music the fiercest grief can charm,
And fate's severest rage disarm:
Music can soften pain to ease,
And make despair and madness please:
Our joys below it can improve,
And antedate the bliss above.
This the divine Cecilia found,
And to her Maker's praise confined the sound.
When the full organ joins the tuneful quire,
The immortal powers incline their ear;
Borne on the swelling notes our souls aspire,
While solemn airs improve the sacred fire;
And Angels lean from heaven to hear.
Of Orpheus now no more let Poets tell,
To bright Cecilia greater power is given;
His numbers raised a shade from hell,
Here Is lift the soul to Heaven.
THE SHEPHERD's WEEK. IN SIX PASTORALS.
These are Mr. Gay's principal performance. They were originally intended, I
suppose, as a burlesque on those of Philips; but, perhaps without designing it,
he has hit the true spirit of pastoral poetry. In fact, he more resembles
Theocritus than any other English pastoral writer whatsoever. There runs
through the whole a strain of rustic pleasantry which should ever distinguish
this species of composition; but how far the antiquated expressions used here
may contribute to the humor, I will not determine; for my own part, I could
wish the simplicity were preserved, without recurring to such obsolete
antiquity for the manner of expressing it.

MONDAY; OR, THE SQUABBLE.
LOBBIN CLOUT, CUDDY, CLODDIPOLE. LOBBIN CLOUT. THY younglings, Cuddy, are but
just awake,
No thrustles shrill the bramble bush forsake,
No chirping lark the welkin sheen invokes,
No damsel yet the swelling udder strokes;
Over yonder hill does scant the dawn appear,
Then why does Cuddy leave his cott so rear?

CUDDY. Ah Lobbin Clout! I ween, my plight is guest,
For, he that loves, a stranger is to rest;
If swains belie not, thou have proved the smart,
And Blouzelinda's mistress of thy heart.
This rising rear betokens well thy mind,
Those arms are folded for thy Blouzelind.
And well, I trow, our piteous plights agree,
Thee Blouzelinda smites, Buxoma me.

LOBBIN CLOUT. Ah Blouzelind! I love thee more by half,
Than does their fawns, or cows the new-fall'n calf:
Woe worth the tongue! may blisters sore it gall,
That names Buxoma Blouzelind withal.

CUDDY. Hold, witless Lobbin Clout, I thee advise,
Lest blisters sore on thy own tongue arise.
Lo yonder Cloddipole, the blithsome swain,
The wisest lout of all the neighboring plain!
From Cloddipole we learnt to read the skies,
To know when hail will fall, or winds arise.
He taught us erst the heifer's tale to view;
When stuck aloft, that showers would strait ensue:
He first that useful secret did explain,
That pricking corns foretold the gathering rain.
When swallows fleet soar high, and sport in air,
He told us that the welkin would be clear:
Let Cloddipole, then, hear us twain rehearse,
And praise his sweetheart in alternate verse.
I Will wager this same oaken staff with thee,
That Cloddipole shall give the prize to me.

LOBBIN CLOUT. See this tobacco-pouch, that is lined with hair,
Made of the skin of sleekest fallow-deer.
This pouch, that is tied with tape of reddest hue,
I Will wager, that the prize shall be my due.

CUDDY. Begin thy carrols, then, thou vaunting slouch;
Be thine the oaken staff, or mine the pouch.

LOBBIN CLOUT. My Blouzelinda is the blithest lass,
Than primrose sweeter, or the clover-grass.
Fair is the king-cup that in meadow blows,
Fair is the daisie that beside her grows;
Fair is the gilliflower, of gardens sweet,
Fair is the mary-gold, for pottage meet.
But Blouzelind's than gilliflow'r more fair,
Than daisie, mary-gold, or king-cup rare.

CUDDY. My brown Buxoma is the featest maid,
That ever at wake delightsome gambol played.
Clean as young lambkins, or the goose's down,
And like the goldfinch in her Sunday gown.
The witless lamb may sport upon the plain,
The frisking kid delight the gaping swain,
The wanton calf may skip with many a bound,
And my cur Tray play deftest feats around;
But neither lamb, nor kid, nor calf, nor Tray,
Dance like Buxoma on the first of May.

LOBBIN CLOUT. Sweet is my toil when Blouzelind is near;
Of her bereft it is winter all the year.
With her, no sultry summer's heat I know;
In winter, when she is nigh, with love I glow.
Come, Blouzelinda, ease thy swain's desire,
My summer's shadow, and my winter's fire!

CUDDY. As with Buxoma, once, I worked at hay,
Even noontide labor seemed an holiday;
And holidays, if happily, she were gone,
Like worky-days, I wished would soon be done.
Eftsoons, O sweetheart kind, my love repay,
And all the year shall then be holiday.

LOBBIN CLOUT. As Blouzelinda, in a gamesome mood,
Behind a haycock loudly laughing stood,
I slily ran, and snatched a hasty kiss,
She wiped her lips, nor took it much amiss.
Believe me, Cuddy, while I Am bold to say,
Her breath was sweeter than the ripened hay.

CUDDY. As my Buxoma, in a morning fair,
With gentle finger strok'd her milky care,
I queintly stole a kiss; at first, it is true,
She frowned, yet, after, granted one or two.
Lobbin, I swear, believe who will my vows,
Her breath by far excelled the breathing cows.

LOBBIN CLOUT. Leek to the Welsh, to Dutchmen butter's dear,
Of Irish swains potatoe is the cheer;
Oats, for their feasts, the Scottish shepherds grind,
Sweet turnips are the food of Blouzelind.
While she loves turnips, butter I Will despise,
Nor leeks, nor oatmeal, nor potatoe prize.

CUDDY. In good roast-beef my landlord sticks his knife,
The capon fat delights his dainty wife,
Pudding our parson eats, the 'squire loves hare,
But white-pot thick is my Buxoma's fare.
While she loves white-pot, capon never shall be,
Nor hare, nor beef, nor pudding, food for me.

LOBBIN CLOUT. As once I played at Blindman's-buff, it hapt
About my eyes the towel thick was wrapped.
I missed the swains and seized on Blouzelind.
True speaks that ancient proverb, 'Love is blind.'

CUDDY. As at Hot-cockles once I laid me down,
And felt the weighty hand of many a clown;
Buxoma gave a gentle tap, and I
Quick rose, and read soft mischief in her eye.

LOBBIN CLOUT. On two near elms the slackened cord I hung,
Now high, now low, my Blouzelinda swung.
With the rude wind her rumpled garment rose,
And showed her taper leg, and scarlet hose.

CUDDY. Across the fallen oak the plank I laid,
And myself poised against the tottering maid.
High leapt the plank; adown Buxoma fell;
I spied -- but faithful sweethearts never tell.

LOBBIN CLOUT. This riddle, Cuddy, if thou can explain;
This wily riddle puzzles every swain:
What Marygold.
flower is that which bears the virgin's name,
The richest metal joined with the same?

CUDDY. Answer, thou carle, and judge this riddle right,
I Will frankly own thee for a cunning wight.
What Rosemary.
flower is that which royal honor craves,
Adjoin the virgin, and it is strown on graves?

CLODDIPOLE. Forbear, contending louts, give over your strains,
An oaken staff each merits for his pains.
But see the sunbeams bright to labor warn,
And gild the thatch of goodman Hodge's barn.
Your herds for want of water stand adry;
They Are weary of your songs -- and so am I.

TUESDAY; OR, THE DITTY.
MARIAN. YOUNG Collin Clout, a lad of peerless meed,
Full well could dance, and deftly tune the reed;
In every wood his carols sweet were known,
At every wake his nimble feats were shown.
When in the ring the rustic routs he threw,
The damsels pleasures with his conquests grew;
Or when, aslant, the cudgel threats his head,
His danger smites the breast of every maid;
But chief of Marian: Marian loved the swain,
The parson's maid, and neatest of the plain.
Marian, that soft could stroke the udder'd cow,
Or lessen with her sieve the barley mow;
Marbled with sage the hardened cheese she pressed,
And yellow butter Marian's skill confessed;
But Marian now, devoid of country cares,
Nor yellow butter, nor sage cheese, prepares:
For yearning love the witless maid employs,
And love, say swains, all busy heed destroys.
Collin makes mock at all her piteous smart,
A las, that Cic'ly hight, had won his heart;
Cic'ly, the western lass, that tends the kee,
The rival of the parson's maid was she.
In dreary shade now Marian lies along,
And, mixed with sighs, thus wails in plaining song.
Ah woeful day! ah woeful noon and morn!
When first by thee my younglings white were shorn,
Then, first, I ween, I cast a lover's eye;
My sheep were silly, but more silly I;
Beneath the shears they felt no lasting smart;
They lost but fleeces, while I lost a heart.
Ah Collin! can thou leave thy sweetheart true?
What I have done for thee will Cic'ly do?
Will she thy linen wash, or hosen darn,
And knit thee gloves made of her own-spun yarn?
Will she with huswife's hand provide thy meat,
And every Sunday morn thy neckcloth plait?
Which over thy kersey doublet spreading wide,
In service time drew Cic'ly's eyes aside.
Wherever I gad I cannot hide my care,
My new disasters in my look appear.
White as the curd my ruddy cheek is grown,
So thin my features that I Am hardly known;
Our neighbors tell me often, in joking talk,
Of ashes, leather, oatmeal, bran, and chalk;
Unwittingly of Marian they divine,
And wist not that with thoughtful love I pine.
Yet Collin Clout, untoward shepherd swain,
Walks whistling blithe, while pitiful I plain.
Whilom with thee 'twas Marian's dear delight
To moil all day, and merry-make at night;
If in the soil you guide the crooked share,
Your early breakfast is my constant care.
And when, with even hand, you strew the grain,
I fright the thievish rooks from off the plain.
In misling days when I my thresher heard,
With nappy beer I to the barn repaired;
Lost in the music of the whirling flail,
To gaze on thee I left the smoking pail:
In harvest, when the sun was mounted high,
My leathern bottle did thy drought supply;
When-e'er you mowed I followed with the rake,
And have, full often, been sunburned for thy sake;
When in the welkin gathering showers were seen,
I lagg'd the last with Collin on the green;
And when, at eve, returning with thy carr,
Awaiting heard the gingling bells from far,
Strait on the fire the sooty pot I placed;
To warm thy broth I burnt my hands for haste.
When, hungry, thou stood'st staring, like an oaf,
I sliced the lunceon from the barley loaf,
With crumbled bread I thickened well thy mess:
Ah, love me more, or love thy pottage less!
Last Friday's eve, when, as the sun was set,
I, near yon style, three sallow gypsies met.
Upon my hand they cast a poring look,
Bid me beware, and thrice their heads they shook;
They said, that many crosses I must prove,
Some in my wordly gain, but most in love.
Next morn I missed three hens and our old cock,
And off the hedge two pinners and a smock.
I bore these losses with a christian mind,
And no mishaps could feel, while thou were kind.
But since, alas! I grew my Collin's scorn,
I Have known no pleasure, night, or noon, or morn.
Help me, ye gypsies, bring him home again,
And, to a constant lass, give back her swain.
Have I not sat with thee full many a night,
When dying embers were our only light,
When every creature did in slumbers lie,
Besides our cat, my Collin Clout, and I?
No troublous thoughts the cat or Collin move,
While I alone am kept awake by love.
Remember, Collin, when at last year's wake,
I bought the costly present for thy sake;
Could thou spell over the posie on thy knife,
And with another change thy state of life?
If thou forget'st, I wot, I can repeat;
My memory can tell the verse so sweet.
"As this is engraved upon this knife of thine,
"So is thy image on this heart of mine."
But woe is me! Such presents luckless prove;
For knives, they tell me, always sever love.
Thus Marian wail'd, her eyes with tears brimfull,
When goody Debbins brought her cow to bull.
With apron blue to dry her tears she sought,
Then saw the cow well served, and took a groat.

WEDNESDAY; OR, THE DUMPS.
SPARABELLA. THE wailings of a maiden I recite,
A maiden fair, that Sparabella hight.
Such strains never warble in the linnet's throat,
Nor the gay goldfinch chaunts so sweet a note.
No magpye chatter'd, nor the painted jay,
No ox was heard to low, nor ass to bray;
No rusling breezes played the leaves among,
While thus her madrigal the damsel sung.
Awhile, O D'Urfey, lend an ear or twain,
Nor, though in homely guise, my verse disdain;
Whether thou seek'st new kingdoms in the sun,
Whether thy muse does at Newmarket run,
Or does with gossips at a feast regale,
And heighten her conceits with sack and ale;
Or else, at wakes, with Joan and Hodge rejoice,
Where D'Urfey's lyrics swell in every voice;
Yet suffer me, thou bard of wondrous meed,
Amid thy bays to weave this rural weed.
Now the sun drove adown the western road,
And oxen laid at rest forget the goad;
The clown fatigued trudged homeward with his spade,
Across the meadows stretched the lengthened shade:
When Sparabella, pensive and forlorn,
Alike with yearning love and labor worn,
Leaned on her rake, and, strait, with doleful guise,
Did this sad plaint in mournful notes devise.
Come night, as dark as pitch, surround my head,
From Sparabella Bumkinet is fled;
The ribbon that his val'rous cudgel won,
Last Sunday happier Clumsilis put on.
Sure, if he would eyes (but love, they say, has none)
I whilom by that ribbon had been known.
Ah, well a day, I Am shent with baneful smart,
For with that ribbon he bestowed his heart.
My plaint, ye lasses, with this burden aid,
It Is hard so true a damsel dies a maid.
Shall heavy Clumsilis with me compare?
View this, ye lovers, and like me despair.
Her blubbered lip by smutty pipes is worn,
And in her breath tobacco whiffs are born;
The cleanly cheese-press she could never turn,
Her awkward fist did never employ the churn;
If ever she brewed, the drink would strait go sour,
Before it ever felt the thunder's power:
No huswifry the dowdy creature knew;
To sum up all, her tongue confessed the shrew.
My plaint, ye lasses, with this burden aid,
It Is hard so true a damsel dies a maid.
I Have often seen my visage in yon lake.
Nor are my features of the homeliest make.
Though Clumsilis may boast a whiter dye,
Yet the black sloe turns in my rolling eye;
And fairest blossoms drop with every blast;
But the brown beauty will like hollies last.
Her wan complexion's like the withered leek,
While Katherine pears adorn my ruddy cheek.
Yet she, alas! the witless lout has won;
And, by her gain, poor Sparabell's undone!
Let hares and hounds in coupling straps unite,
The clocking hen make friendship with the kite;
Let the fox simply wear the nuptial noose,
And join in wedlock with the waddling goose;
For love has brought a stranger thing to pass,
The fairest shepherd weds the foulest lass.
My plaint, ye lasses, with this burden aid,
It Is hard so true a damsel dies a maid.
Sooner shall cats disport in waters clear,
And speckled mackrels graze the meadows fair,
Sooner shall screech-owls bask in sunny day,
And the slow ass on trees, like squirrels, play;
Sooner shall snails on insect pinions rove,
Than I forget my shepherd's wonted love.
My plaint, ye lasses, with this burden aid,
It Is hard so true a damsel dies a maid.
Ah! did thou know what proffers I withstood,
When late I met the squire in yonder wood!
To me he sped, regardless of his game,
While all my cheek was glowing red with shame;
My lip he kissed, and praised my healthful look,
Then from his purse of silk a guinea took,
Into my hand he forced the tempting gold,
While I with modest struggling broke his hold.
He swore that Dick, in liv'ry stripped with lace,
Should wed me soon, to keep me from disgrace;
But I nor footman prized, nor golden fee;
For what is lace, or gold, compared to thee?
My plaint, ye lasses, with this burden aid,
It Is hard so true a damsel dies a maid.
Now plain I ken whence Love his rise begun.
Sure he was born some bloody butcher's son,
Bred up in shambles, where our younglings slain,
Erst taught him mischief, and to sport with pain.
The father only silly sheep annoys,
The son the sillier shepherdess destroys.
Does son or father greater mischief do?
The fire is cruel, so the son is too.
My plaint, ye lasses, with this burden aid,
It Is hard so true a damsel dies a maid.
Farewell, ye woods, ye meads, ye streams that flow;
A sudden death shall rid me of my woe.
This penknife, keen, my windpipe shall divide.
What, shall I fall as squeaking pigs have died!
No -- To some tree this carcass I Will suspend.
But worrying curs find such untimely end!
I Will speed me to the pond, where the high stool
On the long plank hangs over the muddy pool,
That stool, the dread of every scolding queen;
Yet, sure a lover should not dye so mean?
There placed aloft, I Will rave and rail by fits,
Though all the parish say I Have lost my wits;
And thence, if courage holds, myself I Will throw,
And quench my passion in the lake below.
Ye lasses, ease your burden, cease to moan,
And, by my case forewarned, go mind your own.
The sun was set; the night came on a-pace,
And falling dews bewet around the place;
The bat takes airy rounds on leathern wings,
And the hoarse owl his woeful dirges sings;
The prudent maiden deems it now too late,
And, till tomorrow comes, defers her fate.

THURSDAY; OR, THE SPELL.
HOBNELIA. HOBNELIA, seated in a dreary vale,
In pensive mood rehearsed her piteous tale;
Her piteous tale the winds in sighs bemoan,
And pining echo answers groan for groan.
I rue the day, a rueful day I trow;
The woeful day; a day, indeed, of woe!
When Lubberkin to town his cattle drove,
A maiden fine bedight he happ'd to love;
The maiden fine bedight his love retains,
And for the village he forsakes the plains.
Return, my Lubberkin, these ditties hear;
Spells will I try, and spells shall ease my care.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
When first the year, I heard the cuckoo sing,
And call with welcome note the budding spring,
I straitway set a running with such haste,
Deb'rah, that won the smock, scarce ran so fast.
'Till spent for lack of breath, quite weary grown,
Upon a rising bank I sat adown,
Then doff'd my shoe, and, by my troth, I swear,
Therein I spied this yellow frizled hair,
As like to Lubberkin's in curl and hue,
As if upon his comely pate it grew.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
At eve last midsummer no sleep I sought,
But to the field a bag of hemp seed brought,
I scattered round the seed on every side,
And three times, in a trembling accent, cried,
"This hemp seed with my virgin hand I sow,
"Who shall my true-love be, the crop shall mow."
I strait looked back, and, if my eyes speak truth,
With his keen scythe behind me came the youth.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
Last Valentine, the day when birds of kind
Their paramours with mutual chirpings find;
I rearly rose, just at the break of day,
Before the sun had chased the stars away;
A-field I went, amid the morning dew,
To milk my kine (for so should huswives do)
Thee first I spied; and the first swain we see,
In spite of fortune, shall our true-love be;
See, Lubberkin, each bird his partner take;
And can thou, then, thy sweetheart dear forsake?
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
Last May Day fair I searched to find a snail
That might my secret lover's name reveal;
Upon a gooseberry bush a snail I found,
For, always, snails near sweetest fruit abound.
I seized the vermin, home I quickly sped,
And on the hearth the milk-white embers spread.
Slow crawled the snail, and, if I right can spell,
In the soft ashes marked a curious L:
Oh, may this wondrous omen lucky prove!
For L is found in Lubberkin and Love.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
Two hazle nuts I threw into the flame,
And to each nut I gave a sweet-heart's name.
This with the loudest bounce me sore amazed,
That in a flame of brightest color blazed.
As blazed the nut so may thy passion grow;
For 'twas thy nut that did so brightly glow.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
As peascods once I plucked, I chanced to see
One that was closely filled with three times three,
Which when I cropp'd I safely home conveyed,
And over the door the spell in secret laid;
My wheel I turned, and sung a ballad new,
While from the spindle I the fleeces drew;
The latch moved up, when who should first come in,
But, in his proper person, -- Lubberkin.
I broke my yarn, surprised the sight to see;
Sure sign that he would break his word with me.
Eftsoons I joined it with my wonted slight;
So may again his love with mine unite!
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
This Lady-fly I take from off the grass,
Whose spotted back might scarlet red surpass.
"Fly, Lady-bird, north, south, or east or west,
"Fly where the man is found that I love best."
He leaves my hand! see, to the west he is flown,
To call my true-love from the faithless town.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
I pare this pippin round and round again,
My shepherd's name to flourish on the plain.
I fling the unbroken paring over my head,
Upon the grass a perfect L is read;
Yet on my heart a fairer L is seen
Than what the paring marks upon the green.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
This pippin shall another trial make;
See from the core two kernels brown I take;
This on my cheek for Lubberkin is worn,
And Boobyclod on the other side is born.
But Boobyclod soon drops upon the ground,
A certain token that his love's unsound,
While Lubberkin sticks firmly to the last;
Oh were his lips to mine but joined so fast!
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
As Lubberkin once slept beneath a tree,
I twitch'd his dangling garter from his knee;
He wist not when the hempen string I drew.
Now mine I quickly doff, of inkle blue;
Together fast I tie the garters twain,
And, while I knit the knot, repeat the strain:
"Three times a true-love's knot I tie secure;
"Firm be the knot, firm may his love endure."
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
As I was wont, I trudged last market day
To town, with new-laid eggs preserved in hay.
I made my market long before 'twas night;
My purse grew heavy and my basket light.
Strait to the 'pothecary's shop I went,
And in love-powder all my money spent;
Behap what will, next Sunday, after prayers,
When to the alehouse Lubberkin repairs,
These golden flies into his mug I Will throw,
And soon the swain with fervent love shall glow.
With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.
But hold, our Lightfoot barks, and cocks his ears,
Over yonder style see Lubberkin appears.
He comes, he comes, Hobnelia's not bewrayed,
Nor shall she, crowned with willow, die a maid.
He vows, he swears, he will give me a green gown;
Oh dear! I fall adown, adown, adown;

FRIDAY; OR, THE DIRGE.
BUMKINET, GRUBBINOL. BUMKINET. WHY, Grubbinol, do thou so wistful seem?
There Is sorrow in thy look, if right I deem.
It Is true, yon oaks with yellow tops appear,
And chilly blasts begin to nip the year;
From the tall elm a shower of leaves is born,
And their lost beauty riven beeches mourn.
Yet even this season pleasance blithe affords,
Now the squeezed press foams with our apple hoards.
Come, let us hye, and quaff a cheary bowl,
Let cider now wash sorrow from thy soul.

GRUBBINOL. Ah Bumkinet! since thou from hence were gone,
From these sad plains all merriment is flown;
Should I reveal my grief 'twould spoil thy cheer,
And make thine eye overflow with many a tear.

BUMKINET. Hang sorrow! Let Us to yonder hut repair,
And, with trim sonnets, cast away our care.
Gillian of Croydon well thy pipe can play;
Thou sing'st, most sweet, Over hills and far away.
Of Patient Grissel I devise to sing,
And catches quaint shall make the valleys ring.
Come, Grubbinol, beneath this shelter, come,
From hence we view our flocks securely roam.

GRUBBINOL. Yes, blithesome lad, a tale I mean to sing,
But with my woe shall distant valleys ring,
The tale shall make our kidlings droop their head;
For, woe is me! -- our Blouzelind is dead.

BUMKINET. Is Blouzelinda dead? farewell my glee!
No happiness is now reserved for me.
As the wood pigeon cooes without his mate,
So shall my doleful dirge bewail her fate.
Of Blouzelinda fair I mean to tell,
The peerless maid that did all maids excel.
Henceforth, the morn shall dewy sorrow shed,
And evening tears upon the grass be spread;
The rolling streams with watery grief shall flow,
And winds shall moan aloud -- when loud they blow.
Henceforth, as often as autumn shall return,
The dropping trees, whenever it rains, shall mourn;
This season quite shall strip the country's pride;
For 'twas in Autumn Blouzelinda died
Wherever I gad, I Blouzelind shall view,
Woods, dairy, barn, and mows, our passion knew.
When I direct my eyes to yonder wood,
Fresh rising sorrow curdles in my blood.
Thither I Have often been the damsel's guide.
When rotten sticks our fuel have supplied;
There I remember how her faggots large,
Were frequently these happy shoulders charge.
Sometimes this crook drew hazel boughs adown,
And stuffed her apron wide with nuts so brown;
Or, when her feeding hogs had missed their way,
Or wallowing 'mid a feast of acorns lay;
The untoward creatures to the stye I drove,
And whistled all the way -- or told my love.
If by the dairy's hatch I chance to hie,
I shall her goodly countenance espy;
For there her goodly countenance I Have seen,
Set off with kerchief starched and pinners clean.
Sometimes, like wax, she rolls the butter round,
Or with the wooden lilly prints the pound.
Whilom I Have seen her skim the clouted cream,
And press from spongy curds the milky stream.
But now, alas! these ears shall hear no more
The whining swine surround the dairy door,
No more her care shall fill the hollow tray,
To fat the guzzling hogs with floods of whey.
Lament, ye swine, in gruntings spend your grief,
For you, like me, have lost your sole relief.
When in the barn the sounding flail I ply,
Where, from her sieve, the chaff was wont to fly,
The poultry there will seem around to stand,
Waiting upon her charitable hand.
No succor meet the poultry now can find,
For they, like me, have lost their Blouzelind.
Whenever by yon barley mow I pass
Before my eyes will trip the tidy lass.
I pitched the sheaves (oh could I do so now)
Which she in rows pil'd on the growing mow.
There every deal my heart by love was gained,
There the sweet kiss my courtship has explained,
Ah, Blouzelind! that mow I never shall see,
But thy memorial will revive in me.
Lament, ye fields, and rueful symptoms show;
Henceforth, let not the smelling primrose grow;
Let weeds, instead of butter-flowers, appear,
And meads, instead of daisies, hemlock bear;
For cowslips sweet let dandelion spread,
For Blouzelinda, blithsome maid, is dead!
Lament, ye swains, and over her grave bemoan,
And spell ye right this verse upon her stone:
"Here Blouzelinda lies -- Alas, alas!
"Weep, shepherds, -- and remember flesh is grass.

GRUBBINOL. Albeit thy songs are sweeter to mine ear,
Than, to the thirsty cattle, rivers clear;
Or winter porridge to the laboring youth,
Or buns and sugar to the damsel's tooth;
Yet Blouzelinda's name shall tune my lay;
Of her I Will sing for ever and for aye.
When Blouzelind expired, the weather's bell
Before the drooping flock tolled forth her knell!
The solemn death-watch click'd the hour she died,
And chilling crickets in the chimney cried;
The boding raven on her cottage sat,
And, with hoarse croaking, warned us of her fate;
The lambkin, which her wonted tendance bred,
Dropped on the plains, that fatal instant, dead;
Swarmed on a rotten stick the bees I spied,
Which erst I saw when goody Dobson died,
How shall I, void of tears, her death relate,
While on her darling's bed her mother sat;
These words the dying Blouzelinda spoke;
And of the dead let none the will revoke.
"Mother," quoth she, "let not the poultry need,
And give the goose wherewith to raise her breed;
Be these my sister's care -- and, every morn,
Amid the ducklings let her scatter corn;
The sickly calf, that is housed, be sure to tend,
Feed him with milk, and from bleak colds defend.
Yet, e're I die -- See, mother, yonder shelf,
There secretly I Have hid my worldly pelf.
Twenty good shillings in a rag I laid;
Be ten the parson's, for my sermon, paid.
The rest is yours -- my spinning-wheel and rake,
Let Susan keep for her dear sister's sake;
My new straw hat, that is trimly lined with green,
Let Peggy wear; for she is a damsel clean.
My leathern bottle, long in harvests tried,
Be Grubbinol's -- this silver ring beside:
Three silver pennies, and a nine-pence bent,
A token kind, to Bumkinet is sent."
Thus spoke the maiden, while her mother cried,
And peaceful, like the harmless lamb, she died.
To show their love, the neighbors, far and near,
Followed, with wistful look, the damsel's bier.
Sprigg'd rosemary the lads and lasses bore,
While, dismally, the parson walked before.
Upon her grave the rosemary they threw,
The daisie, butter-flower, and endive blue.
After the good man warned us from his text,
That none could tell whose turn would be the next;
He said, that Heaven would take her soul, no doubt,
And spoke the hourglass, in her praise -- quite out.
To her sweet memory flowery garlands strung,
Over her now empty seat aloft were hung.
With wicker rods we fenced her tomb around,
To ward, from man and beast, the hallowed ground,
Lest her new grave the parson's cattle raze;
For both his horse and cow the churchyard graze.
Now we trudged homeward to her mother's farm,
To drink new cider mull'd, with ginger warm:
For gaffer Tread-well told us, by the by,
Excessive sorrow is exceeding dry.
While bulls bear horns upon their curled brow,
Or lasses with soft stroakings milk the cow;
While paddling ducks the standing lake desire,
Or batt'ning hogs roll in the sinking mire;
While moles the crumbled earth in hillocks raise,
So long shall swains tell Blouzelinda's praise.
Thus wail'd the louts in melancholy strain,
'Till bonny Susan sped across the plain;
They seized the lass, in apron clean arrayed,
And to the alehouse forced the willing maid:
In ale and kisses they forget their cares,
And Susan Blouzelinda's loss repairs.

SATURDAY; OR, THE FLIGHTS.
BOWZYBEUS. SUBLIMER strains, O rustic muse, prepare;
Forget, awhile, the barn and dairy's care;
Thy homely voice to loftier numbers raise;
The drunkard's flights require sonorous lays,
With Bowzybeus songs exalt thy verse,
While rocks and woods the various notes rehearse.
'Twas in the season when the reapers toil
Of the ripe harvest 'gan to rid the soil;
Wide through the field was seen a goodly rout,
Clean damsels bound the gathered sheafs about;
The lads, with sharpened hook and sweating brow,
Cut down the labors of the winter plow.
To the near hedge young Susan steps aside,
She feigned her coat or garter was untied,
Whatever she did, she stooped adown unseen,
And merry reapers, what they list, will ween.
Soon she rose up, and cried with voice so shrill,
That echo answered from the distant hill;
The youths and damsels ran to Susan's aid,
Who thought some adder had the lass dismayed.
When fast asleep they Bowzybeus spied,
His hat and oaken staff lay close beside.
That Bowzybeus who could sweetly sing,
Or, with the rosin'd bow, torment the string:
That Bowzybeus who, with finger's speed,
Could call soft warblings from the breathing reed;
That Bowzybeus who, with jocund tongue,
Ballads, and roundelays, and catches sung.
They loudly laugh to see the damsel's fright,
And in disport surround the drunken wight.
Ah, Bowzybee, why did thou stay so long?
The mugs were large, the drink was wondrous strong!
Thou should have left the fair before 'twas night,
But thou sat'st toping till the morning light.
Cic'ly, brisk maid, steps forth before the rout,
And kissed with smacking lip, the snoring lout;
For custom says, "Whoever this venture proves,
For such a kiss demands a pair of gloves."
By her example Dorcas bolder grows,
And plays a tickling straw within his nose.
He rubs his nostril, and, in wonted joke,
The sneering swains with stamm'ring speech bespoke.
"To you, my lads, I Will sing my carrols over;
As for the maids -- I Have something else in store.
No sooner 'gan he raise his tuneful song,
But lads and lasses round about him throng.
Not ballad-singer, placed above the crowd,
Sings with a note so shrilling sweet and loud,
Nor parish-clerk, who calls the psalm so clear,
Like Bowzybeus sooths the attentive ear.
Of nature's laws his carols first begun,
Why the grave owl can never face the sun.
For owls, as swains observe, detest the light,
And only sing and seek their prey by night.
How turnips hide their swelling heads below,
And how the closing colworts upwards grow;
How Will-a-Wisp misleads night-faring clowns,
Over hills, and sinking bogs, and pathless downs.
Of stars he told, that shoot with shining trail,
And of the glowworms light that gilds his tail.
He sung, where wood-cocks in the summer feed,
And in what climates they renew their breed;
Some think to northern coasts their flight they tend,
Or to the moon, in midnight hours, ascend.
Where swallows in the winter's season keep.
And how the drowsy bat and dormouse sleep.
How nature does the puppy's eyelid close,
Till the bright sun has nine times set and rose;
For huntsmen, by their long experience find,
That puppies, still, nine rolling suns are blind.
Now he goes on, and sings of fairs and shows;
For still new fairs before his eyes arose.
How pedlars stalls with glittering toys are laid,
The various fairings of the country-maid.
Long silken laces hang upon the twine,
And rows of pins and amber bracelets shine;
How the tight lass knives, combs, and scissars spies,
And looks on thimbles with desiring eyes.
Of lott'ries, next, with tuneful note, he told,
Where silver spoons are won, and rings of gold.
The lads and lasses trudge the street along,
And all the fair is crowded in his song.
The mountebank now treads the stage, and sells
His pills, his balsams and his ague-spells;
Now over and over the nimble tumbler springs,
And on the rope the venurous maiden swings;
Jack Pudding, in his party-colored jacket,
Tosses the glove, and jokes at every packet.
Of Raree-shows he sung, and Punch's feats,
Of pockets picked in crowds, and various cheats.
Then sad he sung, The Children in the Wood.
Ah barbarous uncle, stained with infant blood;
How blackberries they plucked in deserts wild,
And, fearless, at the glittering fauchion smiled;
Their little corpse the robin-red-breasts found,
And strewn, with pious bill, the leaves around.
Ah gentle birds! if this verse lasts so long,
Your names shall live for ever in my song.
For buxom Joan he sung the doubtful strife,
How the sly sailor made the maid a wife.
To louder strains he raised his voice, to tell
What woeful wars in Chevy-chace befell,
When "Piercy drove the deer with hound and horn,
Wars to be wept by children yet unborn!"
Ah With'rington, more years thy life had crowned,
If thou had never heard the horn or hound!
Yet shall the 'squire who fought on bloody stumps,
By future bards be wail'd in doleful dumps.
All in the land of Essex next he chaunts,
How to sleek mares starch Quakers turn gallants:
How the grave brother stood on bank so green.
Happy for him if mares had never been!
Then he was seized with a religious qualm,
And, on a sudden, sung the hundredth psalm.
He sung of Taffey Welsh, and Sawney Scot,
Lilly-bullero, and the Irish Trot.
Why should I tell of Bateman or of Shore,
Or Wantley's dragon slain by valiant Moore,
The bower of Rosamond, or Robin Hood,
And how the grass now grows where Troy town stood?
His carrols ceased: the listening maids and swains
Seem still to hear some soft imperfect strains.
Sudden he rose; and, as he reels along,
Swears kisses sweet should well reward his song.
The damsels laughing fly: the giddy clown
Again upon a wheatsheaf drops adown;
The power that guards the drunk his sleep attends,
Till, ruddy, like his face, the sun descends.

MAC FLECKNOE.
The severity of this satire, and the excellence of its versification, give it
a distinguished rank in this species of composition. At present, an ordinary
reader would scarce suppose that Shadwell, who is here meant by Mac Flecknoe,
was worth being chastised, and that Dryden's descending to such game was like
an eagle's stooping to catch flies. The truth, however, is, Shadwell, at one
time, held divided reputation with this great poet. Every age produces its
fashionable dunces, who, by following the transient topic, or humor, of the
day, supply talkative ignorance with materials for conversation.

ALL human things are subject to decay,
And, when Fate summons, monarchs must obey.
This Flecknoe found, who, like Augustus, young
Was called to empire, and had governed long;
In prose and verse was owned, without dispute,
Through all the realms of Nonsense, absolute.
This aged prince, now flourishing in peace,
And blessed with issue of a large increase;
Worn out with business, did, at length debate
To settle the succession of the state:
And pond'ring which, of all his sons, was fit
To reign, and wage immortal war with Wit,
Cried, It Is resolved; for Nature pleads, that he
Should only rule, who most resembles me.
Sh --, alone, my perfect image bears,
Mature in dullness from his tender years:
Sh --, alone, of all my sons, was he,
Who stands confirmed in full stupidity.
The rest, to some faint meaning make pretense;
But Sh -- never deviates into sense.
Some beams of wit on other souls may fall,
Strike through, and make a lucid interval;
But Sh -- 's genuine night admits no ray;
His rising fogs prevail upon the day.
Besides, his goodly fabric fills the eye,
And seems designed for thoughtless majesty:
Thoughtless as monarch oaks, that shade the plain,
And, spread in solemn state, supinely reign.
Heywood and Shirley were but types of thee,
Thou last great prophet of Tautology.
Even I, a dunce of more renown than they,
Was sent before but to prepare thy way;
And, coarsely clad in Norwich drugget, came
To teach the nations in thy greater name.
My warbling lute, the lute I whilom strung,
When to king John of Portugal I sung,
Was but the prelude to that glorious day,
When thou on silver Thames did cut thy way,
With well-tim'd oars, before the royal barge,
Swelled with the pride of thy celestial charge;
And, big with hymn, commander of an host,
The like was never in Epsom blankets tossed.
Methinks I see the new Arion sail,
The lute still trembling underneath thy nail.
At thy well-sharpen'd thumb, from shore to shore
The trebles squeak for fear, the bases roar:
Echoes from Pissing-Alley Sh -- call,
And Sh -- they resound from Aston-Hall.
About thy boat the little fishes throng,
As at the morning toast that floats along.
Sometimes, as prince of thy harmonious band,
Thou wield'st thy papers in thy threshing hand.
St. Andre's feet never kept more equal time,
Not even the feet of thy own Psyche's rhyme:
Though they in number as in sense excel;
So just, so like Tautology they fell,
That, pale with envy, Singleton forswore
The lute and sword, which he in triumph bore,
And vowed he never would act Villerius more.
Here stopped the good old sire, and wept for joy,
In silent raptures of the hopeful boy.
All arguments, but most his plays, persuade,
That for anointed dullness he was made.
Close to the walls which fair Augusta bind,
(The fair Augusta, much to fears inclined)
An ancient fabric, raised to inform the sight,
There stood of yore, and Barbican it hight;
A watch-tow'r once; but now, so fate ordains,
Of all the pile an empty name remains:
From its old ruins brothel-houses rise,
Scenes of lewd loves, and of polluted joys,
Where their vast courts the mother-strumpets keep,
And, undisturbed by watch, in silence sleep.
Near these a nursery erects its head,
Where queens are formed, and future heroes bred;
Where unfledged actors learn to laugh and cry,
Where infant punks their tender voices try,
And little Maximins the Gods defy.
Great Fletcher never treads in buskins here,
Nor greater Johnson dares in socks appear;
But gentle Simkin just reception finds
Amidst this monument of vanished minds:
Pure clinches the suburbian muse affords,
And Panton waging harmless war with words.
Here Flecknoe, as a place to fame well known,
Ambitiously designed his Sh -- 's throne:
For ancient Decker prophesied, long since,
That in this pile should reign a mighty prince,
Born for a scourge of Wit, and flail of sense:
To whom true dullness should some Psyche's owe,
But worlds of Misers from his pen should flow;
Humourists and Hypocrites it should produce,
Whole Raymond families, and tribes of Bruce.
Now empress Fame had published the renown
Of Sh -- 's coronation through the town.
Roused by report of Fame, the nations meet,
From near Bun-hill, and distant Watling-street.
No Persian carpets spread the imperial way,
But scattered limbs of mangled poets lay:
From dusty shops neglected authors come,
Martyrs of pies, and relics of the bum.
Much Heywood, Shirley, Ogleby, there lay;
But loads of Sh -- almost choked the way.
Bilk'd Stationers for yeomen stood prepared,
And H -- n was captain of the guard.
The hoary prince in majesty appeared,
High on a throne of his own labors reared.
At his right hand our young Ascanius sat,
Rome's other hope, and pillar of the state.
His brows thick fogs, instead of glories, grace,
And lambent Dullness played around his face.
As Hannibal did to the altars come,
Swore by his sire a mortal foe to Rome;
So Sh -- swore, nor should his vow be vain,
That he, till death, true dullness would maintain;
And, in his father's right, and realm's defense,
Never to have peace with wit, nor truce with sense.
The king himself the sacred unction made,
As king by office, and as priest by trade.
In his sinister hand, instead of ball,
He placed a mighty mug of potent ale;
Love's kingdom to his right he did convey,
At once his scepter, and his rule of sway;
Whose righteous lore the prince had practiced young,
And from whose loins recorded Psyche sprung.
His temples, last, with poppies were overspread,
That, nodding, seemed to consecrate his head.
Just at the point of time, if fame not lie,
On his left hand twelve reverend owls did fly.
So Romulus, it is sung, by Tyber's brook,
Presage of sway from twice six vultures took.
The admiring throng loud acclamations make,
And omens of his future empire take.
The sire then shook the honors of his head,
And from his brows damps of oblivion shed
Full on the filial dullness: long he stood,
Repelling from his breast the raging god;
At length burst out in this prophetic mood:
"Heavens bless my son, from Ireland let him reign
To far Barbados on the western main;
Of his dominion may no end be known,
And greater than his father's be his throne;
Beyond Love's kingdom let him stretch his pen!" --
He paused, and all the people cried, Amen.
Then thus continued he: "My son, advance
Still in new impudence, new ignorance.
Success let others teach, learn thou, from me,
Pangs without birth, and fruitless industry.
Let Virtuoso's in five years be writ;
Yet not one thought accuse thy toil of wit.
Let gentle George in triumph tread the stage,
Make Dorimant betray, and Loveit rage;
Let Cully, Cockwood, Fopling, charm the pit,
And, in their folly, show the writer's wit.
Yet still thy fools shall stand in thy defense,
And justify their author's want of sense.
Let 'em be all by thy own model made
Of dullness, and desire no foreign aid;
That they to future ages may be known,
Not copies drawn, but issue of thy own.
Nay, let thy men of wit too be the same,
All full of thee, and differing but in name.
But let no alien S -- dl -- y interpose,
To lard with wit thy hungry Epsom prose.
And, when false flowers of Rhetoric thou would cull,
Trust Nature, do not labor to be dull;
But write thy best, and top; and, in each line,
Sir Formal's oratory will be thine:
Sir Formal, though unsought, attends thy quill,
And does thy Northern Dedications fill.
Nor let false friends seduce thy mind to fame,
By arrogating Johnson's hostile name.
Let father Flecknoe fire thy mind with praise,
And uncle Ogleby thy envy raise.
Thou art my blood, where Johnson has no part:
What share have we in nature or in art?
Where did his wit on Learning fix a brand,
And rail at arts he did not understand?
Where made he love in prince Nicander's vein,
Or swept the dust in Psyche's humble strain?
Where sold he bargains, whip-stitch, kiss my arse,
Promised a play, and dwindled to a farce?
When did his muse from Fletcher scenes purloin,
As thou whole Eth'ridge do transfuse to thine?
But so transfused, as oil and waters flow;
His always floats above, thine sinks below.
This is thy province, this thy wondrous way,
New humors to invent for each new play:
This is that boasted bias of thy mind,
By which, one way, to dullness it is inclined:
Which makes thy writings lean on one side still,
And, in all changes, that way bends thy will.
Nor let thy mountain-belly make pretense
Of likeness; thine's a tympany of sense.
A tun of man in thy large bulk is writ;
But sure you are but a kilderkin of wit.
Like mine, thy gentle numbers feebly creep:
Thy tragic muse gives smiles, thy comic, sleep.
With whatever gall thou set'st thyself to write,
Thy inoffensive satires never bite.
In thy felonious heart though venom lies,
It does but touch thy Irish pen, and dies.
Thy genius calls thee not to purchase fame
In keen Iambics, but mild Anagram.
Leave writing plays, and choose for thy command
Some peaceful province in Acrostic land.
There thou may Wings display, and Altars raise,
And torture one poor word ten thousand ways.
Or, if thou would thy different talents suit,
Set thy own songs, and sing them to thy lute."
He said; but his last words were scarcely heard:
For Bruce and Longvil had a trap prepared,
And down they sent the yet declaiming bard.
Sinking, he left his drugget robe behind,
Borne upwards by a subterranean wind.
The mantle sell to the young prophet's part,
With double portion of his father's art.
ON POETRY. A RHAPSODY.
Here follows one of the best versified poems in our language, and the most
masterly production of its author. The severity with which Walpole is here
treated, was in consequence of that minister's having refused to provide for
Swift in England, when applied to for that purpose in the year 1725 (if I
remember right). The severity of a poet, however, gave Walpole very little
uneasiness. A man whose schemes, like this minister's, seldom extended beyond
the exigency of the year, but little regarded the contempt of posterity.

ALL human race would fain be wits,
And millions miss for one that hits.
Young's universal passion, pride,
Was never known to spread so wide.
Say, Britain, could you ever boast
Three poets in an age, at most?
Our chilling climate hardly bears
A sprig of bays in fifty years:
While every fool his claim alleges,
As if it grew in common hedges.
What reason can there be assigned
For this perverseness in the mind?
Brutes find out where their talents lie:
A bear will not attempt to fly;
A foundered horse will often debate
Before he tries a five-barr'd gate:
A dog, by instinct, turns aside,
Who sees the ditch too deep and wide.
But man we find the only creature,
Who, led by folly, combats nature;
Who, when she loudly cries forbear,
With obstinacy fixes there;
And, where his genius least inclines,
Absurdly bends his whole designs.
Not empire to the rising sun,
By valor, conduct, fortune won;
Not highest wisdom in debates
For framing laws to govern states;
Not skill in sciences profound,
So large, to grasp the circle round;
Such heavenly influence require,
As how to strike the Muse's lyre.
Not beggar's brat, on bulk begot;
Not bastard of a pedlar Scot;
Not boy brought up to cleaning shoes,
The spawn of Bridewell, or the stews;
Not infants dropped, the spurious pledges
Of gypsies litt'ring under hedges,
Are so disqualify'd by fate
To rise in church, or law, or state,
As he whom Phoebus, in his ire,
Has blasted with poetic fire.
What hope of custom in the fair,
While not a soul demands your ware?
Where you have nothing to produce
For private life, or public use?
Court, city, country, want you not;
You cannot bribe, betray, or plot.
For poets law makes no provision;
The wealthy have you in derision;
Of state affairs you cannot smatter;
Are awkward, when you try to flatter;
Your portion, taking Britain round,
Was just one annual hundred pound;
Now not so much as in remainder,
Since Cibber brought in an attainder;
For ever fixed by right divine
(A monarch's right) on Grub-street line.
Poor starvling bard, how small thy gains!
How unproportion'd to thy pains!
And here a simile comes pat in:
Though chickens take a month to fatten,
The guests, in less than half an hour,
Will more than half a score devour:
So, after toiling twenty days
To earn a stock of pence and praise,
Thy labors, grown the critic's prey,
Are swallowed over a dish of tea:
Gone, to be never heard of more;
Gone, where the chickens went before.
How shall a new attempter learn
Of different spirits to discern,
And how distinguish which is which,
The poet's vein, or scribbling itch?
Then hear an old experienced sinner,
Instructing thus a young beginner.
Consult yourself, and, if you find
A powerful impulse, urge your mind;
Impartial judge within your breast
What subject you can manage best;
Whether your genius most inclines
To satyr, praise, or hum'rous lines;
To elegies in mournful tone,
Or prologue, sent from hand unknown.
Then, rising with Aurora's light,
The muse invoked, sit down to write;
Blot out, correct, insert, refine,
Enlarge, diminish, interline;
Be mindful, when invention fails,
To scratch your head, and bite your nails.
Your poem finished, next, your care
Is needful to transcribe it fair.
In modern wit all printed trash is
Set off with numerous breaks -- and dashes --
To statesmen would you give a wipe,
You print it in Italic type.
When letters are in vulgar shapes,
It Is ten to one the wit escapes;
But, when in capitals expressed,
The dullest reader smokes the jest;
Or else, perhaps, he may invent
A better than the poet meant;
As learned commentators view
In Homer more than Homer knew.
Your poem in its modish dress,
Correctly fitted for the press,
Convey by penny-post to Lintot,
But let no friend alive look into it.
If Lintot thinks 'twill quit the cost,
You need not fear your labor lost:
And how agreeably surpised
Are you to see it advertised!
The hawker shows you one in print,
As fresh as farthings from the mint:
The product of your toil and sweating;
A bastard of your own begetting.
Be sure at Wills, the following day,
Lie snug, and hear what critics say.
And, if you find the general vogue
Pronounces you a stupid rogue,
Damns all your thoughts as low and little,
Sit still, and swallow down your spittle
Be silent as a politician,
For talking may beget suspicion:
Or praise the judgment of the town,
And help, yourself, to run it down.
Give up your fond, paternal pride,
Nor argue on the weaker side
For poems read without a name
We justly praise, or justly blame;
And critics have no partial views,
Except they know whom they abuse:
And, since you never provoked their spite,
Depend upon it their judgement's right.
But if you blab, you are undone:
Consider what a risk you run:
You lose your credit all at once;
The town will mark you for a dunce;
The vilest doggrel Grub-street sends
Will pass for yours with foes and friends;
And you must bear the whole disgrace,
Till some fresh blockhead takes your place.
Your secret kept, your poem sunk,
And sent in quires to line a trunk,
If, still, you be disposed to rhyme,
Go, try your hand a second time.
Again you fail; yet safe's the word;
Take courage, and attempt a third.
But, first, with care employ your thoughts,
Where critics marked your former faults:
The trivial turns, the borrowed wit,
The similies, that nothing fit;
The cant which every fool repeats,
Town jests, and coffee-house conceits;
Descriptions tedious, flat, and dry,
And introduced the lord knows why:
Or, where we find your fury set
Against the harmless alphabet;
On A's and B's your malice vent,
While readers wonder whom you meant;
A public or a private robber,
A statesman, or a South Sea jobber;
A prelate who no God believes;
A parliament, or den of thieves;
A pick-purse at the bar, or bench;
A duchess, or a suburb wench:
Or often when epithets you link
In gaping lines to fill a chink;
Like stepping-stones to save a stride
In streets where kennels are too wide;
Or like a heel-piece, to support
A cripple with one foot too short;
Or like a bridge that joins a marish
To moorlands of a different parish.
So have I seen ill-coupled hounds
Drag different ways in miry grounds.
So geographers in Afric maps
With savage pictures fill their gaps,
And over unhabitable downs
Place elephants, for want of towns.
But, though you miss your third essay,
You need not throw your pen away.
Lay now aside all thoughts of fame,
To spring more profitable game.
From party merit seek support;
The vilest verse thrives best at court.
A pamphlet in Sir Bob's defense
Will never fail to bring in pence:
Nor be concerned about the sale,
He pays his workmen on the nail.
A prince, the moment he is crowned,
Inherits every virtue round,
As emblems of the sovereign power,
Like other bawbles in the Tower:
Is generous, valiant, just, and wise,
And so continues till he dies:
His humble senate this professes
In all their speeches, votes, addresses:
But once you fix him in a tomb,
His virtues fade, his vices bloom;
And each perfection, wrong imputed,
Is fully at his death confuted.
The loads of poems in his praise
Ascending, make one funeral-blaze:
As soon as you can hear his knell,
This God on earth turns d -- l in hell:
And lo! his ministers of state,
Transformed to imps, his levee wait;
Where, in the scenes of endless woe,
They ply their former arts below;
And, as they sail in Charon's boat,
Contrive to bribe the judge's vote:
To Cerberus they give a fop,
His tripple-barking mouth to stop;
Or, in the ivory gate of dreams,
Project Excise and South Sea schemes;
Or hire their party-pamphleteers
To set Elysium by the ears.
Then, poet, if you mean to thrive,
Employ your muse on kings alive;
With prudence gathering up a cluster
Of all the virtues you can muster;
Which, formed into a garland sweet,
Lay, humbly, at your monarch's feet;
Who, as the odours reach his throne,
Will smile, and think 'em all his own;
For law and gospel both determine
All virtues lodge in royal ermine.
(I mean the oracles of both,
Who shall depose it upon oath.)
Your garland, in the following reign,
Change but the names, will do again.
But, if you think this trade too base,
(Which seldom is the dunce's case)
Put on the critic's brow, and sit
At Will's the puny judge of wit.
A nod, a shrug, a scornful smile,
With caution used, may serve awhile.
Proceed no further in your part,
Before you learn the terms of art;
For you can never be too far gone
In all our modern critics jargon:
Then talk, with more authentic face,
Of unities, in time and place;
Get scraps of Horace from your friends,
And have them at your fingers ends;
Learn Aristotle's rules by rote,
And, at all hazards, boldly quote;
Judicious Rymer often review,
Wise Dennis, and profound Bossu.
Read all the prefaces of Dryden,
For these our critics much confide in,
(Though merely writ, at first, for filling,
To raise the volume's price a shilling).
A forward critic often dupes us
With sham quotations, peri hupsous:
And, if we have not read Longinus,
Will magisterially outshine us.
Then, lest with Greek he overrun ye,
Procure the book for love or money,
Translated from Boileau's translation,
And quote quotation on quotation.
At Will's you hear a poem read,
Where Battus, from the table-head,
Reclining on his elbow-chair,
Gives judgment with decisive air;
To whom the tribe of circling wits,
As to an oracle, submits.
He gives directions to the town
To cry it up, or run it down;
Like courtiers, when they send a note,
Instructing members how to vote.
He sets the stamp of bad and good,
Though not a word be understood.
Your lesson learnt, you will be secure
To get the name of connoisseur:
And, when your merits once are known,
Procure disciples of your own.
For poets (you can never want 'em)
Spread through The ancient name of London.
Augusta Trinobantum,
Computing by their pecks of coals,
Amount to just nine thousand souls:
These over their proper districts govern,
Of wit and humor judges sovereign.
In every street a city-bard
Rules, like an alderman, his ward;
His indisputed rights extend
Through all the lane, from end to end;
The neighbors round admire his shrewdness
For songs of loyalty and lewdness;
Outdone by none in rhiming well,
Although he never learnt to spell.
Two bordering wits contend for glory,
And one is Whig, and one is Tory:
And this for epics claims the bays,
And that for elegiac lays:
Some famed for numbers soft and smooth,
By lovers spoke in Punch's booth:
And some as justly fame extols
For lofty lines in Smithfield drolls.
Bavius in Wapping gains renown,
And Maevius reigns over Kentish-town:
Tigellius, placed in Phoebus' car,
From Ludgate shines to Temple Bar:
Harmonious Cibber entertains
The court, with annual birthday strains;
Whence Gay was banished in disgrace,
Where Pope will never show his face;
Where Y -- g must torture his invention
To flatter knaves, or lose his pension.
But these are not a thousandth part
Of jobbers in the poet's art,
Attending each his proper station,
And all in due subordination,
Through every alley to be found,
In garrets high, or under ground;
And when they join their pericranies,
Out skips a book of miscellanies.
Hobbes clearly proves, that every creature
Lives in a state of war, by nature.
The greater for the smallest watch,
But meddle seldom with their match.
A whale, of moderate size, will draw
A shoal of herrings down his maw.
A fox with geese his belly crams,
A wolf destroys a thousand lambs.
But, search among the rhiming race,
The brave are worried by the base.
If on Parnassus' top you sit,
You rarely bite, are always bit.
Each poet of inferior size
On you shall rail and criticize;
And strive to tear you limb from limb,
While others do as much for him.
The vermin only teaze and pinch
Their foes superior by an inch.
So, nat'ralists observe, a flea
Has smaller fleas that on him prey,
And these have smaller still to bite 'em,
And so proceed ad infinitum.
Thus every poet, in his kind,
Is bit by him that comes behind;
Who, though too little to be seen,
Can tease, and gall, and give the spleen;
Call dunces fools, and sons of whores,
Lay Grub-street at each other's doors;
Extol the Greek and Roman masters,
And curse our modern poetasters.
Complain, as many an ancient bard did,
How genius is no more rewarded;
How wrong a taste prevails among us;
How much our ancestors out-sung us;
Can personate an awkward scorn
For those who are not poets born;
And all their brother dunces lash,
Who crowd the press with hourly trash.
Oh Grub-street! how do I bemoan thee,
Whose graceless children scorn to own thee!
Their filial piety forgot,
Deny their country, like a Scot;
Though, by their idiom and grimace,
They soon betray their native place:
Yet thou have greater cause to be
Ashamed of them, than they of thee,
Degenerate from their ancient brood,
Since first the court allowed them food.
Remains a difficulty still,
To purchase fame by writing ill?
From Flecknoe down to Howard's time,
How few have reached the low sublime?
For, when our highborn Howard died,
Blackmore, alone, his place supplied:
And lest a chasm should intervene,
When death had finished Blackmore's reign,
The leaden crown devolved to thee,
Great Lord Grimstone, author of a play called Love in an Hollow Tree.
poet of the Hollow-tree.
But ah! how unsecure thy throne!
A thousand bards thy right disown:
They plot to turn, in factious zeal,
Duncinea to a commonweal;
And, with rebellious arms, pretend,
An equal priv'lege to descend.
In bulk there are not more degrees,
From elephants to mites in cheese,
Than what a curious eye may trace,
In creatures of the rhiming race.
From bad to worse, and worse they fall;
But who can reach the worst of all?
For though, in nature, depth and height
Are equally held infinite,
In poetry the height we know;
It Is only infinite below.
For instance: when you rashly think,
No rhimer can like Welsted sink,
His merits balanced, you shall find,
The laureate leaves him far behind.
Concannen, more aspiring bard,
Soars downwards deeper by a yard.
Smart Jemmy Moor with vigor drops,
The rest pursue as thick as hops.
With heads to points the gulf they enter,
Linked perpendicular to the center;
And, as their heels elated rise,
Their heads attempt the nether skies.
O, what indignity and shame,
To prostitute the Muse's name!
By flattering --, whom Heaven designed
The plagues and scourges of mankind;
Bred up in ignorance and sloth,
And every vice that nurses both.
Fair Britain, in thy monarch blessed,
Whose virtues bear the strictest test;
Whom never faction could bespatter,
Nor minister nor poet flatter.
What justice in rewarding merit!
What magnanimity of spirit!
What lineaments divine we trace
Through all his figure, mien, and face!
Though peace with olive bind his hands,
Confessed the conquering hero stands.
Hydaspes, Indus, and the Ganges,
Dread from his hand impending changes.
From him the Tartar, and Chinese,
Short by the knees, entreat for peace.
The consort of his throne and bed
A perfect goddess born and bred,
Appointed sovereign judge to sit
On learning, eloquence, and wit.
Our eldest hope, divine Iulus,
(Late, very late, O, may he rule us!)
What early manhood has he shown,
Before his downy beard was grown!
Then think what wonders will be done
By going on as he begun,
An heir for Britain to secure
As long as sun and moon endure.
The remnant of the royal blood
Comes pouring on me like a flood.
Bright goddesses, in number five;
Duke William, sweetest prince alive.
Now sing the Minister of state,
Who shines alone without a mate.
Observe with what majestic port
This atlas stands, to prop the court:
Intent the public debts to pay
Like prudent Fabius, by delay.
Thou great vicegerent of the king,
Thy praises every muse shall sing!
In all affairs thou sole director,
Of wit and learning chief protector;
Though small the time thou have to spare,
The church is thy peculiar care.
Of pious prelates what a stock
You choose to rule the sable flock?
You raise the honor of the peerage,
Proud to attend you at the steerage.
You dignify the noble race,
Content yourself with humbler place.
Now learning, valor, virtue, sense,
To titles give the sole pretense.
St. George beheld thee, with delight,
Vouchsafe to be an azure knight,
When on thy breast and sides herculean
He fixed the star and string cerulean.
Say, poet, in what other nation
Shone ever such a constellation!
Attend, ye Popes, and Youngs, and Gays,
And tune your harps, and strew your bays:
Your panegyrics here provide:
You cannot err on Flattery's side.
Above the stars exalt your style,
You still are low ten thousand mile.
On Lewis all his bards bestowed,
Of incense, many a thousand load;
But Europe mortified his pride,
And swore the fawning rascals ly'd.
Yet what the world refused to Lewis,
Applied to George, exactly true is.
Exactly true! invidious poet!
It Is fifty thousand times below it.
Translate me now some lines, if you can,
From Virgil, Martial, Ovid, Lucan.
They could all power in Heaven divide,
And do no wrong to either side:
They teach you how to split a hair,
Give -- and Jove an equal share.
Yet, why should we be laced so strait?
I Will give my -- butter-weight.
And reason good; for many a year
Jove never intermeddled here:
Nor, though his priests be duly paid,
Did ever we desire his aid:
We now can better do without him,
Since Woolston gave us arms to rout him.
* * * * * Caetera desiderantur. * * * * *
OF THE USE OF RICHES.
This poem, as Mr. Pope tells us himself, cost much attention and labor; and,
from the easiness that appears in it, one would be apt to think as much.

P. WHO shall decide, when Doctors disagree,
And soundest Casuists doubt, like you and me?
You hold the word, from Jove to Momus given,
That man was made the standing jest of Heaven;
And gold but sent to keep the fools in play,
For some to heap, and some to throw away.
But I, who think more highly of our kind,
(And, surely, Heaven and I are of a mind)
Opine, that Nature, as in duty bound,
Deep hid the shining mischief under ground:
But when, by man's audacious labor, won,
Flamed forth this rival to its Sire, the Sun,
Then careful Heaven supplied two sorts of Men;
To squander These, and Those, to hide again.
Like doctors, thus, when much dispute has passed,
We find our tenets just the same at last.
Both fairly owning, Riches, in effect,
No grace of Heaven, or token of the Elect;
Given to the Fool, the Mad, the Vain, the Evil,
To Ward John Ward, of Hackney, Esquire. member of parliament, being prosecuted by
the duchess of Buckingham, and convicted of forgery, was first expelled the
house, and then stood in the pillory on the 17th of March 1727. He was
suspected of joining in a conveyance with Sir John Blunt, to secret 50,000l.
of that director's estate, forfeited to the South Sea company by act of
parliament. The company recovered the 50,000 l. against Ward; but he set up
prior conveyances of his real estate to his brother and son, and concealed all
his personal, which was computed to be 150,000 l. These conveyances being also
set aside by a bill in Chancery, Ward was imprisoned, and hazarded the
forfeiture of his life by not giving in his effects till the last day, which
was that of his examination. During his confinement, his amusement was to give
poison to dogs and cats, and see them expire by flower or quicker torments. To
sum up the worth of this gentleman at the several aera's of his life; at his
standing in the pillory he was worth above 200,000 l. at his commitment to
prison he was worth 150,000 l. but has since been so far diminished in his
reputation, as to be thought a worse man by 50 or 60,000 l.

Fr. Chartres, a man infamous for all manner of vice. When he was an ensign in
the army, he was drummed out of the regiment for a cheat: he was next banished
Brussels, and drummed out of Ghent on the same account. After a hundred tricks
at the gaming tables, he took to lending of money at exorbitant interest, and
on great penalties, accumulating praemium, interest, and capital, into a new
capital, and seizing, to a minute, when the payments became due. In a word, by
a constant attention to the vices, wants, and follies of mankind, he acquired
an immense fortune. His house was a perpetual bawdy house. He was twice
condemned for rapes, and pardoned; but, the last time, not without imprisonment
in Newgate, and large confiscations. He died in Scotland in 1731, aged 62. The
populace, at his funeral, raised a great riot, almost tore the body out of the
coffin, and cast dead dogs, etc. into the grave along with it. The following
epitaph contains his character, very justly drawn, by Dr. Arbuthnot.

HERE continues to rot
The body of FRANCIS CHARTRES,
Who, with an INFLEXIBLE CONSTANCY, and
INIMITABLE UNIFORMITY of life,
PERSISTED,
In spite of AGE and INFIRMITIES,
In the practice of EVERY HUMAN VICE;
Excepting PRODIGALITY and HYPOCRISY:
His insatiable AVARICE exempted him from the first,
His matchless IMPUDENCE from the last.
Nor was he more singular in the undeviating pravity
Of his manners, than successful in
Accumulating WEALTH;
For, without TRADE or PROFESSION,
Without TRUST of PUBLIC MONEY,
And without BRIBE WORTHY service,
He acquired, or, more properly, created
A MINISTERIAL ESTATE.
He was the only person of his time,
Who could CHEAT without the mask of HONESTY,
Retain his primaeval MEANNESS when possessed of
TEN THOUSAND a year,
And having daily deserved the GIBBET for what he did,
Was at last condemned to it for what he could not do.
Oh indignant reader!
Think not his life useless to mankind!
PROVIDENCE connived at his execrable designs,
To give to after-ages a conspicuous
PROOF, and EXAMPLE,
Of how small estimation is EXORBITANT WEALTH
In the sight of GOD, by his bestowing it on
The most UNWORTHY of ALL MORTALS.
This gentleman was worth 7000 l. a year estate in land, and about 100,000 l.
in money.

Mr. Waters, the third of these worthies, was a man no way resembling the
former in his military, but extremely so in his civil capacity; his great
fortune having been raised by the like diligent attendance on the necessities
of others. But this gentleman's history must be deferred till his death, when
his worth may be known more certainly.


, to Waters, Chartres, and the Devil.
B. What Nature wants commodious Gold bestows;
It Is thus we eat the bread another sows.
P. But how unequal it bestows, observe;
It Is thus we riot, while, who sow it, starve:
What Nature wants (a phrase I much distrust)
Extends to Luxury, extends to Lust:
Useful, I grant, it serves what life requires,
But dreadful, too, the dark assassin hires.
B. Trade it may help, society extend:
P. But lures the Pyrate, and corrupts the Friend.
B. It raises armies in a Nation's aid:
P. But bribes a Senate, and the Land's betrayed.
In vain may Heroes fight, and Patriots rave;
If secret gold sap on from knave to knave.
Once, we confess, beneath the Patriot's cloak,
From the cracked bag the dropping Guinea spoke This is a true story, which
happened in the reign of king William III. to an unsuspected old patriot, who
coming out at the backdoor from having been closeted by the king, where he had
received a large bag of guineas, the bursting of the bag discovered his
business there.
,
And jingling down the back-stairs, told the crew,
"Old Cato is as great a rogue as you."
Blessed paper-credit! last and best supply!
That lends Corruption lighter wings to fly!
Gold, imp'd by thee, can compass hardest things,
Can pocket States, can fetch or carry Kings In our author's time, many princes
had been sent about the world, and great changes of kings projected in Europe.
The Partition-treaty had disposed of Spain; France had set up a king for
England, who was sent to Scotland, and back again; king Stanislaus was sent to
Poland and back again; the duke of Anjou was sent to Spain, and don Carlos to
Italy.
;
A single leaf shall waft an army over,
Or ship off Senates to some distant shore This alludes to several ministers,
counselors, and patriots banished in our times to Siberia, and to that more
glorious fate of the Parliament of Paris, banished to Pontoise in the year 1720.
;
A leaf, like Sibyl's, scatter to and fro
Our fates and fortunes, as the wind shall blow:
Pregnant with thousands flits the scrap unseen,
And, silent, sells a King, or buys a Queen.
Oh! that such bulky bribes as all might see,
Still, as of old, encumbered Villainy!
Could France or Rome divert our brave designs,
With all their brandies, or with all their wines?
What could they more than Knights and 'Squires confound,
Or water all the Quorum ten miles round?
A statesman's slumbers how this speech would spoil!
"Sir, Spain has sent a thousand jars of oil;
"Huge bales of British cloth blockade the door;
"A hundred oxen at your levee roar."
Poor Avarice one torment more would find;
Nor could Profusion squander all in kind.
Astride his cheese Sir Morgan might we meet;
And Worldly Some misers of great wealth, proprietors of the coal-mines, had
entered, at this time, into an association to keep up coals to an extravagant
price, whereby the poor were reduced almost to starve; till one of them taking
the advantage of underselling the rest, defeated the design. One of these
misers was worth 10,000 l. another 7000 l. a year.
crying coals from street to street,
Whom with a wig so wild, and mien so mazed,
Pity mistakes for some poor tradesman crazed.
Had Sir William Colepeper, Bart. a person of an ancient family and ample
fortune, without any other quality of a gentleman; who, after ruining himself
at the gaming-table, passed the rest of his days in sitting there to see the
ruin of others; preferring to subsist upon borrowing and begging, rather than
to enter into any reputable method of life, and refusing a post in the army
which was offered him.
Colepeper's whole wealth been hops and hogs,
Could he himself have sent it to the dogs?
His Grace will game: to White's a Bull be led,
With spurning heels, and with a butting head.
To White's be carried, as to ancient games,
Fair Coursers, Vases, and alluring Dames.
Shall, then, Uxorio, if the stakes he sweep,
Bear home six Whores, and make his Lady weep?
Or soft Adonis, so perfumed and fine,
Drive to St. James's a whole herd of swine?
Oh filthy check on all industrious skill,
To spoil the nation's last great trade, Quadrille!
Since, then, my Lord, on such a World we fall,
What say you? B. Say? Why take it, Gold and all.
P. What Riches give us, let us, then, enquire:
Meat, Fire, and Clothes. B. What more? P. Meat, Clothes, and Fire.
Is this too little? would you more than live?
Alas! it is more than One who, being possessed of 300,000 l. laid down his
coach because interest was reduced from 5 to 4 per cent. and then put 70,000 l.
into the Charitable Corporation, for better interest: which sum having lost, he
took it so much to heart, that he kept his chamber ever after. It is thought he
would not have outlived it, but that he was heir to another considerable
estate, which he daily expected; and that, by this course of life, he saved
both clothes and all other expenses.
Turner finds they give.
Alas! it is more than (all his visions past)
Unhappy A nobleman of great qualities; but as unfortunate in the application
of them, as if they had been vices and follies.
Wharton, waking, found at last!
What can they give? to dying A citizen whose rapacity obtained him the name of
Vulture Hopkins. He lived worthless, but died worth 300,000 l. which he would
give to no person living, but left it so as not to be inherited till after the
second generation. His council representing to him how many years it must be
before this could take effect, and that his money could only lie at interest
all that time, he expressed great joy thereat, and said, "They would then be as
long in spending, as he had been in getting it." But the Chancery afterward
set aside the will, and gave it to the heir at law.
Hopkins, Heirs;
To Chartres, Vigor; Japhet Crook, alias Sir Peter Stranger, was punished with
the loss of those parts, for having forged a conveyance of an estate to
himself, upon which he took up several thousand pounds. He was at the same time
sued in Chancery, for having fraudulently obtained a will, by which he
possessed another considerable estate, in wrong of the brother of the deceased.
By these means he was worth a great sum, which (in reward for the small loss of
his ears) he enjoyed in prison till his death, and quietly left to his executor.
Japhet, Nose and Ears?
Can they, in gems, bid pallid Hippia glow;
In Fulvia's buckle ease the throbs below:
Or heal, old Narses, thy obscener ail,
With all the imbroid'ry plastered at thy tail?
They might (were Harpax not too wise to spend)
Give Harpax self the blessing of a friend;
Or find some Doctor that would save the life
Of wretched Shylock, spite of Shylock's Wife:
But thousands die, without or this or that,
Die, and endow a College, or a Cat A famous duchess of Richmond, in her last
will, left considerable legacies and annuities to her cats.
.
To some, indeed, Heaven grants the happier fate,
TO enrich a bastard, or a son they hate.
Perhaps you think the poor might have their part.
Bond damns the poor In the year 1730, a corporation was established to lend
money to the poor upon pledges, by the name of the Charitable Corporation. It
was under the direction of the Right Honorable Sir R. S. Sir Arch. Grant, Mr.
Dennis Bond, Mr. Buroughs, etc. But the whole was turned only to an iniquitous
method of enriching particular people, to the ruin of such numbers, that it
became a parliamentary concern to endeavor the relief of those unhappy
sufferers; and three of the managers, who were members of the house, were
expelled. That "God hates the poor," and, "That every man in want is knave or
fool, etc." were the genuine apothegms of some of the persons here mentioned.
, and hates them from his heart:
The grave Sir Gilbert holds it for a rule,
That every man in want is knave or fool:
"God cannot love (says Blunt, with tearless eyes)
"The wretch he starves" -- and piously denies:
But the good Bishop, with a meeker air,
Admits, and leaves them, Providence's care.
Yet, to be just to these poor men of pelf,
Each does but hate his neighbor as himself:
Damned to the mines, an equal fate betides
The Slave that digs it, and the Slave that hides.
B. Who suffer thus, mere Charity should own,
Must act on motives powerful, though unknown.
P. Some War, some Plague, or Famine they foresee,
Some Revelation hid from you and me.
Why Shylock wants a meal the cause is found,
He thinks a loaf will rise to fifty pound.
What made Directors cheat in South Sea year?
To live on In the extravagance and luxury of the South Sea year, the price of
a haunch of venison was from three to five pounds.
Ven'son when it sold so dear.
Ask you why Many people, about the year 1733, had a conceit that such a thing
was intended; of which, it is not improbable, this lady might have some
intimation.
Phryne the whole Auction buys?
Phryne foresees a general Excise.
Why she and Sappho raise that monstrous sum?
Alas! they fear a man will cost a plum.
Wise Peter Walter, a person not only eminent in the wisdom of his profession,
as a dextrous attorney, but allowed to be a good, if not a safe conveyancer;
extremely respected by the nobility of this land, though free from all manner
of luxury and ostentation: his wealth was never seen, and his bounty never
heard of; except to his own son, for whom he procured an employment of
considerable profit, of which he gave him as much as was NECESSARY. Therefore,
the taxing this gentleman with any Ambition, is, certainly, a great wrong to
him.
Peter sees the world's respect for Gold,
And, therefore, hopes this nation may be sold:
Glorious Ambition! Peter, swell thy store,
And be what Rome's great A Roman lawyer, so rich as to purchase the empire,
when it was set to sale upon the death of Pertinax.
Didius was before.
The crown of Poland, venal twice an age,
To just three millions stinted modest The two persons here mentioned were of
quality, each of whom, in the time of the Missisippi, despised to realize above
300,000l. The gentleman, with a view to the purchase of the crown of Poland;
the lady, on a vision of the like royal nature. They since retired into Spain,
where they are still in search of gold in the mines of the Asturies.
Gage.
But nobler scenes Maria's dreams unfold,
Hereditary Realms, and worlds of Gold.
Congenial souls! whose life one Avarice joins,
And one fate buries in the Asturian Mines.
Much injured Sir John Blunt, originally a scrivener, was one of the first
projectors of the South Sea company, and afterward one of the directors and
chief managers of the famous scheme in 1720. H^ was also one of those who
suffered most severely by the bill of pains and penalties on the said
directors. He was a dissenter of a most religious deportment, and professed to
be a great believer. Whether he did really credit the prophecy here mentioned,
is not certain; but it was constantly in this very style he declaimed against
the corruption and luxury of the age, the partiality of parliaments, and the
misery of party-spirit. He was particularly eloquent against avarice in great
and noble persons, of which he had, indeed, lived to see many miserable
examples. He died in the year 1732.
Blunt! why bears he Britain's hate?
A wizard told him in these words our fate:
"At length, Corruption, like a general flood,
(So long by watchful ministers withstood)
Shall deluge all; and Avarice creeping on,
Spread like a low-born mist, and blot the Sun;
Statesman and Patriot ply alike the Stocks,
Peeress and Butler share alike the Box,
And Judges job, and Bishops bite the town,
And mighty Dukes pack cards for half a crown.
See Britain sunk in lucre's sordid charms,
And France revenged of Anne's and Edward's arms!"
'Twas no court-badge, great Scriv'ner, fired thy brain,
Nor lordly Luxury, nor City Gain:
No, 'twas thy righteous end, ashamed to see
Senates degenerate, Patriots disagree,
And nobly wishing Party-rage to cease,
To buy both sides, and give thy country peace.
"All this is madness," cries a sober sage:
But who, my friend, has reason in his rage?
"The ruling passion, be it what it will,
The ruling passion conquers Reason still."
Less mad, the wildest whimsey we can frame,
Than even that passion, if it has no Aim;
For though such motives Folly you may call,
The Folly's greater to have none at all.
Hear, then, the truth: "'It Is Heaven each passion sends,
And different men directs to different ends.
Extremes in Nature equal good produce,
Extremes in Man concur to general use."
Ask we what makes one keep, and one bestow?
That Power who bids the ocean ebb and flow;
Bids seed-time, harvest, equal course maintain,
Through reconciled extremes of drought and rain,
Builds Life on Death, on Change Duration founds,
And gives the eternal wheels to know their rounds.
Riches, like insects, when concealed they lie,
Wait but for wings, and, in their season, fly.
Who sees pale Mammon pine amidst his store,
Sees but a backward steward for the Poor;
This year a Reservoir, to keep and spare;
The next, a Fountain, spouting through his Heir,
In lavish streams to quench a Country's thirst,
And men and dogs shall drink him till they burst.
Old Cotta shamed his fortune and his birth,
Yet was not Cotta void of wit or worth:
What though (the use of barbarous spits forgot)
His kitchen vy'd, in coolness, with his grot?
His court with nettles, moats with cresses stored,
With soups unbought, and sallads, blessed his board?
If Cotta lived on pulse, it was no more
Than Bramins, Saints, and Sages did before;
To cram the Rich was prodigal expense;
And who would take the Poor from Providence?
Like some lone Chartreux stands the good old Hall,
Silence without, and fasts within the wall;
No rafter'd roofs with dance and tabor sound,
No noontide bell invites the country round;
Tenants with sighs the smoakless towers survey,
And turn the unwilling steeds another way:
Benighted wanderers, the forest over,
Curse the saved candle, and unop'ning door;
While the gaunt mastiff growling at the gate,
Affrights the beggar whom he longs to eat.
Not so his Son; he marked this oversight,
And then mistook reverse of wrong for right.
(For what to shun will no great knowledge need,
But what to follow, is a task indeed.)
Yet sure, of qualities deserving praise,
More go to ruin Fortunes, than to raise.
What slaughtered hecatombs, what floods of wine,
Fill the capacious 'Squire, and deep Divine!
Yet no mean motives this profusion draws,
His oxen perish in his country's cause;
It Is George and Liberty that crowns the cup,
And zeal for that great House which eats him up.
The woods recede around the naked seat;
The Sylvans groan -- no matter -- for the Fleet:
Next goes his wool -- to clothe our valiant bands;
Last, for his Country's Love, he sells his Lands.
To town he comes, completes the nation's hope,
And heads the bold Train-bands, and burns a Pope.
And shall not Britain now reward his toils,
Britain, that pays her Patriots with her Spoils?
In vain at Court the Bankrupt pleads his cause,
His thankless Country leaves him to her laws.
The Sense to value Riches, with the Art
TO enjoy them, and the Virtue to impart,
Not meanly, nor ambitiously pursued,
Not sunk by sloth, not raised by servitude;
To balance Fortune by a just expense,
Join with Economy, Magnificence;
With Splendour, Charity; with Plenty, Health;
Oh teach us, Bathurst! yet unspoil'd by wealth!
That secret rare, between the extremes to move
Of mad Goodnature, and of mean Self-love.
B. To Worth or Want well weighed, be Bounty given,
And ease, or emulate, the care of Heaven;
(Whose measure full overflows on human race)
Mend Fortune's fault, and justify her grace.
Wealth in the gross is death; but life diffused;
As poison heals, in just proportion used:
In heaps, like Ambergrise, a stink it lies,
But well dispersed, is incense to the Skies.
P. Who starves by Nobles, or with Nobles eats?
The Wretch that trusts them, and the Rogue that cheats.
Is there a Lord, who knows a cheerful noon
Without a Fiddler, Flatt'rer, or Buffoon?
Whose table, Wit, or modest Merit share,
Un-elbow'd by a Gamester, Pimp, or Play'r?
Who copies Yours, or Edward Harley earl of Oxford, the son of Robert, created
earl of Oxford, and earl Mortimer, by queen Anne.
Oxford's better part,
To ease the oppressed, and raise the sinking heart?
Wherever he shines, oh Fortune, gild the scene,
And Angels guard him in the golden Mean!
There, English bounty yet awhile may stand,
And Honor linger ere it leaves the land.
But all our praises why should Lords engross?
Rise, honest Muse! and sing The person here celebrated, who, with a small
estate, actually performed all these good works, and whose true name was almost
lost (partly by the title of The Man of Ross, given him by way of eminence, and
partly by being buried without so much as an inscription) was called Mr. John
Kyrle. He died in the year 1724, aged 90, and lies interred in the chancel of
the church of Ross in Herefordshire.
The Man of Ross:
Pleased Vaga echoes through her winding bounds,
And rapid Severn hoarse applause resounds.
Who hung with woods yon mountain's sultry brow?
From the dry rock who bad the waters flow?
Not to the skies in useless columns tossed,
Or in proud falls magnificently lost;
But, clear and artless, pouring through the plain
Health to the sick, and solace to the swain.
Whose Cause-way parts the vale with shady rows?
Whose Seats the weary Traveller repose?
Who taught that Heav'n-directed spire to rise?
"The Man of Ross," each lisping babe replies.
Behold the Marketplace with poor o'er-spread!
The Man of Ross divides the weekly bread:
He feeds yon Almshouse, neat, but void of state,
Where Age and Want sit smiling at the gate;
Him portion'd Maids, apprentic'd Orphans blessed,
The young who labor, and the old who rest.
Is any sick? The Man of Ross relieves,
Prescribes, attends, the medicine makes, and gives.
Is there a variance? enter but his door,
Balked are the Courts, and contest is no more.
Despairing Quacks with curses fled the place,
And vile Attorneys, now an useless race.
B. Thrice happy man! enabled to pursue
What all so wish, but want the power to do!
Oh say, what sums that generous hand supply?
What mines to swell that boundless charity?
P. Of Debts and Taxes, Wife and Children, clear,
This man possessed -- five hundred pounds a year.
Blush, Grandeur, blush! proud Courts, withdraw your blaze!
Ye little Stars! hide your diminished rays.
B. And what? no monument, inscription, stone?
His race, his form, his name almost unknown?
P. Who builds a Church to God, and not to Fame,
Will never mark the marble with his name:
Go, search it there The parish register.
, where to be born and die,
Of rich and poor makes all the history;
Enough, that Virtue filled the space between;
Proved, by the ends of being, to have been.
When Hopkins dies, a thousand lights attend
The wretch, who, living, saved a candle's end;
Should'ring God's altar a vile image stands,
Belies his features, nay, extends his hands;
That live-long wig which Gorgon's self might own,
Eternal buckle takes in Parian stone Ridicules the wretched taste of carving
large perriwigs on busto's; of which there are several vile examples among the
tombs at Westminster, and elsewhere.
.
Behold what blessings Wealth to life can lend!
And see, what comfort it affords our end.
In the worst inn's worst room, with mat half-hung,
The floors of plaster, and the walls of dung,
On once a flock-bed, but repaired with straw,
With tape-ty'd curtains, never meant to draw,
The George and Garter dangling from that bed
Where tawdry yellow strove with dirty red,
Great Villers lies George Villers, duke of Buckingham, who died in this manner.
-- alas! how changed from him,
That life of pleasure, and that soul of whim!
Gallant and gay, in Cliveden's proud alcove,
The bower of wanton Shrewsbury and love;
Or just as gay, at Council, in a ring
Of mimick'd Statesmen, and their merry King.
No Wit to flatter, left of all his store!
No fool to laugh at, which he valued more.
There, victor of his health, of fortune, friends,
And fame; this lord of useless thousands ends.
His Grace's fate sage Cutler could foresee,
And well (he thought) advised him, "Live like me."
As well his Grace replied, "Like you, Sir John?
That I can do when all I have is gone."
Resolve me, Reason, which of these is worse,
Want with a full, or with an empty purse?
Thy life more wretched, Cutler, was confessed,
Arise, and tell me, was thy death more blessed?
Cutler saw tenants break, and houses fall,
For very want; he could not build a wall.
His only daughter in a stranger's power,
For very want; he could not pay a dower.
A few gray hairs his reverend temples crowned,
'Twas very want that sold them for two pound.
What even denied a cordial at his end,
Banished the doctor, and expelled the friend?
What but a want, which you, perhaps, think mad,
Yet numbers feel, the want of what he had!
Cutler and Brutus, dying, both exclaim,
"Virtue, and Wealth, what are ye, but a name!"
Say, for such worth are other worlds prepared?
Or are they both, in this, their own reward?
A knotty point! to which we now proceed.
But you are tired -- I Will tell a tale -- B. Agreed.
P. Where London's column The Monument, built in memory of the fire of London,
with an inscription importing that city to have been burnt by the papists.
, pointing at the skies,
Like a tall bully, lifts the head, and lies;
There dwelt a Citizen of sober fame,
A plain, good man, and Balaam was his name;
Religious, punctual, frugal, and so forth;
His word would pass for more than he was worth.
One solid dish his weekday meal affords,
An added pudding solemnized the Lord's:
Constant at Church, and Change; his gains were sure,
His givings rare, save farthings to the poor.
The Devilish was piqu'd such saintship to behold,
And longed to tempt him, like good Job of old:
But Satan, now, is wiser than of yore,
And tempts by making rich, not making poor.
Roused by the Prince of Air, the whirlwinds sweep
The surge, and plunge his father in the deep;
Then full against his Cornish lands they roar,
And two rich shipwrecks bless the lucky shore.
Sir Balaam, now, he lives like other folks;
He takes his chirping pint, and cracks his jokes:
"Live like yourself," was soon my Lady's word;
And lo! two puddings smoked upon the board.
Asleep and naked as an Indian lay,
An honest factor stole a Gem away:
He pledged it to the knight; the knight had wit,
So kept the Di'mond, and the rogue was bit.
Some scruple rose, but thus he eased his thought,
"I Will now give sixpence where I gave a groat;
Where once I went to church, I Will now go twice --
"And am so clear too of all other vice."
The Tempter saw his time; the work he plied;
Stocks and Subscriptions pour on every side,
'Till all the Demon makes his full descent
In one abundant shower of Cent. per Cent.
Sinks deep within him, and possesses whole,
Then dubs Director, and secures his soul.
Behold Sir Balaam now a man of spirit,
Ascribes his gettings to his parts and merit;
What late he called a blessing, now was Wit,
And God's good Prov^dence, a lucky Hit.
Things change their titles, as our manners turn:
His Compting-house employed the Sunday-morn:
Seldom at Church ('it was such a busy life)
But duly sent his family and wife.
There (so the Devilish ordained) one Christmas-tide,
My good old lady caught a cold, and died.
A Nymph of Quality admires our Knight;
He marries, bows at Court, and grows polite:
Leaves the dull Cits, and joins (to please the Fair)
The well-bred cuckolds in St. James's air:
First, for his Son a gay Commission buys,
Who drinks, whores, fights, and in a duel dies:
His daughter flaunts a Viscount's tawdry wife;
She bears a Coronet and P -- x for life.
In Britain's Senate he a seat obtains,
And one more Pensioner St. Stephen gains -- atque unum civem donare Sybillae.
JUV.
.
My lady falls to play; so bad her chance,
He must repair it; takes a bribe from France;
The House impeach him; Coningsby harangues;
The Court forsake him, and Sir Balaam hangs:
Wife, son, and daughter, Satan! are thy own,
His wealth, yet dearer, forfeit to the Crown;
The Devil and the King divide the prize,
And sad Sir Balaam curses God and dies.
It Is strange the Miser should his Cares employ
To gain those riches he can never enjoy:
Is it less strange, the Prodigal should waste
His wealth, to purchase what he never can taste?
Not for himself he sees, or hears, or eats;
Artists must choose his Pictures, Music, Meats;
He buys, for A gentleman famous for a judicious collection of drawings.
Topham, Drawings and Designs;
For Pembroke Statues, dirty Gods, and Coins;
Rare monkish Manuscripts for Hearne alone,
And Books for Two eminent physicians; the one had an excellent library; the
other the finest collection, in Europe, of natural curiosities: both men of
great learning and humanity.
Mead, and Butterflies for Sloane.
Think we all these are for himself? no more
Than his fine Wife, alas! or finer Whore.
For what has Virro painted, built, and planted?
Only to show, how many tastes he wanted.
What brought Sir Visto's ill-got wealth to waste?
Some Demon whispered, "Visto! have a Taste."
Heaven visits with a Taste the wealthy fool,
And needs no Rod but Ripley with a Rule.
See! sportive Fate, to punish awkward pride,
Bids Bubo build, and sends him such a Guide:
A standing sermon, at each year's expense,
That never Coxcomb reached Magnificence!
You show us, The earl of Burlington was then publishing designs of Inigo
Jones; and the antiquities of Rome, by Palladio.
Rome was glorious, not profuse,
And pompous buildings once were things of Use.
Yet shall, my Lord, your just, your noble rules,
Fill half the land with Imitating-Fools?
Who random drawings from your sheets shall take,
And of one beauty many blunders make;
Load some vain Church with old Theatric state,
Turn Arcs of Triumph to a Garden-gate;
Reverse your ornaments, and hang them all
On some patched dog-hole ek'd with ends of wall;
Then clap four slices of pilaster on it.
That, laced with bits of rustic, makes a Front.
Shall call the wind through long arcades to roar,
Proud to catch cold at a Venetian door A door, or window, so called from being
much practiced at Venice, by Palladio and others.
;
Conscious they act a true Palladian part,
And, if they starve, they starve by rules of art.
Often have you hinted to your brother Peer
A certain truth, which many buy too dear:
Something there is more needful than Expense,
And something previous even to Taste -- it is Sense:
Good Sense, which only is the gift of Heaven,
And, though no Science, fairly worth the seven:
A Light, which in yourself you must perceive;
Jones and Le Notre have it not to give Inigo Jones, the celebrated architect;
and M. Le Notre, the designer of the best gardens of France.
.
To build, to plant, whatever you intend,
To rear the Column, or the Arch to bend,
To swell the Terras, or to sink the Grot;
In all, let Nature never be forgot.
But treat the Goddess like a modest fair,
Nor over-dress, nor leave her wholly bare;
Let not each beauty every where be spied,
Where half the skill is decently to hide.
He gains all points, who pleasingly confounds,
Surprises, varies, and conceals the Bounds.
Consult the Genius of the Place in all;
That tells the Waters or to rise, or fall;
Or helps the ambitious Hill the Heavens to scale,
Or scoops in circling theaters the Vale;
Calls in the country, catches opening glades,
Joins willing woods, and varies shades from shades;
Now breaks, or now directs, the intending lines;
Paints as you plant, and, as you work, designs.
Still follow Sense, of every Art the Soul,
Parts answering parts shall slide into a whole,
Spontaneous beauties all around advance,
Start even from Difficulty, strike from Chance;
Nature shall join you; Time shall make it grow
A Work to wonder at -- perhaps a STOW The seat and gardens of the lord
viscount Cobham, in Buckinghamshire.
.
Without it, proud Versailles! thy glory falls;
And Nero's Terraces desert their walls:
The vast Parterres a thousand hands shall make,
Lo! Cobham comes, and floats them with a Lake:
Or cut wide views through mountains to the Plain This was done in
Hertfordshire by a wealthy citizen, at the expense of above 5000 l. by which
means, (merely to overlook a dead plain) he let in the North wind upon his
house and parterre, which were, before, adorned and defended with beautiful
woods.
,
You Will wish your hill or sheltered seat again.
Even in an ornament its place remark,
Nor in an Hermitage set Dr. Clarke.
Behold Villario's ten years toil complete;
His Quincunx darkens, his Espaliers meet;
The Wood supports the Plain, the parts unite,
And strength of Shade contends with strength of Light;
A waving Glow the bloomy beds display,
Blushing in bright diversities of day,
With silver quivering rills maeander'd over --
Enjoy them, you; Villario can no more;
Tired of the scene Parterres and Fountains yield,
He finds, at last, he better likes a field.
Through his young Woods how pleased Sabinus strayed,
Or sat delighted in the thick'ning shade,
With annual joy the red'ning shoots to greet,
Or see the stretching branches long to meet!
His son's fine Taste an op'ner Vista loves,
Foe to the Dryads of his Father's groves;
One boundless green The two extremes in parterre, which are equally faulty; a
boundless green, large and naked as a field; or as a flourished carpet, where
the greatness and nobleness of the piece is lessened by being divided into too
many parts, with scrolled works and beds; of which the examples are frequent.
, or flourished carpet views,
With all the mournful family of Yews Touches upon the ill taste of those who
are so fond of evergreens, (particularly yews, which are the most tonsile) as
to destroy the nobler forest trees, to make way for such little ornaments as
pyramids of dark green, continually repeated; not unlike a funeral procession.
;
The thriving plants ignoble broomsticks made,
Now sweep those Alleys they were born to shade.
At Timon's Villa let us pass a day,
Where all cry out, "What sums are thrown away!"
So proud, so grand; of that stupendous air,
Soft and Agreeable come never there.
Greatness, with Timon, dwells in such a draught
As brings all Brobdignag before your thought.
To compass this, his Building is a Town,
His Pond an Ocean, his Parterre a Down:
Who but must laugh the master when he sees,
A puny insect, shivering at a breeze!
Lo, what huge heaps of littleness around!
The whole, a labored Quarry above ground.
Two Cupids squirt before: a Lake behind
Improves the keenness of the Northern wind.
His Gardens next your admiration call,
On every side you look, behold the Wall!
No pleasing Intricacies intervene,
No artful wildness to perplex the scene;
Grove nods at grove, each Alley has a brother,
And half the platform just reflects the other.
The suffering eye inverted Nature sees,
Trees cut to Statues, Statues thick as trees;
With here a Fountain, never to be played;
And there a Summer House, that knows no shade;
Here Amphitrite sails through myrtle bowers;
There The two statues of the Gladiator Pugnans, and Gladiator Moriens.
Gladiators fight, or die in flowers;
Unwater'd, see the drooping seahorse mourn,
And swallows roost in Nilus' dusty Urn.
My Lord advances with majestic mien,
Smit with the mighty pleasure to be seen;
But soft -- by regular approach -- not yet --
First through the length of yon hot terrace sweat;
And when up ten steep slopes you have dragged your thighs,
Just at his Study-door he will bless your eyes.
His Study! with what Authors is it stored?
In Books, not Authors, curious is my Lord:
To all their dated backs he turns you round;
These Aldus printed, those Du Sueil has bound.
Lo some are Vellom, and the rest as good
For all his Lordship knows, but they are Wood.
For Lock or Milton it is in vain to look,
These Shelves admit not any modern book.
And now the Chapel's silver bell you hear,
That summons you to all the Pride of Prayer:
Light quirks of Music, broken and uneven,
Make the soul dance upon a Jig to Heaven.
On painted Ceilings you devoutly stare,
Where sprawl the Saints of Verrio (Antonio) painted many cielings, etc. at
Windsor, Hampton Court, etc. and Laguerre, at Blenheim-castle, and other places.
Verrio or Laguerre,
Or gilded clouds in fair expansion lie,
And bring all Paradise before your eye.
To rest, the Cushion and soft Dean invite,
Who never mentions This is a fact; a reverend dean preaching at court,
threatened the sinner with punishment, "in a place which he thought it not
decent to name before so polite an assembly."
Hell to ears polite.
But hark! the chiming Clocks to dinner call;
A hundred footsteps scrape the marble Hall:
The rich Buffet well-colour'd Serpents grace,
And gaping Tritons spew to wash your face.
Is this a dinner? this a genial room The proud festivals of some men are here
set forth to ridicule, where the pride destroys the ease, and the formal
regularity all the pleasurable enjoyment of the entertainment.
?
No, it is a Temple, and a Hecatomb.
A solemn Sacrifice, performed in state,
You drink by measure, and to minutes eat.
So quick retires each flying course, you would swear
Sancho's See Don Quixote, vol. iv. chap. 6.
dread Doctor and his Wand were there.
Between each Act the trembling salvers ring,
From soup to sweet-wine, and God bless the King.
In plenty starving, tantaliz'd in state,
And complaisantly helped to all I hate,
Treated, caressed, and tired, I take my leave,
Sick of his civil pride from morn to eve;
I curse such lavish cost, and little skill,
And swear no day was ever past so ill.
Yet hence the poor are clothed, the hungry fed;
Health to himself, and to his infants bread
The Lab'rer bears: what his hard heart denies,
His charitable Vanity supplies.
Another age shall see the golden Ear
Imbrown the slope, and nod on the Parterre,
Deep harvests bury all his pride has planned,
And laughing Ceres reassume the land.
Who, then, shall grace, or who improve the Soil?
Who plants like Bathurst, or who builds like Boil?
It Is use, alone, that sanctifies Expense,
And Splendour borrows all her rays from Sense.
His Father's Acres who enjoys in peace,
Or makes his Neighbors glad, if he increase:
Whose cheerful Tenants bless their yearly toil,
Yet to their Lord owe more than to the soil;
Whose ample lawns are not ashamed to feed
The milky heifer and deserving steed;
Whose rising forests, nor for pride or show,
But future Building, future Navies, grow:
Let his plantations stretch from down to down,
First shade a Country, and then raise a Town.
You too proceed! make falling Arts your care,
Erect new wonders, and the old repair;
Jones and Palladio to themselves restore,
And be whatever Vitruvius was before:
Till Kings call forth the ideas of your mind The poet, after having touched
upon the proper objects of magnificence and expense in the private works of
great men, comes to those great and public works which become a prince. This
poem was published at the time when some of the new churches, built by the act
of queen Anne, were ready to fall, being founded on boggy land; and others
vilely executed, through fraudulent cabals between undertakers, officers, etc.
when Dagenham-breach had done very great mischiefs; when the proposal of
building a bridge at Westminster had been petitioned against, and rejected;
when many of the highways throughout England were hardly passable, and most of
those which were repaired by turnpikes made jobbs for private lucre, and
infamously executed, even to the entrances of London itself. At this time there
had been an uninterrupted peace in Europe for above twenty years.
,
(Proud to accomplish what such hands designed)
Bid Harbors open, public Ways extend,
Bid Temples, worthier of the God, ascend;
Bid the broad Arch the dangerous Flood contain,
The Mole projected break the roaring Main;
Back to his bounds their subject sea command,
And roll obedient Rivers through the Land:
These Honors, Peace to happy Britain brings,
These are Imperial Works, and worthy Kings.
FROM THE DISPENSARY. CANTO VI.
This sixth canto of the Dispensary, by Dr. Garth, has more merit than the
whole preceding part of the poem, and, as I am told, in the first edition of
this work it is more correct than as here exhibited; but that edition I have
not been able to find. The praises bestowed, on this poem are more than have
been given to any other; but our approbation, at present, is cooler, for it
owed part of its fame to party.

AND now the Delegate prepares to go
And view the wonders of the realms below.
Thrice did the goddess, with her sacred wand,
The pavement strike; and strait, at her command,
The willing surface opens, and descries
A deep descent, that leads to nether skies.
Hygeia to the silent region tends;
And, with his heavenly guide; the Charge descends.
Thus Numa, when to hallowed caves retired,
Was by Aegeria guarded and inspired.
Within the chambers of the globe they spy
The beds where sleeping vegetables lie,
Till the glad summons of a genial ray
Unbinds the glebe, and calls them out to day.
Hence Pancies trick themselves in various hue,
And hence Junquils derive their fragrant dew;
Hence the Carnation, and the bashful Rose,
Their virgin blushes to the morn disclose.
Hence the chaste Lilly rises to the light,
Unveils her snowy breasts and charms the sight.
Hence arbours are with twining greens arrayed,
T'oblige complaining lovers with their shade:
And hence on Daphne's laureled forehead grow
Immortal wreaths for Phoebus and Nassau.
The insects here their lingering trance survive:
Benumbed they seem, and doubtful if alive.
From Winter's fury hither they repair,
And stay for milder skies and softer air.
Down to these cells obscener reptiles creep;
Where hateful Nutes and painted Lizzards sleep.
Where shivering Snakes the summer Solstice wait,
Unfurl their painted folds, and slide in state.
Here their new form the numbed Erucae hide,
Their numerous feet in slender bandage tied;
Soon as the kindling year begins to rise,
This upstart race their native clod despise,
And, proud of painted wings, attempt the skies.
Now those profounder regions they explore,
Where metals ripen in vast cakes of oar.
Here, sullen to the sight, at large is spread,
The dull unwieldy mass of lumpish Lead.
There, glimmering in their dawning beds, are seen
The aspiring seeds of sprightly Tin.
The Copper sparkles next in ruddy streaks;
And in the gloom betrays its glowing cheeks,
The Silver, then, with bright and burnished grace,
Youth, and a blooming luster in its face,
To the arms of those more yielding metals flies,
And in the folds of their embraces lies:
So close they cling, so stubbornly retire,
Their love's more vi'lent than the chymist's fire.
Near these the Delegate, with wonder, spies
Where floods of living silver serpentize:
Where richest metals their bright looks put on,
And golden streams through amber channels run.
Where Light's gay God descends to ripen gems,
And lend a luster brighter than his beams.
Here he observes the subterranean cells,
Where wanton nature sports in idle shells.
Some helicoeids, some conical appear;
These mitres emulate, those turbans are.
Here marcasites in various figure wait,
To ripen to a true metallic state:
Till drops, that from impending rocks descend,
Their substance petrify, and progress end.
Nigh, livid seas of kindled sulphur flow,
And whilst, enraged, their fiery surges glow,
Convulsions in the laboring mountains rise,
And hurl their melted vitals to the skies.
He views, with horror, next, the noisy cave,
Where, with hoarse dinns, imprisoned tempests rave;
Where clamorous hurricanes attempt their, flight,
Or, whirling in tumultuous eddies, fight.
The warring winds, unmoved, Hygeia heard,
Braved their loud jars, but much for Celsus feared.
Andromeda, so, whilst her hero fought,
Shook for his danger, but her own forgot.
And now the goddess, with her charge, descends
Where scarce one cheerful glimpse their steps be-friends.
Here his forsaken seat old Chaos keeps,
And, undisturbed by Form, in silence sleeps.
A grisly wight, and hideous to the eye;
An awkward lump of shapeless anarchy.
With sordid age his features are defaced;
His lands unpeopled, and his countries waste.
To these dark realms much learned lumber creeps;
There copious M -- safe in silence sleeps.
Where mushroom libels in oblivion lie,
And, soon as born, like other monsters, die.
Upon a couch of jett, in these abodes,
Dull Night, his melancholy consort, nods.
No ways and means their cabinet employ;
But their dark hours they waste in barren joy.
Nigh this recess, with terror, they survey
Where Death maintains his dread tyrannic sway:
In the close covert of a cypress grove,
Where goblins frisk and airy specter rove,
Yawns a dark cave, with awful horror, wide;
And there the monarch's triumphs are descried.
Confused, and wildly huddled, to the eye,
The beggar's pouch and prince's purple lie.
Dim lamps with sickly rays scarce seem to glow;
Sighs heave in mournful moans, and tears overflow.
Restless Anxiety, forlorn Despair,
And all the faded family of Care;
Old mouldering urns, racks, daggers, and distress,
Make up the frightful horror of the place.
Within its dreadful jaws those furies wait,
Which execute the harsh decrees of Fate.
Febris is first: the hag relentless hears
The virgin's sighs, and sees the infant's tears;
In her parched eye balls fiery meteors reign;
And restless ferments revel in each vein.
Then hydrops next appears amongst the throng;
Bloated, and big, she slowly sails along.
But, like a miser, in excess she is poor,
And pines for thirst amidst her watery store.
Now loathsome Lepra, that offensive spright,
With foul eruptions stained, offends the sight;
Still deaf to beauty's soft persuading power:
Nor can bright Hebe's charms her bloom secure.
Whilst meager Pthisis gives a silent blow;
Her strokes are sure, but her advances slow.
No loud alarms, or fierce assaults, are shown:
She starves the fortress first, then takes the town.
Behind stood crowds of much inferior name;
Too numerous to repeat, too foul to name;
The vassals of their monarch's tyranny,
Who, at his nod, on fatal errands fly.
Now Celsus, with his glorious guide, invades
The silent region of the fleeting shades:
Where rocks and ruful deserts are descried;
And sullen Styx rolls down his lazy tide.
Then shows the ferry-man the plant he bore,
And claims his passage to the further shore.
To whom the Stygian pilot, smiling, said,
You need no passport to demand our aid.
Physicians never linger on this strand:
Old Charon's present still at their command.
Our awful monarch, and his consort, owe
To them the peopling of their realms below.
Then in his swarthy hand he grasped the oar,
Received his guests aboard, and should from shore,
Now, as the goddess and her charge prepare
To breathe the sweets of soft Elysian air,
Upon the left they spy a pensive shade,
Who on his bended arm had raised his head;
Pale Grief sat heavy on his mournful look:
To whom, not unconcerned, thus Celsus spoke:
Tell me, thou much afflicted shade, why sighs
Burst from your breast, and torrents from your eyes;
And who those mangled manes are, which show
A sullen satisfaction at your woe?
Since, said the ghost, with pity you will attend,
Know, I Am Guaicum, once your firmest friend.
And on this barren beach, in discontent,
Am doomed to stay, 'till the angry powers relent.
Those specter, seam'd with scars, that threaten there,
The victims of my late ill conduct are.
They vex, with endless clamours, my repose:
This wants his palate, that demands his nose:
And here they execute stern Pluto's will,
And ply me every moment with a pill.
Then Celsus thus, O much-lamented state!
How rigid is the sentence you relate?
Methinks I recollect your former air;
But ah, how much you're changed from what you were!
Insipid as your late ptisans you lie,
That, once, were sprightlier far than Mercury.
At the sad tale you tell the poppies weep,
And mourn their vegetable souls asleep.
The unctuous Larix, and the healing Pine,
Lament your fate in tears of Turpentine;
But still the offspring of your brain shall prove
The grocer's care, and brave the rage of Jove.
When bonfires blaze your vagrant works shall rise
In rockets, till they reach the wondering skies.
If mortals ever the Stygian powers could bend,
Entreaties to their awful seats I Would send:
But, since no human arts the Fates dissuade,
Direct me how to find blessed Hervey's shade.
In vain the unhappy ghost still urged his stay:
Then, rising from the ground, he showed the way.
Nigh the dull shore a shapeless mountain stood,
That, with a dreadful frown, surveyed the flood
Its fearful brow no lively greens put on;
No frisking goats bound over the ridgy stone.
To gain the summit the bright goddess tried,
And Celsus, followed, by degrees, his guide.
The ascent thus conquered, now they tower on high,
And taste the indulgence of a milder sky.
Loose breezes on their airy pinions play,
Soft infant blossoms their chaste odours pay,
And roses blush their fragrant lives away.
Cool streams through flowery meadows gently glide;
And, as they pass, their painted banks they chide.
These blissful plains no blights, nor mildews fear,
The flowers never fade, and shrubs are myrtles here.
The morn awakes the tulip from her bed;
Ever noon, in painted pride she decks her head:
Robbed in rich dye, she triumphs on the green,
And every flower does homage to their queen.
So, when bright Venus rises from the flood,
Around, in throngs, the wondering Nereids crowd;
The Tritons gaze, and tune each vocal shell,
And every grace unsung the waves conceal.
The Delegate observes, with wondering eyes,
Ambrosial dews descend, and incense rise.
Then hastens onward to the pensive grove,
The silent mansion of disastrous love.
Here Jealousy with jaundice looks appears,
And broken slumbers, and fantastic fears.
The widowed Turtle hangs her moulting wings,
And to the woods, in mournful murmurs, sings.
No winds but sighs there are, no floods but tears.
Each conscious tree a tragic signal bears.
Their wounded bark records some broken vow,
And willow garlands hang on every bough.
Olivia, here, in solitude he found,
Her downcast eyes fixed on the silent ground:
Her dress neglected, and unbound her hair,
She seemed the dying image of despair.
How lately did this celebrated thing
Blaze in the box, and sparkle in the ring!
Till the Green Sickness, and Love's force, betrayed
To Death's remorseless arms the unhappy maid.
All over confused the guilty lover stood,
The light forsook his eyes, his cheeks the blood;
An icy horror shivered in his look,
As to the cold-complexion'd nymph he spoke:
"Tell me, dear shade, from whence such anxious care;
Your looks disordered, and your bosom bare?
Why thus you languish, like a drooping flower,
Crushed by the weight of some relentless shower?
Your languid looks your late ill-conduct tell;
O that, instead of trash, you would taken steel!"
Stabbed with the unkind reproach, the conscious maid
Thus, to her late insulting lover said:
"When ladies listen not to loose desire,
You style our modesty our want of fire.
Smile or forbid, encourage or reprove,
You still find reasons to believe we love:
Vainly you think a liking we betray,
And never mean the peevish things we say.
Few are the fair ones of Rufilla's make;
Unasked she grants, uninjur'd she will forsake:
But several Caelia's several ages boast,
That like where Reason recommends the most.
Where heavenly truth and tenderness conspire,
Chaste passion may persuade us to desire."
"Your sex (he cried) as custom bids, behaves;
In forms the tyrant ties such haughty slaves.
To do nice Conduct right, you Nature wrong;
Impulses are but weak, where Reason's strong.
Some want the courage; but how few the flame!
They like the thing, that startle at the name.
The lonely Phoenix, though professed a nun,
Warms into love, and kindles at the sun.
Those tales of spicy urns, and fragrant fires,
Are but the emblems of her scorched desires."
Then, as he strove to clasp the fleeting fair,
His empty arms confessed the impassive air.
From his embrace th'unbody'd spectre flies;
And, as she moved, she chid him with her eyes.
They hasten now to that delightful plain,
Where the glad manes of the blessed remain:
Where Hervey gathers simples, to bestow
Immortal youth on heroes shades below.
Soon as the bright Hygeia was in view,
The venerable sage her presence knew:
Thus he --
Hail, blooming goddess! thou propitious power,
Whose blessings mortals more than life implore,
With so much luster your bright looks endear,
That cottages are courts where those appear.
Mankind, as you vouchsafe to smile or frown,
Finds ease in chains, or anguish in a crown.
With just resentments and contempt you see
The foul dissentions of the Faculty;
How your sad sickening art now hangs her head;
And, once a science, is become a trade.
Her sons never rifle her mysterious store,
But study Nature less, and lucre more.
Not so, when Rome to the Epidaurian raised
A temple, where devoted incense blazed.
Often father Tyber views the lofty fire,
As the learned son is worshipped like the fire;
The sage with Romulus like honors claim;
The gift of life and laws were then the same.
I showed, of old, how vital currents glide,
And the meanders of their refluent tide.
Then, Willis, why spontaneous actions here,
And whence involuntary motions there:
And how the spirits, by mechanic laws,
In wild careers tumultuous riots cause.
Nor would our Wharton, Bates, and Glisson lie
In the abyss of blind Obscurity.
But, now, such wondrous searches are forborne,
And Paean's art is by divisions torn.
Then let your Charge attend, and I Will explain
How her lost health your science may regain.
Haste, and the matchless Atticus address;
From Heaven and great Nassau he has the mace.
The oppressed to his asylum still repair;
Arts he supports, and Learning is his care.
He softens the harsh rigor of the laws,
Blunts their keen edge, and grinds their harpy claws;
And, graciously, he casts a pitying eye
On the sad state of virtuous poverty.
When ever he speaks, Heavens! how the listening throng
Dwells on the melting music of his tongue!
His arguments are emblems of his mien,
Mild, but not faint; and forcing, though serene;
And, when the power of eloquence he would try,
Here, lightning strikes you; there, soft breezes sigh.
To him you must your sickly state refer;
Your charter claims him as your Visiter.
Your wounds he will close, and sov'reignly restore
Your science to the height it had before.
Then Nassau's health shall be your glorious aim,
His life should be as lasting as his fame.
Some princes claims from devastations spring,
He condescends, in pity, to be king:
And when, amidst his olives placed, he stands,
And governs more by candor than commands,
Even then not less a hero he appears,
Than when a Laurel diadem he wears.
Would Phoebus, or his G -- le, but inspire
Their sacred veh'mence of poetic sire;
To celebrate in song that godlike power,
Which did the laboring universe restore:
Fair Albion's cliffs would echo to the strain,
And praise the arm that conquered, to regain
The earth's repose, and empire over the main.
Still may the immortal man his cares repeat,
To make his blessings endless as they are great:
Whilst Malice and Ingratitude confess
They Have strove for ruin long, without success.
When, late, Jove's eagle from the pyle shall rise,
To bear the victor to the boundless skies,
Awhile the God puts off paternal care,
Neglects the earth to give the Heavens a star.
Near thee, Alcides, shall the hero shine;
His rays resembling, as his labors, thine.
Had some famed patriot, of the Latin blood,
Like Julius great, and like Octavius good,
But thus preserved the Latin liberties,
Aspiring columns soon had reached the skies:
Loud Io's the proud capitol had shook,
And all the statues of the gods had spoke.
No more the sage his raptures could pursue:
He paused; and Celsus, with his guide, withdrew.
ECLOGUE I. SELIM: OR THE SHEPHERD'S MORAL. SCENE, A VALLEY NEAR BAGDAT. TIME,
THE MORNING.
The following eclogues, written by Mr. Collins, are very pretty: the images,
it must be owned, are not very local; for the pastoral subject could not well
admit of it. The description of Asiatic magnificence, and manners, is a subject
as yet unattempted amongst us, and, I believe, capable of furnishing a great
variety of poetical imagery.

YE Persian maids, attend your poet's lays,
And hear how shepherds pass their golden days.
Not all are blessed, whom Fortune's hand sustains
With wealth, in courts, nor all that haunt the plains:
Well may your hearts believe the truths I tell;
It Is virtue makes the bliss, wherever we dwell.
Thus Selim sung, by sacred Truth inspired;
Nor praise, but such as Truth bestowed, desired:
Wise in himself, his meaning songs conveyed
Informing morals to the shepherd maid;
Or taught the swains that surest bliss to find,
What groves nor streams bestow, a virtuous mind.
When, sweet, and blushing like a virgin bride,
The radiant morn resumed her orient pride;
When wanton gales along the valleys play,
Breathe on each flower, and bear their sweets away;
By Tigris' wandering waves he sat, and sung
This useful lesson for the fair and young.
Ye Persian dames, he said, to you belong,
Well may they please, the morals of my song:
No fairer maids, I trust, than you are found,
Graced with soft arts, the peopled world around!
The morn that lights you, to your loves supplies
Each gentler ray delicious to your eyes:
For you those flowers her fragrant hands bestow,
And yours the love that kings delight to know.
Yet think not these, all-beauteous as they are,
The best kind blessings Heaven can grant the fair!
Who trust alone in beauty's feeble ray,
Boast but the worth Bassora's pearls display;
Drawn from the deep we own their surface bright,
But, dark within, they drink no lustrous light:
Such are the maids, and such the charms they boast,
By sense unaided, or to virtue lost.
Self-flattering sex! your hearts believe in vain
That love shall blind, whence once he fires the swain;
Or hope a lover by your faults to win,
As spots on ermin beautify the skin:
Who seeks secure to rule, be first her care
Each softer virtue that adorns the fair;
Each tender passion man delights to find,
The loved perfections of a female mind!
Blessed were the days, when Wisdom held her reign,
And shepherds sought her on the silent plain;
With Truth she wedded in the secret grove,
Immortal Truth; and daughters blessed their love.
O haste, fair maids! ye Virtues come away;
Sweet Seace and Plenty lead you on your way!
The balmy shrub for you shall love our shore,
By Ind excelled, or Araby, no more.
Lost to our fields, for so the fates ordain,
The dear deserters shall return again.
Come thou, whose thoughts as limpid springs are clear,
To lead the train, sweet Modesty, appear:
Here make thy court, amidst our rural scene,
And shepherd-girls shall own thee for their queen.
With thee be Chastity, of all afraid,
Distrusting all; a wise, suspicious maid:
But man the most -- not more the mountain do
Holds the swift falcon for her deadly foe.
Cold is her breast, like flowers that drink the dew;
A silken veil conceals her from the view.
No wild desires amidst thy train be known,
But Faith, whose heart is fixed on one alone;
Desponding Meekness, with her downcast eyes,
And friendly Pity, full of tender sighs;
And Love the last: by these your hearts approve;
These are the virtues that must lead to love.
Thus sung the swain; and ancient legends say,
The maids of Bagdat verified the lay:
Dear to the plains, the Virtues came along;
The shepherds loved, and Selim blessed his song.
ECLOGUE II. HASSAN: OR THE CAMEL-DRIVER. SCENE, THE DESERT. TIME, MIDDAY.
IN silent horror, over the boundless waste
The driver, Hassan, with his camels past;
One cruise of water on his back he bore,
And his light scrip contained a scanty store;
A fan of painted feathers in his hand,
To guard his shaded face from scorching sand.
The sultry sun had gained the middle sky,
And not a tree, and not an herb was nigh;
The beasts, with pain, their dusty way pursue,
Shrill roared the winds, and dreary was the view!
With desperate sorrow wild, the affrighted man
Thrice sighed, thrice struck his breast, and thus began:
"Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
Ah! little thought I of the blasting wind,
The thirst, or pinching hunger that I find!
Bethink thee, Hassan, where shall Thirst assuage,
When fails this cruise, his unrelenting rage?
Soon shall this scrip its precious load resign;
Then what but tears and hunger shall be thine?
Ye mute companions of my toils, that bear,
In all my griefs, a more than equal share!
Here, where no springs in murmurs break away,
Or moss-crown'd fountains mitigate the day,
In vain ye hope the green delights to know,
Which plains more blessed, or verdant vales, bestow:
Here rocks alone, and tasteless sands, are found,
And faint and sickly winds for ever howl around.
"Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
Cursed be the gold and silver, which persuade
Weak men to follow far-fatiguing trade!
The lilly peace outshines the silver store,
And life is dearer than the golden ore:
Yet money tempts us over the desert brown,
To every distant mart and wealthy town.
Full often we tempt the land, and often the sea:
And are we only yet repaired by thee?
Ah! why was ruin so attractive made,
Or why fond man so easily betrayed?
Why heed we not, while, mad, we haste along,
The gentle voice of Peace, or Pleasure's song?
Or wherefore think the flowery mountain's side,
The fountain's murmurs, and the valley's pride;
Why think we these less pleasing to behold,
Than dreary deserts, if they lead to gold?
"Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
O cease, my fears! -- all frantic as I go,
When thought creates unnumber'd scenes of woe:
What if the lion in his rage I meet! --
Often, in the dust, I view his printed feet:
And, fearful! often, when day's declining light
Yields her pale empire to the mourner night,
By hunger roused, he scours the groaning plain,
Gaunt wolves and sullen tigers in his train:
Before them death with shrieks directs their way,
Fills the wild yell, and leads them to their prey.
"Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
At that dead hour the silent asp shall creep,
If aught of rest I find, upon my sleep:
Or some swol'n serpent twist his scales around,
And wake to anguish with a burning wound.
Thrice happy they, the wise, contented poor,
From lust of wealth, and dread of death, secure!
They tempt no deserts, and no griefs they find;
Peace rules the day, where Reason rules the mind.
"Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
O hapless youth! for she thy love has won,
The tender Zara, will be most undone;
Big swelled my heart, and owned the powerful maid,
When fast she dropped her tears, as thus she said:
"Farewell the youth whom sighs could not detain,
Whom Zara's breaking heart implored in vain!
Yet, as thou go, may every blast arise
Weak and unfelt as these rejected sighs!
Safe over the wild, no perils may thou see,
No griefs endure, nor weep, false youth, like me."
O let me safely to the fair return,
Say, with a kiss, she must not, shall not mourn;
O! let me teach my heart to lose its fears,
Recalled by Wisdom's voice, and Zara's tears.
He said, and called on Heaven to bless the day,
When back to Schiraz' walls he bent his way.
ECLOGUE III. ABRA: OR THE GEORGIAN SULTANA. SCENE, A FOREST. TIME, THE EVENING.
IN Georgia's land, where Tefflis' towers are seen,
In distant view along the level green,
While evening dews enrich the glittering glade,
And the tall forests cast a longer shade,
What time it is sweet over fields of rice to stray,
Or scent the breathing maize at setting day;
Amidst the maids of Zagen's peaceful grove,
Emyra sung the pleasing cares of love.
Of Abra, first, began the tender strain,
Who led her youth with flocks upon the plain:
At morn she came those willing flocks to lead,
Where lillies rear them in the watery mead;
From early dawn the live-long hours she told,
Till, late at silent eve, she penned the fold.
Deep in the grove, beneath the secret shade,
A various wreath of odorous flowers she made:
That these flowers are found in very great abundance in some of the provinces
of Persia; see the Modern History of Mr. Salmon.
Gay-motley'd pinks, and sweet jonquils, she chose,
The violet blue that on the moss-bank grows:
All sweet to sense, the flaunting rose was there:
The finished chaplet well adorned her hair.
Great Abbas chanced that fated morn to stray,
By love conducted from the chase away;
Among the vocal vales he heard her song,
And sought the vales and echoing groves among:
At length he found, and wooed the rural maid;
She knew the monarch, and, with fear, obeyed.
"Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
And every Georgian maid like Abra loved!
The royal lover bore her from the plain;
Yet still her crook and bleating flock remain:
Often, as she went, she backward turned her view,
And bad that crook and bleating flock adieu.
Fair happy maid! to other scenes remove,
To richer scenes of golden power and love!
Go, leave the simple pipe, and shepherd's strain:
With love delight thee, and with Abbas reign.
"Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
And every Georgian maid like Abra loved!"
Yet, midst the blaze of courts, she fixed her love
On the cool fountain, or the shady grove;
Still, with the shepherd's innocence, her mind
To the sweet vale, and flowery mead, inclined:
And, often as spring renewed the plains with flowers,
Breathed his soft gales, and led the fragrant hours,
With sure return she sought the sylvan scene,
The breezy mountains, and the forests green.
Her maids around her moved, a duteous band!
Each bore a crook, all-rural, in her hand:
Some simple lay, of flocks and herds, they sung;
With joy the mountain and the forest rung.
"Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
And every Georgian maid like Abra loved!"
And often the royal lover left the care
And thorns of state, attendant on the fair;
Often to the shades and low-roof'd cots retired,
Or sought the vale where first his heart was fired;
A russet mantle, like a swain, he wore,
And thought of crowns and busy courts no more.
"Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
And every Georgian maid like Abra loved!"
Blessed was the life that royal Abbas led:
Sweet was his love, and innocent his bed.
What if in wealth the noble maid excel;
The simple shepherd girl can love as well.
Let those who rule on Persia's jewell'd throne
Be famed for love, and gentlest love alone;
Or wreathe, like Abbas, full of fair renown,
The lover's myrtle with the warrior's crown.
O happy days! the maids around her say;
O haste, profuse of blessings, haste away!
"Be every youth, like royal Abbas, moved;
And every Georgian maid, like Abra, loved!"
ECLOGUE IV. AGIB AND SECANDER: OR, THE FUGITIVES. SCENE, A MOUNTAIN IN
CIRCASSIA. TIME, MIDNIGHT.
IN fair Circassia, where, to love inclined,
Each swain was blessed, for every maid was kind;
At that still hour when awful midnight reigns,
And none, but wretches, haunt the twilight plains;
What time the moon had hung her lamp on high,
And past, in radiance, through the cloudless sky;
Sad over the dews two brother shepherds fled,
Where wildering fear and desperate sorrow led:
Fast as they pressed their flight, behind them lay
Wide ravaged plains, and valleys stole away.
Along the mountain's bending sides they ran,
Till faint and weak Secander thus began:
SECANDER. O stay thee, Agib, for my feet deny,
No longer friendly to my life, to fly.
Friend of my heart, O turn thee, and survey,
Trace our sad slight, through all its length of way!
And, first, review that long-extended plain,
And yon wide groves, already past with pain!
Yon ragged cliff, whose dangerous path we tried!
And, last, this lofty mountain's weary side!

AGIB. Weak as thou art, yet, hapless, must thou know
The toils of flight, or some severer woe!
Still as I haste the Tartar shouts behind,
And shrieks and sorrows load the saddening wind:
In rage of heart, with ruin in his hand,
He blasts our harvests, and deforms our land.
Yon citron grove, whence first in fear we came,
Droops its fair honors to the conquering flame:
Far fly the swains, like us, in deep despair,
And leave to ruffian bands their fleecy care.

SECANDER. Unhappy land, whose blessings tempt the sword.
In vain, unheard, thou call'st thy Persian lord!
In vain thou court'st him, helpless, to thine aid,
To shield the shepherd, and protect the maid!
Far off, in thoughtless indolence resigned,
Soft dreams of love and pleasure soothe his mind:
'Midst fair sultanas lost in idle joy;
No wars alarm him, and no fears annoy.

AGIB. Yet these green hills, in summer's sultry heat,
Have lent the monarch, often, a cool retreat.
Sweet to the sight is Zabran's flowery plain,
And once by maids and shepherds loved in vain!
No more the virgins shall delight to rove
By Sargis' banks, or Irwan's shady grove;
On Tarkie's mountain catch the cooling gale,
Or breathe the sweets of Aly's flowery vale:
Fair scenes! but, ah! no more with peace possessed,
With ease alluring, and with plenty blessed.
No more the shepherds' whitening tents appear,
Nor the kind produces of a bounteous year;
No more the date with snowy blossoms crowned!
But Ruin spreads her baleful fires around.

SECANDER. In vain Circassia boasts her spicy groves,
For ever famed for pure and happy loves:
In vain she boasts her fairest of the fair,
Their eye's blue languish, and their golden hair!
Those eyes in tears their fruitless grief must send;
Those hairs the Tartar's cruel hand shall rend.

AGIB. Ye Georgian swains, that, piteous, learn from far
Circassia's ruin, and the waste of war;
Some weightier arms than crooks and staffs prepare,
To shield your harvests, and defend your fair;
The Turk and Tartar like designs pursue,
Fixed to destroy, and steadfast to undo.
Wild as his land, in native deserts bred,
By lust incited, or by malice led,
The villain Arab, as he prowls for prey,
Often marks with blood and wasting flames the way;
Yet none so cruel as the Tartar foe,
To death inured, and nursed in scenes of woe.
He said, when loud along the vale was heard
A shriller shriek, and nearer fires appeared:
The frighted shepherds, through the dews of night,
Wide over the moonlight hills renewed their flight.

THE SPLENDID SHILLING. BY MR. J. PHILIPS.
This is reckoned the best parody of Milton in our language: it has been an
hundred times imitated, without success. The truth is, the first thing in this
way must preclude all future attempts; for nothing is so easy as to burlesque
any man's manner, when we are once showed the way.

HAPPY the man, who, void of cares and strife,
In silken, or in leathern, purse, retains
A Splendid Shilling: he nor hears with pain
New oysters cried, nor sighs for cheerful ale;
But, with his friends, when nightly mists arise,
To Juniper's Magpye, or Town Hall Two noted alehouses in Oxford, 1700.
repairs:
Where, mindful of the nymph whose wanton eye
Transfixed his soul, and kindled amorous flames,
Cloe, or Philips; he each circling glass
Wishes her health, and joy, and equal love.
Mean while, he smokes, and laughs at merry tale,
Or Pun ambiguous, or Conundrum quaint.
But I, whom griping penury surrounds,
And hunger, sure attendant upon want,
With scanty offals, and small acid tiff,
(Wretched repast!) my meagre corpse sustain:
Then solitary walk, or doze at home
In garret vile, and with a warming puff
Regale chilled fingers; or from tube as black
As winter chimney, or well-polish'd jet,
Exhale Mundungus, ill-perfuming scent:
Not blacker tube, nor of a shorter size
Smokes Cambro-Briton (versed in pedigree,
Sprung from Cadwalador and Arthur, kings
Full famous in romantic tale) when he
Over many a craggy hill and barren cliff,
Upon a cargo of famed Cestrian cheese,
High over-shadowing rides, with a design
To vend his wares, or at the Arvonian mart,
Or Maridunum, or the ancient town
Yclip'd Brechinia; or where Vaga's stream
Encircles Ariconium, fruitful soil!
Whence flow nectareous wines, that well may vie
With Massic, Setin, or renowned Falern.
Thus, while my joyless minutes tedious flow,
With looks demure, and silent pace, a Dun,
Horrible monster! hated by gods and men,
To my aerial citadel ascends,
With vocal heel thrice thundering at my gate,
With hideous accent thrice he calls; I know
The voice ill-boding, and the solemn sound.
What should I do? or whither turn? amazed,
Confounded, to the dark recess I fly
Of woodhole; strait my bristling hairs erect
Through sudden fear; a chilly sweat bedews
My shudd'ring limbs, and (wonderful to tell!)
My tongue forgets her faculty of speech;
So horrible he seems! his faded brow
Entrenched with many a frown, and conic beard,
And spreading band, admired by modern saints,
Disastrous acts forebode; in his right hand
Long scrolls of paper solemnly he waves,
With characters and figures dire inscribed,
Grievous to mortal eyes; (ye gods, avert
Such plagues from righteous men) behind him stalks
Another monster not unlike himself,
Sullen of aspect, by the vulgar called
A Catchpole; whose polluted hands the Gods
With force incredible, and magic charms,
First have endu'd, if he his ample palm
Should, happily, on ill-fated shoulder lay
Of debtor, strait his body, to the touch
Obsequious, (as whilom knights were wont)
To some enchanted castle is conveyed,
Where gates impregnable, and coercive chains
In durance strict detain him, till, in form
Of money, Pallas sets the captive free.
Beware, ye debtors, when ye walk, beware,
Be circumspect; often, with insiduous ken,
This caitiff eyes your steps aloof, and often
Lies perdue in a nook or gloomy cave,
Prompt to inchant some inadvertent wretch
With his unhallowed touch. So (poets sing)
Grimalkin, to domestic vermin sworn
An everlasting foe, with watchful eye
Lies nightly brooding over a chinky gap,
Protending her fell claws, to thoughtless mice
Sure ruin. So, her disembowell'd web,
Arachne, in a hall, or kitchen, spreads,
Obvious to vagrant flies: she secret stands
Within her woven cell; the humming prey,
Regardless of their fate, rush on the toils
Inextricable, nor will aught avail
Their arts, or arms, or shapes of lovely hue;
The wasp insiduous, and the buzzing drone,
And butterfly, proud of expanded wings
Distinct with gold, entangled in her snares,
Useless resistance make: with eager strides,
She towering flies to her expected spoils;
Then, with envenomed jaws, the vital blood
Drinks of reluctant foes, and to her cave
Their bulky carcases triumphant drags.
So pass my days. But when nocturnal shades
This world invelop, and the inclement air
Persuades men to repel benumbing frosts
With pleasant wines, and crackling blaze of wood;
Me, lonely sitting, nor the glimmering light
Of makeweight candle, nor the joyous talk
Of loving friend delights; distressed, forlorn,
Amidst the horrors of the tedious night,
Darkling I sigh, and feed with dismal thoughts
My anxious mind, or, sometimes, mournful verse
Indite, and sing of groves and myrtle shades,
Or desperate lady near a purling stream,
Or lover pendent on a willow-tree.
Mean while I labor with eternal drought,
And, restless, wish, and rave, my parched throat
Finds no relief, nor heavy eyes repose:
But if a slumber happily does invade
My weary limbs, my fancy's still awake,
Thoughtful of drink, and eager, in a dream,
Tipples imaginary pots of ale,
In vain; awake I find the settled thirst
Still gnawing, and the pleasant fantom curse.
Thus do I live, from pleasure quite debarred.
Nor taste the fruits that the sun's genial rays
Mature, John-Apple, nor the downy Peach,
Nor Walnut in rough-furrow'd coat secure;
Nor Medlar fruit, delicious in decay:
Afflictions great! yet greater still remain:
My Galligaskins, that have long withstood
The winter's fury, and encroaching frosts,
By Time subdued (what will not Time subdue!)
An horrid chasm disclosed with orifice
Wide, discontinuous; at which the winds
Eurus and Auster, and the dreadful force
Of Boreas, that congeals the Cronean waves,
Tumultuous enter with dire chilling blasts,
Portending agues. Thus, a well fraught ship
Long sailed secure, or through the Aegean deep,
Or the Ionean, till cruising near
The Lilybean shore, with hideous crush,
On Scylla, or Charybdis (dangerous rocks!)
She strikes rebounding, whence the shattered oak,
So fierce a shock unable to withstand,
Admits the sea; in at the gaping side
The crowding waves gush with impetuous rage,
Resistless, overwhelming; horrors seize
The mariners, death in their eyes appear,
They stare, they lave, they pump, they swear, they pray:
(Vain efforts!) Still the batt'ring waves rush in,
Implacable, till, deluged by the foam,
The ship sinks found'ring in the vast abyss.
A PIPE OF TOBACCO: IN IMITATION OF SIX SEVERAL AUTHORS.
Mr. Hawkins Brown, the author of these, as I am told, had no good original
manner of his own, yet we see how well he succeeds when he turns an imitator;
for the following are rather imitations, than ridiculous parodies.

IMITATION I. A New Year's ODE.
RECITATIVE.
OLD battle-array, big with horror, is fled,
And olive robbed Peace again lifts up her head.
Sing, ye Muses, Tobacco, the blessing of peace;
Was ever a nation so blessed as this?
AIR.
When summer suns grow red with heat,
Tobacco tempers Phoebus' ire;
When wintry storms around us beat,
Tobacco chears with gentle fire.
Yellow Autumn, youthful Spring,
In thy praises jointly sing.
RECITATIVE.
Like Neptune, Caesar guards Virginian fleets,
Fraught with Tobacco's balmy sweets;
Old Ocean trembles at Britannia's power,
And Boreas is afraid to roar.
AIR.
Happy mortal, he! who knows
Pleasure which a Pipe bestows;
Curling eddies climb the room,
Wafting round a mild perfume.
RECITATIVE.
Let foreign climes the vine and orange boast,
While wastes of war deform the teeming coast;
Britannia, distant from each hostile sound,
Enjoys a Pipe, with case and freedom crowned:
Even restless Faction finds itself most free;
Or, if a slave, a slave to Liberty.
AIR.
Smiling years, that gayly run
Round the zodiac, with the sun,
Tell, if ever you have seen
Realms so quiet and serene.
British sons no longer, now,
Hurl the bar, or twang the bow;
Nor of crimson combat think,
But securely smoke and drink.
CHORUS.
Smiling years, that gayly run
Round the zodiac, with the sun,
Tell, if ever you have seen
Realms so quiet and serene.
IMITATION II.
LITTLE tube, of mighty power,
Charmer of an idle hour,
Object of my warm desire,
Lip of wax, and eye of fire:
And thy snowy, taper waist,
With my finger gently braced;
And thy pretty swelling crest,
With my little stopper pressed,
And the sweetest bliss of blisses
Breathing from thy balmy kisses.
Happy thrice and thrice again,
Happiest he of happy men,
Who, when again the night returns,
When again the taper burns;
When again the cricket's gay,
(Little cricket, full of play)
Can afford his tube to feed
With the fragrant Indian weed:
Pleasure for a nose divine,
Incense of the god of wine.
Happy thrice and thrice again,
Happiest he of happy men.
IMITATION III.
O THOU, matur'd by glad Hesperian suns,
Tobacco! fountain pure of limpid truth,
That looks the very soul; whence pouring thought
Swarms all the mind; absorpt is yellow care;
And at each puff imagination burns.
Flash on thy bard, and, with exalting fires,
Touch the mysterious lip that chaunts thy praise,
In strains to mortal sons of earth unknown.
Behold an engine, wrought from tauny mines
Of ductile clay, with plastic virtue formed,
And glazed magnific over, I grasp, I fill.
From Paetotheke with pungent powers perfumed,
Itself one tortoise all, where shines imbibed
Each parent ray; then rudely ram'd illume,
With the red touch of zeal-enkindling sheet,
Marked with Gibsonian lore; forth issue clouds,
Thought-thrilling, thirst-inciting clouds around,
And many-mining fires: I all the while,
Lolling at ease, inhale the breezy balm.
But chief, when Bacchus wont with thee to join,
In genial strife and orthodoxal ale,
Stream life and (...) into the Muses' bowl.
O be thou still my ^^eat inspirer, thou
My Muse; oh fan me with thy zephyrs boon,
While I, in clouded tabernacle shrin'd,
Burst forth all oracle and mystic song.
IMITATION IV.
CRITICS avaunt; Tobacco is my theme;
Tremble like hornets at the blasting steam.
And you, court-insects, flutter not too near
Its light, nor buzz within the scorching sphere.
Pollio, with flame like thine my verse inspire,
So shall the Muse from smoke elicit sire.
Coxcombs prefer the tickling sting of snuff;
Yet all their claim to wisdom is -- a puff:
Lord ^oplin smokes not -- for his teeth afraid:
Sir Tawdry smokes not -- for he wears brocade.
Ladies, when pipes are brought, affect to swoon;
They love no smoke, except the smoke of town:
But courtiers hate the puffing tribe -- no matter,
Strange, if they love the breath that cannot flatter!
Its foes but show their ignorance; can he
Who scorns the leaf of knowledge, love the tree?
The tainted Templar (more prodigious yet)
Rails at Tobacco, though it makes him -- spit.
Citronia vows it has an odious stink;
She will not smoke (ye gods!) -- but she will drink.
And chaste Prudella (blame her if you can)
Says, Pipes are used by that vile creature Man:
Yet crowds remain, who still its worth proclaim,
While some for pleasure smoke, and some for fame:
Fame, of our actions universal spring,
For which we drink, eat, sleep, smoke, -- every thing.
IMITATION V.
BLESSED leaf! whose aromatic gales dispense
To Templars modesty, to Parsons sense:
So raptured priests, at famed Dodona's shrine,
Drank inspiration from the steam divine.
Poison that cures, a vapor that affords
Content more solid than the smile of lords:
Rest to the weary, to the hungry food,
The last kind refuge of the wise and good:
Inspired by thee, dull cits adjust the scale
Of Europe's peace, when other statesmen fail.
By thee protected, and thy sister, Beer,
Poets rejoice, nor think the bailiff near.
Nor less the critic owns thy genial aid,
While supperless he plies the piddling trade.
What though to love and soft delights a foe,
By ladies hated, hated by the beau,
Yet social freedom, long to courts unknown,
Fair health, fair truth, and virtue are thy own.
Come to thy poet, come with healing wings,
And let me taste thee unexcis'd by kings.
IMITATION VI.
BOY! bring an ounce of Freeman's best,
And bid the vicar be my guest:
Let all be placed in manner due;
A pot wherein to spit, or spue,
And London Journal, and Free-Briton,
Of use to light a pipe, or * *
* * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * *
This village, unmolested yet
By troopers, shall be my retreat:
Who cannot flatter, bribe, betray;
Who cannot write, or vote for *.
Far from the vermin of the town,
Here let me rather live, my own,
Doze over a pipe, whose vapor bland
In sweet oblivion lulls the land;
Of all, which at Vienna passes,
As ignorant as * * Brass is:
And scorning rascals to caress,
Extol the days of good queen Bess,
When first Tobacco blessed our isle,
Then think of other queens -- and smile.
Come jovial pipe, and bring along
Midnight revelry, and song;
The merry catch, the madrigal,
That echoes sweet in City hall;
The parson's pun, the smutty tale
Of country justice over his ale.
I ask not what the French are doing,
Or Spain to compass Britain's ruin:
Britons, if undone, can go,
Where Tobacco loves to grow.
END OF VOL. I.

