A LECTURE ON MIMICRY, As it was delivered with great Applause, at the Theaters
in Covent Garden and the Hay-Market, and the great Room in Panton-Street. In
the Course of which were introduced A GREAT VARIETY OF THEATRICAL IMITATIONS.
To which is added JERRY SNEAK's RETURN FROM THE REGATTA; AND A LECTURE ON
LECTURES. BY GEORGE SAVILLE CAREY.

LONDON. Printed for J. BEW, No. 28, PATERNOSTER ROW. M.DCC.LXXVI. [Price ONE
SHILLING.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
PART I. A Managerial Scene, in which is introduced
Mr. Fiddlestick, Mr. F-sh-r Mr. Smallcoal, Mr. C-lm-n Mrs. Artichoke, Mrs.
H-rt -- y Bouana Figli. Sig. S-st-ni Patent, Mr. G-r-k Richard IIId. Mr.
W.st-n. Shylock in Macbeth, Mr. M-ckl-n.
PART II.
What alas shall Sig. M -- ll-co Rosy Wine, Miss C-t -- y The early Horn, Mr.
L-we This is Sir, Mr. B-n -- ster From Morn 'till Mrs. B-rt -- n Think, O!
think Mr. V-r -- n Sweet Willy O! Mrs. B-d-ley The Mulberry Mr. K-ar Ye
Warwickshire Lads, etc. a Duette, Mr. V -- n and Mr. D -- n.
PART III. A Scene from Harlequin's Invasion.
Mr. Br -- by, Mr. D-dd, Mrs. P.-rs-ns, and others. Othello, Mr. B-r-y
Cymbeline, Mr. H -- st Jacimo, Mr. P-lm-r Posthumus, Mr. R -- dish The Riva
Singers and the Determination of Dr. GUTTLE, Mr. D -- d-n, Mr. Q -- ck, Dr.
A-ne.
A Diologue between ARISTOPHANES and BILLY BUCKRAM.

POETICAL INTRODUCTION.
YOUR kind indulgence I am come to ask,
Whilst I pursue my arduous mimic task, --
The path's contracted which I Have sought to tread,
Chance pops each fancied figure in my head;
No dint of labor gathered by degrees;
I cannot assume an object when I please,
But just when Nature throws it in my way,
I take the hint, and bear the form away.
I would not by this mimic trade offend,
My only motive is a private end,
chinking the pocket. And who is here will say, that I Am to blame,
Since all mankind are apt to do the same.
Yet some there are, methinks, I hear 'em too,
Who cry "this fellow's plan can never do,
"Damn his wry faces -- He pretend to sing,
"Would he were taken off but once -- to swing.
"Did ever mortal such an effort see?
"He Would fain persuade you that he takes off me,
"How could the puppy ever think to please,
"No more like me, than I to Hercules.
mimicking W -- dw -- d. Should I engagement seek -- and by the by
Should I to Aristophanes apply,
The Satirist perhaps would thus reply; --
"Engage you sir! no, that can never be,
"Two of a trade you know can never agree,
"You say I broil my characters like sprats,
"And make me write a comedy of cats,
"Croak too the hellish language of a crow,
"When all the world can tell, I don't know how;
"Would you engage, try to engage the town,
"And then like me you will hobble to renown;
"Live by your wits, sir, that is the way to thrive,
"Why how the devil do you think I live?"
I Will take the hint, and, on myself depend,
I never yet found Manager my friend,
By you supported, boldly I Will oppose
My mimic powers against a host of foes;
Roscius shall wake, and strut about the stage
And limping Proteus grin with comic rage,
Feeble Othello shall the state address,
And toothless Shylock lisp in Macbeth's dress,
Declaiming Richard in short accents breathe,
And bind his brows with a victorious wreathe.
The silken sons of Italy shall squall,
And John roast-beef, in vulgar accents bawl;
In fine -- as far as mimickry can go,
At least as far as I can make it do,
These and some others of the changeful crew,
Shall rise for judgment to your candid view,
And if some merit you shall chance to find,
Some little genius in the lecturer's mind,
O'erlook his failings, set his heart at ease,
Nor damp an ardour which aspires to please.
LECTURES ON MIMICKRY.
A SUDDEN transition, from the gloomy shades of oblivion, to the sunshine of
prosperity, has different effects on different objects; the man of sense shows
it in a modest reserve; a coxcomb in a superficial glare of ostentation, which
renders him the laughing stock of all mankind. A tom-boy is always pleased with
a new coat, let it fit him ever so ill; and when he should rather hide himself,
his vanity leads him into the great world; hence he is proud of establishing a
character, though a ridiculous one.

I beg leave to give my auditors a novel scene in another peep behind the
curtain.

FIDDLESTICK. Hollo! you carpenters, what the devil are you all about there?


CARPENTER. Drawing up the clouds to make room for an Italian sky.


FIDDLESTICK. Why, you make such a tugging and a pulling, you will tear all the
clouds to pieces.


CARPENTER. Somebody has taken away the laurel from the figure of Apollo, sir,
and we have not another in the house.


FIDDLESTICK. Oh! I have got that, it fits me very well, and I intend to wear
it in the character of Apollo, at the masquerade this evening. There, there,
what the devil are you about now, hey!


CARPENTER. It Is only one of the ropes that snap'd.


FIDDLESTICK. The devil snap you, what do you mean by that; do you know that
the fourth part of every rope in this house belongs to me.


CARPENTER. 'Twas only the rope that was tied about the neck of Apollo; there
is rope enough left to hang all the Apollo's in England.


Here Jerry Dowlas comes to offer himself. DOWLAS. A good morning sir, pray
sir, is not your name Mr. Fiddlestick.


FIDDLESTICK. Timothy Fiddlestick, Esquire. if you please.


DOWLAS. I beg your pardon sir.


FIDDLESTICK. Well, what do you want here?


DOWLAS. Sir, I came to offer myself.


FIDDLESTICK. Offer yourself, to do what!


DOWLAS. To play, sir.


FIDDLESTICK. Hey, well, what do you play the fiddle?


DOWLAS. No, sir.


FIDDLESTICK. Can you sing?


DOWLAS. No, sir.


FIDDLESTICK. Then I would not give a fig for you.


DOWLAS. I am a tragedian, sir.


FIDDLESTICK. Damn your tragedies and your comedies, -- I wish they were at the
bottom of the sea, with all my heart; -- It Is a great pity they were ever
introduced upon the stage; -- there is more sound sense in a good solo, or a
concerto, than all the tragedies and comedies in the world. But here comes Mr.
Smallcoal, -- you would better speak to him. Hey, what, well -- Mr. Smallcoal, here
is a gentleman who says he is a tragedian.


SMALLCOAL. A tragedian is he. Sneering did you ever play in any company.


DOWLAS. Oh! yes sir, very often.


SMALLCOAL. What company, sir?


DOWLAS. Sometimes in one company, and sometimes another.


SMALLCOAL. But what company, sir?


DOWLAS. Sometimes at the Faulcon in Fetter-lane, sometimes at the Horn in
Doctor's Commons, sometimes at the Goose-and-Gridiron in St. Paul's Churchyard.


SMALLCOAL. I never saw such a goose as you are, I Am sure laughing Can you
read, sir?


DOWLAS. O yes. sir.


SMALLCOAL. Can you write?


DOWLAS. Yes, sir.


SMALLCOAL. Then I Will be damned if you will ever do for me: for you fellows that
write and read are always too conceited; there is no making any thing of you.


DOWLAS. I thought it was impossible to be an actor without such requisites,
sir.


SMALLCOAL. You thought? -- who gave you the privilege of thinking, sir? --
that is another proof of your stupidity -- an actor should never think for
himself.


DOWLAS. No, sir?


SMALLCOAL. No, he should always leave that to a Manager. -- Did you ever hear
Mrs. Hartichoke?


DOWLAS. No, sir.


SMALLCOAL. No? -- call her in -- now you shall hear the very pattern of an
actress. Enter Hartichoke Prithee, my dear girl, give me your favorite speech
in shore. -- Oh, she has all the charming monotony of the cuckoo.


HARTICHOKE. Such is the fate unhappy women find,
And such the curse entailed upon our kind,
That man the lawless libertine may rove
Free and unquestioned through the wilds of love;
While woman, sense and nature's easy fool,
If poor, weak woman swerve from virtue's rule,
If, strongly charmed, she leave the thorny way,
And in the softer paths of pleasure stray,
Ruin ensues, reproach, and endless shame,
And one false step entirely damns her fame;
In vain with tears the loss she may deplore,
In vain look back to what she was before,
She sets like stars, that fall to rise no more.

SMALLCOAL. There, there, what do you think of her?


DOWLAS. Very clever indeed Sir; -- but surely she could never have arrived at
such a pitch of excellence, without knowing how to write and read.


SMALLCOAL. Not a word, sir -- not a syllable -- all nature and my assistance;
-- besides, when she has lost the power of acting -- she will be able to get
her living by squeezing oranges and lemons at a coffee-house. squeezing his
hands.


DOWLAS. Sir, a good morning to you -- I Am sorry I have been so troublesome.


SMALLCOAL So am I, sir, [hey Fiddlestick] but I am afraid you have the
greatest trouble to come.


DOWLAS. What trouble, sir?


SMALLCOAL. The trouble of taking yourself away as you came. [hey Fiddlestick]


DOWLAS. It Is a sad misfortune to be bit by a mad player; -- however, I have
one resource left yet. I Will even to my old friend Billy Bustle; -- he is
hand-and-glove with Patent; Patent will soon find out my genius, though these
purblind dunciads have overlooked it.


SCENE II.
BUSTLE to PATENT. BILLY BUSTLE. We Have lost it, we have lost it, we have lost it
running up and down, blowing his nose, and wiping his fingers on his breeches


PATENT. What have you lost -- your senses?


BUSTLE. It is the cause, it is the cause.


PATENT. What cause, Billy, what cause?


BUSTLE. That damned illiterate cause; -- Milton, Shakespeare, Johnson, Dryden,
Pope, Addison, and all the whole list of worthies are gone to hell.


PATENT. The devil they are! -- where did you get this intelligence?


BUSTLE. From those double-dy'd devils in Westminster Hall.


PATENT. What do you mean?


BUSTLE. My property is gone; it is indeed -- indeed it is -- Our family have
had an illiterate property for many generations -- I can prove my copy-right,
granted to my great, great grand-father's grandfather, to the following
illiterate productions: Sir John Gower's Poems, Jeffery Chaucer's Canterbury
Tales, Drayton's Polyalbian, Spencer's Fairy Queen, Sir John Harrington's
Orlando Furioso, from the Italian of Ariosto.


PATENT. And they are gone, are they, Billy?


BUSTLE. For ever!


PATENT. Well, don't despair, I have a consolation for you yet.


BUSTLE. Is it possible?


PATENT. You shall have my productions, they will be the property of the living.


BUSTLE. I Am happy, I Am happy; let the copy-right of the dead die with their
illiterate masters for what I care. -- Odds bobs I had like to have forgot -- I
have a present for you.


PATENT. What is it, Billy-boy?


BUSTLE. A genius.


PATENT. Indeed!


BUSTLE. A voice like a lion, and an eye -- -- Oh here he comes. I Will leave you
together alone.


Exit BUSTLE. Enter DOWLAS. PATENT. Walk in, Sir; your servant, Sir, your
servant -- have you any particular business with me?


DOWLAS. Yes, sir, my friends have lately discovered that I have a genius for
the stage.


PATENT. Oh, you would be a player, would you, sir? -- pray, sir, did you ever
play?


DOWLAS. No, sir, but I flatter myself --


PATENT. I hope not, sir; flattering one's-self is the very worst of hypocrisy.


DOWLAS. You Will excuse me, sir.


PATENT. Aye, sir, if you will excuse me for not flattering you. -- I always
speak my mind.


DOWLAS. I dare say you will like my manner, sir.


PATENT. No manner of doubt, sir -- I dare say I shall -- pray, sir, with which
of the ladies are you in love?


DOWLAS. In love, sir! -- ladies! looking round


PATENT. Aye, sir, ladies -- Miss Comedy, or Dame Tragedy?


DOWLAS. I Am vastly fond of Tragedy, Sir.


PATENT. Very well, Sir; and where is your fort?


DOWLAS. Sir?


PATENT. I say, sir, what is your department?


DOWLAS. Department? -- Do you mean my lodging, sir?


PATENT. Your lodgings, sir? -- no, not I; -- ha, ha, ha, I should be glad to
know what department you would wish to possess in the tragic walk -- the
sighing lover, the furious hero, or the sly assassin?


DOWLAS. Sir, I should like to play King Richard the Third.


PATENT. A damned good character -- a very good character; and I dare say you
will play it vastly well, sir.


DOWLAS. I hope you will have no reason to complain, sir.


PATENT. I hope not. Well, sir, have you got any favorite passage ready?


DOWLAS. I have it all by heart, sir.


PATENT. You have, sir, have you? -- I shall be glad to hear you.


DOWLAS. Hem -- hem -- hem -- clearing his throat.
What will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground -- I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death,
Oh! may such purple tears, be always shed
On those who wish the downfall of our house;
If there be any spark of life yet remaining
Down, down, to hell, and say I sent thee thither,
I that have neither pity, love nor fear.

PATENT. Hold, sir, hold -- in pity hold; za, za, za, sir, -- sir -- why
dam'me, sir, it is not like humanity. You will not find me so great a barbarian as
Richard, -- you say he had neither, pity, love nor fear, -- now, sir, you will
find that I am possessed of all those feelings for you at present, -- I pity
your conceit, I love to speak my mind; and damme I fear you will never make a
player.


DOWLAS. Do you think so, sir.


PATENT. Do I think so, sir? -- Yes, I know so sir! -- now sir, only look at
yourself -- your legs kissing as if they had fallen in love with one another;
-- and your arms, dingle dangle, dingle dangle, like the fins of a dying
turtle, mimicks him 'pon my soul, sir, 'twill never do, -- pray, sir, are you
of any profession?


DOWLAS. Yes, sir, a linen draper!


PATENT. A linen draper! -- a damned good business; a very good business --
you will get more by that than by playing, -- you had better mind your thrumbs
and your shop, and be damned to you -- and don't pester me here any more with
your Richard and your -- za, za, za -- this is a genius damn such geniusses I
say. Exit.


It will be acknowledged, I believe, that some, the most ingenious of mankind,
who now stand dignified in the court of Fame, have been often more indebted to
chance than industry.

Painters have drawn conversation pieces from the figures they have fancied to
have seen in a fire; beautiful landscapes from the broken plaster in a wall;
-- formidable caverns, and terrifick mountains from the inside of a rotten
cheese.

Musicians have composed favorite airs, from the creaking hinges of a door, the
gurgling in the neck of a bottle, or the wind whistling through some little
cranny.

Famous actors too have often formed their mode of speaking from the howling of
a wolf, the roaring of a lion, or the braying of an ass.

There is a modern theatrical hero, "whom I have heard many praise, and highly
too" as Hamlet says, who fell in love with the monotony of a chimney sweeper.

S**th. Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
Our stern alarms are changed to merry meetings;
Grim-visag'd war has smoothed his wrinkled front,
And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds,
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's ehamber,
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.

Little Peter Pollish took his hints from a different object. This gentleman
has often been heard to say, that a windmill was one of the most graceful
structures in the world, and that it always put him in mind of a flying
Mercury; but how he made it out, heaven only knows; it is certain he had studied
the motion of a windmill, and the figure of a Mercury, for he had ever the
action of the one, and the attitude of the other; it is said he was a profound
politician too, and has been often heard muttering to himself, concerning the
precarious and ticklish finances of poor Old England, our trade declining,
frequent bankruptcies, combustions in the state, city squabbling, public
complainings; and no Popery.

Once in a sudden gush of exclamation, he broke out in a quotation from
Barbarossa, sometimes ingeniously making one syllable into two.

S**ig*y. Now sleep and silence -- ber-oods over the city,
The devoted sentinel, now takes his lonely stand,
And idly der-eams of that tomorrow,
Which shall never come; -- in this der-ead interval.
Oh! busy thought; from outward things
Descend into thyself; bring with thee
Awful conscience, and fir-em resolve,
That in the approaching hour of blood and horror
I may stand unmoved.
And there he left off as stiff as a statue.

A certain veteran of the stage, perceiving a dearth of genius and the theater
in an absolute decline, stood forth at seventy-five to save it from a total
fall. Othello, he observed, had lost his legs, and Roscius his inclination. --
Shall we for ever bid good by'e to Romeo -- Adieu to Castalio, -- and farewell
to Macbeth; -- no, I will step forth myself, and convince the world there is no
occasion for leg, tooth, or eye to play such characters; and without any of
those corporeal requisites, my auditors shall see that I will act them to a
charm.

M**k**n. If it were done, when it is done, then 'twere well,
It were done quickly; if the assassination
Could trammell up the consequence, and catch
With its surcease, success; that but this blow
Might be the be-all, and the end-all -- HERE.
But here upon this bank and shoal of time,
We'd jump the life to come. -- But in these cases
We still have judgment here, that we but teach
Bloody instructions, which being taught, return
To plague the inventor. Even-handed justice
Returns the ingredients of our poisoned chalice
To our own lips. Exit.

End of the First Part.
SECOND PART.
THE Italians make the ladies the objects of their imitation. Who does not
laugh to hear a gigantic hero, from whose appearance one might expect the roar
of a bellowing Taurus, warble out the commands of the conqueror of the world,
with the execrable squeaking of a guinea-pig.

GAUDANI. What, alas! shall Orpheus do?
Whither go without his love?
Euridice, oh! answer me,
I have lost my darling dove, etc.

I know no difference there can be in this between a C*T**Y in breeches, and a
S***S**O in petticoats.

C*T**Y. When bickerings hot,
At high words got,
Break out at gammy-oram,
The golden rule
Their flame to cool,
Is push about the jorum.
With fist on jug,
Coifs who can hug,
Or show me that glib speaker,
Who her red rag
In gibe can wag
When her mouth's brim full of liquor?

It Is not every ear that is so refined; some will listen with more satisfaction
to the natural and unaffected manner of an English singer, than to the
debilitated extravagance of an Italian.

DU**LL**Y. With early horn
Salute the morn, etc.

Now I will beg leave to introduce the manner of a gentleman who has a little
more pudding in his voice.

B*NN****R. This is, sir, a Jubilee,
Music without Melody,
Verses without harmony
That is, sir, a Jubilee,
etc. etc.

There is generally a greater share of affectation in singers than in actors,
and they are frequently more indebted to art than to nature. To imitate the
dissonant jargon of an unpolished African, requires a mimical capacity but no
great share of vocal abilities.

D*BD*N. Deer heart, deer heart, what a terrible life am I led, etc.


The Italians, whose ancestors were the sweetest of all poets, seem to have
abolished that celestial science, as if they thought poetry and good sense
unnecessary, where there is fine singing. A famous air in an Italian Opera has
been literally translated thus: Where, which, and wherefore,
There, this, and therefore.


Paintings in still life seem to have lost their estimation -- but we have
capital singers in still life, in high esteem, who think it unnecessary to move
hand or foot; nay sometimes indeed even disdain to open their mouths.

Mrs. BAR***L***N. From morn to night alone I set,
For liberty I sigh and fret:
Like Robin in his cage.
Mamma too kills me with her care;
She tells me I am young and fair,
At a bewitching age.
etc. etc.

Our most sanguine wishes are frequently disappointed by the most provoking
contrarieties. Some there are who possess enchanting tones, but are destitute
of taste; and on the other hand, we meet with those who are endowed with every
requisite but a voice. When therefore a passion for imitation is guided by
taste and judgment, it will always give satisfaction; and we are ever pleased
to view good action, fine feelings, and superior taste supply the deficiency of
a voice.

V*RN*N. Think, ah! think, within my breast,
While contending passions reign,
How my heart is robbed of rest,
And in pity ease my pain.
To a lover thus distressed,
Torn with doubting, hopes and fears,
Every moment till he is blessed
Is a thousand thousand years.

When an actor or a singer is possessed of an extravagance of action, it
destroys all effect of sense or sound; and renders the most elegant composition
farcical.

Mrs. B*DD**Y. The pride of all nature was sweet Willy O,
The first of all swains,
He gladden'd the plains,
None ever was like to the sweet Willy O,
None ever was like to the sweet Willy O,
etc. etc.

I have heard the tree of our immortal Shakespeare celebrated in the melodious
strains of an itinerant crier of wooden ware.

"By my bowl or platter, buy my wooden ware." K**R. Behold this fair goblet was
carved from the tree
Which, Oh, my sweet Shakespeare was planted by thee;
As a relic I kiss it, and bow to the shrine,
What comes from thy hand must be ever divine.
All shall yield to the mulberry tree,
Bend to thee, blessed mulberry;
Matchless was he that planted thee,
And thou, like him, immortal be.

As I have already given Mungo in distress, and Amintor in love, give me leave
to introduce them once more in the rustic Ballad Singers.

V*RN*N. Ye Warwickshire lads and ye lasses,
See what at the Jubilee passes.
etc. etc.

D*BD*N. Be proud of the charms of your county,
Where nature has lavished her bounty.
etc. etc.

V**N*N. Old Ben, Thomas Otway, John Dryden,
And half a score more we take pride in,
etc. etc.

D*BD*N. There never was sure such a creature.
Of all she was worth he robbed nature.
etc. etc.

End of the Second Part.
PART III.
IT rarely happens that we meet with a ROSCIUS, whose imitative genius can
comprehend the great variety of human passions, and arrive at superior
excellence in each.

There are many characters in which the figure of the figure of an actor gives
us a disgust, and were they possessed of every other requisite, the part would
always show an awkward deficiency. -- A crook-back'd Richard six feet high,
will prejudice us against the character. -- An Othello or a Mark Anthony, have
the same effect, when represented by a diminutive figure. -- But I have seen
those characters acted by a modern tragedian, who has impressed on me so
strong an idea, that I have sometimes thought he had just left the great
originals, and came to mimic them on the stage.

B*R*Y. Most potent, grave, and reveren'd Seniors,
My ever honored and approved good masters,
That I have taken away this old man's daughter,
It is most true -- true I married her;
The very head and front of my offending
Has this extent -- no more. --

It has been too often observed the managers of our theaters pay too little
deference to their Kings. I have seen his Majesty of Denmark represented by a
gentleman who would have made an excellent waiter at a tavern, and Cymbeline
put into the hands of another who would have done more credit to Snuffle in the
Mayor of Garrat than any other actor on the stage.

H**ST. I Have surely seen him,
His favor, his familiar to me -- Boy!
Thou have looked thyself into my grace
I know not why, -- or wherefore
To say, Live, Boy! never thank thy master -- live!
And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou will
Fitting my bounty, and thy state, I Will give it.

When a hero makes his complaints, they should be expressed with the spirit of
a hero; but when he whimpers them like a schoolboy, it renders him perfectly
ridiculous.

P*L**R. It was upon a time --
A curse the clock that struck the hour,
When I brought proof enough to make
The noble Leonatus mad. Whereupon
Methinks I see him now!

R*DD**H. Ah, so thou do, Italian fiend,
Ah, me, egregious murderer, spit
And throw stones at me, set
The dogs in the street at me,
Let every thing be called Posthumous, Leonatus.
Oh! Imogen, my life, my wife, my Imogen!

Comedy has never a better effect on our passions than when two characters are
happily contrasted, like light and shade in painting, each serves to foil the
other; -- the ludicrous vociferation of a Major Sturgeon, and the vacant
timidity of a Jerry Sneak, give a double satisfaction, being opposed to each
other.

DIALOGUE.
Aristophanes, F**TE. Billy Buckram W*ST*N. BUCKRAM. Your servant, Master
Stophanes.


ARISTOPHANES. Ah, what my little waddling, swaddling Billy Buckram, how goes
the world with you? -- I thought old Charon had punted you over long enough
ago. -- I thought you was lost!


BUCKRAM. No, I am not lost -- I was just found -- I was in Heaven, as it were
-- I walked, I do not know how I walked -- mechanically, like a clock, or
Moore's machine.


ARISTOPHANES. What, you have been with the damned Methodists again, I find.


BUCKRAM. Damned Methodists! -- Oh, thou shall broil for that; thou shall stand
at the Devil's gate, and I will pelt thee, yea, I will pelt thee with red hot
cinders.


ARISTOPHANES. The devil you will -- Red hot cinders! -- I fancy you talk of
things too hot to hold, hey, Billy -- Come, prithee, be thy goodly self again,
put off that damned face and begin.


BUCKRAM. Begin What?


ARISTOPHANES. Johnny Pringle, to be sure.


BUCKRAM. Nay, I can be merry an I choose.


ARISTOPHANES. Then prithee choose to be merry.


BUCKRAM. So I will master 'Stophanes, for I loves you for old acquaintance
sake.

SONG.
Johnny Pringle had a little pig,
It was little, and not very big.
Oh, had you been alive, and there to see
Johnny Pringle, Jenny Pringle, and little Piggy.
Johnny Pringle sat him down and cried,
Jenny Pringle laid her down and died.
So there was an end of all the whole three,
Johnny Pringle, Jenny Pringle, and little Piggy.
But I am a-weary of this wicked world for all that.


ARISTOPHANES. Its more than I am.


BUCKRAM. And yet by your shining face, it seems to make you sweat, too.


ARISTOPHANES. Huh, huh, sweat? -- Fry, broil, burn, -- I broil characters as
you broil sprats.


BUCKRAM. Broil characters, I gad, that is odd enough.


ARISTOPHANES. Aye, broil characters; -- What think you of Dr. Squintum, Peter
Paragraph, Sir Luke Limp, Mother Cole, and the whole tribe of the Nabobs.


BUCKRAM. Oh, they are parfectly burnt to a cinder now, the town wants more
coals, fresh Coals, or any thing fresh, --


ARISTOPHANES. They shall have 'em. -- I Will tell you a secret, -- shut the door
-- I Am going to have a new pantomime. -- I Will tell you another, -- I shall play
harlequin myself. -- Such a magazine for the next campaign. Characters never
thought of by any bard before. -- But to return to my pantomime -- You shall be
my Perriot.


BUCKRAM. Perriot! Oh, if you make a peer of me, master 'Stophanes, you will be a
princely gentleman, indeed.


ARISTOPHANES. Hold your tongue, you damned fool you. I shall be harlequin, and
a nimble one -- -- You must keep close to my heels if you can. -- And when we
are pursued by all the mob of pantomimical figures, with their constables
staves, red-hot pokers, pitch-forks, etc. at last we are drove into some
turn-again lane, -- how are we to make our escape? --


BUCKRAM. I cannot tell how, indeed.


ARISTOPHANES. You cannot, why then I Will tell you. -- I Will turn you into a lion,
and myself into an ass!


BUCKRAM. I beg to be excused, master 'Stophanes.


ARISTOPHANES. Hold your tongue, ye fool. -- -- When the pantaloon and his mob
comes to close quarters -- you shall roar like a lion, and I Will bray like an ass


BUCKRAM. cannot roar like a lion, master 'Stophanes.


ARISTOPHANES. I warrant you I Will make you.


BUCKRAM. How will you make me.


ARISTOPHANES. By a charm to be sure.


BUCKRAM. But what sort of a charm.


ARISTOPHANES. You shall hear -- When you are standing in a corner sucking your
thumbs, and wont roar, I Will lay my stick, thawk across your shoulders -- and I
warrant you will roar like a lion in spite of your teeth.


BUCKRAM. But shall not I make use of the same charm to you, Master 'Stophanes.


ARISTOPHANES. I beg to be excused -- I have my part by heart -- For instance,
what mob can stand this brays like an ass away they run -- There Is a touch for
you.


BUCKRAM. A touch indeed!


ARISTOPHANES. Now, what is the next scene?


BUCKRAM. Nay, I cannot tell.


ARISTOPHANES. Some beautiful waterworks -- with a fine cascade -- when I the
gentle harlequin, by the side of my pretty little columbine, shall be
discovered playing some tender air on my flute -- suppose I give you a touch
from Bona Figliola.


BUCKRAM. Bona, Fi-fi-fili.


ARISTOPHANES. Oh, that is too hard a bone for you to pick.


BUCKRAM. Oh, I shall like to hear it, Master 'Stophanes, though I don't
understand it. -- I Am not so much out of fashion as that.


ARISTOPHANES. Why then you shall have it. imitates the flute upon his stick.
There, there, is not that enough to charm any body. -- Well, in the midst of
our felicity, we are attacked again -- and how do you think I got rid of 'em?


BUCKRAM. Drown 'em all, I suppose.


ARISTOPHANES. No -- I Will turn the waterworks into fireworks.


BUCKRAM. Into fireworks.


ARISTOPHANES. Yes, fireworks; -- and you shall be my little match-man. --
I Will be Torre behind, and you shall take care of the rockets in front. -- Here
goes a rocket. Imitates the firing of a rocket. There, there it goes, Billy.


BUCKRAM. Where, where, Master 'Stophanes.


ARISTOPHANES. Where? Why, its all in idea to be sure.


BUCKRAM. But I cannot find out the idea, Master 'Stophanes.


ARISTOPHANES. Why then you're a damned fool, that is all -- And now Billy, now
for it.


BUCKRAM. Now, what is next.


ARISTOPHANES. Why I shall turn the cathrine-wheels into a couple of cats.


BUCKRAM. A couple of cats.


ARISTOPHANES. Yes, a couple of cats. You remember my parrot, don't you.


BUCKRAM. I don't remember your parrot, not I.


ARISTOPHANES. No? -- Room for cuckolds, Poll, Poll, Poll, O pretty Padle.


BUCKRAM. O Lud, I remember poor Poll vastly well now.


ARISTOPHANES. You do -- Then what think you of my cats, -- the amorous
courtship of two cats in a gutter. -- 'Twill make a damned good moonlight
scene.


BUCKRAM. But how will you introduce 'em, Master Stophanes.


ARISTOPHANES. How? -- Why you shall hear -- Suppose two cats on the top of a
house, making love to each other; washing their faces; for all your true lovers
should go with clean faces, hey, Billy -- The gentleman shall address his lady
thus:

Mimicks the cats. "Moll, Moll-row, Moll-row."
Now the she cat.
"Cur-well, Cur-well, Cur-well."
Now the he cat.
"Cur you love me, Cur you love me."
Now the she cat.
"No, Cur no, Cur no."
Now the catastrophe.
Hoo, hoo, Oh, you whore.
Imitates the fighting of cats. There Is for you, Billy, there is for you, boy;
-- if there should be a serious face in the house while that scene is going
forward, I shall pronounce it, the face of a murderer or a methodist.


End of the Third Part.
JERRY SNEAK's RETURN FROM THE REGATTA.
I AM just come from 'Gatta; am drenched like a hound,
It Is twenty to one that I had not been drowned,
There were wife and myself, and some brave jolly boys,
In a six-oar'd cutter, amidst all the noise,
When a blundering broad-bottom'd country barge
Came bearing down on us, -- and then to our charge
We were all overset; should surely have sunk,
And have gone to the bottom if we had not been drunk;
There was never a one dead of us all, but my wife,
But they towed her to shore, and soon brought her to life;
She was dead as a fish, and as pale as a clout,
But they rubbed her, and scrubb'd her, and rolled her about,
'Till they made her to talk, and to walk, and to see,
And now she is as blithe and as brisk as a be,
But we boarded our cutter, and ventured again,
Determined to see, what there was to be seen,
Such a wonderful possy of pennants and colors,
Such splashing and dashing with oars and scullers,
Skiffs, wherries and barges all huddl'd together,
Such crying for shelter on account of the weather,
The people on shore, who paid pounds for a seat,
Got wet to the skin and were glad to retreat,
While we on the Thames were so snug and so quiet,
Amidst all the rain, all the racket and riot;
There were courtiers and cits, and the gay savage-weavers,
With fifes and with drums, with bones and with cleavers,
The men were all red, and the women all white,
Oh, what a beautiful, wonderful sight,
The like I never saw since born of my mother,
Should I live 'till I die, I should never see another,
For should I have been drowned again and again,
I Would have gone every day such a sight to have seen;
There Is nothing in drowning you know nowadays,
They Have found out such wonderful comical ways,
Were you dead as a stone, you have no reason to fear,
They Will bring you to life with a flea in your ear;
The barges, some looked like a body of gold,
Some new ones were made -- out of those that were old,
With awnings of silk; with some figure or trinket,
And many were covered -- with naught but a blanket,
With white-lead and black-lead, with paint and with pitch,
Some large and some small, some ragged, some rich;
Such a sight, such a noise, and such a sweet smell,
Was never yet equaled on earth, or in hell;
But we got to the gardens, and landed at last,
In hopes to partake of the princely repast,
The tables were covered with many a thing,
You Would have thought they would set out a fine feast for a king;
The aldermen fixed 'em each man to his plate,
One took off his wig, and then rubbing his pate,
Looked eagerly round with a face of despair,
For fear that he should not come in for his share,
Then stuck his knife greedily into a ham,
Unbutton'd his waistcoat his stomach to cram,
Laid bones of fat capons in many a heap,
That he eat and he drank till he fell fast asleep.
I was hungry too, for as I am a sinner,
I Would never a spare minute to get me a dinner,
So took me a plate, and then slily sat down,
Determined to get me a bit of the brown,
Was resolved to have it the risque of my life,
In spite of that termagant teazer, my wife,
But I Would scarcely got down a good mouthful or two,
Before she came up, and made such ado,
Cried I never should more go with her to a feast,
Said I looked like a hog, that I eat like a beast,
I Would have looked if I could still more like a swine,
Would have swill'd all the night, but could get me no wine;
And mine was the fate too, often out of twenty,
There was naught but the artful appearance of plenty;
To canal next I went, and there dipped in my hat
To get me some water -- there was plenty of that,
I heard some of the people most bitterly curse,
But I took it like marriage, the better for worse;
The people all round seemed in wonderful pother,
Did nothing but grumble, and look at each other.
To me it appeared like a scene of confusion,
Without a beginning, or without a conclusion.
All the folks that were, -- Turk, Christian, or Jew,
Seemed plaguely puzzled to know what to do.
By the fate of St. Peter, and well too they might,
'Twas the very first time they had seen such a sight,
'Twas a kind of rehearsal, where none knew his part,
To act a Regatta's a wonderful part!
There was none of them perfect, to be sure, it was plain,
'Twill be much better done when they play it again;
But they all from that day have been fond of the water,
Not a father or mother, not a son or a daughter,
But what have sat off for a draught or a dip,
To get themselves cured of the scurvy and hyp.
Oh, were you at Margate, Southampton, or Brighton,
To see them all sous'd -- it is enough to delight one;
It Is sheep-sheering time, so they go there to feast,
The first to be washed well, and then to be fleeced.
The townsmen have all got a wonderful knack
Of touching your pocket, and stroking your back,
But give them a chance, once, of taking a pull,
At a fat golden fleece, and they will have all his wool.
If you would not be apt now to think it too long,
I Would finish my story good folks with a song.
SONG. The BOOKS of BRIGHTON. Tune, Cold and raw the North does blow.
I.
The country is moorish,
The natives are boorish,
Though ignorant, yet they are cunning,
These are excellent places,
If you're of false faces,
With abundance of fleecing and funning.
II.
I wish you much pleasure,
And mirth without measure,
My wishes, I Am sure they are fervent,
You may all believe me,
I do not deceive ye,
So believe me your most humble servant.
End of the Fourth Part.
A LECTURE ON LECTURES, By LANCELOT LAST; As delivered with Applause in the
COMIC MIRROR. Written by G. S. CAREY.
LADIES and Gemmen, I am going presently, as you will presently find, to give
you a Lecture on Lectures; but first and foremast, I think it necessary that I
should give some account of myself, because why, a man who can give no account
of himself, is to all intents and purposes a vagram.

First, as to my name, Lancelot Last, at your service, by trade, when I used to
follow it, a Shoemaker; but happening to see one of your lectures in our town,
I was inspired, as it were; and knowing him to be no better a schollard than
myself, I took off my apron, threw down my lap-stone, kicked up my last, gave
up my awl, and so sat off to lecture.

I was a long time before I could determine with myself what subject to begin
upon, at last Stronomy came into my head, but I found the stars were out of my
reach, and whenever I dipped into that science, I was presently lost as it
were, in a cloud.

Then Ottamy came into my head, I was at home to a peg in Ottomy, for as to
plucking out a tooth, picking out a corn, or curing the gripes, nobody is more
skilful than myself; but when I came to the imputation of a leg, and as I am
naturally tenderhearted, I found it too cutting a business for me.

Then says I to myself, what think thou Lancelot Last of Chemistry, I
thought as how that business was something in my way, for as to your consalves
and presarves, nobody is more larned in that way than myself, but then thinks I
again, some of my auditors may have an objection to the name of physic, and
physic nowadays is nothing but a drug.

Then Heraldry came into my head, but happening to see the king's arms on a
hackney-coach, I thought the dignity of that science was gone to the dogs.

I was advised by a friend to set about Midwifery. But my mind was big with a
thousand apprehensions whenever I thought on midwifery, so I gave it up because
I thought I should never be able to deliver myself on that subject.

I would have set about a Lecture on Heads, but my friend, Alexander Stevens,
had dissected every head in the kingdom so well, that I should have been set
down as one of his block-heads, if I had meddled with ever a one.

I thought the Heart would be no bad subject, but I could find so very few good
ones, that I had not a heart to set about it.

Thinking of bad hearts put the Law into my head, and I thought a Lecture on
the Law would be no bad thing; then says I to myself, the Law is no good thing
in itself, but would it not be better if I could make a good subject out of it.
I thought and I pondered about it 'till I found myself like a poor fly in a
cobweb. The law always puts me in mind of a coffin -- once in, your never out
again.

If none of these subjects will do, what in the name of Lucifer will do, --
Lucifer! who the devil is Lucifer? -- A great orator mayhap. -- Odds-bobbs, an
orator. -- It directly came into my head that a lecture on oratory would be the
best thing I could set about, and so I begins my lecture on oratory.

Ladies and gemmen, now according to the learned, and I am something of a
schollard myself. Oratory means jawing, because why, why because no orator can
speak without his jaws; perhaps you will think I cannot give you a Latin
devination for it, now you will find yourselves mistaken, what is English for Os?
why bon^ to be sure, and the jaws being full of bones* they are fixed proofs
that the word oratory comes from Os.

Now I think it is necessary that you should know what an orator is -- -- and
what is it you will say; I answer, it is a man -- and what is he to do? -- I
answer, to speak words -- -- and what are words? -- I answer, letters put
together, but there can be no word without a wowel; -- because why; why do you
see, because they cannot.

What are the necessary qualities of an orator -- -- The first, he must spit,
then wipe his mouth, then lay his hand upon his heart, then turn up his eyes,
then out comes a word, then another follows it, and then, like a post horse,
let him get on as fast as he can.

An orator should be a good mimic too -- Odds-bobbs, now I talk of mimics, I
must take care what I am about, for I am surrounded by mimics here, and they
will be for taking me off, perhaps, now you shall see I will save them the
trouble, and take off myself.

going off. FINIS.

