The Choice Spirits Assembly.


SONGS, COMIC, AND SATIRICAL.

BY GEORGE ALEXANDER STEVENS.

I love FUN! -- Keep it up! LECTURE UPON HEADS. OXFORD: Printed for the AUTHOR.

Sold by J. WALLER, in Fleet Street; G. ROBINSON, in Paternoster-Row; and F.
NEWBERY, the Corner of St. Paul's Church Yard, London.

M,DCC,LXXII.

To the PUBLIC.
A Paultry Collection of Songs having lately made its Appearance, to which the
Publisher has, with uncommon Effrontery, prefixed my Name as the Editor, and
upon my disclaiming the P^^^^sit^on, has even had the Assurance, in a public
Advertisement, to assert that he had my Authority for so doing; -- although I
have more Veneration for the Public, than either to trouble them, or load the
Daily Papers with an Altercation between a little Country Shopkeeper and a
Ballad-Maker, yet I once for all beg Leave to state the real Fact.

About four Years ago I exhibited my LECTURE at Whitehaven, and having Occasion
to use this Man's Shop, he took the Opportunity of soliciting me to give him a
few Comic Songs, because he had a Mind to publish a Volume to please his
Customers in the Part of the Country where he lived, and at the same Time
opening a Song Book, showed me several under my Name, which he told me he
purposed to print in his Collection: -- My Reply was; -- Sir, There is not one
of those printed as I wrote them; and some to which my Name is affixed are
really not mine. -- But sir, replied my Chapman, will you please to give
yourself the Trouble to mark such of them as are yours. -- Why really, sir, I
am ashamed of them. -- Lord, sir, they will do very well here; pray, sir, take
the Book home, and be so obliging as to mark them for me. -- And, if it would
not give Mr Stevens too much Trouble, I should be greatly obliged if he would
just put a Mark upon any other Songs in the Book that he thinks worth printing.
-- This was done, and the Volume returned the next Day.

From hence I could not imagine he would do more than insert my Name to the
Songs I had owned; and I solemnly declare he had no Authority from me to use it
otherwise. -- What I did was a mere Act of common Civility; -- I had not then,
nor have I since had any Connections with the Man; and upon this Ground alone
he has had the Modesty to charge me with a Breach of Promise by my Disavowal.
-- This, among other Reasons, has induced me to publish my own Songs, which I
now claim as Property, and have entered in the Hall Books of the Stationers
Company.

G. A. STEVENS.

DIRECTIONS to the BINDER.
The Assembly of Choice Spirits, Frontispiece. The Moonlight Piece to face the
Prologue, Signature A, Page 15.
Advertisement.
THE Writer of these Ballads, by way of Preface, begs leave to introduce a
Fragment, which he happily met with among the MSS preserved in that inestimable
receptacle of Curiosities at Chelsea, well known to the Literati of all
Nations, under the denomination of DON SALTERO'S COFFEE-HOUSE.

This Fragment indeed bears no marks of Antiquity; yet the origin as well as
progress of MUSIC and POETRY is here traced with uncommon perspicuity; and it
is greatly to be lamented that the Author himself could not be consulted, for
putting the finishing hand to so arduous and elaborate an undertaking.

THE HISTORY OF CHOICE SPIRITS AND BALLAD SINGING.
JUBAL, or TUBAL CAIN, was the first composer of Tunes; his Lyre preceded
Orion's, Amphion's, and even the Harp of Orpheus.

ORION, when making his voyage upon the Dolphin's back, invented Water Music.

AMPHION introduced Cotillons as well as Country Dancing.

ORPHEUS, to please his Eurydice, exhibited the first Harmonic Meeting.

And on the mountain Gibello, CIRCE held her first Court for COMUS. The
Magazines of the Ancients, those most useful repositories of ready-made
erudition tell us, that BACCHUS instituted a Club at this very period, called
the Baccae or Bacchantes, and which are now called the BUCKS; as it appears,
not only by Nimrod's ancient Charter deposited in the Archives of the
Babylonian Lodge in the environs of Soho, but also by the authenticated Records
belonging to the Pewter Platter in Bishopsgate-precinct.

And to these two Bodies of that Noble and Ancient Order, the following
Engraving of the famous GOBLET, or CUP used by the GRAND BUCK at Rome, when he
celebrated the Secular Games, is here addressed, with its original Inscription,
and a Translation, for the mutual entertainment of those distinct Classes of
Critics, the LEARNED and UNLEARNED, who alternately take the lead in all
Conversations.

POCULUM POCULORUM; Or the CUP of CUPS.


BEEN VOBIS,
BEEN MIHI,
BEEN AMICAE MEAE,
BEEN OMNIBUS NOBIS;
BEEN CUI NON INVIDET MIHI,
ET EO CUI NOSTRO GAUDEO GAUDET.
THUS TRANSLATED:

HERE IS TO THEE,
HERE IS TO ME,
ON OUR ABSENT FRIENDS WE'LL THINK,
TO OUR NOBLE SELVES WE'LL DRINK;
THEN TO HIM, FROM ENVY FREE,
WHO LOVES FUN LIKE YOU AND ME.
The reason for introducing this Antique unto the Reader's acquaintance is,
according to the modern custom of Book-making, to show the Author's ERUDITION;
which is still farther displayed in the following account of CHOICE SPIRITS.

After Circe's elopement with Ulysses, they became wanderers upon the Face of
the Earth, and like Jews, and Stroling-players, continue Itinerants even unto
this day; they have nevertheless multiplied exceedingly, propagating their
Convivialities into the different Orders of GRIGS, GREGS, and GREGORIANS; --
ANTIGALLICANS, FREE MASONS, and MACARONI; -- SONS of SOUND SENSE and
SATISFACTION; -- SONS of KIT, and OLD SOULS; -- TRUE BLUES, PURPLES, and
ALBIONS; -- The BEEF STEAK, JOCKEY, and CATCH CLUBS; -- The MAGDALENS, and
LUMBER TROOP, with many Others; all which acknowledge the Affinity they bear to
their paternal Society, by celebrating their Evening Mysteries with a Song and
a Sentiment.

The CHOICE SPIRITS have ever been famous for their Talents as Musical Artists.
They usually met at the harvest-homes of Grape-gathering: There exhilerated by
the pressings of the Vintage, they were wont to sing Songs, tell Stories, and
show Tricks, from their first emerging, until their Perihelion under the
Presidentship of Mr. GEORGE ALEXANDER STEVENS, Ballad-Laureat to the Society of
CHOICE SPIRITS, and who appeared at Ranelagh in the Character of COMUS,
supported by those Droles of merry Memory.

Unparalleled were their performances, as first Fists upon the SALT-BOX, and
inimitable the variations they would twang upon the forte and piano JEWS-HARP.
Excellent was Howard in the CHIN CONCERTO; whose Nose also supplied the
melodious Tones of the BAGPIPE. -- Upon the STICCADO Matt. Skeggs remains still
unrivalled. -- And we cannot now boast of one real Genius upon the genuine
HURDY GURDY.

Alas! these Stars are all extinguished; and the remains of ancient British
Harmony is now confined to the manly Music of MARROW-BONES and CLEAVERS.

Every thing must sink into Oblivion; -- "Corn now grows where Troy Town
stood." -- Ranelagh may be metamorphosed into a Methodist's Meeting House!
Vaux-Hall cut into Skittle-Alleys! the two Theaters converted into
Auction-Rooms; and the New Pantheon become the stately Habitation of some Jew
Pawn-Broker: -- Nay, the SONS OF LIBERTY themselves * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * *.

Caetera desunt.

Alphabetical LIST of the SONGS.
A.
AD Infinitum, Page 77 Auction, Page 183 Amelia, Page 131 Artists, Page 28
Administration, Page 153
B.
Bottle, the Page 185 Beef and a Bumper, Page 207 Blood, the Page 139 Beef
Steak Club, Page 164 Beaume de Vie, Page 179 Briton, the Page 50 Bartleme Fair,
Page 69 Briton's Wish, Page 106 Beauty and Wine, Page 119
C.
Conclusion of Humbugg, Page 189 Cobbler of Cripplegate, Page 218 Comet, Page
136 Courtship, Page 145 Circe, Page 157 Chastity, Page 159 Carricature, Page
177 Castles in the Air, Page 55 Connoisseur, Page 81 Cabal, Page 89 Common
Sense, Page 94 Contentment, Page 232
D.
Demirep, Page 102 Dick and Doll, Page 85 Day and Night, Page 65 Do the Same,
Page 140 Damned Honest Fellow, Page 126 Divorce, Page 14 Dream, Page 30 Ditto,
Page 42 Doodle Do, Page 134 Drink, to Page 66
E.
Extravaganza, Page 47 English Litany, Page 18 End, the Page 53 Epilogue, Page
246 Elixir l'Argent, Page 59
F.
Forecastle Song, Page 96 Fools Hall, Page 172 Freedom, Page 169 Fair Play,
Page 155 Fright, the Page 214 Funeral, Page 217
G.
Griskin Club, Page 162 Gaming Page 61 Give the Devil his Due, Page 234 God
save the King, Page 147
H.
Honor, Page 171 Humbugg, Page 133 Here Goes Page 82 Hum, the Page 223
I.
Jolly Soul, Page 63 Independency, Page 32 Jack Tarr's Song, Page 165
K.
Kissing, Page 67
L.
Lesson of Love, Page 244 Love and Wine's Partnership, Page 142 Liberty Hall,
Page 129 Love Song, Page 120 London Hunt, Page 193
M.
Marine Medley, Page 20 Masquerade, Page 186 Marquis of Granby, Page 188 Man,
the Page 195 Maria, Page 151 May Page 104 Mutual Love, Page 108 Mum, Page 220
Mediocrity, Page 241
N.
Nunc est Bibendum, Page 16 Nabob, the Page 39 Nose, my Page 196 Norfolk
Farmer, Page 181 New Roast Beef, Page 144 Nobody and Nothing, Page 237 Not as
it should be, Page 117
O.
Origin of English Liberty, Page 1 -- of Faction, Page 4 -- of Toll, loll,
loll, Page 37
P.
Parent, the Page 221 Point, the Page 226 Present Taste, Page 236 Picture, the
Page 10 Pastoral, Page 46 Portrait, the Page 202 Parade, the Page 212
Prejudice, Page 167 Polities, Page 175 Pipe of Love, Page 116
Q.
Question, the Page 90
R.
Race, Page 6 Reason, Page 24 Railers, Page 26 Rural Felicity, Page 71
Repentance, Page 57
S.
Silenus and Cupid, Page 12 Sleep, Page 191 Seriosity, Page 198 Squabble, the
Page 200 Spring, Page 209 Sentiment Song, Page 124 Specific, the Page 160
Simple Pastoral, Page 87 Songster's Horn-Book, Page 92 Scurvy, the Page 100
Self, Page 225 Semele, Page 230 Sweethearts, Page 243
T.
Toll, loll, loll, Page 33 Toll de roll, Page 35 True Blue, Page 40 Time's
Defeat, Page 49 Toast, a Page 204 Time Killers, Page 215 Transit of Venus, Page
150 Trio, Page 52 Toper, Page 73 The Times, Page 75 Time for all Things, Page
110 Tom of Bedlam, Page 228
V.
Vision, the Page 149 Veteran, the Page 112
W.
Worms, the Page 8 Wine Vault, Page 44 World, the Page 206 Wonder, a Page 211
What Is that to me, Page 122 Whim, the Page 98 Water, Page 239


PROLOGUE.
THROUGH gloomy Grove, along the Lawn,
Or by the still Brook's side,
When the Day's sable shroud is drawn,
Then Ghosts are said to glide.
The paly Moonshine's silv'ry gleams
Seem dancing down the glade,
Mingling 'midst shadowy forms it is beams,
Which scare the trembling Maid.
The Trav'ller often is apt to see,
Through twilight's dusky veil,
A Giant in each Hedge-row Tree,
While Phantoms fill the Dale.
So rambling Readers may condemn
This Book of medley Rhimes,
Whose Errors will appear to them
A list of Giant Crimes.
Already mark; -- Sir Cynic scowls,
Rage wrinkling on his brow,
To see, O shame! two amorous Owls,
Instinctive on yon Bough.
With outspread hands, and upcast eyes,
As Bigots tell their stories,
The o'er-zealous Commentator cries,
O Tempora! O Mores!
But why should Critics carp at Songs?
Or Classic Scales apply?
To them alone this freight belongs,
Who'd rather laugh than cry.
For neither Pedant nor for Prude,
These Sonnets took their birth;
But are dish'd up, as pleasant Food,
For SONS of SOCIAL MIRTH.
SONGS, COMIC and SATIRICAL.
SONG I. ORIGIN of ENGLISH LIBERTY.
To it is own Tune.
I.
ONCE the Gods of the Greeks, at ambrosial feast,
Large bowls of rich nectar were quaffing,
Merry Momus among them appeared as a guest,
Homer says the Celestials loved laughing.
II.
This happened before Chaos was fixed into form,
While Nature disorderly lay;
While elements adverse engendered the storm,
And uproar embroiled the loud fray.
III.
On every Olympic the Humourist droll'd,
So none could his jokes disapprove;
He sung, repartee'd, and some odd stories told,
And at last thus began upon Jove:
IV.
Sire, -- Mark how you Matter is heaving below,
Were it settled 'twou'd please all your Court;
It Is not wisdom to let it lie useless, you know;
Pray people it, just for our sport.
V.
Jove nodded assent, all Olympus bowed down,
At his Fiat creation took birth;
The cloud-keeping Deity smiled on his throne,
Then announc'd the production was Earth.
VI.
To honor their Sovereign each God gave a boon;
Apollo presented it Light;
The Goddess of Childbed dispatched us a Moon,
To silver the shadow of Night.
VII.
The Queen of Soft-wishes, foul Vulcan's fair bride,
Leer'd wanton on her Man of War;
Saying, as to these Earth-folks I Will give them a guide,
So she sparkled the morn and eve Star.
VIII.
From her cloud, all in spirits, the Goddess up sprung
In ellipsis each Planet advanced;
The Tune of the Spheres the Nine Sisters sung,
As round Terra Nova they danced.
IX.
Even Jove himself could not insensible stand,
Bid Saturn his girdle fast bind,
The Expounder of Fate grasped the Globe in his hand,
And laughed at those Mites called Mankind.
X.
From the hand of great Jove into Space it was hurled,
He was charmed with the roll of the ball,
Bid his daughter Attraction take charge of the World,
And she hung it up high in his hall.
XI.
Miss, pleased with the present, reviewed the globe round,
Saw with rapture hills, valleys, and plains;
The self-balanc'd orb in an atmosphere bound,
Prolific by suns, dews, and rains.
XII.
With silver, gold, jewels, she India endowed,
France and Spain she taught vineyards to rear,
What was fit for each clime on each clime she bestowed,
And Freedom she found flourished here.
XIII.
The blue-ey'd celestial, Minerva the wise,
Ineffably smiled on the spot;
My dear, says plumed Pallas, your last gift I prize,
But, excuse me, one thing is forgot.
XIV.
Licentiousness Freedom's destruction may bring,
Unless Prudence prepares it is defense;
The Goddess of Sapience bid Iris take wing
And on Britons bestowed Common-Sense.
XV.
Four Cardinal Virtues she left in this isle,
As guardians to cherish the root;
The blossoms of Liberty gaily 'gan smile,
And Englishmen fed on the fruit.
XVI.
Thus fed, and thus bred, by a bounty so rare,
Oh preserve it as pure as 'twas given;
We will while we have breath, nay we'll grasp it in death,
And return it untainted to Heaven.
SONG II. ORIGIN of FACTION.
Tune, -- I am, quoth Apollo, when Daphne, etc.
I.
IN hist'ries of Heathens, by which Tutors train us,
The salt water Sovereign is called OCEANUS;
His spouse was delivered, by man-midwife Triton,
Of this sea-girt island, his favorite Britain.
II.
The Naiads were Nurses; old Trident declared,
To embellish his offspring no pains should be spared:
By flying fish drawn, to Olympus he drove,
And petitioned the Gods, that his suit they would approve.
III.
Quoth Jupiter, I Will make it King of the Sea:
Avast! replied Neptune, pray leave that to me:
I Will guard it with shoals, and I Will make their lads Seamen.
Strong Hercules hollowed out, I Will make 'em Freemen.
IV.
And what will you make, Venus whispered to Mars?
Why I Will make all Soldiers, that Nep. don't make Tars.
Momus smiled, as that droll always merrily means;
He begged they would go partners, and make 'em Marines.
V.
Quoth Saturn, much time I Will allow 'em for thinking;
Buck Bacchus replied, no, allow it for drinking:
But Mercury answered, a fig for your Wine,
The art of Time-killing by Card-playing's mine.
VI.
By Styx, quoth Apollo, but Hermes you're bit;
Against Gaming I Will send 'em an antidote, -- Wit:
In England, laughed Momus, Wit no one regards,
Save that sort of Wit that is in -- Playing your Cards.
VII.
Well, well, replies Phoebus, I Will mend their conditions,
I Will teach 'em to fiddle, and send them Physicians.
Among Fiddlers, quoth Momus, true Harmony's scarce;
And as to your Doctorship, -- Physick's a Farce.
VIII.
Says Venus, I Will people this Island with Beauties,
And tempt Married-Men to be true to their duties. --
You to Married-Men's duty a friend! bawled out Juno,
You're a strumpet, you slut, and that I know and you know.
IX.
Then turning to Jove, who looked pale, she began, --
I Will spoil your olympical gift-giving plan:
Herself not consulted, she vowed she would wrong us,
Blew a Scold from her mouth, and sent Party among us.
X.
God Bacchus, to counterpoise Juno's rash action,
Commanded Silenus to seize upon Faction;
Swift flitted the Fiend, the old Toper outsped,
Whilst Semele's son sent a Flask at his head.
XI.
The Imp, by the blow, speechless fell to the ground;
May Wine thus for ever foul Faction confound:
Unanimity! that, that is the Toast of our Hearts,
Though no Party-men here, Here Is to all Men of Parts.
SONG III. THE RACE.
Tune, As Roger came tapping at Dolly's Window.
I.
AS the Farmer went over his corn ripened land,
And counted increase of his grain,
Scarlet poppies he saw down the long furrows stand,
Like soldiers, in lines on the plain.
Quoth he, though in Learning I am not well skilled,
In memory this maxim I Will keep,
Those weeds among wheat, show when belly is filled
We have nothing to do but to sleep.
II.
Each scene of creation that opes to our view,
Affords contemplation a theme,
As blossoms enameled by drops of bright dew,
With di'monds so Court-beauties beam.
See grape to grape swelling, transparent on vine,
That fruit is an emblem of bliss;
Balmy lip to lip Lovers as lusciously join,
And the nectar enjoy of a Kiss.
III.
While Britons, like Britons, dare English Taste own,
Success on our strength could depend;
We now, by importing enervate Bon Ton,
To impotent Idlers descend.
We wed without Love, we attempt without Powers,
And strengthless, and senseless, in swarms,
Insipid as butterflies, basking on flowers,
The fribbles fill fine women's arms.
IV.
If Bacchus and Ceres were drove from Love's court,
Desire must frozen depart!
Roast Beef quantum suff. and take tantum Red Port,
They steel the Main-spring of the Heart.
Could we Venus consult, why indeed so we may,
Since each circle a Venus supplies,
I Will back my opinion, those beauties will say
A Milksop's the thing we despise,
V.
The Elixir of Love in our full bottles view,
For Beauty's sake Bumpers embrace;
While kept in this Training we cannot but come through,
For Give-and-Take Plates in Love's Race.
Success to that Meeting, where each against each,
Well mounted, push forward to win,
For third, fourth, or fifth heats, they rallying stretch,
And, neck to neck, nimbly come in.
SONG IV. THE WORMS.
Tune, When Strephon to Chloe made love his pretense.
KEEP your distance, quoth King, who in lead coffin lay,
As beside him they lowered a shrowdless old Clay;
The Mendicant Carcass replied, with a sneer,
"Mister Monarch be still, we are all equal here.
II.
"Life's miseries long I was forced to abide,
"By the Seasons sore pelted, sore pelted by pride:
"And though clad in ermine, yet you have been distressed,
"Both our cares now are over, -- so let us both rest."
III.
A committee of worms, Manor Lords of the Grave,
Overheard 'em and wondered to hear the Dead rave.
Quoth the Chairman, Dare mortals presume thus to prate,
When even we Maggots don't think ourselves great?
IV.
"Insane ostentations, who brag of their births,
"Yet are but Machines, mixed of aggregate earths.
"They distinctions demand, with distinctons they meet
"When we throw by the rich folks, as not fit to eat.
V.
"They are scurvy compounds of Debauch and Disease,
"Putrefactions of Sloth, or Vice run to the Lees.
"By Luxury's pestilence Health is laid waste:
"And all they can boast is, -- They Are poisoned in Taste.
VI.
"'It Is true, cries Crawlina, the Queen of the Worms,
"They make upon earth immense noise with their forms,
" Pon onner, with Beauties though so much I deal,
"On not one in ten can I make a good meal.
VII.
"When we chose to regale, on the dainties of charms,
"We formerly fed on necks, faces, and arms;
"Now Varnish envenoms their tainted complections,
"A fine woman's features spread fatal infections.
VIII.
"Not a Worm of good taste, and bon ton, I dare vouch,
"A morsel of fashion-made Beauties will touch.
"A Quality Toast we imported last week, --
"Two Maggots, my servants, died eating her cheek."
IX.
Very odd, quoth a Critic, Worms hold such discourse.
Very odd, quoth the Author, that Men should talk worse.
Like Reptiles, we crawl upon earth for a term,
Take wing for a while, -- then descend to a Worm.
X.
Dan Pope declares all Human Race to be Worms;
Maids, Misses, Wives, Widows, all Maggotty forms.
But of Worms, and worm-feeding, no more we'll repeat,
Here Is a glass, To the Dainty that is made for Man's meat
SONG V. THE PICTURE.
Tune, -- Fine Songsters too often apologies make.
I.
WISHING well to good folks, both on this and that,
By my own fireside, with my Lass,
Not yawning, nor mute, but in spiritful chat,
To Old England I took off my glass.
II.
The next to my King; and the third was a Joke,
Of all places I toasted The Best;
She seemed not to hear, but her cheeks blushes spoke
The Wanton my Sentiment guessed.
III.
Her bosom I pressed, to my lips it arose,
The crimson still flushing her face;
With love-lisping laugh, she replied, "I suppose
"You presume I can guess at the place."
IV.
I answered, but first for my Fee took a Kiss,
"Where the Temple of Love we attend.
"Beauty's columns begin at the Fountain of Bliss;
"In tapering outlines they end.
V.
"On the top, at the Arch of Enjoyment unite,
"Curled tendrils the Pediment grace;
"For Cupid's Pantheon, the Shaft of Delight
"Must spring from the Masculine Base.
VI.
"If the Lady of this perfect Mansion you will see,"
As I spoke, gave my hand to the Lass,
"Oh, by all means" she said; -- "then my dear come with me;"
So I led my Girl up to the glass.
VII.
Off she turned, with a pshah! yet no anger expressed,
Good-breeding scorns Prudery's skreen;
Among our dinnertime toasts, when we drink to the Best,
We only most excellent mean.
VIII.
Remember, my Bucks, when you're aiming at Jokes
Be sure make the most of a Jest;
Not like the assembly of impotent folks,
Who prove themselves, -- bad at the best.
IX.
Our Youths in their waists are now scarcely a span,
An insensible, expletive crew;
When Loveliness weds one, in hopes of a Man,
It Is the worst thing a Lady can do.
X.
Here Is to Beauty a Toast, sir, but not Face alone,
Lower yet lies the Circle of Grace;
Beneath, where in center Love buckles her Zone,
The Point of Attraction we place.
XI.
Let our Bottles, like globes, have elliptical sweep;
Geometrists mind what I say,
May beautiful Parallels distances keep,
To give Perpendiculars way.
SONG VI. SILENUS and CUPID.
Tune, -- Derry down.
I.
CUPID sent on a message one evening by Venus,
As ill-luck would have it, was met by Silenus;
The big-belly'd Sot asked the Urchin to play,
And the silly lad gam'd all Love's weapons away.
Derry down, etc.
II.
His Bow from the Bubble, the old Gambler drew,
And into a crutch-headed Stick turned the Yew:
The String was tough Catgut, Si. swore it was well,
A strong line he wanted, to ring his Bar Bell.
III.
Love's Arrows were Cane, he divided the joints,
Pipe-stoppers the ends made, and Pick-teeth the points.
The Feathers to brush down his tables were clever;
And to a Tobacco-pouch turned the boy's Quiver.
IV.
For pipe-lighting Matches he chose Billet-deux,
And away, at each puff, went a Sonneteer's Vows.
His Tinder was drawn from the brains of the Jealous;
And long-bottled Sighs he preserved for his Bellows.
V.
Hermes took the lad home, told the story to Venus,
She dashed down her tea-cup, and flew to Silenus:
Then threatened her Captain should kick the old Clown,
But he laughed, and he smoked, and he sung derry down.
VI.
She squeezed his hard hand, and his filthy beard strok'd,
Nay kissed him, though with his tobacco-fumes choked;
Then begged the boy's Arms, but Si. swore with a frown,
He Would be damned if he gave them for her Derry down.
VII.
She whipped her doves back, vastly piqued you may guess,
In Synod Celestial demanded Redress;
Jove laughed at the jest, and he vowed, by his Crown,
When Spouse railed hereafter he would sing -- Derry down.
MORAL.
Ye Husbands, too fond, who are Feminine-fool'd,
And tamely, by Petticoat Government ruled,
Resist your Wives Railings, their shrill trebles drown,
By smoking, and singing of -- Down, derry down.
Derry down, etc.
SONG VII. THE DIVORCE.
Tune, Old women we are, and as wise in the chair.
I.
NO more let defections of Wedlock be blamed,
To be sure of grave Cato you have heard;
In morals more strict not a man could be named,
Yet his Wife to a friend he transferred.
II.
In Rome they encouraged no Trials crim. con.
In France, Cuckold-making's a Jest;
And, I trust, in few years, by the help of bon ton,
We shall be as polite as the best.
III.
It Is vastly immense! and most horridly low!
When a Month after Marriage is past,
That the Husband should be such a Fright not to know
His Lady's affections cannot last.
IV.
For, broken in Fortune, and ruined in Health,
To patch up both Person and Purse,
His Honor addresses some Citizen's Wealth,
And the Daughter accepts, as his Nurse.
V.
Too often, for the sake of a Title impure,
Doomed Beauty is forced from her vows,
To unite with a Blank, for upon the Grand Tour
Foreign Vice has disabled the Spouse.
VI.
In defense of the Fair, Satire openly stands,
And forbids the vague Spendthrifts to roam;
Wives have too much stock lying dead on their hands
When Husbands are Bankrupts at home.
VII.
Censure no married Dame, as the trade's so decreased,
Heavy Interest, Principal clogs;
When Ladies have furnished and exquisite feast,
Must their dainties be thrown to the dogs?
VIII.
Then Divorce, -- but we laugh at such frivolous things,
Having here no intention to part: --
We are wed to our Wine; Wine regen'rates the springs
Of that self-moving muscle the Heart.
IX.
Though to Wine we are wed, yet we do not think fit
To be tied down for better for worse,
If our landlord Adultery dares to commit,
At once we demand a Divorce.
X.
But at present I hope, with an Englishman's ease,
We enjoy both our Wine and our Wives;
By Liberty blessed, with the pleasure to please,
May we live all the days of our lives.
SONG VIII. NUNC EST BIBENDUM.
Tune, -- Moggy Lauder.
I.
NOW we are free from College Rules,
From Common-place-book reason,
From trifling syllogistic Schools,
And Systems out of Season;
Never more we'll have defined,
If Matter thinks or thinks not;
All the matter we shall mind,
Is -- he who drinks -- or drinks not.
II.
Metaphysic'ly to trace,
The Mind, or Soul abstracted;
Or prove Infinity of Space,
By cause on cause effected;
Better Souls we cannot become
By immaterial thinking;
And as to Space, we want no room,
But room enough to drink in.
III.
Plenum, vacuum, minus, plus,
Are learned words, and rare too, --
Those terms our Tutors may discuss,
And those who please may hear too. --
A Plenum in our Wine we show,
With Plus, and Plus behind, sir,
And when our Cash is minus, low,
A Vacuum soon we find, sir.
IV.
Copernicus, that learned sage,
Dane Tycho's error proving,
Declares in -- I cannot tell what page --
The Earth round Sol is moving.
But which goes round, what is that to us?
Each is, perhaps, a notion;
With Earth, and Sun, we make no fuss,
But mind the Bottle's motion.
V.
Great Galileo ill was used,
By Superstition's fury;
Antipodeans were abused
By ignoramus jury:
But, feet to feet, we dare attest,
Nor fear a treatment scurvy;
For when we are drunk, probatum est,
We Are tumbling, topsy turvy.
VI.
Newton talked of Lights and Shades,
And different Colors knew, sir:
Don't let us disturb our heads, --
We will but study two, sir. --
White and Red our glasses boast,
Reflection, and Refraction;
After him we name our Toast, --
"The Center of Attraction."
VII.
On that Thesis we'll declaim,
With stratum, super stratum;
There Is mighty magic in the name,
It Is Nature's Postulatum.
Wine, in nature's next to love;
Then wisely let us blend 'em;
First though, physically prove,
That Nunc, nunc est bibendum.
SONG IX. ENGLISH LITANY.
TUNE, When I entered my Teens, and threw play-things aside.

I.
TO a Stage-Coach we aptly may liken this Nation,
Where Passengers seldom are pleased with their station;
But wrangling, and jangling, and jostling, and jumbling,
The Inside-folks grin, and the Outsides are grumbling.
II.
The Inns they are in, and the Outs they are out;
To be in is the Riddle, which makes all this route.
The Outs call the Ministry infamous elves;
And the Inns, when they are out, say the same things themselves.
III.
It is cunning Credulity ever enslaves;
The world is a Hot-bed, to raise Fools and Knaves:
They pull this and that way, sometimes pull together;
But Common-sense scorns to go partners with either.
IV.
My Country, my Freedom, and oh, my Religion!
These tickle the ear, faith, like Mahomet's pigeon:
It Is the time's cant, the farce, the finesse of all ages,
For what the best actors of, get the best wages.
V.
Oh my Country? but hold, sir, on which side the Tweed?
Wa worth tul your words, if ye dinna take heed.
We give praise to one side, the other abuse,
Can the unborn their place of nativity choose?
VI.
Off Prejudice, off, to Oblivion's cave;
We boast we are Britons, as Britons behave:
Can this, or that side of a stream alter nature?
No, -- wash those reflections away in the water.
VII.
Get, get, is the cry now, and get all ye can;
If ye can get, get honestly; get, though's the plan.
Get one thing, and every thing else you will obtain:
For Honors are now humble servants to Gain.
VIII.
The African Slave-dealers some may think base;
But what must they think -- if at home it is the case?
The Guinea trade, here keeps a market, it is certain;
And Yes and No bought and sold; more's the misfortune.
IX.
When a Beauty's enjoyed by a Man of the Town,
What he doted last week on, this week he will disown.
The Self-sellers thus, become those people's scoff,
Who first turn them Prostitutes, then turn them off.
X.
May all be turned off, who those dealings befriended,
Where honester folks have been sometimes suspended;
May they die as they lived, by all good men abhorred,
WE BRITONS BESEECH THEE TO HEAR US, GOOD LORD.
SONG X. The MARINE MEDLEY.
First tune, -- Come and listen to my ditty.

I.
NOW safe moored, with bowl before us,
Mess-mates heave a hand with me,
Lend a Brother Sailor Chorus,
While he sings our Lives at Sea:
Over the wide wave-swelling ocean;
Tossed aloft, or tumbled low,
As to fear, it is all a notion,
When our Time's come, we must go.
II.
Tune, -- Life is checkered.
Hark the boatswain hoarsely bawling
By topsail sheets and haul-yards stand,
Down top-gallants, down be hauling,
Down your stay-sails, hand boys, hand;
Now set the braces,
Don't make wry faces,
But the lee top-sail sheets let go,
Starboard here,
Larboard there,
Turn your quid,
Take a swear,
Yo! yo! yo!
III.
First Tune again.
Oh, ye Landmen, idly lying
All along-side Beauty's Charms,
Safe in soft beds, seas defying,
Free from all but Love's alarms.
While on billows, billows rolling,
Death appears in every form,
On no Lady Laps we are lolling,
No kind Kiss can calm the Storm.
IV.
But loud peals, on peals are clashing,
Through rift rocks, the shrill wind shrieks;
In our eyes fierce lightning flashing,
Scorch the sails, and stench the decks.
Bursting clouds upon us pouring,
Black, overspread the face of day,
Burying seas in whirlpools roaring,
Fierey flies the sparkling spray.
V.
High, the tossing Tempest heaves us,
Toward the Pole aloft we go,
While the clouds seem to receive us,
Dreadful yawns the gulf below.
In that dark deep, down, down, down, down,
Down we sink from sight of sky,
By the swell, as instant up thrown,
Hark! what means yon dismal cry!
VI.
The fore-mast's gone, yells some sad tongue out
Over the lee, twelve feet 'bove deck. --
A leak beneath the chestree's sprung out,
Call all hands to clear the wreck.
Quick the lannyard's cut in pieces,
Come my Hearts, be stout and bold,
Plumb the well, the leak increases --
Four feet water's in the hold.
VII.
Worse and worse, the wild winds tearing
Warring waves around us foam,
For the worst, while we are preparing,
Nature sinks, and sighs for Home.
There, our babes, perhaps are saying,
In their little lisping strain,
As round mother's knees they are playing,
Daddy soon will come again.
VIII.
Tune, -- Early one morn a jolly young Tar.
If we must die, why die we must,
It Is a birth in which all must belay mun.
When our debt's due, for Death will not trust,
Then all hands be ready to pay mun.
As to Life's striking its Flag, never fear,
Our Cruise is out, that is all my brother,
In this world we have luff'd it up, thus, and no near,
So let us ship ourselves now for another.
IX.
Tune the first again.
Overboard the guns be throwing,
To the pumps come every hand,
See her mizen mast is going
On the lee beam lies the land.
Rising rocks appear before us,
Hopeless, yet for help we call,
Every sea breaks fatal over us,
To the Storm's fell power we fall.
X.
Now Dismay, with aspect horrid,
Swells each sleepless eye with tears;
And Despair, with bristly forehead,
On each bloodless face appears.
Sadly still we wait the Wave! --
The o'erwhelming Wave rolls mountain high;
The swell comes on, our seagreen grave, --
Hark, what means yon happy cry!
XI.
The Leak we have found, it cannot pour fast,
We Have lightened her a foot or more;
Up and rig a jury Foremast,
She rights, she rights, boys, wear off shore.
Now, my Hearts, we are safe from sinking,
We'll again lead Sailors lives;
Come, the Cann boys, let us be drinking
To our Sweethearts, and our Wives.
SONG XI. REASON.
Tune, -- When Fanny to Woman is growing apace.
I.
WHAT the heart feels oppose to the phrases of schools,
Sweet Sympathies prove the Philosophers fools.
Can all the clasped volumes of learned men's feats,
Be equal to clasping one Beauty in sheets.
II.
Go Instinct, call Reason, and hear what he will say --
The cowardly Tyrant keeps out of the way.
Bolt the door then Desire, we'll bilk him at least,
He may pick up our Offals, and rail at the feast.
III.
The union of Souls is a Task, words may try
But Lovers' Sensations, Description defy;
To them only known, who voluptuously prove
Affection's Enjoyment, the Phrenzy of Love.
IV.
But hark! who is that we hear hobbling up stairs?
It is Reason, quoth Fancy; -- Oh is it! who cares?
He Is welcome, -- a chair there -- I hope he will sit down:
As he entered I smiled, -- he returned me a frown.
V.
My Lass was before me, my Bottle between;
In our looks we rejoiced we just now were not seen;
But when Pleasure prompts, Reason always sneaks off;
When over, he bully-like, enters to huff.
VI.
Just like an old Watchman, the Goblin was dressed,
Gray hairs, pole and lanthorn, broad belt, and long vest;
Young Fellow, quoth He, it is time you should think;
Old Fellow, quoth Me, it is time you should drink.
VII.
(...) offered a Flask of Champaign, on my knee,
And begged, as my Doctor, he would drink for his fee;
(...) praised his wise seeming, -- my praises prevailed;
For Flattery's a nostrum which never yet failed.
VIII.
With Praises, with Bumpers, I plied him so long,
That himself he forgot, and would sing us a Song;
Aye and dance, nay a wench he would have, and he swore;
But attempting to rise, he fell drunk on the floor.
IX.
As I ordered a Bed, says my love-looking Fair,
"As to Bed, my dear! Reason has no business there;
"The Senses their title to that Manor prove,
"Let Reason sleep on, while we waken to Love."
The MORAL.
Reason is but a Bugbear, to scare girls and boys,
Wine and women, without him, Experience enjoys;
That we are worthy those Blessings, let Life's practice prove,
May we never want Reason for Drinking or Love.
SONG XII. THE RAILERS.
Tune, Ye Ladies who drive from the smoke of the Town.
I.
BEhold on the brow the leaves play in the breeze,
While Cattle calm feed in the vale;
The Church spire tapering, points through the trees,
As Lord of the hill and the dale.
II.
The playful Colts skip after Dams to the brook,
The Brook slow and silently glides;
The surface so smooth, and so clear, if you look
It reflects the gay green on it is sides.
III.
^n Farm-yard, by his feathered Seraglio caressed,
The King of the Walk dares to crow;
No Nabob, not Nimrod, enslaving the east,
Such prowess with Beauty can show.
IV.
Beneath the still Cow, Nancy presses the teat,
Her face like the ruddy faced morn;
Loud strokes in the barn the strong Threshers repeat,
Or winnow for market the corn.
V.
Industrious, their Wives, at the doors of their cots,
Sit spinning, dressed cleanly, though coarse,
To their Babes, while unheeding the Traveller trots,
They show the fine Man and his Horse.
VI.
At the heels of the Steed, bark the base village Whelps,
Each Puppy rude echo bestirs;
But the Horse, too high bred, bounds away from their yelps,
Disregarding the clamor of Curs.
VII.
Illiberal Railers thus Envy betray,
When Merit above them they view;
But Genius disdains to turn out of his way,
Or afford a reply to the Crew.
VIII.
To contempt and despair, such Insanes we commit;
But to generous Rivals, a Toast, --
May rich Men reward honest Fellows of wit, --
Here Is a health to those Dunces hate most.
SONG XIII. THE ARTISTS.
Tune, Though Man has long boasted an absolute sway.
I.
PRUDE Pallas observed to the Demirep Queen,
Dear Venus, what is it these English folks mean?
Their Island is favored beyond other Isles,
'Twas I gave them Sapience, and you bestowed Smiles;
Nay every Immortal a bounty has sent 'em,
II,
The Goddess of Grace, in love's soft silver tone,
Replied "'it was immense, immense odd she must own;
"Let us trip down to Earth, just to see the affair,
"It is only through Atmosphere taking the air;
"I Have my Doves at the door, come, dear creature, "with me;"
Away in a Whirlwind they whisk'd -- Vis a vis.
III.
From Council Jove missed them, enquiring about,
His feather-heel'd post boy discovered their rout;
Replies the sky ruler, "they have no business there,
"In Britain there always is beauty to spare;
"And as to Dame Wisdom, by Styx I aver,
"While Faction stays with them they will not employ her.
IV.
"Haste home with them Hermes," away flew the God,
And the yielding clouds cut with his snake twisted rod;
In London, from place to place, questioning flew,
Where is Wisdom? but where, indeed nobody knew.
He returned with a tale, with a tale melancholy,
That Wisdom elop'd into Scotland with Folly.
V.
"Where is Venus??" quoth Mars, "Aye, my Wise "have you seen?"
Cries the King of the Cyclops, "My Man-loving "queen?"
"I left her employed with her Handmaids, the Graces,
"By Science requested to finish his Faces:
"Here Is the name of each Genius with whom she is a guest,
"REYNOLDS, GAINSBOROUGH, MORTIMER, "MYERS, DANCE, WEST."
VI.
Vulcan vowed he would fetch her, "You shall not, "thurder'd Jove,
"I encourage the Arts, and yon Island I love;
"Into Fate I have looked, and ever long I can see,
"What Athens was once, my Britannia will be;
"So Lemnos be mute, Haebe hand me the nectar,
"Here Is Great-Britain's Artists, and GEORGE "their PROTECTOR."
SONG XIV. THE DREAM.
Tune, -- Push about the brisk Bowl.
I.
BY a whirlwind methought I through Ether was hurled,
Electric among Spirits of Air;
Upborn by the clouds, we looked down on the world,
And odd exhibitions spied there.
II.
England's Genius was there, bearing Monarchy's crown,
In procession round Liberty Hall;
Faction seized her rich robe, Public Spirit pulled down,
And Folly broad grinn'd at her fall.
III.
In weather-house placed, to denote foul and fair,
Two Figures are veering about;
So pageants we saw, and we smiled at their glare,
As they turned, with the Times, in and out.
IV.
The Methodists, masked with Hypocrisy's face,
Anathemas thundered aloud;
So Jack Puddings joke, with distorted grimace,
Benetting their Gudgeons, -- the Crowd.
V.
Wit and Humor were there, drove from Dignity's door,
That Stupidity's coach might have room;
Debauch we saw open Temptation's base store,
And Disease taint Simplicity's bloom.
VI.
Stubborn Will against Prudence was waging a fight,
While Desire opposed Duty strong;
The Passions confessed Reasons Dictates were right,
Though themselves still resolved to be wrong.
VII.
A wonderful Troop toward Westminster bore;
What wonders there are among mankind?
In gilt chariots Lawyers paraded before,
On foot Justice followed behind.
VIII.
Church Preferments we saw -- but respect shall withstand
The abuse that is poured forth on the Cloth;
Stock Jobbers and Statesmen we saw hand in hand,
And Pride stood at par between both.
IX.
Cent per Cent had lain siege to Integrity's head,
And Beauty was battering his heart;
East India Success struck Humility dead,
And Title took Vanity's part.
X.
Crafty Care and pale Usury, two sleepless hags,
Wealth overwhelmed, yet untired with toil;
Their heir Dissipation we saw at their bags,
With Flattery sharing the spoil.
XI.
The myst'ries of Trade, -- but no longer I Will dwell,
On either the mighty or mean;
From an Emperor's court to a Penitent's cell,
Life's all the same laughable scene.
XII.
It Is a pitiful piece, like a Farce in a Fair,
Where show, noise, and nonsense misrule,
Where tinsel paradings, make Ignorance stare,
Where he who acts best is the Fool.
SONG XV. INDEPENDENCY.
Tune, -- Though my dress, as my manners, is simple and plain.
I.
LET us laugh at the common distinctions of State,
When merely from Title, men hold themselves great;
If Merit wins Honors, the wearers we praise,
But only the Mean, homage Heraldry's Blaze.
II.
If you are a lineal descendant from Adam,
Or Spouse can collateral claim from his Madam;
Over acres of parchment, though Pedigrees spread,
Boast not how you're born sir, but show how you're bred.
III.
You Laurels display, which your forefathers won;
We allow they did great things, but what have you done?
The Cover, the Stubble, your conquests proclaim,
And your Country's preserved -- by the Laws of the Game.
IV.
Ye Lords of large Manors, your flatt'rers disband,
What are ye but tenants for life to the Land;
Your lakes, gardens, grots, temples, busts, pictures, plate,
Are things of the Inn, where in Life's-stage you bait.
V.
Awhile you the labors of Luxury bear,
'Till Time tells you out, to make room for your Heir;
The same round of riot, he runs for his day,
His successor's summons, sends him the same way.
VI.
But HE who exists in Infinity's State,
Whose hand holds the Sun, and whose Fiat is Fate;
To some has sent power, to others gives wealth,
And to us, who are humble, his best Blessing -- Health.
VII.
To the Graces, we nightly, a sacrifice make,
Wit and Humor, the chairs, as our Toast-masters take;
By their social converse, our time we improve,
While Tenderness lends us the daughters of Love.
VIII.
Jolly Welcome attends Hospitality's call,
Common Sense is our Cat'rer in Liberty Hall;
For one dish dressed there, all Court Treats we resign,
Keep your distance, ye Kings! INDEPENDENT we dine.
SONG XVI. TOLL, LOLL, LOLL.
Tune, -- Black Joke.
I.
AS one day at home in a maudlinish mood,
Like dull Porter Drinkers, I drowsily stood,
Heavily humming out, Toll, loll, loll, loll.
The Fair of my Fancy whisk'd into the room,
All lovely she looked, like a May morning's bloom;
Her form was, but forming a Simile's flat,
Think all that you can think, and she was all that.
I quickly left yawning, Toll, loll, loll, etc.
II.
On a Sopha she sunk, as if failing in strength,
Then gracefully wanton, fell back at full length,
In attitude temptingly, tuning Toll, loll.
I begged for the Words, but her smiling expressed,
What Words among friends? try the Tune 'twill do best.
'Twas a hint, and I instantly 'rose to her Wishes,
Fell into her arms, there she fed me with Kisses,
For Kisses are Symphonies, Toll, loll, etc.
III.
As if just awakened, inclining her head,
Her eyes pleasure sparkling, short sighing she said
"How sweet is the found of Toll, loll?
"All Art in Enjoyment's profane Affectation,
Possession's true Pleasure, is prompt Inclination;
"When Souls in sweet Unison, blend their Embraces*
"Then, then, and then only, Love's gamut has Graces?
Toll, loll, loll, etc.
IV.
It is Taste at an Op'ra, to Pantomime Pleasure,
Overcome by the magic of Harmony's measure,
And seem to expire with Toll, loll, loll, loll
But Nature's nice organs, have nobler sensations,
Not bodiless sounds, but corporeal vibrations;
In these dear Da Capos, both equal advancing,
Elastical Arteries full Chords are dancing,
Toll, loll, loll, etc.
V.
To practice Love's lesson exceeds all the schools,
Scarlatti and Handell, and such folks were fools,
At Toll, loll, loll, loll, loll, loll, loll.
They Harmony made out of half Tones and whole,
To lull lady's ears, but it is Love charms the Soul;
When lips to lips tuning soft Symphonies tender,
The heart beating Preludes, denote a surrender
Of Toll, loll, loll, etc.
VI.
It Is Music and Love, or the Music of loving,
That only the life which we live for is proving,
Toll, loll, loll, loll, loll, loll, loll, loll.
Though Interest makes Freedom pay Wedlock's expenses,
Yet Love for Love leads up the Dance of the Senses;
Where Jealousy frights not, nor Folly is teazing,
There may we enjoy the true pleasure of pleasing.
Toll, loll, loll, loll, etc.
SONG XVII. TOLL, LOLL DE ROLL.
Tune, -- Let the Grave and the Gay.
I.
WHEN the Deity's word
Throughout Chaos was heard,
And in order up rose this vast ball;
Land, Sea, and Sky rung
With Creation's glad song,
It was then a fine -- Toll, de roll, loll.
II.
Inconstant mankind
Could not keep in one mind,
But into foul parties must fall;
Against Religion and State
Raised a pother and prate,
And made a sad -- Toll de roll, loll.
III.
On this sea-circled land,
By great Nature's command,
Freedom stopped at Integrity's call;
England's Genius apppear'd,
In full chorus was heard,
Loved Liberty's song -- Loll de roll.
IV.
On each distant shore
We have sung it encore,
And are ready, my lads, One and All,
To sound the same strain,
Though I think France and Spain
Have enough of our -- Loll de roll, loll.
V.
All the noise that our foes
Took such pains to compose,
Not a Heart of Oak's Ear could appal;
But the Dons and Mounseers
Were struck dumb with three cheers,
They Are the English Tarr's Toll de roll, loll
VI.
At the place Minden named,
By the British Foot famed,
How glorious those days to recall:
The French Folks advancing,
Were stopped in their dancing,
And tumbled about -- Loll de roll.
VII.
For this thing, or that,
Toll de roll, comes in pat,
It Is a Chorus I Will always extol;
It Is supposed, not expressed,
It Is what each one likes best,
Then here is to the best -- Toll de roll, etc.
SONG XVIII. THE ORIGIN OF TOLL, LOLL, LOLL.
Tune, -- As one day at home in a maudlinish mood.
I.
I WILL sing you a song, and I Will sung all about it,
Or in tune on out on it, you need not to doubt it,
My tune is Toll, toll, toll, loll, loll.
Stoccatos, Chromatics, Rests, Crotches, and Chords,
Deep Tenors, sharp Trebles, with Fifths, Eighths, and Thirds,
Are sounds without Sense; Common Sense come before us.
So Silence each Solfa let us Toll, toll, toll, chorus,
And nothing but Toll, toll, toll, toll, toll, toll.
II.
If word-gnawing Critics gramatical bawl,
Unde derivatur, Sir, this Toll, toll, toll?
"I answer, from Loll, loll, loll, loll, loll, loll."
And pray what is Loll, loll, loll, perge, quoth Pedant?
Profecto, continues he, I never read on it;
What part of Speech are you, this Toll, loll, loll, making?
"The only part, sir, of the whole that is worth taking,"
Toll, loll, loll, etc.
III.
The Verb which Love conjugates, Nature's the tutor,
Both active and passive, but sometimes stands neuter,
Toll, loll, loll, etc.
When wantonly wished for, optative Mood makes it;
When promised in suture, Hope happily takes it.
Of all Terminations respecting the Tenses,
The present is always the best for the Senses.
Toll, loll, loll, etc.
IV.
But let us for once, though become something ser'ous;
The Black Joke's a tune, that mayhap is mister'us,
Who knows what is hid under Toll, loll, loll, loll.
What is under, or in it, or what is about it,
Perhaps has a meaning, perhaps is without it;
It may be thought Wit, but that would be wonder;
It may be a single, or double Entendre,
Toll, loll, de roll, etc.
V.
If you have, or if you have not, read a History,
If you are Free-mason'd, and understand Mist'ry,
Toll, loll, loll, loll, loll, is Loll, toll, toll, toll.
VI.
If more may be made on it, I beg to know what,
It may be, or may not be, it can, or cannot;
For how be it, hereby, so be it, and so forth,
But good friends excuse me, indeed I must go forth.
Toll, loll, de roll, etc.
SONG XIX. THE NABOB.
Tune, -- Ye Lovelies who never Inconstancy knew.
YE makers of Nabobs who millions amass,
Eclipsing Nobility's train;
In pride of profusion your Pageantries pass,
To your Worships a word, -- don't be vain.
Though Spoils of the East, you exultingly view,
Not a Reptile that crawls but is richer than you.
II.
Your sideboards may bend with superfluous weight,
Your breasts the slant Ribbon may bind,
You homage receive from the Paupers of State,
Weigh these against the Wealth of the Mind.
An Instinct unerring all animals boast;
Lord-Man he has Reason, and so my Lord's lost.
III.
Can we wanton on waves in the deep troubled storm?
Can the Board of Works, Beaver-like build?
Can ye Artists contend with a transmigrate Worm?
Or Spider-like sail through the field?
Cont^mpt must attend on Ambition's odd grasp,
Who catches at Crowns, when he shrinks from a Wasp.
IV.
Over Passion can Beauty a conquest atchieve?
Could Sampson an Ague engage?
What Science can teach us the Art not to grieve?
What Bribe is to buy off old Age?
What Opium can lull the Alarms of the Mind?
That something so wakeful, which wakens mankind.
V.
In pompous down beds Guilt may labor to rest;
Back, Conscience the curtain will draw,
To exhibit such speeches as harrow the Breast,
While Memory sharpens her saw:
Humanity sighs at the sufferer's pains;
But Justice proclaimed, Thus I balance their Gains.
VI.
Let us, as we ought, bid defiance to Knaves,
And Briton-like speak as we think.
Disgrace to the crew of Venality's slaves;
To honest men -- Happiness drink.
Here Is to Liberty, Lads, without Flattery or Fear,
And I hope I am pledged from the Heart by all here.
SONG XX. TRUE BLUE.
Tune -- To all ye Ladies now at Land.
THE cards were sent, the Muses came,
'Twas Ceres gave the feast
To Juno, Jove's majestic dame,
Fair Haebe hailed each guest.
With Phoebus, Bacchus, wit and wine,
Like man and wife, should social shine.
With I fall, lal, la.
II.
The Olympic Dance, Minerva wise,
With graceful steps moved round;
Blue was the fillet -- like her eyes,
Her sapient temples crowned;
That girdle loosened, falling down,
Buck bacchus caught the azure Zone.
III.
Upon his breast the Ribbon placed,
By Styx, avowed the youth,
What had the Throne of Wisdom graced,
Should grace the Seat of Truth:
His robe he instant open threw,
And on his bosom beamed True Blue.
IV.
"Kings, taught by me, shall Garters give,
"In Installations show;
"What Subjects merits should receive,
"Their Monarchs should bestow.
"This Symbol, loved, Celestials view,
"And stamp your Sanctions on True Blue."
V.
The rosy God, Urania praised;
The tuneful sisters join;
The Sovereign of the Sky was pleased
To constellate the Sign.
Along the Clouds, loud Paeans flew,
Olympus joined, and hailed True Blue.
VI.
This order Iris bore to earth,
Minerva charged the fair,
Where first she found out Sons of worth,
To leave the Ribbon there.
From clime to clime she searching flew,
And in HIBERNIA left True Blue.
SONG XXI. DITTO.
Tune, -- Masks all.
I.
LET those who love Helicon sip at it is streams,
And chilled by cold water, doze spiritless dreams;
No aid I Will invoke from a tea-drinking Muse,
But bumper me Bacchus to toast the True Blues.
Sing tantararara True blue.
II.
No man slaying hero's rash deeds I rehearse,
Nor shall Strephon's sighs sadly whine in my verse;
To friendship, to freedom, this sonnet is due,
And friendship and freedom become a True Blue.
III.
Wronged Nature to Newton from Dullness appealed,
Mankind he enlightened, bright vision revealed;
All colors examined, and found upon view
One chief, one unchanged, and he named it True Blue.
IV.
Kings, Statesmen, and Patriots, illustrious choose
The slant azure bandage, the mark of True Blues;
To Britain's chief knigthood the Garter is due,
And that honored Ribbon is spotless True Blue.
V.
To furnish, with Science, the sons of the earth,
Olympus the goddess of Wisdom brought forth;
Her eyes, Paris owned, were the brightest he knew,
And their luster, quoth Homer, is sparkling True Blue.
VI.
In spring, when Creation her blossoms resumes,
And field-flowers fill the rich air with perfumes;
What sky color, tell me, the sun best looks through?
The atmosphere's clearest when clouds are True Blue.
VII.
To sully that standard each social disdains,
The tint of True Blue bids defiance to stains;
On the breast of each Brother the Ribbon we view,
Which shows, that at heart he is pure and True Blue.
VIII.
When Liberty lingering, Hibernia quits,
And Honor to passive Obedience submits;
Public Spirit to Ireland then bids adieu,
Adieu, Lads to life then, then farewell True Blue.
SONG XXII. THE WINE VAULT.
Tune, -- The Hounds are all out.
I.
COntented I am, and contented I Will be,
For what can this world more afford,
Than a lass who will sociably sit on my knee,
And a Cellar as sociably stored,
My brave boys.
II.
My Vault door is open, descend and improve,
That Cask, -- aye, that we will try;
It Is as rich to the taste as the lips of your love,
And as bright as her cheeks to the eye.
III.
In a piece of slit hoop, see my candle is stuck,
'Twill light us each bottle to hand;
The foot of my glass for the purpose I broke,
As I hate that a bumper should stand.
IV.
Astride on a butt, as a butt should be strod,
I gallop the brusher along;
Like grape blessing Bacchus, the good fellow's God,
And a Sentiment give, or a Song.
V.
We are dry where we sit, though the oozing drops seem
With pearls the moist walls to emboss;
From the arch, moldy cobwebs in gothic taste stream
Like stucco-work cut out of moss.
VI.
When the lamp is brimful how the taper flame shines,
Which when moisture is wanting decays;
Replenish the lamp of my life with rich wines,
Or else there is an end of my blaze.
VII.
Sound those Pipes, they are in tune, and those Bins are well filled,
View that heap of Old Hock in your rear;
Yon bottles are Burgundy! mark how they are pil'd,
Like artillery, tier over tier.
VIII.
My cellar's my camp, and my soldiers my flasks,
All gloriously ranged in review;
When I cast my eyes round I consider my casks
As kingdoms I Have yet to subdue.
IX.
Like Macedon's Madman my glass I Will enjoy,
Defying hyp, gravel, or gout;
He cried when he had no more worlds to destroy,
I Will weep when my liquor is out.
X.
On their stumps some have fought, and as stoutly will I,
When reeling, I roll on the floor;
Then my legs must be lost, so I Will drink as I lie,
And dare the best Buck, to do more.
XI.
It Is my will when I die, not a tear shall be shed,
No Hic Jacet be cut on my stone;
But pour on my coffin a bottle of red,
And say that His drinking is done,
My brave boys.
SONG XXIII. A PASTORAL.
Tune, -- Despairing beside a clear stream.
I.
BY the side of a green stagnate pool,
Brick-dust Nan she sat scratching her head,
Black matted locks frizzled her skull,
As bristles the hedgehog bespread;
The wind tossed her tatters abroad,
Her ashy-bronz'd-beauties revealed;
A link boy to her, through the mud,
Barefooted, flew over the field.
II.
As vermin on vermin delight,
As carrion best suits the crow's taste,
So beggars and bunters unite,
And swine-like on dirt make a feast:
To a Hottentot offals have charms,
With garbage their bosoms they deck;
She sluttishly opened her arms,
He filthily fell on her neck.
III.
On her flabby breasts one hand he placed,
No towels those breasts ever teaze,
The other fist gripped her stays-wanting-waist,
Like ladies, she dressed for her ease:
Jack drew forth his quid, and he swore,
Then his lower lip, charged to the brim,
He scoul'd, like a lewd grunting boar,
And squinting, she leer'd upon him.
IV.
"Oh, my love, thof I cannot well jaw,"
This plyer at playhouse began,
"Not tobacco's so sweet to the chaw,
"As to kiss is the lips of my Nan:"
O! my Jack, cries the mud-coloured she,
And gave him some rib squeezing hugs,
In a dust hole I Will cuddle with thee,
Aye, blast me! though bit by the bugs.
V.
Full as black as themselves, now the sky
To the south of the hemisphere lour'd,
To finish love's feast in the dry,
To a stable they hastily scoured;
While hungry rats round them explored,
And cobwebs their canopy grace,
Undaunted on litter they snor'd,
Fatigued with dirt, drink, and embrace.
SONG XXIV. EXTRAVAGANZA.
Tune, -- Pan's song in Midas.
I.
NOT one of the wise men, though ever so knowing,
Can stop the heart's dancing, when fancy is flowing,
Dame Caution may dodge us, but quickly we'll breathe her,
And high over earth boys, break cover in Ether.
Toll, loll.
II.
How then shall we laugh at each sublunar system,
And prove to star peepers how much they have mist'em.
We'll hob nob with Saturn, his cellar will charm us,
And hand in hand run round his girdle to warm us.
III.
In tangents fly off, and to Jupiter hurry,
Ask Majesty's leave with his moons to be merry;
On Captain Mars call, from the Spheres get a tune,
Send the North Star a card, by the Man in the Moon.
IV.
On Mercury mount, make a Comet postilion,
With Demirep Venus then dance a cotillion;
Her Hesper and Vesper, you know their vocation,
They rise and set just like the state of the nation.
V.
But now to talk more like a two-legg'd terrestrial,
Awhile we'll leave fancying this gallop celestial:
Suppose some dear girl her appointment was keeping,
And pat pat up stairs, you first heard her feet tripping.
VI.
Or when down the dark walk the silk gown comes rustling,
How each sense is hurried, from head to heel bustling;
Unbounded as mad expectation can fancy,
It Is pleasure's sharp fury, Love's Extravaganzy.
VII.
We fill up our time, by full filling our glasses,
And jollily laughing with love-looking lasses;
Our bumpers discharging, then charge to our wishes,
Present and give fire in volleys of kisses.
VIII.
But we'll have no more now of Roundelays rattling,
Of chiming and rhiming, of tittling and tattling.
This singing or saying may please I don't doubt it;
But here is to that mouth who makes no words about it.
SONG XXV. TIME's DEFEAT.
Tune, -- Cupid sent on an Errand, etc.
I.
ONE evening, Good Humor, took Wit as his guest,
By Friendship invited to Gratitude's feast;
Their liquor was Claret, and Love was their host,
Laugh, song, and droll Sentiment, garnished each toaft.
II.
While Freedom and Fancy enlarged the design,
And dainties were furnished by Love, Wit, and Wine,
Alarmed, they all heard, at the door a loud knock,
A watchman hoarse bawling, 'Twas past Twelve o'Clock.
III.
They nimbly ran down, the disturbing dog found,
And up stairs they brought, the Impertinent, bound;
When dragged to the light, how much were they pleased
To see 'twas the Grey-glutton Time they had seized.
IV.
His Glass as his Lanthorn, his Scythe as his Pole,
And his single Lock dangled adown his smooth Skull;
My friends, quoth he, panting, I thought fit to knock,
And bid ye be gone, for it is past Twelve o'Clock.
V.
Says the Venom'd-Tooth'd-Savage, on this advice fix,
Though Nature strikes twelve, Folly still points to six;
He longer had preached, but no longer they would bear it,
So hurried him into a Hogshead of Claret.
VI.
Wit observed it was right, while we are yet in our prime,
There is nothing like Claret for killing of Time;
Love, laughing replied, I am pleased from my heart,
He cannot come and put us in mind we must part.
VII.
This intruder, rude Time, though a tyrant long known,
By Love, Wit and Wine can be only overthrown;
If hereafter he is wanted on any design,
He Will always be sound in a Hogshead of Wine.
VIII.
Since Time is confined to our Wine, let us think
By this rule we are sure of our Time when we drink;
Henceforth, let our glasses with bumpers be prim'd,
We Are certain our drinking must now be well timed.
SONG XXVI. THE BRITON.
Tune, -- All you who would wish to suceed with a Lass.
I.
FROM the face of the Sun, see the Mists disappear,
Resplendent his beams brighten Day;
The Highlands, the Trees, and the Hill-tops are clear,
It Is the pride of the year, it is May.
II.
The Hare starts away, Puss disturbed from her seat
Flies frighted, and doubles the Would.
How plaintive the Sheep their loud echoes repeat,
Because not yet freed from the Fold.
III.
It Is Liberty's language, the voice of the soul,
Throughout Air, upon Earth, in the Sea,
From us unto where the most distant Worlds roll,
What Animal would not be free?
IV.
Let us live while we are free; but when Liberty wares
Life is but imprisoning breath;
As slaves shall we sigh, or escape from our chains,
And follow our Freedom to death.
V.
We dare, even dying, our birthrights defend,
Our last shall be Liberty's call;
Like Sampson, we'll nobly existency end,
And our Tyrants overwhelm with our fall.
VI.
Good inbjects will Government ever obey,
Into Air toss Malignity's tale;
But Honor forbid, Fraud should ever come in play,
And England be set up to sale.
VII.
While Will, without Law, scourges Gallia's coast,
Let us, in our honesty bold,
First drink the KING's health, -- then a'd to the toast,
May Englishmen scorn to be sold.
SONG XXVII. THE TRIO.
Tune -- Ye Fair possessed of every Charm.
I.
WIT, Love, and Reputation, walked
One evening out of town,
They sung, they laughed, they toy'd, they talked
'Till night came darkling on.
Love wilful needs would be their guide,
And smiled at loss of day,
On her the kindred pair relied,
And lost with her their way.
II.
Damp fell the dew, the wind blew cold,
All bleak the barren moor.
Across they toiled, when Love, grown bold,
Knocked loud at Labor's door.
Awhile within the reed-roof'd-cot
They stood, and star'd at Care,
But long could not endure the spot,
For Poverty was there.
III.
The Twain proposed next morn to part,
And travel different ways;
Quoth Love, I soon shall find a Heart,
Wit went to look for Praise.
But Reputation, sighing, spoke,
"It Is better we agree,
"Though Love may laugh, and Wit may joke,
"Yet friends take care of me.
IV.
"Without me, Beauty wins no Heart,
"Without me Wit is vain;
"If headstrong here with me you part,
"We never can meet again.
"Of me you both should take great care,
"And shun the rambling plan,
"No calling back, my friends, I Will bear,
"So keep me while you can."
V.
Love stopped among the village youth,
Expecting to be crowned,
Enquiring for her brother Truth,
But Truth was never found.
She sought in vain, for Love was blind,
And Hate her guidance crossed;
It Is said, since Truth she cannot find,
That Love herself is lost.
SONG XXVIII. THE END.
Tune, -- The Fool who is wealthy is sure of a Bride.
I.
PAPILIO the rich, in the hurry of love,
Resolving to wed, to fair Arabell drove;
He made his proposals, he begged she would fix,
What Maid could say no to a new Coach-and-six?
II.
We'll suppose they were wed, the guests bid, supper done,
The fond pair in bed, and the stocking was thrown.
The Bride lay expecting to what this would tend,
Since created a wife, wished to know for what end.
III.
On the velvet peach often, as the gaudy fly rests,
The Bridegroom's lips stopped, on Love's pillows, her breasts.
All amazement, impassive, the heart-heaving fair,
With a sigh seemed to prompt him, don't stay too long there,
IV.
Round her waist, and round such a waist, circling his arms,
He raptures rehearsed on her unpossess'd charms.
Says the fair one, and gaped, I hear all you pretend,
But now, for I Am sleepy, pray come to an end.
V.
My love never shall end, 'Squire Shadow replied,
But still, unattempting, lay stretched at her side.
She made feints, as if something she meant to defend,
But found out, at last, it was all to no end.
VI.
In disdain starting up from the impotent boy,
She, sighing, pronounced, there is an end of my joy.
Then resolved this advice to her sex she would send,
Never to wed 'till they are sure they can wed to some end.
VII.
And which end is that? why the end which prevails,
Ploughs, ships, birds, and fishes, are steered by their Tails,
And though man and wife for the Head may contend,
I Am sure they are best pleased when they gain the other end.
VIII.
The end of our wishes, the end of our wives,
The end of our loves, and the end of our lives,
The end of conjunction 'twixt mistress and male,
Though the Head may design, has its end in the tail.
IX.
It Is time though to finish, if ought I intend,
Lest, like a bad husband, I come to no end:
The ending I mean is what none will think wrong,
And that is, to make now an end of my song.
SONG XXIX. CASTLES IN AIR.
Tune, -- The Lass who would know how to manage a Man.
I.
IF I was a wit, like a wit I Would presume,
But no Muse beckon down from the sky.
I had rather go up -- so old Pindar the groom
Bring Pegasas out and I Will fly.
II.
Take a leap from the land, gallop atmosphere over,
The man in the moon how he will stare!
When I start for the pole, I Will go off upon score,
And clear every Castle in Air.
III.
Those castles are built by Dependancy's dreams,
Poor Vanity's bubble the base.
Pale promise-pin'd Hope, as the architect schemes,
They Are furnished by folks out of place.
IV.
If the nod of a Courtier our cringing should crown,
Or bit by a smile from the fair,
Self-consequence swelled, we disdain to look down,
So look up to a Castle in Air.
V.
My country I Will serve, my constituents defend --
On their honor thus candidates swear.
But fixed in their seat, would you look for your friend
He is lost in a Castle of Air.
VI.
What man in his senses of puffs would be proud,
Or covet the multitude's stare?
What use have the shouts of Venality's crowd?
But erecting a Castle in Air.
VII.
As to Genius, or Learning, or Science; -- such names
Are frights to make fine breeding stare.
Dissipation at present such title disclaims,
They Are said to be Castles in Air.
VIII.
Wise men from the East -- you indeed every day
Can count out your orient glare.
Hark forward ye NIMRODS, a Nabob's your play,
A NABOB's no Castle in Air.
IX.
Till Death shall us part, I Will be constant I vow,
This, too often, is the phrase of the Fair,
But some Ladies minds are -- one cannot tell how --
Not better -- than Castles in Air.
X.
Till Death! -- How appalling must that sentence be?
What looks then the proudest must wear?
When all the land left them, is six feet by three,
Their Castle -- but out of the Air.
XI.
Too late they perceive, that they have time misemploy'd
To be star'd at, or only to stare;
That they have lived to their loss, as each day was destroyed
Erecting new Castles in Air.
XII.
The Grave -- but too grave is not fit for our plan,
Which is neither to dote nor despair.
While we live, let us live, making life all we can.
Then a fig for each Castle in Air.
SONG XXX. REPENTANCE.
Tune, -- In April when Primroses paint the sweet plain.
THE dictates of Nature prove school knowledge weak;
Does not Instinct beyond all the orators speak?
From their parts of speech we'll not borrow one part,
Our lips, without words, find the way to the heart.
II.
^hus as last night I sung, with my lass on my knee,
^ethought one below, hoarse enquired for me;
^e listened and heard him, his breathing seemed scant,
and up stairs he stepped with asthmatical pant.
III.
The door opening wide, solus entered the sprite,
Black and all black his dress, sable emblem of Night.
His livid lips quiver'd, pronouncing my name,
And, head and staff shaking, declared me to blame.
IV.
Repentance (quoth he) will not admit of delays,
I insist, from this moment, you alter your ways.
As I star'd at him, slily, my bottle I hid,
Then punct'ally promised to do as he bid.
V.
With unkerchief'd neck, sparkling eyes, and loose hair,
Her gown, single pinned, burst from closet my fair,
There she fled when the fright first appeared in the room,
Then fell at his seet in the health of Love's bloom.
VI.
So graceful she knelt, and so tender her tone,
Then she sent such a look, Silver-beard was her own.
I saw his eyes twinkle, blood flattered his face,
He fondly, though feebly, essayed an embrace.
VII.
I left them, and, just as I fancied, the churl
Made a strengthless attempt to be rude with my girl.
She shrieked, I rushed in as he strove to escape,
And the Watch took Repentance away for a rape.
VIII.
Ever since when we wanton in rapturous embrace,
The reproach-bearing-wretch dares not show us his face
May each fond of each, thus enjoyment improve,
Be henceforth Repentance a stranger to Love.
SONG XXXI. ELIXIR L'ARGENT.
Tune, -- Pretty Peggy of Windsor.
I.
THOUGH with puffs daily papers are crammed, Sir,
With antidotes for every ail,
I Will show a specific not shamm'd, Sir,
A Nostrum which never can fail.
The Drop and Pill
May heal or kill,
As Doctors on Doctors have done;
But snug and sure,
To work a cure,
Apply the Elixir l'Argent.
II.
For weak conscience it is an Emetic;
A Restorative for a lost fame;
If fear gravels you, this Di'retic
Discharges each symptom of shame.
Like Achilles from Styx,
No would will fix
When this Unguentum is on.
Nay, choose to anoint
Even Justice's point,
It Is blunt by Elixir l'Argent.
III.
It Is a Stiptic to stop maidens scruples,
An Opiate makes jealousy rest;
It Is a Lecture where all men are pupils,
Art and science without it a jest.
Be witty, be wise,
Win Learning's prize,
This Recipe want your're undone:
Merit vainly may strive,
No genius can thrive,
But the genius who gets the l'Argent.
IV.
His Honor demurs to a hearing,
The Agent demurs to his plan,
The Witness demurs to his swearing,
And Madam demurs to her man;
Yet each sick breast
Demurs digest,
Secundum artem they are gone,
When a Quantum suff.
Is took of the stuff,
Elixir nouveau de l'Argent.
V.
When sickness voluptuousness seizes,
The medical corpse in array,
Sword by side take the field against diseases,
And, Swiss-like, give battle for pay.
Not a word of Self,
Accepting the pelf,
That lesson the learned never con,
But says we are flamm'd,
We might dye and be damned,
But for our Elixir l'Argent.
SONG XXXII. GAMING.
Tune, -- Ye Virgins of Britain who wisely attend.
I.
LAST night I attended at Robinhood's Group,
Where five-minute-orators keep the thing up;
Where Politics, Physics, Wit, Humor, and Learning,
May hear things to wonder at past their discerning.
II.
Quoth a Speaker, applying a pinch to his nose,
As slowly, like tragedy ghost, he arose,
The Methodist Preachers began our seduction,
And Gamesters and Gambling complete our destruction.
III.
Young Knowell upstarting, replied, with a sneer,
"Mr. President, really that gentleman's queer,
"He rails against Gamesters, yet, this may be said,
"He would have been one, but he wanted a head.
IV.
"And now I am up, and my minutes go on,
"That I prove him a fool, why, I Will hold two to one.
"These fault-finders don't know the things they are abusing,
"What Is all is the world after, but winning and losing?
V.
"I forgive all he knows, and I dare him to say,
"If he would, or would not have the best of the lay.
"Honest people I love, but I never heard yet,
"It was thought wrong to have the right side of a Bett.
VI.
"Life's like Hazard-playing, we all wish to win,
"And he must have luck, to be sure, who throws in.
"'It Is the statesman who sets, his friends nick their places,
"And those against the court are supposed to throw Aces.
VII.
"On the turf we perhaps may have Cunning's assistance,
"But Westminster Hall gives Newmarket a distance.
"By crossing and jostling this land may be lost,
"And Liberty run on the wrong side the Post.
VIII.
"I abjure each expression would hurt Ladies fame,
"But will they not all play the best of the game?
"To be sure trade's a virtue, and gaming a vice,
"Yet fraudulent bankrupts are worse than false dice.
IX.
"If our betters will play, and playfellows esteem us,
" Cum Monitor ludit nos quoque ludemus,
"Don't blame him who wins, rather laugh at the loser.
"We only take Fortune from those who abuse her.
X.
"If a Lord loves a Gamester's life, is it absurd
"For a Gamester to take up the life of a Lord?
"Whether Lord, or what else, it is a matter of mirth,
"What signify's title, Sir, What are you worth?"
XI.
The hammer went down, Knowell silent became,
And henceforth we'll honor the best of the game.
So here goes a Main, here the Caster must win,
We drink to the lucky, who hold longest in.
SONG XXXIII. THE JOLLY SOUL.
Tune, -- The Wine Vault.
I.
COME Liberty, damme boys, but we'll be free,
Though Care killed a cat, what care I?
I Will hold six to four, only say done to me,
Like a Soul I have lived, and I Will dye.
My brave boys.
II.
They sent me to college, I didn't mind that,
To teach me to preach and to pray;
I woudn't be humm'd, I saw what they were at,
So my eye upon all they can say.
III.
As to pulpit palaver, why, that is all a flam,
No priestcraft shall ever do for me.
I will, or I will not, a free agent I am,
And I Will only believe what I see.
IV.
May lovers of Claret, aye, Claret's the thing,
To drink it without any tax;
I don't mind the bother 'bout Subject and King,
But custom-free that is all I ax.
V.
If Clergy, and Commons, and Lords will but join,
Our national debts to pay off,
And let us free Gratis have women and wine,
Why then we may do well enough.
VI.
In half-pints the Parla'ment-house then I Will toast,
And GEORGE too, upon my bare knee;
I don't care which side, nor if none rule the roast,
So I Have but my fun and am free.
VII.
But now they are sad times, for our freedom is gone,
Since we to bumbailiffs submit;
Bill of Rights! damn all bills, for the nation's undone
By that General Warrant, a Writ.
VIII.
We must be made slaves if they don't put a stop
To Lawyers, the Justice, and all;
For if in Old England we don't keep it up,
Why then, to be sure, it must fall.
IX.
When I dye -- but that is queer -- and to think on it is dull,
So as to this here, or that there,
Let me go where I will, if my bottle is full,
And I get but a girl, I don't care.
X.
If Master Death thrusts himself into my room,
They tell me, he always makes free,
I Will try if I cannot tip old Boney a hum,
If not, why, may-hap he hums me.
XI.
As I told you before, I Am resolved not to think,
So I cannot a Sentiment give,
However, my Souls, while we live let us drink,
Because while we are drinking we live,
My brave boys.
SONG XXXIV. TODAY AND TONIGHT.
Tune, -- What a Blockhead is he who is afraid to dye poor.
I.
RUBY-FINGER'D Aurora, fair Lady of Light,
From saffron robes shaking the last shade of Night,
Called Phoebus, who blessed with his sea beauty's boon,
Slow awoke, Thetis vowed, 'twas immensely too soon.
II.
Above the horizon his beams, circling, spread
The gray dappled clouds, fringed transparent with red.
The breezy air rich with the perfumes of May,
While birds on the boughs chirp'd and sung in the day.
III.
Shall man, most obliged, offer less to that power
By whom he is endowed, to enjoy every hour?
Yes, -- pride-born Ingratitude never will pay
The thanks which are due for the gift of Today
IV.
No, -- Tomorrow's the thing; Tomorrow! Sloth cries --
Tomorrow's the shadow which every day flies.
Death Yesterday called in his fools -- and, Today,
It Is not six to four but we are had the same way.
V.
We must laugh when we look on Time-killers's distress,
Who dress, dine, and daudle -- dine, daudle, and dress.
In one senseless saunter dream Day and Night through,
In nothing to say, and -- in nothing to do.
VI.
As for thinking Today, it is absurd to begin:
A head fine frizzur'd wants no finish within.
Tomorrow's the wild-goose at which they take aim,
A mouthful of moonshine they get for their game.
VII.
Let us, lads, depend on Life's plain-dealing plan,
Not kill Time, but keep all alive while we can.
Day and Night too, our welcome to Beauty we'll pay,
Love equal expects both good Night and good Day.
VIII.
To Night be my song then, -- I honor its shades;
Fall fertile ye vapors, make Mothers of Maids.
To the end of each Day be our doings upright,
May all do the best thing they can do Tonight.
SONG XXXV. TO DRINK.
Tune, -- Guildford Style.
I.
WHEN Prudence declaims how time passes,
Could we tempt Mr. Chronos to stay,
While we are bump'ring a round of our lasses,
We would wait upon all he could say.
But is it worth while
Through books to toil,
In troubling our heads how to think?
Thought never was designed
To puzzle the mind,
Let us only mind how we drink.
II.
There was Solomon one of the wise things
When past it, began to complain:
He affected at last to despise things
Because his was labor in vain;
But used to say,
There Is time to play,
To labor, to love, and to think;
Let those in their prime
Remember the time,
At present it is time we should drink.
III.
A pox on Reflection, be jolly,
Dispassionate Cynics despise,
Did you once know the raptures of folly,
You never would wish to be wise.
I scorn the plans
Sobriety scans,
From bumpers I never will shrink;
By the busy in trade
Be Cent per Cent. made,
It Is Cent. per Cent. better to drink.
SONG XXXVI. KISSING.
Tune, -- In pursuit of some Lambs from my Flocks that had strayed.
YE delicate lovelies, with leave, I maintain
That happiness here you may find.
To yourselves I appeal for Felicity's reign
When you meet with a man to your mind.
II.
When Gratitude Friendship to Fondness unites,
Inexpressive endearments arise:
Then hopes, fears, and fancies, strange doubts, and delights,
Are announc'd by those tell tales, the eyes.
III.
Those technical terms, in the science of Love,
Cold schoolmen attempt to describe,
But how should they paint what they never can prove?
For Tenderness knows not their tribe.
IV.
Of all the abuse on enjoyment that is thrown,
The treatment Love takes most amiss,
Is the rant of the coxcomb, the sot, and the clown,
Who pretend to indulge on a Kiss.
V.
The love of a fribble at self only aims:
For sots and clowns -- class them with beasts.
No fiber, no atom, have they in their frames,
To relish such delicate feasts.
VI.
In circling embraces, when lips to lips move,
Description, oh! teach me to praise
The Overture KISS to the Op'ra of Love --
But Beauty would laugh at the phrase.
VII.
Love's preludes are Kisses, and, after the play,
They fill up the pause of delight.
The rich repetitions, which never decay,
The Lip's silent language at night.
VIII.
The raptures of KISSING we only can taste,
When sympathies equal inspire;
And while to enjoyment, unbounded, we haste,
Their breath blows the coals of desire.
IX.
Again, and again, and again Beauty sips;
What feelings these pressures excite?
When fleeting life's stopped by a Kiss of the lips,
Then sinks in a sigh of delight.
MORAL.
Whilst our glasses we kiss, and we frolic at ease,
Of Happiness never may we miss;
May we live as we list, may we kiss whom we please,
And may we still please whom we kiss.
SONG XXXVII. BARTLEME FAIR.
Tune, -- Young Strephon he went the other day to the Wake.
I.
WHILE gentlefolks strut in their silver and sattins,
We poor folks are tramping in straw hats and pattens,
As merrily Old English ballads can sing -- o,
As they at their opperores outlandish ling -- o;
Calling out, bravo, encoro, and caro,
Tho'f I will sing nothing but Bartleme Fair -- o.
II.
Here first of all, crowds against other crowds driving,
Like wind and tide meeting, each contrary striving;
Here Is fiddling and fluting, and shouting and shrieking,
Fifes, trumpets, drums, bag-pipes, and barrow-girls squeaking.
My rare round and sound, here is choice of fine ware -- o,
Though all is not sound sold at Barleme Fair -- o.
III.
Here are drolls, hornpipe dancing, and showing of postures;
Plum-porridge, black-puddings, and opening of oysters;
The tap-house guests swearing, and gall'ry folks squawling,
With salt-boxes, solos, and mouth-pieces bawling;
Pimps, pick-pockets, strollers, fat landladies, sailors,
Bawds, baileys, jilts, jockies, thieves, tumblers, and tailors.
IV.
Here Is Punch's whole play of the gunpowder-plot, Sir,
Wild beasts all alive, and pease-porridge hot, Sir:
Fine sausages fried, and the Black on the wire;
The whole court of France, and nice pig at the fire.
The ups-and-downs, who will take a seat in the chair -- o,
There are more ups and downs that at Bartleme Fair-o.
V.
Here Is Whittington's cat, and the tall dromedary,
The chaise without horses, and Queen of Hungary;
The merry-go-rounds, come who rides, come who rides;
Wine, beer, ale, and cakes, fire-eating besides;
The famed learned dog that can tell all his letters,
And some men, as scholars, are not much his betters.
VI.
This world's a wide fair, where we ramble among gay things;
Our passions, like children, are tempted by play-things;
By sound and by show, by trash and by trumpery,
The fal-lals of fashion, and Frenchify'd frumpery.
Life is but a droll, rather wretched than rare -- o,
And thus ends the ballad of Bartleme Fair -- o.
SONG XXXVIII. RURAL FELICITY.
Tune, -- On Market Day last, I remember the time.
I.
LET court lovers pay adoration to crowns,
That man is a monarch for me,
Who cheerful improves the few acres he owns,
Unenvying, industrious, and free.
II.
At night, in high health, from his labor he rests,
His household sit round in a row,
Wife, children, and servants, domestical guests,
Such circles in town can ye show?
III.
He smiles on his babes, as some strive for his knee,
And some to their mother's neck clung,
While playful the prattlers for place disagree,
The roof with their shrill trebles ring.
IV.
Those Cynics who brood over a single life's spleen,
The offspring they have dare not own,
But happy-wed pairs can enjoy the fond scene
To you ye unsocials unknown.
V.
His dame the good man of the house thus addressed: --
'Twas so with us when we were young.
Her hand within his he with gentleness pressed,
While sentiment prompted his tongue.
VI.
I remember the day of my falling in love,
How fearful I first came to woo;
I hope that these boys will as true-hearted prove,
And our lasses, my dear, look like you.
VII.
A tear of joy starting, he kissed from her cheek,
Love gratefully glowing her face,
Too full her fond heart, not a word could she speak,
But, sighing, returned his embrace.
VIII.
It Is by such endearments affection is shown,
In silence more nobly expressed,
Than all the cant phrase, the Bon Ton of the town,
Where Love is a Monmouth-street guest.
IX.
Go on ye high births, and pretend to despise
Those scenes which to you are unknown;
But laugh not too long, rather aim to be wise,
And compare such a life with your own.
X.
Vain jesters be mute, I Will a Sentiment give,
A Toast which esteem will not scorn;
May they who can taste them, Love's kisses receive,
And Tenderness meet a return.
SONG XXXIX. THE TOPER.
Tune, -- Shanbuy.
YE lads of true spirit pay courtship to Claret,
Released from the trouble of thinking;
A fool long ago said, we nothing could know, --
The fellow knew nothing of drinking.
To pore over Plato,
Or practice with Cato,
Dispassionates, dunces might make us;
But men now more wise,
Self-denial despise,
And live by the lessons of Bacchus.
II.
Big wigg'd, in fine coach, see the Doctor approach,
And solemnly up the stairs pace,
Gravely smell on his cane, apply finger to vein,
And count the repeats with grimaces.
As he holds pen in hand,
Life and Death's at a stand,
A toss-up which party will take us;
Away with his cant,
No prescription we want,
But the nourishing nostrums of Bacchus.
III.
We jollily join in the practice of Wine,
While misers 'midst millions are pining;
While ladies are scorning, and lovers are mourning,
We laugh at wealth, wenching and whining.
Drink, drink, now it is prime,
Toss a bottle to Time,
He Will not make such haste to overtake us;
His threats we prevent,
And his cracks we cement,
By the styptical Balsam of Bacchus.
IV.
What work there is made, by the news-paper trade,
Of this man and the other man's station;
The Ins are all bad, and the Outs are all mad,
In and Out is the cry of the nation.
The politic patter,
Which both parties chatter,
From bumpering freely shall not shake us;
With half-pints in hand,
Independent we'll stand,
To defend Magna Charta of Bacchus.
V.
Be your motion well timed, you're charged and you're prim'd,
Have a care! -- Right and left, and make ready --
Right hand to glass join -- at lips rest the wine --
But be in your exercise steady.
Our levels we boast,
When our women we toast,
May graciously they undertake us;
No more we desire,
So drink and give fire,
And volley to BEAUTY and BACCHUS.
SONG XL. THE TIMES.
Tune, -- Once on a time, 'twas long ago.
I.
GOOD people all, both great and small,
And eke, and aye, and also;
Pray lend an ear, and you shall hear,
And then I need not bawl so.
There was a Time, when Times were good,
The ancient Bard in rhyme sings;
So use Time well, it is Time we should,
We should so, did we time things.
II.
But out of Time, and out of Tune,
We helter skelter go forth;
Sometimes too late, sometimes too soon,
Good lack-a-day, and so forth.
We give great folks the greatest crimes,
They can afford to father 'em,
But so impartial are the Times,
We Are guilty, omnium gatherum.
III.
Fox-hunting, boldly Bucks embrace,
But Sportsmen of discernment,
Abroad will choose a Nabob's Chase,
Or hunt at home Preferment.
To hunt the Statesman, who is in play,
When Patriots cast-about Sir,
A Pension stops the Hark-away,
And so the Field's flung out Sir.
IV.
In such place-tempting Times as these,
Upright be our intentions;
Ill fare the Loon who first took Fees,
And Him who first paid Pensions.
Yet Sine-cures we'll not abuse,
Nor their illust^ious Givers,
We quarrel now, 'cause we cannot choose
Who should be the Receivers.
V.
Dear Englishmen and Country-folks,
Don't give yourselves uneas'ness,
Nor mind the flouts, the shouts, the jokes,
But only mind your business.
Wou^d one mind one, the Kingdom through,
And work within his station,
At h^me h^'ll find enough to do,
And not undo the Nation.
VI.
So to conclude, and make an end,
Of this nice-diction'd ditty,
Indeed it is Time, the Times should mend,
In Country, Court, and City.
For our good Queen our song we'll sing, --
May she never wake nor sleep ill;
And next, my lads, -- God bless the King,
And all his faithful people.
SONG XLI. AD INFINITUM.
Tune, -- Which nobody can deny.
I.
SINCE Life's but a jest, let us follow this rule,
There Is nothing so pleasant as playing the Fool;
In town we may practice, as well as at school,
Which nobody can deny.
II.
The World turns about, the same things over and over;
We fool it; our forefathers fooled it before:
They did what we do, which our sons will encore.
III.
Life's but a half holiday, lent us to stare;
We wander, and wonder, in Vanity's fair;
All baby-like bawling for each bauble there.
IV.
If Denial should follow a Lover's request,
Like a tooth-cutting child he is a troublesome guest,
Till the chit by his deary is hushed to her breast.
V.
When Discontents dare against Court-service riot,
The Minister, nurse-like, prepares proper diet;
They Have Pensions for Pap, then the urchins are quiet.
VI.
We, Children-like, covet the glitter of gay things,
Make racquet for ribbonds, and such sort of play-things;
Which we cannot have though -- without we can say things.
VII.
But before we can say, we should see how things go,
If the Market is high, or Majority low,
Then, just at the selling-price, give Yes, or No.
VIII.
We take, or are all in our turns taken in;
The World, to be sure, it is a shame and a sin,
Might soon be much better, -- but who will begin.
IX.
Each age has its folly, ours is dissipation,
Enfeebling -- but why all this dull declamation?
If weakened, we'll drink to the Strength of the Nation.
X.
Allowing things wrong, Sir, which way shall we right 'em?
It Is Taste to hear good things, it is tasty to slight 'em:
It was, is, and will be so, ad Infinitum.
Which nobody can deny.
SONG XLII. THE RAREE SHOW.
Tune, -- Now we are free from College Rules.
I.
THE Town's a Raree-Shew, some say,
A rare Show for projectors:
What pity it is, we spoil the play
For want of better Actors.
But sometimes in, and sometimes out,
It Is so upon all stages;
Folks will not mind what they are about,
But only mind the Wages.
II.
Among the imitative arts,
Chief is an Actor's science;
Expressive Heads, and feeling Hearts,
With Nature form alliance.
Behind the scenes, though Party rage,
Caprice, and Adulation,
With Slander -- but we know the Stage
Should represent the Nation.
III.
A Representative indeed! --
As Players make believe, Sir,
In this World's Drama, to succeed,
It Is as you can deceive, Sir.
You may be caught, by face or dress,
Before you come to know folks;
But then the Counterfeits confess,
They Are all -- but only Shew-Folks.
IV.
Most aim great Characters to hit,
Pride spouts as Public Spirit,
Pert Dullness is mistook for Wit,
And Silenee want of Merit.
Some study the Informer's arts,
Then Power their side espouses;
Some play the Pimps, and Flatterers parts,
In hopes to have full houses.
V.
We title this same Droll we show,
The Humors of the Nation --
Extremely high, extremely low,
Endemic Dissipation.
The World! -- What by that word we mean,
Is self and self's disguises;
A busy, lazy, Lottery Scene,
Where Folly fills up Prizes.
VI.
Whatever we think, whatever we say,
Whatever we are pursuing,
Is over and over the self-same play
Of doing and undoing.
Life's vegetation ripes and rots,
'Till dust to dust returning;
So let us sprinkle well our spots
And drink from Night to Morning.
SONG XLIII. THE CONNOISSEUR.
Tune, -- Masks all.
TO excel in Bon Ton both as Genius and Critic,
And be quite the thing, Sir, Immense Scientific;
On all exhibitions give sentence by guess,
With shrugs and stolen phrases that sentence express.
Sing tantararara Taste all.
II.
The money you squander your judgment confirms,
You need not know Science, repeat but the terms.
The labor of Learning belongs to the poor,
Do but pay -- that is enough for a True Connoisseur.
III.
As to Shakespeare, or Purcell, why you may allow
They were well-enough once -- but they will not do now.
Admit Newton's clever, just clever, -- that is all;
And formerly, faith, we might fancy White Hall.
IV.
When Lord of the Feast, 'midst your Parasite Group,
You're the slave of Conceit, and low Forgery's dupe.
All artists (but English ones) praise and procure,
By your band of Bear-leaders you're dubbed Connoisseur.
V.
For Words, when you're lost, fill the blank with Grimace,
And Pantomime Scorn by your power of Face.
If Merit dares speak, and he is known to be poor,
Knock him down with a Bett, then your triumph's secure.
VI.
With high-varnish'd masters, and bronz'd bustos graced,
Your house, like a toy-shop, is lumber'd in Taste.
All, all are Antiques, Ciceroni procures,
For who dares deceive such complete Connoisseurs?
VII.
The Worth of a man, say the Wise, is his Pence:
'Twas said so, and so it will centuries hence.
Then Money's the thing; the Grand Pimp that procures,
Full work for the Wits, when she forms Connoisseurs.
Sing tantararara Taste all.
SONG XLIV. HERE GOES.
Tune, -- To sigh or complain.
I.
COME care-curing Mirth
From Wit's bower forth,
Bring Humor, your brother, along,
Hospitality's here,
And Harmony near,
To chorus droll Sentiment's song.
II.
In Comedy trim,
Joke, Gesture, and Whim,
With Trios will keep up the ball;
By order of Taste
We open the feast
Of Friendship in Liberty-hall.
III.
Who Will President be?
Unanimity, see
He Is ordered to sit as our host;
My Lord Common Sense,
With pains and expense,
Introduced him to give out the toast.
IV.
Though Scandal we hate,
Only Good we hold great,
Nor any for Title's-sake praise;
Unworthy's that name,
No Merit can claim,
But what Genealogies raise.
V.
In this Anno Dom. we
Would Felicity see,
I Will demonstrate how easy we could:
Change fault-finding elves
To mending ourselves,
Then things might soon be as they should.
VI.
Some Wives read their mates
Curtain-Lecture debates,
And wonder they are not understood;
The Husband's perplexed,
And the Lady is vexed,
'Cause every thing's not as it should.
VII.
If Pension, or Place,
Is the gift of His Grace,
Refusal would be over-nice,
Plumb-pudding on board,
And pressed by my Lord,
Who would not come in for a slice?
VIII.
Corruption's the cry,
Opposition runs high,
Yet who can help laughing to see,
Though Faction's so big
Ambo Tory and Whig,
In one part both Parties agree.
IX.
For the Kingdom of Man,
Division's the plan.
By the laws of the Cyprian Court,
The Ladies must yield,
When our Standard we weild,
And what we advance they support.
X.
For a Bumper I call, --
Here Is the Sovereign of All,
The Spring from which all honor flows,
From thence we all came,
So we go to that same,
Here Is to it, and to it, Here goes.
SONG XLV. DICK AND DOLL.
Tune, -- I Am like a Skiff on the Ocean tossed.
I.
AS one bright summer's sultry day,
For sake of shade I sought the grove;
Through thickset-hedge, on top of hay,
I met with mutual Love:
A Youth with one arm round his pretty Girl's waist,
On small swelling breasts he his other hand placed.
While she cried Dick be still,
Pray tell me what is your will?
II.
"I come (quoth Dick) to have some chat,"
And close to hers, his lips he squeezed;
"I guess (cries Doll) what you would be at,
"But now I will not be teased."
She strove to rise up, but his strength held her down,
She called out for help! and petitioned the Clown,
"O Dick, dear, let me rise,
"The Sun puts out my eyes.
III.
"I Will tear your soul out! -- Lord! these men,
"If ever -- well -- I will not submit. --
"Why? what? the Devil! -- Curse me then! --
"You Will fling me in a fit."
Down, like a bent lily, her head dropped aslant,
Her eyes lost the daylight, her breath became scant,
And, feebly, on her tongue
Expiring accents hung.
IV.
The chorus birds sung over their heads,
The breeze blew rustling through the grove,
Sweet smelt the hay, on new-mown meads,
All seemed the scene of Love.
Dick offered to lift up the Lass as she lay,
A look, full of tenderness, told him to stay;
"So soon Dick will you go?
"I wish -- dear me! -- heigh ho!"
V.
Vibrating with heart-heaving sighs,
Her tucker trembling to and fro',
Her crimsoned cheeks, her glist'ning eyes,
Proclaimed Possession's glow.
Dick bid her farewell, but she, languishing, cried,
As wanton she played by her fallen Shepherd's side;
"A moment! pray sit still,
"Since now you have had your will."
VI.
"Lord! (cries the Girl) you hasty men,
"Of Love afford but one poor proof;
"Our Fowls at home, each Sparrow Hen,
"Is ten times better off. --
"No! that you should not, had I known your design,
"But, since you have had your will, pray let me have mine;
"So, once more, ever we rise,
"Do, dear Dick, save my eyes."
SONG XLVI. A SIMPLE PASTORAL
To a very simple Tune of -- Christmas now is coming.
I.
AURORA, Lady gray,
Hides her face in blushes;
Budding, blanching May,
Whitens hawthorn bushes.
II.
See the Clouds transparent,
See the Sunshine rising;
London Rakes, I warrant,
Would think this surprising.
III.
See the Sturdy Swains,
Trenching-ploughs are holding;
Some on pebbly plains,
Last night's pens unfolding.
IV.
How the Swine-yards woo?
How the Herds are lowing?
While the Pigeons coo,
Barn-door fowls are crowing.
V.
Here are Flora's dressings,
Air-fill'd perfume here is,
Here Pomona's blessings,
Here the gifts of Ceres.
VI.
Hark! the tinkling Rills,
And the bubbling Fountains;
Cascade over the hills,
Tumble down the mountains.
VII.
See! at welcome Wakes,
Shew-folks Fire-eating;
While, with Ale and Cakes,
Jack his Gill is treating.
VIII.
Hark! the distant Drum,
Lasses all look frighted;
But, when Soldiers come,
Girls how you're delighted.
IX.
Night her shutters closing,
All the Village still is,
Save where, unreposing,
Captain calls on Phillis.
X.
While she lets her Spark in,
Shooting Stars are sailing,
Farmer's Dogs are barking,
Comets dreadful trailing.
XI.
For to Scholars thinking,
Omens must be telling;
Whether worlds are sinking,
Or if waists are swelling.
XII.
But, my Lads and Lasses,
Mind a friend's advisings,
Let us fill our glasses
To our Falls and Risings.
SONG XLVII. THE CABAL.
Tune, -- Long time with the Graces fair Venus, etc.
I.
WHY should you, loved Sensible, should you be pale,
The portrait of Grief you appear;
You look like yon' Lily that droops in the vale,
With my lips let me wipe off that tear.
II.
Disdain a reply to Malignity's tongue,
Let Patience to Clamor submit;
It is better that Slander should say you was wrong,
Than that you the wrong should commit.
III.
The Atheist, if really such madmen exist,
Belief will delirious decry,
In Infidel Doubtings pretend to persist,
What they cannot conceive they deny.
IV.
Thus some of your sex, old and ugly, will rail,
Like Atheists all goodness they doubt,
Insisting men may over all beauties prevail,
Because themselves could not hold out.
V.
You must pardon the cry, think not strange what I say,
They Mercy from you must receive;
Be it known to your tenderness, it is the world's way,
Who injure will never forgive.
VI.
Smile, smile, and smile on, let Day beam on your face,
To Oblivion be Obloquy hurled;
By the best you're beloved, thou fair figure of Grace,
So laugh at the rest of the world.
SONG XLVIII. THE QUESTION.
Tun^, -- To please me the more, and to change the dull scene.
I.
SUPPOSE Twelve has struck, wherefore pray all this fuss?
Next time 'twill strike less, what are Hours to us?
Let the Sun rule the day, and the Moon mark the night;
Without Rules, or Schools, sure we know when we are right.
II.
The Inf'rence from hence which I draw, but first drink,
A Bumper's the best preparation to think:
I infer, nay affirm, and with me you must join,
Life's not Life without Love, Love's not Love without Wine.
III.
This Truth I Will maintain, thus maintaining my post,
And give in this bumper a Truth for my toast. --
I Am sure to be pledged by each Lass-loving Youth,
Here Is a Brusher, my Bucks, to the famed naked Truth.
IV.
At first we are into this world pulled and teased;
At our getting, Papa and Mama may be pleased;
But as to us Babes, Nature' multiplication,
Begot for diversion, we are born in vexation.
V.
We are Fools in green youth, mankind ripe into Knaves,
Gray hairs turn to Money, or Mistresses Slaves;
To our burial from birth, passive objects of Fear,
Keep the door shut, and don't let that Scrub slip in here.
VI.
Let Ill Will abuse us, Hypocrisy bawl,
Vain-zeal the cry join, we join laugh against them all.
Self-denial may sermonize, Temperance teaze,
We live as we like -- let them live as they please.
VII.
Our Voyage is Pleasure, Hope hoists up the Sail,
Our Pilot is Instinct, Desire the Gale;
To Beauty we are bound, we have Bacchus on board,
Our Guns by Love loaded, Enjoyment's the Word.
SONG XLIX. THE SONGSTER's HORN-BOOK.
Tune, -- Ally Croker.
I.
GREAT A was alarmed at B's bad behav'our,
Because he refused C, D, E, F, favor,
G, got a Husband, with H, I, K, and L,
M, married Mary and scholars taught to spell.
A b c d e f g h i k l m, etc.
II.
It went hard at first with N, O, P, and Q,
With R, S, T, single and also double U.
With X and Y it stuck in their gizzards,
'Till they were made friends by the Two crooked Izzards.
III.
This A, B, C, though so little it is thought about,
Each Change in the World, by its power has brought about;
It Is the groundwork of Wisdom, of Science the key, Sir,
What can a man know, who don't know A B C? Sir,
IV.
Some Fiddlers, in dress, pretend to ape their betters,
They had better mind their Horn-book and study all their letters;
Their Knowledge now no farther goes, from A B C, Sir,
To the four more letters called, D, E, F, and G, Sir.
V.
As to Words it is not worth while to mind their precision,
If we through the Gamut can run a division;
The Annals of England, to our shame, will tell ye,
That Newton was nothing to fine Farinelli.
VI.
How ravishing that swell! what sweet Symphonina?
What Cantabilis? what Taste? Ah cara divina!
O chi gusto the voice of Signior Sustinuti,
Miltonic the language of Tace titti tutti.
VII.
As insects will cluster round pots full of honey,
Imported illiberals swarm for our money.
Sense is scared off by Sound, and Trash over Taste glories,
Only Show it is succeeds now, O Tempora, O Mores!
VIII.
This A B C excuse without Ceremoni,
My hoarse voice and harmony is not Unisoni.
If you censure my singing, for censure is free, Sir,
As a Songster, remember, I Am but in A B C, Sir.
A b c d e f g h i k l m, etc.
SONG L. COMMON SENSE.
Tune, -- One morning young Roger accosted me thus.
I.
ONE night having nothing to do -- nor to drink,
I began a new practice, and that was to think;
What my subject should be, kept me some time in doubt,
I considered, at last -- what we all were about.
II.
Such frauds and such fractions, such follies, such fictions,
Such out-of-door clamours, and in contradictions;
What must this be owing to? why? or from whence?
What is it we want? -- why, we want Common Sense.
III.
O yes! who can tell us where Common Sense dwells?
Does it burnish Gold Roofs, or strew Rushes in Cells?
Does it beam in the Mine? does it swim in the Sea?
Does it wing the wide Air? does it blossom the Tree?
IV.
If folks would accept Common Sense as their guest,
With Meum and Tuum at home they will be blessed.
Not Lunatic Lacqueys run mad up and down,
Nor mind any business but what was their own.
V.
But which is the way to find Common Sense out?
She feasts not on Turtle; -- cuts in at no rout? --
Get the Tub Cynic's lanthorn, we will not mind expense,
But look by its light, 'till we spy Common Sense.
VI.
If chance she is seen, though for fear we mistake her,
She Is natively neat, like a lovely young Quaker.
Pure Beauty, despising false Drapery's aid,
And Common Sense scorns all pedantic parade.
VII.
Let us first call at Court, but, perhaps, we intrude,
'Twas told so by Miss Affectation, the Prude;
There Fashion forbids the free use of the mind,
What can Common Sense say in a place so refined?
VIII.
Then at Church! to be sure, Common Sense there succeeds,
Unless Superstition should choke it with weeds;
And though Infidelity dares a pretense,
She Is easily vanquished by plain Common Sense.
IX.
When I mentioned the Church, you expected at least,
In the commonplace mode, some stale joke against a Priest;
That a laugh I should raise, at the Clergy's expense,
But he who would wish it, must want Common Sense.
X.
As to Trade, no accounts can be well kept without her,
Yet Stock-jobbers say they know nothing about her.
Bear witness 'Change-Alley -- the Omniums declare,
Common Sense shall for ever be under Par there.
XI.
Come, I Will give you a Toast, if I give no offense --
Here Is the Sensitive Plant, and the Root Common Sense.
Here Is Love's Magic Circle, which all Senses binds,
And Delicate Pleasures to Sensible Minds.
SONG LI. A FORE-CASTLE SONG.
Tune, -- How happy could I be with either.
I.
DO you see, as a Sailor, I Will heave off
A bit of a song in my way,
But, if you don't like it I Will leave off,
I soon can my bawling belay.
Odd Lingos Musicianers write in,
Concerning Flats, Sharps, and all that;
We Seamen are sharp in our fighting,
And as to the Frenchmen they are flat.
II.
Outlandish folks tickle your ears
With Solos, and such sort of stuff,
We Tars have no more than Three Cheers,
Which French folks think music enough.
Through Canada loudly 'twas rung,
Then echoed on Senegal's shore,
At Gaudaloupe merrily sung,
And Martinique chorus'd Encore.
III.
At Havre we played well our parts,
Though our Game they pretended to scoff,
For Trumps we turned up English Hearts,
They threw down their Cards and sheer'd off.
They have met with their match now they feel,
Their Shuffling and Cutting we check;
They were lurch'a at Crown Point, and lost Deal,
And faith they got slamm'd at Quebec.
IV.
Our Music gave French folks the vapors,
It took an odd turn on Conflans;
We knew they were all fond of Capers,
So set up an old English Dance.
'Twas Britons strike home that we sounded,
By the strength of that tune they were trounc'd,
The Tididols looking confounded,
While Hawke faith their feather-heads pounc'd.
V.
Our instruments always do wonders,
From Round-tops we give serenades;
Our Organs are twenty-four pounders,
Our Concerts are brisk Cannonades.
For Cooks, thof the French folks are neater,
Our messes they never can beat,
Our Dishes have so much Saltpeter,
And as to our Balls they are forc'd-meat.
VI.
God bless our King George, with Three Cheers, Sirs,
And God bless his Consort, Amen.
In past times we have drubb'd the Mounseers Sirs,
For pastime we'll drub them again.
There Is one thing I have more to say, -- Though
Beyond seas, my boys, we'll overcome,
If you will give Old England fair play though,
And keep yourselves quiet at home.
SONG LII. THE WHIM.
Tune, -- If I ever should know, and that Knowledge impart.
I.
THAT the World is a Stage, and the Stage is a School,
Where some study Knaves parts, and some play the Fool,
Was said, and again so we say;
For as the World's round, and rolls round about,
Old fashions come in, and new fashions go out,
As Vanity dresses the Play.
II.
Do not seriously think of these whimsical times,
But sing or say something in whimsical rhimes, --
The World's but a Whim, and all that;
I mean not the World which revolves on the poles,
But the Animal World, that is made up of odd Souls,
The sons and the daughters of Chat.
III.
For a new Exhibition their Portraits we'll plan,
And Pen and Ink Likenesses sketch if we can,
Where all may their semblances see;
Though folks of fine breeding, immensely polite,
Their own faces finish, with Rouge and Flake White,
So leave no employment for me.
IV.
Let us tenderly take off those masks, and their cures
Attempt, by exposing such caricatures
In Impartiality's Hall;
But if the galled sinner should wince at a line,
And cry, "Curse the fellow! -- the picture's not mine,"
The Prime-serjeant Painter I call.
V.
Come, Satyr, assist me, my project is new. --
The Demi-beast, grinning, his range of reeds blew,
And this was his Symphony's Song: --
"Should I sing of these Times, or in prose or in verse,
"Weak things, but not wicked ones I should rehearse,
A medley betwixt Right and Wrong.
VI.
"This Era is much too insipid for me,
"Futility's only in practice I see,
"Unworthy one stroke of my lash;
"The fashion is Folly, let Folly go on,
"To show Sense subsides, and True Taste to Bon Ton;
"And Genius is banished for Trash."
VII.
Disdain frowned his brow, redd'ning Rage his eyes cast,
Contempt over his countenance spread as he past,
No more Dissipation he will school.
We'll be quite the thing then, as life's but a toy,
A bustle in which we can only enjoy
The Pleasure of playing the Fool.
SONG LIII. THE SCURVY.
Tune, -- Ever Phoebus shall peep on the fresh budding flowers.
I.
EVE tempted to err, ill betide the sad time,
Ye modern wives pity her fall,
Since we her sons suffer for Grandmamma's crime,
The Scurvy has tainted us all.
II.
To curb the contagion which putrifies here,
In vain have the Faculty tried;
Its pestilent symptoms offensive appear
In vulgar Erruptions of Pride.
III.
For all Pride is low, it is a Cancerous Brain,
A Poorness or Foulness of Blood;
The want of Sound Sense renders wretches insane
Who are lifted above what they should.
IV.
Epidemic Prognostics appear in each State,
Where Meaness in office is placed,
Who scurvily ape the odd airs of the Great,
And fancy ill breeding is Taste.
V.
But when their high mighty Superiors approach,
The malady takes a new turn;
As abjectly then the base Scurvy things crouch,
As before they were bloated with Scorn.
VI.
With Artists the Scurvy of Envy appears,
When Comates they coldly commend;
Nay, often it breaks out in illiberal sneers,
And poisons the Fame of a Friend.
VII.
Should Genius a visit to Greatness presume,
He Is scurvily offered a Chair;
Disdain marks the Things in the Visiting-room,
Who wonder the Fright should come there.
VIII.
Be proud, if you please, ye gay Groups of Conceit,
Still flatter, be venal, and vain;
We know what ye feel, what ye pay for each treat,
And we know too -- Ye dare not complain.
IX.
With unmeaning gaze pampered Wealth wheeled along,
With the Scurvy of Vanity swelled,
Took the snuff of Contempt at the more worthy throng,
By whom he is with pity beheld.
X.
Come meek-ey'd Humility, lend me thy hand,
Humanity deign me thy aid,
Instruct me, that I may myself understand
Not to scorn those my MAKER has made.
SONG LIVE. THE DEMIRFP; OR, I KNOW WHO.
Tune, -- Though Austria and Russia, France, Flanders, and Prussia.
I.
CLEOPATRA the gay, as old stories declare,
Put Mark Anthony often to the rout:
That the Lover was fond, and the Lady was fair,
No modern among us will doubt.
But yet I insist
Our own Times are the best.
Antiquity! what can that do, Sir?
Could Livia, or Lais,
Faustinia, or Thais,
Compare to the fine -- I know who, Sir?
II.
Let Placemen receive, and let Patriots oppose,
And raise unforgiving dissentions;
A Mistress's Arms is the Post I would choose,
A Bottle and Friend are my Pensions.
Preferments at Court
Are Ministers sport,
When they see what to gain them folks do, Sir;
They may Boroughs command,
I wish only to stand
As Member for fine -- I know who, Sir.
III.
Possessors, Assessors, envelope the mind
With Ethics of old Aristotle;
The Lesson of Nature, to tutor Mankind,
Is -- Beauty sublimed by a Bottle.
The best in the College,
Who boast of their Knowledge,
The Science supreme never knew, Sir,
Unless they can prove,
That a Lecture of Love
They have had with the fine -- I know who, Sir.
IV.
You this or that system embrace or reject,
As Philosophy's fashion is ruling;
But look in her face and you will find an effect
Beyond Electricity's fooling.
Though sparks there arise,
What are they to her eyes?
And as to what touching can do, Sir,
It is all but a joke,
When compared to the stroke
That is given by fine -- I know who, Sir.
V.
The Atoms of Carts Sir Isaac destroyed;
Lebnitz pilfer'd our Countryman's Fluxions;
Newton found out Attraction, and proved Nature's void,
Spite of prejudiced Plenum's constructions.
Gravitation can boast,
In the form of my Toast,
More power than all of them knew, Sir;
What FELLOW, or SOPH,
Will in Tangents fly off
From the Center of fine -- I know who, Sir?
VI.
Ye sensible Socials who dare, now and then,
To laugh at some Folks in this Nation,
It Is Beauty which sculptures us Blocks into Men,
To Beauty then make a Libation.
Poor Lovers may prize,
Lips, Legs, Arms, and Eyes,
Such piecemeal pretensions will not do, Sir?
No Part shall be lost
When I mention my Toast, --
"Here Is the WHOLE of the fine -- I know who, Sir."
SONG LV. MAY.
Tune, -- A beautiful Face, and a Form without Fault.
I.
BLEAK Winter is drove, by warm winds, to the North,
And Spring's early pencil gay colors the Earth;
Each Blossom expands its pied leaves to the Day,
Creation's new clothed in the Livery of May.
II.
As thus, in Soliloquy, rambling along,
I looked toward the Wood, there I heard a sweet Song;
The Leaves gently fanned to and fro' by the breeze,
The Air a soft Symphony played through the trees.
III.
As a Hound after Hare the long meadow o'erleaps,
It was something like Love which gave speed to my steps;
I beat through the Thicket, upon the Game sprung,
And too soon had a view of the Siren who sung.
IV.
Oh! how my heart beat, how alarmed was my pride,
To behold a young Rustic fixed close at her side;
They toy'd and they prattled, 'twas inocent play,
Their rosey cheeks spoke all the warmth of new May.
V.
The Lad and the Lass looked like Eden's first pair,
And I, scowling, stood just as Satan did there.
Her Tenderness hateful, his Fondness as bad,
But their give-and-take Kissings, -- O God! -- I grew mad.
VI.
I turned from the sight, then returned in despair,
And pretended a cure by despising the Fair;
On both bestowed curses, went raving away,
But I stopped at each step, nor could go, nor could stay.
VII.
Home heavily sighing, I halted along,
Each Bird jarr'd my Head with its out-of-tune Song:
The late pleasing Landscapes appeared in decay,
The Scene to December was changed from new May.
VIII.
In my books I expected some Nostrum to find,
But Learning to Love has small share in the Mind.
No Morals I met there the wonder could work,
But Instinct suggested -- to draw a long Cork.
IX.
As Sorrow is dry, the best thing I could do,
To make my Cure perfect, was -- drawing out Two:
So Wine before Wenching hereafter I Will say,
For Wine's good in all Months, as well as in May.
SONG LVI. THE BRITON's WISH.
Tune, -- Daniel Cooper.
I.
WOULD you know the way that Eve
In Eden was caught tripping,
Arch SATAN 'twitch'd her by the sleeve,
And showed a Golden Pippin;
Tempted by the glittering charm,
'Twas said she ill-us'd Adam,
And ever since the same alarm
Bewitches MISS and MADAM.
II.
The Dad of Danae was a Dolt,
To lock a Woman's will in;
A Guinea Shower burst each bolt,
Miss opened her lap for filling.
Ask Beauties, who for Chapmen wait,
What it is they chiefly wish for,
They Will own, though most men take their bait,
It Is only Gold they fish for.
III.
But why should Women bear the blame,
When Men, both out and in, Sir,
Will gamble at the Golden Game,
Nor care they how they win, Sir.
Arts, Science, Office, Trade, confess
Mean mercenary dealings,
All Reasoning Bipeds, more or less,
Show selfish fellow-feelings.
IV.
Election Agents Truth disgrace,
They Have made this an unsound age;
To Brothels brought fair Freedom's face,
And, Pandar-like, took poundage.
But henceforth Britons may we show,
In Bribes no more our trust is,
But nobly independent go,
And only vote for Justice.
V.
O THOU! from whom each Blessing springs,
Earth, Seas, and Skies Director,
To whom we owe the best of Kings,
Be his, be our Protector.
The Tyrant, armed with Terror's scourge,
Awes subject slaves t'approve him,
But Freeborn Britons bow to GEORGE,
For in our hearts we love him.
VI.
Dear Liberty, Celestial Fire,
Remain here unconsuming;
May that spark catch, to Son from Sire,
From Age to Age illuming.
For this is every Briton's song,
This all we wish to be boys;
Let Life be short, let Life be long,
But let that Life be free boys.
SONG LVII. MUTUAL LOVE.
Tune, -- As Chloe on flowers reclined, etc.
I.
ON a Brook's grassy brink, in the Willow's cool shade,
The Primroses pressing, a Damsel was laid;
She smiled on the tide that rolled limpid along,
Beholding herself, to herself sung this song. --
II.
The 'Squire's fine Lady last night he brought home;
What! though in such gay clothes from London she is come,
Had I costly fashions as well should I seem,
For fairer my Face is, if Truth's in this stream.
III.
Through Churchyard, on Sunday, as slowly I tread,
While gaping Louts, grinning, on tombstones are spread,
I hear how they praise me, I keep on my way,
And, down-looking, seem not to heed what they say.
IV.
Sometimes Lords and Captains, all over perfume,
Will stop me, and tell me, I Am Beauty in Bloom.
That I rival the Rose, -- that I Am whiter than Snow:
I simper, and simply say -- Don't jeer one so.
V.
They Have pressed me, they have promised, nay offered me gold,
Sometimes (I assure them) they have strove to be bold;
They Have talked of my Treasure, they have called it a Gem,
To be sure so it is, but it is not for them.
VI.
No! no! it is for him, and it is only his part,
Who Is the Man of my Hope, and the Hopes of my Heart;
Who friendly instructs me, who fondly can play,
And his Eyes always speak what his Wishes would say.
VII.
The ranging Be sweets from the honey cup sips,
As sweet I taste Love from the Touch of his Lips;
Often my cheek on the fleece of my Lambkins I rest,
But cold is that pillow compared to his breast.
VIII.
It Is here for my Fair one! -- her Lover replied,
Over the hedge as he leaped, and light dropped at her side;
She started! a moment Life's bloom left her face,
But quick 'twas recalled by the warmth of embrace.
IX.
She, languishing lay in Love's tenderest scene,
And questioned the Rambler where 'twas he had been?
Why so he would fright her. -- She Would scold him she vowed,
But a Kiss was his plea, and that plea was allowed.
X.
'Till by Kisses overcome, to his transports she yields,
The landscapes were lost, and forgot were the fields;
Each felt those Sensations Susceptibles prove,
Who, mutually melting, exchange mutual Love.
SONG LVIII. A TIME FOR ALL THINGS.
Tune, -- I am a young Damsel that flatters myself.
ALL things have their Time by the Hebrew King's rule;
What pity a Wise Man would ever play the Fool.
Yet weak was that Sage, who when long past his prime,
Attempted with beautiful Girls to keep Time.
All was Vanity then, and Vexation his text,
To be sure he was vain, and his women were vexed.
II.
On his own Times how wisely King Solomon spoke,
But Wisdom, in our Times, is rather a Joke.
Who Is to blame? it is not clear, whether we or our guides,
But equally things are ill-timed on all sides.
Like Witlings, who sacrifice all to their fun,
We our errors enjoy, and rejoice we are undone.
III.
There Is a Time to be right, for some Time we have been wrong;
There Is a Time for a Speech, and a Time for a Song. --
As to Song-making, somebody told me the way,
Since I nothing could do, how I something should say.
A wish still to do, has my doings out-sped,
And all I have left, alas! lumbers my Head.
IV.
Superannuate Socials, like me, leave the Lass,
Pursue the sole sport which we are fit for, -- the Glass.
Be not bubbled by self, nor by Flattery's dupes,
Nor attempt at Intrigue when Ability droops.
At impotent Keepers we have pointed with scorn,
Avoid the same vice, -- be not laughed at in turn.
V.
Turned the corner of Forty, it is Time to give way; --
But Women to Wine change, and still we have our Day.
Doctor Bibbibus says, whether Flask or Scotch Pint,
As Oil to the Head, Wine the Soul will anoint.
Embrace then the Bottles, hug closely your Quarts; --
May we have in our Arms what we love in our Hearts.
SONG LIX. THE VETERAN.
Tune, -- Give us Glasses my Wench.
I.
TURNED of Forty! -- what then? -- why 'twixt that and Threescore,
All the days of our lives let us live.
We only ask Health, not a moment hope more,
Than what Nature undoctor'd will give.
II.
Non sum qualis eram, in Schoolmaster's Lore,
Is, our Cake we cannot have when it is eat; --
Do not turn to past views, but new ground gallop over,
Nor pull up, for it is Time enough yet.
III.
Ulysses at Forty Queen Circe embraced,
When older Calypso could move.
Aetherials pronounced him a Man to their Taste,
He had Health, Understanding, and Love.
IV.
The Boys of this Time never to Manhood arise,
As Shrubs cannot strengthen to Trees.
Affectation Ability's Vacuum supplies,
Ever of Age, they are old by Disease.
V.
Insipid Emaciates each public place throng. --
As Trinkets on Watch-chains are worn,
By fine Women's sides, shewy, ratil'ing along,
The Fops are for fashion-sake born.
VI.
Those Mode-made-up Things, flutter lifehood away,
Abortions of what Britons were:
Perpetually talk, though they have nothing to say,
Their looks are but Vacancy's stare.
VII.
As nothing they think on, so nothing they do,
But only rise up, and lie down;
Inexpletive paths Dissipation pursue,
And hue and cry Life through the town.
VIII.
In the pause of Embrace practiced Beauties aver,
That Wit keeps Desire alive;
No wonder they sensible Forty prefer
To Folly and faint Twenty-five.
IX.
No Chronics my mascular bulworks invade,
Within, prima via is right:
Constitution I never a Bankrupt have made,
So can pay Beauty's Bill upon Sight.
X.
It is true we are old, -- old companions we have been:
Yet sound in our Heads, and our Hearts,
Let Wine, Wit, and Women, but open the Scene,
We still can go on with our parts.
XI.
While prompted by natural vigor to play,
We act thus, encore and encore.
The warning-bell rung, we have no business to stay,
Valete, the Farce faith is over.
SONG LX. A NEW ROAST BEEF
TO THE OLD TUNE.
I.
NOW Old England's Flag is Commander in Chief,
With Monsieur our Monarch turned over a new leaf,
Down, down with French Dishes, up, up with Roast Beef.
O the Roast Beef, etc.
II.
In Flat-botloms, slily, those schemers were coasting,
They threatened Invasion, but spite of their boasting,
No Ribs of Roast Beef had they; but a Rib roasting.
III.
While good English Beef, and good English Brown Beer,
Please our tastes, and each day on our tables appear,
What more can we hope for, or what can we fear?
IV.
The Spaniards once strove, by the strength of their Guns,
To make us keep Lent, and to turn our Girls Nuns,
But we still roast our Beef, for we basted the Dons.
V.
At Minorca indeed, though I speak it with grief,
Our Garrison fainted for want of relief,
They grew out of Hopes as they grew out of Beef.
VI.
But at Minden, well fed, why we there faced about,
Right and Left, Van and Rear, Foot and Horse, put to rout;
They would be in our Beef -- but, avast, they were out.
VII.
To plunder our Cupboards, France sent the Breast Fleet,
We a belly-full gave them without any meat;
they then sold their Plates 'cause they would nothing to eat.
VIII.
We came, saw, and conquered, the French Lilies droop,
Louisbourg, Montreal, Martinique, Guadaloupe,
Their towns we tossed up, just as they swallow Soup.
IX.
By the strength of our Beef we our Bulwarks maintain,
As Liberty's firstborn, and Lords of the Main;
And those deeds are witnessed by France and by Spain.
X.
All Knights, by their Titles, in Heraldry shine,
Nay, Writers Romantic have styled some divine,
But what are their Sirs to Old England's Sir-loin.
XI.
Let us honor this Dish, it is in dignity chief,
For garnish will give it the noblest relief:
Here Is LIBERTY, -- LOYALTY, -- AYE, -- and ROAST BEEF.
O the Roast Beef, etc.
SONG LXI. THE PIPE OF LOVE.
Tune, -- Blessed Age of Gold.
I.
ONE Primrose Time a Maiden Brown,
Wishing for what we will not say,
By side of Shepherd sat her down,
And softly asked him, would he play?
Mild shone the Sun through Redstreak Morn,
And glist'ning Dew-drops pearl'd the grass;
The Rustic, stretched beneath the thorn,
Grinning, replied -- I Will please thee Lass.
II.
All on the green field's turfy bed,
Smiling, the fond one fell along;
The thick-leaf' shade her face overspread,
While, lisping, she began this Song. --
"It Is Love which gives Life holidays,
"And Love I Will always take thy part;
"My Shepherd's pipe so sweetly plays,
"If finds the way to win my Heart.
III.
"The Ladies dressed with silks so fine,
"In golden chairs to visits go;
"On costly dishes they can dine,
"And every night see every show.
"Yet, if it is true what I Have heard speak,
"Those high degrees lead lonely lives;
"Husbands are willful, Husbands weak,
"And seldom pipe to please their Wives."
IV.
Blue broke the clouds, the day yet young,
The flowers fragrant filled the breeze;
Wanton the Lass, half whispering, sung,
Yes Shepherd -- once more if you please.
Awaking from embraced delight,
She heard her Dame, and dared not stay;
They kiss, they part, but first -- at Night,
She charged him, come again and play.
V.
His Team to geer, home hy'd the Loon,
The love-cheer'd Lass blithe bore her Pail,
And thus she gave her ditty tune,
Tripping it deftly down the Dale.
"Though Organ Pipes play music fine,
"And Fountain Pipes folks run to see:
"Though thirsty Souls love PIPES of WINE,
"The Pipe of Love's the Pipe for me."
SONG LXII. NOT AS IT SHOULD BE.
Tune, -- If ever I incline.
I.
A Coxcomb once said
He had Bet's Maidenhead,
But 'twas false, as I told Mr. Wou'd-be.
His Doctor declared,
Impotency debarred,
The Fribble was not as he should be.
II.
As Beauty is used,
So Britannia's abused,
How many loud Coffee-house praters
Will boast of the weight
Which they have in the State,
And would be the Nation's Dictators.
III.
Such Creatures pretend
They can England befriend,
So attact or distract all about them;
That, pon onner, they know
How, when, what, and also,
And the Ministry cannot do without them.
IV.
When Candidates bow,
Patriotic they vow
To honor, esteem, and adore us;
But chose, they change soon,
They are taught the Court Tune,
And chant in Majority's Chorus.
V.
Reproach, if you please,
May impertinent teaze,
Rememb'rance attempt to awaken;
But the answer is this,
I thought things amiss,
I really, my friend, was mistaken.
VI.
His Market is made,
We all live by Trade,
So buy or sell, Sirs -- choose you whether;
Rich and Poor it is the same,
Chang-alley's the game,
A job! a sad job altogether!
VII.
Our Animal Stuff
Is not made of Bomb Proof,
When Temptation's Artillery assails;
As the Batt'ries begin,
We Are betrayed from within,
The Flesh over Spirit prevails.
VIII.
Corruption! -- that is hard --
But, from birth to churchyard,
What are we? but rotting along:
Folly moulders our Clay,
Each Vice has its Day,
But -- goodnight -- for I Have done with my Song.
SONG LXIII. BEAUTY AND WINE.
Tune -- Attend all ye Fairs, I Will tell you the Art.
I.
ONE day at her Toilet as Venus began
To prepare for he face-making duty,
Bacchus stood at her elbow, and swore that her plan
Would not help it, but hinder her Beauty.
II.
A Bottle young Semele held up to view,
And begged she would observe his directions --
This Burgundy, dear Cytharea, will do,
It Is a Rouge that refines all Complexions.
III.
Too polite to refuse him, the Bumper she sips,
On his knees, the Buck begged she would encore;
The Joy-giving Goddess, with Wine-moisten'd lips,
Declared she would Hob Nob once more.
IV.
Out of window each Wash, Paste, and Powder, she hurled,
And the God of the Grape vowed to join;
Shook hands, signed and sealed, then bid Fame tell the World,
The Union of Beauty and Wine.
SONG LXV. A LOVE SONG.
Tune, -- Genteel is my Damon, engaging his Air.
I.
LET him fond of fibbing invoke which he will choose,
Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, or Madam the Muse;
Great names in the classical Kingdom of Letters,
But Poets are apt to make he with their Betters.
II.
I scorn to say aught, save the thing which is true,
No Beauties I Will plunder, yet give mine her due;
She has Charms upon Charms, such as few people may view,
She has Charms, -- for the Toothache, and eke for the Ague.
III.
Her Lips; -- she has two, and her Teeth they are white,
And what she puts into her mouth, they can bite;
Black and all Black her Eyes, but what is worthy remark,
They are shut when she sleeps, and she is blind in the dark.
IV.
Her Ears from her Cheeks equal distance are bearing,
'Cause each side her head should go partners in hearing:
The Fall of her Neck's the Downfall of Beholders,
Love tumbles them in by the Head and the Shoulders.
V.
Her Waist is -- so -- so, so waste no words about it,
Her Heart is within it, her Stays are without it;
Her Breasts are so paired -- two such Breasts when you see,
You Will swear that no woman yet born ever had three.
VI.
Her Voice neither Nightingales, no! nor Canaries,
Nor all the winged warblers wild whistling vagaries:
Nor shall I to Instrument Music compare it,
It Is likely, if you was not deaf you might hear it.
VII.
Her Legs are proportioned to bear what they have carried,
And equally paired, as if happily married;
But Wedlock will sometimes the best friends divide,
By her Spouse so she is served when he throws them aside.
VIII.
Not too Tall, nor too Short, but I Will venture to say,
She Is a very good Size -- in the Middling way.
She Is -- aye -- that she is, -- she is all, but I Am wrong,
Her ALL I cannot say, for I Have sung ALL my Song.
SONG LXVI. What Is THAT TO ME?
Tune, -- The dainty Dames who trip along.
I.
THE blue Clouds from the Skies are fled,
And Vapors cap the Mountain's Head;
The Lord of Day resigns his reign,
While Twilight ushers in her Train.
But, what is all this to me?
II.
By Shepherds whistl'ing over the Would,
The tink'ling Flocks are drove to fold;
Her brimming Pail the Milk-maid bears,
And hears her Love, or think she hears --
Yet, what is all this to me?
III.
From reeking Pools the Steams ascend,
Tall leafy Trees their shades extend;
Evening appears in matron gray,
And puts to blush the rakish Day.
Still, what is all this to me?
IV.
The flowery Beds have lost their bloom,
The verdant Grove's concealed in gloom,
The Landscapes die upon the sight,
And chilly spreads the veil of Night.
Well! what is all this to me?
V.
Though dismal birds begin to prowl,
The slitting Bat, the hooting Owl;
And Gloworms glimmer feeble rays,
The link-boys of the lightfoot Fays,
Why, what is all this to me?
VI.
Yes, yes, 'in truth, for when 'twas dark,
A light I 'spy'd, and blessed the mark; --
I hemmed, and quick the casement opened,
How leaped my heart, my search was stopped.
And, that was much to me.
VII.
"Hist, (cries my fair one) softly creep,
"The old folks are both fast asleep,
"Lord! how our House-dog makes a din!
"But I Will steal down, and let you in."
Now, what do you think of me?
VIII.
When safe we met, few words were said,
For fear by voice to be betrayed; --
^o what was done I will not say,
^Twas Love looked on, and bid us play.
But, what is that to thee?
IX.
Love's raptured Rites are secret Joys,
Profaned by Sots and babbling Boys;
But we Initiates never boast,
Fidelity's our general Toast.
Here Is that my Friend to thee.
SONG LXVII. THE SENTIMENT SONG.
Tune, -- Sing Tantararara Toast all.
I.
DINNER over, and Grace said, we'll for Business prepare,
Arrang'd right and left in support of the Chair,
We'll Chorus our Song as the circling Toast passes,
And manage our Bumpers as Musical Glasses.
Sing Tantararara Toast all.
II.
To your Lips, my Convivials, the Burgundy lift,
May we never want Courage when put to a Shift: --
Here Is what Tars dislike, and what Ladies like best; --
What Is that? -- you may whisper, why it is to be pressed!
III.
Ye Fowlers who eager at Partridges aim,
Don't mark the maimed Covey, but mind better Game;
It Is Beauty's the sport to repay Sportsmen's trouble,
And there may our Pointers stand stiff in the Stubble.
IV.
To Game we give Law, and Game Laws we have skill in, --
Here Is Love's Laws, and they who those Laws are fulfilling.
But never may Damsels demur to our sport,
Nor we suffer Nonsuits when called into Court.
V.
As the Indians are warring, our Game we must flush,
On our breasts, as we lie, we present through a Bush --
Here Is the Nest in that Bush, and the Bird-nesting Lover;
Here Is Middlesex Bush-fighting, -- rest and recover.
VI.
Asthmatical Gluttons exist but to eat,
They purchase repletions at each Turtle treat;
Love's feast boasts a flavor unknown to made dishes --
Here Is Life's Dainty, dressed with the sweet sauce of Kisses.
VII.
Fair befall every Lass, fair may fine Ladies fall,
No color I Will fix on, but drink to them all;
The black, the brunette, and the golden-lock'd Dame --
The Lock of all Locks, and unlocking the same.
VIII.
More upright foreknowledge that Lock is commanding,
Than all other Locks, aye, or Locke's understanding:
That Lock has the Casket of Cupid within it,
So -- Here Is to the Key Lads, -- the Critical Minute.
IX.
Lads pour out Libations from Bottles and Bowls,
The Mother of All Saints is drank by All Souls. --
Here Is the Down Bed of Beauty which upraises Man,
And beneath the Thatch'd-House the miraculous Can.
X.
The Dock-Yard which furnishes Great Britain's Fleets,
The Bookbinders Wifes manufact'ring in Sheets,
The Brown Female-Reaper, who dares undertake her?
And the Wife of Will Wattle -- The neat Basket-maker.
XI.
Here Is Bathsheba's Cockpit where David stood Centry;
Eve's Custom-house, where Adam made the first Entry;
The pleasant placed Water-fall' midst Bushy Park;
The Nick makes the Tail stand, the Farrier's Wife's Mark.
XII.
That the Hungry be filled with rich Things let us say;
And well pleased the Rich be sent empty away. --
The Miller's Wife's Music; -- the Lass that is Lamb-like; --
And Fence of the Farmer on Top of Love's Dike.
XIII.
But why from this round-about phrase must be guessed,
What in one single syllable's better expressed;
That syllable then I my Sentiment call,
So here is to that word, which is, one word for all.
Sing Tantararara Toast all.
SONG LXVIII. THE DAMNED HONEST FELLOW.
Tune, -- Old Woman at Grimstone.
AS a Choice-Spirit bred so I Will choisely behave,
My Bucks I Am damned honest and free;
As to Rules, they are for Fools; I Will be nobody's slave;
The Minister must do for me.
II.
If he does not, nor cannot, for that is all the same,
But leaves me to sink or to swim;
If he will not do for me when I send in my name,
Why, damme then, I Will do for him.
III.
If GEORGE did but tip me a Place, or a Post,
If I didn't clear all, I Will be cursed.
I Will take care that nothing shall never be lost,
Of myself though, I Will take care the first.
IV.
The Government's Tools to a Man I would shift,
Corruption's the Nation's disgrace;
The Treasury's Lord, why I Will turn him adrift,
And whip myself plump in his place.
V.
The National Debt I Will wet-spunge it away,
The Sinking Fund that I would drown;
And when we bold Britons have nothing to pay,
Why then all our money's our own.
VI.
As to Scotchmen, I Will scotch them all off, never fear,
They are Jacobites all to man;
Pray tell me what business have such fellows here?
I Am a Briton, and hate every Clan.
VII.
They have nothing to do with our Meat and our Drink,
I grant you they are clever, but still
We Are ten times as clever, if we would but think,
And one time or other we will.
VIII.
Like Foxes I Will hunt Presbyterians to Church,
For zounds we'll be all orthodox;
The Subsidy Princes I Will leave in the lurch,
And Stockjobbers set in the stocks.
IX.
My Friends I Will provide for, and thus I Will begin; --
Archbishop of York shall make room, --
His Pulpit I Have promised to my Whipper-in,
And Lord Chancellor's Seat to my Groom.
X.
My Grand Buck at Drinking shall Admiral be;
I Have Judgment in all I design: --
He surely must prove best Commander at Sea
Who Is best at an Ocean of Wine.
XI.
Now as to Land-service, Excise I Will disband,
And I Will banish the Watch from the street;
Betwixt York and Lunnon no Turnpikes shall stand,
And I Will burn the King's Bench and the Fleet.
XII.
As to Smugglers, why curse on the Custom-house Tribe,
Of Placemen, I Will soon make an end;
I Will hang the first fellow I find take a bribe,
Except 'twas a Buck, -- and my Friend.
XIII.
So now for a Toast -- stay -- what Toast shall we have?
Why LIBERTY -- can we say more. --
And he who will not pledge it I Am sure is a Slave,
And a Slave is a Son of a Whore.
XIV.
A Wife to be sure! that is the fashion in Town,
And fashion for Wives to make free;
But I will not be humm'd, I Will have none of my own,
What Friends have will always serve me.
XV.
So here is to that Girl who will give one a share,
But as for those Jilts who deny,
So cursedly coy, though they have so much to spare --
But drink, Brother Bucks, for I Am dry.
SONG LXIX. LIBERTY-HALL.
Tune, -- Derry down.
I.
OLD Homer! but with him what have we to do?
What are Grecians, or Trojans, to me or to you?
Such Heathenish Heroes no more I Will invoke,
Choice Spirits assist me, attend Hearts of Oak.
Derry down.
II.
Sweet Peace, beloved handmaid of Science and Art,
Unanimity, take your Petitioner's part;
Accept of my Song, it is the best I can do --
But first, may it please ye -- my service to you.
III.
Perhaps my Address you may premature think,
Because I have mentioned no Toast as I drink;
There are many fine Toasts, but the best of 'em all
Is the Toast of the Times; that is Liberty-Hall.
IV.
That fine British building by Alfred was framed,
Its grand cornerstone Magna-Charta is named;
Independency came at Integrity's call,
And formed the front pillars of Liberty-Hall.
V.
This Manor our forefathers bought with their blood,
And their sons, and their sons sons, have proved the deeds good;
By that title we live, with that title we'll fall,
For Life is not Life out of Liberty-Hall.
VI.
In mantle of honor, each star spangled fold,
Playing bright in the sunshine, the burnish of gold,
Truth beams on her breast; see, at Loyalty's call,
The Genius of England in Liberty-Hall.
VII.
Ye sweet smelling Courtlings of ribband and lace,
The spaniels of Power, and Bounty's disgrace,
So supple, so servile, so passive ye fall,
'Twas Passive-obedience lost Liberty-Hall.
VIII.
But when Revolution had settled the crown,
And Natural Reason knocked Tyranny down,
No frowns clothed with Terror appeared to appall,
The doors were thrown open of Liberty-Hall.
IX.
See England triumphant, her ships sweep the sea,
Her standard is Justice, her watch word be free;
Our King is our Countryman, Englishmen all,
GOD BLESS HIM, and bless us, in Liberty-Hall.
X.
On vere is des All -- Monsieur wants to know,
It Is neither at Marli, Versailles, Fontainbleau:
It Is a palace of no mortal architect's art,
For LIBERTY-HALL is an ENGLISHMAN'S HEART.
Derry down.
SONG LXX. AMELIA.
Tune, -- Ye Lasses who drive from the smoke of the Town.
I.
ONE eve from Whist Table Amelia withdrew,
Joined our Group, and she begged we'd explain --
Why year after year, by Wit's commonplace Crew,
We are told Life's so short and so vain.
With a Look that spoke more than all Cicero said,
To me flew her order -- I bowed, and obeyed.
II.
"Our Sex, my fair Curious, are Vanity's fools,
"On bubbles of Self-love we soar;
"However a patron may pension his tools,
" Dependency dodges for more.
"The Gross of Mankind are such near-sighted elves,
"As Trash they behold all the World, -- but themselves.
III.
"Illib'ral Ingratitude always will scold,
" Expectancy's ever in pain;
" Abuse gives her tongue, and you need not be told,
"The most worthless are always most vain.
"Like pure silent streams, Merit keeps in its place,
"Approach Dunce's torrent, Froth flies in your face.
IV.
"When you bless the day, with your figure and face,
" Insensibles seem to admire;
"By Love's Electricities -- Beauty and Grace,
"Even Dullness is struck with desire.
"Life's not worth without you, one half day's exp^nce,
"'It Is a World without Sun, and a Soul without Sense.
V.
"O! would ye, Ineffables, would you endure,
"To bestow upon Man a new birth;
"Your Forms are Specifics to furnish the cure,
"And eradicate Folly from Earth.
"To you, as our Sovereign, we offer our Hearts,
"And only are happy when you take our parts."
SONG LXXI. THE HUMBUG.
Tune, -- The Man who is drunk is void of all Care.
I.
THAT Living's a Joke, Johnny Gay has expressed,
Fall de roll, toll loll.
In earnest we'll make all we can of the Jest;
Loll de roll, etc.
A load of conceits, a long life we are lugging,
Which some are Humbugg'd by, and some are Humbugging.
Fall de roll, etc.
II.
His Honor with consequence charges his face,
Bows round to the Levee, and ogles His Grace;
Then whispers his friend, Sir, depend on my Word, --
But if you depend, you're Humbugg'd by the Lord.
III.
Says Patty the prude, and she wide spread her fan, --
Me marry! What? I go to bed to a Man?
I detest all Male Creatures! my God! -- I shall swoon!
She did -- and was brought to-bed, faith, before noon!
IV.
To London Pa sent her, when bloom was regained,
Invi'late her Maidenhead there she maintained;
For a Virgin was wed, she knew how to be mum,
So gained a good Husband, her Husband a Hum.
V.
Miss nicely observed, wastly wulgar's this word,
Immensely indelicate, monsterous absurd:
Yet last night, dear Miss, when you thought yourself snug,
You confessed -- without loving -- life's all a Humbug.
VI.
The wanton Wife often, too often I fear,
Proves Words to be Facts when she calls her Spouse Deer;
And enjoys the sweet cheat as stolen pleasures she hugs,
How cunningly now she her Cuckold humbugs.
VII.
But Husband at home, as few married men wish,
Fall de roll, toll loll.
To dine every day on the very same dish,
Loll de roll, etc.
Makes a meal with her Maid, the thing publicly known is,
A Tete-a-Tete feast, called the Lex Talionis.
Fall de roll, etc.
SONG LXXII. DOODLE DO.
Tune, -- Every where fine Ladies flirting.
I.
YOUNGLINGS fond of Female Chaces,
Mount on Hopes in Wedlock's Races,
Some for Fortune, some for Faces.
Doodle, doodle, do, etc.
II.
Oh! the extatic joys which flow, Sir,
When two souls congenial glow, Sir,
This above, and that below, Sir.
III.
Each against each, like Wrestlers, twining,
Each with each engagement joining,
Now resisting, now resigning.
IV.
When imparadis'd they are pairing,
Every nerve stretched to its bearing,
Hardly knowing what nor wherein.
V.
Fainting, panting -- pulses thrilling --
She -- obedient waits, and willing,
But he is out of breath with billing.
VI.
Fain the Fair would fondly dally,
Looking Love -- but he don't rally,
Rather seeming -- shilly shally.
VII.
Kissing, smiling, she cries -- so! so!
Go you naughty creature, go! go!
While he yawns out -- ah! -- ah! -- oh! oh!
VIII.
This indeed too often the case is,
Men will furious fall on Faces,
Then fall off into Disgraces.
IX.
All the work they make with wooings,
Couplings, changings, cursings, cooings,
Are but doodling doodle doings.
X.
Falling back, then falling to, Sir,
We, like babies, beauties woo, Sir,
Love is -- Cock a doodle do, Sir.
Doodle, doodle, do, etc.
SONG LXXIII. THE COMET.
Tune -- Should I once become great, what a business it would be.
I.
HAD I old Homer here I would make that wretch see,
(Quoth Venus) whom it is he abuses;
What business has any Verse-monger with me?
Their Prudes let them stick to, -- the Muses. --
And so I was wounded by rough Diomede?
A pretty dressed up sort of story;
See Jupiter smiles -- but Papa now, indeed,
It Is not for your Honor and Glory.
II.
Why will you permit these Mortality Frights,
What Olympus has planned to review?
Don't suffer such Reptiles to creep out at nights
T'observe what we Deities do.
Immensely impertinent 'twas, you must own,
My Transit to see, and expose it;
Because, the other day, I just drove out of Town,
Their Spectacles peeped in my Closet.
III.
A moment Jove laid his bright dignity down,
And let Laughter illumine his face;
To his Daughter replied -- Cytharea, a frown
Becomes not the Empress of Grace.
Those Atoms of Clay which you see to and fro',
Skip about on yon' Globular Crust,
Like the blue on a plumb, are but Insects you know,
A mere Animalculous Dust.
IV.
Those Emmets, it is true, scientifical prate,
A race of half-reasoning Elves,
Who all can account (as they think) for my State,
Yet know not the State of themselves.
They pretend to examine Eternity's rules, --
The Cause of all Causes dispute; --
I Will show you these arrogant Ea^th-worms are Fools,
And thus all their Systems confute.
V.
Away, at his word, the vast COMET rushed forth,
And swift through immensity blazed;
Yet Attraction went on, though it girdl'd the Earth --
On Earth, how the Star-peepers gazed.
Each circl'd, and circl'd a scheme of his own,
And reasoned about, and awry;
In derision, a moment, Immorals look down,
'Twas a Jest for the Sons of the Sky.
VI.
Be humble ye Beings of feeble Threescore,
Shall Finites, -- Infinity scan?
The best of us only are Men, and no more --
And, at best, only think what is Man?
A contrary mixture of Pity and Scorn,
Pride, Servility, Sorrow, and Mirth;
In a Moment he is made, in a Moment he is born,
In a Moment again he is Earth.
VII.
Sons of Error; for that is all the birthright ye share,
As every day's actions make known;
No longer let Vanity gaze into Air,
But think of itself and look down. --
Yet hold! -- let us think, -- to look down did I say?
I did so, -- and so seize my Cup,
Come, do as I do, and I Will show you the way,
The best way, my Lads, to look up.
SONG LXXIV. THE BLOOD.
Tune, -- Tars of Old England.
I.
YE learned of the Age,
Each Artist, each Sage,
Ye Speakers at famed Robinhood,
Describe, or decline,
Or derive, or define,
What the Character is of a Blood?
II.
Macaronies so neat,
Pert Jemmies so sweet,
With all their effeminate brood;
Free-Masons so shy,
Choice Spirits so high,
Are kicked out of doors by a Blood.
III.
If making a Bet,
Or if taking a Whet,
Or if beating the Rounds he thinks good,
Who dare to oppose,
Will be plucked by the Nose,
With a -- Dam'me Sir, a'n't I a Blood?
IV.
If the Constable queer,
And the Watch should appear,
His Riots to quell, if they could,
Without compliment,
Out of Window they are sent,
And that is fine fun for a Blood.
V.
He laughs at Old Nick,
Calls Religion a trick,
And his Argument cannot be withstood;
It Is a Bett or an Oath,
But most commonly both,
As to Reason, -- What Is that to a Blood?
VI.
As we have but our Day,
Even Bloods must decay,
He would keep it up still if he could;
But his Manors foreclos'd,
And his Honor exposed,
He must dye as he lived -- like a Blood.
VII.
To retrench would be base,
To repent a Disgrace,
So he acts just as Geniusses should;
By a Medicine of Lead,
Warm applied to his Head,
He cures the Disease of a Blood.
SONG LXXV. DO THE SAME.
Tune, -- How do you do?
MARK Anthony gave up the world for a Girl,
And he who would not do the same is a Churl.
Do the same! that is the Thing; -- do not think me to blame
If a Bumper I drink, will not you do the same?
II.
But what do you think that I mean by all this?
Why Evil to them who imagine amiss.
Hit or miss, Luck is all; are the Lucky to blame?
No no, do but win -- we would all do the same.
III.
The dainty-fed Dame, in unpinn'd dishabille,
To the Swain of her sighs upon tiptoe will steal;
Voluptuously welcomes the sense-piercing Kiss,
And gives up her Soul to the dangerous bliss.
IV.
While soft broken murmurs betray her delight,
The rustling leaves play through the still of the night,
As if to her Tremblings they kept Time and Tune;
Above mildly shone, in pale splendour, the Moon.
V.
Lady Luna down looking, the luscious scene sees,
Withdrew her beams, blushing, from silver-topp'd trees;
In a cloud veils her face, crying out, fie for shame,
To Endymion drives off, -- and with him does the same.
VI.
It Is Hypocrisy's Humor, the Ton of the Times,
To lay on our Neighbors the Load of our Crimes;
The failings of friends we to Slander proclaim,
But sink our own Sinnings, -- will not you do the same.
VII.
Reason never had the Headache, no Toasts he will approve;
Reason never had the Heart ach -- he never was in Love.
B^t poor honest Instinct, he is always to blame,
For he will drink and he will love, and -- why we do the same.
VIII.
My Country! my Country! that Phrase cannot fail;
It Is the Bait Voters bite at, the Tub for the Whale:
Distinction, on each side, is only a name;
For this side, and that side, -- both sides do the same.
IX.
Let us, without blaming or this side or that,
Only keep to our own side, and mind what we are at.
I would be at something, but what, I will not name,
Yet to Toast it I Will teach you, and drink to the same.
X.
Your sentiment, Decency, give it to me, --
The Quaker's Address, Friend, I drink unto thee.
So here is to it, and to thee; and pray who is to blame?
Why him -- can you find him? who will not do the same.
SONG LXXVI. LOVE AND WINE's PARTNERSHIP.
Tune, -- No more let us trouble our Heads 'bout the State.
I.
IT was as one morning on Ida Jove shone,
All frantic the Queen of Love flew in,
Her arms she expanded, embracing his throne,
Saying, Sire, oh save me from Ruin!
For Justice Dione to Jupiter prays,
They abandon my Temples and Shrine, Sir,
That Sot and his Sots, have extinguished my Blaze,
And drowned Beauty's Altars in Wine, Sir.
II.
By Styx, but it is false, jolly Bacchus replied;
Such slander I Will never endure, Ma'am.
Love's pains to assuage men that many things tried,
In me only met with their Cure, Ma'am.
Your ignorant Urchin, your Booby, is blind,
And scatters his Arrows at random;
The Heart they mislead, and they madden the Mind;
It Is Wine which alone can withstand 'em.
III.
Where is it? the Olympical Grand called out,
Young Semele bumper'd Champaign, Sir,
Full nimbly the Genius brushed it about. --
Quoth Monarchy, I Will drink again, Sir.
So laying his Lightning's Artillery down,
His Tresses imperially shaking,
To Venus put on a majestical frown,
Saying, Certainly you are mistaken.
IV.
Mistaken, Papa? -- Miss pray hold your tongue,
You Would better. -- Jove thundered to Venus,
Pon 'Onner (she pertly replied) you are wrong,
Celestials be Judges between us.
Go Mercury, summon the States of the Sky. --
Thus ordered Lord Chancellor Jove, Sir,
(...) Ida's Exchequer this Suit they shall try,
Decreeing for Wine or for Love, Sir.
V.
Their Worships went first on the Cyprian Cause,
Unarray'd, Beauty figured before 'em;
What licking of lips, what hums, and what hahs!
What peeping there was among the Quorum!
The Patron of Vines saw 'twou'd go for the Wench,
Unless that a Dust he could kick up,
Tipp'd Hermes the wink, and they bumper'd the Bench
'Till the Court only chorus'd a Hickup.
VI.
With eye-li^s half-clos'd, one attempted at Speech,
But wind over-charg'd his expression.
My Opin -- nin -- nin -- nin -- but bump on his Breech
He squatted, and snor'd out the Session.
Apollo was Chairman, in full buckl'd wig,
For that Day, being Juno's Physician,
Smelt Cane, strok'd his Chin, used hard words, and looked big,
As became his Right Worship's Condition.
VII.
The Statutes, quoth he, the Statutes at Large,
Aye and small too, declare Coram Nob. --
But Head was too heavy to hold out the Charge,
It dropped, and down fell his full Bob:
An Emblem of what often happens below,
Stupidity office disgraces;
For Folly has friends, and too many we know --
And we know the Wise Folks too want Places.
VIII.
Now Bacchus and Venus agreed 'twixt themselves
Altercation hereafter to smother;
At Dullness to laugh, though among dignified Elves,
And friendly assist one another.
But now mind the Moral: It Is clever to think,
And think too about something clever; --
Since Wine makes us Love, and since Love makes us drink,
Here Is Drinking and Loving for ever.
SONG LXXVII. COURTSHIP.
Tune, -- To all ye Ladies now at Land.
I.
LET others sing of Flames and Darts,
And all Love's lullaby; --
Of crying Eyes, and cracking Hearts --
The Deuce a bit will I.
If you are willing, I Am so too,
If not -- why there is no more to do.
With fa, la, la.
II.
Should you expect, in Sorrow's guise,
I Will wear a woeful face,
Such maudlin Mumm'ry I despise,
Mine is no Lovesick Case --
It Is but my Whim, even make it thine,
Then Whim to Whim, and yours to mine.
III.
Or if you think in golden rain,
Like Jove, I Will pave my way,
Such expectations are but vain,
I Have only this to say, --
You Have something which I would be at,
I Have something too; -- so Tit for Tat.
IV.
Your Taste, your Talk, I may admire,
And praise, with truth, your Face;
Your sparkling Eyes that speak Desire,
And give Expression Grace.
Yet there is a -- but I Will not be bold,
Nor say, what is better took than told.
V.
Well kens the Lass what I would win,
And well I ken the Road;
He that is out would fain be in.
A Patriot A-la-mode. --
As you're my Sovereign grant me Grace,
I only ask a little Place.
VI.
Least said, they say, is mended soon,
With you I Will not dispute;
Ill tastes the long requested Boon
It Is sweet, when short's the suit.
Then grant, with Grace, the Grace I sue,
Or let me, without Grace, fall to.
With fa, la, la
SONG LXXVIII. GOD SAVE THE KING.
Tune, -- While Waves rebound from Albion's shore.
YE hardy Sons of Honor's Land,
Where Freedom MAGNA CHARTA planned,
Ye Sovereigns of the Sea;
On every shore where salt tides roll,
From East to West, from Pole to Pole,
Fair Conquest celebrates your Name,
Witnessed aloud by wondering Fame,
When! when will you be free?
II.
Mistake me not, my Hearts of Oak,
I scorn with LIBERTY to joke,
Ye Sovereigns of the Sea;
No right I blame, I praise no wrong,
But sing an Independent Song, --
Since Ministers must be withstood,
And Patriots are but Flesh and Blood,
I dare with both be free.
III.
While strange told tales from Scribblers' pen,
Disturb the heads of honest men,
Ye Sovereigns of the Sea;
The trash of temporizing Slaves,
Who earn their daily bread as Knaves.
Heedless which side may rise or fall,
The Ready Money -- that is their All.
Such fellows cannot be free.
IV.
We meet for Mirth, we meet to Sing,
And jolly join -- God save the King,
Ye Sovereigns of the Sea;
As Honest Instinct points the way,
Our KING, our COUNTRY, we obey;
Yet pay to neither side our Court,
But LIBERTY in both support,
As Men who should be free.
V.
Assist, Uphold your Church and State,
See Great Men Good, and Good Men Great;
Ye Sovereigns of the Sea;
Shun Party, that unwelcome Guest,
No Tenant for a Briton's Breast.
Forget, Forgive, in Faction's Spite,
Awe All Abroad, at Home unite,
Then, then, my Friends you're free.
VI.
Ye Sov'reigns of Wide Ocean's Waves,
To Heroes long enshrined in Graves,
A Requiem let us sing;
I Alfred, Henry, Edward name, --
Then William, our Deliverer came: --
May future Ages BRUNSWICK own,
Perpetual Heir to England's Throne,
So here is GOD SAVE THE KING.
SONG LXXIX. THE VISION.
Tune, -- As I went over the Meadows, no matter the Day.
I.
AS Home I returned, it was late in the Day,
Through Westminster Abbey, I knew, was my way,
And there I beheld, -- or believe that I saw,
A terrible Spectre, with Teeth wanting Jaw.
The Figure was frightful, as you may suppose,
His Sockets were Eyeless, and never a Nose.
II.
I, trembling, addressed him with -- Sir, I presume
Your Worship is walking from Nightingale's Tomb?
As Milton observes, so he grinn'd for a Smile,
And, stalking off, beckoned me down the dark Isle.
But says I will not follow, -- and loudly I spoke,
Then took to my heels and I tumbled -- and 'woke.
III.
My Joy could you guess, when, recovered, I spied
My Girl sweetly sleeping, and warm by my side;
Such Lips! such a Neck! then her Cheeks had a hue
Like Roses just moist with the Summer Morn's Dew.
I pressed her close to me, nay held her too tight,
For faith I was scarcely escaped from my fright.
IV.
Awaking, she tenderly called out, -- My Dear!
What ails you? you shake so, you're not well I fear?
What pleasure this is though, quoth me to myself,
To have Love alive here, instead of that Else?
With rapture I fell on the dear Creature's Face,
With rapture the fond one returned my Embrace.
V.
Let Fribbles with Beauty as Fribbles behave,
And Pedantry boast, he is no Passion's Slave.
Let Pride, folly-teeming, lure dress-loving Elves,
To scorn the Enjoyment of all -- but themselves.
Such things we despise, and them only approve,
Whose Hearts Esteem ripens from Friendship to Love.
SONG LXXX. TRANSIT OF VENUS.
Tune -- Had I but the Way to turn some Things to Gold.
I.
ASTROLOGERS lately a Bustle have made,
How round the Sun Venus could dance it,
With optic, catoptric, dioptric parade,
To spy how genteel was her Transit.
Between you and I, tho 'twas mal a-propo,
T'examine a fine Woman's Actions,
For were we to look among Ladies below,
What Fays it would make? and what Fractions?
II.
Good-lack how they looked at this wonderful Sight. --
A wonderful Sight! but what is it?
When all came to all, and when all came to light,
Love's Regent, paid Neptune a Visit.
Bedewed by the Salt Water Spray as she rose,
To Apollo her Beautyship run Run pro ran, for the Rhyme Sake.
,
Intending to dry her Olympical Clothes,
So stood between us and the Sun.
III.
While pointing your Glasses, and winking each way,
Inquisitives, what did you see?
Does the Empress of Joy, now, friends, honestly say,
Wear Garters above, or 'low knee?
A fig for the farce of your schemes and your scrolls,
Eclipses indeed ye may show,
But as to each Orb which high over us rolls,
Not an Inch past your Noses ye know.
IV.
Into Ditch Thales fell, with his Telescope geer,
At midnight would Stargazing roam,
When brought back bedaub'd, all his Spouse said was, Dear
You had better observe things at home.
If Husbands who ramble, this Maxim would mind,
And put it but once to the proof,
Observe things at Home; go but Home and they will find,
At Home they had Business enough.
SONG LXXXI. MARIA.
Tune, -- Ianthe Lovely, the Joy of the Plain.
ONE day, by appointment, Maria I met,
That day of Delight, I remember it yet.
As the meadow we crossed, to avoid the town's crowd,
The Sun seemed eclipsed by a black spreading cloud.
Escaping the shower, to Barn we fast fled,
There safe heard the pattering rain over head.
II.
Some moments I suffered my Fair to take breath,
Then, sighing, she cried, "Lord! I Am frighted to Death;
"Suppose, now, by any one I should be seen?"
"Nay, nay, now, -- nay, pray now -- Dear -- what do you mean?"
"Had I thought you would be half so rude -- sye! for shame!
"I wish I Would been wet to the skin ever I came.
III.
"You will have a Kiss then! -- why, take one or two!
"I beg you will not teize me! -- Lord! what would you do?
"You Will tear all one's things -- I never saw such a Man!
"I will hold your hands though! -- Aye, do if you can.
"Is this your love for me? -- is this all your care?
"I Will never come near you again, -- now, I swear!
IV.
As she pushed me away, Love explained by her eyes,
Resistance was only to heighten the Prize;
Her Face changed, alternate, from Scarlet to Snow,
Her Neck rose and fell fast, her Language was low.
Such Beauty! but more of that scene was not shown --
For Decency here bid her Curtain drop down.
V.
The Storm being over, all Sunshine the Air,
When instant rose up, the yet Love-looking Fair,
Crying, hark! there is one listens -- do look out, my Dear,
I must be bewitched, I am sure, to come here,
My things how they are rumpled? -- Lord! let me begone.
What have you been doing? and what have I done?
VI.
Into this fatal place, I most solemnly vow,
I innocent entered -- but am I so now?
I Am ruined, -- I never myself can forgive --
I Will leap in the Brook, -- for I Am sure I cannot live! --
If I do, my whole life will be wasted in Grief,
Unless here tomorrow you will give me Relief.
SONG LXXXII. ADMINISTRATION.
Tune, -- In this Mirror Bucks behold.
I.
SEE this Bumper, Bucks be gay,
I scorn all imposition;
If you will pledge my Toast you may,
It Is Courtship's Coalition.
When two parties close embrace,
And separation smother,
He is upright in his place,
And downright is the other.
II.
Whether it is to rise or fall,
Yet still his time improving,
In the Cockpit at Whitehall
The best of measures moving,
Outs will sometimes Ins become,
'Twixt both sides bold he ventures,
Pushing things with vigor home,
Administration enters.
III.
Certain of a strong support,
Each opening he embraces,
All the time he stays at Court
His friends preserve their places.
The Members he depends upon,
When placed in proper Station,
The Star above the Garter won
At Beauty's Installation.
IV.
In Love and State exact the same,
Respecting Mankind's wishes,
ALL the Cupboard's Key would gain
To plunder Loaves and Fishes.
Placemen England have disgraced,
The daily papers tell us,
Howsoe'er you have men placed
Non Placets will be jealous.
V.
Ministers may Places fill,
I buy none, nor am selling;
A Thatched House underneath the Hill
Is what I choose to dwell in.
Though it has no high-rais'd Roof,
Yet Prospects can command, Sir;
Not so low, but Room enough
For me upright to stand, Sir.
VI.
On the Hill, along the Dale,
I sometimes turn a Rover,
Then within the Mossy Vale
I slily creep to Cover.
There Is the Sport, and that is the Spot,
It Is Pleasure's wild Plantation,
Lest the Toast should be forgot --
Here Is Love's Association.
SONG LXXXIII. FAIR PLAY.
Tune, -- When the Nymphs were contending for Beauty and Grace.
I.
FRIENDS, Britons, and Countrymen, heed what you say,
Let Englishmen ever show all folks fair play;
Look up, and reflect, ever ye dare to despise,
We are all Sons alike of one LORD of the Skies.
II.
Does HE give to the Savage, the Turk, or the Jew,
The Indian, or Catholic, less than to You?
But Prejudice blinds us, that mind-madd'ning Elf,
We all would be wiser than WISDOM itself.
III.
The unfeeling Base deny Sorrow a tear,
Vulgarities dare at Deformity sneer;
Though pity, it is true, but Observance will find
The term Vulgar takes in two-thirds of Mankind.
IV.
We wrangle, we ridicule, laugh, and despair,
Then rashly our, what we call, Reasons declare;
Illib'ral on Customs and Countries decree,
And sentence each Being born the other side Sea.
V.
At Scotsmen we spurn, and at Irishmen sneer;
Partiality, prithee a word in your ear --
With looks of contempt other Nations you view,
With equal injustice they thus deride you.
VI.
Hospitality, somehow, was banished from town,
Good nature inquired where Welcome was flown;
By Faction drove off, she returns here no more,
Contentedly settled on Ireland's shore.
VII.
For the Scots -- if we suffer not Party to rate,
There are Wise Men among 'em; and Good Men and Great;
Where ever Merit's found, give that Merit its due,
To praise the Praiseworthy, adds Merit to you.
VIII.
To Oblivion consign those Distinctions of Soil,
Distinction among Men all born in one Isle?
The same sea encircles our shores with its tide,
What Creation unites thus shall Clamor divide?
IX.
Here Is to all the Good Fellows, in every Degree,
Who dare do as we do, drink, think, and speak free;
And here is to those Lasses who Liberty prove,
And pledge from their Hearts this Toast, FREEDOM IN LOVE.
SONG LXXXIV. CIRCE.
Tune, -- I have a Tenement to let.
I.
CIRCE was a precious piece,
A plague upon the Gypsey,
She dol'd out drink somewhere in Greece,
And made her Tenants tipsey;
And then each filthy swinish Sot,
Engend'ring among her Devils,
Upon those obscene Imps begot
A harpy Spawn of Evils.
II.
The Fiend Corruption, first brought forth
Dust-licking Adulation;
A second Demon harrass'd Earth,
With Party's altercation.
The Hag Deceit a Reptile bred,
Called Infamy, the Pander;
A third and fourth were brought-to-bed
Of Insolence and Slander.
III.
So fertile where the Infernal Race,
Each day new monsters prowling,
Base Perjury with rank Grimace,
And Envy ever howling;
Servility with worthless Pride,
Debauch with poisoned Diet,
Swollen Gluttony by Scurvy's Side,
A Faction formed for Riot.
IV.
A while these Implings croak'd about,
'Till startl'ing Madam Circe,
She ordered all the Vermin out,
Nor to her own showed mercy.
Absurdity with Malice went,
Ingratitude with Lewdness,
Scurrility with Discontent,
And Ridicule with Rudeness.
V.
Their bastard brood the Demons bore,
Along the mid-air flitting,
And found at last a welcome shore,
Where Bribery was sitting.
Ambition hailed them on their way,
And gave them his directions;
His Agents took them into pay,
Then sent them to ELECTIONS.
SONG LXXXV. CHASTITY.
Tune, -- Good people I Will tell you no Rhodamontado.
I.
I Wonder, quoth Dame, as her Spouse she embraces,
How Strumpets can look, how they dare show their faces,
And those wicked Wives who from Husband's arms fly,
Lord! where do they think they must go when they die?
II.
But next day, by Husband, with 'Prentice Boy caught,
When she from the bed was to Toilet-glass brought,
Her Head he held up, with this gentle Rebuke --
My Dear! you was wishing to know how Whores look!
III.
Turn your eyes to that table, at once you will see
What Faces Jades wear; then, my Dear, behold me.
Your Features confess the Adulteress clear,
My Visage exhibits how Cuckolds appear.
IV.
You asked where bad Wives go? why, really, my Chick,
You must, with the rest of them, go to Old Nick!
If Beelzebub don't such damned Tenants disown,
For bad Wives, he knows, make a Hell of their own.
V.
All the World would be wed, if the Clergy could show
Any rule in the service to change I for O:
How happy the Union of Marriage would prove,
Not long as we Live joined, but long as we Love.
VI.
At his feet she sunk down, Sorrow lent her such Moans
That Resentment was gagged by her Tears and her Tones.
What could Hubby do then? what could then Hubby do?
But Sympathy struck, as she cried, he cried too.
VII.
Oh Corregio! could I Sigifmunda design,
Or exhibit a Magdalen Guido like thine,
I would paint the fond Look which the Penitent stole,
That pierced her soft Partner, and sunk to his Soul.
VIII.
Transported to doting! he raised the Distressed,
And tenderly held her long time to his Breast;
On the Bed gently laid her, by her gently laid,
And the Breach there was closed the same way it was made.
SONG LXXXVI. THE SPECIFIC.
Tune, -- Though I with one Love would be always content.
THOUGH Newspapers puff every Nostrum to town,
What Nostrum is like the Grape's Juice?
No Chemical Liquor that turns red to brown,
No Beaume de Vie, nor Eau de Luce.
As to Rouge, the rank practice, alas! is so rise,
The Beauty of Health it consumes,
But Wine is the Volatile Spirit of Life,
And brightens our natural Blooms.
II.
The Balsam of Honey a tickling Cough stops,
To Maredant the Scurvy submits;
There Is what is his Name's wonderful Viperine Drops,
And Henry for Hysteric Fits;
But Physic, like Music, bears Fashion's decree,
Of Modish Distempers they tell us;
Licentiates, or not so, yet every M. D.
Pronounces us Narvous or Bilous.
III.
Pour Wine into Wounds you will be cured in a jerk,
Religious that text to pursue,
Whenever my mind's wounded, I draw a long Cork,
Sometimes my Prescription is Two.
The Doctor's a Dunce, down the sink dash the Slops,
Those Pipes we are going to start 'em;
Just draw off a Glass, they are Bacchus's Drops,
The Mixture is Secundum Artem.
IV.
As to Cuckoldom -- that is a hurt to the Head, --
If Wives will be Harlots why let them,
An Absorbent we find in a Bottle of Red,
An Opiate by which we forget them.
Philosophers say, -- but a fig for their Saws,
Such water-chill'd Maxims disown 'em;
Their Efficients I prove are deficient in Cause,
When I Have my Scots Pint, Magnum Bonum.
V.
Wine makes -- aye, what will not it? it makes right and wrong,
It Is Love, Wit, and Truth's Ventilator;
At once it locks up the most voluble Tongue,
At once turns a Mute to a Prater.
If fond of a Fair, Wine this Magic will show,
Make but, like an Artist, your Trial;
In her it will silence the nerves which say no,
And raise you above a Denial.
VI.
More or less to the Scurvy all Men are a prey,
Quoth this, that, and the other Physician:
More or less we are all mad, I will venture to say,
And the World's in a scurvy condition.
Good Wine makes good Blood, and good Blood keeps us sound,
So Recipe tantum sufficit;
For Madness, my friends, since the Remedy's found,
Let none be so mad as to miss it.
SONG LXXXVII. THE GRISKIN CLUB.
Tune, -- A Toper I love as my Life.
OF Griskins I sing,
They Are a feast for a King;
Kings, Homer says, dressed their own Messes:
Achilles, the hot,
Always hung on the Pot,
Patroclus he garnished the Dishes.
II.
By the Poets of old,
Apicius we are told
Was an Eater among the Antiques;
Though his Taste it was fine,
Yet like us could not dine,
For no Griskins were cooked among the Greeks.
III.
Among the Greeks? well I know, man,
Apicius was Roman,
So no Critic's rod am I risking;
Not of Roman, nor Greek,
But of Britons I speak,
And Britons who boast of their Griskin.
IV.
Trimalchio's Stuff,
And the French Dartineuf,
Had almost good Eating abolished;
Sardanap'lus was great,
And Lucullus could treat,
Yet never a Griskin demolished.
V.
One Emp'ror took pains
To make Ragouts of Brains,
But how were those Dishes compounded?
It was done long ago,
For at present I know,
Our Cooks would be greatly confounded.
VI.
Come! Lads, hark away,
Hunt the Bottle Today,
At Night, Boys, to Beauty high over;
Be this understood,
May our Griskins prove good,
When, as Grisks, we leap into Love's Cover.
SONG LXXXVIII. BEEF STEAK CLUB.
Tune, -- Since Artists who sue for the Trophies of Fame.
I.
DRAW the Cork, the Clothes drawn, -- a Toast to the KING,
I presume it is meet, after meat we should sing,
For thus prescribes Galen; -- "Life's Health to prolong,
"Take Dinner's digestive, a Glass, and a Song."
To him the Diplomists their judgments resign,
So fiat mixturam, it is Music and Wine.
II.
Old Homer, who, Shakespeare-like, all Nature knew,
Does honor to Beef, and to Beef-eaters too;
He sings, that the Greeks, by whom Troy Town was sell'd,
In fighting and eating, all Nations excelled;
And he, for the Day, who was Hero in Chief,
Had a Double Proportion, or Premium of Beef.
III.
It was Cacus (some say) though that is not Orthodox,
'Twas Milo of Crotos first knocked down an Ox;
He invited all friends to his Beef-eating Wake,
But first, on Turf Altar, he offered a Stake.
The Aetherials regaled on the odor that 'rose,
Says Epicure Jove, such a Club we'll compose.
IV.
Then called out for Vulcan, the God, limping, came,
And, ogling behind him, attended his Dame;
Each Deity seemed more inclined to her Mess,
Than to dine on the best dish Olympus could dress.
Jove silence proclaims, his curls awfully shakes,
And on Ida established a Club of BEEF STAKES.
V.
When Juno, that instant, a female peal rung,
In Jove's hand the Bowl shook, the Toast died on his tongue;
But commanding a Cloud, like a Curtain to fold,
He embraced her within it, and silenced the Scold.
In practice, ye Husbands, put Jupiter's plan,
And keep your Wives quiet -- as well as you can.
SONG LXXXIX. JACK TAR'S SONG.
Tune, -- A Begging we will go.
COME bustle, bustle, drink about,
And let us merry be,
Our Can is full, we'll pump it out,
And then all Hands to Sea.
And a Sailing we will go.
II.
Fine Miss at Dancing-school is taught,
The Minuet to tread,
But we go better when we have brought
The Fore Tack to Cat Head.
III.
The Jockey's called to Horse, to Horse,
And swiftly rides the Race,
But swifter far we shape our course
When we are giving Chase.
IV.
When Horns and Shouts the Forest rend,
His Pack the Huntsman cheers,
As loud we hollow when we send
A Broadside to Mounseers.
V.
The What's-their-names, at Uprores squal,
With music fine and soft,
But better sounds our Boatswain's Call,
All Hands, all Hands aloft!
VI.
With Gold and Silver Streamers fine
The Ladies Rigging show,
But English Ships more grander shine,
When Prizes home we tow.
VII.
What Is got at Sea we spend on Shore,
With Sweethearts, or our Wives,
And then, my Boys, hoist Sail for more,
Thus passes Sailors lives.
And a Sailing we will go.
SONG XC. PREJUDICE.
Tune, -- Without you will promise, nay, swear to be true.
I.
INGRATITUDE's crime worse than Witchcraft is named,
A neglect to repay what we owe;
Of such an omission we must be ashamed,
I Am ashamed such omission to show.
II.
But when the alarm of an Earthquake was spread,
All London seemed running away;
Unsafe the fine Gentleman fancied his bed,
And tumbled out, trembling, to pray.
III.
No Sunday-throng'd Routs then Politeness disgraced,
But each to the Temple repairs;
The Delicate, dressed most immensely in Taste,
Attempted to spell out their Prayers.
IV.
Under Beds, into Cellars, up Chimneys, in shoals,
As Rabbits to burrows will fly;
The Free-thinkers ran, they believed then in Souls,
And blubbering, -- begged not to dye.
V.
But when Apprehension had labored in vain,
And Safety stopped Penitent's din,
Religion was quitted, for Seven is the Main,
It Is Church Time, my Dear, we'll cut in.
VI.
Before that Rebellion at Culloden fled,
Pale Terror took Towns in the South;
Laugh seemed to want Mirth, nay, Debauch sneaked to Bed,
And Clamor was down in the Mouth.
VII.
Then Soldiers were welcomed, as Soldiers should be,
Nay, embraced, as the Props of the Land;
And Englishmen grateful, from Prejudice free,
Shook bra' bonny Scots by the Hand.
VIII.
But since -- may HIS Memory Britons preserve,
Who gave to Invasion Defeat;
In Peace we permit our own Soldiers to starve,
But cannot bear a Scotchman should eat.
IX.
Ever Mahomet could the Turk's Mission begin,
Arch Gabri'l came down as his guest;
He purified Mecca's Professor from sin,
Extracting a Speck from his breast.
X.
That Spot we are born with, it is Jealousy's Core,
Mortality's Pain and Disgrace;
Pluck it out, and to hinder its hurting you more,
EMULATION apply in its place.
SONG XCI. FREEDOM.
Tune, -- Bessy Bell, and Mary Gray.
I.
COME Neighbors, Neighbors, drink about,
Have done with Party's pother,
List not, ye Lads, to Uproar's rout,
On one side nor on the other.
The Winners laugh, the Losers rail,
Thus Faction ever dins, Sir;
Insanity tells Folly's tale,
The Outs will at the Ins, Sir.
II.
Oh, Common Sense! once more descend
To save this Isle from sinking;
Be once again Britannia's friend,
And set her Sons to thinking!
No more by Knaves let us be schooled,
But teach us how to read 'em,
Nor let well-meaning Men be fooled
By Privilege and Freedom.
III.
Where Is Freedom? -- point out how and when
We have enjoyed that Bounty?
When Magna Charta -- aye, Amen, --
But tell me where is her County?
Why where our Property's secured,
Where Liberty possessing; --
Then, Brother Britons, be assured
The GAME ACT is a Blessing.
IV.
Loved LIBERTY! celestial Maid!
Which way shall we address thee?
You're England's Genius, it is said,
And Englishmen possess thee.
We boast too much about this Fair,
For, nightly, though we toast her,
I would not have you, Friends, despair --
But, faith, I fear we have lost her.
V.
Like Hamlet's Ghost, 'Twas here! it is gone!
And only to be guessed at;
As Maidenheads, when lost and won,
Are what the winners jest at.
In vain the GODDESS opes her arms,
No more her arms we are wooing;
Licentiousness has Harlot's charms,
Which tempt to our undoing.
VI.
Wit, Beauty, Sciences, and Arts,
Are all become dependant;
We Are neither free in Heads nor Hearts,
We Are Slaves, and there is an end on it.
It was, and ever will be so,
Each fettered to some Folly;
And, all the Liberty we know,
Is -- drink! and let us be jolly.
SONG XCII. HONOR.
Tune, -- Confusion to him who a Bumper denies.
I.
OUR Reckoning we have paid, here is to all bon repos,
The Decks we have cleared, and it is time we should go;
A Coach did you say? No! I Am sober and strong,
Waiter! call me a Link-boy, he will light me along.
II.
Obsequious the dog with his dripping torch bows --
Your Honor! poor Jack, Sir, your Honor Jack knows.
For the sake of the pence thus he will honor me on,
Gold Dust strews the Race-ground where all Honor's won.
III.
Hold your light up! -- what half-naked Objects here lie,
Thus huddled in heaps? -- Good your Honor! they cry;
To poor creatures, your Honor, some charity spare;
Honor's phrase is Necessity's commonplace prayer.
IV.
Young perishing Outcasts thus nightly are found,
No Parishes care, they are too poor to be owned.
For he, in these times, would be laughed to scorn,
Who Distress would assist, yet expect no Return.
V.
With Courtier-like bowing the Shoe-cleaners call,
And offer their Brush, Stool, and shining Black Ball;
Japanning your Honor, these Colourists plan,
And, really, some Honors may want a Japan.
VI.
To varnish the Taste is, -- as cases from dust,
Each picture now glares with a transparent crust;
Nay, some Ladies Faces are colored like Blinds,
While men use japanning which masquerades minds.
VII.
Of Honor, of Freedom, yet England can boast,
And Honor and Freedom's an Englishman's Toast;
May Infamy ever Deserters attend,
But Honors crown those who our HONORS defend.
SONG XCIII. FOOLS-HALL.
Tune, -- The Sun in Virgin Luster shone.
I.
OLD Homer nodded long ago,
And modern Bards often sleep we know;
They doze to dream, and dream to write,
'Twas thus with me the other night.
Sleeping by all somnif'rous rules,
Methought 'twas in the Hall of Fools;
More properly the place to call,
The Learned say, it was Fools-Hall.
II.
There Billingsgate, with front of brass,
And Faction, rode on braying Ass;
While scurril' Banter leer'd along,
With face buffoon, and loll'd-out tongue.
Riot there, with mouth stretched wide,
On a Drunkard sat astride;
Spangled Lewdness opened the Ball,
And Nonsense echoed round Fools-Hall.
III.
Credulity, the Dupe of Lies,
Stupidity in Thought's disguise;
Dullness came in Hood and Cowl,
Solemn as the broad-fac'd Owl.
Quirk and Quaintness hand in hand,
In Lawyer's gown, and Pleader's band.
On tiptoe Pride o'erlook'd them all, --
While Scandal flew about Fools-Hall.
IV.
Base Scribblers armed with white and black,
To shine or soil, to heal or hack,
With stone-blind Ignorance stood next,
And Pedants tearing Shakespeare's text.
There Prejudice the day denies,
With hands held up before his eyes;
Pert Dissipation welcomed all,
She kept it up within Fools-Hall.
V.
With Vanity blind Zeal was paired;
Hypocrisy their profits shared;
Fraud, Pimp-like, Superstition led,
But hoodwinked, to Imposture's bed.
Miss Affectation made the Rout,
Debauch the sickening Feast sat out;
While Doctors waited Symptom's call,
Disease's vapors filled Fools-Hall.
VI.
The stupid Heirs of much-muck'd Land,
With wheezing Gluttons thronged the Strand;
Great sport they hoped, they longed to see,
Heedless what victim 'twas to be.
But wealthy Dunces joke the best
On Merit, when it is most distressed;
While Sots, while Coxcombs great and small,
Paraded, grinning, round Fools-Hall.
VII.
Plain Truth appeared, but at the sight
They shrieked, they could not bear the fright;
The CRY confined him in the Stocks,
And Virtue proved not Orthodox.
Honor the parish passed away,
And Wit was gagged for Folly's play;
Deserted Beauty, mocked by all,
The Beadle's Whip drove from Fools-Hall.
VIII.
Overwhelmed with that I saw, I wept,
And, happily, no longer slept;
Malice, methought, had spied my tears,
Exposing me to Party's Sneers,
Who hissed, and should me through the throng;
I'woke, as I was dragged along, --
Here Is Women, Wine, and Health to all,
Who scorn the crowds which fill Fools-Hall.
SONG XCIV. POLITICS.
Tune, -- It Is a Twelwemonth ago, nay, perhaps it is twain.
I.
AS an Englishman ought, I wish well to my King,
As an Englishman ought, for my Country I Will sing,
And my mind I will tell, it is a Kingdom to me,
By his Birthright a Briton dares think and speak free.
II.
My Hearts of Oak, stoutly you call out for Freedom,
And Liberty, Property, -- really we need 'em;
But don't, quite so loud, against Brib'ry exclaim,
Rogues will buy, -- but who sells, Sirs? then, pray who is to blame?
III.
Ye noise-making, fash-breaking, Lacqueys of Factions,
Ye insane Disturbers, who are bit by Distractions,
Think what you're about, when the loudest you bawl,
Not a man that you're mad for but laughs at ye all.
IV.
Who Patriots were once now are Patriots no more,
And what has been, certainly may be, encore;
Nay, have not some Bustlers confessed their intentions,
They opened their mouths until MUM popp'd in Pensions.
V.
To be wise is the word; how that word comes about
Is, -- the wise are those in, and the otherwise out;
So small's the distinction betwixt one another,
When Outs become Ins, then they are wiser than the other.
VI.
The World has, without one exception, a Rule,
The rich Man's a wise Man, the poor Man's a Fool;
And foolish he is, faith, since Money's the test,
Who attempts not to get what will get all the rest.
VII.
Attend and depend through the year, so you may,
And begin, waste and end the next just the same way;
As to promise on promise such schemes I condemn;
Folks will not serve us unless we can serve them.
VIII.
Let us now serve ourselves, fill our Glasses, fill high,
We'll laugh when we are pleased, and we'll drink when we are dry;
And we'll drink the King's Health, it is the best Toast of all --
Here Is our Lord of the Manor in Liberty-Hall.
SONG XCV. A CARICATURE.
Tune, -- The Other day as I sat in the Sycamore shade.
I.
MAN's all Contradiction, a medley Machine,
Now this Thing, and now he is that;
Today all in Spirits, tomorrow all Spleen,
The next, knows not what to be at.
II.
When in Love, -- how he labors the prize to obtain,
If luck'ly, he draws Beauty's Lot,
He Will hate what he has, nay, Possession's a Pain,
And he is mad to have what he has not.
III.
When the wind's in the East, sad and sick of his life,
As if under Spell of Queen Mab;
He is always at Home Sir John Brute to his Wife,
Abroad, Jerry Sneak to his Drab.
IV.
At the Tavern he will prove all Religion is Art,
And laughs at Eternity's Doom;
But in Bed, when alone in the dark, how he will start
If a Mouse only moves in the room.
V.
He swears, aye and loudly, that he will be free,
Nay, dye ever his Country disgrace;
Confusion to Ministers! drinks on his knee,
Then, rising, runs off for a Place.
VI.
Wives, Sisters, or Daughters, wherever he stays,
A prey for Debauch he intends;
Proper Gratitude thus for his Welcome he pays,
It is right to be fond of one's Friends.
VII.
Should Pique prompt his Spouse to retaliate in kind,
He Will bellow Death, Vengeance, and all;
My Pistols bring quick! -- but, quick changing his mind
On his Proctor, imprimis, he will call.
VIII.
When maudlin at night, as it is nightly the case,
How loving the Creature appears;
While drops from dimn eyes trickle down his smeared face,
And Hickups keep Time to his Tears.
IX.
Foolish friendships he will proffer, and fulsome repeat,
But the zeal of the night snor'd away,
For his interest, indeed, he tomorrow may meet,
If not, he don't know you next day.
X.
Not the best of us all, not a Man is exempt,
If ourselves we impartially scan;
We are Objects for Pity, or else for Contempt;
Misconduct is Master of Man.
XI.
As against our own wills we are tumbled to Town,
So reluctant again we go out;
In chacing and changing that Will up an down,
We Wisdomites blunder about.
XII.
Still blunder we must, as we are born but to dye,
And as wise in the Dark as the Light;
But in Drinking, my Bucks, all Mistakes we defy;
Here Is a Bumper to prove ourselves right.
SONG XCVI. BEAUME DE VIE.
Tune, -- Two Gods of great Honor.
I.
ARIADNE one morning
To Theseus was turning,
When missing her Man, to the Beach down she flew;
Her cries unavailing,
She saw far off, sailing,
His Ship before the wind lessening swift to her view.
She tore her fine hair,
Beat her breast in despair,
Spread her arms to the skies, and sunk down in a swoon,
When Bacchus, 'midst Ether,
Begged leave of his Father
To comfort the Lady, Jove granted the Boon.
II.
Then gently descending,
Her sorrows befriending,
His Thyrsis he struck against the big-belly'd Earth,
When over the smooth gravel,
In murmuring travel,
A spring of Champaign at her Head bubbled forth;
She, waked with the scent,
Gave her sorrow fresh vent,
Yet to drink was determined, exhausted by tears;
She tastes the Champaign,
Licks her lips, tastes again,
And feels herself suddenly freed from her fears.
III.
As still she kept sipping,
Her heart lightly leaping,
She looked upon These. as a pitiful Elf;
Wine turned her to singing,
In hopes it would bring in
A Lover, -- 'twas lonely to drink by herself.
The God, her Adorer
Confessed, stood before her,
She hailed the Celestial, she welcomed the Guest;
Champaign stopped resistance,
She kept not her Distance,
But jollily clasped the young Buck to her Breast.
IV.
Each Girl given over,
Betrayed by her Lover,
To Hartshorn, to Salts, or Salt Water may fly;
But we have an Elixir
Will properly fix her,
If properly she will the Prescription apply:
The Recipe's wholesome,
It Is Beauty's best Balsam,
For which we refuse though to pocket a Fee.
As gratis we give it,
Girls grateful receive it,
So here is to the Practice of Love's Besume de Vie.
SONG XCVII. THE NORFOLK FARMER.
Tune, -- I Am married, and happy, with wonder hear this.
WHEN the early Cock crows at the Day's dappl'd dawn,
And soaring Lark through the air trills,
Ever yet the warm Sun drinks the dews from the lawn,
Or vapors uncover the hills;
While Ploughmen are whistlitng, as furrows they turn,
And Shepherds releasing their care,
I rise to unkennel, at sound of the Horn,
Or course, with my Greyhounds, the Hare.
II.
In Springtime observing my Husbandmen sow,
Then see how my Yearlings go on;
Sometimes, riding round mark my Turnip-men hoe,
Or in Barn what my Threshers have done,
At Home, with the Parson, 'bout Markets I prate,
His Tithes, though I never delay;
We properly each should maintain in his State,
The Vineyard-man's worthy his pay.
III.
My Milk-maidens, morn and eve, Dairy-cows press,
For custards, cream, puddings, and cheese;
My Daughters keep market in neat but plain dress,
And Dame too -- but it is when she will please.
We never for Master or Mistressship strive,
But Man and Wife's Lot share and share;
As Gratitude tells us, in Friendship we live,
Do so ye Crim. Cons. if ye dare.
IV.
My Poultry is all by my good Woman bred,
My Garden gives Roots for my Health,
For London my Bullocks on best fodder fed,
Yet pinch not the Poor for my Wealth.
I Have plenty of Game in my copses and woods,
My Flock on its Thyme feeding thrives;
With Fishes well stored are my ponds and my floods,
And Honey from yon' row of hives.
V.
What grateful Return is to Industry made?
What Reward have the Bees for their Toil?
We boast of our RIGHTS, yet, their Rights we invade,
And seize on their Labors as Spoil.
But Justice to Power is only a name,
Great Fishes devour the small;
Great Birds, and great Beasts, and great Men do the same,
'Till Death, the grand Robber, robs all.
IV.
Content spreads my cloth, and says Grace after Meat,
While Welcome attends at my board;
No Outlandish Mixture disguises my treat,
My Wine my own Orchards afford.
With a Glass in my Hand, to Church, Country, and King,
I drink, as a Subject should do;
Perhaps my Dame smiles, then one Song I must sing,
So, Sir, if you please, pray do you.
SONG XCVIII. THE AUCTION.
Tune, -- Pho! pox on this nonsense, I prithee give over.
I.
I WILL strive to sing something, yet would not do wrong,
Will you please to accept of a Commonplace Song; --
This World's like an Auction for seling and showing,
Truth, Friendship, and Gratitude, -- going! a going!
II.
They are going! -- but how? not by hammer knocked down, --
No, no! out of Taste, they must go out of Town.
Such stuff would our dear dissipation encumber,
They are shipped off for sea, and exported as lumber.
III.
Preferment put up! who bids? I, I, I, I;
Such a noise it has made we the Lot must put by:
At the name of Preferment if uproar is heard,
No wonder such clamor against the preferred.
IV.
Confusion, and eke Contradiction its mate,
Fill out heads with, -- I don't know what politic prate;
As all to be in, suppose equal pretenses,
Of Innings when balked, they are out of their senses.
V.
Yet, seriously, Sirs, this world's not so bad,
Some Women are chaste, and some Men are not mad;
But where do they live? it is not worth while to try,
They are such sort of folks other folks cannot live by.
VI.
How easy is Weakness by Wickedness turned,
Unworthiness welcomed, and Worthiness scorned;
The Female Sex charge not with prostitute vice,
Mankind will be bought come but up to their price.
VII.
All Men and their Measures it is easy to see,
No Parties, but Parties of Pleasure for me;
Let this Side, or that Side, or both Sides be mad,
We know no distinction but good Men and bad.
VIII.
Will any here hesitate how they declare?
Or, Toast the good people at home and elsewhere;
Their country, complexion, religion, or wealth,
We heed not, but drink to the HONEST MAN's HEALTH.
SONG XCIX. THE BOTTLE.
Tune, -- On a Time I was great, now little am grown.
PUSH the Bottle about, name the Toast, and away,
With Wine be our Sentiments flowing;
We idly grow old while we drinking delay,
Be merry, my Bucks, and keep doing.
Keep doing I say, fill it up to the brink,
It Is a Trouble to talk, it is a Trouble to think,
It Is a Trouble -- no, no! -- it is a Pleasure to drink.
Prithee ring, we must have to'ther Bottle.
II.
Our Classic is Bacchus, his Volumes prefer,
To all that is in old Aristotle;
But why, with quotations, should we make a stir?
We'll stir about briskly the Bottle.
A Fool once to find how the World could go round,
Leaped into the deep where the puppy was drowned,
But deep had he drank, he the secret had found,
Such wonders are worked by a Bottle.
III.
The Sportsman arous'd when the Horn harks away,
Shrill echo Tantwivy repeating,
His warm wishing Wife clings around him to stay,
But shouts put to silence entreating.
Yet what is his Chase to the Chase that we boast?
So, ho! here is a Bumper, hark, hark! to the Toast.
Hit it off, and be quick, lest the scent should be lost,
And we are cast in the Chase of a Bottle.
IV.
Let Heroes or Neroes run mad after Fame,
We Are charged and ranged ready for battle;
Let Placemen perplex, and let Patriots declaim,
Let both be indulged in their prattle;
But Preachers over Liquor we always confute,
Without it is the Toast, at our meetings we are mute,
For what, without Wine, can be worth a dispute,
Except it is a Short-measure Bottle.
V.
Should Sickness with sadd'ning Captivity join,
The Ancients I Will equal in thinking;
But all my Philosophy should be my Wine,
Despair I defy when I Am drinking.
Stood Death like a Drawer to wait on me home,
Or, Bailiff-like, dare he rush into my room,
I Would try for one moment to tip him a Hum,
While I bumper'd the last of my Bottle.
SONG C. THE MASQUERADE; OR, LABOR IN VAIN.
Tune, -- Masks All.
I.
ONCE Jupiter's Lady, called Juno the Scold,
At Toilet imagined herself to look old;
In a pet put a Veil on to hide her disgrace,
Then scheem'd how each Beauty should shadow her face.
Sing tantararara Masks all.
II.
First England reviewed, there, amazed, Madam saw
Many Faces and Forms without failure or flaw;
Then others discovered whose Features were spread,
All tasty, all pasty, with caustics of lead.
III.
Those last pleased the Queen, who declared, with a smile,
The Folly of Fashion should lead in this Isle;
The great gifts of Jove they were dup'd to despise,
And natural Beauty by Art they disguise.
IV.
It Is an Empire, she said, of Dress, Drinking, and Song;
Of Bathing -- because we are bit by Bon Ton:
Her scheme, she foretold, would succeed with the town,
For whatever's imported must always go down.
V.
A Card flew to Pan, who was skilled in these matters,
To model some Masks from the Portraits of Satyrs;
Of Proserpine asked Merry Andrew's Shade,
Without a Buffoon there is no Masquerade.
VI.
Pale Miss Affectation was ordered, in haste,
To dress up the Phantom, and call the thing Taste;
Then taught it to talk, just one phrase and no more,
Do you know me? it squeak'd, do you know me? encore.
VII.
'Twas the Thing, for 'twas foreign, it must be adored, --
It gagged deposed Wit; when will Wit be restored?
When Englishmen -- (thus it was Truth bid me say.
Will show to their own Understandings fair play.
VIII.
The World is no more than one vast Masquerade,
Where, by best concealments, best fortunes are made;
But why should Plain Dealing pretend to complain,
Reformation to Labor is -- Labor in vain.
Sing tantararara Masks all.
SONG CI. THE MARQUIS OF GRANBY.
Tune, -- Shanbuy.
THOUGH Austria and Prussia, France, Flanders, and Russia,
Have Heroes who claim an attention;
On the long list of Fame, as I looked at each name,
A Briton I thought she should mention.
A Man among Men,
Who was worthy her pen,
Nor could she doubt who must the Man be;
As I saw not the whole,
She unfolded the scroll,
And on top stood the Marquis of Granby.
Old Time shook his Scythe, as he tottering stood by,
His Iron Teeth dreadfully grated;
Yet the sad-looking Crone cleared his brow from a frown
When Fame had my business related.
The cheeks of the Churl,
With a smile, seem to curl,
And cheerfully answ'ring as can be,
Say, single-lock'd Seer,
"Sir, this point's pretty clear,
"We all loved the Marquis of Granby."
III.
"By order of Fate I was bid to translate
"That Hero to happier station;
"The trumpet of Fame shook the air to proclaim
"Her Granby's beatification.
"He shines now a Star,
"Near the Planet of War,"
Illustrious Soldier befriend us,
Be thy Influence our Shield,
And, when dared to the Field,
May thy Martial Spirit attend us.
IV.
Grief, away with your tears, see his Lineage appears,
We remember those looks, and adore 'em;
They shall live in our love, and, my life on it, they prove
As brave as the brave Man before 'em.
What more can we say?
But the Granby's huzza!
Encore! loud and loud as loud can be;
To the brim fill it up,
It is Gratitude's Cup,
Off it goes, To the Offspring of Granby.
SONG CII. CONCLUSION OF THE HUMBUG.
TO THE SAME TUNE.
I.
THE Sages of old, and the Learned of this day,
Fa, la, la.
About Life and Living have said and will say
Fa, la, la.
About and about it, about and about,
They every thing say, but can make nothing out.
Fa, la, la.
II.
Rail on if you please, when the Knowing-ones win,
Yet half the world strives to take the other half in;
But all schemes concluded, and Loss and Gain summed,
Both Biters and Bubbles are equally humm'd.
III.
Let those who will hunt after Fame, and such dreams,
Break their rest, necks, or hearts, in the chase of those schemes;
Should they what they wish to be ever become,
They will find all they longed for, alas! but a Hum.
IV.
By Terror of Parents, or tempted by Gain,
The Lady resigns to some Jessamy Swain;
When Husbands such delicate creatures become, --
When Husbands! no, no! for it is there lies the hum.
V.
When Beauty, all brilliant, shines Queen of the Ring
Such Grace and such Taste, and such -- oh! she' the Things!
How happy her Husband! -- he may be, -- but mum,
For sometimes such happiness is but a Hum.
VI.
What a Rout among the Rich at an only Son's Birth
And what a Parade when Papa's put in Earth;
Go cast up, who pleases, Felicity's sum,
From Birth unto Burial the Total's a Hum.
VII.
The Profit of Life is out-ballanc'd by Cost,
Fa, la, la.
Joy ever must be in Satiety lost;
Fa, la, la.
It is, -- it has slipped me, what it is I Would be at,
So a Bumper I Will drink, there is no Humbug in that.
Fa, la, la.
SONG CIII. SLEEP.
Tune, -- By the gayly circling Glass.
SLEEP, thou leaden, lazy God,
What Is thy Balm for Sorrow's Wound?
What thy restorative Rod,
Can it render Wretches sound?
Not thy Wand, -- no, no! it is Wine,
Wine can all Distress defy;
Ecce Signum, here is the sign,
Don't believe me, drink and try.
II.
Let the restless Sleep invoke,
Sleep which cicatrizes Care;
Let -- but, I say, Sleep's a joke,
Wine's the Dose against Despair.
What we have been? -- why, farewell! --
What we might be? -- we'll not think. --
What we shall be! -- who can tell?
Here we are, and here we'll drink.
III.
When my Face deep wrinkles seize,
And my Head with palsy shakes;
When the Gout benumbs the Knees,
And the Voice, once manly, breaks;
When the sunken Cheek shows pale,
And the hollow Eyes blear dim;
When the Ear and Memory fail,
And unnerv'd each withered Limb.
IV.
Then repining, then I Will say,
Life, alas! is all a Cheat!
When I Have nothing left to pay,
Envious, then, abuse the Treat.
Soon or late, but late's too soon,
Who will trust tomorrow may;
Thinking puts one out of Tune,
Let us drink, my Lads, today.
V.
Day by day, and night by night,
Joyful Jubilees we keep;
Life we measure by Delight,
Tell me, -- have we time to sleep?
Present Time is in our power,
And the means that Time to improve;
Taste it, it is Enjoyment's Hour,
Pledge me, lads, in Wine and Love.
VI.
Let the Glass and Lass be kissed,
Let not coyness chill the scene;
To excuse, or to resist,
Is High Treason to Love's Queen.
Pouting Lips, and panting Breasts,
Pressing, mingling, murmuring join;
Wine inspiring Beauty's guests,
Pledge me, lads, it is Love and Wine.
SONG CIV. THE LONDON HUNT.
Tune, -- Come rouse Brother Sportsinen, etc.
I.
THOUGH far from Field Sports, we will Field Sports apply,
Hark! hark! social Sportsmen, hark forward and try;
Nor think we want Game, though we are settled in Town,
It Is Follies are Game, which we here will hunt down.
II.
We break Cover first, and throw off among the Great,
By Babblers surrounded, called Flatt'rers of State;
Whip them off, for they are vermin unworthy a chase,
Their Patron's dishonor, and Bounty's disgrace.
III.
Like Pageants, the Nimrods of Nabobs behold!
Midst all they have purchased by strange gotten Gold;
Though large packs of Livery Couples they own,
When Conscience starts up, can they all hunt it down?
IV.
^n French varnished chariots see Quacks drawn along,
Like Death, looking down on their Victims, the Throng;
With tales of their Medicines each paper abounds, --
Hunt their Nostrums; -- no, no! -- they would poison our hounds.
V.
Disappointment against the Successful exclaims,
And Envy will always make Uproar call names.
Those pests of the public to Clamor make court,
To kennel such curs, for they only spoil sport.
VI.
The Outs against the Ins will for ever take aim,
And Ministers must be the Multitude's game;
It Is Tempests and Tides which preserve the pure Sea,
We soon should be stagnate if all should agree.
VII.
Beat about for fresh sport, through yon' Hall let us draw,
It abounds in Black Game, and that Game is the Law;
Call the Dogs off I say, -- there have nothing to do, --
If you meddle with them they will soon turn and hunt you.
VIII.
We Are at fault, but whose is it? come, Sportsmen, try back,
Hark to Honesty, that is the prime hound in our pack;
We are all sound and staunch, for a brisk Burst prepare,
Talio! it is a Bumper, -- fill free and drink fair.
IX.
Here Is the Queen of our Hunt, it is Britannia's our boast;
Old England for ever! let that be the Toast;
See a fresh bottle starts, one view hollow; -- huzza!
The Fox Brush, and Beauty's Brush, brush them away.
SONG CV. THE MAN.
Tune, -- How pleasant the meads were, how joyful the scene.
I.
IT is he who is unawed by the sound of a Name,
Yet harbors no Hate in his breast;
What his Betters may do he pretends not to blame,
As he hopes they do all for the best.
To his King he is just, to his Country he is true,
And true to his Friend and his Glass;
A Sportsman who always with spirit comes through
And never balked a Leap, nor a Lass.
II.
No Office he flatters, compounds with no Cheat,
But ever takes Honesty's part;
Compassion awaits on his Justice's seat,
And Charity tenants his heart.
When a love-laden Lass with contrition appears,
For Girls are ensnared like the Game;
His tenderness turns not away from her tears,
His pity prevents her from shame.
III.
To Game-Acts he fancies our Liberty yields,
So sets their inflictions aside;
Protection allows not to vermin in fields,
Which is to the Freeborn denied.
Suppose a Young Idler at birds should take aim,
Or Puss take, perhaps, in a snare,
Must Englishmen's Birthright be forfeit for Game,
And Man made a Slave for a Hare?
IV.
If Sticks from the Hedge of his Honor are found
In the lap of the big-belly'd poor,
While sleet fills the air, and deep snow's on the ground,
And Misery groans at the door;
Humanity tells him to seek out the cause,
Which prompted Distress to turn Thief;
Convinced 'twas mere Want, he awakes not the laws,
But stops future crimes by Relief.
V.
This, this is the Man, uncorrupted he stands,
To Baal who never bowed the knee;
Unmortgag'd, enjoys all his Ancestor's Lands,
And ever lived debtless and free.
Yes, yes, this is He, this the Man to my mind,
The Man who no Party can snare;
Shall I tell you, my Friends, where this Man you may find,
I would -- if I could but tell where.
SONG CVI. MY NOSE.
Tune, -- An Ass, an Ass.
I.
WHILE people called Poets, in Blank Verse, or Rhyme,
Pindarics or Epics compose,
And celebrate Heroes in Sonnets sublime,
My subject is, simply, -- my Nose.
II.
The large Nose and long one, thereby hangs a Tale,
A Tail the old Scholiasts suppose;
Ex noscitur Naso -- but Proverbs may fail,
I find it, in faith, by my Nose.
III.
The boys of Conceit blushing Merit deride,
For Coxcombs are Modesty's foes;
I challenge the sons and the daughters of Pride
To move such a muscular Nose.
IV.
Prometheus, it is said, formed our Animal Clay,
For quickening to Ether he rose;
I fear that some 'Prentice, when he was away,
A little aside should my Nose.
V.
I presume, -- but perhaps, it is presumption to say,
I even presume to suppose,
I should set myself up in the Song-singing Way,
When I ought to set down with my Nose.
VI.
My Song therefore ends, now a Toast with your leave --
May Wisdom our Councils compose,
May Britons be Friends, and forget and forgive,
And at Faction each turn up his Nose.
SONG CVII. SERIOSITY.
Tune, -- This cold flinty Heart it is you who have warmed.
I.
WHITE Winter has left us, with all its chill train,
And fruitful Spring puts forth it buds over the plain;
The Birds their glad welcome by warblings express,
All Nature seems pleased at the change of her dress.
II.
Let us take example, and merrily sing,
Each moment at Midnight to us is new Spring;
Our green covered Table, a Garden for Souls,
Our Nosegays are Bumpers we gather from Bowls.
III.
With Daisies, with King-cups, the meadows are crowned,
But Blossoms from Bacchus our Verdure surround;
It Is Life -- and such Life too, which only Bucks know,
As for Death we can talk about him when we go.
IV.
When coffined, no matter to us all the fun,
The smart things we have said, or the droll things we have done;
Future Fame's all a joke -- I Am for Life's present treat,
What Is to come may be queer, for Tomorrow's a Cheat.
V.
It Is certain that, one by one, all must resign
The post of true pleasure, Health, Women, and Wine.
Think, Ladies, what Life is, and Living improve,
To bilk the base worms, bestow Beauty on Love.
VI.
As we ought, we reflect on Life's pleasure and pain,
We have lived, drank, and loved, we'll repeat them again.
While Desires depend on Ability's aid --
But Faculty's failing, -- here Sexton your spade.
VII.
I have acted from Instinct, I Have lived upon Whim,
As to Prudence -- I cannot say I ever drank with him;
With the Sun though I Have drove round the Bottle in Tune,
And have labored all Night with Queen Midwife the Moon.
VIII.
As to Sins, -- why, Repentance will shorten our score,
The lowest have Hopes, and the highest no more;
We speak as we feel, and we act as we think,
And to Men of such Methods a Bumper we'll drink.
IX.
Here Is to those who, like us, Affectations defy,
Not Spendthrifts of life, nor like Misers would dye:
When called on to pay, calmly cast up expense,
And drink their last Toast -- A good Journey from hence.
SONG CVIII. THE SQUABBLE.
Tune, -- Push the Bottle about, etc.
I.
ON Ida one day, at Olympical feast,
The Lass loving Jove was the Host, Sir,
Who gayly proposing a Health to the Best,
On Venus he fixed for his Toast, Sir;
Each Deity smiled as the Glass went about,
But, pettishly, Pallas her Bumper threw out,
She spoke not, but seemed by her manner to doubt
The justice of toasting Miss Venus.
II.
Then Juno broke silence, and swore by her power,
Her face looking pale like a Spectre,
"The Liquor was turning excessively sour,
"The Toast gaver a Fust to the Nectar."
Minerva maliciously seconds the Queen,
"I wonder, Papa, what it is you can mean,
"Sure other Celestials are sweet and as clean,"
Though not quite so common as Venus.
III.
Dear M'em, replies Demirep Dio, and bowed,
Your breeding just parrs your goodnature,
But ask the Gods round, and, Nem. Con. it is allowed,
To all I Am superior in Feature.
To be sure you're a Prude, and Enjoyment to spite,
That ugly Shield bear, as if Lovers you will fright,
Enough, they are scared when they have once had a sight
Of the old-mainden face of Minerva.
IV.
Her Sovereign and Spouse haughty Juno may teize,
And bedchamber women be rating,
And you, Miss Militia, as long as you please,
May listen to Sophisters prating;
But I, who am Empress of Love and its Laws,
Who have from Immortals and Mortals applause,
Whose Beauties -- but Beauty (quoth Vulcan) has flaws;
When Mars knit his brow and looked frowning.
V.
Jove rose in a rage, as he rose though, he reeled,
And Hiccups gave out by the hundred;
Like Artists on Ice, to the right and left wheeled,
By Styx then he swore and he thundered:
"Two to one, Madam Ox-Eye, is very foul play;
"Miss Brain-born I beg you will dispatch and away,
"Or what Paris told me of both, I shall say."
The Goddesses went away grumbling.
VI.
Come, come! (says young Bacchus) pray, father, have done,
They are off; in the Milky-Way, walking,
We'll drink and be merry, the Gossips are gone --
Of a Song brother Phoebus was talking.
Apollo began, with the help of the Nine,
The Ladies returning, good-natur'dly join,
Such power has Music when mingled with Wine,
All friendly were fuddled together.
SONG CIX. THE PORTRAIT; OR, LA, LA, LA.
Tune, -- Colin and Phoebe.
I.
YE Bibbers who sip limpid Helicon's Rill,
Ye Lords of large Manors on Parnassus Hill,
Allow me, a Scribler, to try at Solfa,
And languish, in liquids, a Love-Song, la, la.
II.
The Grubber in Kennels for old Iron seeks,
A Grubber for Thoughts scrubs the Streams of the Greeks;
With stumpy Quils raking each Classical Spa,
To pick up some Simile Fragments, la, la.
III.
I would, if I could, with the Muses make free,
But which of those Sisters will listen to me?
Attraction I want, their attention to draw,
As I Am old, they will object, that it must be, la, la.
IV.
Ye Ladies of Lapland who beesoms bestride,
Or, paired in Witch Whiskeys, aslant the Moon slide;
If Fiends, or if Friends, you have harnessed to draw,
Let me be Postilion, and trot on la, la.
V.
Ground Ivy has crowned me instead of the Bays,
Right Holland's inspires my rare Roundelays;
Miss Soap Suds I sing, by Poetical Law,
To Shifts more than to Shirts we are put, la, la, la.
VI.
Ye Dabblers in Distichs wherever ye snore,
On flock beds in cellars, or Garreteers soar,
Arouze from your blankets, assist me to draw
My Love's half, three-quarters, and whole-length, la, la.
VII.
Her Eyebrows are Cross-bows, the Bolts are her Looks,
With which my poor Senses are knocked down like Rooks;
Her Cheeks -- but who can a comparison draw?
Not Carmine, -- no, no; she has none! it is la, la!
VIII.
Her Lips! and such Lips, and such Kisses they gave,
That Prudence was gagged, and sent off as a slave;
They found in my Mind's Magna Charta a flaw;
Nonsuited my Judgment, and cast me, LA, LA!
IX.
Her Neck has great Grace, after Meat and before;
Her Legs, but, alas! I must mention no more,
For Decency, lately, has kept me in awe,
So to say any more would be, but paw, paw; paw.
SONG CX. A TOAST.
Tune, -- Ye Lads who approve.
I.
WHEN running Life's Race,
We gallop apace,
Each strives to be first at the Post;
Mount Hope with Catch-weights,
For Game's Give-and-take Plates,
And pray what is Fame but a Toast?
II.
The Taste of our days
Is poaching for praise,
All Men of their Services boast;
The Ladies by Dress,
The same ardour express,
Each would if she could be a Toast.
III.
Both Sexes agree,
Over Wine to be free,
For Freedom's an Englishman's boast;
As freely we think,
So as freely we drink,
And a Sentiment give for a Toast.
IV.
What is Life? prithee say,
But a Glass and away,
While Health is our ruddy-fac'd Host;
But when we abuse him,
We Are certain to lose him,
By taking too much of a Toast.
V.
These Commonplace Rhimes
Suit Commonplace Times,
Who now can of Genius boast? --
Why, really, I think
It Is a Science to drink,
And there is Genius in giving a Toast.
VI.
Even Politics fail,
Altercation grows stale,
Of what now can either side boast?
No matter to us,
All their Farce and their Fuss,
Deserves not the name of a Toast.
VII.
The Riots and Routs
Of the Ins and the Outs,
Is only a newspaper roast;
Of Cricket I sing,
In and Out there is the thing,
And there I Will attempt a new Toast.
VIII.
May our Innings be long,
May our bowling be strong,
Middle-wicket I choose for my post;
Come, bumper away,
'Twixt the Stumps your Balls play,
And win the Game Love -- that is the Toast.
SONG CXI. THE WORLD.
Tune, -- The Schemes of my Sex I abhor and abjure.
I.
THE World, and its Works, which we grieve to forsake,
Are good or bad, just as we hit or mistake;
We write and we wrangle, make parties and plan,
As wife when we finish as when we began;
So let us laugh on, to be serious is sad,
A Man in his Senses would now be thought mad.
II.
Our Senses are bubbles in Vanities Fair,
And Men-children sillily make a show there.
Each mounting his hobbyhorse starts for the race,
Expects Admiration, but ends in Disgrace;
For so Dissipation our training has scheem'd,
The more we are looked into, the less we are esteemed.
III.
Behold the Booth's Shew-cloth to draw the crowd in,
The Rustics are wrinkl'd with open-mouth grin.
Each Muscle's in motion at Andrew's grimace,
Who tickles the throng 'till they push in for place;
Pray tell me what more is the World's present plan,
Than places to get in, and push who push can.
IV.
The shirtless untrowzer'd Philosophers Saws,
Once obsolete Reason pretended were Laws;
But Instinct turned Rebel, so Instinct was tried,
The Passions were Jurors, NOT GUILTY! they cried.
Keep Sapience in schools, Folly now is the mode,
Truth's ways want repairing, I Will ride the new Road.
V.
My Bottle's my Hunter, I mount with a Song,
And ti-tup about like a Sunday-hack throng.
Each raises his Portion of Dust for the day,
And he who is a Buck here will dust it away.
We'll laugh at the Dust which is made about Town,
And up with our Brushers, to brush the Dust down.
SONG CXII. BEEF AND A BUMPER.
Tune, -- Accept of my Ditty without finding fault.
I.
LET those who have nothing to do but to hear,
And those who have nothing to do but to sneer,
Glean Scandal from Infamy's stubble;
Praise is but a vapor, and Censure the same,
Go ask of Philosophers what they call Fame?
It Is, Anglice, Vanity's bubble.
II.
This scribbling, this pen-and-ink-itch is a crime,
Yet Heaven forgive each poor Sinner in Rhyme,
Condemned to the penance of Thinking;
For what are all Similes to a Sirloin?
The flowing of Fountains to filling of Wine?
Huzza! for good eating and drinking.
III.
The Sapphics so soft, the Pindarics so rare,
The Epics, Iambics, and such sort of fare,
With many more names that are harder.
To Turtle, what signifies Tytire tu?
With Classics I beg you will have nothing to do,
But study the style of a Larder.
IV.
Parnassus and Pegasus, cold Hypocrene,
Are words which I warrant give schoolboys the spleen.
And as to the Pedant Apollo,
Let him take his Snuff, let his Sisters drink Tea,
No Coxcombs I want, Sir, no old Maids for me,
But Bacchus and Venus I Will follow.
V.
The Choice Spirit Horace composed Lyric Verse,
Catullus and Ovid good Scholars rehearse,
Cap, scan 'em, and conjugate clever;
My Sentiments are for a Sentiment Toast,
And Syntax abolish for baked, boiled, and roast.
So BEEF and a BUMPER for ever!
SONG CXIII. SPRING.
Tune, -- Come! pledge me Love, etc.
I.
LOOK round, my Love! how changed the Scene,
So late white over with Snow;
Now 'ray'd in flower enameled green,
How rich the meadows show?
II.
The Sun creative power re-sumes,
And warms the breezy air;
The bursting buds expand their blooms,
While birds their nests prepare.
III.
The Herds, and Flocks on herbage feed,
Sweet Spring renews its pride;
The Ice-bound Streams from fetters freed,
Now tinkling, roll their tide.
IV.
On leafless boughs no candy'd frost
In icycles appears;
But as in grief, for Winter lost,
Dissolving into tears.
V.
Thus sordid senseless Human Kind
But mere existence prove;
'Till Beauty's Sunshine ope's the Mind,
And melts the Mass to Love.
VI.
For spite of Wealth, or Power's control,
Or all the Wise can say,
'Till WOMAN warms the frozen soul,
We are but Clods of Clay.
SONG CXIV. A WONDER.
Tune, -- Since Life's but a Jest.
I.
A Wonder! a Wonder! a Wonder I Will show,
You Will wonder indeed when this Wonder you know,
We are wonderful high, and as wonderful low.
Which nobody can deny.
II.
We always are wondering at every thing new,
The good things we wonder at rich people do,
It Is a Wonder indeed if such Wonders are true.
III.
Some wonderful folks make a wonderful rout,
While some blunder in other folks blunder out,
We wonder what Blunderers can be about.
IV.
One Side says the Times are so good they are glad;
The Times, says the other side, never were so bad:
No Wonder if this Side or that Side is mad.
V.
For the Times, I some Patriot Changes propose, --
That our Taxes be less, and we wear plainer clothes;
And that every wearer may pay what he owes.
VI.
Imprimis, -- reflect on the Taxes on Wheels,
On Cards, and the Claret we waste at our meals;
These grievances each party equally feels.
VII.
To be sure we must own it is cursed provoking,
To see how some people their vices are cloaking,
While Virtue -- but, neighbors, don't think I am jokeing.
VIII.
For my Grandfather said, and his name's revered,
That his Father's Father had often times heard,
How Virtue, when he was a schoolboy, appeared.
IX.
She fled without leaving behind her directions,
'Twas in vain she observed to oppose such connexions,
As Turtle-feasts, Cuckoldoms, Cards, and Elections.
X.
You may think me severe, but indeed you think wrong,
I promised a Wonder at first in my Song,
And the Wonder is -- How could you listen so long?
Which nobody can deny.
SONG CXV. THE PARADE.
Tune, -- While others strive by pompous Phrase.
I.
LET those attend who seek the choice,
Here, independent, we rejoice;
We look, we like, we meet, we part,
As Instinct prompts the feeling heart.
While many Groups miscalled the great,
Surrounded by insipid State,
The Health of Peace abuse.
In Party's tumult, Pomp's fatigue,
Place, Popularity's intrigue,
Life's social scenes they lose.
II.
The Danglers at a Birth-night's glare,
As Toyshop Figures, fin'ry wear,
Like winnow'd chaff shift to and fro',
In all the fuss and farce of show.
As flies to Sunshine spread their wings,
So up and down these idle things,
In courtly Sunbeams play.
The Nobles smile to see the train,
Which, with a blush, they must maintain,
To garnish Grandeur's day.
III.
Daughters of Dignity and Grace,
Ye high-bred Dames of haughty Race,
What think you, 'midst your Di'mond blaze,
Your crowded Routs, and Gala days?
Though sordid Flatt'ry's servile grin
Extols your forms, is all within
Fit for Contentment's dome?
Sisters of Fashion laugh and love,
Though round you all the Graces move,
Yet how are things at Home?
IV.
Your stucco'd Cielings, embossed Plate,
Your Carpets, Robes, and Beds of State,
Where Gold and Silver Cupids wove,
Exbibit artificial Love. --
Can Down, or fringed Embroidery's art,
Affection win or warm the Heart,
Or strengthen Vigour's stores?
Perhaps, 'midst all the waste of Pride,
The Fribble yawns at Beauty's side,
Or sottish Husband snores.
V.
While we, as married folks should do,
On neat unvarnish'd Love fall to.
Satiety never bids us roam,
We find Fruition's feast at home;
Beyond all mercenary charms,
Pure Inclination opes her arms.
Give Caesar Caesar's due.
May Friendship fill the manly breast,
And Gratitude be Beauty's guest,
And each to each be true.
SONG CXVI. THE FRIGHT.
Tune, -- Ah! Chloe! transported, I cried.
I.
ONE Evening alone in the Grove,
Miss sat on the side of the Green,
She wondered at what they call Love,
And what it was married folks mean.
"All night how I tumble and toss,
"Yet neither want manner nor means;
"Alas! must I live to my Loss,
"And wither away in my Teens?
II.
Young Rhodophil ran up the slope,
As if he some Sport had in view;
She trembled, betwixt Fear and Hope,
Irresolute what she should do.
She saw him advance to her seat,
She saw him, but could not away;
Love fixed a large weight to her feet,
Curiousity told her to stay.
III.
Desire gave grace to his tongue,
As Lovers to Lovers will speak;
Enamored, he over her hung,
Then bowed down his Lips to her Cheek.
He knelt, she attempted to rise,
Though 'twas but a feeble essay;
The wildness he wore in his eyes,
So scared her she fainted away.
SONG CXVII. TIME KILLERS.
Tune, -- How foolish weak Women believe.
I.
HOW weak is the Wisdom of Man?
How foolish the fancy of Taste?
Admitting that Life's but a Span,
That Span must we wantonly waste?
About we dissatisfied move,
And ramble from climate to clime;
Yet neither enjoy nor improve,
But only, alas! to kill Time.
II.
Ye Husbands, rash Dupes to Excess,
Pretend to live damned honest lives,
Ingrates to the good ye possess,
You abuse both your Time and your Wives.
At midnight inebriate reel,
A prey to foul Prostitute's lure,
O! think what Affection must feel,
What delicate Wives may endure?
III.
The Gun-loaded 'Squire will toil
All day with keen Industry's care,
Incessantly anxious to spoil,
The innocent Tenants of Air.
Or after the Fox bursts away,
Swift down the wind gallops along;
The Mischiefs that chance in the Day,
At Night furnish Fun for a Song.
IV.
At Toilets how Beauties appear,
Like Fowlers they arm and take aim;
High charged with Curls, tier over tier,
And animal Man is their Game.
Sometimes with less dangerous arts
The fair, Dissipations pursue,
If Trifles did not take their parts,
With horrid Time what could they do?
V.
When fine Women do as they please,
They hear not the Nursery's din;
No Husband's absurdities teize,
They fly such dull Scenes to cut in.
Dear Bragg, Hazard, Loo, and Quadrille,
Delightful! extatic! immense!
With them each Reflection they kill,
And escape all the trouble of Sense.
VI.
Yet, Lovelies, before it is too late,
While yet the pulse beats in its prime,
Consider that wrinkles await,
And make up your Quarrel with Time.
Before it is too late, so will we --
Too long I Have your patience be rhim'd,
With Time may we henceforth agree,
And henceforth all things ^e well-tim'd.
SONG CXVIII. THE FUNERAL.
Tune, -- Come ye careless, come and hear me.
I.
SEE the Pall-supporting Bearers,
All in Undertaker's show;
See the train of Sable-wearers,
Acting every Mode of woe.
Silent crowds the spot surrounding,
Called the GRAND RECEIVER's Dome;
Dismal tolling Tenor sounding,
Fellow Mortals follow Home.
II.
List! oh list! ye State Declaimers,
On whose words the many dwell;
Place-bestowing, Patriot-tamers,
Hark! oh hark! it is Grandeur's Knell.
Heralds loud proclaim the Honors
Which this once puissant past;
Tell his Titles, count his Manors,
Lord of only this at last.
III.
View the Tomb with Sculpture splendid,
View the Sod with Briars bound;
There the Farce of Finery's ended,
All are equal under ground.
Fashions there, there Envy's banished,
Beauties there cannot plead their forms;
There Precedencies are vanished,
Offals ALL to odious worms.
IV.
Wise folks, weak ones, poor, and wealthy,
Tenant unremitting Graves;
Haughty, humble, sick, and healthy,
Britons sons, and Asian slaves.
Gloom no more the brow with sorrow,
Meet the moment, come what may;
If we are all to dye Tomorrow,
Let us live, my Lads, Today.
V.
We'll not lavish Life's expenses,
Nor be Niggards when we pay;
Let us please, not pall our Senses,
This is Reason's holiday.
Here, to Dunces bid defiance,
Affectations disapprove;
Here Is my Toast, -- The grand Alliance,
FRIENDSHIP, FREEDOM, WIT, and LOVE.
SONG CXIX. THE COBBLER OF CRIPPLEGATE.
Tune, -- Had pretty Miss been at a Dancing-School bred.
I.
THOUGH a Cobbler is called but a low occupation,
The practice of cobling is come into fashion,
From me up to those who would cobble the nation.
II.
^ome say that Old England wants heel-piecing, true,
Our Country is trod upon like an old Shoe,
And may Heel-pieces want, aye, and Head-pieces too.
III.
One, vamping our old Constitution pretends,
And turn and translate it to serve self and friends,
All this is but botching to serve their own Ends.
IV.
Each Roof in this Island with Liberty rings,
The Good of their Country each Party-man sings,
The Sense of that Phrase is, -- My Country's good Things.
V.
If I, but how should I the State have a hand in?
Good souls I Would be picking, the bad be disbanding,
And then we should come to a right understanding.
VI.
Against Want the cunning man wifely provides,
A Storm shunning shepherd beneath a bush hides,
^o as the Times change we are sure to change Sides.
VII.
With my Awl in my hand I Will Old England defend,
Giving room to my betters who have much room to mend,
^lay they soon become better, or soon have an end.
VIII.
To those who are heedless what here may mishap,
Their hearts are as hard as the Stone in my lap,
They Are taking their swing, would their swing was my Strap.
IX.
I begin to wax warm, so I Will close up my seam,
Or else I could hammer out such a fine theme,
It was about something I sawed in a dream.
X.
To my Last I am come, and that shall not last long,
So this is the last of a poor Cobler's Song,
May they now be right who till now have been wrong.
SONG CXX. MUM.
Tune, -- Ye medley of mortals.
I.
YE Gossips who blab out the secrets of State,
Ye Tell-tales who over the tea-tables prate,
Ye Boasters of Favors from Beauties overcome,
Be wiser poor Pratlers, henceforward be mum.
Sing tantararara mum all.
II.
Ye Wives who have Husbands neglecting their duties,
That time give the Bottle that is due to your beauties;
Would you cure them? take care when in drink they reel home,
To receive them with smiles, and resolve to be mum.
III.
It is good to hold fast, to hold much, or hold long,
But the best hold of all is the holding your Tongue;
Though Wits by their words good companions become,
Can they get half so much as the Man who is mum?
IV.
The Servant who slily keeps silent will rise,
His ears he must doubt, nor give faith to his eyes;
Ask the fine Waiting-maid how she rich could become,
She will curt'sy and answer, because I was mum.
V.
But enough has been said, and enough has been sung,
Remember, dear friends, keep good watch over your Tongue;
I have no more to say, to an end I am come,
My Rhymes are all out, I must henceforth be mum.
Sing tantararara mum all.
SONG CXXI. THE PARENT.
Tune, -- Away with the Strife, the Uproar of State.
I.
A Fond Father's bliss is to number his race,
And exult on the bloom that just buds on their face;
With their prattle he will daily himself entertain,
And read in their smiles their loved mother again.
Men of pleasure be mute, this is Life's lovely view;
When we look on our young ones our youth we renew.
II.
Thus living we love, and thus loving enjoy;
No Deceit here distracts, no Debauches destroy;
From the May-morn of Youth unto Winter's white age,
Hand in hand, with contentment, we sing through Life's stage;
When Death bids us stop we end easy our Song,
And give the Gods thanks that we have lived well so long.
SONG CXXII. THE HUM.
Tune, -- Push about the brisk Bowl.
I.
PUSH about the brisk Bowl, 'twill enliver the heart,
While thus we sit round on the -- Stay!
What business have I an old Song to impart,
When I, Sirs, a new one can say, can say,
When I, Sirs, a new one can say
II.
What shall I first say, or what shall I first do?
What best will my bad voice become?
Why faith, Sirs, I Will strive by my verses to show,
That Life is, alas! but a Hum.
III.
Children weep at their birth, and old men who they dye,
At Death the most happy look glum;
At our Entrance and Exit we equally cry,
Which proves our Life's plainly a Hum.
IV.
Law and Physic you see will make sure of the fee,
What advice to you gratis will come;
If poor, you are lost, though merit you boast,
For Worth without Wealth is a Hum.
V.
Acquaintance pretend that your fortunes they will mend,
And vow to your service they will come;
But be you in need, and you will find that indeed,
Modern Friendship is merely a Hum.
VI.
When some Ladies kneel, small devotion they feel
(But let us be modest and mum)
At the altar they bow, but it is only for show,
Religion with them is a Hum.
VII.
We are hum'd from our birth, till we are hum'd into earth,
To an end of our jokes then we come:
Take your Glass my brisk brother, and I Will take another,
And thus make the most of a Hum, a Hum,
And let us make the most of a Hum.
SONG CXXIII. SELF.
Tune, -- I met with a Maiden one day at the Fair.
I.
SAYS I to my Tutor, Sir, what shall I do,
Shall I think to accumulate pelf?
Or Learning or Glory, which must I pursue?
Converse, quoth the Put, with yourself.
II.
Myself I addressed, but Self seemed in a huff,
Replying, we never shall agree,
For Drinking and Cards, Folly, Shame, and such stuff,
Had charged all their Odiums on me.
III.
Non est factum, says I, and resolved to be tried,
Conceit bid me hope for some sport;
To Sessions I ran, I had Laugh on my side,
Intending to hum the whole Court.
IV.
But Reflection, a wretch who had no business there,
Nor Memory, yet would come in;
Repentance bid Pleasure descend from the Chair,
And ordered the Cause to begin.
V.
I begged a permission to call in my friends
To prove the defense I should make;
Quoth Self as to Friendship he served his own ends,
And only did things for my sake.
VI.
For his Mistress in Gaiety I was maintained,
For me he a Madman has proved;
Though he may to hundreds affection have feigned,
Yet me, and me only he loved.
VII.
In a pet I resolved not a Witness to call,
The general Issue my Plea;
But challenged the Court, Judge and Jury, and all,
That they were as guilty as me.
VIII.
It Is the Loadstone of Life, to that point the world turns,
For Man is a miserly Elf,
Who cries and laughs, loves and hates, flatters and scorns,
As Interest acts upon Self.
IX.
But now I Am awake -- I that Logic deny,
Which proves Self the ruler of Man;
To a Heart that can feel, weeping Beauty apply,
Let him think then of Self if he can.
X.
'Till WOMAN has civilized savage mankind,
We cannot susceptible prove;
But when her perfections have beamed on our mind
We Are brightened to Wisdom and Love.
XI.
Ye Scoffers begone, ye ridiculous base --
To Gratitude first be my Toast;
May Merit meet always with Friendship's embrace,
And each in each other be lost.
SONG CXXIV. THE POINT.
Tune, -- I will tell you what, Friend.
I.
SINCE at last I am FREE,
Contented I Will be,
Over briars barefooted to go;
Or lost in the rain,
Upon Sal'sbury Plain,
Or left without clothes in the snow.
II.
Or if I should perch
On top of Paul's Church,
The hottest day, just about noon,
Astride the cross sat,
Without hood, or hat,
I Would whistle off pain with a Tune.
III.
For now I am FREE,
No low spirits for me,
I laugh at all Crosses I find;
I think as I please,
And reflect at my ease,
For Liberty i^les in the mind.
IV.
To my Fancy I live,
And what Fancy can give,
I enjoy, though it is but a dream;
Observe the world through,
Do others pursue
Ought else than a fanciful scheme?
V.
Some fancy the Court,
Some fancy Field-sport,
The Chase of a Beauty some choose;
The Topers with Wine,
The Misers with Coin,
And Poets are pleased with their Muse.
VI.
La Mancha's mad Knight,
With Wind-mills would sight,
Like him our attempts are a jest;
With envy insane,
And with projects so vain,
Each sneers at the schemes of the rest.
VII.
This Extravagancy
On Folly or Fancy,
Appears to be rather too long;
With something that is shrewd,
I wish to conclude,
And make this an Epigram Song.
VIII.
In a Point it must end,
On a Point I depend,
And like a staunch Pointer I Will stand;
I appoint you to sing,
I appoint you to ring,
And a Scotch Pint of Claret command.
SONG CXXV. TOM OF BEDLAM.
Tune, -- Young Jockey be courted sweet Mogg the Brunette.
I.
BAREFOOT and Head-bare, his Blanket tight skewer'd,
Tom of Bedlam paraded, erect as my Lord;
The Boys left their play, at his raggedness scared,
The Mob pity struck, at his misery star'd.
Girls laughed, and the Fops, fashion formed for the day,
Shrill screaming on tiptoe stole trembling away;
While Infants crept close, in their mothers arms hid,
Tom, Beauty-like moved, heedless what harm he did.
II.
Where Is the Devil? quoth Tom, where is the Devil I say?
Good folks have you not seen the Devil today?
A Brother, just cured, cries -- "Where Old Nick does dwell,
"Come hither, I Will show you; -- look, there is his Hell.
"Behold those round Pillars with Ram's-horns on top,
"A Palace some call it, I say it is his Shop.
" Attendance, Dependence, there move round and round,
"And where such a Dance is, the Damned must be found.
III.
"The Fiend of Revenge this vile torment made out,
"'Twixt Hope and Despair, to hang souls up in doubt.
" Expectation indeed may fill Vanity's head,
"But poor must we live when by Promises fed.
"I honor the Great, who dare greatly behave,
"I dissent not from Pique, nor assent as a Slave,
"For Englishmen scorn base earned bread to receive,"
Such a damned life, quoth Tom, I Will be damned if I live.
IV.
That moment a Methodist came to the place,
Hair tucked behind ears, and Zeal's cant on his face;
He threatened, he groaned, he grimac'd, and he whin'd,
The Mad Fellows mounted and seized him behind.
The Multitude questioned why he was used thus;
He has broke out, quoth Tom, -- he is, you see, one of us.
To their Hospital dragged him, he there was unloos'd,
Tom cried out -- At Bedlam is Madness refused?
V.
His Comate replied -- Brother Tom do not fret,
The World only works now for what it can get;
Such sad objects as we are, it cares not about,
What has Interest to do, with us two, in or out?
But this a Decoy Duck, who brings in great gains,
And tunnels his hearers by turning their brains.
If he is stopped, folks will follow some mischief as bad,
For one way or other, the World will be mad.
VI.
Here Is a Bumber, my Boys, may we still find the way,
To speak what we know, and to know what we say.
Ye big Wigs of Gresham some Nostrum compound,
To keep our Heads clear and preserve our Hearts sound.
May Greatness and Goodness as partners agree,
May our sons, like ourselves, social sing, WE ARE FREE!
And may we, self conscious, presumption despise,
Nor ever be so mad as to think ourselves wise.
SONG CXXVI. SEMELE.
Tune, -- Hang whining and pining, lay hold of your Glass.
I.
EXtinguish the candles, give Phoebus fair play,
The shutters unbolt, let us honor the day;
My Lady Lucina we have drove from her post,
The Sun shines upon us, we'll give him a Toast.
II.
Says Caution, the neighbors are passing along,
They Will look through the sashes, and tell us we are wrong:
Remonstrance avaunt -- what is all they can say?
But they have slept all night whilst we drank it away.
III.
Ye Tutors, Disputers, ye dignified Doctors,
Ye Majors, ye Minors, with Prebends and Proctors,
What Sense is it, prithee, which tells us to think?
When all our seven Senses declare we should drink.
IV.
Our Patron is Bacchus, and Jove was his Sire,
He was born in a Burst of Celestial Fire;
Mamma begged the God would come worthy her charms,
The Lightning of Love proved too much for her Arms.
V.
From her, in a moment, the Baby was snatched,
And into a Buck by Nurse Jupiter hatched;
The Immortal to expiate Semele's Rape,
Bestowed on his Foundling the Gift of the Grape.
VI.
Ye Lovesick who live on the Shine of an Eye,
The Red of a Cheek, or the Tone of a Sigh;
Impressed by the Smiles or the Frowns of a Fair,
As Weather-glass shows Variations of Air.
VII.
In Country or Town you have, seen without doubt,
A Dancing-Bear led by a ring in his snout;
While Pug plays his tricks if you show him some fruit,
These Emblems, ye Ladies, will most Lovers suit.
VIII.
If Girls will not comply why we never run mad,
But away to the next, as enough may be had;
If again we are repulsed, we never hang nor despair,
But in Wine comfort seek, we are sure of it there.
IX.
Draw your Bows ye Crochetti in Music's defense,
With Sound I Am for having a portion of Sense;
Give me a Bell's Tinkle, a fat Landlord's Roar,
With a good Fellow's Bellow, -- Bring six Bottles more.
X.
Six Bottles! we'll have them, and bumper away,
We Have drank up the Night and we'll drink down the Day;
Here Is their Healths who to Wine and their Words will be just,
Here Is the Girl that we love, and the Friend we can trust.
SONG CXXVII. CONTENTMENT.
Tune, -- Ye Nobles who hurry through every gay Toil.
I.
THE Poachers for Fortune who Damsels ensnare,
With Dress and Addresses deceive;
To Lasses of Wealth how those Miscreants swear,
And, alas! how the Lasses believe.
II.
Nay, some Ladies seem to expect being lost,
They trust whom they know are forsworn,
They listen to him who has ruined the most,
And hope to be ruined in turn.
III.
Can this be believed? -- no! -- the Song-maker jokes,
It Is the tale of a slanderous crew;
A Sigh! -- then I fear that there may be some folks
Who are sorry to say it is true.
IV.
But when Love for Love is received on each side,
How Tenderness smiles on the pair;
This, this is a triumph, and this is my pride,
I enjoy such a favorite Fair.
V.
No Paint in her Face, -- no Art in her Mind,
Her Thoughts are explained by her Eyes;
From Principle faithful, from Gratitude kind,
And scorns the Deceit of Disguise.
VI.
All along on the Slope, by the side of a stream,
Our hours we happily pass;
My Head on her Lap, while my Love is her Theme,
And my Looks I lift up to my Lass.
VII.
Enjoying the Breeze from the fields of new hay,
We gather the Summer's sweet pride;
Or point to the Brook where the small Fishes play,
And count them beneath the clear tide.
VIII.
In Rooms rich embellished with Luxury's Store,
Let wealth pampered Indolence yawn;
Let Wantonness act her deliriums over,
'Till Dupes to her dungeon are drawn.
IX.
Let commonplace Fondness her blandishments spread,
And tempt by the Toilet's parade;
The Squeeze, the soft Sigh, wanton Glance, and sly Tread,
Are Pantomine Tricks of her Trade.
X.
I have tried, and can tell, -- I have frolick'd away,
And followed the fashion of Fun;
The same Farce have acted that is played at this day,
And while the World wheels will be done.
SONG CXXVIII. GIVE THE DEVIL HIS DUE.
Tune, -- To take in good part the soft Squeeze, etc.
I.
THERE is one thing, my Friends, I must offer to you,
It Is, Give to Old Nick what to Old Nick is due;
What he owes to us I can venture to say.
Like a Demon of Rank, upon Honor he will pay.
II.
Though you smile at my System, and sneer at my Song,
His Worship's allowed to be Prince of Bon Ton;
Now thus lies the business, Sirs, as we are polite,
And practice good manners, pray what is his Right?
III.
The Devil is in you's a phrase daily used,
Yet often, by such language the Devil's abused.
Though some hollow Hearts may have much room to spare,
The Devil himself would not choose to dwell there.
IV.
Some People affect with this World to be sick,
And give themselves up in a pet to Old Nick;
Devil fetch me! they cry, but if SATAN they knew,
His Honor has much better business to do.
V.
Though of Darkness he is King, he is a Prince of the Air,
And with his Infernalship we should deal fair;
The cheerful Day's ruled by the Angel of Light,
And the Devil (Lord bless us) is Monarch of Night.
VI.
His torturing spirits around him await,
As Watchmen attend on the Constable's state;
Those Imps of Authority sally in shoals,
And pennyless Strumpets drag in as damned Souls.
VII.
The Hell upon Earth, and Life's Devilish Disease,
Is Poverty sinning, and seized on for Fees;
Deep in Darkness that Dross we call Money was hid,
A proof that the Use on it to us was forbid.
VIII.
But Pluto, the Devil's old heathenish name,
Brought it forth from below, as a Varnish for Shame.
Persuasion, Temptation, attended the Gold,
'Till all have been bid for, and few are unsold.
IX.
We are Dev'lishly odd, in a Devilish odd Way,
Since Bribe as Bribe can, there is the Devil to pay;
The Devil of Party makes damnable rout,
Though the Devil a bit can we tell what about.
X.
May Satan seize those who by purchase deceive,
May they take the same Road who such things receive;
But may we preserve HONEST Men, though they are few,
Export all the rest, give the Devil his Due.
SONG CXXIX. PRESENT TASTE.
Tune, -- Last Night, in my Dream, I beheld a brown Lass.
I.
ONE day meeting Momus, it was upon 'Change,
Accosting the Droll with -- What News?
By the Foot of Alcides (quoth he) it is strange,
That the English should England abuse.
As Locusts, in swarms cross the seas for their prey,
As Woodcocks first fleshless appear,
So shoals of imported Illib'rals this day,
( Necessity's Troop) landed here.
II.
Not a Stroller from France, not a Vagrant from Rome,
Not a Swiss with a Marmozet Show,
But here Men of Science and Breeding become,
Outlandish Folks every thing know.
The Rich will receive them as Flattery's Imps,
Servility grins in their looks,
And British-born Artists are elbow'd by Pimps,
By Hair-Dressers, Dancers, and Cooks.
III.
English Merit, in vain, may attempt at the lead,
All the Wit in the world we may waste;
But Things from beyond Sea are sure to succeed
They hit the high fashion of Taste.
To Taste and to Honor who has not a claim?
They are worn without any expense;
They are self-bestow'd Gifts, they are Egotists Fame,
They Are Knav'ry and Dunces Defense.
IV.
English might be allowed in the rude days of yore,
Such Vulgars we caant now endure;
There is something so soft in the sound of Signior,
And immensely polite in Messieur.
How coarse sounds the SANDBYS? in Merit indeed,
Those Brothers embellish the age?
Can such a rude name now as Rooker succeed?
Besides he belongs to the Stage.
V.
All Is vulgar and horrid, low, wretched, and flat,
Of us thus the Connoissieur speaks;
But exquisite fine, it is immense, and all that,
When he talks about Gothics and Greeks.
Perhaps my Address a Presumption may seem,
And received by the Rich as a Sneer;
But with all YOU are worth, to be worthy Esteem,
Do JUSTICE TO GENIUS BORN HERE.
SONG CXXX. NOBODY AND NOTHING.
Tune, -- Gee-ho Dobbin.
I.
A Story, or Song, you have left to my choice,
For one I Have no Humor, for the other no Voice;
In attempting a Tune I like Nobody bawl,
And as to a Mimic I Am nothing at all.
II.
The wrinkl'd-cheek Critic, called 'Squire Syntaxis,
Pedantical Speaking would bring into practice,
With Classical Gabble may wink and may sneer,
And beg I would make the thing Nothing appear.
III.
For Schoolmasters conjugate derivate stuff,
I speak to be understood, that is enough;
The Phrase of like Nobody they may condemn,
But as I sing nothing, it is nothing to them.
IV.
Now as to this Nobody I dare to say,
Although we see Somebody always in play;
And sometimes that something may somehow be shown,
Yet Nobody only must many Things own.
V.
The Public is pestered with many gay forms,
Like Butterflies, springing from Grubs and from Worms;
Those well-dress'd Necessities daily we view,
In Nobody's business with nothing to do.
VI.
They Have nothing to think on, they have nothing to say,
Nobody's all night, and just nothing all day;
At nothing they laugh, and at nothing they cry,
And Nobody cares how they live or they dye.
VII.
It Is Nobody only can guess the Game played,
When Nobody's by, betwixt Master and Maid;
Unless Indiscretion should alter their plan,
Nobody knows nothing 'twixt Mistress and Man.
VIII.
The Romp too ripe grown, unless gathered a Spouse,
Will fall, the first shake, from weak Chastity's boughs;
Dear Captain, she whispers, somebody will hear us,
Dear Miss, whispers he, there is Nobody near us.
IX.
But when she is betrayed by her Passion, to Shame,
And Parents and Guardians begin with their blame;
Who, I Sir? -- not I Sir! -- no! Honor forbid it,
If I am with Child, it was NOBODY did it.
X.
The tread of Gallant by Cornuto is heard,
On tiptoe the Lover from rendezvous scared;
Who Is there? starts the Husband, it is Thieves that I hear,
But Wife pats his cheek, and lisps, Nobody! dear.
XI.
Anybody may say, if they please, I am wrong,
Ev'ry-body find Fault, if they please, with my Song;
But careful lest somebody we should offend,
I with Nothing began, and with Nobody end.
SONG CXXXI. WATER.
Tune, -- The big-belly'd Bottle.
I.
OUR Chorus to Bacchus, to Bacchus we'll raise,
Long Corks be my Garland instead of the Bays;
With Burgundy's Blessings my Temples anoint,
And toast the first Toper who drank a Half-pint.
II.
My Song is to Bacchus, the God of the Vine,
The Engineer Artist to spring Beauty's Mine;
Without him Wit pines, and Love languidly fades,
Cold Water has kept the Nine Muses old Maids.
III.
Quoth Temperance, WATER's the medicine of health,
And Water, quoth Prudence, will win a man wealth;
Though odd it may seem, as the story's not long,
Once Water helped Bacchus, and thus says the Song.
IV.
"It was when his Harvest rejoiced the parched Earth,
"Beneath the first Vine, Love on Wit begot Mirth;
"Yet Hate raised some Rebels who broke from his sway,
"And, drunk with his bounty, denied to obey.
V.
"He harnessed his Tigers, he marshalled his force,
" Silenus was Sutler, Lord Pan led the Horse;
"The Ganges they crossed, came in front of the Foe,
"And struck them all dead, without striking a blow.
VI.
"'It Was Pan did the feat, cast them into a fright,
"He crept, like a Fox, through their camp in the night;
"All the Wine he drew off, while these Ignorants snor'd,
"And into the Bottles foul Ditch Water poured.
VII.
Each Rebel, next morn, raised the Flask to his head,
But chilled the first gulp, in an ague-fit fled;
Fled, trembling, from Monarch to meanest Mechanic,
From hence came the Phrase, to put Men in a Paninic.
SONG CXXXII. MEDIOCRITY.
Tune, -- Attempt to be happy! but how can that be?
I.
IN a neighbourly way, with an honest man's fame,
Unoffending, I hope to succeed;
Attend if you please, if you're pleased with a name,
Imprimis, let Probity lead.
II.
Be careful to keep on Humility's side,
Nor ever lose Gratitude's view;
Obey not the Envy of Pique nor of Pride,
Nor pilfer from Merit its due.
III.
Be assured that Esteem is a noble Estate, --
Let not a fond smile make you proud;
Nor rail at Men merely because they are Great,
Be not dup'd by the Roar of a Crowd.
IV.
Shun Flattery's phrase, let not Promise allure,
Nor dangle for Dinners in Taste;
Forget not old Friends, though perhaps they are poor,
Nor make new Acquaintance in haste.
V.
Oh! suffer not Interest, Friendship to wean,
Accept not Servility's treat;
Nor silently witness Iniquity's scene,
But open at once on Deceit.
VI.
Remember Yourself, spare the shame of your Friend,
Nor carry your Wit to excess;
With Spirit the Cause of the Absent defend,
And shrink not your arm from Distress.
VII.
Oppress not the Low, nor be High People's Slave,
Nor ever despair nor be vain;
However inconsistent the World may behave,
Mediocrity ever maintain.
VIII.
His views let Ambition extend over the State,
Let Avarice gluttonize Wealth;
No Nabobs I wish for, I would not be great,
I only ask humbly for Health.
IX.
How cheerful, in Health, will my latter days pass,
Unenvied, unenvying live;
With the Friends I have proved, and my favorite Lass,
And PRACTICE THE PRECEPTS I GIVE.
SONG CXXXIII. THE SWEETHEARTS.
Tune, -- Derry Down.
I.
SINCE the World is so old, and the Times are so new,
And every thing talked of except what is true;
Among other stories my Fable may pass,
Of four or five Sweethearts who courted a Lass.
Derry Down, etc.
II.
The first was from France, a-la mode de Paris,
All fashion, all feather, bien Monsieur poudrie;
He bowed, he took snuff, cut a caper, and then
He bowed, cut a caper, and took snuff again.
III.
A Dutchman advanced, when the Lady he saw,
He dropped down his pipe, and he waddl'd ^^t yaw;
With hands hid in pocket, and unpolished leer,
As frogs sing in courtship, so croak'd out Mynheer.
IV.
From Connaught, itself, another Beau came,
Macfinnin Macgragh Ballinbrough was his name;
He bowed to the Lass, and he star'd at Mounseer,
Clapped hand on his sword, and said, Ah! -- Arrah, my Dear!
V.
The next a Mess John, of rank Methodist Taint,
Who thought like a sinner, but looked like a saint,
Closed hands, twirl'd his thumbs, moving muckle his face,
Then turned up his eyes as about to say grace.
VI.
A neat English Sailor in holiday trim,
Who long loved the Lass, and the Lass had loved him,
Athawrt them all stepped, under arm tossed his switch,
Squared his hat, opened his pouch, gave his trowsers a hitch.
VII.
He along-side her fell, and he grappl'd on board,
She struck the first broadside of kisses he poured;
Then he towed her to church, and as to the rest,
What afterward followed is easily guessed.
Derry Down, etc.
SONG CXXXIV. A LESSON OF LOVE.
Tune, -- Go on ye gay wantons, etc. etc.
I.
YE Lexicon Critics, whose classical pride,
Plain sense and plain English, as moderns, deride;
Yet WOMAN, dear WOMAN! your minds could improve,
Turn Students to her, take a Lesson of Love.
II.
Ye Rustics who burst from the arms of embrace,
To Beauty's prefer the rude joys of the chase,
So savage a practice no more you will approve,
When once you have practiced a Lesson of Love.
III.
At Midnight, ye Topers, when bump'ring your toast,
Be careful of who, and to whom it is you boast;
If the tithe of those joys you pretend ye could prove,
Wine would not have power to wean you from Love.
IV.
Ye Soldiers who rush through the rough-work of war,
As Statesmen may scheme, or as Sovereigns jarr,
Engagements more glorious at home ye may prove,
So set up your standards and list under Love.
V.
Ye Busy in traffic, whose Cent. per Cent. lives,
Can estimate justly all worth -- but your Wives;
While the Interests of Trade you so anxious improve,
You neglect their demands and are bankrupts to Love.
VI.
The Life of a Man is Inquietude's reign,
Care, dullness, fatigue, disappointment, and pain;
But clasp the fond Female, those ills she will remove,
Such Witchcraft has Woman, such Magic is Love.
SONG THE LAST; OR, EPILOGUE.
Tune, -- Laura's Song in the Chaplet.
I.
THE Wits were wont, in ancient times,
To estimate their Age by Rhimes,
A Ballad was their Schooling;
We Moderns may, perhaps be wrong,
If not likewise, also a Song
May fit us for our Fooling.
II.
Imprimis, there is the Men of State,
But, hold! I Will let alone the Great,
Lest I should gain a Schooling,
For Greatness was not formed for sport,
Though some folks greatly make their Court,
By greatly, greatly Fooling.
III.
We play the Fool, we act the Wise,
We barefaced walk, or wear disguise,
As Hopes and Fears are ruling;
And yet, with all our deep-laid wiles,
From John of Nokes to Tom of Styles,
What is it all but Fooling?
IV.
If Men will think, if Men will see,
That all this To, -- or not to be,
Is as we are hot, or cooling;
Today on Expectation's wing,
Tomorrow off, it is not the Thing,
What is the Thing? -- why Fooling.
V.
Fool on, Fool on, for Life at best,
Is but half-bred, 'twixt Cry and Jest,
As Chance, not Reason's ruling;
To Chance we owe our Rights and Wrongs,
To CHANCE I dedicate these Songs,
A Ballad-Maker's Fooling.
G. A. S. FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 40 Ver. 5 Line 3. for Speeches read Specter. Page 71 Ver. 3 Line 2. for
clung read cling. Page 73 Ver. 2 Line 4. for grimaces read grimace. Page 100
Ver. 7 Line 5. for bustle read bubble. Page 102 Ver. 1 Line 9. for Faustinia
read Faustina. Page 111 Ver. 4 Line 3. for by read be. Page 150 Ver. 1 Line 8.
for says read frays. Page 185 Ver. 4 Line 7. for without read with our. Page
204 Ver. 1 Line 5. for Game read Fame. Page 206 Ver. 2 Line 1. for Vanities
read Vanity's.

