FRONTISPIECE to THE DUPES OF FANCY, Dedicated to Mrs. Jordan. By G^ S. Carey
Esquire.

Drawn by (...). Engraved by (...)

MRS. JORDAN.
Published by Alex. Hogg, July 13. 1792



THE DUPES OF FANCY, OR EVERY MAN HIS HOBBY; A NEW FARCE: IN TWO ACTS. AS
PERFORMED AT THE KING's THEATER ROYAL IN THE HAY-MARKET, WITH GREAT APPLAUSE.

S^us cuique est mos. By GEORGE SAVILLE CAREY, Esquire.

DEDICATED to Mrs. JORDAN, AND Embellished with a Portrait of that Celebrated
Performer.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR ALEX. HOGG, AT THE KING'S ARMS, NO. 16, PATERNOSTER-ROW;
AND SOLD BY T. LEWIS. GREAT RUSSEL STREET, COVENT GARDEN, AND BY ALL OTHER
BOOKSELLERS AND STATIONERS IN EVERY CITY, BOROUGH, TOWN, AND VILLAGE IN GREAT
BRITAIN AND IRELAND. Of Whom may be had, GRATIS (just Published) HOGG's NEW
CATALOGUE of PUBLICATIONS for the present Year. 1792. [PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

DEDICATION.
To Mrs. JORDAN.
MADAM,
IN the Hours of Meditation, when the Mind was on its researches for a
Patroness to the following Petit Drama, I was not long at a loss for One to
whom I might with propriety pay my respects. The very conspicuous figure you
have made upon the Stage, brought your Merits to my view, and from those I
thought there could be no impropriety in my laying this Trifle at your feet.
The tutelary Sisters, Melpomene and Thalia, who preside over all the Scenic
Arts, have taken you by the hand and placed you on a pedestal so high, that
Envy lowers her scowling front whenever she casts her jaundiced Eye upon your
exalted Station, for you justly assimulate the pathetic manners of the one, and
fascinate with the bewitching archness of the other. This perhaps may look like
flattery, but those who know me, know that flattery is a talent which I never
yet possessed, and, for the want of which, perhaps I may have hatched some
Snakes and Scorpions who have endeavored to breathe their venom upon the
blossoms of my reputation. In the present instance certain malevolant
Competiters attempted to sting my rising hopes and disconcert the eminent and
arduous exertions of the Performers, to whom I am so much indebted on this
Piece's first assay; -- yet I had the satisfaction to see it baffle all their
Spleen, and now, Madam, I submit it to the APPROBATION of the PUBLIC, and hope
it will receive your PROTECTION.

I have the Honor to Subscribe myself, MADAM, your most Humble and Obedient
Servant, GEORGE SAVILLE CAREY.
Store Street, Bedford Square,
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE PRINTER begs leave to observe that the Reviewers of Theatricals in the
MORNING HERALD and other respectable PRINTS, who saw the Representation as well
as the Editors of the LONDON, EUROPEAN, NEW LADY'S, and other MAGAZINES, have
spoken of this New Piece in very Respectful Terms. "That it is replete with
wit, whim, and good humor, and exhibits a well timed satire on the bent of
fanciful individuals, demonstrating that Every Man has his Hobby, and that all
mankind, are, at some period of Life or other, the Dupes of Fancy. Upon the
whole they pronounce this Farce to surpass mediocrity, and that its merits
justly deserve that kind reception from the Public which it has experienced."
The Author is well known to the world by his Lectures on Mimicry, Imitations,
and other humourous writings; and all lovers of dramatic productions and the
Public in general will be highly gratified by a sight and perusal of this Comic
Piece.

On it is first appearance at the Hay Market, some objections were made to it is
length, particularly in the Dinner Scene, but by the Author's Judicious
curtailment for future Representation, every objection of this kind will be
obviated. It is however printed as originally written, and such parts of it
marked as were omitted in the representation. It is presumed it will be
performed this Summer, at many of the Watering Places throughout the Kingdom,
and that it will be brought forward with some amendment and alteration next
Season at the King's Theater.

THE PRINTER.

PROLOGUE,
Written by a Friend of the Author.
(THE ACTOR COMING ON THE STAGE AS IF IN ANGER WITH THE PROMPTER.) I WISH your
Prologues, all, were in the Sea,
You're sure to saddle every one on me. --
Each trembling Author, shows a frightened mind,
And cries to me -- Pray will you be so kind
As say a word or two, to paliate
The apprehensions that around me wait. --
A pretty task! -- and, nothing more, in brief,
Then feeling guilty, hollows out -- "Stop Thief!"
Should the thing please -- pray, what do I get by it?
I Will tell you what -- I prologuise each night. --
Wit, like a Diamond, is bright and scarce,
Our Author's Wit (poor soul) is all a Farce;
You Will see it clearer ere the matter's ended,
But, saying little, is the soonest mended. --
I Have got a part to play -- it is time to budge,
Hoping, that while you listen, you will judge
With Mercy -- nor make absolute the Case,
Lest the poor Author fall into disgrace.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
TINTEM, a Florist, MR. BADDELEY. GRUB, a Butterfly Fancier, MR. SUET.
WILLINGFORD, betrothed to Miss Tintem, MR. DIGNUM. GABY Mr. Tintem's Servant
MR. BANNISTER, Jun.
WOMEN.
MISS TINTEM, Niece to MR. Tintem MISS COLLINS. DOLLY, Miss Tintem's Servant,
MISS POPE.
N. B, The Parts of this Entertainment marked with Inverted Commas thus " "
were omitted in the Representation.

THE DUPES OF FANCY.
ACT I.
Scene I. The Kitchen.
GABY discovered tying on his neckcloth, and seemingly to be admiring himself
in the Looking-glass, when DOLLY comes in and taps him on the shoulder. DOLLY.
WHAT is that which you are taken with so much, Mr. Lazy-bones? why you have
been looking at yourself this half-hour, and now you look as if you were
frightened out of your wits!


GABY. Frightened! -- frightened at what?


DOLLY. At yourself to be sure, and I do not wonder at it; why your head looks
like a rumpled hen that has gone through a hedge backwards, and your face is as
pale as a parsnip.


GABY. You are making me out a strange creature forsooth, may not a body tie on
one's neckcloth without being frightened out of one's wits at the looking-glass.


DOLLY. Tying on your neckcloth truly; -- heavens what a sloven; -- why you
have not above half tied it; -- I suppose you will be for making love to me
with your collar open again. -- You look in the face for all the world like the
picture of the starved poet, in my master's dressing room.


GABY. Faith and troth you are full of your skits, Mrs. Dolly; but for all
that, I have heard people say, that to be careless is to be modish.


DOLLY. Modish, modish, ha! ha! ha! -- I never saw such a modish ninny as you
before, it is enough to make one kill one's self with laughing, I am sure you
shall never go into the parlour such a comical figure as that -- only look at
yourself again.


GABY. Why, how would you have me look?


DOLLY. Like a man to be sure. -- You that are drawn for the militia too -- why
you ought to look like a soldier!


GABY. How in the name of patience am I to look like a soldier before I Am
taught.


DOLLY. Let me put on your neckcloth, and I Will show you how.


GABY. Ah, that you shall, and thank you too.


DOLLY. Kneel down then, and you shall see what a comely figure I will make of
you.


GABY. Kneel, aye, that I will and pray too, if you like it, my dear little
chick-a-biddy.


(GABY kneels while DOLLY ties his neckcloth so tight, that it almost choaks
him.) DOLLY. There! there! there! -- you seem now as if you had a little blood
in your face, you look like a soldier now with a witness.


GABY. (Struggling) Murder! murder! murder! -- Oh, pray!


DOLLY. Ha! ha! ha! -- Well, now since I have brought you to your prayers I am
satisfied, and you shall be released -- but it is a pity you had not been
choked, you looked so pretty.


GABY. And should you have liked to have seen me choked Dolly?


DOLLY. Choke me if I should not.


GABY. Why Dolly, now that is so cruel of you.


DOLLY. Why? -- because you're such a lazy, lubberly, slovenly creature. --
Don't you know that this is Saturday, that Alderman Grub is coming to visit
Master, and you have got nothing ready.


GABY. Lord help you, be'ant I always ready, what would the woman have me do?


DOLLY. What? -- why there are all the knives to clean; my Master's new wig to
comb out; the tobacco pipes to wax at the ends; and the sanddishes to be got in
readiness -- you know that they smoke like a couple of Turks!


GABY. Lord bless me I had forgot all that to be sure.


DOLLY. I knew you had, you have a precious memory, but my Master would not be
apt to forget you I fancy, if you had not got them all prepared in time; -- you
know he is never so happy as when surrounded with smoke.


GABY. Nor I neither, Dolly -- Lord, it is my heart's delight.


DOLLY. I Am glad to hear that, for it convinces me that you will make a better
soldier.


GABY. What are they so fond of smoke then?


DOLLY. Every good soldier is fond of the smoke of gunpowder to be sure.


GABY. Oh, I never liked that ever since I had like to have been blown up with
it the last fifth of November; I Will tell you all about it; -- you must know
that I had got a whole pound of powder, and was making of squibs.


DOLLY. Making of squibs was you, and so, I suppose, you went off in a cracker?

[Bell rings.
GABY. Odds-bobbs! Master's bell rings.


DOLLY. Aye, and if he catches you here with your gunpowder stories, he will be
for blowing us both up.

[Exit GABY and DOLLY.
SCENE II.
(Mr. TINTEM is discovered in his morning gown and velvet cap, surrounded with
garden pots, flower-sticks, and a pen stuck in his cap, with which he marks
some of the labels.) TINTEM. They say that every man has his hobby horse, and
without one has something in pursuit, life is as insipid as tripe, without
mustard or vinegar. -- My hobbyhorse is my flower-garden, and I can ride that
with safety, for I shall never be afraid of that kicking me in the stomach, or
breaking my neck with stumbling. -- I expect my friend Grub here by and by, and
think that I shall amaze him with the variety of colors, which I shall present
to him in my amphitheatre. -- Mr. Grub has his hobbyhorse too, but his horse
is a butter-fly; -- I often tell him, that he is as fond of pursuing a fly, as
a fish or a swallow. -- But I must make haste, he will be here soon, and if we
should not happen to have the dinner on table exactly at one, he will be for
stinging me with reproaches, and buzzing in my ears like a gnat.


Enter GABY. GABY. Did you ring, Sir?


TINTEM. Yes, to be sure -- yet one would have thought that you had forgot it,
by your being so long in coming -- What was you about?


GABY. Nothing, Sir.


TINTEM. I suppose so -- I should have been angry with you had you not told me
the truth, for that is one of the hardest things in the world to get at.


GABY. Oh, Sir, I always tell the truth.


TINTEM. You are mistaken, I am afraid, and have marred all; you only told me
truth by way of accident, because you was too dull of invention, and had not
time to tell me a falsehood.


GABY. I never tell a falsehood, Sir, but when I cannot help it.


TINTEM. Well, -- I hope Dolly told you that Alderman Grub was coming to dine
with me to day?


GABY. Yes, Sir.


TINTEM. And are all things in readiness?


GABY. Yes -- Sir; -- No -- Sir.


TINTEM. Yes, Sir; no, Sir! -- there seems to be a lie, and a true saying, both
in a breath, which of them am I to believe?


GABY. Which you please, Sir.


TINTEM. I suppose so -- therefore I am inclined to believe that you have got
nothing ready.


GABY. 'Faith, Sir, you have hit it.


TINTEM. Hit it, have I? -- Why you audacious Scoundrel, I have a good mind to
hit you; I Will knock you down, you blockhead -- Where is my Wig?


GABY. Upon the block, Sir.


TINTEM. I wonder that you have it not on then; is it dressed?


GABY. No, Sir, not quite dressed.


TINTEM. I declare I have a good mind to give you a good dressing -- go to your
brother block and finish it immediately; it is insufferable to have two
blockheads in the house at once. But first take this, and bid the gardener to
place it in the Amphitheatre; the third row; between that of Arrogance and
Indifference; being a modist flower, its blushes will be the more distinctly
seen.

[Exit GABY. "What a strange thing is fear, it sits as Lord Chief Justice of
our Conscience, and often extorts a falsehood, or makes us tell the truth, by
being over-awed from Apprehension of Conviction -- This fellow of mine, take
him in common, as a servant, is not a bad one; -- he has always an inclination
to tell the truth, yet his heart is never courageous enough to prevent his give
way to a falsehood. -- But how goes time -- (pulls out his watch) odds so, it is
almost twelve o'clock, we shall have Master Grub here by one."

[Rings the bell.
Enter DOLLY. DOLLY. Did you ring, Sir?


TINTEM. Aye, how goes on the Dinner?


DOLY. As fast as the Jack and Fire can make it, Sir; -- Cook, Sir, is broiling
away like a post-horse in the Dog Days.


TINTEM. And if she should happen to be a minute too late, my friend Grub would
have no more mercy upon her, than the hasty rider upon his jaded steed.


DOLLY. Cook, you know, Sir, is a little rough in her paces, if he were to fall
foul of her, he might stand a chance to be flung, and get his bastings.


TINTEM. Where Is my Neice -- Mrs. Prate-a-dace?


DOLLY. In her dressing room, Sir.


TINTEM. Tell her it is Twelve o'Clock -- Mr. Grub will be here presently; bid
her get ready to receive him, and not be behind hand as she generally is upon
these occasions.


DOLLY. Oh, never fear her, Sir; she may be ready to receive him in order to
please you, but she will be the more glad to get rid of him to please herself.


TINTEM. What do you mean by that you impudent baggage, -- hey?


DOLLY. I can hardly tell what I mean, myself, Sir; -- but there is a certain
old gentleman that will acquaint you soon enough I warrant you.


TINTEM. An old Gentleman! -- What old Gentleman, Huzzy?


DOLLY. Why Sir, the old gentleman that goes see-saw, see-saw in the face of
our clock, who has got only one lock of hair on his forehead, and a scythe in
his hand; -- old Master Time.


TINTEM. Was there ever such insolence. -- Away with you then, and don't stay
loosing your time here, but mind your business, and take care that every thing
be properly placed.

[Exit DOLLY. Mean while I Will go and take a peep into the garden; and, like a
good and prudent Minister, see that my affairs be properly arrang'd fit for the
eye of public inspection.

[Exit.
SCENE III. The House.
Enter Mr. WILLINGFORD disguised as a Ballad Singer with Songs. Here is the
place, and this the Temple wherein resides the Goddess of my affections: --
while I like a poor and devoted Pilgrim have wandered hither thus disguised, to
render up my offerings, and soothe those pangs of love which rankle in my
breast -- I have taken this disguise, lest I should be discovered by the
imperious and avaricious eye of one that is fixed by fate as a guard to check
the inclinations of her lenient bosom. -- Therefore will put my little
stratagem into execution, by singing an old English Ballad, and see if I cannot
attract the notice of some of the Domestics; to whom, I may communicate my
purpose, and through whom I may perhaps have an opportunity of seeing the beloved
object of my heart.


Song (Mr. WILLINGFORD) Of all the Girls, etc.

DOLLY and GABY enter in the middle of the Song and listen -- and when it is
finished go up to WILLINGFORD and buy one each. DOLLY. Faith you sing well
Master, let me have one of your Songs, I like them vastly.

[WILLINGFORD gives a Song.
GABY. And so do I, come let me have one, too.

[WILLINGFORD gives him two. Nay, you have given me too many -- I only asked
for one, and you have given me two.


WILLINGFORD. Why did not you say one, two; and that makes a couple to be sure.


GABY. Does it so, Mr. Sharpshins, but one will do for me, I thank you; though I
wish it had been Dolly of our Alley -- instead of Sally of our Alley, then I
should have been singing it all day to my sweetheart, here.


DOLLY. Sweetheart! -- you're a pretty fellow for a sweetheart to be sure; --
come, come, come along in and mind your business, or else instead of a
sweetheart, you may chance to meet with a sour face from my Master by and bye.


[As they are going WILLINGFORD interrupts them. WILLINGFORD. Dolly! Dolly!


DOLLY. Dolly! Dolly! -- How the deuce did you come by my name so pat?


GABY. Why, I told him to be sure.


WILLINGFORD. Don't you know me?


DOLLY. Know you! -- not I.


WILLINGFORD. Don't you know Mr. Willingford. [discovering himself by throwing
off his cloak.


DOLLY. Mr. Willingford! mercy upon me; oh! dear, you have almost frightened me
out of my wits.


GABY. As sure as I am alive it is Mr. Willingford, why it has struck me almost
into an Egyptian Mummy.


DOLLY. Come in, Sir, pray come in, and let me hide you as fast as I can, I
would not have my Master see you for all the world.


GABY. Nor I either -- not but that I am glad to see you, don't you be afraid
of that. -- ha! ha! ha! I cannot help laughing at it -- this is a comical kind
of a joke.


DOLLY. Come in, Sir, for heaven's sake, and let me hide you, or else it will
be a Tragical joke, I Am afraid.


GABY. Aye, away with you, Sir, away with you for your own sake, for Dolly's
sake, and for my sake; we'll take care of you -- though hide and seek is no bad
game by the bye -- I know one that will be glad to find you.

[Exeunt Omnes.
SCENE IV.
Miss TINTEM in her dressing room, reading. MISS TINTEM. The story which I have
been reading, puts me exactly in mind of poor Mr. Willingford and myself. --
His father died, and left him nothing but a good education, and the wide and
hazardous world to ramble in; -- Mine bequeathed me all he had by his will, but
left me no will of my own; -- he has made me over to the care of an avaricious
uncle, until I arrive at the age of twenty-one, which, thank heaven, is almost
at hand; yet he wishes to transfer me to a beastly creature, who would fain
present himself to me as a husband -- but I will die first -- I am told they
cannot force me to marry any body against my will, and that is a comfortable
consolation. -- Ah! poor Mr. Willingford, when I think of thee --


[Dolly speaking in a hurry from the staircase. DOLLY. Miss, Miss, Missey!


MISS TINTEM. What Is the matter?


DOLLY. Come down stairs and I Will tell you.


MISS TINTEM. Why cannot you tell me while I am above stairs?


DOLLY. There is somebody just come in, who wants to speak with you.


Enter DOLLY. MISS TINTEM. I know who you mean, therefore I shall not hurry
myself.


DOLLY. No you don't; if you did, I fancy you would talk in a different strain.


MISS TINTEM. Is the girl mad? -- I wish you would not take the liberty to
teaze me in such a manner -- you know I hate the fellow.


DOLLY. What fellow?


MISS TINTEM. What fellow! -- why the fellow that you are talking about -- that
nasty fusty, wig-pated fellow -- Old Grub.


DOLLY. Grub! Grub! -- he is no Grub; he is a gentleman every inch of him, and
a pretty one too.


MISS TINTEM. Who is he then, why don't you tell me?


DOLLY. Why, who should it be but Mr. Willingford?


MISS TINTEM. Mr. Willingford! -- bless me you have struck me with astonishment
-- I hope my Uncle has not seen him; if he has, we shall have a sad piece of
work, and all our hopes will be totally overset. -- Where is my Uncle?


DOLLY. In the Garden.


MISS TINTEM. And where is Mr. Willingford?


DOLLY. I have taken care of him, he is safe enough out of harms way, I promise
you.


MISS TINTEM. Is he?


DOLLY. Aye that he is.


MISS TINTEM. Where is he then?


DOLLY. Where do you think?


MISS TINTEM. I cannot think, nor do I care, so he is but safe out of danger;
-- where is he? -- prithee tell me girl.


DOLLY. Why I have slipped him up the back stairs into my bed-room, I have got
the key in my pocket, and here it is.


MISS TINTEM. Charming! you are a dear good creature and I love you for it. --
But what is to be done; I know not what to do, or what to say -- I am all
confusion; I that should at this moment be nothing but contrivance and
maneuver, am, by the present unaccountable flurry on my spirits, rendered
incapable of every thing, that might be the means of my future happiness.


DOLLY. I Will endeavor to help you out -- I Am not in love you know -- I Have got
no flurry on my spirits.


MISS TINTEM. You are the best of creatures, and shall never have occasion to
repent this act of kindness.


DOLLY. I Will tell you what then -- you know my Master and old Grub, always go
poking and pottering about the garden after dinner, and will be for holding
their argumentations of an hour and a half long, about their flowers, their
butterflies and the duce knows what.


MISS TINTEM. Well -- what then? -- my dear good girl -- what then?


DOLLY. What then? -- why then you will have nothing to do after dinner, but to
let Mr. Willingford know that you are alone and you will not want company, I
warrant you.


MISS TINTEM. After dinner! -- Now you talk of dinner, what is he to do? --
Must the poor dear creature set starving in your bed-room all the time; I dare
say he has not dined; -- did you ask him?


DOLLY. Dined? -- Why I am told that your true lovers never want to eat.


MISS TINTEM. Prithee don't be foolish.


DOLLY. Don't make yourself uneasy, Miss, I was neither so foolish or so
brutish, but I had thought enough about me to take proper care of him.


MISS TINTEM. In what respect?


DOLLY. In respect to his dinner -- for I have sent him up a cold Collection as
they call it, and provided him with some veal and ham; the cold giblet pie,
some cold pudding, by way of settling his love, and a bottle of wine to wash it
down whenever he pleases.


MISS TINTEM. Excellent! -- you delight me. -- (Bell rings.) that is my uncle's
bell. -- Go, and ask what he wants, and let me know immediately.

[Exit DOLLY. I am delighted with the frankness and attachment of this good
natured girl, but extremely aggitated at the state of poor Mr. Willingford;
sure it is the most provoking and tantalizing situation in the world. -- The
man I love, and whom I have not seen this month, to have him under the very
roof with me, and even there deprived the sight of him, when instead of
receiving him as I ought, to have him locked up in a state of apprehension and
fear, is hard indeed!


Enter DOLLY. DOLLY. Miss, my Master is in the strangest mood imaginable, and
desires that you will come down immediately.


MISS TINTEM. Tell him that I am coming [Exit DOLLY. he will find me in as
strange a mood as himself; -- I have just as little inclination to set down to
dinner, as I have to hear the conversation that I am likely to be pestered with
while I am at the table.

[Exit MISS TINTEM.
SCENE V.
(Changes to a dressing room and discovers Mr. TINTEM buckling on his shoes,
still in his cap with his hat over it, he rings the bell.) Enter GABY. GABY.
Did you want me, Sir?


TINTEM. Where Is my Wig, Sirrah? Must I dine in my Nightcap think you; go and
fetch it immediately, or I Will have you set in the stocks for disobedience.


GABY. Sir, I have just done it -- I have got to the hundred and fortieth curl,
and have only five more to do.


MR. TINTEM. Five, you Scoundrel you, why, if there had been five hundred
Curls, you might have done them before this time. -- What is the reason you
have not done it before? -- I insist upon knowing. (takes him by the Collar.)


GABY. I Will tell you indeed, Sir, if you will not be angry.


MR. TINTEM. Tell me then, immediately.


GABY. Why then, since the truth must out, it must; -- that bitter fury of a
Cook, Sir!


MR. TINTEM. The Cook! What has she thrown it upon the fire in one of her
infernal Tantrums?


GABY. No, Sir; -- but as I hope to be saved, I was only getting a sop in the
pan, and the great splaw-footed creature pushed me down, and so, to save my
head from going into the fire, I tumbled with my hands into the Dripping-pan,
which scalded my poor fingers so much that I was obliged to to run to Dr.
Seret's in order, as a body might say, to get them nointed before I could make
use of them again.


MR. TINTEM. I wish you and the Cook were both in Heaven.


GABY. Heaven forbid Sir!


MR. TINTEM. Heaven forbid indeed -- Go and fetch my wig, I say, bring it to me
done or undone?


GABY. I Am gone, Sir.

[Exit GABY.
MR. TINTEM. I Am out of all patience,


Re-enter GABY. GABY. Sir, Sir, Sir!


MR. TINTEM. What is the matter now?


GABY. Mr. Grub is arrived. Sir, and the clock is just upon the stroke of one.


MR. TINTEM. Bring in my Wig, call down my Niece, and carry in the dinner.

[Exit GABY.
Enter DOLLY. DOLLY. Sir, if you please, Miss desires that you will excuse her
coming down to dinner to day.


MR. TINTEM. Excuse? I Will have no excuse -- What is the matter with her now?


DOLLY. She Is got a sad pain in her stomach, Sir.


MR. TINTEM Pain in her stomach? -- A good dinner is the best remedy in the
world for a pain in the stomach -- tell her to come down immediately.


(Enter GABY in a great hurry with the Wig) GABY. Here it is, Sir; -- here it
is at last.


(He tumbles over the skirts of DOLLY's gown.) MR. TINTEM. Here it is -- here
it is -- No there it is -- I think there it is -- You villain you have ruined me
-- I wish you had broken your neck with all my heart.


GABY. 'Twas not my fault, Sir,


MR. TINTEM. Not your fault you Scoundrel?


GABY. No, Sir.


MR. TINTEM. No! Whose fault was it pray?


GABY. Dolly's Sir.


DOLLY. Mine? Oh, Monsterous!


GABY. Yes, if your confounded long train had not been in the way, I should not
have had this misfortune!


MR. TINTEM. Why her train seems always to be in your way -- this is the second
time to day that you have got yourself entangled in her skirts. -- One would
think that you were blind -- Come you blunder-skull, you, put it on as it is; I
must make the best of it now, and see if you can find the way to show Mr. Grub
into the parlour; Dolly, run and call your Mistress down, away with you both.

[Exit TINTEM, DOLLY, and GABY at different doors.
SCENE VI.
(Changes to a Dining Parlour, -- enter MR. TINTEM and his Niece to MR. GRUB.
GABY brings in the Dinner and waits.) (MR. TINTEM Gives GRUB a hearty shake by
the hand.) MR. TINTEM. Mr. Grub, I am heartily glad to see you -- always
punctual -- punctual as the clock -- you gentlemen of the City look sharp after
Time.


GRUB. Consider the hour, Master Tintem, it is dinner Time, and my stomach
generally looks sharp after that -- but my eye, my eye, Mr. Tintem at this
moment, looks very sharp after something else -- My dear, Miss Tintem, how do
you do? -- My dear little sweetheart how do you do?


MISS TINTEM. I thank you, Sir, but very indifferent.


GRUB. Indifferent! -- I Am very sorry for that, but I hope you will never be
indifferent to me.


GABY. (aside) You seem to be but a very indifferent creature at the best.


MR. TINTEM. Come my good friend; -- Sit down -- say, what I shall help you too?


GRUB. Why, Sir, if you please, I will thank you for a little of the roasted
Pig -- I am glad you have got a young pig, there is nothing that I love better
than a young Pig, and every thing that is young, so does my dear little girl
there, I dare say, does'nt she?


GABY. (aside) Oh, what an amorous devil!


MISS TINTEM. Would you wish me, Sir, to be fond of nothing but what is young?


GRUB. No, to be sure, (speaking with his mouthful).


MISS TINTEM. Then you never can expect that I can be fond of you.


GABY. (aside) That Is a douser for you old one.


MR. TINTEM. The devil's in the girl to be sure; you will never get Mr. Grub for
a husband, while you pass such compliments as those upon him.


GRUB. Oh, never mind the little Puss -- for as to compliments, and all them
there kind of things, I never minded them, -- nay, to tell you the truth, I
always hated compliments. (eating)


MR. TINTEM. I should think it strange, indeed, if you could ever love them,
especially, if they came in the manner my Niece bestows them on you.


GRUB. Ah, let the little thing say what she will she will never be able to
make me quarrel with my Victuals.


MISS TINTEM. That I really believe. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. Will you give me leave to help you to a little of this roasted
Duck -- I assure you it is highly seasoned; and seems to be well dressed -- a
clean plate Gaby.


GRUB. Roasted Duck! -- I was always very, very fond of a roasted Duck.


GABY. What a fond creature it is! -- (aside)


MISS TINTEM. I dare say, that will be his answer to every thing upon the
Table. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. Shall I help you to a Leg or a Wing, Master Grub?


GRUB. Both if you please, my very good friend.


GABY. It Is a pity he had not the whole Duck, feathers and all. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. That Is right, I like every body to speak their mind, it shows the
proper freedom of spirit, and saves a great deal of unnecessary trouble.


GRUB. I likes Freedom, and I hates trouble; -- you may be sure of that by the
speeches, you must have heard me make in Guildhall -- I say nothing now, but
don't you think that we are in a sweet situation?


MR. TINTEM. Sweet! not very sweet at present; for you must confess we have
been rather sowered of late.


GRUB. Sowered -- pray by what means.?


MR. TINTEM. Why I think the sweetness of our situation has been greatly abated
by the high price your Company has set upon Sugars.


GRUB. Oh! that has proved a monstorous good thing to our Company.


MR. TINTEM. But monstorous things are not at all times the most pleasant,
either to the Eye or to the Mind, and I know of no monster so frightful, to the
greatest part of his Majesty's Subjects, as that Monster called Monopoly.


GRUB. A Monopoly! I never saw any of them there creatures in all my Life --
Pray, Sir, what are they like? And what part of the world do these Monopolies
come from.


GABY. (aside) Lord they are to be seen at Exeter Change or the Lyceum every
Day.


MR. TINTEM. From all parts I fancy, but it is an animal that seems to thrive
more in this Country than any other.


GRUB. Ah, Master Tintem, you seem to be more acquainted with these here
matters than I am -- you have traveled a good deal you know; I Am told that you
have been to all the Watering-places in England; but as to my part I was never
any farther than Margate -- I went there and came back by Water, which made me
so sick of the Journey, that I don't think I shall ever go there again.


MR. TINTEM. No, indeed?


GRUB. No not I -- Besides they are such a set of imposing Rascals, that they
would often charge me Sixpence for a half-penny's worth of Small beer, and you
know one can get a quart of good sound porter in London for threepence
halfpenny.


MR. TINTEM. Ah, you will find imposition in every part of the Kingdom
nowadays.


GRUB. A little more Duck if you please.


GABY. I knew he would finish it. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. How do you like it -- don't you find the sauce rather Predominant.


GRUB. "I have not tasted any yet -- I wish you would give me a little of it."


MR. TINTEM. "A little of what?"


GRUB. "Why a little of the Predominant as you call it. -- I suppose that is
some new kind of sauce, I wish you would give me a little of it."


(MR. and MISS TINTEM endeavor to smother a laugh.) MR. TINTEM, I beg pardon,
Master Grub, but you cannot help being entertaining.


GRUB. Aye that is my way -- I Am generally said to be the life of the company.


GABY. I Will be hanged if he be'ant as great a Gaby as myself. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. Will you drink a glass of wine?


GRUB. With all my heart, and I dare say my little intended will not refuse to
join me. -- I Will give you a toast, if I can remember one -- odds-bobbs I have
it -- I Will give you, "Love without Interest."


MISS TINTEM. With all my heart, Sir.


MR. TINTEM. That Is good -- I must join you in that -- Come, "Love without
Interest."


(In the drinking, GRUB gets some of the wine down the wrong way, and coughs
excessively -- MR. TINTEM and MISS rise from the table.) MR. TINTEM. Lord bless
us what is the matter -- call in Dolly!

[rings the Bell.
GABY. Dolly! Dolly! -- make haste, bring in the smelling-bottle -- bring in
the hartshorn -- Mr. Grub is a-dying. -- Some water too!


Mr. TINTEM. I hope it is no spasm.


Enter DOLLY. (With a bottle of hartshorn in one hand, and a basin in the
other.) Apply the bottle to his nose, and the water to his temples immediately
-- I hope it is no apoplexy.


MISS TINTEM. No, I do not think it is that, I fancy it was only the toast
stuck in his stomach.


MR. TINTEM. (to GABY) Toast! toast! -- why you damned villain, have you put
toast in the wine?


GABY. Toast, Sir! -- toast! -- Lord, Sir, I never did such a foolish thing in
all my life!


MR. TINTEM. (to Miss) Why did not you say that the toast stuck in his stomach?


MISS. TINTEM. I only meant the sentimental toast which he had given himself.


Mr. TINTEM. Oh, he revives!


GRUB. (recovering) Mercy upon me where am I?


GABY. In our house, Sir.


GRUB. Oh! my poor head -- Oh! my stomach, I thought that I should have been
choked.


DOLLY. Ah! poor gentleman, that would have been a pity indeed! (sarcastically)


MR. TINTEM. Bless me my good friend, I have been sadly alarmed; but I assure
you, I am over-joyed to see you so much recovered.


GRUB. I thank you my very good friend -- I thank you. -- What do I see, my
dear little sweetheart? -- I warrant she has been ready to cry at my misfortune?


MISS TINTEM AND DOLLY, Ha! ha! ha!


GRUB. Is that the way you show your feeling? -- what do you laugh at my
affliction?


MISS TINTEM, I beg your pardon, Sir, -- I did not laugh at your afflictions,
but your expressions.


DOLLY. Lord, Sir, do you think that my Mistress is to fall a-crying every time
you choke yourself with eating, or suffocate yourself with drinking? -- ha! ha!
ha!


MR. TINTEM. Gaby and you Miss Tarter, take the dinner things away, (they take
away) and Madam my Niece, you shall be confined to your dressing room without
society.


GRUB. Nay, don't be cruel to her, don't banish her this time; her laughing was
perhaps only an innocent frolic -- a liberty, you know, that lovers will take
with one another, now and then.


MR. TINTEM. "Sir, she must not be indulged in this way -- but console herself
alone, 'till she can behave better."


GRUB. "Oh, the little piggy-wiggy -- it grieves me to hear so cruel a decree."


MISS TINTEM. "It is no cruelty to me, Sir, I can assure you."


MR. TINTEM. "There Is for you again -- come, Sir, you and I will go and take a
peep into the garden, while she sits a little by herself, so that she may be
softened by reflection."


GRUB. "Ah, Master Tintem, you are a wag -- you seem to know how to manage the
Ladies to a nicety -- perhaps it may be all for the best. -- My dear little
intended don't you mourn -- don't you get piping now by yourself -- a little
absence, they say, is sometimes a great sedement to love -- is it not deary?"


MISS. TINTEM. You Will excuse me if I laugh a little -- I cannot help it now,
ha! ha! ha!


MR. TINTEM. Away with you, Madam, we shall be back to tea -- then see if you
can prepare it in time, and meet Mr. Grub in a more agreeable humor.


GRUB. By, by! -- don't you get piping I say.


MISS TINTEM. Ha! ha! ha! -- By, by! ha! ha! ha!


GRUB. What a sweet bewitching, wicked little devil it is.

[Exeunt omnes.
ACT II.
SCENE I. The Garden.
Enter TINTEM, GRUB, and GABY. MR. TINTEM. A fine cheerful afternoon I protest!


GRUB. The weather is cheerful enough it is true, but as to myself, I am
melancholy enough.


Mr. TINTEM. I am sorry for that -- why should you be melancholy -- what is the
matter?


GRUB. That little Niece of yours, runs strangely in my head.


MR. TINTEM. I Am glad to hear that; it is a good sign.


GRUB. And yet my mind is not perfectly at ease about her.


MR. TINTEM. Better and better still, I should be sorry if it were.


GRUB. I am very much obliged to you for your kindness; it seems to be a
laughing matter to you, but it is otherwise to me.


GABY. I wish he be'ant love sick already. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. Ha! ha! ha! -- quite touched I see -- poor Mr. Grub, she seems to
have got fast hold of you my friend,


GRUB. Nay, not not so fast as you imagine.


MR. TINTEM. What is the matter with you then?


GRUB. Why, to tell you the truth, I do not think that she seems to pay me so
much attention as I could wish.


MR. TINTEM. No!


GRUB. No -- there is very litttle affection, I am afraid, about that tittering
heart of here is -- I doubt she does not love me truly.


MR. TINTEM Not love you? -- never trouble yourself about that -- I Will make her
love you.


GRUB. What, whether she will or not -- that must be a curious secret indeed.


MR. TINTEM. Aye, I know the proper physic for the ladies when they happen to
be disobedient.


GRUB. Physic?


MR. TINTEM. Aye, physic.


GABY. I wish they may not be going to give the poor creature love-powder.
(aside)


MR. TINTEM. She is in my power at present, and shall marry you whether she
will or not, and when she is yours, you know what you have to do.


GRUB. What is that?


MR. TINTEM. Why you have nothing to do then but to keep her under your thumb.


GABY. Under his thumb! and if he does, I wish she may not slip through his
fingers. (aside)


GRUB I am told there is a Mr. Willingford, a young spark, to whom she turns a
willing ear, if so, it will be a difficult matter to wean her of him.


GABY. You are right enough there old Gentleman. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. Oh, never let that give you any concern; he is nothing but a Boy,
and a Beggar.


GRUB. As to his being a Beggar, that will be no impediment, especially if he
has been ingenious enough to coax her Heart from her.


MR. TINTEM. Oh, never mind the heart, so you have got the Body. -- Possession
you know is every thing.


GRUB. Aye, but the mind often sets the Body capering.


MR. TINTEM. Confound your capering apprehensions I say -- Why, you talk like a
Simpleton -- what can you be afraid of.


GRUB. There was a confounded Stag's head, and an awkward pair of horns in your
hall, which looked butt in my face as I entered your house to day, and I cannot
help thinking them omnious.


GABY. What a cowardly old fool! (aside)


Mr. TINTEM. Mr. Grub, Mr. Grub, take care what you say -- "My Niece was the
daughter of my brother -- my brother was the son of my mother, and my mother
was the pattern of Virtue -- No, Mr. Grub, if you have any qualms of that kind
in your mind you have mistaken the stock;" the blood of the Tintem's is of a
peculiar dye, pure as the peerless Stream, and chaste as the mountain Snow.


GRUB. And as cold too, I Am afraid.


MR. TINTEM. Cold?


GRUB. Aye, cold, I think; -- why your niece always looks as chilly as an
Icicle at me.


GABY. One would think she was dead by his talking. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. You don't like the match perhaps


GRUB. Yes, my very good friend, I likes the match very well, -- but -- but


MR. TINTEM. You would like the money without the match I suppose.


GABY. The devil doubt him. (aside)


GRUB. No, no -- I don't say that either, your Niece is young and beautiful, a
little sweet creature any body might be fond of, and I will do her the justice
to say that I think she would like any young fellow better than me.


GABY. You never said a truer thing in all your life. (aside)


Mr. TINTEM. Well, well, we'll drop the subject at present, and after another
interview or two, you will be better able to judge of her disposition.


GRUB. I think so too, and therefore let us go and amuse ourselves with a sight
of your Hobbyhorse, as you call it.


MR. TINTEM. And so you shall; -- go you on Gaby, and tell Jonas the gardner to
place this flower as I told you before, then return home, and fetch me the key
of the pinery -- I have forgot it.

[Gives him the flower.
GABY. Where did you say it was to be placed, Sir, between 'gnorance and
impudence?


MR. TINTEM. No, Mr. Impudence; -- between arrogance and indifference, they are
two very fashionable flowers.

[Exit GABY.
GRUB. And therefore must be a kin to the gentry Gaby was talking of I suppose,


MR. TINTEM. Cousin Germins I assure you.

[Exit TINTEM and GRUB.
SCENE II.
(The Drawing Room in TINTEM's House) Enter MR. WILLINGFORD, MISS TINTEM. and
DOLLY. DOLLY. There -- I Am glad you are once more got together, and I wish that
Old Harry would break the shins of him that parts you.

[Exit. DOLLY.
MISS TINTEM, What a comical girl.


MR. WILLINGFORD. What a good one; she has been the providential instrument of
our present blessed interview.


MISS TINTEM. Do not call that thing blessed, which chance may have an
opportunity of overturning.


MR. WILLINGFORD. My dear Miss Tintem, I rest on hope and trust in providence,
you know I am a child of here is; and Chance must be a churl indeed, should she
at this moment thwart me in my wishes.


MISS TINTEM. What are your wishes?


MR. WILLINGFORD. It rather surprises me that you should ask.


MISS TINTEM. I do not doubt but you will be polite enough to resolve me then.


MR. WILLINGFORD. Most certainly, and that from my heart -- ah, me! I wish that
you were mine, but that you know already, and your asking me to tell you now,
seems as if you doubted me.


MISS TINTEM. I do not doubt; but, when I consider the present state of things,
I am rather surprised that you should persevere in running after me, especially
when I shall tell you what a formidable rival you have to encounter.


MR. WILL. A rival? is it possible!


MISS TINTEM. It is true, and that is more.


MR. WILL. I am sorry for it.


MISS TINTEM. And so am I; for he is a favorite of my Uncle's, and a wealthy
one also.


MR. WILL. And perhaps you love him too.


MISS TINTEM. You shall see him by and by, then you will be able to judge, if
it be possible for me to resist him.


MR. WILL. Indeed! this is a circumstance I did not expect; this gives me a pain
more exquisite then ever I felt before. -- Is it possible?


MISS TINTEM. Is what possible?


MR. WILL. That you should love him.


MISS TINTEM. Nay, I have not told you that -- you should stay till you are
convinced. (Amiable creature, but I Will torture him no further) [aside -- Come,
come, cheer up -- one would think that you suspected me; -- it carries danger
with it, if your doubts begin to quicken only on report.


MR. WILL. " Report is a dangerous fiend, seldom to be credited; but the doubts
I have, arose from what you said yourself, and never did I hold your word so
slight, as not to credit whatever you have been pleased to tell me."


MISS TINTEM. "I do believe you, and therefore I -- I -- I -- "


MR. WILL. "Speak out."


MISS TINTEM. "It is -- it is -- "Time enough yet" as the song says."


MR. WILL. "But shall I tell you what I hope you was going to say."


MISS TINTEM. "That might show too much conceit in you perhaps, and put a
maiden to the blush."


MR. WILL. Well; -- it it enough -- I shall rest satisfied without doing the one
or saying the other, and trust to the event.


MISS TINTEM. But to digress a little from the present parley, Dolly told me of
all your stratagem, how she discovered you, and that you sang charmingly.


MR. WILL. I am afraid Dolly has deceived you.


MISS TINTEM. Will you give me leave to judge?


MR. WILL. I can deny you nothing, as I know you have generosity and candor
enough to overlook defect, when poor Endeavor does her utmost to oblige.


MISS TINTEM. I hope so.


MR. WILL. I will try to sing you a little song, which I made respecting the
situation of a poor recruit, whom I once met upon a journey, lamenting that his
ill stars had parted him from his favorite fair one.


SONG. THE POOR RECRUIT.
I.
As I Have plodded my way to some country town,
Full many a wearisome day,
My purse has contained but a scanty half-crown,
And that has soon melted away.
II.
Often weary and sad on some wint'ry road,
With rain I Have been wet to the skin:
Of my knap-sack grown tired, I Have sought for abode
At some friendly good Alehouse or Inn.
III.
I Have hoped that good Fortune, in turning her wheel,
Would cast me, perchance, on the place,
Where the wound in my bosom would instantly heal
At the sight of my Sally's dear face.
IV.
She grieves, for she knows how I Am destined to roam,
On the strength of my furlow to rest;
And then she often wishes her Allen at home,
To bury his cares in her breast.

Enter DOLLY in a hurry. DOLLY. I beg pardon for interrupting you, but I could
not help telling you that Gaby is just returned from the Garden, and says,
there had like to have been, a sad piece of work about you both.


MISS TINTEM. What was the matter then?


MR. WILL. Do they know that I am here?


DOLLY. No -- but Master and old Grub had like to have quarrelled about you.


MISS TINTEM. In what respect?


DOLLY. Why Mr. Grub had found out, (saving your presence Miss) that you had an
affection for Mr. Willingford.


MISS TINTEM. That is odd indeed -- affection for Mr. Willingford! -- who could
tell him such a piece of news as that -- it is more than Mr. Willingford knows
himself.


DOLLY. Lord, Miss -- but I Will say no more.


MR. WILL. What had this quarrel like to have risen from?


DOLLY. What? -- why Mr, Grub was jealous of you to be sure; and talked about
the pair of stag's horns in the hall staring him in the face this morning,
which had given him the qualms.


MR. WILL. I wish they had butted him in the stomach, with all my heart.


MISS TINTEM. I have not ability to find out all this mystery, I confess.


MR. WILL. It Is no matter.


DOLLY. I dare say they will quarrel, I am sure it would be the highest
entertainment to you both, were you to go and listen to their comical
conversation.


M. WILL. Is this Mr. Grub, as you call him, the gentleman you signified to be
my rival?


MISS TINTEM. The same; I promised that you should see him; therefore we can go
and stand with safety and unseen behind the old yew hedge near the
amphitheatre, where you may at once behold his delicious person, and hear his
bewitching conversation.


MR. WILL. Agreed.


MISS TINTEM. "Dolly, you must be sure to take care, should we be put to
flight, to find a ready shelter again for Mr. Willingford."


DOLLY. "Put to flight! -- I know of no shelter in such a case, that would be
so convenient as a tight post chaise and four good horses, to hurry you both
out of harms way in an instant."


MR. WILL. "An excellent thought."


MISS TINTEM. "Is the girl bewitched?"


DOLLY. "Not so bewitched, but I could tell you which would be the best road
you could take."


MR. WILL. "Bravo!"


MISS TINTEM. "Prithee, girl, don't be foolish; come let us go and listen to
the learned disquisitions of my sagacious Uncle, and the trite observations of
your more formidable rival."


MR. WILL. "With all my heart."


Exeunt Omnes. SCENE III.
(The Garden, with a view of the Amphitheatre) Enter MR. TINTEM and GRUB. MR.
TINTEM. Here they are Mr. Grub -- here are my beauties -- there is a display for
you -- there is an arrangement, all the colors of the rainbow; the eye is
ravished with beholding, and the nose with smelling.


GRUB. This is truly a fine sight, Master Tintem.


MR. TINTEM. Fine indeed! though I say it, Mr. Grub; -- this is nature in her
holiday-cloaths; you say you are fond of flowers Mr. Grub.


GRUB. So fond of them, that I always buy a halfpenny nosegay when I can, and
stick it in my bosom whenever I go to church on a sunday.


MR. TINTEM. Ha! ha! ha! -- a halfpenny nosegay Mr. Grub? -- I beg your pardon,
but you make me laugh -- a halfpenny nosegay truly -- they must have been weeds
my good friend; -- weeds -- what sort of flowers could they have been?


GRUB. Sometimes a bunch of primroses, or the lillies of the valley; at other
times I have treated myself with a few pale snow-drops, or yellow crocuses;
which in my opinion, are the first of flowers.


MR. TINTEM. The first of flowers -- ha! ha! ha!


GRUB. You must acknowledge that they are generally the first in the season.


MR. TINTEM. I will acknowledge that they are the first colored weeds which
the spring throws up; but we do not place them under the denomination of
Flowers.


GRUB. No!


MR. TINTEM. No -- you talk of putting a whole bunch of Flowers in your bosom
for a halfpenny; when many a single root of some of the Flowers now before you,
have cost me, ten, twenty, nay thirty pounds.


GRUB. Mercy on me; -- why you make me tremble at the very Idea.


MR. TINTEM. Why should you tremble about it, when I have told you it is my
Hobbyhorse; and there are many of your high-flying dashers of the Turf, will
give you a thousand or fifteen hundred guineas for a Hobbyhorse, that shall
crack a hole in the Fortune, or break the neck of his Rider, before he has had
him a Week.


GRUB. Mercy on us; -- when I think on the follies and extravagancies of the
age, I bless my stars, that I happened to be born with so much prudence about
me.


MR. TINTEM. Come, come, Mr. Prudence, do not arrogate so much to your own
merit; -- you have got your Hobbyhorse too; -- I am told that you had the
liberality, when you was at Mr. Lottum's Auction the other day, to give twenty
guineas for a frame of dead Butterflies.


GRUB. Why that is neither here or there, as the saying is -- We will not talk
of them there things just now, but as to the matter of that, I don't know why I
should not have my Hobbyhorse, as you call it, as well as any body else.


MR. TINTEM. To be sure -- to be sure; -- yours you know is a fly, and mine is
a flower, that is the difference -- so we will drop the present parley, and
look before us.


Enter MR. WILLINGFORD, MISS TINTEM, DOLLY and GABY, behind the Yew Hedge.
GABY. There they are, hard at it.


MISS TINTEM. Hold your impertinence, Mr, Simpleton, if we should be
discovered, it will mar all. (aside)


MR. TINTEM. Here Mr, Grub, here is a flower for you, what do you think I call
this.


GRUB. Nay, I cannot tell.


MR. TINTEM. Did you never see a sign which bore a resemblance to this.


GRUB. A sign? -- I have seen the sign of the Flower-de-Lucey; the Rose and
Crown, and the Scotch Thistle, which I suppose is one of the Flowers of
Edinborough.

[an inward laugh from behind.
MR. TINTEM. Aye, but that is not the Idea -- did you never see the sign of a
General like this flower?


GRUB. A General!


Mr. TINTEM. Aye, a General?


GRUB. No truly.


MR. TINTEM. Why then, I Will tell you -- That is the Duke of Cumberland.


GRUB. The Duke of Cumberland!


MR. TINTEM. Aye, the Great Duke of Cumberland; -- that flower made its first
appearance in the Botanical world, in the Rebellion, Forty-five; -- was named
in honor of the British hero of that day, and such a flower as this is enough
to immortalize the memory of any General in the world.


GRUB. What, is it an Evergreen, then?

[a tittering from behind.
MR. TINTEM. An Evergreen? -- Bless the man -- Why, you seem to have no Idea of
vegetation at all; -- no more taste for a flower, than I have for a dead
butterfly.


GRUB. Yes, I have generally got a good taste for them, when they produce a
good smell to me, (smelling) but this flower seems to have no smell at all.


MR. TINTEM. Psha; -- what the Duce has smell to do with the beauty of a
Flower; -- it is the Color we look at -- the color.


GRUB. Odds so, -- I suppose so.


GABY. What a couple of comical creatures, ha, ha, ha. (from behind)


GRUB. Wist, Wist! -- I heard a strange kind of noise just now -- you hav'nt
any Varment about the Garden, have you -- no Pole-cats or Weasels -- I am
strangely fearful of those kind of gentry; -- and as to a Rat! -- the very
sight of a Rat would turn my whole mast of blood into a posset. (shows great
apprehensions, which causes a laugh from behind) There again! I am sure there
are Varment about us.


MR. TINTEM. Vermin -- the Devil! -- It Is only some of those cursed Magpies who
pestre the garden every day for the sake of the cherries.


GRUB. Magpies! I hate your Magpies, they are the most hateful omnious bird
that flies. -- I was at Cuckold's point the other day, when I happened to be
crossed by one of those infernal Chatter-boxes, and in a minute or two after, I
had the misfortune to break both my shins over a Hog-trough at my Cousin
Crumplet's the Baker's door, which laid me up for a week.

[a laugh again.
GRUB. There again -- there are certainly Varment. (shows much fear.


MR. TINTEM. The Magpies, I tell you, the Magpies, -- Look you here my friend
Grub; since you are fond of a flower that has got a smell -- Here is one I
fancy that will tickle your taste, and your smell at the same time (Grub takes
up the flower pot) Aye, that is right -- take it up and smell to it -- Put on
your Spectacles, and look at it -- there is a Turban, there is your Furr, there
is the very Sash and Sabre of the Emperor himself.


GRUB. Emperor!


MR. TINTEM. Aye, Emperor; -- that is the Emperor of Morocco! --


GRUB. The Emperor of Morocco; why you deal in nothing but grand names -- This
flower, I perceive has got a charming smell, this is something like a Flower;
the Emperor of Morocco; -- grand, very grand, -- a fine sounding name, I
protest. (Grub turns up his eyes with a kind of rapsodical ardour, and by
accident discovers a fine butterfly, lets drop the flower pot, and tumbles over
it, then gets up in a hurry with his hat in his hand, pursuing the butterfly,
and crying out) Damme there goes the King of Bohemia!


MR. TINTEM. (In a great rage, runs and picks up the broken pot and the flower,
crying) Damn your King of Bohemia.


GRUB. Damn your Emperor of Morocco! I would not have lost my king of Bohemia,
for all the Emperors in the world -- no, not the Emperor of the Moon.


MR. TINTEM. You wretch, you Nonentity, you thing without an Idea!


GRUB. You fool, you Frantic, you Dasey-hunter, you stem of a Dog-rose, you bud
of a Crocus, you stinking root of a Daffy down-dilly; I would not have lost my
King of Bohemia for all the nonsensical flowers in your garden.


MR. TINTEM. Why, you Catterpiller, you Bug, you Beetle, you Gnat, you Grub --
I would not have had my Emperor destroyed for all the contemptible collection
of Insects which you have been scraping together these thirty years; -- and
give me leave to tell you, Sir, that you behave like a dirty fellow.


GRUB. Damme, Sirrah, if it were not for fear of your taking the Law of me, I
would tell you a bit of my mind.


MR, TINTEM. Mind, mind? -- why you have no mind, you are a mere insect; -- but
I Will close your mouth for you presently -- I Will lop your greedy expectations, I
warrant you.


GRUB. I defy you -- I defy you.


MR. TINTEM. My Niece, you Cockatrice, my Niece.


GRUB. Your Niece, I would not give a fig for your Niece.


MR. TINTEM. That is as false as you are foolish; you Rattlesnake, it is --
"You would say very different things, and tell a different story, if her
fortune were before you -- you would give all your soul for that" -- I wish
poor Willingford was here with all my heart; you should see that I would give
her to him before your face.


GRUB. "No, you would not -- you love yourself too much for that -- I know how
fond you would be of giving her fortune to a Beggar; I dare you to that -- I
dare you to that!"


MR. TINTEM. "I shall choke with rage."


[They walk petulantly backward and forward upon the stage crossing each
other.] DOLLY. "Now, Sir -- Now my dear Miss -- now is your time!"


GABY. "Aye, now or never."


MR WILL. "Aye, now is the time indeed."


MISS TINTEM. "I am terrified to death."


MR. WILL. "Never fear, have a good heart, think of the event; -- do not shrink,
while such a plea as ours depends upon the moment."

[From behind.
MR. TINTEM. "Mr. Grub, give me leave to tell you, Sir, that I think you have
behaved like an arrant scoundrel."


GRUB. "Take care what you say, or I Will make the Gentlemen of the great Wig
shake their heads at you; -- they will make a good breakfast of the word
Scoundrel, in Westminster Hall, I warrant you -- therefore I would advise you
to take care what you say.."


MR. TINTEM. "You ought rather to be afraid of what I may do."


GRUB. "Why, what would you do?"


MR. TINTEM. "What!"


GRUB. "Aye, what?"


MR. TINTEM. "If young Willingford was here, I would convince you in a minute."


GRUB. "You would be for presenting your Niece to him I suppose?"


MR. TINTEM. Cripple me if I would not.


GRUB. Cripple me if I think you would.


MR. TINTEM. Would to Heaven he was here this moment.

[MR. WILL. Coming forward with MISS TINTEM in his hand] Now my dear Miss Tintem.

[they both go up to Mr. Tintem and kneel at his feet.]
MR. WILL. Here we both are, ready for your gracious confirmation.


(GRUB and TINTEM start back and look with amasement) Mr. TINTEM. How is this
-- you have taken me by surprise -- this act is rather sudden upon me -- yet,
after all, may I be annihilated if I be not glad of it. -- Now you Hornet, you
Beetle, you Butterfly -- you shall see that I will keep my word -- you shall
see that I will dare to do, what you dared me to -- take her lad -- she is
yours -- and Heaven bless you both together!


DOLLY. (falls on her knees) Heaven bless your Honor! for this dear
good-natured action.


GRUB, Well said, Mrs. Nettle-top.


GABY. Huzza! -- huzza! -- huzza! -- The Emperor of Morocco for ever! -- down
with the King of Bohemia! down with your Grubs and your Catterpillars.


GRUB. I don't like this -- he has played me the devil of a trick -- I don't
like it -- I knew those cursed magpies would prove omnious. (aside) So Master
Tintem, you have finished the business rarely, upon my word.


MR. TINTEM. Aye; and it is finished as it ought to be -- I hope I have
convinced you that I am not only a Florist, but a Pugilist! -- I think I have
given you a fair trimming; -- and now I will sing with the Poet -- "Revenge,
revenge, revenge shall appease my restless spright."

[sings much agitated.
GRUB. Why you seem as if you were crazy, and foam at the mouth like a mad dog;
-- you have made a fine hand of it, truly, to give your Niece to such a
vagabond as that, who has not got a farthing in the world, and, in all
likelihood, will spend her fortune in a month.


MR. WILL. Sir, I will convince you, that he has bestowed his Niece upon one
that loves her, and one that is too sensible of the principles of a gentleman,
and a man of honor, than to suffer himself and this amiable lady to be treated
with ill-manners, by such a scoundrel as you are.


GRUB. Take care what you say; a scoundrel, Sirrah!


MR. WILL. You shall see that I neither fear what I say, or care what I do, if
you don't leave the room immediately, you shall feel the force of my
resentment. "In respect to such a bloated piece of consequence as you are -- Go
home and take this, by way of hastening your journey -- There, -- there --
there! take that -- " [kicks him off the stage.


GRUB. Oh, you Villain, I Will make you bleed for this treatment, I will.

[Exit GRUB.
DOLLY. Take care of the Varment!


GABY. Take care of the Magpies!


DOLLY. And your Cousin Crumplet's Hog-Trough.

[hollowing after him.
Mr. TINTEM. He is rightly served -- and now since the matter is over, I am
glad that it is done, as it is done.


MISS TINTEM. It gives me infinite pleasure, Sir, to hear you say so much.


MR. TINTEM. And I feel a secret satisfaction in having done so much. But
Willingford, how came you here so opportunely?


Mr. WILL. Upon my Hobbyhorse. Sir.


MR. TINTEM. What you have got your Hobbyhorse too, have you? -- Pray, what kind
of a Hobby did you ride.


MR. WILL. My Hobby was a little Rosey boy, with airy wings called Love, led by
a blind capricious guide, called Fortune, who from my cradle has for ever
thwarted me in my paths; but now the bounteous Goddess has brought me to the
fountain of sublunary bliss, and crowned me with the hand of this fair Lady,
whom I love dearer than myself, and will cherish with the utmost efforts of my
Life.


MR. TINTEM. Well said -- You have honestly and fairly expressed yourself, and
confirmed me also, that I have done right in this Act; -- you have helped to
take away a load, which hung heavily about my Heart; and it shall be my
Hobbyhorse in future, to make you both as happy as I can.


The PRINTER having inadvertently omitted Printing in Page 16 the SONG sung by
Mr. DIGNUM, in ACT I. SCENE III. begs leave to apologize for inserting it in
this Place.

SONG. SALLY IN OUR ALLEY.
I.
Of all the girls that are so smart.
There Is none like our Sally,
She is the darling of my heart,
And she lives in our Alley.
There Is never a lady in the land,
That Is half so sweet as Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
And she lives in our Alley.
II.
Her father he makes cabbage nets,
And through the streets does cry 'em,
Her mother she sells laces long,
To such as please to buy 'em:
But sure such folks could never beget
So sweet a girl as Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
And she lives in our Alley.
III.
When she is by, I leave my work,
I love her so sincerely;
My master comes like any Turk,
And bangs me most severely,
But let him bang his belly full,
I bear it all for Sally,
She is the darling of my heart,
And she lives in our Alley.
IV.
Of all the days that is in the week,
I dearly love but one day,
And that is the day that comes betwixt
A Saturday and Monday;
For then I Am dressed, all in my best,
To walk abroad with Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
And she lives in our Alley.
V.
My master carries me to Church,
And often am I blamed;
Because I leave 'em in the lurch,
As soon as text is named;
I leave the Church in sermon time,
And slink away to Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
And she lives in our Alley.
VI.
When Christmas comes about again,
Oh, then I shall have money;
I Will hoard it up, and box and all,
And give it to my honey:
Ah, would it were ten thousand pounds,
I Would give it to my Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
And she lives in our Alley.
VII.
My Master and the neighbors all,
Make game of me and Sally;
And, but for her, I Would better be
A slave and row a galley;
But when my seven long years are out,
Oh, then I Will marry Sally;
Oh, then we'll wed, and then we'll bed,
But not in our Alley.
FINIS
A New Catalogue of Publications just Printed for ALEX. HOGG, At the
King's-Arms, No. 16, Paternoster-Row, London; and Sold by all other Booksellers
and Newscarriers in England, Scotland, and Ireland.
I. Mr PALMER'S New Spouter's Companion; Or, Complete Theatrical Remembrancer.
Containing a new Collection of all the most esteemed PROLOGUES and EPILOGUES
written by distinguished Wits, to accompany approved Tragedies, Comedies,
Operas, Farces, etc. Price 1s. Embellished with an elegant Frontispiece.

II. VERNON'S London and Country Songster; Or, Universal Banquet of Vocal
Music. Including a select Collection of the most admired English and Scotch
Songs, Ballads, Catches, Glees, Duets, Airs, and Cantatas, which have been
sung, and received applause at the Public Theaters, Vauxhall, Ranelagh,
Sadler's Wells, Astley's, and other Places of Amusement. Price only 1s. with an
Engraving.

III. MELMOTH'S MODERN Universal Story Teller; Or, a New Picture of Human Life.
Consisting of a greater Variety of valuable Matter, calculated for the pleasure
and Improvement of Readers of every Class, than was ever given in any Volume of
the Kind. The whole carefully selected from the most approved English Authors.
Price 3s. bound.

IV. KING's New London Spy, Or, A Complete and Modern Twenty-four Hours Ramble
through the Bills of Mortality. Containing a New and Universal Disclosure of
the secret, nocturual, and diurnal Transactions in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, and the Borough of Southwark.

*Be careful to ask for King's New London Spy, embellished with an humorous
Frontispiece Price only 1s. 6d.

V. Mr. PORNEY's Weekly Novelist; Or Entertaining Companion Being a New and
Complete Collection of interesting Novels and Romances, faithfully translated
from the French, and embellished with elegant Copper Plates. The whole
comprised in only to Weeky Numbers, at 6d. each, may be had by one or two at a
time, or the whole may be had in a large Octavo Volume, Price 6s. neatly bound.

V. The New Art of Speaking; Or, A Complete Modern System of Rhetoric,
Elocution and Oratory. C^mprising all the Rules of those elegant Arts, and
including every Thing necessary to formo the persuasive and accomplished
Speaker, and to give Propriety not only to the Words but Actions of the Orator.

N. B. Be careful to ask for The New Art of Speaking, embellished with an
elegant Frontispiece. Price 2s.

VII. MELMOTH's NEW AND COMPLETE Roman History. Containing a New and Authentic
HISTORY of the Western and Eastern EMPIRES of ROME: the latter of which, though
absolutely necessary for Scholars, as well as other Readers, is entirely
omitted in every other simliar Work.

Adorned with a Frontispiece, Price 3s. neatly bound, or 2s. 6d. sewed.

VIII. MORGAN's New Complete Sportsman; Or, the Town and Country Gentleman's
Recreation. Price 3s. bound embellished with a Frontispiece.

IX. MIDDLETON's NEW ABRIDGEMENT OF THE History of England; Embellished with a
Frontispiece. Price 3s. neatly bound, or 2s. 6d. sewed.

X. ARNOLD's NEW and IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF AMERICA. Containing a complete
Historical and Chronological Account of the First Discovery of America, the
conquest of Mexico and Peru, and of the Soil, Climate, and Natural Productions
of all the Countries in North and South America, and the West India Islands.
Including the whole Transactions of the late War between AMERICA and GREAT
BRITAIN.

Adorned with an emblematical Frontispiece Price 3s. 6d. neatly bound, or 3s.
sewed.

XI. MELMOTH's New and Complete Abridgement of the GRECIAN HISTORY, From the
Original of Greece, to the entire Reduction of that ancient and renowned Empire
by the Romans. *Be careful to ask for MELMOTH's NEW GRECIAN HISTORY. Price 3s.
neatly bound, illustrated with an accurate Map of Ancient Greece.

XII. Embellished with Elegant Copper Plates. MELMOTH's New Edition of the
Celebrated Adventures of Telemachus, The Son of Ulysses, king of Ithaca, etc.
in Greece, and one of the Princes who conducted the siege of Troy. Originally
written in French by Francis Salignac de la Motte Fenelon, la te Archbishop of
of Cambray, in the French Netherlands. Now translated from the best Paris
Editions, with Improvements, by William Henry Melmoth, Esquire. The whole being
just printed off, may be had in 24 numbers, one or more at a time, Price 6d.
each, or the whole together, Price 16s. bound in Calf and Lettered.

XIII MELMOTH's New Quarto Edition of the Whole Genuine WORKS OF HOMER, The
Celebrated GRECIAN POET. Including New and Accurate Editions of the ILIAD, the
ODYSSEY, etc. Together with Memoirs of the LIFE of HOMER, valuable Explanatory
Notes, and most elegant Quarto Copper Plates, by the most eminent Artists.

N. B. Melmoth's New Quarto Edition of Homer, being just printed off in only
Forty Numbers, one or more may be had at a time, Price only 6d. each, or the
Whole bound in Calf and lettered, Price 1l. 4s.

XIV. MURRAY's New, Complete, and Universal History of Scotland, From FERGUS,
the First King of Scotland, to his present Majesty GEORGE III. Embellished with
an elegant emblematical Frontispiece, and a new accurate Map of Scotland, Price
only 3s. neatly bound, or 2s. 6d. sewed.

XV. Embellished with a Portrait of VIRGIL, 30 other plates, finely engraved
MELMOTH's NEW and BEAUTIFUL QUARTO EDITION of the Whole of VIRGIL's WORKS, The
Famous ROMAN HISTORIAN and POET: Containing the AEN, EID GEORGICS and
Pastorals. To which are now added, Copious NOTES, Critical and Explanatory.
Also Authentic Memoirs of the LIFE of Virgil; and New Essays and Dissertations
on Epic, Heroic, Didactic, and Pastoral Poetry, with an Index to the Whole.

Be careful to Order MELMOTH's VIRGIL Printed in Quarto with 31 Copper Plates.

*This Edition being just completed, in 30 Numbers the Public may take the Work
in by one, or more Numbers at a Time, price only Sixpence each, the Whole
together bound in Calf and Lettered, Price 19s.

XVI HOWARD's NEW ROYAL. ENCYCLOPAEDIA and CYCLOPAEDIA; OR, COMPLETE, MODERN,
AND UNIVERSAL Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, ON AN ENTIRE NEW AND IMPROVED
PLAN. And including all the Modern Improvements and latest Discoveries on the
various Subjects: Containing a New, Full, Complete, General, Accurate, and
Copious Digest and Display of the Whole Theory and Practice of the Liberal and
Mechanical ARTS; and all the various respective SCIENCES, Human and Divine.

Wherein all the respective SCIENCES are arranged into general and complete
SYSTEMS and the ARTS digested into distinct TREATISES: Also, all the various
detached Parts of Knowledge Alphabitically Arranged, and copiously explained,
according to the Best and most Respectable Authorities.

By G. S. HOWARD, Esquire. L L. D. and F. R. S. And many other Gentlemen of
distinguished Learning and Abilities, in the Arts and Sciences.

The Whole of this Work being just printed off and thoroughly completed in 150
Numbers, may be had by One Two, Three, Four, or more Numbers at a Time, price
only Sixpence each, agreeable to the Convenience or Inclination of the
Purchasers, or the Whole may be had by Gentlemen or Ladies together in 150
Numbers, embellished with near 200 Copper Plates, price Sixpence each, being
3l. 15s. for the whole set Complete, or elegantly bound in THREE Large Volumes,
Calf and Lettered, Price 5l. plain, or 5l. 5s. gilt.

XVII. WALPOOL's New British Traveller; Or, A Complete Modern Universal Display
of Great Britain and Ireland. Being a New, Complete, Accurate, and Extensive
Tour through England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, the Isles of Man, Wight,
Scilly, Hebrides, Jersey, Sark, Gernsey, Alderney, and other Islands adjoining
to and dependant on the Crown of Great Britain. Embellished with a most elegant
and complete Set of numerous Copper Plates. Now publishing in 60 Numbers, one
or two of which may be had at a Time, at 6d. each, or the Whole in a very large
handsome Volume in Folio, Price 1l. 18s. neatly bound in Calf and Lettered.

XVIII. ANDERSON's Folio Edition of Captain Cook's Voyages, etc. ROUND THE
WORLD. With all the splendid large Folio Copper Plates, Maps, Charts, etc.
accurately copied from the Originals. Now publishing in 80 Sixpenny Numbers,
one or more of which may be had at a Time: the Whole making a very large
handsome Volume in Folio, Price 2l. 8s. bound.

XIX. HOGG's OCTAVO Edition of Captain Cook's Celebrated Voyages, With
Copper Plates, Maps, Charts, etc. The public will please to observe, that the
correct and genuine OCTAVO Edition is printed only for Mr. HOGG, No. 16,
Paternoster-Row, in Sixpenny Numbers only, one or more of which may be had at a
Time. The Whole now publishing in only 60 Numbers, making Four large handsome
Volumes in Octavo, Price 1l. 14s. bound.

XX. MILLAR's New, Authentic, and Universal SYSTEM OF GEOGRAPHY, Being a
complete modern history and description of the Whole World. Embellished with
the best and most numerous set of whole Sheet Maps, Charts Plans, and other
beautiful and elegant Copper Plates ever Published. To accommodate those who
are not possessed of this Work, and who may not be inclined to purchase it in
Weekly Numbers, any Person may, be supplied with the Whole, together, in 80
Numbers price unbound, 2l. or, bound in calf and lettered, 2l. 8s. in one very
large Volume, Folio.

XXI. THORNTON'S New, Complete and Universal History, Description, and Survey
Of the Cities of London, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, etc. Including
not only all the Parishes within the Bills of Mortality, but likewise the
Towns, Villages, Palaces, Seats, and Country, to the extent of Twenty Miles
round, with all the late Improvements. Embellished with a most elegant and
complete Set of numerous Copper Plates. -- Now publishing in numbers, one or
two of which may be had at a time, price only 6d. each. The Whole comprised
into 60 Numbers, making a very large handsome Volume in Folio, Price 1l. 18s.
neatly bound in Calf and Lettered.

XXII. BARNARD's New, Comprehensive and Complete History of England, From the
very earliest Period to the present Time Embellished with upwards of One
Hundred and Twenty beautiful and grand Copper-plate Engravings, hitherto
unequalled in any other Work of the Kind whatever. This Work may be taken in by
Numbers every Week or oftener, Price 6d. each, or the whole in 70 Numbers,
handsomely bound in calf and lettered, in a large Folio Volume, 2l. 2s.

XXIII. BOSWELL's New Collection of Elegant Picturesque Views of the
Antiquities of England and Wales, Being a grand Copper-plate Repository of
Elegance, Taste, and Entertainment. Containing superb Views of all the most
remarkable Ruins and Ancient Buildings, etc. etc. Finely Engraved by the most
celebrated Engravers. -- The Whole accompanied by elegant Letter-Press
Descriptions of the several Places, comprising the whole principal substance of
the late Capt. Grose's Works. This Work being just completed, may be had in
Numbers one or more at a time, Price 6d. each, or the whole in 100 Numbers,
handsomely bound in Calf and Lettered, Price 3l.

XXIV. The New Newgate Calendar; Or, Complete Register and Chronicle of Old
Bailey Trials, etc. Embellished with the very best set of curious
Copper Plates, executed in the most striking manner. The whole comprised in
only Fifty Numbers, which may be had by one, two* three, four, or more at a
time, price 6d. each, or bound in 5 Vols large Octavo, 1l. 10s.

The New Lady's Magazine, Or, Polite, Entertaining, and Fashionable Monthly
Companion For the Fair Sex. Embellished with Plates and Songs set to Music,
Price only Sixpence. Also The New London Magazine, Or, New Gentleman's
Complete Monthly Repository of Knowledge, Instruction, and Entertainment, Price
only Sixpence. Embellished with Plates.
The Public are requested to be careful in ordering any of the above
Publications by their particular Titles, and to observe, that they are PRINTED
for ALEX. HOGG.

Of the Booksellers, Stationers, etc. may also be had the following useful and
entertaining Books, just Published by Mr. Hogg. MILLER's New Folio Edition of
Buffon's Natural History, complete in Sixty Numbers, Price 6d. each with Cuts,
or the Whole Bound in Calf and Lettered, Price 1l. 18s. Dr. Wright's New Family
Bible, with Notes and Copper Plates, in Eighty Numbers, Price 2l. 8s, neat
bound in Calf and Lettered. Mason's large Octavo Edition of Bunyan's Pilgrim's
Progress, Price 5s. bound. Bradshaw's New Quarto Edition of Josephus's Works,
in Forty Numbers with Copper Plates, Price 1l. 4s. bound in Calf and Lettered.
Dr. Worthington's New Whole Duty of Man, Price 6s. bound, with Cuts. Dr.
Wright's Complete Edition of Fox's Book of Martyrs, In Eighty Numbers, Price
2l. 8s. bound in Calf and Lettered, with elegant Prints. Fellows's History of
the Bible in Verse, in Four Volumes neatly bound, Price 10s. Dr. Wright's New
Life of Christ, Printed Complete in Folio, and comprised in Thirty-six Numbers,
with Plates, Price 1l. 4s. bound in Calf and Lettered. Dr. Wright's Folio
Edition of the Common Prayer Book, with a full Explanation of the Whole
Service, Public and Private, and Elegant Copper Plates, Published in Thirty-six
Numbers Price 1l. 4s. handsomely bound.


Also this Day are Published the following Articles: Brown's New and Complete
English Letter-Writer, price 2s. bound Brown's Young Man's Companion, 1s. Mrs.
Price's New Book of Cookery, 1s. Worthington's Family Prayers. 3s. bound
Worthington's Week's Preparation, 1s bd. Bettesworth's New Universal Ready
Reckoner 1s. bound. Bettesworth's New Tables of Interest. 1s. 6d. bound.
Francis Quarle's Emblems, Complete, a new and the only elegant Edition, with
near One Hundred Cuts, Price 7s. bound Fellows's Grace Triumphant, a Poem, 1s.
6d Fellows's new Protestant Alarm, 2s. 6d. Fellows's Hymns in Various Metres,
4d. The Town and Country Jester. 1s. Sir. John Fielding's Jests, 1s.
Cunningham's new Jest Book. 6d. King's new Frauds of London Detected, 1s.
King's new Covent Garden Register, containing many interesting Memoiers and
Lives, price only 2s. The Farmer's Wife, 1s. 6d. Gordon's Family Physician, 2s.
Maple's New and Complete Horse Doctor, 1s. Mr. Freeman's Lover's Instructor 1s.
Girton's Pigeon-Fancier, 1s. 6d. Price's Whole Art of Consectionary, 2s.
Thompson's New Bird-Fancier, 1s. Thompson's New Gardner's Calendar, 1s. Hogg's
New English Farmer, 1s. 6d. Powell's Universal Fortune Tellers, Stanhope's New
Polite Tutoress, 1s.


A very liberal Allowance made to all Merchants, Captains, etc. who purchase an
Assortment of the above Variety of Articles for America, the East and West
Indies, etc. -- all Country and Town Booksellers, Stationers, Dealers, etc.
supplied with an Assortment of the above Books for Sale, by ordering the
Payment of Read Money, on delivery of the above Parcels in London.


