THE CAUSE OF THE DELUGE DEMONSTRATED.
BEFORE I proceed to my present Demonstration of the Cause of the Deluge, I
must premise this, That in my New Theory of the Earth, especially as improved
and corrected in the Second Edition, I have evi^ently shown, that in Case a
Comet passed by, be^^re the Earth, in its annual Course, on the 17th Day of the
Second Month, from the Autumnal Equinox, or Nov. 28. in the 2349th Year before
the Christian Era, the Phenomenon of Nature and History, and particularly the
Mosaic Account of the Deluge of Noah, which are no otherwise to be ac^ounted
for, are exactly explained; that the Calcu^ations and Proportions, wherever
we can come (...) them, are on that Hypothesis right, agreeable to (...)
another, to Ancient, especially Sacred History, and to the System of Astronomy;
that there are Tra^s in Ancient Books of a Tradition, that a Comet ^id appear
at the very Beginning of the Deluge; ^at the very Month and Day mentioned by
Moses (...) such its Beginning, is attested to by other Old ^ecords, and, on
this Hypothesis, by Astronomical ^alculations also: whence I concluded that it
was most highly probable, or rather physically demonstrable, that a Comet did
pass by at that time, and was, under the Conduct of the Divine Providence, and
as his Instrument in punishing a wicked World, the Cause of that Deluge. The
only thing wanting, was, to demonstrate from the Period of some Comet, and its
Situation in the Heavens, Astronomically stated and computed, that such a Comet
did actually come by at that very time: which if it could be once shown, the
whole must be owned as certain, and demonstrated, and all the natural
Corollaries therefrom must be allowed as true, even by the Obstinate and
Incredulous. This indeed at first was looked upon by me as not at all to be
expected; since we then barely began to know, or rather strongly to conjecture
that Comets did revolve about the Sun in settled Periods, but without being
able to determine any one of those Periods. But of late God has so blessed the
Labors of the Learned; and this Part of Astronomy is so much improved,
especially by the farther Pains and Observations of the great Inventor himself,
Sir Isaac Newton; whose Name will never be forgotten while Mathematics and
Astronomy are preserved among Mankind; and by the laborious Calculations of the
acute Dr. Halley, on the Principles laid down by the former, that what was a
few Years ago almost despaired of, is now in great Measure discovered, and we
know, not only that one Comet has come round three or four times already in
later Ages, viz. A.D. 1456, 1531, 1607, and 1682, and will no doubt come round
again A.D. 1758, as making its Period in about 75 Years; that another has
probably come round in the same later Ages twice already, viz. A.D. 1532, and
1661; and so is to return A D. 1789, or 1790, as making its Period in about 129
Years: But, which is the greatest Discovery of all, that the last most
remarkable Comet, whose Descent into our Regions has occasioned almost all the
modern solid Knowledge we have relating to the whole Cometick System it self,
has also several times been seen already within the time of certain Records; I
mean in the 44th Year before Christ, and again A.D. 531, or 532; and yet again
A.D. 1106, besides this its last Appearance A.D. 1680, whereby we know that it
revolves in about 575 Years. This last Comet I may well call the most
remarkable one that ever appeared; since besides the former Consideration, I
shall presently show, that it is no other than that very Comet which came by
the Earth at the Beginning of Noah's Deluge, and which was the Cause of the
same. Now considering the Premises, I shall only have occasion, in order to my
present Design, to prove these five Things concerning it. (1.) That no other of
the known Comets could pass by the Earth at the Beginning of the Deluge. (2.)
That this Comet was of the same Bigness with that which passed by at that time.
(3.) That its Orbit was then in a due Position to pass by at that Time. (4.)
That its descending Node was then also in a due Position for the same Passage
by. (5.) That its Period exactly agrees to the same time. Or, in short, that
all the known Circumstances of this Comet do correspond, and that it actually
passed by on or about that very Year, and on or about that very Day of the Year
when the Deluge began. All which Things I shall demonstrate in their Order.

I. None of the other Comets yet known, I mean of the 21 in Dr. Halley's Table
and my Solar System, could be that which passed by the Earth at the Beginning
of the Deluge. This appears by these certain Arguments following.

(1.) None of them appear to have been of a due Bigness: For the Phenomenon of
the Deluge, as I New Theor. 2d Edit. Co^^. 2. Lem. 8^. and p. 203, 204.
have elsewhere showed, require a small one in Comparison of the Earth, whereas
the rest of the Comets seem to have been commonly larger than it.

(2.) None of their descending Orbits are duly situate, I mean between 90 and
100 Degrees from Aries: which Position is yet absolutely necessary in this
Case. For the Precession of the Equinox, which is about 50 Degrees, added to
the 46 Degrees that the Earth was distant from Aries when the Flood began, must
suppose the descending Orbit of the Comet to be now between 90 and 100 Degrees
from Aries: at which place none of the descending Orbits of the other Comets
are now situate; as Dr. Halley's Table, and my Solar System grounded thereon,
will readily show. (3.) None of the other's Nodes are so situate, as is
necessary to bring the Comet near enough to our Earth: I mean between 90 or 100
Degrees from Aries; and so as to cross the Plane of the Ecliptic very near to
the Distance of the Earth from the Sun; as is also plain from the same Table
and System. Nay indeed, the wrong Situation of the descending Orbits, noted
under the last Head, renders this due Situation of the Nodes plainly
impossible. For it being necessary, that the Orbit it self intersect the
Ecliptic it self in the 17th Degree of Taurus; this cannot possibly be in such
a Situation of the Orbit, as that we have already mentioned to belong to all
the rest of the known Comets. So that these other Comets were utterly incapable
of being instrumental in the Deluge, even tho their Periods should any of them
agree; which yet we know not that any of them do.

II. This Comet was of the same Bigness with that which passed by at that time;
I mean a very small one, and only 10 times as large as the Moon. V^^^^^^
This appears by Mr. Flamsteed's Determination of its apparent Diameter, about
20 when it was nearly as far off as the Sun: whereas he supposes that of the
Moon at the same Distance to be about 6. So that if due Allowance be made for
that large and dense Part of the Atmosphere, which hides the Nucleus or Comet
it self from us, suppose 7, the Diameter of the solid Body it self will be only
13. Now the Cube of 13, or 2197, is to the Cube of 6, or 216, as about 10 to 1.
Whence it appears, that this Comet is about ten times so great as the Moon, or
so great as the Earth, as the real Comet that occasioned the Deluge ought to be.

III. The descending Part of the Orbit of this Comet was about the 17th degrees. of
Taurus at the Time of the Deluge, as that of the Comet at the Deluge must have
been. For this descending Orbit is now in the 2d Degree of Cancer; and if we
allow 46 Degrees for its apparent Motion since the Deluge, which is very little
different from the real Precession of the Equinox, the main, if not only
Occasion of it, it will appear to have been in the 17th Degree of Taurus at
that Time, according to the foregoing Computation.

IV. The Descending Node of this Comet, which is of the greatest Consideration
here, and liable to the greatest Variety of all, does also exceeding well agree
in the present Case. For this is now in the 3d Degree of Cancer; and if we
allow, as before, 46 Degrees for its apparent Motion since the Deluge, or for
the real Precession of the Equinox, the main, if not only Cause of it, it will
appear to have been in the 17th of Taurus at that Time also. Nay, if we allow
the least Inequality in these two Motions, or the least Alteration of the
Planes either of the Ecliptic or of the Comets Orbit, or of both, as we justly
may, both from the Physical Causes, and Astronomical Observations, we may
suppose them still nearer the Earth's Distance from the Sun, and so more
exactly suitable to the Case of the Deluge.

V. The Period of this Comet most exactly agrees to the same Time, I mean to 7
Revolutions in 4028 Years, the Interval from the Deluge till its last
Appearance 1680. ^^cip. (...) ^ 4^5.
For, as Sir Isaac Newton first observed, from its Elliptick Curvature before
it disappeared, that its Period must be in general above 500 Years; so has he
and Dr. Halley since observed, that the same Comet has been seen four times,
viz. the 44th Year before Christ. A.D. 531 or 532, A.D. 1106, and A.D. 1680,
and that by consequence it makes a Revolution in about 575 Years. Now if we
make a very small Allowance for the old Periods before Christ, and suppose
that, one with another, it has revolved in 575 Years, we shall find that 7 such
Periods amount to 4028 Years, exactly, according to that Number since the
Deluge. This is so remarkable an Observation, and so surprising, that it will
deserve a particular Demonstration from the original Authors themselves. To
begin then with the first of the Appearances recorded in later History, I mean
that in the 44th Year before Christ, the Year that Julius Caesar was slain,
^en. Not. (...) I. V^^. C. 1^. (...) H^st. Not. ^. II. C. 24. (...).
we have no fewer nor lesser Persons than Seneca, Suetonius, Plutarch and
Pliny, to attest it; and the last, as bringing Augustus's own Words for his
Voucher. Take the Account in those Words, as being the most authentic and
remarkable. 'On those very Days, says Augustus, when I was exhibiting some
Games to the People, [begun about Sept. 26.] a Comet appeared for 7 Days, and
was seen in the Northern Part of Heaven. It rose about the 11th Hour of the
Day: It was a remarkable one, and visible all over the World. The common People
believed, that it signified the Reception of the Soul of Caesar into the Number
of the immortal Gods. On which Account the Image of this Star was added to that
Statue representing Caesar's Head, which we a while after consecrated in the
Forum'. Accordingly it is known that some of Caesar's Coins have a Star upon
them, for a Memorial of this Comet; and observable that Virgil hints at the
same also, Aeneid. VIII.
Patrium aperitur v^rtice sidus. Plutarch's, Seneca's and Suetonius's Words are
almost the very same that are included in the Passage from Augustus, and so
need not be distinctly set down. Only the Time of its Rising is by Suetonius
set down about the 11 th Hour, without the Words of the Day, which the other
two have; and its Northern Position is only mentioned by Augustus himself. Now
if we interpret the 11th Hour, or 11th Hour of the Day, to be either 11 a clock
before Noon, or an Hour before Sunset, this will render the whole almost
incredible: it being next to impossible, that this Comet should be seen in the
Daytime. But the Romans then accounting Midnight the Beginning of their Day,
as is well known by Chronologers, we may reckon this 11th Hour to be 11 at
Night, and all will agree to the Comet before us; and it will show, that as it
had been concealed by cloudy Weather for some time, so it now appeared
ascending from the Sun, with its long and splendid Tail for a Week, before the
like cloudy Weather, or the Comet's too great Remoteness rendered it no longer
observable. Accordingly the Northern Position of this Comet, noted here by
Augustus, secures us still farther, that it must have been the same with that
A.D. 1680, which is ever in the same Position, at the same Place of its Orbit:
to say nothing of its remarkable Brightness, which I take to belong to its
Tail, and which rendered it so very remarkable then in the World: In which Point
it as well or better agrees with this, than with any other in the whole
Cometary System. So that on all these Accounts, the Comet seen then by the
Romans, and that seen A.D. 1680, must have been one and the same Comet. The
next Period when this Comet might be seen again, according to the foregoing
Time of its Revolution, was A.D. 531, or 532. When yet we hear nothing of it in
Hevelius's History of Comets. But then we have it in Lubienietz's more exact
Catalogue, out of Zonaras, the Original Historian, whose Words are these,
Annal. L. xiv. p. 61. 'In the 5th Year of the Emperor Justinian [ A.D. 531, or
532.] a Comet appeared, of that Sort which is called Lampadias. It sent its
bright Tail upward, and continued to shine 20 Days.' Which Words exactly agree
to this Comet. The next Period when it was to be expected, was A.D. 1106. at
which Time the Historians are full of their Accounts of it. Take those Accounts
in their own Words, as they stand in Hevelius and Lubienietz, who have given us
a most complete Collection of them in their Histories of Comets.

^^vath ex (...) 148. (...) ex (...).
A.D. 1106. We saw a Comet of wonderful Brightness, from the first Week in
Lent, until the Passion of our Lord. An extraordinary Star was seen to shine
this Year on Friday in the Evening, Southward and Westward, and appeared bright
for 25 Days together, and always at the same Hour.

(...)
A.D. 1106. in the Month of February, two Days after the New Moon, a great
Comet appeared South-Westward. (...) ^. 14^. gebert. (...)
A.D. 1106. a Comet appeared like a Fire, almost all the Month of February.

A very great Comet was seen in the Time of Lent. Praetorius adds, that the
Emperor Henry IV. died the same Year; which Calvisius also agrees to.

(...)
A.D. 1106. a Star, which we call a Comet, appeared.

A.D. 1106. a dreadful Comet appeared, from the first Week in Lent, till the
Vigil of Palm Sunday. The same Year the Emperor Henry IV. died.

On the Year of our Lord 1106, the 14th of the Calends of March, [ Feb. 16.] a
certain strange Star was discovered, and was seen to shine between the South
and West for 25 Days, after the same manner, and at the same Hour. It seemed to
be small and obscure; but that Light which went out from it was exceeding
bright, and a Splendour, like a great Beam, proceeded from the East and North,
and shot it self upon the same Star.

In these Testimonies, we may see that all the Circumstances of this Comet
agree to that of A.D. 1680. I mean the Smallness and Obscurity of its Nucleus,
the Brightness and Remarkableness of its Tail, its Position South-West, and the
Direction of its Tail North-East. So that there is no Reason (...) doubt, but
it was the very same. Only we must here note, that these two Periods were, one
with another, three Quarters of a Year shorter ^han the last Period. For from
September, in the ^4th Year before Christ, till February or March A. D. 1106.
are but 1148 Years, or two Periods of ^74 a-piece, one with another: whereas
from ^he same February or March A.D. 1106. till Febru^^y or March 1680/1, when
this Comet was about (...) same Position again, there are just 575 Years. (...)
is rather a Wonder, that the three last Periods (...) our Famous Comet are so
very nearly equal, ^^an that there is this small Inequality among ^^em. Nor is
it, by the way, any Wonder there^^re, that the four first Periods after the
Deluge are (...) be supposed one with another rather above 576 ^ears, to agree
exactly to that Time. It Is rather (...) Question whether the rest of the Comets
Periods ^ill prove any of them near so equal in Proportion, (...) even that
Allowance makes these to be. Accord^^gly, Sir Isaac Newton and Dr. Halley
rightly observe, Princip. p. 480. Praelect. Physico. Math. p. 358, 359.
^^at these Cometary Orbits are the most easily (...) sensibly disturbed by the
occasional Nearness of ^^eir Comets to other Bodies of all others; and so
considerable Inequalities are to be expected among them.

Note, (1.) That it is highly remarkable, that this is the only Comet yet
known, whose Node renders it capable of approaching very near the Body of the
Earth; and that the same Node is still so little remote from the Earth's Orbit,
as Dr. Halley well observes, that it brought this Comet about as near to the
same as the Moon this very last time. Hear his remarkable Words, and consider
the Consequence of them in this Matter. Synops. Comet. in calce.
'No Comet, says he, has hitherto threatened the Earth with a nearer Appulse
than that of 1680. For by Calculation, I find that November 11th 1h 6 after
Noon, that Comet was not above a Semidiameter of the Sun, (which I take to be
equal to the Distance of the Moon) to the Northwards of the Way of the Earth.
At which time, had the Earth been there, the Comet would, I think, have had a
Parallax equal to that of the Moon.' Nor can I pass over his following Words
without setting them down, they are so apposite to my present Purpose. 'The
former Observations, says he, are to be supposed as spoken to Astronomers. But
what might be the Consequences of so near an Appulse, or of a Contact, or
lastly of a Collision of these celestial Bodies, (which are none of them
impossible) I leave to be discussed by the Philosophers.'

(2.) Since this Comet's Period is 575 Years, its middle Distance must be about
5,600,000,000 Miles from the Sun; its longer Axis and greatest Distance twice
so long, or nearly 11,200,000,000 Miles; its Aphelion Distance about 14 times
as great as the Distance of Saturn; its greatest Distance to its least, as
above 20,000 to 1: and so its greatest Light and Heat to its least, as above
400,000,000 to 1.

(3.) Since 575 Years appears to be the Period of the Comet that caused the
Deluge, what a learned Friend of mine, who was the Occasion of my Examination
of this Matter, suggests, will deserve to be considered, viz. Whether the Story
of ^he Phoenix, that celebrated Emblem of the Resurrection in Christian
Antiquity; [that it returns once after 5 Centuries, and goes to the Altar and
City of ^he Sun, and is there burnt; and another arises out of its Ashes, and
carries away the Remains of the former, etc.] be not an Allegorical
Representation of this Comet; [which returns once after 5 Centuries, and goes
down to the Sun, and is there vehemently heated, and its outward Regions
dissolved; yet that it flies off again, and carries away what remains after
that terrible burning, etc.] and whether the Conflagration and Renovation of
things, which some such Comet in its Ascent from ^e Sun may bring upon the
Earth, be not hereby ^refigur'd. I will not here be positive; but I own that I
don't know of any Solution of this famous Piece of Egyptian Mythology and
Hieroglyphics, (...) this seems to be, that can be compared with it.

Note, (4.) That none of those Comets whose Or^its are yet known, can come near
enough to our Earth in their Ascent from the Sun to cause the Conflagration.
This is evident to those who con^^der Dr. Halley's Table, or my Solar System
built upon it; since none of them move in or very near ^he Plane of the
Ecliptic; and those four which ^ave their Nodes nearest the Earth's Orbit, and
so might approach nearest to the Earth, are either ^^ch as have these Nodes so
near only in their De^^ent to the Sun; as that in 1472, and that in 1618, and
that in 1680; or go not any time much near^ to the Sun than the Earth it self,
as that in 1684, and so are on all Accounts utterly incapable of affording Heat
enough for such a Conflagration.

Note (5.) That therefore the Period of Time for that Conflagration, upon the
Supposition that it is to be caused by a Comet, cannot now be discovered by any
natural Means; but must still remain, as formerly, only knowable from Divine
Revelation.

New Theory, p. 45^, ^453.
Note (6.) That hence those remarkable Corollaries, drawn from the accurate
Solution of such Difficulties now, as formerly were plainly insoluble; I mean,
the great Regard due to the Ancientest Sacred and Profane Records, and to the
inspired Method whence they must have been derived; the Imperfection of Human
Knowledge; the Folly of rejecting Revealed Truths, out of regard to uncertain
Human Reasonings; the Wisdom of adhering to the most obvious Sense of
Scripture; the Reasonableness of believing Scripture-Accounts and
Scripture-Mysteries, though not fully comprehended by us; the Justness of
expecting Satisfaction in moral Difficulties in due time from the like
Satisfaction afforded already in those that are Philosophical, and the like, do
all receive a new and surprising Confirmation; and will therefore deserve a new
and serious Consideration.

N.B. Dr. Halley having himself given an Account of this Comet lately in Dr.
Gregory's English Astronomy, P. 901, 902, 903, I here present it to the Reader
verbatim, that he may compare the two Accounts together, for his more entire
Satisfaction.

"But as far as Probability from the Equality of Periods, and similar
Appearance of Comets, may be urged as an Argument, the late wondrous Comet of
1680/1, seems to have been the same, which was seen in the Time of our King
Henry I. Anno 1106, which began to appear in the West about the middle of
February, and continued for many Days after, with such a Tail as was seen in
that of 1680/1. And again in the Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, about the
Year of Christ 531, such another Comet appeared in the West, of which Malela,
perhaps an Eyewitness, relates that it was (...), a great and fearful Star;
that it appeared in the West, and emitted upwards from it a long white Beam;
and was seen for 20 Days. It were to be wished the Historian had told us what
Time of the Year it was seen; but it is however plain, that the Interval between
this and that of 1106, is nearly equal to that between 1106 and 1680/1, viz.
about 575 Years. And if we reckon backward such another Period, we shall come
to the 44th Year before Christ, in which Julius Caesar was murdered, and in
which there appeared a very remarkable Comet, mentioned by almost all the
Historians of those Times, and by Pliny in his Natural History, lib. 11. c. 24.
who recites the Words of Augustus Caesar on this Occasion, which lead us to the
very Time of its Appearance, and its Situation in the Heavens. These Words
being very much to our purpose, it may not be amiss to recite them. In ipsis
Ludorum meorum diebus, sydus crinitum per septem dies, in regione Coeli quae
sub Septentrionibus est conspectum. Id oriebatur circa undecimam horam diei,
clarumque and omnibus terris conspicuum fuit. Now these Ludi were dedicated
Veneri genetrici, (for from Venus the Caesar's would be thought to be
descended,) and began with the Birthday of Augustus, viz. Sept. 23. (as may be
collected from a Fragment of an Old Roman Calendar extant in Gruter, page 135.)
and continued for 7 Days, during which the Comet appeared. Nor are we to
suppose that it was seen only those 7 Days, but possibly both before and after.
Nor are we to interpret the Words sub Septentrionibus, as if the Comet had
appeared in the North, but that it was seen under the Septem triones, or
brighter Stars of Ursa major. And as to its rising Hora undecima diei, it can
no ways be understood, unless the word diei be left out, as it is by Suetonius;
for it must have been very far from the Sun, either to rise at Five in the
Afternoon, or at Eleven at Night; in which Cases it must have appeared for a
long time, and its Tail have been so little remarkable, that it could by no
means be called, Clarum and omnibus Terris conspicuum Sydus. But supposing this
Comet to have traced the same Path with that of the Year 1680, the ascending
part of the Orb will exactly represent all that Augustus has said concerning
it; and is yet an additional Argument to that drawn from the Equality of the
Period. Thus it is not improbable but this Comet may have four times visited us
at Intervals of about 575 Years: Whence the Transverse Diameter of its Elliptic
Orb will be found 3575x575 times greater than the annual Orb; or 138 times
greater than the mean Distance of the Sun; which Distance, though immensely
great, bears no Proportion to that of the Fixed Stars."

FINIS.
A Complete Catalogue of Mr. WHISTON's Writings, according to the Order of Time
when they were Published.
ENGLISH.
(1.) A New Theory of the Earth, from the Creation to the Consummation of all
Things, 2d Edition, with great Corrections and Improvements. 8 vo. Price bound
6 s. (2.) The Chronology of the Old Testament, and the Harmony of the Four
Evangelists. 4 to. 8 s. (3.) An Essay on the Revelation of St. John; with Two
Dissertations at the End. 4 to. 7 s. (4.) The Fulfilling of Scripture
Prophecies, in Eight Sermons at Mr. Boyle's Lecture; with a Supplement and a
Postscript. 8 vo. 3 s. 6 d. (5.) A Memorial for setting up Charity-Schools in
England and Wales. Half a Sheet. Given Gratis. (6.) Sermons and Essays on
several Subjects; with Novatian De Trinitate. 8vo. 4 s. 6 d. (7.) Collection of
Small Tracts against Dr. Alix, Dr. Grabe, Dr. Smallbroke, etc. 8 vo. 2 s. 6 d.
(8.) Primitive Christianity Revived: In Five Volumes. (1.) An Historical
Preface. A Dissertation on the Epistles of Ignatius, with the Epistles
themselves, Greek and English, and Eunomius's Apologetick. (2.) The
Constitutions of the Holy Apostles, Greek and English. (3.) A Vindication of
those Constitutions. (4.) An Account of the Primitive Faith; with the Fourth
Book of Esdras, from the Latin and Arabic. (5.) The Recognitions of Clement.
To all which may be added, a Collection of small Tracts relating to them, but
not therein contained. 8 vo. 1 l. 13 s. (9) The Supposal; or a New Scheme of
Government. Half a Sheet. Given Gratis. (10.) Athanasius convicted of Forgery.
8 vo. 3 d. Note, that this is more complete, with its Vindication, at the End
of the Argument, afterward published. (11.) Primitive Infant Baptism revived. 8
vo. 6 d. (12.) Proposals for Erecting Societies for promoting Primitive
Christianity. Half a Sheet. Given Gratis. (13.) Primitive Christianity revived:
The Four Volumes in one; all English. 8 vo. 7 s. 6 d. (14.) Dr. Mather's Old
Paths revived; with a New Preface. 12 o. 3 d. (15.) A Scheme of the Solar
System, with the Orbits of the 21 Comets. In a large Sheet, engraved on Copper,
by Mr. Senex. 2 s. 6 d. (16.) Reflections on a Discourse of Free-Thinking. 2d
Edition. 8 vo. 8 d. (17.) Three Essays. (1.) The Council of Nice vindicated
from the Athanasian Heresy. (2.) A Collection of Ancient Monuments thereto
relating. (3.) The Liturgy of the Church of England reduced nearer to the
Primitive S andard. 8 vo. 4 s. 6 d. (18.) An Epitome of the Essay on the
Revelation: In a Copper Plate explained. 6 d. (19.) The Christian's Rule of
Faith: Or a Table of the most Ancient Creeds. Engraved in Copper. 1 s. (20.) An
Argument concerning the Dissenters Baptism, and other Ministrations: With Two
Appendices. 8 vo. 8 d. (21.) Letters to Dr. Sacheverel, and Mr. Lydal his
Assistant. Given Gratis. (22.) The Cause of the Deluge demonstrated. An
Appendix to the New Theory. 3d Edit. 8 vo. 3 d. (23.) A Course of Mechanical,
Optical, Hydrostarical, and Pneumatical Experiments, performed by Mr. Whiston,
and Mr. Hauksbee. 4 to. 5 s. (24.) A New Method for Discovering the Longitude.
The 2d Edition, with great Improvements. By Mr. Whiston and Mr. Ditton. 8 vo. 1
s. (25.) His Defense, prepared for the Court of Delegates. With his Reasons
against that Procedure. 8 vo. 3 s. (26.) The Copernicus: Describing an
Astronomical Instrument so called. 12 o. 1 s. (27.) A Vindication of the
Sibylline Oracles. 8 vo. 2 s. 6 d. (28.) An Account of the last, and of the
next great Eclipse of the Sun; engraved in Copper. By it self 2 s. 6 d. But
Rolled, with Mr. Whiston's Second, and both Dr. Halley's Schemes. 7 s. (29.)
St. Clement's and St. Irenaeus's Vindication of the Apostolical Constitutions;
with a large Supplement to the 2d Edition. 8 vo. 1 s. (30.) An Account of the
surprising Meteor, seen March 6. 1715/6;. 8 vo. 1 s. (31.) An Address to the
Princes of Europe, for the Admission, or at least the Open Toleration of the
Christian Religion in their Dominions. 8 vo. 1 s. (32.) Astronomical Principles
of Religion, Natural and Revealed. 8 vo. 5 s.
Now in the Press,
(33.) A Commentary on the Three Catholic Epistles of St. John. 8vo. 1 s.
Preparing for the Press,
(34.) Scripture Politics: Or an Impartial Account of the Origin and Measures
of Government, Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the Books of the Old and New
Testament. To be Dedicated to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Bangor.
Published by Mr. Whiston,
(1.) Mr. Chub's Supremacy of the Father; in Eight Arguments. 8 vo. 1 s. N.B.
The same Author has lately Published Two Enquiries: The One concerning
Property, or of Liberty of Conscience: The Other concerning Sin, or of Original
Sin. 8 vo. 1 s. Sold by Mr. Roberts in Warwick Lane.
Now in the Press,
The Primitive Catechism: Useful for Charity-Schools. By a Presbyter of the
Church of England, 8 vo. 1 s.
LATIN.
(35.) Praelectiones Astronomicae, Cantabrigiae in Scholis Publicis habitae. 8
vo. 5 s. 6 d. (36) Euclidis Elementa, juxta editionem Cl. Tacquetti: cum
additamentis. 8 vo. 4 s. 6 d. (37.) Praelectiones Physico-mathematicae, five
Philosophia Newtoni Mathematica. 8 vo. 4 s. 6 d.
Published by him,
V. C. Algebrae Elementa. 8 vo. 4 s. 6 d.
The 35th, 36th and 37th, are also published in English, under the Author's
Review.

N.B. These Books are Sold by the Author Himself in Cross-street,
Hatton-Garden; or by Mr. Took near Temple Bar; or by Mr. Clarke in the
Poultrey; or by Mr. Senex at the Globe, near Salisbury-Court, Fleet street; and
Mr. Tailor at the Ship in Paternoster Row; or by Mr. James Roberts, the
Publisher, in Warwick Lane, London: or by Mr. Crownfield at the
University-Press, Cambridge: For some of whom they were all Printed. His
Astronomical Instrument, called the Copernicus, is Sold by Himself, and Mr.
Senex; as also by Mr. Hudson, at the Cabinet in Frith-street, near Soho-Square.
Price 6 Guineas.

March 25, 1717. W.W.


