LAW-TRACTS.

BY JOSEPH RITSON, OF GRAYS INN, BARRISTER.

ET IN ARCADIA EGO. LONDON: M DCC XCIV.

CONTENTS.
I. THE OFFICE OF CONSTABLE. II. THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURT LEET. III. A
DIGEST OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COURT LEET OF THE MANOR AND LIBERTY OF THE
SAVOY.
THE OFFICE OF CONSTABLE: BEING AN ENTIRELY NEW COMPENDIUM OF THE LAW
CONCERNING THAT ANCIENT MINISTER FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE PEACE.

CAREFULLY COMPILED FROM THE BEST AUTHORITIES.

WITH A PREFACE; AND AN INTRODUCTION, CONTAINING SOME ACCOUNT OF THE ORIGIN AND
ANTIQUITY OF THE OFFICE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR WHIELDON AND BUTTERWORTH, FLEET STREET.

M.DCC.XCI.

PREFACE.
A SINCERE wish to benefit the community, by furnishing its most ancient, most
constitutional, and most useful officer with a compendious system or manual of
his duty and powers, carefully extracted from, and upon an actual perusal of
the best authorities, has produced the following sheets, -- a mere epitome, in
fact, of the original compilation. But the utility of the measure seemed, upon
second thoughts, to be more favored by a pamphlet, affording the fullest
information in the narrowest compass, than by a volume, which the verbose
prolixity of modern statutes, vying, as it were, with each other in conveying
the simplest regulation in the most embarrassing manner, and greatest possible
number of words, would have extended to a size and price little calculated to
invite the class of readers for whom it was principally intended. The decision,
therefore, was in favor of the briefest summary; such a one as men who have
little money, leisure, or capacity (one or other, or, indeed, all of which are,
unfortunately, too often met with in the composition of a modern constable)
might buy, read, and, if possible, understand A small tract published under the
direction of "the society (as it is called) for carrying into effect the kings
proclamation," since the following pages were prepared for the press, has not
appeared to supersede the present attempt. Of former publications on the
subject it may be sufficient to observe, that all or most of them have been
looked into.
. The language, however, is generally that of the authority quoted; and the
books referred to (which it may be occasionally necessary to consult) are to be
found in many booksellers shops, and in the libraries of the four law
societies: few barristers, at the same time, are without all or most of them;
and some justices of peace, it is presumed, may possess "The Statutes at
Large." It is undoubtedly a serious consideration, that the persons and
property of almost all but professional men should be subjected to laws which
they are totally ignorant of, and do not even know where to find, or how,
unless by dear-bought and fatal experience, to get acquainted with; and of
which the mere study is sufficient employment for the best part, if not the
whole, of a long life. These "Statutes at Large," which, while they preserve
many acts that are not, and many more that ought not to be, in force, do not
contain above half the number that are actually so The private and local acts,
every where in force and no where to be met with, are at least as numerous.
"How is this?" exclaimed a lawyer one day, "why all these proceedings of yours
are manifestly illegal; contrary to Magna Charta; to the Bill of Rights, to the
liberty of the subject, to --." "Sir," says his client, who was a churchwarden,
"we have got an act of parliament." And thus it is; every little dirty parish
in the environs of London must have a law for itself. The churchwardens or
overseers can provide the money, the attorney wants a job, the justice looks
forward to the penalties, and the gemmen of the westry like authority; an act
of parliament is accordingly obtained, and, being an admirable compound of
ignorance and knavery, cannot fail of proving exceedingly beneficial to the
community. To the statutes which are not and ought not to be in force may be
added those which are altogether doubtful, and, till they come in question,
cannot be positively said either to be in force or not. The drawer of a modern
act of parliament seldom troubles himself about former laws on the same
subject; he erects the new house and leaves the old one standing. It is a
well-known observation of a grave and learned sergeant, that an act of
parliament was much wanted to repeal all the laws made for thirty years past.
This, to be sure, would be pretty well; but a retrospect of two or three
hundred would be infinitely better. Lord Coke complains bitterly of the
injudicious penners of acts of parliament in his time, "overladen," as he says,
" with provisoes and additions, and many times on a sudden penned or corrected
by men of none or very little judgment in law." Those acts, however, which gave
such just offense to this truly learned and eminent lawyer, will appear
perspicuous as light, and "brief as woman's love," when compared with the
endless and inextricable parliamentary labyrinths of the present century. See
also 1 Black. Com. 10.
, are comprised in no less than sixteen closely printed quarto volumes; the
Common Law is dispersed through near two hundred folios, exclusive of every
other size, many of which exist only in a barbarous gibberish peculiar to the
profession It was long since objected as a fault to the professors of the law,
that they wrote their reports and books of the law in a strange and unknown
tongue, which none could understand but themselves, to the end that people
being kept in ignorance of the law, might the more admire their skill and
knowledge, and esteem and value it at a higher price. Preface to Sir John
Davis's Reports, published in 1628.
: even a very imperfect abridgement of it filling no less than twenty-four.
This, however, is a complaint which has been so frequently and so ineffectually
made Bishop Burnet, near a century ago, pronounced the law "the greatest
grievance of the nation." And the great lord Bacon, who complains that the laws
were then "subject to great incertainties, and variety of opinions, delays, and
evasions," delivered a formal proposition to king James I. for their amendment;
and this at a time when the statutes were in two volumes, and, beside the year
books, there were but four reporters extant.
, that one must have patience till the mischief, every day increasing, shall
remedy itself; till, in short, "there is A DROP TOO MUCH."

Sir William Blackstone observes that, considering what manner of men are for
the most part out into the office of constable, it is perhaps very well that
they are generally kept in ignorance of the extent of their powers 1 Com. 356.
; an observation to which it may be readily conceived, the compiler of the
following Digest does not subscribe. In fact, he has ever regarded it as
equally sarcastic, illiberal, and unbecoming; and only to be accounted for by
the professional character and habits of the writer; who, doubtless, thought
that law, like religion, being a mystery, the scriptures should in both cases
be locked up in an unknown language or unintelligible jargon 3 Com. 322. and
Benthams Fragment of Government, Preface, p. xxxv.
; that the profane ought to know no more than the initiated may think fit to
communicate; and that, in short, the most ignorant are the most tractable, and
consequently the fittest for good Christians and good subjects. If the powers
which the law has vested in the constable be so large, that it is even
dangerous he should know them, why were they given him? why are they not taken
away? why is he to be punished for neglecting duties of which it is best he
should be ignorant? Would it not be full as well, considering what manner of
men are for the most part put into the office of justice of peace, if they too
were to be kept in ignorance of the extent of their powers? This, indeed, it
may be, is already the case; though they do not on that account seem the less
inclined to abuse them. But wherefor is it that such "manner of men" are put
into the Office of Constable? Because upward of a hundred acts of parliament,
which few ever see, and still fewer comprehend The emperor Caligula, it is
said, caused his laws to be written so small, and placed so high, that, though
all might clearly see, none could possibly read. The English law is thought by
some to bear in many instances a great resemblance to the Roman. And it seems a
maxim in both, that ignorantia legis non excusat. Others have not hesitated to
say that British statutes resemble cobwebs, placed in darkness and obscurity,
for the purpose of entrapping the smaller flies, in order to glut the
bottled-spiders of Westminster Hall with their blood. But these, no doubt, are
the ravings of beggered suitors, and consequently not to be regarded.
, added to the arbitrary and capricious decisions of some courts, and the
ignorance and innovation of others, have redered it so burdensome, servile,
vexatious, and expensive, that they who possess or usurp the power of filling
it, select those who have nothing to recommend them but the willingness with
which they receive the yoke, and the patience with which they bear it. The
reason given for this partiality is, that no GENTLEMAN can accept such an
office; poverty, both in purse and in spirit, being looked upon as the proper
qualification for a constable. These same GENTLEMEN, it should seem, are
high-mettled horses, who would kick and wince, and play the devil, in short, if
you attempted to put them in the shafts; the VULGAR are asses, who tamely
submit to every indignity. But, gentleman or no gentleman, he who can best
afford to lose his time and money, who has spirit and ability to sustain
fatigue, and resolution to oppose insult and oppression, is the fittest person
to discharge the Office of Constable. To confer it, from whatever motive, upon
people of base or inferior condition, was long ago reprobated by lord Bacon as
"a mere abuse or degenerating from the first institution Law Tracts, 183.
." And, certainly, the necessity of a man who depends upon his daily employment
for the daily bread of himself and his family, and whose time is of course the
most precious, ought to be a sufficient excuse in any court of justice why he
should not be compelled to serve this office; only it would probably cost him
more to obtain the determination than he can value his time at. It is,
doubtless, a very scandalous insinuation that justices of peace, who have some
how or other acquired the power of making constables, select the meanest and
most ignorant by way of magnifying their own wisdom and consequence; gems, it
is well known, which require no foil to increase their luster.

It is, by no means, a less abuse, when a person every way fit for the office
is pitched upon, to admit in his stead any worthless fellow that he can
procure, base enough to serve the duty for a few guineas. What integrity or
propriety of conduct can be expected from one whose necessity renders every
shilling that is offered him an irresistible temptation? The great Shakspeare
has satirised this practice with admirable pleasantry, in his play of Measure
for Measure, where he introduces the character of a foolish substitute bringing
a charge before one of the dukes deputies:

Escalus. Come hither to me, master Elbow; come hither, master constable. How
long have you been in this place of constable?

Elbow. Seven years and a half, sir.

Esca. I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had continued in it some
time. -- Alas! it has been great pains to you! they do you wrong to put you so
often upon it. Are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it.

Elbow. Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they are chosen, they
are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some piece of money, and go through
with all There is another not over-wise constable in the Comedy of Much ado
about Nothing; and again in that of Loves Labor Lost. It is to be hoped such a
character is not so very common now a days.
.

If the preservation of peace and good order be the interest of society, the
legislature would essentially contribute to that end in extending more
effectual protection and encouragement to the constable. This would be done by
causing all the laws which authorize or oblige him to do particular acts, or
any way concern the execution of his office, to be reduced into a single
statute, conceived in plain intelligible language A resolution of all the
judges would answer the same purpose. Something of this kind, it is true, was
formerly attempted by a chief justice, but being hastily, carelessly, and every
way badly done, was deservedly rejected by his brethren.
; and by requiring every court, at the election of a constable, to put a copy
of it into his hands: in order that, having his power and duty constantly under
his eye, he might be without excuse in neglecting the one, and without danger
in exercising the other. If it be true that every man who serves the public
ought to be paid by the public, it is most unreasonable and unjust that a duty
should be imposed upon any one, which, if attended to as it ought to be, would
demand the greatest part of his time, not only without making him the slightest
recompense, but even obliging him to be at (what is to him) a considerable
expense; for even the mere "consumption of time, to him who lives by the sale
of his time, is equivalent to expense." Suppose, therefore, that every person
duly elected a constable were, during his continuance in office, not exceeding
one year, exempt from all taxes and impositions; parliamentary, or local; and,
in case of actions against him touching his office (the dread of which is one
great obstacle to its due execution) should be allowed to defend, not in forma
pauperis, but some really unexpensive mode The defense of actions by an
innocent man requires the fortune of a rich one. Even a pauper, who is to swear
himself not worth five pounds in the world, will have to provide ten, or
possibly fifty times that sum, to prosecute or defend his suit.
This, if not an adequate compensation, would be a great relief, and in some
cases, at least, an indemnity, to persons serving the office, would induce them
to accept it with cheerfulness, and execute it with spirit, conscious that in
so doing they were benefiting society without injuring themselves In some parts
of the north, the constable is entitled to an ancient cess charged upon certain
lands, which has formerly amounted to a pretty considerable sum.
. One cannot, however, have the satisfaction to think, that a suggestion so
advantageous both to the community and to the individual, stands the least
chance of ever passing into a law. If, indeed, the proposal were for a
productive tax upon constables, or for the purpose of making bad worse, or of
heaping oppression upon the oppressed, there would be little fear of its being
adopted. This, therefore, is another of those self-reforming grievances which
must be patiently suffered to attain their worst state.

To conclude: If the following pages prove at all instrumental toward making a
single constable more active, confident, and secure in the discharge of such of
the powers and duties of his office as are any way beneficial to society, (for
the less he attends to the others the better,) the compiler will have reason to
flatter himself that his efforts, though humble, have not been useless,

ERRATA.
p. xxii. for ordnance, read ordinance. p. 4. for 1 Mod. 42. read 6 Mod. 42.
for Freeman, 256. read, 12 Mod. 256. p. 5. after Styles, 362. add Barnard, 51.
after (Noy, 112.) add Mar. 30. p. 6. for (Mod. 13.) read (1 Mod, 13.) p. 26.
for Freeman, 256. read 12 Mod. 256. p. 27. for 20 and 30, read 30 and 40. p.
32. for Forster, read Foster. p. 43. for eu^yre, read eu'rye.
INTRODUCTION.
1. THE origin of the word CONSTABLE, which some etymologists have erroneously
sought for in the Saxon language See Lambard, Sir T. Smith, and others.
, is undoubtedly to be found in the Comes Stabuli of the Eastern empire: hence
the constabularius, constabulus, etc. of barbarous Latinity; the connestable of
the French; the conestabile of the Italians, and See Spelmans Glossary, voce
CONSTABULARIU^.
This comes stabuli was at first, as his title imports, no more than prefect or
superintendant of the imperial stables, or, in other words, the emperors master
of the horse; but having, in process of time, obtained the command of the army,
his name, corrupted into constabulus and constabularius, began to signify a
commander; and, with this signification, appears to have been introduced into
England at the Norman Conquest, or, perhaps, sooner; since, in fact, some such
officer seems to have been already known under the title of Stallarius.

2. THE CONSTABLE (or LORD HIGH CONSTABLE) OF ENGLAND was an officer of the
highest dignity and importance in the realm. He was the leader of the kings
armies; and had the cognizance of all contracts and other matters touching arms
or war 13 R. z. st. 1. c. 2. See also. Madox's History of the Exchequer, p. 27,
etc.
. This office, which appears to have been granted by William the Conqueror to
Walter earl of Gloucester, or, according to others, to William Fitzosbern, or
Roger de Mortimer, became, afterward, hereditary in two different families, as
annexed to the earldom of Hereford; and, in that right, after a lapse of near
two centuries, (several persons enjoying the title and authority in the mean
time) was revived, by judgment of law, in the person of Edward Stafford duke
of Buckingham; but Henry VIII. thinking the office too high and dangerous for
the hands of a subject, took the first opportunity of putting an end to it by
cutting off his head. Since this period, there has been no lord high constable,
except pro hac vice, as Robert earl of Lindsey was appointed in 1631 to
determine the appeal of lord Rea against Ramsey, and as some person or other is
created at the coronation of a king or queen.

3. We had also CONSTABLES OF CASTLES, that is, keepers or governors, so
called, of the castles of the king or great barons, whom the French term
chatellains, from the Latin castellani, and who were frequently hereditary, and
by feudal tenure; such were the constable of the tower, the constable of
London, or Baynards-castle, the constables of the castles of Dover, Windsor,
Chester, Flint, etc. some of which offices, though not now hereditary, are
remaining to this day. These are the constables intended in Magna Charta, cc.
17. 20. and who, in the statute of Westminster the first (3 E. 1. c. 15.) are
called constables of sees, and there considered as keepers of prisons; a
constituent part, indeed, of all ancient castles. Lord Coke observes that
before Magna Charta these constables of castles had the like authority within
their precincts as the sheriff had within his bailiwick, and commonly sealed
with their portraiture on horseback 2 Inst. 31. See also W. 1. c. 17.
. The statute of 5 H. 4. c. 10. which recites that, by color of their
commissions as justices of the peace, they took people to whom they bore evil
will, and imprisoned them in their castles till they made fine and ransom for
their deliverance, and ordains that none be imprisoned but in the common jail,
seems to have put an end to a race of tyrants so odious to the people as to be
usually represented in romances under the character of monstrous giants, who,
not content with the property, would eat the flesh, drink the blood, and grind
the bones of the unwary and unfortunate traveler.

4. There was likewise formerly a CONSTABLE OF THE EXCHEQUER; of whom we may
read in the Dialogus Scaccarii, l. 1. c. 5. in the statute De Districtione
Scaccarii (51 H. 3. st. 5.) in Fleta, l. 2. c. 31. and in Madox's History of
that Court, p. 724, etc. We also find mention made in some old statutes of THE
CONSTABLE OF THE STAPLE. See 27 E. 3. c. 8. 15 R. 2. c. 9. 23 H. 8. c. 6.

5. We now come to THE CONSTABLE OF THE HUNDRED, OR HIGH, CHIEF, OR HEAD
CONSTABLE (as he is otherwise called) of whom we shall have a little more to
say. By the statute of Wynton, or Winchester (13 E. 1.) c. 6. it is ordained,
that in every hundred or franchise there shall be chosen two constables to make
the view of armor, as directed in the preceding part of the chapter; and that
the constables aforesaid shall present before the justices assigned the
defaults of armor and of the suits of towns and of highways; and shall also
present those who harbor strangers in upland towns for whom they will not
answer. They are likewise to present sheriffs or bailiffs who do not follow the
cry of the county.

It is agreed by Mr. Lamberd On Constables, 3.
, by sir Edward Coke 4 Inst. 267.
, and by sir Matthew Hale 2 P. C. 96.
, that constables of the hundred were first introduced by this statute. And
though Fitzherbert J. P. 156, b.
, and Crompton after him J. P. 201, b.
, have asserted that they were conservators of the peace at the Common Law; and
though it is said in other books that "notwithstanding the opinions to the
contrary," the high constable was an officer at the Common Law, and that the
statute of Wynton only enlarged his authority 3 Keble, 231. Salk. 175. 381. 11
Mod. 215. L. Rav. 1193. 1195.
, yet no one has hitherto produced the least evidence in support of such
assertion. On the other hand, beside the authority of Coke and Hale, it has
been expressly held from the Bench, that a high constable is not such an
officer, nor conservator of the peace, whereof the Common Law takes any notice;
that he is not mentioned in any book; and that, in fine, he is only by custom
and for conformity Cro. Eliz. 375. where it is said that in the North they had
no high constables, which appears from Nordens Description, p. 30. to be the
case in Cornwall.
. It must be confessed, that the first mention made of the high constable in
any statute subsequent to that already cited, is by 4 E. 4. c. 1. He afterward
occurs in 19 H. 7. c. 11. 22 H. 8. c. 23. 24 H. 8. c. 10, etc.
And though sir William Blackstone has, in one place, attempted to carry up his
antiquity as high as king Henry II. 4 Com. 211. The praepositus hundredi, whom
the learned author has mistaken for the high constable, seems to have been the
bailiff of the hundred, as praepositus comitatus is the sheriff, and
praepositus manerii the bailiff or reve of the manor. Vide Spelman, in voce.
The praepositus hundredi is frequently mentioned in Domesday Book.
he, in another, expressly mentions him to have been first ordained by the
statute of Winchester 1 Com. 355.
. After all, however, nothing can be more certain than that the constable of
the hundred, or high constable, whether he be allowed an officer at the Common
Law or not, was instituted long before that statute. This curious fact is
ascertained by a writ or mandate of the 36th year of king Henry III. preserved
in the Adversaria to Wats's edition of Matthew Paris, and from which chapters
4. and 6. of the statute of Wynton are evidently taken, though it has hitherto
escaped the notice of every writer or speaker upon the subject. By this writ it
is provided, that in every hundred there should be constituted a CHIEF
CONSTABLE, at whose mandate all those of his hundred sworn to arms [ i. e. to
have such arms, according to the quantity of their lands or chattels, as there
directed] should assemble and be observant to him for the doing of those things
which belong to the conservation of the kings peace In singulis vero hundredis
constituatur UNUS CAPITALIS CONSTABULARIUS, ad cujus mandatum omnet jurati ad
arma de hundredis suis conveniant, and cis sint intendentes ad faciendum ea
quae spectant ad conservationem pacis nostrae.
. No mention, it is believed, of this officer can be any where found prior to
the date of this instrument; which, however, it may be contended, no more
determines the question as to his original creation, than the statute of Wynton
appeared to do; the language in both cases being imperative, and the only
difference consisting in the word eleus (chosen) for constituatur
(constituted). Be this as it will, the discovery ought at least to teach not
antiquaries alone, but even lawyers and judges to look a little into matter of
record, and trust less to opinion, which ought no more to be law upon the Bench
than it is off it.

6. The CONSTABLE OF THE VILL (or PETTY CONSTABLE, as, to distinguish him from
the constable of the hundred, he is frequently called) has been repeatedly
acknowleged by the law to be "one of the most ancient officers in the realm for
the conservation of the peace Popham, 13. and below, p. 1.
," and is declared by lord Coke to be as ancient as torns or leets be, and not
to have begun about the beginning of E. 3. as some have supposed 4 Inst. 265.
His lordship here alludes to the opinion of Mr. Lambard, who says, "About the
beginning of the reign of K. Ed. 3. petty constables were devised in towns and
parishes for the aid of the constables of the hundred." An opinion which
certainly detracts from the character of Mr. Lambard as an industrious or
judicious antiquary. Lord Bacon, on the contrary, who allows the great
antiquity of (petty) constables, doubts that the high constable was not ab
origin, and only introduced for convenience sake "when the authority of the
justices of the peace [who did not exist before the first year of Edw. 3.] was
enlarged by diverse statutes." Law Tracts, 181. An idea equally erroneous.
. It must be confessed, however, that no mention of him, by this identical
name, is any where found to occur anterior to the writ or mandate, already
mentioned, of king Henry III. whereby it is provided, that in every villate or
township there should be constituted a constable or two, according to the
number of the inhabitants In singulis vero villatis aliis constituatur UNUS
CONSTABULARIUS vel duo, secundum numerum inhabitantium and provisionem
praedictorum.
. It is, nevertheless, pretty certain, that lord Cokes idea is right, and that
this officer is actually owing to the institution of the frankpledge, usually
attributed to king Alfred, and was in fact originally the senior or chief
pledge of the tithing or decenna. In support of this position we may observe,
that the constable (or an officer resembling him) is, in many places, at this
very day, called the headborough, tithingman, or borsholder; all names
belonging to the chief pledge, and to be found in numerous statutes in company
with and as synonimous to constable See 28 H. c. 10. now repealed, in which we
have likewise a thirdborough. See also Sir T. Smith, Commonwealth of England,
174, and Lambard on Constables passim.
; that the statute of 2 E. 3. c. 3. in which the name of this constable first
occurs, the words are "BURGH-ALDRES, CONESTABLES, et gardens de la pees;" and,
lastly, that in the stat. of 20 H. 6. c. 14. the "CONSTABLES, TITHINGMEN, and
CHIEF PLEDGES of every town, are required to aid the venders of goods in
disputes with the kings purveyors." It was therefore rightly adjudged in B. R.
23 C. 2. that " decennarius, prima facie, is the same with a constable, and
differed little in the execution of that office;" though Hale (who has
elsewhere told us all he knew about the matter) said he was not the same
officer 1 Ven. 170. It should seem, indeed, from Lambard and others, that where
there is a constable as well as a tythingman, headborough, or thirdborough in
one and the same place, the office of the latter is inferior to that of
constable. In Shakspeares comedy of Much ado about Nothing, two of the
characters are a "constable" and a "headborough;" but, though it is
sufficiently evident that Master Dogherry, the constable, takes a great deal
more upon him than his "comp^^tner." yet as he supposes himself by much the
wiser man, it is not perfectly clear that he was invested with any greater
degree of authority. It is allowed, however, that where there is only a
headborough, thirdborough or tythingman, his office does not at all differ from
that of constable. One is, therefore, at a loss to conceive why the court (Gould
J.) should, on the trial of Power for murder (O. B. Sep. 1789), ask one of the
witnesses, "What are you, a constable or a headborough? -- A. I am headborough
of Aldgate." "Was there any constable in the passage at that time? -- A. There
was not." Since, the arrest being illegal for want of a warrant, it could make
no difference what he was, nor whether any constable (supposing Aldgate had
both constable and headborough) were present or not. Sly, the drunken tinker,
in the Taming of the Shrow, is threatened by his hostess with the
"thirdborough;" and, the term not being familiar to the London editors, got
corrupted into headborough, which is evidently incongruous and absurd; " Third,
or fourth, or fifth borough," says he, "I Will answer him by law." In Loves
Labor Lost, Goodman Dall says, he reprehends the duke own person, and calls
himself "his grace's tharborough." Norden, in his Description of Cornwell, p.
30, tells us, that "tythinges have therdbarows, in some places hedborows, in
some borrowsheds, and in the weste parts a tything man." And Ben Jonson, in
his Tale of a Tub, introduces the "high constable of Kentish-town," the
"headborough" of Islington, the "petty constable" of Hamstead, the
"thirdborough" of Belsise, and "the high constables man." This thirdborough is
supposed by Blount a corruption of the Sax^n freoborg, or freepledge; but, if
one may be allowed the conjecture, it ^s not improbable, that as the
headborough, or chief pledge, was the first man of the ten or decenna, and had
the s^q^r^^ authority, so the first man of each of the r^maining threes (that
is, the first, fourth, and seventh of the nine) might have had some subordinate
jurisdiction as his assistants, and hence receive the name of thirdboroughs.
The common pledges were called handbarrows.
. It therefore follows, that the above ordnance of Hen. III. far from
instituting the office, merely enlarged the number of officers, placing them in
towns and villages, instead of franchises; since it might frequently happen,
that a manor of great extent had only a single constable for several townships;
a case exactly similar, indeed, sometimes occurring at this day, where a
township, comprehending several hamlets, equally populous it may be with
itself, has only one constable for the whole The book of Villa^um, in the
Exch^quer, sets out all the vills, and there cannot be a constablewick created
at this lay (unless by act of parliament). 1 M^d. 13.
. We find the constable beginning to be familiarly known by that name in the
time of king Edward I. though it is not a little extraordinary that (not to
mention Bracton, who wrote toward the end of the reign of Henry III.) there
should not be a word about him in either Britton He seems to mean constables in
chap. 16. by gardens de villes.
or the Mirror, and that he should be only incidentally named by the author of
Fleta He is supposed to have been one of king Edward the First's judges, and by
him committed to the Fleet. Britton, also, is thought to have been a judge, if
not a bishop, in the time of the same prince. The Mirror was compiled by one
Horn, citizen and chamberlain of London, in the reign of Edward the Second.
who has express chapters on the different and most inferior ministers of the
law in his time. In certain articles of inquiry at the Air, perhaps, or
Trailbaston, certainly in the time of Edward I. Coll. Madox, Mus. iii. 285.
are the following items: De ceus ke sunt CONESTABLES DE VILLS ou baylifs le
roy, ke unt lor garsouns ovek eus de atacher les felouns, e il les fount garnir
avaunt par quey lez comandemens le roy ne peussent estre tenuz en null point Of
those who are constables of vills or bailiffs of the king, who have their men
with them to attach felons, and cause them to give notice beforehand by whom
the commands of the king could not be kept in any instance; or it may mean, and
cause them (the felons) to be forewarned ( i. e. of the coming of the justices)
whereby the kings commands cannot be observed, etc.
. De ceus ke desturbent les CONESTABLES DE VILLS ou bailifs, ou autre ministre,
kill ne poent lor office fere come il sunt charget per le roy pur la pes de sa
terre garder Of those who disturb the constables of vills or bailiffs, or other
ministers, that they cannot do their office, as they are charged by the king
for keeping the peace of his realm.
.


He seems also to be meant by the two following chapters of the Air, as given
in Fleta, l. 1 c. 20. 126. 133.

De vic' CONSTABULARIIS vel aliis qui retonsores ceperint, vel attachiaverint
cum retonsura cruda vel cum platis seisitos, and qui pro mercede eos
deliberaverint and attachiamentum illud concelaverint. Of sheriffs, constables,
or others who shall have taken or attached clippers or coiners, seized with (or
possessed of) the thing clipped (or coined) fresh, or with (or of) unwrought
silver, and for reward shall have let them go, and concealed the attachment.
.

De vic' CONSTEBULAR' and ballivis quibuscunque qui mercedem ceperint per sic,
quod pacerent and fingerent attachiare suspectos, vel qui eos attachiaverint,
sive Christianos sive Judaeos, pro levi suspitione, quos non invenerint
seisitos cum retonsura, and ipsos pro mercede deliberaverint Of sheriffs,
constables, and bailiffs whomsoever, who shall have taken reward for this that
they should connive at and feign to attach suspected persons, or who shall have
attached them, whether Christians or Jews, for a light suspicion, and not
finding them seized with the thing clipped, shall have let them go for reward.
.

Several of these charges or articles of inquiry, even of the time of Hen. III.
are extant in old chronicles, but none of them has been found to make any
mention of the constable.

He is named in the statute of 2 E. 3. c. 3. already mentioned, for the first
time, and in those of 4. E. 3. c. 10. 5 E. 3. c. 14. 25 E. 3. st. 1. c. 6. and
36 E. 3. st. 1. c. 2. in several statutes, now repealed or obsolete, in the
reigns of R. 2. H. 4. and H. 6. in the 1 H. 7. c. 7. etc. etc.

In the Vision of (i. e. concerning) Piers the Plowman are the following lines,
which may serve to give us some imperfect idea how he was considered in the
time of that writer ( i. e. about the year 1380).

The king swore by Christ and by his crown both
That wrong for his works should woo thoroughly,
And commanded A CONSTABLE to cast him in yrons,
AND set him not these seven years see his fete once Fo. xviii, b.

This passage is the rather curious, as we do not elsewhere find that the
constable had any power to put people in irons, much less to detain them for so
considerable a length of time. Possibly, however, it is to be understood of the
constable or keeper of a castle, before mentioned; although in must be
confessed that the expression would in this case have been more accurately THE
constable, since there could not well be more than one such officer attending
the court.

7. Notwithstanding any thing that has been said or omitted in the course of
this enquiry, it seems highly probable that, at the Common Law, and before the
mandate of Henry III. the constable of the hundred, and the constable of the
manor, were officers of the same nature and authority, originating at the same
time, and differing only as to the extent of their several districts: In short,
that they bore to each other the same analogy as subsisted between the bailiff
of the hundred and the bailiff of the manor; and, consequently, that the local
jurisdiction of the constable of the hundred was commensurate with that of the
torn or leet at which he was elected, being such part of the division only as
was not comprehended within the jurisdiction of any other leet. It follows,
therefore, that the constable of the hundred neither possessed nor could have
exercised any more authority within the precinct of the leet, than the
constable of one manor possessed or could have exercised in another; the manor
being, to all intents and purposes, exempt from and excluded out of the hundred
See 4 Inst. 261. It should hence seem that at this day a warrant directed to
all constables generally, cannot be legally executed by the high constable
within the limits of any petty constablery.
. The preeminence, therefore, which the constable of the hundred is supposed to
have, or may think proper to assume, over the constables of manors or townships
within the hundred, is altogether unfounded and imaginary, and might, with
equal justice or propriety, be claimed by the bailiff of the hundred or sheriff
of the county over the bailiff of the manor, or, in short, by any one constable
over another whose district was more circumscribed; for though, as lord Bacon
observes, the high constables authority has the more ample circuit, "yet I do
not find," says he, "that the petty constable is subordinate to the high
constable, or to be ordered or commanded by him Law Tracts, 181.187.
." Those cases, therefore, wherein it has been adjudged, that the being subject
to a particular leet shall not excuse a man from serving the office of
constable of the hundred, seem to have been decided upon a wrong principle, and
(to use an expression of sir Edward Coke) "for want of the knowledge of
antiquity 3 Keble, 197.230, 231. Freeman, 348.11 Mod. 215.
."

All this, however, is spoken with an exception not of acts of parliament only,
which, tinker-like, for one flaw they pretend to remedy, make a hundred To
offer advice to the legislature may be a presumptuous but is certainly a
useless measure. It would, however, lessen the mischief which almost every act
of parliament unintentionally does, if a general saving or proviso were
introduced, as is usual in private acts, whereby every right, law, or custom,
not expressly taken away or altered by such act, should continue in force.
, but also of the powers and pretensions, exercised or asserted by the quarter
sessions, which being generally composed of men who neither know nor care what
the law is, and who, therefore, consider themselves as a sort of legislative
body, and at liberty to do whatever they please, -- finding it, perhaps, much
easier to make new laws than to become acquainted with those already made, --
has, in direct opposition to a positive rule of law That a court created by act
of parliament cannot prescribe, nor exercise any authority which is not thereby
expressly given to them. "How," says Holt, "can justices of peace make a
constable, who is an officer at Common Law, and they only by statute?" 12 Mod.
180. See also 4 Inst. 267.
, usurped so much, and so long, with respect to the election and control both
of the constable of the hundred and of the constable of the vill, that it is
become difficult, if not impossible, to determine, with any degree of
precision, the actual rights of either.

THE OFFICE OF CONSTABLE.
CHAP. I. OF HIS QUALITY.
Conservator of the peace.
THE costable was ordained to repress felons, 10 E. 4. 18. Cromp. J. P. 201. 4
Inst. 265.
and to keep the peace, of which he was and is a conservator by the common law
Conservators of the peace, by the common law, were, 1. in respect of their
offices; 2. constituted for the purpose. Those in respect of offices were (and
still are) 1. the king; 2. the chancellor or keeper of the great seal; 3. the
lord high steward; 4. the lord marshall; 5. the lord high constable; 6. the
justices of the court of Kings Bench; 7. the lord treasurer; 8. the master of
the Rolls; (N. B. the last two are doubtful;) 9. the sheriff; 10. the coroner;
and, 11. the (petty) constable. Those constituted for the purpose (and instead
of whom are the modern justices of peace) were, 1. ordinary; 2. extraordinary.
The ordinary were, 1. by tenure; 2. by election; 3. by prescription. Those by
tenure were such as held lands of the king by this particular service, amongst
others, of keeping the peace within a particular district. Those by election
were such as were chosen to this office in pursuance of the kings writ by the
freeholders in the county court. And those by prescription were such as claimed
this power by immemorial usage in themselves, their ancestors, predecessors, or
those whose estate they had in certain lands. The extraordinary were persons
especially commissioned by the king, in times of imminent danger, to take care
of and defend a particular district, and to preserve the peace within the
limits thereof. The general authority of all these conservators was the same,
being that which the (petty) constable has at this day. But none might award
process, or take recognizance for the surety of the peace, beside the king, the
great officers already named, and judges of record; though all might take such
surety by obligation. See 2 Hawk. P. C. 43, 44, 45. (new edition) and the
authorities there cited.
.

His office is, 1 Hale P. C 88
therefore, 1. original or primitive, 1. Conservator.
as a conservator of the peace; 2. ministerial and relative to justices of the
peace, 2. Minister of the justice, etc.
coroners, sheriffs, etc. whose precepts he is to execute.

He is, 1 Hale P. C. 459. Comb. 446. Carth. 508. 1 Salk. 176. L. Raym. 1300. 12
Mod. 316. Foster, 312. n. 2 Black. Rep. 1135, 1 H. Black. 13.
however, an officer only for his own precinct, Local jurisdiction.
and cannot execute a warrant directed "to the constable of the vill," or "to
all constables" generally, out of that particular jurisdiction; for he is a
constable no where else; nor is he compellable to do it, though the warrant be
directed to him by name; but he may if he will, and so may any other person By
24 G. 2. c. 55. in case any person, against whom a warrant shall be issued,
shall escape into, or be in any other county, etc. it shall be lawful for any
justice of that county, etc. upon proof on oath of the handwriting of the
justice who granted the warrant, to indorse his name thereon, which shall be a
sufficient authority to the person bringing the warrant, and all others to whom
it was originally directed, to execute the same in such other county, etc. But
even under this act a constable is not compellable to go out of his district.


Comb. 204.
He is an officer of the court of quarter sessions, Officer of the Sessions
over whom they have power This power seems to be given to the justices of the
peace by the second clause of their commission: "We have also assigned you, and
every two or more of you (of whom, etc.) our justices to enquire the truth more
fully, by the oath of good and lawful men of the aforesaid county,... of all
and all manner of felonies, etc. And also of all sheriffs, bailiffs, stewards
CONSTABLES, keepers of gaols, and other officers, who in the execution of their
offices about the premises,... have unduly behaved themselves... or have
been... careless, remiss, or negligent in our aforesaid county."
.

CHAP. II. OF HIS QUALIFICATION.
Idoneus home.
THE common law requires, 8 Rep. 41. 6.
that every constable should be idoneus homo, i. e. apt and fit to execute the
said office; and he is said in law to be idoneus who has these three things,
honesty, knowledge, and ability; honesty, to execute his office truly, without
malice, affection, or partiality; knowledge, to know what he ought duly to do;
and ability, as well in estate as in body, that he may intend and execute his
office, when need is, diligently, and not for impotency or poverty to neglect
it; for if poor men should be chosen to this office, who live by the labor of
their hands, they would rather suffer felons and other malefactors to escape,
and neglect the execution of their office in other points, than leave their
labor, by which they, their wives and children live: and the commonwealth
consists in the well-ordering of particular towns, and order will not be well
observed in them but where the officers are idonei, i. e. honest, knowing, and
of ability.... And if one be elected constable who is not idoneus, he, by the
law, may be discharged of his office, and another man who is idoneus appointed
in his place.

Better sort.
The petty constables in towns ought to be of the better sort of resiants;
Bacons L. T. 183.
save that they ought not to be aged or sickly; but men of able bodies, in
respect of the keeping watch and toil of their place; neither ought they to be
in any man's livery.

Meaner sort.
For constables chose out of the meaner sort, Dalt. J. P. 58.
they are either ignorant what to do, or dare not do what they should, or are
not able to spare the time to execute this office: they are therefore to be able
men, Able men.
and to be chosen of the abler sort of parishioners; and are not to be chosen
either by the house or other custom.

Publican.
He ought not to be the keeper of a public house Such persons are expressly
prohibited in Westminster, by 29 G. 2. c. 25.
. 1 Mod. 42.


Resiant.
And must be an inhabitant of the place for which he is chosen. Freeman, 256


CHAP. III. OF HIS ELECTION.
Leet or tourn.
HE is chosen, 4 Inst. 265. 2 Salk. 502. Comb. 416. 2 Jones 212. Salk. 175. L.
Ray. 70. 71. Strange, 1119. 5 Mod. 130, 131.
by the common law, at the leet, or, where there is no leet, at the tourn;
sometimes by the jury, and sometimes by the steward, according to ancient and
particular usage. If he be present, when chosen, he is to take the oath in
court; if absent, he may be sworn before a (single) justice of the peace. But
in the latter case he ought to have special notice of his election, and a time
and place should be appointed for his taking the oath.

Two justices.
In case a constable dye, 13 and 14 C. 2. c. 12. Comb. 328. Strange, 798. 1050.
1213. Bulstr. 174. Styles, 362.
or quit the precinct, two justices may make and swear a new one, till the lord
of the manor shall hold a court leet, or till the next quarter sessions, who
may either approve of the constable so made, or appoint another. Also, if he
continue above a year in office, Quarter sessions.
the quarter sessions may discharge him, and put another in his place until the
lord shall hold a court. But justices of the peace, either in or out of the
quarter sessions, cannot in any other case discharge a constable chosen in the
leet The following persons are exempt from being compelled to serve this
office: 1. Attorneys of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas. (Noy, 112.
Cio. Car. 389.) 2. Barristers (as it seems. 1 Mod. 22. 3. The president and
fellows of the college of physicians, in London. (32 H. 8. c. 40.) but no other
physicians, nor they or others elsewhere. (1 Mod. 22. Vide tamen 1 Sid. 431. 2
Keble 578.) 4. Freemen of the company of surgeons of London, examined,
approved, and exercising the science of surgery. (5 H. 8. c. 6. 32 H. 8. c. 42.
18 G. 2. c. 15. and vide Comyns, 312) 5. Freemen of the mystery of barbers of
London. (5 H. 8.c. 6. 32 H. 8. c. 42. 18 G. c. 15.) 6. Dissenting teachers. (1.
W. and M. c. 18.) 7. Apothecaries practicing in, or within 7 miles of, London,
free of the company; or in the country, having served 7 years. (6 and 7 W. 3.
c. 4.) 8. The original proprietor of first assignee of a certificate for
prosecuting certain felons to conviction (commonly called a Tyburn ticket) if a
parish or (as in London) a ward office (within the parish or ward in which the
felony happened) to be only once used. (10 etc 11. W. 3. c. 23). But note, this
is no exemption from serving the office for a manor, nor, as it should seem,
for a vill or township. (2 Bur. 1182.) 9. A parliament man's servant. Q. (Mod.
13.) 10. Naturalized foreigners. (5 Bur. 278.) 11. Persons serving in the
militia. (26 G. 3. c. 107. 130) And 12. In Westminster, persons aged 63. (31 G.
2. c. 17 This act, in the index to the different editions of Rusf heads
statutes, is refered to as a general law, and yet Mr. Sergeant Runnington the
last editor, professes to have compiled a new one.
.) But not persons being, 1. masters of arts (5 Viner, 429); nor, 2. Justices
of the peace in another county (Strange 698.); nor, 3. officers of the guards
(1 Lev. 233); nor, 4. officers or watchmen of the custom-house (1 Sid. 272. 1.
Keble 933.); nor, 5. tenants in ancient demesne, (1 Vent. 344.)



Mandamus.
A mandamus may be granted to the steward of a court leet to swear a constable.
Comb. 285.


Indictment.
A person may be indicted for not taking upon him the office of constable.
Strange, 920.


Fine or amerciament.
In the leet or tourn where one is elected constable, 5 Mod. 130.
and refuses to be sworn, he may, if present, be fined for the contempt; if
absent, amerced or subjected to a penalty for non-acceptance of the office
according to the order.

Certificate.
And if the steward certify what person has been chose, 5 Mod. 128. Allen, 78.
which certificate is carried to a justice of peace, the justice may send his
warrant to compel him to appear before him and be sworn. Warrant.
And the Kings Bench has granted a writ in such case. Writ.


Order of court.
But one cannot be committed till he obey an order of court requiring him to
take the office. Cro. Car. 567. 12 Mod. 180.


Pleading.
And the indictment must set forth that he was chosen by a sufficient
authority, 5 Mod. 96. 1 Keble, 418.
and summoned before a justice of peace to take the oath; and debito modo
electus will not do.

Sessions.
Though the justices of the peace have not originally the making of the
constable, 2 Jones, 212.
it is matter of the peace within their general jurisdiction, and they may
examine it in their sessions.

Quo warranto.
An information in the nature of a quo warranto is grantable against one to
show by what authority he exercises the office of constable. Strange, 1213.


CHAP. IV. OF HIS POWER AND AUTHORITY.
Chief Justice.
THE constable has as good authority in his place as the chief justice of
England has in his. 1 Roll. Rep. 238.


Arrest of felon, ex officie.
Where a felony is committed he may ex officie (without a warrant) arrest and
imprison the felon till he can conveniently be conveyed to a justice of peace,
2 H^le P. C. ^0.
or to the common jail. And it is all one wherever the felony was committed, if
the felon be within his precinct.

Killing felon.
And if felon resists or flies, 4 Hale P. C. 481.489. 2 Hale P. C. 90.
whether after arrest or before, and cannot be taken, he may kill him; and such
killing is not felony, nor causes forfeiture.

Arrest on suspicion.
Where a felony has been actually committed, Cromp. J. P. 153, 6. 2 Hale P. C.
9.11 Mod. 248. Douglas, 345. Leadwith v. Catchpole, E. 23 G. 3. B. R.
the constable upon probable grounds of suspicion, even from information of
others, may lawfully apprehend the suspected person, and carry him before a
magistrate. And so may a private person do, without a constable.

Causes of suspicion.
Now probable causes of suspicion are very many, Cromp. J. P. 87.154. Owen,
121.12 Rep. 92.2 Hale P. C. 81.3 Bulstr. 287.
as, for instance, common fame; hue and cry levied; having part of the goods
found upon him; being indicted of the like; refusing to show cattle charged to
be stolen.

Breaking open doors, etc.
In case of a felony committed, 2 Hale P. C. ^2.90.94.
or in danger to be committed (as if A. wounds B. so that he is in danger of
death) the constable, either upon complaint, or upon a justice's warrant, or
hue and cry, may break open the doors to take him, if, upon demand and notice,
he will not yield himself, or entrance be refused. And, in that case, if the
constable kill the felon, who cannot be otherwise taken, it is no felony.

Arrest in discretion.
If A. lose goods, Clayton, 44.
and charge B. with stealing them; and the constable searches B's house but
finds none of the goods, yet upon the charge, and at the request of A. he may
arrest B. but this is discretionary, since he had found no cause of suspicion
on his search.

Dismission or detainer.
If the constable, Keilwey, 34.
having arrested a man for suspicion of felony, finds that no such felony has
been committed, the opinion of Keble, Conisby and Frowike was, that he might
let his prisoner go. But, by their opinions, if a man be killed in fact, and
one is arrested for that felony, or for suspicion thereof, although the
constable afterward finds that prisoner is not guilty, still he may not let him
go, but he ought to be delivered by due course of law.

Common jail.
He may carry that he has arrested for felony to the common jail, 4 E. 3. c.
10.13 E. 4.9.17 E. 4.5.1 Hale P. C. 595.
and the jailor is bound to receive him.

Imprisoning to prevent felony.
He may imprison to prevent a felony, by his office; Moore, 284. Pop. 13
as if he see two with weapons drawn, ready to fight, in preservation of the
peace, and to prevent manslaughter, which might ensue, he may set both in the
stocks. Or if a man in fury be purposed to kill, maim, or beat another, the
constable seeing it may arrest and imprison him till his rage be passed, for
the conservation of the peace.

Arrest in danger of felony.
Where one beats another almost to death Br. Faux Imprisonment, pl. 6. Cromp.
J. P. 141.
and hue and cry is raised, the constable may arrest the party, and, if he
refuse the arrest, may take power to arrest him; and may beat him till he obey
the arrest; and may imprison him till he perceive whether the other will live,
and may then let him at large.

Felonious intent.
He may arrest and imprison one for a felonious intent; Moore, 284. Pop 13.
as where a man had led away an infant of two years old into a church, and
there left it to perish for want of sustenance, and the constable took him, and
set him in the stocks. Also if a man lay an infant which cannot help itself
upon a dunghill, or in the open field, so that the beasts or fowls may destroy
it, or where no one is bound by law to take it up but he who brought it
thither, whereby the infant might perish, the constable seeing it may commit
the party so doing to prison.

Affray, etc.
If he see one making affray, Cromp. J. P. 131.155.201.
or assaulting another, or breaking the peace, or hear, or know, one to menace,
or threaten to kill, wound, maim, or beat another, he may take and set him in
the stocks, or commit him to prison, or to jail, Surety of the peace,
till he find surety for keeping the peace, or is bound to his good behavior.

Obligation.
He may take surety of the peace by obligation in his own name, 10 E. 4.18. Br.
Peace, pl. 2. Br. Suertie, pl. 23. Cromp. J. P. 131.4 Inst. 265. Cro. Eliz.
375.376.
but not otherwise; and may certify it at the sessions According to Lord Bacon,
he was to send it to the Exchequer or Chancery, whence process should be
awarded to levy the debt, if the peace was broken, L. T. 111.
.

Aid of neighbors.
He may take aid of his neighbors to arrest another, Cromp. J. P. 141.
and they are compelled to assist him by law; and, upon affray and such like,
he may raise the people of the realm to cause the peace to be observed.

Commitment for affray.
He may commit during affray in his own view, Cro. E. 375. Br. Faux Impris. 6.
but not after affray, to compel the party to find surety of the peace, as he
cannot take any man's oath that he is in fear of his life. 2 Hale P. C. 90.
But he may, upon complaint, arrest the party, and bring him before a justice
of the peace, to find surety, or for appearance.

Affray within doors.
If men be making affray in a house, Cromp. J. P. 130. b. 2 Hale P. C. 95.
and the doors are shut, the constable may enter and see the peace kept. And if
manslaughter, or bloodshed, is likely to ensue, and entrance upon demand is
refused, he may break open the doors to keep the peace and prevent the danger.

Affray and flight.
And if he who made the affray flies to a house and shuts the door, Cromp. J.
P. 130, b.
the constable may follow and take him by fresh suit, or otherwise, where the
other party is in danger of his life.

Impending affray.
And if he perceive that persons are about to make affray, Cromp. J. P. 130.
he may command them to disperse upon pain of imprisonment; and if it appear
likely to be a great affray may commit them to prison for a short time to
prevent it.

Stocks or jail.
But he may not set one who has broke the peace in the stocks, 22 E. 4.35.
if he can have him to the next jail for the night.

Watch.
He has power ex officio to keep a watch for the purpose to raise or pursue
hue and cry upon robberies committed, 2 Hale P. C. 97.
by the statute of Winton, c. 1; to search for lodgers in suburbs of cities
that are suspicious persons, which is to be done every week, or at least once
in 15 days, by the same statute c. 4; for such as ride or go armed, by the
statute of 2 E. 3. c. 3; for night walkers and persons suspicious, either by
night or day, by the statute of 5 E. 3. c. 4. And it is in his power to hold
such watches as often as he pleases, and the watchmen are his ministers and
assistants, and are under the same protection with him, and may act as he does,
and regularly he ought to be in company with them in their walk and watch A
watchman has a double protection of the law, viz. 1. As an assistant to the
constable when he is present or in the watch. 2. Purely as a watchman set by
order of law; and the law takes notice of his authority; and the killing of a
watchman in the execution of his office is murder, 2 Hale, P. C. 97.
.

Disorderly house.
If there be disorderly drinking or noise at an unseasonable time of night, 2
Hale P. C. 95.
especially in inns, taverns, or alehouses, the constable, or his watch
demanding entrance and being refused, may break open the doors, to see and
suppress the disorder; as is constantly done in London and Middlesex.

Insult, etc.
He may imprison one who insults, 1 Roll R. 238. Br. Faux Impris. 41. Cromp. J.
P. 131. Clayton, 10.
assaults, or makes affray upon him, or opposes him, though but verbally, in
the execution of his office; and may also beat another in his own defense.

Madman.
He may take a madman and put him in prison, Owen 98.
and shall not be charged though he dye there.

Refusal to watch.
If an inhabitant refuse to watch in his turn, 3 Lev. 208.
the constable may set him in the stocks.

Innkeeper refusing a guest.
If an innkeeper will not lodge a man, 5 E. 4.2. Br. action sur le case. 76.
Cromp. J. P. 201.
the constable, upon complaint, may oblige him Quare How? He may present him,
indeed, at the sessions, or leet: but the book should seem to imply something
more; as the man may be lost or starved for want of a lodging. Innkeepers are,
in such case, likewise, subject to an action for damages at the suit of the
party grieved (Godb. 346. Palm. 374. 2 Roll R. 345.) and it is a great pity
their insolence is not now and then corrected by one or other of these methods.
.

Night walkers.
He may apprehend night walkers And so may his watchmen, and commit them to
custody till the morning, 2 Hale P. C. 98. Br. Faux Imprisonment, 39. And so,
in short, may any man. Br. Faux Imprisonment, 15.
. 2 E 4.8.


And may arrest and commit lewd persons, Cromp. J. P. 153, b. Br. Trespass, 432.
12 Mod. 567. 5 Rep. 556.
who resort to houses where bawdry is used, Lewd persons.
to make them find security for their good behavior.

General Warrant.
If he arrests on a general warrant, scil. coram aliquo justiciario (before
some justice) he may carry his prisoner to what justice he will.

Going armed.
He may arrest persons coming before the kings justices with force and arms, 2
E. 3. c. 3.
or who bring force in affray of the peace, or go or ride armed This is to be
understood of going or riding armed with harness and weapons, in an unusual,
warlike and terrific manner. Every man has by law a right to carry ordinary
arms for the defense of his person and property, and (if necessary) to kill
those who offer violence to either.
.

Deputy.
He may make a deputy to execute his office in his absence; Cromp. J. P. 201.
Bacon L. T. 137. Moore, 845. 3 Bol. 78. 1 Roll. R. 274. 1 Roll. A. 591. Sid.
355. 1 W. and M. c. 18. 7. 3. Burr. 1262.
and such deputy may execute warrants, directed to the constable, and do all
other things pertaining to the office of constable, though he be not sworn But
he must be answerable for his deputy upon any miscarriage; unless the deputy is
duly allowed and sworn; for then he is constable. Wood, b. 1. c. 7.
.

Neighbors.
He may command his neighbors to assist him in the execution of any authority
or duty vested in him by the common law; Comb. 309.
but not by particular statute, unless in special cases.

Breaking open doors.
By virtue of a warrant, he may break open a house to take a person for treason
or felony; Brown l. 211. 1 Bulstr. 146.
but for no other cause.

Warrant.
Where he has a warrant he is tied up to that warrant, 11 Mod. 248.
to act only as it directs.

Servants in Husbandry.
He may grant testimonials under his seal licensing servants in husbandry, 5
Eliz. c. 4.
etc. to depart from their masters and serve elsewhere.

Plague.
He may command infected persons in time of plague to keep the house If they
refuse, the watchmen or keepers may enforce them; or if they go abroad and
converse in company, having any infectious sore, they are to be adjudged felons
and suffer death; or, having no sore, to be punished as vagabonds, and bound to
their good behavior.
. 1 Ja. c. 31.


Suspected deserters.
He may apprehend persons suspected of being deserters, 30 G. 3. c. (Annual.)
and bring them before a justice.

CHAP. V. OF HIS DUTY.
Affray.
THE office of constable is to take such as make affray, Cromp. J P. 131.
and imprison them till they are bound to the peace.

Roberdesmen.
If any man have suspicion of evil of roberdesmen, 5 E. 3. c. ^4.
wastours, or drawlatches, whether it be day or night, they are to be
incontinently arrested by the constable; who is to deliver them, if in a
franchise, to the bailiff, if in gildable Gildable is such of a county as is
not comprised within any franchise; no other being anciently subject to the
jurisdiction of the sheriff, nor liable to gelds or taxes.
, to the sheriff, to be kept in prison till the jail delivery.

If he have notice that a burglary has been committed, Cro. E. 16.
it is his duty to pursue the felon immediately, though in the night.

Escape.
It constable arrest a felon and carry him to the county jail, 10 H. 4.7.
and the jailor will not receive him, the constable ought to keep him till the
jail delivery, otherwise it is escape.

Carrying to jail.
If one take a felon in the vill, and carry him to the constable, Cromp. J. P.
201, b.
it is his duty to convey him to the jail, and to cause others of the vill to
assist him.

Demeanor toward prisoners.
As to what the constable is to do with his prisoner that he has arrested for
felony or otherwise: 2 Hale P. C. 95. Ib. 120.
in case of a sudden affray through passion or excess of drink, he may put the
party into the stocks, or in a prison, if there be one in the vill, till the
heat of his passion and intemperance is over, though he deliver him afterward,
or till he can bring him before a justice of peace. In other offenses, he may
convey his prisoners to the sheriff, or his jailor of the county, or, if within
a franchise, to the jailor of the franchise; and they are bound to receive them
without taking any thing, by 4 E. 3. c. 10. vide 5 H. 4. c. 10. 23 H. 8. c. 2.
But the safest and best way in all cases is to bring them to a justice of
peace, to be my him bailed or committed as the case may require. For till they
be bailed or discharged, or the sheriff or jailor has received them, they are
still under the charge of the constable.

Stocks.
Till the constable can conveniently convey the party to a justice of peace, 2
Hale P. C. 95. Ibid. 119.
or to the common jail, as when the time is unseasonable, or there is danger of
a rescue, or the party is sick, he may secure him in the stocks, or in a house,
till the next day, or such further time as may be reasonable.

Felons.
If felons or murderers be in the vill, and the constable have knowledge
thereof, Cromp. J. P. 201, b.
it is his office and duty to assemble people and take them.

Flight.
If a man fly for felony, the constable ought to seize his goods, Ibid.
and keep them safely for the kings use.

Constables are, upon request, 1 Mary, fuss. 2. c. 9.
to assist the president of the college of physicians in London, and all
persons by him authorized for the due execution of 14 and 15 H. 8. c. and 32 H.
8. c. 40. upon pain of contempt.

Harvest
In time of hay or corn harvest, the constable is to cause all persons meet for
labor, 5 Eliz. c. 4.
at his discretion, to serve by the day in mowing, reaping, etc. and is to set
them in the stocks if they refuse.

Poors rate.
The weekly rate for the relief of the poor is to be assessed, 43 Eliz. c. 2.
12.
in case the parishioners disagree, by the churchwardens and constables; who
are, in either case, to levy the rate.

The churchwardens and constables of every parish are to collect the sums
rates, 43 Eliz. c. 3. 35.
and pay the same over to the high constable.

Malefactors.
Lewd persons who shall cut or take away corn growing, 43 Eliz. c. 7. and 15 C.
2. c. 2.
rob orchards or gardens, break or cut hedges or fences, pull up fruit trees,
or spoil woods, not being felony, being thereof convicted, and not making
satisfaction for the damages, shall be committed to the constable or other
inferior officers to be whipped.

Unlicensed ale houses.
Persons keeping a common tippling house, or selling ale, 3 C. 1. c. 3.
beer, cider or perry, without a license, forfeit twenty shillings, to be
levied by the constables or churchwardens, and not having sufficient goods, or
not paying within six days, are to be committed to the constable or other
inferior officer to be openly whipped.

Customs.
Constables are to be aiding to the officers of the customs in the execution of
this act By 12 C. 2. c. 19. any person under the warrant of the lord treasurer,
barons of the Exchequer, or chief magistrate of the port or place, with the
assistance of a constable, may enter in the daytime into any house where
uncustomed goods are suspected to be concealed; and in case of resistance,
break open houses, and seize and secure the goods; and all officers of justice
are to be aiding and assisting.

By 12 C. 2. c. 23. Gagers shall, by night, in the presence of a constable, be
permitted, upon request, to enter the house, brewhouse, etc. of any brewer,
distiller, etc.

And by 13 and 14 C. 2. c. 11. any person authorized by writ of assistance out
of the Exchequer, may take a constable inhabiting near the place, and in the
daytime, enter any house, shop, etc. and in case resistance break open doors,
chests, etc. to seize and bring away any kind of uncustomed goods.

But quaere whether a constable is obliged to go with the officer; or if he
should, whether he need do more than look on. The legislature seems very
frequently to confound the constable with his staff.


. 13 and 14 C. 2. c. 11.


Measures.
They are to search and examine if any person use any other measure than what
is agreeable to the standard marked in the Exchequer, 22 C. 2. c. 8.
called the Winchester measure of eight gallons to the bushel, or strike the
same otherwise than even by the wood or brim; or sell or buy by a measure
unsealed: and, finding any such unsealed measure, are to seize and break the
same; and for that and every other offense are to present the offender at the
next sessions.

Kidderminster weavers.
They are to be aiding and assisting to the president, 22 and 23 C. 2. c. 8.
etc. of the Kidderminster weavers, as often as required.

Distress for rent.
The constable is to be aiding and assisting in the appraisement and sale of
goods distrained for rent, 2 W. and M. Sess. 1. c. 5.
and may swear the appraisers; and is to receive the overplus for the owners
use. And

Is to aid and assist landlords, 11 G. 2. c. 19.
etc. seizing as a distress for rent, goods fraudulently carried away and
locked up in any house, etc. which (oath being first made before a justice of
reasonable ground of suspicion) they are empowered to break open.

Upon the breaking out of nay fire within London or Westminster all constables
and beadles (upon notice thereof) are to repair to the place with their staves
and other badges of authority, and be aiding and assisting in the extinguishing
of the fire, 6 Ann. c. 31.
Fire.
causing people to work at the engines Or rather persuading them to do so; a
constable has no power to cause or force people to work who are unwilling, nor
is it fit he should have it. The law knows nothing of beadles.
and preventing goods being stolen; and are to apprehend all ill-disposed
persons whom they find stealing of pilfering from the inhabitants, and to give
their utmost assistance to help the inhabitants to recover their goods.

Jurors.
The justices of peace at the quarter sessions next after the 24th of June are
to issue their warrant to the head or chief constable of the hundred, 3 and 4
Ann. c. 18.
requiring him to issue his precepts to the constables, directing them to meet
him at some usual or convenient place within fourteen days, when and where the
constables shall prepare a true list signed by them of the names and abode of
all persons within the places for which they serve qualified to serve on juries
according to 4 and 5 W. and M. c. 24. between the ages of 21 and 70, according
to 7 and 8 W. 3. c. 32. which list the constables at the quarter sessions are
to return and give to the justices in open court.

But it is sufficient if the constables subscribe their lists in the presence
of a justice, 3 G. 2. c. 25.
and attest the truth thereof on oath, and deliver them to the chief constable.

Hue and cry.
Every constable to whom notice shall be given of and robbery is with the
utmost expedition to make fresh suit and hue and cry after the felon. 8. G. 2.
c. 16.


Hawkers of spirits.
Any person may seize and detain hawkers of spirits till he can give notice to
the constable, 11 G. 2. c. 26.
etc. who is to carry them before a justice of the peace.

Poors rate.
Where no rate is made for relief of the poor, 12 G. 2. ^. 29.
the quarter sessions may direct the sum assessed for the purposes of this act
to be rated and levied by the constable to be by him paid to the high constable
of the hundred.

Vagrants.
Two or more justices are four times a year or oftener (if need be) by their
warrant to command the constables, 27 G. 2. c. 5.
who shall be assisted with sufficient men, to make a general privy search
throughout their respective limits for the finding and apprehending of rogues
and vagabonds, viz. persons threatening to run away and leave their wives or
children to the parish; persons unlawfully returning to the parish or place
from whence they have been legally removed, without a certificate; persons, not
having wherewith to maintain themselves, living idle and refusing to work;
persons going about from door to door, or placing themselves in streets,
highways or passages, to beg or gather alms, all of whom are to be deemed idle
and disorderly persons; persons going about as patengatherers or gatherers of
alms, under pretenses of loss by fire or other casualty; or as collectors for
prisons or hospitals; fencers, bearwards, common players of interludes,
minstrels, juggles; persons pretending to be gypsies, or wandering in the habit
or form of Egyptians, or pretending to have skill in physiognomy, palmestry or
like crafty science, or to tell fortunes, or playing or betting at any unlawful
games or plays; persons running away and leaving their wives or children,
whereby they become chargeable to any parish or place; petty chapmen and
pedlers wandering abroad, not being duly licensed or authorized; persons
wandering abroad, and lodging in alehouses, barns, outhouses, or the open air,
not giving a good account of themselves; persons wandering abroad and begging,
pretending to be soldiers, mariners, seafaring men, or pretending to go to work
in harvest; and all other persons wandering abroad and begging; all of whom are
to be deemed rogues and vagabonds By 23 G. 3. c. 88. Whoever shall be
apprehended, and any pistol, hanger, or other offensive weapon found upon him,
with intent feloniously to assault any person; or having upon him any picklock,
crow, or other implement, with intent feloniously to break and enter into any
dwelling house, shall be deemed a rogue and vagabond.
; endgatherers offending against 13 G. 1. c. 23. persons apprehended as rogues
and vagabonds, and escaped from the persons apprehending them, or refusing to
go before a justice or to be examined before him, or to be conveyed by a pass,
or knowingly giving a false account of themselves on such examination, after
warning given them of their punishment; rogues or vagabonds breaking or
escaping out of any house of correction; and persons having been punished as
rogues and vagabonds, and discharged, again committing any of the said
offenses, who are to be deemed incorrigible rogues; and every justice on
receiving information that rogues and vagabonds, are in any place within his
jurisdiction is to issue his warrant to the constable of such place to search
for and apprehend them. Such rogues and vagabonds to be brought before any
justice or justices of the peace of the same county, etc. who after taking
their examination shall order them to be publicly whipped by the constable,
etc. or sent to the house of correction; and after such whipping or confinement
such justice or justices may by a pass under hand and seal cause them to be
conveyed to the place of their settlement, and with the pass shall deliver to
the constable a note or certificate ascertaining how they are to be conveyed,
and what allowance he is to have for conveying them. Whereupon the constable is
to convey them agreeably to the pass, the next direct way to the place where
they are ordered to be sent if in the same county, etc. but if in some other
county, etc. shall deliver them to the constable of the first town in the
direct way with the pass and duplicate of examination, taking his receipt. And
such constable shall without delay apply to some justice in the same county.
etc. who shall make the like certificate as before, and deliver it to the said
constable, who shall convey the persons unto the first parish, etc. in the next
county, etc. in the direct way, and so from one county to another, till they
come to the place to which such persons are sent.

Cursing and swearing.
If the constable hear any person swear or curse, 19 G. 2. c. 21
he is, if a stranger, to seize him and carry him before the next justice, etc.
or, if known to him, make information before such justice, etc. to be convicted
and punished Q. For what offense?
.

Indorsed warrant.
Where, 24 G. 2. c. 55.
under an indorsed warrant, he apprehends the offender, he is to carry him
before the justice who indorsed it; and if the offender find bail, is to
receive the recognizance, examination, etc. and deliver them over to the clerk
of assize or clerk of the peace of the county where the offender is required to
appear; and, if the offender be not bailed, is to carry him before a justice of
the county where the offense, was committed This act is every defective; for
supposing an offender who has committed a crime in Middlesex to escape from
county to county till he gets into Northumberland, the warrant being indorsed
by a magistrate of each he passes through, whoever carries the warrant to be
last indorsed, and by virtue thereof apprehends the offender, must personally
carry either the prisoner or his recognizance back to the original county; and
it will not be sufficient that he deliver either to a constable of the next
adjoining county, and so on; nor, in case he does deliver his prisoner to such
constable, will the warrant be any authority to him to carry the body forward.
Therefore let the constable in any case take heed how he acts.


Disorderly houses.
If two inhabitants of any parish or place paying scot and bearing lot give
notice in writing to the constable of any person keeping a bawdy house, 25 G.
2. 36.
gaming house or other disorderly house in such parish or place, he is to go
with them to a justice of the peace, and upon their making oath that they
believe the contents of the notice to be true, and entering into a recognizance
to give or produce material evidence, enter into a recognizance in L. 30. to
prosecute such person for such offense at the next sessions or assizes. The
expenses of prosecution to be paid by the overseers of the poor.

Warrant of distress.
Constable making a distress under a justice of peace's warrant, 27 G. 2. c. 20.
shall, if required, show the same to the party, and suffer a copy to be taken.

Every constable or beadle within his district, 29 G. 2. c. 30.
and every watchman on duty, Stealers of lead, etc.
is to apprehend persons reasonably suspected of having, carrying, or
conveying, after sunset and before sunrise, any lead, iron, copper, brass,
bell-metal, or solder, suspected to be stolen or unlawfully come by, and carry
it and the party before two or more justices.

Militia.
The lieutenant and (or) deputy lieutenants are to issue their orders to the
chief constable to issue an order to all constables to return to the deputy
lieutenants lists in writing of all men dwelling within the parish, 26 G. 3. c.
107. 21.
etc. between eighteen and forty-five, distinguishing their rank and occupation,
having first affixed a copy of such list on the church door; and on the day
appointed for return of the lists the constables are to attend and verify the
return on oath; 24.
and the deputy lieutenants at a subsequent meeting are to issue an order to
the chief constable requiring him to give notice to the constable of each
parish, etc. of the number of men appointed to serve, and at another meeting
are to issue an order to the chief constable to direct the constable to give
notice to every man chosen to serve in the militia to appear at the next
meeting, when the constable is to attend and make oath of the service of the
notice.

And the constables are to cause the notice they receive from the chief
constable of the time and place of exercise to be fixed on the church door. 69.


And constables, 78.
etc. are to billet militia-men, when called out to annual exercise, in inns,
livery stables, alehouses, etc. upon application by the lieutenant, colonel or
commanding officer; and are also to provide lodging for the sergeants,
corporals and drummers at other times.

And when the militia is called out any justice of peace, 80.
being required by the order of the lieutenant, or a deputy lieutenant, or the
colonel or chief officer of the regiment, etc. is to issue his warrant to the
chief constable, or to the constables of the parishes, etc. through which the
militia is to march, to provide carriages and drivers.

And in case of actual invasion, 98.
or imminent danger thereof, or in case of rebellion, the lieutenant or deputy
lieutenants are to issue orders to the chief constable, who is to forward the
same to the constables, and they on receipt thereof are to give notice to the
militia men to attend at the time and place mentioned in the order.

Highways.
On the 22d of September in every year, 13 G. 3. c. 78.
the constables, churchwardens, surveyor of the highways, and householders, are
to assemble and make a list of ten inhabitants having an estate in the parish,
etc. of L. 10 a year, or personalty of the value of L. 100, or being occupiers
of house or land of L. 30 a year, to serve the office of surveyor of the
highways; and the constable is three days after to transmit a duplicate of the
list to a justice of peace, and return the original to the special sessions for
the highways in the week after the Michaelmas general quarter sessions, and is
also within three days to give notice to the persons named in the list, that
they may appear at the special sessions to accept the office; ten days notice
of the time and place of holding the same being to be given to the constable by
the justices. And the constable is, upon requisition of the justices, to return
an account in writing of the sum which an assessment of sixpence in the pound
has raised or will raise within the parish, etc.

Suspected thieves.
Constables, 22 G. 3. c. 58.
beadles, and watchmen, are to apprehend those suspected of conveying, between
sunset and sunrise, any goods or chattels suspected to be stolen, and carry
them before a justice.

Soldiers.
The constables are to quarter and billet the officers and soldiers in the
kings service in inns, 30 G. 3. c. (Annual.)
livery stables, alehouses, victualing houses, and the house of sellers of
wine, brandy, etc. by retail to be drank in their own houses or places thereto
belonging (except tavern-keepers free of the vintners company). And the high
and petty constables within the city and liberties of Westminster, and places
adjacent, when required, are to billet and quarter the officers and soldiers of
the foot guards in such like houses, in and about the said city and liberties,
and places adjacent (except the city of London); and when any order shall issue
for the quartering or billeting of officers or soldiers within the said city
and liberties of Westminster, and places adjacent, the high constables of each
parish, etc. to billet and quarter such officers and soldiers of the foot
guards, and such petty constables shall billet and quarter them equally and
proportionably. And these petty constables shall at every general quarter
sessions for Westminster, and parts adjacent, make and deliver to the justices
upon oath, signed lists of all houses liable to receive soldiers, with the
number billeted in each house. And

Justices (being duly required) are to issue their warrants to the constables
to make provision of carriages for troops on march.

Warrants.
Though the constable is not named in 3 and 4 W. and M. c. 10. 1 Salk. 381.
nor appointed to be the officer to execute the warrants, yet the justices may
command him to execute them The reason given is, that "as at common law the
constables were subordinate officers to the conservators of the peace, so they
are now the proper officers of the justices." But the premises are false, and
of course the conclusion bad: they were conservators of the peace themselves.
.

Presentiments.
A constable must either return his warrant, 1 Salk. 381.
or certify what he has done upon it He ought not to return the warrant, but
keep it for his own justification. -- See 24 G. 1. c. 44.
.

He should present all offenses within his own knowledge, Dalton, J. P. 474.
Fitz. J. P. 6.
which concern the peace, as defaults of watching, disorderly houses, affrays,
etc. etc. at the leet, tourn, or quarter sessions. And such presentment is as
available as one made by twelve men.

But he is not obliged to present a highway sworn before him by two witnesses
to be out of repair; 1 Vent. 336.
even though demanded so to do by the quarter sessions; and may tell them
plainly that he will not present it N. B. Although it be said in the pamphlet,
entitled, "The Duty of Constables, etc." Gloucester, 1790, that they "as well
as other parish officers are to take care, as much as in them lies, that the
sabbath be not profaned," the constable is no more concerned in preventing such
profanation (except in levying the penalty or inflicting punishment under the
justice's warrant) than any other person; and as that part of the act (29 C. 2.
c. 7.) which makes it penal for a man to exercise his trade or calling on (what
is called) the Lords day, savours a little too much of bigotry and Calvinism,
it will be most commendable, and perhaps most advisable, if he in all such
cases wait for the warrant. What is innocent one day cannot well be criminal
another.
.

Discharge.
He is not discharged of his office till his successor be sworn; Freeman, 256.
because the district cannot be without an officer.

CHAP. VI. OF HIS PROTECTION, INDEMNITY, ALLOWANCES, ADVANTAGES, AND REWARDS.
Aid of the country.
THE constable shall have aid of the country to pacify affray. Cromp. J. P. 131.
Constables are usually summoned by the sheriff to attend at the quarter
sessions and assizes to make presentiments, etc. which though not warranted by
any express law, must be allowed a very ancient usage; but the following
practice seems to be perfectly unjustifiable. The grand inquest for the county
of Middlesex, previous to their sitting, and before they are sworn, issue a
warrant, under their hands and seals, to the high constable, commanding him to
summon the petty constables, who, on making default are presented by the
inquest and compelled to appear to the presentment in the crown office and take
a copy of it, which is attended with an expense of between 20 and 30 shillings,
and here the proceedings uniformly stop. And, this is done every term, but
surely without the privity of the Court of Kings Bench, which can never
sanction so illegal and oppressive a conduct. No grand jury has the least power
by law to require the attendance of a single person for any purpose whatever,
even after it is sworn, and yet here is one which assumes that power even
before it exists. The warrant is sent to the high constable, who is no officer
of the Court of the Kings Bench, and has no business to obey it. And yet if any
one thus irregularly called upon does not appear he will be subject to the
above fine in the crown-office. For though the court would doubtless quash the
presentment, yet the getting it quashed would cost him a great deal more: he is
therefore obliged to submit to an unconstitutional and oppressive measure,
because the remedy is worse than the disease. See the warrant in the Complete
Constable, 1725. p. 149. If it be necessary for the constables to make their
presentiments to the grand inquest, the court of Kings Bench should issue its
writ for that purpose to the sheriff.


Action.
He is not suable out of the county for what he does in the execution of his
office. Sty. 393.


General issue.
If he be sued for any thing done by virtue of his office, 7 J. 1. c. 5.
he, Double costs.
and all who assist him, may plead the general issue, Not guilty, and give the
special matter in evidence, and on a verdict for the defendant or defendants,
or on the plaintiffs becoming nonsuit or discontinuing, the defendant or
defendants shall have double costs. Cromp. J. P. 201.
And so of a deputy constable.

But in this case the judge who tries the cause must order the postea to be
marked, 2 Ven. 45. Douglas, 294.
and certify that the defendant was acting in the execution of his office.

Murder*
If in the execution of his office, 1 Hale P.C. 9. 460.
after competent notice that he is constable, he, or any that come to his
assistance, be killed, it is murder; although the party killing do not know his
person But then, as has been already observed, he must be acting in his own
district or division. For if the constable of A. come into the vill of B. to
suppress any disorder, and in the tumult be killed, this is only manslaughter,
because he had no authority in B. 1. Hale P. C. 459. The constable of St.
Margarets parish in Westminster, having a search warrant directed to the
constables of that parish, came into the parish of St. Paul, Covent Garden, and
took a woman in the street near the theater, and carried her to the
round-house; where he was assaulted and killed by some who wanted to rescue
her; and this killing adjudged only manslaughter: 1. Because it was a sudden
action without precedent malice. 2. Because the constable had no authority at
all in Covent Garden; nor, supposing he had any, was the woman guilty of any
disorderly act; and it is not a constables suspecting that will justify his
taking up any person, but it must be just grounds of suspicion; and it would be
hard that the liberty of the subject should depend on the will of the
constable, or his not liking a woman's looks be any cause of suspicion. 3. The
prisoners had a sufficient provocation; for it one be imprisoned upon an
unlawful authority, it is a sufficient provocation to all people out of
compassion, much more when it is done under a color of justice; and WHERE THE
LIBERTY OF THE SUBJECT IS INVADED, IT IS A PROVOCATION TO ALL THE SUBJECTS IN
ENGLAND. (By HOLT, C. J.) 2 L. Ray. 1300, 1301.

There are other instances of a constable, or his assistant, being killed,
where he has been too officiously or imprudently, because ignorantly acting as
such, and exercising an authority not given him by law; which of course will in
such case afford him no more protection than a common man. See the trial of
William Power for the wilful murder of John Wilkinson, Sessions paper, 1788-9.
p. 820, where Gould, J. having consulted two of his brethren, in directing the
jury, said, the thing being over, it was unwarrantable in these people to seize
this man thus quiet, without having an authority from a justice of peace; he
was therefore illegally assaulted and arrested by these men: when a man
therefore is deprived of his liberty, and does an act that causes the death of
the assailant in any manner whatever, certainly by law it reduces the offense
to manslaughter: and so of course the jury found. The deceased had sent for the
constable, and given him charge of the prisoner, for having drawn a knife on
him twice, and threatening his life, and in helping the constable to force him
away, was unfortunately stabbed. See also Leaches Cases in Crown Law, 211.
These little accidents should operate to make every constable more familiar
with his actual powers, which, wherever there may be danger, he ought always,
for his greater security, to execute with sufficient assistance or properly
armed; since the hanging of his murderer (though it be all the law can do) will
hardly restore him to life, or recompense his family for his loss; let him
therefore learn to protect himself; and let others, also, when he is usurping an
illegal authority, be taught to protect themselves against him.

At present, by 29 G. 2. c. 25. the Westminster constables are to be appointed
out of the different parishes, for the whole city and liberty. In London, also,
by ancient custom, the constables, though appointed in particular wards (of
which there are twenty-six) have power to serve warrants and execute their
office throughout the city.


.

Notice.
Coming to appease a sudden affray in the daytime in the place where he is
constable, 1 Hale P. C. 461.
it seems every man is bound to take notice that he is constable: but it is not
so in the nightime, unless there be some notification that he is constable.
But whether it be day or night, it is sufficient notice if he declare himself
to be the constable, or command the peace to be kept in the king's name, or the
like.

Trespas^^
If two men are combating, Cromp. J. P. 130.
and the constable come to part them and is hurt, he shall have action of
trespass; and if he hurt them, they shall not have action against him. 2 Hale
P. C. 97.
And so of those who aid him; every man who is assisting to the constable in
the execution of his office having the same protection that the law gives to
the constable.

Unjustly removed.
If he be removed without just cause, Bulstr. 174.
the court of Kings Bench will by rule of court order him to be restored to his
place.

Cursing and swearing.
If he be sued for seizing or prosecuting persons who swear or curse in his
hearing, 19 G. 2. c. 21.
he may plead the general issue, and give the special matter in evidence, and
if he get a verdict, or plaintiff be nonsuit, or discontinue, he is to have
treble costs.

Warrant.
A justice of pe^ce's warrant is a sufficient justification of a constable in a
matter within the jurisdiction of such justice. Strange, 711.


Action.
No action shall be brought against a constable, 24 G. 2. c. 44.
or any one acting by his order or in his aid, for any thing done in obedience
to a warrant under the hand or seal of a justice of peace, until demand of the
perusal and copy of such warrant, and refusal or neglect for six days. And if,
after demand and compliance, an action be brought without making the justice a
defendant, the jury shall give a verdict for the defendant or defendants,
notwithstanding any defect of jurisdiction in such justice. And if such action
be brought jointly against justice and constable, the jury, on proof of the
warrant, shall find for the latter. And no action shall be brought against a
constable unless commenced within six months Note, The above act extends only
to actions of tort: and therefore where an action for money had and received was
brought against an officer who had levied money on a conviction by a justice of
the peace, the conviction having been quashed, it was holden, that a demand of
a copy of the warrant was not necessary. Bullers N. P. 24. And although this
act may afford the constable protection in a civil suit, yet if the warrant be
plainly illegal, as, for instance, to apprehend a man for adultery or incest,
it seems the party may legally resist, and if in defense of his liberty he kill
the constable, such killing is not murder; but if on the other hand the
constable should kill him, he shall be adjudged guilty of murder.

Of the above description, perhaps, are the warrants put into the hands of an
uninformed constable, who supposes every thing to be legal which comes from a
justice of peace, who may possibly at the same time be as ignorant as himself,
for the searching after and IMPRESSING OF SEAMEN; a practice in direct
violation of every constitutional principle, and certainly unsupported by any
positive law. Let the constable therefore who too officiously engages in a
business so deservedly unpopular, seriously reflect of the risk he runs; let
him dread the consequences of a spirited resistance. He murders if he kill; it
is justifiable homicide, or at most manslaughter, if he be killed. The law,
very properly, encourages and invites all men to repress an act of illegality
and violence, and the rather, as we have just seen, if it be done under color
of justice. See the case already cited in Lord Raymonds Reports; and that of
Hopkins Hugget, in Sir John Kelyngs: Cases of much greater consequence and
authority than the flimsy reasoning used in defense of press-warrants. Observe
also what is said by Lord Hale on this subject, in his History of the Pleas of
the Crown; and consider whether the life, liberty, and happiness of the subject
are to be blown away by an insidious side-winded act of parliament. It is no
place here to enter into a discussion of the arguments used by Sir Michael
Forster and Mr. Butler on this subject, which, however, might be easily refuted
upon the most solid and legal, as well as constitutional, principles. The
practice is very far from ancient, but were it ever so, NO DEGREE OF ANTIQUITY
CAN GIVE SANCTION TO A USAGE BAD IN ITSELF. 3 Bur. 1767.


.

Militia list.
Any person endeavoring by rewards of menaces to prevail on the constable to
make a false return of a militia list, 2 G. 3. c. 20.
forfeits L. 20. And refusing to tell his name or the name of his lodger, L. 10.

Common scold.
He and his assistants may, Moore, 847.
under a presentment in the leet and the stewards warrant, justify punishing a
common scold according to law ( i. e. putting her in the ducking-stool).

Charges of conveying malefactors.
The charges of sending malefactors to jail were by the common law to be born
by the vill in which they were apprehended. 1 Hale P. C. 96. 3 J. 1. c. 10. 27
G. 2. c. 3.
But now every person not having goods or money within the county where he is
taken sufficient for that purpose, on application by any constable, or other
officer who conveyed him, any justice of the peace for the same county shall
upon oath examine into and ascertain the reasonable expenses to be allowed him;
and forthwith, without fee or reward, by warrant under his hand and seal, order
the treasurer of the county to pay the same, which he is required to do as soon
as he receives such warrant, except in Middlesex, where such expenses are to be
paid by the overseers of the poor of the parish or place where the person was
apprehended.

Vagrants.
The county treasurer is to pay the constable the rates or allowances
ascertained by the justice's certificate, 17 G. 2. c. 5. 26 G. 2. c. 34.
for conveying rogues and vagabonds (see before, p. 21.)

Soldiers.
A mandamus is grantable on 1 G. Strange, 42. 93.
1. c. 34. (Mutiny Act) to allow a constable extraordinary charges in providing
carriages, etc.

Distress.
The constable making a distress under a justice's warrant, 27 G. 2. c. 20.
may deduct the reasonable charges of taking, keeping, and selling the
distress, out of the money arising by such sale.

Account.
Every constable is every three months, 18. G. 3. c.
and within fourteen days after he goes out of office, to deliver to the
overseers of the poor an account entered in a book, kept for the purpose, and
signed by him, of all sums by him expended and received on account of the
parish, etc. which overseers are within fourteen days to lay the same before
the inhabitants, and, if approved, are to pay the money due out of the poor
rates; but, if disallowed, are to deliver the book back to the constable, who
may produce it before a justice of peace, giving reasonable notice to the
overseers; which justice is to examine the account, determine objections,
settle the sum due, and enter it in, and sign the account; and the overseers
are to pay such sum out of the poors rate; but may appeal (giving notice) to
the quarter sessions.

Settlement.
Serving for himself and on his own account for the space of a year, 3 W. and
M. c. 11. Burr. S. C. 27. 30. 238. 520. 634. 19 Vine^, 359. Strange, 444.
he gains a settlement in the parish in (or in part of) which he so serves.

Vagrants.
If he apprehend and convey (to any justice or justices of the peace) any rogue
or vagabond (see before, 17 G. 2. c. 5
p. 19.) such justice or justices shall reward him by making an order upon the
high constable to pay him ten shillings within a week after demand: and, where
no high constable, he shall pay himself, and be allowed it in his accounts.

Deserters.
He is entitled to twenty shillings for every deserter he apprehends, 30 G. 3.
c. (Annual.)
to be paid, under a justices warrant, out of the land tax.

CHAP. VII OF HIS RESPONSIBILITY AND PUNISHMENT.
Warrant.
A CONSTABLE must at his peril take notice that his warrant is by one in the
commission of the peace. 12 Mod. 347.
Since (before 1 G. Gib. So.
3. c. 23.) even the lord chief justice's warrant for apprehending a person was
void by the kings demise, and the constable imprisoning one by force thereof, 2
Hevk. P. C. 81.
liable to an action. Nor can he justify an arrest by force of a justice's
warrant for a matter appearing to be out of his jurisdiction.

Misdemeanour. Illegality ab i^to.
And though his warrant be legal, Clayton, 44. 12 Mod. 344.
yet if he be guilty of a misdemeanour in executing it, (as where, upon a
search-warrant, a constable pulled the clothes from off a woman in bed, to
search under her smock) this will make all bad from the beginning.

Chargeable.
Arresting on possessed of money who dies, Owen, 121.
he is chargeable with the money. And so where he takes from a felon money of
which he had robbed another, even though he be afterward robbed of it himself.

Neglect of duty.
Neglecting a duty incumbent on him either by common law, 1 Salk. 381. 2 Roll
R. 78.
or by statute, he is for his default indictable.

Affray.
On affray made in his presence, Cromp. J. P. 130, b.
if he do not endeavor to pacify it, he shall be fined: but not if the affray
be at a distance, and he is only told of it.

Not returning warrant.
If he will not return his warrant, 6 Mod. 83. 1 Salk. 381. 24. G. 2. c. 44.
or certify what he has done under it, (for he ought to keep the warrant for
his own justification,) the sessions may fine him It is said in 5 Mod. 96. that
a constable may be fined by the leet, but not by the sessions; considering him,
it should seem, as an officer of the former court, in which he is elected, and
not of the latter. And it is to be observed that the commission of the peace
gives the justices power to enquire of the misbehaviour of constables by good
and lawful men, and not to punish them in a summary way. Ideo quaere. And vide
Gib. 192.
. But the court of Kings Bench will not grant a mandamus.

Escape.
If he wilfully lets a felon escape out of the stock, 1 Hale P. C. ^69.
and go at large, it is felony.

Offender brought to the watch-house.
It is a misdemeanour in him to discharge an offender brought to the
watch-house by a watchman in the night And, per Wilmot J. though without a
positive charge. The principle of this doctrine is not altogether apparent. The
watch are by law assistants to the constable, not the constable servant to the
watch. The watchman may be drunk, the charge frivolous, (as that in the case
was for "walking the streets to pick up men,)" or the like. The only reason for
charging the constable seems to be the actual offense of the party; not the
bare delivery by the watchman. In many cases, as affrays for instance, or even
a supposed felony, he may lawfully discharge his prisoner, whether arrested by
himself or others; and why not a man taken by the watch? It is nevertheless a
perilous privilege, and ought to be cantiously exercised. But to say he shall
in no case whatever use his discretion seems too much.
. 2 Bur. 867.


Removal.
He may for just cause be removed by the authority which elected him. Bulst.
174. 2 Hawk. P. C. 63.


Laborers.
Not setting one in the stocks who refuses to work in hay or corn harvest (see
before, 5 Eliz. c. 4.
c. 15.) he forfeits forty shillings.

Poor^ rate.
If he fail to make payment of the weekly parish rate toward the relief of
sick, 43 Eliz. c. 3. 6.
hurt and maimed soldiers and mariners (see before, p. 16.) he forfeits twenty
shillings.

Malefactors in cases, etc. Unlicensed alehouses.
Not executing, 43 Eliz. 1. 7. 2. 3 C. 1. c. 3. 3.
by himself or some other, the punishment limited by these statutes, (see
before, p. 16.) he is to be sent to jail until it is done.

Drunkards.
Neglecting the due correction of a person convicted of drunkenness (who, 4. J.
1. c. 5. ^ 3.
if unable to pay five shillings, is to be committed to the stock for six
hours) given in charge to him by the precept of any mayor, etc. he forfeits ten
shillings to the use of the poor.

Hawkers and pedlers.
Refusing or neglecting, 9 and 10 W. 3. c. 27.
upon due notice or his own view, to be aiding and assisting in the execution
of this act, (whereby hawkers and pedlers refusing to show their license are to
forfeit L 5.) he is to forfeit forty shillings.

Juries.
Not returning the list of persons qualified to serve on juries at the quarter
sessions, 3 and 4 Ann. c. 18.
he forfeits L 5.

Hue and cry.
Refusing to make fresh suit and hue and cry (see before, ^ G. 2. c. 16.
p. 18.) he forfeits L 5.

Hawkers of spirits.
Refusing or neglecting to be aiding and assisting in the execution of 11 G. 11
G. 2. c. 26.
2. c. 26. 9 G. 2. c. 23. 10 G. 2. c. 19. he forfeits L 20.

Poors rate.
Refusing to account for or pay over money received for the purposes of this
act (see before, 12 G. 2. c. 29. 17.
p. 19.) he is to be committed.

Vagrants.
Refusing or neglecting his best endeavors to apprehend or convey to a justice
any rogue or vagabond (see before, 17 G. 2. c. 5. 5.
p. 19.) he forfeits from ten shillings to L 5.

If (where there is no high constable) he refuse to pay the reward of ten
shillings for taking up vagabonds on demand, 17 G. 2. c. 6. 5.
he is liable to distress for twenty shillings, out of which it is to be paid.

If he counterfeit or alter any certificate, 17 G. 2. c. 5. 18.
receipt, or note, used in the conveyance of rogues and vagabonds, he forfeits L
50. Or if he will not receive or convey them, or does not deliver them to the
proper person, he forfeits L 20.

If he be defective or remiss in the execution of this act he forfeits from ten
shillings to L 50. 17 G. 2. c. 5. 22.
to the use of the poor, or in case of no distress is to be sent to the house
of correction.

Cursing and swearing.
Wilfully omitting the performance of his duty in seizing or informing of
persons who swear or curse in his hearing, 19 G. 2. c. 21.
he is to forfeit forty shillings, or be sent to the house of correction Both
he and the justice ought rather to be sent thither, for putting so ridiculous
an act into execution. It must be confessed however that the pious editor of
"The Duty of Constables," Gloucester, 1790, is of a very different opinion; for,
says he. "This vice, which is a scandal to a christian country, a due exertion
of your office might prove the means of checking, and by degrees that
reformation may be produced by the fear of punishment, which the commands of
the Supreme Being, alas! are too weak to effect." -- Alas! and if a man were to
stand cursing and swearing for a day together, who (except himself) would be
the worse for it? If the Supreme Being have prohibited this practice (which
remains to be proved) he will undoubtedly adapt a fit punishment to it in
another state. The only object of criminal law is to prevent offenses injurious
to a society; a description within which a few ridiculous and insensible
phrases can never fall. Bigots always confound sins with crimes, though no two
things can be more essentially different.
.

Indorsed Warrant.
If, 24 G. 2. c. 55.
where under an indorsed warrant he has apprehended an offender who shall give
bail before the justice who indorsed it, or any other of the same county, etc.
he do not deliver over the recognizance, examination, or other proceedings
received from such justice, to the clerk of the assizes or clerk of the peace
of the county, etc. where such offender is required to appear, he forfeits L 10.

Disorderly houses.
If he refuse or neglect to go before a justice or enter into recognizance for
the purpose of indicting a disorderly house, 25 G. 2. c. 36. 7.
or be wilfully negligent in carrying on the prosecution, he forfeits L 20. to
each of the inhabitants giving notice. (See before, p. 22).

Highway^.
Neglecting or refusing to make a list of persons to serve the office of
surveyor of the highway (see before, 13 G. 3. c. 78.
p. 24.) or not returning it, or not giving the notice or serving the warrant
directed by the act, or not returning the amount of the sixpenny assessment, he
forfeits forty shillings; or refusing to execute a justice's warrant under the
act, he forfeits from forty shillings to L 10.

Militi^.
Refusing or neglecting to return the lists of persons liable to serve in the
militia, 26 G. 3. c. c. 107. 30.
or to comply with the orders of he deputy lieutenants, etc. or being guilty of
fraud or partiality in the return, he may be committed by them for a month, or
fined L 5.

Soldiers.
If he presume to quarter of billet any officer or soldier in a private house,
(...) G. 3. c. (Annual)
without the consent of the owner, such owner is to have his remedy at law
against him! And refusing to execute warrants for providing carriages, he
forfeits from twenty shillings to forty shillings; quartering wives, children
or servants, he forfeits to the party grieved twenty shillings; or refusing or
neglecting (for two hours) to billet, or receiving money to excuse persons,
from forty shillings to L 5; and not delivering to the quarter sessions for
Westminster and parts adjacent signed lists of houses liable to receive
soldiers, with the number billeted in each house, he forfeits L 5.

CHAP. VIII. OF THE HIGH CONSTABLE.
Quality.
THE high, C^omp. J. P. 201. 2 Hale P. C. 96. 3. Keble, 231. 1 S^lk. 381. 11
Mod. 215. L. Ray. 1193.
chief, or head constable is the constable of a hundred, rape, lathe, wapentake
or such like division, but it is doubtful whether he be a conservator of the
peace.

He is as much the officer of the justices of the peace the constable of a vill
or parish. Fort^^^^e, 12^.


Election.
He is elected at the leet (or turn) of the hundred, 1 Roll A. ^35. Bu^sti.
174. 3 K^ble, ^97.
or by the justices of the peace In Westminster a high constable is to be
elected annually, and is not to (...) for more than three years together. 29 G.
2. c. 25.
. And suit and service to a leet is not sufficient to excuse a man from serving
the office without special custom.

And if A. 1 Roll A. 535.
serve for a year, and the jury for the hundred according to the custom present
B. and the steward refuse to swear him, but continue A. a writ out of the Kings
Bench may be directed to the steward to swear B. and if there be good cause to
refuse him, it may be returned to the court.

Power.
He may hold petty or statute sessions (for the hiring of laborers and
servants of husbandry) according to ancient usage. 5 Eliz. c. 4.


It is doubtful whether he can arrest for breach of the peace, 1 Salk. 381.
Cro. Eliz. 375. 376.
or take surety of the peace even by obligation; much less a man's oath that he
is in fear of his life.

He is said to be an officer within the mutiny act for billeting of soldiers. 1
Black. R. 350. 3 Bur. 3262. (But vide the act, 1.)
And may occasionally make a deputy, whose acts in his principals absence will
be good.

Duty.
He is to present those who in upland towns harbor strangers for whom they
will not answer; 13 E. 1. c. 6.
and also such sheriffs or bailiffs as do not follow the cry of the country.

And is to deliver the lists of persons qualified to serve on juries, 3 G. 2.
c. 25.
which he shall receive from the constables at the quarter sessions, attesting
the receipt on oath.

He is on receiving notice of any robbery to make fresh suit and hue and cry
after the felons; 8 G. 2. c. 16.
and is to defend any action brought by one who has been robbed against the
hundred; and is to give public notice of being served with process.

And is to collect the county rate; and pay it over to the county treasurer, 12
G. 2. c. 29.
or account for it at the sessions.

17 G. 2. c. 5.
And was to pay to the petty constable the rate or allowance ascertained by a
justice of peace's certificate for the conveyance of vagrants; which was to be
allowed him by the county treasurer, on passing his accounts. But such rate or
allowance is now to be paid immediately by the said treasurer.

If he hear any person swear or curse, 1^ G. 2. c. 21.
he is, if a stranger, to seize him and carry him before the next justice, etc.
or if known to him, make information before such justice, etc. to be convicted
and punished The drawer of this act has thought proper to use the terms
"constable" and "petty constable;" which is just as absurb as it would be to
speak of the "jury" and "petty jury;" as if the petty constable were the deputy
or officer of the high constable.
.

Is to forward, or give notie of the orders of the lieutenant, 26 G. 3. c. 107.
or deputy lieutenants, to the constables.

And in Westminster and places adjacent, 30 G. 3. c. (Annual.)
when required, may billet the foot guards; and on the issuing of any order for
that purpose shall deliver out precepts to the constables within his division
to billet the said guards.

Punishment.
If he fail, 3 and 4 Ann. c. 18.
in obedience to the sessions warrant, to issue his precept to the constable
within his hundred to convene an meet him, to prepare lists of persons
qualified to serve on juries, he forfeits L. 10.

If he neglect or refuse to collect, 12 G. 2. c. 29.
account for, or pay over, the county rate, he is to be sent to jail until it
is done.

If he refuse or neglect to pay the reward of ten shillings for apprehending
vagrants on demand, 17 G. 2. c. 5.
the justice may levy twenty shillings by sale of his goods, out of which it is
to be paid.

Wilfully omitting the performance of his duty, 19 G. 2. c. 21.
in seizing or informing of persons who swear or curse in his hearing, he is to
forfeits forty shillings, or be sent to the house of correction.

Refusing or neglecting to return the lists directed by this act, 26 G. 3. c.
107. 30.
or to comply with the orders of the deputy lieutenants, he is to be committed
to jail for a month, or fined from 40 s. to L 5.

Neglecting or refusing to execute the warrants for providing carriages for
soldiers, 30 G. 3. c. (Annual.)
he is to forfeit from twenty shillings to forty shillings. And if he neglect
or refuse (for two hours) to billet soldiers, or receive, demand, or agree for
any reward to excuse persons from quartering, he is to forfeit from forty
shillings to L 5. This seems to be intended of "Westminster and parts
adjacent." (See p. 40).

He is removeable by the justices of the peace, Bulstr. 174. 1. Salk. 150.
if there be cause for it.

Indemnity.
No person shall have an action against any hundred for robbery, 8. G. 2. c. 16.
unless he, before the secondary of the Kings Bench, the filazer of the Common
Pleas, or the sheriff of the county, (inter alia) enter into a bond to the high
constable (who is to defend the action) for securing the payment of his cost;
such bond to be delivered over upon request to the high constable; and no
process of execution is to be served upon him; and his expenses to be paid out
of the assessment.

Privil^^.
Mr. Dalton says he had seen a MS. said to be a collection of Sir Nicholas Hide
of the office of a justice of peace; J. P. 57.
wherein was said, that it was resolved by all the judges of England, ( Trin. 5
Car. 1.) that justices of peace at sessions may not compel the constables of
hundreds to attend at the quarter sessions, and to present offenders upon oath;
otherwise it is as to the assizes, etc.

2 Jones, 46.
He shall be discharged from serving the office of collector of the poors rate
during his office The high constable (as has been elsewhere mentioned) is
generally but ignorantly supposed to have, and in fact frequently found to
assume a degree of authority over those who are called petty constables, which
is not given him by law. For although some acts of parliament have empowered
the justices to direct their warrants to him, commanding him to issue his
precepts to the constables, who are subjected to a penalty for disobeying them,
yet even this gives him no authority, his office being simply ministerial. And
in all cases where the justices make out such general warrant, not being
empowered thereto by express statute, it is conceived that the constables, in
disobeying the precepts of the constable of the hundred, are not liable to
punishment; notwithstanding any "faulty precedent in Burn." See the
Introduction, and Bacons Law Tracts, p. 187. and 1 Burns Justice, 397.
.

APPENDIX.
No I. THE CONSTABLES OATH.
YOU shall swear, That you will well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the office of constable for the township of C. within this manor
[hundred or county] for the year now next ensuing, or until you shall be
thereof discharged by due course of law: You shall see the kings peace kept,
and keep all such watch and ward as are usually accustomed, and ought to be
kept; and you shall well and truly do and execute all other things belonging to
the said office according to the best of your knowledge.

So help you God.

No II. COMMAND OR PROCLAMATION FOR RIOTERS TO DISPERSE.
OUR Sovereign Lord the King charges and commands all persons here assembled,
immediately to disperse themselves, and peaceably depart to their habitations,
on pain of imprisonment.

No III. FORM OF AN OBLIGATION TO BE TAKEN BY A CONSTABLE FOR KEEPING THE PEACE.
KNOW all men by these presents, That I A. B. of C. in the county of D.
labourer, am held and firmly bound unto E. F. yeoman, constable of the township
[manor, etc.] of C. aforesaid, in the sum of L. 40, to be paid to the said E.
F. or his certain attorney, executors, administrators or assigns, for which
payment to be well and faithfully made I bind myself, my heirs, executors and
administrators, firmly by these presents, sealed with my seal. Dated this first
day of July, in the 30th year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord George the
Third, by the Grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, and so forth, and in the year of our Lord 1790.

THE condition of the above-written obligation is such, That if the
above-bounden A. B. shall [personally appear at the next general quarter
sessions of the peace to be holden in and for the county of D. to do and
receive what shall be then and there enjoined him by the court, and in the mean
time shall] keep the peace [and be of the good behaviour] toward the king and
all his liege people, and especially toward G. H. of C. in the said county,
yeoman, then the said obligation to be void, or else to remain in full force
and virtue.

Signed, seal, and delivered in the presence of

No IV. OATH OF THE APPRAISERS OF GOODS DISTRAINED FOR RENT, TO BE ADMINISTERED
BY THE CONSTABLE.
YOU shall swear that you will faithfully appraise and value the goods now
taken in distress, and mentioned in the inventory to you shown, as between
buyer and seller, according to the best of your skill and understanding.

So help you God.

No V. APPOINTMENT OF A DEPUTY.
I A. B. constable of C. in the county of D. do hereby make, substitute, and
appoint E. F. of the same place, yeoman, my true and lawful deputy in the
office aforesaid so long as I shall hold the same: or thus -- during the
continuance of my will and pleasure (or for any particular purpose). Dated, etc.

THE SONG of a CONSTABLE: Made by JAMES GYFFON, Constable of Alburye [in
Surry], Anno 1626.
To the tune of "Jump to me Cossen." (Now first printed.)
I A constable have took mine oath;
By which shall plain appear
The troth and nothing but the troath,
Whoseuer my song will here.
One great constable of Ingland was,
Another late should have been;
But little ones now is found will serve,
So they be but honnest men.
A constable must be honest and just;
Have knowledge and good report;
And able to strain with body and brain,
Else he is not fitting for 't.
Some parish puttes a constable on,
Alas! without understanding,
Because they would rule him when they have done,
And have him at their commanding,
And if he commands the poor they will grutch,
And twit him with partial blindness;
Again, and if he commands the rich,
They Will threaten him with unkindness:
To charge or compel 'um, he is busy they will tell 'um;
In paying of rates they 'le brawle,
Fall he but unto, do that he should do,
I Will warnt you displease them all.
Whip he the roagues By 39 Eliz. c. 4. since repealed.
they will rail and they will curse:
Soldiers as rude cause they are
Sent to the treasurer with their pass See 43 Eliz. c. 3. 8.13.
,
And my not beg every where.
If warrantes do come, as often they do,
For money, then he it demaundes,
To eu'yre one with 's rate he does go,
Wherein they are levied by lands:
They 'le say then he gaters up money of others,
To put to use for increase;
Else he gathers it up, to run away wu't:
What terrible words be these!
Hearing a press for soldiers they will start,
Else hide them selves when we come;
Their wives then will say, to press we ye may:
Our husbands are not at home This idea of pressing the wife for the husband is
the subject of a humorous old song (latinized by Bold) beginning "I am a
cunning constable, etc." of which the second stanza is as follows: Ho! who is at
home? Lo! here am I!
Good morrow, neighbor. Welcome, sir.
Where is your husband? Why truly
He Is gone abroad, a journey far.
Do you not know when he comes back?
See how these cowards fly for life!
The king for soldiers must not lack;
If I miss the man, I Will take the wife.
The press for soldiers has now given place to the equally illegal and much
more infamous one for seamen. The former was carried on under a form or color
of law, but the latter is executed by a gang of lawless ruffians.


.
Coin for magazens sent for in have;
Much ado was ear they yielded,
Yet's gathered and paid; and I am afraid
They will not in have be builed.
The justices will set us by the heels
If we do not do as we should;
Which if we perform the twonsmen will storm;
Some of them hang's if they could,
The constable's warnde to the sessions then,
Unwilling some goes, alas!
Yet there may wit and experience learn,
If that he be not an ass.
There shall he see the justices set,
Here three of O yeses, and
Then shall he here the commission read,
Though little he understand It was then in Latin.
.
Our free landed men are called for in then,
To be of the great inquest,
The chief of our towns, with hoare on their crowns,
That what should be done knows best.
Choice men of every town in the sheire,
Three juries their must be more,
Called unto the book with "here, sir, here!"
The wisest of twentye before;
Then there shall he see whom has transgrest
Punished for his offense,
There shall he here a number amerc't,
Along of their negligence:
What things are amiss, what doings there is,
Justices charge them enquier,
Fore clarke of the peace and baylies at least
A dozen besides the crier.
Verdicts must come from these juries then,
But howsoeare they endite them,
They Will not be took till next day by ten,
Unless that their clerks do wright them.
Ruff words or smooth are all but in vain,
All courts of proffit do savor,
And though the case be never so plain,
Yet kissing shall go by favor:
They Will punish the leastest, and favor the greatest,
Naught may against them proceed,
And who may dare speak against one that is great,
Law with a powlder indeed!
But now my constableship's near done:
Mark hearers, sayers and singers,
There is not an officer under the sun
But does look through his fingers.
Yet where I see one willing to mend,
Not prating nor making excuses,
Such a one if I can I Will befreind;
And punish the gross abuses.
My counsel now use, you that are to choose,
PUT ABLE MEN EVER IN PLACE;
FOR KNAVES AND FOOLS IN AUTHORITY DO
BUT THEMSELVES AND THEIR COUNTRY DISGRACE
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page xxii. for ordnance, read ordinance.

Page xxvi. after l. 9. insert: Now by Christ, quod the king, and I catch might
Fass or Fauel, or any of there feeris,
I wosde be wroken of tho wreches that worken th^s ii,
And done hem hang by the hass, and as that hem meinteyneth;
Shall never man of this mosde may upryse the leest,
But right as the law wos soke, set fas on hem as
And command a CONSTABLE that 'cam' at the first,
To attache tho tyrauntes for any thing ihote,
And fetter fast Fassnes for any kynnes gifts,
And gyrde of Gyles head, and set him go no f^rther;
And if ye cache Liar, let him not escape,
Or he be put on the pisserye for any prayers ihote,
And bring Mede to me in mauger them all.


And add Again, in a different place: and in the note, after Fo. insert xi.

l. 14. for This passage is read These passages are.

l. 17. after time, make the period a comma, and read or cut off their heads;
and, in that and the next line, for it is, read they are.

l. 23. add And, indeed, that the supposition is groundless will appear from
another passage, where our officer is found in very good company, it is true,
but in his ordinary occupation.

Shas neither king ne knight, CONSTABLE, nor mayre,
Ouerseade the common, ne to the court sommone,
Ne put hem [in] panel, to done hem psight her truth.
(Fo. xvi, b.)

4. for 1 Mod. 42. r. 6 Mod. 42. for Freeman 256. r. 12 Mod. 256. 5. after
Styles, 362. add Barnard. 51. after (Noy 112.) add Mar. 30. 6. for Mod. 13. r.
(1 Mod. 13.) 26. for Freeman, 256, r. 12. Mod. 256. 27. for 20 and 30, r. 30
and 40. 32. for Forster r. Foster. 48. for eu'yre, r. eu'rye.
THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURT LEET.

THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURT LEET: EXEMPLIFYED IN THE ARTICLES WHICH THE JURY
OR INQUEST FOR THE KING IN THAT COURT IS CHARGED AND SWORN, AND BY LAW
ENJOINED, TO ENQUIRE OF AND PRESENT.

TOGETHER WITH APPROVED PRECEDENTS OF PRESENTIMENTS AND JUDGMENTS IN THE LEET;
AND A LARGE INTRODUCTION, CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE ORIGIN, NATURE, AND
PRESENT STATE, OF THIS INSTITUTION.

VELUT UMBRA. LONDON: PRINTED FOR WHIELDON AND BUTTERWORTH, IN FLEET STREET;
AND P. BRETT, OPPOSITE ST. CLEMENT'S CHURCH, IN THE STRAND.

M.DCC.XCI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT was originally intended that the compilers publication on the subject here
treated of should have comprised all that, to his knowledge, had been said, or
in his judgment, could be said, upon it. Large collections were made for the
purpose, and the work partly proceeded in; but the bulk of the volume, and the
scanty sale it was likely to experience, effectually discouraged him from
proceeding with that plan, and produced the Introduction and Analysis now
presented to the public.

INTRODUCTION.
TO the concise view attempted in the following pages of the jurisdiction of
the Court Leet it may not be improper to prefix a few words upon the name,
antiquity, nature, and present state of this ancient and venerable tribunal.

I. The name or style of this court, NAME.
as formally entered in its own proceedings, is the "Court Leet and View of
Frankpledge." The word Leet, -- which, it is very remarkable, is to be found
neither in the Saxon law, nor in Glanvil, Bracton, Britton, Fleta, or the
Mirror, our most ancient law writers, nor in any statute prior to the 27th year
of King Ed. III. C. 28. After which it does not appear again till the 4 E. 4.
c. 1. See also 12 E. 4. c. 9.
though it is allowed to occur in the Conquerors charter for the foundation of
Battle Abbey, and not unfrequently in Domesday book Spelmans Glossary, v. Leta.
, -- seems to be derived from the Saxon leoth plebs; and to mean the populi
curia, or folk mote, as the Sheriffs tourn or Leet of the county (at least)
appears to have been once actually called Spelman, v. Folkesmote. Kennets
Parochial Antiquities, Glos. v. Falmote.
; in contradistinction, perhaps, to the Halmote or Court Baron, which consisted
of the free tenants only, who, being few in number, might conveniently assemble
in the Lords Hall; whereas the Leet, which required the attendance of all the
refiants, and concerned the administration of public justice, was, as there
will be hereafter occasion to mention, usually held in the open air. The "view
of Frankpledge," visus franciplegii, means the examination or survey of the
freepledges, of which every man, not particularly privileged, was anciently
obliged to have nine, who were bound that he should be always forthcoming to
answer any complaint. The better to understand this we are to be informed that
the kingdom being divided into countys or shires, and each county into
hundreds, and each hundred into tithings, each tithing containing ten families
or households, the heads of these families were reciprocally bound and
responsible for each other; so that, in fact, of every ten householders
throughout the kingdom each man had nine pledges or sureties for his good
behavior Of these pledges the eldest, or most respectable, and first sworn,
was called the headborough or chief pledge, and had a degree of authority over
the rest, not now exactly ascertained. It was, however, in all probability,
much the same with that of the constable, who was formerly a character of great
consequence, and is to this day in many places called the headborough, a word,
which, according to Sir William Blackstone, (too implicitly following Sir
Thomas Smith) bespeaks its own etymology, and means "the discreetest person in
the borough." Great lawyers, however, are sometimes indifferent etymologists:
the word, in fact, implys nothing more or less than the chief pledge, from
borg, borh, or borhoe, fidejussor, a pledge or surety. He was also called the
borsalder (borges ^alder) ( i. e. the eldest of the pledges, and the tithing
man.) Both tithing man and borsholder are to be found in modern statutes as
synonimous with constable and headborough. But at what period the constable
became a distinct officer, and the chief pledges were metamorphosed into a
grand jury, is a point which must be left to a more successful enquirer.
. This is the famous system of King Alfred, so much applauded by both ancient
and modern writers; which produced such singular effects among a barbarous and
disorderly people, that a man might have hung his purse by the side of a public
road, and found it untouched a month after; or might have ridden, with much
treasure, and no other weapon than a white wand, from one end of the kingdom to
the other Ingulphus. W. Malmesbur. Rob. Glouc. Lambard (on Constables). 8. 2
Inst. 73. 1 Roll. R. 73. 2 Hale P. C. 75. Sir W. Temples works, (8vo.) III. 133.
. Since, however, this so excellent and admirable institution is, from whatever
cause, sunk into total disuse, there not having been any freepledges in the
kingdom for two or three centuries, the words "View of Frankpledge" in the
style of the court seem now altogether unnecessary and improper. It is also
called a Lawday 32 H. 8. c. 13. 33 H. 8. cc. 6. 9. 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8. 4
and 5 P. and M. c. 3. 18 Eliz. c. 10. 1 Ja. 1. c. 22. 21. Ja. 1. c. 21. Dyer.
30. b. Bacons Law Tracts. 115. Sir T. Smiths Commonwealth of England. p. 156.
See also 1 E. 4. c. 2. In Othello act 3. sc. 3. Iago asks -- Who has a breast
so pure,
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep Leets and Lawdays, and in sessions sit
With meditations lawful?
Shakspeare mentions the Leet, in another play, quoted below, p. 11. He had
possibly served the office of an aletaster, at Stratford; or might indeed have
got his information by attending the court when his father was Bailiff.
.

ANTIQUITY.
II. That the Leet is "the most ancient court in the land" (for criminal
matters, that is, the Court Baron being of no less antiquity in civil) has been
pronounced by the highest legal authority 7 H, 6. 12, b. 1 Roll. R. 73.
. For though we do not meet with the word among the Saxons, there can be no
doubt of the existence of the thing. The venerable chief justice who lately
retired from the elevated situation in which he had so long presided found this
court "coeval with the establishment of the Saxons here," and its activity
"marked very visibly both amongst the Saxons and the Danes 3 Bur. 1860.
." In those times whoever possessed a vill or territory, with the liberties of
soc, sac, etc. (a long string of barbarous words) was the lord of a manor, had
a court leet, court baron, and, in a word, every privilege which it seems to
have been possible for the monarch to bestow, or for the subject to acquire
Vide Spelman v. Manerium. The position used by Fineux in 12 H. 7. 15. that the
Leet is derived out of the Sheriffs Tourn is not entitled to any particular
notice, being a mere unsupported dictum; to which neither Lord Cokes adoption
(2 Inst. 71.) nor that of Lord Mansfield, (3 Bur. 1860.) can add any weight.
Much matter and many authorities must be sacrificed throughout this little
enquiry for the sake of brevity. As to the rest, the word Leet, though
generally appropriated to the court of a manor, has in fact nothing essentially
distinct from the Tourn, but the being upon a smaller scale. (See, however,
Britton. c. 29. 44 E. 3. 9. 1 E. 4. c. 2.) Those writers therefore who suppose
the Leet of a hundred or manor inferior to or subject to the control of the
Tourn or Leet of the County are egregiously mistaken: the jurisdiction of the
latter being confined to so much of the county or hundred as is not comprised
within the precinct of the manor. See 4 Inst. 261: It is indeed repeatedly said
in our old books that things of which the Leet (of a manor, that is) omits to
enquire shall be enquired of in the Tourn: which may well be; and the reason is
that the lord has forfeited his leet for the time, quoad the particular object:
it being very clear that, when the Leet of a manor is by any means lost the
resiants owe suit to the tourn, and that although they should be within a
hundred in the hands of a private person.
.

III. NATURE.
The Leet is a court of record for the cognizance of criminal matters, or pleas
of the crown, and necessarily belongs to the King; though a subject, usually
the Lord of a Manor, may be and is entitled to the profits, consisting of the
essoign pence, fines and amerciaments. It is held before the Steward, (or was,
in ancient times, before the Bailiff) Mirror, passim. Finch's Law. 248. See
also Kennets P. A. 319.
of the Lord, that is, of the person entitled to the perquisities of Court,
whether king or subject. This officer, who should be a barister of learning and
ability 1 Jones. 283. 4. Inst. 265. Scroggs. 33. By 1 Ja. 1. c. 5. he is
prohibited form taking to the value of 12d. for his own use, by color of any
grant of the profits of this court.
, is judge of record 10 H. 6. 7.
may take recognizance of the peace 4 Inst. 263.
, may fine 7 H. 6. 12, b. 10 H. 6. 7. Dye^, 233. b. 8 Rep. 38, etc. Cro. Eliz.
581. Moor. 470. Ray. 68.
, imprison 21 H. 7. 32. Cromp. J. P. 130, b. Owen. 113.
, and, in a word, "as to things to which his power extends, has equal power
with the Justices of the Bench 7 H. 6. 12, b.
." In one instance, at least, he has even more; for, if he should be in want of
jurors, he may compel a stranger who is riding along the highway to alight and
be sworn Br. Leete. 14. 24. This power must, however, be confined to those
courts in which it is the usage to swear and discharge the Jury in the course
of the day, as the stranger is supposed to have no opportunity of marching off.
; which, it is conceived, the Lord Chief Justice of England, in all the
plenitude of his authority, cannot do. It is held sometimes once, sometimes
thrice, but, most commonly, twice in the year; that is, within a month after
Easter, and a month after Michaelmas See Magna Charta. c. 35. Br. Leete. 23. 2
Inst. 72. 6 H. 7. 2. Keilwey. 148. Br. Leete. 21. 32. 1 Roll R. 201. and 2 Leo.
pl. 31.
; and cannot, unless by adjournment, be held at any time not warranted by
ancient usage. As to the place in which it is held, that, it has been said, may
be any where within the precinct 8 H. 7. 3. Br. Court Baron 8. Owen 35.
; but, more strictly speaking, ought to be certain and accustomed Rastalls
Entries. 151.
. Formerly, either for the convenience of the suitors, or from an excellent
principle of the common law, that courts of justice should be as public as
possible, if used to be held in the open air, upon a fair green, on the side of
a hill, or under a large tree Spelman v. Mallobergium. Kennets Parochial
Antiquities Glos. v. Franciplegium. It is a curious illustration of the above
principle that the Justices itinerant in the time of Edward the first, sat at
the stone cross (opposite the Bishop of Worcesters house, now Somerset Place)
in the Strand. This venerable monument, which was even then ancient (Pat. 4 E.
2. pl. 2. m. 15. d.) is mentioned by Stow as standing headless in 1598. The
Justices, probably in bad weather, sometimes sat in the bishops house; as the
Steward or Bailiff of a Leet would for the same reason occasionally do in the
church, where, notwithstanding a canon (1 Burn E. L. 361) it is in many places
still held.
. All persons above the age of twelve years, except peers, clerks, women, and
aliens, resiant within the district, whether masters or servants, owe personal
suit and attendance to this court, and ought to be here sworn to their fealty
and allegiance 52 H. 3. c. 10. 2 Inst. 120. 121. Britton. c. 29. Fleta l. 2. c.
52. 7 E. 2. 204. 8 E. 2. 276. 277. 12 H. 7. 15. Br. Incidents. 28. Brownlow.
185. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Keilwey. 141.
; and here also, by immemorial usage and of common right, that most ancient
constitutional officer the Constable 4 Inst. 265. 1 Salk. 175. etc.
, and sometimes, by prescription the Mayor of a borough 11 G. 1. c. 4. How the
mayor of a corporation comes to be elected in this court, by the burgage
holders, suitors to the court baron, is a paradox which the editor is unable to
solve.
are elected and sworn. The general jurisdiction of the court will appear form
the following pages to extend to all crimes, offenses and misdemeanors at the
common law, as well as to several others which have been subjected to it by ^ct
of parliament In general it will be found that the objects of this jurisdiction
are the best part of our criminal jurisprudence; most of them abiding the test
to which all prohibited or punishable acts should be submitted -- the in^ury of
society: -- a manifest proof of the superior excellence of the common ^aw! The
application of the above touchstone cannot be too earnestly recommended, as it
is a very easy matter for a capricious and unthinking legislator to brand an
indifferent action with the name of a crime; and to punish it as severely as if
it actually were one.
. These are enquired after by a body of the suitors, elected, sworn and charged
for that purpose, who must not be less than twelve, nor more than twenty three;
and who, in some manors, continue in office for a whole year, while, in others,
they are sworn and discharged in the course of the day. Whatever they find they
present to the Steward; who, if the offense be treason or felony, must return
the presentment (in these cases called an indictment) to the kings justices See
p. 4.
: in all other cases he has power, upon the complaint of any party grieved, or
upon suspicion of the concealment of any offense, to cause and immediate
enquiry into the truth of the matter by another jury In which case the first
jurors, if sound perjured, shall amerced. Mirror, c. 1. 17. 17 E. 2. 520. 521.
Custom. 1. Br. Customs. 3. See also 33 H. 8. c. 6. and 1 Eliz. c. 17. 10. If
the jury should refuse to make a presentment according to their oath, each of
them may be fined (...) the discretion of the Steward for their concealment and
contempt. Dyer, 211, b. 11 Rep. 41. And so if any one either refuse to give his
^erdict, or depart without giving it, or give it before all are agreed, he
shall be fined. 8 Rep. 38, b. 40 Ass. 10. 1 Roll. A. 219.
. But the presentment, being received, and the day passed, shall be held as
true and sacred as the Gospel, and, unless it concern the partys freehold,
shall not be shaken or questioned by any tribunal whatever 10 E. 3. 5. 45 E. 3.
8. Ass. 442. Bar, 271. Br. Leete. 7. (...). Presentiments in courts, 1. 15.
Br. Traverse d'office, 42. Keilwey, 66. 141. 19. H. 8. 11. Dyer, 13, b. Finch,
L. 368. Freeman, 339. -- Hi^ P. C. 153. 155. 2 Keble 50. 3 Keble 646. 1 Hawk.
P. C. 217. 217 2 Hawk. P. C. 60. 71. Comb. 76. Woods Inst. 486. 4 Black. Co^
301.
. Upon every presentment of the jury retained by Court, an amerciament That is
judgment of amerciament; Ideo in misericordia, or am^ciatur; therefore he is in
mercy or amerced. We have no other than th^^ equivocal term (mercy) to express
the Latin word misericordia: but (...) use it in the same sense when we say
such a one is at another mercy though it is not supposed he will have any
mercy upon him. The King Mercy is, in old statutes, frequently termed grievous;
an idea worthy (...) a tyrant!
follows of course, which is afterward, in open court Mirror, c. 5. 1.
agreeable to Magna Charta c. 14. See also W: 1. c. 6. And that these statutes
were in thi^ particular but an affirmation of the common law, sec 8 Rep. 39,
(...) 2 Inst. 27.
assessed by the pares curia, that is, the peers or equals of the delinquent,
affeered (...) reduced to a certainty or to a precise sum, by two or more
suitors sworn to be impartial Mirror, c. 5. 1. Br. Amerciament 50. Keilwey 65.
8 Rep. (...) Cro. Car. 275. 2. Keble 613. 1 Salk. 56. Show. 62. 3 Lev. 206.
Th^^ old usage was for the affeerers to mark the sum at which they assessed
(...) persons amerciament super caput; that is, immediately over his name Many
instances of this practice occur among the Precedents in Kitch^^ etc. But the
modern and better method is to add after the words, "And therefore he is
amerced," the following; "And his amerciament is affee^^ by M. N. and N. M.
sworn affeerers thereof, at the sum of 6s. 8d." (...) there is sometimes
occasion to set forth the names of the affeerers i^ pleading.
. The amerciaments thus ascertained are then estreated (or extracted) from the
roll or book in which the proceedings are recorded, and levied by the Bailiff,
by distress and sale of the party goods Br. Distress. 20. 40. 45. 72. 8 Rep.
41. Sav. 94
, by virtue of a warrant from the Steward (...) that effect Moore. 574. 607.
Cro. Eliz. 698. 748. Carth. 75.
; or may be recovered by other means Fines and amerciaments imposed at Courts
Leet, of which the perquisites belong to the Crown, are usually levied by
process of Levari Fa^ia^, etc. from the Exchequer (Hard. 471.); and those set
at Courts of which the king is lord in right of his Duchy of Lancaster by a
similar process out of the Duchy Court. Another remedy is by action of debt
Keilwey. 66. Br. Leete. 37. Br. Ley Gager. 99. Br. Debt. 179. Ras^all, Debt.
151. Bull. Ni. Pri. 167.

Other punishments there are which may be lawfully inflicted by the Leet in
respect of the misdemeanors and offenses there inquirable: as the ^ILLORY and
TUMBREL for knavish bakers and brewers (51 H. 3. st. 1. ^t. 6. Rastall, Leet.
Br. Quo War. Keilwey, 139, b. Kitchen. 24. Cro. Eliz. 698. 13 R. 2. st. 1. c.
8.); the STOCKS The stocks, besides being the constables prison, were anciently
used for punishing offenders, of what description does not appear. Rastell.
425, b. Kitchen. 24. 43. And see 12 R. c. 7. and 19 H. 7. c. 12. (now rep. or
obs.) whereby beggars, vagabonds, etc. are to be set in the stocks.
for drunkards (4 J. c. 5.); and the DUCKING (or cucking) STOOL Sax.
Scealsing-stol, i. e. diving stool. Cucking seems a ridiculous word made to
express the imperfect utterance occasioned by immersion; e. g. cuc, cuc.
Instead of a ducking-stool, they, in some places, make use of a curious iron
machine called a scolding bridle.
for a common scold (Kitchen. ^3. 1. Jones. 283. 1 Hawk. P. C. 200). Nuisances
likewise may be either abated by the proper officer, or made removable by the
party within a given time upon a pain (Br. Leete. 37. 2. Keble, 613. Lane, 51).
Forfeitures or penalties also, imposed by act of parliament upon offenses
inquirable in this court, are ipso facto incurred by the presentment, and
require no affeerment, but must be recovered by action, or such other means as
the act itself may prescribe.

For relief of the inquest certain branches of their duty have been committed
to the care of inferior officers; as the breach of assize, false weights and
measures, unwholesome drink, etc. to the ALECONNERS From Al and cunnere, Sax.
q. d. cervisiae tentator.
; corrupt victuals, to the FLESHTASTERS; and vagrancy, noctivagancy, disorderly
houses, etc. to the CONSTABLE. These officers, therefore, are (...) return such
offenses to the court; upon which returns the Jury themselv^^ must present the
offenders: it being, in the words of an ancient writer, "an abuse to amerce any
man by a presentment of less than twelve freemen sworn." Mirror, c. 5. 1. See
also 3 Keble. 362. It is however said that presentiments of constables at the
Sessions (and, of course, it (...) presumed, in the Leet) shall be as good and
available as a presentment made by 12 men. Fitz J. P. 6.


. This practice, in substance at least, is of prodigious antiquity; and is,
perhaps, the only perfect representation still extant of the criminal part of
the constitution. Before the conquest, and probably for some time after, this
court of the Leet was, if not the sole, at least the most usual dispensary of
criminal justice in the kingdom. No crime, in those remote ages, appears to
have been punished by death, unless it were that of open theft, where the
offender was taken with the mainour, that is, with the thing stolen upon him;
-- and of this crime, and this only, the cognizance did not belong to the Leet
The elucidation of this circumstance would form a curious if not an interesting
article; but could not be easily compressed within the compass of a note; and,
in fact, belongs more properly to a different work.
All other offenses, of what nature or degree soever, subjected the party to a
mulct or pecuniary fine, which was, in many cases, determinate and fixed. "For
two hundred shillings," observes an ingenious writer, "you might have killed a
peasant; for six times as much a nobleman: for six-and-thirty times as much you
might have killed the king. A king in those days was worth exactly 7,200
shillings Benthams Introduction, p. clxxvi. It should be observed, however,
that the King valued himself. Friend Panurge did not think King Anarchus worth
quite so much, when he made him a crier of green sauce.
." This pecuniary composition, with respect to certain capital offenses, was
abrogated, and the punishment of death substituted in its place, by K. Henry I.
Spelman v. Felo. Wilkins, LL. Sax. 304. In fact there is a^ ordinance to this
effect among the laws of Canute. William the conqueror, considering punishment
by death as too lenient and merciful, ordered offenders to be mutilated:
Eruantur oculi and abscindantur pedes vel testiculae vel manus, etc. Neither
does the law of Henry I. appear to have been invariably observed, if indeed it
were not actually repealed. See Mr. Reeves's learned, accurate, and interesting
History of the English Law. Vol. I. pp. 16. 33. 193. Glanville, after
enumerating high treason, the concealment of treasure-trove, pleas of the kings
peace broken, homicide, arson, robbery, rape, forgery, and the like, adds,
which crimes are punished by death (ultimo supplicio) or mutilation (memb^o^um
truncatione). l. 1. c. 1.
How far this alteration might affect the Leet we are not now able to discover.
But it is not improbable that the distinction of indictments for felonies, and
presentiments of inferior offenses, owes its origin to the above measure. It is
still doubtful, however, what became of a person indicted at the Leet for a
capital offense before the introduction of the petty jury (as it is now called)
in the reign of Edward I. or Henry III. This second jury was originally, and
for many years, considered merely as witnesses. See an excellent account of
this institution in the valuable work just quoted.
: as it should seem that supposing an indictment, positively affirming such a
one to have committed a capital crime, had been returned to the kings justices
at the iter or jail delivery Dr. Hickes thought that Justices itinerant were
originally instituted by Henry II. ( Dis. Epis. p. 8. 48.) But Mr. Madox has
produced evidence of their existence in the reign of King Stephen (Hist. Ex. p.
100).
the punishment must have been awarded without further process, or any plea,
traverse, or answer, from the party; of course, that they had nothing to do but
to pronounce sentence of death: a presentment of any fact upon the oath of
twelve men, judicially appointed to enquire thereof, being always conclusive by
the ancient law; as, indeed, it is, in many cases, particularly with respect to
offenses of which the enquiry, as well as the punishment, still belongs to the
Leet, at this day In aid of Eyres, says the Mirror, are turns of Sheriffs
necessary and views of frankpledge, and when that good men at such inquests
indicted [any] of mortal sin, Kings used to destroy [them] without answer,
which usages still remain in Germany; but by warrant of pity and of mercy, and
for that the frailty of man cannot be held from sining, it is accorded that no
one appealed or indicted be destroyed without answer. c. 2. f. 3. The more
general mode, however, of proceeding against criminals was by appeal, the
consequence of which was either duel or purgation (if a freeman) by fire (per
ferrum callidum), or (if a rustic) by water: death or mutilation and banishment
awaiting the unsuccessful. And it must be confessed that by Constitutions of
Clarendon (to which it is possible the Mirror may allude) it should seem as if
the party indicted by the inquest of a Leet would have been subjected to the
same purgation. Wilkins, LL. Sax. c. 330. Hist. of the English Law, i. 193. See
also Glanville. l. 4. cc. 1. 3. The subject, which is singularly perplexed and
obscure, both demands and deserves the most copious and minute investigation
from the learned and sagacious antiquary. But this is not the age of a Spelman,
a Seldom, or a Hickes.


It has been said by Sir Edward Coke, and repeated by the noble judge already
mentioned, that, by the clause Nullus vicecomes, etc. in the Great Charter No
Sheriff, Constable, Coroner, or other our Bailiffs, shall hold pleas of our
crown. c. 17. And whether they did so became an article of enquiry at the Air.
And yet in a writ issued in 18 H. 3. for the interpretation of another clause
in this Charter, it is expressly admitted that pleas of the Crown might be held
at the Hundred and Wapentake courts, " nisi ita sit quod ad Hundreda illa et
Wapentakia, fieri debet inquisiti^ DE PLACITIS CORONAE, sicut de morte hominis,
thesauro invento et hujusmodi." Prynnes Animadversions. 190. In short, it is
very well known that both Sheriff and Coroner have held pleas of the crown ever
since the granting of the great charter, and do so at this day. It appears,
however, from Glanville, that the crime of theft, at that time, belonged wholly
to the Sheriff, and was to be pleaded and determined in the county court. And
that he had also cognizance of medleys (or affrays), batteries, and wounds,
unless where the addition was made, of the Kings peace broken. (l. 1. c. 1. l.
4. c. 8.) These, therefore, one might think, were the plea^ of the crown taken
away by Magna Charta; that is, the criminal jurisdiction of the county court;
if it did not appear both from Fleta (l. 1. c. 47.) and Hengham (Magna, c. 2.)
that such sort of pleas were still held by the Sheriff. In any case it is
nothing to the Leet.
, "the jurisdiction of the Leet was abridged, its power to hear and determine
taken away;" but it has been said and repeated without due attention either to
the nature and constitution of the Court, or to the law of the time. No
offense, it is well known, is at this day, or, for aught that appears, ever
was, heard and determined in the Leet, -- nor, before the period refered to, by
any other criminal court in the kingdom, -- otherwise than upon the presentment
of twelve men, -- or what we now, in most courts, call the Grand Jury. This
presentment, as has been already observed, found and established the fact; and
judgment, whether of misericordia, mutilation or death, followed as an
incident or matter of course, precisely, indeed, as the punishment does at this
day on the verdict for the king of the petty jury. In fact, therefore, the
jurisdiction of the Leet was not in the least abridged or affected by that
charter; nor is it at all probable that the Barons would either seek or suffer
the diminution of their own privileges, of which, on the contrary, there is an
express saving.

That this court has no power to enquire of the death of a man, or of rape Let
and Hundr. 10 Br. Leete 22.
, is a more ancient, but not less erroneous, opinion. The contrary is most
directly and expressly held in the Statutum Walliae, in Britton, Fleta, the
Mirror, and the statute (or whatever it is) of 18 Ed. 2. all much older and
better authorities than the book of Assizes 41 E. 3. pl. 30. A doubt is
suggested in 9 H. 6. 44. whether the Leet can enquire of high treason, and an
opinion given in Br. Ley Gager. 99. against its power; but this, as my lord
Coke observes on a similar occasion, happened "for want of the knowledge of
antiquity." See 2 Inst. 72. It is a no less extraordinary dictum in Dyer, 233,
b. that an indictment of assault and battery found in the Leet, without blood
shed, is void; the principal case being a fine for an assault, in disturbance
and contempt of the Court. He might possibly allude to the book case of 8 E. 4.
5. which by no means supports his doctrine; as the plaintiff, whose counsel
makes that allegation, took nothing by his writ.
, in which that opinion first appears. If, indeed, the reason of the exception
be that the enquiry of these two crimes belonged properly to the Coroner, it
may be readily admitted without impeaching the jurisdiction of the Leet. The
Coroner took cognizance of death super visum corporis, and of rape, as well as
other offenses, by appeal only. It follows, therefore, that in every instance,
either where he could not, or did not, act, the enquiry must be in the Leet,
otherwise the offender should have escaped without punishment, which would be
absurd. They who suppose Rape, as a felony, to be excepted, because it has been
made so by act of parliament, and allow it to be enquired of as a trespass
Turn de Viscount. 5. Let and Hundr'. 3. Br. Leete. 26. etc. etc.
, seem to have forgot that it is a trespass by act of parliament W. 1. (3 E.
1.) c. 13.
and a felony at common law Vide the following summary in the margin.
; they should have also recollected the general rule, that where a trespass is
by statute turned into felony the trespass is merged Bullers Nisi Prius. 32. If
indeed the statute of W. 1. operated a an alteration of the common law, and was
not virtually repealed by that of W. 2. (13 E. 1. st. 1.) c. 34. it would seem
to follow that Rape cannot be enquired of at all in the Leet, either as felony
or trespass.
.

It is indeed unaccountable how such groundless assertions come to be made.
There is no point better settled than that the Steward of a Leet may award to
prison persons either indicted, or accused, of felony, before him, or ^uilty of
any contempt in the face of the court. And ^et lord Coke has not hesitated to
assert that the Leet, though a court of record, has no power to imprison 11
Rep. 43, b. 1 Roll Rep. 35. 74.
; ^n assertion in which he is positively contradicted by every ^uthority
ancient or modern W. 2. c. 13. 13 H. 4. 12. 10 H. 6. 7. 21 H. 7. 32. Cromp. J.
P 92, b. Owen, 113. Possibly, however, lord Coke meant to confine the
disability of imprisoning to offenses presented and punishable in the Leet;
which (except in the case of bakers, etc.) can only be punished by amerciament:
The reason whereof is, that this Court was established long before imprisonment
was adopted as a mode of punishment. And, indeed, how far any other court was
authorized to inflict it, by the common law, might have been once a question.
. These errors are, probably, owing to the imperfect knowledge judges and
lawyers are content to acquire upon certain uprofitable subjects. "From Magna
Charta, to this time," says the ^ate illustrious chief, Courts Leet "have been
always abridged, never enlarged 3 Burr. 1864.
." It is an incontestable fact that the jurisdiction of the Leet has been
enlarged by several statutes, and was never abridged by one It was the same
great character who decided, in opposition to the united authority of ages (see
before, p. xi.), or rather to the law itself, that a presentment in the Leet of
a common offense is liable to be traversed. But, in short, it seems to have
been the leading principle of his long life and continuance on the bench to
unsettle that law, of which the chief, and, too often, the only merit is its
certainty.
.

PRESENT STATE.
IV. Though the Leet, from being principal criminal court in the kingdom, is
now considered as the ^owest, the greater part of its business having been
transfered to other more extended jurisdictions, yet it must not be supposed
that the power and authority of the court is thereby diminished and gone. On
the contrary, there is no offense which it ever did or could enquire of and
punish, which it may not equally enquire of and punish at this day. That the
tourn and the leet have been so long in a declining way is not, however, at all
owing to the cause refered to by a learned writer 4 Black. Com. 274.
, i. e. the discharge granted by the statute of Marlbridge (in which, by the
way, the Leet is not mentioned) to all prelates, peers, and clergymen, from
their attendance on these courts; since the county court and court baron, which
they are still compellable to attend (at least by attorney), are scarcely in a
more flourishing condition. Neither is it perfectly clear that "experience has
shown the wisdom of widening the circle of both civil and criminal
jurisdiction" 3 Burr. 1864.
. Changes may be for the worse as well as for the better. True it is that the
business of the Leet has for the most part gradually devolved upon the quarter
sessions 4 Black. Com. 274.
; but many reasons may be given for this circumstance much more plausible than
those already mentioned. In the first place the increased population, and more
commercial turn of the country, and the consequent increase of offenders and
offenses, required the dispensaries of justice to be, if not always, at least
frequently, open: whereas the Leet is seldom held more than twice, and
sometimes but once, in the year; though it may certainly be kept open by
adjournment from month to month, from week to week, or even from day to day.
Secondly, the jurisdiction of this court is, upon whatever principle, confined
to offenses at the common law, which are become less numerous than those
created by act of parliament. A third reason may be, the Steward of a Leet
seldom resides upon the spot; justices of peace, on the contrary, are every
where to be met with, and by keeping, in a manner, open shop, make their
profession and powers familiar to the people, who love to buy law, one would
think, as they do any other commodity. The learned commentator is therefore in
the right where he reckons "the almost entire disuse and contempt of the
court leet, and sheriffs-tourn, the kings ancient courts of common law;
formerly," he observes, "much revered and respected," among the mischievous
effects of the change in the administration of justice, by ^ummary proceedings
before justices of the peace 4 Black. Com. 281.
: a change which, as it places the liberty and property of the subject in the
power of a single, too often an insolent and oppressive, and not unfrequently
an interested and corrupt man It is a notorious fact that many of these
gentlemen, particularly in and about the metropolis, act solely for the sake of
the emoluments of their office, whence the odious appellation of trading
justices. And, though they are sworn to send the fines, etc. that happen before
them to ^he Exchequer, for which, in certain cases, other funds have been
su^sti^^ted by act of parliament, it appears from a late enquiry, that some of
them, at least, think it better policy to put what they get into their own
^ockets; but one can never believe that men so very honorable keep in pay (...)
gang of vile informers, much less that they will now and then convict ^n
innocent man for the sake of the penalty. His Majestys Attorney General should
look a little into this business; which he undoubtedly will ^o -- if he be well
paid for it.
, as it is destructive of trial per pares Trial per pares (by ones equals) is
not only a more ancient but a ^o^e proper phrase than trial by Jury; as it is
by no means necessary, in ^ompliance with a relic, whether of Christian or of
Pagan superstition, ^^at men should either in this or in any other case ^e upon
oath. The ^i^ors of the Court Baron, like the Peers in Parliament, are never
sworn.
, and only favorable to a system of tyranny and arbitrary power, cannot be
sufficiently reprobated.

To the circumstances already noticed may be added the practice adopted in the
quarter sessions, and other superior courts, of allowing and trying a traverse
to the Grand Jurys presentment In cases of felony, the party is, upon his plea
of not guilty, instantly put upon his trial. In misdemeanors he is required to
find surety for trying his traverse at the next sessions at his own expense;
the consequence (...) which is, that if he have neither money nor friends he
must remain in j^^^ untryed, and is of course in a much worse situation than
the more heino^^ offender. The editor has on such an occasion known the
worshipful be^^^^ persuade the defendant to retract his plea and confess
himself GUILTY and thus enable them to inflict what some might conceive under
such circumstances a not very slight or trifling punishment for what in fact
was (...) an indictable matter. But then they got rid of an awkward business,
and such sort of people are seldom known to complain, and much seldomer to
obtain redress. It is indeed frequently an object to be convicted; since even
the honor of an acquittal, as Mr. Bearcroft told the jury in Steward v. Powler
(K. B. Sittings after M. T. 1790), had cost his client, a p^^porter, no less
than eight pounds. The trial of Mr. Hastings, let the eve^^ be what it will, is
expected to cost him not less than one hundred thousand*
; a proceeding to which, whethe^ it be good or bad, the primitive constitution
of the country is an utter and total stranger. It gives occasion, however, to a
number of offices, a long list of fees, and affords employment to a multitute
of lawyers and attorneys; a description of men unknown to the tourn or leet;
on^ may add also, in former times, to the country court an^ court baron, and
consequently to the ancient law, which was too simple to need their
interference, and, possibly, too just to suffer it If the excellence of
municipal law consist in the number and advantages of those who make it a
profession, then undoubtedly the mo^^ voluminous, obscure, perplexed,
unintelligible, and inconsistent it is, the more, in short, matter is
sacrificed to form, and simplicity to complexedness, the nearer it will
approach to perfection; a point to which English jurisprudence seems in a fair
way to arrive. "Happy the nation," (...) claims the enlightened Beccaria,
"where the knowledge of the law is not science!" Where the people, not "being
ignorant of the consequences of their own actions," do not "become necess^^^ly
dependent on a few who are the interpreters of the laws, which instead of being
public and general are thus rendered private and particular!"
. The proceedings in the Lee^ are without expense; the suitor pays no fees; and
advocates or attorneys, of course, never enter it. A public-spirited prosecutor
cannot here be at a charge of forty or fifty pounds to get an offender (in
whose punishment he is no more concerned than any other member of society)
fined so many shillings, or perhaps pence It is the practice of the Court of
Kings Bench, and thence of the Judges of Oyer and Terminer and ja^l-delivery,
and of the court of Quarter Sessions, to assess an arbitrary Fine upon persons
convicted of certain offenses in those courts, and compel the payment thereof
upon pa^n of ^mprisonment for li^e; which in fact is frequently the
consequence. How far such a practice is reconcilable to the libe^ty of the
subject, to the principles of the constitution, to the law of the land, and in
particular to ^he 14th chapter of MAGNA CHARTA, is submitted to the honorable
and worshipful magistrates concerned. See also 4 Black. Com. 378. In the mean
time, it seems of very little importance, when contending with the Crown, by
whom a man is tried, if the measure of his punishment is to ^e le^t to the
DISCRETION of the Kings ministers. This is obvious in ^lmost every thing that
comes in a criminal way before a certain court; of which the judges seem as
glad to get a culp^it into their clutches as the ^urr'd law cats of Rabelais:
Person n'eschappe de cea^s sans y laiss^^ du ^til, or ca, ou de la peau le
plus souvent, or ca. Pantagruel. l. ^. c. 13.
; nor will one of a different disposition find in this court an opportunity of
gratifying his malice. The punishment of the guilty is not aggravated, nor the
acquittal of the innocent purchased, by the payment of heavy costs, or court
fees. Twenty-three men do not here, upon their oath, find a man guilty of an
offense of which twelve others, likewise upon their oath, immediately afterward
acquit him; nor do those who are sworn to enquire with diligence, and present
the truth, refuse to hear half the evidence. In fine, public justice is not in
this court sacrificed to private lucre, nor a criminal process turned into an
action for damages See 4 Black. Com. 363. N.B. All the references to this wor^
are to the 8vo. edition of 1778

The reader must not, from any thing here suggested, collect an opini^^ that a
man should be hanged upon the secret enquiry and ba^e presentment of a Grand
Jury. The evidence ought in all cases to be publicly taken and as well for the
accused as for the crown. (See 2 Hale P. C. 157. St^^^ Trials, iv. 183.) Add to
this, that to put a man to death, by form (...) law, for any c^^me or upon any
pretense whatever, is nothing more or (...) than a cool and deliberate MURDER;
which no necessity can require, and which an irrational prejudice in favor of
ancient barbarism, a cal^^^ magistracy, and an indolent, unfeeling legislature,
will never justify. Th^^ magistrate, indeed, hardened as he is, may be in some
measure excusable since he studies in a school where even murder will appear an
act of gentleness and humanity when contrasted with the more than savage
barbarit^ of a system he is taught to admire as the perfection of human
jurisprudence. In HIGH TREASON, this mildest and most boasted of crimi^^^
codes, adjudges a virtuous, perhaps, and most amiable character, -- wh^ has
offended no moral or social duty, -- who has been guilty only of adhering with
a laudable fidelity to the cause of an unfortunate sovereign, -- of prefering,
at the worst, the title of a tyrant without power to that (...) one in
possession of it, -- or of speculating in his closet upon the title (...)
tyran^s in general One might add also, of having the misfortune to profess an
unpopular religion which a few years before had been the established one of the
(...) Hundr^ds on this account have ^ncurred the guilt of High Treason and
suff^^ed (...) ordingly, not for what they had done but for being what they
w^^^; so their opinions and not their actions. See the "Memoirs of Missionary
Priests," etc. a curious work, which every one who wishes to form a perfect
idea of the charitable and tolerating disposition of the government, law and
church of England, would do well to peruse. He will there find that our pious
Protestant ancestors understood the use of torture^ as well as an Inquisitor
General or Amboyna Dutchman.
, -- to be drawn, -- originally naked with his feet tied to a horses tail, --
afterward on an oxes hide, -- and lastly (it may be curio^ to remark the
progress of judicial compassion!) on a hurdle or sledge Cuthbert Maine, a
priest, "was to be drawn a quarter of a mile to ^he place of execution, and
when he was to be laid on the sledge, s^m of ^he justices moved the she^iffs
deputy that he would cause him to have his head laid over the ca^^e, that he
might be dashed against the stones in drawing." These good Christians, upright
magistrates and loyal subjects, doubtless thought this ingenious contrivance
would be as acceptable to God as they knew it would be agreeable to the judges
and the Queen.
, -- to the place of execution, there to be hanged by the neck, but not till he
is dead; -- no, that would be cruel; -- he is to be cut down alive In Caxtons
Chronicle, c. 253. is an instance of a pardon granted to five traitors after
they were hanged and cut down.
, his privy members cut off, and his heart and bowels ripped out, and thrown
into the fire before his face; then his head is to be cut off, and his body
divided into four quarters, which are to be at the Kings disposal: The
execrable grant who first devised, ordained or pe^mitted this horrid butchery,
^ou^d probably eat them raw. -- And yet we talk of the HURONS! -- But a grant
is not to be sat^ated even with blood; nor appeased by the immola^ation of
agonizing vict^ms: he adds the basest rapine to the most atro^ious murder;
s^izes the dowry of the disconsolate widow, the patrimony of the helpless
orphan, and devotes to ages of misery the innocent and the ^nborn. In PETTY
TREASON, -- from a refined attention to the delicacy of the fair s^x, -- a
woman is only to be burnt alive: -- of late indeed the ^^manity of the
executioner -- of the common hangman -- has been proof against the bar^a^ous
insensibility of the legislature, and, at the risque of ^is own life, she is
p^eviously strangled This punishment has been altered to hanging since these
pages were prepared ^or the press. See 30 G. 3. c. 48.
. And yet the authors of the Bill of Rights (so undeservedly applauded) thought
it necessary to protest against "new and unusual punishments," as if the most
diabolical imagina^ion could suggest any equal to those already established At
this time too there existed a species of torture equal if not superior ^n point
of cruelty to any practiced in the Inquisition -- and in one respect ^t least
much worse, since it only terminated with the death of the mi^erable sufferer.
This was the peine fo^t et dure; by which a prisoner, who, in order to secure
his little property to his family, refused to plead, was gradually pressed to
death in a dungeon by heavy weights upon h^^ beast, his only sustenance in the
mean time, -- that is during two or three days -- for so long have some unhappy
wretches supported this excruciati^^ ^^rment, -- being the foul and loathsome
water which the place afforded. ^y way of prologue or preface to this torture
the judges had a pleasant ^^actice of tying the culprits hands together with
whipcord -- and, while ^e wretch fainted with agony, and the blood spouted from
his fingers, ^ould coolly order him away to consider how he should like
something ^orse. All this, in the great mercy of the legislature, has been
lately ^^anged to immediate death!
! Punishment is only necessary or justifiable, so far as it is beneficial to
the community; it induces the prevention of crimes, and the reformation of the
crim^^^ that of death (in itself a crime), however ins^icted, answers neither
p^^pose, confounds all degrees of criminality, and makes no difference between
a man and a wolf. "Is it not absurd," -- they are the words of (...) humane and
philosophic Beccaria, -- "Is it not absurd," says he, "(...) the laws which
detest and punish homicide, should* in order to preve^ murder, publicly commit
murder themselves? What must men th^^ when they see wise magistrates and grave
ministers of justice, with ind^ference and tranquillity, dragging a criminal to
death, and whilst a wre^^ trembles with agony, expecting the fatal stroke, the
judge, who has condemned him, with the coldest insensibility, and perhaps with
no sm^^^ gratification from the exertion of his authority, quits his tribunal
to enjoy the comforts and pleasures of life."

The hungry judges soon the sentence sign,
And wretches hang that jurymen may dine.
It is not however to prevent murder alone that the law of England commits it;
since (according to Sir William Blackstone, its express panegyn^ "among the
variety of actions which men are daily liable to commit, (...) less than an
HUNDRED AND SIXTY have been declared by act of parliament to be felonies
without benefit of clergy; or, in other words, to be worthy of instant death.
So dreadful a list," he adds, "instead of diminishing increases the number of
offenders." (4 Com. 18.) This "dreaful list" since considerably augmented; and
every session continues to produce law breathing the spirit of Draco, and
written in letters of blood. -- To return All that is here contended for is
that the Grand Jury (so called), under proper regulations, appears to be the
most constitutional mode of tri^^^ and as favorable in every respect to the
innocence of the accused as the petty jury, than which, in regard to the
unanimity required from exactly twelve men upon oath, nothing can be more
absurd, nor have a mo^^ obvious tendency to perjury and injustice. The only
difficulty seems to be in the form or manner of the accusation, which in fact
is all that the finding of the Grand Jury now serves for; a difficulty which,
were this ^ proper place for further discussion, would not prove insurmountable.


.

The peculiar excellence of this most ancient and respectable tribunal is, that
it does what is usually called every bodies business and nobodys business. The
juro^^ are to enquire of such offenses or disorders as may happen within their
own neighborhood, under their own observation; in order that, if they cannot
be avoided by timely interference, an adequate penalty may prevent their
rep^^^tion. They are to be themselves vigilant; to see with ^^eir own eyes; to
hear with their own ears; and, if the evidence of others should, as it may
sometimes, in offenses ^lready committed, happen to be necessary, to receive it
^^partially Much of this can only be understood of those courts in which it is
^e custom to swear the jury in for the year: where they are discharged ^e same
day, it should seem necessary for them to proceed chiefly upon ^vidence: and
indeed there is generally, if not always, a proclamation ^or that purpose.
. A jurisdiction of which the end is jus^^ce will abhor the use of baseness in
the means to attain (...): this of which we are now speaking affords neither
^ncouragement nor countenance to a common informer, ^ho seems to be to Law,
what the jackall is said to be to ^e Lion, -- a servile and dependent monster,
employed to ^^^scover and hunt down the prey of an indolent and vora^ous tyrant.

To conclude: Whether it be now too soon -- for it ^eems impossible that the
day should never arrive when ^he people at large will be convinced that even
(what is ^alled) law may be unjust, tyrannical and oppressive, and that it is
essential to their happiness to have justice admi^istered, in its utmost
simplicity, free of expense, and as ^ear as possible to their own doors -- But
whether it be ^oo soon or too late to expect that the Leet, however ^enerable
for its antiquity, honorable for its constitutional ^rigin, excellent in its
institution, and useful in its effects, should ever recover its ancient
influence and extende^ jurisdiction, -- unless by a remedy which might prove
eve^ worse than the disease, -- the introduction of fees, pleading lawyers and
attorneys, -- it is, at the same time, much (...) be desired that the exercise
of those powers which it (...) still retained, and which apply to the
punishment and prevention of such offenses as, being the most frequent, a^
possibly the most generally injurious, or, at least, vexatious, may be enforced
with vigor and efficacy, and society thereby receive a benefit which is only
undervalue perhaps, because it is not paid for, and its source too litt^
beholden to distance and mystery, -- qualitys, it would seen equally necessary
to ensure reverence to Religion and (...) Law.

THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURT LEET, etc.
I. CRIMES.
TREASON.
HIGH TREASON; ^itton, c. 29. ^. Wall. 12 E. 1. at. 18 E. 2. H. 6. 12. H. 6. 44.
H. 6. 7. E. 3. st. 5. c. 2. ^chin. 16. 100. Hale P. C. 91. ^aw. P. C. 105.
that is, the compassing or imagining of the death of the King, Queen, or
Prince, declared by some overt act; -- the violation or carnal knowledge of the
Kings Consort, his eldest daughter unmarryed, or the Princes's wife; -- the
levying of war against the King; -- the adhering to his enemies within the land
or without, declared by some overt act; -- the counterfeiting of his great or
privy seal, or of his money; or the bringing of counterfeit money into the
realm; -- the killing of the chancellor, treasurer, justices of either bench,
in air, of assise, or oyer and terminer, being in their places, doing their
offices; ^^le P.C. 235.
-- the receiving of a traitor knowingly; the voluntarily permitting of him to
escape; or the breaking of the Kings prison to enlarge him.

Petit Treason; 2^ E. 3. st. 5. c. 2. Br. Leygag. 99. Modus tenendi curiam
Baronis, etc. 1533. 4, b. Kitchen. 16.
that is, the killing, by a servant, of his master or mistress; by a wife, of
her husband; or, by a clergyman, of his prelate or superior (except where it is
or may be found by the Coroner).

FELONY.
The washing or clipping of gold or silver money. 22 E. 4. 22. Br. Leete. 26.
Mod. tenen. cu. Bar. 4, b. Kitchen. 16.
[Made High Treason by 3 H. 5. c. 6. rep. by 1. Ma. st. 1. c. 1. rev. by 5
Eliz. c. 11.]

Murder; Stat. Wall. Britton, c. 29. Kitchen. 17. 2 Haw. P.C. 105.
that is, the killing of a man with malice express or employed (except as above).

Manslaughter; Ibi.
that is, the killing of one without malice (except as before).

Involuntary, Ibi.
or excusable, homicide, or chance medley; that is, the killing of a man per
infortunium, by misadventure, against or besides the will of the killer, or se
defendendo (except as above).

Mayhem; Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Staun. P. C. 38, b. Kitchen. 16.
that is, the depriving a man of the use of such of his members are necessary
in fight, either to defend himself or to annoy his adversary, as his eye,
tongue, foretooth, hand, finger, testicles, etc.

Rape; Glanvill. l. 14. c. 6. Bracton. l. 3. t. 2. c. 28. Stat. Wall. Brit. c.
29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Stat. 18 E. 2. Staund. P. C. 21, b. Mod. tenen. cur.
Bar. 7. Kitchen, 17. 100. 3 Inst. 60. 2 Hawk. P. C. 105.
that is, the carnal knowledge of a woman, by force and violence, against her
will.

Arson; Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mo^te cu. Bar. 5. Kitchen.
17. 100. 1 Hale P.C. 566.
that is, the malicious and voluntary burning of the house or outhouse of
another, by night or day.

Hamsoken; Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Mirror. c. 1. 11. Stat. 18 E. 2. 1 Hale.
P.C. 548. Lie. Dic. Sax. v. Hamso^n.
that is, the breaking or invasion of a house, by day or night.

Burglary; Brit. c. 29. Mo. ten. cu. Bar. ^o, b. Kitchen. 17. 100.
that is, the breaking into a dwelling house in the night time, with intent to
commit a felony.

Robbery; Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mo. te. cu. Bar. 7.
Kitchen. 17. 100. ^ Hale. P.C. 532.
that is, the feloniously and violently taking of any money or goods from the
person of another, putting him in fear, be the value above or under one
shilling.

Larceny; Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c. 1 17. Mo. te.
cu. Bar. 5. Kitchen. 17. 100.
that is, the stealing or fraudulently taking and carrying away of money,
cattle, goods, or other personal thing, above the value of twelve pence.

Petit Larceny; Stat. Wall. Britton. c. 15. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c.
1. 17. Stat. 18 E. 2. Mo. te. cu. Bar. 5. Kitchen. 18. 102.
that is, the stealing or fraudulently taking and carrying away of money,
geese, hens, or other personal thing, of or under the value of twelve pence;

The taking of doves or pigeons either out of a dove-house, Stat. Wall. Brit. c.
29. Stat. 18 E. 2. Kitchen. 18. 102.
by night, or flying from it, or in winter by snares;

The voluntary permission of a jailer to the escape of a felon in his custody;
^leta. l. 2. c. 52. Kitchen. 18. 102.
the rescuing of a felon in custody; the escape of a felon, either without
force, or by breach of prison or other violent means; or the receiving of a
felon knowingly.

The returning of outlaws, Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror.
c. 1. 17. Stat. 18 E. 2. Mo. ten. cu. Bar. 5. 11.
exiles, and persons who have abjured the realm, without warrant;

The being accessory to petit treason or felony (not petit larceny); Mirror. c.
1. 17. 1 Hale. P.C. 540. 4 Blackst. Com. 36. 37.
that is, either before the fact, in procuring, counseling, or commanding
another to commit a crime, and being absent at the commission thereof; or after
the fact, in receiving, comforting, or assisting the criminal, knowing him to
be such. Note, Of the above crimes the Leet has the enquiry only, and not the
punishment. The indictments of the criminals (which are as strong as if they
were taken in the Kings Bench (10 H. 6. 7.) are to be certified by the Steward
to the Justices of Oyer and Terminer or Gaol Delivery. W. 2. c. 13. 1 E. 3. st.
2. c. 17. 8 H. 4. 17. 27 H. 8. 2. Br. Indict. 1. Cromp. J. P. 150. But that
petty larceny was formerly punished in the Leet, see Britton, c. 15.


II. MISDEMEANORS. In fact all misdemeanors are crimes, and e converso; but,
as Sir W. Blackstone observes, in common usage, the word crimes is made to
denote such offenses as are of a deeper and more atrocious dye; while smaller
faults, and omissions of less consequence, are comprised under the gentler name
of "misdemesnors" only. 4 Com. 5. It is almost needless to say that the
arrangement of this elegant and ingenious writer is the basis of the present
sketch.

MISPRISIONS, CONTEMPTS, AND OFFENSES AGAINST THE KING OR THE LORD.
MISPRISION of Treason and Felony; Blackst. Com. 20. 121.
that is, the knowledge and concealment of those crimes.

The concealing of treasure-trove. Blackst. Com. 21.
Vide post.

The disclosing by a juror, ^bi. 126.
to a person indicted, of the evidence against him.

The withdrawing or withholding of suit to the court; Britton. c. 29. Fleta. l.
2. c. 52. Mirror. c. 1. 17. ^^at. 18 E. 2.
which is due by all of twelve years and upward, not being peers, prelates,
clerks, women, or aliens, resiant a year and a day. Such resiants not being
sworn to their fealty or allegiance. Mirror. c. 1. 17. ^^at. 18 E. 2. ^o. te.
cu. Ba. 6. Kitchen 103.


The withdrawing, ^^at. Wall. Brit. c. 29. ^leta. l. 2. c. 52.
withholding, concealing, or alienating of the Kings rights.

The accroaching or appropriating of rights royal, Stat. Wall.
without warrant; as gallows, amends (or cognizance) of the assise of bread and
ale broken, plea of replevin, and the like.

The claiming of franchises or rights royal; Brit. c. 29.
and the raising of new franchises, customs, or rights.

The withdrawing of customs and services due to the court. Stat. 18 E. 2.


Every purpresture or incroachment upon the King or the lord. Fleta. l. 2. c.
52. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Mod. tenen. cu. Bar. 6, b. 2 Hawk. P. C. 106.


The disturbing of the administration of justice, 1 Haw. P.C. 58.
by a direct contempt offered to the court.

OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE.
The obstructing of the execution of lawful process; Mirror. c. 1. 17. 4
Blackst. Com. 129.
or the disturbing of the Kings officers in the execution of their duty.

Hue and Cry; Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c. 1. 17.
Stat. 18 E. 2. Kitchen. 101. 3 Inst. 118.
or other offender, by fresh suit, rightfully raised, not pursued.

The negligent escape of a felon. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52.


The breach of prison by one lawfully confined (not for treason or felony).
Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. 4 Blackst. Com. 130.


The rescue of one lawfully arrested or confined (not for treason or felony).
Mod. tenen. cu. Bar. 5, b. Kitch. 21. 101. 4 Blackst. Com. 131.


The retaining of a felon elsewhere than in the Kings prison beyond a day and a
night. Brit. c. 29.


The receiving of stolen goods, ^^at. Wall. ^^it. c. 29.
knowing them to be so.

The going in message for thieves or felons, ^tat. 18 E. 2. ^o. te. cu. Bar. 5.
Kitchen. 21.
as to procure them victuals, etc.

Theft-bote; ^tat. Wall. ^rit. c. 29. ^leta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c. 1. 17.
that is, the receiving, by any one, of his goods when stolen, or the taking of
other amends not to prosecute the thief.

The unjust detention of persons bailable, ^leta. l. 2. c. 52.
and the dismission of those not so.

Forestalls; ^tat. Wall. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Kitchen. 20.
that is, the rescous or rescuing of beasts distrained, in their way to the
pound.

Pound-breach; ^tat. Wall. ^rit. c. 29. Mirror. c. 2. 26. Kitchen. 20. Haw. P.C.
106.
that is, the breaking of the common pound, and taking any distress thereout.

Barratry; Kitchen. 20.
that is, the exciting and stirring up of suits and quarrels between his
Majestys subjects, either at law or otherwise.

Maintenance; Haw. P.C. 249. Blackst. Com. ^4.
that is, the officiously stirring up or interfering in quarrels or suits, or
the maintaining or assisting of either party with money or otherwise to
prosecute or defend.

Champerty; Haw. P.C. 156.
that is, the unlawful maintenance of a suit, in consideration that the
champerter shall have part of the lands or thing in dispute, or part of the
gains.

The buying of titles; 1 Haw. P.C. 161.
that is, doubtful or disputed titles to land.

Conspiracy; 3 Inst. 143. 4 Blackst. Com.
that is, a combination of two or more to indict an innocent man of felony,
falsely and maliciously, and who is accordingly indicted and acquitted.

Perjury; 1 Hawk. P.C. c. 69.
that is, a wilful false oath in any proceeding in a court of justice This
crime, committed in the Leet, is punishable in every other proper court, as
well by Statute as at Common Law. 5 Eliz. c. 9. Godbolt. 71.
.

Subornation of perjury; that is, the procuring of a man to take such false
oath.

Bribery; 4 Blackst. Com. 140.
that is, the taking by, or offering to, any judge, officer, or other person
concerned in the administration of justice, of any reward, to influence his
behavior in his office.

Embracery; Ibi. 141.
that is, the laboring, influencing, or attempting to influence, a jury, by
promises, persuasions, entreaties, money, entertainments, or the like.

The misfeasance, Mo. te. cu. Bar. 7. Kitch. 22. 105.
neglects, or defaults, of public officers, as bailiff, coroner, constable, etc.

Forgery; 1 Haw. P.C. 182. 4 Blackst. Com. 247.
that is, the falsely and fraudulently making or altering any record or other
authentic writing of a public nature, as a parish register, deed, will, etc.

The embezzling, Hawk. P. C. 45.
defacing, or altering, of any record, without due authority.

Extortion; Black. C. 141. ^^z. J. P. 13.
that is, the unlawful taking, by color of ones office, of any money or thing
of value not due to him, or more than is due, or before it is due.

Every wrong done by the Kings ministers, ^irror. c. 1. 17.
or others, to the commonalty of the people.

OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE.
The coming before the Kings justices or minister, ^E. 3. c. 3. Black. C. 149.
doing their office, with force and arms; the bringing of any force in affray
of the peace; or the going or riding armed (with dangerous or unusual weapons,
to the terror of the people).

Affrays; ^^it. c. 29. ^itchin. 20. 105. Inst. 158. Haw. P.C. 106.
that is, the fighting of two or more in some public place, to the terror of
his Majestys subjects.

Brawls; ^^it. c. 29. ^o. te. cu. Bar. 6. ^^tchin. 20.
that is, the brawling, quarreling, or chiding, of two or more.

Common scolding [of a woman]. ^^chin. 104. 8. ^oore. 847. 6 Mod. 200. 1 Hawk.
P. C. 200.


Riots, Inst. 176. Black. C. 146.
Routs, and Unlawful Assemblies; that is, 1. where three or more do an unlawful
act, as beating a man, etc. with force and violence; 2. where three or more
meet to do an unlawful act upon a common quarrel, as to break down enclosures,
etc. and, 3. where three or more assemble to commit a rout or riot, and do it
not.

Hue and cry wrongfully raised. Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52.
Mirror. c. 1. 17. Stat. 18 E. 2. Mo. ten. cur. Bar. 11, b.


The spreading of false news, 4 Black. C. 149.
to make discord between the King and nobility.

The challenging of another to fight. Ibi.


Libels; Ibi.
that is, malicious defamation of any person, especially a magistrate, made
public by either printing, writing, signs, or pictures, in order to provoke him
to wrath, or expose him to public hatred, contempt, or ridicule.

Not keeping the watch. Brit. c. ^9. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52.


Any other thing done against the peace of the land. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52.


OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC TRADE.
The breaking or not observing of the assise of bread, Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29.
Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Stat. 18. E. 2. 13 R. 2. st. 1. c. 8. Mo.
ten. cur. Bar. 11. Kitchen. 21. 106.
ale, wine, cloths, weights, or measures.

The using, Jud. Pil. 51 H. 3. Stat. Wall. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c. 1. 17.
Stat. 18 E. 2. Kitchen. 21. 2 Hawk. P. C. 106.
of false balances, weights, or measures, to buy or sell with.

The using, Jud. Pil. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Stat. 18 E. 2.
or being in possession, of two measures; buying by the greater, and selling by
the less.

Tapsters or tipplers, M^d. tenen. cu. Bar. 5, b. Kitchen. 22.
that is, vintners, and others who retail drink, selling by cups, dishes, or
measures, not lawfully sealed This article is alluded to by Shakspeare.

Yet would you say, ye were beaten out of door;
And rail upon the hostess of the house;
And say, you would present her at the Leet,
Because she brought stone-ju^, and no sealed quarts.
TAMING OF HE SHREW, Act l. Sc. 2.


Forestalling; Jud. Pil. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Mo. ten. cu. Bar. 6, b, ^ Black. C.
158. [2] J. 1. c. 22.
that is, the buying of or contracting for any merchandise or victual coming to
the market; or the dissuading of persons from bringing their goods or
provisions there; or the persuading of them to enhance the price when there.

Regrating; Mod. tenen. cu. Bar. 6, b. Black, C. 158.
that is, the buying of corn, or other dead victual, in the market, and
afterward selling it there, or within four miles of it.

Engrossing; ^bi.
that is, the getting into ones possession or buying up of large quantities of
corn, or other dead victual, with intent to sell them again; or of any other
commodity, with intent to sell it at an unreasonable rate.

The putting to sale of malt not sufficiently trodden, (...) and 3 E. 6. c. 10.
rubbed, and fanned.

Innholders making horse-bread, ^1 Ja. 1. c. 21. Kitchen. 22.
or selling horse-bread, hay, oats, etc. or any kind of victual, either for man
or beast, for unreasonable gain.

Butchers, 23 E. 3. c. 6. 13 R. 2. st. 1. c. 8. Kitchen. 22.
fishmongers, and others, selling victuals at unreasonable prices.

The taking, Mirror. c. 1. 17. Mo. ten. cur. Bar. 6, b. 11. 4 Lev. 12.
by millers, of excessive toll; or, by landlords or others, of outrageous
distress.

The conspiring of butchers, 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 15.
brewers, bakers, cooks, costermongers or fruiterers, not to sell their
victuals but at certain prices; or of artificers, workmen, or laborers, not to
make or do their work but at certain prices; or not to finish what another has
begun; or not to work but at certain hours or times.

The using of two trades, Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. 1 [2] J. 1. c. 22. 22 and 23 C.
2. c. 19.
namely, of shoemaker, curryer, or leather-cutter, and tanner, tanner and
butcher, or tailor and salesman (of old clothes).

The using of any art or mystery in which the party has not been brought up. 5
Eliz. c. 4. 31 Eliz. c. 5. 1 [2] J. 1. c. 22.


The buying of raw hides by any but tanners. 1 [2] J. 1. c. 22.


The making for sale or uttering of deceitful wares. Mo. te. cu. Bar. 6.
Kitchen. 22.


Butchers gashing hides, ^ [2] J. 1. c. 22.
or killing calves to sell under five weeks old.

The unlawful tanning of hides; [2] J. 1. c. 22.
currying of leather; or making of shoes.

The making and using of false dice. Mirror. c. 1. 17.


All manner of treachery, ^bi.
cheating, and deceit.

Innkeepers refusing to receive and entertain travelers. Hawk. P. C. 78.


OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC HEALTH.
Butchers, ^^d. Pil. ^irror. c. 1. 17. H. 6 53. (...). Leete. 1. ^o. te. cu. B.
5, b. ^it. 22. 46. 106.
fishmongers, cooks, victualers, or bakers, selling corrupt, spoiled, or
unwholesome meat, fish, victuals, or bread.

Brewers, Mirror. c. 1. 17. Kitchen. 106.
vintners, or others, brewing or selling spoiled or unwholesome wine, ale, or
other drink.

The making of unpure or unseasonable malt. (...) and 3 E. 6. c. 10.


OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC ECONOMY.
All obstructions, ^^t. Wall. ^^^t. c. 29. (...). l. 2. c. 52. at. 18 F (...) H.
8. 6 27 (...). Action sur le cas. 6. Mo. ten. cur. Bar. 5, b. Kitchen. 103. 104.
stoppages, restrictions, straightenings, or diversions, of the highway.

All purprestures or encroachments made in common places, (...) or. c. 1. 17.
^^tenen. cur. ^^t. ^. ^. 10 b. Kitchen. 106.
upon land or water, or with blocks or stocks in the highway.

All walls, ^^t. Wall. (...). c. 9. ^^^a. l. 2. c. 52. ^o. te. cu. Ba. 6.
Kichin. 104
houses, gates, causeways, ditches, pools, or pits, raised, prostrated, or
made, upon or near the common highway, to the nuisance of the way, and to the
danger of passengers.

All laystalls made, Kitch. 20. 104.
or filth or carrion cast, in the highway, to the annoyance of the people.

The obstructing, Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Stat. 18 E. 2.
Kitchen 103.
stopping, straightening, or diverting, of the course of any water.

Bridges and causeways broken. Britton. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c.
1. 22 E. 4. 22. Br. Leete. 26.


Ditches not scoured. 22 E. 4. 22. Br. Leete. 26. Mo. tenen. cur. Bar. 10.
Raym. 250.


The removing of bounds or landmarks. Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c.
52. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Stat. 18 E. 2.


Offensive trades or manufactures. 4 Black. C. 167.


The keeping of hogs in the street. Salk. 460.


All common nuisances. 22 E. 4. 22. Br. Leete. 26. 2 Haw. P.C. 106.


All disorderly inns or alehouses. 4 Black. C. 163.


Railing, Hob. 246.
and sowing of discord amongst neighbors.

Eaves-dropping; Mo. te. cu. Bar. 6. Kitchen. 20.
that is, standing under walls or windows to hear tales, and carry them to
others, to make strife and debate.

Vagrancy; Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mo. ten. cu. Bar. 6, b. Kitchen. 22.
that is, vagabonds, or persons wandering up and down, of whom there is
suspicion of evil; and harboring or receiving them.

Innkeepers or others harboring suspected persons, ^t. Wall.
perceiving or knowing them to be of ill behavior; or entertaining persons
unknown for more than two nights.

Noctivagancy, E. 4. 22. (...). Leete. 26. ^^^ch. 21. 46.
or night-walking.

The continually haunting of alehouses and taverns by such as have no visible
or known means of subsistence. ^t. 18 E. 2. ^o. tenen. cur. ^. 6, b. 11.


Sleeping in the day and waking in the night, ^i.
eating and drinking well, and having nothing.

Common bawdy-houses; ^^tchin. 21. 104. ^nst. 205. Black. C. 168.
and frequenting the same.

All open lewdness, Hawk. P. C. 7.
grossly scandalous.

Misdoers in parks, ^at. Wall. ^^^it. c. 29. ^^ta. l. 2. c. 52.
fishponds, and warrens.

The tracing and killing of hares in the snow. and 15 H. 8. c. 10.


The putting of undersized or mangy horses upon the common. H. 8. c. 13.


The keeping of a common house, H. 8. c. 9. Eliz. c. 5.
alley, or place, for bowling or other unlawful game; and using and haunting
the same, and there playing.

Artificers, etc. playing at bowls or other unlawful games.

Cock-fighting; 11 Rep. 87, b. 3 Keble. 465. 510.
or keeping a common cockpit.

Taking or killing the young fry of fish in any floodgate, 1 Eliz. c. 17.
etc. or pike or pickerel, or salmon, undersized; or fishing with a net with
unsizeable meshes.

Taking or killing pheasants of partridges with nets or other devices in the
nightime; 23 Eliz. c. 10.
or hawking or hunting in eared or codded corn.

Drunkenness, 4 J. 1. c. 5.
or continuing drinking and tippling; or publicans suffering others to do so.

Watering hemp or flax in a river, 33 H. 8. c. 17.
etc. or otherwise than in proper grounds or pits, or the partys own pond.

PERSONAL SECURITY.
Assault; Mod. tenen. cu. Bar. 10. Finch, Law. 202 1 Haw. P.C. 132.
that is, an attempt or offer to beat or do a corporal hurt to another.

Battery; Ibi.
that is, the wrongful beating of a man, or any injury, however small, actually
done to his person.

Blood shed, Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Stat. 18 E. 2. 22 E. 4.
22. Br. Leete. 26. Mo. te. cu. Bar. 5, b. 10, b. Kitchen. 104.
wound made, or weapon drawn, against the Kings peace.

Kidnapping; Ravm. 474. 4 Black. C. 219.
that is, the forcible abduction or stealing away of a man, woman, or child,
and sending him or her into another country.

False imprisonment; ^^at. Wall. ^rit. c. 29. ^irror. c. 1. 17.
or the wrongful detinue of the body of a man. N. B. The conusance of several
other offenses is given to the Leet by act of parliament; such as, not
destroying crows and rooks, by 24 H. 8. c. 10. -- shooting, or not shooting, in
guns and bows, contrary to 33 H. 8. cc. 6. 9. -- the mending of highways, by 2
and 3 P. and M. c. 8. and 18 Eliz. c. 10. -- the taking of musters, by 4 and 5
P. and M. c. 3. -- hats and caps, by 13 Eliz. c. 19. etc. etc. -- which, being
either expired, repealed, obsolete, or out of use, are here omitted.


III. THE RIGHTS OF THE KING, AND THE LORD OF THE MANOR.
LANDS forfeited by persons attainted of high treason. Kitchen. 19.


Escheats; Ibi.
that is, the lands of persons attainted of petit treason or felony Escheats
for want of heirs are to be enquired of in the Court Baron.
.

Treasure-trove; Stat. Wall. Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror c. 1. 17.
Stat. 18 E. 2. Mod. ten. cu^. Ba^. 6, b. Kitchen. 23. 2 Hawk. P. C. 106.
that is, treasure found hidden in the earth or other secret place, the owner
whereof is unknown.

Waifs and estrays; Brit. c. 29. Fleta. l. 2. c. 52. Mirror. c. 1. 17. Mo. te.
cu. Ba^ 6. 6, b. 10, b. Kitchen 23 103 105. 2 Haw. P.C. 106.
that is, 1. goods (which have been stolen) waived or thrown away by the thief
in his flight; and, 2. tame or reclaimed animals (as horses, neat, sheep, hogs,
or swans) found straying within the manor, the property of which, if unclaimed
by the owner for a year and a day, is in the King or the Lord.

Goods and chattels forfeited by conviction of high treason, Mo. te. cu. B. 11.
Kitchen. 19. 24. 100. 101. 4 Black. C. 421.
misprision of treason, petit treason, felony, felony de se, manslaughter,
excusable homicide; by outlawry; by conviction of petit larceny; by flight in
treason or felony, by praemunire, etc.

Goods derelict, (...) Prero. pl. 12. Vent. 267.
or in which no man has property (as those of intestate bastard, etc.).

The certum letae, ^ Salk. 37. (...) H. 4. 9. ^itchin. 102. Roll A. 211.
capitage, chief or head silver, or common fine, payable in some manors This
was in its origin a composition with the Lord by the deziners, to excuse their
personal appearance: and was to be answered and paid by the chief pledge, who
otherwise was himself punishable for their absence. Vide Spelmans Glossary,
voce CAPITAGIUM.
.

APPROVED PRECEDENTS OF PRESENTIMENTS AND JUDGMENTS IN THE LEET.
Presentiments in Leet ought to be certain, viz. to show at what place the
nuisance is made, and to say within the jurisdiction of the court; for it is
the declaration of the King, which ought to be good to every common intent. Br.
Leete. 33. and vide Keilwey. 89. To the nuisance of the Kings subjects, or to
common nuisance, ought to be in every Presentment [ sci. of nuisance]. C^o. J.
382. And to the nuisance of several persons will not do. 3 Keble. 106.
Presentment of a thing done before the last court is of no force. 3 Keble. 644.
It is not necessary that a Presentment in the Leet should be either s^aled or
indented. 3 Bur. 1860. Vide tamen. W. 2. c. 13. 1 E. 3. st. 2. c. 17. Manor. c.
1. 17.
HIGH TREASON AS FELONY.
THE jurors for the lady the queen upon their oath say, Kitchen. 100.
that R. S. etc. at I. within the jurisdiction of this court, as a felon of the
lady the queen, one hundred angels of gold and three hundred groats falsely and
feloniously coined and fabricated (the letters patent of the lady the queen in
that behalf not before obtained), against the peace of the said lady the queen
that now is, her crown and dignity, and against the form of the statute in such
case made and provided.

RAPE.
They also present, Kitchen. 100.
that A. B. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this court, the close and house of one, etc. broke and entered,
and upon one Katherine, etc. the daughter, etc. in the peace of God and the
lady the queen being, made assault, and her with force and arms then and there
against her will ravished, and her carnally knew, against the peace, etc.

ARSON.
They also present, Ibi.
that one T. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this court, with force and arms, etc. wilfully and feloniously,
of his malice aforethought, the house of one J. S. burned, contrary to the
peace of the lady the queen. Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff to seize
all his lands and tenements, goods and chattels, that he may answer thereof to
the lord of this manor.

RO^BER^
They also present, Ibi. 101.
that E. F. of I. aforesaid, labourer, on such a day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this court, with force and arms, and against the peace, etc.
upon one T. D. at, etc. within the jurisdiction of this court, in the queens
highway there in the peace of God and the lady the queen being, made assault,
and the said T. D. then and there robbed, and sixteen groats of silver, and one
angel of gold, of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid T. D. in his certain
purse then and there being, from the person of the same T. feloniously took and
carried away, against the peace of the lady the queen, her crown and dignity.

BURGLARY.
They also present, Kitchen. 100.
that B. D. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this court, about the hour of nine in the night of the same
day, the house and mansion of one, etc. as a felon of the lady the queen, broke
and entered, with intention to rob the aforesaid, etc. and six angels of gold,
of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid, etc. then and there in a certain
chest being, feloniously took and carried away, against the peace, etc.

LARCENY.
They also present, that J. W. of I. aforesaid, gentleman, on such a day, etc.
at I. within the jurisdiction of this court, a certain fallow deer, tame, and
bearing a bell about its neck, of the value, etc. of the goods and chattels of
one, etc. then and there found, feloniously took and carried away, against the
peace, etc. Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff, as above, etc.

They also present, that J. L. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day, etc. at
I. aforesaid, within the jurisdiction of this court, about the hour of one in
the night of the same day, a certain trunk of one, etc. broke and entered, and
ten fishes, called pikes, of the value, etc. of the goods and chattels of the
aforesaid, etc. from the trunk of the same, etc. then and there feloniously
took and carried away, against the peace, etc. Therefore, etc.

They also present, Kitchen. 100.
that W. P. of I. aforesaid, labourer, on such a day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this court, with force and arms, and against the peace, etc.
the close of one, etc. at I. aforesaid, broke and entered, and one black satin
waistcoat, of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid, etc. then and there
found, feloniously took and carried away. Therefore it is commanded to the
bailiff, etc.

PETIT LARCENY.
They also present, Ibi.
that P. I. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day, etc. the close of one, etc.
at I. aforesaid, broke and entered, and one towel, of the value of sixpence, of
the goods and chattels of the aforesaid, etc. then and there found, feloniously
took and carried away. Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff to seize all his
goods and chattels into the hands of the lord.

They also present, Ibi. 102.
that A. B. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day and year, etc. at I. within
the jurisdiction of this court, about the hour of one in the night of the same
day, a certain dovecote of one, etc. broke and entered, and forty pigeons, of
the value, etc. of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid, etc. from the house
of the same, etc. feloniously took and carried away, against the peace, etc.
Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff, etc. as above.

FELONY AND FLIGHT.
They also present, ^itchin. 101.
that E. L. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day and year, etc. at I. within
the jurisdiction of this court, a certain white gelding, of the value, etc. of
the goods and chattels of one, etc. in the common field there being,
feloniously stole, took, and carried away: And that the aforesaid E. L. for the
felony aforesaid, withdrew himself and fled. Therefore it is commanded to the
bailiff to seize two cows, of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid E. L. as
escheats and forfeitures to the lord; and that they be safely kept to the use
of the lord, etc. or thus, to the use of the queen.

PRISON BREACH.
They also present, (...)
that whereas one B. R. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, was taken and arrested for
suspicion of a certain felony, and put in the stocks; one J. F. of I.
aforesaid, labourer, on such a day and year, etc. at I. aforesaid, the
aforesaid stocks with force and arms and feloniously broke, and the aforesaid
B. R. then and there to escape and go at large permitted, against the peace.
Therefore it is commanded, as before, etc.

RESCOUS OF FELON.
They also present, (...) 102.
that T. J. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, on such a day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this court, one calf, of the value, etc. of the goods and
chattels of one J. B. then and there found, feloniously took and carried away.
And that W. Q. bailiff of the manor aforesaid, on such a day and year, etc. at
I. aforesaid, the aforesaid T. J. for suspicion of the felony aforesaid
arrested: And that W. F. of I. aforesaid, labourer, with force and arms, etc.
at I. aforesaid, on the said day and year, upon the aforesaid W. Q. in the
peace of God and the said lady the queen being, made assault, and the aforesaid
T. J. in the custody of the aforesaid W. then and there feloniously took,
forced, and rescued, and at large permitted to go, against the peace, etc.
Therefore it is commanded, as above, etc.

OUTLAW RETURNED.
They also present, M. T. C. B. 11.
that Q. J. before such a coroner, on [in and at] such a day, year, and place,
of his own free will acknowleged himself to have done felony on [in and at]
such a day, year, and place, for which recognition he abjured the realm, etc.
and afterward returned without the charter of the king, and remains within this
lordship. Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff or constable of the same
lordship the same Q. bodily to attach, and to the next gaol of the lord the
king lead, there under close custody to remain until, etc. And it is commanded
to the bailiff to seize his goods and chattels.

ACCESSORY BEFORE THE FACT.
They also present, Kitchen. 100.
that W. S. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, within the jurisdiction of this court,
counseled, instigated, procured, comforted, and abetted one L. M. etc. one
black cow, of the value, etc. of the goods and chattels of one, etc. then and
there found, feloniously to steal, take, and carry away: And the aforesaid L.
by virtue of the counsel, instigation, procuration, comfort, and abetting
aforesaid, etc. the said cow, on such a day, etc. in the year, etc. feloniously
stole, took and carried away.

FELON AND ACCESSORY AFTER THE FACT.
The jurors also say, ^.T.C.B. 10, b.
upon their oath, that W. C. by night, in such a year, etc. the close of J. T.
at I. broke and entered, and capons, geese, and hens, of the value of three
shillings, there found, feloniously took and carried away; and that J. R. him
received, entertained, and comforted, knowing him to be a felon, and felony so
to have committed: And it is commanded to the bailiff that he as well the
aforesaid W. as the aforesaid J. attach, and to the next gaol lead, etc.

The also say, that W. R. [in and at] such a day, year, and place, etc. within
the lordship of A. stole one black horse, of the value of 20s. of one J. B. and
that K. C. knowing him the felony aforesaid so to have committed, him receives,
entertains, and comforts. Therefore in mercy. And it is commanded to the bailiff
to seize the horse aforesaid, as forfeited, and to answer of the issues.

DECINERS IN DEFAULT.
They also say, T.C.B. 11, b.
that J. and W. are deciners, and have made default, etc.

DEFAULT OF SUIT.
They also present, ^^tchin. 103.
upon their oath, that J. R. R. W. and J. W. are resiants within the precinct
of the view of frankpledge aforesaid, and at this day have made default.
Therefore every of them in mercy, as appears above their heads.

RESIANTS NOT SWORS.
They also present, Kitchen.
that R. W. W. F. R. B. and W. G. have inhabited within the precinct of this
view of frankpledge for the space of one year and one day, and upward, and are
not sworn to the queen for ligeance. Therefore each of them in mercy, as appears
above their heads.

HUE AND C^ NOT FOLLOWED.
They also present, Ibi. 101.
that the aforesaid T. D. being robbed, raised great hue and cry, and the
aforesaid E. F. as a felon of the lady the queen, on the said day and year,
from the place aforesaid, where he was so robbed, freshly followed unto the
aforesaid town of, etc. and that no inhabitant there the felon aforesaid upon
the hue aforesaid followed, and so the felon aforesaid escaped, in contempt of
the said lady the queen, and against the form of the statute of Winchester in
such case made and provided. Therefore the aforesaid town of, etc. in mercy, etc.

CHIEF PLEDGES IN DEFAULT.
They also present, M.T.C.B. 10.
that R. B. and C. D. are chief pledges, and make default. Therefore they in
mercy.

CONSTABLE IN DEFAULT
They also present, Kitchen. 105.
that W. G. is constable, and is not here at the view of frankpledge to present
that which to that office belongs, but has made default. Therefore he in mercy
2s.

ALETASTER IN DEFAULT
They also present, Ibi.
that R. S. is aletaster, and is not here at the view of frankpledge to present
that which to that office belongs, but hat made default. Therefore he in mercy
2s.

MEAT-SEARCHERS IN DEFAULT.
They also present, Kitchen. 105.
that B. R. and C. D. are meat-searches, and should be here at the view of
frankpledge to present that which to that office belongs, and have made
default. Therefore each of them in mercy 2s.

SCAVENGERS IN DEFAULT.
They also present, ^bi.
that T. J. and W. J. are scavengers, and ought to be here at the view of
frankpledge, and have made default. Therefore each of them in mercy 6d.

AFFRAY.
They also present, Ibi. 105.
that J. S. made affray within the jurisdiction of this court, and drew blood.
Therefore he in mercy 3s. 4d.

HUE WRONGFULLY RAISED.
They also say, M.T.C.B. 11, b.
that K. B. and C. D. unjustly raised great hue, in disturbance of the peace of
the lord the king, after the last view held, to the nuisance of their
neighbors at H. Therefore in mercy.

BREACH OF ASSISE.
They also say, Ibi. 11.
that A. and C. are bakers of man's bread, and have broken the assise. Therefore
they in mercy.

They also present, Kitchen.
that E. W. and W. X. by their wives, are common tipplers ( i. e. retailers) of
ale, and have sold ale by unlawful measures, and have broken the assise.
Therefore each of them in mercy, as appears above their heads.

EXCESSIVE TOLL.
They also present, M.T.C.B. 11.
that J. H. miller, of this lorship or manor, has taken toll unjustly and
excessively of the meal of his neighbors. Therefore he in mercy.

UNWHOLESOME BREAD.
They also present, Kitchen. 106.
that W. M. and R. B. are common bakers of man's bread, and for diverse time have
baked unwholesome bread, and have broken the assise. Therefore each of them in
mercy, as appears above their heads.

UNWHOLESOME ALE.
They also present, Ibi.
that R. W. and J. D. are common brewers, and have brewed for diverse times
unwholesome ale, and have broken the assise. Therefore each of them in mercy, as
appears above their heads.

NUISANCE.
They also present, Ibi.
that there is a hedge of great thickness, and that the branches thereof hang
over the lane, called Kings Lane, to the nuisance of the carriages going along
the same lane, in the default of W. C. Therefore it is commanded to him to cut
down or lop the same, before the feast, etc. under the pain, etc.

They also present, M.T.C.B. 10, b.
that W. D. has accroached to himself of the common water, land, etc. to the
grievous nuisance of his neighbors. Therefore he in mercy. And it is commanded
to the bailiff to seize into the hand of the lord, etc.

They also present, Kitchen. 104.
that R. W. has placed a certain dunghill over against his house, near the
queens highway, to the nuisance of the people of the lady the queen. Therefore
it is commanded to him to remove and carry away the same before the feast, etc.
under the pain, etc.

They also present, ^^tchin. 104.
that there is a certain gutter leading from the house or kitchen of T. I. by
which nasty or stinking water is conducted into the queens highway, to the
great nuisance of the queens highway, and of all carriages to be carried along
the same by the people of the lady the queen. Therefore it is commanded to him
to amove or stop up the same before the feast, etc. under the pain, etc.

DIVERSION OF WATERCOURSE.
They also present, that R. C. of I. aforesaid, yeoman, diverts the common
course of a certain rivulet, leading by the house of one T. H. out of the right
course in which it used to run. Therefore it is commanded to him to let it go in
its right accustomed course before the feast, etc. under the pain, etc.

REPAIR OF BRIDGE, etc.
They also present, that the common way leading through the field called the
Prebend Field is a common way for passing and riding, and was so used from time
whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary; and that the gate and bridge
being beyond the further bridge ought to be maintained and kept by the tenant
of the land, and now are not. Therefore it is commanded to the tenant of the
land the same gate and bridge to amend and repair before the feast of Saint
John the Baptist next ensuing, under the pain, etc.

DITCH NOT SCOURED.
They also present, M.T.C.B. 10.
that the kings way at C. is very dangerous and founderous, in defect of
scouring the ditch of J. B. Therefore he in mercy.

They also present, Ibi.
that W. C. has a ditch not scoured at, etc. containing twelve perches of
land, to the nuisance of the people of the lord the king. Therefore he in mercy.

They also present, Kitchen. 104.
that there is a certain ditch unscoured and uncleansed, in the default of B.
S. to the nuisance, etc. Therefore he in mercy 12d. And it is commanded to him
to scour or cleanse the same before the feast, etc. under the pain of 2s.

They also say, M.T.C.B. 11.
that the lord has a ditch not scoured, of the length of twelve perches.
Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff to amend [the same].

COMMON SCOLD.
They also present, Kitchen. 104.
that N. C. widow, is a common scold with her neighbors, and a common breaker
of hedges; and [that] she is not of good fame and government. Therefore she in
mercy, as appears above, etc.

ENTERTAINER OF WHO^^.
They also present, Ibi.
that H. B. widow, is a common entertainer and receiver of whores and women of
ill fame and conversation, to the great nuisance of her neighbors. Therefore
she is amerced 2s. 2d.

VAGABOND.
They also say, M.T.C.B. 11.
that K. of sound mind and good health, is a vagabond, who wakes by night and
sleeps by day, and nothing labors. Therefore, etc.

ASSAULT.
They also present, M.T.C.B. 10.
that W. C. made assault upon J. S. with a staff, against the peace of the lord
the king. Therefore he in mercy.

BLOODSHED.
They also present, (...) 10, b.
that M. S. unjustly and against the peace, drew blood upon R. B. with a sword.
Therefore he in mercy. And the said sword remains to the lord by judgment of
forfeiture.

They also present, ^^tchin. 104.
that as one A. B. servant of W. C. the lords bailiff, was bringing certain
chattels of one R. G. unto the lords pound, there to be impounded, came one E.
P. with great violence into the pound aforesaid, with one sword, of the value
of 5s. and then and there the aforesaid A. stuck with the same sword upon the
head, and so shed blood upon the same A. B. by reason of which stroke the
aforesaid A. B. fell to the ground as if he were dead. Therefore the aforesaid
E. P. in mercy. And affeered by the chief pledges at five shillings.

WAI^.
They also say, ^^T.C.B. 10, b.
that a certain unknown felon stole one horse, of the value of 20s. without
this lordship. Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff to seize the said horse
into the hand of the lord by reason of forfeiture.

They also present, ^^^chin. 103.
that one M. S. came within the jurisdiction of this view of frankpledge, and
hither brought certain goods and chattels by her stolen (to wit), one linen
shirt, of the value, etc. and diverse other vestments, in English, one smock,
one petticoat, and one shirt; all which things are worth 20s. and no more: And
all and singular which things were hither brought by the aforesaid M. and that
the same M. here within the jurisdiction of this manor the same waived, left,
and fled from; whereby all the goods and chattels aforesaid have come to the
lord of this manor. Whereupon it was commanded to the bailiff to seize [the
same] into the hands of the lord, as escheats and forfeitures to the lord; and
he did so, and the goods and chattels aforesaid were delivered to the lord in
this court.

ESTRAY.
They also say, M.T.C.B. 10, b.
that one black ox, or one horse, etc. cames as an estray within this lordship
at the feast of Easter last past. And it is commanded to the bailiff to
proclaim [the same] in the market, and in the church, as the manner is, etc.

They also present, Kitchen. 105.
upon their oath, that on the twentyeth day of May, in the year of the reign of
our lady queen Elizabeth that now is, came within this lordship one gray horse
as an estray, and remains in the custody of X. D. to be proclaimed.

They also present, Ibi.
that there is one bay colt, of the age of four years or more, which came
within this lordship as an estray, on the 9th day of September, in the year of
the reign of the said lady the queen the twentyeth, of the value of 24s. and
has remained in the custody of the bailiff for the space of one year and one
day, after three proclamations for three several days, made according to the
form of the statute. Therefore the property of the same colt is in the lord.

OUTLAW.
They also say, M.T.C.B. 11.
that O. P. is outlawed on (in and at) such a day, year, and place, at the suit
of K. O. in a plea of trespa^s. Therefore it is commanded to the bailiff to
seize his goods and chattels to the use of the lord, etc.

COMMON FINE.
They say, Ibi. 10.
upon their oath, that D. gives to the lord as of certainty (de certo) for a
common fine at this day of ancient custom, as appears in capite.

They also say, Kitchen. 102.
that they give to the lord as of certainty (de certo) for a common fine, at
this day of ancient custom, 6s. 8d.

ORDERS UPON PAIN.
It is ordained, Ibi.
that R. B. do make and scour his ditch, at the lower end of Great Hill,
containing by estimation twenty perches, before the feast of the nativity of
Saint John the Baptist next coming, under the pain, for each perch thereof, of
8d.

It is also ordained, Ibi.
that T. M. do reform and throw open a certain parcel of land lately by him
incroached, between Wash lane and Peckham Rye Common, before the feast of All
Saints next coming, under the pain, for each perch not reformed and thrown
open, of 20d.

It is also ordained, Kitchen. 106.
that no one do permit his beasts (to wit), his oxen or cows, to go into and
feed upon the common of this lordship, nor in the lanes to the same manor
belonging, without a keeper, under pain of forfeiting to the lord, for each of
them, for each time, 2d.

It is also ordained, Ibi.
that W. J. do remove his dunghill, lying by the queens highway, over against
his house, before the feast of Easter next, under pain of forfeiting to the
lord 10s.

It is also ordained, Ibi.
that J. F. do make and maintain a bridge in his close called Great Colmans in
the way leading from Islington to Hoggesden, under pain of forfeiting to the
lord 10s.

It is also ordained, Ibi. 107.
that every one do yoke or ring his hogs before the feast of St. Michael the
Archangel next, and the same keep so yoked or ringed until the feast of Saint
John the Baptist then next following, under pain of forfeiting to the lord, for
every hog, for every week, 3s. 4d.

PAIN INCURRED.
They also say, T.C.B. 11.
that B. C. had, at the day of the last court, to amend one ditch, in length
twelve perches, upon pain of 40d. and that he has not made the said ditch.
Therefore he incurs the said pain. And it is commanded to the bailiff to levy
the said pain so forefeited to the use of the lord.

THE END.
A DIGEST OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COURT LEET OF THE MANOR AND LIBERTY OF THE
SAVOY, PARCEL OF THE DUCHY OF LANCASTER, IN THE COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX; FROM THE
YEAR 1682 TO THE PRESENT TIME.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.LXXXIX.

TO THE GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY OF THE MANOR AND LIBERTY OF THE SAVOY, FOR THE
PRESENT YEAR, THIS DIGEST, COMPILED AND PRINTED FOR THE USE OF THEMSELVES AND
THEIR SUCCESSORS, IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR VERY HUMBLE SERVANT,

J. RITSON, HIGH BAILIFF.
GRAYS INN, 11th Nov. 1789.
ADVERTISEMENT.
ALL the books, rolls, and other muniments of the Savoy Court, anterior to the
year 1683, are supposed to have perished in private hands. But there is
sufficient evidence that the court has been regularly held ever since the
accession of King Henry the Fourth, anno 1399; as, without doubt, it was long
before that period; the Liberty being one of the oldest in the kingdom, and
having been parcel of the possessions of the Duchy of Lancaster from the time
of its first erection, and even the property of he Earls of that title for near
a century before.

HEADS.
Aleconners Page 1 Bailiff Page 2 Bawdy Houses Page 2 Butchers Page 2
Commissioners of Pavements Page 2 Commissioners of Sewers Page 3 Constables
Page 4 Contempts Page 10 Defaulters Page 11 Disorderly Houses Page 12 Essex
Stairs Page 14 Forestalling Page 15 Gaming Page 14 Encroachments Page 16
Inmates Page 18 Jury Page 19 Nuisances Page 20 Pavements Page 26 Poulterer Page
26 Savoy Prison Page 26 Scavengers Page 27 Selling drink without a license Page
28 Sewers Page 28 Strand Bridge Page 28 Strand Lance Stairs. Surry Stairs Page
29 Watching and Warding Page 29 Water Works Page 29 Weights and Measures Page
30 Special Entries. Page 33
A DIGEST, etc.
* E. C. is Easter Court; M. C. Michaelmas Court.

Aleconners.
M. C. 1693. Mr. Howson (the sutler in the Savoy) "for refuseing to let the ale
coners either weigh his bread or messuer his pots, being thereto requierd,"
amerced 1 l.

E. C. 1747. Upon the information of the aleconners, Humphrey Roberts, "for
refusing to produce and show 'his' liquid measures to the said ale conners,
though several times requested so to do," amerced 13 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1751. Peter Wood, "for three several times refuseing to let the...
aleconners try his weights and measures," 1 l. 10 s.

See Weights and Measures.

Note, It is the office of the aleconners (signifying, from the Saxon verb
cunman, tryers or provers of ale, and who are in many manors called aletasters,
anciently tastatores or temptatores cervisiae) to examine bread, weights,
measures, ale and beer for sale, and to return such as offend against the
assize or standard, or vend unwholesome liquor. These returns are generally and
properly made the ground of the jurys presentment, but some instances occur
where an amerciament (either by the court or by the jury) has been set
immediately upon the presentment, as well of the aleconners, as of the
fleshtasters, scavengers and constables; which is conceived to be irregular.
Vide E. C. 1690; M. C. 1690; E. C. 1691; E. C. 1700; etc.

Bailiff.
E. C. 1754. Joseph Daniel, the under-bailiff, "for a misdemeanour in his said
office," fined 1 l. See an instance, 24th Feb. 1768, of the high-bailiffs
swearing in a constable for the remainder of the year in the presence of two
suitors.


Bawdy Houses.
See Disorderly Houses.

Butchers.
M. C. 1685. John Spencer, "for putting to sale unwholesome and corrupt meat,
and for blowing of veal," amerced 6 d.

Several others amerced for the same offense.

M. C. 1690. Six persons, "for exposeing to sale meat vnmarketable," amerced 3
s. 4 d. each.

E. C. 1697. Upon the oaths of the fleshtasters, Robert Linley, "for selling
corupt and vnwholsom mutton," amerced 13 s.

M. C. 1730. Mr. Cheese, a butcher, "for hanging sheep carkes's without side
his shop, to the anoyance of his majestys subjects passing the high way,"
amerced 3 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1761. Upon the return of the fleshtasters, Mr. Harrison, butcher, "for
exposing to sale fleshmeat no fit for Christians to eat, and refusing to remove
the same," amerced 50 s.

Commissioners of Pavements.
M. C. 1773. The commissioners of pavements "for neglecting to repair a flight
of steps leading out of Surry Street into Strand [Lane]," amerced 10 l.

N. B. This amerciament was discharged by the steward, and the nuisance ordered
to be represented to the commissioners by letter.

E. C. 1774. The commissioners of pavements "for leaving a water trunk near the
house of Mr. Lingham, facing Exeter Exchange... being a great annoyance to
passengers," amerced 2 l. 2 s.

See Scavengers.

Commissioners of Sewers.
M. C. 1770. The jury "present that the grate at the corner of Little Essex
Street, and the rail under the archway at the bottom of this street, are in
very bad order; and that the pavements throughout Essex Street and Milford
Lane, and also the pavement in Water Street, fronting Gray Hound Court, are in
very bad order, and greatly out of repair; and therefore 'they' request that
notice may be given, by the order of the court, by the bailiff of this manor
and liberty, to the commissioners of sewers, and to the several persons by whom
the said grate, rail, and bad pavements ought to be repaired, that the same be
forthwith amended, and put in effectual repair; and in default thereof this
jury will set exemplary amerciaments for the same at the next court."

"Ordered by the court, that Mr. Sammuel Dry, the deputy bailiff of this manor
and liberty, do deliver unto the clerk of the commissioners of sewers, and also
to every person by whom the grate, rail, and bad pavements, presented by the
jury to [be] out of repair ought to be repaired and amended, a copy of the said
jury's presentment; and unless the repairs thereof be effectually done within a
convenient time, this court does declare that the steward and burgesses will
recommend it to the jury at the next court to set exemplary amercements upon
them for their defaults."

Constables.
Accepting the Office.
E. C. 1768 (by adjournment). "At this court came Isaac Hayes, constable elect
for the middle ward within this manor and liberty for the year next ensuing, or
until he shall be thereof discharged by due course of law, and accepted the
said office, and took the oath by law in that behalf required."

Account.
E. C. 1729. "Ordered by this court, that John Seaford, James Singer, Peter
Nightingale, and Joseph Francis, the four constables of this manor and liberty,
and who are now present in court, do each of them severally and respectively
make up an account in writing for the year last past of what they severally and
respectively have received and collected by virtue of their said offices of
constable, or of the constables rate, together with an account of what they
have thereout paid and disbursed to the watchmen, or otherwise in the execution
of their said offices; and that they lay the same, together with the several
constables rates, before this court on Thursday the 8th day of May next, or
that before such court they lay such account, together with the several
constables rates, before any one of the burgesses of this manor and liberty,
and pay the balance of such account, if any such balance shall be in their
hands after all just and reasonable allowances made them, into the hands of Mr.
Glisson Maidwell, the senior burgess of this manor and liberty, to be by him
applied as this court shall direct and appoint, under the penalty of five
pounds apeice for such of them as neglect or refuse to obey the said order."

Adjourned Court, 8th May 1729. Constables refusing to comply with the above
order, fined 5 l.; and time given to the 1^th May, under the further penalty of
5 l.

16th May 1729. The constables still refusing, fined 5 l. each; and time given
to the 21st, under the further penalty of 5 l.

21st May 1729. The constables still refusing, fined 5 l. a-piece The form of
the Constables Account.


Assistant.
E. C. 1768. "At this court came George Jennings, the constable elected and
sworn for the Savoy Ward within this manor and liberty, and prayed that John
Hopkins, of Exeter Court, within this manor and liberty, glover, might be
received and sworn as the substitute or assistant of the said George Jennings
in the said office of constable,

24th Feb. 1719.

The Constables of the Dutchey Liberty of the parish of St. Clement Danes, in
the County of Middlesex.

An account of the several sums of money collected of the several
housekeepers by us Richard Robins, Richard Holt, John Howard, and Thomas
Collingwood, in the Royal-Ward, Church-Ward, Middle-Ward, and Savoy-Ward; and
of the several payments made to the watchmen, beadle, and warder in the said
several wards, as follows: For the quarter due at Christmas 1719.
L. s. d. Received of the inhabitants in the Royal Ward 13 0 0 Received of the
inhabitants in Church Ward 6 1 0 Received of the inhabitants in Middle Ward 17
8 9 Received of the inhabitants in Savoy Ward 16 14 0 53 3 9 L. s. d. Paid to
ten watchmen, 5 s. to each man per week 32 10 0 Paid the beadle for the said
quarter 7 0 0 Paid the warder 3 5 0 Paid coals and brooms 0 18 6 Paid for
watchmens drink, at 15 d. per night 5 13 9 For our expenses attending the first
day of term 1 4 0 50 11 3 Paid for the warder's coat, hat, and stockings 3 3 0
Constables
Richd Robins, Richd Holt, John Howard, Tho. Collingwood.
and for whom he will be answerable; and the court here approving of the said
John Hopkins as a proper person for that purpose, he accordingly took the oath
in that behalf required."

E. C. 1773. "Samuel Shelly, leave given to appoint a substitute; John Barnard
sworn in as his assistant.

John Henson, James Booth his assistant."

E. C. 1774. Roger Pincher, and John Barnard his assistant.

Samuel Price, and James Booth his assistant.

E. C. 1775. Samuel Edstrum, and James Booth his assistant, sworn constables
for Savoy Ward.

E. C. 1781. "William Morley, for the Church Ward, sworn assistant constable."

E. C. 1782. William Robinson, and Patrick Mac Negus (in one book, in the other
Mac Gregus, mistakes for Mac Manus) his assistant.

Deputy.
E. C. 1684. Four deputies.

E. C. 1741. John Thomson, "sworn in deputy constable to Mr. William
Hutchins... according to ancient custom."

E. C. 1742. A like entry.

E. C. 1744. John Couch, "sworn deputy constable to Richard Bath, chief
constable."

Election.
E. C. 1712. "At this court it was ordered by the said court, that Thomas Batt
being duly elected constable of the Middle Ward within this liberty for the
year ensuing, should immediately upon notice hereof, and of a certificate
signed by the steward of this court, certifying such his election as aforesaid,
go before one of her majestyes justices of the peace for the county of
Middlesex, and be duly sworn into the said office, upon the penalty of tenn
pounds."

E. C. 1729 (by adjournment). "At this court John Harman, living within the
Church Ward within this liberty; Thomas Ryder, living within the Middle Ward
within this manor and liberty; Jonathan Fantom, living within the Savoy Ward,
within this manor and liberty, were severally presented and chosen constables
of their said respective wards for the year ensuing; and they being not
present in court though duly summoned, it is ordered, that notice, and a
certificate of their being so severally chosen into the said offices of
constable, be given to each of them; and that they do attend this court on
Tuesday the 10th day of June next, to which time this court will be adjourned,
to take upon them the oaths of the office of constable, or that they should
take upon them the oaths of the said office of constable, before one of his
majesty's justices of the peace for the county of Middlesex, within ten days
from this day, under the penalty of ten pounds."

June 10th, 1729. "At this court John Harman and Thomas Ryder, now prosecuted
for not appearing to take upon them the oaths of office of constable, and for
having neglected and refused to take the said oath of office of constable,
before one of his majesty's justices of the peace for the county of Middlesex,
according to the certificate delivered to them, and wilfully and obstinately
refusing so to do, for which they were amerced 10 l. each."

* This amerciament was affeered, but without necessity, as the constables, by
neglect and refusal, had, ipso facto, incurred the pain set at the former
court, which would have been good without affeerment.

Note, That it appears from the above order, that the ancient custom was that
the constable of each ward should be a person resident therein.

Neglect of Duty.
M. C. 1709. William Swift, "for being sworn constable, and not officiateing
as constable, nor any other person, for near seven weeks, by which this liberty
has received great prejudice," amerced 10 s.

E. C. 1714. John Foguerty, having been "duly sworn constable for the Middle
Ward... and 'appearing not to have officiated' for some months [in] the said
office in person, according to the custom of this liberty and court leet,"
amerced 7 l.; affeered at 5 l.

M. C. 1727. "At this court... John Carter, deputy constable for the Savoy
Ward, upon the complaint of the jury, in not giving his attendance to apprehend
a felon, of whom he had notice, and for the neglect of his duty of the said
office, was fined two pounds."

E. C. 1737. "Richard Atwood, constable for the Savoy Ward... for neglect of
duty, by entertaining and keeping watchemen belonging to this liberty in his
own house at unseasonable hours in the night, and when they should be upon
their duty," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

E. C. 1771. "The jury request Mr. Steward will consider by what legal method
the constables may be compelled to do their duty in that office, and intimate
to the court that they would have set exemplary amerciaments upon the
constables for the last year, had they been certain they 'could' legally do the
same."

N. B. There can be no doubt of the jurys power to present a constable for this
offense.

Refusing the Office.
E. C. 1692. William Chipp, "for refusing, in contempt of this court, to serve
the office of constable... being duly elected," fined 1 l.

Two more for the like, 2 l. each.

Two others for the like, 5 l. each.

M. C. 1709. Walsingham Heathfield, "for his great contempt to the court, after
being duly chosen constable... refuseing to take upon him the said office...
till several weeks after, being very prejudicial to the inhabitants of this
liberty," amerced 2 l.

M. C. 1732. Thomas Ryder, who had been "required to take upon him the office
of constable within 14 days of the last court, under a penalty of five pounds,"
for 'having "neglected' to take upon him the said office," incurred the said
penalty of 5 l. (affeered).

E. C. 1761. "At this court personally appeared Benjamin Walwyn, of Exeter
Court, within this manor and liberty, glover, and Michael Conner, of Arundell
Street, within the same manor and liberty, peruke maker, two of the resiants
and inhabitants within this manor and liberty, being duly sumoned thereto upon
pain, according to ancient custom, to serve our sovereign lord the king upon
the enquest, and other offices for this manor and liberty: and the said
Benjamin Walwyn and Michael Conner being at this court severally nominated and
elected as proper persons to serve the office of constable within this manor
and liberty for the year next ensuing, or until they should be thereof
discharged by due course of law; and being severally called upon to accept the
same office, and to take the oath by law in that behalf required, they and each
of them did then and there refuse to accept the said office of constable, and
to take the oath in that behalf required; and they, nor either of them, not
having shown to the court any reasonable or just cause to excuse them, or
either of them, from the said office, the said deputy steward did thereupon
think fit to impose and set upon the said Bejamin Walwyn, for his said contempt
and refusal, a fine of seven pounds; and upon the said Michael Conner, for his
said contempt and refusal, the like fine of seven pounds."

Quitting the Liberty.
M. C. 1735. "At this court it was found by the jury, that Joseph Wright, sworn
constable for the Royal Ward, is removed out of the said manor and liberty;
whereupon Thomas Ricketts being presented by the said jury as a proper person
to serve the said office for the remainder of the year, was elected by the
steward, and sworn in accordingly."

M. C. 1736. Two similar entries.

Substitute.
The practice of swearing in substitute constables is of late years become so
common as even to be regarded as a matter of course. The difference between an
assistant, a deputy, and a substitute seems to be, that in the two former cases
the principal is responsible, in the latter case he is discharged. But quaere.

See Assistant.

Usurping the Office.
E. C. 1714. Robert Evans, "for taking upon him the office of a constable, and
exerciseing the same... without the leave of this court," amerced 40 s. reduced
to 20 s.

See Disorderly Houses.

Contempts.
Departing without Leave.
E. C. 1696. John Ashley, for "apearing at this court, and in contemp[t] thereof
departing without license," fined The difference between a fine and amerciament
is, that the former is the sole act of the court; the latter must be grounded
upon the presentiments of the jury, and must likewise be affeered, i. e.
ascertained or reduced to certainty, by indifferent persons sworn for that
purpose, and who are generally, but not necessarily, taken out of the jury (See
E. C. 1754 and 1772, instances of the affeerers not being jurymen). It seems
requisite however that they should be acquainted with the nature of the offense
in respect whereof the amerciament is imposed. A fine on the contrary needs no
affeerment, being imposed by the steward as judge, for offenses committed
within his own view, or the defaults of the officers of the court. A fine on an
officer is likewise called an amerciament or amerciament royal, but does not on
that account require any affeering. Unless, therefore, John Ashley was in
office, this fine was illegal.

Till the year 1787, (M. C.) the amerciaments were always set by the jury in
their presentiments, at an express sum, which was afterward affeered. But this
practice, being thought irregular, was then altered, upon due deliberation and
good advice; so that then and thenceforward the amerciament was and has been
set by the court indefinitely, "and therefore he is amerced," answering to the
Ideo ipse in misericordia of the old precedents; and afterward affeered at a
precise sum. It should be noticed, however, that some instances have been since
discovered where an amerciament is set upon the presentiments of the aleconners,
etc. in the very language now adopted, "and therefore he is amerced;" which may
induce one to believe that it is but a restoration of the ancient practice. See
E. C. 1690; M. C. 1690; and E. C. 1691.


40 s.

Misbehaviour.
E. C. 1694. John Willson, "for swering and vnreuerent behavior in... court,"
fined 5 s.

E. C. 1695. Richard Hall, "for vnreuerent behavior, and giueing disturbance
at this court," fined 5 s.

E. C. 1697. Henry Jenings, "for vnreuerent behavior at this court, for
caleing the foreman of the jewry of this leet rascal, in contempt of this
court, and the athoritey thereof," sined 40 s.

M. C. 1722. William Jarvis, (returned for insulting the jury) for "in some
measure justifieng what he said to the jury, and adding unbecomeing behavior,"
fined 20 s.

E. C. 1727. Richard Guest, "for misbehaving himself in open court, and using
ill language there," fined 40 s.

See Constables, Jury, Scavengers.

Defaulters.
Resiants.
M. C. 1684. 196 persons, for having made "defaults in not doing their...
suits and services to the... court leet.... haueing had sufficient warning for
the same," amerced 6 d. each.

(Upon the presentment of the bailiff.)

E. C. 1687. 188 persons, "for making default of their suit and service to his
majesty at this court," amerced 6 d. a-piece.

N. B. The presentment is sometimes of "all persons that do owe suite and
service at this court, being reciants and inhabitants, and did not appear,"
without naming them; and the amerciament sometimes 1 s.

The above instances are only noticed to show the antiquity of the custom, of
which there is similar evidence at almost every court down to the year 1765.

See the Special Entries.

Summoned upon Pain.
E. C. 1687. Six persons, "being summoned upon pain to be chosen into an
office... for having made default," amerced 5 l. a-piece.

E. C. 1694. Four persons, "for not apearing at this court, being sumoned upone
pain of five pounds," amerced 5 l. a-piece.

E. C. 1700. Ten persons amerced for default 5 l. each. Note, These
amerciaments occur almost every Easter Court down to the present time: and this
amerciament being the "pain" intended by the summons, it does not seem to be in
power of the affeerers either to mitigate or to increase it From the preceding
entry in 1694, it may be conjectured that the pain was formerly specified in
the summons; in this case affeerment was certainly superfluou^; and indeed,
setting aside the antiquity of the practice, one might even doubt whether it
were absolutely necessary at present.
.

Disorderly Houses.
E. C. 1683. Carey Harris, widow, "for keeping disorderly house for three
months," amerced 3 l. 10 s.

Several others amerced for the same offense.

E. C. 1684. Anne Simpson (presented by the constables) "for a suspeckted house
of bawdry," for six months, amerced 5 l.

Two others, "for a disorderly house," 5 l. each.

M. C. 1686. Thomas Pettee, "for keeping a suspected disorderly house, and
several times refusing 'the constables' entrance when disorderly persons have
been in the house," amerced 2 l. 10 s.

Others amerced for the like offense.

M. C. 1690. Mrs. Ruport, "for keepeing a house suspected of bawdreye, and
denying entrance to 'the constables' when there were several persons in the
house, and the time very unseasonable," amerced 5 l.

Mrs. Phyladelphya Jones, "for keepeing a disorderlye house, and suspected of
bawdreye," amerced 7 l. 10 s.

E. C. 1691. Mrs. Curtis, for refusing entrance to the constables, "there being
company in the house," amerced 2 l.

Another for the same offense, 2 l. and 2 l. 10 s.

E. C. 1695. Upon the oaths of the constables, William Wade, "for keeping a
disorderly ale house," amerced 5 l.

Three others, for keeping "bawdy and disorderly houses," amerced 5 l. each.

N. B. Such like presentiments occur almost every court, for several years.

E. C. 1710. James Keate, "for keeping a lewd disorderly house, and
entertaining lewd and disorderly persons at vnseasionable times of the night,
to the disturbance and annoyance of his neighbors," amerced 5 l.

M. C. 1720. William Weetmore and Eufrum [Ephraim] Harding, "for keeping a
disordlely house, or nigh[t] seller," amerced 20 l.

M. C. 1733. Upon a complaint of the neighbors, James Ealing, "for keeping a
disorderly house," amerced 5 l.

E. C. 1735. Three, "for entertaining and harboring disorderly persons at
unseasonable hours," amerced 10 l. 10 l. and 20 l.

M. C. 1737. Major Smith, "for keeping a disorderly house... and for
entertaining therein lewed and disorderly persons of both sexes at very
unseasonable hours in the nightime, to the public disturbance of the
neighborhood, and the great terror of his mejestys subjects" amerced 50 l.

Again, M. C. 1738, 50 l.

E. C. 1745. Peter Wood, "for keeping a disorderly house... by keeping
disorderly hours in the said house, and entertaining therein persons of ill
fame and reputation," amerced 20 l.

William Marjerum, William Dyos, John Moore, and Anna Maria French, for the
same offense, amerced 20 l. each.

M. C. 1745. Peter Wood for the same offense, "as 'appeared' to 'the jury' on
the information of diverse persons duly sworn before the.. steward.... in open
court," amerced 40 l.

E. C. 1746, William Dyos, William Marjorum, and Peter Wood, for the same
offense, amerced 30 l. 30 l. and 40 l.

E. C. 1774. Edward Bertles, for "the Talbot Inn," presented "as a very
illgoverned and disorderly house," amerced 20 l.

E. C. 1776. Upon the return of the constable, James Roupell, "for keeping a
disorderly house," amerced 50 l.

John Johnson (Talbot Inn) for the same offense, 50 l.

E. C. 1777. William Smith (of the Fish alehouse, Strand Lane) "for keeping a
disorderly house," amerced 20 l.

Richard Reeve, "for keeping a disorderly house," amerced 40 l.

The above John Johnson, for the same offense, 50 l.

E. C. 1781. William Clark (of the Fish alehouse) for "an exceeding disorderly
house, and a receptacle in the night for loose idle persons," amerced 10 l.

E. C. 1784. Andrew Rook, alias Rorke (of the Fish alehouse) for the same
offense, amerced 10 l.

Essex Stairs.
E. C. 1688. William Vincent, "for neglecting to amend Essex Stairs after 6
months notice," amerced 5 l.

E. C. 1689. Mr. Leonard Hancock, "for a post in the Thames, much to the
prejudice of the landing at Essex Stairs at high water," amerced 3 l. 5 s.

E. C. 1691. Sir William Thompson and Mr. Tookey, "for not repayering Essex
Stayers, the same being a common passage for their majesty's subjects to pass
and repass to and from the river Thames, the said stayers b-ing much out of
repayer," amerced 6 l.

M. C. 1715. Sir Edward Northey and others, for the landing-place at these
stairs being "dangerous bad," amerced 40 s. each.

E. C. 1744. The surveyors of the highways, "on account of the stairs of Essex
Street being in a dangerous condition," amerced 2 l.

E. C. 1758. The proprietors of Essex Stairs, "for that the said Stairs are in
a ruinous condition," amerced 2 l.

Gaming.
E. C. 1694. Edward Mather, "for haueing card playing in his house between ten
and eleven of cloak at night," amerced 1 s.

E. C. 1700. Charles Johnson, "for keeping a billiard table... for public use,
'being' a great inconveniency to the neighbors, especially to the youth, by
induceing them to play at the same, and by loosing their money there are put to
difficulties to obtain more, and that by unlawful means," amerced 5 l.

M. C. 1706. Sherrard [Sherwood] Dixon and his wife, "for keeping a gameing
house... for cards, dice, and other unlawful games," amerced 5 l.

E. C. 1707. The same, "for keeping a common gameing house," amerced 5 l.

E. C. 1714. William Howell, "for keeping a common gameing table," amerced 40
l. affeered at 10 l.

Sherwood Dixon, for the same offense, amerced 50 l. affeered at 30 l.

Margaret Cole, "for keeping a common billiard table," amerced 5 l. affeered at
40 s.

M. C. 1714. Angel Mager, "for keeping a common ninepin-yard and ill house,"
amerced 5 l.

E. C. 1720. Peter Brewer, "for keeping a common gameing table," amerced 20 l.

M. C. 1724. William Lucas, "for not keeping in a neat and orderly manner the
skittle-ground within this liberty, whereby his majesty's subjects are very
much annoyed," amerced 2 l.

M. C. 1728. Thomas Harris, "for a common gameing house, late hours, playing a
game commonly called Missisipee," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

E. C. 1731. Thomas Hurrill, "for keeping a skittle-ground, and suffering loose
and idle persons to game and play there, which is a great nuisance to the
neighbors," amerced 13 s. 4 d.

E. C. 1732. Thomas Footman, "for suffering jdle persons (hawkers of run goods)
to game in his house," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

Forestalling.
M. C. 1685. William Tailor, "for forestalling his neighbor," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1699. Joseph Whiston, "for forestalling his neighbors by hanging out
silks, to the damage of the king's subjects," amerced 2 l. 10 s. -- Again, E.
C. 1700, 5 l.

Peter Williams, for the same offense, 5 l. affeered at 50 s. -- Again, E. C.
1700. 5 l.

E. C. 1714. Chamack Ryley, "for forestaleing his neighbors, by putting out
his basket and other goods after notice given," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

E. C. 1728. Thomas Baxter, "for forestalling the street," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

James Church, for the like, 1 l.

Encroachments.
E. C. 1685. William Bear, "for erecting a shed in Strand Lane for three
month," amerced 2 s. 6 d.

Wm. Burch for the same, 2 s. 6 d.

M. C. 1685. William Tailor, "for making stair in the kings high way into Surry
Street," amerced 5 s.

M. C. 1689. William Burch, "for building a hogsty in Strand Lane," amerced 10
s.

William Bew, "for building a shedd in Strand Lane," amerced 10 s.

Robert Brown, "for setting up a shed in Strand Lane," amerced 10 s.

M. C. 1690. Mr. Handcock, "for building a shedd in Howard Street," amerced 3
s. 4 d.

Mr. Robinson, "for an incroachment in Surry Street by a fruit standing,"
amerced 3 s. 4 d.

E. C. 1691. Leonard Handcock, Esquire "for building a shedd in Howard Street, the
same incroacheing upon the kings high way 5 foot in breadth and 5 foot in
length, or there aboutes," amerced 5 l.

Mr. Thomas Bewraw, "for incroacheing on the kings high way before his shopp,
by making a bulk two inches into the street, and three foot in length, or
there aboutes," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

E. C. 1699. Jane Syms, "for incroaching upon the Milford Lane Stairs, by
taking away the ground," amerced 1 l. 10 s.

E. C. 1700. Jane Syms, "for an incroachment, in taking in two foot of ground
in breadth near the free landing water stairs by Milford Lane... as also for
cutting the said stairs shorter then they were several years past, and
stopping up the passage there that no boat can conveniently come to the said
stairs to land there, either with passengers or goods, to the great prejudice
of his majesty's subjects, and of the inhabitants near adjacent, notice thereof
'having' been given her for eleven months last past," amerced 20 l.

E. C. 1701. Jane Syms, "for an incroachment in taking in 2 foot of ground in
breadth near the free landing water stairs, commonly called Millford Lane
Stairs, within this liberty; and also for cutting the said stairs shorter
then they were for several years past, and stopping up the passage, by
placeing and laying a dung barge or barges there that noe boat can conveniently
come to the said stairs to land there either with passenger's or good's, to
the great damage and annoyance of his majesty's liege subject's, and of the
inhabitant's near adjacent," ^me^^^ 1 l.

E. C. 1703. Jane Boucher, "for an incroachment before her dwelling house on
her majesty's high way in the Strand," amerced 20 l.

E. C. 1705. Sir Streneham Masters, "for an incroachment fronting the May pole
in the Strand, in the Savoy liberty, being two foot six inches into the queens
highway, and one foot to the backside of St. Clements church, the same being
continued five months and upwards after due notice given," amerced 50 l.

The same, "for building up a shed upon the public high way, and continueing
the same after some part of it was broke down by order of the jury," amerced 5
l.

E. C. 1715. Grovehouse, "for incroaching three inches on the kings highway, in
a new building near Exeter change, and laying of the rubish, lime, and bricks
in the street, without fencing in, to the great annoyance of the
neighborhood," amerced 20 l.

E. C. 1731. Sarah Gibson, "for an encroachment on the king's highway, by
suffering the tenant in her cellar to set out greens and basketts in the
street," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

Thomas Oldfield, "for an encroachment on the kings high way by an ^erb stall
ajoyning to his house," amerced 1 l.

Jonathan Sisson, "for a nuisance in building a bulk, being an incroachment on
the public foot passage leading down to 'Beauford' Buildings," amerced 6 s. 8
d.

M. C. 1757. John Brander, "for projecting his shop window and encroaching on
the kings highway," amerced 1 l. 19 s.

E. C. 1773. Robert Mylne, "for making and continuing an encroachment upon the
soil of his majesty by projecting the wall of his dwelling house... thirteen
inches," amerced 5 l. Again, M. C. 1773. 10 l.

E. C. 1773. William Hyde, "for making and continuing an incroachment upon the
soil of our souvereign lord the king, by projecting the front wall of the house
occupied by his tenant, Mr. Ashbridge, twenty three inches, and by making in
Strand Lane five stone steps leading to the door of the said house, measuring
five feet and two inches, or therebouts," amerced 20 l.

The same, "for making and continuing another incroachment on the soil of our
sovereign lord the king within this manor and liberty, by projecting the front
wall of his house in Surry Street occupied by Mr. Proctor," amerced 20 l.

M. C. 1773. Again, for both encroachments, 40 l.

M. C. 1773. Charles Grave Hudson, esquire. "for erecting and continuing a porch
and steps at his house in Arundell Street... which projects so much on the foot
pavement as that there is scarce room left for a single person to pass,"
amerced 1 l. 1 s.

William Hyde, "for making a flight of steps in Strand Lane, being an
incroachment on the soil of our lord the king, the bottom step being much
higher then the pavement [at] one end," amerced 2 l. 2 s.

John Lawson, "for continuing a flight of steps, being an incroachment, at the
back door of [his] house Strand Lane," amerced 1 l. 1 s.

E. C. 1779. Hans Wintrop Mortimer, esquire. "for an incroachment on his majesty's
soil of this manor... upon the landing places in Strand Lane and Surry
Stairs... such encroachments 'being' attended with inconvenience to all persons
resorting to the said landing places from the river, and... a very great
nuisance," amerced 50 l. Again, E. C. 1780, 10 l. Again, E. C. 1782, 10 l.

Inmates.
M. C. 1684. Mary Day, "for divideing her house... into several tenements for
the space of five months," amerced 2 l. 10 s.

M. C. 1685. Anthony Plomer, "for taking jnmates into his house for... two
months," amerced 10 s.

E. C. 1692. John Billing, "for letting two houses in Milford Lane... to
several families, and taking of jnmtes," amerced 13 s. 4 d.

Jury.
Defaulters.
E. C. 1709. John Loggan, for "not appearing at this court, and refusing to
assist and attend the rest of the jury, and bearing an equal share in their
expenses," fined 2 l.

M. C. 1709. Richard Nichals, "for not appearing and attending at this court,
and not attending the jury in their business out of court," amerced 10 s.

E. C. 1724. Thomas Keen, "for not attending this day to do his duty, and
likewise for not attending the jury upon their going their rounds... though
proper notice was given him each time," fined 40 s.

M. C. 1748. Ignatius Douglas, Henry Ellers, and Henry Lamb, "for 'their'
contempt in not appearing to do 'their' duty as 'jurymen' at the said court,
though duly summoned thereto," fined 5 l. each.

M. C. 1773. Thomas Beckett and John Twigg, "two of the jurymen... who
'appeared'... to have been duly and severally summoned to attend 'the' court...
but 'had' made default," amerced 40 s. each.

Departing without Leave.
E. C. 1732. Four persons, "for departing this court without leave, after
having been sworn on the jury, and for not staying to hear their charge given,"
fined 10 s. each.

Insults.
M. C. 1761. "It having been made appear to 'the' court that Joseph Hallet,"
(amerced 20 s. for continuing a high post) "'had' been guilty of very insolent
and improper behavior to the jury... in the execution of their office, he
'was' fined for the same 20 shillings This was irregular and illegal; he ought
to have been presented and amerced. See before, p. 10.
."

M. C. 1763. William Richards, servant to Mr. Sneyde, "for insulting the jury
in the execution of their office," amerced 1 l.

Refusing to serve.
E. C. 1692. Jeremy Thornhill, "for refusing to serve on the jury... being
duly summond and present in court, and refuseing to be sworn," fined 40 s.

John Holden, for the like, 5 l.

E. C. 1749. William Alexander, "for his contempt of the court, for refusing to
take the oath of office as a juryman, being duly summoned for that purpose,
without giving any reasonable cause for his refulsal," fined 5 l.

Nuisances.
Ashes.
E. C. 1685. Widow Barrier, "for anoying the street with ashes," amerced 2 s.

Samuel Heath, for the same, 2 s.

M. C. 1690. Rebecca Pritchard, "for sifting ashes in the street," amerced 3 s.
4 d.

Bulks.
E. C. 1716. Christopher Scrape, "for building a new bulk nere Exeter Change,
and blocking up a door way into the said change, to the great detriment of Mr.
Brown," amerced 2 l.

M. C. 1746. Three persons, "for erecting 'bulks' or 'outsets'... in the street
opposite 'to their houses,'" amerced 6 s. 8 d. each.

Carts in the Street.
E. C. 1683. Leonard Hancock, "for setting his grain carte in the kings
highway, in Milford Lane, for the space of one month," amerced 5 s.

Mr. Smyth, for setting his carte laden with timber in the street," amerced 6
s. 8 d.

E. C. 1689. Mr. Leonard Hancock, "for stopping up the street with carts,"
amerced 2 l. 10 s.

E. C. 1696. Thomas Prentice, "for stoping up the kings high way... with
carts... the same being an anuzance to all his majestes subjects passing and
repassing the said high way," amerced 1 l.

Casks in the Street.
E. C. 1683. Mrs. Smyth, "for setting caske in the street for one month,"
amerced 3 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1695. Richard Thawts, "for hooping or causeing to be hoopt his caske in
a pasage between Beuford Buildings and Fountain Court... which 'stopped' the
passage of his majesty's subjects," amerced 10 s.

E. C. 1709. Simon Harbin, "for suffering several brewers casks to stand and
be emptied of the wash before his door, to the great annoyance of his
neighbors," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1732. Emmerton, "for placeing tubbs before his house," amerced 3 s.

Cellar Doors and Windows.
E. C. 1686. Mr. Baswright, "for letting his celler door lie open very far in
to the street, to the great anoya[n]ce of the kings subjects," amerced 10 s.

M. C. 1692. Lord Germayne, "for not covering and amending his celler window,
the same being open and very dangerous for their majesty's subjects passing and
repassing thereby," amerced 6 l.

E. C. 1721. William Roberts, "for not keeping his cellar or vault door... in
good repair, to the annoyance and damage of his neighbors and others of his
majesty's subjects passing and repassing that way," amerced 10 s.

Common Shore.
E. C. 1683. Joseph Whiston, "for occationing the common shore to be stopped by
Exeter Chainge," amerced 10 s.

Dunghills.
E. C. 1685. Thomas Row, esquire. "for making a dunghill from his stable in the
common street," amerced 5 s.

The Lady Brown, "for throwing horse dung in the street," amerced 5 s.

M. C. 1690. Sir Charles Porter, "for making a laystall in Millford Lane,"
amerced 3 s. 4 d.

Three others amerced for the like offense.

E. C. 1707. James Long and Francis Roods, "for making a dung wharffe and
Beauford Building... and for continuing a large quantity of dung there for
several days, and for bringing the said dung out of several parishes, and
there laying and continuing the same upon the said wharffe, to the very great
damage and nuisance of all the inhabitants liveing there, and the like offense
having been presented at former courts and not reformed," amerced 99 l.

E. C. 1725. Francis Rhodes, "for making a dung wharfe or lay stall at the
lower end of Fountain Court... being a great nuisance to the inhabitants
thereabouts and others, and for continuing the same after several notices
given to him to abate the same," amerced 20 l.

Filth and Nastiness.
E. C. 1731. John Roads, "for a nucence by keeping of a great quantity of filth
and nastiness in a vault under Fountain Court, to the great annoyance of the
inhabitants," amerced 10 l.

Hanging out Clothes, etc.
E. C. 1685. Richard Barber, "for hanging out clothes in the street upon a
poll, amerced 5 s.

E. C. 1697. Peter Williams, "for an incroachment and anuzance in the kings
high way... by hanging out silks so low in the street and his majestes
subjects cannot pass and repasse as they used and ought to do," amerced 1 l.

House of Office.
M. C. 1684. Widow Day, "for a house of office emptying itself upon the kings
high way," amerced 2 l.

M. C. 1725. Solomon Humbleby, "for refusing the party vault or house of office
to be emptied through his house, contrary to ancient custom and usage, whereby
the emptying thereof other ways became a great nuisance to his neighbors,"
amerced 13 s. 4 d.

Obstructing the Passage.
M. C. 1721. John Simmock, "for obstructing the passage," amerced 13 s. 4 d.

C. 1718, held August 28th, to view a stop made in the Strand by Mr. Francis
Saul and Mr. Richard Willett, by digging vaults before their doors, and
thereby occasioning a stop for several days;" adjourned ("disputes arising")
till August 30th; said Saul and Willett amercod 5 l. each, affeered (September
3d) at 50 s. each.

E. C. 1747. Joseph Hallett, "for encouraging vagrant and disorderly persons to
stand at the door of his house... the same being a nusanse and an obstruction
to persons passing and repassing on the kings highway," amerced 1 l.

E. C. 1757. Tate, "for obstructing the footway with bird-cages," amerced 13 s.
4 d.

Open Places.
M. C. 1693. Upon the oaths of the constables, "Mr. Aldersey and Mr. William
Bushel, the undertakers and managers of the city pipes, for breaking up and
leaueing open the ground in the kings high way in the Strand, near Exeter
Change, being very dangerous for there majesty's subjects pasing and repasing
the said way," amerced 5 l.

E. C. 1712. "The Duke of Beuford, for a defolt, letting a pease of ground ly
open in Foutting Cort, which several people fell done one story deep, for which
when a mesing," 10 l.

M. C. 1773. Hans Wintrop Mortimer, esquire. "for opening and leaving open a drain
in Strand Lane, and for leving in Strand Lane and Surry Street... a
considerable quantity of rubbish and materials for building," amerced 10 l.

E. C. 1774. John Tinckler, carpenter, "for leaving open and uncovered three
areas in Exeter Street... being very dangerous to passengers, especially in the
night time," amerced 3 l. 3 s.

Rubbish in the Street.
M. C. 1684. Mr. Robert Cordell, "for laying rubbish at the west end of the...
Exchange," amerced 3 s. 4 d. (upon the oaths and information of the scavengers.)

Simon Fox, esquire. "for permitting a heap of rubbish to lie at the side of Mr.
Weeks his house, and upon his own ground in Surry Street, for 3 months,"
amerced 1 d.

Five others for the like offense. 10 s. etc.

M. C. 1693. The undertakers and managers of the city pipes, "for leaueing
there pipes and a quantety of rubbish in the street, it being a great nuzance
to their majesty's subjects," amerced 5 l.

M. C. 1730. Thomas Pyke, churchwarden of St. Clements, "for suffering great
heaps of lime and mortar to lie in the church yard several weeks," amerced 6
s. 8 d.

M. C. 1746. Three persons, "for laying rubbish in the public street,"
amerced, "unless removed in six days," 2 l. 1 l. and 1 l.

Ruins.
M. C. 1683. Simon Fox, esquire. "for a house in the Strand much decayed and in
danger of falling down speedely," amerced 5 l.

M. C. 1765. Mr. Knot, "for not clearing away the rubbish in Water Street, and
for not taking down the stack of chimnies and front wall in Arundell Street,
where a fire lately was, it being very dangerous to passengers," amerced 2 l.
10 s.

E. C. 1767. The same, "for not putting up a proper fence before his house in
Arundell Street, where the late fire was, it being a great nuisance to the
neighborhood there," amerced 2 l. 2 s.

M. C. 1773. (...), "for continuing a stack of chimneys, being the remains of
his late house burnt done in Water Lanel... whereby the lives of pessengers are
endangered," amerced 5 l.

Shed.
M. C. 1689, Mr. Wood, "for building a shed in Worcester Street, to the great
annoyance of the neighborhood and incroachment of the kings highway," amerced
1 l.

Sink.
M. C. 1726. Mary Armshaw, "for turning the sink of her house into 'Angell'
Court, to the great annoyance of her neighbors," amerced 1 l.

Soil.
E. C. 1718. Josiah Keen, "for bringing his soil and scattering of it in the
streets... to the great annoyance of the inhabitants," amerced 20 l.

M. C. 1722. William Jarvis, "for annoying his next door neighbor by throwing
out filth and soil, and darking his next door neighbor by hanging out
clothes, and also for an insult offered to the jury in the execution of their
office," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

Stills.
E. C. 1707. Mary Bavige, "for not removeing a still in her house, whereby her
neighbors houses have been and are in danger of fire, and likewise for keeping
a disorderly house," amerced 2 l.

M. C. 1721. Peter Duamell, distiller, "for negligently fixing and putting up a
still very dangerous to the inhabitants his neighbors... and others his
majesty's subjects," amerced 2 l.

Watercourse.
M. C. 1740. Mrs. Brown, "that she suffers her watercourse to break in upon her
neighbor's vault to their great injury," amerced 1 l.

Pavements.
* The presentiments for bad pavement before 17 are almost innumerable, but this
branch of the jurys duty being now vested in a different body, they are not
necessary to be more particularly noticed.

See Commissioners of Pavements.

Poulterer.
E. C. 1694. Nicholas Baker, poulterer, "for vending and selling stinking and
corupt and unholsom pidgions," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

Savoy Prison.
M. C. 1708. "Terient Markmahone [Terence Mac Mahon] marshall or keeper of the
prison in the Savoy... for exposeing to sale the 13th October instant within
the same to soldiers impressed for her majesty's service in the Savoy
unwholesome beer and ale, by which many of the said poor men dye; and also for
extorting from the said poor men threepence a pint for the said unwholesome
drink, and hindering them from buying any drink any where else... the jury
'being' of opinion it is very prejudicial for her majesty's service that the
said Markmahone, being jailer there, should be allowed to sell drink," amerced
2 l.

S. C. and E. C. 1709. The same for the like offenses on the 20th October, 4 l.
-- 21st, 2 l. -- 30th November, 5 l. -- 22d January, 6 l. -- 2d March, 7 l.

M. C. 1721. Captain Thomas Morphew, "for keeping the prison in a very
unwholsom condition, and not allowing necessaries in bedding," amerced 50 l.

E. C. 1725. Thomas Garton, alias Gartell, "for. keeping the prison in the
Savoy... in a very noisome and unwholesome con^^tion, in bad bedding and
deficiency of provisions for the poor prisoners, whereby they labor under very
great hardships, and are almost starved," a merced 50 l.

M. C. 1774. "On the return of the aleconners, William Jackson of the Savoy
prison, for serving the prisoners with several loaves of bread wanting in
weight," amerced 40s. "A great part of this prison having been burnt last
February, the prisoners at night are now crowded into two rooms. The prison
very dirty: not white-washed these two years. Some of the prisoners almost
naked; without shirts, shoes or stockings. Several prisoners died last spring,
and probably many more will die the spring ensuing, if greater attention be not
paid to them. Here were six of the guards in a close offensive room (the black
hole) in which they are confined on bread and water twenty-four of forty-eight
hours, for drunkenness, neglect of duty, etc. 1788, September, 13, deserters
45." ACCOUNT OF LAZARETTOS, etc. By JOHN HOWARD, F. R. S. WARRINGTON, 1789, p.
128.

It does not appear that the coroner of the liberty is ever sent to in
consequence of any death happening in this prison.


.

Scavengers.
M. C. 1684. The scavengers, "for not clensing the streets for 2 months,"
amerced 2 l.

M. C. 1685. The same "for rubbish lying by St. Clements churchyard, etc."
amerced 5 s.

E. C. 1686. Ditto, "for not causing the dirt to be taken out of Strand Lane
for three months," amerced 1 l.

S. C. "For not appearing last court leet," amerced 10 s.

E. C. 1692. James Brown, "for refuseing in contempt of 'the' court to serve
the office of scavenger... being duly elected," fined 40 s.

* Since 17 these officers have been appointed by the commissioners of
pavements.

M. C. 1766. Francis Thomas, scavenger to the commissioners of the pavement,
"for not cleansing the Strand from Exeter Change to Temple Bat," amerced 13 s.
4 d.

Seliing Drink without a License.
M. C. 1689. Thomas Tower, "for selling drinck in Strand Lane without a license
for 3 months," amerced 10 s.

Sewers.
See Commissioners of Sewers.

Strand Bridge.
E. C. 1711. Anthony Sabatier and Jeffery Nash, "late surveyors of the high
ways for the liberty," for having "taken away the old stairs at Strand bridge,
and contrary to the usadge and custom of the said stairs for 200 years and
more... erected a plat form about 12 foot from the old landing place into the
river of Thames to the great cost and charges of the liberty, and 'had' not
according to the notice given them... destroyed such their innovation, and
'placed' the stairs according to the ancient custom," amerced 20 l.

E. C. 1743. "Thomas Maples and John Hemmings, surveyors for the highways, on
account of the stairs of Strand Bridge being in a dangerous and ruinous
condition," amerced 1 l. -- Again E. C. 1744. 2 l.

M. C. 1743. The same, "on account of the railes at the head of Strand Bridge
near the Thames being out of repair," amerced 13 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1744. The churchwardens of the parish of St. Clement Danes, "for not
repairing and amending the bridge called Strand Bridge and the stairs thereto
belonging... the said bridge and stairs being in a ruinous condition and very
dangerous to persons passing up and down the same," amerced 2 l.

And again E. C. 1745, 5 l.

M. C. 1765. The churchwardens of St. Clements, "for not repairing Strand
Bridge and the stairs thereto belonging... the same being in a ruinous
condition and very dangerous to passengers," amerced 5 l.

M. C. 1775. The churchwardens of St. Clement Danes, "for neglecting to rail
and fence each side of a certain bridge called Strand Bridge... It appearing to
'the jury' that his majesty's subjects passing over the said bridge are in
'imminent' danger," amerced 4 l.

Strand Lane Stairs. Surry Stairs.
M. C. 1773. The duke of Norfolk, "for neglecting to repair Surry Stairs and
Strand Lane Stair," amerced 40 s. for each.

See Encroachments.

Watching and Warding.
* The watch being now under different regulations, none of the very numerous
proceedings on this head are necessary to be stated.

Water Works.
New River Water.
E. C. 1684. The governors and company of New River water, "for not repairing
their pipes, to the great damage of the inhabitants and annoyance of
passengers," amerced 5 l.

M. C. 1684. E. C. 1686. M. C. 1690. Other presentiments of the like nature.

Thames Water.
E. C. 1686. Ralph Bucknell, Esquire and 'partners,' "for not mending their pips
belonging to the Thames water in several places," amerced 2 l. 10 s.

See Nuisances.

Weights and Measures.
E. C. 1684. William Fennel, baker, "for two half penny loves of wheaten bread
wanting one ounce of the assise, and also for six halfepenny wheaten loves
wanting three ownces and a half in the 6 of the assise, and for [] half penny
wheaten loves wanting half an ounce in each pennyworth of the assise, and
likewise for two half penny wheaten loaves wanting half an ounce of the
assise, all the fame day at several houses," amerced 10 l. 6 s. 8 d.

Several others amerced for the same offense These presentiments are numerous at
almost every court; and are generally "upon the oaths and information of the
aleconners."
.

M. C. 1709. Verrient Mack Mohone [Terence M' Mahon] "for exposeing to sale...
thirty one pennyworth of bread wanting thirty one ounces assize," amerced 10 l.
6 s. 8 d.

E. C. 1685. Mr. Spencer, butcher, "for one half hundred wait wanting one
pound," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

M. C. 1689. Mary James "her weights being too light," amerced 5 s.

E. C. 1702. Henry Styleman, "(...) ^^^ing in the way of his trade a pair of
unequal ^^^^s... ^^cale a quarter of an ounce lighter then the other,' amerced
5 s.

Three others for "offenses nature," amerced 7 s. 6 s. 15 s. 10 s.

Catherine Lynton, "for a 2 pound weigh [t] a quarter and half a quarter of an
ounce lighter then the assize," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

E. C. 1717. Five persons, "for light weights," amerced 6 s. 8 d. each.

E. C. 1720. William Harris, "for keeping false scale," amerced 13 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1755. Ritson, widow, "for useing short weights," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1766. Upon the return of the aleconners, Mrs. Fossick, cheesemonger,
"for selling with scales no true balance, to the great prejudice of the fair
trader," amerced 2 l. 10 s.

E. C. 1785. Upon the return of the aleconners Mr. Fossick, cheesemonger, "for
having scales which they found deficient," amerced 40 s.

M. C. 1684. Mr. Davis, "for haueing short measure," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

"John the Coffeeman," for the same offense, 2 s.

E. C. 1686. Mr. Thomas Kelly, "for one Wynchester quart wanting half a pint
broaken," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1687. John Bancks, "for selling coals by an half busshell and a peck
that wanted half an inch in breadth and depth," amerced 2 l.

Another for the like offense, 5 l.

M. C. 1689. Mr. Williams, "for a short yard," amerced 3 s. 4 d.

M. C. 1693. Mr. Hillton, "for selling ale and bear in falfe and unlawful
messuers," amerced 1 s.

M. C. 1705. Elias Allington and others, for "short yards," 6 s. 8 d. each.

E. C. 1721. Mr. Gardner "for fraudulently selling and exposing to sale with a
yard or pretended measure of a yard made on his counter wanting an inch in
length," amerced 6 s. 8 d.

M. C. 1727. Richardson, "for selling coals in sacks that want near 3 inches in
length and near 7 inches in breadth of the standard (...) asize by law
directed," amerced 20 l.

E. C. 1735. Thomas Richardson (upon return of the aleconners) "for his bushel
being short of standard measure," amerced 20 l.

M. C. 1755. David Keen, coalmerchant, "for useing short measures," amerced 6
s. 8 d.

E. C. 1767. Upon the return of the aleconners, Thomas Townsend, "for having a
short bushel measure for coals," amerced 5 l.

E. C. 1772. "We the jury of this court and liberty, and also we William
Manning, William Robinson, and Peter Greenough, three of the aleconners of this
liberty, do present that the yard measures in general used by shopkeepers
within this manor and liberty are wanting and short of the standing yard
measure of London, one-eight of an inch, and the half bushel generally made use
of in this manor and liberty 'is' also considerably wanting in length and depth
of the standard half bushel measure of London; but it appearing that such yard
and half bushel measures respectively have been stamped as true measures, and
that the persons using them may have been themselves deceived, and may have
used the same without any willful design to do wrong, we the said jury do not
think fit at this time to present or amerce any individual for the same, but we
the said jury and aleconners humbly pray that the steward, high bailiff, and
burgesses of this court and liberty to order public notice to be given that
every person within this manor and liberty do forthwith procure all their
respective measures by them used, or to be used, within the same, to be made
agreeable to the standard measures of the city of London; and we do also
recommend it to the jury our successors to inquire after, present, and amerce
at the next court all such persons as shall hereafter use any measures wanting
or short of the standard measures of London; and in as much [as] we the said
jury having been informed that the aforesaid bad measures now used in this
liberty were so stamped as true measures by the proper officer of the liberty
of Westminster, who is entrusted to stamp measures, and that his fees were paid
for the same, do recommend to the consideration of the court, and also of the
new jury our successors, whether such stamping officer of Westminster aforesaid
[should] not have intimation given [him] of the matters now presented by us,
and be remonstrated with upon this occasion By "the proper officer of the
liberty of Westminster entrusted to stamp measures," it is supposed they mean
the clerk of the market for that liberty, who is by no means the proper officer
for any place out of his own jurisdiction. The standard yard and bushel are
said to be kept in the Exchequer; and some officer of the court, no doubt,
ought to seal the measures, in default of the clerk of the market for the
liberty of the Savoy, who, at present, is Mr. James Armstrong.

An entire new set of weights and measures was purchased in consequence of this
representation.


."

See Aleconners.

Special Entries.
1. Concerning the Amerciament of the Simple Defaulters.

(Easter Court, 1709.)

No amerciament is made upon the simple defaulters this year for the reasons
following.

What the simple defaulters was amerced before the year 1684 is uncertain, but
it does appear plainly by the entries made in the leet jurys book, that for 12
years, viz. from 1684 to Lady Day 1696 the simple defaulters were amerced by
the jury at 6 d. each and no more: at which Lady Day (Joseph Whiston being
foreman) they were amerced 12 d.; but at the Michaelmas leet next following
(Richard Acton foreman) the amerciament was reduced again to 6 d. each, and so
continued at 6 d. till the year 1699 (Rober^ Bampton foreman) when and from
which time the entering the names of these defaulters was discontinued till the
year 1704 (Joseph Gaywood foreman) and then they appear again in the leet book,
and as it is there set down amerced 12 d. each, and has so been kept up at 12d
from that time to this Michaelmas 17^8, when the present jury being desirous to
reduce this amerciament to the ancient and usual sum of 6 d. the court seemed
uneasy, and very unwilling to consent thereto, and the bailiff did not then or
at any time since exhibit or produce to the said jury any list or roll
containing the number or the names of such defaulters, nor make any returns to
the jury, which he, as well as the constable, aleconner, etc. ought to do; yet
notwithstanding a list is since entered in the steward's book (as we are
informed) of 123 simple defaulters at the Michaelmas leet 1708, and another
list of 146 at Lady Day leet next following; and money has been demanded and
received by the bailiff thereon, contrary both to the law, and the custom and
usage of this manor as we conceive.

Samvel Watkinson William Champian Wm. Widows Henry Goby John Wheeler Richard
Clark Mark Bingham John Wynell Wm. Lukin John Aldridge Richard Guest Simon New
John Loggary Richard White Geor. Eues"
* M. C. 1716. "We do amerce all defaulters for not appearing at the court
leet this day one shilling each man."

II. The appointment of a Constable by the Jury.

"The 5th day of July 1710.

At a meeting of the jurors for the manor de le Savoy, in le Strand, in comt.
of Middlesex, Parcel. Honor. and Ducat Lanc.

To the Honorable the Justices at Hicks' Hall.

Whereas John Musson was swore constable for the Savoy ward in the liberty
aforesaid, at a court leet held the 20th day of April 1710, and in the nineth
year of the reign of queen Ann of Great Britton, etc.

Upon an indictment this day exhibeted before us, the treu copey hereunto
annexed, held at a general quarter sessions of the peace at Westminster the
30th day of June 1710, for evil practice and a notorious breach of the peace of
our sovereign lady queen Ann, etc.

We the jurors for the liberty aforesaid, do appoint and present Peter
Vareen, an inhabitant and bookseller in the said liberty, to be constab[l]e for
the Savoy ward aforesaid, in the place of the said John Musson.

Accordingly Peter Vareen was accepted and sworn constable in the court at
Hicks' Hall."

III. Orders relative to Persons summoned upon Pain.

"Manor and liberty of the Savoy, in the Strand, parcel of the Duchy of
Lancaster.

At a court leet held for the said manor and liberty, the 25th day of April,
in the fourth year of the reign of our sovereign Lord George, by the grace of
God of Great Britain, France and Ireland, king, defender of the faith, etc.
Anno Domini 1718, before William Bellamy, esquire steward of the said manor.

Richard Willott Burgesses and burgesses assistants of the said liberty.
Watkinson Burgesses and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. Phil.
Pinckney Burgesses and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. Richard Cooper
Burgesses and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. James French Burgesses
and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. Daniel Brown Burgesses and
burgesses assistants of the said liberty. John Wareing Burgesses and burgesses
assistants of the said liberty.
At this court it was ordered by the court, that the bailiff of the said
liberty, or his deputy, do issue new summons according to the list delivered to
him by the foreman of the jury, and according to the ancient custom used in
the said liberty: and then the court adjourned to Wednesday the seventh of May
next."

"Manor and liberty of the Savoy, in the Strand, parcel of the Duchy of
Lancaster.

At a court leet held for the said manor and liberty by adjournment on the 7th
of May 1718, before William Bellamy, esquire steward there.

Richard Willett Burgesses and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. Phil.
Pinckney Burgesses and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. Daniel Brown
Burgesses and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. John Wareing Burgesses
and burgesses assistants of the said liberty. Richard Cooper Burgesses and
burgesses assistants of the said liberty. James French Tuttle Burgesses and
burgesses assistants of the said liberty.
This court being informed that the bailiff of the said liberty, or his deputy,
had summoned the resiants to appear upon 5 l. a piece, and several of the said
resiants not named in the list given him by the foreman of the jury, it was
ordered by the court that Mr. James Fuller, in the absence of the foreman of
the jury, do deliver a list to the steward of persons inhabitants to be
summoned upon pain of five pounds a piece, according to the antiant custom,
they not being summoned according to foremans list and the order of the last
court, and that Thomas Collingwood do summons such persons in such list named,
to appear on the 14th instant as usual, according to a list to be given him
for that purpose. And then the court adjourned to the 14th of May instant."

N. B. These orders are chiefly inserted to show the antiquity of the foreman's
list. In other respects they are of no authority whatever. If the bailiff had
not done his duty, the court ought to have set a fine upon him, but had no
power to transfer his office to another person Th^mas Collingwood was the
head-headle.
; a circumstance of which the steward could hardly be ignorant, which renders
it probable he was not present, nor had any concern in this very irregular
proceeding.

IV. Representation of the Jury (E. C. 1723) that no inhabitant ought to be put
into an office in less than three years.

"We the jury for the liberty of the Duchy finding by the jury book that it
has heretofore been a method with several preceding jurys not to put any
inhabitant into any of the ward offices in less then three years clear from
their having served any one ward office, as also not to putt any inhabitant
on any office till he has been an inhabitant for full three years in the
liberty; but notwithstanding that this has been observed by several jurys, yet,
for want of its being inserted in the jurys book, the said rule has very offten
been broke into, to the detriment and very great hardship of several of the
inhabitants aforesaid, several of which have very often been put into two
offices within the space of 2 or 3 years at most, while great numbers of the
other inhabitants of the said liberty have escaped from serving any one office
at all for 10, 15, or 20 years. To remedy this hardship, therefore, we do here
leave it as our oppinion and judgment, and as a very great piece of justice,
do recommend it to all suceeding jurys, That it the time of their chooseing
the officers and jury to succeed them, that they would take the trouble
carefully to over look this book and only to put in such as have enjoyed three
clear years besides the year they were in any office: the jury also recommend
it farther to their successors to cause this said representation, or some other
such as in their judgment will answer the purpose designed, in writeing at the
end of their years account in this book for the good and just advantage (not of
themselves only, but) of the inhabitants of this liberty in general."

V. The Rules, Orders, and Forfeitures made and paid by the Jury, 1727.

"Ordered, That the constable (who attends the jury) be at the vestry room by 8
of the clock in the morning (when the jury are to go their rounds) from Lady
Day to Michaelmas, and at 9 from Michaelmas to Lady Day.

Ordered, That the beadles do attend at the door below stairs, and that they
fail not of being their first.

Ordered, That every jury man who shall not be in the vestry room before the
clock has stroke the first stroke of 8 in the morning for the summer half year,
and of 9 for the winter half year, do forfeit and pay 0 1 0

Ordered, That every jury man who shall neglect to walk shall forfeit and pay,
over and besides the shilling above -- 0 2 6 But such pursons as are sick or
shall have the foremans leave to be absent, are excused from the two forfeturs
above mentioned: but they are to pay their part of the expense of the day.

Ordered, That whatever jury man shall call the foreman by any other name or
title (dureing the time the jury are together upon buisness) then Mr. Foreman,
shall forfeit and pay -- 0 1 0

Ordered, That whatever jury man shall come drunk into the jury, or swear, or
t^lk bawdy or obseenly dureing the time the jury are together (on buisness)
snall forfeit and pay for each of the said offenses. -- 0 1 0

Ordered, That the constable attending the jury be [lyable to all the said
forfitures: but that he be allways excused from paying any otherwise.

The jury at their last court leet, and goeing out, gave, To Faithful, the
upper beadle, -- L. 1 0 0 To Reeves, the under beadle, -- 0 10 0 To Mrs.
Sainworthe (ve[s]try woman) 0 5 0 They sometimes added 5 s. "to the allms women
under the church house (for charity)."



N. B. The foreman pays double forfeitures and double to every other expense."

VI. Representation of Inconveniences for want of a Watch House.

"October the 14, 1737.

We presented two the court leet a petition in the words following -- and the
court promest uss that they woold take care of it, and give proper directions
about it -- which we are in hopes to see finishet in a short time.

We humbly represent the many and great inconveniences this liberty at this
time lies under for the want of a watch house, the constubles being now
oblidged to keep there watch in the round house in Strand lane, a place no ways
fit for that purpose, it is in a dark durty hole, and so remote from great
part of the liberty -- many and frequent disorders happen in the night, and
more especially in the grand street, from Temple Bar to the Savoy, to the
great disturbance of the inhabitance of the said wards and of his majesty's
subjects passing too and froe about there lawful occasions The watch-house of
this liberty was originally erected by the burgesses, by virtue of a license
from king James II. under the Duchy seal, in 1688; but was taken down and
another built in 1700; and this, again, was taken down in 17^^, by direction of
the commissioners for more commodious building the New Church in the Strand. In
1719, it appears the constables kept their watch "in St. Clements church house,
to the great damage of the same."
-- and, in order to remedy this great complaint we have bin careful to find
out a fit and proper place which we hope will meet with your approbation --
the place is at the east end of the new church in the Strand, we have had the
ground measured, and find that there is full room without aney hinderance to
aney of the neighburhood -- and we humbly hope you will give orders for the
building of a watch house in that place, which will be of great service to the
liberty A watch-house was soon afterward erected by the burgesses at the west
end of the New Church, which stood till the year 1780, when (being looked upon
as an unsightly object) by virtue of an order of the Duchy court, and with the
consent of the burgesses, it was taken down, and, by leave of the rector and
churchwardens, a new one erected between the piers of the great entrance to the
church, by sir William Chambers, at the expense of government.


VII. Leave given to the Coal Porters to erect a Shed.

"Memorandum this 4th day of May 1742. That Mr. Henry Garbrand and Mr. James
Fletcher, church wardens, and we the jury of the court leet of the Duchy of
Lancaster, did consent to give leave to the company of coal porters to erect a
shed at Milford stairs, for convenience of putting up their sacks, etc.
appearing to be no nuisance to any person [as] Mr. Hutchens our raker
acknowledged.

Thomas Maples, foreman Joseph Townsend Thomas Rayner Samuel Wright J.
Warmingham Benjamin L'huile William Dowse Samuel Trumbell Aaron Trumbell Edward
Deaintree Jo. Emerton John Tice Henry Howard John Jones"
VIII. Election of a Foreman by the Jury.

"Memorandum.

Our late foreman, Mr. Thomas Moore, appointed by the jury last year, being
dead, for our more regular manner of proceeding think it necessary to ellect
another, and having maturely considered thereon, we severally and respectively
approve of Mr. John Perry, our deputy, beleiving him to be a very proper person
to succeed the late Mr. Thomas Moore, and we hereby declare and acknowledge the
said John Perry as our foreman, and think it reasonable he should enjoy all the
privileges peculiar to persons formerly in that office, according to ancient
custom, for which we have hereunto set our hands this 22d day of March 1757.

John Stevenson William Williams Daniel Walker John Gregory John Willis James
Clark Robert Grammar Richard Andrews John Shipman Edward Prior William Redhead
Thomas Cahusac Christopher Clifft. John Harling J. Clarke John Henson
N. B. To signify that since the last court leet Mr. Thomas Moore, late
foreman, being dead, Mr. John Perry, his deputy, was this day by the steward
sworn foreman in his room."

APPENDIX.
THE OATHS OF THE OFFICERS.
OATHS OF THE JURY.
The Foremans Oath.
YOU, as foreman of this jury, shall diligently enquire, and true presentment
make, of all such things as shall be given to you in charge; the Kings counsel,
your own and your fellows, you shall well and truly keep; you shall present
nothing out of hatred or malice, nor conceal any thing out of fear or
affection, or for any reward, or for the hope or expectation of a reward, but
all things you shall well and truly present as the same shall come to your
knowledge. So help you God!

Oath of the Four next the Foreman.
The like oath that your foreman has taken, on his part, you, and each of you,
shall well and truly observe and keep on your respective parts. So help you God!

Oath of the rest.
The like oath that your foreman, and others your fellows, have taken on their
parts, you, and each of you, shall well and truly observe and keep on your
respective parts. So help you God!

OATH OF THE ALECONNERS.
You shall swear thar you will well and truly serve our sovereign Lord the King
in the office of Aleconner for the (...) ward within this manor and liberty for
the year now next ensuing, or until you shall be thereof discharged by due
course of law: you shall well and truly do and execute all things belonging to
the said office according to the best of your knowledge. So help you God!

* The oath of the FLESHTASTERS is to the ssame effect.

OATH OF THE CONSTABLES.
You shall swear that you will well and truly serve our sovereign Lord the King
in the office of Constable for the (...) ward within this manor and liberty, or
until you shall be thereof discharged by due course of law: you shall, to the
utmost of your power, see the kings peace kept, and Keep all such watch and
ward as have been usually accustomed and ought to be kept: and you shall well
and truly do and execute all other things belonging to the said office
according to the best of your knowledge. So help you God!

THE BOUNDS OF THE LIBERTY OF THE SAVOY.
FROM THE PLAN OR SURVEY TAKEN THEREOF, BY VIRTUE OF A COMMISSION OUT OF THE
DUCHY COURT, IN THE YEAR 1740. "And the said jurors, upon their oaths
aforesaid, do further say and present, That in a certain schedule to this
inquisition annexed, comprised in one skin of vellum, entitled the Second
Schedule, is contained a true and exact map, plan, and description of the said
lordship or manor of the Savoy, and of the liberty and franchise of the Duchy
of Lancaster, called the Savoy Liberty, as the same did appear to the said
jurors on a view thereof, and as the same has been surveyed and admeasured,
duly proved on oath, and given in evidence on this inquisition by John Rockque,
a skilful surveyor, and which was conformable to the said jurors knowledge and
remembrance of the known meats and bounds thereof, save and except toward the
west end of the said manor and liberty, from the middle of a street called
Cecil Street to the middle of a lane, way, or passage called Ivy Lane, which
has of late years been disused, and not claimed as part of the said liberty,
but why or for what reason the said jurors know not."

A copy or duplicate of this plan is in the jury room in the Court House.




This liberty is divided into four wards, viz. Royal-Ward, Middle-Ward,
Savoy-Ward, and Church-Ward.

The ROYAL-WARD 'lyes' on the east end of the liberty, beginning at the
south-west corner of Temple Bar, and from thence 'goeth' along by the wall of
the Middle Temple on the south, and from thence 'extending' westward, and
thence again toward the south, as the said wall goes along to the river,
passing by a boundary stone with the mark of an anchor thereon, till it falls
into the River of Thames, and from thence 'extending' along by the said river
westward by several wharfs on the bank of the said river till it comes to
Milford Lane, and thence northward up the middle of the said lane,
comprehending the buildings on the east side thereof, till it shoots out into
the Strand, and from thence stretching over toward the north-west till it
comes to the south-west corner of Saint Clements Church, and from thence
passing by the west door of the said church till it comes by the corner of a
row of houses on the north side of the churchyard, comprehending the said
houses, and going though a passage there to the middle of a street 'called the
Backside of' St. Clements, and from thence extending eastward through the
middle of Butcher Row by the kennel there till it comes opposite to the Ship
Tavern, just beyond the east end of the Butcher Row, and from thence crossing
over the way, as the kennel now goes, to the southward, opposite to Cross Keys
Court, till it comes to the kennel next without the footway there, and from
thence going eastward to Temple Bar, where it first began.

The MIDDLE-WARD... begins at the kennel on the north side of the Strand,
without the footway there, opposite to Milford Lane, and from thence extending
down by the middle of the said lane to the River Thames, being bounded all the
way on the east side by the RoyalWard before described, and extending from the
bottom of Milford Lane all along by the River Thames, as the said river runs
toward the north-west, till it comes to Strand Bridge Stairs, including the
same, and from thence turning northward up Strand Bridge Lane, by the wall of
Somerset House garden and Somerset House, the boundary toward the west, till
it comes into that part of the highway called the Strand, where the kennel runs
without the footway on the north side of the said highway, and then turning
eastward from that part of the said kennel which is opposite to the north-east
corner of the front buildings in Somerset House, all long by the said kennel,
till it comes opposite to Milford Lane, where the boundary first began.

The SAVOY-WARD... begins at the north-east corner of the buildings in the
front of Somerset House in the Strand, and from thence extending by the wall or
boundary of Somerset House and garden to the River of Thames, being bounded all
the way on the east side of the Middle-Ward before described, until it comes to
Strand Bridge, and from thence extending all along by the River of Thames, as
the said river runs to the north-west, till it comes to a stone marked with an
anchor in the wall next the river at the bottom of Cecil Street, and from
thence extending in the same manner till it comes to Ivy Bridge, and from
thence comprehending the said bridge, turning northward all along by Durham
Yard, within the liberty of Westminster, the boundary toward the west end of
the Duchy Liberty, till it comes into the middle of the high street called the
Strand, comprehending the buildings described in the.. map to be the ancient
site of Salisbury House, and from the middle of the high street, opposite to
Ivy Bridge And the said jurors, on their oaths aforesaid, do further say and
present, that it appears to them by authentic copiers of two several surveys of
the sand man^^ or liberty duly proved and given in evidence on this ^^quisition
(that is to say) one a copy of a survey or return of a commission under seal of
the said Duchy of Lancaster, and remaining of record in the Duchy Office for
bounding her then majesty's manor of the Savoy, beating date the sixth day of
February, in the forty-fourth year of the reign of queen Elizabeth; and the
other a copy of a survey taken by ordinance of parliament in the year 1653,
remaining of record in the Augmentation office, that the bounds of the said
manor, liberty, or franchise, at the respective times of taking the said
several surveys, did extend toward the west to the middle of Ivy Lane opposite
to Ivy Bridge; and therefore the said jurors, no contrary evidence having been
given to them, on their oaths aforesaid, do say and present, that the boundary
of the said manor and liberty ought not to terminate to the westward at the
middle of Cecil Street, but ought to extend opposite the middle of Ivy Lane
aforesaid, according to the surveys aforesaid, and as in the map or plan herein
before mentioned is expressed and declared."

This inquisition is, in many respects, an admirable record, and the plan very
accurately and neatly delineated. The jurors, however, were undoubtedly misled
by the survey of 44 Eliz. for in fact there is no mention of Ivy Lane in that
of 1653. Whether there were any blame in not enquiring more minutely into a
matter so important as evey this is which men have to deliver upon oath as a
guide to posterity, and upon whom it ought to fall, we cannot well say. But the
reason and cause of this serious mistake was in truth as follows: Soon after
the 44th Eliz. which was the year 1602, being the last of her reign, the
ancient lane called Ivy Lane or Ivy Bridge Lane, was by virtue of a grant under
the Duchy seal and of a writ of ad quod dumnam, and an inquisition thereon,
taken away or blocked up by Sir Robert Cecil, afterward Earl of Salisbury, who,
in lieu thereof, opened a new lane or passage from the Strand to the river on
the west side of his house, which retained the old name of Ivy Lane, as a
bridge at the bottom of it did that of Ivy Bridge The ancient bridge was of a
very different nature. Both Ivy Lane and Strand Lane were originally low
subterraneous passages, somewhat resembling, it is thought, the present arched
cart-ways to the Adelphi wharfs; the bridges themselves being in the high
street. Vide Stows Survey by Strype, ^. ic. c. 7. It is wonderful that the
translation of Ivy Lane should have escaped the researches of this industrious
edito^. S^^^e works was originally published in 1598.
This proceeding, which was confirmed by a private act of parliament in the 3d
year of K. James I. could not however affect the boundary of the liberty; and
as the middle of Cecil Street has, ever since it was made, been looked upon and
perambulated as the west boundary, it seems highly probable that the middle of
this street is the identical ground which at the time of taking the survey of
the 44th Eliz. was the middle of Ivy Lane. Instead therefore of the words in
italies, we ought to read the following: -- and from thence turning directly
northward up the middle of Cecil Street, the boundary toward the west end of
the Duchy liberty, till it comes into the middle of the high street called the
Strand, and from the middle of the high street, opposite to the middle of Cecil
Street.


extending eastward till it comes opposite to the middle of Burleigh Street
near Exeter Change, and from thence extending up the middle of Burleigh Street
till it comes to a corner extending toward the north-east to the corner of a
building about eighty foot in length, near which is placed in the front the
mark of an anchor, and from thence going on by the ancient site of Burleigh
House, on the north-east side thereof, till it comes to the north side of a
house fifty-five foot distant from the front thereof, now in the Strand, in the
possession of Mrs. Nicholson, pewterer, and from thence proceeding on to the
kennel on the north side of the Strand next without the footway there, eighteen
foot or thereabouts distant from the front buildings there, and from thence
extending to the eastward along by the said kennel, leaving the church of Saint
Mary le Strand on the south, till it comes a little beyond the east end of the
said church, and from thence stretching over as the said kennel in part goes to
the middle of the highway called the Strand, opposite to the north-east corner
of the front buildings of Somerset House on the north-west end of Strand Bridge
Lane, where the boundary first began.

The CHURCH-WARD... begins a small distance from the end of Holywell Street,
and from thence extending southward to the highway called the Strand till it
comes to the boundary of the Middle Ward, almost opposite to Strand Bridge
Lane, being bounded toward the west by part of the end of the Savoy Ward
before described, and from thence extending eastward along the said highway
called the Strand, being bounded toward the south by the Middle Ward before
described, till it comes almost opposite to the end of Milford Lane, and from
thence stretching northward and north-eastward, near the corner of Saint
Clements Church, being bounded toward the east by the Royal Ward before
described, and going through the passage from Saint Clements Churchyard, near
the said church, till it falls into the kennel in the middle of the said
street, called the Backside of Saint Clements, and from thence extending
toward the west all along by the kennel in the middle of Holywell Street,
comprehending the buildings on the south side of the said street, till it falls
into a cross kennel toward the west end of the said street, where the boundary
first began.

FINIS.

