LEUCOTHOE. A DRAMATIC POEM.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

LEUCOTHOE. A DRAMATIC POEM.

In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas
Corpora.
OVID. Met. lib. i. Vulgo recitare timentis.
HOR. lib. i. sat. 4. LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall; And
Sold by M. COOPER in Paternoster Row, and A. BROWN in the Hay-Market. 1756.

TO THE READER.
WE are not to do evil that good may come of it, else I might plead in favor
of the following little poem, that, whatever its faults may be, it was
undertaken and pursued with a laudable design. The ridiculousness, not to say
barbarity, of turning Shakespeare's plays into operas, and larding them with
songs from quite different authors, as has been lately practiced upon our most
justly approved theater, is, I apprehend, of so glaring a nature, that every
one, who is endued with the smallest spark of taste, must immediately be struck
with it. It is indeed the same thing, as if any person should take it into his
head to reduce one of our ancient Gothic cathedrals to a modern summer house,
and ornament it with designs from Halfpenny's Chinese architecture. Such is the
devastation and overturning! such are the breaks and patches!

There is no man in England, I believe, who has greater respect for a piece of
beef A thing to which Shakespeare has been more than once compared.
than I have; but should I therefore like it cut into mince meat, and mixed
with my custard and apple-pie? Certainly, no: the impropriety of the olio would
then disgust me. So do the vigorous lines of SHAKESPEARE, when I meet them
hashed up, with Waller and Cowley, in the luscious compositions of a musical
entertainment.

If we must have English operas, somewhat of less value, and at the same time
better calculated for the end proposed, might, I thought, be made use of. But
many people will ask, what occasion is there that we should have English operas
at all? Let any common lover of music go but once to the King's theater in the
Hay-market, and he will easily perceive, that the Italian composition does, and
must, with all its inconsistencies, for ever excel any thing we can produce of
the like nature; and this, not for want of abilities in our composers, but
through the insuperable disadvantages of our language. Had I seen any of their
musical dramas before I undertook this, LEUCOTHOE should never have been
written: but since it is done, and cannot be recalled, I hope I shall be
pardoned, if I am willing to try, whether it may not be borne as a juvenile
attempt at poetry; though I have not been sollicitous to have it accompanied with
the graces of that harmony for which it was originally intended.

A French poetaster would have sent such a petit piece into the world with the
title of Tragedy; but the Author of this has not been long enough of the
trade to acquire so much confidence. Opera he must not call it, because it
should then end happily, which the disposition of his fable would not admit of:
he therefore lets it go under the denomination of a DRAMATIC POEM. But because
it is, save in that one instance of its catastrophe, an opera, he begs leave to
subjoin what one of the first English poets has written of that species of the
drama; which will be sufficient to show, that, if he has failed in it, it is
what a greater genius might have done; and, if he has succeeded, it is what the
greatest genius has not been ashamed to think worthy of his accomplishing.

"An opera, [says Mr. DRYDEN, in his preface to ALBION and ALBANUS] is a
poetical tale or fiction, represented by vocal and instrumental music, adorned
with scenes, machines, and dancing. The supposed persons of this musical drama
are generally supernatural, as gods and goddesses, and heroes, which at least
are descended from them, and are in due time to be adopted of their number. The
subject, therefore, being extended beyond the limits of human nature, admits of
that sort of mavelous which is rejected in other plays. Human impossibilities
are to be received as they are in faith, because, where the Gods are
introduced, a Supreme Power is understood, and second causes are out of doors.
-- If the persons represented were to speak upon the stage, it would follow of
necessity, that the expressions should be lofty, figurative, and majestical.
But the nature of an opera denies the frequent use of those poetical ornaments;
for vocal music, though it often admits a loftiness of sound, yet always exacts
an harmonious sweetness, or, to distinguish yet more justly, the recitative
part of the opera requires a more masculine beauty of expression and sound: the
other, which, for want of a properer word, I must call the songish part, must
abound in softness, and variety of numbers; its principal intention being to
please the hearing, rather than gratify the understanding." He ends all, after
having given the preference to the Italian opera, thus: "If I thought it
convenient, I could here discover some rules which I have given to myself in
writing an opera in general, and in this opera in particular: but I consider,
that the effect would only be, to have my own performance measured by the laws
I gave, and consequently set up little judges, who, not understanding
thoroughly, would be sure to fall upon the faults, and not to acknowledge any
of the beauties. Here, therefore, if they will criticize, they shall do it out
of their own fund; but let them be assured, that their ears are nice, for there
is neither writing nor judging on this subject without that good quality. It is
no easy matter, in our language, to make words so smooth, and numbers so
harmonious, that they shall almost set themselves; and yet there are rules for
this in nature, and as great a certainty and quantity in our syllables, as
either in the Greek or Latin. But let poets and judges understand this first,
and then let them begin to study English. When they have chewed a while upon
these preliminaries, it may be they will scarce adventure to tax me with want
of thought and elevation of fancy in this work; for they will soon be satisfied
that those are not the nature of this sort of writing. The necessity of double
rhimes, and ordering of the words and numbers for the sweetness of the voice,
are the main hinges on which an opera must move; and both of these are without
the compass of any art to teach another to perform, unless Nature in the first
place has done her part, by enduing the poet with nicety of hearing, that the
discord of sounds in words shall as much offend him as a seventh in music would
a good composer. I have therefore no need to make excuses for meanness of
thought in many places. The Italians, with all the advantages of their
language, are continually forced on it, or rather they affect it. The chief
secret is in the choice of words; and by this choice I do not mean elegancy of
expression, but propriety of sound, to be varied according to the nature of the
subject. -- The same reasons which depress thought in an opera, have a stronger
effect upon the words, especially in our language; for there is no maintaining
the purity of English in short measures, where the rhyme returns so quick, and
is so often female or double rhyme; which is not natural to our tongue, because
it consists too much of monosyllables, and those too most commonly clogged with
consonants; for which reason I am often forced to coin new words, revive some
that are antiquated, and botch others.

ARGUMENT.
LEUCOTHOE, daughter of ORCHAMUS King of Persia, is beloved, and secretly
enjoyed by the SUN; when CLYTIE, a former mistress of his, becomes acquainted
with their amor, and, in the rage of jealousy, makes a full discovery of it to
the Lady's father. ORCHAMUS, as a punishment for his daughter's crime, orders
her to be buried alive; which is accordingly executed in her lover's absence;
who, coming too late to give her any assistance, first changes her body into a
tree of frankincense, and then CLYTIE, the cause of her misfortune, into a
statue.

This is the chief subject matter of the following rhimes. In OVID we are told
that CLYTIE was metamorphosed into a sun-flower: but the Author hopes he need
not make any apology for deviating from his original in that particular, any
more than for some other trifling circumstances which he has taken the liberty
to vary, and others which he has entirely omitted as foreign to his purpose.

PERSONS.
PHOEBUS. ORCHAMUS, King of Persia. LEUCOTHOE, Daughter of Orchamus, in love
with, and beloved by Phoebus. CLYTIE, in love with Phoebus, but slighted by
him. A BLACK SLAVE attending Clytie. Chorus's, Priests, Youths, Virgins, and
other Attendants.
SCENE, PERSIA. LEUCOTHOE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
The theater represents a plain, bordered with wood; several mountains, which
rise one above another, till the highest seem lost in the clouds, making the
point of view at the farther end. CLYTIE is discovered in a melancholy posture.
OH! Jealousy, thy torments who can bear?
Forsaken, scorned, abandoned to despair!
I rage, I burn, no kind assistance nigh!
Give, give me ease, ye gods, or let me die.
Farewell, ye streams! farewell, ye groves!
Farewell, ye shady bowers!
Soft scenes of blissful hours,
Of former conscious loves.
Farewell, sweet peace of mind!
Fond wishes, pleasing pain,
With all the tender train,
The joy that happy lovers find.
Farewell! your halcyon days are over,
And I must never know you more.
The sun, which appears in the midst of the sky, moves slowly toward the
summit of the mountains; where, opening by degrees, it shows Phoebus in his
chariot. The horses are discovered, and a great glory. But, see! he comes, the
author of my woes:
He comes, ungrateful God; -- but not to me.
Another love within his bosom glows;
Another nymph! distracting misery!
Another nymph allures him to her arms.
I cannot bear the thought! confound her art,
Eternal lightenings blast her charms,
That robbed me of the dear inconstant's heart.
Goddess of dire Revenge! may all her days
To peace be strangers, and her nights to rest;
May Hope never sooth her with imagined ease,
Nor Patience still the tumults in her breast.
Since she has stolen possession of my joy,
Fulfill my prayer, by pity, justice, led;
May turns alike our happiness destroy,
And all my griefs be doubled on her head.
She retires among the trees.
SCENE II.
PHOEBUS descends the mountain, a symphony playing. The machine sinks. " Hail!
to love, delicious boy,
" Hail! to love, and welcome joy:"
Love, the best, the only treasure,
Love, that laughs at proud degree,
Love, that renders pain a pleasure,
And by enslaving makes us free.
When Heaven to woman beauty did dispense,
It gave away its own omnipotence.
High amongst the powers above, enthroned I sit,
I Am styled the God of Wisdom, and of Wit;
This arm alone Light's fiery steeds can rein.
Oh force, how impotent! oh boast, how vain!
Incapable to curb my own desires.
What Is strength, or wisdom's use, when love inspires?
Unseen, resistless, it impels us on;
No force can tame it, nor can prescience shun,
And, ere we dread the danger, we are undone.

SCENE III.
PHOEBUS, CLYTIE. Hah! whence this boldness? now who dares intrude
Upon my peaceful, sacred solitude?

CLYTIE, kneeling. Light of the world, great eye, and soul,
View at your feet a suppliant maid;
Behold my tears, for you they roll,
For you these sighs my breast invade.
Ah! turn your face; ah! cease to chide;
Nor let, while my distress you see,
What Is warmth and life to all beside,
Be coldness, and be death to me.

PHOEBUS. Have I not told you, CLYTIE, over and over,
That we must meet upon these terms no more?
Why then persist you thus to haunt me still,
And force me to be cruel against my will?

CLYTIE. Because I love, it is therefore I pursue.
Oh need I say I love! you know I do.
That answer for me: love, in spite of fear,
Brought me to meet your dread resentment here,
The resolution of my doom to know,
And die, -- if you, unkind, will have it so.

PHOEBUS. Leave me, and live.

CLYTIE. Inhuman! rather say,
Oh ten times rather, -- CLYTIE, Die, and stay.
To life with firmness I can bid adieu;
But it is impossible to part from you.

PHOEBUS. Be gone.

CLYTIE. I cannot. -- There was once a time,
When such a word would have been thought a crime.
Oh change, how great! my person to behold,
Am I deformed, or suddenly grown old?
If ever I had charms your love to gain,
Methinks those charms their wonted bloom retain.
Say then in what, in what is it I offend?
Let me but know my fault, I Will strive to mend.

PHOEBUS. Would you my languid appetite revive,
And keep the just expiring flames alive,
Mild and reserved you should at distance stand,
And gently feed it with a cautious hand:
What sparingly applied, renews desire;
Poured on, extinguishes, and damps the fire.
Give me the nymph who charms with ease,
Whose greatest pleasure is to please;
Whose passion never tyrannic grows,
But hand in hand with freedom goes;
Who never feels transport in her breast,
But as she sees her lover blessed:
It Is such a nymph, and only she,
Must hope to gain a heart from me.

CLYTIE. And can you then so soon those vows forget,
Which Echo scarce has left repeating yet?
Those vows -- to me for ever fatal day,
When first they led my easy faith astray!
Which morns and eves have heard, thou base ingrate,
And promised love immortal as your state?
Phoebus traverses the stage, she following. Think but how often, unmindful of
alarms,
You Have lain encircled by those yielding arms,
Insatiate draining copious draughts of bliss,
And swearing heaven was lodged in every kiss;
And then when cloyed with the delicious feast,
And sunk unnerv'd on this still panting breast,
Think now, repeating the dear task, you have died,
Yet cursed the day that forced you from my side.

PHOEBUS. That once your beauties did my soul subdue,
I frankly told you, and I told you true.
I loved, enjoyed, and from enjoyment blessed,
Thought for a while my appetite increased;
But grown with frequent iteration tired,
At length I nauseate what I first desired.

CLYTIE. I see you nauseate, even this moment see
Your eyes regard me with antipathy.
Nor think me stranger to the cause; I know
What brings you, PHOEBUS, to this secret plain,
For whom my gentle bondage you forego,
And treat my love with insults and disdain.

PHOEBUS. Hah!

CLYTIE. For LEUCOTHOe. You start; that name
Has struck you. Oh! more false than syren's song,
Was it for this I sold myself to shame?
For this --

PHOEBUS. Be wise in time, and stop your tongue,
Another word's destruction sure as hell.
Now hearken, and take care t'observe me well.
By that irrevocable oath I swear,
Which even gods themselves with trembling take,
By the eternal, gloomy Flood, if ever
You breathe again what you have presumed to speak
This instant, life shall expiate the offense.
Reply not; make no answer: get you hence.
Oh where, too charming, cruel maid,
Unmindful do thou rove?
Why is my bliss thus long delayed?
Haste, haste thee quickly to my aid,
And tune my jarring soul to love.

CLYTIE. Confusion! madness! hell! or yet what is worse!
Oh give me breath sufficiently to curse
The world, myself -- and all my feeble race.
What! boast your falsehood, own it to my face!
Go, tyrant, seek the idol you adore,
CLYTIE's weak claims shall trouble you no more:
Hence! stubborn weakness, hence! -- O tender fool!
My heart yet fain would hold him, could it be:
But tutored by example, I shall cool,
And him disdain, as he has slighted me.
No more let love with golden shafts be drawn,
Or downy mantled wing;
But armed his hands,
With flaming brands,
And scorpion whips to sting,
The wretches by his fell distemper gnawn.
No more an infant heaven-design'd,
But a grim monster, fierce and blind,
The curse and scourge of human kind.

SCENE IV.
PHOEBUS. Infernal Jealousy! thou foe to rest,
Despotic ruler in the female breast,
Of Love begot, unnatural, and dire,
Thou prey'st upon the vitals of thy fire.
But, see! she comes, whom no such pangs excite,
The harbinger of every dear delight;
She comes, like teeming Spring along the plain,
Youth, Plenty, Health, and Pleasure, in her train.

SCENE V.
PHOEBUS, LEUCOTHOE. So in some evening fair the feathered male,
Expects his tuneful consort in the vale;
At sight of her, his heart exulting springs,
He rears his plume, and beats his little wings:
They meet, they nestle to each other's breast,
And side by side pursue their way to rest.

LEUCOTHOE. My lord! my life!

PHOEBUS. My best, my tenderest part!
Thus let me clasp you to my panting heart.
Hence, ye profane! each ruder guest be far,
The slaves of Business, and the sons of War;
Let none within these happy shades be seen,
But such as wait upon the Paphian Queen,
The sports, the pleasures, and the winged boys,
Foes to suspicion and domestic noise.
Passion may doubt, and quarrel in decay,
Ours still shall flourish -- Oh LEUCOTHOE!
[Embracing, and gazing on her tenderly. Was ever creature formed so fair!
Sweets from every pore distilling,
Such a shape, and such an air,
Lips so soft, and eyes so killing.
Turn, oh turn these humid fires!
I cannot bear their wounding glances;
They fill my soul with fierce desires,
And plunge me in extatic trances.

LEUCOTHOE. Oh! welcome to my soul, as after showers
Your own enlivening beams to fruits and flowers,
Welcome as cooling wind to laboring swains,
Or freedom to the wretch that groans in chains.
Might this for ever, ever be my place,
To live and die in thy adored embrace.

PHOEBUS. Oh thrilling joy! oh more than charming she!
Was ever deity caressed like me?

LEUCOTHOE. Oh height of bliss! oh greater than divine!
Was ever mortal happiness like mine?

PHOEBUS. How shall I speak the dictates of my heart!
No language can express, no actions prove
My meeting joys.

LEUCOTHOE. My sorrows when we part!

PHOEBUS. How tenderly I dote!

LEUCOTHOE. How much I love!
Who upon the oozy beach,
Can count the numerous sands that lie?
Or distinctly reckon each
Transparent star that studs the sky?
As their multitudes betray,
And frustrate all attempts to tell,
So it is impossible to say
How much we love, we love so well.

PHOEBUS. Be hushed, ye winds, and you, ye powers, accord,
Who own the force of my superior word.
Hear, and obey! ye deities that reign
Over the green woods, or haunt the dusky plain;
Hear, and obey! ye softer forms, that lave
In the cool font, or stem the lucid wave;
And ye that roll the rapid orbs on high.
[Soft music.
LEUCOTHOE. What sounds are these of melting melody,
Which steal so soft and sweet upon my ears?

PHOEBUS. Hark! it is the music of the moving spheres;
Obedient to thy beauties, they advance
The harmonious measures of their tuneful dance.
Nature exults, affected by my joy;
And, see! the sisters, from their sacred height,
In concert mingling, all their art employ,
Proud to administer to your delight.

The music coming forward in a full symphony; the clouds, which obscured the
head of the mountains, suddenly disperse, showing Parnassus, the Muses with
their proper symbols, etc. An entertainment is performed by them on their
several instruments, consisting of three parts; the first very sonorous; the
second a slow movement, to which a pastoral nymph dances; the third sprightly;
when the lowest of the mountains opens, discovering Vulcan 's cave. The Cyclops
come out, and dance with a number of Dryads, who enter from the woods, then
range themselves on each side of the stage. Phoebus and Leucothoe advance.
LEUCOTHOE. Methinks these scenes, such wonder they inspire,
I still could gaze upon, and still admire;
Yet for the present, prithee, let them cease,
Our revels may offend the neighboring peace:
And should they to my father's ears be brought --
My blood runs cold, and curdles at the thought!

PHOEBUS. Causeless the thought, and premature the fear!
What can your father do when I am here?
He, and th'extensive empire which he sways,
Struck by my word, shall vanish like a blaze.
Come thou, poor trembling turtle, seek thy mate,
And, safe beneath his pinion, laugh at fate.

PHOEBUS and LEUCOTHOE. Hark! Love summons us away;
Let Us obey,
Come away;
Hark! Love summons us away:
Just expiring,
With desiring,
Take, oh! take me while you may,
Else I shall dissolve away.
Stay my fleeting soul with kisses,
Till we feed on fiercer blisses,
Blisses Gods alone should share.
Oh! my life, my joy, my treasure,
Oh! the ecstasy, the pleasure;
It Is too much, too much to bear.

The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A night-prospect of a garden; a pavilion in view, beyond which appears the
back part of a palace; a terrace adorned with statues, etc. etc. PHOEBUS and
LEUCOTHOE enter from the pavilion. CLYTIE, with a black slave, listening
behind. LEUCOTHOE. THE winds are fast asleep, there is scarce a breeze
To rock the little birds upon the trees.
What grateful odours rise from every brake!
See how the moon-beams shine on yonder lake!
How softly sweet these waters fall to ground,
That break the silence with their murmuring sound!
You will not, sure, so quickly bid farewell;
I Have yet a thousand things to ask, and tell.

PHOEBUS. And I could ever stay to talk and hear;
But look how faint those glimmering fires appear!
I must be gone, by sad occasion pressed:
The morning star already lights the East;
Aurora now unbars the gates of day,
And from that mountain summons me away.

LEUCOTHOE. Yet stay. -- I know I Have somewhat to impart;
If you are absent long, 'twill break my heart.
How soon will you return?

PHOEBUS. With double speed
I Will lash my coursers to their western bed
At night. -- Believe me to my promise just;
I Will come on wings --

LEUCOTHOE. Then must we part?

PHOEBUS. We must,
But for a few short hours: restrain your tears;
Why thus encompassed with unusual fears?
You droop!

LEUCOTHOE. Oh, PHOEBUS!

PHOEBUS. Say thou? Prithee speak.

LEUCOTHOE. Forgive me; I Am a woman, fond, and weak,
In terror often when no danger's nigh:
Perhaps I weep, and fear, I know not why.
Why with sighs my heart is swelling,
Why with tears my eyes overflow,
Ask me not, it is past the telling,
Mute, involuntary woe.
Prizing joys, we fear to lose 'em;
Can you then condemn my pain?
Something whispers to my bosom,
We shall never meet again.

PHOEBUS. Oh! my dear love, quick, quickly drive away
Those boding thoughts which on your quiet prey;
The breed of Fancy, gender'd in the brain,
Nursed by the grosser spirits, light, and vain;
The vagrant visions of the sleeping mind,
Which vanish waked, nor leave a mark behind.
When two kind doves their nest desert,
A different passage to pursue,
With gentle murmurs thus they part.

LEUCOTHOE. My life, farewell!

PHOEBUS. My love, adieu!

SCENE II.
During this scene Clytie attempts coming forward several times, but is
withheld by her slave. LEUCOTHOE. He Is gone, and left me: hah! what means this
dread?
Save me! a sword hangs hovering over my head.
The earth yawns to swallow me: I sink, oh Fate!
Alas! I Am frighted with my own conceit:
Nor sword, nor yawning earth, is here, and now
A lazy languor creeps along my veins;
Dull, and more dull my heavy eyelids grow,
And every sense accepts the leaden chains.
Oh, God of Sleep! arise, and spread
Thy healing vapors round my head;
To thy friendly mansions take,
My soul that burns,
Till he returns,
For whom alone I wish to wake.
There yield my thoughts their favorite theme,
And bring my lover in a dream.

SCENE III.
CLYTIE comes forward with the BLACK SLAVE. A short silence. SLAVE. Why stand
you thus bemus'd, in silence lost?
Fiend-struck you seem, or frighted by some ghost.
Alas! she hears me not; within her mind,
As warring flames are in the earth confined,
So is her rage and indignation pent.
Dear Mistress!

CLYTIE. Oh!

SLAVE. There give your passion vent.
Behold of love the so much boasted bliss!

CLYTIE. Why was I born, ye Gods, since doomed to this?
Off, idle ornaments, detested glare
Of gold and jewels, wherefore are ye here?
Why am I dressed in pompous robes like these?
There Is no one now whom I would wish to please.
Let then my soul and body be akin,
Naked without, as desolate within.
By various passions am I torn,
Now with anger, now with scorn;
Now with fear my heart's recoiling,
Now with rage my spirit's boiling:
As the different plagues infest,
To love or vengeance I incline;
Now I could stab his faithless breast,
Now -- press him close to mine.

SLAVE. Assuage your transports, you augment the ill
By nourishing those thoughts you ought to kill.

CLYTIE. Hence, paultry babbler! when the loud winds sweep,
Command the Nile's impetu'us surge to sleep;
When burning Aetna rages, bid it cease;
Go sooth the tortures of the damned to peace:
Their sieve, their stone, their vulture, and their wheel,
Are light, are nothing, to the pangs I feel.

SLAVE. Take comfort.

CLYTIE. Yes; it is fixed, I Will die this hour;
That Is all the comfort now within my power:
A dagger ends at once my life and care.

SLAVE. Oh! tossed on seas of ruinous despair!
Yet hear me ever you split upon this shelf;
Revenge on those who wrong you -- not yourself.

CLYTIE. Revenge on whom? a God!

SLAVE. The best revenge.
Pay falsehood back with falsehood, change for change,
Try softer hearts, exert your charms, and show,
Indifferent, as he leaves, you let him go.
When unpitied we languish,
And sigh for a swain,
Who feels not our anguish,
But laughs at our pain,
In vain we pursue his untractable mind,
With whining,
And crying,
And wishing,
And dying;
Then scorn the perplexer, and look out to find
Another as lovely -- another more kind.

CLYTIE. Is this the mighty vengeance you propose,
This the kind comfort then you yield my woes?
To sue to others, and from them obtain,
What all my love deserved from him in vain.
Returns I Have had -- How sweet!

SLAVE. How quickly past!
Better never tasted, since they could not last.

CLYTIE. And shall I turn a beggar with my charms?
The thought with double strength my fury arms,
No! thus at once my farther pangs I save --
[Drawing a dagger.
SLAVE. Behold upon her knees your faithful slave!
Oh! let my tears, my services, prevail;
We Have means of great revenge, which cannot fail.

CLYTIE. Avaunt!

SLAVE. Oh! hear me.

CLYTIE. Yet again! beware,
Nor tempt the fury of my rage too far.
Come, thou last, only friend, thy work pursue.
[Looking at the dagger, as she holds it ready to strike.]
SLAVE. By all my hopes of happiness, it is true;
The object of your jealousy shall die!

CLYTIE, pausing from the stroke. Go on.

SLAVE. First lay that dreadful weapon by:
I cannot speak, your looks my words appal.

CLYTIE, throwing away the dagger. Said thou not she, the accursed she,
should fall?
You held my arm, or she, ere this, had lain
Dead at my feet.

SLAVE. And she shall still be slain,
But not by you; the God already cold,
What then should gain his love, his vengeance hold?

CLYTIE. Speak quick the means; my soul has taken alarm,
And all my fluttering senses round me arm.
Oh give me poison, racks, consuming fire,
Swift as my rage, and wild as my desire.

SLAVE. Nor poison, racks, nor fire, we need to wait,
The King, her father, be our means of fate:
To him unfold in secret all you know,
You point the weapon, but he strikes the blow.

CLYTIE. I Will do it; -- each moment is a year's delay:
It Is clear, it is obvious as the noontide-day;
By passion blinded, by despair misled,
I walked in clouds. -- She is already dead!
My rival's doomed! I see her on the ground!
I hear her groans! -- There Is music in the sound.

SLAVE. Look where in shades those myrtle-branches throng,
The King appears, and this way moves along;
The time, the occasion, both conspire to bless
Your great design, and crown it with success.

CLYTIE. What sudden tremors seize upon my heart!
Cold dewy damps from every pore perspire!
No matter -- Injured Love, perform thy part,
The consequence be what it may. -- Retire.

SCENE IV.
CLYTIE. Hence, weak remorse! hence, hence away!
In vain before my dazzl'd eyes,
In all your daunting shapes you rise,
To fill me with dismay.
Your checks I defy,
My rival shall die;
And thou, whose false, ungrateful heart
Thy immortality secures,
Look down, while I revenge my smart,
And through her bosom strike at yours.

SCENE V.
ORCHAMUS, CLYTIE. ORCHAMUS. Hail! roseate dawn, at whose approaching light,
Specter and birds ill-omen'd take their flight;
Thou, at whose rise Shame seeks Cimmerian shades,
And Lust and Murder hide their horrid heads;
Hope springs aloft, the mists of Grief exhale,
And Life and Joy renew their course -- all hail!

CLYTIE, kneeling. May the King live for ever!

ORCHAMUS. Rise, bright maid;
Thou should not pay obeisance, but be paid:
Abroad thus early have you made your way,
To add new charms to, or outshine the day?

CLYTIE. To view the infant morning at its birth,
As first it rose upon the darkened earth,
When great Jove uttered the creative word,
And Nature all alive obeyed her Lord;
To hear the birds, observe the waking flower,
And wondering at Heaven's works, adore its power.

ORCHAMUS. Exalted Wisdom! from those lips it broke!
Was it an angel, or fair CLYTIE spoke?
How much superior beauty awes,
The coldest bosoms find;
But with resistless force it draws,
To sense and virtue joined.
The casket where to outward show
The artist's hand is seen,
Is doubly valued, when we know
It holds a gem within.

CLYTIE, aside. Now tremble, ye inconstants, wheresoe'er,
Who cheat with fraudful vows th'unwary fair:
Fate is at work -- Love sits on Justice' throne,
And hastens to chastise you all in one.
[ Going to speak to Orchamus, she corrects herself.
ORCHAMUS. What would thou? Speak. But now, there something sprung
Warm from your heart, which froze upon your tongue.
Give it free air -- lay chilling fears aside,
And on a Monarch's faith and power confide.

CLYTIE. Yet why should friendship force me to reveal,
And tell him that which pity should conceal!

ORCHAMUS. Whatever you would demand, my grant ensues;
When beauty asks, can ORCHAMUS refuse?
Say, then, what thoughts so cruel to molest
The peaceful tenor of that gentle breast?

CLYTIE. Ask not the subject of my thoughts, which known,
Perhaps may spoil the quiet of your own.

ORCHAMUS. Virtue unmoved the thund'rer's voice can hear;
To guilt a stranger, we are unknown to fear.

CLYTIE. Ay, but some ills there are of such a kind,
So black, so dreadful, even the virtuous mind
Cannot support their shock, which leave a sting
Like vice behind. -- Oh ill requited King!
Think, is there nothing could affect you more,
Than loss of state, dominion, wealth, and power?

ORCHAMUS. You deal in riddles!

CLYTIE. Dreadful to expound!
Oh! be my tongue to silence ever bound!
Drive, drive me from you to the farthest pole --

ORCHAMUS. You mean to stagger my determined soul!

CLYTIE. Your daughter!

ORCHAMUS. What of her? I shake all over!

CLYTIE. Yet send me hence in time, and seek no more.
Farewell!
[Going.
ORCHAMUS. Return, I charge you; haste, come back:
[She returns. You would not leave me thus upon the rack.
Say, is my daughter dead? -- I think I can --
At least I Will try -- to bear it like a man.

CLYTIE. Was that the worst, how easy to be said,
For what is the loss of life? Her honor's dead.
Her virtue!

ORCHAMUS.. Hah, beware!

CLYTIE. But now these eyes
Beheld them rev'ling in their guilty joys;
Even here they parted as you sought the place.
I could have stabbed them in their last embrace.

ORCHAMUS. O name the traitor, that he soon may bleed!

CLYTIE. The God you worship, Sir, has done the deed:
The glorious SUN, inspired with lustful flame,
Has paid your incense with your daughter's shame.

ORCHAMUS. It Is well! -- Oh Kings, your boasted power how small!
Where, when did he? Damnation! tell me all.

CLYTIE. At a silent, secret hour,
Softly stealing to her bower,
There he found the lovesick maid,
Wishing, warm, and unarray'd;
Fired with the charming sight,
Soon began the amorous fight!
Their pulse beat high to love's alarms;
He strove -- and triumphed over her charms.

ORCHAMUS. What Is to be done? Confusion! shame! and death!
This hand shall stop the wanton strumpet's breath.
I gave her being -- how then shall I take
That being from her? -- ORCHAMUS, awake!
It Is dreams, chimera's all -- imperfect, wild,
Justice commands me to destroy -- my child!
At once a father, and a judge,
How shall I bid her die or live?
There one severely would condemn,
The other tenderly forgive.
[Walks about in great disorder.
CLYTIE, aside. What a rough war contending Passion keeps!
Now the storm's up; now, hah! by Heaven he weeps.
Oh may these drops, like those which fall from high,
Before the rapid thunder rends the sky,
Be the forerunners of approaching wrath,
And bode destruction, perils, rage, and death.

ORCHAMUS. Ye furies that howl in the abyss profound,
Hither, hither repair,
From the wilds of Despair,
And encompass me round;
Each a torch in her hand,
Take your terrible stand!
From my breast keep all motions of pity away;
And when Nature speaks,
In your yellings and shrieks
Drown her softening plea.
What honor demands, it is our duty to give;
Who merits to die, shall we suffer to live?

SCENE VI.
CLYTIE. Oh glorious hearing! oh triumphant day!
Thus great Nemesis, thus my thanks I pay:
Now, now, false God, your recompense receive,
And in your turn confess the pangs you gave.
Fly, care, to the wind,
My fate has been kind;
Oh! pleasure,
Past measure,
Transcendently great;
No more I complain
Of ungrateful disdain,
If I suffer in love, I triumph in hate.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
The theater represents a rocky shore, with a distant prospect of the sea;
beyond which is seen still more faintly a city. Several MEN and WOMEN in
affliction. A MAN. BEhold, my friends, behold the dismal scene,
Where never summer treads, nor spring serene,
But everlasting winter lowering over,
Deforms the bleak, uncomfortable shore.

A WOMAN. Here, where the wild beast lurking in his den,
Avoids the haunts of no less savage men;
Among these rocks the horrid cavern lies,
Doomed to receive the Royal sacrifice.

CHORUS. Oh dreadful sentence! unrelenting fate!
Mourn, all ye sons of prostrate Persia, mourn;
From hence let sorrow take an endless date,
Tears follow tears, and sighs to sighs return;
In an eternal course of piercing woe,
Such as from shame, despair, and grief, should flow.

A MAN and a WOMAN. A nymph adorned with every grace,
So soft a form, so fair a face,
With Venus she may vie:
Like some sweet flower, untimely crop!
Ah, must she fade! ah, must she drop!
Ah! must she, must she die?

A MAN. Soft! break ye quickly off! west over the beach,
Far as the eye its piercing beams can stretch:
Lo! where the victim, 'midst a mournful throng,
In solemn, slow procession, moves along.

A WOMAN. She comes a living coarse; what eye but weeps
At the sad spectacle? -- Now, SUN eclipse!
At once the lover and the God assume,
And snatch her trembling from the untimely tomb.

SCENE II.
A procession appears at a considerable distance, consisting of priests,
youths, virgins, etc. etc. Leucothoe in the center, covered with a black veil;
as it approaches the audience, the following semi-chorus is sung with frequent
pauses. SEMI-CHORUS. Prepare! ye Stygian powers, prepare!
In all your pomp of horrors dressed;
Ye dreadful ministers of fate,
Set wide Death's adamantine gate,
For, lo! we bring a guest.
Prepare! prepare! prepare!

[The procession being come to the front of the stage.] STROPHE. Hear! injured
chastity; pure essence, hear!
From yonder marble sphere;
Wherever thou hold'st thy mansion in the skies,
Look down, look down,
From thy exalted and star-spangled throne,
To thee we sacrifice.

CHORUS. To thee,
To thee we sacrifice.

ANTI-STROPHE. Hear, Justice! awfulest of beings, hear!
Tremend'ous and severe,
Thou whose stern resolution never dies,
Look down, look down,
From thy immovable, immortal throne;
To thee we sacrifice.

CHORUS. To thee,
To thee we sacrifice!

EPODE. To her, to thee our voice we raise,
Avert your anger from the state;
Deign to accept a nation's praise,
And let the forfeiture she pays
Her crime expiate.

SEMI-CHORUS. Prepare! ye Stygian powers, prepare!
In all your pomp of horrors dressed;
Ye dreadful ministers of fate,
Set wide Death's adamantine gate,
For, lo! we bring a guest.
Prepare! prepare! prepare!

LEUCOTHOE, Putting aside the veil. She appears in white, with fillets, after
the manner of a sacrifice. Oh, mighty God! that guides the day,
A moment stop your rapid way;
Behold me in this dreadful strife,
Just tottering on the brink of life,
No help, no friendly comfort nigh,
To break my fall,
Beset with all
The terrors of eternity;
While doubts and fear
My bosom tear,
And with alternate passion vie;
Think when you see,
And pity me;
Oh! think it is for you I die.

A YOUTH. Thy charms just rising to their noon,
Ah! must we see them set so soon?

A VIRGIN. Those charms which distant princes wooed,
And deities themselves pursued!

A YOUTH. What heart that is not frozen quite,
But must in thy afflictions share?

A VIRGIN. To see, oh melancholy sight!
To see you plunged in sudden night!

A YOUTH. To be you know not what!

A VIRGIN. To go you know not where!

LEUCOTHOE. Weep not, my dear companions!

CHORUS of Youths and Virgins. Cruel stroke!
Can nothing then thy destiny revoke?

LEUCOTHOE. No! we must part; even now fate lifts the sheers,
To cut the thread of my scarce half-spun years.
Farewell! when poor LEUCOTHOE's forgot,
Oh! may you find a more indulgent lot.
May each be happy in some nymph or youth,
Proud to repay your tenderness and truth.
Then, if between the transports of your bliss,
You should recount a piteous tale like this,
Of some poor creature by her love betrayed,
As the sad accidents your memory strike,
Bestow a tear in pity to my shade,
And mourn at once two fates so much alike.

YOUTH and VIRGIN. Come, Sorrow, from thy gloomy cell,
Where in eternal rage you dwell;
From thy bed of raven's plumes,
Curtain'd round with dusky fumes.

CHORUS. Come, and with you bring your groans,
Frantic gestures, sullen moans,
Fury of conflicting passions,
Sighs, and tears, and lamentations,
Join with us in doleful lay,
Rage and Death triumph today.

[The procession disperses, and the music strikes dead and solemn.] SCENE III.
ORCHAMUS, LEUCOTHOE, etc. etc. ORCHAMUS. Hold yet a moment! ere the impervious
skreen,
Which severs world from world, be drawn between;
Ere yet I am of all my hopes beguiled,
Let me once more embrace my wretched child;
The judge, the sovereign, have their parts supplied,
And now the parent will be satisfied.

LEUCOTHOE. My father! oh be quick to drive me down.
Gape wide, ye rocks, and save me from his frown!

ORCHAMUS. Be not of thy fond father's frowns afraid,
Nor think he comes thy folly to upbraid;
No, rather to these sad proceedings loath,
He comes to mourn the cause which ruins both;
That rigid honor, whose stern voice demands
Thy forfeit life at his unwilling hands.

LEUCOTHOE. To death, without repining, I submit,
As to a thing which Heaven and you think fit;
Whatever has been my crime, while yet I live,
Let me but hear you pity and forgive.

ORCHAMUS. Forgive you! pity you! oh that I do,
These tears be witness which my cheeks bedew.
Would any thing but death might purge our line
From your offense, or any death but thine;
For with thee all my joys will take their leave,
And I shall walk in sorrow to the grave.

LEUCOTHOE. Stop! stop! those sacred showers, they must not fall
For me; I now indeed am criminal.

ORCHAMUS. The mother-hind,
Distract in mind,
Her young one made the hunter's prey;
Wide over the lawn,
From rosy dawn
To dewy evening takes her way;
Till quite overcome,
With fruitless pain,
Wearied at length she lays her down,
In sad despair,
And fills the plain
All night with miserable moan.
It Is thus, when thou art gone, thy Sire shall be;
So shall he wish by day, so mourn at night, for thee.

LEUCOTHOE. Behold thus low, your wretched, indiscreet,
Unhappy daughter, casts her at your feet.
Oh! wherefore did not my frail being end,
Ere I had power such goodness to offend?
Before my crimes had stained my royal race,
Or drawn a tear along that sacred face.

ORCHAMUS. Good heaven and earth! turn; Nature, turn aside;
Turn, nor behold this pious parricide,
Lest, blind to chance, and ign'rant of the cause,
You think mankind, like me, has left your laws.
To Leucothoe. Farewell! the time calls on us, we must part.
This last embrace -- Down, down, my swelling heart.

LEUCOTHOE. Look on me.

ORCHAMUS. You there who attend the rites,
Haste to perform the farther requisites.
Nature, lie still!

LEUCOTHOE. I come -- Oh why, my blood,
Why run'st thou to my heart a freezing flood?
Why trembl'st thou, my flesh? Limbs yet awhile
Support me -- but a few short moments past,
Dissolving Death shall free you from your toil,
And give ye up to everlasting rest.
A rock being removed, the mouth of the caverns appears. She starts, then
advances toward it. Thou dark abyss! whose womb obscene
Is fraught with every mortal pain,
Whose horrid jaws, in dread display,
Gape to devour me -- take your prey!
Receive me, yet the vital lamps,
All burning with spiritu'us fire,
Among thy raw, unwholesome damps,
Unseen, unpitied, to expire.
[The priest preparing to put her down.
ORCHAMUS. Stay! yet again forbear -- an instant hold!
Ye Gods, regard me, I Am infirm, and old;
[Kneeling. A load of grief unable to sustain!
Let not the weak and suppliant beg in vain.
If with mistaken piety I rate
This crime, if justice asks not what I give,
Arrest the uplifted arm of vengeful fate;
Appear! and bid the destined victim live.

CHORUS. Your blissful mansions leave!
Appear! and save!

STROPHE. The powers are silent to our prayer.

ANTI-STROPHE. Nor signs of mercy show.

STROPHE. Whom Heaven condemns, shall mortal spare?

SROPHE, ANTI-STROPHE. No! no! no!
[They put her into a cavern.
ORCHAMUS. [Turning about just as she disappears.] Ye solid poles, give way; ye
skies, roll back;
Earth, from your deep foundations, be disjoined:
Burst nature round me in a general wrack,
All horrible confusion, like my mind!
Oh me! unhappy father, where,
Where shall I go to seek relief?
Every object, every place,
Tends my sorrows to increase;
Not one to blot away my care,
Not one to cure my grief.

SCENE IV.
Enter CLYTIE in wild disorder, followed by her Slaves. CLYTIE. Oh! are you
found, Sir? What is it you have done,
To raise the anger of the immortal SUN?
Speak quickly; answer me, without delay:
Where is your daughter? where is LEUCOTHOE?

ORCHAMUS. I prithee ask me not; my heart-veins bleed
Each time I think of it. -- Oh! where indeed?
Where but -- dread consequence of jealous spleen!
For thy officiousness she never had been.

CLYTIE. For my officiousness! What, then you would make
Me partner of your guilt! -- Perdition take
The execrable purpose! -- I disclaim
Whatever you have done. Look to it, the blame
On your own head. -- But, hark! it comes apace!
The thunder comes! -- Fly, instant fly this place!
Would you their safety, or your own, consult?
[Pointing to those about him. For my part, I shall stay to meet the bolt.
[Orchamus and his people withdraw.
SCENE V.
PHOEBUS with the HORAE, CLYTIE with her Slaves. PHOEBUS, entering. Oh most
accursed King! inhuman Sire!
My life! my love! my only heart's desire!
LEUCOTHOE! Oh murdered! -- Hence, away
Like lightning: help her ere it is yet too late.
[To the Hours. If there is a spark of life unquench'd, we may
Redeem her still, and snatch her soul from fate
[Going off.
CLYTIE, kneeling. Oh, PHOEBUS! hither turn your angry eyes!
[ Exit Phoebus, Clytie looking after him. What! gone without a word!

SLAVE. Dear Lady, rise:
Think where you are --

CLYTIE. Went he not frowning too?
What sudden horrors rush upon my view!
Rising, and casting round her eyes. What desolate coast is this we tread,
So like the dreary nation of the dead?
Thus wretched Ariadne, left behind,
Wept on the shores of Argos, bleak and bare;
While cruel Theseus fled before the wind,
Nor listened to the voice of her despair.

SLAVE. Laid her on gently.

CLYTIE. Stay ye yet awhile;
My brain's on fire, my blood begins to boil:
What do you hold me for? -- Stand off.

SLAVE. Alas!
What still I Have feared -- at length is come to pass.
Her senses are disturbed.
[Thunder.
CLYTIE. What noise was that?
Jove talking -- all the Gods are in debate
Upon my future welfare. -- Hark! hark! hark!
Not a word more -- it is grown exceeding dark:
See clouds on clouds above each other rise,
In sable mountains, to obscure the skies.
It Is done! Where am I? Let me grope my way
Again through this black passage into day.
Ah, wretch! bewildered wretch!
In vain my arms I stretch,
In vain I feel about:
Will no kind star afford its light,
To guide my erring steps aright?
No friendly hand held out,
Conduct me through this gloom of night!

SLAVE. Patience! sweet patience! all shall yet go well.

CLYTIE. At length the vapors gradu'lly dispel;
Sure it is the dawn, from yonder point it breaks,
Bright'ning the front of heaven with rosy streaks.
[Thunder again. There leaped the eternal coursers with a bound
From the green flood -- and now it is light around.
Lo! where aloft immortal PHOEBUS stands,
Graceful the reins, depending from his hands:
He looks, he smiles, he beckons me from far;
I run, I fly, I mount the fiery car.
Oh! Triumph, Triumph, seated by his side,
Sublime in splendour, through the air I ride.
We come! we come!
Make room! make room!
Now climbing heaven's stupend'ous steep,
We view the Empyrean height;
Now over the smooth meridian sweep,
The earth below too small for sight;
Now down the blue concave descending again,
Impetu'us we drive to the western main:
While at every crash,
Of the thundering lash,
As we whirl along, the zodiac round
Replies to the stroke, and echoes the sound.
Bless me! oh, how am I oppressed?
Soft, lay me gently down to rest.

CHORUS. Her wits return; ye powers! restore,
And yield her to herself once more.

CLYTIE, the slaves laying her on the ground. At some tall mountain's hoary
feet,
With shelving rocks and trees o'erhung,
Whose head incessant tempests beat,
And ravens pester all day long;
Let me -- where slow meander steers
Its course, upon the banks reclined,
Augment the water with my tears,
And with my sighs increase the wind.

SCENE VI.
PHOEBUS, CLYTIE, etc. etc. PHOEBUS. Desist, desist; your pains are fruitless
all,
The vital spirit's fled beyond recall,
Sunk to those shades from whence it never must rise,
From whence grim Pluto never yields a prize.
Inexorable power! -- Oh might we mix
Even here, content from heaven I would remove,
Upon thy ruthless sepulcher to fix
A monument of wretchedness and love.

One of the HORAE. Far be such sorrows from the God of DAY,
Who next to Jove bears universal sway;
Suppose your mistress dead, exert your power,
She still may glide a stream, expand a flower;
Or rising stately in the sylvan scene,
Stretch forth a leafy umbrage over the green.

PHOEBUS. It shall be so; yes, dear unhappy maid,
Since thy sad lover can no farther aid:
Since stubborn Death denies to loose his hold,
And yield thy beauties in their proper mold,
Thus I pronounce -- Grow fruitful, steril grave!
And strait do thou thy former species leave.
Exist -- though not as thou were wont to be;
No more a woman, flourish in a tree!
So shall thy body changed, as heretofore,
Teach deities to bend, and mortals to adore.

CHORUS. What sudden fragrance fills the air!
Lo! the blooming shoots appear!
Parent earth,
Assist the birth,
So shall her body, changed as heretofore,
Teach deities to bend, and mortals to adore.

The body of Leucothoe, supposed to be changed into a tree of frankincense,
rises slowly out of the rock. PHOEBUS. Thrice sacred plant!
Thus Heaven thy favored growth endows;
A spicy scent
Spring ever from thy teeming boughs,
While round thy root rich unguent flows.
The tears you shed,
To Gods a grateful sacrifice,
On altars laid,
In aromatic smoke shall rise,
And plead for mortals with the skies.
[Phoebus about to withdraw.
CLYTIE starting up, catches hold of his robe. By the breeze that passing sighs,
By the rocks that round us rise;
By the stars that dimly glow,
Witness of my present woe;
By the mountains, by the woods,
By the grotto's, by the floods,
By the dear transporting nights,
Witness of our past delights:
For love -- for former friendship's sake,
I charge you stay -- and hear me speak.

PHOEBUS. Unhand me!

CLYTIE. Mercy!

PHOEBUS. Fury, let me go!
Or --

CLYTIE. Never, never will I loose you. -- Oh
Grant me a little strength! -- Do break my hands!
Destroy me! Dash me on those flinty sands!
Yet still persisting will I hold you fast,
And, striving to embrace you, breathe my last.

PHOEBUS, dragging her out of sight. Nay, then!

CLYTIE. O stay -- Kind Venus, help afford!
Here let me grow a statue!

PHOEBUS, returning. At your word
I take you. -- Be the thing that you desire,
A dread example of immortal ire:
Fixed to that spot, remain to future times,
An instance of my vengeance, and your crimes.

CLYTIE, behind the rocks. What! -- What is this I feel? -- I Am bound,
My feet are rooted to the ground.
A sudden stupor over me comes,
That every faculty benumbs;
Cold, cold, I freeze!
My blood congeals,
My eyesight fails,
Death invades me by degrees.
I stiffen upward -- Cruel -- so!
My heart -- my voice -- help -- help me -- oh!

PHOEBUS. It Is thus I have revenged, in one just hour,
My injured love, and my offended power.
Expose that wretch!
The Horae setting aside the rocks which obscured her, discover Clytie
transformed to a statue. Her Slaves gather about it weeping. Such ever be the
end
Of those rash mortals who with Gods contend.
But first to finish what there yet remains!
Thou horrid prospect of dry, sandy plains,
Unfit, all rueful as ye now appear,
To nurse the precious relics of my dear,
Smooth your rough face -- with instant verdure crowned,
Let smiling Spring encompass ye around;
While we in decent sorrows mourn the dead,
And with due rites appease her injured shade.

The scene is totally changed to a delightful prospect of a champaign country,
the Tree and Statue still in view. A dance is performed proper to the subject.
CHORUS. Enough! enough! your games give over,
The well-pleased ghost demands no more:
Deep in the coverts of the grove,
Where helpless lovers joy to rove,
Secure she rests, nor farther heeds
The weak effects of earthly deeds.

FINIS.

