SOP IN THE PAN FOR PETER PINDAR, ESQUIRE. OR, A LATE INVITATION TO CHELTENHAM: A
BURLESQUE POEM.

BY PINDAROMASTIX.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

MDCCLXXXVIII.

TO THE PUBLIC.
SOME apology may be required for my making so free with an old favorite of
yours. So many of you as are in the habit of admiring the sublime performances
of our English Pindar, will, do doubt, exclaim against me for assigning a post
at Court, the most humiliating of all others, to your darling Poet. But this is
the very thing I intended: for this favorite of yours (like many other
favorites) has been spoiled by too much indulgence, and is grown so
intolerably saucy, that he ought to be taken down a little. But there may be
others among you who will acknowledge P. Pindar to be fair game, and who may
say that this gentle castigation is not half so much as he deserves for that
impudent mockery and caricature which he has so often pointed at his S -- n. To
all such, it may not be amiss to intimate, that I have another birch in soak
for Master Peter, which, I think, will give him a smart flagellation. The few
lines which I now hazard the publication of, are only meant as preparatory to
the introduction of this other labor of my sportive Muse, provided that I find
this my first essay is tolerably well received, and that it is acknowledged to
be of sufficient merit to entitle me, in some small degree, to the signature of

PINDAROMASTIX.

SOP IN THE PAN, etc.
HAIL! funny Bard, of never-ceasing lay,
To Chelt'nham's favorite fountain speed thy way.
Wherever thy commons be, and mimic joke,
Whether with guzzling cits 'midst London smoke,
Or, far removed to thy own native moors,
With Cornish tinners, 'squires, or hugging boors;
Or whether you are still at thy old favorite sport,
Eaves-dropping slily at St. James's Court,
To catch another Kitchen Tale,
In Ode Pindaric to retail;
Wherever this friendly call may find thee,
Quick, mount thy Pegasus, and take thy muse behind thee;
(Not winged Pegasus in Poet's Fable,
But hackney Pegasus in liv'ry stable)
And whilst you are jogging on the turn-pike road,
Set all thy brains at work to hatch a merry Ode
To tickle thy loved King
At Chelt'nham's purging spring:
So shall thy Muse the royal favor gain,
And give thee rank among the courtly train;
That rank for which, sure, Fate and Nature framed thee,
Since neither stocks nor pillory has claimed thee.
Yes, witty Peter,
Thy merry meter,
If right I ween, will very soon
Exalt thee to be Court Buffoon,
With title and with pension,
And all that thou can wish or mention.
No more Pindaric Ballads shall thou sing,
Which poor, precarious, scanty dinner bring
To meagre Poetaster;
But pampered, courtly songster shall thou be,
Of jolly plight, and full of heartfelt glee,
The darling of thy Master.
Thus when the K -- g,
From Chelt'nham spring,
To Cloacina's temple shall repair
To pour the due libation,
His funny favorite only shall attend him there,
To help the operation.
Nor, faithless, thou this presage deem
Delusive sport of Poet's dream;
For whilst thy brother Bard of late
On Cloacina's tripod sat,
My fancy wandering to and fro,
I heard these accents rumble in the vault below.
"Haste thee Bard of funny lay,
"Peter Pindar come away,
"Friend and favorite of thy K -- g
"Hie thee down to C -- m spring."
The sounds which struck my ravished ear
Were more than mortal lugs could bear.
I sat amazed,
I gasp'd, I gazed,
So wondrous was the strain,
It almost cracked my brain.
My soul was struck with dire affray,
I buttoned up and ran away.
Now, Peter, if thou wilt not believe this true,
Then, Peter, you are an unbelieving Jew;
But if thou art a Jew, it may be proved from hence,
That thou art circumcised, by plainest consequence.
This thou know best, and it is thy own affair,
For, circumcised or not, I very little care.
But what I say is true as true can be,
And if thou wilt not believe, then hear and see.
[Now, gentle reader, thou art to suppose a Voice is heard as thus:]
Funny Peter,
Funny Peter,
Full of meter,
Full of meter.
Peter. Hark! what sounds assail mine ear?
Sure it is my S -- n's voice I hear.
O yes, from none but him these words can flow,
The r -- l duplicates full well I know.

G -- e. Yes, Peter, it is thy loved and loving K -- g;
For thee my bowels yearn at C -- m spring.
Now, Peter, run with utmost speed,
To help thy K -- g in time of need.
Put thy better foot before,
As thou did in days of yore,
In thy youthful occupation;
Whether some pregnant Cornish dame,
Or some hapless virgin's shame,
Called for quick obstetrication.
Friend Peter, you are so very droll, I find,
So full of humor and of comic matter,
To thee this courtly office I Have assigned,
To help the passage of my C -- m water.
Not one of all my subjects do I know
So fit to fill this pretty post as thou.
Act well thy part in this, and by and by
In other points thy talents I may try.
But, for the present, this will suit thee best,
'Twill give thee scope for many a merry jest;
For well I know that every thing thou wilt tell,
To make the people laugh at C -- m well.
But, Peter, in this fun of thine there are
Some things in which thy jokes are pushed too far.
My r -- l speech to make the ridicule
Of every little silly grinning fool; --
My words of Majesty for thee to play with,
Are liberties I neither can nor will away with.
I fear thou wilt turn out one of that vile sort
Of varlets which infest each monarch's court,
Who wear our livery suits and spite us,
Who eat our pudding and backbite us.

Peter. O, good my Liege, let me, your slave,
In humblest wise your pardon crave:
Perish that rhyme and doggrel jest,
If aught offends your r -- l breast.
But, Sire, if you will believe me,
You widely misconceive me,
Or else some courtier's envious tongue
Has done your slave this mighty wrong.
Wherever your sacred speech I quoted,
And in Pindarics fondly noted,
My sole intention was to prove
My zeal, my loyalty and love.
Of friends and lovers it is the usual way
To speak of all their favorites do and say,
Of every little pleasing anecdote to tell,
On every custom'd word and syllable to dwell.
My Liege, I longed to let your people know
How wondrous wise and quick your questions flow,
To make your loving subjects all rejoice
To hear the pleasing echo of your voice,
For which, believe me, there is such demand,
From folks of all degrees throughout the land,
That Kearsley's presses groan both night and day,
And his poor Dev'ls have neither rest nor play.
Even subterraneous tinners club their groats,
And hungry Scotchmen sell their very oats,
To purchase this delicious treat,
For which they gladly forfeit drink and meat.
O, if you knew how well your subjects love you,
I Am sure it would with joy and transport move you.
It glads the cockles of my heart to tell
How rapidly my Odes Pindaric sell;
Sure never monarch's words went off so well.

G -- e. Peter, I fear, in coming to this water,
Thou Wilt void thy wit, and only learn to flatter.
Already, I perceive, thou'st got thy cue,
I guess, from some of my St. J -- s's crew.
But think not thou to obtain my favor
By words of such insipid favor.
Think thou I Am hither for palaver come,
With which, thou know, I Am surfeited at home?
'Twas not for this thou heard'st me say
Funny Peter, haste and come away;
For thee my bowels yearn at C -- m spring,
O come to meet thy loved and loving K -- g.
Whilst here I live in vacant ease,
And do and say just what I please;
Now take my ride, now take my walk,
Now with my C -- m subjects talk:
Exempt from cabinets and public toils,
Released from Th -- w, P-tt, and council broils;
Whilst here I purge away my gout and bile,
Thy merry jests shall tickle me the while.
I know thou art a clever dog,
A witty and facetious rogue,
So full of humor and of comic matter,
Thy fun promotes the passage of this water.
Besides, I find thy witty folly
A sovereign cure for melancholy.
Now whilst my couriers evil tiding bring
Of P -- a's slippery oscillating K -- g,
Whenever thou see my r -- l breast
O'ercharg'd with sorrow and with grief,
Let off some pun, or witty jest,
So shall thou give me sure relief.
Then cease thy fawning and grimace,
Suit thy demeanor to thy place.
Further -- it is thine to tell me public rumor,
And bolt out truth whenever it is thy humor.
This priv'lege rare all jesters hold,
Allowed from merry times of old.
But, Peter, like thou such a birth as this?

Peter. O yes, yes, yes, my Liege -- O yes, yes, yes.

G -- e. Peter, leave off that hasty way of speaking,
Habits indulged are very hard of breaking.
I cannot divine where thou this trick have got,
For sure I am, from me thou had it not.

Peter. This trick, my Liege, I caught in mockery and play,
And, trust me, now I cannot leave off this apish way.

G -- e. Aye, very like; for mocking's catching, I Have heard say.
But let us digress no farther, lest we lose our way.
Now, Peter, know it is our r -- l will,
That thou this merry office shall fulfill.
In rhyme or prose display thy future jest;
But rhyme thou'st used me to, and so I like that best.
Mark well my words: I charge thee speak thy mind;
So shall thou prove thy Master ever kind.
Whenever I ask thee for advice,
Be sure to give it in a trice.
And now I Will try thy honesty and skill,
To see how well thy duty thou wilt fulfill.
I long to put thy talents to the test,
And from thy answers now, I Will judge of all the rest.
Now, Peter, truths there are, I hear,
Deep lodged in courtly well,
Which seldom come to Princes' ear,
And none but friends, like thee, will tell.
Then speak out, Peter, in thy own blunt way,
What do the people of my measures say?

Peter. Why, truly, Sire, they say it is a sad disaster
That servants should rebel against so good a Master.

G -- e. True, Peter, true; it is even so;
But, in this case, what can I do?
That Th -- w looks so grim, and talks so big,
When he gets on that awful C -- y wig;
With fist uprear'd, he gives me such a frown,
As if he really meant to knock me down.
Then B -- y P-tt, that stubborn, headstrong boy,
Is doomed no less my quiet to annoy.
What would they more?
They Have all the loaves and fishes;
They taste of all my store
Of sugar-plums and dishes;
And yet they quarrel all the while,
Like thieves dividing stolen spoil.
They Are just like all my former friends,
Nor K -- g nor commonweal they mind, but their own ends.
Now, Peter, tell me, what is thy advice?

Peter. O yes, I will, my Liege, and in a trice.
When saucy servants give themselves such airs,
Exert your r -- l foot, and kick the knaves down stairs.
Naught like a sudden tumble,
To make proud spirits humble.

G -- e. Why, Peter, thy advice is full and round,
But whether altogether safe and sound,
I must consider on it
When I have slept upon it.
But, Peter, say, have thou no private end?
No favorite of thy own to recommend?

Peter. Not I, my Liege, upon my troth;
On this I Will take my Bible oath.
All one to Peter whether Whig or Tory;
I only wish your happiness and glory.
To me it matters not who guides the helm,
So but prosperity attend the realm.
Yet, if these thankless fellows were turned out,
There is a man or two I could point out.
What says my Liege of C -- s F -- x?

G -- e. On him and all his crew a p -- x.

Peter. But, then, my Liege, there is P -- d's honest Duke.

G -- e. O name him, name him not, 'twill make me puke.
Peter, methinks, I smell a rat,
And shrewdly guess what thou would be at.
But play me none of these dog's tricks;
I relish not thy politics.
But now I feel another motion
From this same C -- m's watery potion.
Peter, attend me, thou know where,
And do thy proper office there.
So shall thou merit my regard,
And all thy service meet a full reward.

[Dialogue between G -- e and Peter ends.] Now! brother craft in doggrel rhyme,
I hope thou wilt take my word another time.
No lying Bard, thou see, I was,
For all I sung is come to pass.
O, Peter, it is a goodly thing
To be man-midwife to a laboring K -- g,
At C -- m spring.
Such office to a T will fit thee,
Sure nothing better could have hit thee;
Thy work so easy, thou wilt think naught no't,
Thy birth so sweet, I Am glad thy Master thought on it.
Now breed no more Pindaric riot,
But eat and drink, and sleep in quiet;
No longer tittle tattles tell
Of what, what, what? and well, well, well.
Henceforth forbear, poor Laureat Warton
And Birthday Song to be so smart on.
Whatever Tom's model and design
For future Ode, even pass it by;
It Is neither flesh nor fish of thine,
Thou'st other fish to fry.
A truce with all,
Both great and small;
With every brother courtier thou can name us,
From B -- y P-tt quite down to B -- y Ramus:
Birds alike of courtly feather
Flock and fatten all together.
Now, Peter, hold thy blabbing tongue,
And tell no tales, be it right or wrong.
If curious gossips want to pry,
Make Irish Paddy's short reply:
"By Jasus! honey, now I see and don't see,
"And many a thing, my dear, I see and will not see."
Peter, I know you are given to tattling;
Once more I charge thee, curb thy prattling.
I really wish, with all my heart,
Thou may not fail in this weak part.
If counsel good thou wilt not remember,
And steadily pursue it,
And govern thy unruly member,
I tell thee, thou shall rue it.
Disgraced at court, what can thou do?
Or where for food and raiment go?
Both ins and outs will flout thee,
Even Printers' Devils will scout thee.
Those Printers, Peter, are a wicked race;
All Authors know it:
Without remorse, they will grind the very face
Of friendless Poet.
To cope with them, there was but one
Of all our corpse, and he is gone:
Athletic Johnson, with an angry frown,
Could clinch his fist, and knock these fellows down.
He kept them all in awe so well,
Though soundly drubb'd, they durst not tell.
But now our champion is no more,
And long may we his loss deplore.
For cracking Printers' crowns with fist or cane,
We never shall see the like of Sam again.
And now of his support bereft,
And friendless and defenseless left,
They Will wreak their spite upon us all,
The weakest still must go to the wall.
It Is true, in fair and prosperous times,
And eager call for Poets' rhymes,
These Printers can be civil;
But when Pindarics will not sell,
They Will d -- n both them and thee to h-ll
Headlong, to serve the D -- l.
O, Peter, Printers are a broken reed
For Bards to rest uupon in time of need.
Thrice happy thou! whom Fortune's golden shower
Has kindly placed beyond their griping power.
Then if thou know when thou art well,
Thy courtly pudding eat, and nothing tell.
But if thy saucy gibe must needs break out,
Search out for game among that rebel rout
Which thwarts thy Master's pleasure;
On B -- ke and Sh -- d-n, and wicked F-x,
Thou may pour forth Pindaric jokes,
Sans number and sans measure.
What though thy quondam cronies mouth and bellow,
And call thee turn-coat, knave, and sh-tt-n fellow?
Tell them that thou have done no more
Than patriots often have done before.
Tell them it is aye
The Patriots' way,
To snarl and grin,
Till they get in.
Ask where is the man,
Of all their clan,
Since time began,
Or reivers ran,
Whom sop in pan
(Say what they can)
Did not trepan.
Come, then, my Buck,
Cheer up thy pluck,
As Brother W -- d says;
A fig for all the patriot clan,
Enjoy thy goodly sop in pan,
And happy be thy days.
FINIS.

