THE CONNOISSEUR.

BY MR. TOWN, CRITIC, and CENSOR-GENERAL.

VOL. II.

-- Non de villis domibusve alienis,
Nec male necne Lepos saltet; sed quod magis ad nos
Pertinet, et nescire malum est, agitamus.
HOR. LONDON: Printed for R. BALDWIN, at the Rose in Paternoster Row. MDCCLVI.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXI. THURSDAY, June 5, 1755.
Est brevitate opus, ut currat sententia, neu se
Impediat verbis lassas onerantibus aures:
Et sermon opus est modo tristi, saepe jocoso.
HOR.
AMONG the several degrees of authors, there are none perhaps, who have more
obstacles to surmount at their setting out, than the writers of periodical
essays. Talk with a modern critic, and he will tell you, that to set up a new
paper is a vain attempt after the inimitable SPECTATORS and others; that the
subjects are already preoccupied, and that it is equally impossible to find out
a new field for observation, as to discover a new world. With these prejudices
the public are prepared to receive us; and while they expect to be cloyed with
the stale repetition of the same fare, though tossed up in a different manner,
they have but little relish for the entertainment.

THAT the SPECTATOR first led the way, must undoubtedly be acknowledged: but
that his followers must for that reason be always supposed to tread in his
steps, can by no means be allowed. In the high road of life there are several
extensive walks, as well as bye-paths, which we may strike into, without the
necessity of keeping the same beaten track with those that have gone before us.
New objects for ridicule will continually present themselves; and even the same
characters will appear different by being differently disposed, as in the same
pack of cards, though ever so often shuffled, there will never be two hands
exactly alike.

AFTER this introduction I hope to be pardoned, if I indulge myself in speaking
a word or two concerning my own endeavors to entertain the public; which I
imagine I could never do with so good a grace, as at the beginning of my second
volume. And first, whatever objections the reader may have had to the subjects
of my papers, I shall make no apology for the manner in which I have chose to
treat them. The dread of falling into (what they are pleased to call)
colloquial barbarisms has induced some unskilful writers to swell their bloated
diction with uncouth phrases and the affected jargon of pedants. For my own
part, I never go out of the common way of expression, merely for the sake of
introducing a more sounding word with a Latin termination. The English language
is sufficiently copious and expressive without any further adoption of new
terms; and the native words seem to me to have far more force than any foreign
auxiliaries, however pompously ushered in: as British soldiers fight our
battles better than the troops taken into our pay.

THE subjects of my essays have been chiefly such, as I thought might recommend
themselves to the public notice by being new and uncommon. For this reason I
purposely avoided the worn out practice of retailing scraps of morality, and
affecting to dogmatize on the common duties of life. In this point, indeed, the
SPECTATOR is inimitable; nor could I hope to say any thing new upon these
topics after so many excellent moral and religious essays, which, are the
principal ornament of his work. I have therefore contented myself with exposing
vice and folly by painting the actors in their natural colors, without
assuming the rigidness of a preacher, or the moroseness of a philosopher. I
have oftener chose to undermine our fashionable excesses by secret sapping,
than to storm them by open assaults. In a word, upon all occasions I have
endeavored to laugh people into a better behavior; as I am convinced, that
the sting of reproof is not less sharp for being concealed; and advice never
comes with a better face, than when it comes with a laughing one.

THERE are some points in the course of this work, which perhaps might have
been treated of with a more serious air. I have thought it my duty to take
every opportunity of exposing the absurd tenets of our modern free-thinkers and
enthusiasts. The enthusiast is, indeed, much more difficult to cure than the
free-thinker; because the latter, with all his bravery, cannot but be conscious
that he is wrong; whereas the former has perhaps deceived himself into a
belief, that he is certainly in the right, and the more he is opposed, the more
he considers himself as "patiently suffering for the truth's sake." Ignorance
is too stubborn to yield to conviction; and on the other hand those, whom "a
little learning has made mad," are too proud and selfsufficient to hearken to
the sober voice of reason. The only way left us, therefore, is to root out
superstition, by making its followers ashamed of themselves: and as for our
free-thinkers, it is but right to turn their boasted weapons of ridicule
against them; and as they themselves endeavor to banter all others out of
their serious and virtuous notions, we too (in the language of the Psalmist)
should "laugh them to scorn, and have them in derision."

BUT whatever merit I may assume to myself from my writings, I must at the same
time confess myself indebted to several correspondents for many excellent
pieces; and more particularly to the gentlemen, who have signed themselves A.
B. and G. K. As I know not the real names of any of my correspondents, I am not
without some hopes, that I have been honored by an Earl or a Right Honorable
at least: for to say the truth, I cannot at present apply to myself the known
boast of Terence, -- Homines nobiles
Eum adjutare, assidueque una scribere.


IT is with infinite pleasure, that I find myself so much encouraged to
continue my labors, by the kind reception which they have hitherto met with
from the public: and Mr. Baldwin with no less pleasure informs me, that as
there are but few numbers left of the present edition, he intends to collect
them into Two Pocket Volumes. The reader cannot conceive, how much I already
pride myself on the charming figure, which my works will make in this new form:
and I shall endeavor to render these volumes as complete as I possibly can, by
several considerable additions and amendments. Though contracted into the small
space of a twelves volume, I still hope to maintain my former dignity; like the
Devils in Milton's Pandaemonium, who, -- To smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large.


THE SPECTATOR has very elegantly compared his single papers, as they came out,
to "cherries on a stick," of the dearness of which the purchasers cannot
complain, who are willing to gratify their taste with choice fruit at its
earliest production. I have considered my own papers as so many flowers, which
joined together would make up a pretty nosegay; and though each of them, singly
taken, may not be equally admired for their odours, they may receive an
additional fragrance by an happy union of their sweets.

CUSTOM has lately introduced a new fashion among essay-writers, of giving
translations of the mottos for the benefit of the ladies. But (as Denham has
remarked of translation in general) "the spirit of the original is evaporated
in the transfusion, and nothing is left behind but a mere caput mortuum."
Translations, however, must be given; and it has been the usual way to copy
them promiscuously from Dryden or Francis: though they are generally very wide
of the intended sense of the original, and not unfrequently nothing to the
purpose. For this reason I design to give new translations, or rather
imitations, of all the mottos and quotations, adapted to the present times.
Some of these will admit of epigrammatic turns; and many of them will afford
room for lively and picturesque allusions to modern manners. In this dress they
will at least appear more of a piece with the essays themselves; and not like
the patch-work of random translations.

IN the mean time, I shall only add, that if any Nobleman, Gentleman, or Rich
Citizen, is ambitious to have his name prefixed to either of these volumes, he
is desired to send in proposals, together with a list of his virtues and good
qualities, to the publisher; and the Dedications shall be disposed of to the
best bidder.

*None but principals will be treated with.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXII. THURSDAY, June 12, 1755.
-- Versus inopes rerum, nugaeque canorae.
HOR.
THE managers of our Public Gardens, willing to make their summer diversions as
complete as possible, are not content with laying out beautiful walks, and
providing an excellent band of music, but are also at much expense to amuse us
with the old English entertainment of Ballad-singing. For this end they not
only retain the best voices that can be procured, but each of them also has a
poet in ordinary, who is allowed a stated salary, and the run of the Gardens.
The productions of these petty laureats naturally come within my notice as
CRITIC; and, indeed, whether I am at Vauxhall, Ranelagh, Marybone, or even
Sadler's Wells, I indulge myself in many remarks on the poetry of the place;
and am as attentive to the songs as to the Cascade, the Fireworks, or Miss
Isabella Wilkinson.

BALLADS seem peculiarly adapted to the genius of our people; and are a species
of composition, in which we are superior to all other nations. Many of our old
English Songs have in them an affecting simplicity; and it is remarkable, that
our best writers have not been ashamed to cultivate this branch of poetry.
Cowley, Waller; Rofcommon, Row, Gay, Prior, and many others, have left behind
them very elegant Ballads; but it must be confessed, to the honor of the
present age, that it was reserved for our modern writers to bring this kind of
poetry to perfection. Song-writing is now reduced to certain rules of art, and
the Ballad-maker goes to work by a method as regular and mechanical, as a
carpenter or a blacksmith.

SWIFT, in his "Voyage to Laputa," describes a machine to write books in all
arts and sciences: I have also read of a mill to make verses; and remember to
have seen a curious table, by the assistance of which the most illiterate might
amuse themselves in composing hexameters and pentameters in Latin: Inventions
wonderfully calculated for the promotion of literature. Whatever gentlemen of
Grub-street or others are ambitious to inlist themselves as hackney sonetteers,
are desired to attend to the following rules, drawn from the practice of our
modern song-writers: a set of geniusses excellent in their manner, and who will
probably be hereafter as much known and admired as Garden-Poets, as the
celebrated Tailor is now famous under the denomination of Water-Poet.

I MUST beg leave possitively to contradict any reports, insinuating that our
Ballad-makers are in possession of such a machine, mill, or table as
abovementioned; and believe it to be equally false, that it is their practice
to hustle certain quaint terms and phrases together in a hat, and take them out
at random. It has, indeed, been asserted on some just ground, that their
productions are totally void of sense and expression, that they have little
rhyme and less reason, and that they are from beginning to end nothing more
than nonsensical rhapsodies to a new tune. This charge I do not mean to deny:
though I cannot but lament the deplorable want of taste, that mentions it as a
fault. For it is this very circumstance, which I, who am professedly a
CONNOISSEUR, particularly admire. It is a received maxim with all composers of
music, that nothing is so melodious as nonsense. Manly sense is too harsh and
stubborn to go through the numberless divisions and subdivisions of modern
music, and to be trilled forth in crotchets and demiquavers. For this reason,
thought is so cautiously sprinkled over a modern song; which it is the business
of the singer to warble into harmony and sentiment.

OUR Ballad-makers for the most part slide into the familiar style, and affect
that easy manner of writing, which (according to Wycherley) is easily written.
Seeing the dangerous consequence of meaning, in words adapted to music, they
are very frugal of sentiment: and indeed they husband it so well, that the same
thoughts are adapted to every song. The only variation requisite in twenty
ballads is, that the last line of the stanza be different. In this ingenious
line the wit of the whole song consists; and the author, whether he shall die
if he has not the lass of the mill, or deserves to be reckoned an ass, turns
over his dictionary of rhymes for words of a similar sound, and every verse
jingles to the same word with all the agreeable variety of a set of bells
eternally ringing the same peal.

THE authors of love-songs formerly wasted a great deal of poetry in
illustrating their own passion and the beauty of their mistress; but our modern
poets content themselves with falling in love with her name. There cannot be a
greater misfortune to one of these rhymers than a mistress with a hard name;
such a misfortune sends them all over the world and makes them run through all
arts, sciences, and languages for correspondent terms: and after all perhaps
the name is so harsh and untractable, that our poet has as much difficulty to
bring it into verse, as the celebraters of the Duke of Marlborough were puzzled
to reduce to rhyme the uncouth names of the Dutch Towns taken in Queen Anne's
wars. Valentine in Love for Love, when he talks of turning poet, orders Jeremy
to get the maids together of an evening to Crambo: no contemptible hint to our
Balladmakers, and which, if properly made use of, would be of as much service
to them as Byshe's Art of Poetry.

FEARING lest this method of song-writing should one day grow obsolete, in
order to preserve to posterity some idea of it, I have put together the
following dialogue as a specimen of the modern manner. I must, however, be
ingenuous enough to confess, that I can claim no farther merit in this elegant
piece than that of a compiler. It is a Canto from our most celebrated new
songs; from which I have carefully culled all the sweetest flowers of poetry,
and bound them up together for the delight and wonder of the world. As all the
lines are taken from different songs set to different tunes, I would humbly
propose that this curious performance should be sung jointly by all the best
voices, in the manner of a Dutch concert, where every man sings his own tune. I
had once some thoughts of affixing marginal references to each line, to inform
the reader by note at what place the song whence it is taken was first sung.
But I shall spare myself that trouble by desiring the reader to look on the
whole piece as arising from a coalition of our most eminent song-writers at
Vauxhall, Ranelagh, Marybone, and Sadler's Wells: assuring him, that this short
dialogue contains the pith and marrow, or rather (to borrow an expression from
the Fine Lady in Lethe) the Quinsetence and Emptity of all our modern songs.

A PASTORAL DIALOGUE, BETWEEN CORYDON and SARAH.
Sar. AH! whither so fast would my Corydon go?
Step in, you have nothing else to do.
Cor. They say I Am in love, but I answer no, no,
So I wish I may die if I do.
Once my heart played a tune that went pity pattie,
And I sighed, but I could not tell why.
Now let what will happen, by Jove I Will be free.
Sar. O fie, Shepherd, fie, Shepherd, fie.
Cor. Though you bid me begone back again,
Yet, Sally, no matter for that.
The Women love kissing as well as the men.
Sar. Why what a pox would you be at?
You told me a tale of a cock and a bull,
Upon my word he did.
Cor. I swear I meant nothing but playing the fool.
Sar. Very fine! very pretty indeed!
Cor. Come, come, my dear Sally, to church let us go,
No more let your answer be no.
Sar. The duce sure; is in you to plague a maid so.
I cannot deny you, you know.
CHORUS by BOTH.
No courtiers can be so happy as we,
Who bill like the sparrow and dove.
I love Sue, and Sue loves me,
Sure this is mutual love
THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXIII. THURSDAY, June 19, 1755.
-- Secernere sacra profanis.
HOR.
WALKING the other, day in Westminster Abbey, among the many oftentatious
monuments erected to kings and warriors, I could not help observing a little
stone, on which was this pompous inscription -- Aeternae Memoriae Sacrum --
Sacred to the Eternal Memory of --. The name of the person, to whom immortality
was thus secured, is almost obliterated; and perhaps, when alive, he was little
known, and as soon forgot by the small circle of his friends and acquaintance.

I HAVE been used to look upon epitaphs as a kind of flattering dedications to
the dead; in which is set down a long catalogue of virtues, (that nobody knew
they were possessed of while living) and not a word of their vices or follies.
The veracity of these posthumous encomiums may, indeed, be fairly suspected, as
we are generally told, that the disconsolate widow, or weeping son, erected the
monument in testimony of their affliction for the loss of the kindest husband,
or most affectionate father. But what dowager, who gets a comfortable jointure
by her good man's decease, would refuse to set her hand to it on his
tombstone, that he was the best of husbands; though perhaps they had parted
beds? or what heir would be so base and ungrateful, as not to give a few good
words to a crabbed parent after his death, in return, for his estate?

BY the extravagant praises, which are indiscriminately lavished on the ashes
of every person alike, we entirely pervert the original intent of epitaphs,
which were contrived to do honor and justice to the virtuous and the good: But
by the present practice the reputations of men are equally confounded with
their dust in the grave, where there is no distinction between the good and the
bad. The law has appointed searchers to enquire, when any one dies, into the
cause of his death: in the same manner I could wish, that searchers were
appointed to examine into his way of living, before a character be given of him
upon the tombstone.

THE flatteries, that are paid to the deceased, are undoubtedly owing to the
pride of their survivors, which is the same among the lowest as the highest set
of people. When an obscure grocer or tallow-chandler dies at his lodgings at
Islington, the newspapers are stuffed with the same parade of his virtues and
good qualities, as when a duke, goes out of the world: and the petty overseer
of a little hamlet has a painted board with the initials of his name stuck up
at the end of his wicker'd turf, while the noblemen reposes under a grand
mausoleum erected to his memory, with a long list of his titles and heroic
deeds.

THE Great, indeed, have found means to separate themselves even in their
graves from the vulgar, by having their ashes deposited in churches and
cathedrals, and covered by the most superb monuments. In my late visit to
Westminster Abbey, I could not but remark the difference of Taste, which has
prevailed in setting up these edifices for the dead. In former times, we find,
that they were content to clap up the bust or statue of the deceased, set round
perhaps with the emblems of his merits, his employment, or station of life. If
any person was remarkable for his virtue and piety, it was pointed out by two
or three little chubby-faced cherubims, who were crying for his death, or
holding a crown over his head. The warrior was spread along at full length in
a complete suit of armor, with the trophies of war hung round about him; and
the bishop was laid flat upon his back, with his coifed head resting on a stone
bible, and his hands joined together in the posture of praying.

IF Socrates, or any other of the ancient Philosophers could revive again, and
be admitted into Westminster Abbey, he would be induced to fancy himself in a
Pantheon of the Heathen Gods. The Modern Taste, (not content with introducing
Roman temples into our Churches, and representing the Virtues under allegorical
images) has ransacked all the fabulous accounts of the Heathen Theology to
strike out new embellishments for our Christian monuments. We are not in the
least surprised to see Mercury attending the tomb of an orator, and Pallas or
Hercules supporting that of a warrior. Milton has been blamed for his frequent
allusions to the Heathen Theology in his Sacred Poem: but surely we are more to
be condemned, for admitting the whole class of their fictitious deities into
the House of God itself.

IF there is not a stop put to this Taste, we may soon expect to see our
churches, instead of being dedicated to the service of religion, set apart for
the reception of the Heathen Gods. A deceased admiral will be represented like
Neptune, with a trident in his hand, drawn in a shell by dolphins, preceded by
Tritons, and followed by Nereids lashing the marble waves with their tails. A
general will be habited like Mars, bearing an helmet and spear in polished
stone; and a celebrated toast will be stuck up naked, like the Venus de
Medicis, cut in alabaster.

IT has been proposed (on a different account) to have a separate place
distinct from our churches, for the reception of our monuments. I could wish to
see such a scheme put in execution: for the present absurd mixture of the
several objects of Pagan and Christian belief, as represented on the tombs
lately set up in compliance of the modern taste, must be shocking to every
serious beholder. Our pious forefathers were content with exhibiting to us the
usual emblems of death, the hourglass, the skull, and the cross-marrow-bones:
but these are not sufficient for our present more refined age: The Three Fatal
Sisters, mentioned in the Heathen Mythology, must be introduced spinning,
drawing, and cutting the thread of life. Could one of the last century see a
winged figure blowing a trumpet on the top of a modern monument, he would be
apt to mistake it for an archangel, and be naturally put in mind of that awful
time, "when the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall rise." But the design,
we are told, is very different; and this winged messenger is no other than the
ancient personage of Fame, who is proclaiming the virtues of the defunct round
the world.

SHOULD any one propose to take down from St. Paul's Cathedral those paintings
of Sir James Thornhill representing the transactions of St. Paul, and in their
place to set up Titian's pictures of the amors of the Heathen Gods and
Goddesses, every one would be shocked at the impiety of the proposal. Nor is
the fashion of introducing Heathen Deities into our monuments much less absurd:
for while any of those are suffered to remain in our Churches, the reproof of
our Savior concerning the Temple at Jerusalem may perhaps become applicable to
the present times -- "My House is an House of Prayer; but ye have made it a DEN
OF THIEVES."

I HOPE I shall not be thought too grave or whimsical, if I earnestly recommend
it to the consideration of those whom it may concern, whether a reformation is
not necessary in our Churches, to purge them from these profane images; which,
though not the objects of our idolatry, have no more pretense to be set up in
the Temple of the Living Lord, than those of the canonized Saints of the Roman
Catholics.

MODERN Taste is continually striking out new improvements. We may therefore
conclude, that when our statuaries have traveled through the ancient Pantheon,
and exhausted all the subjects of the Grecian and Roman Mythology, we shall
have recourse to the superstitions of other nations for the designs of our
monuments. They will then probably be adorned with Egyptian Hieroglyphics, and
the tomb of some future hero may be built according to the model of the
Prophet's tomb at Mecca. It is not to be doubted, but that the Chinese Taste,
which has been already introduced into our gardens, our buildings, and our
furniture, will also soon find its way into our Churches; and how elegant must
a monument appear, which is erected in the Chinese Taste, and embellished with
dragons, bells, Pagods, and Mandarins!

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXIV. THURSDAY, June 26, 1755.
-- Non ita Romuli
Praescriptum, et intonsi Catonis
Auspiciis, veterumque norma.
HOR.
THERE is no method of reproof more in vogue, than the drawing invidious
parallels between the present times and the past. The grumbling politician
rails over his coffee at the present ministry, and reminds you with a sigh of
the golden Days of Queen Bess: while, in matters of less consequence, the
critic shakes his head at Mr. TOWN, and mentions BICKERSTAFF. But the moralists
are above all others devoted to this practice. These wise gentlemen are
continually looking backwards, and condemning what lays immediately before them
by retrospect. They are for ever harping on this jarring chord, and have scarce
more words in their mouths than the solemn sentences said to be delivered by
Friar Bacon's Brazen Head, Time is -- Time was -- Time is past.

NO comparisons of this sort are so frequently repeated, and so much insisted
on, as those drawn between the Ancients and Moderns. If an eloquent member of
the House of Commons is cruelly suspected of bellowing for a place, nothing
rings in his ears but Tully and Demosthenes. If a gentleman or perhaps a
nobleman, with a heavy mortgage on his estate, disencumbers it by selling his
interest at a county election, he is immediately upbraided with one Roman that
was not ashamed to follow the plough-tail, and another who could refuse large
bribes, and content himself with a cottage and turnips. If a lady makes an
unfortunate slip, she is told again and again of Lucretia, and fifty other
schoolboy tales of honor and chastity. In a word, there is not one
fashionable frailty but has some stubborn antiquated virtue set in opposition
to it; and our unhappy metropolis is every day threatened with destruction for
its degeneracy from the rigid maxims of Rome or Sparta.

IN the midst of all these severe reflections, it gives me infinite pleasure,
that I can with justice take notice of the incontestable superiority of the
Moderns in point of Modesty. The arrogance of the Ancients was so remarkable,
that, in their idea of a perfect character, they included every public and
private virtue. They aimed at a strict observance of all the duties of life:
and if some old Romans had been styled Gods while living, it would not have
been such gross flattery as was afterward practiced, in honoring the Emperors
with an Apotheosis. Their inflexible honesty was their perpetual boast, and
their virtue was their pride. This high idea of a Perfect Character among the
Ancients naturally urged them to lift themselves to an invidious superiority
above the rest of the world: while the modest Moderns, by taking all the vices
instead of the virtues into their notion of a Fine Gentleman, endeavor to let
themselves down to a level with the lowest of their species, and have laid the
surest foundation for humility. Fine Gentlemen are so far from being proud,
that they are never guilty of any thing which gives them the least reason to be
so: and our Fine Ladies have none of the disgusting haughtiness of virtue,
though indeed they are seldom known to be ashamed.

IT is impossible to devise one method of lowering the good opinion a man might
possibly conceive of himself, that has not been put in practice. No Fine
Gentleman ever aimed at acquiring any excellence, and if any natural
perfections might give some little occasion for pride, the greatest pains have
been taken to destroy them. Good parts have been often drowned in drunkenness,
and a strong constitution sweated away in bagnios: and in the mean time
learning has been totally neglected, lest improvement should bring on pedantry
and literary pride. The most shining parts in the character of a Fine Gentleman
are, that he drinks deep, dresses genteelly, rides well, can shoe his own
horse, and is possessed of some few other qualifications, which nobody can ever
suspect a mind the least given to ambition would ever labor to acquire. For my
part I am so far from agreeing with our famous satirist that love of fame is
the universal passion, that when I observe the behavior of our Fine Gentlemen,
I am apt to think it proceeds from the lowest and humblest turn of mind: indeed
their singular modesty appears to me the only means of accounting for their
actions, which commonly tend to place them in the meanest and most contemptible
light.

NOTHING but this invincible Modesty, and fear of seeming to aim at excellence,
could ever give rise to certain habits, not only ridiculous, but ungraceful.
Good eyes, for instance, are universally acknowledged to give luster to the
whole countenance, yet fashion and humility have blinded the whole town. The
beau draws his eyes out of his pocket, and the beauties kill us through
spying-glasses. It has been known to be the vogue for persons of fashion to
lose the use of their legs, and limp along as if they were crippled: this
practice I daily expect to be revived, for I take it for granted that the tall
staves now carried about must naturally dwindle into crutches. An inarticulate
lisp even now infects the delivery in polite conversation. It is not at all
unfashionable to pretend deafness; and unless the ladies object to it, I do not
despair of seeing the time when the whole modish world shall affect to be dumb.

THIS humble way of thinking has been carried so far, that it has even
introduced a new species of hypocrisy. Fine Gentlemen, fearing lest their good
qualities should in their own despite overbalance their bad ones, claim several
vices to which they have no title. There is something very admirable and
ingenuous in this disposition among our young people, who not only heartily
discover all their frailties, but accuse themselves of faults, which they never
intended to commit. I know a young fellow who is almost every morning
complaining of the headache, and cursing the last night's champagne at the St.
Alban's, when I am well assured he passed his evening very soberly with his
maiden aunts in Cheapside. I am also acquainted with another gentleman, who is
very fond of confessing his intrigues, and often modestly takes shame to
himself for the great mischief he does among the women; though I well know he
is too bashful even to make love to his laundress. He sometimes laments
publicly the unlucky consequences of an amor, and has more than once been
discovered to send pill-boxes and gallipots directed for himself, to be left at
the bar of neighboring coffee-houses. The same humble turn of mind induces the
frugal to appear extravagant: and makes many a religious young fellow deny his
principles, brave his conscience, and affect the character and conversation of
an Atheist. To say the truth, the generality of the gay world are arrant
hypocrites in their vices, and appear to be worse than they really are. Many of
our pretended Bloods are, in fact, no more drunkards, whoremasters, or
infidels, than a bully is a man of courage: and are as sincere in their boasts
of vice, as statesmen or beauties in their mutual professions of friendship.

THAT part of the female world, which composes the order of Fine Ladies, have
as much humility as their counterparts, the Fine Gentlemen. There is something
so charming in the fair sex that we should almost adore them, if they did not
lay aside all the pride of reputation, and by some good-natured familiarities
reduce themselves to an equality with us. It is indeed wonderful to see with
what diligence our polite ladies pare off the excellencies from their
characters. When we see them almost as naked as the Graces, it is natural to
suppose them as warmly devoted to Venus; and when we hear them talk loosely,
and encourage double meanings in conversation, we are apt to imagine their
notions of honor not very strict or severe. But after all this is frequently
mere hypocrisy, and the effect of humility. Many a lady very wanton in
appearance, is in reality very modest; and many a coquet has lost her
reputation, without losing her virtue. I make no doubt but that several ladies
of suspicious characters are not so bad as they seem, and that there are
honorable persons among the gayest of our women of quality.

TO return whence I see set out, the extraordinary Modesty of the Moderns, so
averse to the arrogant pride of the Ancients claiming all virtues and good
qualities whatsoever, is the only key to their behavior. Thus vice, or at
least the appearance of vice, becomes absolutely requisite to pass through the
world with tolerable decency, and the character of a man of spirit. As Sir John
Brute says, "they were sneaking dogs, and afraid of being damned in those
days," but we are better informed, and fear nothing but the appearance of too
much virtue. To secure the nobility, gentry, and others from so shocking an
imputation, I shall speedily present the world with a curious piece, compiled
from the practice and principles of the present times, entitled A New Treatise
on Ethics; or, a System of Immoral Philosophy. In this treatise I have treated
at large of Modern Modesty, shown the excellence and utility of Immorality, and
considered Drinking, Whoring, Fighting, and Gaming, as the four Cardinal Vices,
or in other words, the principal constituents of Bucks, Bloods and Fine
Gentlemen.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXV. THURSDAY, July 3, 1755.
Non tu corpus eras sine pectore. --
HOR.
GOODNATURE is to the mind, what beauty is to the body; and an agreeable
disposition creates a love and esteem for us in the rest of mankind, as an
handsome person recommends us to the good graces of the fair-sex. To say the
truth, any little defect in point of figure is sooner overlooked than a
sourness in the temper; and we conceive a more lasting disgust at a morose
churlishness of manners than at a hump-back or a pair of bandy legs.
Goodnature is, indeed, so amiable a qualification, that every man would be
thought to possess it: and the ladies themselves would no more like to be
accused of a perverse turn of mind than of an unhappy cast of features. Hence
it proceeds, that those unfortunate stale virgins, usually called Old Maids,
have both these heavy censures thrown upon them; and are at once condemned, as
ugly and ill-natured.

SOME persons are (according to the strict import of the phrase itself) born
Good-Natured. These fortunate people are easy in themselves, and agreeable to
all about them. They are, as it were, constitutionally pleasing, and can no
more fail of being affable and engaging in conversation, than a Hamilton or a
Coventry can be otherwise than beautiful and charming. Yet it is the duty even
of these, who are naturally endowed "with the soft parts of conversation." to
be careful not to deprave or abuse them. They must not rely too confidently on
their native agreeableness of temper: for we should no more esteem a man, who
discovered a negligence of pleasing, than we should admire a beauty, who was an
intolerable slattern. Nor on the other hand, should they let their Goodnature
run to an excess of compliment and extravagant civility: for an engaging temper
has been as often spoiled by this troublesome politeness, as a fine shape has
been squeezed into frightful distortions by bad stays, and a fine complexion
entirely ruined by paint.

BUT if this care is requisite even in those few, who are blessed with this
native complacency and good humor, how necessary is it for the generality of
mankind to labor at rectifying the irregularities in their temper. For this
purpose it would be fully sufficient, if they would employ half the art to
cultivate their minds, that is daily made use of to set off their persons. To
this important end not only the female delicacies of paint and essence are
called in as auxiliaries to the embroidered suits and French perukes, but this
anxiety to supply any personal defect has set the invention of artificers to
work with so much earnestness, that there is scarce any external blemish, which
may not be removed or concealed: and however unkindly nature may have dealt
with you, you may by their assistance be made a model for a statuary, or a
pattern for a painter to study. If you want an inch in height, your shoemaker
can supply it, and your hosier can furnish you with a pair of calves that may
put an Irishman to the blush. An irregularity in your shape can be made
invisible by your tailor, or at least by the artist near the Hay-market, who
daily gives notice, that he makes steel stays for all those who are INCLINED to
be crooked. There are various compounds and cosmetics that will cure spots and
freckles in the complexion, and combs and ointments that will change red hair
to the finest brown. Do you want an eye? Tailor will fill the vacant socket
with as bright a piercer as the family of the Pentweazles can boast: or is your
mouth deficient for want of teeth, Paul Jullion (to use his own phrase) will
rectify your head, and fix a set in your gums as even and beautiful as ever
adorned the mouth of a chimney-sweeper. These and many other inventions as
curious and extraordinary have been devised; and there are no operations,
however painful, which have not been submitted to with patience to conquer
personal deformities. I know a gentleman who went through the agony of having
his leg broke a second time, because it had been set awry; and I remember a
lady, who died of a cancer in her breast, occasioned by the application of
repelling plasters to keep back her milk, that the beauty of her neck might
not be destroyed. I most heartily wish the same resolution was discovered in
improving the disposition. Half the care that is taken of the body would have
happy effects upon the temper. Tully in that part of his Offices, where he
speaks of Grace, tells us, "that it is destroyed by any violent perturbations
either of the body or mind." It is a pity that mankind cannot be reconciled to
this opinion; since it is likely, they would spare no pains in cultivating
their minds if it tended to adorn their persons. Yet it is certain that a man
makes a worse figure with an ignorant pate than an unpowdered peruke, and that
knowledge is a greater ornament to the head than a bag or a smart cocked hat;
that anger sets like a blood-shot in the eyes, while goodnature lights them up
with smiles, and makes every feature in the face charming and agreeable. There
is a certain sweetness of disposition, which is sure to procure to those who
possess it the good will of their acquaintance; but it is as ridiculous for a
man to hope to be beloved, while he neglects to be amiable, as it would be in a
lady, who expects a multitude of admirers, to appear always in a dirty
dishabille.

THE difficulty of being convinced that we want this social turn, is the grand
reason that so little pains are taken to acquire and perfect it. Would a man
once be persuaded of any irregularity in his temper, he would find the
blemishes of the mind more easily corrected and amended than the defects and
deformities of the body; but alas! every man is in his own opinion sensible and
good-humored. It is, indeed, possible to convince us, that we have a bad
complexion or an awkward deportment, which we endeavor to amend by washes and
a dancing master; but when the mind is in fault, self-adulation, the most fatal
species of flattery, makes us cajole ourselves into a belief, that the fault is
not in our own disposition, but in that of our companions: as the mad
inhabitants of Moor-fields conclude all, that come to visit them, out of their
senses. A whimsical person complains of the perverseness of his acquaintance,
and constantly accuses them of fancy and caprice: and there never was an
instance of a positive untoward man, that did not continually rail at the
stubbornness and obstinacy of the rest of the world. A modern Buck damns you
for a sullen fellow, if you refuse a pint bumper, and looks upon you as a
sneaking scoundrel if you decline entering into any of his wild pranks, and do
not choose to lay all night in the round-house. It was the saying of an old
philosopher, that "the eye sees not itself:" but when this blind partiality is
carried so far, as to make us think those guilty of the folly who make us
sensible of it, it is surely as absurd as to imagine, that the hair-lip or
carbuncled nose, a man sees in the glass, belongs to the figure in the mirror,
and not to his own face. This foolish flattery it is, that makes us think
ourselves inflexibly right, while we are obstinately wrong, and prevents our
receiving or communicating, any pleasure in society. The untractable humourist,
while he disgusts all that are about him, conceives himself to be the person
affronted, and laments that there is no harmony in the conversation, though he
is himself the only one out of tune.

PERFECTION is no more to be expected in the minds of men than in their
persons: Natural defects and irregularities in both must be overlooked and
excused. All I desire at present is, that they would endeavor with equal
earnestness to cultivate their minds, as they do to adorn their persons. To
this end we should examine ourselves impartially, and not erect ourselves into
judges, and treat all the rest; of mankind like criminals. Would it not be
mighty ridiculous in a person of quality to go to court in a ruff, a cloak, a
pair of trunk breeches, and the habit worn in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and
while he strutted about in this antiquated garb, to accuse all the rest of the
world of being out of the fashion? As we are composed of a body and mind, equal
attention should be paid to both; and we should not be anxious to cloth the
person, and at the same time let the mind go naked. We should be equally
assiduous to obtain knowledge and virtue as to put on lace and velvet: and when
our minds are completely dressed, we should take care that goodnature and
complacency influence and direct the whole; which will throw the same grace
over our virtues and good qualities, as fine clothes receive from being cut
according to the fashion.

I CANNOT conclude better than with a passage from Swift's Tale of a Tub, where
the strict analogy between the clothing of the mind and the body is
humourously pointed out. "Man (says he) is a Micro-coat. As to his body there
can be no doubt; but examine even the acquirements of his mind, you will find
them all contribute in their order toward furnishing out an exact dress. To
instance no more; is not religion a cloak, honesty a pair of shoes worn out in
the dirt, self-love a surtout, vanity a shirt, and conscience a pair of
breeches, which though a cover for lewdness as well as nastiness, is easily
slipped down for the service of both."

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXVI. THURSDAY, July 10, 1755.
Vomeris huc and falcis honos, huc omnis aratri
Cessit amor: recoquunt patrios fornacibus enses:
Classica jamque sonant: it bello tessera signum.
VIRG.
THE British Lion, who has for a long time past been a passive couchant beast,
or at most been heard to growl and grumble, now begins to roar again. His
tremendous voice has roused the whole nation, and the meanest of the people
breathe nothing but war and revenge. The encroachments of the French on our
colonies are the general topic of conversation, and the popular cry now runs
NEW England for ever! Peace or War has been the subject of bets at White's as
well as debates at the Robin Hood; and "a Fleet roasting, new world's new
dress, the colonies in a rope, etc." were, last Sunday, the subjects of a
prayer and lecture at the Oratory in Clare Market. The theaters also, before
they closed the season, entertained us with several warlike Dramas: The Press
Gang was exhibited at Covent Garden; and at Drury Lane, the same sea that
rolled its canvas billows in pantomime at the beginning of the season, to carry
Harlequin to China, was again put in motion to transport our sailors to North
America. At present the streets ring with the martial strains of our ballad
singers, who are endeavoring, like Tyrtaeus of old, to rouse their fellow
countrymen to battle: while all the polite world are hurrying to Portsmouth to
see mock-fights, and be regaled on board the Admiral.

THIS posture of affairs has occasioned politics, which have been long
neglected as studies useless and impertinent, to become once more fashionable.
Religion and politics, though they naturally demand our constant attention, are
only cultivated in England by fits. Christianity sleeps among us, unless roused
by the apprehensions of a plague, an earthquake, or a Jew-bill: and we are
alarmed for a while at the sudden news of an invasion or a rebellion, but as
soon as the danger is over, the Englishman, like the soldier recovered from his
fright occasioned by Queen Mab's drumming in his ear, "swears a prayer or two,
and sleeps again." To preach up public spirit, is at some seasons only blowing
a dead coal; but at others, an accidental blast kindles the embers, and they
mount into flame in an instant. The reign of politics seems at present to be
re-commencing. Our newspapers contain dark hints and shrewd conjectures from
the Hague, Paris, and Madrid; and spirited orations from Nova Scotia: and the
lie of the day is artfully contrived to influence the rise and fall of the
money-barometer in Change-Alley. This is the present state of politics within
the bills of mortality, of which I shall now take no further notice, but submit
to the perusal of my readers the following letter from my Cousin VILLAGE on the
same important subject.

To Mr. TOWN.
--, June 30 1755. DEAR COUSIN!
WAR, though it has not laid our fields waste or made our cities desolate,
engrosses almost all the attention of this place. Every farm-house swarms with
politicians, who lay their wise heads together for the good of the nation, and
at every petty chandler's shop in town, while the half quarterns of tea are
weighed out, the balance of Europe is adjusted. The preparations now making by
sea and land are as popular subjects as the price of hay or the
Broad-Wheel-Act. Success to our noble admirals, and a speedy war, are also as
common toasts over a mug of ale as a good harvest: though it must be owned,
that some selfish farmers, who have not an equal share of public spirit and
love of their country with their fellow rustics, are somewhat apprehensive of
the influence, which a war may have upon the Land Tax.

I AM at present on a visit to Sir Politic Hearty, who is one of those country
gentlemen, that are continually athirst for news, and are more anxious about
the affairs of the nation, than the care of their own estates. Sir Politic is
miserable three days in the week for want of fresh intelligence; but his
spirits revive at the sound of the posthorn, when the mail brings him the
Lomdon Evening Post, and a long letter of news from his nephew at the Temple.
These Sir Politic himself reads after dinner to me, the curate of the parish,
and the town-apothecary, whom he indulges with the run of his table for their
deep insight into the proceedings of the government. He makes many shrewd
remarks on every paragraph, and frequently takes the opinion of the two Doctors
(for he honors both the curate and apothecary with that title) on the
asterisks, dashes, and italics. He has also discovered several mysteries in his
Majesty's visit to Hanover, has elected a king of the Romans, and laid a better
plan for discharging the national debt, than has ever yet been proposed by
Jacob Henriques. Many of his reflections have given me great entertainment but
I was never more diverted than at the following droll incident at one of our
late privy councils. Sir Politic's nephew, who, it seems, has made as great a
proficiency in the study of the Humbug as of the law, sent him down, as a
serious prophecy, a new pamphlet humourously foretelling the destruction of the
French from Ezekiel. This the unsuspicious Baronet read very gravely over, and
then turning to the curate, cried out, "Rare news, doctor! -- Come fill a
bumper to Old England -- We have the bible of our side, you see, and hark ye,
Doctor, I Would advise you as a friend to preach a sermon upon Thou shall be
desolate, O MOUNT SEIR!"

NOTHING at first puzzled the honest baronet, and the rest of our country
politicians so much as the new seat of war. They were pretty tollerably
acquainted with Brussels, Ghent, Antwerp, and the other scenes of action in
Flanders, but Virginia, the Ohio, the Lake Ontario, etc. (to use a common
phrase) were quite out of their latitude. This difficulty was however at length
surmounted by the templar's transmitting to his uncle one of D' Anville's maps,
which has enabled the baronet sometimes to delineate the progress of the French
up the Ohio in meanders of port winding along the table, and sometimes to
demolish the forts lately raised by the enemy behind Pensylvania and at Crown
Point. Sir Politic has indeed studied Monsieur D' Anville very thoroughly, and
I dare say is better acquainted with his plan of North America, than with the
map of his own estate.

WAR never fails of producing several groundless and contradictory reports; but
if Fame is a lying jade in town, she is the idlest gossip that ever spoke in
the country. It is impossible for you, Cousin, or any of your readers, who
reside constantly in London, to form any tolerable idea of a country
news-paper. There is in this town a petty printer who sets his press to work
once a week by publishing a journal, which contains advices more extraordinary,
if not authentic, than the gazette. It has been his custom for some years past
to raise apparitions in country churches, to give accounts of battles fought in
the air, comets, and several other preternatural phoenomena: but since the
rumor of a war, he has dealt in nothing but skirmishes and engagements. He
gave the French fleet several furious broadsides before it sailed from Breast,
and has gained us several victories in Virginia; though in his last journal he
shot off both Boscawen's legs, and made him fight, like Witherington, on his
stumps; and it was but yesterday that Sir Politic, on the authority of a letter
from his nephew, confuted this intelligence, and set the Admiral on his legs
again.

THIS, Cousin, is the present state of politics at --, which I think, in the
style of our newspapers, might cause you much speculation. You would be of
great service, if you could persuade our country statesmen that they would be
better employed at their rustic occupations than in managing the affairs of the
nation, and that many a man would make a scurvy figure at the helm of the
state, who is of great use at the plough-tail. As to my friend Sir Politic, I
should be very glad if he would leave the conduct of the war, and the
destination of our fleets and armies to the ministry, who will, I doubt not,
adjust matters as prudently as himself, the curate, and apothecary: and I think
his thoughts might be more properly exercised in contriving some method of
redeeming two heavy mortgages that incumber his estate, than in laying plans
for the discharge of the national debt.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXVII. THURSDAY, July 17, 1755.
Cum pulchris tunicis sumet nova consilia et spes.
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
July 14, 1755. SIR!
I READ your late paper, showing the close analogy which clothing the body
bears to adorning the mind, with great attention: and am thoroughly persuaded,
that the generality of mankind would be as glad to embellish their minds as to
set off their persons, if they could procure knowledge, virtue, and
goodnature, with the same ease that they can furnish themselves with the
ornaments of the body. The clown in rug or duffel can, at a moment's warning,
be furnished with a complete suit of lace or embroidery from Monmouth-street:
his long lank greasy hair may be exchanged in Middle Row for a smart bag or a
jemmy scratch; and his clouted shoes, with the rough hobnails in the heel and
sole clumping at every step, may be transformed into a pair of dancing pumps at
the Yorkshire Warehouse, or the Old Crispin in Cranbourn Alley. The draggled
street walker can rig herself with a clean smock, a linen gown, and a hat
smartly cocked up behind and before, in Broad St. Giles's; or if she can afford
it, every pawn-broker will let out a gold watch with coronets, a tissue or
brocaded sack, and all the paraphernalia of a countess. But where, Mr. TOWN,
can these people go to cloth their minds, or at what shops are retailed sense
and virtue? Honor and honesty are not to be purchased in Monmouth-street:
Knowledge is not infused into the head through the powder-puff; and, as good
wine needs no bush, sense is not derived from the full-bottomed periwig. The
woman of the town, vamped up for show with paint, patches, plumpers, and every
external ornament that art can suggest, knows no method to beautify her mind.
She cannot for any price buy chastity in Broad St. Giles's, or hire honesty
from the pawnbroker's.

SEEING therefore at one view the difficulty in obtaining the accomplishments
of the mind, and the exact analogy they bear to dress, I have been laboring
this week past to remedy that inconvenience, and have at length devised a
scheme which will fully answer that purpose. In a word then, I shall next
winter open a shop or warehouse in the most public part of the town, under the
name of a MIND-AND BODY-CLOTHIER: two trades which, though never yet united,
are so far from being incompatible, that they are in their nature inseparable.
I shall not only supply my friends with a suit or a single virtue, but furnish
them with complete habits of mind and body from head to foot: and by a certain
secret art in the form and texture of the things sold, the required virtues
shall be as inherent in them, as the materials of which they are composed. That
such virtues may be transfused by clothes is evident from experience. In the
narrow extent of my reading, Mr. TOWN, I remember to have met with an account
of Fortunatus's Wishing-Cap, by which he could transport himself in an instant
from one place to another: It is also well known, that the famous Jack the
Giant-killer possessed a sword of sharpness, shoes of swiftness, and a coat of
invisibility. Why then may not I sell a suit of patriotism, a sword of honor,
and retail modesty and chastity to fine ladies in tuckers and aprons. My scheme
is already in great forwardness; and I shall be able to accommodate my
customers by the next birthday: wherefore, as Messieurs Paris and others daily
advertise in the newspapers, I also choose to give the world public notice of
my scheme, and shall be proud to see them first apprised of it by means of your
paper.

NO one, who duly considers the natural influence, which clothes commonly have
upon their wearers, will object to my scheme as utterly impracticable. That a
person can put on or throw off the internal habits of his mind together with
his coat or his perriwig, is plain in very numerous instances. The young
counselor, who every morning in term time takes the measure of
Westminster Hall with the importance of a judge upon the circuit, at once
divests himself of his gravity with the starched band and long robe, and
resumes the spirit of a buck together with the sword and bag-wig. In the same
manner the orthodox vicar once a week wraps himself up in piety and virtue with
his canonicals; which qualities are as easily cast off again as his surplice;
and for the rest of the week he wears the dress as well as the manners of his
fox-hunting patron. We may learn the disposition of a man by his apparel, as we
know the trade of a carpenter by his leathern apron, or a soldier by his red
coat. When we see a snuff-coloured suit of ditto with the bolus buttons, a
metal headed cane, and an enormous bushy grizzle, we as readily know the wearer
to be a dispenser of life and death, as if we had seen him pounding a mortar or
brandishing a clyster-pipe. The different affections of the mind have been
distinguished by different colors; as scarlet has been made to represent
valor, yellow to denote jealousy, and true blue to signify integrity: but we
may likewise discover all the virtues and vices lurking in the different parts
of the apparel. When at a city feast I see the guests tucking their napkins
into their shirt-collars, as if they were all of them going to be shaved, I
very well know that their thoughts wear a different dress than in the Alley:
and when the antiquated toast is laying on her complexion at the toilette, and
repairing the ruins of beauty, what is she doing but patching her mind with
pride and conceit? In a word, I can discover impudence staring from the bold
cock of a Kevenhuller, frugality skulking in a darned stocking, coquetry spread
out in a hooppetticoat, and soppery dangling from a shoulder-knot. I often
please myself with thus remarking the various dresses of the mind; and by the
clue you have already given us I have been able to unfold the inmost linings of
the heart, and discover "the very stuff of the thoughts."

IT must, however, be owned, that in these matters the nicest penetration may
be imposed on; since in the present random method of dressing, many persons
appear in masquerade. This inconvenience, among many others, will be remedied
by my project; for, as whoever deals with me will at once cloth his mind and
his body, the whole town will be dressed in character. Thus if a
chimney-sweeper or a plough-boy put on a suit of embroidery, a sword, bag-wig,
etc. they will at the same time invest themselves with the internal dignity of
a person of quality: my lady's youngest son may buy courage with his
regimentals, and orthodoxy may be purchased at the same time with a gown and
cassock by the young smarts from the universities. My scheme also further
recommends itself, by laying open the only path to virtue and knowledge, that
the world will choose to follow: and as my clothes will always be cut according
to the newest and most elegant manner, these qualifications of the mind,
inherent in them, must necessarily come into fashion. Thus our fine gentlemen
will learn morality under their valet de chamber; and a young lady of fashion
will acquire new accomplishments with every new ribband, and become virtuous as
well as beautiful at her toilette. I depend on your readiness to promote my
scheme; but what I most earnestly entreat of you, Mr. TOWN, is to use your
utmost interest with the polite world, but especially with the ladies, not to
discard clothes entirely; as by such a resolution my scheme must be defeated:
and indeed it will not be in the power of man to give them virtue, if they
determine to go naked.

AS knowledge and virtue can never be sufficiently diffused, my warehouse will
be calculated for general use, and stored with large assortments of all kinds
of virtues and dresses, that I may suit persons of whatever denomination.
Physicians may be furnished from my shop with gravity and learning in the ties
of a perriwig; sergeants at law may be fitted with a competent knowledge of
reports under a coif; and young counselors may be endued with a sufficient
fund of eloquence for the circuits, in a smart tie between a bob and a flow,
contrived to cover a toupee. I shall sell religion to country parsons in
pudding-sleeves, and to young town curates just come from the university, in
doctors scarfs and cut grizzles: I shall have some pious ejaculations,
whinings, and groans, ready cut out in leathern aprons and blue frocks, for the
preaching fraternity of carpenters, bricklayers, tallow-chandlers, and
butchers, at the Tabernacle and Foundery in Moor-fields. For our military
gentlemen designed to go abroad, I shall have several parcels of true British
courage woven in a variety of cockades and sword-knots: and for our fine
gentlemen, who stay at home, I have provided a proper quantity of French
Bagatelle, in cut velvet, lace and embroidery, neat as imported.

AS the ladies, I suppose, will all of them to a woman be desirous of
purchasing beauty with every branch of the female apparel, I am afraid I shall
not be able to answer their demands: but I shall have several dresses, which
will make up for the want of it. I shall have neatness done up in a great
variety of plain linen; decency and discretion in several patterns for mobs,
hoods, and nightgowns; together with modesty disposed into tuckers, kerchiefs
for the neck, stays that almost meet the chin, and petticoats that touch the
ground. I shall also have a small portion of chastity knit into garters, and
laces for the stays, very proper to be worn at masquerades and assemblies.

I HAD almost forgot to mention, that authors, who are often in equal want of
sense and clothes, shall be fitted out by me with both at once on very
reasonable rates. As for yourself, Mr. TOWN, I shall beg leave to present you
with an entire suit of superfine wit and humor, warranted to wear well, and
appear creditable, and in which no author would be ashamed to be seen.

I am, Sir, your humble servant EUTRAPELUS TRIM.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXVIII. THURSDAY, July 24, 1755.
[A very uncommon though just vein of thought, runs through the following
letter. I shall add nothing more in recommendation of it, but only assure my
correspondent that I shall be very glad to hear from him again.]

Aetatis cujusque notandi sunt tibi mores.
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR!
NOTHING appears to me to be more necessary in order to wear off any
particularities in our behavior, or to root out any perverseness in our
opinions, than mixing with persons of ages and occupations different from our
own. Whosoever confines himself entirely to the society of those who are
engaged in the same persuits, and whose thoughts naturally take the same turn
with his own, acquires a certain stiffness and pedantry of behavior, which is
sure; to make him disagreeable, except in one particular set of company.
Instead of cramping the mind by keeping it within so narrow a circle, we should
endeavor to enlarge it by every worthy notion and accomplishment; and temper
each qualification with its opposite, as the four elements are compounded in
our natural frame.

THE necessity of this free conversation, to open and improve the mind, is
evident from the consequences, which always follow a neglect of it. The
employment each man follows, wholly engrosses his attention, and tinges the
mind with a peculiar die, which shows itself in all the operations of it,
unless prevented by natural good sense and liberal education. The physician,
the lawyer, and the tradesman will appear in company, though none of those
occupations are the subject of discourse; and the clergyman will grow morose
and severe, who seldom or never converses with the laity. But if no particular
profession has this influence over us, some darling passion or amusement gives
a color to our thoughts and actions, and makes us odious, or at least
ridiculous. Fine ladies for instance, by despising the conversation of sensible
men, can talk of nothing but routes, balls, assemblies, birthday suits, and
intrigues; and fine gentlemen, for the same reason, of almost nothing at all.
In like manner, the furious partizan, who has not been weaned from a mad
attachment to particular principles, is weak enough to imagine every man of a
different way of thinking a fool and a scoundrel; and the sectary or zealot
devotes to eternal damnation all those, who will not go to heaven in the same
road with himself, under the guidance of Whitefield, Wesley, or Count
Zinzendorff. To the same cause we owe the rough country squire, whose ideas are
wholly bent on guns, dogs, horses, and game; and who has every thing about him
of a piece with his diversions. His hall must be adorned with stags heads
instead of busts and statues, and in the room of family pictures, you will see
prints of the most famous stallions and race-horses: all his doors open and
shut with foxes feet, and even the buttons of his clothes are impressed with
the figures of dogs, foxes, stags, and horses. To this absurd practice of
cultivating only one set of ideas, and shutting ourselves out from any
intercourse with the rest of the world, is owing that narrowness of mind which
has infected the conversations of the polite world with insipidity, made
roughness and brutality the characteristics of a mere country gentleman, and
produced the most fatal consequences in politics and religion.

BUT if this commerce with the generality of mankind is so necessary to remove
any impressions, which we may be liable to receive from any particular
employment or darling amusement, what precautions ought to be used, in order to
remedy the inconveniences naturally brought on us by the different ages of
life! It is not certain that a person will be engaged in any profession, or
given up to any peculiar kind of pleasure, but the mind of every man is subject
to the inclinations arising from the several stages of his existence, as well
as his body to chronical distempers. This indeed, Mr. TOWN, is the principal
cause of my writing to you, for it has often given me great concern to see the
present division between the young and the old; to observe elderly men forming
themselves into clubs and societies, that they may be more securely separated
from youth; and to see young men running into dissipation and debauchery,
rather than associate with age. If each party would labor to conform to the
other, from such a coalition many advantages would accrue to both. Our youth
would be instructed by the experience of age, and lose much of that severity,
which they retain too long: while at the same time the wrinkled brow of the
aged would be smoothed by the sprightly cheerfulness of youth; by which they
might supply the want of spirits, forget the loss of old friends, and bear with
ease all their worldly misfortunes. It is remarkable, that those young men are
the most worthy and sensible, who have kept up any intercourse with the old;
and that those old men are of the most cheerful and amiable disposition, who
have not been ashamed to converse with the young.

I WILL not pretend to decide which party is most blameable in neglecting this
necessary commerce between each other, which, if properly managed, would be at
once so beneficial and delightful: but it undoubtedly arises from a certain
selfishness and obstinacy in both, which will not suffer them to make a mutual
allowance for the natural difference of their dispositions. Their inclinations
are indeed as different as their years; yet each expects the other to comply,
though neither will make any advances. How rarely do we see the least degree of
society preserved between a father and son! a shocking reflection, when we
consider that nature has endeavored to unite them by parental affection on one
side, and filial gratitude on the other. Yet a father and son as seldom live
together with any tolerable harmony as a husband and wife; and chiefly for the
same reason: for though they are both joined under the same yoke, yet they are
each tugging different ways. A father might as well expect his son to be as
gouty and infirm as himself, as to have the disposition which he has contracted
from age: and a son might as reasonably desire the vigor and vivacity of five
and twenty, as his own love of gaiety and diversions in his father. It is
therefore plainly evident, that a mutual endeavor of conforming to each other
is absolutely requisite to keep together the cement of natural affection, which
the want of it so frequently dissolves: or at at least, if it does not disturb
the affection, it constantly destroys the society between father and son.

THIS unhappy and unnatural division is often the subject of complaint in
persons of both ages, but is still unremedied because they neither reflect on
the cause whence it proceeds. Old men are perpetually commenting on the extreme
levity of the times, and blaming the young, because they do not admire and
court their company: which indeed is no wonder, since they generally treat
their youthful companions as mere children, and expect such a slavish deference
to their years, as destoys that equality by which cheerfulness and society
subsists. Young men do not like to be chid by an ill-natured proverb, or
reproved by a wrinkle: but though they do not choose to be corrected by their
grave seniors, like schoolboys, they would be proud to consult them as
friends; which the injudicious severity of old age seldom will permit, not
deigning to indulge them with so great a degree of freedom and familiarity.
Youth, on the other hand, shun the company of age, complaining of the small
regard and respect paid to them, though they often act with so little reserve
and such unbecoming confidence as not to deserve it. Suppose the old were
pleased with the natural flow of spirits and lively conversation of youth,
still some respect may be challenged as due to them: nor should the decency and
sobriety of their characters ever be insulted by any improper or immodest
conversation.

I AM an old man myself, Mr. TOWN, and I have an only boy, whose behavior to
me is unexceptionable: permit me therefore to dwell a moment longer on my
favorite subject, and I will conclude. With what harmony might all parents and
children live together, if the father would strive to soften the rigor of age,
and remember that his son must naturally possess those qualities, which ever
accompany youth; and if the son would in return endeavor to suit himself to
those infirmities which his Father received from old age! If they would
reciprocally study to be agreeable to each other, the father would insensibly
substitute affection in the room of authority, and lose the churlish severity
and peevishness incident to his years: while the son would curb the unbecoming
impetuosity of his youth, change his reluctance to obey into a constant
attention to please, and remit much of his extreme gaiety in conformity to the
gravity of his father. Wherever such a turn of mind is encouraged there must be
happiness and agreeable society; and the contrary qualities of youth and age,
thus compounded, compose the surest cement of affection, as colors of the most
opposite tints by a skilful mixture, each giving and receiving certain shades,
will form a picture, the most heightened and exquisite in it is coloring.

I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant, JOHN BEVILL.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXIX. THURSDAY, July 31, 1755.
-- O te, Bollane, cerebri
Felicem! aiebam tacitus, dum quidlibet ille
Garriret, vicos, urbem laudaret. --
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
I HAVE been very much diverted with your observations on our honest tradesmen,
who make weekly excursions into the neighboring villages; and I agree with
you, that the generality of our citizens seldom dare trust themselves out of
the sight of London smoke, or extend their travels further than with their
wives and children in the Wandsworth double post-chaise, or the Hampton long
coach. But we may now and then pick up a stray citizen, whom business has
dragged beyond the bills of mortality, as it happened to myself the other day
about twenty miles from London: and as I was mightily pleased with his
behavior and conversation, I have taken the liberty to send you an account of
it.

BEING caught in a shower upon the road, I was glad to take shelter at the
first inn I came to; which, if it had been called the NEW INN, I should have
thought, from its antique appearance, that it had been an house of
entertainment in the time of our great grandfathers. I had scarce alighted,
when a strange figure (driven thither, as I supposed, on the same account with
myself,) came soberly jogging into the yard, dripping wet. As he waited for the
steps, before he would venture to get off his horse, I had the opportunity of
surveying his whole appearance. He was wrapped up in an old threadbare
weather-beaten surtout, which I believe had once been scarlet; the cape was
pulled over his head, and buttoned up close round his face; and his hat was
flapped down on each side, and fastened about his ears with a list garter tied
under his chin. He wore upon his legs something that resembled splatterdashes,
which (as I afterward learned) were cut out of an old pair of boots; but his
right shoe was considerably larger than the other, and had several slits in the
upper leather. He had spurs on, indeed, but without rowels; and by way of whip
a worm-eaten cane, with a bone head studded with brass pins, hung from his
wrist by a string of greasy black leather.

I SOON found I was nobody: for the GENTLEMAN, it seems, took up the whole
attention of the maid, mistress, and ostler, who all of them got round him, and
with much difficulty, by the assistance of the steps, helped him down. My
landlady, (after the usual welcome) before it was possible for her to see any
part of him but his nose, told him "he looked brave and jolly;" and when she
had led him into the kitchen, she fetched a large glass of what she called "her
own water," which (she said) would keep the cold out of his stomach. All hands
were now busied in drawing off his surtout, which discovered underneath a
full-trimmed white coat, and a black velvet waistcoat with a broad gold lace
very much tarnished. The surtout was hung to dry by the fire as well as his
coat, the place of which was supplied by a long riding-hood of my landlady; and
as the gentleman complained of having suffered by a loss of leather, the maid
was dispatched to the doctor's for some diachylon. The usual question now
succeeded, concerning dinner; and as he observed I was all alone, he very
courteously offered me to join company, which I as readily accepted.

THE important business of dinner being settled, we adjourned into a private
room; when my fellow-guest told me of his own accord, that he lived in London;
that for these twenty years he had always come to the town we were now in, once
a year, to receive money, and take orders for goods; and that he had always put
up at this house. He then run on in the praises of the landlady; and tipping me
a wink, "ay, says he, she has been a clever woman in her time, before she bore
children." He added, that for his part he did not like your great inns; for
that they never looked upon any thing under a coach and six. He further
informed me, that he was married to his present wife in the first mayoralty of
Alderman Parsons, and in the very waistcoat he had on: "but, says he, I now
wear it only on a journey; because, you know, a bit of lace commands respect
upon the road." Upon enquiring about his family, I found he had three boys; one
of whom was bound prentice to himself; the other was sent to sea, because he
was a wild one; and the third he designed to make a parson of, because he was
grave, and his play-fellows at Poule's school used to call him "bishop."

ALL this while he had sat in my landlady's riding-hood, with a linen nightcap
on his head tied on the top with a piece of black ribband, which (he told me)
he always rode in, because it was cooler than a wig. But the saddle-bags were
now ordered in; and out of one of them he drew a large flowing grizzle
carefully buckled, which he combed out himself, borrowing some flour from the
kitchen drudger. His splatterdashes were next taken off, his shoes wiped with a
wisp of hay; and being assured by the landlady herself, that his coat was dry
enough to put on, he completely equipped himself, in order to wait on several
tradesmen, with whom he had dealings, after dinner. As this was not quite
ready, we took a walk to the stables to see his mare: and though the beast
seemed as lean and harmless as Sancho's ass, he assured me he had much ado to
ride her, she was so frisky; "for she had not run in the chaise these two
sundays past."

BEING summoned in to dinner, we sat down to a repast of mutton chops and
sheeps hearts, which last he declared to be the wholsomest eating in the world.
He objected to wine, because there was not a drop good for any thing to be got
upon the road; but he vastly recommended my landlady's home-brewed, which he
affirmed to be better than Hogsden ale, or the thatch beer at Islington. Our
meal being ended, my companion took his pipe; and we laid our heads together
for the good of the nation, when we mauled the French terribly both by land and
sea. At last, among other talk, he happened to ask me, if I lived in the City?
As I was desirous of hearing his remarks, I answered, that I had never seen
London. "Never seen it? (says he) Then you have never seen one of the finest
sights in the whole world. Paris is but a dog-hole to it." There luckily hung a
large Map of London over the chimney-piece, which he immediately made me get
from my chair to look at. "There, says he, there is London for you. -- You see
it is bigger than the Map of all England. He then led me about, with the end of
his pipe, through all the principal streets from Hyde-Park to White-Chapel. --
"That, says he, is the River Thames; -- There Is London Bridge -- There my Lord
Mayor lives -- That Is Poule's -- There the Monument stands: And now, if you was
but on the top of it, you might see all the houses and churches in London." I
expressed my astonishment at every particular: but I could hardly refrain
laughing, when pointing out to me Lincoln's Inn Fields -- "There, said he,
there all the noblemen live." At last, after having transported me all over the
town, he set me down in Cheapside, "which (he said) was the biggest street in
the City." -- "And now, says he, I Will show you where I live. -- "That Is
Bow-Church -- and thereabouts -- where my pipe is -- there -- just there my
shop stands." He concluded with a kind invitation to me to come and see him;
and pulling out a book of patterns from his coat-pocket, assured me, that if I
wanted any thing in his way, he could afford to let me have a bargain.

I PROMISED to call upon him; and the weather now clearing up, after settling
the balance of our reckoning with the landlady, we took leave of each other:
but just as I had mounted my horse, and was going to set forward, my new
acquaintance came up to me, and shaking me by the hand, -- "Hearkye, says he,
if you will be in town by the twenty fifth of this instant July, I will
introduce you to the Cockney's Feast; where, I assure you, you will be mighty
merry, and hear a great many good songs."


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXX. THURSDAY, August 7, 1755.
Nulla viri cura interea, nec mentio fiet
Damnorum. --
JUV.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
IF polygamy was allowed in this country, I am sure I might maintain a seraglio
of wives at less expense than I have brought upon myself by marrying one woman.
One did I say? Alas! I find it to my cost, that a wife, like a polypus, has the
power of dividing and multiplying herself into as many bodies as she pleases.
You must know, Mr. TOWN, I took a woman of small fortune and made her my own
flesh and blood: but I never thought that all her relations would likewise
fasten on me with as little ceremony as a colony of fleas. I had scarce brought
her home, before I was obliged to marry her mother: then I was prevailed on to
marry her two maiden sisters; after that I married her aunts; then her cousins
-- In short, I am now married to the whole generation of them. I do not
exaggerate matters, when I say that I am married to them all: for they claim as
much right to every thing that is mine, as the person whom the world calls my
wife. They eat, drink, and sleep with me: Every room in my house is at their
command, except my bedchamber: They borrow money of me: -- and since I have the
whole family quartered upon me, what signifies which of them takes upon her my
name, -- my wife, her sister, or her twentieth cousin?

O Mr. TOWN! I never sit down to table without the lamentable prospect of
seeing as much victuals consumed, as would dine a whole vestry. So many mouths
constantly going at my expense! And then there is such variety of provisions!
for cousin Biddy likes one dish; my aunt Rachel is fond of another; sister
Molly cannot abide this; and mother could never touch that: -- though I find
they are all of them unanimous in liking the best of every thing in season.
Besides, I could entertain a set of jolly topers at a less rate than it costs
me in light wines for the women. One of them drinks nothing but Lisbon; with
another nothing goes down but Rhenish and Spa; a third swallows me an ocean of
Bristol Milk, with as little remorse as she would so much small beer: my eldest
aunt likes a glass of dry Mountain, while the other thinks nothing helps
digestion so well as Madeira. 'Twas but the other day, that my wife expressed a
desire of tasting some Claret, when immediately all my good-natured relations
had a mighty longing for it: but with much ado I at last prevailed on them to
compound with me for a chest of Florence.

YOU may imagine, that my house cannot be a very small one: and I assure you
there are as many beds in it, as in a country inn. Yet I have scarce room to
turn myself about in it; for one apartment is taken up by this relation,
another by that; and the most distant cousin must have more respect shown her
than to be clapped up in a garret with the maidservants: so that poor I have
no more liberty in my own house than a lodger. Once, indeed, I in vain
endeavored to shake them off, and took a little box in the neighborhood of
town, scarce big enough to hold my own family. But alas! they stuck as close to
it, as a snail to her shell: and rather than not lie under the same roof with
their relation, they contrived to litter together like so many pigs in a stye.
At another time, thinking to clear my house at once of these vermin, I packed
up my wife and mother, and sent them to her uncle's in the country for a month.
But what could I do? there was no getting rid of those left behind: my wife had
made over to them the care of the household, allotting to each of them her
particular employment during her absence. One was to pickle walnuts, another to
preserve sweetmeats, another to make Morella brandy; all which they executed
with the notableness peculiar to good housewives, who spoil and waste more than
they save, for the satisfaction of making these things at home. At last my wife
returned; and all that I got by her journey, was the importation of two new
cousins fresh out of the country, who she never knew before were the least
related to her: -- but they have been so kind as to claim kindred with me by
hanging upon me ever since.

ONE would imagine, that it were sufficient for these loving relations to have
the run of my table, and to make my house in every respect their own: but not
content with this, they have the cunning to oblige me in a manner to find them
in clothes likewise. I should not repine, if any of my worthy relations were
humble enough to put up with a cast-off suit of my wife's; but that would be
robbing the maid of her just dues, and would look more like a dependant than a
relation: Not but that they will condescend now and then to take a gown, before
it is half worn out, (when they have talked my wife into a dislike of it) --
because it is too good for a common servant. They have more spirit than to beg
any thing: but -- if my wife has a fancy to part with it -- they will wear it,
purely for her sake. A cap, an apron, or an handkerchief, which looks hideous
upon her, I always find is very becoming on any other of the family: and I
remember, soon after we were married, happening to find fault with the pattern
of a silk brocade my wife had just bought, one of her sisters took it from her,
and told me she would have it made up for herself, and wear it on purpose to
spite me.

YOU must know, Mr. TOWN, that upon my marriage I was indiscreet enough to set
up my chariot: and since my family has increased so prodigiously, this has
given them a handle to have a coach likewise, and another pair of horses, for
them to take an airing in. This also furnishes them with a pretense for running
about to public diversions, where I am forced to treat them all: for they are
so very fond of each others company, that one will hardly ever stir out without
the other. Thus, at home or abroad, they constantly herd together: and what is
still more provoking, though I had rather have a route every week at my house,
my wife makes a merit of it, that she keeps little or no company.

SUCH is the state of my family within doors: and though you would think this
sufficient for one man, I can assure you that I have other calls on me from
relations no less dear to me, though I have never yet had the happiness to see
them. A third cousin by my wife's father's side was set up in the country in a
very good way of business; but by misfortunes in trade must have gone to jail,
if my wife had not teized me into being bound for him, and for which I was soon
after arrested, and obliged to pay the money. Another, a very promising youth,
was just out of his time, and only wanted a little sum to set him up; which as
soon as I had lent him, he run away, and is gone to sea. One of the aunts, who
is now with me, (a widow lady) has an only daughter, a sober discreet body, who
lived as a companion with an old gentlewoman in the country: but the poor
innocent girl being drawn aside by a vile fellow that ruined her, I have been
forced to support the unhappy mother and child ever since, to prevent any
reproach falling on our family. I shall say nothing of the various presents,
which have traveled down to my wife's uncle, in return for one turkey and
chine received at Christmas; nor shall I put to account the charge I have been
at, in the gossips fees, and in buying corals, etc. for half a dozen little
nephews, neices, and cousins, to which I had the honor of standing godfather.

AND now, Mr. TOWN, the mention of this last circumstance makes me reflect with
an heavy heart on a new calamity, which will shortly befall me. My wife, you
must know, is very near her time: and they have provided as great a store of
caps, clouts, biggens, belly-bands, whittles, and all kinds of childbed-linnen,
as would set up a Lying-in Hospital. You will conclude that my family wants no
further increase: Yet, would you believe it? I have just received a letter,
that another aunt, and another cousin, are coming up in the stage coach to see
their relation, and are resolved to stay with her the month. Indeed I am
afraid, when they have once got footing in my house, they will resolve to stay
with her till she has another and another child.

I am, sir, Your humble servant, etc.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXI. THURSDAY, August 14, 1755.
-- Genus humanum multo fuit illud in arvis
Durius. --
JUV.
Mr. VILLAGE to Mr. TOWN.
DEAR COUSIN!
A MERE Country Squire, who passes all his time among dogs and horses, is now
become an uncommon character; and the most awkward loobily inheritor of an old
mansion house is a fine gentleman in comparison to his forefathers. The
principles of a town education formerly scarce spread themselves beyond the
narrow limits of the bills of mortality: but now every London refinement
travels to the remotest corner of the kingdom, and the polite families from the
town duly import to their distant seats the customs and manners of Pall Mall
and Grosvenor-Square.

I HAVE been for this fortnight past at Lord Courtley's, who for about four
months in every year leads a town life at the distance of above two hundred
miles from London. He never rises till twelve or one o'clock; though indeed he
often sees the sun rise; but then that only happens, when, as the old song
says, he has "drank down the moon." Drinking is the only rural amusement he
persues, but even that part of his diversions is conducted entirely in the
London fashion. He does not swill country ale, but gets drunk with Champagne
and Burgundy; and every dish at his table is served up with as much elegance as
at White's or Ryan's. He has an excellent pack of hounds: but, I believe, was
never in at the death of a fox in his life: yet strangers never want a chase,
for the hounds are out three times a week with a younger brother of Lord
Courtley's, who never saw London in his life; and who, if he was not indulged
with a place at his lordship's table, might naturally be considered as his
whipper-in, or his game-keeper.

THE evening-walk is a thing unknown and unheard of at Lord Courtley's: for,
though situated in a very fine country, he knows no more of the charms of
purling streams and shady groves, than if they never existed but in poetry or
romance. As soon as the daily debauch after dinner, and the ceremonies of
coffee and tea are over, the company is conducted into a magnificent apartment
illuminated with wax-candles, and set but with as many card-tables, as the
route of a foreign ambassador's lady. Here Faro, Whist, Brag, Lansquenet, and
every other fashionable game make up the evening's entertainment. This piece of
politeness has sometimes fallen heavy on some honest country gentlemen, who
have found dining with his lordship turn out a very dear ordinary; and many a
good lady has had occasion to curse the cards, and her ill-starred connections
with persons of quality: though his lordship is never at a loss for a party,
for as several people of fashion have seats near him, he often sits down with
some of his friends of the club at White's. I had almost forgot to mention that
her ladyship keeps a day, which is Sunday.

THIS, Dear Cousin, is the genteel manner of living in the country; and I
cannot help observing, that persons polite enough to be fond of such exquisite
refinements, are partly in the same case with the mechanic at his dusty villa.
They both, indeed, change their situation; but neither find the least
alteration in their ideas. The tradesman, when at his box, has all the notions
that employ him in his compting-house: and the nobleman, though in the farthest
part of England, may still be said to breath the air of St. James's.

I WAS chiefly induced to send you this short account of the refined manner, in
which persons of fashion pass their time at Lord Courtley's, because I think it
a very striking contrast to the character described in the enclosed paper. I
hope your readers will not do either you or me the honor to think this natural
description a mere creature of the imagination. The picture of the
extraordinary gentleman here described is now at the seat of Lord Shaftsbury at
St. Giles's near Cranborn in Dorsetshire, and this lively character of him was
really and truly drawn by Anthony Ashly Cowper, first Earl of Shaftsbury, and
is inscribed on the picture. I doubt not but you will be glad of being able to
communicate it to the public, and that they will receive it with their usual
candor.

I am, dear Cousin, yours, etc.


The Character of the Honorable W. HASTINGS of Woodlands in Hampshire; Second
Son of FRANCIS Earl of Huntingdon.
IN the Year 1638 lived Mr. Hastings; by his Quality Son, Brother, and Uncle to
the Earls of Huntingdon. He was peradventure an original in our Age; or rather
the Copy of our ancient Nobility, in hunting, not in warlike times.

He was low, very strong and very active; of a reddish flaxen Hair. His Clothes
always green Cloth, and never all worth (when new) five Pounds.

His House was perfectly of the old Fashion, in the midst of a large Park well
stocked with Deer; and near the House Rabits to serve his Kitchen; many
Fishponds; great store of Wood and Timber; a Bowling Green in it, long but
narrow, full of high Ridges, it being never levelled since it was plough'd.
They used round Sand Bowls; and it had a Banqueting House like a Stand, built
in a Tree.

He kept all Manner of Sport Hounds, that ran Buck, Fox, Hare, Otter, and
Badger. And Hawks, long and short winged. He had all Sorts of Nets for Fish. He
had a Walk in the New Forest, and the Manor of Christ-Church. This last
supplied him with Red Deer, Sea and River Fish. And indeed all his Neighbors
Grounds and Royalties were free to him, who bestowed all his Time on these
Sports, but what he borrowed to caress his Neighbors Wives and Daughters;
there being not a Woman in all his Walks, of the Degree of a Yeoman's Wife or
under, and under the Age of forty, but it was extremely her Fault, if he was
not intimately acquainted with her. This made him very popular; always speaking
kindly to the Husband, Brother or Father: who was to boat, very welcome to his
House, whenever he came. There he found Beef, Pudding, and small Beer in great
plenty. A House not so neatly kept as to shame Him or his dirty shoes: the
great Hall strow'd with Marrow-bones, full of Hawks-Perches, Hounds, Spaniels
and Terriers: the upper Side of the Hall hung with Fox-skins of this and the
last Year's kiiling; here and there a Pole-Cat intermixed; Game-keepers and
Hunter's Poles in great Abundance.

The Parlour was a large Room as properly furnished. On a great Hearth paved
with Brick lay some Terriers, and the choicest Hounds and Spaniels. Seldom but
two of the great Chairs had litters of young Cats in them; which were not to be
disturbed; he having always three or four attending him at Dinner; and a little
white round Stick of fourteen Inches lying by his Trencher, that he might
defend such Meat as he had no mind to part with to them. The Windows (which
were very large) served for Places to lay his Arrows, Cross-Bows, Stone-Bows,
and other such like Accoutrements. The Corners of the Room full of the
best-chose Hunting and Hawking Poles. An Oyster Table at the lower End, which
was of constant Use twice a Day all the Year round. For he never failed to eat
Oysters, before Dinner and Supper, through all Seasons; the neighboring Town of
Pool supplied him with them.

The upper part of the Room had two small Tables and a Desk, on the one side of
which was a Church Bible, and on the other the Book of Martyrs. On the Table
were Hawks-Hoods, Bells, and such like; two or three old green Hats, with their
Crowns thrust in so as to hold ten or a dozen Eggs, which were of a Pheasant
kind of Poultry he took much care of and fed himself. Tables, Dice, Cards, and
Boxes were not wanting. In the Hole of the Desk were store of Tobacco Pipes
that had been used.

On one Side of this End of the Room was the Door of a Closet wherein stood the
Strong Beer and the Wine, which never came thence but in single Glasses; that
being the Rule of the House exactly observed. For he never exceeded in Drink or
permitted it.

On the other Side was the Door into an old Chapel, not used for Devotion. The
Pulpit, as the safest Place, was never wanting of a cold Chine of Beef, Venison
Pasty, Gammon of Bacon, or great Apple-pye with thick Crust, extremely baked.

His Table cost him not much; though it was good to eat at. His Sports supplied
all but Beef and Mutton, except Fridays, when he had the best Saltfish (as well
as other Fish) he could get; and was the Day his Neighbors of best Quality
most visited him. He never wanted a London Pudding, and always sung it in with
My Part lies therein-a. He drank a Glass or two of Wine at Meals; very often
Syrup of Gilly-flower in his Sack; and had always a Tun Glass, without Feet,
stood by him, holding a Pint of Small-Beer which he often stirred with Rosemary.

He was well natured but soon angry, calling his Servants, Bastards and
cuckoldy Knaves, in one of which he often spoke Truth to his own Knowledge; and
sometimes in both, though of the same Man. He lived to be an hundred; never
lost his Eyesight, but always wrote and read without Spectacles; and got on
Horseback without Help. Until past fourscore he rode to the Death of a Stag as
well as any.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXII. THURSDAY, August, 21 1755.
Nosse omnia haec, salus est adolescentulis.
TER.
THOUGH the following letter was originally written for the instruction of a
Young Gentleman going to the University, yet as it contains several just and
sensible reflections, (which may be of use to many of my readers,) I have
willingly complied with the request of my correspondent in making it the
entertainment of today.

DEAR SIR,
AS you are now going to the University, I would not be thought to pay so ill a
compliment to your own natural good sense, as to suppose, that you will not
(like many young gentlemen of fortune) in some measure apply yourself to study:
otherwise the time you spend there will be entirely lost; for (as the SPECTATOR
very justly remarks) "all ornamental parts of education are better taught in
other places." At the same time I do not mean, that you should commence Pedant,
and be continually poring on a book; since that will rather puzzle than inform
the understanding. Though I know many sprightly young gentlemen of lively and
quick parts affect to despise it altogether, it will be necessary to learn
something of Logic; I mean in the same manner one would learn Fencing -- not to
attack others, but to defend one's self. In a word, you will find it a great
unhappiness, when you return hither, if you do not bring with you some taste
for reading: for a mere Country Gentleman, who can find no society in books,
will have little else to do, (besides following his sports,) but to sit (as
squire of the company) tippling among a parcel of idle wretches, whose
understandings are nearly on a level with his dogs and horses.

IT has been an established maxim, that the world will always form an opinion
of persons according to the company they are known to keep. In the University,
as well as in other places, there are people, whom we ought to avoid, as we
would the plague: and as it is of the utmost consequence, whether you plunge at
once into extravagance and debauchery, or sink gradually into indolence and
stupidity, I shall point out some of these pests of society in as few words as
possible.

THE first person I would caution you against, is the wretch that takes a
delight to turn religion into ridicule: one that employs that speech, which was
given him by God to celebrate his praise, in questioning his very being. This,
as it is impious in itself, is likewise the height of ill-manners. It is hoped
there are but few of them to be met with in a place of sound doctrine and
religious education: but wherever they are, they ought as much as possible to
be avoided: and if they will force themselves into our company, they should be
used with the same contempt, with which they have the hardiness to treat their
Maker. And this, I can assure you, may be done safely: for I never knew any
body, who pretended to be above the fear of God, but was under the most
terrible apprehensions, whenever attacked by man.

THE next character whom I would advise you to shun, is the GAMESTER, in some
respects not unlike the former. The gaming-table is his shrine, and fortune his
deity; nor does he ever speak or think of any other, unless by way of
blasphemy, oaths and curses, when he has had a bad run at cards or dice, He has
not the least notion of friendship; but would ruin his own brother, if it might
be of any advantage to himself. He, indeed, professes himself your friend; but
that is only with a design to draw you in: for his trade is inconsistent with
the principles of honor or justice, without which there can be no real
friendship. It should therefore be the care of every gentleman not to hold any
commerce with such people, whose acquaintance he cannot enjoy, without giving
up his estate.

THE next person, whom you ought to beware of, is a DRUNKARD; one that takes an
unaccountable pleasure in sapping his constitution, and drowning his
understanding. He constantly goes senseless to bed, and rises maukish in the
morning: nor can he be easy in body or mind, 'till he has renewed his dose, and
again put himself beyond the reach of reflection. I would therefore entreat you
by all means to avoid an habit, which will at once ruin your health, and impair
your intellects. It is a misfortune, that society should be esteemed dull and
insipid without the assistance of the bottle to enliven it; so that a man
cannot entirely refrain from his glass, if he keeps any company at all. But let
it be remembered, that in drinking, as well as in talking, we ought always to
keep a "watch over the doors of our lips."

A LOWNGER is a creature, that you will often see lolling in a coffee-house, or
sauntering about the streets, with great calmness, and a most inflexible
stupidity in his countenance. He takes as much pains as the Sot, to fly from
his own thoughts, and is at length happily arrived at the highest pitch of
indolence both in mind and body. He would be as inoffensive, as he is dull, if
it were not that his idleness is contagious; for, like the torpedo, he is sure
to benumb and take away all sense of feeling from every one, with whom he
happens to come in contact.

IT were also best to forbear the company of a WRANGLER, or a person of a
litigious temper. This sometimes arises, not from any great share of
ill nature, but from a vain pride of showing one's parts, or skill in
argumentation. It is frequently observed of young Academics in particular, that
they are very apt impertinently to engage people in a dispute whether they will
or not. But this is contrary to all the rules of good-breeding, and is never
practiced by any man of sense, that has seen much of the world. I have
sometimes known a person of great sauciness, and volubility of expression,
confuted by the Argumentum Baculinum, and both his head and his syllogism
broken at the same time.

I NEED not point out to you the profligate RAKE or the affected COXCOMB, as
persons from whose company you can reap no sort of benefit. From the first the
good principles, already instilled into you, will doubtless preserve you; and I
am sure you have too much real sense, not to despise the absurd fopperies of
the latter. Noted LIARS are no less to be avoided, as the common pests of
society. They are often of a mischievous disposition, and by their calumnies
and false suggestions take a pleasure in setting the most intimate friends at
variance. But if they only deal in harmless and improbable lies, their
acquaintance must frequently be out of countenance for them: and if we should
venture to repeat after them, I am sure it is the way to be out of countenance
for ourselves.

BUT above all I must advise you never to engage, at least not with any degree
of violence, in any PARTY. Be not transported by the clamorous jollity of
talking patriots beyond the sober dictates of reason and justice; nor let the
insinuating voice of corruption tempt you to barter your integrity and peace of
mind for the paultry satisfaction of improving your fortune. If you behave with
honor and prudence, you will be regarded and courted by all parties; but if
otherwise, you will certainly be despised by all. Perhaps indeed, if you should
hereafter engage in elections, and spend your own money to support another's
cause, the person, in whose interest you are, may shake you by the hand, and
swear you are a very honest gentleman: -- just as butchers treat their
bull-dogs, who spit in their mouths, clap them on the back, and then halloo
them on to be tossed and torn by the horns of their antagonist.

AFTER having guarded you against the evil influence of your own sex, I cannot
conclude without throwing in a word or two concerning the Ladies. But that I
may not be thought unmannerly to the fair, I shall pass over their faults; only
hoping, that their excellencies will not tempt you to precipitate a match with
one much your inferior in birth and fortune, though "endowed with every
accomplishment requisite to make the marriage state happy." In these hasty and
unequal matches it sometimes happens, that mutual love gives way to mutual
reproaches. We may perhaps too late repent of our bargain: and though
Repentance be an excellent visiting friend, when she reminds us of our past
miscarriages, and prescribes rules how to avoid them for the future, yet she is
a most troublesome companion, when fixed upon us for life.

I am, dear sir, your sincere friend, etc. H. A.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXIII. THURSDAY, August 28, 1755.
-- Me LITERULAS stulti docuere parents.
MART.
SINCE genius is the chief requisite in all kinds of poetry, nothing can be
more contrary to the very essence of it, than the adopting, as beauties,
certain arts, which are merely mechanical. There are daily arising many
whimsical excellencies which have no foundation in nature, but are only
countenanced by the present mode of writing: with these it is as easy to fill
our compositions as to dress ourselves in the fashion; but the writer, who puts
his work together in this manner, is no more a poet than his tailor. Such
productions often betray great labor and exactness, but show no genius: for
those who sit down to write by rule, and follow "dry receipts how poems should
be made," may compose their pieces without the least assistance from the
imagination; as an apothecary's prentice; though unable to cure any disease,
can make up medicines from the physician's prescription, with no more knowledge
of physic than the names of the drugs. Thus the Muse that ought to fly, and
"ascend the brightest heaven of invention," walks in leading-strings, or is
supported by a go-cart.

AMONG the many poetical tricks of this sort, none has been more successfully
practiced, or had more advocates and admirers, than a certain fantastical
conceit called ALLITERATION: which is nothing more than beginning two, three,
or perhaps every word in a line with the same letter. This method of running
divisions upon the alphabet, and pressing particular letters into the service,
has been accounted one of the first excellencies in versification, and has
indeed received the sanction of some of our best poets; but wherein the beauty
of it consists, is something difficult to discover: since Quarles or Withers
might practice it with as much adroitness as Dryden or Spenser. It is one of
those modern arts in poetry which require no fancy, judgment, or learning in
the execution: for an author may huddle the same letters on each other again
and again, as mechanically as the printer selects his types, and ranges them in
whatsoever order he pleases.

THIS partial attachment to particular letters is a kind of contrast to the
famous Odyssey of Tryphiodorus, where every letter in the alphabet was in its
turn excluded: and the Alliterator must be as busily employed to introduce his
favorite vowel or consonant, as the Greek poet to shut out the letter he had
proscribed. Nothing is esteemed a greater beauty in poetry than a happy choice
of epithets; but Alliteration reduces all the elegancies of expression to a
very narrow compass. Epithets are culled indeed with great exactness, but the
closest relation they are intended to bear to the word to which they are
joined, is that the initials are the same. Thus the fields must be flowery,
beauty must be beaming, ladies must be lovely, and in the same manner must the
"waves wind their watery way," the "blustering blasts blow," and "locks all
loosely lay," not for the sake of the poetry, but the elegance of the
Alliteration. This beauty has also taken possession of many of our tragedies,
and I have seen ladies wooed and heroes killed in it: though I must own I never
hear an actor dying with deadly darts and fiery flames etc. but it always puts
me in mind of the celebrated pippin-woman in Gay's Trivia, whose head, when it
was severed from her body, rolled along the ice crying pip, pip, pip, and
expired in Alliteration.

THE same false taste in writing that "wings displayed and altars raised," also
introduced Alliteration; and Acrostics in particular are the same kind of
spelling-book poetry. It is therefore somewhat extraordinary that those sublime
writers, who have disgraced their pages with it, did not leave this as well as
the other barbarous parts of literature to the Goths in poetry: since it is a
whimsical beauty, below the practice of any writer, superior to him who turned
the Aencid into Monkish verses. Shakespeare, who was more indebted to nature
than art, has ridiculed this low trick with great humor in his burlesque
tragedy of Pyramus and Thisbe. Besides that noted passage of -- With blade,
with bloody, blameful blade
He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast,
He before introduces a mock rant, which Bottom calls Ercles' vein, which is
not only rank fustian, but is also remarkable for its Alliteration. To make all
split the raging rocks, and shivering shocks shall break the locks of prison
gates -- and Phibbus car shall shine from far, and make and mar the foolish
fates. In this strange style have whole poems been written, and every learned
reader will recollect on this occasion the Pugna Porcorum per P. Porcium
Poetam, which I wish some of our poetasters would translate, in the true spirit
of the original, and praise pigs and pork with all the beauties of Alliteration.

THE advocates and admirers of this practice have asserted, that it adds
significance and strength of expression to their verses, but I fear this
boasted energy seldom appears to the reader. The Alliteration either remains
unregarded, or, if it is very striking, disgusts those who perceive it, and is
often in itself, from such a disagreeable cluster of the same letters, harsh
and uncouth. There are very many instances where Alliteration, though
studiously introduced, renders the versification rough and inharmonious; and I
will appeal to the greatest lovers of it, whether the following line, where the
repetition was scarce intended, is one of the most pleasing in all Virgil's
works. Neu patriae Validas in Viscera Vertite Vires.


IT must be acknowledged, that there is something very mechanical in the whole
construction of the numbers in most of our modern poetry. Sound is more
attended to than sense, and the words are expected to express more than the
sentiment. There are set rules to make verses run off glibly, or drawl slowly
on, etc. and I have read many a poem with scarce one tolerable thought in it,
that has contained all these excellencies of versification: for which reason I
must confess myself no friend to those critics, who analyze words and
syllables, and discover latent beauties in every letter, when the author
intended that the whole should be taken together. Poetry should seem at least
to flow freely from the imagination, and not to be squeezed from the droppings
of the brain. If we would endeavor to acquire a full idea of what we mean to
describe, we should then of course express ourselves with force, elegance, and
perspicuity: and this native strength of expression would have more true energy
than elaborate phrases, and a quaint and studied combination of words and
letters. Fine numbers are undoubtedly one of the chief beauties in poetry; but
to make the sound echo to the sense, we should make the sense our chief object.
This appears to me to have been the manly practice of the Ancients, and of our
own Shakespeare, Milton, etc. who breathed the true spirit of poetry, without
having recourse to little tricks and mean artifices, which only serve to
disgrace it. A good writer, who would be above triffling even with a thought,
would never pursue words, and play with letters, but leave such a childish
employment for the small fry of rhimers who amuse themselves with anagrams and
crambo. The true poet trusts to his natural ear and strong conception, and
knows that the versification is adapted to the sentiment without culling
particular letters, and stringing them on his lines; as he is sure that his
verses are just measure, without scanning them on his fingers.

THERE are almost daily published certain Lilliputian volumes, entitled Pretty
Books for Children. A friend of mine who considers the little rhimers of the
age as only "children of a larger growth," who amuse themselves with rhimes
instead of rattles, proposes to publish a small pocket volume for the use of
our Poetasters. It will be a treatise on the art of poetry adapted to the
meanest capacities, for which subscriptions will be taken, and specimens may be
seen, at George's and the Bedford coffee-houses. It will contain full
directions how to modulate the numbers on every occasion, and will instruct the
young scribbler in all the modern arts of versification. He will here meet with
infallible rules how to soften a line and lull us to sleep with liquids and
dipthongs; to roughen the verse and make it roar again with reiteration of the
letter R; to set it hissing with semivowels; to make it pant and breathe short
with a hundred heavy aspirates; or clog it up with the thickest double
consonants and monosyllables: with a particular table of Alliteration,
containing the choicest epithets for any words that can be wanted. To be
illustrated with examples from the modern poets. The whole to be published
about the middle of the winter under the title of The Rhimer's Play-thing, or,
Poetaster's Horn-book; since there is nothing necessary to form such a poet,
except teaching him his letters.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXIV. THURSDAY, September 4, 1755.
-- Tu, dum tua navis in alto est,
Hoc age. --
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
YOU obliged the world some time ago with a few reflections on the Gentlemen of
the Army: at the present juncture, a word or two on our Sea-Officers would not
be unseasonable. I do not mean that you should presume to direct them how to
behave in their several stations, but rather to remark on their conduct and
conversation in private life, as far as they are influenced by their maritime
characters. There is a certain unfashionable dye, which their manners often
take from the salt water, that tinctures their whole behavior on shore. If you
could assist in blotting out these stains, and give a new color to their
conduct, you would add grace and politeness to their ordinary conversation, and
would be of as much service to our naval commanders in this point, as he was to
navigation in general, who first invented the compass.

AS the conversation of those fair-weather foplings, many of whom may be met
with in the three regiments of guards, is usually flat and insipid, that of our
sea-officers is turbulent and boisterous: and as a trip to Paris has perhaps
over-refined the coxcomb in red, a voyage round the world frequently brutalizes
the seaman, who comes home so rough and unpolished, that one would imagine he
had not visited any nation in the world except the Savages, the Chinese, or the
Hottentots. The many advantages he has received from having seen the customs
and manners of so many different people, it is natural to suppose, would render
his conversation very desirable, as being in itself particularly instructive
and entertaining: but this roughness, which clings to the seaman's behavior
like tar to his trowsers, makes him unfit for all civil and polite society. He
behaves at an assembly as if he was upon deck; and his whole deportment
manifestly betrays, that he is, according to the common phrase, quite out of
his element. Nor can you collect any more from him concerning the several
nations he has visited, than if he had been during the whole time confined to
his cabin: and he seems to know as little of them, as the fine gentleman of his
travels after the polite tour, when he has, for the sake of improvement, rid
post through all Europe.

THAT our ordinary seamen, who are, many of them draughted from the very lowest
of the populace, should be thus uncivilized, is no wonder. The common sailor's
education in Broad St. Giles's, Tottenham Court, or at Hockley in the Hole, has
not qualified him to improve by just reflections on what he sees during his
voyage; and going on board a man of war is a kind of university education,
suitably adapted to the principles imbibed in the polite seminaries, which he
came from. A common sailor too is full as polite as a common soldier; and
behaves as genteely to a Wapping landlady as the gentleman soldier at a
suttling-house. But surely there ought to be as much difference in the
behavior of the commander and his crew, as there is in their situation: and it
is beneath the dignity of the British Flag to have an Admiral behave as rudely
as a Swabber, or a Commodore as foul-mouthed as a Boatswain.

IT may perhaps be alleged in excuse, that the being placed among such a
boisterous set of people, as our common sailors, must unavoidably wear off all
politeness and good-manners: as it is remarkable, that all those who are
employed in the care of horses, grow as mere brutes as the animals they attend;
and as we may often observe those justices, whose chief business is the
examination of highwaymen, house-breakers, and street-walkers, grow at least as
vulgar and foul-mouthed as a pick-pocket. As there may be some truth in this,
the commander should therefore be still more on his guard to preserve the
gentleman in his behavior, and like the sea itself, when the storm is over,
grow smooth and calm. It is accounted a piece of humor on the Thames to abuse
the other passengers on the water; and there are certain set terms of abuse,
which fly to and fro from one boat to another on this occasion. A wag might
perhaps amuse himself with this water-language in his voyage to Vaux-Hall, but
must be a very silly fellow indeed, to think of carrying the joke on shore with
him. In the same manner some roughness may perhaps be necessary to keep the
crew in order; but it is absurd for an officer to retain his harshness in
polite company: and is in a manner tying his friends up to the yard-arm, and
disciplining all his acquaintance with the cat-of-nine-tails.

BUT the worst part of this maritime character is a certain invincible
contempt, which they often contract for all mankind, except their
fellow-seamen. They look on the rest of the world as a set of fresh water
wretches, who could be of no service in a storm or an engagement; and from an
unaccountable obstinacy are particularly deaf to any proposals of new
improvements in navigation: though experience daily teaches them the great use
of the discoveries already made, and how much room there is for more. They have
no notion, how studious men can sit in their closets, and devise charts and
instruments to direct them in their course; and despise those ingenious
persons, who would assist them in their undertakings; while they consider them
with the utmost contempt, as going round the world in their closets, and
sailing at sea in their elbow-chairs. It is no less shameful than true, that
the Ventilator, one of the most beneficial inventions that ever was devised,
was first offered to the service of our men of war, and rejected. It was first
used in foreign ships, then by our merchantmen, and last of all among our men
of war, to whose use it was first recommended. This is a strong proof of that
fatal obstinacy, which our Sea-Commanders are too apt to contract; and as a
further instance of it, I have been told of an Admiral's indignation on this
subject, venting itself in the following manner. "A pack of blockheads, (said
he,) sit poring, and pretend to make improvements for our use. They tell you
that they discover this, and discover that; but I tell you they are all fools.
-- For instance now, they say the world is round; every one of them says the
world is round; -- but I have been all round the world, and it is as flat as
this table."

THE chief reason of their unpolished behavior is owing to their being often
sent to sea very young with little or no education, beyond what they have
received perhaps at the academy of Woolwich or Portsmouth. A lad of good
family, but untoward parts, or mischievous disposition, who has been flogged
for a while at the grammar school, or snubbed by his parents and friends at
home, is frequently clapped on board a ship in order to tame him, and to teach
him better manners. Here perhaps he at first messes with the lowest of the
seamen: and all that the young gentleman can learn from his jolly mesmates in
the course of two or three voyages, is to drink flip, sing a bawdy catch, and
dance an horn-pipe. These genteel accomplishments he is sure to retain, as he
grows old in the service; and if he has the good fortune to rise to a command,
he is as surly and brutal when advanced to the cabin, as when he was tugging
before the mast.

AFTER all it is but justice to confess, that there are many among our
Sea-Officers, who deservedly bear the character of gentlemen and scholars; and
it is easy to perceive, with how much better grace they appear in the world
than the rest of their brethren, who (when laid up and taken out of service)
are as mere logs as the mainmast. An officer, who has any relish for reading,
will employ the many vacant hours (in which he is relieved from duty) much more
to his improvement and satisfaction, than in sauntering between the decks, or
muddling over a bowl of punch. I would therefore seriously recommend it to
those young sailors, who have the happiness to launch forth with a genteel and
liberal education, not to suffer every trace of it to be washed away, like
words written on the sands; but that, when they return from sea, they may be
fit to be admitted at St. James's, as well as at Wapping or Rotherhithe.

BEFORE I conclude, I must beg leave to say a word or two concerning our
Sea-Chaplains. The common sailors are known to have, when on board, a very
serious regard for religion; and their decent behavior at prayers, and sedate
attention to the sermon upon quarter deck, might shame a more polite audience
at St. James's Church. For this reason a truly religious Chaplain of good
morals and sober conversation will necessarily have as much influence on their
behavior, as a mild and prudent Commander: Nor can a clergyman be too
circumspect in this point; since, if he does not act in every respect
conformable to his function, his place for ought I know might be as well
supplied by any one of the unbeneficed Doctors of the Fleet. In a word, if a
Chaplain will so far divest himself of his sacred character, as to drink,
swear, and behave in every respect like a common sailor, he should be obliged
to work in the gang-way all the rest of the week, and on sundays be invested
with a jacket and trowsers instead of his canonicals.

I am, sir, your humble servant, T. FORE-CASTLE.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXV. THURSDAY, September 11, 1754.
-- Nos animorum
Impulsu, et caeca magnaque cupidine ducti.
HOR.
SO long ago as my fourth number (the reader perhaps may not remember) I made
mention of a FEMALE THERMOMETER, constructed by my ingenious friend Mr. James
Ayscough, Optician, on Ludgate Hill; and I then informed the public, that "the
liquor contained within the tube was a chemical mixture, which being acted upon
by the circulation of the blood and animal spirits, would rise and fall
according to the desires and affections of the wearer." But I have now the
further satisfaction to acquaint my fair readers, that after several repeated
trials and improvements we have at length brought the instrument to so great a
degree of perfection, that any common by-stander may, by a proper application
of it, know the exact temperature of any lady's passions. The liquor, among
other secret ingredients, is distilled secundum artem from the herbs lady's
love, and maidenhair, the wax of virgin-bees, and the five greater hot and
cold seeds: and the properties of it are so subtle and penetrating, that
immediately on its coming within the atmosphere of a lady's affections, it is
actuated by them in the same manner, as the spirits are by the impulse of the
air in the common Thermometer.

IT was not without some difficulty, that we could settle the different degrees
of heat and cold in a lady's desires, which it would be proper to delineate on
our Thermometer: but at last we found, that the whole scale of female
characters might be reduced to one or other of the following; viz. Abandoned
IMPUDENCE. -- GALLANTRY. -- LOOSE BEHAVIOR. -- INNOCENT FREEDOMS. --
INDISCRETIONS. Inviolable MODESTY.


FROM these degrees, which we have accurately marked on the side of the tube,
we have been able to judge of the characters of several ladies, on whom we have
made the experiment. In some of these we have found the gradations very sudden;
and that the liquor has risen very fast from the lowest point to the highest.
We could likewise discover, that it was differently affected according to the
different station and quality of the subject: so that the same actions, which
in a lady of fashion scarce raised the liquor beyond INDISCRETIONS, in another
caused it to mount almost to IMPUDENCE. Much also depended upon the air and
temperature of the place, where we made our trials: and even the dress had some
influence on our Thermometer; as we frequently observed, that the rise and fall
of the liquor in the tube bore an exact proportion to the rise and fall of the
stays and petticoat.

I SHALL now proceed to give a succinct account of the many repeated
experiments, which we have made on different subjects in different places.
During the winter season we had frequent opportunities of trying the effects,
which the playhouse, the opera, and other places of diversion, might have on
the Thermometer. At the playhouse we always found the liquor rise in
proportion, as the drama was more or less indecent or immoral: at some
comedies, and particularly the Chances, its elevation kept pace exactly with
the lusciousness of the dialogue and the ripening of the plot; so that it has
often happened, that with some subjects, at the opening of the play, the liquor
has struggled awhile, and rose and sunk about the degrees just above MODESTY;
but before the third act it has stood suspended at the middle point between
MODESTY and IMPUDENCE; in the fourth act it has advanced as far as LOOSE
BEHAVIOR; and at the conclusion of the play it has settled at downright
IMPUDENCE. At public concerts, and the opera especially, we observed that the
Thermometer constantly kept time (if I may say so) with the music and singing:
and both at the opera and the playhouse, it always regulated its motions by
the dancer's heels. We have frequently made trials of our instrument at the
masquerades in the Hay-Market: but the temperature of that climate has proved
so exceeding hot, that on the moment of our coming into the room the liquor has
boiled up with a surprising effervescence to ABANDONED IMPUDENCE.

DURING the summer season we have not failed to make our observations on the
company at the public gardens. Here we found, indeed, that with some raw
unpolished females, who came only to eat cheese-cakes and see the fireworks,
the liquor did not stir beyond MODESTY; with many it has crept up to
INDISCRETIONS; and with some it has advanced to LOOSE BEHAVIOR. We had no
opportunity to try our Thermometer in the dark walks: but with some subjects we
have plainly perceived the liquor hastening up toward INNOCENT FREEDOMS, as
they were retiring to these walks from the rest of the company; whilst with
others, who have gone the same way, it has only continued to point (as it did
at the beginning of our observations) at GALLANTRY. One young lady in
particular we could not help remarking, whom we followed into Vaux-Hall,
gallanted by an officer; we were glad to see, at her first going in, that the
liquor, though it now and then faintly aspired toward INDISCRETIONS, still
gravitated back again to MODESTY: after a turn or two in the walks we perceived
it fluctuating between INNOCENT FREEDOMS and LOOSE BEHAVIOR: after this we
lost sight of them for some time; and at the conclusion of the entertainment
(as we followed them out) we could not without concern observe, that the liquor
was hastily bubbling up to a degree next to IMPUDENCE.

BESIDES the experiments on those ladies, who frequent the public places of
diversion, we have been no less careful in making remarks at several private
routs and assemblies. We were here at first very much surprised at the extreme
degree of Cold which our Thermometer seemed to indicate in several ladies, who
were seated round the card-tables; as we found not the least alteration in it
either from the young or old: but we at last concluded, that this was owing to
their love of play, which had totally absorbed all their other passions. We
have, indeed, more than once perceived, that when a lady has risen from cards
after so much ill luck as to have involved herself in a debt of honor to a
gentleman, the Thermometer has been surprisingly effected; and as she has been
handed to her chair, we have known the liquor, which before was quite stagnate,
run up instantaneously to the degree of GALLANTRY. We have also been at the
trouble to try its efficacy in the long rooms at Bath, Tunbridge, Cheltenham
etc. as it is well known, that these places have brought about surprising
changes in the constitutions of those SICK ladies, who go thither for the
benefit of the waters.

HAVING thus sufficiently proved the perfection of our Thermometer, it only
remains to acquaint my readers, that Mr, Ayscough will be ready to supply the
public with these useful instruments, as soon as the town fills. In the mean
time I would advise those ladies, who have the least regard for their
characters, to reflect that the gradations, as marked on our Thermometer,
naturally lead to each other; that the transitions from the lowest to the
highest are quick and obvious; and that though it is very easy to advance, it
is impossible to recede back again, Let them, therefore, be careful to regulate
their passions in such manner, as that their conduct may be always consistent
with decency and honor; and (as Shakespeare says) "not stepping over the
bounds of MODESTY." I shall conclude with observing, that these Thermometers
are designed only for the ladies: for though we imagined at first, that they
might serve equally for the men, we have found reason to alter our opinion;
since, in the course of several fruitless experiments on our own sex, there has
scarce appeared any medium in them between MODESTY and IMPUDENCE.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXVI. THURSDAY, September 18, 1755.
-- Via sacra, sicut meus est mos,
Nescio quid meditans nugarum, et totus in illis.
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
IT has been generally imagined, that learning is only to be acquired in the
closet, and by turning over a great number of pages; for which reason men have
been assiduous to heap together a parcel of dusty volumes, and our youth have
been sent to study at the universities: as if knowledge was shut up in a
library, and chained to the shelves together with the folios. This prejudice
has made every one overlook the most obvious and ready means of coming at
literature; while (as the wise man has remarked) "Wisdom cries without; she
utters her voice in the streets; she cries in the chief place of concourse,
in the openings of the gates: in the city she utters her words," and no man
regards her. Every lane teems with instruction, and every alley is big with
erudition: though the ignorant or incurious passer-by shuts his eyes against
that universal volume of arts and sciences, which constantly lies open before
him in the highways and bye-places; like the laws of the Romans, which were
hung up in the public streets.

YOU must know, Mr. TOWN, that I am a very hard student, and have perhaps
gleaned more knowledge from my reading, than any of your poring fellows of
colleges, though I was never possessed of so much as an horn-book. In the
course of my studies I have followed the example of of the ancient
Peripatetics, who used to study walking: and as I had not the advantage to be
brought up a scholar, I have been obliged, like the Lacedaemonian children, to
the public for my education. My first relish for letters I got by conning over
those elegant monosyllables, which are chalked out upon walls and gates, and
which (as pretty books for children are adorned with cuts) are generally
enforced and explained by curious hieroglyphics in caricatura. I soon made a
further progress in the alphabet by staring up at the large letters upon
play-bills, etc. 'till at length I was enabled to make out the inscriptions
upon signs, bills on empty houses, and the titles on rubric-posts. From these I
proceeded gradually to higher branches of literature, and went through a
complete course of physic by perusing the learned treatises of Dr. Rock and
other eminent practitioners. Having thus laid in the rudiments of literature,
my method has since been to visit the Philobiblian libraries, and other learned
stalls, and the noble collections at Moor-fields; in which choice repositories
I have with infinite pleasure and advantage ran over the elaborate systems of
ancient divines, politicians, and philosophers, which have escaped the fury of
pastry-cooks and trunk-makers. As for the modern writings of pamphletteers and
magazine-compilers, I make it my business to take my rounds every morning at
the open shops about the Royal Exchange; where I never fail to run through
every thing, fresh as it comes out. Thus, for example, I make a shift to squint
over the first page of the Connoisseur, as it lies before me, at Mrs. Cooke's;
at the next shop I steal a peep at the middle pages, at another proceed on to
the fourth or fifth, and perhaps return again to conclude it at Mrs. Cooke's.
By the same means I am myself become a Connoisseur likewise; and you will be
surprised when I assure you, that I have a great variety of the finest prints
and paintings, and am master of a more curious set of nicknacks, than are to be
found in Sir Hans Sloane's Collection: for, as I constantly survey the windows
of every printshop, and attend every auction, I look upon every curiosity as
actually in my possession; and you will agree with me, that while I have the
opportunity of seeing them, the real owners cannot have more satisfaction in
locking them up in cabinets and musaeums.

YOU will conclude, that the knowledge, which I have thus picked out of the
streets, has been very extensive: I have learned at every corner, that the
scurvy is a popular disease, -- that the bloody flux cannot be cured by any of
the faculty, except the gentlewoman at the blue posts in Haydon Yard, -- that
nervous diseases were never so frequent, -- and that the royal family and most
of our nobility are troubled with corns; -- and many other curious particulars
of the same kind: I have also got a smattering of the French language from the
advertisements of tailors and staymakers, and of Mrs. Dubois's portable soop,
in French and English. I was completely grounded in politics by stopping at
Temple Bar every morning to read the Gazzetteer, which used to be pasted up
there to the great emolument of the hackney-coachmen upon their stands. But
above all, I have acquired the most sublime notions of religion by listening
attentively to the spirited harangues of our most eminent field-preachers: and
I confess myself highly obliged to the itinerant missionaries of Weslley,
Whitefield, and Zinzendorf, who have instructed us in the New Light from empty
barrels and joint-stools. Next to these, I have received great improvements
from the vociferous retailers of poetry; as I constantly used to thrust myself
into the circle gathered round them, and listen to their ditties, till I could
carry away both words and tune. I have likewise got some notion of the drama by
attending the theaters; though my finances were too scanty for me ever to get
admittance into them. I therefore had recourse to the following practice: I
would contrive to hear one act at the outside of one of the pit-doors; the next
act I took my stand at the other; and as the author generally rises in the
middle, I could catch the most tearing parts during the third act in the
passage to the two-shilling gallery: in the fourth act the rants came toleably
loud to my ear at the entrance of the upper gallery; and I very attentively
listened to the pathetic at the conclusion of the play with the footmen in the
lobby.

ENDOWED with so much learning, you will doubtless be curious to know to what
purposes I have turned it. Almost before I could read at all, I got into the
service of a very eminent doctor of physic, who employed me in sticking up his
bills, and slipping them slily into the hands of spindle-shanked young fellows,
as they passed by. After this, by closely studying these elegant compositions,
I got together a sufficient set of medical phrases, which (by the help of
Bayley's dictionary) enabled me to draw up bills and affidavits for those
doctors, who were not so happy as to be able to write or read. I was next
promoted to the garret of a printer of bloody murders, where my business was to
invent terrible stories, write Yorkshire tragedies, or Christmas carrols, and
occasionally to put the Ordinary of Newgate's Account of Dying Speeches into
lamentable rhyme. I was afterward concerned in works, that required a greater
fund of erudition, such as bog-house miscellanies, and little books for
children; and I was once engaged as the principal compiler of a two-penny
magazine. Since that I followed the occupation of an Eves-dropper, or Collector
of News for the daily papers; in which I turned a good penny by hunting after
marriages and deaths, and inventing lies for the day. Once indeed, being out of
other business, I descended to the mean office of a ballad-singer, and hawked
my own verses; but not having a good ear for music, and the tone of my voice
being rather inclined to whining, I converted my ballads into penitential
hymns, and took up the vocation of Methodist Preacher. In this station I made
new converts every day among the old women by my sighs and groans, who in
return contributed their halfpence, which I disposed of in charity -- to
myself: but I was at last beat off the field by a journeyman shoemaker, who
fairly out-whined me; and finding myself deserted by my usual audience, I
became Setter to a Fleet-parson.

MY employment now was to take my stand at the end of Fleet-Market, and
whenever I saw any gaping young couple staring about them, to whisper them
softly in the ear, and ask them whether they wanted to be married; assuring
them withal, that ours was the only marriage-booth in the fair. Whenever the
ceremony was performed, I officiated as clerk: and when my master the doctor
died, I made a shift to purchase his entire stock in trade, (consisting of a
rusty cassock, an old grizzle wig, and one lappet of a band) and succeeded him
in his benefice of the Hand-and-Pen Chapel. I now got a more comfortable
subsistence than many regularly ordained curates in the country: but the
marriage-act soon after taking place, I was flung out of employ; and as the
Primate of May-Fair, the reverend Dr. Keith, is forced to sell snuff in the
Fleet-prison, I have been obliged to retail gin in a night-cellar.

THUS, Mr. TOWN, have I set before you the progress I have made in literature,
as well as the particular circumstances of my life, in hopes they will induce
you to the notice of the public. As the parliament has not thought fit to make
any provision for the poor distressed Clergy of the Fleet, I intend to open a New
Oratory-Chapel in Fleet-market, to be conducted on the same principles with
that established in Clare-market; and for which, I flatter myself, I shall
appear no less qualified by my education, than the renowned Henley or any of
his butchers. I shall therefore beg leave to subscribe myself, hoping for your
countenance and protection,

Your very humble servant, ORATOR HIGGINS.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXVII. THURSDAY, September 25, 1755.
Quid dignum tanto tibi ventre gulaque precabor?
MART.
EATING and drinking being absolutely requisite to keep our crazy frames
together, we are obliged to attend to the calls of nature, and satisfy the
regular cravings of the appetite: Though it is, in truth, but a very small part
of the world, that eat because they are hungry, or drink because they are dry.
The common day-labourer may, indeed, be glad to snatch an hasty meal with his
wife and children, that he may have strength to return to his work; and the
porter finds it necessary to refresh himself with a full pot of entire butt,
while he rests his load upon the bulk at the alehouse door: but those, who
have more leisure to study what they shall eat and drink, require something
more in their food, than what is barely wholesome or necessary; their palates
must be gratified with rich sauces and high-seasoned delicacies; and they
frequently have recourse to whetters and provocatives, to anticipate the call
of hunger, and to enable their stomachs to bear the load they lay on it. There
are a sort of men, whose chief pride is a good taste (as they call it) and a
great stomach: and the whole business of their lives is included in their
breakfast, dinner and supper. These people, of whatever rank and denomination,
whether they regale with turtle, or devour shoulders of mutton and peck-loaves
for wagers, whether a duke at White's, or a chairman at the Blue-Posts, are
certainly of the number of those, "whom nature, (as Sallust tells us,) has made
like the brutes, obedient to their bellies;" and, indeed, partake in some
measure of the sentence passed on the Serpent, "to be cursed above all cattle,
and to go for ever on their bellies."

THERE are many follies and vices, which men endeavor to hide from the rest of
the world: but this, above all others, they take a pride in proclaiming; and
seem to run about with the cap and bells, as if they were ambitious to be
ranked among the Sons of Folly. Indeed, as the politeness of the French
language has distinguished every glutton by the title of Bon Vivant, and the
courtesy of our own has honored their beastly gluttony by the name of Good
Living, the epicure thinks to eat and drink himself into your good opinion, and
recommend himself to your esteem by an exquisite bill of fare. However this may
be, it is remarkable, that as the fox-hunter takes delight in relating the
incidents of the chase, and kills the fox again over a bowl of punch at night,
so the Bon Vivant enjoys giving an account of a delicious dinner, and chews the
cud of reflection on such exquisite entertainment.

I HAVE been led into these thoughts by an acquaintance which I have lately
made with a person, whose whole conversation is, literally speaking,
Table-Talk. His brain seems to be stuffed with an hodge-podge of ideas,
consisting of several dishes, which he is perpetually serving up for the
enterainment of the company. As it was said of Longinus, that he was a Walking
Library, in the same manner I consider this gentleman as a Walking Larder: and
as the orations of Demosthenes were said to smell of the lamp, so my friend's
whole conversation savours of the kitchen. He even makes use of his stomach as
an artificial memory; and recollects every place he has been at, and every
person he has seen, by some circumstances relating to the entertainment he met
with. If he calls to mind any inn, he adds, "for there the cook spoiled a fine
turbot:" another house is recollected, "because the parson took all the fat of
the haunch of venison:" he remembers a gentleman you mention, "because he had
the smallest stomach he ever knew;" or one lady, "because she drank a great
deal of wine at supper;" and another, "because she has the best receipt for
making her pickled cucumbers look green."

HIS passion for eating also influences all his actions, diversions, and
studies. He is fond of hare-hunting, as he says his persuit is animated by the
hopes of seeing puss smoking on the table; but he wonders how any man can
venture his neck in a chase after a fox, which, when it is got, is not worth
eating. He has had occasion to visit the several Wells in this kingdom, which
he considers, not as places where persons go to drink the waters, but where
they go to eat; and in this light he gives a character of them all. " Bath,
says he, is one of the best markets in the world: At Tunbridge you have fine
mutton, and most exquisite wheat-ears: But at Cheltenham, pox take the place,
you have nothing but cow-beef, red veal, and white bacon." He looks upon every
part of England in the same light; and would as soon go to Cheshire for butter,
and Suffolk for cheese, as miss eating what each particular town or county is
famous for having the most excellent in its kind. He does not grudge to ride
twenty miles to dine on a favorite dish; and it was but last week, that he
appointed a friend in Buckinghamshire to meet him at Uxbridge, "which (says he
in his letter) is the best place we can settle our business at, on account of
those excellent rolls we may have for breakfast, and the delicious trout we are
sure to have at dinner."

MR. CRAMWELL (for that is his name) is so unfortunate as to want a purse
adequate to his taste; so that he is put to several shifts, and obliged to have
recourse to several artifices, to gratify his appetite. For this purpose he has
with great pains constituted a Club, consisting of persons most likely to
promote Good Living. This Society is composed of members, who are all of them
of some trade that can furnish it with provisions, (except one country squire,
who supplies it with game,) and they are obliged to send in the best of
whatever their trade deals in, at prime cost: by which wise management the Club
is supplied with every delicacy the seasons affords, at the most reasonable
rates. Upon any vacancy much care and deliberation is used in electing a new
member. A candidate's being able to devour a whole turkey with an equal
proportion of chine, or eat one haunch of venison with the fat of another as
sauce to it, would be no recommendation: On the contrary; there was never more
caution used, at the death of a Pope, to elect a successor who appears the most
likely to be short-lived, than by this Society of Epicurean Hogs to admit
nobody of a stomach superior to their own. Mr. CRAMWELL, on account of his
extraordinary proficiency in the Science of Eating, is honored with the office
of Caterer; and has arrived to such a pitch of accuracy in the calculation of
what is sufficient, that he seems to gage the stomachs of the Club, as an
Exciseman does a cask: and when all the members are present, they seldom send
away three ounces of meat from the table. A Captain of a ship trading to the
West Indies has been admitted an honorary member, having contracted to bring
over as a present to them a sufficient cargo of turtle every voyage; and a few
days ago I met CRAMWELL in prodigious high spirits, when he told me, that he
was the happiest man in the world: "for now, says he, we shall have Ortolans as
plenty as pigeons; for it was but yesterday, that we balloted into our society
one of the Flanderkin-Bird-Merchants." This association for the preservation of
elegant fare gratifies my friend CRAMWELL's luxury at a cheap rate: and that he
may make as many good meals as possible, he often contrives to introduce
himself to the tables of persons of quality. This he effects by sending my lord
or her ladyship a present of a Bath Cheese, a Ruff or Land-Rail from his
friends in Lincolnshire or Somersetshire, which seldom fails to procure him an
invitation to dinner. It once happened, that dining with an Alderman his
appetite got the better of his good-breeding, when he shaved off all the
outside of a plumb-pudding; and he has ever since been talked of in the city by
the name of SKIN-PUDDING.

AS all his joy and misery constantly arises from his belly, he thinks it is
the same with others; and I heard him ask a perfect stranger to him, who
complained that he was sick, whether he had over-eat himself. It is no wonder,
that CRAMWELL should be sometimes troubled with the gout: I called upon him the
other morning, and found him with his legs wrapped up in flannel, and a book
lying open before him upon the table. On asking him what he was reading, he
told me he was taking physic; and on enquiring whose advice he had, "Oh, says
he, nobody can do me so much good as Mrs. Hannah Glass. I am here going
through a course of her Art of Cookery, in hopes to get a stomach: for indeed,
my dear friend, (added he, with tears in his eyes) my appetite is quite gone;
and I am sure I shall die, if I do not find something in this book, which I
think I can eat."

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXVIII. THURSDAY, October 2, 1755.
-- Fuit haud ignobilis Argis,
Qui se credebat miros audire tragoedos,
In vacuo laetus sessor plausorque theatro.
Hic ubi cognatorum opibus curisque refectus
Expulit helleboro morbum bilemque meraco,
Et redit ad sese; pol me occidistis, amici,
Non servastis, ait; cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error.
HOR.
HORACE, in the passage quoted at the head of my paper, tells us (after
Aristotle) of a man, who used to sit in the empty theater, and fancy that he
saw real exhibitions on the stage. We have the like account in another ancient
author, of a person that used to wait with great solicitude the coming in of
ships into the harbor, believing them to be his own property. The end of these
madmen was also similar: they were both cured; and both complained, that they
were deprived of the satisfaction which they before enjoyed from a pleasing
error of their minds.

THAT the happiness and misery of the far greatest part of mankind depends upon
the fancy, need not be insisted on: Creed quod habes et babes, Think that you
have and you have, is a maxim not confined to those only within the walls of
Bedlam. I remember an humourist, who would frequently divert himself in the
same manner with the madmen abovementioned, and supply his real wants by the
force of his imagination. He would go round the markets, and suppose himself to
be cheapening the most dainty provisions; and when he came home to his scanty
meal, by the same ideal contrivance he would convert his trotters into turbot,
and his small beer into the most delicious Burgundy. As he was a barber by
trade, he would put on the air and manners of his customers, while he combed
out their wigs: with every bag he would conceive himself going to court or a
ridotto; and once, when he was sick, he got together three or four of the
largest ties, placed them upon blocks round his bedside, and called them a
consultation of physicians.

BUT of all others, there are none perhaps, who are more obliged to the
imagination for their ideal happiness, than the fraternity of which I am an
unworthy member. There is no set of people, who are more ambitious to appear
grand in the world, and yet have less means, than those gentlemen whom the
world has styled Authors. Wit and pride as often go hand in hand together as
wit and poverty: but though the generality of writers are by the frowns of
fortune debarred from possessing a profuse share of the good things of this
world, they are abundantly recompensed by enjoying them in speculation. They
indulge in golden dreams, at the time that they have not sixpence in their
pockets, and conjure up all the luxuries of Pontac's before them, though they
are at a loss perhaps where to get a dinner. Thus a Critic by a kind of magic
will transport himself to the theaters in an imaginary gilt chariot, and be
seated at once in the front-boxes; when in reality he has waited for two hours
in Vinegar-Yard before the opening of the doors, to secure to himself a corner
in the twelve-penny gallery. Hence it also happens to most Authors, that though
their way of life be ever so mean, their writings favor of the most unbounded
magnificence; and as they have nothing to bestow, a most surprising generosity
always accompanies every action of the quill. Thus a Novellist, for example, is
remarkably lavish of his cash on all occasions; and spares no expense in
carrying on the designs of his personages through ever so many volumes.
Nothing, indeed, is more easy than to be very profuse upon paper: An author,
when he is about it, may erect his airy castles to what height he pleases, and
with a wave of his pen may command the mines of Peru: and as he deals about his
money without once untying his purse-strings, it will cost him the same whether
he throws away a mite or a million; and another dip of ink, by the addition of
two or three gratis ciphers, may in an instant convert a single ten into as
many thousands. We must not therefore be surprised, that the heroes of our
modern novels seem to possess the Purse of Fortunatus, as their writers have
all of them the power of his Wishing-cap.

BUT it must be confessed, that we Essay-writers, as we are the greatest
Egotists, are consequently most vain and ostentatious. As we frequently find
occasion to prate about ourselves, we take abundant care to put the reader
constantly in mind of our importance. It is very well known, that we keep the
best company, are present at the most expensive places of diversion, and can
talk as familiarly of White's, as if we had been admitted to the honor of
losing an estate there. Though the necessaries as well as the luxuries of life
may perhaps be denied us, we readily make up for the want of them by the
creative power of the imagination. Thus, for instance, I remember a brother
Essayist, who took a particular pride in dating his lucubrations, From my own
Apartment; which he represented as abounding with every convenience: though at
the same time he was working three stories from the ground, and was often
forced to scribble upon wrappers of tobacco for want of other paper. As to
myself, I make no doubt but the reader has long ago discovered without my
telling him, that I loll at my ease in a crimson velvet chair, rest my elbow on
the polished surface of a mahogany table, write my essays upon gilt paper, and
dip my pen into a silver standish.

Indeed, though I have taken upon me the Title of a CONNOISSEUR, I shall not
presume to boast, that I am possessed of a Musaeum like Sloane's, or a Library
equal to Mead's. But as Pliny, and after him our countryman Mr. Pope, have left
us a description of their elegant Villa, I hope it will not be thought
arrogance in me (after what I have said,) if I set before the reader an account
of my own STUDY. This is a little edifice situated at a small distance from the
rest of the house, for the sake of privacy and retirement. It is an ancient
pile of building, and hangs over a small rivulet, which runs underneath it; and
as the entrance into it is shaded by a thick hedge of ever-greens, which cast a
kind of awful gloom about it, some learned antiquarians have been led to
conjecture, that it was formerly a Temple (or rather Chapel of Ease,) dedicated
to one of the heathen Goddesses. This Goddess, they inform me, was worshipped
by the Romans, and was probably held in no less veneration by the Egyptians,
Chaldees, Syrians, and other nations. However this be, the walls on the inside
are decorated with various inscriptions alluding to the religious rites
performed there, and hung round with the rude rhymes of ancient bards.

TO this STUDY I retire constantly every morning after breakfast, and at other
parts of the day, as occasions call. Here I am at liberty to indulge my
meditations uninterrupted, as I suffer no one to break in upon my privacy; and
(what will perhaps surprise my readers) I find in myself the greatest
inclination to visit it after an hearty meal. In this place I have made a very
rapid progress in literature, and have gone through several very learned
volumes, which otherwise I should never have looked into. I have here traveled
leaf by leaf through the works of many worthy, but neglected ancient divines,
critics, and politicians; and have turned over many a modern pamphlet or poem
with equal satisfaction. I must not forget to mention, that (like the
scrupulous Mahometans) I have often picked up the fragments of several learned
writers, which have come from the chandlers, and lodged them, among others no
less valuable, in my STUDY.

I MAY safely boast, that I am indebted for many of my best thoughts in the
course of these papers to the reflections I have had the leisure to make in
this STUDY; which probably has the same influence on my mind, as the stewed
prunes, which Bays tells us he always took when he wrote. But if my STUDY
serves to inspire me sometimes with agreeable ideas, it never fails on the
other hand to remind me of the mortality of writers; as it affords repeated
proofs, that we may justly say of our works, as well as of ourselves, Serius
aut citius SEDEM proper amus ad unam.


ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas a pirated Edition of the CONNOISSEUR is advertised to be published by
Mr. Faulkner in Dublin; and as this can be no other than a mere Copy of the
Folio Edition; the Proprietors think it necessary

N. B. The Papers are revised and corrected, with several considerable
Additions, and the Mottos and Quotations translated and adapted to modern
Manners, in a New Taste, by the AUTHORS. A copious Table of Contents is also
prefixed to each Volume.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER LXXXIX. THURSDAY, October 8, 1754.
Lugete, O Veneres, Cupidinesque,
Et quantum est hominum venustiorum!
Passer mortuus est meae puellae,
Passer deliciae meae puellae;
Quem plus illa oculis suis amabat.
CATULL.
GOING the other day to visit Mrs. Penelope Dote, after I had waited some time
in the parlour, the maid returned with her mistress's compliments, and informed
me, that as she was extremely busy, she begged to be excused coming down to me,
but that she would be very glad to see me in the Nursery. As I knew she was a
maiden lady, I was a good deal startled at the message; but however I followed
the servant up stairs to her mistress; whom I found combing a little white dog
that lay in her lap, with a gray parrot perched on one arm of the settee where
she sat, a monkey on the back, and a tabby cat with half a dozen kittens in the
other corner. The whole room, which was a very large one, was indeed a Nursery
for all kinds of animals, except those of the human species: It was hung every
where with cages, containing parrots, mackaws, canary birds, nightingales,
linnets, goldfinches, etc. on the chairs were several cats reposing on soft
cushions; and there were little kennels, in the Chinese taste, in almost every
corner of the room, filled with Pugs, Fidos, and King Charles's breed. As soon
as the chattering of the birds, the barking of the dogs, and the mewing of the
cats, which my entrance occasioned, began to cease, "You find me here, Sir,
(said the lady) tending my little family, the only joy of my life: Here Is a
dear pretty creature (holding up the dog she was combing) a beauty! sir, a fine
long-eared snub-nosed beauty! Lady Faddle advertised three quarters of a year,
and cold not get the fellow to it. Ah, bless it, and love it, sweet soul!" --
And then she stroaked it, and kissed it for near two minutes, uttering the
whole time all those inarticulate sounds, which cannot be committed to paper,
and which are only addressed to Dogs, Cats, and Children, and may be styled the
language of the Nursery. Upon observing me smile, at the embraces she bestowed
on her little motley darling, "I am afraid (said she) you don't love these
pretty creatures. How can you be so cruel? Poor dumb things! I would not have
them hurt for all the world: nor do I see why a lady should not indulge herself
in having such sweet little company about her, as well as you men run out
estates in keeping a pack of filthy hounds." Then she laid Pompey on his
cushion by the fireside, and railed at the barbarity of the human species to
the rest of the creation, and entered into a long dissertation on tenderness
and humanity.

A HUMANE disposition is, indeed so amiable either in man or woman, that it
ought always to be cherished and kept alive in our bosoms; but at the same time
we should be cautious not to render the first virtue of our nature ridiculous.
The most compassionate temper may be sufficiently gratified by relieving the
wretches of our own species: but who would ever boast of their generosity to a
lap-dog, and their conferring eternal obligations on a monkey? or would any
person deserve to be celebrated for their charity, who should deny support to a
relation or a friend, because he maintains a litter of kittens? For my part,
before I would treat a Dutch puppy with such absurd fondness, I must be brought
to worship dogs, as the Egyptians did of old; and ever I would so
extravagantly dote upon a monkey, I would (as Iago says on a different
occasion) "change my humanity with a baboon."

YET there have been many instances, besides my female friend, of this fondness
for the brute creation being carried to very ridiculous lengths. The grave
doctors of the faculty have been called in to feel the pulse of a lap-dog, and
inspect the urine of a squirrel: nay, I am myself acquainted with a lady, who
carried this matter so far, as to discharge her chaplain, because he refused to
bury her monkey. But the most solemn piece of mummery on these occasions is the
making provisions for these animals by will; which absurd legacies as little
deserve the title of humanity, as those people merit being called charitable,
who in a deathbed fright starve their relations, by leaving their estates to
found an hospital. It were indeed to be wished, that money left in trust for
such uses were subject to some statute of Mortmain; or at least that the
gentlemen of the long robe, would contrive some scheme to cut off the entail
from Monkeys, Mackaws, Italian Greyhounds, and Tabby Cats.

THAT a stage coachman should love his cattle better than his wife and
children, or a country squire be fond of his hounds and hunters, is not so
surprising, because the reason of their regard for them is easily accounted
for; and a seacaptain has, upon the same principles, been known to contract an
affection for his ship: but no coachman would, like Caligula, tie his horses to
a golden rack, but thinks he shows sufficient kindness by filling them with
good wholesome provender; and the country sportsman takes care to provide his
hounds with a good kennel and horseflesh, but would never think of placing them
on cushions before the fire, and feeding them with fricasees, or breed them
with as much care as the heir to his estate. This irregular passion (if I may
so call it) is most frequently to be met with among the ladies. How often has
the slighted gallant envied the caresses given to a lap-dog, or kisses bestowed
on a squirrel! and "I would I were thy bird!" has been the fond exclamation of
many a Romeo. But it is remarkable, that this affection for birds and beasts
generally wears off after marriage, and that the ladies discard their
four-footed darlings and feathered favorites, when they can bestow their
endearments on an husband. Wherefore, these dry nurses to Puggs and Grimalkins
are mostly to be met with among those females, who have been disappointed in
the affairs of love, and have against their will retained the flower of
virginity till it has withered in their possession. It often happens, that
there is some kind of analogy between the gallant they once loved, and the
animal on which they afterward fix their affections: and I myself remember an
instance of a lady's passion for a lawyer being converted into dotage on a
parrot; and have an old maiden aunt, who once languished for a beau, whose
heart is now devoted to a monkey.

BUT I should not so much quarrel with these humane ladies, who choose to settle
their affections on the brute species, if they were not troublesome to others,
who are not so sensible of the charms of a snub nose, or can discover any
beauty in the gray eyes of a cat. A doting mother would never forgive you, if
you did not call her brat a fine child, and dangle it about, and prattle with
it, with as much seeming rapture as herself: and in like manner, a lady would
take it as an affront to her own person, if you did not pay your adresses
equally to her pug or her parroquet. I know a young fellow, that was cut off
with a shilling by an old maiden aunt, because he gave poor Veny a kick only
for lifting up his leg against the gentleman's stocking: and I have heard of
another, who might have carried off a very rich widow, but that he could not
prevail upon himself to extend his caresses to her dormouse. Indeed, I cannot
help thinking, that the embraces and endearments bestowed on these rivals of
the human species should be as private as the most secret intrigues; and I
would have lap-dogs, like fretful and squalling children, confined to bark and
growl only in the Nursery. We may often see a footman following his lady to
church with a common prayer book under one arm a dog under the other: I have
also known a grave divine forced to stop short in the middle of a prayer, while
the whole congregation has been raised from their knees to attend to the
howling of a lap-dog: and I once saw a tragedy monarch disturbed in his last
moments, as he lay expiring on the carpet, by a little black dog of king
Charles's breed, who jumped out of the stage-box, and seizing upon the hero's
perriwig, brought it off in his mouth, and lodged it in his lady's lap.

IT will not appear strange, after what has been said, that these ladies (or
lady-like gentlemen) should be as sollicitous to preserve the breed of their
favorite animals, as a sportsman of his hounds and horses. I have known a
gentleman in St. James's street send his little Cupid in a sedan chair as far
as Grosvenor square to wait upon a lady's Veny for this very purpose: and I
shall never forget a Card, which was sent to another lady on a like occasion,
expressed in the following terms. -- "Mr. -- 's compliments to Lady Betty --,
is glad to hear Miss Chloe is safely delivered, and begs it as a particular
favor, that her ladyship would be pleased to SET HIM DOWN FOR A PUPPY."

THE CONNOISSEUR, By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XC. THURSDAY, October 15, 1755.
-- Ego nec studium sine divite vena,
Nec rude quid prosit, video, ingenium. --
HOR.
IF we consider that part of our acquaintance, whom we remember from their
infancy, we shall find, that the expectations we once entertained of their
future abilities are in many instances disappointed. Those, who were accounted
heavy dull boys, have by diligence and application made their way to the first
honors, and become eminent for their learning and knowledge of the world;
while others who were regarded as bright lads, and imagined to possess parts
equal to any scheme of life, have turned out dissolute and ignorant; and quite
unworthy the title of a Genius, except in the modern acceptance of the word,
by which it signifies a very silly young fellow, who from his extravagance and
debauchery has obtained the name of a Genius, (like lucus a non lucendo)
because he has no Genius at all.

IT is a shocking draw-back from a father's happiness, when he sees his son
blessed with strong natural parts and quick conception, to reflect that these
very talents may be his ruin. If vanity once gets into his head and gives it a
wrong turn, the young coxcomb will neglect the means of improvement, trust
entirely to his native abilities, and be as ridiculously proud of his parts, as
the brats of quality are taught to be of their family. In the mean time those,
whom nature threw far behind him, are by application enabled to leave him at a
distance in their turn; and he continues boasting of his Genius, till it
subsists no longer, but dies for want of cultivation. Thus vanity and indolence
prevents his improvement, and if he is to rise in the world by his merit, takes
away the means of success, and perhaps reduces him to very miserable
distresses. I know one of these early Geniuses, who scarce supports himself by
writing for a bookseller; and another, who is at leisure to contemplate his
extraordinary parts in the Fleet-prison.

IF we look into the world, we shall find that the mere Genius will never raise
himself to any degree of eminence without a close and unwearied application to
his respective business or profession. The Inns of Court are full of these men
of parts, who cannot bear the drudgery of turning over dry Cases and Reports;
but, though they appear ever so eloquent in taverns and coffee-houses, not the
nearest relation will trust them with a Brief: And many a sprightly physician
has walked on foot all his life, with no more knowledge of his profession than
what lies in his perriwig. For whatever opinion they themselves may have of
their own parts, other persons do not choose to be bantered out of their
estates, or joked out of their lives: And even in trade, the plodding men of
the Alley would foretell the bankruptcy of any wit among them, who should laugh
at the labor of Accounts, or despise the Italian Method of Book-keeping. Thus
we see, that parts alone are not sufficient to recommend us to the good opinion
of the world: and even these, if not roused and called forth by study and
application, would become torpid and useless: as the racehorse, though not put
to drag a dray or carry a pack, must yet be kept in exercise. But I shall
enlarge no further on this subject, as I would not anticipate the thoughts
contained in the following elegant little Fable; which (as my correspondent
informs me) is written by the same ingenious hand, that obliged the public with
the Verses on Imitation, inserted in my sixty-seventh number.

The HARE and the TORTOISE.
GENIUS, blessed term of meaning wide!
(For sure no term so misapplied,)
How many bear the sacred name,
That never felt a real flame!
Proud of the specious appellation,
Thus fools have christened Inclination.
But yet suppose a Genius true,
Exempli gratia, me or you.
Whatever he tries with due intention,
Rarely escapes his apprehension;
Surmounting every opposition,
You Would swear he learnt by intuition.
Should he presume alone on parts,
And study therefore but by starts?
Sure of success whenever he tries,
Should he forego the means to rise?
Suppose your watch, a Graham make,
Gold if you will for value sake,
It Is springs within in order due,
No watch, when going, goes so true:
If never wound up with proper care,
What service is it in the wear?
Some genial spark of Phoebus' rays
Perhaps within our bosom plays.
O how the purer rays aspire,
If Application fans the fire!
Without it Genius vainly tries,
However sometimes it seems to rise:
Nay, Application will prevail,
When braggart parts and Genius fail.
And now, to lay my proof before ye,
I here present you with a story.
In days of yore, when Time was young,
When birds conversed as well as sung,
And use of speech was not confined
Merely to brutes of human kind;
A forward Hare of swiftness vain,
The Genius of the neighboring plain,
Would often deride the drudging crowd:
For Geniuses are ever proud.
His flight, he would boast, 'twere vain to follow
For horse and dog, he would beat them hollow;
Nay, if he put forth all his strength,
Outstrip his brethren half a length.
A Tortoise heard his vain oration,
And vented thus his indignation.
O Puss! it bodes thee dire disgrace,
When I defy thee to the race.
Come, it is a match, -- nay no denial,
I lay my shell upon the trial.
'Twas done and done, all fair, a bet,
Judges prepared, and distance set.
The scamp'ring Hare outstrip'd the wind,
The creeping Tortoise lagg'd behind,
And scarce had passed a single pole,
When Puss had almost reached the goal.
Friend Tortoise, cries the jeering Hare,
Your burthen's more than you can bear:
To help your speed, it were as well
That I should ease you of your shell:
Jog on a little faster prithee,
I Will take a nap, and then be with thee.
So said so done, and safely sure;
For say, what conquest more secure?
Whenever he waked (that is all that is in it)
He could overtake him in a minute.
The Tortoise heard the taunting jeer,
But still resolved to persevere;
Still drawl'd along, as who should say
I win, like Fabius, by delay;
On to the goal securely crept,
While Puss unknowing soundly slept.
The betts are won, the Hare awake,
When thus the victor Tortoise spoke:
Puss, though I own thy quicker parts,
Things are not always won by starts:
You may deride my awkward pace,
But slow and steady wins the race.
*It is necessary to acquaint the Public, that the Twelves Edition of the
CONNOISSEUR, in Two neat Pocket Volumes, will be published here at the Meeting
of the Parliament; that Mr. Faulkner's Irish Edition is without the Knowledge
or Consent of the Authors and Proprietors; but for the Satisfaction of the
Gentlemen in Ireland, Mr. WILSON, Bookseller in Dublin, (and no other) will be
furnished with a GENUINE COPY of the English Edition of this Work in Twelves,
to reprint with the Consent and Approbation of the Authors.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCI. THURSDAY, October 23, 1755.
-- Utrumne
Divitiis homines, an sint virtute beati;
Et quae sit natura BONI. --
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
THE explanation which you gave us some time ago of GOOD COMPANY, has led me to
consider the import and extent of the epithet GOOD; which, in the modern sense
of the word, is indiscriminately applied to things very bad in their nature,
and is sometimes used only as a term of reproach.

To begin, first, with what is called a GOOD MAN. By this, one would imagine,
should be understood an honest, virtuous, and religious person: but to look for
a GOOD MAN, in this strict acceptance of the phrase, among the men of fashion,
would be as vain a search as that of Diogenes with his lanthorn in open
daylight. This appellation is, indeed, very familiarly used among the
gentlemen of 'Change Alley: but there it is meant only to signify a Rich man.
He is there called a GOOD MAN, who is able to answer a bill at sight, though he
is known to be ever so great a cheat. So by the same unaccountable phraseology,
a scoundrel with a large estate is entitled a Man of Worth: as among rakes the
HONEST fellow may be the most abandoned debauchee and greatest villain upon
earth.

BY the same figure, the GOOD FELLOW is he, who at a Country Wake can soil the
best wrestler, break most heads, and challenge the ring; take Broughton by the
nose; bid defiance to the Clare-Market butchers; knock down the constables and
watch, in beating the rounds in Covent Garden; bilk the waiter, and kick the
bully out of doors in the hundreds of Drury; carry off his six bottles of port
at a sitting; or drink October, till he leaves the country squire and the
parson on the floor.

AS to the other sex, the term GOOD WOMAN is applied, as a mere expletive
without any meaning, to the poor only, or perhaps to get rid of the importunity
of a beggar. In the country, indeed, a GOOD LADY is sometimes mentioned with a
sneer or as a term of reproach; and means one, who is so old-fashioned, as to
go to church, say her prayers, and convert her dressing room into an
apothecary's shop. But I would ask any well-bred lady, if she would be content
to banish herself from the delights of the theater, operahouse, masquerades,
routs, drums, assemblies, and the dear card-table, to be confined to the
country, have prayers in her own house twice a day, and do charitable offices
to her poor neighbors, merely to acquire the ridiculous reputation of a GOOD
LADY.

I SHALL proceed next to consider what is generally understood by a GOOD
EDUCATION. This is not to be found in either of our Universities: nor is any
learning or knowledge implied in it, except what is called the Knowledge of the
World, which cannot be attained among pedants, or gathered from musty books.
Common lads may be lashed through a grammar school, and afterward locked up in
colleges: but young fellows of taste and spirit have better opportunities of
improving themselves by mixing with the town and the beau monde. For this
reason they are introduced very early into those excellent Seminaries of GOOD
EDUCATION about Covent Garden, and placed under the tuition of Haddock,
Douglass, Harris, etc. It is also necessary, to ground them in the genteel
principles of infidelity and free-thinking, that they should attend the
disputations at the Robin Hood and the lectures of the Clare-market Orator: and
it would not be amiss, if they were to get a little notion of the modern Art of
Criticism by frequenting the Bedford and George's coffee-houses. After this it
is proper, to complete their education, that they should make the tour of
France and Italy; which will not fail to inspire them with the laudable love of
every thing that is foreign, and a thorough contempt for their own country.
Nothing now remains but to instruct them in the noble Science of Gaming; for
which purpose it has been found expedient to constitute an Academy at White's;
where it is taught in all it is branches. The consequences of such a GOOD
EDUCATION, as is here set down, may be seen in many instances: Some have been
enabled by it to ruin their constitutions, and others to run out their estates.
Some have received the finishing stroke of a GOOD EDUCATION at Tyburn, while
others have given sufficient proofs of it by being gallantly run through the
body in a duel, or genteelly shooting themselves through the head.

LET us now take a view of the GOOD EDUCATION, which is at present in vogue
among the fair sex. As the GOOD LADIES of former days were desirous, that their
daughters should make GOOD WIVES, they thought the first step toward it was to
make them GOOD HOUSEWIVES. They therefore bred them up in the domestic arts of
pickling, preserving, distilling simple waters, and the like: they also taught
them to work at their needle, write, cast accounts, and read a chapter in the
Bible or some other Good BOOK, as they are ridiculously oalled. But this method
of education has been found to be fit only for low girls designed to go to
service, or poor parsons daughters that must come to be milliners, or something
worse. As to ladies of fashion, to learn English would only obstruct their
advancement in the French language, which they are taught to speak from their
infancy, but never to read: besides, they will get a better knowledge of their
mother tongue from the peculiar dialects used at routes and assemblies, and the
spirited conversations carried on at masquerades and other public places, than
they could possibly do from books. All the writing required is to be able to
scrawl out a billet-doux; for which we must also own, that spelling-books are
of no service: and working we know would hurt their eyes no less than reading:
As to religion, honor, virtue, charity, and the like old-fashioned cant,
nobody would think of stuffing any girl's head with it, above the degree of a
chambermaid.

THE present notion of a GOOD Education was, therefore, unknown to the females
of former ages; as, besides the usual accomplishments of dancing, or the like,
it will be found to consist in the knowledge of Intriguing, Dress, and (I may
add too) the Card-table. In the first of these particulars they constantly
receive lessons from the milliners, mantua-makers, and maidservants; and by
being carried about to all public places of diversion, they soon become
proficients in the sciences. The same tutors likewise take care to instruct
their young pupils in the Art of Dress; and I have known a little miss, by the
time she was arrived at her teens, so nice an adept in face-painting, as to
apply the rouge to her pretty cheeks with as much elegance and propriety as her
mamma. To conclude, when a young lady has got Hoyle's rules by heart, and is
qualified to play a rubbers at a Sunday route, it is a sure mark of her having
had a complete GOOD EDUCATION.

THERE are many other instances, in which this word GOOD is perverted to a very
preposterous sense. Thus GOOD LIVING is made to signify the practice of no
other excellence, but what consists in Good Eating and Drinking: but as you
have formerly given us the character of one of these GOOD LIVERS, I shall only
take notice, that the ill humors consequent of their luxury and intemperance,
which show themselves in blotches and breakings out on their faces, are
emphatically called their Goodness. In like manner, by GOOD BLOOD we are taught
to understand a gentility of birth: and though a nobleman be ever so notorious
for his vices, or though his ancestors have been raised by the vilest means,
his posterity always pride themselves on the GOOD BLOOD of the family. I would
not be thought to quibble about words, when I observe, that the most shocking
and blasphemous ridicule on the sacred tenets of our religion (though without
the least shadow of wit) is by the present shallow race of free-thinkers
applauded as a GOOD JOKE. The most cruel and unmanly actions are by our Bucks
and Bloods set down under the same denomination: and if blasphemy and
profaneness is a GOOD JOKE, a rape or a murder is upon the same pinciples
esteemed a very GOOD THING.

I am, Sir, your humble Servant, PHILAGATHUS.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCII. THURSDAY, October 30, 1755.
O nata mecum Consule Manlio,
Seu tu querelas, sive geris jocos,
Seu rixam, et insanos amores,
Seu facilem, pia testa, somnum;
Descend. --
HOR.
DRINKING is one of those popular vices, which most people reckon among their
venial failings, and it is thought no great blot on a man's character, to say
he takes his glass rather too freely. But as those vices are most dangerous and
likely to prevail, which if not approved are at least excused by most people, I
have been tempted to examine, whether Drinking really deserves that quarter it
receives from the generality of mankind: and I must own, that after a strict
attention to the principal motives that induce men to become hard-drinkers, as
well as to the consequences which such excesses produce, I am at a loss to
account for the received maxim that "in good wine there is truth;" and should
no more expect happiness in a full bowl, than chastity in the bar of a tavern.

THE incentives to this practice are some of them very shocking, and some very
ridiculous; as will perhaps appear from the following characters. Poor Heartly
was blessed with every noble qualification of the head and heart, and bade fair
for the love and admiration of the world, but was unfortunately bound in a very
large sum for a friend, who disappeared, and left him to the mercy of the law.
The distresses, thus brought upon him by the treachery of another, threw him
into the deepest despair, and he had at last recourse to drinking, to benumb
(if possible) the very sense of reflection. He is miserable when sober, and
when drunk stupefied and muddled: His misfortunes have robbed him of all the
joys of life, and he is now endeavoring wilfully to put an end to them by a
slow death.

TOM BUCK, from the first day that he was put into breeches, was always
accounted a boy of spirit: and before he reached the top of Westminster school,
knew the names and faces of the most noted girls upon town, tossed off his
claret with a smack, and had a long tick at the tavern. When he went to Oxford,
he espoused the Tory party, because they drank deepest; and he has for some
years been accounted a four-bottle man. He drank for fame, and has so well
established his character, that he was never known to send a man from his
chambers sober, but generally laid his whole company under the table. Since his
leaving the university, nobody ever acquired more reputation by Electioneering;
for he can see out the stoutest freeholder in England: He has, indeed,
swallowed many a tun in the service of his country, and is now a sounder
patriot by two bottles than any man in the county.

POOR Wou'd-be became a debauchee through mere bashfulness, and a foolish sort
of modesty, that has made many a man drunk in spite of his teeth. He contracted
an acquaintance with a set of hard drinkers, and though he would as soon choose
to swallow a dose of physic, has not courage to refuse his bumper. He is drunk
every night, and always sick to death the next morning, when he constantly
resolves, to drink nothing stronger than small beer for the future; but at
night the poor fellow gets drunk again through downright modesty. Thus Wou'd-be
suffers himself to be pressed into the service; and since he has commenced a
jolly fellow is become one of the most miserable wretches upon earth.

HONEST Ned Brimmer is at present the most dismal object that ever fell a
sacrifice to liquor. It was unluckily his first ambition to promote what is
usually called Good Fellowship: In this undertaking he has in a very few years
entirely ruined his constitution, and now stalks up and down in so piteous a
condition, as might inspire his companions with more melancholy reflections
than an empty bottle. He has quite lost all appetite; and he is now obliged to
keep up a weak artificial heat in his body, by the same means that destroyed
the natural warmth of his constitution. Rum, brandy, and usquebaugh are his
diet-drinks, and he may perhaps linger a few months, before he falls a martyr
to Good Fellowship.

HAVING thus taken a short view of the unhappy motives, that induce men to
become hard-drinkers, few perhaps will think such reasons any recommendation to
Drunkenness: nor can I imagine they will grow more fond of it, by observing
what strange creatures they are during their intoxication. Shakespeare calls it
"putting a devil into their mouths to steal away their brains;" and indeed a
cup too much turns a man the wrong side out; and wine, at the same time it
takes away the power of standing from the legs, deprives the mind of all sense
and reflection. It is whimsical enough to consider the different effects, which
wine produces on different tempers. Sometimes, like love, it makes a fool
sensible, and a wise man an ass; and seems to imbibe a new quality from every
different body, as water takes a tincture from the ground it runs through.

HORACE has with great pleasantry recapitulated the various effects of wine in
a stanza, which I have placed at the head of this paper. One man grows maudlin
and weeps; another becomes merry and facetious; a third quarrels, throws a
bottle at his companion's head, and could run his dearest friend through the
body; a fourth is mad for a girl, and falls in love with a street-walker, or an
old woman roasting chestnuts; while to a fifth, the liquor serves as an opiate,
and lulls him to sleep. Shakespeare has also shown this variety of characters
with great humor. Cassio cries, "let us to business," and immediately begins to
hiccup out his prayers, and belches out his hopes of salvation: Justice
Silence, who does not speak a word while he is sober, has no sooner swallowed
the rouzing cup, than he roars out a catch, and grows the noisiest man in the
company. It is reported to have been one of the most exquisite entertainments
to the choice spirits in the beginning of this century, to get Addison and
Steel together in company for the evening. Steel entertained them till he was
tipsy; when the same wine that stupefied him, only served to elevate Addison,
who took up the ball just as Steel dropped it, and kept it up for the rest of
the evening. They who have never been present at a scene of this kind may see
the whole group of drunken characters, displayed at one view with infinite
humor, in Hogarth's Modern Midnight Conversation.

THUS excess of drinking verifies all the transformations recorded in the fable
of Circe's cup; and perhaps the true reason why Bacchus is always painted with
horns, is to intimate that wine turns men into beasts. Indeed, if none were to
indulge themselves in drinking, except those who, like Steel and Addison,
could be witty and agreeable in their cups, the number of hard-drinkers would
be very happily diminished. Most men have so little right to plead an excuse of
this sort in vindication of their drunkenness, that wine either makes them very
rude, very stupid, or very mad. It is a vulgar error to suppose that liquor
only shows ill qualities, since it also frequently creates them; and engenders
notions in the mind quite foreign to its natural disposition, which are the
mere effects of wine, and break out, like blotches and carbuncles on the face.
The disgustful appearance, which most people make when they are drunk, was what
induced the Spartans to intoxicate their slaves, and show them to their
children, in order to deter them from so odious a vice: In like manner let the
Choice Spirit, who is often seen hanging his head over the pot, or snoring in
an armed-chair in a tavern, reflect what a shocking figure he must have made,
when he sees the drunken beggar sleeping on a bulk, or rolling in the kennel.

WHOEVER thus considers the motives that generally induce men to give into
these excesses, and how ridiculous and unhappy they are often rendered by the
effects, will hardly be tempted by the charms of a bottle: and, indeed,
Hard-Drinking is frequently one, among the many evils, that arise from want of
education. The dull squire, settled in the country, who has no taste for
literary amusements, has nothing, except his dogs and horses, but his bumper to
divert him: and the town squire fits soaking for the same reasons in a tavern.
These are the common herd of Bacchus's swine: but nothing is more shocking,
than to see a man of sense thus destroying his parts and constitution. It not
only makes a terrible innovation in his whole frame and intellects; but also
robs him of the society of those like himself, with whom he should associate,
and reduces him to the level of a set of wretches; since all may be admitted to
his company and conversation, who are able to toss off a bumper.

THESE considerations are sufficient to convince us of the evils which result
from hard-drinking: but it will shock us still more, if we reflect how much it
will influence our life and conduct. Whoever is engaged in a profession will
never apply to it with success, while he sticks so close to his bottle; and the
tradesman, who endeavors to make business and pleasure compatible, will never
be able to make both ends meet. Thus whether health, fame, or interest is
regarded, Drunkenness should be avoided; and we may say with Cassio, "Every
inordinate cup is unblest, and the ingredient is a Devil."

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCIII. THURSDAY, November 6, 1755.
Fortuna saevo laeta negotio, et
Ludum insolentem ludere pertinax.
HOR.
I CANNOT but admire the ingenious device prefixed to the advertisements of
Hazard's Lottery-Office, in which Fortune is represented hovering over the
heads of a number of people, and scattering down all kinds of Prizes among
them. What Mr. Hazard has here delineated, every adventurer in the late Lottery
had pictured to himself: the ten thousand constantly floated before his eyes,
and each person had already possessed it in imagination. But alas! all our
expectations are now at an end; the golden dream is at length vanished; and
those, who were kept giddy all the while that the wheel of Fortune was turning
round, have now leisure soberly to reflect on their disappointment. How many
unhappy tradesmen must now trudge on foot all their lives, who designed to loll
in their chariots! how many poor maidens, of good family but no fortune, must
languish all their days without the comforts of an husband and a coach and fix!
Every loser thinks himself ill used by Fortune: and even Mrs. Betty, the
possessor of a single sixteenth, flies to the Office, pays her penny, and
receives the tidings of her ill luck with surprise; goes to another Office,
pays her penny, hears the same disagreeable information, and can hardly, very
hardly persuade herself, that Fortune should have doomed her still to wash the
dishes and scrub down the stairs.

THUS the views of every adventurer are directed to the same point, though
their motives for engaging in the Lottery may be different. One man puts in,
because he is willing to be in Fortune's way; another, because he had good luck
in the last; and another, because he never got any thing before. This indulges
in the prospect of making a fortune, and that buoys himself up with the hopes
of retrieving his desperate circumstances. Every one, however, thinks himself
as sure of the ten thousand, as if he had it in his pocket; and his only
concern is, how to dispose of it. In this light we may consider every
adventurer, as having been in actual possession of this treasure; and out of
fifty thousand people, who have been blessed within this fortnight with such
ideal good fortune, I shall select the following instances, which fell within
my own notice.

JOSEPH WILKINS of Thames Street Esquire, Oilman and Cheesemonger, got the
10,000 l. He could not bear the foggy air and dingy situation of the City: he
therefore resolved to take an house at the St. James's end of the town, and
intended to fit up a snug box at Hampstead in the Chinese taste, for his
retirement on Sundays. A Chariot was absolutely necessary, to carry him to and
from 'Change every morning: but he designed to have it made according to the
modern fashion, that it might occasionally be converted into a Post-Chaise, to
wheel him on a Saturday night to his Country-seat, and back again on the Monday
morning. Nothing was now wanting but a careful plodding partner, who should
take upon himself the whole drudgery of the shop; so that the Squire might have
no farther trouble than to receive his dividend of the profits. But while he
was considering on whom this important favor should be conferred, his ticket
was drawn -- blank: and Squire Wilkins is contented with his greasy employment
of measuring out lamp-oil, and cutting out penny-worths of Cheshire Cheese.

JOHN JONES of Ludlow in the county of Salop Esquire, Dealer and Chapman, got
the 10,000 l. This gentleman was forewarned of his success by several
undeniable tokens. His lady had dreamt of a particular Number four nights
together; and while the bells were ringing upon his being chose Bailiff of the
Corporation, they spoke in as plain words, as ever Whittington heard, " Mr.
John Jones will get ten thousand pound -- Mr. John Jones will get ten thousand
pound." He and his lady therefore came up to London: and not being able to meet
with the particular Number at Hazard's or Wilson's or any other Office always
remarkable for selling the ten thousands, they advertized it in the papers, and
got the great Prize, for only paying a guinea more for their ticket than the
market-price. As Mrs. Jones knew a good deal of the world, (having lived for
some years in quality of an upper servant in a great house,) she was determined
that Mr. Jones should take the opportunity, now they were in town, of learning
how to behave himself as he should do, when he came to his fortune. She
therefore introduced him into the best company in all the housekeepers and
stewards rooms in the best families, where she was acquainted: and as Mr. Jones
was so deficient in politeness, as not even to know how to make a bow in coming
into a room, he had private lessons from Mr. Dukes, who undertakes to teach
Grown Gentlemen to dance. Mrs. Jones herself was very busy in consulting with
the milliner and mantua-maker about the newest fashions, when the long
looked-for ten thousand came up: and directly after the Hey-Ge-Ho carried them
down again to Salop with this only consolation, that their ticket was within
one of the fortunate Number.

JONATHAN WILDGOOSE of Cheapside, Silk Mercer, had too much taste to be
confined to dirty business, which he neglected for the more agreeable persuits
of pleasure. Having therefore met with great losses in trade, he was obliged to
embark the remains of his shattered fortune in the Lottery, and by purchasing a
number of tickets secured to himself the 10,000 l. He had determined to keep
his success secret, bilk his creditors by becoming bankrupt, turn the whole
into an annuity for his life, and live abroad like a gentleman upon the income.
But unluckily his creditors came upon him too quickly; and before he could know
that he had not got the ten thousand, hurried him to jail, where he now lies,
lamenting that the Act of Insolvency was not postponed 'till after the Lottery.

SIR HUMPHRY OLDCASTLE, having greatly dipped his estate by being chosen into
Parliament on the Tory interest, mortgaged all he had left, to put himself in
the way of the the 10,000l. for the good of his country. This seasonable
recruit fixed him a staunch patriot: and he declared he would stand another
election against all oppositions. But, however it happened, the finishing of
the lottery has induced him to change his sentiments; and Sir Humphry in lieu
of the 10,000 l. has accepted a place.

JEMMY LISTER, an Attorney's Clerk, was carried into the Lottery by pure
disinterested love. He had conceived a violent passion for his master's
daughter; but the prudent old gentleman could not be prevailed on to give her
away to an handsome young fellow without a penny. This enraged him so much,
that he was in doubt whether he should bestow his 10,000 l. on the young lady,
or employ it more fashionably in keeping a girl. However, his hopes soon sunk
to one of the 5,000 l. prizes, which he at once determined to settle upon her
together with his person. But in this too he was disappointed, as also of the
other inferior prizes; and having received a positive refusal from his
mistress, out of mere spite he directly married the maid.

CAPTAIN MAC MULLEN, a decayed Gamester, made a shift to purchase the Chance of
a Ticket, which came up 10,000l. He immediately flew to Arthur's (late
White's,) risked it all at Hazard, set the whole table, and stripped the company
of their last shilling. After this he bought running-horses, made matches,
carried off the best plates, and took in all the Knowing-Ones on the Turf. But
so fluctuating is the situation of a Gamester, that at the end of the Lottery
he found that Fortune had left him in the lurch, without so much as a groat to
buy an halter. Et frustra mortis cupidum, cum deerit egenti
As, laquei pretium, --
HOR.

I NEED not point out any particular instances among the other sex, with
respect to their disposal of the 10,000 l. which every lady had secured by
choosing the ticket herself, taking particular care that the number be an odd
one. The married ladies have sufficient calls for even double this sum, to
supply them with the necessaries of dress, and to answer the expenses of
frequenting public diversions: and as to the unmarried ladies, they very well
know the truth of that maxim in the ballad, that "in ten thousand pounds ten
thousand charms are centered." Some ancient maiden ladies, who could never be
brought to think of an husband, or to give into the vanities of the world, were
resolved to live retired upon their Prize in the country, and leave proofs of
their good dispositions behind them, by swelling out their Wills with a long
list of Items to this or that charity or hospital.

BEFORE I conclude, I cannot but take notice of the great generosity of my own
PUBLISHER upon getting the 10,000 l. As his success was owing to his laying out
in the Lottery all the profits, which had already risen from the publication of
this Paper, he had determined to circulate my future numbers gratis; and had
even designed to keep open house for the reception of poor authors. Unhappily
for the public, as well as my brother-writers, Fortune has frustrated his
disinterested scheme: Even I myself am admitted to eat his mutton but once a
week; and (instead of giving away my papers) he has advertised, that the
Twelves edition of the CONNOISSEUR will be published on Tuesday the 25th of
this instant November, in Two Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCIV. THURSDAY, November 13, 1755.
-- Militavi non sine gloria.
HOR.
AS I was going through Smithfield the other day, I observed an old fellow with
a wooden leg, dressed in a sailor's habit, who courteously invited the passer-by
to peep into his raree-show, for the small price of an halfpenny. His
exhibitions, I found, were very well suited to the times, and quite in
character for himself: for among other particulars, with which he amused the
little audience of children that surrounded his box, I was mightily pleased to
hear the following, " -- there you see the British fleet persuing the French
ships, which are running away -- there you see Major General Johnson beating
the French soldiers in America, and taking Count Dieskau prisoner -- there you
see the Grand Monarque, upon his knees before King George, begging his life."
As the thoughts of the public are now wholly turned upon war, it is no wonder
that every method is taken to inspire us with a love of our country, and an
abhorrence of the French king: and not only the old seaman with his raree-show,
but the public theaters have likewise had a view to the same point. At
Drury Lane we have already been entertained with the Humors of the Navy; and I
am assured, that at Covent Garden Mr. Barry will make an entire conquest of
France in the person of that renowned hero Henry the fifth. And as the English
are naturally fond of bloody exhibitions on the stage, I am told that a new
Pantomime, entitled the Ohio, is preparing at this last house, more terrible
than any of it is Hells, Devils, and fiery Dragons; in which will be introduced
the Indian Manner of Fighting, to conclude with a representation of the Grand
Scalping Dance with all its Horrors.

WHILE this warlike disposition prevails in the nation, I am under some
apprehensions, lest the attention of the public should be called off from the
weighty concerns of these papers. I already perceive, that the common
newspapers are more eagerly snatched up in the public coffee-houses than my
essays; and the Gazette is much oftener called for than the Connoisseur. For
these reasons I find it necessary to lay open my own importance before the
public, to show that I myself am acting (as it were) in a military capacity,
and that Censor-General TOWN has done his country no less service as a valiant
and skilful commander at home, than Major General Johnson in America. Authors
may very properly be said to be engaged in a state of literary warfare; many of
whom are taken into pay by those great and mighty potentates the booksellers:
and it will be allowed, that they undergo no less hardships in the service,
than the common soldiers who are contented to be shot at for a groat a day.

IT has been my province to repel the daily inroads and encroachments made by
vice and folly, and to guard the nation from an invasion of foreign fopperies
and French fashions. The town has been principally the scene of action; where I
have found enemies to encounter with, no less formidable than the Tquattotquaws
or the Chickchimuckchis of North America. But as the curiosity of the public is
so much engaged in attending to the enterprises of Old Hendrick the Sachem, and
the incursions of Indians who have taken up the hatchet against our Colonies, I
am afraid that my exploits against the Savages, which infest this metropolis,
will be wholly over-looked. I have therefore resolved to give my readers fresh
advices from time to time of what passes here, drawn up in the same warlike
style and manner as those very alarming articles of news, which are commonly to
be met with in our public papers.

WE hear from White's, that the forces under Major General Hoyle, which used to
encamp at that place, are removed from thence, and have fixed their winter
quarters at Arthur's. The same letters say, that an obstinate engagement was
fought there a few nights ago, in which one party gained a great booty, and the
other suffered a considerable loss. We are also informed, that an epidemical
distemper rages among them, and that several of the chiefs have been carried
off by a sudden death.

THEY write from Covent Garden, that last week a Body of Irregulars sallied out
at midnight, stormed several forts in that neighborhood, and committed great
outrages; but being attacked by a detachment from the allied army of watchmen,
constables, and justices, they were put to flight, and several of them taken
prisoners. The plague still rages there with great violence, as well as in the
neighboring territories of Drury.

WE hear from the same place, that the Company commanded by Brigadier Rich has
been reinforced with several new-raised recruits to supply the place of some
deserters, who had gone over to the enemy: but his chief dependence is on the
light-armed troops, which are very active, and are distinguished, like the
Highlanders, by their party-colored dress. The enemy, on the other hand, have
taken several Swiss and Germans into pay; though they were at first under
terrible apprehensions of their being set upon by the Critics. These are a
rude, ignorant, savage people, who are always at war with the nation of
Authors. Their constant manner of fighting is to begin the onset with strange
hissings and noises, accompanied with an horrid instrument, named the Cat-call;
which, like the War-hoop of the Indians, has struck a panic into the hearts of
the stoutest heroes.

WE have advice from the Butcher Row, that on monday night last the Infidels
held a grand Council of war at their head quarters in the Robin Hood, at which
their good friend and ally, the Mufti of Clare-market, assisted in person.
After many debates, they resolved to declare war against the Christians, and
never to make peace, till they had pulled down all the Churches in Christendom,
and established the Alcoran of Bolingbroke in lieu of the Bible.

ALL our advices from the City of London agree in their accounts of the great
havoc and slaughter made there on the Festival, commonly called My Lord
Mayor's Day. All the Companies in their black uniform, and the trained bands in
their regimentals, made a general forage. They carried off vast quantities of
chickens, geese, ducks, and all kinds of provisions. Major Guzzledown of
Bassishaw distinguished himself greatly, having with sword in hand gallantly
attacked the outworks, scaled the walls, mounted the ramparts, and forced
through the covert-way of a large fortified Custard, which seemed impregnable.

THE Inhabitants of Sussex have lately been alarmed with the apprehensions of
an Invasion; as the French have been very busy in fitting out several small
vessels laden with stores of wine and brandy, with which it is thought they
will attempt to make a descent somewhere on our coasts. The Independent
Companies of Smugglers in the service of France are to be sent on this
expedition: but if the fleet of Custom-house smacks, etc. do not intercept them
at sea, we are preparing to receive them as soon as they are landed.

FROM diverse parts of the country we have advice, that the roads are every
where crowded with Ladies, who (notwithstanding the severity of the weather)
are hurrying up to London, to be present at the meeting of the Female
Parliament. At this critical juncture the fate of the nation depends entirely
on the deliberations of this wise and august Assembly: and as there are known
to be many disinterested patriots in the House, it is not to be doubted but
that proper measures will be persued for the good of their country. Many
salutary laws are already talked of, which we could wish to see put in
execution; such as -- A Bill for prohibiting the importation of French
Milliners, Haircutters, and Mantua-makers. -- A Bill for the exportation of
French Cooks and French Valets de Chambres. -- A Bill to restrain Ladies from
wearing French Dresses. -- And lastly, a Bill to restrain them from wearing
French Faces.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCV. THURSDAY, November 20, 1755.
Melle soporatam et medicatis frugibus offam
Objicit. --
VIRG.
AS every marriage is a kind of family festival, the wedding day is honored
with various celebrities, and distinguished like the fifth of November, the
birth-days of the Royal Family, or any other public day, with many
demonstrations of joy: The happy couple are dressed in their richest suits, the
bells ring all day, and the evening is concluded with the merry ceremony of
throwing the Stocking. But these festivities are not always so religiously
observed in Town, where many a pair of quality are tacked together with the
utmost privacy, and immediately after sneak out of town, as if they were
ashamed to show their faces after what they had done. In the Country, when the
squire, or any other person of distinction is married, the Honey-Moon is almost
a continued Carnival: and every marriage is accounted more or less likely to be
prosperous, in proportion to the number of deer, oxen, and sheep, that are
killed on the occasion, and the hogsheads of wine and tuns of ale, with which
they are washed down. By the last post I received an account from my Cousin
VILLAGE, of the wedding of a near relation, with a particular detail of the
magnificence of the entertainment, the splendour of the ball, and the universal
joy of the whole manor. At the same time I received compliments from the
new-married couple, with a large slice of the BRIDE-CAKE; the virtues of which
are well known to every girl of thirteen. I was never in possession of this
nuptial charm before: but I was so much delighted with this matrimonial token,
and it excited in my mind so many reflections on conjugal happiness, that
(though I did not lay it under my pillow,) it gave occasion to the following
Dream.

I FOUND myself in the middle of a spacious building, which was crowded with a
variety of persons of both sexes; and upon enquiry was told, that it was the
Temple of the God of Marriage; and that every one who had an inclination to
sacrifice to that Deity, was invited to approach a large altar which was
covered with a great number of CAKES of different shapes and appearance. Some
of these were molded into the form of hearts; and others were woven into
true-lovers-knots: some were strewed with sugar, and stuck about with
sweetmeats; some were covered with gold; some were stamped with coronets; and
others had their tops embellished with glittering toys, that represented a fine
house, a set of jewels, a coach and six or the like. Plutus and Cupid were
busily employed in distributing these Cakes (which were all of them marked with
the word MATRIMONY, and called BRIDE-CAKES) to different persons, who were
allowed to choose for themselves, according to their different views and
inclinations.

I OBSERVED several hasten to the altar, who all appeared to be differently
affected by their choice. To some the Cakes seemed of so delicious a flavor,
that they imagined they should never be surfeited; while others who found the
taste very agreeable at first, in a short time declared it to be flat and
insipid: However, I could not help remarking, that many more (particularly
among the quality) addressed themselves to Plutus, than to Cupid.

BEING desirous to take a nearer view of the company, I pushed through the
crowd, and placed myself close by the altar. A young couple now advanced, and
applying to Cupid, desired him to reach them one of the Cakes, in the shape of
a double heart pierced through with darts; but just as they were going to share
it betwixt them, a crabbed old fellow, whom I found to be the girl's father,
stepped up, broke the cake in two, and obliged the young lady to fix upon
another which Plutus picked out for her, and which represented the figure of a
fine gentleman in gilt ginger-bread.

AN old fellow of sixty-two, who had stolen one day from the business of the
'Change and the Alley, next came toward the altar, and seemed to express a
strong desire for a Cake. Plutus, who recollected him at first sight,
immediately offered him one, which, though very moldy and coarse, was gilt all
over; but he was astonished at the old gentleman's refusing it, and petitioning
Cupid for a Cake of the most elegant form and sweetest ingredients of any on
the altar. The little God at first repulsed him with indignation, but
afterward sold it to him for a large sum of money; a circumstance which amazed
me beyond expression, but which I soon found was very commonly practiced in
this Temple. The old fellow retired with his purchased prize: and though I
imagined he might still have a colt's tooth remaining, after having for some
time mumbled it between his old gums in vain, it lay by him untouched and
unenjoyed.

I WAS afterward very much disgusted with the many instances that occurred, of
these delicate morsels being set up to sale: and I found, that their price rose
and fell, like that of beef or mutton, according to the glut or scarcity of the
market. I was particularly affected with the disposal of the two following. A
young gentleman and lady were approaching the altar, and had agreed to take
between them a Cake of a plain form but delicious flavor, marked Love and
Competence; but a person of quality stepping forward persuaded the false female
to join with him, and receive from Plutus a glittering dainty, marked
Indifference and a large Settlement. Another lady was coming up with a Knight
of the Bath, being tempted by a Cake with a red ribbon streaming from it, like
the flags on a Twelfth-Cake; but was prevailed on by a person of greater rank
and distinction to accept a more showy Cake, adorned with a blue ribbon and a
coronet.

A BUXOM dame of an amourous complexion came next, and begged very hard for a
Cake. She had before received several which suited her tooth, and pleased her
palate so excessively, that as soon as she had dispatched one, she constantly
came to Cupid for another. She now seized her Cake with great transport, and
retiring to a corner with it, I could discern her greedily mumbling the
delicious morsel, though she had fairly worn out six and twenty of her teeth in
the service. After this an ancient lady came tottering up to the altar,
supported by a young fellow in a red coat with a shoulder-knot. Plutus gave him
a stale Cake marked with the word JOINTURE in large golden capitals, which he
received with some reluctance, while the old lady eagerly snatched another from
Cupid, (who turned his head aside from her,) on which I could plainly discover
the word DOTAGE.

A RICH rusty bachelor of the last century then came bustling through the
crowd. He brought with him a redcheeked country girl of nineteen. As he
approached the altar, he met several coming from it with Cakes, which he had
refused: some of which were marked Riches, some Family, some Beauty, and one or
two Affection. The girl he brought with him proved to be his dairy-maid, whom
he had for some time past been in vain attempting to bring over to his wishes;
but at last finding his design impracticable, he came with her to the altar. He
seemed, indeed, a little ashamed of his undertaking, and betrayed a good deal
of aukwardness in his manner and deportment. However, as soon as he had taken
his Cake, he retired; and determined to spend the rest of his days with his
milch-cow in the country.

TO satisfy a modest longing, there now advanced a maiden lady in the bloom of
threescore. She had, it seems, heretofore refused several offers from Cupid and
Plutus; but being enraged to find, that they had now given over all thoughts of
her, she seized by the hand a young Ensign of the Guards, and carried him to
the altar, whence she herself snatched up a Cake, and divided it with her
gallant. She was highly delighted with the taste of it at first, but her
partner being very soon cloyed, she too late discovered that the half which she
held in her hand was signed Folly, and that which she had forced upon her
paramour was marked Aversion.

A LITTLE, pert, forward Miss in a frock and hanging sleeves briskly ran up to
Cupid, and begged for a Cake: what it was she did not care; but a Cake she must
and would have, of one kind or another. She had just stretched out her hand to
receive one from Cupid, when her mamma interposed, sent the child back again
blubbering to the boarding-school, and carried off the Cake herself.

AN old woman, fantastically dressed, then burst into the Temple, and run raving
up to the altar, crying out that her name was MARY SINGLETON, and she would
have an husband. But the poor lady seemed likely to be disappointed; for as she
could prevail on no one to join hands with her, both Cupid and Plutus refused
to favor her with a Cake. Furious with rage and despair, she snatched one off
the altar; and seizing on the first man that came in her way, (which
unfortunately happened to be myself,) she would have crammed it forcibly down
my throat. As the least crumb of it was as disagreeable as a drench to an
horse, I began to spawl and sputter and keck; and though the flurry of spirits,
which it occasioned, awaked me, I thought I had the nauseous taste of it still
in my mouth.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCVI. THURSDAY, November 27, 1755.
-- Sex paratur aut december sophos nummis.
Secreta quaere carmina, et rudes curas,
Quas novit unus, scrinioque signatas
Custodit ipse virginis pater chartae.
Mercare tales ab eo, nec sciet quisquam.
MART.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
AMONG the many Register Offices erected within these few years past, I am
surprised that no scheme of the like nature has been thought of for the service
of literature; and that no place has been set apart, where Literary Commodities
of every sort might be disposed of; where men of learning might meet with
employment, and where others, who want their assistance, might be sure to meet
with men of learning. There is nothing of this kind in being at present, except
among the booksellers; who have made a monopoly of the trade, and engrossed the
whole market to themselves. To remedy this inconvenience, my design is to set
up a LITERARY REGISTER OFFICE: for which purpose I intend to hire the now
useless theater in Lincolns Inn Fields, and convert it into a mart for the
staple commodities of the literary commonwealth. I shall here fit up apartments
for the reception of my authors, who will be employed from time to time in
supplying the public with the requisite manufactures. This scheme, will, I
doubt not, meet with great encouragement, as it is of general utility: and I do
not remember any design of the same nature, except at a barber's on the other
side the water, who has hung out a board over his shop with the following
inscription -- Letters read and written for Servants and others.

I SHALL always have a fresh assortment of goods in the best taste and newest
fashion: as of Novels for example, while the humor of reading them is
prevalent among all ranks of people. For this branch I shall retain a very
eminent master-novellist, to cut out adventures and intrigues; and shall employ
a proper number of hands to finish the work with all possible care and
expedition: and if any ladies of quality, or others, choose to furnish their own
materials for Memoirs and Apologies, they may have them done up, and be fitted
exactly, at my Office. Besides several others, which my men shall get up with
the greatest dispatch, I can assure you I have myself worked night and day, and
have already finished six and thirty sheets of the History of Miss Sukey
Sapling, Written by Herself.

PAMPHLETS of all sorts shall be composed, whenever any popular subject starts
up, that is likely to engage the attention of the public. Every new play shall
be followed by an Examen or Remarks: all riots at either playhouse will afford
scope for Letters to the Managers; and every new actor or actress produce
theatrical criticisms. Poetry, you know, Mr. TOWN, is a mere drug; but I shall
always have a number of ready-made Odes by me, which may be suited to any Great
Man, dead or alive, in place or out of place. I shall also have a large bundle
of Poems on several Occasions, very proper for any gentleman or lady, who
chooses to publish by subscription; besides a more ordinary sort of Hymns to the
Morning, Verses on the Death of --, Odes to Miss A. B. C. Acrostics and
Rebusses, for the use of the Magazines: to be sold a pennyworth, with allowance
to those who take a great quantity.

WITH regard to Law matters, as they have no sort of connection with wit or
learning, I shall not concern myself with their unintelligible jargon; nor
presume to interfere with those authors in parchment, who measure their words
by the foot-rule, and sell their writings at so much per line. However, I shall
furnish young Students of the several Inns of Court with complete Canons of
Criticism, and Opinions on any new theatrical Cases; on which they may argue
very learnedly at a tavern, or plead at the bar of a coffee-house. For Medical
subjects, I shall procure a learned Graduate by Diploma from abroad, whose
practice will not so much take up his time as to prevent his being at leisure
to write occasional treatises, setting forth the virtues of any newly-invented
Powder, or newly-discovered Water. He shall also draw up the advertisements for
medicines, that remove all diseases, and are never known to fail; he shall
compile the wonderful accounts of their surprising cures; and furnish cases
that never happened, and affidavits that were never made. With respect to
Divinity, as I have reason to believe that controversial writings will be often
called for, I intend to bargain with the Robin Hood Society to undertake in the
lump to furnish my Office with Defenses of Lord Bolingbroke, etc. and till I
can procure some poor curate out of the country, or servitor from the
university, to write the Manuscript Sermons of eminent Divines lately deceased,
warranted originals, I must make shift with the Fleet Parsons now out of
business.

THOUGH I shall not keep any dramatic works ready made by me, (as these
commodities are apt to grow stale and out of fashion,) yet either of the
theaters may be served with tragedy, comedy, farce, or the like, by bespeaking
them, and giving but three days notice. For the comic pieces I shall employ a
poet, who has long worked for the drolls at Bartholomew and Southwark fairs,
and has printed a comedy as it was half acted at Drury Lane. My tragedies will
be furnished by a North Briton, who walked up to London from his native country
last winter with a most sublime tragedy in his coat-pocket, and which is now to
be disposed of to the best bidder. Any old play of Shakespeare or Ben Johnson
shall be pieced with modern ones according to the present taste, or cut out in
airs and recitative for an English Opera. Rhymes for Pantomimes may be had, to
be set to the clack of a mill, the tinkling of a tin cascade, or the slaps of
Harlequin's wooden sword. The proprietors of our public Gardens, during the
summer season, may be also supplied from my Office with Love-Songs to a new
burden, or comic Dialogues in Crambo; and words shall, at any time be fitted
to the music, after the tunes are composed.

AS I propose to make my Office of general utility, every thing that bears the
least affinity to literature will be naturally comprehended in my Scheme.
Members of Parliament may be supplied with Speeches on any political subject;
and Country Justices may, on directing a letter to the Office post paid, have
Charges to the Jury at the Quarter Sessions sent down to them by the first
coach or wagon. Addresses on particular occasions shall be drawn up for the
worshipful mayor and aldermen of any city or corporation: Laws, Rules,
Regulations, or Orders, shall be formed for the Anti-Gallicans, Ubiquarians,
Gregorians, or any private clubs and societies. N. B. The Free Masons may
depend upon secresy.

MANY advantages may likewise accrue to the polite world from the establishment
of my Office. Gentlemen and ladies may have Billet-doaux written for them with
the most soft and languishing expressions: Message Cards, and Invitations to
Routs, shall be filled up and circulated at so much per hundred, or undertaken
in the gross at a fixed price all the year round. Beaux may be accommodated
with letters of gallantry to send to their laundresses, or have them copied out
in a fashionable female scrawl, and directed to themselves; which they may show
about as coming from ladies of quality in love with them. Gentlemen who love
fighting, but cannot write, may have challenges penned for them in the true
style and spirit of a modern Blood.

THERE are many other conveniences arising from such an Office, which it would
be too tedious to enumerate: and it will be found to be no less beneficial to
you authors, Mr. TOWN, than those other Register Offices are to men and
maidservants. If an author (for example) wants employment, or is out of place,
he has nothing to do but to enter his name with me, and I shall presently get
him work: or if a bookseller wants an hand for any particular job, (as a
translation-spinner, a novel-weaver, a play-wright, a verse-turner, or the
like) upon searching my books he will be sure to meet with a man fit for the
business. In short, any composition, in prose or rhyme, and on any subject, may
be procured at a minute's warning, by applying to my Office: and I dare say,
you yourself, Mr. TOWN, will be very glad now and then to purchase a
Connoisseur of me, whenever the idle fit seizes you. If that should happen to
come upon you this week, and you have nothing better, you will oblige me by
laying the scheme here sent before your readers; and in return, you shall have
the credit of publishing your papers at my Office, as soon as it is opened, and
welcome.

I am, Sir, Your humble Servant, J. WITSELL.


*On Tuesday last was published The CONNOISSEUR (revised end corrected, with a
new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations) in Two neat Pocket Volumes, Price
Six Shillings bound.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCVII. THURSDAY, December 4, 1755.
De te pendentis, te respicientis amici.
HOR.
I REMEMBER to have heard a cousin of mine, who was formerly at Cambridge,
often mention a sect of Philosophers distinguished by the rest of the
collegians by the appellation of Tuft-Hunters. These were not the disciples of
the Stoics or Epicureans, or the advocates for the old or new philosophy, but
the followers, literally speaking, of the fellow-commoners, noblemen, and other
rich students, whom, it seems, the courtesy of the University has honored with
a cap adorned with a gold tossel. These few gold threads have almost as much
influence in the University as a red or blue ribband at court, and always draw
after the wearer a train of humble companions, who will be at his call to
breakfast, dine, or sup with him whenever he pleases, will go with him any
where, drink with him, wench with him, borrow his money, or let him pay their
reckoning. They are, I am told, a sort of disease of the place, which a man of
fortune is sure to catch as soon as he arrives there: and these fast friends
stick so close to him, that he can never shake them off, while he keeps his
gown on his back.

THE University of London is not without its Tuft-Hunters, who fasten, like
leeches, on a young man of fortune at his first coming to town. They beset him
as soon as he arrives, and when they have once surrounded him, seldom fail of
securing him to themselves; for no persons of character care to have any
connections with him, when he has been frequently seen in such bad company. It
is a great misfortune for any young gentleman to fall into their hands: though
indeed, as a fool is the natural prey of knaves, the wealthy maintainers of
this fraternity are generally none of the wisest: And as at the University,
"where the learned pate ducks to the golden fool," the gentleman-student is
distinguished by a cap with a gold tuft, I always consider these sons of folly
in town as adorned with a showy cap hung with bells, which serve at once to
denote the depth of their parts, and to call their train about them.

THE dialect of the town has very expressively characterised these humble
dependants on men of fortune by the name of Hangers-on. They will, indeed, take
such sure hold, and hang on a man so constantly, that it is almost impossible
to drop them. Whenever the gentleman appears, the Hanger-on is sure to be at
his elbow. They will squeeze themselves into every party that is formed; and I
have known instances of their thrusting themselves into strange families, by
sticking to their patron's skirts, and impudently introducing themselves where
he has been invited to dinner: which, indeed, I think would not be an improper
custom, provided they would submit to stand behind his chair. They will stick
so closely, that all the adhesive quality of burs, pitch, etc. seem to be
collected in them; and the line in Pope's Odyssey, so often ridiculed, may
rather be considered as emphasis than tautology in speaking of Them. The
Hanger-on clings to his fool, as Ulysses did to the rock, and in Pope's words,
They STICK ADHERENT, and SUSPENDED HANG.


THE tenaciousness of a Hanger-on is so very strong, that whoever is drawn into
their snares, is so firmly limed he can hardly ever loose himself from them.
For as nothing but the lowest meanness of spirit could ever prevail on a man to
submit to such dependence on another, it is in vain to think of getting rid of
such abject wretches by treating them with contempt. They will take as much
beating, provided you will allow them an equal degree of familiarity, as a
spaniel. They will also submit to do any little offices, and are glad to make
themselves useful, whenever they have an opportunity. They will go among the
brokers to borrow money for you, pimp for you, or submit to any other such
gentleman-like employment to serve their friend.

IT must here be noted, that every Hanger-on is a person of strict honor and a
gentleman; for though his fortune is (to be sure) somewhat inferior to yours,
and he submits to make himself convenient on several occasions, yet on that
account you are indebted to his infinite goodnature; and all his endeavors to
serve you proceed from his great friendship and regard for you. I remember one
of these friendly gentlemen, who carried his esteem so far, that in a quarrel
with his rich companion, in which he was favored with several tweaks by the
nose and kicks on the breech, he received all these injuries with patience, and
only said with tears in his eyes, "Dear Jack, I never expected this usage from
you. You know I don't mind fighting; but I should never have a moment's peace,
if I was to do you the least injury. Come, Jack, let us buss and be friends."
Their gentility is unquestionable, for they are seldom of any trade, though
they are sometimes (being younger-brothers perhaps) of a profession. I know
one, who is a nominal lawyer; but though his friend has often fee'd him, our
Counselor could never with any propriety consider him as a client; and I know
another, who (like Gibbet in the play) is called Captain, whose elegant manner
of living must be supported by his being on full pay with his patron, since he
does not receive even the common soldier's groat a day from his commission.
However, considering at one view the gentility of their profession, and the
shortness of their finances, I often look on them as a band of decayed
gentlemen, the honorable pensioners of those they follow. The great men among
the Romans had a number of these Hangers-on, which attended them wherever
they went, and were emphatically called Umbrae, or Shadows; and, indeed, this
appellation conveys a very full idea of the nature of these humble retainers to
the wealthy, since they not only follow them like their shadows, but "like a
shadow prove the substance true:" for whenever you observe one or more of these
Umbrae perpetually at the heels of any gentleman, you may fairly conclude him
to be a man of fortune.

THESE faithful friends are so careful of every thing that concerns you, that
they always enquire with the greatest exactness into your affairs, and know
almost as well as your steward the income of your estate. They are also so fond
of your company, and so desirous of preserving your good opinion, that a
Hanger-on will take as much pains to keep you entirely to himself, and to
prevent a rival in your affections, as a mistress: and as a convenient female
is a very necessary part of the equipage of a person of fashion, these male
companions must be a very agreeable part of the retinue of those high-spirited
young gentlemen, who are fond of being the head of their company. It is only a
more refined taste in expense to pay a man for laughing at your wit, and
indulging your humor: and who will either drink his bottle with you at the
tavern, or run to the end of the town for you on an errand.

I MIGHT also take notice of an humbler sort of Hangers-on, who fix themselves
to no one particular, but fasten upon all their friends in their turns. Their
views, indeed, are seldom extended beyond a present subsistence, and their
utmost aim perhaps is to get a dinner. For this purpose they keep a register of
the hours of dining of all their acquaintance; and though they contrive to call
in upon you just as you are sitting down to table, they are always with much
difficulty prevailed upon to take a chair. If you dine abroad, or are gone into
the country, they will eat with your family to prevent their being melancholy
on account of your absence; or if your family is out, they will breakfast,
dine, and sup with you out of charity, because you should not be alone. Every
house is haunted with these disturbers of our meals: and perhaps the best way
to get rid of them, would be to put them, with the rest of your servants, upon
board-wages.

BUT besides these danglers after men of fortune, and intruders on your table
in town, the country breeds a race of lowly retainers, which may properly be
ranked among the same species. Almost every family supports a poor kinsman, who
happening to be no way related to the estate, was too proud of his blood to
apply himself in his youth to any profession, and rather chose to be supported
in laziness at the family-seat. They are, indeed, known perhaps to be cousins
to the squire, but do not appear in a more creditable light than his servants
out of livery; and sometimes actually submit to as mean offices of drudgery as
the groom or whipper-in. The whole fraternity of Hangers-on, whether in town or
country, or under whatever denomination, are the sons of idleness: for it will
be found upon examination, that whenever a man, whose bread depends on his
industry, gives himself up to indolence, he becomes capable of any meanness
whatever: and if they cannot dig, yet like our Hangers-on, to beg they are not
ashamed.

This Day is Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCVIII. THURSDAY, December 11, 1755.
Ut id ostenderem, quod te isti facilem putant,
Id non fieri ex vera vita, neque adeo ex aequo et bono,
Sed ex assentando, indulgendo, et largiendo. --
TER.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR!
I HAVE been some years married to one of the best women in the world. She
possesses all the virtues that can be named: but alas! she possesses some of
them to excess. Those which I wish to particularize, and which are infinitely
pernicious to me, and my fortunes, are her superabundant Goodnature, and her
boundless Generosity.

IT is a little difficult perhaps to ascertain what are, or ought to be, the
exact bounds of Goodnature; which, of all virtues, seems to me most necessary
to be confined, or at least mitigated in such a manner, as to hinder it from
destroying its own excellence and utility. On the one hand, if it is restrained
too close, the world will say, that it must entirely lose its essence: But
fatal experience has convinced me, that if it is permitted to enjoy a full
unlimited sway, this amiable virtue becomes a ridiculous vice; and brings with
it, as in my wife's case, fruitless expenses, ill-judged concessions, and a
kind of blind folly, that is always liable to contempt.

GENEROSITY is the daughter of Goodnature. She is very fair and lovely when
under the tuition of Judgment and Reason; but when she escapes from her tutors,
and acts indiscriminately, according as her fancy allures her, she subjects
herself, like her mother, to the blasts of sneer, ridicule, and disdain.

TO illustrate these assertions by some examples, from among the many mishaps,
losses, and embarassments, which have accrued to us in the course of our
domestic affairs, give me leave to tell you, that some years ago, we had a
footboy who acted as butler, and had the custody of all the little plate which
our small fortune could afford us. The fellow was awkward, and unfit for the
station; but my wife very good-naturedly was determined to keep him in our
service, because he intended to marry the nursery-maid, and would undoubtedly
make an excellent husband. The rascal was a thief; but as it is ill-natured to
suspect people, before we have full proof of their knavery, several of his
tricks, and petty larcenies, were attributed to the itinerant Jews and higlers
(we then living at Newington) who frequently called at our door. Flushed with
success, and relying on my wife's credulity and Goodnature, he began to form
deeper designs; and (as he lay in the kitchen) pretended to have seen a man
breaking in at the window, and to have hid himself with a chopping knife in his
hand, so as to have felled the villain to the ground as soon as he had put his
body through the casement. A noise from without was said to have given an alarm
to the housebreaker, and to have interrupted him in his attempt; but some whole
panes of glass being dislocated from their lead, and some hacks and scratches
of a chisel (marks all made by our own servant) being visible next morning, my
wife very generously rewarded her Jemmy, whom she jocularly called Scrub, for
his diligence and courage in defending us from having our throats cut. This
terrible tale was doubtless formed in order to remove all suspicions, when he
should pillage the house himself; but precautions being taken by us, in
consequence of this alarm, to fortify our bedchamber, where he knew our
current treasure was reposited, Jemmy thought it time to decamp; so that in
about a week after he had received the reward, I hinted at, of a crown piece
from his lady, he stole her gold repeating watch, and a pair of our best silver
candlesticks, with which he voluntarily transported himself, as we have been
since told, to the West Indies, leaving his mistress the nursery-maid, big with
child, and thereby giving great license to the neighborhood to animadvert upon
my wife's amazing prescience in foreseeing his excellencies as an husband.

YOU must further be told, Sir, that my dear consort, in the full glow of her
goodness, is never contented unless her servants marry each other. All I can
urge against so impolitic a custom has been to no purpose: Marriage (she says)
prevents vice, and saves souls from destruction. Perhaps it may; but are no
unmarried servants to be found in Mr. Fielding's Register Office, or elsewhere,
but what are vicious? At least I am sure, that this piece of sanctity is very
expensive in its effects, and is attended with many inconveniences. One of her
maids about two years ago was discovered to be very intimate with my footman;
my wife, to prevent ill consequences, hastened to have them married, and was
present herself at the ceremony. She admired the modesty of the woman and the
decent gravity of the man during the holy rites, and she was entirely convinced
that no harm could have happened from so decent a couple. In little more than
three months after the marriage, Patty brought forth a swinging girl; but as it
was born almost six months before its time, my wife advised them to keep it the
remaining half year in cotton. She did this purely from a motive of
goodnature, to try to shield the new married woman's reputation; but finding
our neighbors fleer at the incident, and smile contemptuously at the
prescription of cotton, she contented herself in believing Patty's own account,
that "in truth she had been married eight months before by a Fleet-parson, but
was afraid to own it."

BUT if my wife's indulging her domestics in matrimony was productive of no
other ill consequence than merely their being married, it might indeed
sometimes rather prove a benefit than a detriment: but the chaster and more
sober they have been before marriage, the greater number of children are
produced in matrimony; and my wife looks upon herself as in duty obliged to
take care of the poor helpless offspring, that have been begotten under her own
roof; so that I assure you, Sir, my house is so well filled with children, that
it would put you immediately in mind of the Foundling Hospital; with this
difference however, that in my Hospital not only the children are provided for,
whether bastards or legitimate, but also the fathers and mothers.

YOUR high office, Mr. CENSOR, requires and leads you to hear domestic
occurrences, otherwise I should scarce have troubled you with the records of a
private family, almost ruined by excrescencies of virtue. The same overflowing
humanity runs through the whole conduct of the dear woman whom I have
mentioned. Even in trifles she is full of works of supererogation. Our doors
are perpetually surrounded with beggars, where the halt, the maimed and the
blind assemble in as great numbers, as at the door of the Roman Catholic Chapel
in Lincoln's Inn-Fields. She not only gives them money, but sends them out
great quantities of bread, beer, and cold victuals; and she has her different
pensioners (as she herself calls them) for every day in the week. But the
expense attending these out-door petitioners (many of whom have from time to
time been discovered to be impostors) is nothing in comparison to the sums that
are almost daily drawn from her by begging letters. It is impossible to imagine
a calamity, by which she has not been a sufferer, in relieving those who have
extorted money from her, by pretended misfortunes. The poor lady has been much
hurt by losses in trade, has been a great sufferer by fire, undergone many
hardships from sickness and other unforeseen accidents, and it was but
yesterday that she paid a long apothecary's bill brought on by a violent fever.
Thus, Sir, though my wife goes into but little company, and the family-expences
are to all appearance very small, yet my wife's superabundant Goodnature is
such perpetual drawback on her economy, that we run out considerably. This
extravagant and ill-judged Generosity renders all her numerous excellencies of
none effect: and I have often known her almost destitute of clothes, because
she had distributed her whole wardrobe among liars, sycophants, and hypocrites.

THUS, Sir, as briefly as I can I have set before you my unhappy case. I am
perishing by degrees, not by any real extravagance, any designed ruin, or any
indulgence of luxury and riot in the person who destroys me. On the contrary,
no woman can exceed my wife in the simplicity of her dress, the humility of her
desires, or the contented easiness of her nature. What name, Sir, shall I give
to my misfortunes? They proceed not from vice, nor even from folly: they
proceed from too tender a heart; a heart that hurries away, or absorbs all
judgment and reflection. To call these errors the fruits of Goodnature is too
mild a definition: and yet to give them an harsher appellation, is unkind. Let
me suffer what I will, I must kiss the dear hand that ruins me.

IN my tender hours of speculation I would willingly impute my wife's faults to
our climate, and the natural disposition of our natives. When the English are
Good-natured, they are generally so to excess: and as I have not seen this
particular character delineated in any of your papers, I have endeavored to
paint it myself: and shall draw to the conclusion of my letter by one piece of
advice, Not to be GENEROUS overmuch. The highest acts of Generosity are seldom
repaid in any other coin, but baseness and ingratitude: and we ought ever to
remember, that out of ten lepers cleaned, one only came back to return thanks;
the rest were made whole, and went their way.

I am, Sir, your most humble servant, TIMON of LONDON.


*A Letter directed for G. K. is left at the Publisher's.

This Day is Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER XCIX. THURSDAY, December 18, 1755.
Da veniam, servire tuis quod nolo Calendis.
MART.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR!
AT this season of the year, while the streets resound with the cry of New
Almanacks, and every stall is covered with News from the Stars, Diaries,
Predictions, Complete Ephemeris, etc. drawn up by Partridge, Parker, Vincent
Wing, and the rest of the sagacious body of Philomaths and Astrologers, give me
leave to acquaint you of my intentions of appearing annually in a like
capacity. You must know, Sir, that having observed, that among the great
variety of Almanacks now published, there is not one contrived for the use of
people of fashion, I have resolved to remedy this defect by publishing one
every year under the title of the Court Calendar, calculated for the Meridian
of St. James's.

THE plan, which has been hitherto followed by our Almanack-makers, can be of
no use whatever to the polite world, who are as widely separated in their
manner of living from the common herd of people as the inhabitants of the
Antipodes. To know the exact Rising and Setting of the Sun may serve to direct
the vulgar tradesman and mechanic when to open shop or go to work: but persons
of fashion, whose hours are not marked by the course of that planet, are
indifferent about its motions; and like those who live under the Equinoctial
Line, have their days and nights of an equal degree of length all the year
round. The Red-letter days pointed out in our common Almanacks may perhaps be
observed by some formal ladies, who regulate their going to church by them: but
people of quality percieve no difference between the Moveable or Immovable
Feasts and Fasts, and know no use of Sunday, but as it serves to call them to
the card-table. What advantage can a beau reap from Rider's List of the Fairs,
which can only be of service to his groom? or what use can any gentleman or
lady make of those Diaries now inscribed to them; which are filled with Algebra
and the Mathematics? In a word, the present uncouth way of dividing the months
into Saints Days, Sundays, and the like, is no more adapted to the present
modes of polite life, than the Roman division into Ides, Nones, and Calends.

INSTEAD of supposing, with the vulgar tribe of astronomers, that the day
begins at sunrise, my day, which will commence at the time that it usually
breaks in fashionable apartments, will be determined by the Rising of people of
quality. Thus the morning dawns with early risers between eleven and twelve;
and noon commences at four, when, at this time of the year, the dinner and
wax-lights come in together. For want of a thorough knowledge of the
distribution of the day, all who have any connection with the polite world
might be guilty of many mistakes: and when an honest man from Cornhill intended
a nobleman a visit after dinner, he would perhaps find him sipping his morning
chocolate. The inconveniences of the old style in our manner of reckoning the
days were so manifest, that it was thought proper to amend them by act of
parliament. I am resolved in like manner, to introduce the new style of
dividing the hours also into my Almanac: for can any thing be more absurd than
to fix the name of morning, noon, and evening, etc. at present on the same
hours, which bore them in the reign of Queen Elizabeth? A Duchess is so far
from dining at eleven, that it often happens that Her Grace has not then opened
her eyes on the tea-table; and a Maid of Honor would no more rise at five or
six in the morning, as it was called by the early dames of Queen Bess's court,
than she would, in imitation of those dames, breakfast upon strong beer and
beef-steaks. Indeed in those houses, where the hours of quality are observed by
only one part of the family, the impolite irregularity of the other, in
adhering to the old style, occasions great disturbance, for as Lady Townly
says, "such a house is worse than an inn with ten stage coaches. What between
the impertinent people of business in a morning, and the intolerable thick
shoes of footmen at noon, one has not a wink of sleep all night."

THE reformation which I have also made in respect to the Red-letter-days is no
less considerable. I have not only wiped away that immense catalogue of Saints
which crowd the Popish Calendar, but have also blotted out all the other Saints
that still retain their places in our common Almamacks: well-knowing that
persons of fashion pay as little attention to the Apostles and Evangelists, as
to St. Mildred, St. Bridget, or St. Winifred. Indeed I retain the old name of
St. John, because I am sure, that people of quality will not think of any
body's being designed under that title, except the late Lord Bolingbroke.
Having thus discarded the Saints, people whom nobody knows, I have taken care
to introduce my readers into the best company: for the Red-Letters in my
Calendar will serve to distinguish those days on which the ladies of the first
fashion keep their routes and visiting days: a work of infinite use as well to
the persons of distinction themselves, as to all those who have any occasional
intercourse with the polite world. That season of the year commonly
distinguished by the appellation of Lent, which implies a time of fasting, I
shall consider, according to its real signification in the Beau Monde, as a
yearly festival; and shall therefore mention it under the denomination of The
Carnival. The propriety of this will be evident at first sight, since nothing
is so plain, as that at this season all kinds of diversion and jollity are at
the height in this metropolis. Instead of the Man in the Almanac, I at first
intended (in imitation of Mr. Dodsley's Memorandum Book) to delineate the
figure of a fine gentleman dressed a la mode: but I was at length determined, by
the advice of some ingenious friends, to suffer the old picture to remain
there; since as it appears to be run through the body in several places, it may
not improperly represent that fashionable character a Duellist.

IN the place which is allotted in other Almanacks for the change of weather,
(as hail, frost, snow, cloudy, and the like) I shall set down the change of
dress, adapted to different seasons, and ranged under the titles of hats,
capuchins, cardinals, sacks, negligees, gause handkerchiefs, ermine tippets,
muffs, etc. and in a parallel column (according to the custom of other
Almanacks) I shall point out the several parts of the body, affected by these
changes; such as head, neck, breast, shoulders, face, hands, feet, legs, etc.
And as Mr. Rider accompanies every month with seasonable cautions about sowing
turnips, raising cabbages, blood-letting, and such other important articles, I
shall give such directions, as are most suitable to the beau-monde: as a
specimen of which I shall beg leave to lay before you the following
Observations on the month of May.

IF the season proves favorable, it will be proper at the beginning of this
month to attend to the cultivation of your public gardens. Trim your trees, put
your walks in order, look after your lamps, have ballads written, and set to
music, for the ensuing summer. Ladies and gentlemen must be careful not to
catch cold in crossing the water, or by exposing themselves to the damp air in
the dark walk at Vaux-hall.

Toward the middle of this month the air at both playhouses will begin to be
too close and sultry for ladies, that paint, to risk the loss of their
complexion in them.

About the end of this month it will be expedient for those ladies, who are apt
to be hysterical when the town empties, to prepare for their removal to
Tunbridge, Cheltenham, and Scarborough, for the benefit of the waters.

I am, Sir, your humble Servant, TYCHO COURTLY.


*I did not think of ever mentioning the old woman who calls herself MARY
SINGLETON again; but having just received the following letter by the
penny-post, I cannot so far affront the young lady, by whom it is written, as
not to publish it. But though I shall always be glad to hear from one who
writes with so much spirit, yet I must beg that for the future she would choose
some other subject, since to use the expression of that well-bred lady her
aunt, "it is not perfectly civil to entertain the town with her private
affairs."

SIR!
AS my Aunt Singleton has publicly given her honor, that she will never read
any of your future papers, I think I may venture to send you a letter without
fear of her discovery: an incident, which might perhaps be of cruel consequence
to me, as I know she can never forgive. I am not under any apprehensions of
being betrayed by her friends. She has but few, and those are a sort that
rather choose to sooth her weaknesses than to raise her choler; not knowing
whether, in her hours of peevishness, some of her bile may not fall upon
themselves.

I OWN I was much surprised to find my name in print, and to see my picture
drawn at full length. I observe that my guardian Aunt, like all painters
whether male or female, has dipped her pencil in the colors of flattery: and
accordingly she has drawn me, if not entirely perfect, at least only with such
faults, as are rather commendable, than otherwise. "A silence in company, and
too much submission to judgments not so good as my own," are failings natural
to my youth and want of experience, which time, and an introduction into proper
company, very different from such as I see at my Aunt's tea-table, will soon
cure: but I am still conscious that neither the progress of time, the gifts of
fortune, nor the success of improvement, can render me, what she has already
painted me, A faultless monster whom the world never saw.


SHE affirms, "that I sing and play to great perfection." Upon my word, Sir, I
have no voice. She teizes me sometimes to squall forth a Solo, and I obey,
because as she justly tells you, "I tremble at her look," which, if it had the
family power of one of her ancient ancestors, must long since have turned me
into stone. But what is the effect of my song? Alas it generally proves, only
an incantation to rouse the lapd-og out of a sound sleep upon his cushion, or
to set the parrot and the mackaw into a chorus of screaming, that would if
possible, awaken our neighbors the dead, in St. Giles's Church Yard.

SHE hints, that "I am in love with a certain military Gentleman of no
fortune," and she adds that "he is modest, brave, studious, and polite." That
an officer comes often to our house is strictly true. That he has no fortune is
no less so. But that I am in love with him is absolutely false, nor are his
visits to me. They are to my Aunt, whom he certainly "would prefer to any
dowager whatever without a jointure;" and who, to my knowledge, would be highly
pleased, notwithstanding her family pride, to change the name of Singleton into
O-Kelly.

THIS leads me to let you into the real cause, why she prefers The WORLD to all
other weekly essays whatever. The partiality does not arise from the merit of
the performance in general, but from the subject of one particular paper, (No.
28.) which constantly lies upon her table, hid under the work-basket, and which
strongly recommends by various precepts and examples the admiration and love of
OLD WOMEN.

I am watched too close to write to you a longer letter, and am therefore
obliged to conclude abruptly, but am

Your humble Servant, JULIA.




THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER C. THURSDAY, December 25, 1755.
Ilicet Parasiticae arti maximam in malam crucem!
Abeo ab illis, postquam video me sic ludificarier.
Pergo ad alios: venio ad alios: deinde ad alios: una res.
PLAUT.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR!
I AM one of those idle people, (of whom you have lately given an account) who
not being bred to any business, or able to get a livelihood by work, have taken
up the more servile trade of an Hanger-on.

I FIRST served my time with an old nobleman in the country; and as I was a
distant relation of his lordship's, I was admitted to the honor of attending
him in the double capacity of valet, and apothecary. My business in a morning
was to wait on him at dressing time; to hold the basin while he washed his
hands, buckle his shoes, and tie on his neck-cloth. Besides this, his lordship
had such a regard for me, that nobody but myself was ever trusted with cutting
his corns, or paring his toe-nails: and whenever he was sick, it was always my
office to hold his head during the operation of an emetic, to attend him in the
water-closet when he took a cathartic, and sometimes to administer a clyster.
If his lordship had no company, I was, indeed, permitted to sit at table with
him: but when he received any visiters more grand than ordinary, I was equipped
(together with some of the best-looking tenants) in a tye-wig, full-trimmed
coat and laced-waistcoat, in order to swell the retinue of his servants out of
livery. I bore my slavery with the greatest degree of patience; as my lord
would often hint to me, that I was provided for in his will. However, I had the
mortification to find myself supplanted in his good graces by the Chaplain, who
had always looked upon me as his rival, and contrived at length to out-wheedle,
out-fawn, and out-cringe me. In a word, my lord died: -- and while the Chaplain
(who constantly prayed by him during his last illness) had the consolation of
having a good benefice secured to him in the will, my name was huddled among
those of the common servants, with no higher legacy than twenty guineas to buy
mourning.

WITH this small pittance (besides what I had made a shift to squeeze out of
the tenants and tradesmen, as fees for my good word, when I had his lordship's
ear) I came up to town; and embarked all I was worth in fitting myself out as a
gentleman. Soon after, as good luck would have it, the nephew and heir of my
old lord came from abroad: when I contrived to wind me into his favor by
abusing his deceased uncle, and fattened myself upon him. It is true, he
supported me; admitted me into an equal share of his purse: but considering the
dangers to which I was constantly exposed on his account, I regarded his
bounties as only plasters to my sores. My head, back and ribs have received
many a payment, which should have been placed to his lordship's account: and I
once narrowly escaped being hanged for murdering a poor fellow, whom my lord in
a frolic had run through the body. My patron, among other marks of his taste,
kept a mistress; and I, as his particular crony and a man of honor, was
allowed to visit her. It happened one evening he unluckily surprised us in some
unguarded familiarities together. But my lord was so far from being enraged at
it, that he only turned madam out of the room, and very coolly kicked me down
stairs after her.

I WAS now thrown upon the wide world again: but as I never wanted assurance, I
soon made myself very familiarly acquainted with a young gentleman from
Ireland, who was just come over to England to spend his estate here. I must
own, I had some difficulty in keeping on good terms with this new friend; as I
had so many of his own countrymen to contend with, who all claimed a right of
acquaintance with him, and some of them even pretended to be related to him.
Besides, they all persuaded the young squire, that they had fortunes in
different parts of Ireland; though not one of them had any real estate any more
than myself: though, indeed, I also had a nominal 1500 l. per Ann. in the
West Indies. These furious fellows (for, Sir, they would all fight) gave me
much trouble: however, I found out my young friend's foible, and in spite of
his countrymen became his inseparable companion. He was not only very fond of
women, but had a particular passion for new faces; and to humor this
inclination, I was perpetually on the look-out to discover fresh pieces for
him. I brought him mantua-makers, milliners, and servant-maids in abundance;
and at length grew so great a favorite by having prevailed on one of my own
cousins to comply with his proposals, that I verily believe he would soon have
made me easy for life in an handsome annuity, if he had not been unfortunately
run through the body in a duel by one of his own countrymen.

I NEXT got into favor with an old colonel of the guards, who happened to take
a fancy to me one evening at the Tilt Yard coffee-house, for having carried off
a pint bumper more than a lieutenant of a man of war, that had challenged my
toast. As his sole delight was centered in the bottle, all he required of me
was to drink glass for glass with him; which I readily complied with, as he
always paid my reckoning. When sober he was the best-humoured man in the world:
but he was very apt to be quarrelsome and extremely mischievous when in liquor.
He has more than once flung a bottle at my head, and emptied the contents of a
bowl of punch in my face: sometimes he has diverted himself by setting fire to
my ruffles, shaking the ashes of his pipe over my perriwig, or making a thrust
at me with the red-hot poker: and I remember he once soused me all over with
the urine of the whole company, by clapping a large pewter Jordan topsy-turvy
upon my head. All these indignities I very patiently put up with, as he was
sure to make me double amends for them the next morning: and I was very near
procuring a commission in the army through his interest, when to my great
disappointment he was suddenly carried off by an apoplexy.

YOU will be surprised when I tell you, that I next contrived to squeeze myself
into the good opinion of a rich old curmudgeon, a city-merchant, and one of the
circumcised. He could have no objection to my religion, as I used to spend
every Sunday with him at his country house, where I preferred playing at cards
to going to church. Nor could I, indeed, get any thing out of him beyond a
dinner: but I had higher points in view. As he had nobody to inherit his
fortune but an only daughter, (who was kept always in the country) I became so
desperately in love with her, that I would even have turned Jew to obtain her.
Instead of that, I very foolishly made a Christian of her, and we were
privately married at the Fleet. When I came to break the matter to the father,
and to make an apology for having converted her, he received me with a loud
laugh. "Sir, says he, if my child had married the DEVIL, he should have had
every penny that was her due. But -- as she is only my Bastard, the law cannot
oblige me to give her a farthing."

THIS I found to be too true: and very happily for me my Christian wife had so
little regard for her new religion, that she again became an apostate, and was
taken into keeping (to which I readily gave my consent) by one of her own tribe
and complexion. I shall not tire you with a particular detail of what has
happened to me since: I shall only acquaint you, that I have exactly followed
the precept of "becoming all things to all men." I was once supported very
splendidly by a young rake of quality for my wit in talking blasphemy and
ridiculing the bible, till my patron shot himself through the head: and I lived
at bed and board with an old Methodist lady for near a twelvemonth on account
of my zeal for the New Doctrine, till one of the maidservants wickedly laid a
child to me. At present, Mr. TOWN, I am quite out of employ; having just lost a
very profitable place, which I held under a great man in quality of his Pimp.
My disgrace was owing to the baseness of an old Covent Garden acquaintance,
whom I palmed upon his honor for an innocent creature just come out of the
country: but the hussy was so ungrateful, as to bestow on both of us convincing
marks of her thorough knowledge of the town.

I am, Sir, Your very humble Servant, PETER SUPPLE.


To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
I Have a little God-Daughter in the Country, to whom I every Year send some
diverting and instructive Book for a New-Year's-Gift: I would therefore beg you
to recommend to me one fit for the Purpose; which will oblige

Your Humble Servant, T -- W --




To Mr. T -- W --
SIR,
I Know no Book so fit for your Purpose as the CONNOISSEUR, lately published in
Two Pocket Volumes; which I would further recommend to all Fathers and Mothers,
Grandfathers and Grand-Mothers, Uncles and Aunts, Godfathers and Godmothers,
to give to their Sons and Daughters, Grand-Sons and Grand-Daughters, Nephews
and Nieces, God-Sons and God-Daughters; -- as being undoubtedly the best
Present at this Season of the Year, that can possibly be thought of.

TOWN, CONNOISSEUR.




N. B. Large Allowance to those who buy Quantities to give away.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN. CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CI. THURSDAY, January 1, 1756.
-- Janique bifrontis imago.
Virg.
AS the appointed time of our publication now happens to fall on
New-year's-day, I cannot open the business of the year with a better grace,
than by taking the present hour for the subject of this paper: a subject, which
pleases me the more, as it also gives me an opportunity of paying my readers
the compliments of the season, and most sincerely wishing them all a happy new
year, and a great many of them. But in order to make these civilities of more
consequence than a bare compliment, I will also endeavor to give them a little
wholesome advice, by which they may be most likely to ensure to themselves that
happiness, and to go through the ensuing year with ease and tranquillity.

No God in the heathen Pantheon was expressed by properer emblems, or more
significantly represented, than Janus, whom we may fairly style, in our
language, the God of the New Year. The medals on which the image of this Deity
was engraved bore two faces, not ogling each other like those on the shillings
of Philip and Mary, nor cheek by jowl like the double visage on the coin of
William and Mary, but turned from each other, one looking forwards, as it were,
into futurity, and the other taking a retrospective view of what was past.
There cannot surely be devised a stronger, or more sensible lesson of moral
instruction, than this figure teaches us. This double view comprehends in
itself the sum of human prudence; for the most perfect reason can go no higher
than wisely to guess at the future, by reflecting on the past; and morality is
never so likely to persevere in a steady and uniform course, as when it sets
out with a fixed determination of mutually regulating the New Year by a
recollection of the Old, and at the same time making the succeeding a critique
on the last.

Most of the faults in the general conduct of mankind, and their frequent
miscarriages in their most favorite enterprises, will be found, upon
examination, to result from an imperfect and partial view of what relates to
their duty or undertakings. Some regulate their actions by blind guess, and
rashly presuming on the future, without the least attention to the past. With
these the impetuosity of the passions gives their reason no scope to exert
itself, but, neglecting the premises, they jump to a conclusion. Others, who
are often taken for men of deep reflection and mavelous understanding,
meditate so profoundly on the past, that they scarce take any notice either of
the present or the future. To these two characters, whose misconduct arises
from two such contrary sources, may indeed be added a third, whose wild
irregular behavior is founded on no fixed principles, but proceeds from a
total absence of thought and reflection. These easy creatures act entirely at
random, neither troubling themselves with what has been, what is, or what will
be; and, as the image of Janus seems to bear two heads, these thoughtless
vacant animals may almost be said to have no head at all.

But that the necessity of taking this comprehensive view of our affairs may
appear in the stronger light, let us consider the many difficulties in which
men of any of the above characters are involved from a total neglect or partial
survey of matters that should influence their conduct. The first sort of men,
who nourish great expectations from the future, and suffer hope to lay their
prudence to sleep, are very common: Indeed almost every man, like the
dairy-maid with her pail of milk, pleases himself with calculating the
advantages he shall reap from his undertakings. There is scarce a servitor at
either university, who, when he takes orders, does not think it more than
possible he may one day be a bishop, or at least head of a college, though
perhaps at first he is glad to snap at a curacy. Every walking attendant on our
hospitals flatters himself that a few years will settle him in high practice
and a chariot: and among those few gentlemen of the inns of court, who really
deserve the name of students, there is hardly one who sits down to Lord Coke
without imagining that he may himself, some time or other, be Lord Chancellor.
At this early period of life these vain hopes may perhaps serve as spurs to
diligence and virtue; but what shall we say to those people, who in spite of
experience and repeated disappointments, still place their chief dependence on
groundless expectations from their future fortune? This Town swarms with people
who rely almost solely on contingencies: and our goals are often filled with
wretches who brought on their own poverty and misfortunes, by promising
themselves great profit from some darling scheme, which has at last been
attended with bankruptcy. The present extravagance of many of our spend-thrifts
is built on some ideal riches of which they are soon to be in possession; and
which they are laying out as freely, as the girl in the farce squanders the ten
thousand pounds she was to get in the lottery. I am myself acquainted with a
young fellow who had great expectations from an old uncle. He had ten thousand
pounds of his own in ready money; and as the old gentleman was a good deal
turned of sixty, the nephew very considerately computed, that his uncle could
hardly last above five years, during which time he might go on very genteely at
the rate of 2000 l. per ann. However the old gentleman held together above
seven years, the two last of which our young spark had no consolation but the
daily hopes of his uncle's death. The happy hour at length arrived; the will
was tore open with rapture; when, alas! the fond youth discovered, that he had
never once reflected, that though he had a ticket in the wheel, it might
possibly come up a blank, and had the mortification to find himself
disinherited.

I shall not dwell so particularly on the ridiculous folly of those profound
speculatists, who fix their attention entirely on what is past, without making
their reflections of service either for the present or the future, because it
is not a very common or tempting species of absurdity: but shall rather advise
the reader to consider the time past, as the school of experience, from which
he may draw the most useful lessons for his future conduct. This kind of
retrospect would teach us to provide with foresight against the calamities to
which our inexperience has hitherto exposed us, though at the same time it
would not throw us so far back, as to keep us lagging, like the Old Style,
behind the rest of the world. To say the truth, those sage persons who are
given to such deep reflection, as to let today and tomorrow pass unregarded
by meditating on yesterday, are as ridiculous in their conduct, as country
beaux in their dress, who adopt the town modes, just after they are become
unfashionable in London.

But there is no task so difficult as to infuse ideas into a brain hitherto
entirely unaccustomed to thinking: for how can we warn a man to avoid the
misfortunes which may hereafter befall him, or to improve by the calamities he
has already suffered, whose actions are not the result of thought, or guided by
experience? These persons are, indeed, of all others, the most to be pitied.
They are prodigal and abandoned in their conduct, and by vicious excesses ruin
their constitution, till at length poverty and death stare them in the face
together; or if, unfortunately, their crazy frame holds together after the
utter destruction of their fortune, they finish a thoughtless life by an act of
desperation, and a pistol puts an end to their miseries.

Since then good fortune cannot be expected to fall into our laps, and it
requires some thought to ensure to ourselves a likelihood of success in our
undertakings, let us look back with attention on the old year, and gather
instructions from it in what manner to conduct ourselves through the New. Let
us also endeavor to draw from it a lesson of morality: and I hope it will not
be thought too solemn a conclusion of this paper, if I advise my readers to
carry this reflection even into religion. This train of thought, that teaches
us at once to reflect on the past, and look forward to the future, will also
naturally lead us to look up with awe and admiration toward that Being who has
existed from all eternity, and shall exist world without end. No idea can give
us a more exalted idea of the Power who first created us, and whose providence
is always over us. Let us then consider with attention this pagan image, by
which we may add force to our morality, and prudence to our ordinary conduct;
nor let us blush to receive a lesson from Heathens, which may animate our zeal
and reverence for the Author of Christianity.

G. K. is desired to send to the Publisher's, where a Letter is left for him.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CII. THURSDAY, January 8, 1756.
Longumque pulchra stemma repetit a Leda.
MART.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
IT has been my good fortune to be born of a family, that is recorded in the
Herald's Dictionary, as one of the most ancient in the kingdom: We are supposed
to have come into England with William the Conqueror. Upon my accession some
years ago to my elder brother's estate and title of a Baronet, I received a
visit from Rouge Dragon, Esquire Pursuivant at Arms, to congratulate me upon my new
rank of a Vavasour, and to know whether I should choose to bear the dexter base
points of the Lady Isabel's Saltire in chief, or only her Sinister corners; she
being one of the seventeen coheiresses of my great great great great great
grandfather's fourth wife Dorothy, the daughter and sole heiress of Simon de la
Frogpool of Croakham in Suffolk. This unexpected visit must have disconcerted
me to an invincible degree, if upon recollection I had not only remembered Mr.
Rouge Dragon as a constant companion to my late brother, but as a kind of tutor
in initiating him into the Science of Heraldy, and the Civil and Military
Achievements, to which our nobility and gentry are entitled. As soon,
therefore, as I could recover myself from my first surprise in hearing an
unknown English language, I humbly thanked Mr. Dragon for the pains he had
taken in considering my Coat of Arms so minutely, but hoped he would give
himself no farther trouble upon my account: because I was fully determined to
bear the plain Shield of my grandfather Sir Peter, without taking the least
notice of Lady Isabel's Saltire in chief, or even of her Sinister corners.

BE it to my shame or not, I must confess that Heraldry is a science, which I
have never much cultivated: nor do I find it very prevalent among the
fashionable studies of the age. Arms, and Armorial tokens, may, I suppose, be
regularly distinguished, and properly emblazoned, upon the family plate to
which they belong: but I have observed of late, that these honorable ensigns
are not confined entirely to their proper owners, but are usurped by every
body, who thinks fit to take them; insomuch that there is scarce an hackney
coach in London, which is not in possession of a Ducal Crest, an Earl's
Coronet, or a Baronet's Bloody Hand. This has often given me great offense, as
it reflects a scandal on our nobility and gentry: and I cannot but think it
very indecent for a Duke's coach to be seen waiting at a night-cellar while the
coachman is tipping off a glass of gin, or for a Countess's landau to set down
ladies at the door of a common bawdy house. I remember I was one morning
disturbed at my breakfast by a fashionable rap at my door; when looking out of
my window I saw the coach of the lady dowager -- drawn up before it. I was
extremely surprised at so early and unexpected a visit from her ladyship; and
while I was preparing to receive her, I overheard her ladyship at high words
with her coachman in my entry; when stepping to the staircase I found that
they were squabbling together about sixpence, and soon perceived that her
ladyship was dwindled into one of my house-maids. This badge of nobility,
assumed at random according to the fancy of the coach-painter, I have found
inconvenient on other occasions: for I once traveled from London to Derby in
an hired chariot finely ornamented with a Viscount's cipher and coronet; by
which noble circumstance I was compelled in every inn to pay as a Lord, though
I was not at that time even a simple Baronet, or (in the language of my friend
Mr. Dragon) arrived to the dignity of a Vavasour.

I HAVE, indeed, sometimes doubted, whether nobility and high rank are of that
real advantage, which they are generally esteemed to be: and I am almost
inclined to think, that they answer no other desirable end, than as far as they
indulge our vanity and ostentation. A long roll of ennobled ancestors makes, I
confess, a very alluring appearance: To see coronet after coronet passing
before our view in an uninterrupted succession, is the most soothing prospect,
that perhaps can present itself to the eye of human pride: The exaltation that
we feel upon such a review takes rise in a visionary and secret piece of
flattery, that as glorious, and as long, or even a longer line of future
coronets may spring from ourselves, as have depended from our ancestors. We
read in Virgil, that Anchises, to inspire his son with the properest incitement
to virtue, shows him a long race of kings, emperors, and heroes, whom Aeneas is
fore-doomed to give rise to: and the misery of Macbeth is made by Shakespeare
to proceed, less from the consciousness of guilt, than from the disappointed
pride, that none of his own race shall succeed him in the throne.

THE pride of ancestry, and the desire of continuing our lineage, when they
tend to an incitement of virtuous and noble actions, are undoubtedly laudable;
and I should perhaps have indulged myself in the pleasing reflection, had not a
particular story in a French Novel, which I lately met with, put a stop to all
vain glories, that can possibly be deduced from a long race of progenitors.

"A NOBLEMAN of an ancient house, of very high rank and great fortune," says
the Novellist, "died suddenly, and without being permitted to stop at
Purgatory, was sent down immediately into Hell. He had not been long there,
before he met with his coachman Thomas, who like his noble master was gnashing
his teeth among the damned. Thomas, surprised to behold his lordship amidst the
sharpers, thieves, pickpockets, and all the Canaille of Hell, started and cried
out in a tone of admiration, Is it possible that I see my late master among
Lucifer's tribe of beggars, rogues, and pilferers? How much am I astonished to
find your lordship in this place? Your lordship! whose generosity was so great,
whose affluent housekeeping drew such crowds of nobility, gentry, and friends
to your table, and within your gates, and whose fine taste employed such
numbers of poor in your gardens, by building temples and obelisks, and by
forming lakes of water, that seemed to vye with the largest oceans of the
creation. Pray, my lord, if I may be so bold, what crime has brought your
lordship into this cursed assembly? -- Ah, Thomas, replied his lordship with
his usual condescension, I have been sent hither for having defrauded my royal
master, and cheating the widows and fatherless, solely to enrich, and purchase
titles, honors, and estates for that ungrateful rascal my only son. But
prithee, Thomas, tell me, as thou did always seem to be an honest, careful,
sober servant, what brought thee hither? Alas! my noble lord, replied Thomas, I
was sent hither for begetting that Son."

I am, Sir, your most humble Servant, REGINALD FITZWORM.


I MUST agree with my correspondent, that the study of Heraldry is at present
in very little repute among us; and our nobility are more anxious about
preserving the genealogy of their horses, than of their own family. Whatever
value their progenitors may have formerly set upon their Blood, it is now found
to be of no value, when put into the scale and weighed against solid plebeian
gold: Nor would the most illustrious descendant from Cadwallader, or the Irish
Kings, scruple to debase his lineage by an alliance with the daughter of a
city-plumb, though all her ancestors were yeomen, and none of her family ever
bore arms. Titles of quality, when the owners have no other merit to recommend
them, are of no more estimation, than those which the courtesy of the vulgar
have bestowed on the deformed: and when I look over a long Tree of Descent, I
sometimes fancy I can discover the real characters of Sharpers, Reprobates, and
Plunderers of their Country, concealed under the titles of Dukes, Earls, and
Viscounts.

IT is well known, that the very servants, in the absence of their master,
assume the same titles; and Tom or Harry, the butler or groom of his Grace, is
always my Lord Duke in the kitchen or stables. For this reason I have thought
proper to present my reader with the Pedigree of a Footman, drawn up in the
same sounding titles, as are so pompously displayed on these occasions: and I
dare say it will appear no less illustrious, than the pedigrees of many
families, which are neither celebrated for their actions, nor distinguished by
their virtues.

THE Family of the SKIPS, or SKIP-KENNELS, is very ancient and noble. The
founder of it Maitre Jaques came into England with the Duchess of Mazarine. He
was son of a Prince of the Blood, his mother one of the Mesdames of France:
This family is therefore related to the most illustrious Maitres d' Hotel and
Valets de Chamber of that kindgom. Jaques had issue two Sons, viz. Robert and
Paul; of whom Paul the youngest was invested with the purple before he was
eighteen, and made a Bishop, and soon after became an Archbishop. Robert, the
elder, came to be a Duke, but died without issue: Paul, the Archbishop, left
behind him an only daughter, Barbara, base-born, who was afterward Maid of
Honor; and inter-marrying with a Lord of the Bedchamber, had a very numerous
issue by him; viz. Rebecca, born a week after their marriage, and died young;
Joseph, first a Squire, afterward Knighted, High Sheriff of a County, and
Colonel of the Militia; Peter, raised from a Cabin-Boy to a Lord of the
Admiralty; William, a Faggot in the First Regiment of the Guards, and a
Brigadier; Thomas, at first an Earl's Eldest Son, and afterward Lord Mayor of
the City of London. The several branches of this family were no less
distinguished for their illustrious progeny. Jaques the founder, first
quartered lace on his coat, and Robert added the shoulder-knot. Some of them,
indeed, met with great trouble: Archbishop Paul lost his See for getting a
cook-maid with child; Barbara, the Maid of Honor, was dismissed with a big
belly; Brigadier William was killed by a Chairman in a pitched battle at an
alehouse; the Lord of the Admiralty was transported for seven years; and Duke
Robert had the misfortune to be hanged at Tyburn.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CIII. THURSDAY, January 15, 1756.
-- Nihil videtur mundius.
TER.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
IT is my fortune to be married to a lady, who is an extraordinary good
housewife, and is cried up by all the good women of her acquaintance, for being
the neatest body in her house they ever knew. This, Sir, is my grievance: This
superabundant Neatness is so very troublesome and disgusting to me, that I
protest I had rather lodge in a carrier's inn, or take up my abode with the
horses in the stables.

IT must be confessed, that a due regard to Neatness and Cleanliness is as
necessary to be observed in our habitations as our persons: But though I should
not choose to have my hands begrimed like a chimney-sweeper's, I would not, as
among the superstitious Mahometans, wash them six times a day: And though I
should be loath to roll in a pig-stye, yet I do not like to have my house
rendered useless to me under the pretense of keeping it clean.

FOR my own part, I cannot see the difference between having an house that is
always dirty, and an house that is always to be cleaned. I could very willingly
compound to be washed out of my home, with other masters of families, every
Saturday night: But my wife is so very notable, that the same cleansing work
must be repeated every day in the week. All the morning long I am sure to be
entertained with the domestic concert of scrubbing the floors, scouring the
irons, and beating the carpets; and I am constantly hunted from room to room,
while one is to be dusted, another dry-rubbed, another washed, and another run
over with a dry mop. Thus, indeed, I may be said to live in continual
dirtiness, that my house may be clean: For during these nice operations every
apartment is stowed with soap, brickdust, sand, scrubbing-brushes, hair-brooms,
rag-mops, and dishclouts.

YOU may suppose, that the greatest care is taken to prevent the least speck of
dirt from soiling the floors: For this reason all that come to our house,
(besides the ceremony of scraping at the door,) are obliged to rub their shoes
for half an hour on a large ragged mat at the entrance; and then they must
straddle their way along several lesser mats, ranged at due distances from each
other in the passage, and (like boys at play) come into the room with a hop, a
step, and a jump. The like caution is used by all the family: I myself am
scarce allowed to stir a step without slippers: my wife creeps on tip-toe up
and down stairs: the maidservants are continually stumping below in clogs or
pattens; and the footman is obliged to sneak about the house barefooted, as if
he came with a sly design to steal something.

AFTER what has been said you will naturally conclude, that my wife must be no
less nice in other particulars. Indeed, she cannot conceive that any thing,
which is done by so neat a woman, can possibly give offense: I have therefore
been in pain for her several times, when I have seen her, before company, dust
the tea-cups with a foul apron or a washing-gown; and I have more than once
blushed for her, when through her extreme cleanliness she has not been
contented without breathing into our drinking-glasses, and afterward wiping
them with her pocket handkerchief. People, Mr. TOWN, who are very intimate with
families, seldom see them (especially the female part) but in disguise: and it
will be readily allowed, that a lady wears a very different aspect, when she
comes before company, than when she first sets down to her toilette. My wife
appears decent enough in her apparel, to those who visit us in the afternoon:
but in the morning she is quite another figure. Her usual dishabille then is,
an ordinary stuff jacket and petticoat, a double clout thrown over her head and
pinned under her chin, a black greasy bonnet, and a coarse dowlas apron; so
that you would rather take her for a chair-woman. Nor, indeed does she scruple
to stoop to the meanest drudgery of one: for such is her love of Cleanliness,
that I have often seen her on her knees whitening an hearth, or spreading dabs
of vinegar and fullers earth over the boards.

IT is observed by Swift, that "a nice man is a man of nasty ideas:" In like
manner we may affirm, that your very neat people are the most slovenly on many
occasions. I have told you my wife's morning trim: but besides this, she has
another custom, which creates the greatest disgust in me. You must know, Sir,
that among other charms she prides herself vastly in a fine set of teeth: and
somebody has told her, that nothing is so good for them as to rub them every
morning with Scotch snuff and fasting spittle. As an husband is no stranger,
this recipe is constantly administered in my presence before breakfast; and
after this delicate application, her pretty mouth, (which is afterward wiped
for me to kiss,) in order to preserve her gums from the scurvy, must be rinced
-- would you believe it? -- with her own water.

I SHALL dwell no longer on this subject, as I fear it may prove surfeiting
both to you and your readers: I shall therefore conclude with telling you, that
this scrupulous delicacy of my wife in the Neatness of her house was the means
of our losing a very good fortune. A rich old uncle, on whom we had great
dependence, came up to town last summer on purpose to pay us a visit: but
though he had rode above sixty miles that day, he was obliged to stand in the
passage till his boots were pulled off, for fear of soiling the Turkey carpet.
After supper the old gentleman, as was his constant practice, desired to have
his pipe: but this you may be sure could by no means be allowed, as the filthy
stench of the tobacco would never be got out of the furniture again; and it was
with much ado, that my wife would even suffer him to go down and smoke in the
kitchen. We had no room lodge him in except a garret with nothing but bare
walls; because the Chints bedchamber was, indeed, too nice for a dirty country
squire. These slights very much chagrined my good uncle: but he had not been
with us above a day or two, before my wife and he came to an open quarrel; and
the occasion of it was this. It happened, that he had brought a favorite
pointer with him, who at his first coming was immediately locked up in the
coal-hole: but the dog having found means to escape, had crept slily up stairs,
and (besides other marks of his want of delicacy) had very calmly stretched
himself out upon a crimson damask settee. My wife not only sentenced him to the
discipline of the whip, but insisted upon having the criminal hanged up
afterward; when the master interposing in his behalf, it produced such high
words between them, that my uncle ordered his horse, and swore he would never
darken our doors again as long as he breathed. He went home, and about two
months after died: but as he could not forgive the ill treatment, which both he
and his dog had met with at our house, he had altered his will, which before he
had made entirely in our favor.

I am, Sir, Your humble Servant, PETER MUCKLOVE.


IT may not be improper, as my correspondent has but slightly touched upon this
topic, to add a word or two, by way of postcript to his letter, on the
extraordinary solicitude of many notable housewives in the care and
preservation of their furniture. In middling genteel families it is not
uncommon to have things more for show than use: and I cannot but applaud the
ingenious thought of a friend of mine, who has contrived to furnish his house
in the most elegant taste at a very small expense. He is pleased, it is true,
to eat off your common stone ware, because it looks so clean; but you see his
beaufet crowded with a variety of curious enamelled China plates, which are
ranged in such manner as to conceal the streaks of white paint that cement the
broken pieces together: he likes to drink his porter out of the original
alehouse pewter pot; but a large silver tankard always stands upon the
side-board, which the most curious eye cannot at that distance discover to be
French plate. The whole range of rooms in his middle story is most grandly
fitted up: but as it would be pity to soil such good furniture, his curtains,
which we must suppose to be made of the richest damask, are carefully pinned up
in paper-bags; and the chairs, of which the seats and backs are undoubtedly of
the same stuff, are no less cautiously skreened with ordinary-checked linen.
Thus does he answer, by the appearance of finery, all the purposes of pride and
ostentation: -- Like many families, who being really possessed of ornamental
and useful furniture, make no more use of it than the beau blockhead does of
his library; which, though it contains many books finely bound and gilt, is
designed merely for show, and it would spoil the backs or rumple the leaves to
look into the contents of them.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CIV. THURSDAY, January 22, 1756.
Actum est: Ilicet: Peristi.
TER.
THE use of language is the ready communication of our thoughts to one another.
As we cannot produce the objects which raise ideas in our minds, we use words
which are made signs of those objects themselves. No man could convey to
another the idea of a table or chair, without pointing to those pieces of
furniture: as children are taught to remember the names of things by looking at
their pictures. Thus if I wanted to mention King Charles on horseback, I must
carry my companion to Charing Cross; and would I next tell him of the statue of
Sir John Barnard, we must trudge back again, and he must wait for my meaning
'till we got to the Royal Exchange. We should be like the sages of Laputa, who
(as Gulliver tells us) having substituted things for words, used to carry about
them such things as were necessary to express the particular business they were
to discourse on. "I have often beheld (says he) two of those sages almost
sinking under the weight of their packs, like pedlars among us: who, when they
met in the streets, would lay down their loads, open their sacks, and hold
conversation for an hour together; then put up their implements, help each
other to resume their burdens, and take their leave." In these circumstances a
man of the fewest words could not, indeed, talk without carrying about him a
much larger apparatus of conversation, than is contained in the bag of the
noted Yeates, or any other slight-of-hand artist: he could not speak of a
chicken or an owl, but it must be ready in his pocket to be produced. In such a
case we could not say we heard, but we saw the conversation of a friend; as in
the epistolary correspondence carried on by those pretty hieroglyphic letters
(as they are called), where the picture of a deer and a woman finely dressed is
made to stand for the expression of dear lady.

BUT the invention of words has removed these difficulties; and we may talk not
only of any thing we have seen, but what neither we, nor the persons to whom we
speak, ever saw. Thus we can convey to another the idea of a battle, without
being reduced to the disagreeable necessity of learning it "from the cannon's
mouth:" and we can talk of the people in the world of the moon, without being
obliged to make use of Bishop Wilkins's artificial wings to fly thither. Words,
therefore, in the ordinary course of life, are like the paper-money among
merchants; invented as a more ready conveyance, by which the largest sum can be
transmitted to the most distant places with as much ease as a letter; while the
same in specie would require bags and chests, and even carts or ships to
transport it. But, however great these advantages are, the use of language has
brought along with it several inconveniences, as well as paper-money: for as
this latter is more liable to miscarry, more easily concealed, carried off, or
counterfeited than bullion, merchants have frequent cause to complain, that the
convenience of this sort of cash is not without some alloy of evil; and we
find, that in the use of language there is so much room for deceit and mistake,
that though it does not render it useless, it is much to be wished some remedy
could be contrived.

MEN are so apt to use the same words in different senses, and to call the same
thing by different names, that they cannot oftentimes understand or be
understood. If one calls that thing black which another calls green, or that
prodigality which another calls generosity, they mistake each other's meaning;
and can never come to agree, 'till they explain the words. It is to this we owe
so much wrangling in discourse, and so many volumes of controversy on almost
every part of literature. I have known a dispute carried on with great warmth,
and when the disputants have come to explain what each meant, it has been
discovered they were both of a side: like the men in the Play, who met and
fought first, and after each had been heartily beat found themselves to be
friends. What should we say, if this practice of calling things by their wrong
names was to obtain among tradesmen? If you was to send to your haberdasher for
an hat, you might receive a pair of stockings; or instead of a cordial julep
from your apothecary, be furnished with a cathartic or a clyster.

IT would be needless to insist on the inconveniences arising from the misuse
or misapprehension of terms in all verbal combats; whether they be fought on
the spot by word of mouth, or (like a game of Chess) maintained, even though
lands and seas interpose, by the assistance of the press. In our ordinary
conversation it is notorious, that no less confusion has arisen from the wrong
application or perversion of the original and most natural import of words.
Thus, for instance, the word Devil, is used at present only as a bugbear for
children; nor will it raise in the most vulgar minds the idea even of a cloven
foot or the smell of brimstone: and all we can understand by it are, the
errand-boy of a printing house, the name of a tavern, and the broiled gizzard
of a turkey. The no less tremendous words, damned and hellish, are usurped
equally to signify any thing superlatively good, as well as bad: and I am
almost ashamed to mention, that we cannot wonder a particular liquor should be
distinguished by the name of bishop, when the title of the highest dignitary of
our church has been prostituted to a more scandalous purpose. A mere country
put might be startled (at this juncture especially) at the warlike sound of a
route, a drum, or a drum-major; which, we know, have been long adopted by the
fashionable world without any design to alarm us with the notion of a campaign
or a battle, but only to call us (without a pun) to more peaceful engagements:
and he would be very much surprised to receive a card from a lady of quality
inviting him to an Hurricane, or perhaps an EARTHQUAKE.

I REMEMBER, when I commenced author, I published a little pamphlet, which I
flattered myself had some merit, though I must confess it did not sell.
Conscious of my growing fame, I resolved to send the first fruits of it to an
aunt in the country, that my relations might judge of the great honor I was
likely to prove to the family: but how was I mortified, when the good lady sent
me word, "that she was sorry to find I had ruined myself, and had wrote a book;
for the parson of the parish had assured her, that authors were never worth a
farthing, and always died in a goal." Notwithstanding this remonstrance I have
still persisted in my ruin; which at present I cannot say is quite completed,
as I can make three meals a day, have yet a coat to my back, with a clean shirt
for Sundays at least, and am lodged somewhat below a garret. However, this
prediction of my aunt has often led me to consider, in how many senses
different from its general acceptance the word RUINED is frequently made use
of. When we hear this applied to another, we should naturally imagine the
person is reduced to a state worse than he was in before, and so low that it is
scarce possible for him to rise again: but we shall often find, instead of his
being undone, that he has rather met with some extraordinary good fortune; and
that those who pronounce him ruined, either mean you should understand it in
some other light, or else call him undone, because he differs from them in his
way of life, or because they wish him to be in that situation. I need not point
out the extreme cruelty, as well as injustice, in the misapplication of this
term; as it may literally ruin a man, by destroying his character: according
to the old English proverb, give a dog an ill name, and hang him.

MOST people are, indeed, so entirely taken up with their own narrow views,
that, like the jaundiced eye, every thing appears to them of the same color;
and it is no wonder, that they should see ruin staring every man in the face,
who happens not to think as they do. From this selfish prejudice we are led to
make a wrong judgment of the motives and actions of others: I shall, therefore,
here set down a catalogue of some of my own acquaintance, whom the charity and
goodnature of the world have not scrupled to pronounce absolutely ruined.

A young clergyman of Cambridge might have had a good college living in about
thirty years time, or have been head of the house: but he chose to quit his
fellowship for a small cure in town with a view of recommending himself by his
preaching -- Ruined.

A fellow of another college refused to quit his books and his retirement, to
live as chaplain with a smoking, drinking, swearing, fox-hunting country
squire, who would have provided for him -- Ruined.

Dr. Classic, a young physician from Oxford, might have had more practice than
Radcliffe or Mead: but having studied Aristotle's Poetics, and read the Greek
Tragedies as well as Galen and Hippocrates, he was tempted to write a play,
which was universally applauded -- Ruined.

A Student of the Temple might have made sure of a Judge's Robes or the
Chancellor's Seals: but being tired of sauntering in Westminster Hall without
even getting half a guinea for a motion, he has accepted of a commission in one
of the new-raised regiments, and is -- Ruined.

A younger brother of a good family threw himself away upon an obscure widow
with a jointure of 500 l. per annum by which he is -- Ruined. -- Another, a man
of fortune, fell in love with, and married a genteel girl without a farthing;
and though she makes him an excellent wife, he is universally allowed to have
-- Ruined himself.

BEFORE I conclude I cannot but take notice of the strange sense, in which a
friend of mine once heard this word used by a girl of the town. The young
creature, being all life and spirits, engrossed all the conversation to
herself; and herself indeed was the subject of all the conversation: But what
most surprised him, was the manner, in which she used this word Ruined; which
occurred frequently in her discourse, though never intended by her to convey
the meaning generally affixed to it. It served her sometimes as an era to
determine the date of every occurrence -- she bought such a gown just after she
was ruined -- the first time she saw Garrick in Ranger, she was in doubt
whether it was before or after she was ruined. -- Having occasion to mention a
young gentleman, she burst into raptures -- O he is a dear creature! -- He it
was that ruined me. -- O he is a dear soul! -- He carried me to an inn ten
miles from my father's house in the country, where he ruined me. -- If he had
not ruined me, I should have been as miserable and as moping as my sisters. But
the dear soul was forced to go to sea, and I was obliged to come upon the town,
three weeks after I was ruined -- no, not so much as three weeks after I was
ruined -- yes, it was full three weeks after I was ruined.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CV. THURSDAY, January 29, 1756.
Gaudet equis, canibusque, et aprici gramine campi.
HOR.
MY Cousin VILLAGE, from whom I had not heard for some time, has lately sent me
an account of a Country Parson; which I dare say will prove entertaining to my
town readers, who can have no other idea of our Clergy than what they have
collected from the spruce and genteel figures, which they have been used to
contemplate here in doctors scarfs, pudding-sleeves, starched bands, and
feather-topp'd grizzles. It will be found from my Cousin's description, that
these reverent ensigns of orthodoxy are not so necessary to be displayed among
rustics; and that when they are out of the pulpit or surplice, the good pastors
may without censure put on the manners as well as dress of a groom or
whipper-in.

Mr. VILLAGE to Mr. TOWN.
Doncaster, Jan. 14th, 1756. DEAR COUSIN!
I AM just arrived here, after having paid a visit to our old acquaintance Jack
Quickset, who is now become the Reverend Mr. Quickset, Rector of -- parish in
the North Riding of this county, a living worth upwards of three hundred pounds
per annum. As the ceremonies of ordination have occasioned no alteration in
Jack's morals or behavior, the Figure he makes in the church is somewhat
remarkable; but as there are many other incumbents of country livings, whose
clerical characters will be found to tally with his, perhaps a slight sketch,
or, as I may say, rough draught of him, with some account of my visit, will not
be unentertaining to your readers.

JACK, hearing that I was in this part of the world, sent me a very hearty
letter, informing me that he had been double-japanned (as he called it) about a
year ago, and was the present incummbent of --; where if I would favor him
with my company, he would give me a cup of the best Yorkshire Stingo, and would
engage to show me a noble day's sport, as he was in a fine open country with
plenty of foxes. I rejoiced to hear he was so comfortably settled, and set out
immediately for his living. When I arrived within the gate, my ears were
alarmed with such a loud chorus of No mortals on earth are so happy as we, that
I began to think I had made a mistake; till observing its close neighborhood
to the church convinced me, that this could be no other than the
Parsonage-House. On my entrance my friend (whom I found in the midst of a
room-full of fox-hunters in boots and bob wigs) got up to welcome me to --, and
embracing me, gave me the full flavor of his Stingo by belching in my face, as
he did me the honor of saluting me. He then introduced me to his friends, and
placing me at the right hand of his own elbow chair, assured them that I was a
very honest Cock, and loved a chase of five and twenty miles an end as well as
any of them: to preserve the credit of which character, I immediately complied,
with an injunction (though I must confess with less real rapture than a staunch
foxhunter) to toss off a pint bumper of Port, with the foot of the fox dipped
and squeezed into it to give a zest to the liquor.

BUT the whole economy of Jack's life is very different from that of his
brethren. Instead of having a wife and a house-full of children, (the most
common family of a country clergyman,) he is single, unless we credit some idle
whispers in the parish that he is married to his housekeeper. The calm
amusement of piquet, chess, and back-gammon have no charms for Jack, who sees
"his dearest action in the field," and boasts that he has a brace of as good
hunters in his stable, as ever leg was laid over. Hunting and shooting are the
only business of his life, foxhounds and pointers lay about in every parlour,
and he is himself like Pistol, always in boots. The estimation in which he
holds his friends is rated according to their excellence as sportsmen; and to
be able to make a good shot or hunt a pack of hounds well, are admirable
qualities. His parishioners often earn a shilling and a cup of ale at his
house, by coming to acquaint him, that they have found a hare sitting, or a fox
in cover. One day, while I was alone with my friend, the servant came in to
tell him that the Clerk wanted to speak with him. He was ordered in; but I
could not help smiling when (instead of giving notice of a burying,
christening, or some other church business, as I expected) I found the honest
clerk only come to acquaint his reverend superior, that there was a covey of
partridges, of a dozen brace at least, not above three fields from the house.

JACK's elder brother Sir Thomas Quickset, who presented him with the benefice
he now enjoys, is lord of the manor: so that Jack has full power to beat up the
game unmolested. He goes out three times a week with his brother's hounds,
whether Sir Thomas hunts or not; and has besides a deputation from him as lord
of the manor, consigning the game to his care, and empowering him to take away
all guns, nets, and dogs from persons not duly qualified. Jack is more proud of
this office than many other country clergymen are of being in the commission
for the peace. Poaching is in his eye the most heinous crime in the two tables;
nor does the cure of souls appear to him half so important a duty as the
preservation of the Game.

SUNDAY, you may suppose, is as dull and tedious to this ordained sportsman, as
to any fine lady in town: not that he makes the duties of his function any
fatigue to him but as this day is necessarily a day of rest from the usual
toils of the chase. It happened, that the first Sunday after I was with him he
had engaged to take care of a Church, in the absence of a neighboring
clergyman, which was about twenty miles off. I engaged to accompany him: and
the more to encourage me, he had assured me, that we should ride over as fine a
champaign open country as any in the North. Accordingly I was rouzed by him in
the morning before daybreak by a loud hollowing of hark to Merriman, and the
repeated smacks of his half-hunter; and after we had fortified our stomachs
with several slices of hung beef and a horn or two of stingo, we sallied forth.
Jack was mounted upon a hunter, which he assured me was never yet thrown out:
and as we rode along, he could not help lamenting that so fine a soft morning
should be thrown away upon a Sunday; at the same time remarking, that the dogs
might run breast high.

THOUGH we made the best of our way over hedge and ditch, and took every thing,
we were often delayed by trying if we could prick a hare; or by leaving the
road to examine a piece of cover; and he frequently made me stop, not to look
at the prospect, but while he pointed out the particular course that Reynard
took, or the spot where he had eathed. At length we arrived on full gallop at
the Church, where we found the congregation waiting for us: but as Jack had
nothing to do but to alight, pull his band out of the sermoncase, give his
brown scratch bob a shake, and clap on the surplice, he was presently equipped
for the service. In short he behaved himself both in the desk and pulpit to the
entire satisfaction of all the parish as well as the squire of it, who after
thanking Jack for his excellent discourse, very cordially took us home to
dinner with him.

I SHALL not trouble you with an account of our entertainment at the squire's,
who being himself as keen a sportsman as ever followed a pack of dogs, was
hugely delighted with Jack's conversation. Church and King, and another
particular toast, were (in compliment I suppose to my friend's clerical
character) the first drank after dinner; but these were directly followed by a
pint bumper to Horses sound, Dogs hearty. Earth stopped, and Foxes plenty. When
we had run over again, with great joy and vociferation, as many chaces as the
time would permit, the bell called us to evening prayers: after which, (though
the squire would fain have had us stay and take an hunt with him) we mounted
our horses at the church-door, and rode home in the dark; because Jack had
engaged to meet several of his brother-sportsmen, who were to lie all night at
his own house, to be in readiness to make up for the loss of Sunday, by going
out a cock-shooting very early the next morning.

I MUST leave it to you, Cousin, to make what reflections you please on this
character; only observing, that the country can furnish many instances of these
ordained sportsmen, whose thoughts are more taken up with the stable or the
dog-kennel than the church: and indeed, it will be found that our friend Jack
and all of his stamp are regarded by their parishioners, not as Parsons of the
Parish, but rather as Squires in Orders.

I am, dear Cousin, yours etc.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CVI. THURSDAY, February 5, 1756.
-- Non haec solennia nobis
Vana superstitio, veterumve ignara Deorum,
Imposuit. Saevis, hospes Trojane, periclis
Servati facimus. --
VIRG.
IT is with the utmost pleasure that I have observed an article in the
newspapers, signifying that the magistrates of this city will oblige all
taverns, alehouses, etc. to be shut up tomorrow, which is appointed to be set
apart as a day of solemn fast and humiliation, on account of those dreadful
Earthquakes from which we have been so providentially preserved. Without such a
restriction it is to be feared, that too many of the vulgar will observe this
day in the same manner as they are wont to observe the ordinary Sundays; which
they have been long accustomed to look upon as dedicated to Idleness and
Intemperance; to which deities they very devoutly pour their libations
(according to their own phrase) in a church with a chimney in it.

BUT if the common herd are to be thus compelled to their duty, persons of
fashion, who are above the law, will I doubt pay as little regard to this
nominal fast day, as to Ash Wednesday, Good Friday, or the long-exploded 30th
of January. Nor can we expect, that it will work any greater reformation of
manners in them, than the absurd panic occasioned formerly by the ridiculous
predictions of a Swiss madman. Therefore, as they are not to be frightened into
a sense of virtue and religion, we should rather try to wean them gradually
from their darling vices; which may be kept under by softening methods, though
we cannot hope wholly to eradicate them. For this purpose, the first step to be
previously taken, as it appears to me, should be to decoy people of quality
into coming to church, by making it as fashionable to be seen there, as it was
some time ago to meet at Ranelagh on a Sunday. They must, therefore, be allowed
to curtesy, bow, nod, smile, ogle, whisper, or even bawl to one another, before
the service is begun; and that churches may resemble other public places of
diversion, ladies and gentlemen may be permitted to send their servants to keep
places in the pews: but it shall on no consideration be lawful for them (as is
their custom at the opera or playhouse) to disturb the congregation by
dropping in while the prayers are reading or to, interrupt the parson by
talking loud in the middle of the sermon.

THIS point being once gained, it might be possible to bring about some other
reformations in the polite amusements. Perhaps to banish all such moral plays
as the Chances for ever from our theaters, would be in effect to shut them up,
or condemn them to empty boxes: the polite world may, therefore, be sometimes
indulged with them at the particular desire of several persons of quality; or
for the benefit of some hospital, when their appearance may be attributed to a
motive of charity. Nor would I be so scrupulous as to abolish Masquerades
entirely; though I would have them put under new regulations: and no lady
should be suffered to go there half-naked under the pretense of being better
disguised; nor should any one be allowed to personate Eve, though with a
fig-leaf. As to the darling amusement of Gaming, I fear it would be a vain
attempt to think of restraining it within any bounds at present: nor is it
possible to expel the card-table from the routes of persons of fashion, even
upon a Sunday. I would therefore propose, that since they must play, the
winnings on that day should be given to the poor of the parish; and that they
should use a particular sort of cards (like those contrived for the amusement
and instruction of children) strewed with texts of scripture and other
religious and moral sentences.

GALLANTRY and intrigue may be likewise reckoned among the fashionable
amusements of the present age: and I confess I am at a loss to know under what
restrictions to confine them. Married people may perhaps be allowed to indulge
themselves in any freedoms, by the mutual consent of each party; provided
always, that they are persons of distinction, and that the match between them
was made merely on account of family or fortune, in conformity to the true
sense and spirit of the late Marriage Act. With respect to those, who take a
pleasure in debauching raw country girls and common tradesmens daughters, I had
once a thought, that a clause should be added to the abovementioned Act, to
oblige the offenders to do penance in a white sheet; but I have since
considered, that our modern bucks and bloods would probably take as much pride
in this badge of honor, as a young officer in his scarf and cockade. As to the
genteel practice of keeping mistresses, no one should be allowed to take a girl
into keeping, but those who are already past their grand climacteric, and may
be supposed to want a nurse: except it should be thought expedient to extend
this privilege to those spirited young fellows, who at the age of five and
twenty have worn down their constitutions to threescore.

WE cannot but admire the extreme courage and sense of honor, which
characterises our modern heroes, and inspires them sometimes with a desire of
killing their friends, and sometimes of killing themselves. But as this noble
spirit should be only exerted against the common enemy, the honor of the
Duellist might be satisfied, I should think, by a mock-combat without
bloodshed; and the courage of the Suicide might be confined to a bare attempt
on his own life, without the loss of it. Duels, therefore, should be fought
with guarded soils, as in tragedy-rencounters; and any gentleman (or even
mechanic) who finds an inclination to make away with himself, may be allowed to
try the experiment, by drawing a knife or razor across his throat so as not to
cut the windpipe, or by running a sword through the skin without piercing the
ribs; or he may flash a pistol in his face charged with powder only, or be
tucked up in his own garters with a wad of cotton about his neck, and his
nearest relation standing by, ready to cut him down (if he pleases) before he
be quite dead.

I am prevented from persuing this subject any farther, in order to make room
for the following letter.

Mr. TOWN,
AS the day appointed, for a General Fast in these kingdoms is now at hand, I
shall beg leave to touch upon some laxities in the usual manner of observing a
Fast; which though they are not of sufficient dignity to be taken notice of
from the pulpit, should yet be pointed out, as the violation of the Fast in
these particulars is almost universal.

THE very name of a Fast implies a day of abstinence, of mortification and
self-denial; which has always been injoined as a necessary means of subduing
irregular desires, and fitting us for holy meditations. For this reason, in
former days, when people of quality rose earlier than even mechanics now open
their shops, when the Court itself dined at eleven, that meal was deferred till
four o'clock in compliance with this religious exercise, which was in those
times a real abstinence, a true piece of mortification and self-denial. But if
the observance of a Fast consists in not dining till four o'clock, our persons
of fashion may be said to fast every day of their lives. In truth, the several
hours of the day are adapted to such very different employments to what they
were formerly, that our four o'clock stands in the place of their eleven: and
nothing can be more absurd (to use no harsher term) than to adhere to the form
in the performance of a religious act, when by the alteration of circumstances,
that form flatly contradicts the very meaning of its original institution. I
would also ask those rigid devotees, who observe this day in all the strictness
of the letter, and would be shocked at sight of a leg of mutton or beef-steak
on their tables, whether the dining upon salt or other fish, may not be
considered rather as feasting than fasting, if (as is often the case) it should
happen to be a dish they are remarkably fond of. All these methods of keeping a
Fast without abstinence, mortification, or self-denial, are mere quibbles to
evade the performance of our duty, and entirely frustrate the design of
appointing this solemnity. There is something of this nature very commonly
practiced in France: where there are many families who keep the whole Lent with
great strictness; but the last night of it invite a great deal of company to
supper. The moment the clock strikes twelve, a magnificent entertainment,
consisting of all sorts of rich fare, is served up, and these most Christian
debauchees sit down to indulge in luxury, without sinning against the Canon.

I am, Sir, your humble Servant, etc.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CVII. THURSDAY, February 12, 1756.
Cedunt Grammatici, vincuntur Rhetores --
JUV.
To Mr. TOWN.
-- College, Cambridge, Jan. 30 th 1756. SIR,
I HAVE just now, with near an hundred more, taken the first degree, which this
University confers on her sons; and begin to consider within myself, in what
manner we have spent our time for these four years past, and what profit we are
likely to receive hereafter from these our academical studies: But upon
retrospection I find that instead of having laid up a store of learning, which
might have been of service to us in our future connections and intercourse with
mankind, we have been confounding our heads with a miscellaneous heap of
nonsense, which most of us, I am certain, are endeavoring to unlearn as fast
as possible we can: instead of having acquired such a share of common sense, as
might have been of service to ourselves and acquaintance, we must entirely sell
off our old stock, and begin the world of literature anew. This reflection
cannot be very pleasing to those, who I must say have squandered away so very
precious a time of life; a time of life, when, though judgment perhaps is not
come to maturity, yet imagination and invention, those noble offsprings of a
promising mind, are in the very flower and bloom of perfection.

THIS seat of learning (for it undoubtedly deserves that name) has drawn and
kept us together for some years; our manners, conversation, and studies bear a
great similitude: but now either chance or choice is going to disperse us over
the whole kingdom; and our places of abode will scarcely be more widely
different, than our schemes of life. Notwithstanding this, the same plan of
study has been imposed on all: Whether agreeable, or contrary to the bent of
inclination, has never been regarded. Mathematics is the standard, to which all
merit is referred; and all the excellencies, without these, are quite
overlooked and neglected: the solid learning of Greece and Rome is a trifling
acquisition; and much more so, every polite accomplishment: in short, if you
will not get all Euclid and his diagrams by heart, and pore over Saunderson
'till you are as blind as he was himself, they will say of you, as in the motto
to one of your late papers, actum est, ilicet, peristi. Not that I would
depreciate this kind of learning; it is certainly a most noble science, and
reflects the greatest honor on human wit and invention: all that I complain
of, is the unreasonable stress that is laid upon it; nay even the more abstruse
parts of it: which is still more absurd, as there are so very few heads able to
perceive and retain the nice chain of reasoning and deduction, which must
necessarily be made use of, and as a small number of mathematical geniusses
would be sufficient for the service of his Majesty's dominions.

I TAKE it for granted, that your sagacity has by this time discovered, that
you have been addressed by a young man, whose too-overweening conceit of
himself has, perhaps, induced him to imagine, that the University has not
sufficiently rewarded his deserts. If so, you are not deceived: but though this
disappointment may at present set a little uneasy upon me, yet I think I can
foresee, that it will be the most fortunate mortification that could possibly
have befallen me. For, in the first place, it has sufficiently abated that
upstart pride, which most young men are apt to take in their own abilities;
than which nothing can be more insufferable to all their acquaintance, or a
greater impediment to their own real improvement. A pert scholar, whenever he
enters a room of company, immediately assumes a superiority in discourse, and
thinks himself obliged to correct all improprieties in thought or expression.
You must "speak by the card," as Hamlet says, or expect the censure of this
superficial coxcomb. If, according to the common form of speech, you say that
there is either heat in fire, or coldness in ice, he will inform you, that you
deliver yourself very inaccurately, as Mr. Lock has fully demonstrated; he
will tell you, you cannot prove, that two and two make four, or that you are
alive yourself. These, and a thousand other equally impertinent observations,
he is continually making, to the no small uneasiness and perplexity of the
ladies, and honest country gentlemen.

WHAT is still a greater misfortune, is that a man of this cast is never likely
to know any better: for having raked together a few metaphysical distinctions
and scholastic refinements, he thinks, he has laid up a sufficient fund of
knowledge for his whole life: he despises all common sense (which is the best
sense) through an ambition of appearing particular; and as for the advice or
opinion of others, those he thinks himself indispensably bound to disregard;
inasmuch as such submission implies some inferiority, which he would by no
means be thought to labor under. Such a disposition as this, I take to be the
sure and infallible token of confirmed ignorance: a melancholy instance of the
depravity of human nature, that the less we know, the more we presume; and the
fewer advances we have made toward true knowledge, the less occasion we think
we have of any further improvement.

IN the second place, if I may be allowed to judge of what I cannot possibly
have experienced, I take it to be the greatest benefit to a young person to
meet with early disappointments in life: for sooner or later every one must
have his share of them; and the sooner we meet with some of them, the better:
for by this means the mind is easily made familiar with crosses and vexations,
and is not thrown off its balance by every thwarting and wayward accident. By
this means, we submit to ills and troubles, as the necessary attendants on
mankind; just as on a rainy day we make ourselves quiet and contented, but hope
for sunshine on the morrow. And, indeed, there seems to be a strong analogy
between the inclemency of the weather attacking our bodies, and the storms of
afflictions which batter our minds. The rain will beat, and the wind will roar,
let us use our utmost endeavors to the contrary; but by enuring our persons to
the vicissitudes of the seasons, and using other proper methods, we shall feel
no very sensible inconvenience from them: In like manner all our skill and art
cannot prevent or elude the rubs and disasters to which we are liable; but if
by degrees, and early in life, we are hardened and accustomed to them, and if
by the help of reason and sound philosophy we arm and fortify ourselves against
them, they may still perhaps reach us; but their shocks will be quite weak and
languid, and we may say of Fortune, as Virgil says of Priam when he hurled a
javelin at Pyrrhus, -- Telum imbelle sine ictu
Conjecit --
THUS you see, Mr. TOWN, that out of a seeming evil, I have discovered a real
good: and I am certain, if this method of reasoning could be made universal, we
should find much fewer murmurers against the present distribution and order of
things.

I am Sir, Yours etc. B. A.


Mr. TOWN,
I Am so great an admirer of the fair sex, that I never let a tittle of their
vendible writings escape me. I bought this year the Lady's Diary, merely
because it was advertised as the Woman's Almanac, which I construed, the
Almanac composed by a Woman: but I find I have been mistaken in my
supposition. It is not the work of a female. The Christian name of the author,
I have reason to believe, is Marmaduke; unless I misunderstand a most curious
copy of verses, describing a most superb entertainment, of fish, flesh, pies,
and tarts, exhibited upon New Year's Day 1755. His Surname remains as great an
Aenigma as any in his book. His coadjutors, contributers, or assistants are
Messieurs Walter Trott, Timothy Nabb, Patrick Ocavannah, John Honey, Henry
Season, and others. I honor these gentlemen, and their works; but I own my
chief delight is in reading over the Riddles, and Unriddles, the Questions, and
the Answers of Miss Sally West, Caelia, Miss Nancy Evelyn, Miss E. S. Miss
Atkinson, Enira, and other choice little feminine spirits of the age. Riddles
are so becoming, and appear so pretty, when dandled about by ladies, that they
may be compared to soft, smooth, painted waxen babbies, dressed up in a proper
manner for Misses to play with, from eighteen to fourscore. But above all I
must take this opportunity of congratulating dear Miss Fanny Harris, who, I
find, " has given an elegant Solution to a Prize Problem by a Fluxionary
Calculus founded on the Properties of Tangents," and by that means has run away
with no less than twelve Diaries for this important year 1756. As this young
lady is justly called the "honor of her sex," and deals entirely in the
Properties of Tangents, I fear she will never descend so low as Riddleme
Riddlemeree, and therefore I must humbly offer, by the vehicle of your paper,
Mr. TOWN, a small Riddle, invented with much pains and thought by myself, to
the solution of those three ingenious Spinsters, Miss Polly Walker, Miss Grace
Tetlow, and Miss Ann Rickaby, to appear in the Lady's Diary of 1757, and to
receive upon appearance, as a premium, one complete set of the CONNOISSEURS in
Pocket Volumes, to be the property of one or more of these three ladies, who
shall explain my Aenigma: Fire and Water mixed together,
Add to this some Salt and Tin;
Tell me, Ladies, tell me whether
In this Mixture there is Sin.


THE Solution itself, if not truly explained by the Three Graces to whom I now
address it, shall appear, by your permission, in the first Thursday's
CONNOISSEUR after next New Year's Day.

I am, Sir, your humble Servant, MICHAEL KRAWBIDGE.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CVIII. THURSDAY, February 19, 1756.
-- Veniet manus, auxilio quae
Sit mihi. --
HOR.
MY correspondents, whose letters are not of sufficient length to make up a
whole Paper, must be contented to wait 'till I can find convenient room to
introduce them. I shall for the present fling together the two following, from
a number now lying before me, though their subjects have no connection with
each other.

Mr. TOWN!
YOU must know, Sir, in my younger days I was very susceptible of the passion
of love: my heart was always fluttering, jumping, and skipping, when a female
object was in view: and being a pretty good master of that kind of romantic
nonsense, with which the fair are too often captivated; being fond of dancing,
frisking, capering, and fidgeting to all public places; I gained the affections
of many, but could settle to none: and my heart constantly returned to its
owner with the wound healed.

IN this manner I lived till I grew past forty; and thinking such kind of life
not so agreeable, but rather fatiguing, I came to a resolution to marry, and
settle quietly in the world the remainder of my days. You may guess from my
general acquaintance, I could not be a great while before I had an opportunity
offered of meeting something suitable to my inclinations: accordingly I fixed
my mind on a widow lady about ten years younger than myself; to whom I made
known my intentions as soon as I could. I was received in such a manner as all
happy lovers would wish to be: and at last got her promise for the completion:
but when I pressed the day, was told it could not be so soon as I desired; for
to surrender on so short a courtship, the world might impute as an indecorum in
her character.

I MUST tell you, I soon found (like Malvolio in the play) that she had a great
passion for white silk stockings; and you may be sure I always dressed my legs
in that color: but as ill luck would have it, some little time since, having
stayed with her pretty late, and not being able to get either coach or chair, I
was forced to trudge home in the rain, my cursed white stockings were wet from
top to bottom; the next morning the rheumatism took possession of one of my
knees, which not only caused an hobble in my gait, but obliged me to cloth my
legs with thick ribb'd worsted for the sake of warmth.

THUS hobbling and clothed, I went to visit my charmer, who as I entered the
room was sitting in her chair more grave than usual; which I imputed to her
attention to domestic affairs, and sat down by her. I took hold of her hand,
and was going to intrude on her lips for a kiss -- But would you think it, Mr.
TOWN! instead of suffering my salute, she reclined her head on the chair; drew
her hand from mine; held it up as a bar between us; arose; and told me I must
take no such liberties in future. I expostulated; and was for attempting again,
imagining it was only a whim, (for you well know they all have their whims) but
to my great misfortune found it was real. She resumed her place; and in a grave
manner told me, I must think no more of what had passed between us; that she
should always have a regard for me, but was determined not to marry; and
therefore expected I should from that time forbear all further pretension. I
earnestly (as you can make no doubt) pressed for reasons, but could get none
except broken hints; such as -- I would not have you marry -- It may hurt your
constitution, which seems to be very delicate -- I cannot turn Nurse -- We
shall not answer each others expectations -- and without any further or other
ceremony, she quitted the room with all the haughty airs of a fine lady, who
knows she has the man totally in her power.

OH Mr. TOWN! imagine what a confused situation I was in: I was thunderstruck:
I was overwhelmed with horror and astonishment: I stood like the Soldier when
he beheld the shocking condition of his General Bellisarius. After being a long
time in that condition, I a little recovered my senses; and with much
difficulty prevailed on her maid, to follow her to her retreat; and to beg the
favor only to speak to her. That was denied me; I was told her determination
was fixed; she expected I would obey it; and that she should be absent when I
came again.

I AM at present uncertain what to do: I shall therefore be obliged to you, if
you will advise me, (as I can prove a promise of marriage) whether I shall put
the affair into the hands of my attorney: or whether I shall stay till the warm
weather comes (which I imagine will carry off my rheumatism) and attack her
again: or whether I shall pocket the disappointment, and think no more of
matrimony. Give me some consolation if you can: but if you have none, I desire,
for the good of young batchelors like myself, you would advise them all between
forty and fifty not to wear white stockings in winter.

I am, Sir, your constant reader, etc. TIMOTHY DOUBT.


Mr. TOWN!
AS there are some vices, which the vulgar have presumed to copy from the
great, so there are others, which the great have condescended to borrow from
the vulgar. Among these I cannot but set down the black-guard practice (for so
I must call it) of Cursing and Swearing: a practice, which (to say nothing at
present of its profaneness) is low and indelicate, and places a man of quality
on the same level with the chairman at his door. For my own part I cannot see
the difference between a By Gad or a Dem-me minced and softened by a gentle
pronunciation from well-bred lips, and the same expression bluntly bolted out
from the broad mouth of a carman or an oyster-wench.

YOUR predecessor the SPECTATOR has given us an account of a select party of
Swearers, who were extremely surprised at their own common talk, which was
taken down in shorthand, and afterward repeated to them. In like manner, if we
were to draw out a catalogue of fashionable Oaths and Curses in present use at
Arthur's or any other polite assembly, would not the company themselves be led
to imagine, that the conversation had been carried on between the lowest of the
mob? Would they not blush to find, that they had gleaned their choicest phrases
from streets and allies, and enriched their discourse by the elegant dialect of
Wapping or Broad Saint Giles's?

I SHALL purposely wave making any reflections on the impiety of this practice,
as I am satisfied they would have but little weight either with the beau-monde
or the canaille. The Swearer of either station devotes himself piecemeal (as
it were) to destruction; pours out anathemas against his eyes, his heart, his
soul, and every part of his body; and extends the same good wishes to the limbs
and joints of his friends and acquaintance. This they both do with the same
fearless unconcern; but with this difference only, that the Gentleman-Swearer
damns himself and others with the greatest civility and good-breeding
imaginable.

I KNOW it will be pleaded in excuse for this practice, that Oaths and Curses
are intended only as mere expletives, to fill up and give a grace to
conversation: but as there are still some old-fashioned creatures, who adhere
to their common acceptance, it would be proper to substitute some other
unmeaning terms in their room, and at the same time remote from the vulgar
Cursing and Swearing. A worthy clergyman (whose name I cannot recollect) being
chaplain of a regiment, is said to have reclaimed the officers, who were much
addicted to the vulgar idiom of swearing, by taking occasion to tell them a
story, in which he introduced the words bottle and glass, instead of the usual
expletives of God, Devil, and damn, which he did not think quite so becoming
for one of his cloth to make free with. The same method might, I imagine, be
followed by our people of fashion, whenever they are obliged to have recourse
to the like substitutes for thought. Bottle and glass might be used with great
energy in the table-talk at the King's Arms or Saint Alban's taverns: the
gamester might be indulged in swearing by the Knave of Clubs, or the Curse of
Scotland; or he might with some propriety retain the old execration of the
Deuce take it: the beau should be allowed to "swear by his gracious self, which
is the god of his idolatry;" and the common expletives of conversation should
consist only of upon my word, or upon my honor; which, whatever sense they
might formerly bear, are at present understood only as words of course without
meaning.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant, etc.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CIX. THURSDAY, February 26, 1756.
Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus,
Ridetque, si mortalis ultra
Fas trepidat.
HOR.
IT is not easy for the mind of man to recover itself from any extraordinary
panic which has once seized it: for this reason we cannot be surprised, that
many well-meaning people, who have not yet shook off the apprehensions
occasioned by the late dreadful earthquakes, should be led to conjure up new
terrors, and alarm themselves with imaginary dangers. Their fears interpret
every common incident, and even the change of weather, as signs of approaching
destruction: if the day be calm and serene, such (they say) is the usual
forerunner of a shock; or if the night prove tempestuous, they can hardly
persuade themselves that it is only the wind which rocks their houses. With
this propensity to entertain any unreasonable dread about future events, it is
no wonder, that weak minds should be further worked upon by little dablers in
philosophy; who having gleaned a few barren scraps from the Magazines, presume
even to foretell the dissolution of the world by the Comet which will appear in
1758. Swift, in his Voyage to Laputa, has a passage so very apposite to these
idle pretenders to science, that I shall beg leave to transcribe it.

THESE people (says he) are under continual disquietudes, never enjoying a
minute's peace of mind; and their disturbances proceed from causes, which very
little affect the rest of mortals. Their apprehensions arise from several
changes they dread in the celestial bodies. For instance, that the earth by the
continual approaches of the sun toward it must in course of time be absorbed,
or swallowed up. That the face of the sun will by degrees be encrusted with its
own effluvia, and give no more light to the world. That the earth very narrowly
escaped a brush from the last comet, which would have infallibly reduced it to
ashes; and that the next, which they have calculated for one and thirty years
hence, will probably destroy us. For, if in its perihelion it should approach
within a certain degree of the sun (as by their calculations they have reasons
to dread) it will receive a degree of heat ten thousand times more intense,
than that of red hot glowing iron; and, in its absence from the sun carry a
blazing tail ten hundred thousand and fourteen miles long; through which if the
earth should pass at the distance of one hundred thousand miles from the
nucleus, or main body of the comet, it must in its passage be set on fire, and
reduced to ashes. That the sun, daily spending its rays without any nutriment
to supply them, will at last be wholly consumed and annihilated; which must be
attended with the destruction of this earth and of all the planets that receive
their light from it.

THEY are so perpetually alarmed with the apprehensions of these, and the like
impending dangers, that they can neither sleep quietly in their beds, nor have
any relish for the common pleasures or amusements of life. When they meet an
acquaintance in the morning, the first question is about the sun's health, how
he looked at his setting and rising, and what hopes they have to avoid the
stroke of an approaching comet. This conversation they are apt to run into with
the same temper, that boys discover to hear terrible stories of spirits and
hobgoblins, which they greedily listen to, and dare not go to bed for fear.

LET us therefore banish from our thoughts all such vain notions, and let us
fortify our minds with a true sense of religion, which will teach us to rely on
the protection of that providence, which has hitherto preserved us. It is with
great pleasure, that I remarked the unanimous concurrence of all ranks of
people, in observing the late solemn Fast, as a necessary act of humiliation,
to avert the wrath and vengeance of heaven, and to call down its mercies upon
us: nor do I doubt, but the approaching Season will awaken in us the same
serious attention to our duty; that we may not seem to have barely complied
with a stated form, or to have been affected with the short-lived piety of a
single day.

IT is true, indeed, that no persons do more prejudice to the cause of
religion, than they who cloud its genuine cheerfulness with the gloom of
superstition, and are apt to consider every common accident that befalls us, as
a judgment. They cloth religion in the most terrifying habit, and (as it were,
dress it up in all the horrors of the Inquisition. These people are much to be
pitied; and it is to be wished, that their mistaken piety could be better
regulated. But there is another set of men of a different turn, more numerous
and much more dangerous to the community, who treat every act of religion as a
jest, and hold its most sacred ordinances in contempt. Set forms and
ceremonies, though they have no essential virtue in themselves, are yet
indispensably requisite to keep alive in us a quick sense of our duty. It must
be allowed, indeed, that if a man could constantly employ his mind in holy
meditations, exercise the virtues, and believe the mysteries of our religion,
he would be a true Christian, though he never complied with any outward forms,
or so much as repeated a single prayer. But it is manifest from experience,
that those who neglect the ordinances, neglect also the duties of a Christian;
and the least reflection on the human mind will convince us, that some external
rites are necessary to settle the wandering ideas, and to fix the attention on
its proper object. The fervent repetition of a prayer is apt to inspire us with
love and gratitude toward the DEITY, and kindles the sparks of devotion within
us: and it is easy to conceive, that if the celebration of public worship was
neglected among us only for one year, it would be a more fatal blow to religion
than all the weak attacks of infidels and free-thinkers. No arguments,
therefore, could be more ill-grounded than the objections of those people, who
considered the appointment of the late solemn fast as useless and unnecessary.

BUT though forms may be said to compose the body, a good life is the soul of
religion, without which the rest is but a dead mass. The most rigid compliance
with every ordinance of the Church, if it has no influence on our conduct, is
rather a solemn mockery than an atonement for our offenses: as they, who
receive the bread and wine without a firm resolution to lead a new life, are
said to eat and drink their own damnation: Wherefore, a strict observance of
this or that particular day is not a sufficient discharge of our duty, except
it serve to rouse us from the lethargy of sin, to awaken in us a desire of
becoming worthy the protection of the ALMIGHTY, by animating our faith,
amending our lives, and working in us a repentance of our transgressions. Thus
the Lord's Day is not merely set apart for devotion, with an unlimited license
to wickedness all the rest of the week; but our being particularly exercised in
acts of piety for one day, is calculated to strengthen our virtue, and to give
a tincture of religion to our whole conduct through the other six.

THESE considerations I have thought fit to lay before the reader, as
preparatory to another solemn Fast ordained by the Church: and if the
observance of this should be neglected or slightly passed over, may we not
conclude, that our sense of religion is only in proportion to our sense of
danger? As for those, who require constantly to be frightened into their duty,
I will for once venture to commence prophet: and let them be assured that my
predictions will infallibly come to pass. There is a danger, more certain than
an Earthquake or a Comet, which will inevitably overwhelm us; from which we
cannot possibly guard ourselves, and which perhaps is even now at our doors.
This danger I cannot better set forth, than in the alarming words of a
celebrated French preacher. "I know a man (and I will point him out presently)
who is now in this church; a man, in perfect health; a man, in the flower of
his age: And yet this man, perhaps before next Sunday, perhaps by tomorrow,
will be in his grave. This man, my dear brethren, is Myself who speak to you,
it is You who hear me."

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CX. THURSDAY, March 4, 1756.
Hoc opus, hoc studium parvi properemus et ampli,
Si volumus patriae, si nobis vivere chart.
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
EVERY Englishman, who has the good of his country at heart, must lament the
perplexity which our ministers labor under, in contriving ways and means to
raise money for the present exigence of affairs. I have with pleasure hearkened
to the several projects proposed in the debates of patriots in our
coffee-houses and private clubs: but though I find they are unanimous in
allowing the necessity of levying new taxes, every one is willing to shift off
the burden from himself.

I WAS introduced the other night into a set of worthy citizens, who very
zealously took this subject into consideration over their evening pipe. One of
them a grave gentleman, pulling the Evening Post out of his pocket, and putting
on his spectacles, read aloud to us the several methods already proposed; to
which many wise objections were immediately started by the company. "What Is
that? says an old don, (who I afterward found had a small estate in houses) An
additional duty upon bricks, and pan-tiles, and plain-tiles, I suppose they
will lay a tax upon plain-tile-pegs by and bye?" This speech was received with
an hearty chuckle of applause from the rest of the company; when another took
occasion to observe, "that he very much approved the scheme for laying a larger
tax upon cards and dice; one of which he called the devil's books, and the
other his bones." The duty upon plate might perhaps have passed into a law in
this assembly, if it had not been vehemently opposed by one member, (whom I
discovered to be a silver-smith,) in which he was seconded by the landlord of
the house, who had a seat in this meeting, and told us, "that it would lie very
hard upon publicans, as nobody would now drink their porter out of a
pewter-pot." These and the like arguments induced us to set aside all the
projects, that had been offered hitherto and to consult together in order to
find new ones in their room; among which I could not but smile at the proposal
of an honest peruke-maker, who advised the levying of a poll-tax upon all that
wore their own hair, "For, says he, we have never had good times, since wigs
were out of fashion. What rare days were those in Queen Anne's reign, when the
nobility and gentry wore large flaxen flows of thirty guineas price! And as you
may see in my lord Godolphin's monument in Westminster Abbey, a prime minister's
wig, could not be made, I am sure, under fifty guineas."

THE discourse that passed at this society of politicians has led me to turn my
thoughts on devising some method, that might answer the present demands for a
supply, with the least injury to the community. On this account I am of Opinion
that private vices (according to the favorite tenet of Maunderville) may in
some measure be converted into public benefits, by laying a certain tax or duty
on the fashionable amusements of the gay and polite world. For this purpose I
have with great pains and labor contrived a plan, a few heads of which,
without further preface, I shall (with your leave) submit to the consideration
of those whom it may concern.

FIRST then, I would propose, that no persons of quality, or others, should be
allowed to keep any route, drum, assembly, visiting-day, (or whatever other
name it may hereafter be called by,) at which more than one hundred persons
shall be found assembled, without paying a certain rate for every such route,
drum, etc. The number of these meetings, which are held in this town,
(including the city of London and the suburbs thereof) I have computed, upon an
exact calculation, to amount annually to eight thousand three hundred and
upwards; so that if a duty, at only sixpence per head, were to be levied upon
the company, it would bring in a prodigious income to the government; deducting
for the decrease consequent of this tax, as also for those which we may expect
will be smuggled or carried on clandestinely. And as gaming is an essential
diversion at all these meetings, I would further advise, that every card-table
be marked and numbered, in the same manner as wagons and coaches, and a
proportionable rate fixed on them according to the degree and quality of the
owners. Be it enacted moreover, that extraordinary licenses shall be taken out
for playing at cards on the Sabbath Day; but that these be granted only to
persons of the highest rank and fashion.

AT the present juncture of affairs every one will agree with me, that if an
absolute prohibition be impracticable, an heavy duty should be laid on the
importation of French fashions and fopperies into this kingdom. It is therefore
but reasonable, that all French cooks, valets de chamber, milliners,
mantua-makers, hair-cutters, etc. should be at least doubly taxed, as it is
notorious that they exact from the dupes, who employ them, more than double the
wages or price for their labors, that our own modest countrymen would require.
This tax I make no doubt, would produce no inconsiderable sum for the public
use: and as our ladies, though I would not suspect that they have French
hearts, are ambitious of wearing French complexions, a further sum might also
be raised by fixing an high duty upon rouge and carmine.

I SHALL not dwell on other particulars, which might be turned in the same
manner to the public good; such as a tax on kept mistresses, for example, which
practice is now become so generally fashionable, that I question not but a duty
properly levied on them would be sufficient to maintain all the widows of our
soldiers and sailors, who shall happen to be killed in the service. But as it
is incumbent on every Englishman to expose his life in defense of his country
against the common enemy, I must particularly recommend, that some means may be
devised, that the gallant feats of those men of honor, who rather choose to
risk their lives in the modish way of duelling, may be attended with some
advantage to their countrymen. I would therefore advise, that swords and
pistols of a settled length and bore, with the Tower-stamp, be provided by the
government for the use of Duellists, and that they shall not presume to make
use of any other, under pain of incurring the guilt of murder. These weapons
may be let out at a certain price; and if one of the parties happen to kill the
other, the survivor shall be subject to a fine according to his rank and
station, and a jury shall be directed to bring in the verdict, Self-Defence. In
like manner, persons of quality may have leave granted them to put an end to
their own lives, after an ill luck at cards, or the like emergent occasions;
when, upon paying a certain rate, they may be indulged in a private execution
from the hands of Jack Ketch, and the Coroner's inquest shall be directed to
bring in their verdict, Lunacy.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant, etc.


To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
AS you are a CONNOISSEUR, I shall make no apology for desiring you to give the
following Advertisement (which has already appeared in the Daily Advertiser) a
place in some corner of your paper. By doing this you will greatly oblige the
Virtuosos in Flowers, as well as

Your humble Servant, etc.


To be Sold by SUBSCRIPTION,
At Half a Guinea each Plant, Auricula raised by Mr. William Redmond, at
Islington, named the TRIUMPH; having fine Grass, a strong Stem, a certain
Blower, a large Trusser, the Fingers a just Length, a good Pip for Size and
Shape, the Eye extremely white, the Thrum full, the Margin a beautiful Purple
Black, finely variegated with Silver and Green, continues long in Bloom, and
dies in Color. No Plant to be sold for less than one Guinea after the
Subscription is closed, until the Bloom is over.

This Day is Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXI. THURSDAY, March 11, 1756.
Tandem define matrem.
HOR.
THE generality of the young unmarried ladies of the present age dislike no
company so much as the elderly persons of their own sex, whether married or
unmarried. Going with an old maiden aunt, a mamma, or grand-mamma to the play,
or to Ranelagh, is so insipid an amusement, that it robs their entertainment of
the very name of a party of pleasure. To be handed into a box, walk in the
public gardens, or make one at a card-table at a route, with a sprightly young
nobleman, or gallant colonel of the guards, has some life in it; but to be kept
perpetually under the wing of an old lady, can have no charms for a woman of
spirit. The presence of these antiquated females imposes a constraint on their
behavior: they are, indeed, like the Duennas in Spain, spies on the conduct of
the gay and young; and a good old gentlewoman with a young beauty by her side
watches her every motion, and is as much frighted, if the pretty creature makes
any advances to a man, as a hen, who has been foster-mother to a brood of
ducklings, is alarmed at their taking to the water.

BUT though a loose coquet behavior is so much in vogue, a modest deportment
is most natural and becoming in the fair sex; and I am always glad to see a
young lady of sufficient sense and discretion, to behave with an innocent
cheerfulness, instead of apparent uneasiness and constraint, before her more
aged female friends and relations. But though a daughter should prefer no
company to her mother, a son would appear as ridiculous, if he always dangled
at the side of his mamma, as if he wore his sister's petticoats: and however
amiable this maidenly demeanor might seem in a young girl, I cannot view it
with equal approbation in the character of a Male-Virgin; -- a character, with
which I shall here present the reader, as drawn by one of my correspondents.

To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
YOU have already given us several instances of those ambiguous creatures among
the men, who are both male and female: permit me to add to them an account of
those lady-like gentlemen, whom we may distinguish by the title of their
mother's own sons; who have in vain changed the bib and leading-strings for the
breeches, and stick as close to their mammas, as a great calf to the side of an
old cow. I am intimately acquainted with one of these overgrown babies; who is
indeed too big to be dandled in lap, or fed with a pap-spoon, though he is no
more weaned from his mother, than if he had not yet quitted the nursery.

THE delicate BILLY SUCKLING is the contempt of the men, the jest of the women,
and the darling of his mamma. She doats on him to distraction; and is in
perpetual admiration of his wit, and anxiety for his health. The good young
gentleman, for his part, is neither undutiful nor ungrateful: she is the only
woman, that he does not look on with indifference; and she is his tutoress, his
physician, and his nurse. She provides his broth every evening, will not suffer
him to look into a book by candlelight, lest he should hurt his eyes; and
takes care to have his bed warmed: nay, I have known him sit with his mamma's
white handkerchief round his neck through a whole visit, to guard him from the
wind of that ugly door, or that terrible chink in the wainscot.

BUT however familiarly he may behave in his addresses to his mother, and
whatever little acts of gallantry may pass between them, no encouragement can
prevail on him to treat other women with the same freedom. Being once desired
at a ball to dance a minuet, instead of taking out any of the young ladies, he
could pitch upon no partner so agreeable, to whom he might offer the compliment
of his hand, as his mother; and I remember, when he was once called upon in a
large company at a tavern to give a lady in his turn, he plainly showed who was
the sole mistress of his affections, by toasting his mother. The gallant custom
of challenging a lady to drink a bumper, by leaving it to her option whether
she will have hob or nob, frequently gives a delicious flavor to the liquor,
especially when, as I have known it happen, joining the lips of the glasses has
made the prelude to a meeting between the lips of the parties: but he could not
be prevailed on to accept a glass of claret from the fairest hand, though a
kiss were sure to follow it. I have known him so very nice, as to refuse a
glass of sack filled with walnuts, which had been peeled by the snowy fingers
of a beautiful young lady; though I have seen him smack his lips after a glass
of raisin wine, in which his prudent mother had been dabbling with her snuffy
finger, in order to fish out the small particles of cork, which might possibly
have choked him. If a lady drops her fan, he sits without any emotion, and
suffers her to stoop for it herself; or if she strikes her tea-cup against the
saucer to give notice that it is empty, he pays no regard to the signal, but
sees her walk up to the tea-table, without stirring from his chair. He would
rather leave the most celebrated beauty, in crossing the street, to the mercy
of a drayman, than trust her with his little finger: though at the same time
should his mother be so distressed, he would not scruple to bear as much of her
weight as he could stand under, and to redeem her silk stockings from jeopardy
would even expose his own.

ONE would imagine, that this extreme coyness and reserve, in which he so
remarkably differs from the generality of his own sex, would in another respect
as effectually distinguish him from the generality of women: I mean, that being
less polite in his address than a footman, we should hardly expect to find him
more loquacious than a chambermaid. But this is really the case. Suffer him to
take the lead in conversation, and there are certain topics, in which the most
prating gossip at a christening would find it difficult to cope with him. The
strength of his constitution is his favorite theme: he is constantly
attempting to prove, that he is not susceptible of the least injury from cold;
though a hoarseness in his voice, and the continual interruptions of a
consumptive cough, give him the lie in his throat at the end of every sentence.
The instances, indeed, by which he endeavors to prove his hardiness, unluckily
rather tend to convince us of the delicacy of his frame, as they seldom amount
to more, than his having kicked off the bed-choaths in his sleep, laid aside
one of his flannel waistcoats in a hot day, or tried on a new pair of pumps
before they had been sufficiently aired. For the truth of these facts he always
appeals to his mamma, who vouches for him with a sigh, and protests that his
carelessness would ruin the constitution of a horse.

I AM now coming to the most extraordinary part of his character. This
pusillanimous creature thinks himself, and would be thought, a Buck. The noble
fraternity of that order find, that their reputation can be no otherwise
maintained, than by prevailing on an Irish chairman now and then to favor them
with a broken head, or by conferring the same token of their esteem on the
unarmed and defenseless waiters at a tavern. But these exploits are by no means
suited to the disposition of our hero: and yet he always looks upon his
harmless exploits as the bold frolicks of a Buck. If he escapes a nervous fever
a month, he is quite a Buck: if he walks home after it is dark, without his
mamma's maid to attend him, he is quite a Buck: if he sits up an hour later
than his usual time, or drinks a glass or two of wine without water, he calls
it a debauch; and because his head does not ache the next morning, he is quite
a Buck. In short, a woman of the least spirit within the precincts of St.
James's would demolish him in a week, should be pretend to keep pace with her
in her irregularities: and yet he is ever dignifying himself with the
appellation of a Buck.

NOW might it not be giving this gentleman a useful hint, Mr. TOWN, to assure
him, that while milk and water is his darling liquor, a Bamboo cane his Club,
and his mother the sole object of his affections, the world will never join in
denominating him a Buck: That if he fails in this attempt, he is absolutely
excluded from every order in society; for whatever his deserts may be, no
assembly of antiquated virgins can ever acknowledge him for a sister, nature
having as deplorably disqualified him for that rank in the community, as he has
disqualified himself for every other: And that, though he never can arrive at
the dignity of leading apes in hell, he may possibly be condemned to dangle in
that capacity, at the apron-string of an old maid in the next world, for having
so abominably resembled one in this.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant, etc.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXII. THURSDAY, March 18, 1756.
Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea summae
Curvatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo:
Per juga chrysolithi, positaeque ex ordine gemmae.
OVID.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
IT has for a long time been observable that the ladies heads have run much
upon wheels, but of late there has appeared a strange kind of inversion, for
the wheels now run upon the ladies heads. As this assertion may probably puzzle
many readers, who pay no attention to the rapid and whimsical revolutions of
modern taste, it will be necessary to inform them that instead of a cap, the
present mode is for every female of fashion to load her head with some kind of
carriage; whether they are made with broad wheels or not I cannot determine,
however, as they are undoubtedly excluded the Turnpike Act, it is by no means
material. Those heads which are not able to bear a coach and six (for vehicles
of this sort are very apt to crack the brain) so far act consistently with
prudence as to make use of a post chariot, or a single horse chaise with a beau
perching in the middle.

THE curiosity I had of knowing the purport of this invention, and the general
name of these machines led me to make enquiry about them of a fashionable
milliner at the court end of the town. She obliged me with the sight of one of
these equipages, designed for the head of a lady of quality, which I surveyed
with much admiration; and placing it on the palm of my hand, could not help
fancying myself like Gulliver taking up the Empress of Lilliput in her
state-coach. The vehicle itself was constructed of gold threads, and was drawn
by six dapple greys of blown glass, with a coachman, postilion, and gentleman
within, of the same brittle manufacture. Upon further enquiry, the milliner
told me with a smile, that it was difficult to give a reason for inventions so
full of whim, but that the name of this ornament (if it may be called such) was
a Capriole or Cabriole; which we may trace from the same original with our
English word Caprice, both being derived from the French word cabrer, which
signifies to prance like an horse.

IT is not to be doubted, but that this fashion took its rise among the ladies
from their fondness for equipage; and I dare say, that every fair one, who
carries a coach and six upon her head, would be glad to be carried with equal
splendour in a coach of her own. I would, therefore propose a scheme, which
might render this whimsical mode of some kind of service to both sexes; by
which the ladies may give a tacit hint of their inclinations without the least
breach of modesty, the men may prevent the danger and inconvenience attending
the present method of advertising for wives, and the whole course of a modern
courtship may be carried on by means of this new head-dress.

INSTEAD of a Capriole suppose this capital decoration was called a Scutcheon
of Pretense, which must not here be understood as a Term of Heraldry, but as an
invitation to matrimony. Thus if a lady presumes that she has a right either
from her wit, beauty, merit, or fortune, to pretend to a set of horses, let six
bright bays, blacks, or greys prance down one side of her head, and according
to the rank she insists upon, let a ducal, or an earl's coronet, or a bloody
hand be distinguished upon her Capriole. The females of less ambition may
likewise express their inclinations by a postchariot and pair; and even those
who, from a due consideration of the low condition of the funds, are so
condescending as to stoop to a plain cit, have nothing to do but to fix upon
their heads a single horse chaise, filled with a loving couple, sticking as
close together as two dried figs. As to those who have rashly vowed virginity,
if their great proneness to censure the rest of their sex, and the fretfulness
of their aspect, be not sufficient indications to keep the men at a distance,
they may erect upon their noddles a formal female seated in a Sulky, foolishly
pleased with having the whole vehicle to herself, and awkwardly exercising the
imaginary power of having the sole command of the reins.

AS a farther means of facilitating this new method of courtship, I must beg
leave to propose, that every lady's bosom should, instead of a pendent cross,
which savours of popery, be ornamented with a chain and locket, something like
those bottle-tickets which direct us to port, claret, or burgundy, upon which
might be curiously engraved the numbers two hundred, five hundred, or a
thousand, according to the settlement expected. But to those female Quixotes
who scorn the Capriole, and erect Windmills upon their heads instead of it, I
shall offer a word of advice worthy their attention; which is, that they would
provide a pipe of communication, to be conveyed from these machines to the
brain, and constituted upon the model of the ingenious Dr. Hale's ventilators,
that, whenever the sails of the Windmill are put into motion by the external
air, they may draw off all pernicious vapors which may occasion a vertigo in
the inside, as well as on the outside of their heads.

I am, Sir, your humble servant, H.


I AM much pleased with the proposal of my ingenious correspondent, and think
it particularly well adapted to the present disposition of the ladies. A
fondness for showy equipages is now become one of their darling passions; and
the splendour in which they are to be maintained seems to be one of the chief
considerations in modern matches. If a fine lady can be carried to court in a
chair richly ornamented, or roll to the opera in a gilt chariot, she little
considers with how disagreeable a companion she goes through the journey of
life: and a polite female would no more fix her affections on a man, who drives
but a beggarly pair, than she could be content to be tumbled down to his
country seat, like Punch's wife to Rumford, in a wheel-borrow.

BUT as the ladies have strongly manifested this passion for equipage, the
gentlemen, I suppose out of mere gallantry, and in order to further the
gratification of their desires, have taken great pains to convert themselves
into coachmen, grooms, and jockies. The flapped hat, the jemmy frock with plate
buttons and a leathern belt, and the pride which some young men of quality take
in driving, are all calculated the better to qualify them for being the ladies
humble servants. I am therefore for extending my correspondent's scheme: and as
the ladies now adorn their heads with the sign of a coach and six, like the
door of a Meuse alehouse, I would have the gentlemen also bear these
emblematical vehicles; by which the other sex may, by a single glance at a
lover's head, see in what state they will be supported; as we know a clergyman
by his rose, or an officer by his cockade.

THE pretty fellows, who study dress, might show a great deal of invention in
suiting their Caprioles to their circumstances. Any nobleman or gentleman, who
has the honor to be a Knowing one, might show his affection for the turf by
carrying the horse and jockey; another, who is an excellent driver, might bear
his own figure exalted in a Phaeton; and a third, who thinks of picking up a
partner for life, that can be pleased with a tete-a-tete or sober picpuet party
with her husband, may bear a vis-a-vis. In a word, all the different proposals
of various suitors might be made by means of these ornaments, which might be
worn over the foreheads of the beaux, like the white horse in the grenadiers
caps; and the ladies might be as much smitten with a promising Capriole on the
head of a lover, as heretofore with an elegant perriwig.

IF this mode should prevail, the concluding a treaty of marriage between two
persons of quality might be considered in the same light, and expressed in the
same terms as making a match at New Market; and instead of the hackneyed
phrases at present used by our news-writers, we might perhaps see the important
articles in the public papers, concerning marriages drawn up after the
following manner.

We hear that a match will be shortly made between the mourning coach and six
of a merchant's widow with a great jointure, and an hunter, in fine order,
belonging to a younger brother of a noble family.

A running horse, highly valued for his blood, is expected to start soon with a
young filly from Yorkshire. Many thousand pounds are depending on this match.

A few days ago a young fellow from Ireland, mounted on a single horse,
attacked an heiress in her coach and six. The lady made little or no
resistance, and suffered herself to be taken out of the coach, and carried off
behind him.

A gay coach and six, belonging to a young heir just of age, came to town last
week in great splendour, and was intended to be matched with an equipage of the
same kind: but having unfortunately run against Arthur's chocolate-house, it
broke down, and the owner was very much hurt.

We hear from Bath, that the post-chaise of a young lady of great beauty lately
made its appearance in the long room, and soon after went off with the landau
of a neighboring country squire.

We are also informed from the same place, that an oldfashioned two-wheel
chaise with a single horse, contrived to hold only one person, had drove about
the walks for some time; but having jostled against the Sulky of an old
bachelor in his grand climacteric, it was judged expedient to join them
together; when they formed a most agreeable vis-a-vis, for the mutual
accommodation of both parties.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXIII. THURSDAY, March 25, 1756.
O sanctas gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis
Numina! --
JUV.
VIRTU is almost the only instance, in which the appearance of literary
knowledge is affected in the present age; and our persons of rank acquire just
enough scholarship to qualify themselves for Connoisseurs. These sort of
students become sufficiently acquainted with the customs of the ancients, to
learn the least interesting particulars concerning them. They can distinguish a
Tiberius from a Trajan, know the Pantheon from the Amphitheatre, and can
explain the difference between the praetexta and the tunica: which (only
supposing the present times to have elapsed some hundred years) is just as deep
knowledge as if some future antiquarian should discover the difference between
a Carolus and an Anna, or St. Paul's church and Drury Lane playhouse, or a
full-trimmed suit and a French frock.

BUT the full display of modern polite learning is exhibited in the decorations
of parks, gardens, etc. and centered in that important monosyllable, Taste.
Taste comprehends the whole circle of the polite arts, and sheds its influence
on every lawn, avenue, grass-plat, and parterre. Taste has peopled the walks
and gardens of the great with more numerous inhabitants than the ancient
Satyrs, Fauns and Dryads. While infidelity has expunged the Christian Theology
from our creed, Taste has introduced the heathen Mythology into our gardens. If
a pond is dug, Neptune, at the command of Taste, emerges from the basin, and
presides in the middle; or if a vista is cut through a grove, it must be
terminated by a Flora or an Apollo. As the ancients held that every spot of
ground had its guardian Genius, and that woodland deities were pegged in the
knotty entrails of every tree, so in the gardens laid out by modern Taste every
walk is peopled with gods and goddesses, and every corner of it has its
tutelar-deity. Temples are erected to all the train of gods and goddesses
mentioned in Homer or Ovid, which edifices as well as their several statues are
adorned with Latin or Greek inscriptions; while the learned owner wonders at
his own surprising stock of literature, which he sees drawn out at large before
him, like the whole knowledge of an apothecary inscribed upon his gallipots.

THESE persons of Taste may be considered as a sort of learned idolaters, since
they may be almost said to adore these graven images, and are quite
enthusiastic in their veneration of them. The following letter may possibly
give them some offense; but as I have myself no extravagant fondness for a
Jupiter Tonans or a Belvidere Apollo, I heartily wish the scheme proposed by my
correspondent may take place, though it should reduce the price of heathen
godheads.

To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
AT a time when all wise heads are considering of ways and means to raise
taxes, that may prove the least oppressive to indigence, and most effectually
restrictive of luxury, permit me to propose (as a supplement to the thoughts of
one of your correspondents on this subject) a national tax upon Gods.

IT is a strange but an undeniable truth, Mr. TOWN, that if you and I were to
travel through England, and to visit the citizen in his country box, the
nobleman at his seat, the esquire at the hall-house, and even the divine at his
parsonage, we should find the gardens, avenues, and groves, belonging to each
mansion, stuffed and ornamented with Heathen Gods.

IN the present declining state of our established religion, I almost tremble
to consider what may be the consequences of these ready-made deities. Far be it
from me to suppose that the great and the rich will worship any God whatsoever,
but still I am induced to fear that the poor and the vulgar, when they find all
other worship ridiculed and laid aside, may foolishly take to these molten
images, and adore every leaden godhead they can find. If a tax on wheels has
put down some hundreds of coaches, by a parity of reason, a tax upon gods may
pull down an equal, if not a greater number of statues. I would also offer
another proposal; which is this: That an oak be immediately planted, wherever
a statue has been taken away, by which means those vast woods, which of late
years have been cut down in England, to supply the immediate necessities of the
illustrious Arthurites in St. James's-street, may be in some measure supplied
to future generations.

AMONG our present taxes some of them fall upon branches of splendour not
totally luxurious. Wheel carriages may be necessary: want of health or lameness
of limbs may require them: but what necessities can we pretend for statues in
our gardens, Penates in our libraries, and Lares on every chimney-piece? I have
remarked many wild whims of this kind, that have appeared submissions, if not
attachments, to idolatry. A gentleman of my acquaintance has destroyed his
chapel, merely because he could not put up statues in it, and has filled his
garden with every god, that can be found in Spence's Polymetis: Another of my
friends, after having placed a Belvidere Apollo very conspicuously and naked
upon the top of a mount, has erected an Obelisk to the Sun: and this expense he
has not put himself to for the beauty of the Obelisk, for it is not beautiful,
nor again for the splendour of the planet, which is of pewter double gilt, but
only because being in possession of copies or originals of every deity that
Greece or Italy could boast, he was resolved to have the God of Persia to
complete his collection. A poll-tax therefore upon gods and goddesses, be their
representation what it will, Suns, Dogs, Moons, or Monkies, is absolutely
necessary, and would infallibly bring in a large revenue to the state.

HAPPENING to be the other day at Slaughter's coffeehouse in St. Martin's Lane,
I saw two very fine statues of Fame and Fortune, brought out of Mr.
Roubilliac's gate, and exposed to view before they were nailed up, and carted.
The boy of the house told us, they were to be placed upon the top of Sir Thomas
-- 's chapel in Hampshire. "Is it for such as these, observed a sneering papist
who stood near me, that crucifixes have been removed, and that reverend saints
and martyrs have been destroyed, and pounded into dust? Is it for these, that
St. Peter has been broken to pieces, and St. Paul melted down into water pipes?
Must Our Lady make room for Proserpine? And the holy giant St. Christopher fall
a victim to the Farnesian Hercules? Will you not agree with me, Sir, continued
he, that as men are induced and almost constrained to judge of others by their
own manners and inclinations, we who are supposed to worship the images of
christians, must naturally conclude that the protestants of the Church of
England worship the images of heathens?" I confess I was at a loss how to
answer the acuteness of his questions; and must own that I cannot help thinking
St. Anthony preaching to the fishes, or St. Dunstan taking the Devil by the
nose, as proper ornaments for a chapel, as any Pagan deities whatever.

HITHERTO I have kept you entirely among the molten images without doors, but
were we to enter the several mansions whose avenues and demesnes are adorned in
the manner I describe, we should find every chamber a pagod, filled with all
the monstrous images that the idolatry of India can produce. I will not presume
to infer that the ladies address Kitoos (prayers which the Japanese make use of
in time of public distress) to their Ingens, but I am apt to surmise, that in
times of danger and invasion, some of your fair readers would be more alarmed
at the French approach to their china than to their chapels, and would sooner
give up a favorite lap-dog, than a grotesque chimney-piece figure of a Chinese
saint with numberless heads and arms. I have not yet digested my thoughts in
what manner the fair sex ought to be taxed. It is a tender point, and requires
consideration. At present, I am of opinion, they ought to be spared, and the
whole burden entirely laid upon those Bramins and Imams, whose idolatrous
temples lie publicly open to our streets.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant MOSES ORTHODOX.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXIV. THURSDAY, April 1, 1756.
Vesanum tetigisse timent fugiuntque poetam.
HOR.
I REMEMBER when I was very young, a relation carried me to visit a gentleman
who had wrote some pieces that had been very well received, and made me very
happy by promising to introduce me to an Author. As soon as I came, I surveyed
his whole person from top to toe with the strictest attention, sat open-mouthed
to catch every syllable that he uttered, and noticed his voice, manner, and
every word and gesture with the minutest observation. I could not help
whispering to myself the whole evening, "I am in company with an Author," and
waited with the most anxious impatience to hear him deliver something that
might distinguish him from the rest of mankind. The gentleman behaved with
great cheerfulness and politeness; but he did not at all answer the idea which
I had conceived of an Author, and I went away exceedingly disappointed, because
I could not find any striking difference between him and the rest of my
acquaintance.

THERE is no character in human life, which is the subject of more frequent
speculation among the vulgar, than an Author. Some look on him with contempt,
and others with admiration; but they all agree in believing him to be something
different from all other people: and it is remarkable with what greediness they
attend to any little anecdotes, which they can pick up concerning his life and
conversation. He is, indeed, a kind of an ideal being, of which people conceive
very different notions. By some he is supposed never to stir out of a garret,
to wear a rusty black coat, dirty shirt, and darned stockings, and to want all
the necessaries as well as conveniences of life; while others regard him as a
creature superior to the rest of mortals, and endowed with something more than
reason. One part therefore is surprised to see him walk abroad, and appear as
well dressed as other people; and another is disappointed, when they find him
talk and act, and fill the offices of life, no better than any other common man.

NOR is it less curious to consider the different ideas they conceive of the
manner in which the business of writing is executed. The novice in literature,
smit with the love of sacred song, but not yet dipped in ink, supposes it all
rapture and enthusiasm, and in imagination sees the Author running wildly about
his room, talking poetry to the chairs and tables; while the mechanic
considers him as working at his trade, and thinks he can set down to write
whenever he pleases, as easily as the smith can labor at his forge, or a
carpenter plane a board. Indeed he regards the Author with some veneration as a
scholar; but writing appears to him a mighty easy business, and he smiles
whenever he hears any body mention the labor of it; nor has he the least
conception of the mind's being fatigued with thinking, and the fancy harrassed
with persuing a long train of ideas.

AS people are led frequently to judge of a man from his ordinary conversation,
so it is common for them to form an idea of the author's disposition from the
peculiar turn and color of his writings: they expect a gloom to be spread over
the face of a mathematician; a controversial writer must be given to wrangling
and dispute; and they imagine that a satirist must be made up of spleen, envy,
and ill nature. But this criterion is by no means certain and determinate: I
know an author of a tragedy, who is the merriest man living; and one who has
wrote a very witty comedy, though he will sit an hour in company without
speaking a word. Lord Buckhurst is celebrated for being "the best good man with
the worst-natured muse;" and Mr. Addison was remarkably shy and reserved in
conversation. I remember I once fell into company with a painter, a poet, a
divine, and a physician, who were no less famous for their wit and humor, than
for their excellence in their several professions. After the usual common
topics were discussed, the physician and the poet fell into a dispute
concerning predestination, the divine smoked his pipe quietly without putting
in a word, while the painter and myself formed a privy council for the good of
the nation. Thus were it possible to conjure up the spirits of the most eminent
wits in former ages, and put them together, they would perhaps appear to be
very dull company. Virgil and Addison would probably sit staring at each other
without opening their mouths; Horace and Steel would perhaps join in
commendation of the liquor; and Swift would in all likelihood divert himself
with sucking his cheeks, drawing figures in the wine spilt upon the table, or
twirling the cork-screw round his finger.

THE strange prejudices which some persons conceive against Authors, deter many
a youth from drawing his pen in the service of literature: or if he ventures to
commit a favorite work to the press, he steals to the printer's with as much
caution and privacy, as he would perhaps, on another occasion, to a surgeon. He
is afraid that he shall injure his character by being known to have written any
thing, and that the genteel part of his acquaintance will despise him as a low
wretch, as soon as they discover him to be an Author: as if merely the
appearing in print was a disgrace to a gentleman, and the imprimatur to his
works was no more than a stamp of shame and ignominy. These are the terrors,
which at first disturb the peace of almost every Author, and have often put me
in mind of the exclamation of that writer, who cried out, "O, that mine enemy
had written a book!"

THESE fearful apprehensions are perhaps no unlucky drawback on the vanity
natural to all Authors, which undoubtedly they often conceal or suppress, out
of deference to the world: but if this false modesty is too much cherished, it
must of course damp all genius, and discourage every literary undertaking. Why
should it be disgraceful to exert the noblest faculties given us by nature? and
why should any man blush at acquitting himself well in a work, which there is
scarce one in five hundred has a capacity to perform? Even supposing an Author
to support himself by the profit arising from his works, there is nothing more
dishonest, scandalous or mean in it, than an officer in the army (the politest
of all professions) living on his commission. Sense and genius are as proper
commodities to traffic in as courage, and an Author is no more to be condemned
as an hackney scribbler, though he writes at the rate of so much per sheet,
than a Colonel should be despised as a mercenary and a bravo, for exposing
himself to be slashed, stuck, and shot at for so much per day. The truth is,
that Authors themselves often create the evils they complain of, and bring a
disgrace on the service of literature, by being ashamed to wear the badge of
it. Voltaire, in his letters on the English, relates a remarkable instance of
this kind of false pride in our own Congreve. Voltaire, when he was in England,
waited on Congreve, and told him that he was glad of an opportunity of paying
his respects to a writer so much celebrated for his wit and humor. Congreve
received him politely enough, but told him that he should be glad to see him as
a common gentleman, but would not be considered or conversed with as an Author.
The French writer was a good deal surprised at such a ridiculous piece of
delicacy, and could not help telling him, that he thought this nicety something
extraordinary, for that if he had been no more than a common gentleman, he
should never have had any desire of seeing him.

I HAVE often pleased myself with reflecting on the different opinions, which
my readers must have formed of me, since my first appearance as an Author. As
poverty is one of the general characteristics of our brotherhood, those who
indulge themselves in a contempt of writers, have, I doubt not, often painted
me to their own imagination in a very grotesque taste. Their ideal caricatures
have perhaps often represented me lodged at least three stories from the
ground, composing dissertations on the modern taste in architecture: at another
time I may have been delineated sitting in a tattered nightgown and the
breeches of a heathen philosopher, writing satires on the present modes in
dress: and sometimes perhaps they have figured me half starved for want of a
hearty meal, penning invectives against luxury and debauchery.

BUT while these have reduced me to this low condition, and "steeped me in
poverty to the very lips," I flatter myself that some few have bestowed on me
an extraordinary share of virtue and understanding. After so many grave lessons
against the vices and luxury of the present age, they will naturally suppose,
that I never risked a farthing at the gaming-table, never kept a mistress,
would decline an invitation to a turtle-feast, and rather than be provoked to
fight a duel, would take a kick on the breech, or tweak by the nose, with all
the calmness and resignation imaginable. As to my wit and humor, I should
blush to set down the many compliments I have had from several unknown
correspondents on that head: and I once received a note from a very honest
gentleman, who desired to spend an evening with me, promising himself great
diversion in cracking a bottle with the facetious Mr. TOWN.

THESE various opinions of me as an Author, I shall never labor to reconcile,
but shall be equally contented with instructing or amusing the gentle reader,
whether he considers my papers as favors showered down upon him from a
bookseller's garret in Grub Street, or issuing from my own apartment. However
this may be, I shall never think it a disgrace to have written, or be ashamed
to be considered as an Author; and if ever Mr. Voltaire should think proper to
visit England again, I shall be very glad of a literary chat with him, and will
give him a very gracious reception.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXV. THURSDAY, April 8, 1756.
Caelebs quid agam?
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
April 5, 1756. SIR!
NO man is a sincerer friend to innocent pleasantry, or more desirous of
promoting it, than myself. Raillery of every kind, provided it be confined
within due bounds, is in my opinion an excellent ingredient in conversation;
and I am never displeased if I can contribute to the harmless mirth of the
company, by being myself the subject of it; but in good truth, I have neither a
fortune, a constitution, nor a temper that will enable me to chuckle and skake
my sides, while I suffer more from the festivity of my friends, than the spleen
or malice of my enemies could possibly inflict upon me: nor do I see any reason
why I should so far move the mirthful indignation of the ladies, as to be
teized and worried to death in mere sport, for no earthly reason, but that I am
what the world calls, an Old Bachelor.

THE female part of my acquaintance entertain an odd opinion, that a Bachelor
is not in fact a rational creature, at least that he has not the sense of
feeling in common with the rest of mankind; that a Bachelor may be beat like a
stock fish, that you may thrust pins into his legs, and wring him by the nose;
in short that you cannot take too many liberties with a Bachelor. I am at a
loss to conceive on what foundation these romping philosophers have grounded
their hypothesis, though at the same time I am a melancholy proof of it is
existence, as well as of it is absurdity.

A FRIEND of mine whom I frequently visit, has a wife and three daughters, the
youngest of which has persecuted me these ten years. These ingenious young
ladies have not only found out the sole end and purpose of my being themselves,
but have likewise communicated their discovery to all the girls in the
neighborhood. So that if they happen at any time to be apprized of my coming
(which I take all possible care to prevent) they immediately dispatch half a
dozen cards to their faithful allies, to beg the favor of their company to
drink coffee, and help teaze Mr. Ironside. Upon these occasions, my entry into
the room is sometimes obstructed by a cord fastened across the bottom of the
doorcase, which as I am a little near-sighted, I seldom discover till it has
brought me upon my knees before them. While I am employed in brushing the dust
from my black rollers, or chasing my broken shins, my wig is suddenly conveyed
away, and either stuffed behind the looking-glass, or tossed from one to the
other so dexterously and with such velocity, that after many a fruitless attempt
to recover it, I am obliged to sit down bare-headed, to the great diversion of
the spectators. The last time I found myself in these distressful
circumstances, the eldest girl, a sprightly mischievous jade, stepped briskly
up to me, and promised to restore my wig, if I would play her a tune on a small
flute she held in her hand. I instantly applied it to my lips, and blowing
lustily into it, to my inconceiveable surprise, was immediately choked and
blinded with a cloud of soot that issued from every hole in the instrument. The
younger part of the company declared I had not executed the conditions, and
refused to surrender my wig; but the father who had a rough kind of
facetiousness about him, insisted on it is being delivered up, and protested
that he never knew the Black Joke better performed in his life.

I AM naturally a quiet inoffensive animal, and not easily ruffled, yet I shall
never submit to these indignities with patience, 'till I am satisfied I deserve
them. Even the old maids of my acquaintance, who one would think might have a
fellow-feeling for a brother in distress, conspire with their nieces to harrass
and torment me. And it is not many nights since Miss Diana Grizzle utterly
spoiled the only superfine suit I have in the world, by pinning the skirts of
it together with a red-hot poker. I own my resentment of this injury was so
strong, that I determined to punish it by kissing the offender, which in cool
blood I should never have attempted. The satisfaction however which I obtained
by this imprudent revenge, was much like what a man of honor feels on finding
himself run through the body by the scoundrel who had offended him. My upper
lip was transfixed with a large corkin pin, which in the scuffle she had
conveyed into her mouth, and I doubt not that I shall carry the memorem labris
natam from an old maid to the grave with me.

THESE misfortunes, or others of the same kind, I encounter daily; but at these
seasons of the year which give a sanction to this kind of practical wit, and
when every man thinks he has a right to entertain himself at his friend's
expense, I live in hourly apprehensions of more mortifying adventures. No
miserable dunghill-cock, devoted a victim to the wanton cruelty of the mob,
would be more terrified at the approach of a Shrove-Tuesday, were he endued
with human reason and forecast, than I am at the approach of a merry Christmas
or the First of April. No longer ago than last Thursday, which was the latter
of these festivals, I was pestered with mortifying presents from the ladies;
obliged to pay the carriage of half a dozen oyster-barrels stuffed with
brick-bats, and ten pacquets by the post containing nothing but old
newspapers. But what vexed me the most was the being sent fifty miles out of
town on that day by a counterfeit express from a dying relation.

I COULD not help reflecting with a sigh, on the resemblance between the
imaginary grievance of poor Tom in the tragedy of Lear, and those which I
really experienced. I, like him, was led through ford and whirlpool, over bog
and quagmire; and though knives were not laid under my pillow, minced
horse-hair was strewed upon my sheets; like him I was made to ride on a hard
trotting horse, through the most dangerous ways, and found at the end of my
journey, that I had only been coursing my own shadow.

AS much a sufferer as I am by the behavior of the women in general, I must
not forget to remark, that the pertness and sauciness of an old maid, is
particularly offensive to me. I cannot help thinking that the virginity of
these ancient misses, is at least as ridiculous as my own celibacy. If I am to
be condemned for having never made an offer, they are as much to blame for
having never accepted one. If I am to be derided for having never married, who
never attempted to make a conquest; they are more properly the objects of
derision, who are still unmarried after having made so many. Numberless are the
proposals they have rejected according to their own account; and they are
eternally boasting of the havoc they have formerly made among the knights,
baronets, and squires, at Bath, Tunbridge and Epsom; while a tattered madrigal
perhaps, a snip of hair, or the portrait of a cherry-cheeked gentleman in a
milk-white periwig, are the only remaining proofs of those beauties which are
now withered like the short-lived rose, and have only left the virgin thorn
remaining.

BELIEVE me, Mr. TOWN, I am almost afraid to trust you with the publication of
this epistle; the ladies whom I last mentioned will be so exasperated on
reading it, that I must expect no quarter at their hands for the future, since
they are generally as little inclined to forgiveness in their old age, as they
were to pity and compassion in their youth. One expedient however is left me,
and which, if put in execution, will effectually screen me from their
resentment.

I SHALL be happy therefore, if by your means I may be permitted to inform the
ladies, that as fusty an animal as they think me, it is not impossible but by a
little gentler treatment than I have hitherto met with, I may be humanized into
a husband. As an inducement to them to relieve me from my present uneasy
circumstances, you may assure them I am rendered so exceeding tractable by the
very severe discipline I have undergone, that they may mould and fashion me to
their minds with ease; and consequently that by marrying me, a woman will save
herself all that trouble which a wife of any spirit is obliged to take with an
unruly husband, who is absurd enough to expect from her a strict performance of
the marriage vow, even in the very minute article of obedience: that so far
from contradicting a lady, I shall be mighty well satisfied if she contents
herself with contradicting me: that if I happen at any time inadvertently to
thwart her inclinations, I shall think myself rightly served if she boxes my
ears, spits in my face, or treads upon my corns. That if I approach her lips
when she is not in a kissing humor, I shall expect she will bite me by the
nose; or if I take her by the hand at an improper season, that she will
instantly begin to pinch, scratch, and claw, and apply her fingers to those
purposes which they were certainly intended by nature to fulfill. Add to these
accomplishments, so requisite to make the married state happy, that I am not
much turned of fifty, can tie on my cravat, fasten a button, or mend a hole in
my stocking without any assistance.

I am, SIR, Your very humble Servant CHRISTOPHER IRONSIDE.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXVI. THURSDAY, April 15, 1756.
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque viam palantes quaerere vitae.
LUCRET.
THOSE parents, who are unable to give their sons an estate, regard the
educating them to one of the three great professions of Law, Physic, and
Divinity, as putting them in the high road to acquire one. Hence it happens,
that nineteen parts out of twenty of our young men are brought up with a view
to Lambeth, the Seals, or Warwick Lane. But alas! their hopes and expectations
of rising by their professions are often frustrated, and the surprising numbers
engaged in running the same race necessarily jostle one another. For though the
courts of justice are tolerably supplied with matters of litigation; though
there are many invalids and valetudinarians; and though great part of England
is laid out into church preferments; yet there is not in all the kingdom
sufficient matter for legal contention to employ a tenth part of those who have
been trained to engross deeds in their chambers, or to harangue at the bar: the
number of patients bears no proportion to the swarms of the Faculty, nor would
it, though a consultation were to sit on every sick man, like carrion-flies
upon a carcass: and the prodigious number of reverend Divines infinitely
exceeds that of those bishoprics, deaneries, prebends, rectories, vicarages,
etc. which, when they are ordained, they conceive it to be part of their holy
office to fill. From these frequent failures in each of the professions, the
younger sons of great men often wish they had been permitted to disgrace the
family by some mercantile, or more plebeian occupation; while the son of the
mechanic curses the pride of his father, who instead of securing him a
livelihood in his own business, has condemned him to starve in pudding-sleeves,
that he might do honor to his relations by being a gentleman.

THE Three Professions being thus crowded with more candidates for business and
preferment, than can possibly be employed or promoted, has occasioned several
irregularities in the conduct of the followers of each of them. The utter
impossibility of supporting themselves in the usual method of practicing Law,
Physic, or Divinity, without clients, patients, or parishioners, has induced
the laborers in each of those vocations to seek out new veins and branches.
The young Solicitor, who finds he has nothing to do, now he is out of his
clerkship, offers his assistance, in the transaction of all law affairs, by the
public papers, and like the advertising tailors promises to work cheaper than
any of his brethren: while the young Barrister, after having exhibited his
tye-wig in Westminster Hall, during several terms, to no purpose, is obliged to
forego the hope of rivalling Murray and Coke, and content himself with being
the oracle of the courts of Jamaica. The graduate in medicine, finding himself
unsolicited for prescription or advice, and likely to starve by practicing
Physic secundum artem, flies in the face of the college, and professes to cure
all diseases by nostrums unmentioned in the dispensatory. He commences a
thriving quack, and soon makes his way through the important medical degrees of
walking on foot, riding on horseback, dispensing his drugs from an
one-horse-chaise, and lastly lolling in a chariot. The Divine, without living,
cure, or lectureship, may perhaps incur transportation for illegal marriages,
set up a theatrical-oratorical- Billingsgate-chapel under the shelter of the
toleration-act and the butchers of Clare-Market, or kindle the inward light in
the bosoms of the Saints of Moor-Fields, and the Magdalens of Broad St. Giles's.

BUT notwithstanding these shoots ingrafted, as it were, into the main body of
the professions, it is still impossible for the vast multitude of Divines,
Lawyers, and Physicians to maintain themselves at any rate within the pale of
their respective employments. They have often been compelled, at least to call
in adventitious ones, and have sometimes totally abandoned their original
undertakings. They have frequently made mutual transitions into the occupations
of each other, or have perhaps embraced other employments; which, though
distinct from all three, and not usually dignified with the title of
Professions, may fairly be considered in that light: since they are the sole
means of support to many thousands, who toiled in vain for a subsistence in the
three Capital Ones. On these Professions, and their various followers, I shall
here make some observations.

THE first of these Professions is an Author. The mart of literature is indeed
one of the chief resorts of unbeneficed Divines, and Lawyers and Physicians
without practice. There are at present in the world of Authors, Doctors of
Physic who (to use the phrase of one of them) have no great fatigue from the
business of their profession: many Clergymen, whose sermons are the most
inconsiderable part of their compositions: and several Gentlemen of the Inns of
Court who, instead of driving the quill over skins of parchment, lead it
through all the mazes of modern novels, critiques, and pamphlets. Many also
have embraced this Profession, who were never bred to any other: and I might
also mention the many bankrupt tradesmen and broken artificers, who daily enter
into this new way of business, if by persuing it in the same mechanical manner
as their former occupations, they might not rather be regarded as following a
trade than a Profession.

THE second of these Professions is a Player. The ingenious gentlemen, who
assume the persons of the Drama, are composed of as great a variety of
characters as those they represent. The history of the stage might afford many
instances of those who in the trade of death might have slain men, who have
condescended to deal counterfeit slaughter from their right hands, and
administer harmless phials and bowls of poison. We might read also of persons
whose fists were intended to beat the "drum ecclesiastic," who have themselves
become theatrical volunteers. In regard to the Law, many who were originally
designed to manifest their talents for elocution in Westminster Hall, have
displayed them in Drury Lane; and it may be added on theatrical authority, that
Not even Attorneys have this rage withstood,
But changed their pens for truncheons, ink for blood,
And, strange reverse! -- died for their country's good.
I will not so far affront those gentlemen, who were at any time engaged in the
study of the three honorable professions of Law, Physic, and Divinity, as to
suppose that any of them, have ever taken up the more fashionable employment of
a Pimp. Yet it is certain, that this is a very common and lucrative Profession,
and that very many provide themselves with the necessaries of life, by
administering to the pleasures of others. A convenient cousin, sister, or wife,
has sometimes proved the chief means of making a fortune; and the tongue of
slander has often ventured to affirm, that the price of procuration has been
paid with a place or a bishopric.

THE most advantageous and genteel of all Professions is Gaming. Whoever will
make this science his study will find it the readiest way to riches, and most
certain passport to the best company: for the polite world will always admit
any one to their society, who will condescend to win their money. The followers
of this Profession are very numerous; which is indeed no wonder, when we
reflect on the numbers it supports in ease and affluence, at no greater pains
than packing the cards or cogging the dice, and no more risk than being
sometimes tweaked by the nose, or kicked out of company: besides which, this
Profession daily receives new luster from the many persons of quality that
follow it, and crowd into it with as much eagerness, as into the army. Among
Gamesters may also be found Lawyers, who get more by being masters of all the
Cases in Hoyle, than by their knowledge of those, recorded in the reportbooks;
Physicians, the chief object of whose attention is the circulation of the E. O.
table; and Divines, who, we may suppose, were hinted at by a famous wit in a
certain assembly, when among the other benefits resulting from a double tax
upon dice, he thought fit to enumerate, that it might possibly prevent the
Clergy from playing at back-gammon.

BUT the more danger the more honor: and therefore no Profession is more
honorable than that of a Highwayman. Who the followers of this Profession are,
and with what success they practice it, I will not pretend to relate; as the
memoirs of several of them have been already penned by the Ordinary of Newgate,
and as it is to be hoped that the lives of all the present practitioners will
be written hereafter by that faithful historian. I shall therefore only say,
that the present spirit of dissoluteness and freethinking must unavoidably
bring this honorable Profession more and more into vogue, and that every
Sessions may soon be expected to afford an instance of a Gentleman-Highwayman.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXVII. THURSDAY, April 22, 1756.
Ergo haud difficile est perituram arcessere summam
Lancibus oppositis, vel matris imagine fracta.
JUV.
I Have often amused myself with considering the mean and ridiculous shifts, to
which the extravagant are sometimes reduced. When the certain supplies of a
regular income are exhausted, they are obliged to cast about for ready cash,
and set the invention to work in order to devise the means of repairing their
finances. Such attempts to enlarge their revenue have frequently driven those,
whose great souls would not be curbed by the straitness of their circumstances,
into very uncommon undertakings: they have sent lords to Arthur's, and ladies
to assemblies, or sometimes worse places. We may safely conclude, that whoever
breaks through all economy, will soon discard honesty; though perhaps it might
be deemed Scandalum Magnatum to aver, that prodigal men of quality have often
sold their country to redeem their estates, and that extravagant ladies have
been known to make up the deficiencies of their pin-money by pilfering and
larceny.

But one of the first and chief resources of extravagance, both in high and low
life, is the Pawnbroker's. I never pass by one of these shops without
considering them as the repositories of half the jewels, plate, etc. in town.
It is true, indeed, that the honest and industrious are sometimes forced to
supply their necessities by this method: but if we were to enquire, to whom the
several articles in these miscellaneous warehouses belong, we should find the
greatest part of them to be the property of the idle and infamous among the
vulgar, or the prodigal and luxurious among the great: and if, in imitation of
the ancients, who placed the Temple of Honor behind the Temple of Virtue,
propriety should be attempted in the situation of Pawnbrokers' shops, they
would be placed contiguous to a gin-shop, as in the ingenious print of Hogarth,
or behind a tavern, gaming-house, or bagnio.

Going home late last Saturday night, I was witness to a curious dialogue at
the door of one of these houses. An honest journeyman carpenter, whose wife, it
seems, had pawned his best clothes, having just received his week's pay, was
come to redeem them, that he might appear as fine as he usually did on Sunday:
but it being past twelve o'clock, the man of the house, who kept up the
conversation by means of a little grate in the door, refused to deliver them;
though the poor carpenter begged hard for his holiday clothes, as the morrow
was Easter Sunday. This accident led me to reflect on the various persons in
town, who carry on this kind of commerce with the Pawnbrokers, and gave
occasion to the following Dream.

I was scarce asleep, before I found myself at the entrance of a blind alley,
which was terminated by a little hatch; where I saw a vast concourse of people,
of different ages, sex, and condition, going in and coming out. Some of these,
I observed, as they went up, very richly dressed; and others were adorned with
jewels and costly trinkets: but I could not help remarking, that at their
return they were all divested of their finery; and several had even their gowns
and coats stripped off their backs. A lady, who strutted up in a rich brocaded
suit, sneaked back again in an ordinary stuff nightgown; a second retreated
with the loss of a diamond solitaire and pearl necklace; and a third, who had
bundled up her whole stock of linen, scarce escaped with what she had upon her
back. I observed several gentlemen, who brought their sideboards of plate, to
be melted down, as it were, into current specie: many had their pockets
disburthened of their watches; and some, even among the military gentlemen,
were obliged to deliver up their swords. Others of the company marched up,
heavy laden with pictures, household goods, and domestic utensils: one carried
a spit; another brandished a gridiron; a third flourished a drying pan; while a
fourth brought to my remembrance the old sign of the Dog's Head in the
Porridge-pot. I saw several trot up merrily with their chairs, tables, and
other furniture: but I could not help pitying one poor creature among the rest,
who, after having stripped his whole house, even to his feather-bed, stalked
along like a Lock-Patient, wrapped up in the blankets, while his wife accompanied
him, doing penance in the sheets.

As I was naturally curious to see the inside of the receptacle, where all
these various spoils were deposited, I stepped up to the hatch; and meeting a
grave old gentleman at the threshold, I desired him to inform me what place it
was, and what business was transacted there. He very courteously took me by the
hand, and, leading me through a dark passage, brought me into a spacious hall,
which he told me was the Temple of Usury, and that he himself was the chief
priest of it. One part of this building was hung round with all kinds of
apparel, like the sale-shops in Monmouth Street; another was strewn with a
variety of goods, and resembled the brokers' shops in Harp Alley; and another
part was furnished with such an immense quantity of jewels and rich plate, that
I should rather have fancied myself in the Church of the Lady of Loretto. All
these, my guide informed me, were the offerings of that crowd, which I had seen
resorting to this Temple. The Churches in Roman-Catholic countries have
commonly a cross fixed upon them; the Chinese erect dragons and hang bells
about their Pagods; and the Turkish Mosques have their peculiar hieroglyphics:
but I could not help taking particular notice, that this Temple of Usury had
its vestibule adorned with three wooden balls painted blue; the mystery of
which, I was told, was as dark and unfathomable as the Pythagorean number, or
the secret doctrines of Trismegist.

When I had in some measure satisfied my curiosity in taking a general survey
of the Temple, my instructor led me to an interior corner of it, where the most
splendid offerings were spread upon a large altar. This bauble, said he,
showing me an elegant sprig of diamonds, is an aigret, sent in last week by a
lady of quality, who has ever since kept home with her head muffled up in a
double clout for a pretended fit of the toothache. She has at different times
made an offering of all her jewels: and besides these, her whole wardrobe was
very lately lodged here, which threw her into an hysteric fever, and confined
her to her bed-gown for upwards of a month. Those earrings and other jewels
are the paraphernalia of a young bride; who was so constant a votary to this
place, that, when nothing else remained for an offering, she even brought in
her wedding-ring. You may be surprised, perhaps, to behold such a variety of
necklaces, girdle-buckles, solitaires, and other female ornaments, as are here
collected: but it is observable, that their devotions in the Temple of Usury
have been chiefly encouraged and kept alive by their assisting at the midnight
orgies of Avarice.

Nor are the gentlemen, continued he, less encouragers of our rites. That gold
watch laid snug, for a considerable time, in the fob of a young man of quality;
but it was one night jerked out by a single throw of the dice at a
gaming-table, and made its way into the pocket of a stranger, who placed it
here, to keep company with several others, which have been brought hither on a
similar occasion. Those brilliant buckles once glittered on the shoes of a very
pretty fellow, who set out last winter on his travels into foreign parts, but
never got further than Boulogne: and that sword with the rich fillagree hilt,
and elegantly-fancied sword-knot with gold tassels, once dangled at the side of
a spirited Buck, who left it here two years ago, when he went off in a great
hurry to take possession of a large estate in his native country, Ireland,
whence he is not yet returned. You may see many others of these instruments of
death, which rust peacefully in their scabbards, as being of no use whatever to
their owners: that, which commonly hangs upon the vacant peg there, belongs,
you must know, to a noble captain: it is called upon duty once a month, and is
at this instant mounting guard at St. James's.

Not far from these rich ornaments hung several embroidered coats, laced
waistcoats, Point d'Espagne hats, etc. This suit, said my venerable instructor,
pointing to one richly embroidered, was made up for a noble lord on the last
Birthday, and was conveyed hither the very next morning after it had appeared
at court. That jemmy waistcoat with the gold-worked button-holes, on the next
peg, was the property of a smart templar, who, having spent a night out of his
chambers, sent his waistcoat hither in the morning, as a penitential offering,
by his landlady. As to that heap of camblet gowns, checked aprons, and colored
handkerchiefs, which you see strung together a little further off, they are
oblations made here by a sect of maudlin votaries, who resort to this Temple to
pay their devotions to a Goddess, whom they have christened Madam Gin, but whom
they sometimes honor with the more proper appellation of Strip me Naked.

While my conductor was thus relating the history of the various offerings, and
the persons who had made them, he was suddenly called aside to a dark closet,
several of which were erected near the entrance, and appeared not unlike the
confessionals of the Romish priests. These little boxes, I found, were
appointed to receive the votaries, who came to pay their devotions, and make
their offerings: but the necessary rites and ceremonies were commonly
solemnized with as much caution and privacy, as the mysteries of the Bona Dea
among the Romans. At present, however, there was a greater noise and hubbub
than usual. A person of the first rank in the kingdom, who had made some very
considerable oblations of gold and silver plate, was now about to celebrate a
feast in honor of Bacchus, in which these rich utensils would be requisite, on
which occasion he prayed to have the use of them. The chief priest, after
having received the customary fee, granted a dispensation for this purpose, and
loaded the messengers with a number of wrought ewers, vases, and chargers, at
the same time commissioning two or three of the inferior officials of the
Temple to attend the celebration of the feast, and to take care that the plate
was duly returned, and safely lodged again in the Temple.

These matters were scarce adjusted, before an unexpected incident filled the
whole Temple with confusion and disturbance. A rude tribe of officers broke in
upon us, put a stop to the rites, and seized the chief priest himself, charging
him with having profaned the place by a crime almost as infamous as sacrilege.
He was accused of having encouraged robbers to strip the citizens of their most
valuable effects, and for a small reward to deposit them as offerings. The
clamor on this occasion was very great, and at last one of the officers,
methought, seized me, as a party concerned; when endeavoring to clear myself,
and struggling to get out of his clutches, I awoke.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXVIII. THURSDAY, April 29, 1756.
Communi sensu plane caret. --
HOR.
THERE is no race of people, that has been more conspicuous in almost every
relation of life, than the illustrious family of NONSENSE. In every age of the
world they have shone forth with uncommon luster, and have made a wonderful
progress in all the Arts and Sciences. They have at different seasons delivered
speeches from the throne, harangued at the bar, debated in parliament, and gone
amazing lengths in philosophical enquiries and metaphysical disquisitions. In a
word, the whole history of the world, moral and political, is but a Cyclopaedia
of NONSENSE. For which reason, considering the dignity and importance of the
family, and the infinite service it has been of to me and many of my
cotemporaries, I have resolved to oblige the public with a kind of abstract of
the History of NONSENSE.

NONSENSE was the daughter of IGNORANCE, begot on FALSEHOOD many ages ago in a
dark cavern in BOEOTIA. As she grew up, she inherited all the qualities of her
parents: she discovered too warm a genius to require being sent to school; but
while other dull brats were poring over an horn-book, she amused herself with
spreading fantastical lies, taught her by her mamma, and which have in later
ages been familiarly known to us under the names of Sham, Banter, and Humbug.
When she grew up, she received the addresses, and soon became the wife, of
IMPUDENCE. Who he was, or of what profession, is uncertain: Some say he was the
son of IGNORANCE by another venture, and was suffered to become the husband of
NONSENSE in those dark ages of the world, as the Ptolemies of Egypt married
their own sisters. Some record, that he was in the army; others, that he was an
interpreter of the laws; and others, a divine. However this was, NONSENSE and
IMPUDENCE were soon inseparably united to each other, and became the founders
of a more noble and numerous family, than any yet preserved on any tree of
descent whatsoever; of which ingenious device they were said to have been the
first inventors.

It is my chief intent at present to record the great exploits of that branch
of the family, who have made themselves remarkable in England; though they
began to signalize themselves very early, and are still very flourishing in
most parts of the world. Many of them were Egyptian Priests four thousand
years ago, and told the people, that it was religion to worship dogs, monkeys,
and green leeks: and their descendants prevailed on the Greeks and Romans to
build temples in honor of supposed deities, who were, in their own estimation
of them, whores and whore-mongers, pickpockets and drunkards. Others rose up
some ages after in Turkey, and persuaded the people to embrace the doctrine of
bloodshed and the sword, in the name of the most merciful God: and others have
manifested their lineal descent from NONSENSE and IMPUDENCE, by affirming that
there is no God at all. There were also among them many shrewd philosophers;
some of whom, though they were racked with a fit of the stone, or laid up with
a gouty toe, declared that they felt not the least degree of pain; and others
would not trust their own eyes, but when they saw an horse or a dog, could not
tell whether it was not a chair or a table, and even made a doubt of their own
existence.

We have no certain account of the progress of NONSENSE here in England, till
after the Reformation. All we hear of her and her progeny before that period of
time is, that they led a lazy life among the monks in cloisters and convents,
dreaming over old legends of saints, drawing up breviaries and mass-books, and
stringing together some barbarous Latin verses in rhyme. In the days of Queen
Elizabeth, so little encouragement was given to her family, that it seemed to
have been almost extinct: but in the succeeding reign it flourished again, and
filled the most considerable offices in the nation. NONSENSE became a great
favorite at court, where she was highly caressed on account of her wit, which
consisted in puns and quibbles; and the bonny monarch himself was thought to
take a more than ordinary delight in her conversation. At this time, many of
her progeny took orders, and got themselves preferred to the best livings, by
turning the Evangelists into punsters, and making St. Paul quibble from the
pulpit. Among the rest, there was a bishop, a favorite son of NONSENSE, of
whom it is particularly recorded, that he used to tickle his courtly audience,
by telling them that matrimony was become a matter of money, with many other
right reverend jests recorded in Joe Miller. Several brothers of this family
were likewise bred to the bar, and very gravely harangued against old women
sucked by devils in the shape of ram-cats, etc. As an instance of their
profound wisdom and sagacity, I need only mention that just and truly pious act
of parliament made against the crying sin of witchcraft. 1 Jac. I. chap. 12.
Such as shall use invocation or conjuration of any evil spirit, or shall
consult, covenant with, entertain, employ, feed or reward any evil spirit to
any intent, or take up any dead person, or part thereof, to be used in
witchcraft, or have used any of the said arts, whereby any person shall be
killed, consumed, or lamed in his or her body, they, together with their
accessories before the fact, shall suffer as felons, without benefit of clergy.

In the troublesome times of King Charles the first, NONSENSE and her family
sided with the Parliament. These set up new sects in religion: some of them
cropped their hair short, and called themselves the enlightened; some fell into
trances, and pretended to see holy visions; while others got into tubs, and
held forth, with many whinings, and groans, and snuffling through the nose. In
the merry days of King Charles the second, NONSENSE assumed a more gay and
libertine air; and her progeny, from fanatics, became downright infidels.
Several courtiers of the family wrote lewd plays, as well as luscious
love-songs, and other loose verses, which were collected together, and greedily
bought up in miscellanies. In the succeeding reign, some of the kindred, who
had received their education at St. Omers, thought themselves on the point of
establishing NONSENSE in church and state, and were preparing to make bonfires
on the occasion in Smithfield, when they were obliged to leave the kingdom.

Since the Revolution, the field of Politics has afforded large scope for
NONSENSE and her family to make themselves remarkable. Hence arose the various
sects in party, distinguished by the names of Whig and Tory, Ministerial and
Jacobite, Sunderlandians, Oxfordians, Godolphinians, Bolingbrokians,
Walpolians, Pelhamians, etc. etc. etc. names, which have kindled as hot a war
in pamphlets and journals, as the Guelphs and Gibilines in Italy, or the Big
and Little-Endians in the kingdom of Lilliput.

I have here endeavored to give a short abridgement of the History of
NONSENSE; though a very small part of the exploits of the family can be
included in so compendious a chronicle. Some of them were very deep scholars,
and filled the Professors' Chairs at the Universities. They composed many
elaborate dissertations to convince the world, that two and two make four; and
discovered by dint of syllogism, that white is not black. Their enquiries in
Natural Philosophy were no less extraordinary: many spent their lives and their
fortunes in attempting to discover a wonderful Stone, that should turn every
baser metal into gold; and others employed themselves in making artificial
wings, by the help of which they should fly up into the world of the moon.
Another branch of the family took to the Belles Lettres, and were the original
founders of the learned Society of Grub-Street.

Never was any era in the annals of NONSENSE more illustrious than the
present; nor did that noble family ever more signally distinguish itself in
every occupation. In Oratory, who are greater proficients than the progeny of
NONSENSE? Witness many long and eloquent speeches delivered in St. Stephen's
Chapel, in Westminster Hall, at Assizes and Quarter Sessions, at Clare-Market,
and the Robin-Hood. -- In Philosophy, what mavelous things have not been
proved by NONSENSE? The sometime Professor of Astronomy at Gresham College
showed Sir Isaac Newton to be a mere ass, and wiredrawed the books of Moses
into a complete system of Natural Philosophy: Life-guard-men have with the
utmost certainty of NONSENSE foretold Earthquakes; and others have penned
curious essays on Air-quakes, Waterquakes, and Comets. -- In Politics, how
successfully have the sons of NONSENSE bandied about the terms of Court and
Country? How wisely have they debated upon Taxes; and with what amazing
penetration did they but lately foresee an Invasion? -- In Religion, their
domain is particularly extensive: for, though NONSENSE is excluded at least
from the first part of the service in all regular churches, yet she often
occupies the whole ceremony at the Tabernacle and Foundery in Moorfields, and
the Chapel in Long-Acre. But for the credit of so polite an age, be it known,
that the children of NONSENSE, who are many of them people of fashion, are as
often seen at the Playhouse as at Church: and it is something strange, that
the family of NONSENSE is now divided against itself, and in high contest about
the management of their favorite amusement -- the OPERA.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXIX. THURSDAY, May 6, 1756.
Plenus Rimarum sum, huc et illuc perfluo.
TER.
THERE is no mark of our confidence taken more kindly by a friend, than the
intrusting him with a secret; nor any which he is so likely to abuse.
Confidantes in general are like crazy firelocks, which are no sooner charged
and cocked, than the spring gives way, and the report immediately follows.
Happy to have been thought worthy the confidence of one friend, they are
impatient to manifest their importance to another; 'till between them and their
friend, and their friend's friend, the whole matter is presently known to all
our friends round the Wrekin. The secret catches as it were by contact, and
like electrical matter breaks forth from every link in the chain, almost at the
same instant. Thus the whole Exchange may be thrown into a buz to morrow, by
what was whispered in the middle of Marlborough Downs this morning; and in a
week's time the streets may ring with the intrigue of a woman of fashion,
bellowed out from the foul mouths of the hawkers, though at present it is known
to no creature living but her gallant and her waiting-maid.

AS the talent of secrecy is of so great importance to society, and the
necessary commerce between individuals cannot be securely carried on without
it, that this deplorable weakness should be so general is much to be lamented.
You may as well pour water into a funnel, or a sieve, and expect it to be
retained there, as commit any of your concerns to so slippery a companion. It
is remarkable, that in those men who have thus lost the faculty of retention,
the desire of being communicative is always most prevalent where it is least to
be justified. If they are entrusted with a matter of no great moment, affairs
of more consequence will perhaps in a few hours shuffle it entirely out of
their thoughts: but if any thing be delivered to them with an air of
earnestness, a low voice, and the gesture of a man in terror for the
consequence of it is being known; if the door is bolted, and every precaution
taken to prevent a surprise; however they may promise secrecy, and however they
may intend it, the weight upon their minds will be so extremely oppressive,
that it will certainly put their tongues in motion.

THIS breach of trust so universal amongst us, is perhaps in great measure
owing to our education. The first lesson our little masters and misses are
taught, is to become blabs and tell-tales; they are bribed to divulge the petty
intrigues of the family below stairs to pappa and mamma in the parlour, and a
doll or a hobbyhorse is generally the encouragement of a propensity which
could scarcely be attoned for by a whipping. As soon as children can lisp out
the little intelligence they have picked up in the hall or the kitchen, they
are admired for their wit: if the butler has been caught kissing the
housekeeper in his pantry, or the footman detected in romping with the
chambermaid, away flies little Tommy or Betsy with the news; the parents are
lost in admiration of the pretty rogue's understanding, and reward such
uncommon ingenuity with a kiss and a sugar-plumb.

NOR does an inclination to secrecy meet with less encouragement at school. The
governantes at the boarding-school teach miss to be a good girl, and tell them
every thing she knows: thus, if any young lady is unfortunately discovered
eating a green apple in a corner, if she is heard to pronounce a naughty word,
or is caught picking the letters out of another miss's sampler, away runs the
chit who is so happy as to get the start of the rest, screams out her
information as she goes, and the prudent matron chucks her under the chin, and
tells her that she is a good girl, and every body will love her.

THE management of our young gentlemen is equally absurd: In most of our
schools if a lad is discovered in a scrape, the impeachment of an accomplice,
as at the Old Bailey, is made the condition of a pardon. I remember a boy,
engaged in robbing an orchard, who was unfortunately taken prisoner in an
apple tree, and conducted under a strong guard of the farmer and his
dairy-maid, to the master's house. Upon his absolute refusal to discover his
associates, the pedagogue undertook to lash him out of his fidelity, but
finding it impossible to scourge the secret out of him, he at last gave him up
for an obstinate villain, and sent him to his father, who told him he was
ruined, and was going to disinherit him for not betraying his school-fellows. I
must own I am not fond of thus drubbing our youth into treachery, and am much
more pleased with the request of Ulysses when he went to Troy, who begged of
those who were to have the charge of Telemachus, that they would above all
things teach him to be just, sincere, faithful, and to keep a secret.

EVERY man's experience must have furnished him with instances of confidantes
who are not to be relied on, and friends who are not to be trusted; but few
perhaps have thought it a character so well worth their attention, as to have
marked out the different degrees into which it may be divided, and the
different methods by which secrets are communicated.

NED TRUSTY is a tell-tale of a very singular kind. Having some sense of his
duty, he hesitates a little at the breach of it. If he engages never to utter a
syllable, he most punctually performs his promise; but then he has the knack of
insinuating by a nod and a shrug well-timed, or a seasonable leer, as much as
others can convey in express terms. It is difficult, in short, to determine,
whether he is more to be admired for his resolution in not mentioning, or his
ingenuity in disclosing a secret. He is also excellent at a "doubtful phrase"
as Hamlet calls it, or an "ambiguous giving out," and his conversation consists
chiefly of such broken innuendos As, well, I know -- or, I could -- an if I
would --
Or, if I list to speak -- or, there be, an if there might etc.
Here he generally stops; and leaves it to his hearers to draw proper
inferences from these piecemeal premises. With due encouragement however, he
may be prevailed on to slip the padlock from his lips, and immediately
overwhelms you with a torrent of secret history, which rushes forth with more
violence for having been so long confined.

POOR MEANWELL, though he never fails to transgress, is rather to be pitied
than condemned. To trust him with a secret, is to spoil his appetite, to break
his rest, and to deprive him for a time of every earthly enjoyment. Like a man
who travels with his whole fortune in his pocket, he is terrified if you
approach him, and immediately suspects that you come with a felonious intent to
rob him of his charge. If he ventures abroad, it is to walk in some
unfrequented place, where he is least in danger of an attack. At home, he shuts
himself up from his family, paces it to and fro' in his chamber, and has no
relief but from muttering over to himself, what he longs to publish to the
world; and would gladly submit to the office of town crier, for the liberty of
proclaiming it in the market place. At length however, weary of his burden,
and resolved to bear it no longer, he consigns it to the custody of the first
friend he meets, and returns to his wife with a cheerful aspect, and
wonderfully altered for the better.

CARELESS is perhaps equally undesigning, though not equally excusable. Entrust
him with an affair of the utmost importance, on the concealment of which your
fortune and happiness depend: he hears you with a kind of half-attention;
whistles a favorite air, and accompanies it with the drumming of his fingers
upon the table. As soon as your narration is ended, or perhaps in the middle of
it, he asks your opinion of his sword-knot, damns his tailor for having dressed
him in a snuff-colour'd coat instead of a pompadour, and leaves you in haste to
attend an auction; where, as if he meant to dispose of his intelligence to the
best bidder, he divulges it with a voice as loud as the auctioneer's; and when
you tax him with having played you false, he is heartily sorry for it, but
never knew that it was to be a secret.

TO these I might add the character of the open and unreserved, who thinks it a
breach of friendship to conceal any thing from his intimates; and the
impertinent, who having by dint of observation made himself master of your
secret, imagines he may lawfully publish the knowledge it has cost him so much
labor to obtain, and considers that privilege, as the reward due to his
industry. But I shall leave these with many other characters, which my reader's
own experience may suggest to him, and conclude with prescribing, as a short
remedy for this evil, -- That no man may betray the counsel of his friend, let
every man keep his own.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXX. THURSDAY, May 13, 1756.
Judicium subtle videndis artibus
HOR.
TASTE is at present the darling idol of the polite world, and the world of
letters; and, indeed, seems to be considered as the quintessence of almost all
the arts and sciences. The fine ladies and gentlemen dress with Taste; the
architects, whether Gothic or Chinese, build with Taste; the painters paint
with Taste; the poets write with Taste; critics read with Taste; and in short,
fiddlers, players, singers, dancers, and mechanics themselves, are all the sons
and daughters of Taste. Yet in this amazing superabundancy of Taste few can say
what it really is, or what the word itself signifies. Should I attempt to
define it in the style of a Connoisseur, I must run over the names of all the
famous poets, painters, and sculptors, ancient and modern; and after having
pompously harangued on the excellencies of Apelles, Phidias, Praxiteles,
Angela, Rubens, Poussin, and Dominichino, with a word or two on all tasteful
compositions, such as those of Homer, Virgil, Tasso, Dante, and Ariosto, I
should leave the reader in wonder of my profound erudition, and as little
informed as before. But as deep learning, though more flaming and pompous, is
perhaps not always so useful as common sense, I shall endeavor to get at the
true meaning of the word Taste, by considering what it usually imports in
familiar writings and ordinary conversation.

IT is supposed by Lock and other close reasoners, that words are intended as
signs of our ideas: but daily experience will convince us, that words are often
used to express no ideas at all. Thus many persons, who talk perpetually of
Taste, throw it out as a mere expletive, without any meaning annexed to it.
Bardolph, when demanded the meaning of the word accommodated, wisely explains
it by saying that " accommodated, sir, is -- a -- a -- a -- accommodated, sir,
is as if one should say -- a -- accommodated:" and if in like manner, you ask
one of these people What is Taste? they will tell you that "Taste is a kind of
a sort of a -- a -- a --, in short "Taste is Taste." These talkers must be
considered as absolute blanks in conversation, since it is impossible to learn
the explanation of a term from them, as they affix no determinate meaning to
any expression.

AMONG men of sense, whose words carry meaning in their sound, Taste is
commonly used in one of these two significations. First, when they give any
person the appellation of a Man of Taste, they would intimate that he has a
turn for the polite arts, as well as the lesser elegancies of life; and that
from his natural bent to those studies, and his acquired knowledge in them, he
is capable of distinguishing what is good or bad in any thing of that kind
submitted to his judgment. The meaning at other times implied by a Man of Taste
is, that he is not only so far an adept in those matters as to be able to judge
of them accurately, but is also possessed of the faculty of executing them
gracefully. These two significations will perhaps be more easily conceived, and
clearly illustrated, when applied to our Sensual Taste. The Man of Taste,
according to the first, may be considered as a Bon Vivant, who is fond of the
dishes before him, and distinguishes nicely what is savoury and delicious, or
flat and insipid in the ingredients of each: according to the second, he may be
regarded as the Cook, who from knowing what things will mix well together, and
distinguishing by a nice taste when he has arrived at that happy mixture, is
able to compose such exquisite dishes.

BOTH these significations of the word will be found agreeable to the following
definition of it, which I have somewhere seen, and is the only just description
of the term, that I ever remember to have met with. "Taste consists in a nice
harmony between the Fancy and the Judgment." The most chastised judgment,
without genius, can never constitute a Man of Taste; and the most luxuriant
Imagination, unregulated by Judgment, will only carry us into wild and
extravagant deviations from it. To mix oil, vinegar, butter, milk, eggs, etc.
incoherently together, would make an Olio not to be relished by any palate; and
the man who has no gout for delicacies himself will never compose a good dish,
though he should ever so strictly adhere to the rules of La Chapelle, Hannah
Glass, and Martha Bradley. I confine myself at present chiefly to that
signification of the word, which implies the capacity of exerting our own
faculties in the several branches of Taste, because That always includes the
other.

HAVING thus settled what Taste is, it may not be unentertaining to examine
modern Taste by these rules: and perhaps it will appear, that on the one hand
its most pleasing flights and ravishing elegancies are extravagant and absurd,
and that on the other hand those who affect a correct Taste in all their
undertakings, proceed mechanically without genius. The first species of Taste,
which gives a loose to the imagination, indulges itself in caprice, and is
perpetually striking new strokes, is the chief regulator of the fashion. In
dress, it has put hunting-poles into the hands of our gentlemen, and erected
coaches and windmills on the heads of our ladies. In equipage, it has built
chariots of papier mache, and by putting spotted Danish horses into the
harness, has made our beaux look like Bacchus in his car drawn by leopards. The
ornaments, both on the outside and inside of our houses, are all Gothic or
Chinese; and whoever makes a pagod of his parlour, throws a plank or two with
an irregular cross-barred paling over a dirty ditch, or places battlements on a
root-house or a stable, fits up his house and garden entirely in Taste.

THE second sort of Men of Taste are to be found chiefly among the Literati,
and are those, who despising the modern whims to which fashion has given the
name of Taste, pretend to follow with the most scrupulous exactness the chaste
models of the ancients. These are the poets who favor us with correct,
epithetical, and tasteful compositions; whose works are without blemish, and
conformable to the precise rules of Quintilian, Horace, and Aristotle: and as
they are intended merely for the perusal of persons of the most refined Taste,
it is no wonder that they are above the level of common understandings. These
too are the Critics, who in their comments upon authors, embarrass us with
repeated allusions to the study of Virtu: And these too are the Connoisseurs in
Architecture, who build ruins after Vitruvius, and necessaries according to
Palladio. One gentleman of this cast has built his villa upon a bleak hill,
with four spacious porticos, open on each side to court the four winds;
because, in the sultry regions of Italy, this model has been thought most
convenient; and another has, in great measure, shut out the light from his
apartments, and cut off all prospect from his windows, by erecting an high wall
before his house, which in Italy has been judged necessary to screen them from
the sun.

ARCHITECTURE seems indeed to be the main article, in which the efforts of
Taste are now displayed. Among those who are fond of exerting their fancies in
capricious innovations, I might instance the many pretty whims, of which an
infinite variety may be seen within ten miles of London. But us a proof of the
noble and judicious Taste among us, I shall beg leave to describe, in the style
of a Connoisseur, a most amazing curiosity, erected in a very polite quarter of
this town.

IN the midst of a noble and spacious area stands a grand Obelisk. The Base
forms a perfect square with right angles; the Body of it is cylindrical; but
the Capital is an Heptagon, and has several curious lines and figures described
on each of its seven flat sides or superfices, which serve to terminate as many
most magnificent and striking Vistas. This superb Column, no less remarkable
than the famous Pillar of Trajan, seems (from the several Gnomons and other
Hieroglyphics stuck about it) to have been originally dedicated to the Sun; but
is now known among the vulgar by the more common name of The Seven Dials.

This Day is Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXI. THURSDAY, May 20, 1756.
-- Placet impares
Formas atque animos sub juga ahenea
Saevo mittere cum joco.
HOR.
THOUGH I shall not as yet vouchsafe to let the reader so far into my secrets,
as to inform him whether I am married or single, it may not be amiss to
acquaint him, that supposing I still remain a bachelor, it has not been the
fault of my friends or relations. On the contrary, as soon as I was what they
call settled in the world, they were so assiduous in looking out for a wife for
me, that nothing was required on my part, but immediately to fall in love with
the lady they had pitched upon: and could I have complied with their several
choices, I should have been married at the same time to a tall and a short, a
plump and a slender, a young and an old woman; one with a great deal of money,
and another with none at all: each of whom were separately recommended by them
as the properest person in the world for me.

I know not how it happens, but it is notorious, that most people take a
pleasure in making matches; either thinking matrimony a state of bliss, into
which they would charitably call all their friends and acquaintance; or perhaps
struggling in the toils, they are desirous of catching others in the net that
ensnared them. Many matches have been brought about between two persons
absolute strangers to each other, through this kind mediation of our friends,
who are always ready to take upon them the office of an honorable go-between.
Some have come together merely from having been talked of by their acquaintance
as likely to make a match; and I have known a couple, who have met by accident
at an horse-race, or danced together at an assembly, that in less than a
fortnight have been driven into matrimony in their own defense, by having been
first paired in private conversations, and afterward in the common newspapers.

As we cannot insure happiness to our friends, at the same time that we help
them to husbands or wives, one would imagine that few would care to run the
hazard of bestowing misery, where they meant a kindness. I know a good-natured
lady, who has officiously brought upon herself the ill will and the curses of
many of her dearest and most intimate friends on this very account. She has a
sister, for whom she provided a most excellent husband, who has shown his
affection for her by spending her whole fortune upon his mistresses: she
contrived, that another near relation should snap up a rich widow, who was
arrested for her debts within a week after marriage; and it cost her a whole
twelvemonth to bring two doting lovers of her acquaintance together, who
parted beds before the honey-moon was expired.

But if our friends will thus condescend to be Match-makers from a spirit of
benevolence, and for our own advantage only, there are others who have taken up
the profession from less disinterested motives; who bring beauty and fortune to
market, and traffic in all the accomplishments that can make the marriage
state happy. These traders dispose of all sorts of rich heirs and heiresses,
baronets, lords, ladies of fashion, and daughters of country squires with as
much coolness as drovers sell bullocks. They keep complete registers of the
condition and qualifications of all the marriageable persons within the
kingdom; and it is as common to apply to them for an husband or wife, as to the
register-offices for a man or maidservant. They may, indeed, be considered as
fathers and guardians for the greatest part of our youth of both sexes, since
in marriage they may be most properly said to give them away.

It is something comical to consider the various persons, to whom men of this
profession are useful. We may naturally suppose, that a young fellow, who has
no estate, but what, like Tinsel's in the Drummer, is merely personal, would be
glad to come down handsomely after consummation with a woman of fortune; and a
smart girl, who has more charms than wealth, would give round poundage on being
taken for better for worse by a rich heir. Many a tradesman also wants a wife
to manage his family, while he looks after the shop; and thinks it better to
recommend himself by this convenient friend, than by means of the Daily
Advertiser. There are also several young people, who are indifferent as to any
person in particular, and have no passion for the state itself, yet want to be
married, because it will deliver them from the restraint of parents. But the
most unnatural, though very common applications of this sort are from the rich
and the noble; who having immense estates to bestow on their children, will
make use of the meanest instruments to couple them to another of the same
overgrown fortune.

I have known many droll accidents happen from the mistakes of these mercenary
Match-makers, and remember one in particular, which I shall here set down for
the entertainment of my readers. A careful old gentleman came up from the North
on purpose to marry his son, and was recommended by one of these couplers to a
twenty thousand pounder. He accordingly put on his best wig, best beaver, and
gold-buttoned coat, and went to pay his respects to the lady's mamma: He told
her, that he had not the pleasure of being known to her; but as his son's quiet
depended on it, he had taken the liberty of waiting on her: in short, he at
length broke the matter to her, and informed her, that his boy had seen her
daughter at church, and was violently in love with her; concluding, that he
would do very handsomely for the lad, and would make it worth her while to have
him. The old lady thanked him for the honor he intended her family; but she
supposed, to be sure, as he appeared to be a prudent and sensible gentletleman
he would expect a fortune answerable. "Say nothing of that, madam, say nothing
of that", interrupted the Don; -- "I have heard -- but if it was less, it
should not break any squares between us." -- "Pray, sir, how much does the
world say?" replied the lady. -- "Why, madam, I suppose she has not less than
twenty thousand pounds. -- " " Not so much, sir;" said the old lady, very
gravely. -- "Well, madam, I suppose then it may be nineteen, or -- or -- only
eighteen thousand pounds". -- " Not so much, sir.;" -- "Well, well, perhaps
not: but -- if it was only seventeen thousand." -- "No, sir." -- "Or sixteen".
-- "No." -- "Or (we must make allowances) perhaps but fifteen thousand". -- "
Not so much, sir." -- Here ensued a profound silence for near a minute; when
the old gentleman, rubbing his forehead -- "Well, madam, we must come to some
conclusion -- Pray is it less than fourteen thousand? How much more is it than
twelve thousand?" -- "Less, sir." -- " Less, madam? -- " "Less." -- "But is it
more than ten thousand?" -- " Not so much, sir." -- "Not so much, madam?" -- "
Not so much." -- "Why, if it is lodged in the funds, consider, madam, interest
is low, very low -- but as the boy loves her, trifles shall not part us. Has
she got eight thousand Pounds?" -- " Not so much, sir." -- "Why then, madam,
perhaps the young lady's fortune may not be above six -- or five thousand
pounds." -- "NOTHING LIKE IT, SIR." -- At these words the old gentleman started
from his chair, and running out of the room -- "Your servant, your servant --
my son is a fool; and the fellow who recommended me to you is a blockhead, and
knows nothing of business."

Just is Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXII. THURSDAY, May 27, 1756.
-- Nulla virtute redemptum --
A vitiis.
HOR.
I MENTIONED in a former paper, that a friend of mine was writing A New
Treatise on Ethics, or, A System of Immoral Philosophy, compiled from the
principles and practice of the present age; in which the extraordinary modesty
of the Moderns would be enlarged on, which has induced them to comprehend all
the vices, instead of virtues, in their idea of a Fine Gentleman. The work is
now finished; and the Author has sent me the following letter concerning the
Dedication, with leave to submit it to the public.

DEAR TOWN,
THE flatness and fulsom insipidity of Dedications has often been the subject
of our conversation; and we have always agreed, that Authors have miscarried in
these pieces of flattery, by injudiciously affronting, when they meant to
compliment their patrons. The humble Dedicator loads his Great Man with virtues
totally foreign to his nature and disposition, which sit as aukwardly upon him,
as lace or embroidery on a chimney-sweeper: and so overwhelms him with the huge
mass of learning, with which he graciously dubs him a scholar, that he makes as
ridiculous a figure as the Ass in the Dunciad. After having thus bepraised his
patron, till the new Maecenas is heartily ashamed of himself, he wonders that
no notice is taken of so pompous an eulogium, and that a Dedication should be
as mere a drug as a sermon.

Lory in the Relapse advises Fashion to get into the good graces of Lord
Foppington by falling in love with his coat, being in raptures with his peruke,
ravished with the genteel dangle of his sword-knot; and, in short, to recommend
himself to his noble elder brother, by seeming to be captivated with his
favorites. In like manner, the author, who would make his Dedication really
valuable, should not talk to his patron of his honor, and virtue, and
integrity, and a pack of unfashionable qualities, which only serve to disgrace
a Fine Gentleman, but boldly paint him what he really is, and at the same time
convince him of his merit in being a fool, and his glory in being a scoundrel.
This mode of Dedication, though proper at all times, will appear with a
particular good grace, before a System of Immoral Philosophy: wherefore, as my
book is now finished, I have here sent you a rough draught of the Epistle
Dedicatory, and shall be glad to hear your opinion of it.

May it please your Grace! or, My Lord! or, Sir! YOU are in every point so
complete a Fine Gentleman, that the following treatise is but a faint
transcript of your accomplishments. There is not one qualification, requisite
in the character of a man of spirit, which you do not possess. Give me leave
therefore, on the present occasion, to point forth your inestimable qualities
to the world, and hold up to the public view so glorious an example.

YOU distinguished yourself so early in life, and exalted yourself so far above
the common pitch of vulgar Bucks, that you was distinguished, before the age of
twenty, with the noble appellation of STAG. And when I consider the many
gallant exploits you have performed, the number of rascally poltroons you have
sent out of the world, the number of pretty little foundlings you have brought
into it, how many girls you have debauched, how many women of quality you have
intrigued with, and how many hogsheads of French wine have run through your
body, I cannot help contemplating you as a STAG of the first head.

WHAT great reason have you to value yourself on your noble Achievements at
Arthur's! the sums you formerly lost, and those you have lately won, are
amazing instances of your spirit and address; first, in venturing so deeply
before you was let into the secret, and then, in managing it with so much
adroitness and dexterity, since you have been acquainted with it. Nobody cogs
the dice, or packs the cards half so skilfully; you hedge a bet with uncommon
nicety; and are a most incomparably shrewd judge of the odds.

NOR have your exploits on the Turf rendered you less famous. Let the annals of
Pond and Heber deliver down to posterity the glorious account of what plates
you have won, what matches you made, and how often the Knowing Ones have been
taken in, when, for private reasons, you have found it necessary that your
horse should run on the wrong side of the post, or be distanced, after winning
the first heat. I need not mention your own skill in Horsemanship, and in how
many matches you have condescended to ride yourself; for in this particular it
must be acknowledged that you cannot be outdone even by your groom or jockey.

ALL the world will witness the many instances of your Courage, which has been
often tried and exerted in Hyde-Park, and behind Montague-House: nay, you have
sometimes been known to draw your sword most heroicly at the opera, the play,
and even at private routes and assemblies. How often have you put to flight a
whole army of watchmen, constables, and beadles, with the justices at their
head! You have cleared a whole bawdy house before you, and taken many a tavern
by storm: you have pinned a waiter to the ground, and have besides proved
yourself an excellent marksman, by shooting a post-boy flying. With so much
valor and firmness, it is not to be doubted, but that you would behave with
the same intrepidity, if occasions called, upon Hounslow-Heath, or in
Maiden-head-Thicket: and, if it were necessary, you would as boldly resign
yourself up to the hands of Jack Ketch, and swing as genteely as Maclean or
Gentleman Harry. The same noble spirit would likewise enable you to aim the
pistol at your own head, and go out of the world like a man of honor and a
gentleman.

BUT your Courage has not rendered you insusceptible of the softer passions,
for which your heart has been ever inclined. To say nothing of your gallantries
with women of fashion, your intrigues with milliners and mantua-makers, or your
seducing of raw country girls, and innocent tradesmens daughters, you have
formerly been so constant in your devoirs to Mrs. Douglass, and the whole
sister-hood, that you sacrificed your health and constitution in their service.
But above all, witness that sweet delicate creature, whom you have now in
keeping; and for whom you entertain such a strong and faithful passion, that
for her sake you have tenderly and affectionately deserted your wife and family.

THOUGH from your elegant taste for pleasures you appear made for the gay
world, yet these polite Amusements have not called off your attention from the
more serious studies of Politics and Religion. In Politics you have made such a
wonderful proficiency, both in theory and practice, that you have discovered
the good of your country to be a mere joke, and confirmed your own interest, as
well as established your consequence in the proper place, by securing half a
dozen Boroughs. As to Religion, you soon unravelled every mystery of that, and
not only know the Bible to be as romantic as the Alcoran, but have also written
several volumes to make your discoveries plain to meaner capacities. The
ridiculous prejudices of a foolish world unhappily prevent your publishing them
at present; but you have wisely provided that they shall one day see the light,
when I doubt not they will be deemed invaluable, and be as universally admired
as the posthumous works of Lord Bolingbroke.

I am, May it please your Grace, or, My Lord, or, Sir, in humble admiration of
your excellencies, etc. etc. etc.


Just is Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXIII. THURSDAY, June 3, 1756.
Quo patre sit natus, number ignota matre inhonestus?
HOR.
THE notices in the public papers that the Foundling Hospital will be open for
the reception of all infants in general under a certain age, have, I find,
given universal satisfaction. The consequences of a big belly do not appear so
dreadful as heretofore: and it was but yesterday that a young fellow of
intrigue told me, he was happy that his children would no longer be thrown out
of the Hospital, as he himself was out of Arthur's, by black balls. For my
part, though I have no lady in keeping, no child by my housekeeper, nor any
other affair of gallantry on my hands, which makes me wish to swell the number
of infants maintained by that charity, I must own myself to be exceedingly
rejoiced at the extension of so benevolent a design. I look upon it as the
certain preservation of many hundreds in embryo: nor shall we now hear of so
many helpless babes birth-strangled in a necessary, or smothered by the
ditch-delivered drab. As a bastard is accounted in law, quasi nullius filius,
the child of nobody, and related to nobody, and yet is blessed with as fair
proportions, and capable of an equal degree of perfection with "honest madam's
issue," it is surely an act of great humanity thus to rescue them from untimely
deaths and other miseries, which They do not merit, whatever may be the guilt
of their parents.

THOUGH it is obvious, that this Hospital will be made the receptacle of many
legitimate children, it is no less certain that the rich, as well as the poor,
will often send their base-born bantlings to this general nursery. The wealthy
man of quality, or substantial cit, may have their private family-reasons for
not owning the fruits of their secret amors, and be glad to put the little
living witness of their intrigues out of the way. For this reason, an history
of the Foundlings received there would be very curious and entertaining, as it
would contain many anecdotes not to be learned from any Parish Register. The
reflections that passed in my mind on this subject, gave occasion the other
evening to the following Dream.

Methought, as I was standing at the private door of the Hospital, where a
crowd of females (each of them with a child in her arms) were pressing to get
in, an elderly gentleman, whom from his white staff I took to be a governor of
the charity, very courteously invited me to come in. I accepted his offer; and
having seated myself next him -- "Mr. TOWN, says he, I am conscious that you
look upon most these little infants as the offsprings of so many unmarried
fathers, and maiden-mothers, which have been clandestinely smuggled into the
world. Know then that I am one of those guardian Genii, appointed to
superintend the fortunes of Bastards: therefore, as this Hospital is more
immediately under my tuition, I have put on this disguise; and, if you please,
will let you into the secret history of those babes, who are my wards, and
their parents."

I assured him, his intelligence would be highly agreeable; and several now
coming up to offer their children, he resumed his discourse -- "Observe, said
he, that jolly little rogue, with plump cheeks, a florid complexion, blue eyes,
and sandy locks. We have here already several of his brethren by the mother's
side; some fair, some brown, and some black: and yet they are all supposed to
have come by the same father. The mother has for many years been housekeeper to
a gentleman who cannot see that her children bear the marks of his own
servants, and that this very brat is the exact resemblance of his coachman.

"THAT puling whining infant there, with a pale face, emaciated body, and
distorted limbs, is the forced product of viper-broth and cantharides. It is
the offspring of a worn-out buck of quality, who at the same time he debauched
the mother, ruined her constitution by a filthy disease; in consequence of
which, she with much difficulty brought forth this just picture of himself in
miniature.

"THE next that offers is the issue of a careful cit; who, as he keeps an horse
for his own riding on sundays, which he lets out all the rest of the week,
keeps also a mistress for his recreation on the seventh day, who lets herself
out on all the other six. That other babe owes his birth likewise to the city,
but is the joint product, as we may say, of two fathers; who being great
oeconomists in their pleasures as well as in their business, have set up a
whore and an one horse-chaise in partnership together.

"THAT pert young baggage there, who so boldly presses forward with her brat,
is not the mother of it, but is maid to a single lady of the strictest honor
and unblemished reputation. About a twelve month, ago her mistress went to Bath
for the benefit of her health; and ten months after, she traveled into North
Wales to see a relation; from whence she is just returned. We may suppose, that
she took a fancy to that pretty babe while in the country, and brought it up to
town with her, in order to place it here; as she did a few years ago to another
charming boy, which being too old to be got into this Hospital, is now at a
school in Yorkshire, where young gentlemen are boarded, clothed, and educated,
and found in all necessaries, for ten pounds a year.

"THAT chubby little boy, which you see in the arms of yonder strapping wench
in a camblet gown and red cloak, is her own son. She is by profession a
bed-maker in one of the universities, and of the same college, in which the
father (a grave tutor) holds a fellowship under the usual condition of not
marrying. Many sober gentlemen of the cloth, who are in the same scrape, are
glad to take the benefit of this charity: And if all of the same reverend
order, like the priests abroad, were laid under the same restrictions, you
might expect to see a particular Hospital, erected for the reception of the
Sons of the Clergy.

"THAT next child belongs to a sea-captain's lady, whose husband is expected to
return every moment from a long voyage; the fears of which have happily
hastened the birth of this infant a full month before its time. That other is
the posthumous child of a wealthy old gentleman, who had married a young girl
for love, and dyed in the honey-moon. This his son and heir was not born till
near a twelve month after his decease, because its birth was retarded by the
excessive grief of his widow; who on that account rather chose to lye-in
privately, and to lodge their only child here, than to have its legitimacy and
her own honor called in question by her husband's relations."

MY companion pointed out to me several others no less extraordinary; among
which I remember he told me, one was the unhallowed brood of a Methodist
teacher, and another the premature spawn of a Maid of honor. A poor author
eased himself of a very heavy load of two twin-daughters, which in an evil hour
he begot on an hawker of pamphlets, after he had been writing a luscious novel:
but I could not help smiling at the marks sent in with these new Muses,
signifying, that one had been christened Terpsichore, and the other Polyhymnia.
Several bantlings were imported from Islington, Hoxton, and other villages
within the sound of Bow Bell: many were transplanted hither out of the country;
and a whole litter of brats were sent in from two or three parishes in
particular, for which it is doubtful whether they were most indebted, to the
parson or the squire.

A modest-looking woman now brought a very fine babe to be admitted; but the
governors rejected it, as it appeared to be above two months old. The mother on
the contrary persisted in affirming, that it was but just born, and addressing
herself to me, desired me to look at it. I accordingly took it in my arms; and
while I was tossing it up and down, and praising its beauty, the sly hussy
contrived to slip away, leaving the precious charge to my care. The efforts
which I made to bawl after her, and the squalling of the brat which rung
piteously in my ears, luckily awaked me; and I was very happy to find, that I
had only been dandling my pillow instead of a bantling.

Just Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXIV. THURSDAY, June 10, 1756.
Accipe, per longos tibi qui deserviat annos:
Accipe, qui pura norit amare fide.
Est nulli cessura fides; sine crimine mores;
Nudaque simplicitas, purpureusque pudor.
Non mihi mill placent; non sum desultor amoris;
Tu mihi (si qua fides) cura perennis eris.
OVID.
ALMOST every man is or has been, or at least thinks that he is or has been a
Lover. One has fought for his mistress, another has drank for her, another
wrote for her, and another has done all three: and yet perhaps in spite of
their duels, poetry, and bumpers, not one of them ever entertained a sincere
passion. I have lately taken a survey of the numerous tribe of Enamoratos, and
after having observed the various shapes they wear, think I may safely
pronounce, that though all profess to have been in Love, there are very few who
are really capable of it.

IT is a maxim of Rochefoucault's, that, "many men would never have been in
Love, if they had never heard of Love." The justice of this remark is equal to
its shrewdness. The ridiculous prate of a family has frequently great influence
on young minds, who learn to Love, as they do every thing else, by imitation.
Young creatures, almost mere children, have been consumed with this second-hand
flame lighted up at another's passion; and in consequence of the loves of the
footman and chambermaid, I have known little master fancy himself a dying swain
at the age of thirteen, and little miss pining away with Love in a bib and
hanging sleeves.

THAT vast heap of volumes, filled with Love, and sufficient in number to make
a library, are great inflamers, and seldom fail to produce that kind of passion
described by Rochefoucault. The chief of these literary seducers are the old
romances, and their degenerate spawn, the modern novels. The young student
reads of the emotions of Love, till he imagines that he feels them throbbing
and fluttering in his little breast; as valetudinarians study the history of a
disease, till they fancy themselves affected with every symptom of it. For this
reason, I am always sorry to see any of this trash in the hands of young
people: I look upon Cassandra and Cleopatra as well as Betty Barnes, Polly
Willis, etc. as no better than bawds; and consider Don Bellianis of Greece, and
Sir Amadis de Gaul, with George Edwards, Loveill, etc. as arrant pimps. But
though romances and novels are both equally stimulatives, yet their operations
are very different. The romance-student becomes a fond Corydon of Sicily, or a
very Damon of Arcadia, and is in good truth such a dying swain, that he
believes he shall hang himself on the next willow, or drown himself in the next
pond, if he should lose the object of his wishes: but the young novelist turns
out more a man of the world, and after having gained the affections of his
mistress, forms a hundred schemes to secure the possession of her, and to bam
her relations.

THERE are, among the tribe of Lovers, a sort of lukewarm gentlemen, who can
hardly be said, in the language of Love, to entertain a flame for their
mistress. These are your men of superlative delicacy and refinement, who loath
the gross ideas annexed to the amors of the vulgar, and aim at something more
spiritualized and sublime. These philosophers in Love dote on the mind alone of
their mistress, and would fain see her naked soul, diverted of its material
encumbrances. Gentlemen of this complexion might perhaps not improperly be
ranged in the romantic class, but they have assumed to themselves the name of
Platonic Lovers.

PLATONISM, however, is in these days very scarce; and there is another class,
infinitely more numerous, composed of a sort of Lovers, whom we may justly
distinguish by the title of Epicureans. The principles of this sect are
diametrically opposite to those of the Platonics. They think no more of the
soul of their mistress, than a mussulman, but are in raptures with her person.
A Lover of this sort is in perpetual ecstasies: his passion is so violent that
he even scorches you with his flame; and he runs over the perfections of his
mistress in the same style that a jockey praises his horse. "Such limbs! such
eyes! such a neck and breast! such -- oh, she is a rare piece." Their ideas go
no farther than mere external accomplishments; and as their wounds may be said
to be only skin deep, we cannot allow their breasts to be smitten with Love,
though perhaps they may rankle with a much grosser passion. Yet it must be
owned that nothing is more common, than for gentlemen of this cast to be
involved in what is called a Love-match: but then it is owing to the same cause
with the marriage of Sir John Brute, who says, "I married my wife, because I
wanted to lie with her, and she would not let me."

OTHER gentlemen of a gay disposition and warm constitution, who go in the
catalogue for Lovers, are adorers of almost every woman they see. The flame of
Love is as easily kindled in them, as the sparks are struck out of a flint, and
it also expires as soon. A Lover of this sort dances one day with a lady at a
ball, and loses his heart to her in a minuet; the next another carries it off
in the mall; and the next day perhaps he goes out of town, and lodges it in the
possession of all the country beauties successively, till at last he brings it
back to town with him, and presents it to the first woman he meets. This class
is very numerous; but ought by no means to hold a place among the tribe of true
Lovers, since a gentleman who is thus in Love with every body, may fairly be
said not to be in Love at all.

LOVE is universally allowed to be whimsical; and if whim is the essence of
Love, none can be accounted truer Lovers, than those who admire their mistress
for some particular charm, which enchains them, though it would singly never
captivate any body else. Some gentlemen have been won to conjugal embraces by a
pair of fine arms; others have been held fast by an even white set of teeth;
and I know a very good scholar, who was ensnared by a set of golden tresses,
because it was the taste of the ancients, and the true classical hair. Those
ladies, whose lovers are such piecemeal admirers, are in perpetual danger of
losing them. A rash, or a pimple may abate their affection: All those, the
object of whose adoration is merely a pretty face or a fine person, are in the
power of the like accidents; and the small pox has occasioned many a poor lady
the loss of her beauty and her Lover at the same time.

BUT after all these spurious Enamoratos, there are some few, whose passion is
sincere and well-founded. True, genuine Love is always built upon esteem: not
that I would mean that a man can reason and argue himself into Love; but that a
constant intercourse with an amiable woman will lead him into a contemplation
of her excellent qualities, which will insensibly win his heart before he is
himself aware of it, and beget all those hopes, fears, and other extravagances,
which are the natural attendants on a true passion. Love has been described ten
thousand times: but that I may be sure that the little picture I would draw of
it is taken from nature, I will conclude this paper with the story of honest
WILL EASY and his amiable wife. WILL EASY and Miss -- became very early
acquainted, and from being familiarly intimate with the whole family, WILL
might be almost said to live there. He dined and supped with them perpetually
in town, and spent great part of the summer with them at their seat in the
country. WILL and the lady were both universally allowed to have sense, and
their frequent conversations together gave them undoubted proofs of the
goodness of each other's disposition. They delighted in the company, and
admired the perfections of each other, and gave a thousand little indications
of a growing passion, not unobserved by others, even while it was yet unknown
and unsuspected even by themselves. However, after some time WILL, by mutual
agreement, demanded the lady of her father in marriage. But alas! "the course
of true Love never yet run smooth:" the ill-judged ambition of a parent induced
the father, out of mere love to his daughter, to refuse her hand to the only
man in the world with whom she could live happily, because he imagined that he
might in the Smithfield phrase, do better for her. But Love, grounded on just
principles, is not easily shaken; and as it appeared that their mutual passion
had taken too deep root ever to be extirpated; the father at last reluctantly
half-consented to their union. They enjoy a genteel competency, and WILL by his
integrity and abilities is an honor to a learned profession, and a blessing to
his wife; whose greatest praise is, that her virtues deserve such an husband.
She is pleased with having "left dross to duchesses." He considers her
happiness as his main interest, and their example every day gives fresh
conviction to the father, that where two persons of strong sense and good
hearts, conceive a reciprocal affection for each other, their passion is
genuine and lasting, and their union is perhaps the truest state of happiness
under the sun.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXV. THURSDAY, June 17, 1756.
Hae sane vires amicitiae, mortis contemptum ingenerare, vitae dulcedinem
extinguere, crudelitatem mansuefacere, odium in amorem convertere potuerunt.

VAL. MAX.
NOTHING has given me a more sensible pleasure in the course of this
undertaking, than the having been occasionally honored with the correspondence
of several ingenious gentlemen of both our Universities. My paper of to day
gives me unusual satisfaction on this account, and I cannot help looking on it
with a great deal of pleasure as a sort of a little Cambridge Miscellany. The
reader will see, it is composed of two little poems, which I have lately
received from two different correspondents in that learned University. The Ode
to Friendship has, in my opinion, many beauties, and is infinitely superior to
the meagre productions of some celebrated Odemongers. The Fable I have some
reason to imagine, besides the peculiarity of style and manner, comes from the
same hand, who has already obliged the public with some other pieces of poetry
published in this paper.

ODE TO FRIENDSHIP.
I.
COME, Gentle Power! from whom arose
Whatever life's checkered scene adorns;
From whom the living current flows,
Whence science fills her various urns:
Sacred to thee yon marble dome,
O Goddess, rears its awful head,
Fraught with the stores of Greece and Rome,
With gold and glowing gems inlaid;
Where Art, by thy command, has fixed her seat,
And every Muse and every Grace retreat.
II.
For erst mankind, a savage race,
As lawless robbers, ranged the woods,
And chose, when wearied with the chase,
'Midst rocks and caves their dark abodes:
Till, FRIENDSHIP, thy persuasive strains,
Powerful as Orpheu's magic song,
Re-echo'd through the squalid plains,
And drew the brutish herd along:
Lost in surprise, thy pleasing voice they owned,
Chose softer arts, and polished at the sound.
III.
Then Pity first her sacred flame
Within their frozen bosoms raised;
Though weak the spark, when FRIENDSHIP came,
When FRIENDSHIP waved her wing, it blazed.
'Twas then first heaved the social sigh,
The social tear began to flow;
They felt a sympathetic joy,
And learnt to melt at others woe:
By just degrees humanity refined,
And virtue fixed her empire in the mind.
IV.
O Goddess, when thy form appears,
Revenge, and rage, and factions cease;
The soul no fury-passion tears,
But all is harmony and peace.
Aghast The Dionysius -- Alluding to the Story of Damon and Pythias.
Purple Tyrant stood,
With awe beheld thy glowing charms;
Forgot the impious thirst of blood,
And wished to grasp thee in his arms;
Felt in his bread unusual softness rise,
And, deaf before, heard pity's moving cries.
V.
Is there a wretch, in sorrow's shade,
Who lingering wastes life's tedious hours;
Is there, on whose devoted head
Her vengeful curses The Goddess of Misfortune.
ATE pours?
See, to their aid kind FRIENDSHIP flies,
Their sorrows sympathetic feels,
With lenient hand her balm applies,
And every care indulgent heals:
The horrid fiends before her stalk away,
As pallid specter shun the approach of day.
VI.
O for a faithful honest friend!
To whom I every care could trust,
Each weakness of my soul commend,
Nor fear him treacherous or unjust.
Drive flatt'ry's faithless train away,
Those busy, curious, fluttering things,
That, insect-like, in fortune's ray
Bask and expand their gaudy wings;
But ah! when once the transient gleam is over,
Behold the change -- they die, and are no more!
Cambridge, June 14.
To Mr. TOWN.
Trin. Coll. Cant. Jun. 6. SIR,
YOUR Essay on the abuse of words was very well received here, but more
especially that part of it, which contained the modern definition of the word
RUINED. You must know, Sir, that in the language of our old Dons, every young
man is ruined, who is not an arrant Tycho Brahe, or Erra Pater. Yet it is
remarkable, that though the servants of the Muses meet with more than ordinary
discouragement at this place, yet Cambridge has produced many celebrated poets:
witness Spenser, Milton, Cowley, Dryden, etc. not to mention some admired
writers of the present times. I myself, Sir, am grievously suspected of being
better acquainted with Homer and Virgil than Euclid or Sanderson; and am
universally agreed to be ruined for having concerned myself with Hexameter and
Pentameter more than Diameter. The equity of this decision I shall not dispute,
but content myself at present with submitting to the public, by means of your
paper, the following lines on the import of another favorite word, occasioned
by the essay above mentioned.

WORDS are, so Wollaston defines,
Of our ideas merely signs,
Which have a power at will to vary,
As being vague and arbitrary.
Now damned, for instance -- All agree
Damn'd's the superlative Degree;
Means that alone, and nothing more,
However taken heretofore.
Damned is a word cannot stand alone,
Which has no meaning of its own;
But signifies or bad or good,
Just as its neighbor's understood.
Examples we may find enough,
Damned high, damned low, damned fire, damned stuff.
So fares it too with its relation,
I mean its substantive damnation.
The wit with metaphors makes bold,
And tells you he is damnation cold:
Perhaps, that metaphor forgot,
The self-same wit's damnation hot.
AND here a fable I remember --
Once in the middle of December,
When every mead in snow was lost,
And every river bound with frost,
When families got all together,
And feelingly talk over the weather;
When -- pox of the descriptive rhyme --
In short, it was the winter time.
It was a pedlar's happy lot
To fall into a Satyr's cot:
Shivering with cold and almost froze,
With pearly drop upon his nose,
His fingers ends all pinched to death,
He blew upon them with his breath.
Friend, quoth the Satyr, what intends
That blowing on thy fingers ends?
"It is to warm them, thus I blow,
"For they are froze as cold as snow;
"And so inclement has it been,
"I Am like a cake of ice within."
Come, quoth the Satyr, comfort, then!
I Will cheer thy inside, if I can;
You're welcome in my homely cottage
To a warm fire and mess of pottage.
THIS said, the Satyr nothing loath
A bowl prepared of sav'ry broth,
Which with delight the pedlar viewed,
As smoking on the board it stood.
But though the very steam arose
With grateful odor to his nose,
One single sip he ventured not,
The gruel was so wondrous hot.
What can be done? -- with gentle puff
He blows it, till it is cool enough.
WHY how now, pedlar, what is the matter?
Still at thy blowing, quoth the Satyr.
I blow to cool it, cries the clown,
That I may get the liquor down,
For though I grant you have made it well,
You Have boiled it, Sir, as hot as hell.
THEN raising high his cloven stump,
The Satyr smote him on the rump.
"Begone, thou double knave or fool,
"With the same breath to warm and cool:
"Friendship with such I never hold
"Who Are so damned hot, and so damned cold."

We should be glad to know how a Note may be conveyed to G. K.

Printed for R. BALDWIN, at the Rose in Paternoster Row; where Letters to the
CONNOISSEUR are received.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXVI. THURSDAY, June 24, 1756.
Proinde tona eloquio, solitum tibi --
VIRG.
I Remember a rector of a parish at the court end of the town, who was
generally accounted a very fine preacher, that used to aim at delivering
himself in the most bold and animated style of oratory. The tone of his voice
was nicely accommodated to the different branches of his discourse, and every
thing was pronounced with uncommon energy and emphasis; he also indulged
himself in equal freedom of action, and abounded in various extraordinary
gesticulations; his sermons themselves were sown thick with tropes, metaphors,
and similies, and every where enriched with apostrophe and prosopopaeia.

AS I knew that this reverend gentleman had been abroad with a young nobleman
in the capacity of a traveling tutor, I did not wonder at the violent exertion
of his voice, and the vehemence of his action; as this is a piece of clerical
foppery, which an itinerant clergyman is apt to adopt, while his pupil is
gleaning all the other follies of Paris: at which place it is very common to
see a capuchine so heated with his subject, that he often seems in danger of
throwing himself out of the pulpit. But I was at a loss how to account for the
glowing style of his discourses, till happening to turn over the works of a
celebrated French preacher, I found that the oratorical performances of my
friend were no other than faithful translations of them.

THIS sort of pulpit plagiarism may perhaps be more adapted to the taste of
some of our fashionable declaimers, than the more hackneyed method of
transcribing a page from Barrow, Tillotson, or Atterbury: but although such
practices may be less liable to detection, it is certainly more orthodox to
rifle the works of our own Divines, than to ransack the treasures of Romish
priests; and their inflamed orations are undoubtedly less adapted to the genius
of our people, than the sober reasonings of our own preachers. It must be owned
indeed that some of our clergy are greatly wanting in that life and spirit,
which would render their instructions more affecting as well as more pleasing.
Their sermons are frequently drawn out in one continued drawl, without any
variation of voice or gesture: so that it is no wonder, if some of the
congregation should be caught napping, when the preacher himself hardly seems
to be awake. But though this drowsy delivery is not to be commended, yet a
serious earnestness is most likely to engage the attention, and convince the
reason. This manner, as it is most decent in itself, is best suited to an
English audience; though it is no wonder that a different strain of oratory
should prevail in France, since a Frenchman accompanies almost every word in
ordinary conversation with some fantastic gesture, and even enquires concerning
your health, and talks of the weather, with a thousand shrugs and grimaces.

BUT though I do not like to see a preacher lazily lolling on the cushion, or
dozing over his sermon-case, and haranguing his audience with an unchristian
apathy; yet even this unanimated delivery is perhaps less offensive, than to
observe a clergyman less assiduous to instruct his audience, than to be admired
by them. A sober divine should not ascend the pulpit with the same passions
that a public orator mounts the rostrum: much less should he assume the voice,
gesture, and deportment of a player, and the language of the theater. He should
preserve a temperance in the most earnest parts of his discourse, and go
through the whole of it in such a manner, as best agrees with the solemn place
in which it is uttered. Pompous nonsense, bellowed out with a thundering
accent, comes with a worse grace from the pulpit, than bombast and sustian
injudiciously ranted forth by a "periwig-pated fellow" on the stage. I cannot
better illustrate the absurdity and indecency of this manner, than by a
familiar, though shameful, instance of it. Whoever has occasionally joined with
the butchers in making up the audience of the Clare-Market Orator will agree
with me, that the impropriety of his style and the extravagance of his action
become still more shocking and intolerable by the day which they profane, and
the ecclesiastical appearance of the place in which the declaimer harangues.
Thus while those who thunder out damnation from parish pulpits, may, from
assuming the manners of the theater, be resembled to ranting players; the
Clare-Market Orator, while he turns religion into farce, must be considered as
exhibiting shows and interludes of an inferior nature, and himself regarded as
a Jack-pudding in a gown and cassock.

A BLOATED style is perhaps of all others least to be commended. It is more
frequently made a shelter for nonsense, than a vehicle of truth: but though
improper on all occasions, it more especially deviates from the chaste
plainness and simplicity of Pulpit Eloquence. Nor am I less displeased with
those who are admired by some as pretty preachers; as I think a clergyman may
be a coxcomb in his style and manner, as well as a prig in his appearance.
Flowers of rhetoric injudiciously scattered over a sermon are as disgusting in
his discourse, as the snug wig and scented white handkerchief in his dress. The
pretty preacher aims also at politeness and good-breeding, takes the ladies to
task in a genteel vein of raillery, and handles their modish foibles with the
same air that he gallants their fans: but if he has a mind to put his abilities
to the stretch, and indulge himself in a more than ordinary flow of rhetoric,
he fritters away the solemnity of some scriptural subject; and I have heard a
flourishing declaimer of this cast take off from the awful idea of the Passion
by dwelling principally on the gracefulness of person, sweetness of voice, and
elegance of deportment in the Divine Sufferer; and at another time in speaking
of the Fall, I have known him enter into a picturesque description of the
woods, groves, and rivulets, pansies, pinks, and violets, that threw a
perpetual gaiety over the face of nature in the garden of Eden.

AFFECTED oratory and an extravagant delivery were first practiced by those who
vary from the regular established church: nor is there any manner so unbecoming
and indecent, which has not at one time or another been accounted truly
spiritual and graceful. Snuffling through the nose with an harmonious twang has
been regarded as a kind of church-music best calculated to raise devotion, and
a piteous chorus of sighs and groans has been thought the most effectual call
to repentance. Irregular tremblings of the voice and contortions of the person
have long been the eloquence of Quakers and Presbyterians; and are now the
favorite mode of preaching practiced by those self-ordained teachers, who
strike out new lights in religion, and pour forth their extempore rhapsodies in
a torrent of enthusiastical oratory. An inspired cobbler will thunder out
anathemas, with the tone and gesture of St. Paul, from a joint-stool; and an
enlightened bricklayer will work himself up to such a pitch of vehemence, as
shall make his audience quake again. I am sorry to see our regular divines
rather copying than reforming this hot and extravagant manner of preaching; and
have with pain been witness to a wild intemperate delivery in our
parish-churches, which I should only have expected at the chapel in Long-Acre,
or at the Foundery and Tabernacle in Moor-Fields.

AS a serious earnestness in the delivery, and a nervous simplicity in the
style of a discourse, are the most becoming ornaments of the pulpit, so an
affectation of eloquence is no where so offensive. The delivery of a preacher
as well as his diction should, like his dress, be plain and decent. Inflamed
eloquence and wild gestures are unsuitable to the place and his function; and
though such vehement heat may perhaps kindle the zeal of a few enthusiastic old
beldams in the isle, it has a very different effect on the more rational part
of the congregation. I would therefore recommend it to our fashionable divines
to aim at being Preachers rather than Orators or Actors, and to endeavor to
make their discourses appear like Sermons rather than Orations.

Just Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXVII. THURSDAY, July 1, 1756.
Fervens difficili bile tumet jecur.
HOR.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
WE are told, that in Spain it is the custom for husbands never to let their
wives go abroad without a watchful old woman to attend them; and in Turkey it
is the fashion to lock up their mistresses under the guard of a trusty eunuch:
but I never knew, that in any country the men were put under the same
restrictions. Alas! Sir, my wife is to me a very Duena; she is as careful of
me, as the Keisler Aga, or Chief Eunuch, is of the Grand Signior's favorite
Sultana: and whether she believes, that I am in love with every woman, or that
every woman is in love with me, she will never trust me out of her sight; but
sticks as close to me, as if she really was, without a figure, bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh. I am never suffered to stir abroad without her, lest I
should go astray; and at home she follows me up and down the house like a child
in leading-strings: nay, if I do but step down stairs on any ordinary occasion,
she is so afraid I shall give her the slip, that she always screams after me,
"my dear, you are not going out;" though for better security she generally
locks up my hat and cane together with her own gloves and cardinal, that one
might not stir out without the other.

I CANNOT flatter myself, that I am handsomer or better made than other men:
nor has she, in my eyes at least, fewer charms than other women. Need I add,
that my complexion is not over-sanguine, nor my constitution very robust?
Besides, we have not been married above a month. And yet she is so very
doubtful of my constancy, that I cannot speak, or even pay the compliment of my
hat, to any young lady, though in public, without giving new alarms to her
jealousy. Such an one, she is sure from her flaunting airs, is a kept madam;
another is no better than she should be; and she saw another tip me the wink,
or give me a nod, as a mark of some private assignation between us. A nun, Sir,
might as soon force her way into a convent of monks, as any young woman get
admittance into our house: she has therefore affronted all her acquaintance of
her own sex, that are not, or might not have been, the grandmothers of many
generations; and is at home to nobody, but maiden ladies in the bloom of
threescore, and beauties of the last century.

SHE will scarce allow me to mix even with persons of my own sex; and she looks
upon batchelors in particular, as no better than pimps and common seducers. One
evening she, indeed, vouchsafed to trust me out of doors at a tavern with some
of my male-friends: but the first bottle had scarce gone round, before word was
brought up, that my boy was come with the lanthorn to light me home. I sent him
back with orders to call in an hour; when presently after the maid was
dispatched, with notice that my dear was gone to bed very ill, and wanted me
directly. I was preparing to obey the summons; when to our great surprise the
sick lady herself bolted into the room, complained of my cruel heart, and fell
into a fit, from which she did not recover, till the coach had set us down at
our own house. She then called me the basest of husbands, and said that all
taverns were no better than bawdy-houses, and that men only went thither to
meet naughty women: at last she declared it to be her firm resolution, that I
should never set my foot again in any one of them, except herself be allowed to
make one of the company.

YOU will suppose, Sir, that while my wife is thus cautious that I should not
be led astray when abroad, she takes particular care that I should not stumble
on temptations at home. For this reason, as soon as I had brought her to my
house, my two maidservants were immediately turned away at a moment's warning,
not without out many covert hints and some open accusations of too near an
intimacy between us: though I protest to you one was a feeble old wrinkled
creature, as haggard and frightful as mother Shipton; and the other, a
strapping wench, as coarse and brawny as the Female Samson. Even my man John,
who had lived in the family for thirty years, was packed off, as being too well
acquainted with his master's sly ways. A chair-woman was forced to do our work
for some time, before madam could suit herself with maids for her purpose. One
was too pert an hussy; another went too fine; another was an impudent forward
young baggage. At present our household is made up of such beautiful monsters,
as Caliban himself might fall in love with: my lady's own waiting woman has a
most inviting hump-back, and is so charmingly paralytic, that she shakes all
over like a Chinese figure; the house-maid squints most delightfully with one
solitary eye, which weeps continually for the loss of its fellow; and the cook,
besides a most captivating red face and protuberant waist, has a most graceful
hobble in her gait, occasioned by one leg being shorter than the other.

I NEED not tell you, that I must never write a letter, but madam must see the
contents before it is done up; and that I never durst open one till she has
broke the seal, or read it till she has first run it over. Every rap from the
post-man at the door makes her tremble; and I have known her ready to burst
with spleen at seeing a superscription written in a fair Italian hand, though
perhaps it only comes from my aunt in the country. She can pick out an intrigue
even from the impression on the wax: and a cupid, or two hearts joined in
union, or a wafer pricked with a pin, or stamped with a thimble, she interprets
as the certain tokens of a billetdoux. The other week I received a letter from
Derby-shire, which awakened all her mistrust. She knew from the scrawl and
strange spelling on the outside, that it must come from a woman: she therefore
tore it open in a violent rage, in hopes of making a most material discovery;
but to her great disappointment the contents were perfectly illegible. She was
now convinced that it came from some nasty creature, whom I maintained in the
country; and that we corresponded together in cipher. I was obliged to confess
the truth; that it was, indeed, drawn up in cipher, and that I had the key to
it. At length, with much ado, I explained the whole matter to her; telling her,
that it was a letter from my farmer, who not having been bred at a
writing-school expressed his meaning by characters of his own invention.
However, this assurance did not at all pacify her, till she had dispatched a
trusty messenger to be certified of the truth.

THIS loving creature happened to be taken ill lately, when she thought that
she was going to die. She called me to her bedside, and with tears in her eyes
told me, that she should not be able to die in peace, except I would promise
her one thing. I assured her, I would promise any thing to make her easy -- "O
my dear, says she, I cannot bear the thought of your being another's; and
therefore I shall not rest in my grave, if you do not swear to me, that you
will never marry again, or think of another woman, as long as you live." My
poor dear is, however, recovered, without putting my faith to so hard a trial:
though I may venture to say, that I have already had so much of matrimony, I
could submit to any conditions to part with her.

I am, Sir, Your very humble servant, etc.


Just Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXVIII. THURSDAY, July 8, 1756.
Felix convivium, in quod choraules non venit.
MART.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR!
MY wife is mad, stark mad; and unless you can prescribe some remedy for that
strange phrenzy that possesses her, my peace of mind must be for ever broken,
and my fortune inevitably ruined. You must know, sir, that she is afflicted
with a disorder exactly opposite to the bite of a Tarantula: for as that is
said to admit of no cure but music, there is not a note in the Gamut, but what
tends to heighten and inflame my wife's lunacy. I find it is the fashion in
this age for singers and fiddlers to publish Appeals to the public: wherefore,
as you have hitherto listened to the complaints of husbands, I must beg you now
to consider mine, and to suffer me also to Appeal to the public by means of
your paper.

A FEW years ago business called me over to Italy; where this unfortunate woman
received the first, touches of this disorder. She soon conceived a violent
passion for Taste in general, which settled at last in an unquenchable rage
after musical compositions. Solos, Sonatas, Operas, and Concertos, became her
sole employment and delight, and singers and musicians her only company. At
length full of Italian airs she returned to England, where also her whole
happiness has been centered in the orchestra, and it has been her whole pride
to be thought a Connoisseur in music. If there is an opera, oratorio, or
concert, to be performed within the bills of mortality, I do not believe that
the riches of the Indies could prevail on her to be absent. Two, and only two
good consequences attend this madness, and those are, that she constantly
attends St. James's chapel for the sake of the anthem and the rest of the
music: and out of the many pounds idly squandered on minums and semiquavers,
some few are dedicated to charities, which are promoted by musical performances.

BUT what makes this rage after catgut more irksome and intolerable to me is,
that I have not myself the least idea of what they call Taste, and it almost
drives me mad to be pestered with it. I am a plain man, and have not the least
spice of a Connoisseur in my composition, yet nothing will satisfy my wife
unless I appear as fond of such nonsense as herself. About a month ago she
prevailed on me to attend her to the Opera, where every dying fall made her
expire, as well as Lady Townly. She was ravished with one air, in ecstasies at
another, applauded Ricciarelli, encored Mingotti, and in short acted like an
absolute madwoman; while the performance and her behavior had a quite
different effect upon me, who sat dumb with confusion, "most musical, most
melancholy," at her elbow. When we came home again, she seemed as happy as
harmony could make her, but I must own, that I was all discord, and most
heartily vexed at being made a fool in public. "Well, my dear, said she, how do
you like the opera?" -- "Zouns, madam, I would as soon be dragged through a
horsepond, as go to an opera with you again." -- "O fie! but you must be
delighted with The Mingotti." -- "The Mingotti! The Devil." -- "Well, I am
sorry for it, Sir Aaron, but I find you have no Ear." -- "Ear, madam? I had
rather cut off my ears, than suffer them to make me an idiot." To this she made
me no reply, but began a favorite opera tune, and after taking a tour round
the room like one of the singers, left me alone.

IF my wife could be satisfied, like other musical ladies, with attending
public performances, and now and then thrumming on her harpsicord the tunes she
hears there; I should be content. But she has also a concert of her own
constantly once a week. Here she is in still greater raptures than at the
opera, as all the music is chosen and appointed by herself. The expense of this
whim is monstrous, for not one of these people will open their mouths, or rosin
a single string, without being very well paid for it. Then she must have all
the best hands and voices, and has almost as large a set of performers in pay
as the manager of the opera. It puts me quite out of patience to see these
fellows strutting about my house dressed up like lords and gentlemen. Not a
single fiddler or singer but what appears in lace or embroidery, and I once
mistook my wife's chief musician for a foreign ambassador.

IT is impossible to recount the numberless follies to which this ridiculous
passion for Music exposes her. Her devotion to the art, makes her almost adore
the professors of it. A musician is a greater man in her eye than a duke, and
she would sooner oblige an opera-singer than a countess. She is as busy in
promoting their benefits as if she was to have the receipts of the house; and
quarrels with all her acquaintance, who will not permit her to load them with
tickets. Every fiddler in town makes it his business to scrape an acquaintance
with her, and an Italian is no sooner imported than she becomes a part of my
wife's band of performers. In the late Opera disputes she has been a most
furious partizan, and it is impossible for any patriot to feel more anxiety for
the danger of Blakeney and Minorca, than she has suffered on account of the
Opera, and the loss of Mingotti.

I DO not believe my wife has a single idea except recitative, airs,
counter-tenor, thorough-bass, etc. which are perpetually singing in her head.
When we sit together, instead of joining in any agreeable conversation, she is
always either humming a tune, or "discoursing most eloquent music." Nature has
denied her a voice, but as Italy has given her Taste and a graceful manner, she
is continually squeaking out strains less melodious, than the harmony of
ballad-singing in our streets, or psalm-singing in a country church. To make
her still more ridiculous, she learns to play on that masculine instrument the
bass-viol; the pleasure of which nothing can prevail on her to forego, as the
bass-viol, she daily tells me, contains the whole power and very soul of
harmony.

WHAT method, Mr. TOWN, shall I pursue to cure my wife of this musical phrenzy?
I have some thoughts of holding weekly a burlesque Rorotorio, composed of
mock-airs with grand accompanyments of the Jew's Harp, Wooden Spoons, and
Marrowbones and Cleavers on the same day with my wife's concert; and have
actually sent to two of Mrs. Midnight's hands to teach me the art and mystery
of playing on the Broomstick and Hurdy-Gurdy, at the same time that my wife
learns on the bass-viol. I have also a strong rough voice, which will enable me
to roar out Bumper Squire Jones, Roast Beef, or some other old English ballad,
whenever she begins to trill forth her melodious airs in Italian. If this has
no effect, I will learn to beat the drum, or wind the post-horn: and if I
should still find it impossible for noise and clamor to overcome the sound of
her voices and instruments, I have half-resolved peremptorily to shut my doors
against singers and fiddlers, and even to demolish her harpsichord and bass-viol.

BUT this, alas! is coming to extremities, which I am almost afraid to venture,
and would endeavor to avoid. I have no aversion to music, but I would not be a
fiddler: nor do I dislike company, but I would as soon keep an inn, as convert
my house into a theater for all the idle things of both sexes to assemble at.
But my wife's affections are so wedded to the Gamut, that I cannot devise any
means to wean her from this folly. If I could make her fond of dress, or teach
her to love cards, plays, or any thing but music I should be happy. This method
of destroying my peace with harmony, is no better than tickling me to death;
and to squander away such sums of money on a parcel of bawling scraping rascals
in laced coats and bag-wigs, is absolutely giving away my estate for an old
song. You, Mr. TOWN, are a professed Connoisseur, therefore either give me a
little Taste, or teach my wife to abandon it: for at present we are but a
jangling pair, and there is not the least harmony between us, though, like bass
and treble, we are obliged to join in concert.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant, AARON HUMKIN.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXIX. THURSDAY, July 15, 1756.
-- Post cineres gloria sera venit.
MART.
To Mr. TOWN.
SIR!
I AM a rich old bachelor, and like other ancient gentlemen of that order, and
very fond of being indulged in all my odd humors, and always having my own
way. This is one reason I never married, for if my wife had been a shrewish
termagant, she would have killed me, and if she had been a tame domestic animal
I should have killed her: but the way of life I have now fallen into is of all
others the best calculated to gratify my fantastical temper. I have no near
relation indeed to treat as an humble cousin all my life, in hopes of being
happy at my death; yet I abound in sycophants and followers, all whom I delude,
like another Volpone, with the expectations of being made my heir. The abject
spirit of these wretches flatters me, and amuses me. I am indolent and hate
contradiction, and can safely say that not one of my acquaintance has
contradicted me for these seven years. There is not one of them but would be
glad if I would spit in his face, or rejoice at a kick of the breech from me,
if they thought I meant it as a token of my familiarity. When I am grave, they
appear as dull as mutes at a funeral; when I smile, they grin like monkies;
when I tell a silly story, they chuckle over every ridiculous particular, and
shake their sides in admiration of my wit. Sometimes I pretend to be
short-sighted, and then not one of them sees farther than his nose. They
swallow sour wine, eat musty victuals, and are proud to ride in my old boots.

I HAVE been told of a certain prelate, who brought his chaplains to such a
degree of servility, that after every deal at whist, they would ask him, what
he would choose to have for trumps next deal? I keep my fellows in equal good
order. They all think me a close old hunks, and imagining that winning their
money will put me in good humor with them, they practice all the arts of
sharping to cheat themselves. I have known them pack the cards at Whist, that I
might hold all the four honors in my own hand; they will load the dice in my
favor at Hazard; pocket themselves on purpose at Billiards; and at Bowls if
any one is near winning the game, he never fails in the next cast to mistake
his biass. It is impossible for the most despotic monarch to be more absolute
over his subjects, than I am over these slaves and sycophants. Yet in spite of
all their endeavors to oblige me, I most heartily despise them, and have
already drawn up a will, in which I have bequeathed to each of them a shilling
and a dog-collar.

BUT though I have settled in my mind what legacies I shall leave them, I have
not thoroughly resolved in what manner I shall dispose of the bulk of my
estate. Indeed I am fully determined, like most other wealthy bachelors, either
to leave my fortune to some ostentatious pious uses, or to persons, whom I have
never seen, and for whose characters I have not the least regard or esteem. To
speak sincerely, ostentation carries away my whole heart: but then it is a
little difficult to find out a new object to indulge my vanity, whilst I am on
this side the grave; by securing to me a certain prospect of posthumous fame,
which is always so agreeable to living pride.

THE hospitals are so numerous that my name will be lost among those more known
and established of Guy, Morden, Bancroft, and I know not who. Besides in the
space of four or five centuries perhaps it may be thought, notwithstanding my
whole length picture and statue, that I had assistance from parliament. If I
order my money to be laid out in churches, they will never be built. If in
temple, gardens, lakes, obelisks, and serpentine rivers; the next generation of
the sons of Taste will demolish all my works, turn my rounds into squares, and
my squares into rounds, and not leave even my bust, although it were cast a
plaster of Paris by Mr. Racstrow, or worked up in wax by Mr. Goupy. Or
supposing in imitation of some of my predecessors, I were to bequeath my
fortune to my housekeeper, and recommend her in my will as a pattern of virtue,
diligence, and every good quality, what will be the effect? In three weeks
after my death she will marry an Irishman, and I shall not even enjoy my
monument and marble perriwig in Westminster-Abby.

NOTHING perplexes me so much as the disposal of my money by my last will and
testament. While I am living, it procures the most servile compliance with all
my whims from my sycophants, and several other conveniences: but I would fain
buy fame with it after my death. Do but instruct me, how I may lay it out in
the most valuable purchases of this sort, only discover some new object of
charity, and perhaps I may bequeath you a round sum of money for your advice.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant, THOMAS VAINALL.


IT is said by an old poet, that no man's life can be called happy or unhappy
till his death: in like manner I have often thought that no words or actions
are a better comment on a person's temper and disposition, than his last will
and testament. This is a true portraiture of himself drawn at full length by
his own hand, in which the painting is commonly very lively, and the features
very strongly marked. In the discharge of this solemn act, people sign and seal
themselves, either wise and good characters, or villains and sools: and any
person that makes a ridiculous will, and bequeaths his money to frivolous uses,
only takes a great deal of pains, like Dogberry in the play, "that he may be
set down and ass."

THE love of fame governs our actions more universally than any other passion.
All the rest gradually drop off, but this runs through our whole lives. This
perhaps is one of the chief inducements that influences wealthy persons to
bequeath their possessions to ostentatious uses, and they would as willingly
lay out a considerable sum in buying a great name (if possible) at their
deaths, as they would bestow it on the purchase of a coat of heraldry during
their lives. They are pleased with leaving some memorial of their existence
behind them, and to perpetuate the remembrance of themselves by the application
of their money of some vainglorious purposes; though the good gentlemen never
did one act to make themselves remarkable, laid out a single shilling in a
laudable manner, while they lived. If an Apotheosis were to be bought, how many
rich scoundrels would be deified after their deaths! not a plumb in the city
but would purchase this imaginary godship, as readily as he paid for his
freedom at his first setting up; and I doubt not but this fantastical
distinction would be more frequent on an escutcheon, than a coronet.

THE disposal of our fortunes by our last will should be considered as the
discharge of a sacred trust, which we should endeavor to execute in a just
manner; and as we have had the enjoyment of rich possessions, we ought
carefully to provide that they may devolve to those, who have the most natural
claim to them. They who may first demand our favor, are those who are allied
to us by the ties of blood: next to these stand those persons to whom we are
connected by friendship: and next to our friends and relations, mankind in
general. But the humanity of a testator will not be thought very extensive,
though it reaches to posterity, or includes the poor in general, if it neglects
the objects of charity immediately under his eye, or those individuals who have
the best title to his benevolence. Virgil has placed those rich men, who
bestowed none of their wealth on their relations, among the chief personages in
his Hell. Wherefore I would advise my good correspondent Mr. Vainall first to
consider, whether he has not some poor relation, starving perhaps in some
distant part of the kingdom: after that let him look round, whether he has not
some friends, whom he may possibly relieve from misery and distress. But if he
has no relation, nor no person in the world that has any regard for him, before
he begins to endow a college or found an hospital, I should take it as a
particular favor if he would leave his money to me, and will promise to
immortalize his memory in the Connoisseur.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXX. THURSDAY, July 22, 1756.
-- Lyrae solers et cantor --
HOR.
I HAVE just received the following letter from lady Humkin, the musical
consort of my late correspondent Sir Aaron. I shall not pretend to moderate in
family disputes of so important a nature, but leave each party to speak for
themselves.

Mr. TOWN,
PRAY hear both sides fairly, before you judge; for (to use a vulgar
expression) one story is good, till the other is told. I am, sir, the
unfortunate wife of that inelegant (I had almost said insensible) husband, who
in your paper of the eighth instant pronounces and publishes me to be mad,
stark mad.

I CONFESS and glory in my passion for music: and can there be a nobler or a
more generous one? My nerves are naturally strung to harmony, and variously
affected by the various combinations of the Gamut. Some stay in Italy added
skill and taste in composition to my natural happy disposition to music; and
the best judges, as well as the best performers in that country, allowed me to
have an uncommon share of virtu. I both compose and perform, sir: and though I
say it, perhaps few even of the profession possess the contra-punto and the
cromatic better; and I have had the unspeakable pleasure, of hearing my
compositions and my performances dignified in Italy with the unanimous
appellations of squisito, divino, and adorevole.

IS there any madness in this? Does not he better deserve that imputation,
whose breast is insensible and impenetrable to all charms and powers of
harmony? To be plain, I mean my husband; whom I have frequently seen yawn, nay
leave the room, in the middle of the most touching pathetic, sung by the most
affecting Signora Mingotti, accompanied by the divine Signor di Giardino. And
yet, -- pardon this digressive transport, -- how irresistible is the
expression, the melody, the cadences, the appogyraturas of that incomparable
virtuosa! What energy, what delicacy, and what variety are in the inimitable
compositions and execution of the charming Signor di Giardino! What an arpeggio
he has, what a staccato, what an andante! In short, I may I am sure with truth
assert, that whether in the allegro or the piano, the adagio, the largo, or the
forte, he never had his equal. O, Mr. TOWN, what an irretrievable loss has this
country sustained! My good man, among his other qualifications, is a
politician, you must know; and one of his principal objections against these
virtuosi is, that they are foreigners. He flew into a violent passion with me
last Sunday night, because I had a concert at my house, when (he said) such bad
news were received from abroad. I know not what he, and other muddy-headed
politicians may think: but let him talk what he will of THE Blakeney, THE
Governor, THE Admiral, I am sure the nation cannot sustain a greater evil than
the loss of THE Mingotti; who, as the public prints will inform you, "is gone
to Holland, till her affairs in England can be settled."

BUT however gothic my husband may be, I am fully determined to discharge the
duty of a good wife. Accordingly, whenever he comes into my room, I sit down to
my harpsichord, and sing and play the most soothing pieces of music, in hopes
some time or other of hitting his unison, but hitherto to no purpose; and, to
say the truth, I fear he has not one harmonic nerve in his whole system, though
otherwise a man of good plain sense. When he interrupts my performances, (as in
his letter he owns that he does) with wishing for the men from Mother
Midnight's, with their wooden spoons, salt-boxes, jews-harps, and broom-sticks,
to play in concert with me; I answer him with all gentleness and calmness
imaginable. -- "Indeed, my dear, you have not the least notion of these things.
It would be impossible to bring those ridiculous instruments into a concert,
and to adapt a thorough bass to them: they have not above three notes at most,
and those cannot be softenute." -- I wish "for all that, answers he, that they
were here; I should like them better than all your Signors and Signoras; and I
am sure they would cost a great deal less."

THIS article of expense he often dwells upon, and sometimes even with warmth;
to which I reply with all the mildness that becomes a good wife, "My dear, you
have a good fortune of your own, and I brought you still a better. Of what use
is money, if not employed? and how can it be better employed, than in
encouraging and rewarding distinguished gusto and merit? These people, that you
call ballad-singers and pipers, are people of birth, though for the most part
of small fortunes; and they are much more considered, as you know, in Italy,
than all the greatest ancient Roman heroes, if revived, would now be. Many of
them, who would perhaps make a figure in the church or the state, have been
considerable losers by devoting themselves to the pleasures of mankind. They
leave their own country, where they are infinitely esteemed for their moral as
well as their musical characters, and generously sacrifice all these advantages
to our diversion. Besides, my dear, what should we do wish our money? would you
lavish it away, upon foundling bastards, lying-in women who have either no
husbands or too many, importunate beggars, all whose cries and complaints are
the most shocking discords? or suppose that we were to save our money, and
leave our children better fortunes, who knows but they might, as too many do,
squander them away idly? whereas what we give to these virtuosi, we know is
given to merit. For my own part, my dear, I have infinite pleasure, when I can
get any of them to accept of fifty or an hundred guineas, which by the way
cannot always be brought about without some art and contrivance; for they are
most exceedingly nice and delicate upon the point of honor, especially in the
article of money. And I look upon such trifling presents as a debt due to
superior talents and merit; and I endeavor to insinuate them in a way that the
receiver may not blush." -- Here my husband breaks out into a violent passion,
and says, -- "Oons, madam, show me a virtuoso or a virtuosa, (as you call them)
who ever blushed in their lives, and I will give them the fee simple of my
estate." You see, Mr. TOWN, what a strange man he is, that he has no idea of
elegance and divertimenti, and when he is so violently in alt, I will leave you
to judge who it is that is mad, stark mad.

IN short, sir, my husband is insensible, untuneable, to the most noble,
generous, and strongest of all human passions, a passion for music. That divine
passion alone engrosses the whole soul, and leaves no room for lesser and
vulgar cares; for you must certainly have observed, Mr. TOWN, that whoever has
a passion for, and a thorough knowledge of music, is fit for no one other
thing. Thus truly informed of my case, I am sure you will judge equitably
between Sir Aaron and

Your faithful humble servant, MARIA HUMKIN.


Just Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXI. THURSDAY, July 29, 1756.
-- Inter
Perfectos veteresque referri debet, an inter
Viles atque novos?
HOR.
NO other disposition or turn of mind so totally unfits a man for all the
social offices of life as Indolence. An idle man is a mere blank in the
creation, he seems made for no end, and lives to no purpose. He cannot engage
himself in any employment or profession, because he will never have diligence
enough to follow it; he can succeed in no undertaking, for he will never pursue
it; he must be a bad husband, father, and relation, for he will not take the
least pains to preserve his wife, children, and family from starving; and he
must be a worthless friend, for he would not draw his hand from his bosom,
though to prevent the destruction of the universe. If he is born poor, he will
remain so all his life, which he will probably end in a ditch or at the
gallows; if he embarks in trade he will be a bankrupt; and if he is a person of
fortune, he stewards will acquire immense estates, and he himself perhaps will
die in the Fleet.

IT should be considered that nature did not bring us into the world in a state
of perfection, but has left us in a capacity of improvement: which should seem
to intimate that we should labor to render ourselves excellent. Very few are
such absolute idiots, as not to be able to become at least decent, if not
eminent, in their several stations, by unwearied and keen application: nor are
there any possessed of such transcendant genius and abilities, as to render all
pains and diligence unnecessary. Perseverance will overcome difficulties, which
at first appear insuperable; and it is amazing to consider, how great and
numerous obstacles may be removed by a continual attention to any particular
point. I will not mention here the trite example of Demosthenes, who got over
the greatest natural impediments to oratory, but content myself with a more
modern and familiar instance. Being at Sadler's Wells a few nights ago, I could
not but admire the surprising feats of activity there exhibited, and at the
same time reflected what incredible pains and labor it must have cost the
performers, to arrive at the art of writhing their bodies into such various and
unnatural contortions. But I was most taken with the ingenious artist, who
after fixing two bells to each foot, the same number to each hand, and with
great propriety placing a cap and bells on his head, played several tunes, and
went through as regular triple peals and Bob Majors as the boys at Christ
Church Hospital; all which he effected by the due jerking of his arms and legs,
and nodding his head backward and forward. If this artist had taken equal pains
to employ his head in another way, he might perhaps have been as deep a
proficient in numbers as Jedediah Buxton, or at least a tolerable modern
rhimer, of which he is now no bad emblem: and if our fine ladies would use
equal diligence, they might fashion their minds as successfully as Madam
Catharina distorts her body.

THERE is not in the world a more useless idle animal, than he who contents
himself with being merely a Gentleman. He has an estate, therefore he will not
endeavor to acquire knowledge: he is not to labor in any vocation, therefore
he will do nothing. But the misfortune is that there is no such thing in nature
as negative virtue, and that absolute idleness is impracticable. He who does no
good, will certainly do mischief; and the mind, if it is not stored with useful
knowledge, will necessarily become a magazine of nonsense and trifles.
Wherefore a Gentleman, though he is not obliged to rise to open his shop or
work at his trade, may always find some ways of employing his time to
advantage. If he makes no advances in wisdom, he will become more and more a
slave to folly; and he that does nothing because he has nothing to do, will
become vicious and abandoned, or at best ridiculous and contemptible.

THERE is not a more melancholy object, than a man of an honest heart and fine
natural abilities whose good qualities are thus destroyed by Indolence. Such a
person is a constant plague to all his friends and acquaintance, with all the
means in his power of adding to their happiness; and suffers himself to rank
among the lowest characters, when he might render himself conspicuous among the
highest. Nobody is more universally beloved, and more universally avoided than
my friend Careless. He is a humane man, who never did a beneficent action; and
a man of unshaken integrity, on whom it is impossible to depend. With the best
head, and the best heart, he regulates his conduct in the most absurd manner,
and frequently injures his friends; for whoever neglects to do justice to
himself, must inevitably wrong those with whom he is connected; and it is by no
means a true maxim, that an idle man hurts nobody but himself.

VIRTUE then is not to be considered in the light of mere innocence, or
abstaining from harm, but as the exertion of our faculties in doing good: as
Titus, when he had let a day slip, undistinguished by some act of virtue, cried
out, "I have lost a day." If we regard our time in this light, how many days
shall we look back upon as irretrievably lost? and to how narrow a compass
would such a method of calculation frequently reduce the longest life? If we
were to number our days, according as we have applied them to virtue, it would
occasion strange revolutions in the manner of reckoning the ages of men. We
should see some few men arrived to a good old age in the prime of their youth,
and meet with several young fellows of fourscore.

AGREEABLE to this way of thinking, I remember to have met with the epitaph of
an aged man, four years old: dating his existence, from the time of his
reformation from evil courses. The inscriptions on most tomb-stones commemorate
no acts of virtue performed by the persons who lie under them, but only record
that they were born one day and died another. But I would fain have those
people, whose lives have been useless, rendered of some service after their
deaths, by affording lessons of instruction and morality to those they leave
behind them. Wherefore I could wish, that in every parish several acres were
marked out for a new and spacious Burying-Ground: in which every person, whose
remains are there deposited, should have a small stone laid over them,
reckoning their age according to the manner in which they have improved or
abused the time allotted them in their lives. In such circumstances, the plate
on a coffin might be the highest panegyric which the deceased could receive;
and a little square stone, inscribed with Ob. Ann. Aetat. 80. would be a nobler
eulogium than all the lapidary adulation of modern epitaphs. In a
Burying-Ground of this nature, allowing for the partiality of survivors, which
would certainly point out the most brilliant actions of their dead friends, we
might perhaps see some inscriptions, not much unlike the following.

Here lie the remains of a celebrated Beauty, aged 50, who died in the fifth
year of her age. She was born in her eighteenth year, and was untimely killed
by the small pox in her twenty third. Here rests in eternal sleep the mortal
part of L. B. a Freethinker, aged 88, an Infant. He came into the world by
chance in the year -- and was annihilated in the first year of his age. Here
continue to rot the bones of a noted Buck, an embryo, who never showed any
signs of life, and after twenty three years was so totally putrified, that it
could not be kept above ground any longer. Here lies the swollen carcass of a
Boon Companion, who was born in a dropsy in the 40th year of his age: He
lingered in this condition, till he was obliged to be tapped, when he relapsed
into his former condition, and died in the second year of his age, and the 23d
of his drinking. Here lies Isaac Da-Costa, a convert from Judaism, aged 64. He
was born and christened in his 61st year, and died in the true Faith in the
third year of his age. Here is deposited the body of the celebrated Beau
Tawdry, who was born at court in the year -- on a Birthnight, and died of grief
in his second year upon the court's going into mourning. Here rots A. B.
Still-born, who died of a fright on the twentieth of May, 1756. Here rests from
his labors the Brave General B. who died about the hundredth year of his age,
older than Methuselah. THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXII. THURSDAY, August 5, 1756.
Odi profanum vulgus, et arceo.
HOR.
I KNOW not any greater misfortune that can happen to a young fellow at his
first setting out in life, than his falling into Low Company. He that sinks to
a familiarity with persons much below his own level, will be constantly weighed
down by his base connections: and though he may easily plunge still lower, he
will find it impossible ever to rise again. We cannot give a liberal turn of
mind to a vulgar by introducing him to genteel company, any more than we can
make a beau of him by dressing him in embroidery: but a gentlemen will as
naturally catch the manners of a blackguard by mixing with blackguards, as he
would daub his clothes with foot by running against a chimney-sweeper.

BY Low Company I would not be supposed to mean the best and most valuable part
of mankind, which have been distinguished by the name of Middling sort of
people: though I am not ignorant, that these are despised by all, who would be
thought to keep the Best Company. The apes of quality affect to look upon all
others, who have no relish for the amusements of high life, or do not choose to
pay a guinea for their ordinary, as downright vulgars: and it was with the
utmost contempt I once heard a young coxcomb of fashion speak of a most
intimate friend, "that he should be forced to drop his acquaintance, because he
kept such low company." Neither would I confine this appellation solely to the
inferior order of tradesmen and mechanics, or the whole body of the mobility in
general: for although this rank of people may be literally said to be in low
life, a right honorable, who lets himself down to the manners of a porter or a
hackney-coachman, differs from them in nothing but his title.

A PROPENSITY to Low Company is either owing to an original meanness of spirit,
a want of education, or an ill-placed pride, commonly arising from both the
forementioned causes. Those, who are naturally of a grovelling disposition,
show it even at school, by choosing their play-mates from the scum of the class;
and are never so happy, as when they can steal down to romp with the servants
in the kitchen. But the most frequent cause is the desire of being, as it is
called, the head of the company; and a person of this humble ambition will be
very well content to pay the reckoning, for the honor of being distinguished
by the title of The Gentleman. It sometimes happens, that a man of genius and
learning will stoop to receive the incense of mean and illiterate flatterers in
a porter-house or a cyder-cellar: and I remember to have heard of a poet, who
was once caught in a bawdy house in the very fact, of reading his verses to the
good old mother and a circle of her daughters.

THERE are some, who have been led into Low Company, merely from an affectation
of Humor; and from a notion of seeing life, and a desire of being accounted
men of humor, have descended to associate with the meanest of the mob, and
picked their cronies from White-Chapel and Broad St. Giles's. Of these
characters the most remarkable is a young fellow of family and fortune, who was
born and bred a gentleman, but has taken great pains to degrade himself; and is
now as complete a blackguard as those whom he has chosen for his companions. He
will drink purl in a morning, smoke his pipe in a night-cellar, and eat black
puddings at Bartholomew Fair, for the Humor of the thing. All the while, he is
reckoned by his friends to be a mighty good-natured gentleman, and without the
least bit of pride in him.

IN order to qualify himself for the society of the vulgar, Bob has studied and
practiced all the vulgar arts under the best masters. He has therefore
cultivated an intimacy with Buckhorse, and is very proud of being sometimes
admitted to the honor of conversing with the great Broughton himself. He is
also very well known among the hackney-coachmen, as a brotherwhip: but his
greatest excellence is cricket-playing, in which he is reckoned as good a bat
as either of the Bennets; and is at length arrived at the supreme dignity of
being distinguished among his brethren of the wicket by the title of Long Robin.

IT is diverting enough to consider the fate of many of Bob's intimate friends
and acquaintance. It must be owned, that some of these have come to an untimely
end; that some have been sent abroad, and others been set in the pillory, or
whipped in Bridewell. One of Bob's favorite amusements is attending the
executions at Tyburn: and it once happened, that one of his companions was
unfortunately brought thither; when Bob carried his regard for his deceased
friend so far, as to get himself knocked down in endeavoring to rescue the
body from the surgeons.

As Bob constantly affects to mimic the air and manners of the vulgar, he takes
care to enrich his conversation with the emphatical oaths and expressive
dialect of Billingsgate and St. Giles's; which never fails to recommend him as
a man of excellent humor among the Choice Spirits and the Sons of sound sense
and satisfaction, and frequently promotes him to the chair in these facetious
societies. But he is particularly famous for singing those Cant Songs, drawn up
in the lingo of sharpers and pick-pockets; the humor of which he greatly sets
off and heightens, by screwing up his mouth, and rolling about a large quid of
tobacco between his jaws.

BOB has indulged the same notions of humor even in his amors: and he is well
known to every street-walker between Charing Cross and Cheap Side. This has
ruined his constitution, and often involved him in several unluckly scrapes. He
has been frequently bruised, beat, and kicked by the bullies in Fleet-Ditch and
Blood-Bowl Alley; and he was once soundly drubbed by a soldier for engaging
with his trull in St. James's Park. The last time I saw him, he was laid up
with two black eyes, and a broken pate, which he got in a midnight skirmish
about a mistress in a night-cellar. He had carried down a bunter which he had
picked up in the streets, in order to treat her with a quartern of gin royal;
when a sturdy chairman attempting to take away his doxy, a battle ensued
between them, and he was severely handled, amid the universal cry of the whole
company, of -- kick him up stairs -- kick him up stairs.

Just Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXIII. THURSDAY, August 12, 1756.
Sex horas sommo, totidem des legibus aequis;
Quatuor orabis, des epulisque duas.
Quod superest, ultro sacris largire Camaenis.
CO. LITT.
To Mr. TOWN.
Middle Temple. SIR!
IF we look into the several inns of court, the professed students of the law
compose a very numerous body: but if we afterward turn our eyes on those few,
who are employed in exercising their talents in Westminster Hall, this
prodigious army of lawyers shrinks to a very thin and inconsiderable corpse.
Thousands, it seems, are disgusted with the unpleasing dryness of the study, as
it is now managed, and conceive an unconquerable aversion to the white leaves
and the old black letter. This early dislike to legal enquiries certainly
proceeds from the fatal mistakes in the plan of study hitherto marked out.
According to all systems now extant, it is absolutely impossible to be at once
a lawyer and a fine gentleman. Seeing with concern the many evils arising from
these erroneous principles, I have at length devised a method to remedy all
these inconveniences; a method, now very successfully practiced by several
young gentlemen. Wherefore I must beg leave to submit my thoughts to the public
by means of your paper, and to chalk out the outlines of a treatise, now ready
for the press, entitled The Complete Barrister, or, a New Institute of the Laws
of England.

MY Lord Coke prescribes to our student to follow the advice given in the
ancient verses, prefixed to this letter, for the good spending of the day. "Six
hours to sleep, six to the study of the law, four to prayer, two to meals, and
the rest to the Muses." But what an absurd and unfashionable distribution of
the four and twenty hours! I will venture a thousand pounds to a shilling, that
not one student in the kingdom divides his time in this manner. Here is not a
single word of Vauxhall, Ranelagh, the theaters, or other public diversions;
not to mention that nobody but a methodist would ever think of praying four
hours, and that it would be impossible, though we were content with snapping up
a chop every day at Betty's, to dispatch even dinner in two. How then shall we
reconcile these precepts, scarce practicable by a hermit, to the life of a
young gentleman who keeps the best company? Or how can these rules for severe
application be made consistent with the practice of those, who divide their
whole time between eating, drinking, sleeping, and amusements? Well knowing
that the volatile dispositions of the young gentlemen of the present age can
never submit the ordering of their lives to any prescribed rules, I have
endeavored to square my precepts to their lives; and have so contrived the
matter, that amidst the keenest persuit of their pleasures, they shall be
engaged in the most improving course of the law.

AS laws are chiefly nothing else but rules of action, what can be more cruel
and absurd, than to coop up a brisk young man to learn in his chambers, what he
can so much better teach himself by going abroad into the world? I propose to
dose gentlemen with study, as Dr. Rock does with physic, to be taken at home or
abroad without loss of time or hindrance of business. This, I am convinced, is
not only the best method, but also the only scheme which several inhabitants of
the inns of court would ever follow. I shall not at present forestall the
contents of my treatise by presenting you with a dry abstract of it, but rather
endeavor to give you an idea of the spirit and manner in which it is written,
by delineating the plan diligently persued by one of my favorite pupils: and I
cannot but congratulate the bar, that so many young men, instead of blinding
their eyes and bewildering their understandings with Coke, Plowden, Salkeld,
etc. have sense enough to follow the same course of study.

TOM RIOT, the principal ornament of my class of students, was sent to the
Temple, not with any intention that he should become a great lawyer, but merely
because, for a few years, his father did not know how to dispose of him
otherwise: but so unwearied has been his application to the new method, that
his father and the rest of his friends will, I doubt not, be surprised at his
wonderful proficiency. As nothing is of more consequence to those gentlemen,
who intend to harangue at the bar, than the acquiring a ready elocution, and an
easy habit of delivering their thoughts in public, to this I paid particular
attention. For this purpose, I advised him to a diligent attendance on the
theaters, and I assure you, Mr. TOWN, he never fails to take notes at a new
play, and seldom or never misses appearing at one house or the other in the
green boxes. He has also gathered many beautiful flowers of rhetoric, unblown
upon by all other orators ancient or modern, from the Robin Hood Society; and
at the same place he has collected the strongest arguments on every subject,
and habituated himself to modes of reasoning never hitherto introduced into
courts of justice. But what has been of more than ordinary service to him, and
is particularly recommended by Lord Coke himself, who calls "conference the
life of study," is his so frequent attendance at George's and the other
coffee-houses about the Temple, where every student has so many opportunities
of benefiting himself by daily conversation with counselors, attorneys, clerks
to attorneys, and other sages of law.

THE law is intended to take cognizance of all our actions, wherefore my pupil,
who is fond of exerting his faculties in polite life, has already digested
almost all the grand leading points of the law into a journal of his
transactions, which I shall lay before my readers at large in my treatise, as
the best method for a common-place-book. Thus for instance, having been
frequently employed, after leaving the Shakespeare, in what is called beating
the rounds, it has happened to him to be taken into custody by the magistrate
of the night, and carried the next morning before a justice, by which means he
has attained as full a knowledge of certain parts of the duty of a constable
and justice of peace, as could be collected from Dalton, Blackerby, or Burn.
Certain impertinences of his tailor and other tradesmen have given him a very
clear notion of the laws of arrest, and been of as much service to him as the
best treatises on bail and main-prize. Besides which, the several sums of money
which he has taken up at different times payable on his father's death, have
opened to him some difficult points in conveyancing, by teaching him the nature
of bonds, deeds, etc. and have at the same time shown him what Lord Coke calls,
"the amiable and admirable secrets of the common law," by unravelling to him
the intricate doctrines of reversion and remainder, as well as the general
nature of estates. Thus he is continually improving, and whenever he should
happen to commit a rape or a genteel murder, it will serve him for matter of
instruction as well as any history of the pleas of the crown, and give him an
insight into the nature of the practice and extent of the jurisdiction of our
courts of justice.

BY this plan of study no time is lost; so that while other students are idling
away their vacation in the country, my pupil is daily improving there. As he is
a member of the association, he is very conversant in all the laws enacted for
the preservation of the game; and he picks up all the learning of the circuit
by dancing at the Balls at the assizes. As his father has a place, he is
employed in canvassing for votes at the time of an election, which instructs
him in all the points of law touching those matters. He was principally
concerned in discovering the Customary Tenants, the new species of freeholders
unknown to Littleton, Coke, and all the lawyers of antiquity: and he is so
intimately acquainted with all the doctrine contained in the several clauses of
the bribery act, that I propose publishing in the body of my treatise Les
Readings Del Mon Seignior RIOT Sur L'Estatute de 2 Geo. 2. etc.

BY this time, Mr. TOWN, you must perceive that the ground of my scheme is in
short no more than this, viz. that the student should regard his life as a kind
of commentary on the law, as it is recommended to the clergy to become examples
of the doctrine they teach. Or to bring my illustration more home to these
gentlemen, let them learn the law by being occasionally interested in different
parts of it, as they become in some measure doctors of physic from frequent
need of it, and can cure themselves in certain cases as well as Rock himself.
Instead of poring over books, a gentleman need only observe, how far the law
and his actions tally with each other; and as it is said by Lord Coke, "that
the knowledge of the law is like a deep well, out of which each man draws
according to the strength of his understanding," so in persuance of my plan,
the student will improve according to the eagerness with which he engages in
his pleasures: and this, no doubt, was intended by Lord Coke, as it is the most
obvious interpretation of his words, when he concludes the comparison by
saying, that "when the professor of the law can dive into the depth, it is
delightful, easy, and without any heavy burden, so long as he keep himself in
his own proper element."

WHAT plan, Mr. TOWN, can be more delightful, easy, and without any heavy
burden than Institutes of this nature? I have indeed often looked with concern
upon those unhappy gentlemen who have impaired their health by the old method
of study, and considered them as martyrs to huge volumes of reports and
statutes at large: my pupils will be in no danger of these misfortunes. It is
recorded of an eminent counselor of the North family, who being one of the
ablest practitioners at the bar, was so overloaded with business, that
sometimes choosing to retire awhile from hurry and perplexity, he would say to
his clerk "Tell the people I do not practice this term." This proper relaxation
I always recommend to my pupils, and have some reason to think they are prudent
enough to embrace it; for as I am acquainted with several students on the new
plan, and do not remember to have seen them doing any business in the courts
for some time. I suppose they had given notice to their clerks "to tell the
people that they did not practice in those terms."

I am, sir, your humble servant, IGNORAMUS.


The Letter signed J. C. has been received, and shall be duly regarded.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXIV. THURSDAY, August 19, 1756.
(...)
HOM.
Mr. VILLAGE to Mr. TOWN.
Dear Cousin,
THE country at present, no less than the metropolis, abounding with
politicians of every kind, I begun to despair of picking up any intelligence,
that might possibly be entertaining to your readers. However, I have made a
tour to some of the most distant parts of the kingdom with a clergyman of my
acquaintance; and shall not trouble you with an account of the improvements
that have been made in the seats we saw according to the modern taste, but
proceed to give you some reflections, which occurred to us on observing several
country churches, and the behavior of their congregations.

THE ruinous condition of some of these churches gave me great offense; and I
could not help wishing, that the honest vicar, instead of indulging his genius
for improvements, by enclosing his gooseberry bushes with a Chinese rail, and
converting half an acre of his glebe-land into a bowling-green, would have
applied part of his income to the more laudable purpose of sheltering his
parishioners from the weather during their attendance on divine service. It is
no uncommon thing to see the parsonag -house well thatched, and in exceeding
good repair, while the church perhaps has no better roof than the ivy that
grows over it. The noise of owls, bats and magpies makes a principal part of
the church music in many of these ancient edifices; and the walls, like a
large map, seem to be portioned out into capes, seas, and promontories by the
various colors with which the damps have stained them. Sometimes it has
happened, that the foundation being too weak to support the steeple any longer,
it has been found expedient to pull down that part of the building, and to hang
the bells under a wooden shed on the ground beside it. This is the case in a
parish in Norfolk, through which I lately passed, and where the clerk and the
sexton, like the two figures at St. Dunstan's, serve the bells in capacity of
clappers, by striking them alternately with a hammer.

IN other churches I have observed, that nothing unseemly or ruinous is to be
found, except in the clergyman, and in the appendages of his person. The squire
of the parish, or his ancestors perhaps, to testify their devotion, and leave a
lasting monument of their magnificence, have adorned the altar-piece with the
richest crimson velvet, embroidered with vine-leaves and ears of wheat, and
have dressed up the pulpit with the same splendor and expense; while the
gentleman who fills it is exalted in the midst of all this finery with a
surplice as dirty as a farmer's frock, and a periwig that seems to have
transferred its faculty of curling to the band, that appears in full-buckle
beneath it,

BUT if I was concerned to see many of our country churches in a tottering
condition, I was more offended with the indecency of worship in others. I could
wish that the pastors would inform their hearers, that there is no occasion to
scream themselves hoarse in making the responses, that the town-cryer is not
the only person qualified to pray with due devotion, and that he who bawls the
loudest may nevertheless be the wickedest fellow in the parish. The old women
too in the ayle might be told that their time would be better employed in
attending to the sermon, than in fumbling over their tattered testaments till
they have found the text, by which time the discourse is near drawing to a
conclusion; while a word or two of instruction might not be thrown away upon
the younger part of the congregation to teach them, that making posies in
summertime, and cracking nuts in autumn, is no part of the religious ceremony.

THE good old practice of psalm-singing is, indeed, wonderfully improved in
many country churches since the days of Sternhold and Hopkins; and there is
scarce a parish-clerk, who has so little taste as not to pick his staves out of
the New Version. This has occasioned great complaints in some places, where the
clerk has been forced to bawl by himself, because the rest of the congregation
cannot find the psalm at the end of their prayer-books; while others are highly
disgusted at the innovation, and stick as obstinately to the Old Version as to
the Old Style. The tunes themselves have also been new-set to jiggish measures;
and the sober drawl, which used to accompany the two first staves of the
hundredth psalm with the gloria patri, is now split into as many quavers as an
Italian air. For this purpose there is in every county an itinerant band of
vocal musicians, who make it their business to go round to all the churches in
their turns, and, after a prelude with the pitch-pipe, astonish the audience
with hymns set to the new Winchester measure and anthems of their own
composing. As these new-fashioned psalmodists are necessarily made up of young
men and maids, we may naturally suppose, that there is a perfect concord and
symphony between them: and, indeed, I have known it happen, that these sweet
singers have been brought more than once into disgrace, by too close an unison
between the thorough-base and the treble.

IT is a difficult matter to decide, which is looked upon to be the greatest
man in a country church, the parson or his clerk. The latter is most certainly
held in higher veneration, where the former happens to be only a poor curate,
who rides post every sabbath from village to village, and mounts and dismounts
at the church-door. The clerk's office is not only to tag the prayers with an
Amen, or usher in the sermon with a stave; but he is also the universal father
to give away the brides, and the standing godfather to all the newborn brats.
But in many places there is a still greater man belonging to the church, than
either the parson or the clerk himself. The person I mean is the squire; who,
like the King, may be styled Head of the Church in his own parish. If the
benefice be in his own gift, the vicar is his creature, and of consequence
entirely at his devotion: or, if the care of the church is left to a curate,
the Sunday fees of roast beef and plumb pudding, and a liberty to shoot in the
manor, will bring him as much under the squire's command as his dogs and
horses. For this reason the bell is often kept tolling, and the people waiting
in the churchyard, an hour longer than the usual time; nor must the service
begin, till the squire has strutted up the ayle, and seated himself in the
great pew in the chancel. The length of the sermon is also measured by the will
of the squire, as formerly by the hourglass: and I know one parish where the
preacher has always the complaisance to break off to a conclusion, the minute
that the squire gives the signal by rising up after his nap.

IN a village church, the squire's lady or the vicar's wife are perhaps the
only females that are stared at for their finery: but in the larger cities and
towns, where the newest fashions are brought down weekly by the stage-coach or
wagon, all the wives and daughters of the most topping tradesmen vie with each
other every Sunday in the elegance of their apparel. I could even trace the
gradations in their dress according to the opulence, the extent, and the
distance of the place from London. I was at church in a populous city in the
north, where the mace-bearer cleared the way for Mrs. Mayoress, who came
sidling after him in an enormous fan-hoop, of a pattern which had never been
seen before in those parts. At another church in a corporation-town, I saw
several Negligees, with furbelow'd aprons, which had long disputed the prize of
superiority: but these were most woefully eclipsed by a burgess's daughter just
come from London, who appeared in a Trolloppee or Slammerkin, with treble
ruffles to the cuffs, pinked and gymped, and the sides of the petticoat drawn
up in festoons. In some lesser borough towns the contest, I found, lay between
three or four black and green bibs and aprons: at one a grocer's wife attracted
our eyes by a new-fashioned cap called a Joan; and at another they were wholly
taken up by a mercer's daughter in a Nun's Hood.

I NEED not say any thing of the behavior of the congregations in these more
polite places of religious resort; as the same genteel ceremonies are practiced
there as at the most fashionable churches at the court end of the town. The
ladies immediately on their entrance breathe a pious ejaculation through their
fan-sticks, and the beaus very gravely address themselves to the Haberdashers'
Bills glewed upon the linings of their hats. This pious duty is no sooner
performed, than the exercise of bowing and curtsying succeeds; the locking and
unlocking of the pews drowns the reader's voice at the beginning of the
service, and the rustling of silks, added to the whispering and tittering of so
much good company, renders him totally unintelligible to the very end of it.

I am, dear Cousin, yours, etc.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXV. THURSDAY, August 26, 1756.
Vos sapere, et solos aio been vivere, quorum
Conspicitur nitidis fundata pecunia Villis.
HOR.
I Am sorry to have provoked the resentment of many of our present poets by
rejecting their compositions; which, as they abounded in high-flown metaphors
and compound epithets, were, I feared, too sublime for my humble province of
plain prose. I have found, that the same poetical genius, which could soar to
an Ode, can be whetted to a most cutting Satire against me and my works: and
one in particular has poured forth his whole wrath upon me in an Acrostic. But
I need not offer any apology for laying the following Verses before the public,
which may be considered as a supplement to a former paper on the like subject.
The easy elegance, which runs through the whole, will readily distinguish them
to come from the same hand, that has more than once obliged us in the course of
this undertaking.

THE wealthy Cit, grown old in trade,
Now wishes for the rural shade;
And buckles to his one-horse chair
Old Dobbin or the foundered mare;
While wedged in closely by his side
Sits Madam, his unwieldy bride,
With Jacky on a stool before 'em;
And out they jog in due decorum.
Scarce past the turnpike half a mile,
How all the country seems to smile!
And as they slowly jog together,
The Cit commends the road and weather;
While Madam doats upon the trees,
And longs for every house she sees;
Admires its views, its situation,
And thus she opens her oration.
"WHAT signify the loads of wealth,
"Without that richest jewel health?
"Excuse the fondness of a wife,
"Who doats upon your precious life:
"Such ceaseless toil, such constant care
"Is more than human strength can bear.
"One may observe it in your face --
"Indeed, my dear, you break apace:
"And nothing can your health repair,
"But exercise and country air.
"Sir Traffic has a house, you know,
"About a mile from Cheney Row:
"He Is a good man, indeed, it is true,
"But not so warm, my dear, as you:
"And folks are always apt to sneer --
"One would not be outdone, my dear."
SIR Traffick's name so well applied
Awaked his brother merchant's pride;
And Thrifty, who had all his life
Paid utmost deference to his wife,
Confessed, her arguments had reason;
And by the approaching summer season
Draws a few hundreds from the stocks,
And purchases his Country Box.
SOME three or four mile out of town,
(An hour's ride will bring you down,)
He fixes on his choice abode,
Not half a furlong from the road:
And so convenient does it lay,
The stages pass it every day:
And then so snug, so mighty pretty,
To have a house so near the city:
Take but your places at the Boar,
You're set down at the very door.
WELL then, suppose 'em fixed at last,
White-washing, painting, scrubbing past;
Hugging themselves in ease and clover,
With all the fuss of moving over:
Lo! a new heap of whims are bred,
And wanton in my lady's head.
"Well, to be sure it must be owned
"It is a charming spot of ground:
"So sweet a distance for a ride;
"And all about so countryfied!
"'Twould come to but a trifling price
"To make it quite a paradise.
"I cannot bear those nasty rails,
"Those ugly, broken, moldy pales:
"Suppose, my dear, instead of these,
"We build a railing all Chinese.
"Although one hates to be exposed,
"'It Is dismal to be thus enclosed.
"Rural retirement do you term it?
"Lard, it is living like a hermit.
"One hardly any object sees --
"I wish you would fell those odious trees:
"'Twould make a much more cheerful sce^
"I Am tired with everlasting green.
"Objects continual passing by
"Were something to amuse the eye:
"But to be pent within the walls,
"One might as well be at St. Paul's.
"Our house beholders would adore,
"Was there a level lawn before;
"Nothing its views to incommode,
"But quite laid open to the road;
"While every trav'ler in amaze
"Should on our little mansion gaze,
"And, pointing to the choice retreat,
"Cry, that is Sir Thrifty's Country-Seat."
No doubt her arguments prevail,
For Madam's TASTE can never fail.
BLESSED age! when all men may procure
The title of a Connoisseur;
When noble and ignoble herd
Are governed by a single word;
Though, like the royal German dames,
It bears an hundred Christian names;
As Genius, Fancy, Judgment, Gout,
Whim, Caprice, Je ne scai quoi, Virtu:
Which appellations all describe
TASTE, and the modern tasteful tribe.
NOW bricklayers, carpenters, and joiners,
With Chinese artists and designers,
Produce their schemes of alteration,
To work this wondrous reformation.
The useful dome, which secret stood
Embosom'd in the yew-tree's wood,
The trav'ler with amazement sees
Changed to a Temple tout Chinese,
With many a bell and tawdry rag on,
And crested with a sprawling dragon.
A wooden arch is bent astride
A ditch of water four foot wide,
With angles, curves, and zigzag lines,
From Halfpenny's exact designs.
In front a level lawn is seen,
Without a shrub upon the green;
Where Taste would want its first great law.
But for the skulking sly Ha-Ha;
By whose miraculous assistance
You gain a prospect two fields distance.
And now from Hyde-park Corner come
The Gods of Athens and of Rome.
Here squabby Cupids take their places,
With Venus and the clumsy Graces;
Apollo there with aim so clever
Stretches his leaden bow for ever;
And there, without the power to fly,
Stands fixed a tip-toe Mercury.
THE Villa thus completely graced,
All own, that Thrifty has a Taste:
And Madam's female friends and cousins,
With Common-Council-Men by dozens,
Flock every Sunday to the Seat,
To stare about them, and to eat.
THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXVI. THURSDAY, September 2, 1756.
-- Hominem pagina nostra sapit.
MART.
WE, whose business it is to write loose essays, and who never talk above a
quarter of an hour together on any one subject, are not expected to enter into
philosophical disquisitions, or engage in abstract speculations: but it is
supposed to be our principal aim to amuse and instruct the reader by a lively
representation of what passes round about him. Thus, like those painters who
delineate the scenes of familiar life, we sometimes give a sketch of a Marriage
a la mode, sometimes draw the outlines of a Modern Midnight conversation, at
another time paint the comical distresses of itinerant Tragedians in a barn,
and at another give a full draught of the Rake's or Harlot's progress.
Sometimes we divert the public by exhibiting single portraits; and when we meet
with a subject where the features are strongly marked by nature, and there is
something peculiarly characteristic in the whole manner, we employ ourselves in
drawing a full length. In a word, we consider all mankind as sitting for their
pictures, and endeavor to work up our pieces with lively traits, and embellish
them with beautiful coloring: and though perhaps they are not always highly
finished, yet they seldom fail of pleasing some few at least of the vast
multitude of Critics and Connoisseurs, if we are so happy as to hit off a
striking likeness.

THERE is perhaps no knowledge more requisite, and certainly none at present
more ardently sought after, than the Knowledge of the World. In this science we
are more particularly expected to be adepts, as well as to initiate, or at
least improve our readers in it. And though this knowledge cannot be collected
altogether from books, yet (as Pope says) "Men may be read as well as books too
much;" and it is to be lamented, that many, who have only consulted the volume
of life as it lay open before them, have rather become worse than better by
their studies. They, who have lived wholly in the world without regarding the
comments on it, are generally tainted with all its vices; to which the
gathering part of their instructions from books would perhaps have proved an
antidote. There indeed, though they would have seen the faults and foibles of
mankind fairly represented, yet vice would appear in an odious, and virtue in
an amiable light; but those, who unwarned go abroad into the world, are often
dazzled by the splendour with which wealth gilds vice and infamy, and being
accustomed to see barefoot honesty treated with scorn, are themselves induced
to consider it as contemptible. For this reason I am a good deal offended at
the ingenious contrivance of our modern novellists and writers of comedy, who
often gloss over a villainous character with the same false varnish, that
lackers so many scoundrels in real life; and while they are exhibiting a
fellow, who debauches your daughter or lies with your wife, represent him as an
agreeable creature, a man of gallantry, and a fine gentleman.

THE world, even the gayest part of it, may be painted like itself, and yet
become a lesson of instruction. The pieces of Hogarth (to recur to the
illustration I first made use of) are faithful delineations of certain scenes
of life, and yet vice and folly always appear odious and contemptible. I could
wish it were possible to learn the knowledge of the world without being
"hackney'd in the ways of men;" but as that is impracticable, it is still our
duty so to live in it, as to avoid being corrupted by our intercourse with
mankind. We should endeavor to guard against fraud, without becoming ourselves
deceitful; and to see every species of vice and folly practiced round about us,
without growing knaves and fools. The villainy of others is but a poor excuse
for the loss of our own integrity; and though, indeed, if I am attacked on
Hounslow-Heath, I may lawfully kill the highwayman in my own defense, yet I
should be very deservedly brought to the gallows, if I took a purse from the
next person I met, because I had been robbed myself.

THE Knowledge of the World, as it is generally understood, consists not so
much in a due reflection on its vices and follies, as in the practice of them;
and those, who consider themselves as best acquainted with it, are either the
dupes of fashion, or slaves of interest. It is also supposed to lie within the
narrow compass of every man's own sphere of life, and receives a different
interpretation in different stations. Thus, for instance, the man of fashion
seeks it nowhere but in the polite circle of the beau-monde, while the man of
business looks no farther for it than the Alley. I shall beg leave to
illustrate this by two characters; each of whom, though diametrically opposite
to the other, has acquired a thorough Knowledge of the World.

SIR Harry Flash had the good luck to be born before his brother Richard:
consequently the heir to the estate was bred a gentleman, and the other
condemned to plod in the dull drudgery of business. The merchant was sent to
learn accounts at the Academy upon Tower Hill, and the baronet had the
finishing of his education in France. Sir Harry is now a most accomplished fine
gentleman, is an excellent judge of fashions, and can calculate the odds at any
game as readily as Hoyle or Demoivre: the Alderman is the most knowing man upon
'Change, and understands the rise and fall of Stocks better than any Jew. Both
of them know the world; but with this difference, that one by his consummate
knowledge has run out a large estate, while the other has raised a plumb by it.

BEFORE I conclude, it will be proper to take notice of the great improvements
made by our modern ladies in this part of their education. The pretty creatures
were formerly kept at home, and employed in the domestic cares of good
housewifery: they were taught as much as possible to shun the company of the
men, and knew no more of the world than a cloistered Nun. But these restraints
are now happily removed by the present mode of education. The little lady,
instead of being sent to the boarding-school to learn needle work, is
introduced to the politest routs and assemblies, and taught to make one at the
card-table: she is carried about to Vauxhall, Ranelagh, and other genteel
places of amusement; and besides these, if we add a trip to Bath or Cheltenham,
there is no doubt but she is completely versed in the Knowledge of the World.
This, we must own, is very necessary to be attained by ladies of fashion: but
it is with great concern that I have observed the inferior rank of females
frequenting the same schools, and learning the same lessons. Some have
purchased their knowledge very dearly at the expense of their reputation, while
others have laid out their whole fortunes to acquire it; and I could not but
smile the other day at reading an advertisement in the public papers, begging
our charity for a poor distressed gentlewoman, who had formerly lived well, and
seen a great deal of the World.

Just Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXVII. THURSDAY, September 9, 1756.
Hunc comedendum and deridendum vobis propino.
TER.
TO Mr. TOWN.
SIR,
WHAT cloying meat is love, when matrimony is the sauce to it!" says Sir John
Brute. But if he had been joined to such an Epicurean consort as I, those
expressions that favor of the kitchen would have been real, instead of
metaphorical. We live in a land really flowing with milk and honey, and keep a
house of entertainment for all comers and goers. We hardly ever sit down to
table less in number than twenty or thirty, and very often to above double that
number of dishes. In short, sir, so much feasting has given me a surfeit.

THERE are, I see, scattered up and down your papers, several accounts of the
petty distresses and domestic concerns of private families. As you have
listened to many complaints from husbands, I flatter myself you will not refuse
your attention to the humble remonstrance of a wife; being assured, that my
only reason for thus serving up my dear lord as a new dish to gratify the
public taste, is to check (if possible) his violent passion for giveing his
friends entertainments of another kind; which, if indulged much longer, must
eat us out of house and home.

THE magnificent feasts of Timon of Athens, or the stories of old English
Hospitality, would give you but a faint idea of the perpetual riot and luxury
of our family. Our house is always stored with as large a quantity of
provisions as a garrison in expectation of a siege, and those too of the
dearest and most extravagant kind. Ortolans and woodcocks are as plenty as
sparrows, and red mullets are scarce a greater rarity with us than gudgeons or
sprats; while turtle and venison are regarded as branches of citizen-luxury,
which scarce deserve notice among the many other delicacies in which we abound.
Authors, they say, (you will pardon me, Mr. TOWN,) are seldom admitted to great
entertainments; and I can assure you, that it is not easy for any, but those
who are present, to conceive the parade and extravagance displayed in our
house. I myself am condemned to sit at the head of the table, while my lord is
placed at the other end, in pain and uneasiness at my awkward mistakes in doing
the honors. You must know, sir, that I was bred up under an housewifely aunt
in the country, who taught me to pickle and preserve, and gave me, as I
thought, a tolerable notion of cookery. But, alas! though I understand plain
boiled and roast, and have a very good notion of a pudding, I am often totally
ignorant of the names and compositions of the delicacies before me, and have
imagined fish to be fowl, and mistaken a petit patee for a plebeian mince-pie.
In the mean time my lord is displaying his exquisite taste by deciding upon
every dish, and pronouncing with a critical smack upon the flavor of the
wines; all the while not a little solicitous about the exactness of the
Removes, and the duly adjusting the entremets. Claret, Burgundy, and Champagne
are as common as ale or small-beer; and even Hermitage and Tokay are swallowed
with as little remorse as Port of Lisbon. To add to all this, is most absurdly
introduced the French custom of serving in les Liqueurs, which consist of
almost as many sorts as are contained in the advertisements from the Rich
Cordial Warehouse. In a word, every common dinner with us is a feast; and when
we have what my lord calls an entertainment, it is an absolute debauch.

BUT there is no part of this monstrous expense affects me so much as the vast
sums ridiculously lavished on a Desert. This piece of folly and extravagance
could be nothing but the joint product of a Frenchman and a confectioner. After
the gratification of the appetite with more substantial fare, this
whipt-syllabub raree-shew is served up chiefly to feed the eye; not but that
the materials, of which the Desert is composed, are as expensive as the several
ingredients in the dinner: and I will leave you to your own method of rating
the rest, after telling you that my lord thinks himself an excellent
oeconomist, by having reduced the expense of the Hot-House to a thousand per
ann. which perhaps the admirers of exotic fruits will not think dear, as we
have pine-apples as plenty as golden-pippins or nonpareils.

ONE would think, that the first requisite in eating was extravagance, and that
in order to have any thing very good, it must be eat at a time that it is out
of season. Therefore one of the principal uses of our Hot-House is to invert
the order of nature, and to turn winter into summer. We should be ashamed to
see peace upon our table, while they are to be had at a common market; but we
never spare any cost to provide a good crop by the assistance of our hot-beds
at Christmas. We have no relish for cucumbers during the summer months, when
they are no rarity; but we take care to have them forced in November. But my
lord mostly prides himself on the improvements that he has made in his
Mushroom-Beds, which he has at length brought to so great perfection, that by
the help of horse-dung, and throwing artificial sunbeams through a
burning-glass, we can raise any quantity of Mushrooms of the right Italian kind
at two hours warning.

FROM the Hot-House we may make a very natural transition to the Kitchen; and
as in the former every thing must be produced out of season, so every thing in
the latter must undergo a strange metamorphosis. The ordinary distinctions of
fish, flesh, and fowl are quite destroyed; and nothing comes upon table under
its proper form and appellation. It is impossible to conceive what vast sums
are melted down into sauces! We have a cargo of hams every year from
Westphalia, only to extract the Essence of them for our soups; and we kill a
brace of bucks every week, to make a Cullis of the haunches. Half a dozen
turkies have been killed in one day merely for the sake of the pinions; and I
have known a whole pond dragged to furnish a dish of Carps' Palates, and ten
legs of mutton mangled raw to make out a dish of Pope's Eyes.

THE concomitant charges of the cellar, you will imagine, are no less
extravagant; and, indeed, it is not enough that we abound in the best French
and Italian wines, (which by the bye are purchased on the spot at an
extraordinary price,) but we must have several other kinds of the highest
value, and consequently a most delicious flavor. And though but a taste of
each has been sipped round by the company, the same bottles must never be
brought a second time upon table, but are secured as perquisites by the butler,
who fells them to the merchant, who sells them back again to my lord. Besides
these, his lordship has lately been at an immense charge in raising a Pinery,
in order to try the experiment of making Cider of Pine-apples; which he hopes
to do at little more than treble the expense of Champagne. To this article I
might also add the charge of his Ice-Houses: for although these are stored with
an home-commodity originally of no value, yet I may (...) to say, that every
drop of water comes as dear to us as the most costly of our wines.

AS all our liquors, I have told you, are of foreign growth, and all our dishes
distinguished by foreign titles, you will readily conceive, that our household
is chiefly composed of foreigners. The butler out of livery, and his two
under-butlers, are Frenchmen: the clerk of the kitchen is a Frenchman: and
Monsieur Fricando, the head-cook, to be sure is a Frenchman. This gentleman
never soils his fingers in touching the least bit of any thing, but gives his
orders (like a general) to four subalterns, who are likewise Frenchmen. The
baker, the confectioner, the very scullions, and even the fellow that looks
after the poultry, are all of them Frenchmen. These, you may be sure, are
maintained at very high salaries: and though Monsieur Fricando had the pay of a
captain in a marching regiment, my lord was forced to double his wages at the
beginning of the war, and allow him the free exercise of his religion, to
prevent his leaving the kingdom.

I AM sorry to add, that this pride of keeping a table has visibly impaired my
lord's fortunes: and this very summer he has been obliged to fell all the
timber on his estate, as I may say, to keep up his kitchen fire. The only
satisfaction he can possibly reap from all this expense is the vanity of having
it said, "that nobody treats so elegantly as his lordship," and now and then
perhaps reading in the newspapers, "that such a day the right honorable --
gave a grand entertainment at his house in --, at which were present the
principal Officers of State and Foreign Ministers."

I am, SIR, Your humble servant, etc.


THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXVIII. THURSDAY, September 16, 1756.
-- Servata semper lege et ratione loquendi.
JUV.
IN the comedy of the Frenchman in London, which we are told was acted at Paris
with universal applause for several nights together, there is a character of a
rough Englishman, who is represented as quite unskilled in the graces of
conversation; and his dialogue is made up of almost nothing but a repetition of
the common salutation of how do you do, how do you do? Our nation has, indeed,
been generally supposed to be of a sullen and uncommunicative disposition;
while, on the other hand, the loquacious French have been allowed to possess
the art of conversing beyond all other people. The Englishman requires to be
wound up frequently, and stops as soon as he is down; but the Frenchman runs on
in a continued alarm. Yet it must be acknowledged, that as the English consist
of very different humors, their manner of discourse admits of great variety:
but the whole French nation converse alike; and there is no difference in their
address between a Marquis and a Valet de Chamber. We may frequently see a
couple of French barbers accosting each other in the street, and paying their
compliments with the same volubility of speech and grimace of action, as two
courtiers in the Thuilleries.

I SHALL not attempt to lay down any particular rules for conversation, but
point out such faults in the discourse and behavior, as render the company of
half mankind rather tedious than amusing. It is in vain, indeed, to look for
conversation, where we might expect to find it in the greatest perfection,
among persons of fashion; where it is almost annihilated by universal
card-playing: insomuch that I have heard it given as a reason, why it is
impossible for our present writers to succeed in the dialogue of genteel
comedy, that our people of quality scarce ever meet but to game. All their
discourse turns upon the odd trick and the four honors: and it is no less a
maxim with the votaries of Whist than with those of Bacchus, that talking
spoils company. Every one endeavors to make himself as agreeable to society as
he can: but it often happens, that those, who most aim at shining in
conversation, over-shoot their mark: and though a man succeeds, he should not
(as is frequently the case) engross the whole talk to himself; for that
destroys the very essence of conversation, which is talking together. We should
try to keep up conversation like a ball bandied to and fro from one to the
other, rather than seize it all to ourselves, and drive it before us like a
football. We should likewise be cautious to adapt the matter of our discourse
to our company; and not talk Greek before the ladies, or of the last new
furbelow to a meeting of country justices.

THE pests and nuisances of society, which are commonly to be met with, may be
ranged in the following manner. And first, the Attitudinarians and Face-makers.
These accompany every word with a peculiar grimace or gesture: they assent with
a shrug, and contradict with a twisting of the neck; are angry with a wry
mouth, and pleased in a caper or a minuet step. They may be considered as
speaking Harlequins; and their rules of eloquence are taken from the
posture-master. These should be condemned to converse only in dumb show with
their own persons in the looking-glass; as also the Smirkers and Smilers, who
so prettily set off their faces together with their words by a je ne scai quoi
between a grin and a dimple. With these we may likewise rank the affected tribe
of Mimics, who are constantly taking off the peculiar tone of voice or gesture
of their acquaintance: though they "imitate humanity so abominably," that (like
bad painters) they are frequently forced to write the name under the picture,
before we can discover any likeness.

NEXT to these, whose elocution consists chiefly in the action, we may consider
the professed speakers. And first, of the Emphatical; who squeeze, and press, and
beat down every syllable with as much vehemence, as a paviour thumps the
pebbles with his rammer. These energetic orators are remarkable for the force
of expression, with which they utter the particle the and conjunctive and;
which they seem to hawk up with much difficulty out of their own throats, and
to cram them with no less pain into the ears of their auditors. These should be
suffered only to syringe (as it were) the ears of a deaf man through an hearing
trumpet: and with these we may join the Whisperers or Low Speakers, who come up
so close to you, that they may be said to measure noses with you, and have
frequently a stinking breath. I would have these oracular gentry obliged to
talk at a distance through a speaking trumpet, or apply their lips to the walls
of a whispering gallery. The Wits, who will not condescend to utter any thing
but a bon mot, and the Whistlers or Tune-hummers, who never articulate at all,
may be joined very agreeably together in concert: and to these tinkling cymbals
I would also add the sounding brass; the Bawler, who inquires after your health
with the bellowing of a town-cryer.

THE Tatlers, whose pliable pipes are admirably adapted to the "soft parts of
conversation," and sweetly "prattling out of fashion," make very pretty music
from a beautiful face and a female tongue: but from a rough manly voice and
coarse features it is as harsh and dissonant as a jig from a bagpipe. The
Half-Swearers, who split, and mince, and fritter their oaths into gad's bud,
ad's fish and demmee, and the Humbuggers, and those who nickname God's
creatures, who call a man a cabbage, a crab, a queer cub, an odd fish, and an
unaccountable muskin, should never come into company without an interpeter. But
I shall not tire my reader's patience by pointing out others, no less
destructive of society: such as the Sensibles, who pronounce dogmatically on
the most trivial points, and speak in sentences; the Wonderers, who are always
wondering what o'clock it is, or wondering whether it will rain or no, or
wondering when the moon changes; and lastly, the Silent Men, who seem afraid of
opening their mouths for fear of catching cold, and literally observe the
precept of the gospel, by letting their conversation be only yea yea, and nay
nay.

THE rational intercourse, which is mutually kept up among men by conversing
with each other, is one of our principal distinctions from brutes: and it is
imagined by some philosophers, that birds and beasts (though without the power
of articulation) perfectly understand one another by the sounds they utter; and
that dogs, cats, etc. have each a particular language to themselves, like
different nations. Thus it may be supposed, that the nightingales of Italy have
as fine an ear for their own native wood-notes, as any Signor or Signora for an
Italian Air; that the boars of Westphalia gruntle as expressively through the
nose, as the inhabitants in High-German; and that the frogs in the dykes of
Holland croak as intelligibly as the natives jabber their High Dutch. However
this may be, we may consider those, who let their tongues always vibrate as
their hearts beat, and do not keep up the proper conversation of human
creatures, as imitating the language of different animals. Thus, for instance,
the affinity between Chatterers and Monkeys, and Praters and Parrots, is too
obvious not to occur at once: Grunters and Growlers may be justly compared to
Hogs: Snarlers are Curs, that continually show their teeth, but never bite; and
the Spitfire Passionate are a sort of wild Cats, that will not bear stroaking,
but will purr when they are pleased. Complainers are Scriech-Owls; and
Story-tellers, who are always repeating the same dull note, are Cuckows. Poets,
that prick up their ears at their own hideous braying, are no better than
Asses: Critics in general are venomous serpents, that delight in hissing; and
some of them, who have got by heart a few technical terms without knowing their
meaning, are no other than Magpies. I myself, who have crowed to the whole town
for near three years past, may perhaps put my readers in mind of a Dunghill
Cock: but as I must acquaint them, that they will hear the last of me on this
day fortnight, I hope they will then consider me as a Swan, who is supposed to
sing sweetly at his dying moments.

Just Published,
In Two Neat Pocket Volumes, Price Six Shillings bound,

With a new Translation of the Mottos and Quotations.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXXXIX. THURSDAY, September 23, 1756.
-- Sum superbiam
Quaesitam meritis. --
HOR.
I WROTE to my Cousin VILLAGE, informing him of my design to finish with the
next number; and I have received the following answer from him, which I shall
lay before my readers.

DEAR COUSIN,
IT was not without some regret, that I received advice of your intentions to
bid adieu to the public: for as you had been so kind as to introduce me to
their notice, I began to indulge all the weakness and vanity of a young author;
and had almost persuaded myself, that I was the principal support of your
papers. Conscious of my own importance, I expect that you will do me the
justice to acknowledge, how much you are indebted to the assistance of your
very ingenious Cousin; and I care not how many compliments you pay me on my wit
and learning: but at the same time I must beg leave to put in a caveat against
your disposing of me in what manner you yourself please. Writers of essays
think themselves at liberty to do what they will with the characters they have
introduced into their works: as writers of tragedy, in order to heighten the
plot, have brought their heroes to an untimely end, when they have died quietly
many years before in their beds; or as our chroniclers of daily occurrences put
a duke to death, give away an heiress in marriage, or shoot off an admiral's
legs, whenever they please. Mr. ADDISON, while he was carrying on the
SPECTATOR, said "he would kill Sir Roger de Coverly, that nobody else might
murder him:" In like manner, my dear Cousin, you may perhaps take it into your
head to cut me off: you may make an end of me by a cold caught in
partridge-shooting, or break my neck in a staghunt. Or you may rather choose to
settle me perhaps with a rich old country dowager, or press me into the army,
or clap me on board of a man of war. But I desire that you will not get rid of
me by any of these means: but permit me to assure your readers, that I am alive
and merry; and this is to let them know, that I am in good health at this
present writing.

YOUR papers, I assure you, have made a great noise in the country; and the
most intelligent among us read you with as much satisfaction as the Evening
Posts or the Weekly Journals. I know more than one squire, who who takes them
in constantly with the Magazines; and I was told by the postmaster of a
certain town, that they came down every week under cover to the butler of a
member of parliament. There is a club of country parsons, who meet every
Saturday at a neighboring market town, to be shaved and exchange sermons: they
have a subscription for books and pamphlets; and the only periodical works
ordered in by them are the Connoisseur, and the Critical and Monthly Reviews. I
was lately introduced to this society, when the conversation happened to turn
upon Mr. TOWN. A young curate, just come from Oxford, said he knew you very
well at Christ Church, and that you was a comical dog: but a Cantab. declared
no less positively, that you was either a pensioner of Trinity or a commoner of
Bennet's. People, indeed, are very much perplexed about the real author: some
affirm, that you are a nobleman; and others will have it, that you are an
actor: some say you are a young lawyer, some a parson, and some an old woman.

THE subjects of your papers have often been wrested to various interpretations
by our penetrating geniusses; and you have hardly drawn a character, that has
not been fixed on one or other of the greatest personages in the nation. I once
heard a country justice express his wonder, that you was not taken up, and set
in the pillory; and I myself, by some of my rural intelligence, have brought
upon you the resentment of several honest squires, who long to horse-whip the
scoundrel for putting them in print. Others again are quite at a loss how to
pick out your meaning, and in vain turn over their Bailey's dictionary for an
explanation of several fashionable phrases; which, though they have enriched
the town-language, have not yet made their way into the dialect of the country.
Many exquisite strokes of humor are also lost upon us, on account of our
distance from the scene of action; and the wit, which is very brisk and lively
upon the spot, loses much of its spirit in the carriage, and sometimes wholly
evaporates in the post-bag.

YOU moralists are very apt to flatter yourselves, that you are doing a vast
deal of good by your labors: but whatever reformation you may have worked in
town, give me leave to tell you, that you have sometimes done us harm in the
country, by the bare mention of the vices and follies now in vogue. From your
intelligence some of our most polite ladies have learned, that it is highly
genteel to have a route; and some have copied the fashion so exactly, as to
play at cards on Sundays. Your papers upon dress set all our belles at work in
following the mode: you no sooner took notice of the cocked hats, but every hat
in the parish was turned up behind and before; and when you told us, that the
town-beauties went naked, our rural damsels immediately began to throw off
their clothes. Our gentlemen have been also taught by you all the new arts of
betting and gaming: and the only coffee-house in one little town, where the
most topping inhabitants are used to meet to play at draughts and back-gammon,
has, from the great increase of gamesters who resort to it, been elegantly
christened by the name of White's.

AS to the small share, which I myself have had in your work, you may be sure
every body here is hugely delighted with it; at least you may be sure, that I
will say nothing to the contrary. I have done my best to contribute to the
entertainment of your readers: and as the name of Steel is not forgot in the
SPECTATOR, though Addison has run away with almost all the honor, I am in
hopes that whenever the great Mr. TOWN is mentioned, they may possibly think at
the same time on

Your affectionate Cousin and Coadjutor, VILLAGE.


AFTER this account, which my Cousin has sent me, of the reception I have met
with in the country, it will be proper to say something of my reception here in
town. I shall therefore consider myself in the threefold capacity of
CONNOISSEUR, CRITIC, and CENSOR-GENERAL. As a CONNOISSEUR, in the confined
sense of the word, I must own I have met with several mortifications. I have
neither been made F. R. S. nor even a member of the Academy of Bourdeaux or
Petersburgh. They have left me out of the list of Trustees to the British
Musaeum; and his Majesty of Naples, though he presented an "Account of the
Curiosities found in Herculaneum" to each of the universities, never sent one
to me. I have not been celebrated in the Philosophical Transactions, or in any
of our Magazines of Arts and Sciences; nor have I been styled tres-illustre or
tres-scavant in any of the foreign Mercures or Journals Literaires. Once
indeed, I soothed myself in the vain thought of having been distinguished by
the great Swedish Botanist, Linnaeus, under the title of Eruditissimus Urbanus,
which I conceited to be the name of TOWN latinized; but to my great
disappointment I afterward discovered, that this was no other than the learned
Naturalist, Mr. Silvanus Urban, author of the Gentleman's Magazine. This
neglect of me, as a CONNOISSEUR, I can attribute to no other cause, than to my
not having made myself known by my Musaeum or Cabinet of Curiosities: and to
say the truth, I am not worth a farthing in antique coins; nor have I so much
as one single shell or butterfly. All my complaints against the modern
innovations of Taste have been therefore disregarded: and with concern I still
see the Villas of our citizens fantastically adorned with Chinese palings, and
our streets encumbered with superb colonnades, porticos, Gothic arches, and
Venetian windows, before the shops of our tradesmen.

NOR have I, as a CRITIC, met with greater success or encouragement in my
endeavors to reform the present Taste in literature. I expected to have the
privilege of eating beef gratis every night at Vauxhall, for advising the
garden-poets to put a little meaning into their songs: but though I was there
several nights this summer, I could not say (with Cassio) of any of their
productions, "this is a more exquisite song than the other." I have not been able
to write the operas out of the kingdom: and though I have more than once showed
my contempt for Harlequin, I am assured there are no less than three Pantomimes
to be brought on this season. As I set myself up for supreme judge in
theatrical matters, I was in hopes, that my Lord Chamberlain would at least
appointed me his Deputy-Licenser; but he has not even consult me on any one new
play. I made no doubt, but the managers would pay their court to me: but they
have not once sent for me to dinner; and so far from having the freedom of the
house, I declare I have not had so much as a single order from any of the
under-actors.

IN my office of CENSOR-GENERAL, though I cannot boast of having over-turned
the card-tables at routs and assemblies, or broke up the club at Arthur's, I
can safely boast, that I have routed the many-headed monster at the Disputant
Society at the Robin-hood, and put to silence the great Clare-market Orator. In
a word, I have labored to prevent the growth of vice and immorality; and with
as much effect as the Justices at the Quarter Sessions. For this reason I
expected to have been put into commission, and to have had the power of
licensing all places of public diversion vested solely in my hands. But as I
find my merits have been hitherto overlooked, I am determined to lay down my
office; and in my next number I shall take my final leave of the public, when I
shall give them an account or my correspondents, together with a full and
particular account of MYSELF.

Preparing for the Press,
And will be published with all convenient Expedition,

With a new Translation of the Mottos, and a copious Table of Contents; as in
the First and Second Volumes, already published.

THE CONNOISSEUR. By Mr. TOWN, CRITIC and CENSOR-GENERAL.
NUMBER CXL. THURSDAY, September 30, 1756.
Nos DUO turba sumus. --
OVID. -- Pene gemelli,
Fraternis Animis. --
HOR.
PERIODICAL writers, who retail their sense or nonsense to the world sheet by
sheet, acquire a sort of familiarity and intimacy with the public peculiar to
themselves. Had the Th^se Two Volumes in (...) will make Four in Duodecimo; the
Two (...) which are already published, and the Third and Fourth preparing for
the press.
Two Volumes in Folio, which have swelled by degrees to their present bulk,
burst forth at once, Mr. TOWN, must have introduced himself to the acquaintance
of the public with the awkward air and distance of a stranger; but be now
flatters himself, that they will look upon him as an old companion, whose
conversation they are pleased with; and, as they will see him no more after
this time, will now and then perhaps miss their usual visiter.

HOWEVER this may be, the Authors of the CONNOISSEUR now think proper to close
the undertaking, in which they have been engaged for near three years past: and
among their general thanks to the indulgent readers of their papers, they must
include in a particular manner their acknowledgments to those, who have been
pleased to appear in them as writers. They have, therefore, at the close of
their work brought Mr. TOWN and all his associates on the scene together, like
the dramatis personae at the end of the last act.

OUR earliest and most frequent correspondent is only known to us by the
initials G. K. and we are sorry, that he will not put it in our power to
mention his name; which (if we are not mistaken in our guess) would reflect as
much credit on our work, as we are sure will redound to it from his
contributions. To him we are proud to own ourselves indebted for most part of
No. 14 and 17; for the letter, signed Goliath English, in No. 19; for a great
part of No. 33 and 40; and for the letters, signed Reginald Fitzworm, Michael
Krawbidge, Moses Orthodox, and T. Vainall, in No. 102, 107, 113, and 129.

THE next, in priority of time, is a gentleman of Cambridge, who signed himself
A. B. and we cannot but regret that he withdrew his assistance, after having
obliged us with the best part of the letters in No. 46, 49, and 52; and of the
essays in No. 62 and 64.

THE letters in No. 82, 98, 112, and 130, came from various hands, equally
unknown to us. The Imitation of Horace, in No. 11, was written (as we are
informed) by a gentleman of Oxford: the Ode to Friendship, in No. 125, was sent
to us by a gentleman of Cambridge; and from two other gentlemen of that
University we received the letter, signed W. Manly, in No. 65, and another,
signed B. A. in No. 107.

THESE unexpected marks of favor, conferred on us by strangers, demand our
highest gratitude: but we are no less happy in being able to boast of the
assistance of some other gentlemen, whom we are proud to call friends, though
we are not at liberty to introduce them to the acquaintance of our readers.
From a friend, engaged in the Law, we had the first sketches and most striking
passages in No. 75, 78, 87, and 104; though it may be regretted by the public
as well as ourselves, that his leisure would not permit him to put the
finishing hand to them. From a friend, a gentleman of the Temple, we received
No. 111, 115, and 119. To a friend, a member of Trinity College, Cambridge, we
are indebted for the Song in No. 72, and the Verses in No. 67, 90, 125, and
135. The list of contributions from such capable friends would doubtless have
been much larger, had they been sooner let into the secret: but as Mr. TOWN,
like a great prince, chose to appear incog. in order to avoid the impertinence
of others, he did not even make himself known to those about his person, till
at last they themselves found him out through his disguise.

THERE are still remaining two correspondents, who must stand by themselves; as
they have wrote to us, not in an assumed character, but in propria persona. The
first is no less a personage than the great Orator HENLY, who obliged us with
that truly original letter, printed in No. 37. The other, who favored us with
a letter no less original in No. 70, we have reason to believe, is a Methodist
Teacher and a mechanic; but we do not know either his name or his trade.

WE now come to the most important discovery of Ourselves, and to answer the
often-repeated question of; Who is Mr. TOWN? it being the custom for periodical
writers, at the same time that they send the hawkers abroad with their last
dying speech like the malefactors, like them also to couple it with a
confession. The general method of unravelling this mystery is by declaring, to
whom the different signatures affixed to different papers are appropriated. For
ever since the days of the inimitable SPECTATOR, it has been usual for a bold
Capital to stand, like a sentry, at the end of our essays, to guard the author
in secresy: and it is commonly supposed, that the writer, who does not choose to
put his name to his work, has in this manner, like the painters and statuaries
of old, at least set his mark. But the Authors of the CONNOISSEUR now confess,
that the several letters, at first pitched upon to bring up the rear of their
essays, have been annexed to different papers at random, and sometimes omitted,
on purpose to put the sagacious reader on a wrong scent. It is particularly the
interest of a writer, who prints himself out week by week, to remain unknown
during the course of this piecemeal publication. The best method, therefore,
to prevent a discovery is to make the road to it as intricate as possible; and,
instead of seeming to aim at keeping the reader entirely in the dark, to hang
out a kind of wandering light, which only serves to lead him astray. The desire
of giving each writer his due, according to the signatures, has in the course
of this undertaking often confused the curious in their inquiries. Soon after
the publication of our first papers, some ingenious gentlemen found out, that
T, O, W, N, being the letters that formed the name of TOWN, there were four
authors, each of whom sheltered himself under a particular letter; but no paper
ever appearing with an N affixed to it, they were obliged to give up this
notion. But, if they had been more able decypherers, they would have made out,
that though T, O, W, will not compose the name of TOWN, yet by a different
arrangement of the letters it will form the word TWO; which is the grand
mystery of our signatures, and couches under it the true and real number of the
Authors of the CONNOISSEUR.

HAVING thus declared Mr. TOWN to consist of two separate individuals, it will
perhaps be expected that, like two tradesmen, who have agreed to dissolve their
partnership, we should exactly balance our accounts, and assign to each his
due parcel of the stock. But our accounts are of so intricate a nature, that it
would be impossible for us to adjust them in that manner. We have not only
joined in the work taken altogether, but almost every single paper is the joint
product of both: and, as we have labored equally in erecting the fabric, we
cannot pretend, that any one particular part is the sole workmanship of either.
An hint has perhaps been started by one of us, improved by the other, and still
further heightened by an happy coalition of sentiment in both; as fire is
struck out by a mutual collision of flint and steel. Sometimes, like Strada's
lovers conversing with the sympathetic needles, we have written papers together
at fifty miles distance from each other: the first rough draught or loose
minutes of an essay have often traveled in the stage-coach from town to
country, and from country to town; and we have frequently waited for the
postman (whom we expected to bring us the precious remainder of a CONNOISSEUR)
with the same anxiety, as we should wait for the half of a bank note, without
which the other half would be of no value. These our joint labors, it may
easily be imagined, would have soon broke off abruptly, if either had been too
fondly attached to his own little conceits; or if we had conversed together
with the jealousy of a rival, or the complaisance of a formal acquaintance, who
smiles at every word that is said by his companion. Nor could this work have
been so long carried on, with so much cheerfulness and good humor on both
sides, if the Two had not been as closely united, as the two Students, whom the
SPECTATOR mentions as recorded by a Terrae Filius at Oxford, "to have had but
one mind, one purse, one chamber, and one hat."

IT has been often remarked, that the reader is very desirous of picking up
some little particulars concerning the author of the book, which he is
perusing. To gratify this passion, many literary anecdotes have been published,
and an account of their life, character, and behavior, has been prefixed to
the works of our most celebrated writers. Essayists are commonly expected to be
their own Biographers: and perhaps our readers may require some further
intelligence concerning the Authors of the CONNOISSEUR. But, as they have all
along appeared as a sort of Sofias in literature, they cannot now describe
themselves any otherwise, than as one and the same person; and can only satisfy
the curiosity of the public, by giving a short account of that respectable
personage Mr. TOWN, considering him as of the plural, or rather (according to
the Grecians) of the dual number.

Mr. TOWN is a fair, black, middle-sized, very short man. He wears his own
hair, and a perriwig. He is about thirty years of age, and not more than four
and twenty. He is a Student of the Law, and a Bachelor of Physic. He was bred
at the University of Oxford; where having taken no less than three degrees, he
looks down on many learned Professors, his inferiors: yet having been there but
little longer than to take the first degree of Bachelor of Arts, it has more
than once happened, that the CENSOR-GENERAL of all England has been reprimanded
by the Censor of his College, for neglecting to furnish the usual Essay, or (in
the collegiate phrase) the Theme of the week.

This joint description of ourselves will, we hope, satisfy the reader without
any further information. For our own parts, we cannot but be pleased with
having raised this monument of our mutual friendship and esteem: and if these
essays shall continue to be read, when they will no longer make their
appearance as the fugitive pieces of the week, we shall be happy in
considering, that we are mentioned at the same time. We have all the while gone
on, as it were, hand in hand together: and white we are both employed in
furnishing matter for the paper now before us, we cannot help smiling at our
thus making our exit together, like the two Kings of Brentford smelling at one
nosegay.

T.W.O.

The End of the Second Volume.
Preparing for the Press, And will be published with all convenient Expedition,
The THIRD and FOURTH VOLUMES of The CONNOISSEUR, in Twelves. Which will
complete the Work. Corrected and improved. With a new Translation of the
Mottos, and a copious Table of Contents; as in the First and Second Volumes,
already published.


