THE LEGAL MEANS OF POLITICAL REFORMATION, Proposed in two small Tracts, viz.

THE FIRST On "Equitable Representation," and the legal Means of obtaining it.

THE SECOND On " Annual Parliaments, the ancient and most salutary "RIGHT of
the People."

THE THIRD EDITION.

THE LEGAL MEANS OF POLITICAL REFORMATION.
NEVER were the baneful effects of undue influence more sensibly felt, or more
generally acknowledged, than at present.

The legal means of curbing this dangerous evil are proposed in two little
tracts presented with this paper. The one points out a legal mode of obtaining
a more equal representation of the Commons. The other demonstrates the ancient
popular right of holding new-elected Parliaments every year once, and more
often if need be. And the sum of both, jointly considered, may be included in
the following short proposition: -- that a more equal representation of the
Commons in annual Parliaments (i. e. ELECTED every year once, and more often if
need be) is not only an ANCIENT, but even an INDISPENSABLE, right of the
people. That this ancient constitution is indispensable the many fatal effects
of deviating from it have rendered sufficiently obvious; and therefore no
remedy can be more efficacious, and constitutionally natural, than a revival of
that primitive and fundamental right, according to the rule of Law, that, as
often as any thing is doubtful or CORRUPTED, we should RECUR to first
principles. Loft's Elements of Law, No 8.
And we have no reason to expect that the petition and resolutions of the truly
respectable and loyal County of York, (though highly worthy of being adopted by
the other counties,) or indeed any other true principles of Reformation, will
be admitted and rendered effectual by the Legislature, until the several
counties themselves shall reassume this their ancient and constitutional right
of being more equally represented in new annual Parliaments.

Equitable Representation NECESSARY TO THE Establishment of LAW, PEACE, and
GOOD GOVERNMENT: SHOWN IN SOME Extracts from Mr. PRYNNE'S Brevia Parliamentaria
Rediviva, (Printed in 1662, and dedicated to K. Charles II.)

RELATIVE TO Examples of joint Elections for Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
for whole Counties, by the same Electors, at one Time and Place.

WITH SOME OCCASIONAL REMARKS thereupon, Concerning the Necessity as well as
the Means of reforming the enormous Inequality of Representatives which the
Borough-Voters enjoy to the Prejudice of the Counties and great Cities.

LONDON: PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCCLXXX.

EXTRACTS FROM Mr. PRYNNE'S Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, Printed in 1662,
and dedicated to King CHARLES II. WITH SOME Occasional Remarks concerning the
Necessity, as well as the Means, of promoting a more equal Representation of
the Commons in Parliament.
MR. PRYNNE informs us, in p. 175, that in sundry counties the elections of
knights, citizens, and burgesses, were anciently made all together, in the
county court of the shire, on the same day, and all returned together in and by
one indenture, between the sheriffs and their electors; which I shall
exemplify, (says he,) by these ensuing presidents, instead of sundry others,
which I shall remember or recite in the ensuing sections, in due place.

"I shall begin," (says Mr. Prynne,) with the indenture for Cumberland and
Karlisle, anno 2 Hen. V. And he cites the form of the indenture at length, but
it is not here copied, because the example is not so full to the point as some
others, in pages 176, 177, and 178: Viz.

KENT. Anno 12 Hen. IV. Indent. pro militibus Kanciae.

Haec indentura facta apud Cantuar. die lunae prox ante festum apostolorum
Simonis et Jude, prox sequent. post recept. brevis domini regis huic indent.
consut. Inter Johem Darrell, vic. com. praed. et Robtum Clifford, Valentinum
Baret," (and ten more,) qui ad elegend. Milites et cives ad parliament. domini
regis tenend. apud Westminster. in chrast. animarum prox futur. praemuniti fuerunt,
pretextu ejusdem brevis domini regis in hac part eidem vic. directi assensu
totius com. illius, eligerunt Reginaldum Pympe et Willum Notebem, Milit. pro
communitate com. praedict. Willum Hikham et Willum Rose, Cives pro communitate
civitatis Cantuar. Roger Langford et Johem Everard, Cives pro communitate
civitatis Roffs. In cujus rei testimonium tam praefatus vicecom. quam praefati
Robtus, Valentinus, etc. sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt die et anno
supradictis.

Kent. In the 12th Year of Henry IV. Indent for the Knights of Kent.

This indenture made at Canterbury, on Monday the next before the feast of the
apostles Simon and Jude, next following after the receipt of the brief" [or
writ] "of the Lord the King, annexed to this indenture. Between John Darrell,
sheriff of the said county, and Robert Clifford, Valentine Baret, John Broke,
James Dingley, Thomas Lane, William Lans," (and six more,) "who to choose
Knights and citizens for the parliament of the lord the king, to be holden at
Westminster on the morrow of All Souls, that next shall be, were empowered, by
virtue of the brief" [or writ] "of the same lord the king, in this behalf,
addressed to the same sheriff, BY THE ASSENT OF ALL THAT COUNTY, have chosen
Reginald Pympe and Wm Notebem, knights for the community" [or commonalty] "of
the aforesaid county; Wm Hickham and Wm Rose, citizens, for the community" [or
commonalty] "of the city of Canterbury; Roger Langford and John Everard,
citizens, for the community" [or commonalty] "of the city of Rochester. In
witness whereof, as well the aforesaid sheriff as the aforesaid Robert,
Valentine, etc. have alternately affixed their seals the day and year
abovementioned.


The like indenture, for Kent, I find (says Mr. Prynne) in 2 H. V. -- Haec
indentura facta apud Rouchestre," etc. reciting it at length; after which he
remarks as follows: "In these two indentures and others, the knights of Kent
and citizens of Canterbury and Rochester were all elected and returned together
in the county court by the same electors and indentures.

"To these I shall add" (says Mr. Prynne) "this indenture of the sheriff "of
Wiltes, anno 1 Hen. V.

This indenture made at Wylton IN FULL COUNTY [court] of Wilts, holden on
Tuesday the next before the feast of Matthew the apostle, in the first year of
the reign of king Henry V. after the conquest, between Elias de la Mire,
sheriff of the aforesaid county, on the one part, and Thomas Bonham, Wm
Daungens, [and twenty four more,] of the other part, witnesses, that the
aforesaid Thomas Bonham and all the abovenamed, [persons,] present on the day
and at the place abovementioned, and by the aforesaid sheriff, by virtue of the
brief [or writ] of the lord the king to the same sheriff addressed, and to this
indenture annexed, singly examined, have chosen Wm Molyns, knight, and Walter
Hungerford, Knights for the community [or commonalty] of the aforesaid county;
and likewise have chosen Walter Shirle and John Beckot, citizens for the
community [or commonalty] of the city of New Sarum; John Valeys senior and John
Harleston, Burgesses for the community [or commonalty] of the borough of
Wilton; Thomas Coventry and Robert Smyth, Burgesses for the community [or
commonalty] of the borough of Devises; John Charleton and John Randolph,
Burgesses for the community [or commonalty] of the borough of Malmesbury;
Thomas Hatheway and Wm Acliff, Burgesses for the community [or commonalty] of
the borough of Marlborough; Robert Salman and Robert Ronde, Burgesses for the
community [or commonalty] of the borough of Calne; Robert Lany and Wm
Chesterton, Burgesses for the community [or commonalty] of the borough of Old
Sarum, in the aforesaid county; to all and every, [thing,] according to the
tenor of the aforesaid brief, in the parliament of the said lord the king, at
Leicester appointed to be, on the last day of April next, together with others,
to confer, treat, act, and likewise conclude, according as the aforesaid brief
exacts and requires. In witness whereof, etc.
Haec indentura facta apud Wylton IN PLENO COM. WILTES TENTO die Martis proximo
ante festum Matthei apostoli anno regni regis Henrici Quinti post conquestum
primo inter Eliam de la Mire vic. com. praedict. ex part una, et Thomam
Bonham, Willum Daungens, (and twenty-four more,) ex altera part testatur, quod
praedict. Thomas Bonham, et omnes alii superius nominati ad diem et locum
supradict, existentes et per praedictum vic. virtute brevis domini regis eidem
vic. direct. et huic indenturae consut. singulariter examinati, eligerunt
Willum Molyns, chlr. et Walterum Hungerford, MILITES pro communitate COM.
PRAED. et similiter eligerunt Waltum Shirle et Johm Beckot, CIVES pro
communitate CIVITATIS NOVAE SARUM, Johem Valeys seniorem, et Jobem Harleston,
BURGENSES pro communitate BURGI de WILLTON, Thomam Covintre, et Robtum Smyth,
burgenses pro communitate BURGI DE DEVISES, Johem Charleton et Johem Randolph,
burgenses pro communitate BURGI DE MALMESBURY, Thomam Hatheway et Willum
Alclyff, BURGENSES pro communitate BURGI DE MARLEBURGH, Robtum Salman et Robtum
Ronde, BURGENSES pro communitate BURGI DE CALNE, Robtum Lany et Willum
Chesterton, BURGENSES pro communitate BURGI VETERIS SARUM in com. praedicto, ad
omnia et singula juxta tenorem brevis praedict. in parliamento dicti domini
regis apud LEICESTRE, ultimo die Aprilis prox. futur. assignat. simul cum aliis
communicand. tractand. faciend. similiter et terminand. prout praedictum breve
exigit et requirit. In cujus rei testimonium, etc.

"There is the like indenture" (says Mr. Prynne) for Wiltshire, where the
knights, citizens, and burgesses, are jointly elected and returned together.
An. 2 Hen. V.

REMARKS, etc.
THE circumstances of those ancient times are so totally different, in many
respects, from the present times, that it is difficult to determine whether any
such joint elections of knights, citizens, and burgesses, (by the united equal
suffrages of all the electors together, of every degree, in each county,) can
now be made; and, of course, it is doubtful whether such a measure is even
advisable. Many laws have since been enacted respecting elections, all of
which must first be well weighed and considered; for, if any thing therein is
incompatible with the necessary alterations, it must be repealed by the same
authority which ordained it; because non est recedendum a forma per statutum
prescripta; and, again, nil temere novandum est.

Yet, as the injustice and fatal consequences of the present enormous
inequality of representation in favor of petty venal boroughs (to the
disadvantage of the counties and great cities) is notorious and undeniable,
some prudent remedy is surely become necessary, and ought to be most earnestly
sought after by all lovers of peace and good government.

The ruinous effects of a long continued parliamentary corruption, and of its
baneful companion, national reprobacy, (which is the sure harbinger of public
misfortune and approaching slavery,) have made such hasty advances of late,
that many people begin to be alarmed, and to talk seriously concerning the
necessity of endeavoring to obtain. a more equal representation of the commons
in annual parliaments, as the true legal means of restoring public credit, and
of saving the state. Such a disposition, toward parliamentary reformation, I
have perceived in several places, amongst people who have not the least
connection with each other, so that it seems to be the most natural and obvious
conclusion of common sense upon the present alarming state of public affairs;
and will, probably, (if matters should grow worse,) become more and more
general, till the measure be irresistibly demanded by the voice of the people;
in which case, all those persons, who have been most concerned in the
management of the public treasury, must expect to undergo a severe scrutiny!
Or, if any sudden invasion of our natural enemies should be really intended,
(which there is but too much reason to suspect,) the people, it is to be
feared, as soon as they are informed of the public danger, will be so
transported with sudden indignation against particular persons, whose measures
may seem to have contributed to the national weakness, that they will not
easily be restrained from violent and inconsiderate acts of personal
resentment! And it is not at all probable that the people will be thoroughly or
sufficiently united to act against the common enemy, until they have taken such
steps as they may think effectual to insure a reformation of government, (in
case their endeavors against the common enemy should prove successful,) and to
prevent the like calamities in future.

Those state-ministers, therefore, who shall have sufficient courage to give
up, in time, all reliance on undue parliamentary influence, and shall prove
that their regard for good and legal government is sincere, by promoting some
legal means of restoring to the electors of counties and great cities their due
proportion of representation and consequence in the great national assembly,
those ministers, I say, howsoever their former measures may have been disliked,
will, by such a proof of their sincerity in reformation, insure to themselves
the public esteem and confidence: for there is a general disposition in
Englishmen to overlook all differences of opinion in politics, and to forget
all party animosities against those persons, who, by a change of conduct, give
proofs of a future regard for popular and constitutional rights. And the almost
certain advantages to the crown, by adopting and promoting such a measure, will
be the recovery of a great and extensive empire; Memorandum. These Remarks were
written in March, 1777. The author had previously informed a nobleman in
administration, that the Americans were inclined to a reunion, even under the
crown, on constitutional principles, provided his majesty's ministers could
give a proof of their sincerity in treating, by adopting some legal means of
political reformation at home, and that the proper constitutional terms,
consistent with the natural rights of British subjects, would certainly be
accepted, if tendered within two or three months; but that no terms short of
independency would or could be accepted after the expiration of six months from
that time. The desire of pointing out such a plan of reformation, as might be
suitable to the proposed reunion, occasioned these remarks.
for no ground of accommodation will be so effectual and certain as such "a
proof of sincerity" in the sovereign, that he desires to rule his subjects at
home according to the strictest rule of legal and constitutional principles,
and is willing to drop all measures or designs which cannot obtain the
uninfluenced assent of his great national council: and the king's ministers are
never answerable for measures, howsoever unsuccessful, after the same have
obtained the sanction of a free and uninfluenced parliament. By such
righteousness as this the throne shall be established: whereas an obstinate
perseverance and continuance in the contrary mode of administration will, of
course, occasion what is vainly called a state-necessity for advancing still
farther in violent and unpopular measures; which, like the case of Richard II.
But the king was not satisfied with these repeated declarations: he thought his
power and dignity very precarious, while it depended on the authority of
parliament. He dreaded the popular party, and the effects of opposition and
resistance, which he had so lately experienced; and could not bear the
restraint, which these apprehensions laid him under. His whole views therefore
were from this time directed to one end; to set himself above all opposition
and resistance: first, by making peace and gaining firm alliance abroad, and
then, by establishing an uncontrollable power at home. In consequence of this
design, he entered with more earnestness upon a treaty of peace with France,
etc. See the learned bishop Lowth's Life of William of Wykeham, p. 232. King
Richard's obstinate perseverance in such erroneous and dangerous notions
produced those very evils of which he was most afraid, viz. the loss of his
crown, his liberty, and his life; for the Machiavelian policy of his ministers,
in promoting parliamentary corruption and in maintaining a standing army of
Cheshire time-servers, served only to precipitate the monarch's destruction,
and to hasten the revolution.
must inevitably end in destruction! No reformation, however, can be safely
made respecting a more equal representation of the commons, until the mode of
doing it has been first adopted and approved by the majority of the ELECTORS
themselves in each county; but, when their consent is once obtained, the
ostensible proposers and promoters of the measure will be amply secured from
all blame, in case the alteration should not prove effectual; and, on the other
hand, they will certainly enjoy the principal credit of the amendment, in case
the measure should be found to answer the desirable purpose.

The king might safely signify (in a speech to his parliament or by
proclamation) his earnest desire to be more accurately informed of the
sentiments of his people; and that he therefore wishes to promote, by legal and
constitutional means, a more equal representation of all persons who are at
present entitled to vote for knights, citizens, and burgesses, in parliament,
that elections may be made in an equitable and just proportion to the NUMBERS
of those who vote for each denomination, without lessening the total number of
representatives sent up at present from each county; and he might refer the
consideration of the most just and unexceptionable means of doing this to the
very persons whose rights are concerned, by authorizing his sheriffs to summon
grand-juries, in their respective counties, to consider and propose the most
equitable mode of sending the present number of knights, citizens, and
burgesses, for each county, in an equal proportion to the whole number of
electors; and afterward to submit the result of their consultation to a
general-court or assembly of all the electors, in each county, for their assent
or amendment; or to a chosen committee, appointed by a majority of all the said
electors that shall think fit to attend the assembly, agreeably to the first
example in the indenture for the county of Kent, wherein the twelve persons
named in the indenture, are said to have chosen (eligerunt) the two knights for
the county, and four citizens for Canterbury and Rochester: for it is manifest
that the twelve persons named acted only in trust, as a committee for the
electors of the whole county; because the election is expressly declared to
have been made ASSENSU TOTIUS COMITATUS ILLIUS. "By the assent of the whole
county."
And, in the other example for the county of Wilts, wherein only twenty-six
persons, named in the indenture, are said to have chosen sixteen
representatives (viz.two knights, two citizens, and twelve burgesses) in one
joint election; yet we must not consider the said twenty-six persons as the
only electors, but rather as an acting committee, empowered by the whole body
of electors in that county; for, though the words "assensu totius comitatus
illius" are omitted, yet the beginning of the indenture expressly informs us
that it was made " in pleno com. Wiltes tento, "In plain shire" ( or full
county, meaning a full county court) "of Wilts, holden," etc.
" etc. And, likewise, it is not improbable that the said twenty-six electors
(who are expressly named in the indenture with the sheriff, but "exaltera
part") were considered as the manucaptors or sureties for the appearance of
the elected; which will account for their making the indenture with the
sheriff; for no manucaptors are mentioned as such in these indentures, though
the appointment and express mention of manucaptors were generally esteemed a
necessary precaution in those ancient times, of which more shall be said
hereafter.

The most obvious means of reformation are either to divide each county into so
many equal districts as may most conveniently be represented by 2, 3, or 4,
deputies, so as to include the whole number now sent from each county; or else
to choose the whole number of knights, citizens, and burgesses, by the joint
suffrages of all the electors together, at the county court, agreeably to the
ancient examples already cited. By these regulations, indeed, the
borough-voters might complain that they would be injured by losing a large
proportion of their borough Representation; that is, they would certainly lose
that unreasonable proportion of representation which is injurious to the rights
and freedom of their neighbors; but they would be so far from losing any just
and equitable right, really due to themselves, that they would actually gain
thereby a right of voting for all the knights and citizens, as well as for all
the other deputed burgesses, of their respective counties; to which, at
present, (as mere burgesses of one borough,) they have no pretense. The
experience also of late years has shown that it is become necessary to enforce
the ancient laws, which ordain that both the electors and the elected shall be
in eodem comitatu commorantes et residentes. " In the same county dwelling and
resident." That the knights of the Shires within our kingdom of England, to be
chosen to come to the parliaments from henceforth to be holden, should be
chosen in every county by men dwelling and residing in the same County, etc.
And that they, who are to be chosen, be likewise dwelling and residing in the
same Counties, etc.
Quod milites Com. infra regnum nostrum Angl. eligend. adveniend. in parl. ex
tunc tenend. eligantur in quolibet Com. per homines in eodem Com. commorantes
et residentes, etc. -- Et quod illi, qui eligendi fuerint, sint similiter in
eisdem Com. commorantes et residentes, etc. Extract from the copy of a writ, in
p. 133 of Prynne's second part of a brief Register, etc. of parl. writs. See
also an act of parliament to the same purpose, which is still in force, viz. 1
Henry V. chap. 1.
And also to renew the ancient custom of obliging the persons elected to find
sureties (or manucaptors beforementioned) for their appearance AND CONSTANT
ATTENDANCE, ( constant attendance being sometimes expressly required by the
writs, The King to the Sheriff of Kent, greeting. -- Forasmuch as on certain
difficult and urgent affairs, etc. we have appointed our parliament to be
holden at Westminster on the day, etc. -- We command you, strictly enjoining,
that you cause to be chosen of the aforesaid County two Knights, gift with
swords, etc. and of every city of the same county two Citizens, and of every
borough two Burgesses, of the best, and most able, and most discreet, Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, of the County, Cities, and Boroughs, aforesaid, and
cause them to come to Westminster on the day, etc. there and then, during the
aforesaid parliament, CONTINUALLY TO REMAIN, etc.
Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem. -- Quia super quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis,
etc. parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die, etc. -- tenere ordinavimus, etc.
Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Com. praedicto duos Milites
gladiis cinctos, etc. et de qualibet civitate ejusdem com. duos Cives, et de
quolibet burg. duos Burgenses, de melioribus et validioribus et discretioribus
Militibus, Civibus et Burgensibus Comitat. Civitatum et Burgorum praedictorum
eligi, et eos usque Westminster. die, etc. -- venire facias ibidem, et tunc durante
parliamento praedicto CONTINUE MORATUROS, etc. Prynne's 2d part of a brief
Register, etc. p. 105. -- The usual old forms (says Prynne elsewhere) being to
retorn on the back of the Writ or a Cedule, nomina Militum, Manucaptores I. S.
militis, Man. N. F. Militis, or alterius militis; or that two persons were
elected milites, or duos milites, (naming both their Christian and sirnames,)
of the county of B. and that such and such were their manucaptors, they having
for the most part two, four, some six, manucaptors apiece, that they should
appear at the day and place appointed in the writ; some few of them now and
then refused to find manucaptors, whereupon their goods and cattle were
destreined, to cause them to appear in parliament at the time and place
prescribed by the writs, etc. (Prynne's Brevia parliamentaria rediviva, p.
137.) So that men of known abilities and integrity (howsoever fond of their own
ease and private amusements) might then be compelled to serve their country in
parliament, though their electors were also compelled to pay them wages; and
perhaps the renewal of both these ancient usages would contribute much to the
national welfare, that useful talents of private gentlemen might neither be
unemployed nor unrewarded.
) in order to prevent such shameful and unmeaning secessions from public
business as have lately been made by the gentlemen in opposition to ministry as
well as by many who profess to be the ministers friends. A parliament so far
reformed (viz. by having an equal representation of all the electors in each
county) might be well qualified to consider of some farther regulations to
render the representation of the counties themselves more equal and
proportionate, with respect to each other, according to the number of
inhabitants. For, in ancient times, ALL MEN, in each county, that were free,
howsoever poor, enjoyed a share in the legislature; which may be clearly proved
by the very act of parliament -- 8 Henry VI. cap. vii. Whereby the right of
voting was limited to those who have land or tenement to the value of forty
shillings by the year at the least, etc. The preamble of this act, however,
sufficiently proves the fact, that all the common people thought themselves
entitled to vote at elections for knights of shires. Whereas the elections of
knights of shires to come to the parliaments of our lord the king, in many
counties of the realm of England, have now of late been made by very great,
outrageous It is very easy to give hard epithets, without proofs of their
propriety and truth.
and excessive number of people dwelling within the same counties, etc. of the
which most part was of people of small substance and of no value, The value of
our Christian brethren before God, both in church and state, is inestimable!
For, all Christians, that are not convicted of crimes, ought surely to be
equally esteemed the adopted brethren of Christ, and members of that
everlasting building, the church of God, whereby they are entitled to judge,
not only of things in the present world, but also in that which is to come!
For, if they shall hereafter have authority even to "JUDGE ANGELS," how much
more things that pertain to this life? (1 Cor. vi. 3) For herein consists that
NATURAL EQUALITY OF ALL CHRISTIANS, which some political writers aff^ct to deny.
whereof every of them pretended a voice equivalent, as to such elections to be
made with the most worthy knights and esquires dwelling within the same
counties, whereby manslaughter, riots, batteries, and divisions among the
gentlemen and other people of the same counties, shall very likely rise and be,
unless convenient and due remedy be provided, etc. But the inconveniences here
alleged (for which the iniquitous remedy of depriving the common people of
their right of voting at county elections was provided) deserve to be no
otherwise esteemed than as so many mere imaginary pretenses to excuse the
injustice of the act: for, if any such manslaughter, riots, batteries, etc. had
ever been really occasioned by the former popular elections, the framers of
this act would not have failed to cite the examples; for they could not say
that any such mischiefs had ever happened (before that time) but only that they
shall very likely rise and be -- unless convenient and due remedy be provided;
whereas, since their iniquitous remedy has taken place, all these baneful
circumstances do notoriously attend it, though the framers of the act could not
cite a single example of such mischief before that unhappy alteration. -- It is
therefore high time to repeal that act.
which unjustly deprived them of that right!

The nation has severely felt the bad effects of that unjust innovation:
witness the present iniquitous practices at contested elections and the
helpless and endless manner of adjusting them, besides the ruinous expense of
influencing a majority when chosen, (which, at present, is considered as a
measure of state necessity,) and compare these modern corruptions with the
happy manner of conducting elections, in general, for near two hundred years
before that period, as related by Prynne, in his Brev. Parl. Rediv. p. 137. --
Sundry persons of eminency, quality, parts, and wisdom, (says he,) in most
counties were elected knights of the shire, by the unanimous consent of the
gentry, freeholders, AND PEOPLE, not only twice or thrice, but 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, times or more, after another, to serve in parliaments, without any
emulation, polling, feasting, or canvassing, for voices; or future complaints,
contests about their elections, polls, undue or double retorns, which, of late
times, have disturbed the counties peace, and interrupted the parliaments
proceedings: there being not above two or three cases of elections questioned
or complained of from 49 Hen. III. till 22 Edw. IV. for ought (that) appears by
the retornes or parliament rolls, and not so much as one double retorn or
indenture wherewith all the LATE bundles (Prynne wrote in the reign of king
Charles II. and the corruption has notoriously increased since that time) of
writs are stored, and the House of Commons and late Committees of privileges
pestered, perplexed, to the great retarding of the more weighty public affairs
of the king and kingdom. Let it also be remembered, that, by the
beforementioned unhappy deprivation of the common people's rights, the king
has lost the advantage of the proper legal balance against the dangerous power
of rich and ambitious men, and overgrown landholders; the fatal want of which
has lately been most notoriously demonstrated in the unhappy ruined kingdom of
Poland; for, as the authority of a king is amply sufficient to defend the
common people from the oppression of the rich and great, by a due exertion of
the laws, provided the common people be allowed a due share in the legislature;
so the latter, in return, and for their own sakes, will always be ready to
exert their legislative authority, as well as their strength and power in a
free militia, Memorandum. A militia cannot be free, if the individuals of it
are compelled, under the terrors of martial law, to be withdrawn from their
families, their ordinary callings, and even from their counties, for six
months, or more, without return; for, by these means, they are withdrawn also
from their civil capacity in the state, and are apt to become mere soldiers, or
mercenaries: for, when a man loses his trade, or ordinary occupation, together
with his family and local connexions, on which his maintenance depends, he may
justly be said to lose his civil capacity; because he is thereby rendered
dependent on his military sold, or pay, like the common soldiers of all
standing armies; and, therefore, whenever the public defense requires the
national militia to form an army in the field, the service ought to be supplied
by a regular military roster, or rotation, circulating monthly, in due and
equal proportions, throughout all the counties: by which means no man would be
so long withdrawn from his home as to be injured either in his family or
occupation, and yet the most distant parts of the kingdom would be defended, by
the returning disciplined troops; and military vigor would be circulated by
the roster (like the blood of life) throughout the whole body of the nation,
which would give it (under God) such internal strength as must render all
attempts of foreign invaders fatal only to themselves.
to maintain the king and the laws, which (by their union with the crown) they
will always be able to do whenever the aristocratical power requires any just
limitation.

THE END.
ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS, The ANCIENT and MOST SALUTARY RIGHT Of the COMMONS of
GREAT BRITAIN.

Being an Extract from SHARP'S Declaration of the People's natural Right to a
Share in the Legislature, printed in 1774, P. 157 to 170.

WHEREIN IS SHOWN, That the Statutes of 4 Edw. III. c. 14. and 36 Edw. III. c.
10. which ordain, that a Parliament shall be holden every Year one, etc. must
necessarily be understood to mean, -- A NEW ELECTION OF REPRESENTATIVES, every
Year once, and more often if need be.

LONDON: PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.LXXX.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE editor earnestly recommends the subject of the following pages to the
consideration of the public, because he conceives that the restoration of
Elections, every year once, and more often, if need be, (and those in a more
equal proportion of deputation according to the number of Electors in each
county,) is the only measure that can be safely adopted, for a solid and firm
basis of that political reformation, which, at present, is almost universally
acknowledged to be necessary, as well for the security of the people, as the
dignity and safety of the crown. The unhappy effects of modern deviations from
that fundamental rule do clearly demonstrate, that it was not only an ancient
right of the Commons, but even an indispensable right, without which peace and
good government cannot be maintained.

Mos retinendus est fidelissimae vetustatis. Quae praeter consuetudinem et
morem majorum fiunt, neque placent, neque recta videntur. 4 Coke, 78.

As often as any thing is doubtful or corrupted, we should recur to first
principles.

Loft's Elements of Law, No 8.

ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS, The ANCIENT and MOST SALUTARY RIGHT OF THE COMMONS of
GREAT BRITAIN.
-- THE authority of the nominal Legislature in 1650 was entirely illegal, as
well as that in 1653, both of them having been set up and maintained by the
same unconstitutional arbitrary power; and both of them totally void of the
indispensable Representation of the people: for though the wretched remains of
the Long-Parliament in 1650 (being about 80 Representatives or Members, instead
of 513 that had been elected at the beginning of that Parliament) were indeed
chosen by a small part of the people of England, yet the legal Representation,
even of that small part, was out of date and void, from the length of time that
the said Representation had continued without Re-election, which was about ten
years; whereas it is well known that the due effect, or virtue, of popular
Representation, was formerly supposed to be incapable (like some annual fruits)
of being so long preserved in useful purity, without a seasonable renewal, from
time to time; so that our more prudent Ancestors (imitating nature) required
also an annual renewal of their parliamentary Representation, as being
necessary for the maintenance of public virtue.

Sir Edw. Coke, in his 4th Inst. p. 9, speaking of "the matters of parliament,"
informs us of the reasons usually expressed in the writs for calling a new
Parliament, as pro quibusdam arduis urgentibus negotiis, nos statum, et
defensionem regni nostri Angliae, et Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus
quoddam parliamentum nostrum, etc. teneri ordinavimus, etc. And he adds, in the
next paragraph, Now, for as much (says he) as diverse Laws and Statutes have
been enacted and provided for these ends aforesaid, and that diverse mischiefs
in particular, and that diverse mischiefs in particular, and diverse grievances
in general, concerning the honor and safety of the King, the State, and
Defense of the Kingdom, and of the Church of England, might be prevented, an
excellent Law was made, anno 36 Edw. III. c. 10. which, being applied to the
said Writs of Parliament, does, in a few and effectual words, set down the true
subject of a Parliament in these words: For the maintenance of the said
articles, and statutes, and redress of diverse mischiefs and grievances, which
daily happen, A PARLIAMENT SHALL BE HOLDEN EVERY YEAR, as another time was
ordained by a statute. Which Statute, here referred to, was made in the 4th
year of the same reign, cap. 14. Item, it is accorded, that a Parliament shall
be holden EVERY YEAR ONCE, and more often if need be. But Sir William
Blackstone supposes that the King never was obliged, by these Statutes, to call
a new Parliament every year; but only to permit a Parliament to sit annually
for the redress of grievances, and dispatch of business, if need be. (1 Com. c.
2, p. 153.)

It is too true, indeed, that our Kings, in general, did not think themselves "
obliged, by these Statutes," (as they ought in conscience to have been, for the
safety of their souls,) to call a new Parliament every year: nay, it is certain
that many of them would never have called a Parliament at all, had they not
been "obliged" by necessity and the circumstances of the times. But by what
authority could a representative in one Parliament take his seat in the next
annual Parliament, without re-election, before any laws were made for
lengthening the duration of Parliaments? And besides, if the King did only
permit a Parliament to sit annually, etc. by what authority could the
Parliament be convened at all, under such a circumstance, seeing that a mere
permission to sit excludes the idea of a prorogation from year to year?
However, the learned commentator himself very justly observes, in a preceding
page, (150,) concerning "the manner and time of assembling," that the
Parliament is regularly to be summoned by the King's Writ, or Letter, issued
out of Chancery. And it is well known that these Writs are not addressed to the
knights, citizens, and burgesses, elected for any former Parliament, but to the
Sheriffs alone, to cause Knights, Citizens, etc. to be elected; for, when the
said Acts were made, such an absurdity in politics had never been conceived in
England, as that of trusting the Representation of the people, for a term of
years, (as at present,) to the persons elected! On the contrary, when the
business of each Session was finished, the Parliament, of course, was at an
end; and therefore Lord Coke did not speak in vain, when he mentioned "the
excellent Law" ( viz. the Act for annual Parliaments) being applied to the said
Writs of Parliament, etc. before recited.

A man of so much good sense, learning, and judgment, as Sir William
Blackstone is master of, must be well aware of the pernicious effects of
investing the Representatives of the people with a legislative power, beyond
the constitutional term of A SINGLE SESSION, without Re-election; and therefore
I cannot but be surprised at the unguarded manner in which he has expressed
himself in his Comment on the two excellent Statutes of Edward III. for annual
Parliaments; viz. that the King is not, or ever was, obliged by these Statutes
to call a new Parliament every year, etc. He has caused the word new to be
printed in Italics, as if he meant thereby to insinuate, that the Legislatures
of those early times were not unacquainted with our modern idea of conferring
on the popular Representation a kind of continued senatorial dignity, without
Re-election, for several years together; whereas he certainly must have known
that this corrupt modern practice has produced a new order of men amongst us, a
most dangerous increase of aristocratical power, which was entirely unknown to
our Ancestors in the glorious reign of Edward III. If he could show that there
ever was a Parliament, in those times, that was not a NEW Parliament, his
Comment might be justified! But it is notorious that Writs were issued to the
Sheriffs, for new Elections, almost every year during that whole reign: The
Writs, for the most part, are still preserved with the Returns upon them. In
the catalogue of Election-Writs, which Prynne has given in his Brevia
Parliamentaria Rediviva, p. 4 to 6, there is an account of Writs issued for new
Elections in every year of that King's reign, between his 34th (when the last
Act for annual Parliaments was made) and his 50th year, except 3, viz. the
40th, 41st, and 48th, years; in which years the Records of Summons to the
Prelates and Lords of Parliament are also wanting, as appears by Sir William
Dugdale's perfect Copy of Summons to Parliament of the Nobility, etc.

And yet this affords no absolute proof that Parliaments were not holden in
those very years for which the Writs are wanting; because the bundles of Writs
for the said years may have been lost or mislaid. The only wonder is, that more
have not been lost, when we consider the very little care that had been taken
of them; for Prynne found many of these Writs dispersed among a vast
miscellaneous heap of other records on various subjects, (as he himself relates
in his Epistle-Dedicatory to King Charles II. of his Brevia Parliamentaria
Rediviva,) calling the said heap a confused Chaos, under corrding putrefying
cobwebs, dust, and filth, in the darkest corner of Caesar's Chapel in the White
Tower, as mere useless Relics not worthy to be calendred, etc. And, in page
103 of that same work, he speaks of 117 Bundles of Writs, whereof 97 had only
been then lately discovered, filed, and bundled, by himself: But many of these
117 Bundles (says he) are not complete, above half or three parts of the Writs
being either rotted, consumed, maimed, torn, or utterly lost, through
carelessness, wet, cankers, or other casualties; and some of them have not
above two, three, or four Writs, and one or two but one Writ and Retorn
remaining.

But that there were really Writs for Parliaments, even in those three years,
which appear to be wanting, at least in two of them, is very certain; because
it was in the 40th year of this reign, as Sir Edward Coke informs us, (4 Inst.
p. 13,) that the Pope demanded homage for the kingdoms of England and Ireland,
and the arrears of revenue granted by King John to Pope Innocent III. whereupon
the King, in the same year, calls his Court of Parliament, In this Parliament
it was unanimously agreed, by the Prelates, Dukes, Counts, Barons, and Commons,
("et la Commun," and again, "et Communes,") that the said King John, nor no
other, could put himself, nor his Realm, nor his People, in such Subjection,
without their Assent ('sans assent de eux'); and, if it was done, it was done
without their Assent, (that is, without the Assent of the Common; for the
Assent of the Barons was expressed in the Charter,) and contrary to his Oath at
his Coronation, p. 14. Whereupon Lord Coke remarks, in the margin, that no King
can put himself, nor his Realm, nor his People, in such Subjection, without
Assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, etc.
etc. as Sir Edward Coke proves from the Parliament-Rolls of that year, No 8,
remarking, at the same time, that the Act then made was "never yet printed."
See the margin, 4th Inst. p. 13.

And it appears that a Parliament was held also in the 48th year of this reign,
because supplies were in that year granted to the King by Parliament, as
related by Sir Richard Baker, in his Chronicle, p. 173, viz. in his eight and
fortieth year, IN A PARLIAMENT, is granted him a 10th of the Clergy, and a 15th
of the Laity. So that there is but one year, out of so many, in which we cannot
trace the meeting of the annual Parliaments: And annual Writs for new Elections
were regularly issued for the first 18 years of the following reign, (as
appears by Prynne's 2d part of a brief Register and Survey of the several kinds
and forms of parliamentary Writs, pages 116 and 117,) till Richard II. (that
wretched perjured monarch) had rendered himself absolute. His arbitrary
proceedings very soon afterward occasioned his own Loss of Power, and total
Fjectment from the Throne; so that, notwithstanding his boasted Firmness in
executing his favorite measures, he was at last reduced to the most abject
acknowledgements of his own unworthiness to reign.


After considering these unquestionable evidences of the issuing Writs annualy
for new Elections, it will be difficult to comprehend the meaning of Sir
William Blackstone's Comment on the said two Acts for annual Parliaments: Not
that he (the King) is, or ever was, obliged by these Statutes to call a new
Parliament every year; but only to permit a Parliament to sit annually for the
redress of grievances and dispatch of business, if need be. -- These last words
(says he) are so loose and vague, that such of our monarchs, as were inclined
to govern without Parliaments, neglected the convoking them, sometimes for a
considerable period, under pretense that there was no need of them, etc.

But "these last words" are not so loose and vague as either to justify his own
explanation of the said Statues, ( viz. not to call a new Parliament every
year, but only to permit a Parliament to sit, etc.) or to excuse, in the least
degree, the criminal neglects of those depraved monarchs who were inclined to
govern without them: for the words, "if need be," cannot, according to the most
obvious sense of the Act wherein they are found, be applied to the main purpose
of the Act, (the holding annual Parliaments,) but merely to the remaining part
of the sentence, viz. and more often: that is, and more often, if need be. The
Order, that a Parliament shall be holden EVERY YEAR ONCE, is absolute; and the
discretionary power, expressed in the words if need be, relates apparently to
the calling Parliaments "more often:" for, if the said discretionary words, "if
need be," could, with any propriety, be applied to the whole sentence, the Act
itself would have been nugatory; which could never be the intention of the
Legislature: but the true meaning and sense of the Legislature is very clearly
proved by the histories of those times: for it is manifest, not only that new
Representatives were elected every year (with only one exception) for a
considerable number of years after the last of the said Acts was made, (which
confirms the main purpose of the Acts, viz. the holding annual Parliaments,)
but it is also manifest, that Parliaments were frequently holden "more often"
than once a year; Writs were issued for electing 3 new Parliaments in the 6th
year of Edw. III. 2 in his 11th year, 3 in his 12th year, and even 4 in his
14th year; and there appear to have been 2 new Parliaments in the 7th of Rich.
II. See Prynne's Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, p. 5 and 6.
which amply confirms also what I have before said, concerning the meaning of
the discretionary power, expressed in the said Act, by the words "if need be."

These very frequent Elections (sometimes two, three, and four, times IN ONE
YEAR) sufficiently prove that the power, delegated by the people to their
Representatives, continued no longer in force than during the Session of the
particular Parliament to which they were summoned; which being once determined,
(says Prynne, is it part of Brief Register, etc. of Parl. Writs, p. 334.) they
presently ceased to be Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons, in any succeeding
Parliaments or Councils, unless newly elected and returned to serve in them, by
the King's NEW Writs, as our Law Books (referring to 4 Ed. IV. f. 44. Brook,
Officer, 25.34 Hen. VIII. c. 24.) "and experience resolve," etc. And therefore
Judge Blackstone's insinuation, against the calling of a new Parliament, has no
real foundation: for, if it was the intention of the Legislature, in the two
Acts abovementioned, that the King should ever summon any Parliament at all,
they must necessarily be understood to mean a new Parliament on all occasions;
i. e. not only that the regular Parliaments, which they ordained to be holden
every year once, should be new Parliaments, but also those that should be
summoned upon any extraordinary unforeseen occasions; which is sufficiently
expressed in the 1st of the said Acts, by the words, and more often, if need
be. The meaning of the Act is unquestionably proved by the actual issuing of
writs, to the Sheriffs, for electing Knights, Citizens, etc. for two, three,
and sometimes four, new Parliaments, in one year, as mentioned above: And if
any person should object, that such very frequent Elections must be attended
with insuperable difficulties and inconveniences, we may quote the experience
of all ancient times, as affording ample and sufficient proofs to the contrary;
there being not above two or three cases of elections questioned, or complained
of, from 49 Hen. III. till 22 Edw IV. (that is, more than 200 years,) for ought
that appears by the Retornes or Parliament-Rolls, and NOT SO MUCH AS ONE DOUBLE
RETURN or INDENTURE, wherewith all the late Bundles, or Writs, are stored, and
the House of Commons, and late Committees of Privileges pestered, perplexed, to
the great retarding of the more weighty public affairs of the King and Kingdom.
Prynne, Brevia Parl. Rediv. p. 137. This enormous evil, the retardment of
business, by undue Returns, will not (I may venture, without the spirit of
prophecy, to assert) be remedied by the new Regulation for that purpose. The
Commons were never (in ancient times of Freedom) esteemed the proper Judges of
their own Elections, but the King alone, that is, in his limited judicial
capacity, by his Justices and his sworn Juries, in the Courts of Common Law. If
my countrymen will seriously consider all these points, they must be convinced
that the only sure method of healing the alarming distempers of our political
Constitution Viz. the enormous national Debt; the numerous Pensions; the secret
parliamentary Insluence; a standing Army of near 100 Battalions of Foot,
besides Cavalry, in time of Peace! [this was first printed in 1774] etc. etc.
etc. which must render the Estates and Property of individuals precarious and
insecure, or finally EAT THEM UP with growing burdens, if these fatal symptoms
of the most dangerous political consumption are not speedily checked and thrown
off, by the wholesome prescriptions of a free and equal Representation of THE
PEOPLE annually elected.
is to restore to the people their ancient and just Right to elect a new
Parliament, every year once, and more often if need be.

No Parliament could have any right to deprive the people of this inestimable
Law, unless the Representatives had expressly consulted their respective
constituents upon it; as the alteration was of too much moment to be entrusted
to the discretion of any Representatives or Deputies whatsoever, being
infinitely more important than any new device, moved on the King's behalf, in
Parliament, for his aid, or the like; for the most essential and fundamental
Right of the whole body of the Commons (I mean the Principals, not the Deputies
or Agents) was materially injured by the fatal change, and the people's power
of control, for the general good of the kingdom, was thereby apparently
diminished! so that, if it is the duty of Representatives (even in "any new
device" of mere aid, or the like) to consult their Constituents, how much more,
upon the proposal of so material an alteration in the Constitution, ought they
to have answered, that, in this new device, they DARE NOT AGREE WITHOUT
CONFERENCE WITH THEIR COUNTRIES! These are the words of Lord Coke, who mentions
them as the proper answer, See also the answer of the Commons in 13 Edw. III.
(as reported in Sir Robert Cotton's Abridgement of the Records, etc. p. 17.)
almost in the same words.
when any new device is moved, etc. and he adds, whereby it appears (says he)
that SUCH CONFERENCE is warrantable by th law and custom of Parliament, 4th
Inst. p. 14; so that no Representative can be justified (according to the Law
and Custom of Parliament) who refuses to receive the Instructions of his
Constituents, notwithstanding that several very sensible, worthy, and (I
believe) sincerely patriotic, gentlemen have lately declared themselves to be
of a contrary opinion; but, when they peruse the several authorities which I
have cited, concerning the absolute necessity of a very frequent appeal to the
sense of the whole body of the people, I trust, in their candor and love of
truth, that they will alter their sentiments.

THE END.

