MISS in her TEENS: OR, THE MEDLEY of LOVERS.

A FARCE IN TWO ACTS.

As it is Performed at the THEATER ROYAL in Covent Garden.

LONDON: Printed for J. and R. TONSON in the Strand. M.DCC.XLVII.

PROLOGUE.
Written by a FRIEND.
TOO long has Farce, neglecting Nature's Laws,
Debased the Stage, and wronged the Comic Cause:
To raise a Laugh has been her sole Pretense,
Though dearly purchased at the Price of Sense;
This Child of Folly gained Increase with Time;
Fit for the Place, succeeded Pantomime;
Revived her Honors, joined her motley Band,
And Song, and low Conceit, o'er-ran the Land.
More generous Views inform our Author's Breast,
From real Life his Characters are dressed;
He seeks to trace the Passions of Mankind,
And while he spares the Person, paints the Mind.
In pleasing Contrast he attempts to show
The vap'ring Bully, and the frib'ling Beau,
Cowards alike, That full of Martial Airs,
And This as tender as the Silk he wears.
Proud to divert, not anxious for Renown,
Often has the Bard essayed to please the Town,
Your full Applause out-paid his little Art,
He boasts no Merit, but a grateful Heart;
Pronounce your Doom, he will patiently submit,
Ye sovereign Judges of all Works of Wit!
To you the Ore is brought, a lifeless Mass,
You give the Stamp, and then the Coin may pass.
Now whether Judgment prompt you to forgive,
Whether you bid this trifling Offspring live,
Or with a Frown should send the sickly Thing,
To sleep whole Ages under Dulness' Wing;
To your known Candor we will always trust,
You never were, nor can you be unjust.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Sir Simon Loveit. Mr. Hippisly. Captain Loveit. Mr. Havard. Fribble. Mr.
Garrick. Flash. Mr. Woodward. Puff. Mr. Chapman. Jasper. Mr. Arthur.
WOMEN.
Miss Biddy. Miss Hippisly. Aunt. Mrs. Martin. Tag. Mrs. Pritchard.
MISS in her TEENS.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, A STREET. Enter Captain LOVEIT and PUFF. CAPTAIN. THIS is the Place we
were directed to; and now, Puff, if I can get no Intelligence of her, what will
become of me?


Puff. And me too, Sir. -- You must consider I am a married Man, and cannot bear
Fatigue as I have done. -- But pray, Sir, why did you leave the Army so
abruptly, and not give me Time to fill my Knapsack with common Necessaries?
Half a Dozen Shirts, and your Regimentals, are my whole Cargo.


Capt. I was wild to get away, and as soon as I obtained my Leave of Absence, I
thought every Moment an Age till I returned to the Place where I first saw this
young-charming, innocent, bewitching Creature --


Puff. With fifteen thousand Pounds for her Fortune -- Strong Motives, I must
confess. -- And now, Sir, as you are pleased to say you must depend upon my
Care and Abilities in this Affair, I think I have a just Right to be acquainted
with the Particulars of your Passion, that I may be the better enabled to serve
you.


Capt. You shall have 'em. -- When I left the University, which is now seven
Months since, my Father, who loves his Money better than his Son, and would not
settle a Farthing upon me --


Puff. Mine did so by me, Sir --


Capt. Purchased me a Pair of Colors at my own Request; but before I joined
the Regiment, which was going abroad, I took a Ramble into the Country with a
Fellow-C^^legian, to see a Relation of his who lived in Berkshire. --


Puff. -- A Party of Pleasure, I suppose.


Capt. During a short Stay there, I came acquainted with this young Creature;
she was just come from the Boarding-School, and though she had all the Simplicity
of her Age and the Country, yet it was mixed with such sensible Vivacity, that
I took Fire at once --


Puff. I was Tinder myself at your Age. But pray, Sir, did you take Fire before
you knew of her Fortune?


Capt. Before, upon my Honor.


Puff. Folly and Constitution -- But on, Sir.


Capt. I was introduced to the Family by the Name of Rhodophil, (for so my
Companion and I had settled it;) at the End of three Weeks I was obliged to
attend the Call of Honor in Flanders.


Puff. Your Parting, to be sure, was Heartbreaking.


Capt. I feel it at this Instant. -- We vowed eternal Constancy, and I promised
to take the first Opportunity of returning to her: I did so, but we found the
House shut up, and all the Information, you know, that we could get from the
neighboring Cottage was, that Miss and her Aunt were removed to Town, and
lived somewhere near this Part of it.


Puff. And now we are got to the Place of Action, propose your Plan of
Operation.


Capt. My Father lives but in the next Street, so I must decamp immediately for
fear of Discoveries; you are not known to be my Servant, so make what Enquiries
you can in the Neighborhood, and I shall wait at the Inn for your Intelligence.


Puff. I Will patrol hercabouts, and examine all that pass; but I Have forgot the
Word, Sir -- Miss Biddy --


Capt. Bellair --


Puff. A young Lady of Wit, Beauty, and Fifteen thousand Pounds Fortune -- but,
Sir --


Capt. What do you say, Puff?


Puff. If your Honor pleases to consider that I had a Wife in Town whom I left
somewhat abruptly half a Year ago, you will think it, I believe, but decent, to
make some Enquiry after her first; to be sure it would be some small
Consolation to me to know whether the poor Woman is living, or has made away
with herself, or --


Capt. Pr'ythec don't distract me; a Moment's Delay is of the utmost
Consequence; I must insist upon an immediate Compliance with my Commands.

(Exit Captain.
Puff. The Devil's in these fiery young Fellows! they think of no body's Wants
but their own. He does not consider that I am Flesh and Blood as well as
himself. However I may kill two Birds at once; for I shall not be surpised if I
meet my Lady walking the Streets -- But who have we here? Sure I should know
that Face.

Enter Jasper from a House. Who Is that? my old Acquaintance, Jasper!


Jasper. What, Puff! are you here?


Puff. My dear Friend! [Kisses him.] Well, and how Jasper, still easy and
happy! Toujours le meme! -- What Intrigues now? What Girls have you ruined, and
what Cuckolds made, since you and I used to beat up together, Eh?


Jasper. Faith, Business has been very brisk during the War; Men are scarce,
you know; not that I can say I ever wanted Amusement in the worst of Times. --
But harkye. Puff --


Puff. Not a Word aloud, I am incognito.


Jasper. Why Faith, I should not have known you, if you had not spoke first;
you seem to be a little dishabille too, as well as incognito. Whom do you
honor with your Service now? Are you from the Wars?


Puff. Piping hot, I assure you; Fire and Smoke will tarnish; a Man that will
go into such Service as I have been in, will find his Clothes the worse for
wear, take my Word for it: But how is it with you, Friend Jasper? What, you
still serve, I see? You live at that House, I suppose?


Jasper. I don't absolutely live, but I am most of my Time there; I have within
these two Months entered into the Service of an old Gentleman, who hired a
reputable Servant, and dressed him as you see, because he has taken it into his
Head to fall in Love.


Puff. False Appetite and second Childhood! But pr'ythee, what is the Object of
his Passion?


Jasper. No less than a Virgin of Sixteen, I assure you.


Puff. Oh, the toothless old Dotard!


Jasper. And he mumbles and plays with her till his Mouth waters; then he
chuckles till he cries, and calls it his Bid, and his Bidsy, and is so
foolishly fond --


Puff. Bidsy! What Is that? --


Jasper. -- Her Name is Biddy.


Puff. Biddy! What, Miss Biddy Bellair?


Jasper. -- The same --


Puff. I have no Luck, to be sure. [Aside.] -- Oh! I have heard of her; she is
of a pretty good Family, and has some Fortune, I know. But are things settled?
Is the Marriage fixed?


Jasper. Not absolutely; the Girl, I believe, detests him; but her Aunt, a very
good prudent old Lady, has given her Consent, if he can gain her Niece's; how
it will end I cannot tell -- but I am hot upon it myself.


Puff. -- The Devil! not Marriage, I hope.


Jasper. That is not yet determined.


Puff. Who is the Lady, pray?


Jasper. A Maid in the same Family, a Woman of Honor, I assure you; She has
one Husband already, a scoundrel sort of a Fellow that has run away from her,
and listed for a Soldier; so, toward the End of the Campaign, she hopes to
have a Certificate he is knocked of the Head; if not, I suppose, we shall settle
Matters another way.


Puff. Well, speed the Plough. -- But harkye, consummate without the
Certificate if you can -- keep your Neck out of the Collar -- do -- I have wore
it these two Years, and damnably galled I am. --


Jasper. I Will take your Advice; but I must run away to my Master, who will be
impatient for an Answer to his Message which I have just delivered to the young
Lady; so, dear Mr. Puff, I am your most obedient humble Servant.


Puff. And I must to our Agent's for my Arrears: If you have an Hour to spare,
you will hear of me at George's or the Tilt-Yard -- Au Revoir, as we say abroad.
[Exit Jasper.] Thus we are as civil and as false as our Betters; Jasper and I
were always the Beau Monde exactly; we ever hated one another heartily, yet
always kiss, and shake Hands -- But now to my Master, with a Head full of News,
and a Heart full of Joy!

[Going starts. Angels, and Ministers of Grace, defend me!
It cannot be! by Heavens, it is, that fretful Porcupine, my Wife! I cannot stand
it; what shall I do? I Will try to avoid her.


Enter Tag. Tag. It must be he! I Will swear to the Rogue at a Mile's distance;
he either has not seen me, or wont know me; if I can keep my Temper I Will try
him farther.


Puff. I sweat -- I tremble -- She comes upon me!


Tag. Pray, good Sir, If I may be so bold --


Puff. I have nothing for you, good Woman, don't trouble me.


Tag. If your Honor pleases to look this way --


Puff. The Kingdom is overrun with Beggars; I suppose the last I gave to has
sent this: but I have no more loose Silver about me; so pr'ythee, Woman, don't
disturb me.


Tag. I can hold no longer; oh you Villain, you! Where have you been,
Scoundrel! Do you know me now Varlet?

[Seizes him.
Puff. Here Watch, Watch, -- Zounds I shall have my Pockets picked.


Tag. Own me this Minute, Hang-dog, and confess every thing, or by the Rage of
an injured Woman, I Will raise the Neighborhood, t^rottle you, and send you to
Newgate.


Puff. Amazement! what, my own dear Tag! Come to my Arms, and let me press you
to my Heart, that pants for thee, and only thee, my true and lawful Wife. --
Now my Stars have over-paid me for the Fatigue and Dangers of the Field; I have
wandered about like Achilles in search of faithful Penelope, and the Gods have
brought me to this happy Spot.

[Embraces her.
Tag. The Fellow's cracked for certain! Leave your bombastick Stuff, and tell
me, Rascal, why you left me, and where you have been these six Months, heh?


Puff. We'll reserve my Adventures for our happy Winter Evenings -- I shall
only tell you now, that my Heart beats so strong in my Country's Cause, and
being instigated either by Honor or the Devil, (I cannot tell which) I set out
for Flanders, to gather Laurels, and lay 'em at thy Feet.


Tag. You left me to starve, Villain, and beg my Bread, you did so.


Puff. I left you too hastily I must confess, and often has my Conscience flung
me for it. -- I am got into an Officer's Service, have been in several Actions,
gained some Credit by my Behavior, and am now returned with my Master, to
indulge the gender Passions.


Tag. Don't think to fob me off with this nonsensical Talk; what have you
brought me home besides?


Puff. Honor, and immoderate Love.


Tag. I could tear your Eyes out.


Puff. Temperance, or I walk off.


Tag. Temperance, Traitor, Temperance! What can you say for yourself? Leave me
to the wide World. --


Puff. Well, I have been in the wide World too, (...) I? What would the Woman
have?


Tag. Reduce me to the Necessity of going to Service.

[(...)
Puff. Why, I Am in Service too, your Lord and Master, an't I, you saucy Jade,
you? -- Come, where do live, hereabouts? Have got good Vails? Do go to
Market? Come, give me a Kiss, Darling, and tell me where I shall pay my Duty to
thee.


Tag. Why, there I live at that House.

[Pointing to the House Jasper come out of.
Puff. What, there! that House?


Tag. Yes, there, that House.


Puff. Huzza! We Are made for ever, you Slut, you! huzza! Every thing conspires
this Day to make me happy -- Prepare for an Inundation of Joy! My Master is in
love with your Miss Biddy over Head and Ears, and she with him: I know she is
courted by some old Fumbler, and her Aunt is not against the Match; but now we
are come the Town will be relieved, and the Governor brought over; in plain
English, our Fortune is made; my Master must marry the Lady, and the old
Gentleman may go to the Devil.


Tag. Heyday! what is all this?


Puff. Say no more, the Dice are thrown, Doublets for us; away to your young
Mistress, while I run to my Master, tell her Rhodophil! Rhodophil! will be with
her immediately; then if her Blood does not mount to her Face like Quicksilver
in a Weather-glass, and point to extreme hot, believe the whole a Lie, and your
Husband no Politician.


Tag. This is news, indeed! I have had the Place but a little while, and have
not quite got into the Secrets of the Family; but Part of your Story is true,
and if you will bring your Master, and Miss is willing, I warrant we'll be too
hard for the old Folks.


Puff. I Will about it straight; -- but hold, Tag, I had forgot -- Pray how does
Mr. Jasper do?


Tag. Mr. Jasper! -- What do you mean? I -- I -- I --


Puff. What, out of Countenance, Child? Oh fie! Speak plain, my Dear. -- And the
Certificate, when comes that, heh, Love?


Tag. He has sold himself and turned Conjurer, or he could never have known it.

[Aside.
Puff. Are not you a Jade? -- Are not you a Jezebel? -- Arn't you a --


Tag. O ho, Temperance! or I walk off --


Puff. I know I am not finished yet, and so I am easy; but more Thanks to my
Fortune than your Virtue, Madam.


Aunt. [within.] Tag, Tag, where are you, Tag?


Tag. Coming, Madam. -- My old Lady calls; away, to your Master, and I Will
prepare his Reception within.


Puff. Shall I bring the Certificate with me?

[Exit.
Tag. Go, you graceless Rogue, you richly deserve it.

[Exit.
SCENE changes to a Chamber. Enter Aunt and Tag. Aunt. Who was that Man you
were talking to, Tag?


Tag. A Cousin of mine, Madam, that brought me some News from my Aunt in the
Country.


Aunt. Where Is my Neice? Why are not you with her?


Tag. She bid me leave her alone -- She Is so melancholy, Madam, I don't know
what is come to her of late --


Aunt. The Thoughtfulness that is natural upon the Approach of Matrimony,
generally occasions a decent Concern.


Tag. And do you think, Madam, a Husband of threescore and five --


Aunt. Hold, Tag, he protests to me he is but five and Fifty.


Tag. He is a Rogue, Madam, and an old Rogue, and a fumbling old Rogue, which
is the worst of Rogues. --


Aunt. Alas! Youth or Age, it is all one to her; she is all Simplicity without
Experience: I would not force her Inclinations, but she is so innocent she will not
know the Difference --


Tag. Innocent! never trust to that, Madam; I was innocent myself once, but
Live and Learn is an old Saying, and a true one: -- I believe, Madam, no Body
is more innocent than yourself, and a good Maid you are to be sure but though you
really don't know the Difference, yet you can fancy it I warrant you.


Aunt. I should prefer a large Jointure to a small one, and that is all; but
it is impossible that Biddy should have Desires, she is but newly come out of the
Country, and just turned of Sixteen.


Tag. That Is a ticklish Age, Madam! I have observed she does not eat, nor she
does not sleep; she sighs, and she cries, and she loves Moonlight; these, I
take it, are very strong Symptoms.


Aunt. They are very unaccountable, I must confess; but you talk from a
depraved Mind, Tag, here is is simple and untainted.


Tag. She Will make him a Cuckold though for all that, if you force her to marry
him.


Aunt. You shock me, Tag, with your coarse Expressions; I tell you, her
Chastity will be her Guard, let her Husband be what he will.


Tag. Chastity! Never trust to that, Madam; get her a Husband that is fit for
her, and I Will be bound for her Virtue; but with such a one as Sir Simon, I Am a
Rogue if I Would answer for my own.


Aunt. Well, Tag, the Child shall never have reason to repent of my Severity; I
was going before to my Lawyers to speak about the Articles of Marriage. I will
now put a Stop to 'em for some time, till we can make farther Discoveries.


Tag. Heaven will bless you for your Goodness; look where the poor Bird comes,
quite mop'd and melancholy; I Will set my Pump at work, and draw something from
her before your Return, I warrant you.

[Exit Aunt There goes a Miracle; she (...) neither Pride, Envy, or Illnature,
and yet is near Sixty, and a Virgin.


Enter Biddy. Biddy. How unfortunate a poor girl am I, I dare not tell my
Secrets to any Body, and if I don't I Am undone -- Heigho! [Sighs.] Pray, Tag,
is my Aunt gone to her Lawyer about me? Heigho!


Tag. What Is that Sigh for my dear young Mistress?


Bid. I did not sigh, not I -- [Sighs.]


Tag. Nay, never gulp 'em down, they are the worst Things you can swallow.
There Is something in that little Heart of yours, that swells it and puffs it,
and will burst it at last, if you don't give it vent.


Bid. What would you have me tell you? [Sighs.]


Tag. Come, come, your are afraid I Will betray you, but you had as good speak, I
may do you some Service you little think of.


Biddy. It is not in your Power, Tag, to give me what I want.

[Sighs.]
Tag. Not directly, perhaps; but I may be the means of helping you to it; as
for Example -- If you should not like to marry the old Man your Aunt designs
for you, one might find a way to break --


Biddy. His Neck, Tag?


Tag. Or the Match; either will do, Child.


Biddy. I don't care which indeed, so I was clear of him -- I don't think I Am
fit to be married.


Tag. To him you mean -- You have no Objection to Marriage, but the Man, and I
applaud you for it: But come, Courage, Miss, never keep it in; out with it all
--


Biddy. If you will ask me any Questions, I Will answer 'em, but I cannot tell you
any thing of myself, I shall blush if I do.


Tag. Well then -- In the first Place, Pray tell me, Miss Biddy Bellair, if you
don't like somebody better than old Sir Simon Loveit?


Biddy. Heigho!


Tag. What Is Heigho, Miss?


Biddy. When I say Heigho! it means yes.


Tag. Very well; and this Somebody is a young handsome Fellow?


Biddy. Heigho!


Tag. And if you were once his, you would be as merry as the best of us?


Biddy. Heigho!


Tag. So far so good: and since I have got you to wet your Feet, souce over
Head at once, and the Pain will be over.


Biddy. There -- then. [A long Sigh.] Now help me out, Tag, as fast as you can.


Tag. When did you hear from your Gallant?


Biddy. Never since he went to the Army.


Tag. How so?


Biddy. I was afraid the Letters would fall into my Aunt's Hands, so I would
not let him write to me; but I had a better Reason then.


Tag. Pray let us hear that too.


Biddy. Why, I thought if I should write to him, and promise him to love no
body else, and should afterward change my Mind, he might think I was
inconstant, and call me a Coquette.


Tag. What a simple Innocent it is! [Aside.] And have you changed your Mind,
Miss?


Biddy. No indeed, Tag, I love him the best of any of 'em.


Tag. Of any of 'em! Why, have you any more?


Biddy. Pray don't ask me.


Tag. Nay, Miss, if you only trust me by Halves, you cannot expect --


Biddy. I will trust you with every thing. -- When I parted with him, I grew
melancholy; so in order to divert me, I have let two others court me till he
returns again.


Tag. Is that all, my Dear? Mighty simple, indeed.

[Aside.
Biddy. One of 'em is a fine blustering Man, and is called Captain Flash; he is
always talking of Fighting, and Wars; he thinks he is sure of me, but I shall
balk him; we shall see him this Afternoon, for he pressed strongly to come, and
I have given him Leave, while my Aunt's taking her Afternoon's Nap.


Tag. And who is the other, pray?


Biddy. Quite another sort of a Man; he speaks like a Lady for all the World,
and never swears as Mr. Flash does, but wears nice white Gloves, and tells me
what Ribbons become my Complexion, where to stick my Patches, who is the best
Millener, where they sell the best Tea, and which is the best Wash for the
Face, and the best Paste for the Hands; he is always playing with my Fan, and
showing his Teeth, and whenever I speak he pats me -- so -- and cries, The
Devil take me, Miss Biddy, but you will be my Perdition -- Ha, ha, ha!


Tag. Oh the pretty Creature! And what do you call him pray?


Biddy. His Name's Fribble; you shall see him too, for by Mistake I appointed
'em at the same time; but you must help me out with 'em.


Tag. and suppose your Favorite should come too --


Biddy. I should not care what became of the others.


Tag. What Is his Name?


Biddy. It begins with an R^d^o --


Tag. I Will be hanged if it is not Rhodophil.


Biddy. I am frightened at you! You are a Witch, Tag!


Tag. I am so, and I can tell your Fortune too. Look me in the Face. The
Gentleman you love most in the World will be at our House this Afternoon; he
arrived from the Army this Morning, and dies till he sees you.


Biddy. Is he come, Tag? Don't joke with me --


Tag. Not to keep you longer in Suspense, you must know the Servant of your
Strephon, by some unaccountable Fate or other, is my Lord and Master; he has
just been with me, and told me of his Master's Arrival and Impatience --


Biddy. Oh my dear, dear Tag, you have put me out of my Wits -- I am all over
in a Flutter -- I shall leap out of my Skin -- I don't know what to do with
myself -- Is he come, Tag? -- I am ready to faint -- I Would give the World I had
put on my Pink and Silver Robings today.


Tag. I assure you, Miss, you look charmingly!


Biddy, Do I indeed though? I Will put a little Patch under my left Eye, and powder
my Hair immediately.


Tag. We'll go to Dinner first, and then I Will assist you.


Biddy. Dinner! I cannot eat a Morsel -- I don't know what is the Matter with me
-- my Ears tingle, my Heart beats, my Face flushes, and I tremble every Joint
of me -- I must run in and look myself in the Glass this Moment.


Tag. Yes, she has it, and deeply too; this is no Hypocrisy --

Not Art, but Nature now performs her Part,
And every Word's the Language of the Heart.

End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE continues. Enter Captain Loveit, Biddy, Tag, and Puff. Capt. TO find you
still constant, and to arrive at such a critical Juncture, is the height of
Fortune and Happiness


Biddy. Nothing shall force me from you; and if I am secure of your Affections
--


Puff. I Will be bound for him, Madam, and give you any Security you can ask.


Tag. Every thing goes on to our Wish, Sir; I just now had a second Conference
with my old Lady, and she was so convinced by my Arguments, that she returned
instantly to the Lawyer to forbid the drawing out of any Writings at all, and
she is determined never to thwart Miss's Inclinations, and left it to us to
give the old Gentleman his Discharge at the next Visit.


Capt. Shall I undertake the old Dragon?


Tag. If we have Occasion for Help, we shall call for you.


Biddy. I expect him every Moment, therefore I Will tell you what, Rhodophil, you
and your Man shall be locked up in my Bedchamber till we have settled Matters
with the old Gentleman.


Capt. Do what you please with me.


Biddy. You must not be impatient though


Capt. I can undergo any thing with such a Reward in view, one Kiss and I Will be
quite resigned -- and now show me the way.

[Exeunt.
Tag. Come. Sirrah, when I have got you under Lock and Key, I shall bring you
to Reason.


Puff. Are your Wedding-clothes ready, my Dove? the Certificate's come.


Tag. Go follow your Captain, Sirrah -- march -- You may Thank Heaven I had
Patience to stay so long.

[Exeunt Tag and Puff.
Enter Biddy. Biddy, I was very much alarmed for fear my two Gallants should
come in upon us unawares; we should have had sad work if they had: I find I
love Rhodophil vastly, for though my other Sparks flatter me more, I cannot abide
the thoughts of 'em now -- I have Business upon my Hands enough to turn my
little Head, but egad my Heart's good, and a Fig for Dangers -- let me see,
what shall I do with my two Gallants? I must, at least, part with 'em decently;
suppose I set 'em together by the Ears? -- The luckiest thought in the World!
For if if they will not quarrel (as I believe they will not) I can break with them
for Cowards, and very justly dismiss 'em my Service; and if they will fight,
and one of 'em should be killed, the other will certainly be hanged, or run
away, and so I shall very handsomely get rid of both. -- I am glad I have
settled it so purely.

Enter Tag. Well, Tag, are they safe?


Tag. I think so, the Door's double locked, and I have the Key in my Pocket.


Biddy. That Is pure; but have you given 'em any thing to divert 'em?


Tag. I have given the Captain one of your old Gloves to mumble, but my
Strephon is diverting himself with the more substantial Comforts of a cold
Ven'son Pasty.


Biddy. What shall we do with the next that comes?


Tag. If Mr. Fribble comes first, I Will clap him up into my Lady's Store-room; I
suppose he is a great Maker of Marmalade himself, and will have an Opportunity
of making some critical Remarks upon our Pastry and Sweetmeats.


Biddy. When one of 'em comes, do you go and watch for the other, and as soon
as you see him, run in to us, and pretend it is my Aunt, and so we shall have
an Excuse to lock him up till we want him.


Tag. You may depend upon me; here is one of 'em. --


Enter Fribble. Biddy. Mr. Fribble, your Servant --


Fribble. Miss Biddy your Slave -- I hope I have not come upon you abruptly; I
should have waited upon you sooner, but an Accident happened that discomposed
me so, that I was obliged to go home again to take Drops.


Biddy. Indeed you don't look well, Sir. -- Go, Tag, and do as I bid you.


Tag. I will, Madam.

[Exit.
Biddy. I have set my Maid to watch my Aunt, that we may not be surprised by her.


Frib. Your Prudence is equal to your Beauty, Miss, and I hope your permitting
me to kiss your Hands, will be no Impeachment of your Understanding.


Biddy. I hate the Sight of him. [Aside.] I was afraid I should not have had
the Pleasure of seeing you, pray let me know what Accident you met with, and
what is the matter with your Hand? I shall not be easy till I know.


Frib. Well I vow, Miss Biddy, you're a good Creater, -- I Will endeavor to
muster up what little Spirits I have, and tell you the whole Affair -- Hem! --
But first you must give me leave to make you a Present of a small Pot of my
Lip-salve; My Servant made it this Morning -- the Ingredients are innocent, I
assure you; nothing but the best Virgin's-wax, Conserve of Roses, and Lilly of
the Valley Water.


Biddy. I thank you, Sir, but my Lips are generally red, and, when they an't, I
bite 'em.


Frib. I bite my own, sometimes, to pout 'em a little, but this will give them
a Softness, Color, and an agreeable Moister. -- Thus let me make an humble
Offering at that Shrine, where I have already sacrificed my Heart.

[Kneels and gives the Pot.
Biddy. Upon my Word that is very prettily expressed, you are positively the
best Company in the World -- I wish he was out of the House.

[Aside.
Frib. But to return to my Accident, and the Reason why my Hand is in this
Condition -- I beg you will excuse the Appearance of it, and be satisfied that
nothing but mere Necessity could have forced me to appear thus muffled before
you.


Biddy. I am very willing to excuse any Misfortune that happens to you, Sir.

(Curtsies.
Frib. You are vastly good indeed, -- thus it was. -- Hem! -- You must know,
Miss, there is not an Animal in the Creation I have so great an Aversion to, as
those Hackney-coach Fellows -- As I was coming out of my Lodgings, -- Says one
of 'em to me, Would your Honor heve a Coach? -- No, Man, said I, not now (with
all the Civility imaginable) -- I Will carry you and your Doll too, (says he)
Miss Margery for the same Price. -- Upon which the masculine Beasts about us
fell a laughing; then I turned round in a great Passion, curse me, (says I)
Fellow, but I Will trounce thee. -- And, as I was holding out my Hand in a
threatening Poster, -- thus; -- he makes a Cut at me with his Whip, and striking
me over the Nail of my little Finger, it gave me such exquisite Torter that I
fainted away; and, while I was in this Condition, the Mob picked my Pocket of
my Purse, my Scissars, my Mocoa Smelling-Bottle, and my Huswife.


Biddy. I shall laugh in his Face. (Aside.) I am afraid you are in great Pain;
pray sit down, Mr. Fribble, but I hope your Hand is in no Danger.

[They sit.
Frib. Not in the least, Maam; pray don't be apprehensive -- A Milk-poultice,
and a gentle Sweat to Night, with a little Manna in the Morning, I am confident
will relieve me entirely.


Biddy. But pray, Mr. Fribble, do you make use of a Huswife?


Frib. I cannot do without it, Maam; there is a Club of us, all young
Batchelors, the sweetest Society in the World; and we meet three times a Week
at each others Lodgings, where we drink Tea, hear the Chat of the Day, invent
Fashions for the Ladies, make Models of 'em, and cut out Patterns in Paper. We
were the first Inventors of Knotting, and this Fringe is the original Produce
and joint Labor of our little Community.


Biddy. And who are your pretty Set, pray?


Frib. There Is Phil Whiffle, Jacky Wagtail, my Lord Trip, Billy Dimple, Sir
Dilbery Diddle, and your humble --


Biddy. What a sweet Collection of happy Creatures!


Frib. Indeed and so we are, Miss, -- But a prodigious Fracas disconcerted us
some time ago at Billy Dimple's -- three drunken naughty Women of the Town
burst into our Club-room, cursed us all, threw down the China, broke six
Looking-glasses, scalded us with the Slop-Bason, and scrat poor Phil Whiffle's
Cheek in such a manner, that he has kept his Bed these three Weeks.


Biddy. Indeed, Mr. Fribble, I think all our Sex have great Reason to be angry;
for if you are so happy now you are Batchelors, the Ladies may wish and sigh to
very little purpose.


Frib. You are mistaken, I assure you; I am prodigiously rallied about my
Passion for you, I can tell you that, and am looked upon as lost to our Society
already; He, he, he!


Biddy. Pray, Mr. Fribble, now you have gone so far, don't think me impudent if
I long to know how you intend to use the Lady who shall be honored with your
Affections?


Frib. Not as most other Wives are used, I assure you; all the domestic
Business will be taken off her Hands; I shall make the Tea, comb the Dogs, and
dress the Children myself, so that though I Am a Commoner, Mrs. Fribble will lead
the Life of a Woman of Quality; for she will have nothing to do, but lie in
Bed, play at Cards, and scold the Servants.


Biddy. What a happy Creature must she be!


Frib. Do you really think so? Then pray let me have a little serous Talk with
you. -- Though my Passion is not of a long standing, I hope the Sincerity of my
Intentions --


Biddy. Ha, ha, ha!


Frib. Go, you wild Thing. [Pats her.] The Devil take me but there is no
talking to you. -- How can you use me in this barbarous manner! If I had the
Constitution of an Alderman it would sink under my Sufferings -- hooman Nater
cannot support it. --


Biddy. Why, what would you do with me, Mr. Fribble?


Frib. Well, I vow I Will beat you if you talk so -- don't look at me in that
manner. -- Flesh and Blood cannot bear it -- I could -- but I will not grow
indecent --


Biddy. But pray, Sir, where are the Verses you were to write upon me? I find
if a young Lady depends too much upon such fine Gentlemen as you, she will
certainly be disappointed.


Frib. I vow, the Flutter I was put into this Afternoon has quite turned my
Senses -- here they are though -- and I believe you will like 'em. --


Biddy. There can be no doubt of it.

[Curtsies.
Frib. I protest, Miss, I don't like that Curtsey -- Look at me, and always rise
in this manner. [Shews her] But, my dear Creater, who put on your Cap today?
They have made a Fright of you, and it is as yellow as old Lady Crowfoot's Neck.
-- When we are settled, I Will dress your Heads myself.


Biddy. Pray read the Verses to me, Mr. Fribble.


Frib. I obey -- Hem! -- William Fribble, Esquire to Miss Biddy Bellair -- greeting.

No Ice so hard, so cold as I,
'Till warmed and softn'd by your Eye;
And now my Heart dissolves away
In Dreams by Night, in Sighs by Day;
No brutal Passion fires my Breast,
Which loathes the Object when possessed;
But one of harmless, gentle Kind,
Whose Joys are centered -- in the Mind:
Then take with me Love's better Port,
His downy Wing, but not his Dart.
How do you like them?


Biddy. Ha, ha, ha! I swear they are very pretty -- but I don't quite
understand 'em.


Frib. These light Pieces are never so well understood in Reading as Singing; I
have set 'em myself, and will endeavor to give 'em you -- La la -- I have an
abominable Cold, and cannot sing a Note; however the Tune's nothing, the
Manner's all.

No Ice so hard, etc.
[Sings.]
Enter Tag, running. Tag. Your Aunt, your Aunt, your Aunt, Madam!


Frib. What Is the matter?


Biddy. Hide, hide Mr. Fribble, Tag, or we are ruined.


Frib. Oh! for Heaven's sake put me any where, so I don't dirty my Clothes.


Biddy. Put him into the Store-room, Tag, this Moment.


Frib. Is it a damp Place, Mrs. Tag? The Floor is boarded, I hope?


Tag. Indeed it is not, Sir.


Frib. What shall I do? I shall certainly catch my Death! Where Is my Cambrick
Handkerchief, and my Salts? I shall certainly have my Hystericks!

[Runs in.
Biddy. In, in, in -- So now let the other come as soon as he will; I did not
care if I had twenty of 'em, so they would but come one after another.

Enter Tag. Was my Aunt coming?


Tag. No, 'twas Mr. Flash, I suppose, by the Length of his Stride, and the Cock
of his Hat. He Will be here this Minute -- What shall we do with him?


Biddy. I Will manage him, I warrant you, and try his Courage; be sure you are
ready to second me -- we shall have pure Sport.


Tag. Hush! here he comes.


Enter Flash, singing. Flash. Well my Blossom, here am I! What Hopes for a poor
Dog, eh? How! the Maid here! then I Have lost the Town, Dammee! Not a Shilling to
bribe the Governor; she will spring a Mine, and I shall be blown to the Devil.

[Aside
Biddy. Don't be ashamed, Mr. Flash; I have told Tag the whole Affair, and
she is my Friend I can assure you.


Flash. Is she? Then she wont be mine I am certain [Aside.] Well Mrs. Tag, you
know, I suppose, what is to be done: This young Lady and I have contracted
our-selves, and so, if you please to stand Bridemaid, why we'll fix the
Wedding Day directly.


Tag. The Wedding Day, Sir?


Flash. The Wedding Day, Sir? Ay, Sir, the Wedding Day, Sir, what have you to
say to that, Sir?


Biddy. My dear Captain Flash, don't make such a Noise, you will 'wake my Aunt.


Flash. And suppose I did, Child, what then?


Biddy. She Would be frightened out of her Wits.


Flash. At me, Miss! frightened at me? Tout au contraire, I assure you; you
mistake the thing, Child; I have some Reason to believe I am not quite so
shocking.

[Affectedly.
Tag. Indeed, Sir, you flatter yourself -- But pray, Sir, what are your
Pretensions?


Flash. The Lady's Promises, my own Passion, and the best mounted Blade in the
three Kingdoms. If any Man can produce a better Title, let him take her; if
not, the D^l mince me, if I give up an Atom of her.


Biddy. He Is in a fine Passion, if he would but hold it.


Tag. Pray, Sir, hear Reason a little.


Flash. I never do, Madam; it is not my Method of Proceeding; here is my Logic;
[Draws his Sword.] Sa, sa, -- my best Argument is Cart over Arm, Madam, ha, ha,
[^^ges.] and if he answers that, Madam, through my small Guts, my Breath. Blood
and Mistress are all at his Service -- Nothing more, Madam.


Biddy. This 'll do, this 'll do.


Tag. But Sir, Sir, Sir?


Flash. But Madam, Madam, Madam: I profess Blood, Madam, I was bred up to it
from a Child; I study the Book of Fate, and the Camp is my my University; I
have attended the Lectures of Prince Charles upon the Rhine, and Bathiani upon
the Po, and have extracted Knowledge from the Mouth of a Cannon; I Am not to be
frightened with Squibs, Madam, no, no.


Biddy. Pray, dear Sir, don't mind her, but let me prevail with you to go away
this Time -- Your Passion is very fine to be sure, and when my Aunt and Tag are
out of the way, I Will let you know when I Would have you come again.


Flash. When you would have me come again, Child? And suppose I never would come
again, what do you think of that now, ha? You pretend to be afraid of your
Aunt; your Aunt knows what is what too well to refuse a good Match when it is
offered -- Lookee, Miss, I Am a Man of Honor, Glory's my Aim, I have told you
the Road I am in, and do you see here, Child, [Shewing his Sword.] no Tricks
upon Travelers.


Biddy. But pray, Sir, hear me.


Flash. No, no, no, I know the World, Madam, I am as well known at
Covent Garden as the Dial, Madam: I Will break a Lamp, bully a Constable, bam a
Justice, or bilk a Box-keeper with any in the Liberties of Westminster; What do
you think of me now, Madam?


Biddy. Pray don't be so surious, Sir.


Flash Come, come, come, few Words are best, somebody's happier than somebody,
and I Am a poor silly Fellow; ha, ha, -- That Is all -- Look you Child, to be
short, (for I Am a Man of Reflection) I have but a Bagatelle to say to you: I am
in love with you up to Hell and Desperation, may the Sky crush me if I am not
-- But since there is another more fortunate than I, Adieu, Biddy! Prosperity
to the happy Rival, Patience to poor Flash; but the first time we meet --
Gunpowder be my Perdition, but I Will have the Honor to cut a Throat with him

[Going.
Biddy. [Stopping him.] You may meet with him now, if you please.


Flash. Now may I! -- Where is he? I Will sacrifice the Villain.

[Aloud.
Tag. Hush! he^s but in the next Room.


Flash. Is he? Ram me [Low.] into a Mortar-piece, but I Will have Vengeance; my
blood boils to be at him -- Don^t be frighten^d, Miss?


Biddy, No, Sir, I never was better pleased, I assure you.


Flash. I shall soon do his Business.


Biddy. As soon as you please, take your own Time.


Tag. I Will fetch the Gentleman to you immediately.

[Going.
Flash. [Stopping her.] Stay, stay a little; what a Passion I am in! -- Are you
sure he is in the next Room? -- Ishall certainly tear him to pieces. -- I would
fain murder him like a Gentleman too -- Besides, this Family shall not be brought
into Trouble upon my Account. -- I have it -- I Will watch for him in the Street,
and mix his Blood with the Puddle of the next Kennel.

[Going.
Biddy. [Stopping him.] No, pray Mr. Flash, let me see the Battle, I shall be
glad to see you fight for me, you shall not go, indeed.

[Holding him,
Tag. [Holding him.] Oh, pray let me see you fight; there were two Gentlemen
fit Yesterday, and my Mistress was never so diverted in her Life -- I Will fetch
him out.

[Exit.
Biddy. Do, stick him, stick him, Captain Flash; I shall love you the better
for it.


Flash. D^n your Love, I wish I was out of the House.

[Aside.
Biddy. Here he is -- Now speak some of your hard Words, and run him through --


Flash. Don't be in Fits now --

[Aside to Biddy.
Biddy. Never fear me.


Enter Tag and Fribble. Tag. [To Fribble.] Take it on my Word, Sir, he is a
Bully, and nothing else.


Frib. [Frighten'd.] I know you are my good Friend, but perhaps you don't know
his Disposition.


Tag. I am confident he is a Coward.


Frib. Is he? Nay, then I Am his Man.


Flash. I like his Looks, but I Will not venture too far at first.


Tag. Speak to him, Sir.


Frib. I will -- I understand, Sir -- hem -- that you -- by Mrs. Tag here, --
Sir, -- who has informed me -- hem -- that you have sent her, to inform me --
Sir, -- that you would be glad to speak with me -- Demmee --

[Turns off.
Flash. I can speak to you, Sir -- or to any Body, Sir -- or I can let it alone
and hold my Tongue, -- if I see Occasion, Sir, Dammee --

[Turns off.
Biddy. Well said, Mr. Flash, be in a Passion.


Tag. [To Fribble.] Don't mind his Looks, he changes Color already; to him, to
him,

[Pushes him.
Frib. Don't hurry me, Mrs. Tag, for Heaven's sake! I shall be out of breath
before I begin if you d^^ -- Sir, -- [To Flash.] If you cannot speak to a
Gentleman in another manner, Sir, -- why then I Will venture to say, you had
better hold your Tongue -- Oons.


Flash. Sir, you and I are of different Opinions.


Frib. You and your Opinion may go to the Devil -- Take that.

[Turns off to Tag.
Tag. Well said, Sir, the Day's your own.


Biddy. What Is the Matter, Mr. Flash? Is all your Fury gone? Do you give me up?


Frib. I have done his Business.

[Struts about.
Flash. Give you up, Madam! No, Madam; when I am determined in my Resolutions I
am always clam; it is our Way, Madam; and now I shall proceed to Business; --
Sir, I beg to say a Word to you in private.


Frib. Keep your Distance, Fellow, and I Will answer you. -- That Lady has
confessed a Passion for me, and as she has delivered up her Heart into my
Keeping, nothing but my 'arts Blood shall purchase it. Demnation!


Tag. Bravo! Bravo!


Flash. If those are the Conditions, I Will give you Earnest for it directly.
[Draws] Now, Villain renounce all Right and Title this Minute, or the Torrent
of my Rage will overflow my Reason, and I shall annihilate the Nothingness of
your Soul in an Instant.


Frib. I wish there was a Constable at Hand to take us both up; we shall
certainly do one another a Prejudice.


Tag. No, you will not indeed, Sir; Pray bear up to him; if you would but draw
your Sword, and be in a Passion, he would run away directly,


Sir Sim. Do you hear, Jasper? -- Sure the Child is possessed! -- Pray, Miss,
what did they want here?


Biddy. Me, Sir; they wanted me.


Sir Sim. What did they want with you, I say?


Biddy. Why, what do you want with me?


Sir Sim. Do you hear, Jasper? -- I am thunderstruck! I cannot believe my own
Ears! -- Tell me the Reason, I say, why --


Tag. I Will tell you the Reason why, if you please, Sir Simon. Miss, you know,
is a very silly young Girl, and having found out (Heaven knows how!) that there
is some little Difference between Sixty-five and twenty-five, she is ridiculous
enough to choose the latter; when if she would take my Advice --


Sir Sim. You are right, Tag, she would take me? Eh?


Tag. Yes, Sir, as the only way to have both; for if she marries you, the other
will follow of course.


Sir Sim. Do you hear, Jasper?


Biddy. It Is very true. Sir Simon; from my knowing no better, I have set my
Heart upon a young Man, and a young one I Will have; there have been there here
this Afternoon.


Sir Sim. Three, Jasper!


Biddy. And they have been quarrelling about me, and one has beat the other
two. Now, Sir Simon, if you will take up the Conqueror, and kick him, as he has
kicked the others, you shall have me for your Reward, and my Fifteen thousand
Pounds into the Bargain. What says my Hero? Eh?

[Slaps him on the Back.
Sir Sim. The World's at an End! -- What Is to be done, Jasper?


Jasper. Pack up and be gone; don't fight the Match, Sir.


Sir Sim. Flesh and Blood cannot bear it -- I Am all over Agitation -- Hugh,
hugh! -- am I cheated by a Baby, a Doll? Where Is your Aunt, you young
Cockatrice? -- I Will let her know -- she is a base Woman, and you are --


Biddy. You are in a fine Humor to show your Valor. Tag, fetch the Captain
this Minute, while Sir Simon is warm, and let him know he is waiting here to
cut his Throat. [Exit Tag.] I locked him up in my Bedchamber till you came.


Sir Sim. Here Is an Imp of Darkness! What would I give that my Son Bob was here
to thrash her Spark, while I -- ravished the rest of the Family.


Jasper. I believe we had best retire, Sir.


Sir Sim. No, no, I must see her Bully first; and, do you hear, Jasper, if I
put him in a Passion, do you knock him down.


Jasper. Pray keep your Temper, Sir.


Enter Captain, Tag, and Puff. Capt. [Approaching angrily.] What is the
Meaning, Sir? -- Ounds! it is my Father, Puff; what shall I do?

[Aside.
Puff. [Drawing him by the Coat.] Kennel again, Sir.


Sir Sim. I am enchanted!

[Starting.
Capt. There is no Retreat, I must stand it!


Biddy. What Is all this?


Sir Sim. Your humble Servant, Captain Fire-ball. -- You are welcome from the
Wars, noble Captain. -- I did not think I should have the Pleasure of being
knocked of the Head, or-cut up alive by so fine a Gentleman.


Capt. I am under such Confusion, Sir, I have not Power to convince you of my
Innocence.


Sir Sim. Innocence! pretty Lamb! And so, Sir, you have left the Regiment, and
the honorable Employment of fighting for your Country, to come home and cut
your Father's Throat; why you will be a great Man in time, Bob!


Biddy. His Father, Tag!


Sir Sim. Come, come, it is soon done -- one Stroke does it -- or, if you have
any Qualms, let your 'Squire there perform the Operation.


Puff. Pray, Sir, don't throw such Temptations in my way.


Capt. Hold your impudent Tongue!


Sir Sim. Why don't you speak, Mr. Modesty; what Excuse have you for leaving
the Army, I say?


Capt. My Affection to this Lady.


Sir Sim. Your Affection, Puppy!


Capt. Our Love, Sir, has been long and mutual; what Accidents have happened
since my going abroad, and her leaving the Country, and how I have most
unaccountably met you here, I am a Stranger to; but whatever Appearances may
be, I still am, and ever was, your dutiful Son.


Biddy. He talks like an Angel, Tag!


Sir Sim. Dutiful, Sirrah! Have you not rivaled your Father?


Capt. No, Sir, you have rivaled me; my Claim must be prior to yours.


Biddy. Indeed, Sir Simon, he can show the best Title to me.


Jasper. Sir, Sir, the young Gentleman speaks well, and as the Fortune will not
go out of the Family, I would advise you to drop your Resentment, be reconciled
to your Son, and relinquish the Lady.


Sir Sim. Ay, ay, with all my Heart -- Look ye, Son, I give you up the Girl,
she is too much for me, I confess; -- And take my Word, Bob, you will catch a
Tartar.


Biddy. I assure you, Sir Simon, I Am not the Person you take me for; if I have
used you any ways ill, 'twas for your Son's sake, who had my Promise and
Inclinations before you; and though I believe I should have made you a most
uncomfortable Wife, I Will be the best Daughter to you in the World; and if you
stand in need of a Lady, my Aunt is disengaged, and is the best Nurse --


Sir Sim. No, no, I thank you, Child; you have so turned my Stomach to
Marriage, I have no Appetite left. -- But where is this Aunt? Will Not she stop
your Proceedings, think you?


Tag. She Is now at her Lawyer's, Sir, and if you please to go with the young
Couple, and give your Approbation, I Will answer for my old Lady's Consent.


Biddy. The Captain, and I, Sir --


Sir Sim. Come, come, Bob, you are but an Ensign, don't impose on the Girl
neither.


Capt. I had the good Fortune, Sir, to please my Royal General by my Behavior
in a small Action with the Enemy, and he gave me a Company.


Sir Sim. Bob, I wish you Joy! This is News indeed! And when we celebrate your
Wedding, Son, I Will drink a half Pint Bumper myself to your Benefactor.


Capt. And he deserves it, Sir; such a General, by his Example and Justice,
animates us to Deeds of Glory, and insures us Conquest.


Sir Sim. Right, my Boy -- come along then.

[Going.
Puff. Halt a little, Gentlemen and Ladies, if you please: Every Body here
seems well satisfied but myself.


Capt. What Is the Matter, Puff?


Puff. Sir, as I would make myself worthy of such a Master, and the Name of
Soldier, I cannot put up the least Injury to my Honor.


Sir Sim. Heyday! What Flourishes are these?


Puff. Here is the Man; come forth, Caitiff. [To Jasper.] He has confessed
this Day, that, in my Absence, he had taken Freedoms with my lawful Wife, and
had dishonorable Intentions against my Bed; for which I demand Satisfaction.
--


Sir Sim. [Striking him.] What Stuff is here, the Fellow's Brain's turned.


Puff. And cracked too, Sir; but you are my Master's Father, and I submit.


Capt. Come, come, I Will settle your Punctilios, and will take care of you and
Tag hereafter, provided you drop (...) Animosities, and shake Hands this Moment.


Puff. My Revenge gives way to my Interest, and I once again, Jasper, take you
to my Bosom.


Jasper. I Am your Friend again, Puff -- but harkye -- I fear you not; and if
you will lay aside your Steel there, as far as a broken Head, or a black Eye, I Am
at your Service upon Demand.


Tag. You are very good at Crowing indeed, Mr. Jasper; but let me tell you, the
Fool that is Rogue enough to brag of a Woman's Favors, must be a Dunghill
every way -- As for you, my dear Husband, show your Manhood in a proper Place,
and you need not fear these Sheep-biters.


Sir Sim. The Abigail is pleasant I confess, he, he!


Biddy. I Am afraid the Town will be ill-natured enough to think I have been a
little coquettish in my Behavior; but, I hope, as I have been constant to the
Captain, I shall be excused diverting myself with Pretenders.


Ladies, to Fops and Braggarts never be kind,
No Charms can warm 'em, and no Virtues bind;
Each Lover's Merit by his Conduct prove,
Who fails in Honor, will be false in Love.
[Exeunt. ^GUE, by the same Hand as the PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Mrs. PRITCHARD. GOOD Folks, I Am came at my young Lady's bidding,
To say, You all are welcome to her Wedding.
The Exchange she made, what Mortal here can blame?
Show me the Maid that would not do the same.
For sure the greatest Monster ever seen,
Is doting Sixty coupled to Sixteen!
When ^int'ry Age had almost caught the Fair,
Youth, clad in Sunshine, snatched her from Despair:
Like a new Semele the Virgin lay,
(...) her Lover in the Blaze of Day.
Tha^ may each Maid, the ^^ils almost intrapt-in,
Change Old Sir Simon for the brisk young Captain.
I love the^^ Men of Arms, they know their Trade:
Le^ Dastards sue, these Sons of Fire invade!
They cannot bear around the Bait to nibble,
Like pretty, powdered, patient Mr. Fribble:
To Dangers bred, and skilful in Command,
They storm the strongest Fortress, Sword in Hand!
Nights without Sleep, and Floods of Tears when waking,
Showed poor Miss Biddy was in p^^^us taking:
She Is now quite well; for Maids in that Condition,
Find the young Lover is the best Physician;
And without Helps of Art, or Boast of Knowledge,
They cure more Women, faith, than all the College!
But to the Point -- I come with low Petition,
For, faith, poor Bays is in a sad Condition;
Alluding to Bayes's Prologue in the Rehearsal.
The huge tall Hangman stands to give the Blow,
And only waits your Pleasures -- Ay, or No.
If you should -- Pit, Box, and Gallery, egad!
(...) his Senses, and the Man runs mad:
But if your Ears are shut, your Hearts are Rock,
And you pronounce the Sentence -- Block to Block,
D^^^ kneels the Bard, and leaves you when he is dead,
The empty Tribute of an Author's Head.

