THE Non-Juror.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL,

BY His MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mr. CIBBER

-- Pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere; da Justum, Sanctumque videri,
Noctem Peccatis, and Fraudibus objice Nubem.
HOR. DUBLIN: Reprinted by THOMAS HUME, for GEORGE RISK, at the London in
Dame's-Street near the Horse-Guard, 1718.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
In London. In Dublin. Sir John Woodvil, Mr Miles. Mr. Dummit. Colonel Woodvil,
Mr. Booth. Mr. Evans. Mr. Heartly, Mr. Wilks. Mr. Elrington, Sen. Doctor Wolf.
Mr. Cibber. Mr. Griffith Charles, Mr. Walker. Mr. Elrington, Jun.

WOMEN.
Lady Woodvil. Mrs. Porter. Mrs. Lyddal. Maria, Mrs. Oldfield. Mrs. Vanderbank.

The SCENE, an Anti chamber of Sir JOHN'S House in LONDON.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
IN a Time, when all Communities Congratulate Your MAJESTY on the Glories of
Your Reign, which are continually rising from the Prosperities of Your People;
be graciously pleased, Dread Sir, to permit the lowest of Your Subjects from
the Theater, to take this Occasion of offering their most Humble
Acknowledgments for Your Royal Favor and Protection.

YOUR Comedians, SIR, are an Unhappy Society, whom some Severe Heads think
wholly Useless, and others Dangerous to the Young and Innocent: This Comedy is
therefore an Attempt to remove that Prejudice, and to show, what Honest and
Laudable Uses may be made of the Theater, when its Performaces keep close to
the true Purposes of its Institution: That it may be necessary to divert the
Sullen and Dissaffected from busying their Brains to disturb the Happiness of a
Government, which (for want of proper Amusements) they often enter into Wild
and Seditious Schemes to reform: And that it may likewise make those very
Follies the Ridicule and Diversion even of those that committed them. Our
Labors have at least this Glory to boast, That since Plays were first
Exhibited in England, they were never totally suppressed, but by those very
People, that turned our Church, and Constitution, into Irreligion and Anarchy.

OF all Errors, those that are the Effect of Superstition make us naturally
most obstinate; it is therefore no wonder, that the Blinded Proselytes of our
Few Non-Juring Clergy, are so hard to be recovered by the clearest Evidences of
Sense and Reason. But when a Principle is once made truly Ridiculous, it is not
in the Power of Human Nature not to be ashamed of it. From which Reflection, I
was first determined to attack those lurking Enemies of our Constitution from
the Stage: And though my Success has far exceeded my Expectation, yet I grieve,
when I (perhaps with Vanity) imagine it might had thrice the good Effect on the
Minds of Your MAJESTY'S People, were it not under the Misfortune of being
written by a Comedian. I am therefore in some Terror, notwithstanding its
Public Applause, to reflect how far Your MAJESTY, in Your Wisdom, may think it
proper to withold Your Pardon for the Unlicensed Boldness of my Undertaking.
I am sensible it may be justly urged against me, That even Truth and Loyalty
might have lost their Luster, by appearing reduced to want the Defense of so
inconsiderable a Champion: But as I never believed the best Play could be
supported in an Ill Cause; so was I assured the worst might pass, with Favor,
in a Good one. And though my Duty and Concern has made me more careful in the
Conduct of this, than any of my former Endeavors; I am convinced, that what
may have been extraordinary in the Success of it, is utterly owing to a happy
Choice of the Subject: And as its meeting no Opposition from our Public
Malcontents, seems, in some Degree, an Argument of the Clear and Honest Truth
of those Principles it vindicates; so may it of the equal Falsehood of the
Rebellious and Unchristian Tenets it exposes. Nay, I have yet a farther Hope,
that it has even discovered the Strength and Number of the Misguided to be much
less, than may have been artfully infinuated; there being no Assembly where
People are so free, and apt to speak their Minds, as in a Crowded Theater; Of
which Your MAJESTY may have lately seen an Instance, in the Insuppressible
Acclamations that were given on Your appearing to Honor this Play with Your
Royal Presence.

BUT were the Disaffected yet as Numerous, as some Few may wish them, What
Honest Englishman can ever think them formidable, that considers his Security
in the Wisdom of Your MAJESTY'S Counsels, and Your Heroic Resolution to
Execute them? And as every Action of Your Regal Power has shown the Nation,
that Your greatest Glory and Delight is in being the Father of Your People; so
may it Convince its Enemies, that they will always find You KING of Your
Subjects. -- But I am wandering into Thoughts that awe me into Silence; and
humbly beg Leave to Subscribe my self,

May it please Your MAJESTY, Your MAJESTY'S Most Dutiful, and Most Obedient,
Subject and Servant, COLLEY CIBBER.

PROLOGUE.
Written by N. ROW, Esquire
TO Night, ye Whigs and Tories, both be safe,
Nor hope, at one another's Cost, to laugh;
We mean to souse Old Satan and the Pope;
They Have no Relations here, nor Friends we hope.
A Tool of theirs supplys the Comic Stage
With just Materials for Satyrick Rage:
Nor think our Colors may too strongly paint
The Stiff Nonjuring-Separation-Saint.
Good Breeding never commands us to be Civil
To those who give the Nation to the Devil;
Who at our Surest, `Best Foundation strike,
And hate our Monarch and our Church alike:
Our Church -- which awed with Reverential Fear,
Scarcely the Muse presumes to mention here.
Long may she these, her worst of Foes, defy,
And lift her Mitred Head triumphant to the Sky;
While theirs -- but Satyr silently disdains
To name, what lives not but in Madmen's Brains.
Like Bawds, each Lurking Pastor seeks the Dark,
And fears the Justice's Enquiring Clerk.
In close Back Rooms his Reuted Flocks he rallys,
And reigns the Patriarch of Blind Lanes and Alleys.
There safe, he lets his thundering Censures fly,
Unchristens, damns us, gives our Laws the Lie,
And Excommunicates three Storys high.
Why, since a Land of Liberty they hate,
Still will they linger in this Freeborn State?
Here, every Hour, fresh hateful Objects rise,
Peace and Prosperity afflict their Eyes:
With Anguish, Prince and People they survey,
Their Just Obedience, and his Righteous Sway.
Ship off ye Slaves, and seek some passive Land,
Where Tyrants after your own Hearts Command;
To your Transalpine Master's Rule resort,
And fill an empty abdicated Court:
Turn your Possessions here to Ready-Rhino,
And buy ye Lands and Lordships at Urbino.
THE NON-JUROR.
ACT. I.
Sir John Woodvil, and the Colonel.
Col. PRAY consider, Sir,


Sir John. So I do, Sir, that I a ^er Father and will dispose of her as I
please.


Col. I don't dispute your Authority, Sir: but am I am your Son too, I think it
my Duty to be concerned for your Honor: Have not you countenanced his
addresses to my Sister! Has not she received them? How then is it possible,
That either you or she with Honor can recede?


Sir John. Why, Sir? Suppose I was about buying a Pad-nag for your Sister, and
upon Enquiry should find him not sound: Pray, Sir, would there be any great
Dishonor in being off of the Bargain?


Col. With Submission, Sir, I don't take that to be the Case. Mr. Heartly's
Birth and Fortune are too well known to you; and I dare swear he may desy the
World, to lay a Blemish upon his Principles.


Sir John. Why then, Sir, since I must be catechis'd, I must tell you, I don't
like his Principles: For I am informed he is a Time-server, one that basely
flatters the Government, and has no more Religion than you have.


Col. Sir, we don't either of us think it proper to make boast of our Religion;
but if you please to enquire, you will find we go to Church as orderly as the
rest of our Neighbors.


Sir John. Ay! to what Church!


Col. -- St. James's Church -- The established Church.


Sir John. Established Church!


Col. Sir --


Sir John. Nay, you need not stare, Sir; and before he values himself upon
going to Church, I would first have him be sure he is a Christian.


Col. A Christian, Sir!


Sir John. Ay, that is my Question, Whether he is yet christened? I mean, by a
Pastor, that had a Divine, Uninterrupted, Successive Right to mark him as a
Sheep of the true Fold?


Col. Is it possible! are you an Englishman, and offer Sir, a Question so
uncharitable, not only to him, but the whole Nation?


Sir John. Nay, Sir, you may give your self what Air of Amazement you please,
-- I will not argue with you; you are both of you too hardened to be converted
now, but since you thing it your Duty, as a Son, to be concerned for my Errors,
I think it as much mine, as a Father, to be concerned for yours -- I Will only
tell you of them, if you think fit to mend them -- so -- if not -- take the
Consequence.


Col. (Aside.) O! give me Temper, Heaven! this vile nonjuring Zealot! what
poisonous Principles has he swelled him with! -- Well, Sir, since you don't
think it proper to argue upon this Subject, I Will wave it too. But if I may ask
it without Offense, Are these your only Reasons for discountenancing Mr.
Heartly's Address to my Sister?


Sir John. These! are they not flagrant! would you have me marry my Daughter to
a Pagan! for so he is, and all of you, till you are regularly Christians. In
short, Son, expect to inherit no Estate of mine, unless you resolve to come
into the Pale of the Church, of which I prosess my self a Member.


Col. I thought I always was, Sir, and hope I am still, unless you have lately
been converted to the Romans.


Sir John. No, Sir, I abhor the Thoughts on it; and Protest against their Errors
as much as you do.


Col. If so, Sir, Where Is our Difference?


Sir John. Difference! 'twould make you tremble, Sir, to know it! but since
it is fit you should know it, look there -- [Gives him a Book] read that, and be
reformed.


Col. What Is here? (Reads) The Case of Schism, etc. Thank you, Sir, I have seen
enough of this in the Daily Courant, to be sorry its in any Hands, but those of
the common Hangman.


Sir John. Profanation!


Col. And though I always honored your Concern for the Church's Welfare, I
little thought 'twas for a Church that is established no where?


Sir John. O, Perverseness! but there is no better to be expected from your
Course of Life: This is all the Effects of your modern Loyalty, your
Conversation at Button's. Will you never leave that foul Nest of Heresy and
Schism?


Col. Yes, Sir, when I see any Thing like it there; and should think my self
obliged to retire, where such Principles were started -- I own I use the Place,
because I generally meet there instructive or diverting Company.


Sir John. Yes, fine Company indeed, Arians, Party-Poets, Players and
Presbyterians.


Col. That Is a very unusual Mixture, Sir; but if a Man entertains me
innocently, am I obliged to enquire into his Profession, or Principles? Would
not it be ridiculous for a Protestant that loves Music, to refuse going to the
Opera, because most of the Performers are Papists? But, Sir, this seems foreign
to my Business; Mr. Heartly intends this Morning to pay his Respects to you, in
hopes to obtain your final Consent; and desired me to be present, as a Mediator
of Articles between you.


Sir John. I am glad to hear it.


Col. That Is kind, indeed, Sir.


Sir John. May be not, Sir -- for I will not be at home when he comes.


Col. Nay, pray, Sir, 'twill be but Civility, at least, to hear him.


Sir John. And because I will not tell a Lie for the Matter, I Will go out this
Moment.


Col. Good Sir.


Sir John. But because I will not deceive him neither, tell him, I would not have
him lose his Time, in fooling after your Sister -- In short, I have another Man
in my Head for her.

(Exit Sir John.
Col. Another Man! 'twould be worth one's while to know him -- Pray Heaven this
nonjuring Hypocrite has not got some beggarly Traitor in his Eye for her -- I
must rid the House of him at any rate, or all the Settlement I can hope from my
Father is a Castle in the Air, nor can indeed his Life be safe, while such a
Villain makes it an Act of Conscience to endanger it; If his Eyes are not soon
opened against him, the Crown's more likely to inherit his Estate, than I am;
and though the Government has beey very favorable upon those Occasions, it is
but a melancholy Business to perition for what might have been one^s
Birthright. My Sister may be ruined too -- here she comes; if there be another
Man in the Case, she no doubt can let me into the Secret.


Enter Maria. Sister, good Morrow -- I want to speak with you.

Mar. Nay, but prithee, Brother, don't put on the wise politic Face then: Why
you look as if the Minority had like to have carried the Question.


Col. Come, come, a Truce with your Raillery; what I have to ask of you is
serious, and I beg you would be so in your Answer.


Mar. Well then, provided it is not upon the Subject of Love, I will be so --
but make Haste too -- for I have not had my Tea yet.


Col. Why it is, and it is not upon that Subject.


Mar. O! I love a Riddle dearly -- come -- let us hear it.


Col. Nay, pish -- if you will be serious, say so.


Mar. O Laid' Sir, I beg your Pardon -- there -- there is my whole Form and
Features totally disengaged and lifeless at your Service; now put them in what
Posture of Attention you think fit.

(She leans against him, with her Arms awkardly falling on her Knees.
Col. Was there ever such a giddy Devil! -- prithee stand up. I have been
talking with my Father, and he declares positively you shall not receive any
farther Addresses from Mr. Heartley


Mar. Are you serious?


Col. He said it this Minute, and with some Warmth too.


Mar. I am glad on it with all my Heart.


Col. How! glad!


Mar. To a Degree: Do you think a Man has any more Charms for me for my
Father's liking him? No, Sir, if Mr. Heartley can make his Way to me now, he is
obliged to me only: Besides, now it may have the Face of an Amor indeed: Now
one has something to struggle for; there is Difficulty, there is Danger, there is
the dear Spirit of Contradiction in it too. O I like it mightily.


Col. I am glad this does not make you think the worse of Heartley -- but
however, a Father's Consent might have clapped a pair of Horses more to your
Coach perhaps, and the want of that, may pinch your Fortune.


Mar. Burn Fortune; Am not I a fine Woman? And have not I above 5000 l. in my
own Hands?


Col. Yes, Sister, but with all your Charms, you have had it in your Hands
almost these four Years; pray consider that too.


Mar. Pshah! and have not I had the full Swing of my own Airs and Humors these
four Years? But if I Will humor my Father, I Will warrant he will make it three or
four Thousand more, with some unlick'd Lout of a Fellow to drub me into the
Bargain: A comfortable Equivalent truly -- No, no, let him light his Pipe with
his Consent if he pleases. Willful against Wife for a Wager.


Col. Well said; nothing goes to your Heart I find.


Mar. No, no, Brother; the Suits of my Lovers shall not be ended, like those at
Law, by dull Council on both sides, I Will hear nothing but what the Plaintiff
himself can say to me; 'twould be a pretty Thing indeed to confine my Airs to
the Directions of a Solicitor, to look kind or cruel, only as the Jointure
proposed* is, or is not, equal to the Fortune my Father designs me: What do you
think I Will have my Features put into the Gazette to be disposed of, like a
parcel of dirty Acres, by an old Master in Chancery to the fairest Bidder? No,
if I must have an ill Match, I Will have the Pleasure of playing my own Game at
least.


Col, There spoke the Spirit of a freeborn Englishwoman. -- Well, I am glad
you are not startled at the first Part of my News however; but farther -- Pray,
Sister, has my Father ever proposed any other Man to you?


Mar. Another Man! let me know why you ask, and I Will tell you.


Col. Why the last Words he said to me, were, That he had another Man in his
Head for you.


Mar. And who is it? Who is it? tell me, dear Brother, quickly.


Col. Why you don't so much as seem surpised at it!


Mar. No, but impatient, and that is as well you know.


Col. Why how now, Sister?

[Gravely.
Mar. Why sure, Brother, you know very little of Female Happiness, if you
suppose the Surprise of a new Lover ought to shock a Woman of my Temper --
don't you know that I am a Coquette?


Col. If you are, you are the first that ever was sincere enough to own her
being so.


Mar. To a Lover I grant you; but I make no more of you than a Sister, I can
say any Thing to you.


Col. I should have been better pleased if you had not owned it to me -- it is a
hateful Character.


Mar. Ay, it is no Matter for that, its violently pleasant, and there is no Law
against it, that I know of. You had best advise your Friend Heartley to bring
in a Bill to prevent it: All the discarded Toasts, Prudes, and superannuated
Virgins would give him their Interest I dare swear. Take my Word, Coquetry has
governed the World from the Beginning, and will do so to the End on it.


Col. Heartly's like to have a hopeful Time on it with you.


Mar. Well, but don't you really know who it is my Father intends me?


Col. Not I really, but I imagined you might, and therefore thought to advise
with you about it.


Mar. Nay, he has not opened his Lips to me yet -- Are you sure he is gone out?


Col. You are very impatient to know methinks? What have you to do to concern
your self about any Man but Heartly?


Mar. O Lud! O Lud! O Lud! don't be so wise, prithee Brother: Why if you had an
empty House to let, would you be displeased to hear there were two People
about it? Can any Woman think herself happy, that is obliged to marry only with
a Hobson's Choice? No, don't think to rob me of so innocent a Vanity; for
believe me, Brother, there is no Fellow upon Earth, how disagreeable soever,
but in the long Run of his Addresses will utter something at least, that is
worth a poor Woman's hearing. Besides, to be a little serious, Heartly has a
Tincture of Jealousy in his Temper, which nothing but a substantial Rival can
cure him of.


Col. O your Servant, Madam, now you talk Reason; I am glad you are concerned
enough for Heartly's Faults, to think them worth your mending -- Ha! ha!


Mar. Concerned! Why did I say that -- look you, I Will deny it all to him --
Well, if ever I am serious with you again --


Col. Here he comes; be as merry with him as you please.


Mar. Pshah!


Enter Heartly. Maria takes a Book from the Table, and reads. Hear. Dear
Colonel, your Servant.


Col. I am glad you did not come sooner, for in the Humor my Father left me,
'twould not have been a proper Time to have pressed your Affair -- I touched
upon it -- but -- I Will tell you more presently; in the mean Time lose no Ground
with my Sister.


Heart. I shall always think my self obliged to your Friendship let my Success
be what it will -- Madam -- your most obedient -- What have you got there pray?


Mar. [Repeating.] "Her lively Looks a sprightly Mind disclose,
"Quick, as her Eyes, and as unfix'd as those --

Hear. Pray, Madam, What is it?


Mar. "Favors to none, to all she Smiles extends --

Hear. Nay, I will see --

[Strugling.]
Mar. [Putting him by.] "Ost she rejects -- but never once offends.

Col. Have a Care, she has dipped into her own Character, and she will never
forgive you, if you don't let her through with it.


Hear. I beg your Pardon, Madam.

[Gravely.]
Mar. "Bright as the Sun, her Eyes the Gazers strike,
"And like the Sun, they shine on all alike -- um -- um.

Hear. That is something like indeed.


Col. You would say so, if you knew all.


Hear. All what? Pray what do you mean?


Col. Have a little Patience, I Will tell you immediately.


Hear. [Aside.] Confusion! some Coxcomb now has been flattering her, I Will be
cursed else, she is so full of her dear self upon it.


Mar. [Turning to Heartly.] "If to her Share some Female Errors fall,
"Look on her Face -- and you will forget them all.
Is not that natural, Mr. Heartly?


Hear. For a Woman to expect it is indeed.


Mar. And can you blame her, when it is at the same Time a Proof of the poor
Man's Passion, and her Power?


Hear. So that you think the greatest Compliment a Lover can make his Mistress,
is to give up his Reason to her!


Mar. Certainly: For what have your lordly Sex to boast of but your
Understanding? And till that is entirely surrendered to her Discretion, while
the least Sentiment holds out against her, a Woman must be downright vain to
think her Conquest completed.


Hear. There we differ, Madam; for in my Opinion, nothing but the most
excessive Vanity, could value or desire such a Conquest.


Mar. O! do you hear him, Brother? The Creature reasons with me! Nay, has the
frontless Folly to think me in the wrong too! O Lud! he would make a horrid Tyrant
-- positively I will not have him.


Hear. Well, my Comfort is, no other Man will easily know whether you will have
him or not.


Mar. [Affoctedly smiling.] Am not I a horrid, vain, silly Creature, Mr.
Heartly?


Hear. A little bordering upon the Baby, I must own.


Mar. Laud! how can you love one so then? But I don't think you love me though
-- do you?


Hear. Yes, Faith I do, and so shamefully, that I am in Hopes you doubt it.


Mar. Poor Man! he would fain bring me to Reason.

[Smiling in his Face.]
Hear. I would indeed, nor am ashamed to own it -- nay, were it but possible to
make you serious only when you should be so, you would be the most perfect
Creature of your Sex.


Mar. O Lud! he is civil --


Hear. Come, come, you have good Sense, use me but with that, and make me what
you please.


Mar. Laud! I don't desire to make any thing of you, not I.


Hear. Don't look so cold upon me, by Heaven I cannot bear it.


Mar. Well! now you are tolerable.

[Gently glancing on him.]
Hear. Come then, be generous, and swear at least you will never be another's.


Mar. Ah! Lard! now you have spoiled all again; beside, how can I be sure of
that before I have seen this the other Man, my Brother spoke to me of?

[Reads to her self again.]
Hear. What Riddle's this?

[To the Col.]
Col. I told you, you did not know all: To be serious* my Father went out but
now, on purpose to avoid you. In short, he absolutely retracts his Promises,
says he would not have you fool away your Time after my Sister, and in plain
Terms told me, he had another Man in his Head for her.


Hear. Another Man! Confusion! who! what is he? did not he name him?


Col. No, nor has he yet spoke of him to my Sister.


Hear. This is unaccountable -- What can have given him this sudden turn?


Col. Some Whim our Conscientious Doctor has put in his Head I Will lay my Life.


Hear. He! He cannot be such a Villain, he professes a Friendship for me.


Col. So much the worse: By the way, I am now upon the scent of a Secret, that
I hope shortly will prove him a Rogue to the whole Nation.


Hear. You amaze me -- But on what Pretense, what Ground, what Reason, what
Interest can he have to oppose me? -- This Shock is insupportable.

[He stands fixed, and mute.
Col. (Aside to Maria.) Are you really as unconcerned now as you seem to be?


Mar. Thou art a strange Dunce, Brother, thou know no more of Love, than I
do of a Regiment -- You shall see now how I Will comfort him --

[She goes to Heartly -- mimicks his Posture and Uneasiness, then looks
seriously in his Face, and blurts into a Laugh.
Hear. I don't wonder at your good Humor, Madam, when you have so substantial
an Opportunity to make me uneasy for Life.


Mar. O lud! how wise he is? Well! his Reproaches have, that greatness of Soul
-- the Confusion they give one is insupportable -- Betty, is the Tea ready?


Enter Betty. Bet. Yes, Madam.


Mar. Mr. Heartly, your Servant.

[Exit.
Col. So, so, you have made a fine spot of Work on it indeed.


Hear. Dear Tom, you will pardon me, if I speak a little freely, I own the Levity
of her Behavior, at this time, gives me harder Thoughts, than I once believed
it possible to have of her.


Col. Indeed, my Friend, you mistake her.


Hear. O pardon me, had she any real Concern for me, the Apprehension of a
Man's Addresses, whom yet she never saw, must have alarmed her to be something
more than serious.


Col. Not at all, for (let this Man be who he will) I take all this Levity, as
a Proof of her Resolution to have nothing to say to him.


Hear. And pray Sir, may I not as well suspect, that this artful Delay of her
good Nature to me now, is meant as a provisional Defense against my Reproaches,
in case, when she has seen this Man, she should think it convenient to prefer
him to Me?


Col. No, no, she is Giddy, but not capable of so serious a Falsehood.


Hear. It Is a sign you don't judge her with a Lover's Eye.


Col. No; but as a stander by, I often see more of the Game than you do: Don't
you know that she is naturally Coquette? And a Coquett's Play with a serious
Lover, is like a Back game at Tables, all open at first; she will make you twenty
Blots -- and you -- spare none, take them All up, to be sure, while she --
gains Points upon you: So that when you eagerly expect to end the Game on your
Side, slap -- as you were, she whips up your Man, she is fortified, and you are
in a worse Condition, than when you begun with her -- Upon which, you know of
Course, you curse your Fortune, and she laughs at you.


Hear. Faith you judge it rightly -- I have always found it so.


Col. In short, you are in have to be up, and she is resolved to make you play
out the Game at her leisure; you play for the fair Stake, and she for Victory.


Hear. But still, what could she mean by going away so abruptly?


Col. You grew too serious for her.


Hear. Why who could bear such Trifling?


Col. You should have laughed at her.


Hear. I cannot love at that easy rate.


Col. No -- If you could, the Uneasiness would lie on her Side.


Hear. Do you then really think she has any thing in her Heart for me?


Col. Ay, marry Sir -- Ah! if you could but get her to own that seriously now
-- Lord! how you could love her!


Hear. And so I could, by Heaven!

[eagerly embracing him.
Col. Ay, but it is not the Nature of the Creature, you must take her upon her
own Terms; though faith I thought she owned a great deal to you, but now; Did not
you observe, when you were impatient, with what a conscious Vanity she cried --
Now you are tolerable.


Hear. Nay, the Devil can be agreeable when she pleases.


Col. Well, well, I Will undertake for her; if my Father don't stand in your Way
we are well enough, and I don't question, but the Alarm he has given us, like
his other Politic Projects, will end all in Fumo.


Hear. What says my Lady? you don't think she is against us.


Col. I dare swear she is not, she is of so soft, so sweet a Disposition, that
even Provocation cannot make her your Enemy.


Hear. How came so fine a Creature to marry your Father with such a vast
inequality of Years?


Col. Want of Fortune, Frank. She was Poor and Beautiful* He Rich and Amorous
-- She made him Happy, and he her --


Hear. A Lady.


Col. And a Jointure -- Now she is the only one in the Family, that has Power
with our precise Doctor, and I dare engage she will use it with him, to persuade
my Father from any thing that is against your Interest; by the way you must
know, I have some shrewd Suspicions that this sanctified Rogue is carnally in
love with her.


Hear. O the liquorish Rascal!


Col. You shall judge by the Symptoms: First, he is jealous of every Male Thing
that comes near her; and under a friendly Pretense of guarding my Father's
Honor, has persuaded him to abolish her Assemblies: Nay, at the last
Masquerade this conscientious Spy (unknown to her) was eternally at her Elbow
in the Habit of a Cardinal. At Dinner he never fails to sit next her, and will
eat nothing but what she helps him; always takes her side in Argument, and when
he bows after Grace, constantly Ogles her; bids my Sister, if she would look
lovely, learn to Dress by her; and at the Tea-Table, I have seen the impudent
Goat most lusciously sip off her leavings. She lost one of her Slippers the other
Day, (by the way she has a mighty pretty Foot) and what no you think was become
of it?


Hear. You puzzel me.


Col. I gad, this lovesick Monkey had stole it for a private Play Thing, and
one of the House-maids, when she cleaned his Study, found it there with one of
her old Gloves in the middle of it.


Hear, A very proper Relic to put him in mind of his Devotions to Venus.


Col. But mum! here he comes.


Enter Doctor Wolf, and Charles. Doct. Charles, Step up into my Study, and
bring down half a Dozen more of those Manual Devotions that I composed for the
Use of our Friends in Prison: and, do thou hear? leave this Writing there,
but bring me the Key, and then bid the Butler ring to Prayers -- [Exit
Charles.] Mr. Heartly, I am your most faithful Servant, I hope you and the good
Colonel will stay and join in the private Duties of the Family.


Hear. With all my Heart, Sir, provided you will do the Duty of a Subject too,
and not leave out the Prayer for the Royal Family.


Doct. The good Colonel knows, I never do omit it.


Col. Sometimes, Doctor; but I don't remember, I ever One heard you name them.


Doct. That Is only to shorten the Service, lest in so large a Family, some few
vain, idle Souls might think it Tedious; and we ought, as it were, to Allure
them to what is Good, by the gentlest, easiest Means we can.


Hear. How! how Doctor! Are you sure that is your only Reason for leaving their
Names out?


Doct. But, pray Sir, why is Naming them so absolutely necessary? when Heaven,
without it, knows the true Intention of our Hearts? -- Beside, why should we,
when we so easily may avoid it, give the least color of Offense to tender
Consciences?


Col. Ay! now you begin to open, Doctor --


Hear. Have a care, Sir, the Conscience that Equivocates in its Devotions, must
have the blackest Color Hell can paint it with.


Col. Well said! to him Heartly.


Hear. Your Conscience, I dare say, will not be easily convinced, while your
Scruples turn to so good Account in a private Family.


Doct. What am I to be baited then -- but 'twont be always Holiday --
[Frowning.] The Time's now yours, but mine may come.


Col. What do you mean, Sir?


Doct. Sir, I shall not explain my self, but make your best of what I Have said.
I Am not to be intrap'd by all your servile Spies of Power -- But Power perhaps
may change its Hands, and you ever long, as little dare to speak your Mind as I
do.


Col. (Taking him by the Collar.) Hark you, Sirrah! Dare you menace the
Government in my hearing?


Hear. Nay, Colonel.

(Interposing.
Doct. It Is well!


Col. Traitor! but that our Laws have Chains and Gibbets for such Villains, I Would
this Moment crackle all thy Bones to Splinters.

(Shakes him.
Doct. Very well! your Father, Sir, shall know my Treatment.


Hear. Nay, dear Colonel, let him go.


Col. I ask your Pardon, Frank, I am ashamed that such a Wretch could move me
so.


Hear. Come, compose your self.


Doct. (Aside, and recovering himself.) No! I Will take no Notice of it -- I know
he is warm and weak enough to tell this as his own Story to his Father -- let
him -- it is better so -- 'twill but confirm Sir John in his good Opinion of my
Charity, and serve to ruin him the faster.

[Exit.
Hear. Was there ever so insolent a Rascal?


Col. The Dog will one Day provoke me to beat his Brains out.


Hear. Who could have believed such outrageous Arrogance could have lurked
under so Lamb-like an Outside?


Col. This Fellow has the Spleen and Spirit of ten Beckets in him.


Hear. What the Devil is he? whence came he? what is his Original? Is he really
a Doctor?


Col. So he pretends, and that he lost his Living in Ireland upon his refusing
the Oaths to the Government. Now I have made the strictest Inquiries, and cannot
find the least Evidence, that ever he was in the Country. But (as I hinted to
you) there is now in Prison a poor unhappy Rebel I went to School with, whose
Pardon I am soliciting, and he assures me, he knew him very well in Flanders,
and in such Circumstances, as when it can be serviceable to me to know them, he
faithfully promises to discover, but begs till then I will not insist upon it.


Hear. I gad this Intelligence may be worth your Cherishing.


Col. Hah! here is my Sister again.


Enter Maria hastily, Doctor Wolf following. Mar. You Will find Sir, I will not
be used thus: Nor shall your Credit with my Father protect your Insolence to me.


Hear. and Col. What Is the Matter?


Mar. Nothing, pray be quiet -- I don't want you -- stand out of the way --

[They retire.
Col. What has the Dog done to her?


Mar. How durst you bolt with such Authority in my Chamber without giving me
Notice?


Hear. Confusion!


Col. Now, Frank, whose turn is it to keep their Temper.

Apart.
Hear. [Struggling.] It Is not mine I Am sure.


Col. Hold -- if my Father will not resent this, it is then time enough for me to
do it.


Doct. Compose your Transport, Madam, I came by your Father's Desire, who being
informed, that you were Entertaining Mr. Heartly, grew Impatient, and gave his
Positive Command, that you attend him instantly, or he himself, he says, will
fetch you.


Hear. So! now the Storm is rising.


Doct. So for what I have done, Madam, I had his Authority, and shall leave him
to answer you.


Mar. It Is false, he gave you no Authority to insult me; or if he had, did you
suppose I would bear it from you? What is it you presume upon? your Function!
Does that exempt you from the Manners of a Gentleman?


Doct. Shall I have any answer to your Father, Lady?


Mar. I Will send him none by you.


Doct. I shall inform him so --

[Exit.
Mar. A saucy Puppy.


Col. Prithee, Sister, what has the Fellow done to you?


Hear. I beg you tell us, Madam.


Mar. Nay, no great Matter -- but I was sitting carelessly in my Dressing Room
-- a -- a fastening my Garter with my Face just toward the Door, and this
impudent Cur, without the least Notice, comes Bounce in upon me -- and my
develish Hoop happening to hitch in the Chair, I was an Hour before I could get
down my Petticoats.


Hear. The Rogue must be corrected.


Col. Yet I gad, I cannot help laughing at the Accident! What a ridiculous
Figure must she make! ha! ha!


Mar. Hah! you're as Impudent as he I think: Well but had not I best go to my
Father?


Hear. Now, now, dear Tom, speak to her before she goes, this is the very
Crisis of my Life --

[Apart to the Col.
Mar. What does he say, Brother?


Col. Why he wants to have me speak to you, and I would have him do it himself.


Mar. Ay, come, do, Heartly, I am in good Humor now.


Hear. O Maria! -- my Heart is bursting --


Mar. Well, well, out with it.


Hear. Your Father, now, I see is bent on parting us -- Nay, what is yet worse,
perhaps, will give you to another -- I cannot speak -- Imagine what I want from
you --


Mar. Well -- O lud! one looks so silly though, when one's serious -- O Ged --
in short I cannot get it out.


Col. I warrant you, try again.


Mar. O lud! -- well -- if one must be teiz'd then -- why he must Hope, I think.


Hear. Is It possible? -- Thus --


Col. Buz -- [Stopping his Mouth] not a Syllable, she has done very well, I bar
all Heroicks; if you press it too far, I Will hold Six to Four, she is off again
in a Moment.


Hear. I am silenced.


Mar. Now am I on Tiptoe to know what odd Fellow my Father has found out for me.


Hear. I Would give something to know him.


Mar. He Is in a terrible Fuss at your being here I find -- I had best go to him.


Col. By all means.


Mar. O Bless us! here he comes piping hot to fetch me! Now we are all in a
fine Pickle.


Enter Sir John hastily -- He takes Maria under his Arm, Cocks his Hat, Nods,
frowning at Heartly, and carries her off. Col. So -- Well said Doctor! it is he,
I Am sure has blown this Fire. What horrid Hands is this poor Family fallen
into? and how the Traitor seems to Triumph in his Power? How little is my
Father like himself? by Nature, Open, Just, and Generous, but this vile
Hypocrite drives his weak Passions like the Wind, and I foresee at last, will
dash him on his Ruin.


Hear. Nothing but your speedily detecting him can prevent it.


Col. I have a Thought, and it is the only one that can expose him to my Father
-- Come Frank, be cheerful; in some unguarded Hour, we yet, perhaps, this
lurking Thief,

Without his Holy Vizor, may surprise.
And lay the Impostor naked to his Eyes.
[Exeunt.
The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
Charles with a Writing in his Hand.
Charles. IT IS so -- I have long suspected where his Zeal would end, in the
making of his private Fortune -- But then to found it on the Ruin of his
Patron's Children, makes me shudder at the Villainy: What Desperation may a Son
be driven to, so barbarously disinherited! -- Beside his Daughter, fair Maria
too is wronged; wronged in the most tender Point: For so extravagant is this
Settlement, it leaves her not a Shilling, but on her conditionally marrying
with the Doctor's Consent; which seems, by what I Have heard, intended as an
Expedient, to oblige her to accept the Doctor himself for her Husband: Now
'twere but an honost part to let Maria know this Snare, that is laid for her:
This Deed's not signed, and might be yet pervented -- It shall be so -- 'twere
Folly not to try -- My Condition cannot be worse -- Who knows how far her good
Nature may think herself obliged for the Discovery? -- Must he ruin, as he has
done mine, all Families he comes into?


Enter Sir John, Lady Woodvil, and Maria. Sir John. O, Charles, your Master
wants you to transcribe some Letters.


Charles. Sir, I Will wait on him.

[Exit Charles, bowing respectfully to the Ladies.
Mar. A pretty well bred Fellow that.


Sir John. Ay, ay; but he has better Qualities than his good Breeding; he is
honest.


Mar. He Is always clean too.


Sir John. I wonder, Daughter, when thou will take notice of a Man's real Merit
-- Humph! well bred, and clean forsooth -- Would not one think now, she were
describing a Coxcomb?


Mar. But, dear Papa, do you make no allowance for one's Taste?


Sir John. Taste; hah! and One's Taste? That Madam One is to me the most
provoking, impertinent Jade alive; and Taste is the true Picture of her
senseless, sickly Ap- When do you hear my Wife talk at this rate? and yet she
is as young, as your fantastical Ladyship.


Lady. W. Maria's of a cheerful Temper, my Dear; but I know you don't think she
wants Discretion.


Sir John. I shall try that presently, and you, Sweetheart, shall judge
between us: In short, Daughter, your Course of Life is but one continual Round
of playing the Fool to no purpose; and therefore I am resolved to make you
think seriously, and marry.


Mar. That I shall do before I marry, Sir, you may depend upon it.


Sir John. Um -- That I am not so sure of -- but you may depend upon my having
thought seriously, and that is as well: For the Person I intend you, is of all
the World the only Man can make you truly happy.


Mar. And of all the World, Sir, that is the only Man, I Will positively marry.


Lady W. [Aside to Mar.] Thou have rare Courage, Maria; If I had such a Game to
play, I should be frighted out of my Wits.


Mar. Lord, Madam, he will make nothing on it, depend upon it.

[Aside]
Sir John. Mind what I say to you -- This wonderful Man, I say -- First, as to
his Principles both in Church and State, in unquestionable.


Mar. Sir, I leave all that to you, for I should never ask him a Question about
either of them.


Sir John. You need not, I am fully satisfied of both -- He is a true, stanch
Member of the English Catholic Church.


Mar. Methinks though, I would not have him a Roman Catholic, Sir, because you
know of Double Taxes.


Sir John. No, he is no Roman.


Mar. Very well, Sir --


Sir John. Then as to the State, he will shortly be one of the most considerable
Men in the Kingdom; and that too in an Office for Life; which, on whatsoever
pretense of Misbehaviour, no Civil Government can deprive him of.


Mar. That Is fine indeed; I was afraid he had been a Cl^rgyman


S^r J^hn. I have not yet said what his Function is -- As for his private Life
-- he is sober.


Mar. O! I should hate a Sot.


Sir John. Chaste..


Mar. A hem!

(stifling a Laugh.)
Sir John. What is it you sneer at, Madam -- You want one of your fine
Gentleman-Rakes, I suppose, that are snapping at every Woman they meet with.


Mar. No, no, Sir, I am very well satisfied -- I -- I should not care for such
a sort of Man no more than I should for one that every Woman was ready to snap
at.


Sir John. No, you will be secure from Jealousy; he has Experience, Ripeness of
Years; he is almost Forty Nine: Your Sexes Vanities will have no Charm for him.


Mar. But all this while, Sir, I don't find that he has any Charm for our Sexes
Vanity: How does he look? Is he tall, well made? Does he dress, sing, talk,
laugh, and dance well? Has he a good Air, good Teeth, fine Eyes, fine fair
Perriwig -- Does he keep his Chaise, Coach, Chariot, and Berlin with fix
flouncing Flanders? Does he wear Blew Velvet, clean White Stockings, and
subscribe to the Opera?


Sir John. Was there ever so profligate a Creature! What will this Age come to?


Lady W. Nay, Maria, here I must be against you -- Now you are blind indeed, a
Woman's Happiness has little to do with the Pleasure her Husband takes in his
own Person.


Sir John. Right.


Lady W. It Is not how he looks, but how he loves is the Point.


Sir John. Good again!


Lady W. And a Wife is much more secure, that has Charms for her Husband, than
when the Husband has only Charms for her.


Sir John. Admirable! Go on my Dear.


Lady W. Do you think, Child, a Woman of Five and twenty may not be much
happier with an honest Man of Fifty, than the finest Woman of Fifty with a
young Fellow of Five and twenty?


Sir John. Mark that.


Mar. Ay, but when two Five and twenties come together -- Dear Papa, you must
allow they have a chance to be fifty times as pleasant and frolicksome.


Sir John. Frolicksome! why you sensual Idiot, What have Frolicks to do with
solid Happiness? I am ashamed of you -- Go! you talk worse than a Girl at a
BoardingSchool -- Frolicksome! as if Marriage were only a License for two
People to play the Fool according to Law? Methinks, Madam, you have a better
Example of Happiness before your Face -- Here Is one has ten times your
Understanding, and she, you find, has made a different Choice.


Mar. Lord, Sir! how you talk? you don't consider Peoples Temper: I don't say
my Lady is not in the right; but then you know, Papa, she is a Prude, and I am a
Coquet; she becomes her Character very well, I don't deny it, and I hope you
see every thing I do is as consistent with mine: Your wise Folks may lay down
what Rules they please; but it is Constitution that governs us all, and you can
no more bring me, Sir, to endure a Man of Forty nine, than you can persuade my
Lady to dance in a Church to the Organ.


Sir John. Why you wicked Wretch, could any thing persuade you to that?


Mar. Lord, Sir! I will not answer for any thing I should do when the Whim's in my
Head: You know I always loved a little Flirtation.


Sir John. O horrible! My poor Mother has ruined her; leaving her a Fortune in
her own hands, has turned her Brain: In short, your Sentiments of Life are
shameful, and I am resolved upon your instant Reformation; therefore, as an
Earnest of your Obedience, I shall first infist, that you never see young
Heartly more; for in one word, the good and pious Doctor, Wolf's the Man that I
have decreed your Husband.


Mar. Ho! ho! ho!

[Laughing aloud.]
Sir John. It Is very well -- this Laugh you think becomes you, but I shall
spoil your Mirth -- no more -- give me a serious Answer.


Mar. (Gravely) I ask your Pardon, Sir, I should not have smiled indeed, could
I have supposed it possible that you were serious.


Sir John. You Will find me so.


Mar. I am sorry for it; but I have an Objection to the Doctor, Sir, that most
Fathers think a substantial one.


Sir John. Name it.


Mar. Why, Sir, you know he is not worth a Groat.


Sir John. That Is more than you know, Madam; I am able to give him a better
Estate than I am afraid you will deserve.


Mar. How, Sir?


Sir John. I have told you what is my Will, and shall leave you to think on it.

Enter Charles.
Charles. [Aside to Sir John.] Sir, if you are at leisure, the Doctor desires a
private Conference with you, upon Business of Importance.


Sir John. Where is he?


Charles. In his own Chamber, Sir, just taking his leave of the Count and
another Gentleman, that came this Morning Express from Avignon: He has sent you
too the Note you asked him for.


Sir John. It Is well; I Will come to him immediately -- [Ex. Charles.] Daughter,
I am called away, and therefore have only time to tell you, as my last
Resolution, that if you expect a Shilling from me, the Doctor is your Husband,
or I Am no more your Father.

[Exit Sir John, and drops the Paper.
Mar. O Madam! I am at my Wits end, not for the little Fortune I may lose in
disobeying my Father; but it startles me to find what a dangerous Influence
this Fellow has over all his Actions.


Lady W. Dear Maria, I am now as much alarmed as you; for though in Compliance
to your Father, I have been always inclined to think charitably of this Doctor,
yet now I am convinced it is time to be upon our guard -- he is stepping into his
Estate too!


Mar. Here Is my Brother, Madam, we'll consult with him.


To them the Colonel. Col. Madam, your most obedient -- Well, Sister, is the
Secret out? Who is this pretty Fellow my Father has picked up for you?


Mar. Even our agreeable Doctor.


Col. You are not serious.


Lady W. He Is the very Man, I can assure you, Sir.


Col. Confusion! What would the Jewish Cormorant devour the whole Family? Your
Ladyship knows he is secretly in Love with you too.


Lady W. Fie! fie! Colonel.


Col. I ask your Pardon, Madam, if I speak too freely; but I am sure, by what I
have seen, your Ladyship must suspect something of it.


Lady W. I am sorry any Body else has seen it; but I must own his Civilities of
late have been something warmer than I thought became him.


Col. How then are these Opposites to be reconciled; can the Rascal have the
Assurance to think both these Points are to be carried? -- But he does nothing
like other People; he is a Contradiction even to his own Character: Most of your
Non-Jurors now are generally People of a free and open Disposition, mighty
Pretenders to a Conscience of Honor indeed: But you seldom see them put on the
least Show of Religion: But this formal Hypocrite always has it at his Tongue's
end, and there it sticks, for it never gets into his Heart: I Will answer for him.


Lady W. Ay, but that is the Charm, that first got him into Sir John's Heart;
who, good Man, is himself, I am sure, sincere; however now misguided, 'twas not
so much his Principles of Government, as his well painted Piety; his seeming
Self-denial, Resignation, Patience, and humble Outside, that gave him first so
warm a Lodging in his Bosom.


Mar. My Lady has judged it perfectly right.


Col. I am afraid it is too true: There has been his surest footing! But here we
are puzzled again -- What subtle Fe^ch can he have in being really in Love with
your Ladyship, and at the same time making such a Bustle to marry my Sister?


Mar. Truly one would not suspect him to be so Termagant: I fancy the Gentleman
might have his Hands full of one of us.


Col. And yet his Zeal pretends to be so shocked at all indecent Amors, that
in the Country he used to make the Maids lock up the Turky-cocks every Saturday
Night, for fear they should gallant the Hens on a Sunday.


Lady W. O! Ridiculous.


Col. Upon my Life, Madam, my Sister told me so:


Mar. I tell you so: You impudent --


Lady W. Fie! Maria, he only jests with you


Mar. How can you be such a Monster to be playing the fool here, when you have
more reason to be frighted out of your Wits? You don't know, perhaps, that my
Father declares he will settle a Fortune upon this Fellow too.


Col. What do you mean?


Lady W. It Is too true; it is not three Minutes since he said so.


Col. Nay, then it is time indeed his Eyes were opened; and give me leave to
say, Madam, it is only in your Power to save not only me, but even my Father too
from Ruin.


Lady W. I shall easily come into any thing of that kind, that is practicable --
What is it you propose?


Col. Why, if this Fellow (which I am sure of) is really in love with you, give
him a fair Opportunity to declare himself, and leave me to make my Advantage of
it.


Lady W. I apprehend you -- I am loath to do a wrong thing --


Mar. Dear Madam, it is the only way in the World to expose him to my Father.


Lady W. I Will think of it --

[Musing.]
Col. When you do, Madam, I am sure you will come into it.

How now What Paper's this? it is the Doctor's Hand.


Mar. I believe my Father dropped it.


Col. What Is here?

[Reads.]
Laid out at several times for the Secret Service of His M -- l. s. d. May the
28th, For six Baskets of Rue and Time, 00 18 00 The 29th, ditto Two Cart-Loads
of Oaken-Boughs, -- 02 00 00 June 10th, For ten Bushels of White Roses, 01 10
00 Ditto, -- Given to the Bell-ringers of several Parishes -- 10 15 00 Ditto To
Simon Chaunter Parish-Clerk, for his (...) Staves adapted to the Day, 05 07 06
ditto Lemons and (...) sent into (...) -- 09 05 00

Col. Well, while they drink it in Newgate much good may it do them.


Paid to Henry Conscience, Jury man, for his extraordinary Trouble in
acquitting Sir Preston Rebel of his Indictment, -- 53 15 00 Allowed to Patrick
Mac Rogue, of the Foot guards for prevailing with his Comrade to desert 04 06
06 Given as small Money to Humphrey Stanch, Cobbler, lately whipped for speaking
his Mind of the Government, -- 03 04 06 Paid to Abel Perkin, News Writer, for
diverse seasonable Paragraphs, -- 05 00 00 Aug. the 1st, Paid to John Shoplift
and Thomas Highway, for endeavoring to put out the Enemies Bonfire, -- 02 03
00 Aug. the 2d. Paid the Surgeon for Sear cloth, for their Bruises, -- 01 01 06

Was there ever such a Heap of stupid, cold scented Treason? Now, Madam, I hope
you see the Necessity of blowing up this Traitor: These are Lengths I did not
think my Father had gone with him: What vile, what low Sedition, has he made
him stoop to?

Lady W. I tremble at the Precipice he stands on!


Mar. O bless us! I am in a cold Sweat, dear Brother, leave it where you found
it --


Lady W. By all means; if Sir John should know it is in your hands, it may make
him desperate --


Col. You are in the right, Madam.

(He lays down the Paper.
Lady W. Let Us steal into the next Room, and observe that no Body else takes it
up; he will certainly come back to look for it.


Col. But I must leave you, poor Heartly stays for me at White's; and he will sit
upon Thorns, 'till I bring him an Account of his new Rival.


Mar. Well, well, get you gone then.

[Exeunt.
Enter Sir John in a Hurry. Sir John. Undone! Ruined! where could I drop this
Paper? -- Hold -- let us see -- [He finds it.] Ah! here it is -- What a blessed
Escape was this? If my hotbrain'd Son had found it, I suppose by tomorrow, he
would have been begging my Estate for the Discovery --

[Enter Doctor Wolf.
O Doctor! all is well: I have found my Paper.

Doct. I am sincerely glad of it -- It might have ruined us.


Sir John. Well, Sir, what say our last Advices from Avignon?


Doct. All goes right -- The Council has approved our Scheme, and press
mightily for Dispatch among our Friends in England.


Sir John. But pray Doctor --


Doct. Hold, Sir, -- now we are alone, give me leave to inform you better --
Not that I am vain of any worldly Title; but since it has pleased our Court to
dignify me, our Churches Right obliges me to take it.


Sir John. Pray, Sir, explain.


Doct. Our last Express has brought me this -- [be shows a Writing] which (far
unworthy, as I am) promotes me to the vacant See of Thetford.


Sir John. Is it possible? My Lord, I joy in your Advancement.


Doct. It is indeed a Spiritual Comfort to find my Labors in the Cause are not
forgotten; though I must own some less conspicuous Instance of their Favor had
better suited me: Such high Distinctions are invidious; and it would really
grieve me, Sir, among my Friends, to meet with Envy where I only hope for Love;
not but I submit in any way to serve them.


Sir John. Ah! good Man! this Meekness will, I hope, one Day be rewarded -- but
pray Sir -- my Lord! -- I beg your Lordship's Pardon -- pray what other News?
how do all our Friends? are they in Heart, and cheerful?


Doct. To a Man! never in such sanguine hopes -- the Court's extremely thronged
-- never was there such a concourse of Warlike Exiles: though they talk, this
sharp Season, of removing farther into Italy, for the benefit of milder Air:
Well! The Catholics are the sincerest Friends!


Sir John. Nay, I must do them Justice, they are truly Zealous in the Cause,
and it has often grieved my Heart, that our Churches Differences are so utterly
Irreconcilable.


Doct. O nourish still that charitable Thought! there is something truly Great
and Humane in it; and really, Sir, if you examine well the Doctrines laid down,
by my learned Predecessor, in his Case of Schism, you will find those
Differences are not so terribly material, as some obstinate Schismatics would
paint them: Ah! could we but be brought to Temper, a great many seeming
Contradictions might be reconciled on both finds: But while the Laity will
interpret for themselves, there is indeed no doing it. Now, could we, Sir, like
other Nations, but once restrain that monstrous License. Ah! Sir, a Union then
might soon be practicable.


Sir John. Auh! 'twill never do here: The English are a stubborn heanstrong
People, and have been so long indulged in the use of their own Senses; that,
while they have Eyes in their Heads, you will never be able to persuade them
they cannot see, there is no making them give up their Humane Evidences: and your
Credo, quia impossible est, is an Argument they will always make a Jest of. No
no, it is not Force will do the Thing, your Pressed Men don't always make the
best Soldiers. And truly, my Lord, we seem to be wrong too in another Point, to
which I have often imputed the ill Success of our Cause; and that is, the
taking into our Party so may loose Persons of dissolute and abandoned Morals;
Fellows, whom in their daily private Course of Life, the Pillory and Gallows
seem to groan for.


Doct. It Is true indeed, and I have often wished 'twere possible to do without
them, but in a Multitude all Men will not be all Saints; and then again they are
really useful; nay, and in many things, that Sober Men will not stoop to --
They serve, poor Curs, to brak at the Government in the open Streets, and keep
up the wholesome Spirit of Clamor in the common People; and, Sir, you cannot
conceive the wonderful use of Clamor, it is so teizing to a Ministry, it makes
them winch and fret, and grow uneasy in their Posts -- Ah! many a comfortable
Point has been gained by Clamor! it is in the Nature of Mankind to yield more
to that, than Reason -- Even Socrates himself could not resist it; for wise, as
he was, yet you see his Wife Xantippe carried all her Points by Clamor. Come,
come, Clamor is a useful Monster, and we must feed the hungry Mouths of it; it
being of the last Importance to us, that hope to change the Government to let
it have no quiet.


Sir John. Well, there is indeed no resisting mere Necessity.


Doct. Besides, if we suffer our Spirits to cool here at home, our Friends
obroad will send us over nothing but Excuses.


Sir John. It Is true, but still I am amazed, that France so totally should have
left us -- Mardyke, they say, will certainly be demolished.


Doct. No matter, let them go -- we have made a good Exchange, our New Ally is
yet better, as he is less suspected -- But to give them their due, we have no
Spirits among us, like the Women, the Ladies have supported our Cause with a
surprising Constancy. O! there is no daunting them, ev'en with ill Success! they
will starve their very Vanities, their Vices, to feed their Loyalty: I am
informed that my good Lady Countess of Night-and-Day, has never been seen in a
new Gown, or has once thrown a Die at any of the Assemblies, since our last
general Contribution.


Sir John. O my good Lord, if our Court abroad but knew what Obligations they
have to your indefatigable Endeavors --


Doct. Alas! Sir, I can only boast an honest Heart, my Power is Weak, I only
can assist them with my Prayers and zealous Wishes; or if I had been
serviceable, have not you, Sir* overpaid me? Your Daughter, Sir, the sair
Maria, is a Reward no Merit can pretend to.


Sir John. Nays, good my Lord, this tender Gratitude confounds me -- O! this
insensible Girl -- Pray excuse me --

[Weeps.
Doct. You seemed concerned, pray what is amiss?


Sir John. That I should be the Father of so blind a Child, alas! she slights
the Blessing I proposed, she sees you not, my Lord, with my fond Eyes; but lay
not, I beseech you, at my Door, the ungrateful Stubbornness of a thoughtless
Girl.


Doct. Nay, good Sir, he not thus concerned for me, we must allow her Female
Modesty a time, your strict Commands perhaps too suddenly surpised her; Maids
must be slowly, gently dealt with; and might I, Sir, presume to advise --


Sir John. Any thing, your Will shall govern me and her.


Doct. Then, Sir, abate of your Authority, and let the Matter rest a while:
Suppose I first should beg your good Lady, Sir, to be my Friend to her: Women
will hear from their own Sex, what sometimes, even from the Man they like,
would startle them: May I have your Permission, Sir, when Dinner is removed, to
entertain my Lady on this Subject privately?


Sir John. O! by all means, and troth, it is an excellent Thought, I Will go this
Instant, and prepare her to receive you, and will myself contrive your
Opportunity.


Doct. You are too good to me, Sir -- too bountiful.


Sir John. Nay, now, my Lord, you drive me from you.


Doct. Pray pardon me.


Sir John. No more I beg you, good my Lord -- your Servant

[Exit.
Doct. Ha! ha! What noble Harvests have been reaped from bigoted Credulity,
nor ever was a better Instance of it. Would it not make one Smile! that it
should ever enter into the Brains of this Man (who can in other Points
distinguish like a Man) that a Protestant Church can never be secure, till it
has a Popish Prince to defend it.


Enter Charles. So Charles, have thou finished those Letters?

Charles. I have brought them, Sir.


D^ct. It Is very well, let them be sealed without a Direction, and give them to
Aaron Sham the Jew, when he calls for them -- O! and -- here step yourself this
Afternoon to Mr. Deseazance of Gray's Inn, and give him this Thirty Pound Bill
from Sir Harry Foxbound, beg him to sit up Night and Day till the Writings are
finished: For his Trial certainly comes on this Week, he knows we cannot always
be sure of a Jury, and a Moment's Delay may make the Commissioners lay hold of
his Estate.


Charles. My Lord, I Will take the utmost Care.


Doct. Well Charles.

[Gravely smiling.]
Charles. Sir John has told me of the new Duty, I ought to pay when in private.


Doct. But take special heed, that it be only private.


Charles. Your Lordship need not caution me -- My Lord, I hear another Whisper
in the Family; I Am told you will shortly be allied to it; Sir John, they say, has
actually consented; I hope, my Lord, you will find the fair Maria too, as yelding.


Doct. Such a Proposal has indeed been started, but it will end in nothing:
Maria is a giddy wanton thing, not formed to make a wise Man happy, her Life's
too vain, too sensual to elevate a Heart like mine: No, no, I have Views more
serious.


Charles. O my fluttering Joy!

[Aside.
Doct. Marriage is a State too turbulent for me.


Charles. But with Sir John's Consent, my Lord, her Fortune may be considerable.


Doct. Thou know, Charles, my Thoughts of Happiness were never formed on
Fortune.


Charles. No! I find that by the Settlement.

[Aside.
Doct. Or if they were, they would be there impossible; Maria's vain distaste
of me, I know's as deeply rooted, as my Contempt of her: And can thou think
I Would stain my Character to be a Wanton's Mokery, to follow through the Wilds of
Folly she would lead me, to cringe and dote upon a senseless Toy, that every
Feather in a Hat can purchase?


Charles. But may not Sir John take it ill, my Lord, to have her slighted?


Doct. No, no, her ridiculous Aversion will secure me from his Reproaches.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, my Master desires to speak with you.


Doct. I Will wait on him -- Charles, you will take care of my Directions.


Charles. I Will be sure, Sir.

[Exit Doctor.
Kind Heaven, I thank thee! this Bar so unexpectly removed gives vigor to my
Heart, and is, I hope, an Omen of its Fortune -- But I must lose no Time, the
Writing may be every Moment called for -- this is her Chamber.

He knocks softly -- and Betty Enters to him.

Is your Lady busy?

Bett. I think she is only a reading.


Charles. Will you do me the Favor to let her know, if she is at leisure, I
beg to speak with her upon some earnest Business.


Maria Enter with a Book. Mar. Who Is that?


Bett. She Is here -- Mr. Charles, Madam, desires to speak with you.


Mar. O! Your Servant Mr. Charles, -- Here take this odious Homer, and lay him
up again, he tires me.

[Exit. Betty with the Book.
How could the blind Wretch make such a horrid fuss about a fine Woman, for so
many Volumes together, and give us no Account of her Amors? You have read him
I suppose in the Greek, Mr. Charles.

Charles. Not lately, Madam.


Mar. But do you so violently admire him now?


Charles. The Critics say he has his Beauties, Madam. But Ovid has been always
my Favorite,


Mar. Ovid! O! he is ravishing --


Charles. And so art thou to Madness

[Aside.]
Mar. Lord! how could one do to learn Greek, was you a great while about it?


Charles. It has been half the Business of my Life, Madam.


Mar. That Is cruel now! then you think one cannot be Mistress of it in a Month
ar two.


Charles. Not easily, Madam.


Mar. They tell me it has he softest Tone for Love of any Language in the
World, I fancy I could soon learn it -- I know two Words of it already.


Charles. Pray, Madam, what are they?


Mar. Stay let me see -- O -- ay Zoe, kai Psyehe.


Charles. I hope you know the English of 'em, Madam.


Mar. O lud! I hope there is no Harm in it; I am sure I heard the Doctor say it
to my Lady -- Pray what is it?


Charles. You must first imagine, Madam, a tender Lover gazing on his Mistress,
and then indeed they have a softness in 'em, as thus -- Zoe, kai psyche! my
Life, my Soul?


Mar. O the Impudent young Rogue! how his Eyes spoke too!

[Aside.]
What the duce! can he want with me! --

Charles. I have startled her, she muses.

[Aside.
Mar. It always ran in my Head this Fellow had something in him above his
Condition -- I Will know presently. [Aside Well, but your Business with me Mr.
Charles, you have something of Love in your Head now, Ill lay my Life on it.


Charles. I never yet durst own it, Madam.


Mar. Why, what is the Matter?


Charles. My Story is too Melancholy to entertain a Mind so much at Ease as
yours.


Mar. O! I love melancholy Stories of all things --


Charles. But mine, Madam, cannot be told, unless I give my Life into your Power.


Mar. O Lud! you have not done any Body a Mischief, I hope.


Charles. I never did a private Injury; if I have done a public Wrong, I Am
sure it might, in me, at least be called an honest Error.


Mar. Pray whom did you serve before you lived with the Doctor?


Charles. I was not born to serve; and had not an unfortunate Education ruined
me, might have now appeared, like what I am by Birth, a Gentleman.


Mar. I am surpised! Your Education, say you, ruin you? Lord! I am concerned
for you. Pray let me know your Story; and if any Services are in my Power, I am
sure you may command them.


Charles. Such soft Compassion, from so fair a Bosom, o'erpays the word than
can attend my owning what I am.


Mar. O your Servant -- but pray let us hear.


Charles. My Father's elder Brother, Madam, was a Gentleman of an ancient
Family in the North, who having then no Child himself, begged me from my
Nurse's Arms, to be adopted as his own, with an Assurance too of making me his
Heir; to which my Father (then alas! in the Infancy of his Fortune) easily
consented. This Uncle being himself secretly disaffected to the Government,
gave me of course, in my Education, the same unhappy Prejudices, which since
have ended in the Ruin of us both.


Mar. Then you were bred a Roman Catholic.


Charles. No, Madam; but I own in Principles of very little difference, which I
imbibed chiefly from this Doctor; he having been five Years my Governor. As I
grew up, my Father'sMerit had raised his Fortune under the present Government;
and fearing I might be too far fixed in Principles against it, desired me from
my Uncle Home again: But I, as I then thought my self bound in Gratitude,
excused my going in Terms of Duty to my Father; whom since alas! I too justly
have provoked ever to hope a Reconciliation. I saw too late my Folly, and had
no Defense against his Anger, but by artfully confirming him in a Belief, that
I had perished with my Uncle in the late Rebellion.


Mar. Bless us! what do you mean? you were not actully in it, I hope!


Charles. I cannot disown the Guilt -- but since the Royal Mercy has been
refused to none that frankly have confessed with Penitence their Crime (which
from my Heart I most sincerely do) in that is all my Hope -- My Youth and
Education's all the Excuse I plead; if they deserve no Pity, I am determined to
throw off my Disguise, and bow me to the Hand of Justice.


Mar. Poor Creature! Lord! I cannot bear it.

(with Concern.)
Charles. But then unknown, and friendless as I am; to whom, alas! can I apply
for Succor!

[Weeps.
Mar. O Lord! I Will serve you, depend upon it: My Brother shall have no rest
'till he gets your Pardon.


Charles. Your kind Compassion, Madam, has prevented, what, if I durst, I
should have mentioned, I hope too, I shall personally deserve his Favor; if
not, your generous Inclination to have saved me, even in my last Despair of
Life, will give my Heart a Joy.


Mar. Lord! the poor unfortunate Boy loves me too? what shall I do with him?
But, Mr. Charles, pray once more to your Story -- what was it that really drew
you into the Rebellion?


Charles. This Doctor, Madam, who, as he is now your Father's, was then my
Uncle's Bosom-Counsellor: 'Twas his infidious Tongue that painted it to us as
an incumbent Duty, on which the Welfare of our Souls depended; he warmed us too
into such a weak Belief of vile Reports, as Infamy should blush to mention --
we were assured, that half the Churches here in Town were lying all in
sacrilegious Ruins; which since, I found, maliciously was meant, even of those
that are magnificently rising from their new Foundation!


Mar. But, pray -- while you were in Arms how did the Doctor dispose of himself?


Charles. He! -- went with us, Madam, none so active in the Front of
Resolution, till Danger came to face him; then indeed a friendly Fever seized
him, which on the first Alarm of the King's Forces marching toward Preston,
gave him a cold Pretense to leave the Town; in the Defense of which my Uncle
lost his Life, and I my only Friend, with all my long fed Hopes of Fortune.


Mar. Poor Wretch but how came you to avoid being Prisoner?


Charles. Upon our Surrender of the Place, I bribed a Townsman to employ me, as
his Servant, in a backward Working-house, where, from my Youth, and Change of
Habit, I passed without Suspicion till the whole Affair was over -- But then,
alas! whither to turn I knew not: My Life grew now no more my Care -- Perish, I
saw, I must, whether as a Criminal, or a Beggar, was my only Choice.


Mar. O Lord! tell me quickly how you came hither.


Charles. In this Despair I wandered up to London, where I scarce knew one
Mortal, but some few Friends in Prison. What could I do? I ventured even hither
for my Safety; where 'twas my Fortune first to see your Father, Madam,
distributing Relief to several: He knew my Uncle well; and being informed of my
Condition, he charitably took me Home; and here has ever since concealed me as
a menial Servant to the Doctor. The Detestation of whose vile, dishonest
Practices at last have waked me to a Sense of all my blinded Errors; of which
this Writing is his least of sordid Instances.

[Gives it to Maria.
Mar. You frighten me; pray what are the P^rposes of it* It Is neither signed
nor sealed.


Charles. No, Madam, therefore to prevent it by this timely Notice, was my
Business here with you: Your Father gave it the Doctor first to show his
Council, who having since approved it, I understand this Evening 'twill be
executed.


Mar. But what is it?


Charlos. It grants to Doctor Wolf in present four hundred Pounds per Annum, of
which this very House is Part; and at your Father's Death invests him in the
whole Remainder of his Free Estat^. For you indeed there is a Charge of four
thousand Pound upon it; provided you marry only with the Doctor's Consent; if
not, it is added to my Lady's Jointure. But your Brother, Madam, is without
Conditions utt^rly disinherited.


Mar. I am confounded -- what will become of us! my Father now I find was
serious -- O this insinuating Hypocrit^* let me sa^ -- ay -- I will go this
Minute -- Sir, dare you trust this in my Hands for an Hour only?


Charles. Any thing to serve you -- my Life's already in your Hands.


Mar. And I dare secure it with my own -- Hark! they ring to Dinner; pray, Sir,
step in, say I am obliged to dine Abroad, and whisper one of the Footmen to get
an Hackney Coach immediately; then do you take a proper Occasion to slip out
after me to Mr. Double's Chambers in the Temple, there I shall have Time to
talk farther with you You Will excuse my Hurry -- Here Betty, my Scarf, and a
Mask.

[Ex. Maria
Charles. What does my Fortune mean me? She Will there talk farther with me! Of
what! What will she talk of? O my Heart! methought she looked at parting too,
as kindly conscious of some Obligation to me: And then how soft, how amiable
tender was her pity of my Fortune. But O! I rave! keep down my vain aspiring
Thoughts, and to my lost Condition level all my Hopes.

Rather content with Pity let me live,
Than hope for more than she resolves to give,
[Ex.
The End of the Second ACT.
ACT. III.
Maria, and Betty taking off her Scarf, etc.
Mar. HAS any one been to speak with me, Betty?


Betty. Only Mr. Heartly, Madam, he said he would call again, and bid his
Servant stay below to give him Notice when you came Home.


Mar. You don't know what he wanted?


Betty. No, Madam, he seemed very uneasy at your being Abroad.


Mar. Well -- go, and lay up those Things -- [Ex. Betty, Ten to One, but his
wise Head now has found out something to be jealous of; if he lets me see it, I
shall be sure to make him infinitely easy -- Here he comes.


Enter Heartly. Hear. Your humble Servant, Madam,

gravely.
Mar. Your Servant, Sir,


Hear. You have been Abroad, I hear.


Mar. Yes, and now, I am come Home, you see.


Hear. You seem to turn upon my Words, Madam, is there any Thing particular in
them?


Mar. As much, as there is in my being Abrord, I believe.


Hear. Might not I say you had been Abrord, without giving Offense?


Mar. And might not I as well say, I was come Home, without your being so grave
upon it?


Hear. Do you know any Thing should make me grave;


Mar. I know, if you are so, I am the worst Person in the World you could
possibly show it to.


Hear. Nay, I don't suppose you do any thing, you will not justify.


Mar. O! then I find I have done something you think I cannot justify.


Hear. I don't say that neither, perhaps I am in the wrong in what I have said;
but I have been so often used to ask Pardon for your being in the wrong, that I
am resolved henceforth never to rely on the insolent Evidence of my own Senses.


Mar. You don't know now, perhaps, that I think this pretty smart Speech of
yours is very Dull; but since that is a Fault you cannot help, I will not take it
ill. Come now, be as sincere on your Side, and tell me seriously -- Is not what
real Business I had Abroad, the very Thing you want to be made easy in?


Hear. If I thought you would make me easy, I would own it.


Mar. Now we come to the Point -- To morrow Moring then, I give you my Word to
let you know it all, till when there is a Necessity for its being a Secret, and
I insist upon your believing it.


Hear. But pray, Madam, what am I to do with my private Imagination in the mean
Time, that is not in my Power to confine: And sure you will not be offended, if to
avoid the Tortures That may give me, I beg you will trust me with the Secret now.


Mar. Don't press me, for positively I will not.


Hear. Cannot, had been a kinder Term -- is my Disquiet of so little Moment to
you;


Mar. Of none, while your Disquiet dares not trust the Assurances I have given
you; if you expect I should confide in you for Life, don't let me see you dare
not take my Word for a Day; and if you are wise, you will think so fair a Trial
of your Faith a Favor.


Hear. If you intend it such -- it is a Favor, if not it is something -- so --
come let us wave the Subject.


Mar. With all my Heart: Have you seen my Brother lately?


Hear. Yes, Madam, and he tells me, it seems, the Doctor is the Man your Father
has resolved upon.


Mar. It Is so; nay and what will more surprise you, he leaves me only to the
Choice of him, or of no Fortune.


Hear. And may I, without Offense, beg leave to know, what Resolutions, Madam,
you have taken upon it?


Mar. I have not taken any, I do not know what to do; what would you advise me
to?


Hear. I advise you to? Nay, you are in the right to make it a Question.


Mar. He says he will settle all his Estate upon him too.


Hear. O take it, take it, to be sure, it is the fittest Match in the World, you
cant't do a wiser Thing certainly.


Mar. 'Twill be as wise at least, as the Ways you take to prevent it.


Hear. I find, Madam, I am not to know what you intend to do; and I suppose I
am to be easy at that too.


Mar. When I intend to marry him, I shall not care whether you are easy, or no.


Hear. If your Indifference to me, were a Proof of your Inclination to him, the
Gentleman need not despair.


Mar. Very well, Sir, I Will endeavor to take your Advice, I promise you.


Hear. O! that will not cost you much Trouble, I dare say, Madam.


Mar. About as much, I suppose, as it cost you to give it me.


Hear. Upon my Word, Madam, I gave it purely to oblige you.


Mar. Then to return your Civility, the least I can do is to take it.


Hear. Is It possible? How can you torture me with this Indifference?


Mar. Why do you insult me with such a barefaced Jealousy?


Hear. Is it a Crime to be concerned for what becomes of you? Has not your
Father openly declared against me, in Favor of my Rival? How is it possible,
at such a Time, not to have a thousand Fears? What though they all are false
and groundless, are they not still the Effect of Love alarmed, and anxious to
be satisfied? I have an open, artless Heart, that cannot bear Disguises, but
when it is grieved, in spite of me, 'twill show it -- Pray pardon me -- But when
I am told you went out in the utmost Hurry with some Writings to a Lawyer, and
took the Doctor's own Servant with you, even in the very Hour your Father had
proposed him, as your Husband! -- Good Heaven! what am I to think? Can I, must
I suppose my Senses fail me? If I have Eyes, have Ears, and have a Heart, must
it be still a Crime to think I see, and hear -- Yet by my Torments feel I love.


Mar. [Asid^.] Well! I own it looks ill-natured now, now, to show him some
Concern -- but then this Jealousy -- I must, and will get the better of.


Hear. Speak Maria, is still my Jealousy a Crime?


Mar. If you s^^ll insist on it, as a Proof of Love, then I must tell you, Sir,
it is of that kind, that only slighted Hearts are pleased with; when I am so
reduced, then I prehaps may bear it -- The Fact you charge me with I grant is
true, I have been Abroad, as you say: But still let Appearance look never so
pointing, while there is a Possibility in Nature, that what I have done may be
innocent, I will not bear a Look, that tells me to my Face you dare suspect me: If
you have Doubts, why don't you satisfy them before you see me? Can you suppose,
that I Am to stand confounded, as a Criminal before you? How despicable a Figure
must a Woman make, to bear but such a Moment? Come, come, there is nothing shows
so low a Mind, as these grave, and insolent Jealousies. The Man, that is capable
of ever seeing a Woman, after he believes her false, is capable on her
Submission, and a little Flattery, were she really false, poorly to forgive and
bear it.


Hear. You will not find me, Madam, of so low a Spirit; but since I see your
Tyranny arises from your mean Opinion of me, it is Time to be my self, and
disavow your Power, you use it now beyond my bearing; not only impose on me to
disbelieve my Senses, but do it with such an imperious Air, as if my Honest,
manly Reason were your Slave, and this poor grovelling Frame that follows you,
durst show no Signs of Life, but what you deign to give it.


Mar. Oh! you are in the right -- go on -- suspect me still, believe the worst
you can -- it is all true -- I don't justify my self -- Why do you trouble me
with your Complaints? If you are Master of that manly Reason you have boasted,
give me a manly Proof of it, at once resume your Liberty, despise me, go, go
off in Triumph now, and let me see you scorn the Woman, whose vile,
o'er-bearing Falsehood, would insult your Senses.


Hear. O Heaven! is this the End of all? Are then those tender Prorestations
you have made me (for such I thought them) when with the softest ^ind
Reluctance your rising Blushes gave me something more, than Hope -- What all --
O Maria! All but come to this?


Mar. [Aside] O Lud! I am growing silly, if I hear on, I shall tell him every
thing; it is but another struggle, and I shall conquer it -- So so you ar^ not
gone, I see.


Hear. Do you then wish me gone, Madam?


Mar. Your manly Reason will direct you.


Hear. This is too much -- my Heart can bear no more. O! -- what? am I rooted
here! It Is but a Pang, and I am free for ever.


Enter Charles, with two Writings. Mar. At last I am relieved! Well, Mr.
Charles, is it done?


Charles. I did not stir from his Desk, Madam, till it was entirely finished.


Mar. Where Is the Original?


Charles. This is it, Madam.


Mar. Very well, that, you know you must keep, but come, we must lose no Time,
we will examine this in the next Room. Now I feel for him.

[Aside. [Exit Maria, with Charles.
Hear. O Rage! Rage! this is not to be born -- she is gone, she is lost, sordidly
has sold her self to Fortune, and I must now forget her -- Hold, if possible,
let me cool a Moment -- Interest! No, that could not tempt her -- She knows I Am
Master of a larger Fortune, than there her utmost Hopes can give her, that on
her own Conditions she may be mine: -- But what is this secret Treaty then
within! what is doing there! who can resolve that Riddle? -- And yet perhaps,
like other Riddles, when it is explained, nothing may seem so easy: But why
again, might she not trust me too with the Secret! That! that entangles all
a-fresh, and sets me on the Rack of Jealousy.


Enter Colonel. Col. How now, Frank! what in a Rapture?


Hear. Prithee, pardon me, I am unfit to talk with you.


Col. What is Maria in her Airs again?


Hear. I know not what she is.


Col. Do you know where she is?


Hear. Retired this Moment to her Chamber, with the Doctor's Servant.


Col. Why thou art not jealous of the Doctor, I hope?


Hear. Perhaps she will be less reserved to you, and tell you wherein I have
mistaken her.


Col. Poor Frank, thou art a perfect Sir Martin in thy Amors, every Plot I lay
upon my Sister's Inclination for thee, thou art sure to ruin by thy own
unfortunate Conduct.


Hear. I own I have too little Temper, and too much real Passion for a modish
Lover.


Col. Come, come, prithee be easy once more, I Will undertake for you, if you will
fetch a cool Turn in the Park upon Constitution Hill, in less than half an
Hour, I Will come to you.


Hear. Dear Tom, thou art a Friend indeed! O I have a Thousand Things -- but
you shall find me there.

[Exit Heartly.
Col. Poor Frank! now has he been taking some honest Pains to make himself
miserable.


Enter Maria, and Charles. How now, Sister, what have you done to Heartly? The
poor Fellow looks, as if he had killed your Parrot.

Mar. Pshah! you know him well enough, I have only been setting him a
Love-Lesson, it a little puzzles him to get through it at first, but he will know
it all by to morrow; you will be sure to be in the way, Mr. Charles?


Charles. Madam, you may depend upon me, I have my full Instructions.

[Exit. Charles.
Col. O ho! There Is the Business then, and it seems Heartly was not to be
trusted with it; ha! ha! and prithee what is this mighty Secret, that is
transacting between Charles and you?


Mar. That Is what he would have known indeed, but you must know, I don't think
it proper to let you tell him neither, for all your sly manner of asking.


Col. O! pray take your own Time, dear Madam, I am not in haste to know, I can
assure you, I came about another Affair, our Design upon the Doctor: Now while
my Father takes his Nap after Dinner, would be the properest Time to put it in
Execution: prithee go to my Lady, and persuade her to it this Moment.


Mar. Why will not you go with me?


Col. No, I Will place my self unknown to her in this Passage; for, should I tell
her I design to over-hear him, she might be scrupulous.


Mar. That Is true -- but hold, on second Thoughts, you shall know part of this
Affair between Charles and me; nay, I give you leave to tell it Heartly too, on
some Conditions, it is true, I did design to have surpised you, but now -- my
Mind's altered, that is enough.


Col. Ay, for any Mortal's Satisfaction -- but here comes my Lady.


Mar. Away then to your Post -- but let me see you, when this Affair is over.


Col. I Will be with you.

[Ex. Col.
Enter Lady Woodvil. Mar. Well, Madam, has your Ladyship considered my
Brother's Proposal about the Doctor?


Lady W. I have Child, and am convinced it ought not to be delayed a Moment: I
have just sent to speak with him here -- Sir John too presses me to give him a
Hearing upon your Account: but must I play a treacherous Part now, and instead
of persuading you to the Doctor, even persuade the Doctor against you.


Mar. Dear Madam, don't be so nice, if Wives were never to dissemble, what
would become of many wilful Husband's Happiness?


Lady W. Nay, that is true too.


Mar. I Would give the World now methinks, to see this solemn Interview; sure there
cannot be a more ridiculous Image, than unlawful Love peeping his sly Head out
from under the Cloak of Sanctity! O! that I were in your Ladyship's Place, I
would lead that dancing Blood of his such a profane Courant -- your wise
Fellows make the rarest Fools too: But your Ladyship will make a Rogue of him,
and that will do our Business at present.


Lady W. If he makes himself one, it is his own Fault.


Mar. Dear Madam, one Moment's Truce with the Prude, I beg you, don't start at
his first Declarations, but let him go on till he shows the very bottom of his
ugly Heart.


Lady W. I Will warrant you, I Will give a good Account of him -- here he comes.


Mar. Then I hope, Madam, you will give me Leave to be Commode, and steal off.


Lady W. Very well.

[Ex. Maria, and Enter Doctor.
Doct. I am told, Madam, you design me the Happiness of your Commands; I am
proud you think me worthy of them in any sort.


Lady W. Please to sit, Sir.


Doct. Did not Sir John inform you too, that I had desired a private Conference
with your Ladyship?


Lady W. He did, Sir.


Doct. It Is then by his Permission we are thus happily alone.


Lady W. True, and it is on that Account, I wanted to advise with you.


Doct. Well, but, dear Lady, ah! [sighing] you cannot conceive the Joyousness I
feel, in this so unexpected Interview, ah! ah! I have a Thousand friendly
Things to say to you -- Ah! ah! and how stands your precious Health? Is your
naughty Cold abated yet? I have scarce closed my Eyes these two Nights, with my
Concern for you, and every watchful Interval has sent a Thousand Sighs and
Prayers to Heaven for your Recovery.


Lady W. Your Charity was too far concerned for me.


Doct. Ah! don't say so, don't say so -- you merit more, than mortal Man can do
for you.


Lady W. Indeed, you over-rate me.


Doct. I speak it from my Soul! indeed! indeed! indeed! do.

[Presses her Hand.
Lady W. O dear! you hurt my Hand, Sir.


Doct. Impute it to my Zeal, and want of Words to express my Heart; ah! I would
not harm you for the World, no, bright Creature, it is the whole Business of my
Soul to --


Lady W. But to our Affair, Sir.


Doct. Ah! thou heavenly Woman!

[Laying his Hand on her Knee.
Lady W. Your Hand need not be there, Sir.


Doct. Ah! I was admiring the Softness of this Silk, Madam.


Lady W. Ay, but I am ticklish.


Doct. They are indeed come to a prodigious Perfection in this Manufacture --
How wonderful is Humane Art! -- Here it disputes the Prize with Nature -- that
all this soft, and gaudy Luster, should be wrought from the poor Labors of a
Worm?

[Stroking it.
Lady W. But our Business, Sir, is upon another Subject: Sir John informs me,
that he thinks himself under no Obligation to Mr. Heartly, and therefore
resolves to give you Maria: Now pray be sincere, and let me know what your real
Intentions are?


Doct. Is it possible! Can you, Divine Perfection, be still a Stranger to my
real Thoughts? Has not one Action of my Life informed you better? Since I must
plainly speak them then, Maria's but a Feint, a Blind to screen my real
Thoughts from shrewd Suspicion's Eye, and shield your spotless Fame from
worldly Censure. Could you then think 'twas for Maria's sake, your Balls,
Assemblies, and your Toilet Visits have been restrained? Would I have urged Sir
John to make that Fence to enclose a Butterfly? No, soft, and serious
Excellence, your Virtues only were the Object of my Care, I could not bear to
see the Gay, the Young, and the Inconstant daily basking in your diffusive
Beams of Beauty, without a secret Grudg, I might say, Envy even of such Insects
Happiness.


Lady W. Well, Sir, I take all this, as I suppose you intended it, for my Good,
my spiritual Welfare.


Doct. Indeed I meant you serious, cordial Service.


Lady W. I dare say you did, you are above the low and momentary Views of this
World.


Doct. Ah! I should be so -- and yet, alas! I find this mortal Clothing of my
Soul is made like other Men's, of sensual Flesh and Blood, and has its Frailties.


Lady W. We all have those, but yours I know, are well corrected by your
divine, and virtuous Contemplations.


Doct. And yet our Knowledge of Eternal Beauties, do not restrain us wholly
from the love of all that is mortal -- Beauty here, it is true must die, but
while it lives, 'twas given us to admire, to wake the sluggish Heart, and charm
the sensible: At the first Sight of you, I felt unusual Transports in my Soul,
and trembled at the Guilt that might ensue; but on Reflection found my Flame
received a Sanction from your Goodness, and might be reconciled with Virtue; on
this I chaced my slandrous Fears, let in the harmless Passion at my Eyes, and
gave up all my Heart to Love.


Col. [Behind.] Indeed! so warm Sir Roger, but I shall cool your Passion with a
Witness.

[Exit.
Lady W. These gay Professions, Sir, show more the Courtier than the Zealot;
nor could I think a Mind so fortify as yours, could have been open to such vain
Temptation.


Doct. What Bosom can be Proof against such Artillery of Love? I may resist,
call all my Prayers, my Fastings, Tears and Penance to my Aid, but yet, alas!
these have not made an Angel of me: I am still but Man, Virtue may strive, but
Nature will be uppermost: Permit me then on this fair Shrine to pay my Vows,
and offer up a Heart --


Lady W. Hold, Sir, you have said enough to put you in my Power, suppose I now
should let my Husband, Sir, your Benefactor, know the Favor you designed him.

[She rises.
Doct You cannot be so cruel?


Lady W. Nor will, on one Condition.


Doct. Name it.


Lady W. That instantly you renounce all Claim and Title to Maria and use your
utmost Interest with Sir John to give her with her full Fortune to Mr. Heartly:
If you are wise, consider on it

[Sir John, and C^l behind. [The Doctor (...) accidentally sees them
Doct. Ha! the Colonel ther^! his Father with him too! (...) may have been some
Treachery, what is to be done?

(...)
Col. Now, Sir, let your Eyes convince you.


Sir John. They do, that yours, Sir, have deceived you, all this I knew of.

Apart.
Col. How, Sir!


Sir John. Observe, and be convinced.


Doct. I have it.


Lady W. [To the Doctor.] Methinks this Business needs not Sir, so long a Pause.


Doct. Madam, I cannot easily give up such honest Hopes.


Lady W. Honest!


Doct. Perhaps my Years are thought unequal to my Flame, but, Lady, those were
found no strong Objection 'twixt Sir John and you; and can you blame me then
for following so sure a Guide in the same youthful Path to Happiness.


Lady W. Is this your Resolution then?


Col. Will you let him go on, Sir?


Sir John. Yes, Sir, to confound your Slander.

Apart.
Col. Monstrous


Doct. Can you suppose my Heart less capable of Love than his? Is it for me to
push the Blessing from me too; For though my Flame has been of long Duration, my
conscious want of Merit kept it still concealed, till his good Nature brought
it to this blessed Occasion; and can you then, so authorized, refuse your
friendly Pity to my Sufferings? One Word from you compleats my Joy; in you,
Madam, is my only Hope, my Fear, my Ease, my Pain, my Torment, or my Happiness;
Maria! O! Maria!


Col. Confusion!


Sir John. [Coming forward with the Colonel.] Now, vile Detractor of all
Virtue, is your outrageous Malice yet confounded? Did I not tell you too, he
only made an Interest here to gain your Sister?


Col. His Devil has outreacht me.

[Aside.
Sir. John. Is this your rank Detection of his Treachery?


Doct. Sir John, I did not see you, Sir, I doubt you are come too soon, I have
not yet prevailed with her.

[Aside to him.
Sir John. Ah! good Man, be not concerned your Trouble shall be short^r for it,
I Will force her to Compliance.


Lady W. What have you done -- your Impatience has ruined all.

Apart.
Col. I s^^ it now too late.


Sir John. Now, Sir! will your bas^ Pr^judice of Party never b^ at rest? Am I
to be (...) thought partial, blind, and obstinate to favor so much injured
Virtue; if thou art a Man not lost to Conscience, or to Honor, then like a Man
repair this Wrong, confess the Rancour of thy vile Suspicion, and throw thee at
his Feet for Pardon.


Doct. What mean you, Sir?


Lady W. [Aside.] While he is in this Temper, he will not easily be undeceived
-- I Have yet an After game to play, till when, it is best to leave him in his
Error.

[Ex. Lady Woodvil.
Sir John. What! mute! defenseless! hardened in thy Malice?


Col. I scorn the Imputation, Sir, and with the same repeated Honesty avow
(however his Cunning may have changed Appearances) that you are still deceived,
that all I told you, Sir, was true, these Eyes these Ears were Witnesses of his
audacious Love, without the mention of my Sister's Name, directly, plainly,
grossly tending to abuse the Honor of your Bed.


Sir John. Audacious Monster! were not your own Senses Evidence against your
frontless Accusation? I see your Aim; Wife, Children, Servants, all are bent
against him, and think to weary me by groundless Clamours to discard him, but
all shall not do, your Malice on your own vile Heads; to me, it but the more
endears him; either submit, and ask his Pardon for this Wrong --


Doct. Good Sir!


Sir John. Or this Instant leave my Sight, my House, my Family for ever.


Doct. What means this Rashness, Sir! on my Account it must not be, what would
the World report of it? I grant it possible he loves me not, but you must grant
it too as possible he might mistake me! it must be so -- He is too much your
Son to do his Enemy a wilful Injury: If he, I say, supposed my Converse with
your Lady Criminal, to accuse me then, was but the Error of his Virtue, not his
Baseness, you ought to love him, thank him for such watchful Care: Was it for
him to se^, as he believed, your Honor in so soul a danger, and stand
concernless by? The Law of Heaven, of Nature, and of Filial Duty, all obliged
him to allarm your Vengeance, and detect the Villainy.


Sir John. O Miracle of Charity!


Doct. Come, come, such Breaches must not be, betwixt so good a Son, and
Father* forget, forgive, embrace him, cherish him, and let me bless the Hour I
was the Occasion of so sw^^t a Reconcilement.


Sir John. I cannot bear such Goodness! O sink me not into the Earth with Shame
-- Hear this, perverse and Reprobate! O! could thou wrong such more than
mortal Virtue!


Col. Wrong him! the hardened Impudence of this painted Charity --


Sir John. Peace, Monster --


Col. Is of a blacker, deeper Dye, than the great Devil himselfin all his
Triumphs over Innocence ever wore.


Sir John. O graceless Infidel!


Col. No, Sir, though I would hazard Life to save you from the Ruin he
misleads you to; could die to reconcile my Duty to your Favor; yet on the
Terms that Villain offers, it is Merit to refuse it; I glory in the Disgrace
your Errors give me -- But, Sir, I Will trouble you no more: To Day is his -- to
Morrow may be mine.

[Exit. Col.
Doct. I did not think he had had so hard a Nature.


Sir John. O, my good Lord, your charitable Heart discovers not the Rancour
that is in his: but what better can be hoped for, from a Wretch so swelled with
Spleen, and Rage of Party.


Doct. No, no, Sir, I am the Thorn that galls him; it is me, it is me he hates;
he thinks I stand before him in your Favor; and it is not fit indeed I should
do so; for fallen, as he is, he is still your Son, and I alas! an Alien, an
Intruder here, and ought in Conscience to retire, and heal these hapless
Breaches in your Family.


Sir John. What means your Lordship?


Doct. But I Will remove this Eyesore -- Here Charles! --

(Enter Charles.
Sir John. For Goodness sake.


Doct. Bring me that Writing I gave you to lay up this Morning.


Charles. Now Fortune favor us, (Aside) Exit Charles.


Sir John. Make haste, good Charles, it shall be signed this Moment.


Doct. Not for the World; 'twas not to that End I sent for it, but to refuse
your kind Intentions; for with your Chrildren's Curses, Sir, I dare not, must
not take it.


Sir John. Nay good, my Lord, you carry it now too far; my Daughter is not
wronged by it, but if not obstinate may still be happy; and for my wicked Son,
shall he then Heir my Lands, to propagate more miserable Schismatics; No, let
him depend on you, whom he has wronged; perhaps in Time, he may refl^ct upon
his Father's Justice; be reconciled to your rewarded Virtues, and r^form his
(...) Errors.


Re-enter Charles with a Writing. Doct. That would be indeed a Blessing.


Sir John. If Heaven should at last reclaim him, the Power to right him still
is yours; in you I know he yet would find a fond forgiving Father.


Doct. The Imagination of so blessed an Hour, softens me to a Tenderness I cannot
support.


Sir John. O the dear, good Man' come! come, let us in to execute this Deed.


Doct. Will you then force me to accept this Trust? For, call it what you will,
with me, it shall never be more than such,


Sir John. Let that depend upon the Conduct of my Son.


Doct. Well. Sir, since yet it may prevent his Ruin, I consent.

So sweet a Hope must all my Fears control,
I take the Trust, as Guardian to his Soul.
(Exeunt
The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
Maria and Charles. Mar. YOU were a Witness then?


Charles. I saw it signed, sealed, and delivered, Madam.


Mar. And all passed without the least Suspicion?


Charles. Sir John signed it with such Earnestness, and the Doctor received it
with such a seeming Reluctance, that neither had the Curiosity to examine a
Line of it.


Mar. Well, Mr. Charles, whether it succeeds to our Ends, or not, we have still
the same Obligations to you: You saw with what a friendly Warmth my Brother
heard your Story, and I don't in the least doubt his Success in your Affair at
Court.


Charles. What I have done, my Duty bound me to: But pray, Madam, give me
leave, without Offense, to ask you one innocent Question.


Mar. Freely, Sir.


Charles. Have you never suspected then, that in all this Affair I have had
some secret, stronger Motive to it, than barely Duty?


Mar. Yes -- but have you been in no Apprehensions I should discover that
Motive?

[Gravely.
Charles. Pray, pardon me, I see already, I have gone too far.


Mar. Not at all, it loses you no Merit with me, nor is it in my Nature to use
any one ill, that loves me, unless I loved that one again, then indeed, there
might be Danger -- Come, don't look grave, my Inclinations to another, shall
not hinder me paying every One, what is due to their Merit, I shall therefore
always think my self obliged to treat your Misfortunes and your Modesty with
the utmost Tenderness.


Charles. By the dear, soft Ease you have given my Heart, I never hoped for
more.


Mar. Then I Will give you a great deal more, and to show my particular good
Opinion of you, I Will do you a Favor, Mr. Charles, I never did any Man since I
was born -- I Will be sincere with you.


Charles. Is it then possible you can have loved another, to whom you never
were sincere?


Mar. Alas! you are but a Novice in the Passion -- Sincerity is a dangerous
Virtue, and often surfeits what it ought to nourish; therefore I take more
Pains to make the Man I love believe I slight him, than (if possible) I would
to convince you of my Esteem and Friendship.


Charles. Be but sincere in that, Madam, and I cannot complain.


Mar. Nay, I Will give you a Proof of it, I Will show you all the Goodnature you
can desire; you shall make what Love to me you please now; but then I Will tell
you the Consequence, I shall certainly be pleased with it, and that will
flatter you, till I do you a Mischief. Now do you think me sincere?


Charles. I scarce consider that, but I Am sure you are agreeable.


Mar. Why look you there now! do you consider, that a Woman had as live be
thought agreeable, as handsome? And how can you suppose, from one of your
Sense, that I am not pleased with being told so?


Charles. Was ever Temper so enchanting?


Mar. Or Vanity more venial! I Am pleased with you.

[Smiling.
Charles. Distracting! sure never was Despair administered with a Hand so gentle.


Mar. So! now you have convinced me, I have a good Understanding too -- Why I
shall certainly have the better Opinion of yours, for finding it out now.


Charles. Your good Opinion's what I aim at.


Mar. Ay, but the more I give it you, the better you will think of me still; and
then I must think the better of you again, and then you the better of me upon
that too; and so at last I shall think seriously, and you will begin to think ill
of me. But I hope, Mr. Charles, your good Sense will prevent all this.


Charles. I see my Folly now, and blush at my Presumption: but yet to cure my
weaning Heart, and reconcile me to my Doom, be yet sincere, and satisfy one
sickly Longing of my Soul.


Mar. To my Power, command me.


Charles. O! tell me then the Requisites I want, and what is the secret Charm
that has preferred my Rival to your Heart.


Mar. Come then, be cheerful, and I Will answer like a Friend. The Gentleness,
and Modesty of your Temper, would make with mine but an unequal Mixture: with
you I should be ungovernable, not know my self; your Compliance would undo me.
I am by Nature Vain, Thoughtless, Wild, and Wilful; therefore ask a higher
Spirit to control and lead me. For whatever outward Airs I give my self, I am
within convinced, a Woman makes a very wrong Figure in Happiness, that does not
think Superiority best becomes her Husband -- But what is yet more though I
confess you have Qualities uncommon in your Sex, and such as ought to warm a
Heart to love; yet here you come too late; Compassion's all within my Power:
And I know you cannot but have seen, I am under Obligations, I need not explain
to you.


Charles. I am satisfied -- You treat me with so kind and gentle a Concern,
that I must submit to it.


Mar. [Apart.] Well when all is done, he is a pretty Fellow; and the first sure,
that ever heard Reason against himself with so good an Understanding.


Enter a Servant with a Letter to Charles. Serve. Sir, the Colonel ordered me to
give this into your own Hands.


Mar. From my Brother? -- Where is he?


Serve. I left him, Madam, at the Secretary's- Office with one Sir Charles
Trueman, and Mr. Heartly.

(Exit Serve.
Charles. Ha! my Father! O! Heaven, it is his Hand too! Now I tremble!


Mar. Come, Sir, take heart; I dare say there is good News in it, and I should be
glad to hear it -- But no Ceremony; pray read to your self first.


Charles. Since you command me, Madam.

[Reads to himself.
Maria. [Apart.] Lord! how one may live and learn! I could not have believed,
that Modesty in a young Fellow could have been so amiable a Virtue: and though,
I own, there is I know not what of dear Delight in indulging one's Vanity with
them; yet, upon serious Reflection. we must confess, that Truth and Sincerity
have a Thousand Charms beyond it. And I now find more Pleasure in my
self-denying Endeavors to make this poor Creature easy, than ever I took in
humbling the Airs and Assurance of a Man of Quality -- I believe I had as good
confess all this to Heartly, and even make up the Bustle with him too -- But
then he will so teaze one for Instances of real Inclination -- O God -- I cannot
bear the Thought on it -- And yet we must come together too -- Well! Nature
knows the way to be sure, and so I Will even trust to her sor't -- Bless me!
What Is the Matter? you seem concerned, Sir.

[To Charles wiping his Tears.
Charles. I am indeed, but it is with Joy! O! Madam! my Father's reconciled to
me: This Letter is from him.


Mar. Pray let us hear.


Charles. [Reading,]
Dear Charles,
This Day, by Colonel Woodvil, I received the joyful News of your being yet
alive, and well: Though that is but half my Comfort. He has assured me too, you
have renounced those Principles, that made me think your Death my Happiness.
The Services you have intended his Family, and may do the Government, in your
just Detection of a Traitor that would ruin both, have been so well received at
Court, and so generously represented there by the Colonel and Mr. Heartly, that
they have obtained an Order for your Pardon; which I now stay the passing of,
before I throw my Arms about you, that I may have no Doubt or Fear behind to
interupt the Fullness of my Joy. I am informed, that in revealing your self to a
certain fair Lady, you have let fall some Words, that show you have an innocent
though hopeless Passion for her. Your Youth excuses what is past; but now
consider how far you owe your Life to Mr. Heartly: I therefore charge you, on
my Blessing, to give up every idle Thought of Love, that may interrupt his
Happiness, or abate the Merit of what you have done to deserve the Pardon of your
Sovereign, or of your affectionate forgiving Father,

Charles Trueman.


Mar. I an overjoyed at your good Fortune.


Charles. You, Madam, are the Scource of all -- but I am now unfit to thank you.

[Weeps.
Mar. You owe me nothing, Sir; Success was all I hoped for.


Charles. Pray excuse me -- It would be Rudeness to trouble you with the tender
Thoughts this must give a Heart obliged like mine.

[Exit Charles.
Mar. Poor Creature how full his honest Heart is? What early Vicissitudes of
Fortune has he run through? Well! this was handsomely done of Heartly,
considering what he had felt upon his Account, to be so concerned for his
Pardon.


Enter Lady Woodvil. Lady W. Dear Maria, what will become of us? The Tyranny of
this subtle Priest is insupportable: He has so fortified himself in Sir John's
Opinion by this last Misconduct of your Brother, that I begin to lose my usual
Power with him.


Mar. Pray explain, Madam.


Lady W. In spite of all I could urge, he is this Minute bringing the Doctor
to make his Addresses to you.


Mar. I am glad on it: for the Best must come like a Bear to the Stake, I Am
sure: He knows I shall bait him.


Lady. W. No, no, he presses it, to keep Sir John still blind to his wicked
Design upon me -- Therefore I came to give you notice, that you might be
prepared to receive him.


Mar. I am obliged to your Ladyship: Our Meeting will be a tender Scene, no
doubt on it.


Lady W. You have heard, I suppose, what an extravagant Settlement your Father
has signed to.


Mar. Yes, Madam; but I am glad your Ladyship's like to be a Gainer by it,
however: For when I marry, it will be without the Doctor's Consent, depend
upon it.


Lady W. No, Child, I did not come into Sir John's Family with a Design to
injure it, or make any one of it my Enemy: Whenever that Four Thousand Pound
falls into my Hands, you will find it as firmly yours, as if it had been given
you, without that odious Condition.


Mar. Madam, I think my self as much obliged by this kind Intention, as the
Performance: But if your Ladyship could yet find a way to prove this Hypocrite
a private Villain to my Father, I am not without Hopes the Public will soon
have enough against him, to give a Turn to the Settlement.


Lady W. But suppose that fails, what will become of your poor Brother?


Mar. But, dear Madam, I cannot suppose this Fellow must not be hanged at last;
and then, you know, the same honest Hand that ties him up, releases the
Settlement.


Lady W. Not absolutely, neither; for this very House is given him in present,
which, though that were to be the End of him, would then be sorfeited.


Mar. Why, then my Brother must even petition the Government. There have been
Presidents of the same Favor, Madam. If not, he must pay for his Blundering,
and lay his next Plot deeper, I think.


Lady W. I am glad you are so cheerful upon it, however; it looks as if you had
something in Petto to depend upon. But here comes the Doctor.


Enter Sir John, with the Doctor. Sir John. Daughter, since you have the
Happiness to be thought Amiable in the Eye of this Good Man, I expect you give
him an instant Opportunity to improve it into an Amity for Life.


Mar. I hope, Sir, I shall give him no Occasion to alter his Opinion of me.


Sir John. Why, that is well said; come, Sweetheart, we'll use no Ceremony.

[Exit Sir John, with Lady W. Marra and the Doctor stand some Time mute, in
formal Civilities, and a conscious Contempt of each other.
Mar. Please to sit, Sir. -- What can the ugly Cur say to me? He seems a little
puzzled. This puts me in mind of the tender Interview between Lady Charlotte,
and Lord Hardy in the Funeral.

[Aside.
Doct. Look you, fair Lady, not to make many Words, I am convinced,
notwithstanding your good Father's Favor, I am not the Person you desire to be
alone with, upon this Occasion.


Mar. Your Modesty -- is pleased to be in the right, Sir.


Doct. Humh! if I don't flatter my self, you have always had a very ill Opinion
of me.


Mar. A worse, Sir, of no Mortal breathing,


Doct. Humh! and it is likely, it may he immovable,


Mar. No Rock so firm.


Doct. Humh! from these Premises then, I may reasonably conclude -- you hate me
heartily.


Mar. Most sincerely, Sir.


Doct. Well there is, however, some Merit in speaking Truth; therefore to be as
just on my side, I ought in Conscience to let you know, that I have as cordial
a Contempt for you too.


Mar. O! fie! you flatter me.

[Affecting a Blush.
Doct. Indeed I don't; you wrong your own Imperfections to think so.


Mar. These Words from any Tongue but yours, might shock me; but coming from
the only Man I hate -- they charm me.


Doct. Admirable! there seems good Sense in this: Have you never observed,
Madam, that sometimes the greatest Discords raise the most agreeable Harmony?


Mar. Yes. But what do you infer from thence?


Doct. That while we still preserve this Temper in our Hate, a mutual Benefit
may rise from it.


Mar. O! never fear me, Sir; I shall not fly out; being convinced, that nothing
gives so sharp a Point to one's A version, as good Breeding; as, on the
contrary, ill Manners often hide a secret Inclination


Doct. Most accurately distinguished -- Well, Madam, is there no Project you
can think of now, to turn this mutual A version, as I said, into a mutual
Benefit?


Mar. None, that I know of, unless we were to marry for our mutual
Mortification.


Doct. What would you give then, to avoid marrying me?


Mar. My Life, with Joy, if Death alone could shun you.


Doct. When you marry any other Person -- my Consent is necessary.


Mar. So I hear indeed -- But pray, Doctor, tell me, how could your Modesty
receive so insolent a Power, without putting my poor Father out of Countenance
with your Blushes?


Doct. You over-rate my Prudence: I sought it not, but he would crowd it in
among other Obligations: He is good-natured, and I could not shock him by a
Refusal. Would you have had me plainly told him, what a despicable Opinion I
had of his Daughter?


Mar. Or rather, what a favorable one you had of his Wife, Sir?


Doct. Humh! you seem to lose your Temper.


Mar. Why do you suppose, the whole Family does not see it except my Father?


Doct. If you will keep your Temper, I have something to propose to you.


Mar. Your Reproof is just; but I only raised my Voice, to let you know, I know
you.


Doct. You might have spared your Pains, it being of no Consequence to my
Proposal, what you think of me.


Mar. Not unlikely Come, Sir, I am ready to receive it.


Doct. In one Word then -- I take it for granted, that you would marry Mr.
Heartly -- Am I right?


Mar. Once in your Life, you are.


Doct. Nay, no Compliments; let us be plain -- Would you marry him?


Mar. You are mighty nice, methinks -- Well -- I would.


Doct. Then I will not consent to it -- Now, if you have any Proposal to make me
-- so -- if not, our Amour's at an end; and we part as Civil Enemies, as if he
had been married this Twelvemonth -- Think of it.


Mar. (Aside.) O the mercenary Villain, he wants to have a Fellow feeling, I
find -- What shall I do with him -- bite him -- pretend to comply, and make my
Advantage of it -- Well, Sir, I understand every thing but the Sum -- if we
agree upon that, it is a Bargain.


Doct. Half.


Mar. What, Two Thousand Pound for your Consent only?


Doct. Why, is not Two Thousand Pound worth Two Thousand Pound? Don't you
actually get so much by it? Is not the half better than nothing? Come, come,
say, I have used you like a Friend.


Mar. Nay, I think it is the only civil Thing you have done, since you came into
the Family.


Doct. Do you then make your Advantage of it.


Mar. Why, as you say Doctor, it is better than nothing. But how is my Father to
be brought into this?


Doct. Leave that to my Management.


Mar. What Security though do you expect for this Money?


Doct. O! when I deliver my Consent in Writing, Heartly shall lay it me down in
Bank-Bills.


Mar. Well! on one Proviso, I Will undertake that too.


Doct. Name it.


Mar. Upon your immediately owning to my Father, that you are willing to give
up your Interest to Mr. Heartly.


Doct. Humh! stay -- I agree to it -- you shall have Proof of it this Evening
-- But in the mean time, let me warm you too; Don't expect, after I have hinted
what you desire to your Father, to make your Advantages now by betraying me to
him. You know my Power there; if you do, I can easily give it a Counter-Turn:
So discover what you please, I shall only pity you.


Mar. O! I shall not stand in my own Light; I know your Power, and your
Conscience too well, dear Doctor.


Doct. Nay, I dare depend upon your being true to your own Interest. Here comes
your Father, I will break it to him immediately. You Will prepare Mr. Heartly in
the mean time.


Mar. Without fail.


Doct. I am satisfied.


Enter Sir John. Sir John. Well, Sir, is my Daughter prudent? Has she at last,
a true and virtuous Sense of Happiness?


Doct. She understands me better than I hoped, Sir.


Mar. Well said Equivocation.

[Aside.]
Doct. If you please, Sir John, we'll take a Turn in the Garden, I have
something there to offer to you.


Sir John. With all my Heart, Sir, -- Maria. -- There Is a Toy for thee -- Now
thou art again my Daughter

[Gives her a Ring. Come, Sir, I wait on you.

[Exeunt Sir John and Doctor.
Mar. What this Fellow's Original was, I know not; but by his Conscience and
Cunning, he would make an admirable Jesuit -- Here comes my Brother, and I hope
with a good Account of him -- Well! Brother, What Success?


Enter Colonel. Col. All that my honest Heart could wish for -- Substantial
Affidavits! that will puzzle him to Answer; I have planted a Messenger at the
next Door, who has a Warrant in his Pocket, when I give the Word, to take him.


Mar. Why should not you do it immediately, he is now in the Garden with my
Father.


Col. No; our seizing him now for Treason, I am afraid will not convince my Father
of his Villainy: My Design is not only to get my Father out of his Hands, but to
drive the pernicious Principles he has instilled, out of my Father too.


Mar. That I doubt will be difficult.


Col. Not at all, if we can first prove him a private Villain to him. My
Father's Honesty will soon reflect, and may receive as sudden a Turn as his
Credulity.


Mar. That Is true again; and I hope I am furnished with a new Occasion to begin
the Alarm to him.


Col. Pray what is it?


Mar. Not to trouble you with Particulars; but in short, I have agreed with the
Doctor, that Heartly shall give him Two Thousand Pounds for his Consent without
which, you know, by my Father's late Settlement, Heartly and I can never come
together.


Col. And does the Monster really insist upon it?


Mar. Not only that, but even defies me to make an Advantage of the Discovery.


Col. One would think the Villain suspects his Footing in the Family is but
short-lived, he is in such Haste to have his Pennyworths out on it. But prithee,
Sister, What Secret's this, that you have yet behind in those Writings that
Charles brought to you?


Mar. O! that is what I cannot yet tell you.


Col. Why, pray?


Mar. Because, when you have done all you can, I am resolved to reserve some
Merit against him to my self.


Col. But why do you suppose I would not assist in it?


Mar. You cannot, it is now too late.


Col. Pshah! this is rash, and ridiculous.


Mar. Ay, may be so; I suppose Heartly will be of that Opinion too: But if he
is, you had better advise him to keep it to himself.


Col. You will have your obstinate Way, I find.


Mar. It cannot be worse than yours, I Am sure; remember how you came off in your
last Project; I know you meant well, but you are disinherited for all that.


Col. That Is no Surprise to me; but I am ashamed however.


Mar. By the way; What have you done with Heartly? why is he not here?


Col. He has been here, but you must excuse him; he was obliged to call in
Haste for Charles, whom he took home with him in his own Coach, where his
Father waited to receive him.


Mar. The poor Boy by this Time then has seen him. Sure their meeting must have
been a moving Sight; I would give the World methinks for a true Account of it.


Col. You Will have it from Heartly by and by; it is at his House they meet: The
Father, Sir Charles Trueman, happened to be Heartly's intimate Acquaintance.


Mar. Well! I own Heartly has gained upon me by this.


Col. I am glad to hear that at least. But I must let my Lady know what
Progress we have made in the Doctor's Business, and beg her Assistance to
finish him.

[Ex. Col.
Enter a Servant. Ser. Madam, Mr. Heartly.


Mar. Desire him to walk in.


Enter Heartly. Hear. To find you thus alone, Madam, was an Happiness I did not
expect from the Temper of our last parting,


Mar. I should have been as well pleased now to have been thanked as reproached
for my good Nature; but you will be in the Right, I find.


Hear. Indeed you took me wrong; I literally meant that I was afraid you would
not so soon think I had deserved this Favor.


Mar. Well, then, one of us has been in the Wrong at least.


Hear. 'Twas I, I own it -- More is not in my Power; all the Amends that have
been, I have made you: My very Joy of seeing you, has waited, till what you had
at Heart unasked, was perfected; my own Pardon was postpon'd, till I had
secured one even for a Rival's Life, whom you so justly had compassionated.


Mar. Pooh! but why would you say unasked now? Don't you consider your doing it
so, is half the Merit of the Action? -- Lord you have no Art; you should have
left me to have taken Notice of that; only imagine now, how kind, and handsome
an Acknowledgment you have robbed me of?


Heart. And yet how artfully you have paid it? With what a wanton, charming
Ease you play upon my Tenderness?


Mar. Well, but was not you silly now?


Hear. (Gazing on her) Come -- You shall not be serious -- You cannot be more
agreeable.


Mar. O! but I am serious.


Hear. Then I Will be so -- Do you forgive me all?


Mar. What.

[Looking on her Fan, as not hearing him.
Hear. Are we Friends, Maria?


Mar. O Lord! but you have told me nothing of poor Charles; Pray how did his
Father receive him?


Hear. Must you needs know that, before you answer me?


Mar. Lord! you are never well till you have talked one out of Countenance.


Hear. Come, I will not be too particular, you shall answer nothing -- Give me but
your Hand only.


Mar. Pshah! I will not pull off my Glove, not I.


Hear. I Will take it as it is then.


Mar. Lord! there, there, eat it, eat it.

[Putting it awkwardly to him.
Hear. And so I could by Heaven.

[Kisses (...) eagerly, and pulls off her Glove.
Mar. O my Glove! my Glove! my Glove! -- Pooh! you are in a perfect Storm!
Lord! if you make such a Rout with ones Hand only, What would you do if you had
ones Heart?


Hear. That Is impossible to tell -- But you were asking me of Charles, Madam.


Mar. O! ay, that is true! Well, now you are good again -- Come tell me all that
Affair, and then you shall see -- how I will like you.

[Wantonly.
Hear. O! that I could thus play with Inclination!


Mar. Pshah! but you don't tell me now.


Hear. There is not much to tell -- Where two such tender Passions met, Words
had but faintly spoke them. The Son conducted to the Door, with sudden Fear
stopped short, and bursting into Sights, over changed with Shame, and Joy, had
almost fainted in my Arms: The Father, touched with his Concern, moved forward
with a kindly Smile to meet him. At this he took new Life, and springing from
his Hold, fell protestate at his Feet; where mute, and trembling, for a while
he lay: At length with streaming Eyes, and faultring Tongue, he begged his
Blessing, and his Pardon. The tender Father caught him in his Arms, and
dropping his fond Head upon his Cheek, kissed him, and sighed out, Heaven
protect thee! then gave into his hand the Royal Pardon; and turning back his
Face to dry his Manly Eyes, he cried, Deserve this Royal Mercy, Charles, and I
am still thy Father. The grateful Youth. raising his Heart-swollen Voice,
replied, May Heaven preserve the Royal Life that gave it. But here, their
Passions grew too strong for farther Speech: Silent Embraces, alternate Sighs,
and mingling Tears, were all their Language now. The moving Scene became too
tender for my Eyes, and called methought, for Privacy; there unperceived I left
them, to recover into breathing Sense, and utterable Joy.


Mar. Well! of all the inmost Transports of the Soul, there is none that dance
into the Heart, like Friendly Reconcilements.


Hear. Those Transports might be ours, Maria, would you bu^ try your Power to
pardon.


Mar. Which of those Two now do you think was happiest at that Meeting?


Hear. O! the Father, doubtless; Great Souls feel a kind of honest Glory in
Forgiving, that far exce^ds the Transport of receiving Pardon.


Mar. Now I think to bend the stubborn Mind to ask it, is an equal Conquest;
and the Joy superior to receive, where the Heart wishes to be under Obligations.


Hear. Put me into the happy Boy's Condition, and I may then, perhaps, resolve
you better.


Mar. You shall positively bring him into Acquaintance.


Hear. Upon my Word I will.


Mar. And show him to all the Women of Taste; and I Will have you call him my
pretty Fellow too.


Hear. I will indeed: But hear me --


Mar. I Am positive, if he had White Stockings he would cut down all the
Danglers at Court in a Fortnight!


Hear. O! no doubt on it; but --


Mar. You cannot conceive how prettily he makes Love now.


Hear. Not so well, as you make your Defense, Maria.


Mar. O Lord! I had forgot -- he is to teach me Greek too.


Hear. O, the trifling Tyrant! How long, Maria, do you think you can find out
new Evasions for what I say unto you?


Mar. Lord, you are horrid silly! But since it is Love that makes you such a
Dunce -- poor Heartly, -- I forgive you.

[Enter Colonel, unseen.
Hear. That Is kind, however -- But to complete my Joy, be kinder yet -- and --


Mar. O! I cannot, I cannot -- Lord! did you never ride a Horse-Match?


Hear. Was ever so wild a Question?


Mar. Because if you have, it runs in my Head, you certainly galloped a Mile
beyond the Winning Post, to make sure on it.


Hear. Now I understand you: But since you will have me touch every Thing so
very tenderly, Maria, How shall I find proper Words to ask you the Lover's last
necessary Question?


Mar. O! there is a Thousand Points to be adjusted, before that is answered.


Col. (Coming unexpectedly between them.) Name them this Moment then, for
positively this is the last Time of asking.


Mar. Pshah! Who sent for you?


Col. I only came to teach you to speak plain English, my Dear.


Mar. Lord! mind your own Business, cannot you?


Col. So I will; for I will make you do more of yours in Two Minutes, than you
would have done without me in a Twelvemonth. Why, how now! What! do you think
the Man's to dangle after your ridiculous Airs for ever?


Mar. This is mighty pretty.


Col You Will say so on Thursday Sevenight, (for let Affairs take what Turn they
will in the Family); that is positively your Wedding Day -- Nay, you shall not stir.


Mar. Was ever such Assurance?


Hear. Upon my Life, Madam, I am out of Countenance: I don't know how to behave
my self to him.


Mar. No, no, let him go on, only -- This is beyond whatever was known, sure!


Hear. Admirable! I hope it will come to something.

[Aside.
Col. Ha! ha! If I were to leave you to yourselves now, what a Couple of pretty
out of Countenance Figures you would make; Humming and Hawing upon the vulgar
(...) of Jointure, and Pin Money -- Come, come! I know what is proper o'both
Sides, you shall leave it to me,


Hear. I had rather Maria would name her own Terms to me*


Col Have you a Mind to any Thing particular?

[To Maria.
Mar. Why sure! What! Do you think I Am only to be filled out here as you
please, and sweetened, and supped up like a Dish of (...)


Col. Why, pray Madam, when your Tea's ready, what have you to do but to drink
it? But you, I suppose, expect a Lover's Heart, like your Lamp, should be
always flaming at your Elbow, and when it is ready to go out, you indolently
supply it with the Spirit of Contraction.


Mar. And so you suppose, that your Assurance has made an End of this Matter?


Col. Not till you have given him your Hand upon it.


Mar. That then would complete it?


Col. Perfectly.


Mar. Why then take it, Heartly.

[Giving her Hand to Heart.
Hear. O soft Surprise! Exstatick Joy.


Mar. Now I presume you are in high Triumph, Sir.

(To the Col.)
Col. No, Sister, now you are consistent with that good Sense I always thought
you Mistress of.


Mar. I Am afraid, Mr. Heartly, we are both obliged to him.


Hear. If you think so, Maria, my Heart -- Is under double Obligations laid.

(Embracing him.)
Col. -- If it cements our Friendship, I am overpaid.

[Exeunt.
ACT. V.
Heartly, and Maria.
Mar. WELL, now, Heartly, you have nothing to do but to look forward, and, if
possible, to forget what I have been to you: Though it is a horrid Restraint you
lay upon our Sex: You first make it the Business of your Lives to blow up our
Vanity, and then preposterously expect we should be prudent and humble: That
is, you invite us to a Feast, where it is criminal to taste, or have an
Appetite; You put a Sword into a Child's Hand, and then are angry if it does
Mischief.


Hear. You give up too much, Maria; I never treated you so: What might have
been Flattery to most Women, was but honest Truth to you.


Mar. Why look there now! Is not that enough to turn any poor Woman into a
Changeling?


Hear. No, because it is true; charge me with a Falsehood and I submit.


Mar. Nay then, did you not once tell me, that all my Airs and Follies were
merely put on in Compliance to the World, and that good Sense was only natural
to me; that even my Affectation (I have not forgot your Words) carried more
Sincerity, than the serious Vows of other Women.


Hear. By all my Happiness I think so still.


Mar. What, seriously?


Hear. Upon my Soul I do.


Mar. Lord! that is delightful! Do you really love me then, Heartly? Do, tell
me, for now I begin to believe every Thing you say to me. But don't neither --
I am vain still -- 'Twas my Vanity that made me ask you.


Hear. Now I don't take it so.


Mar. There was some in it I am sure, though it begins to dwindle, I can tell you.


Hear. No matter, I love you as you are, I would not have you lose your
Pleasantry, Maria.


Mar. Well, do, let me be silly sometimes.


Hear. O! I can play with you, for that Matter.


Mar. Pshah! you will laugh at me.


Heart. Not while you are good in Essentials.


Mar. Indeed I Will be very good.


Hear. O fie! that will be the way to make me so.


Mar. Lord! What signifies Sense, where there is so much Pleasure in Folly?


Hear. No perfect Passion ever was without it; the Pleasure would subside were
we always to be wise in it.


Mar. For my Part I think so: But will you really stand to the Agreement though,
that I have made with the Doctor?


Hear. Why not? You shall not break your Word upon my Account, though he might be
a Villain you gave it to.


Mar. Well, I take it as a Compliment; not but I have some Hopes of getting
over it, and justly too; but don't let me tell you now. I love to surprise --
Though you shall know all, if you desire it.


Hear. No, Maria, I don't want the Secret; I am satisfied in your Inclination
to trust me.


Mar. Well then, I Will keep the Secret, only to show you, that you upon Occasion
may trust me with one.


Hear. After that, Maria, it would be wronging you to ask it: But pray, Madam,
has the Doctor yet given you any Proof ofhis having declined his Interest to
your Father?


Mar. Yes, he told me just now, he had brought him to pause upon it, and does
not question in Two Days to complete it; but desires in the mean Time you will
be ready and punctual with the Proemium.


Hear. Suppose I should talk with Sir John my self; it is true he has slighted
me of late, but however, I ought at least to ask his Consent, though I have but
little Hopes of it.


Mar. By all Means, do so -- Here he comes -- This may open another Scene of
Action too, that we are preparing for.


Enter Sir John, and Lady Woodvil, who walks apart with Maria. Sir John. Mr.
Heartly, I am glad I have met with you here.


Hear. I have endeavored twice to Day, Sir, to pay my Respects to you.


Sir John. Sir, I Will be plain with you -- I went out to avoid you; but where
the Welfare of a Child is concerned you must not take it ill, if we don't stand
upon Ceremony. -- However, since I have Reason now to be more in Temper, than
perhaps I was, at that Time, I should be glad to talk with you.


Hear. I take it as a Favor, Sir.


Sir John. Sir, -- Doctor Wolf informs me, that he is well assured you were
horn the Year before the Revolution: Now Sir, I should be glad to be well
satisfied in that Points a greater Consequence depending on it, perhaps, than
you imagine.


Hear. Sir, I have been always told that was my Age; but for your farther
Satisfaction I appeal to the Register.


Sir John. Sir, I dare believe you, and am glad to hear it,


Hear. But pray, Sir, may I beg leave to ask, why you are so concerned to know
this?


Sir Jo. Because, Sir, if this be true, I am satisfied you may be a regular
Christian; the Doubt of which, may have, perhaps, done you some Disservice in
my private Opinion.


Hear. Sir, if that can reconcile me to it, I shall be thankful for the
Benefit, without considering why I that way came to deserve it.


Sir Jo. That Argument might hold us now too long. -- But, Sir, -- here is the
Case -- your Principles and mine have the Misfortune to differ: Yours being (as
I take it) entirely on the Revolution Side.


Hear. If I am not misinformed, Sir, you your self commanded a Regiment in
Defense of it.


Sir John. I did so, and thought it just. -- 'Twould be fruitless, perhaps, to
offer you the Reasons, that since have altered my Opinion: But now, Sir, even
supposing that I err in Principle, you must still allow, that Conscience is the
Rule that every honest Man ought to walk by.


Hear. It Is granted, Sir.


Sir John. Then give me leave to tell you, Sir, that giving you my Daughter,
would be to act against that Conscience I pretend to, and consequently the same
Ties oblige me to bestow her, where the same Principles with mine, I think
deserve her. -- Now, Sir, consult your own Honor, and tell me, how you can
still pursue my Daughter, without doing Violence to mine?


Hear. But, Sir, to shorten this Dispute, suppose the Doctor (whom I presume
you design her for) actually consents to give me up his Interest; might not
that soften your Objections to me?


Sir John. But why do you suppose, Sir, he would give up his Interest?


Hear. I only judge from what your Daughter tells me, Sir.


Sir John. My Daughter!


Hear. I appeal to her.


Mar. And I appeal even to your self, Sir -- Has not the Doctor just now in the
Garden spoke in Favor of Mr. Heartly to you? Nay, pray, Sir, be plain, because
more depends on that, than you can easily imagine or believe.


Sir John. What senseless Insinuation have you got in your Head now?


Mar. Be so kind, Sir, first to answer me, that I may be better able to inform
you.


Sir John. Well, I own he has declined his Interest, in Favor of Mr. Heartly.
But I must tell you, Madam, he did it in so modest, so friendly, so
good-natured, so conscientious a Manner, that I now think my self more than
ever bound in Honor to espouse him.


Mar. But now, Sir, (only for Arguments Sake) suppose I could prove, that all
this seeming Virtue was utterly Artificial; that his Regard to Mr. Heartly was
neither founded upon Modesty, Friendship, Goodnature, nor Conscience; or in
short, that he has basely betrayed and sold the Trust you made him; like a
Villain bartered, bargained to give me to Mr. Heartly, for half the Four
Thousand Pound you have valued his Consent at. I say, suppose this were the
Case, where would be his Virtue then, Sir?


Sir John. And I say it is impious to suppose it.


Hear. Under Favor, Sir, how is it possible your Daughter could know the
Doctor had spoke to you upon this Head, if he himself had not told her so, in
Consequence of his Agreement?


Sir John. Sir, I don't admit your Consequence: Her knowing it from him is no
Proof, that he might not still resign her from a Principle of Modesty or Good
Nature.


Mar. Then, Sir, from what Principle must you suppose that I accuse him?


Sir John. From an obstinate Prejudice to all that is Good and Virtuous.


Mar. That Is too hard, Sir, What Blot has stained my Life, that you can think
so of me* But, Sir, the worst your Opinion can provoke me to, is to marry Mr.
Heartly, without either his Consent or yours.


S^r John. What, do you brave me Madam?


Mar. [in Tears] No Sir, but I Scarn a Lie, and will so far vindicate my
Integrity, as to insist on your believing me* if not, as a Child whom you
abandon, I have a right to throw my self into other Arms for Protection.


Hear. O Maria! how thy Spirit Charms me!

[apart to her.]
Sir John. I am Confounded! those Tears cannot be Counterfeit, nor can this be
True.


Lady W. Indeed my Dear, I fear it is, it would be Cruel to her Concern to
think it wholly false, can you suppose she would urge so gross an Accusation only
to expose her self to the Justice of your Resentment?


Sir John. What are you against him too? then he has no Friend but me, and I
cannot, at so short a warning, give him up to Infamy, and Baseness.


Lady W. Good Sir, be Composed, and ask your Heart one farther Question:


Sir John. What would you say to me?


Lady W. In all our mutual Course of Happiness, have I ever yet deceived you
with a falsehood?


Sir John. Never, I grant it, nor has my Honest Heart yet Wronged thy Goodness
with a Jealous Thought of it.


Lady W. Would you then believe me, should I accuse him too? even of Crimes,
that Virtue Blushes but no mention.


Sir John. To what Extravagance would you drive me?


Lady W. I would before have undeceived you, when his late Artifice turned the
Honest Duty of your Son, into his own Reproach, and Ruin: But knowing then
your Temper was inaccessible, I durst not offer it. But now, in better Hope of
being believed, I here avow the Truth of all he was accused of then.


Sir John. Will you Distract me? my Senses could not be deceived.


Lady W. Indeed, they were, he saw you listening, and at the Instant turned his
Impious Barefaced Leve to me, into Equivocal Intercessions pretending to Maria.


Sir John. You Starrle me.


Lady W. Could you otherwise suppose, your Son would have brought you to be
Witness of his own Weak Malice in Accusing him?


Sir John. I Am all Astonishment!


Lady W. Come, Sir, Suspend your Wonder, Respite your Belief even of this, till
grosser Evidence convinces you: Suppose I here, before your Face, should let
you see his Villainy, make him repeat his Odious Love to me, at once throw off
his Mask, and show the Barefaced Traitor.


Sir J^hn. Is it possible? Make me but Witness of that Fact, and I shall soon
Accuse my self, and own my Folly equal to his Baseness: But Pardon me, as I in
such a Case would not believe, even him Accusing you, so am I bound in equal
Charity to think, you yet may be deceived, in what you Charge on him.


Lady W. It Is Just -- let it be so -- we'll yet suppose him Innocent, till you
your self pronounce him Guilty: and since I have staked my Faith upon the Truth
of what I urge, it is fit we bring him to immediate Trial: But then Sir, I must
beg you to descend even to the poorShifts we are reduced to.


Sir John. All, to any thing to ease me of my Doubts, propose them.


Lady W. They that would set Toils for Beasts of Prey, must lurk in humble
Caves to watch their Haunts.


Sir John. Place me where you please.


Lady W. Under this Table is your only Stand, the Carpet will conceal you.


Sir John. Be it so, I Will take my Post, what more?


Lady W. Mr. Heartly, shall we beg your Leave, and you Maria, take the least
suspected way to send the Doctor to me immediately


Mar. I have a Thought will do it, Madam, -- come Sir,

[Exit Mar. and Hear.
Lady W. Here Sir, take this Cushion, you will be Easier, Sir John goes under
the Table.] Now Sir, you must consider how desperate a Disease I have
undertaken to Cure, therefore you must not winch nor stir too soon, at any
freedom you Observe me take with him; be sure lie Close and Still, and when the
Proof is full, appear at your Discretion.


Sir John. Fear not, I Will be Patient.


Lady W. Hush! he comes.


Enter Doctor with a Book. Doct. Your Woman told me, Madam, you were here
alone, and desired to speak with me.


Lady W. I did Sir, but that we may be sure we are alone, pray shut the Outward
Door, and see that Passage too be clear, another Surprise might Ruin us -- is
all safe?


Doct. I have taken care Madam.


Lady W. I am afraid I interrupt your Meditations.


Doct. Say rather you improve them: You, Madam, were the subject of my solitary
Thoughts, I take in all the little aids I can to Guard my Frailty, and truly I
have received great Consolation from an Unfortunate Example here before me.


Lady W. Pray of what kind Sir?


Doct. I had just dipped into poor Eloisas Passion for Abelard; It is indeed a
piteous Conflict! How Terrible! How penitent a Sense she shows of Guilty
Pleasures past, and fruitless Pains to shut them from her Memory.


Lady W. I have read her Story, Sir.


Doct. Is it not pitiful?


Lady W. A Heart of Stone might feel for her.


Doct. O! think then, what I endure for you, such are my Pains; but such is my
Sincerity, though I fear my being reduced to feign a Passion for Maria, in my
late Surprise, has done dishonor to the Vows I then preferred to You.


Lady W. 'Twas on that Point, I wanted now to talk with you, not knowing then,
how fat you might mistake my Silence: Now had I closed with the Colonel in
Accusing You, it would have been plain I was your Enemy; as had I joined in
your Defense against him, it had been as grossly evident I was his; but since I
have Uses for his Friendship, and, as I saw your Credit with Sir John needed no
support, I hope you will think betwixt the two Extremes I have acted but a
prudent Part.


Doct. Let me presume to hope then, what I did, you Judge was Self-Defence, and
pure Necessity.


Lady W. 'Twas wonderful! Surprising to perfection! The Wit of it -- but I
will not tell you, what effect it had upon me.


Doct. Why, Madam? let me beseech you.


Lady W. No, 'twas nothing -- beside -- what need you ask me?


Doct. Why do you thus decoy my foolish Heart, and feed it, with such Hybla
drops of Flattery? You cannot sure think Kindly of me.


Lady W. O well feigned Fear! You too, I sind can flatter in your Turn: You
know how well the subtle force of Modesty prevails. O Men! Men! Men!


Doct. 'Twere Arrogance to think I have deserved this Goodness: but treat me as
you please, I Will be at least sincere to you, and frankly own, I still suspect,
that all this sosrning Favor is but Artifice.


Lady W. Well! well! I Would have you think so.


Doct. What Transport would it give, to be assured I wrong you! but O! I fear
this Shadow of Compliance is only meant to lure me from Maria, and then as
fond Ixions were of old, to fill my Arms with Air.


Lady W. Methinks this Doubt of me, seems rather founded on your second
Thoughts of not resigning Her; it is she, I find is your substantial Happiness.


Doct. O that you could but fear I thought so! how easy 'twere to prove my
Coldness, or my Love.


Lady W. O Sir, you have convinced me Now of Both.


Doct. Can all this pretty Anger then be real? take heed, fair, Creature, it
flatters more, than Kindness.


Lady W. I can assure you Sir, I should have spared you this trouble, had I
known how deeply you were engaged to her.


Doct. Nay then I must believe you; but indeed you wrong me, to prove my
Innocence, it is not an Hour since I pressed Sir John to give Maria to Young
Heartly.


Lady W. O! all Artifice! you knew that modest resignation, would make Sir John
but warmer in your Interest.


Doct. Since you will ripe the secret from my Heart -- know then, I actually
have Sold her, like a Bawble, to her Childish Lover, for two thousand times her
Value.


Lady W. Are you serious?


Doct. As this is true, or false, may I in you be Blessed, or Miserable.


Lady W. But how can you suppose Sir John will ever hear of it.


Doct. Alas! poor Man! he knows not his own Weakness, he is molded into any
shape, if you but gently stroke his Humor: I dare depend on his Consent --
beside, I intend to Morrow to persuade him it is for the Interest of our Cause
it should be so, and then I have him sure.


Lady W. Fie! how is that possible? he cannot be so implicitly Credulous, You
don't take him sure for a Roman Catholic.


Doct. Um -- not absolutely -- But, poor Soul! he little thinks how near he is
one. It Is true, name to him but Rome, or Popery, he Startles, as at a Monster:
But Gild its grossest Doctrines with the Style of English Catholic, he
swallows down the Poison, like a Cordial.


Lady W. Nay, if he is so far within your Power, it cannot fail, He must
consent: well Sir, now I give you leave to guess the Reason, why I too, at our
last meeting, so warmly pressed you to resign Maria.


Doct. Is it possible? was I then so early your Concern?


Lady W. You cannot blame me sure, for having there opposed your Happiness.


Doct. I dye upon the Transport.

[taking her Hand]
Lady W. Be sure you are secret now: your least Imprudence makes these, like
Fair favors vanish in a Moment.


Doct. How can you form so vain a Fear?


Lady W. Call it not vain, for let our Converse end in what it may, you still
shall find, my Fame is Dear to me, as Life.


Doct. Where can it find so sure a guard? the grave Austerity of my Life will
strike Suspicion Dumb, and yours may mock the Malice of Detraction: I am no
Giddy, LooseLiv'd Courtier, whose false profession end only his Boast of
Favors: No, fair spotless Miracle, the Mystery of Love are only fit for
Hearts Recluse, and Elevate as mine my Happiness, like yours, depending on my
Secrecy.


Lady W. It Is you must answer for this Folly.


Doct. I take it whole upon my self, the guilt be only mine, but be our
Transports Mutual -- come lovely Creature, let us withdraw to privacy, where
murmuring love shall hush thy Fears, and lose them in the Burning Joy.


[Sir John step^ng softly behind him seizes him by the Throat.] Sir John.
Traitor!


Doct. Ah!

(Astonished)
Sir John. Is this thy Sanctity? this thy Doctrine! these thy Meditations! If
stung with my Abuses I now should Stab thee to the Heart, what Devil durst
murmur 'twere not an Act of Justice? But since thy Vile Hypocrisy unmasked,
must make Mankind Abhor thee, be thy own shame, thy living with Punishment.


Doct. Do! Triumph Sir -- your Artifice has well succeeded -- I see your Ends!
you needed not so deep a Plot to part with me.

[Trembling]
Sir John. Suppress thy weak evasions -- Ungrateful Wretch! Have I for this
redeemed thee from the Jaws of gaping Poverty, Fed, Clothed, Loved, Preferred
thee to my Bosom, to my Family, and Fortune? Wife, Children, Friends, Servants,
all that were not Friends to thee, accounted as my Enemies; nay more to Crown
my Faith in thee, I have relied on they Integrity even for my Future Happiness:
And how have thou, in one short Day requited me? Taking the Advantage of my
Blinded Passion, thou have turned the Duty of my Son to his Undoing; Sordidly
have Sold the Trust I made thee of my Daughter, Attempted, like a Felonious
Traitor, to seduce my Wife, and have I fear, with Poisonous Doctrines too
ensnared my Soul.


Lady W. Now Heaven be praised his Heart seems Conscious of his Error.

[aside.]
Sir John. But why do I reproach thee? had I not been the weakest of Mankind,
thou never could have proved so great a Villain -- whether Heaven intends all
this to Punish, or to Save me, yet I know not; my Senses staggar at the view,
and my Reflexion's lost in Wild Astonishment.

[He stands musing.]
Doct. This snare was worthy of you, Madam, it is you have made this Villain of
me.

[apart to Lady W.]
Lady W. You would have made me worse, but I have only shown him what you were
before.


Doct. I thank you.


Lady W. Thank your own Ingratitude, and Wickedness: but I must now pursue my
Victory.

[Exit Lady W.]
Doct. [Apart.] No It ends not here. He was not brought to listen to this proof
alone! There Is something deeper yet designed against me -- I must be speedy --
suppose I talk with Charles, allarm him with our Common Danger, Point out his
Ruin as our only means of Safety, and like Panther in the Toil provoked, turn
short with Vengeance on my Hunters!


Sir John. What! still within my Sight! of all my Follys, which is it tells
thee, that I now shall keep my Temper.


Doct. [Turning boldly to him.] Whom do you menace, me Sir. Reflect upon your
own condition first, and where you are.


Sir John. What would the Villain drive at! I prithee leave me, I cannot look
on thee! thy overbearing Insolence confounds me: But since thy Wickedness has
turned my Eyes upon my self, and to thy crimes detected, I hope to owe my
future Innocence, as the sore Wound the Viper gives, the Viper best can Cure:
For that one good may Heaven like me forgive thee: But seek thy Biding in some
other place -- out of my House, this instant, Hence! be gone! and see my
shameful Face no more.


Doct. Nay then, it is time to be my self, and let you know, that I am Master
here, Turn you out Sir, this House is Mine; and now Sir, at your Peril dear to
Insult me.


Sir John. O! Heaven! it is true, thou have disarmed my Justice, and turned its
Sword into my own weal Bosom -- I had forgot my Folly, it is fit it should be
so, and Heaven is Just, at once to let me see my Crime, and Punishment -- O my
poor Injured Son! -- Whither shall I fly to hide me from the World?


Enter Lady Woodvil. Lady W. Whither are you going Sir?


Sir John. I know not -- but here it seems I am a Trespasser -- the Master of
this House has warned me hence, and since the Right is now in him, it is Just I
should resign it.


Lady W. You shall not stir: he dares not Act with such abandoned Insolence, No
Sir, Possession still is yours, if he pretends a Right, let him by open Course
of Law maintain it.


Doct. Are these the shifts you are reduced to? no Madam, I shall not wait so
slow a Vengeance, you will find I have a shorter way to Rout you. -- here!
Charles!

(Exit Doctor.)
Sir John. Nay then there is an end of all -- I have provoked a Serpent -- my
Life, I see, must Pay the Forfeit of my Folly!


Lady W. Come Sir, take Heart! your Life, in spite of him, is Free, and I hope
your Actions too: However, tell me freely, have you rashly done any thing, for
which the Law may Question you?


Sir John. I think, not strictly, it is true I have lately trusted him with
Sums of Money, which he pretended, if accounted for, might Endanger both of us.


Lady W. O! the Subtle Villain! those Sums are Innocent, I dare answer for
them: But is there nothing more?


Sir John. Not, that I can call to Mind, more Criminal.


Lady W. Pray tell the worst, that we may Arm against him.


Sir John. Sometimes with my own Hand, I have relieved the wants of Wretched
Prisoners to the State.


Lady W. We have no Laws, that Frown on Acts of Charity, if that were Criminal,
the Government it self is guilty


Sir John. How far our private converse may affect me -- That I know not. If
Charles Betrays me not, I think his Malice cannot reach me,


Lady W. Then Sir, be easy, for he has lost his Influence there: Charles has
long since perceived his Villainy, and grew from thence a secret Convert to the
Cause of Truth, and Loyalty: of which he has given such Meritorious Proof, that
Mr. Heartly, and your Son this very Day, Sir, have obtained his Pardon.


Sir John. You tell me Wonders! Pardoned! and a Convert say you! how strongly
are our Hearts persuaded by Example! what Darkness have I Wandered in* How
Aimiable is such Royal Mercy! yet with what hardened Malice, has that Slave
traduced it?


Enter Maria hastily. Mar. O Sir! I am frighted out of my Senses! for Heavens
sake be gone! Fly, this Moment, this Wicked Fellow has Designs upon your Life.


Lady W. How.


Sir John. What do thou mean? explain.


Mar. As I was passing by the Hall, I heard him Earnest in Discourse with
Charles, and upon their Naming you, I stopped a while to listen, where, I heard
the Doctor Urge to him, that you were False at Heart, that from your late
Frivolous pretense to break with him, he was convinced your Malice now would
stop at nothing to undo him, that Charles himself was equally in Danger, and
that to save your own Life, you certainly designed to Sacrifice theirs to the
Government, which there was no Possibility of preventing, but by their
immediate joining in a Charge of Treason against You.


Lady W. O the Villain! it is well we are secure in Charles.


Sir John. If we are not, why be it, as it may -- I will not stir -- I Will stand
upon my Innocence, or if that is Betrayed, will throw me on the Mercy of that
Royal Breast, whose Virtues my Credulity has Injured.


Lady W. and Mar. Ah!

[A Pistol is heard from within.]
Sir John What means, that Pistol?


Lady W. Don't stir, I beg you Sir.


Mar. What Terrors has this Monster brought into our Family?


Lady W. What will it end in?


Sir John. How Wretched has my Folly made me?


Lady. W. How now! what is the Matter?


Enter Betty. Bet. O Dear Madam! I shall faint away, there is Murder doing.


Sir John. Who! where, what is it!


Bet. The Doctor Sir, and Mr. Charles, were at high Wordsjust now in the Hall,
and upon a sudden there was a Pistol Fired between them: Oh! I am afraid poor
Mr. Charles is Killed.


Sir John. How!


Bet. Oh! here he comes himself Sir, he will tell you more.


Enter. Heartly, Charles, and the Doctor held by Servants.


Hear. Here bring in this Ruffian, this is Villainy beyond Example.


Sir John. What means this Outrage?


Lady W. I Tremble.


Charles. Don't be alarmed, Madam, there is no Mischief done, what was intended,
the Doctor here can best inform you.


Doct. [to Heartly.] You Sir shall answer for this Insult? What am I held for?
who is here, that dares assume a Right to Question me?


Hear. Keep your Temper, Sir, we'll Release you presently, but Sir John must
first know the Bottom of his Obligations to you.


Sir John. Mr. Heartly, I am ashamed to look on you.


Doct. What Sir! shall my own Servant abuse me, brave me, lift his Hand against
me, and I not dare to punish him.


Hear. Your Servant Sir! we know him better.


Doct. Then Sir, I demand my Liberty, that the Government too may know him.


Charles. Yes, and let it too be known, you first seduced me to Rebel, and now
would have me Expiate my Offense with Perjury.


Doct. How Sir?


Charles. Yes, Perjury! for such it must have been, should I have charged, as
you would have had me, this Gentleman with Treason: What Facts have I been privy
to, that reach that Name? The Worst I know of him, is, that all the Factious
Falsehoods you have raised against the best of Princes, he, blinded with your
Hypocrisy, believed.


Doctor. It Is well Sir, you are protected now.


Charles. This, Sir, in short has been our Cause of Quarrel: The Doctor finding
I received with Coldness his vile designs against your Life, began to offer
menaces on mine, if I complied not; at which I smiling told him, the
Disappointments of his Love had made him Desperate: This stung him into Rage,
and fastening at my Throat, he answered Villain! you will be Humbler, when you
groan in Chains for this: Here indeed all Temper left me, when disengaging from
his hold, with One Home Blow I felled him reeling to the Pavement; at this
grown Desp erate, he ran with Fury to some Pistols that hung above the Chimney,
to Revenge him, I in the Instant as he reached one, seized upon his Wrist, and
as we grappled Sir, the Pistol firing to the Cieling, alarmed the Family, when
Mr. Heartly, and your Servants rusht in to part us.


Sir John. Insatiate Villain! O my Shame!


Doct. Well Sir! now you have heard this Mighty Charge! what have you more
against me?


Hear. More Sir, I hope is needless, but if Sir John is yet unsatisfied --


Sir John. O! I have seen too much! every new instance of his Wickedness but
adds afresh to my Confusion.


Lady W. Now Sir is your Time

apart.
Hear. I go this Minute, Madam.

apart.
Doct. I Value not your whispered menaces, for know to your Confusion, my
Vengeance is not yet Defeated: You Will find Sir, that to Rebel, or to Conceal a
Rebel, are in the Eye of Law both Equal Acts of Treason: That Fact I Am sure is
evident against you; There! there stands in Proof the ^riling Traitor you have
Sheltered! this Sir, your whole Family can Charge you with, and Swear it home
they shall, or Load their Souls with Perjury: but then to dash your few
remaining Days with Bitterness of Misery, Remember I, Sir, whom Mortally you
hate, succeed the Instant Heir to your Possessions: Now farewell, and let
Disgrace, and Beggary be your Childrens Portion.


As he is going out, the Colonel stops him. Col. Hold, Sir, not so fast, you
cannot pass.


Doct. Who, Sir, shall dare to stop me?


Col. Within there! March!


Enter a Messenger with a file of Musketeers. Mess. Is your Name Wolf Sir?


Doct. What if it be Sir!


Mess. Then Sir I have a Warrant against you for High Treason


Doct. Me Sir?

[Startled.]
Mess. Do you know one Colonel Perth Sir?


Doct. Ha! then I am Betrayed indeed.


Hear. This Perth, it seems, Sir, has m^nag'd his Correspondence at Avignon,
from whence he came last Night Express; but the Government having Immediate
Notice of his Arrival, he was this Morning seized, and Examined before the
Council, where, among other Facts, he has confessed he knew the Doctor actually
in Arms at the first Rebellious rising in Northumberland, which has been since
by other Witnesses confirmed.


Col. And, Sir, to Convince you, that even the Doctrine he has Broached could
never flow from the pure Fountain of our Established Faith: Here are Affidavits
in my Hand that prove him under his Disguise a lurking Emissary of Rome that he
is actually a Priest in Popish Orders, and has several times been seen, as
such, to Officiate Public Mass in the Church of Noster Dame at Antwerp.


Mar. Hear. and Lady W. How!


Sir John. I start with Horror, ev'en at the Danger I am freed from.


Col. And now, Sir, had not your Insatiate Villanys to this Family faced me to
this close Inquiry into your Private Life, Perhaps you might have passed
unquestioned, among the Rout of Enemies, whom our Government Despises.


Doct. Well Sir! now then you know your worst of me: But know, what you call
Criminal, may yet before your Triumph is secure, not only find its Pardon but
Reward: I yet may Live, Sir, to retort your Insult, ot least the Days that are
allotted me, will want for no supports of Life, while this Conveyance calls me
Master.


Sir John. There! there indeed he stings me to the Heart! For that rash act
reproach, and endless Shame will haunt me.


Mar. No Sir -- be Comforted! for even there too his abandoned hope must leave
him.


Sir John. Why do thou totrure me! did I not Sign that Deed!


Mar. Yes, Sir, but in that Deed you will find, my Brother, Not that Traitor is
your Heir: For know the fatal Deed, which you intended, Sir, to Sign is here
even yet unsealed and Innocent.


Omnes. Ha!

The Doctor hastily openes the Deed to examine it, and all the Company seems
surpised.
Sir John. What means she?


Mar. I mean Sir, that this Deed, by accident falling into this Gentleman's
Hands, his generous Concern for our Family discovered it to me; when I reduced
to this Extremity, instantly procured that other to be drawn exactly like it,
which in your Impatience, Sir, to execute, passed unsuspected for the Original:
their only difference is, that, wherever here you read the Doctors Name, there
you will find my Brothers only, throughout, and wholly, Sir, in every Article
investing him in all that Right, and Title, which you intended for your Mortal
Enemy.


Doct. Distraction! Outwitted by a Brainless Girl.

[Throws down the Writing in Rage.]
All the Servants having attended to the Discovery, break out into Huzzahs of
Joy, etc. while Sir John, the Col. Charles and Maria severally embrace,
Heartily, and Lady Woodvil silently join in their Congratulations.

Doct. I cannot bear their irksome Joy -- come Sir, lead me where you please --
a Dungeon would relieve me now.


Col. Secure your Prisoner.


Ser. Huzzah! a Traitor! a Traitor!

[Exit Mess. Soldiers, Doctor, and Servants.]
Mar. Now Heartly, I hope I have made atonement for your Jealousy.


Hear. You have Banished it for ever: This was beyond your self surprising.


Col. Sister --


Mar. Come no set Speeches, If I deserve your Thanks, return them in a
Friendship here.

[Pointing to Charles.]
Col. The Business of my Life shall be to merit it.


Charles. And mine to speak my Sense of Obligations.


Sir John. O my Child! for this Deliverance, I only can reward thee here.

[gives Maria to Heartly.] For thee my Son, whose filial Virtues I have
Injured; this Honest Deed in every Article shall be ratified: I see your Eyes
are all upon me, expecting from that vile Traitors Parctices, some Voluntary
Instance of my Hearts Conversion: I must be Blind indeed, were I not now
convinced He must in all things have alike deceived me, as the Dial that
miss-tels one Hour, of Consequence is false through the whole round of Day. Let
it suffice. I see my Errors with a Conscious Shame; but hope, when I am justly
Weighed, you will find those Errors rose but from a Ductile Heart, not
Disinclin'd to Truth, but fatally misled by false Appearances:


Col. Whoever knows your Private Life, must think you, Sir, in this Sincere:


Hear. And Now Sir, since I am sure, it will no more Offend you, give me leave
to Observe, that of all the Arts our Enemies make use on to Embroil us, none
seem so Audaciously Preposterous, as their Insisting, that a Nations best
Security is the Word of a Prince, whose Religion Indulges him to give it, and
at the same time Obliges him to break it: And though perhaps in lesser Points our
Politic Disputes will not suddenly be ended, methinks there is one Principle, that
all Partys might easily come into, that no Change of Government can give us a
Blessing equal to our Liberty.


Grant us but this and then of Course you will own,
To Guard that Freedom, GEORGE must fill the Throne.
FINIS.
Epilogue.
Spoken by Mrs. Oldfield. HOW Wild, how Frantic is the vain Essay,
That Builds on Modern Politics a Play!
Methinks to Write at all, is Bold enough,
But in a Play to stand a Faction Buff!
Not Rome's Old Stage presumed, (or Fame's a Fibber.)
And Moderns to attempt it! well said CIBBER!
Was It not enough the Critics might pursue him!
But must he rouse a Party to undo him!
These Blows I told him on his Play would fall,
But he unmoved, cried -- Blood! we'll Stand it all,
When PRIESTS turn TRAITORS where is the mighty matter?
Since when has Treason been exempt from Satyr?
And should from Guilt a Factious Clamor Rise,
Such Spite must speak them England's Enemies,
But if Old England's Friends allow it is right,
We Are sure their Power can chase the Jacobite,
And put their Malice, like their Troops, to Flight.
As for the Critics, Those, he owns, may Teize him,
Because he never took such Pains to please them,
In Time; Place, Action, Rules by which Old Wits
Made Plays, as -- Dames do Puddings, by Receipts:
But hopes again even Rebels cannot say,
Though Vanquished, they are Insulted in his Play:
Nay more -- To set their Cause in fairest light,
H' has made a Man of Sense -- A Jacobite!
(Though by our Bards good leave, (to take it right,
His Sense was shown, when turned from Jacobite)
Thus too the Fair, that may be wrong Inclined,
He Hopes to CHARLES's Passion will be Kind,
And own, at worst, on their Reflecting Pillow,
The Rebel, after all is, a Pretty Fellow!
But why, you will say, was I made HEARTLYS Wife?
Consider, Fair ones, HEARTLY saved his Life:
So that you see, the Boy han't quite Miscarried
Beside --
Are all those Dears so Happy you have Married?
How often, in that State, has Love seen Elves
So Crammed with Comsort, they could Han^ themselves?
The Worst you can against his Satyr Plead,
Is that My Lord of THETFORD's Hanged indeed:
If that seems hard* why Grant him your Reprive,
And by an Act of Grace, let this NON-JUROR Live.

