THE SHRUBS of PARNASSUS, OR, JUVENILE MUSE.

A COLLECTION OF SONGS, AND POEMS.

CHIEFLY PASTORAL.

By W. HAWKINS.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; By J. ROZEA, No. 11, Little Pultency-Street,
near Golder-Square; and sold by. R. BALDWIN, No. 47, Pater-no^^er-Row; PEARSON
and RALLISON, Birmingham, and all other Booksellers. M DCC LXXVI.

Price TWO-SHILLINGS,

EPISTLE DEDICATORY, TO A CERTAIN YOUNG LADY.
DEAR MADAM,
TO whom can I address these few sheets with so much pleasure and satisfaction,
as to your beauteous self, who has at once taken the sole possession of my
heart, and whose charms and amiable qualities have so often filled my soul with
love and adoration. Therefore, dear charmer, deign to accept of this trifle
(which is published with the greatest pleasure and delight, solely at your
request, and for your kind perusal) nor think me prone to flattery. I could
wish it was more worthy your attention, but am convinced, if not from its
intrinsic merit, at least for it is author's sake, you will condescend to look
upon it with some little candor and respect. With these flattering hopes I
take leave to subscribe myself,

Your truly affectionate and devoted Humble servant, WILLIAM HAWKINS.
July 30, 1776.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Sunt bona, sunt q^^^dam med^o^ria, sunt mala plura
Que legis --
MART. Epig. xvii. l. 1.
THE following pages are the effusion of a youthful mind, and most of the
articles herein contained have occasionally appeared in magazines and other
periodical publications; and if, by selecting them together, the author should
contribute toward the entertainment of the public (as well as to the lady he
was in duty bound to oblige) he will think the pains he has taken amply
rewarded, though, at the same time, he hopes the candid reader will not forget
the following remark, that

A slender poet must have time to grow,
To spread and flourish as his brothers do;
Who still looks lean -- sure with ill fate is cursed,
But no man can be FALSTAFF fat at first.
DRYDEN. * Notwithstanding that part of the title of this book, viz. "The
Shrubs of Parnassus," is borrowed from Mr. WOTY, the author thinks it necessary
to observe, that not a single line is taken or imitated from that gentleman's
works. -- He hears there is a small pamplet in being, called, "The Juvenile
Muse," which he pretends to know nothing of.

-- Tenet insanabile multos
Scribendi cacoethes --
JUV. Sat. vii. v. 51. CONTENTS.
COLIN. A pastoral on the death, and in imitation of Mr. John Cunningham Page 1
That little rogue Cupid. A song -- 3 Come haste thee, my Phillis. A song -- 4
The happy shepherd -- 5 The happy shepherdess -- 6 Damon and Dolly. A song -- 7
The sorrowful shepherd, in imitation of Shenstone 9 On spring and shepherds
bliss -- 10 The linnet -- 11 An extempore -- 13 Verses to Flavia -- 15
Corydon's complaint to Lucinda -- 16 Gentle is my dear Florella. A song -- 17
The wish. A song -- 18 Damon and Laura. A dialogue -- 19 A sonnet -- 20 Ye
gods! how happy once was I? A song 21 Soliloquy on a spring morning -- 22
Sawney. A Scotch song -- 23 Sonnata -- 24 Verses to Delia -- 25 Song, intended
to be sung in the Merchant of Venice, by Lorenzo -- Page 26 Sonnet, by a friend
-- 27 Song, designed for an opera -- 28 The jovial huntsmen. A song -- 29 One
day over the green as I tript it along. A song 30 Strephon and Phoebe. A
cantata -- 32 Damon and Amanda. A cantata -- 36 Delia. A cantata -- 38 The
forsaken maid. A cantata -- 40 The sandman. A cantata -- 41 Elegy, written at
Colchester -- 44 Elegy, to the lady to whom this book is dedicated 48 Verses to
Miss Betsy N -- n -- 50 An extempore, to a young lady -- 52 Verses to Miss
Polly H -- v -- d, on the charms of her voice 54 Verses received from a young
lady, for presenting her with Bell's edition of Shakespeare -- 56 Epistle to
Miss W -- n, in answer to the foregoing 57 Prologue, spoken on a young
gentleman's first appearance on the stage, in the character of George Barnwell
60 An extempore, addressed to Mrs. Greville, on seeing her in the Irish Widow
-- 63 Lines to a deceitful friend -- 64 On Mrs. Yates's first appearance in the
character of Mandane in Cyrus -- 65 On seeing Mr. and Mrs. Barry in the
characters of Othello and Desdemona -- Page 66 An epigram on the character of
Juno in the burletta of the Golden Pippin -- 67 Verses on the death of Mr.
Mossop the celebrated tragedian -- 68 Epitaph on a favorite young lady, lately
deceased 69 Epitaph on a late attorney of the Middle Temple 70 Epitaph on a
poor poet -- 71 A rebus -- 72 The answer, by an unknown hand -- 73 Verses
received from a genius in the country, on perusing my works in manuscript -- 74
My answer to the same -- ibid. Lines sent with a present to friend -- 75 On
seeing a young lady that was prodigeously vain and affected -- ibid. Hops. A
song -- 76
POETICAL STRICTURES on most of the principal performers belonging to the two
theaters royal, in Drury Lane and Covent Garden.
On Mr. Garrick -- 81 On Mr. Barry, Mrs. Barry and Mrs. Heartley 82 On Mr. Ross
and Mr. Smith -- 83 On Mrs. Yates, Miss Young and Mr. King 84 On Mr. Woodward
and Mrs. Abington Page 85 On Mrs. Mattocks and Mr. Reddish -- 86 On Mr. Aickin,
Miss Macklin and Mrs. Bulkley 87 On Mr. Shuter and Mr. Yates -- 88 On Mr.
Moody, Miss. Pope and Mrs. Baddeley 89 On Mr. D*dd, Mr. Parsons and Mrs. Green
90 On Miss Barsanti, Mr. Lewis and Mr. Bensley 91 On Mr. Baddeley and Mrs
Hunter -- 92 On Mr. Clarke and Mr. Palmer -- 93 On Miss Catley* Mrs. Smith and
Mr. Vernon 94 On Mr. Mattocks, Mr. Quick and Mr. Love 95 On the death of Mr.
Dyer -- 96 On the gentle Mr. C -- th -- ley -- ibid. Song to the critical
reviewers -- 97
ERRATA.
Page 4, l. 4, for accent, read accents. Page 6, l. 2, for cool, read a cool.
Page 33, l. 8, for leave, read leave me. Page 41, l. 6, for do, read do ye.
It is hoped the readers will excuse the above errors, and others they may
occasionally meet with in the course of this work, which could not be corrected
on account of the author's distance from the press.

THE SHRUBS OF PARNASSUS, etc.
COLIN, A Pastoral, on the death, and in imitation of Mr. JOHN CUNNINGHAM.
An honest man's the noblest work of GOD. POPE.
I.
GIVE ear, O! ye swains, to my lay,
Since COLIN, alas! is no more;
Let Us languish and pine all the day,
In sorrow his loss to deplore;
For he was the pride of the plain,
The garden, the grove, and the field;
But "lost is the PASTORAL strain,"
Since he no more beauties can yield.
II.
Ye warblers that bill on each spray,
Ye lambkins that ramble alone;
Come round and attend to the lay;
Then "bleat and your master bemoan."
For a tend'r good shepherd was he,
So true and so kind to his trust;
With mildness he lived, and with glee --
A picture of all that was just.
III.
His manner how soft and serene!
Tranquillity dwelt in his air;
No mortal like him ever was seen;
No mortal with him could compare.
For he was so gentle and kind,
That birds clustered round in a throng,
And all in full harmony joined
Whenever he echoed his song.
IV.
But COLIN from us far borne;
No longer he sings through the grove;
No longer beneath the gay thorn Mr. CUNNINGHAN used frequently to lay about in
the fields, under a hedge or a tree, in which situation he wrote several
pastorals.

He pours forth his sonnets of love.
Then farewell, O! favorite bard,
Adieu! my dear COLIN, adieu!
Thy merit I ever shall regard,
To thy fame I will ever be true.
SONG.
I.
THAT little rogue Cupid, I vow,
Is playing such tricks with my heart,
I flutter -- I cannot tell how,
Yet feel the sharp pangs of his dart!
What cruel ungenerous swain
Could send this fond urchin to me?
Whose heart was a stranger to pain,
And ever roved as free as a be.
II.
But now my poor senses are gone;
My spirits are fled from me quite;
And I Am a poor maiden forlorn,
No rest can I take day or night.
How happy, ah! once sure was I!
So cheerful I 'rose in the morn,
But now am addicted to sigh
For him that I treated with scorn.
III.
Young CORYDON must be the swain --
None like him appears to my view;
He caught my fond heart on the plain --
Ah! shepherd, I Am wretched for you!
O! come, then, dear youth, and be kind;
No longer disdainful I Will be,
But harbor content in my mind,
And think upon no one but thee.
SONG.
I.
COME haste thee my PHILLIS I pray,
And let us repair to the grove;
Where nightingale's cheerful and gay;
All tune their sweet accent of love,
So soft is the sound of their song
'Twill surely delight you my fair;
Then haste thee dear charmer along.
And strait to the grove let us repair.
II.
For something I have to impart,
That labors quite hard in my breast;
So ardent and firm is the smart,
It robs me of peace and of rest.
It Is love, that dear passion, I swear
By all that is honest and true;
And thou art the source of my care,
I sigh and I languish for you.
III
Then come dearest PHILLIS, I pray,
And ease all your DORILAND'S pain;
Ah! let him be joyful and gay,
Nor longer implore you in vain.
But let honest freedom invite,
For virtue's the path I pursue!
And may happiness ever unite
With those that are constant and true.
THE HAPPY SHEPHERD.
I.
HOW happy a Shepherd am I,
with LAURA, the pride of my heart;
I Will never once languish or sigh,
For know, she has cu^'d all my smart.
She vows that she will be my wife
By all that is honest and fair;
Then I Will be her husband for life,
And never know sorrow nor care.
II.
Brother shepherds that toil on the plain,
By me take example, I pray,
Throw off all your sorrow and pain,
And ever be cheerful and gay.
Then nymphs that are modest and shy,
For once hear young DAMON'S advice;
The reason I tell you, for why,
As happy you will be in a trice.
III.
Give each of your hands to your swain,
Then drive away faction and strife;
Bid adieu to all anguish and pain!
And be happy the rest of your life.
Such is DAMON'S advice, my kind fair;
Then take it most freely, I pray;
So fly from all sorrow and care,
Henceforward be merry and gay.
THE HAPPY SHEPHERDESS.
I.
SINCE JOCKEY of late is so kind,
My poor panting heart is at rest,
Such peace and contentment I find,
No maiden's so happy and blessed.
For sweetly my days pass away,
With joy I attend on my sheep;
And though they should happen to stray.
I Will never once offer to weep.
II.
Such bliss do I find from my swain,
For he is so bonny and gay;
He meets me each night on the plain,
And calls me the flower of MAY.
He took me last week to the fair,
And gave me a top-knot beside,
Then kis'd me, and called me his care,
And vowed that I should be his bride.
III.
Then tell me, ye maidens, I pray,
How can I my JOCKEY deny,
Who cheerfully sings through the day,
And charms me whenever he is nigh.
On the banks of the soft flowing TWEED,
Whenever we happen to meet,
So pleasing he plays on his reed --
No shepherd like JOCKEY'S so sweet.
DAMON AND DOLLY.
A SONG.
I.
ONE Midsummer morn, as I strayed through the grove,
Young DOLLY I met by the way;
I told her, her charms had subdued me with love,
And caused her a while for to stay.
II
Silly DAMON, she cried, what would you be at?
Your fooling give over, I pray,
For all your fond wooing, your cooing and chat
No longer shall make me delay.
III.
Then I pressed her hand close, saying, Can you deny
A favor so trifling as this?
But still she rejected and cried out, Oh fie!
When I stole, unperceived, a sweet kiss.
IV.
With rapture I gazed on her delicate charms,
(For I could not resist it, I vow)
Then clasping her eagerly in my fond arms --
Said she, I must go to my cow.
V.
Then strait over the plain together we went,
'Till come to cool river's side,
Where we sat ourselves down till I gained her consent
For ever to be my true bride.
VI.
Adieu, then, ye troubles and plagues of this life!
With DOLLY, I sure shall be blessed;
Kind Providence means for to make her my wife,
And lull all our cares into rest.
THE SORROWFUL SHEPHERD.
In imitation of SHENSTONE; written at sixteen years old.
I.
AH! whither, alas! shall I fly?
What clime shall I seek for relief?
Since PHILLIS no longer is nigh,
O! how shall I smother my grief.
The sweetest, the fairest, is she --
So neatly she trips over the plain;
But now she never smiles upon me,
She Is faithless -- and false to her swain.
II.
With STREPHON she is gone far away --
With him is contented and blessed,
Whilst I am distracted all day,
And ruined for want of my rest.
No heed can I take of my sheep,
They ramble and roam as they please,
For I can do nothing but weep
'Till PHILLIS my sorrow does ease.
III.
Dear nymph hear thy shepherd complain,
Return and subdue all my care!
No longer torment me with pain,
For constant I am, I declare.
Thy charms ever shall be my pride,
Thy smiles I will ever admire;
Then deign you to be but my bride,
And satisfy all my desire.
ON SPRING AND SHEPHERDS BLISS.
Written at fifteen years old.
I.
HOW sweet the 'freshing gales of spring,
Each blushing morn how gay,
The tuneful lark begins to sing,
As soon as dawn of day.
II.
Then next AURORA'S golden ray,
Comes glancing over the plains,
To hail the warbler's plaintive lay,
And rouse the sturdy swains.
III.
Who from their cots to toil repair,
Regardless of all strife,
Unknowing and unknown to care,
Is sure the shepherds life,
IV.
He toils, he carols all the day,
At eve then home he bends,
Charmed with birds on every spray;
As to his cottage tends.
V.
His cottage teems with infants dear,
That Is wholesome, clean and neat,
His wife, his bed, his all is there,
To make his joys complete.
VI.
With these he sits a welcome guest,
So happy and so gay,
'Till twilight point the hour of rest,
Then they its call obey.
THE LINNET.
Written at thirteen years old.
I.
AS passing by a wood and grove,
I heard a linnet sing,
Whose sweetly plaintive voice of love,
Proclaimed the cheerful spring.
II.
His pretty accent seemed to flow,
As if he knew no pain,
His downy throat he tuned so sweet,
It echoed over the plain.
III.
Ah! happy warbler I replied,
Contented thus to be,
It Is only harmony and love;
Can be compared to thee.
IV.
Thus perched upon the spray ye stand,
The monarch of the shade,
And ever sip embrosial sweets,
That glows from every glade.
V.
Did man possess but half thy bliss,
How joyful might he be,
But man was never formed for this,
It Is only joys for thee.
VI.
Then farewell pretty bird I said,
Pursue thy plaintive tale,
And let thy tuneful accent spread;
All over the fragrant vale.
AN EXTEMPORE.
I.
AS wandering in a rural shade,
My soul quite rapt in thought,
I chanced to meet the lovely maid,
Who my fond heart had caught.
II.
I gazed I viewed her with delight,
And told my lovesick tale,
But ah! the maid was in a fright,
And bid me quit the vale.
III.
But I more tenderly replied,
How can I leave the grove,
Whilst here such matchless charms reside*
That I adore and love.
IV.
But all in vain I told my tale,
In vain I strove to please,
For all my sighs, could not prevail;
Nor this fair maid appease.
V.
Some other swain there was in view,
She said, she liked the best,
And vowed to him she would prove true;
With him her heart should rest.
VI.
Then strait I left the cruel fair,
And fled along the plain,
Regardless of her flirting air,
And all her cold disdain.
VII.
And now some other nymph I Will find,
Endowed with lovely charms,
And try if she will prove more kind,
And take me to her arms.
VIII*
Adieu! farewell, then fickle maid,
Adieu! for ever more,
No more I Will strive to seek thy aid;
No more thy smiles implore.
TO FLAVIA.
Written on Birling-Hill in Kent, at fourteen years old.
I.
LOVELY FLAVIA, list I pray,
To yon warbler on the spray,
Hear my fair his matin tale,
Charming as the vernal gale.
II.
View* the fields all smiling round,
See the flowerets deck the ground,
And the pretty lambkins play,
While the ewes are gone astray.
III.
See the shepherd pensive sit,
Making of a home spun net,
With his bottle by his side,
And his little dog called Tide.
IV.
How contented is his state,
He envy's not the rich and great,
Free from sorrows, free from pain,
Is the shepherd on the plain.
V.
Except his DAPHNE proves unkind,
Then discontented is his mind,
'Till she resolves to prove more true,
Then all his cares she does subdue.
CORYDON'S COMPLAINT, TO LUCINDA.
Written at fifteen years old.
I.
WHY LUCINDA will you stray,
From your ever constant swain,
Who with anguish all the day,
Sits repining on the plain.
II.
Turn fair maid, and view me here,
Pensive sitting on the ground,
Drooping, dying, with despair,
Gazing on the fields around.
III.
When I view the pasture mead,
How the lambkins skip and play,
Shepherd's tune their oaten reed,
And each bird his plaintive lay.
IV.
But what to CORYDON are these,
When LUCINDA is not near,
Naught my sight can ever please,
Nor sweet sounds will charm mine ear.
V.
Listen fair one to my grief,
Take compassion on your swain,
View him pleading for relief,
Cease for ever all his pain.
SONG.
I.
GENTLE is my dear FLORELLA,
Kind and tender to her swain,
Brighter sure then ever was STELLA,
Sweetest nymph of all the plain.
II.
Soft and pure are sure her kisses,
Fragrance breathes through all her charms,
She Is the source of endless blisses,
When I clasp her in my arms.
III.
STELLA, thinks, that she is more pleasing,
O! the vain ambitious fair;
She her swain is always teazing,
But FLORELLA, soothes my care.
IV.
All her ways are so inviting,
Ever giving fresh delights,
Never pleased but when delighting,
Crowns with peace my days and nights.
THE WISH.
A SONG.
Written at fifteen years old.
I.
"WAS I a shepherd's maid to keep"
Some sheep upon the plain,
I now had never known to weep,
Nor felt ambition's pain.
II.
But pure contentment should enjoy,
(Unheedful of the great)
Nor thus my hopes at once destroy,
By pride's destructive state.
III.
Auspicious stars -- subdue my care,
And guide me in thy ways,
Nor thus let vanity ensnare,
But happy make my days.
IV.
Teach me humility and love,
And ever give me peace;
O! may I learn no more to rove,
But from these foibles cease.
DAMON AND LAURA.
A DIALOGUE.
DAMON. AH! dearest LAURA, ease my pain,
Cease your DAMON'S anguish;
Let me no longer sue in vain,
No long'r let me languish.

LAURA. Yes, DAMON, I will ease your pain,
Since I do cause your smart;
Then take, at once, my gentle swain,
My hand and faithful heart.

DAMON. Then strait to church let us repair,
And join both hearts in one,
We'll bid adieu to future care,
And taste of joys alone.

BOTH. Then we the happiest pair will be
That ever our state possessed;
Happier far than monarchs, we,
Let them be ever so blessed.

A SONNET.
I.
LITTLE CUPID! strike a dart
Steadfast at fair DAPHNE'S heart;
Make her glow with fond desire;
Fill her soul with amorous fire.
II.
Charm her with thy soft persuasion;
Make her melt at DAMON'S name;
Give, O! give, one kind occasion
To reward my ardent flame.
III.
Strive to make us blessed for ever,
In a peaceful, humble state,
Let ambition move us never,
It is for the rich and great.
IV.
Give us only decent substance,
With a little cleanly cot,
There to live without reluctance,
May this ever be our lot.
SONG.
I.
YE gods! how happy once was I?
No mortal ever so blessed,
'Till cruel JENNY caught my heart,
And robbed me of my rest.
II.
A form so lovely and divine,
I could not but admire;
But ah! the sweet, the cruel she
Has set my soul on fire.
III.
Come then, thou soft endearing fair,
And hear thy slave complain;
Unlock his mind, subdue his care,
And take away the chain.
SOLILOQUY ON A SPRING MORNING.
By a Friend.
I.
HOW fresh the air! How fair each scene!
How full of sweets each field!
What balmy odours breathe around!
What lays the warblers yield!
II.
With what enchantment I review
AURORA'S early ray,
That calls up nature's offspring all
To hail the fragrant MAY.
III.
Transported over the mead I walk,
Or cross the verdant lawn,
Pursue the winding streamlet's course,
And mark the vernal dawn.
IV.
Devote my song to Him on high,
From whom those beauties spring,
And with extatic raptures cry,
My GOD is nature's king!
SAWNEY.
A SCOTCH SONG.
Set to music by Mr. French.
I.
SURE SAWNEY is the blythest swain
Of all around the TWEED,
He tends the sheep upon the plain,
And tunes his oaten reed.
He tends, etc.
II.
He calls me his dear life and care,
And his own MOGGY too;
He vows by all that is good and fair,
To me he will prove true.
He vows, etc.
III.
So SAWNEY is a worthy swain,
And I Will be SAWNEY'S wife,
Then bid adieu to care and pain,
And so be blessed for life.
Then bid, etc.
SONNATA.
I.
SWEET CLARISSA of the Green,
Lovely as the CYPRIAN queen,
Ever blooming, young and gay,
Charming as the fragrant MAY.
II.
Young LIONEL'S constant care,
Thou art sure, my charming fair;
All his joys in thee abound,
All his life in thee is found.
III.
Then to church let us be gone,
There unite both hearts in one;
So, CLARISSA, do not stay,
But to church let us haste away.
TO DELIA.
I.
MY Muse inspire me to impart,
In humble ardent strain,
To tell the anguish of my heart,
To her that caused my pain.
II.
DELIA is the lovely maid;
Alas! thou charming fair,
Behold fond DAMON seeks thy aid,
To ease his pain and care.
III.
For thou alone can give relief,
Or anguish most severe,
Thy rapturous charms are all my grief,
Until you prove sincere.
SONG.
Intended to be sung under JESSICA'S window, in the Merchant of Venice, by
LORENZO.
LIST! O list! My JESSEY, fair,
To LORENZO'S call I pray,
Cease, ah! cease, thy lover's care,
Gentle JESSEY, come away!
Then to some sequestered shade
Let us fly, my charming maid;
There with honesty enjoy
Such sweet bliss as never can cloy;
Then, my fair, no longer stay,
Gentle JESSEY -- haste away.
SONNET.
By a Friend.
I.
CUPID, god of soft desire!
Aim, at TELLA'S breast, a dart;
Kindle there thy amorous fire,
Such as glows round STREPHON'S heart.
II.
When I sigh, oh! make her languish!
When my bosom's calmed with peace,
Far be from her every anguish,
Joy sit smiling on her sace.
III.
Thus each bliss and care dividing,
Blessed and happy with our lot,
Naught of pomp or state residing
In our peaceful humble cot.
SONG.
Designed for an Opera.
I.
BLOW soft, ye winds! ye Zephyrs blow!
Ye crystal streams, ah! gently flow!
Ye fragrant gales perfume around,
While beauty decks the verdant ground.
II.
For here CLARINDA'S lulled to rest,
(The darling pride of all the plain)
But ah! she scorns to make me blessed;
With scorn she shuns her constant swain.
III.
Waft to her ears, kind CUPID, pray,
A soft and tender sigh from me;
O! bid her rise whilst here I stay,
And set her faithful captive free.
THE JOVIAL HUNTSMEN.
A SONG.
Written at fourteen years old.
WITH hunting what sports can compare,
So great are the pleasures it yields,
How sweet to pursue the brisk hare,
Over valleys, green meadows and fields.
Then rouse, all dull mortals, and make no delay,
To glorious hunting take horse and away.
CHORUS.
Then rouse, etc.
For noble and manly's the game,
It Is wholesome and pleasant likewise;
Of sports it is the foremost in fame;
Then hunting we ever will prize.
For we follow, follow, follow, and we fly
Over hedges and ditches, with hounds in full cry.
CHORUS.
For we follow, etc.
At eve we return from the chase,
Quite cheerful, contented and gay,
When eating and drinking takes place,
To regale over the sports of the day.
So join chorus, brave boys, for on hunting's our song,
Where glorious pleasure and pastime belong.
FULL CHORUS.
So join chorus, etc.
SONG.
I.
ONE day over the green as I tript it along,
A gentle young shepherd passed by,
He tuned his pipe, and so sweet was his song,
He made my poor heart for to sigh.
II.
He called me back to sit by him a while;
The swain I could scarcely deny,
So sweetly he looked! and he gave me a smile
Which caused me still more for to sigh.
III.
Then strait he came to me and proffered a kiss,
At which I seemed modest and shy;
Yet I vow in my heart I was pleased at this,
Though he made me to flutter and sigh.
IV.
He told me he loved me, and something beside,
Which I must not repeat by the bye,
For fear the young shepherd my conduct should chide,
And make me for ever to sigh.
V.
He promised to take me next week to the fair,
And many fine things he will buy,
Both roses and ribbons to stick in my hair,
Then who will be so shewy as I.
IV.
And if that the swain should make me his wife,
To please him all means I will try;
I Will ever be faithful and constant for life,
And virt'ous until that I die.
STREPHON AND PHOEBE.
A CANTATA.
Intended for the Public Gardens.
Enter Strephon and Phoebe with wands in their hands. STREPHON. RECITATIVE.
HAIL, lovely PHOEBE! charming maid!
Why fly me thus? [She avoids him.
Ah! why so 'fraid?
Let me enjoy thy youthful charms,
And clasp thee ever in those arms.
[Holding out his arms to her.
PHOEBE. AIR. Away thou false swain,
No longer in vain,
Thus teaze and perplex me I pray;
For all your entreating
Your whining and weeping,
Shall never induce me to stay.
For all, etc.

STREPHON. AIR. Alas! cruel maid,
O! let me persuade,
Nor treat me with slight and disdain;
Did you know my smart,
You Would give me your heart,
Nor keep me in anguish and pain.
Did you know, etc.

PHOEBE. RECITATIVE. Begone, false youth, sly hence and leave me,
You only court for to deceive me;
But thus on me you will never prevail,
For I Will never list'n to thy flattering tale.

STREPHON. AIR. On honor fair maid
My passion is laid,
For I mean not to deceive ye;
So prithee don't stand,
For here is my hand
And heart both willing to wed ye.
So prithee, etc.

PHOEBE. AIR. Since you make proffer
Of such an offer,
Here is my hand and heart likewise;
For now I believe
You will not deceive,
And virtue and honor I prize.
For now, etc.

DUET. Thence we'll to church, and join both hearts,
And bid adieu to former care;
So banish from our minds all smarts,
And ever be the happy pair.
Thence we'll, etc.

CHORUS OF SHEPHERDS AND SHEPHERDESSES. May health and wealth both crown your
wishes,
When the nuptial knot is tied;
May peace and plenty -- endless riches,
Ever in your reach reside.

DUET II. May health and wealth both crown our wishes,
When the nuptial knot is tied;
May peace and plenty -- endless riches,
Ever in our reach reside.

CHORUS. May health, etc. [Exeunt.

DAMON AND AMANDA.
A CANTATA.
RECITATIVE. AS fair AMANDA pensive lay,
In a shady green retreat,
Young DAMON chanced to come that way,
Tuning of his lute most sweet.
"Hark, hark!" she cried, "what is this I hear?
"Sure PARADISE is round me;
"Or some bewitching charmer's near,
"With music to confound me."
AIR. "Tune on, tune on, whoever thou art,
"While I the heavenly joys impart."
('It Was thus the sweet AMANDA cried.)
Mean time the swain, inspired, stood mute,
Then eagerly threw down his lute,
And thus, in vocal lays, replied.
AIR. "Oh! thou, whose lovely charms outshine
"The sun's enamored ray,
"Would gracious heaven but make thee mine,
"(Thou sweetest flower of MAY!)
"Not all the outward gems or show,
"Bedecked with pride or art,
"Should make me from my fair-one go,
"So constant is my heart."
RECITATIVE. Then strait AMANDA, turning round,
Viewed DAMON kneeling on the ground,
At which she started with surprise,
While he exclaimed, "Sweet maid, arise,
"For ah! I come to sooth your care.
"Then deign to set your captive free;
"Behold I come for to declare,
"A flame that only burns for thee."
Then to each other's arms they sprung,
And thus the youthful lovers sung.
DUET. "Oh! DAMON, how shall I impart
"The joy this meeting gives my heart;
"Some angel sure, or friend to rest,
"Has sent you here to make me blessed."
"Oh! sweet AMANDA, dearest maid,
"Thou do my heart and soul invade;
"For all my bliss I own in thee,
"Then may we ever happy be."
DELIA.
A CANTATA.
Written at fifteen years old.
SCENE, a Grove. DELIA sitting pensive on a bench. RECITATIVE. YE myrtle groves
and shady bowers,
Sequestered vales and vernal flowers;
What bliss should I receive from thee,
Could thou restore but ease to me.
[Soft music plays. AIR. Gentle god of fond desire,
Take a hapless maiden's part,
Some relief to me inspire,
To subdue my constant heart.
[Rises and comes forward. RECITATIVE. Cruel tyrant of my breast,
Sole disturber of my rest,
Turn, ah! turn, and ease my pain,
Nor let thy DELIA sue in vain.
AIR. But on man there is no depending,
For their vows are soon forgot;
Then what torments -- never ending,
Is the generous maiden's lot.
Yet DAMON urge not my request,
Ease at once my raging pain;
Ah! make thy faithful DELIA blessed,
Take her to thy arms again.
THE FORSAKEN MAID.
A CANTATA.
Written at thirteen years old.
RECITATIVE AH! whither shall I fly to find relief?
Is there no cure for wretchedness and grief?
My dearest THOMAS -- he has proved untrue,
And what, alas! must hapless SALLY do?
Fool that I was to trust perfidious man,
Whose false disembling love our hearts trapan;
Ah! then they leave us in a wretched state.
Ye nymphs take warning ere it is too late.
AIR. How severe is my affliction,
Thus to wander in despair;
Gods! give ear to my direction;
Cease, ye powers, a maiden's care.
Did the youth know how I languish,
He would sure give me relief;
Turn again and ease my anguish,
Succor my distress and grief. The above little piece had the honor of being
presented to the late Earl of CHESTERFIELD, who admired it for its author's
early genius and simplicity, as he was pleased to say.

THE SANDMAN.
A CANTATA.
Written at fourteen years old.
Set to music by Mr. THOMAS SMART.
RECITATIVE. I AM a poor lad, and mean's my calling,
From morn till night I am a bawling;
Through streets, through lanes and squares I pass;
My treasure all on one poor ass.
My constant theme wherever I go;
Is, "Maids do want sand? Sand ho!"
AIR. Though I Am a poor sandman, I care not a jot
For all the fine folks in the nation:
While I can get money to buy a full pot,
I Am the happiest man in my station.
I Am the happiest man in my station.
What Is riches or treasure,
Or all the gay pleasure,
Where happiness does not unite?
It Is naught but a juggle;
A mere hubble bubble
Of pain and perplexity quite.
Of pain and perplexity quite.
RECITATIVE. Now my song's done, a tale I Will tell,
Which sure will please you all full well.
One day, as passing through the street,
I black-ey'd SUSAN chanced to meet.
Ah! dearest SAM, to me she cried,
When shall I be thy own true bride?
Faith SUE, quoth I, I rather tarry,
For hang me if I think to marry.
She called me then ungrateful wretch,
And said the devil would me fetch;
But for all this I did not care,
I drove away and left her there!
AIR. For who in their wits would be plagued with a wife!
To be teased and tormented for ever;
They Will rid you as fast as they can of your life;
And are not contented, -- no, never,
No, no!
And are not contented -- no, never.
They Are such a disaster,
They stick like a plaster
That Is fastened upon a man's back;
And what is still worse,
Ah! that is the curse,
They have such a confounded clack!
Clack, clack, clack, oh! lack, oh! lack!
They have such a confounded clack!
Then since this is the case of having a wife,
Let me ever, ye gods! live a single life,
Live a single life, live a single life! The reader will, in all probability,
find many poetical errors in most of the preceding Cantatas, etc. but as they
were wrote at a very e^^ly period of life, (and solely calculated for music)
the author humbly hopes they will be deemed pardonable.

Note, The above is inserted exactly as it is set to music.



ELEGY.
Written at Colchester.
Addressed to Miss K -- N.
-- Scribere jussit amor.
OVID, Epist. iv. v. 10.
I.
I Asked the muse that rules the sounding lyre,
To wreathe my temples with one sprig of bays;
Some lofty subject to my soul inspire,
Some lofty subject in heroic lays.
II.
But VENUS came, the soft enchanting fair,
I saw her glancing from her native sky,
Loose flowed her shining tresses in the air,
And love's own luster trembled from her eye.
III.
She bade me choose a less ambitious strain,
And showed the image of a smiling maid;
Let DELIA'S praises echo to the plain,
To every murmuring stream and every shade.
IV.
O! ruthless godess! am I doomed to bow
Again to love's soft empire and to thee?
Will thou no respite to my pangs allow,
No destined moment must this heart be free?
V.
Yet not for this I passed the sounding main,
Yet not for this I sought a distant shore;
Thy captive then, exulting, left his chain,
And scorned that power which gods and men adore.
VI.
But well thou have avenged thy slighted pride,
I feel thee now resistless in my veins;
In vain would science soothe and wisdom hide,
Thy triumphs, goddess, and thy suppliants pains.
VII.
Thee, DELIA, thee, by every murmuring stream,
Or thicket rude, unprest by human feet,
I sing, unheeded, to the pale moon's gleam,
Thee, DELIA, thee, the echoing rocks repeat.
VIII.
Come, then, too fatal and too lovely fair!
Come seek these groves, and ease a wretch's toil;
One look from thee can mitigate despair,
And bid all nature with thy lover smile.
IX.
Nor thou despise the shepherd's artless tale;
He leads fair truth and innocence along;
Because she sings in some sequestered vale,
Are there no charms in Philomela's song.
X.
O! might thy lover hope to win thy praise,
His soul should kindle with a nobler flame;
This hand should seize the blood-besprinkled bays
Which conquest snatches from the shrines of fame.
XI.
Place me where raging slaughter's crimson wheels
Over gasping ranks of bleeding warriors roar,
And if my soul one thought of danger feels,
O never, DELIA, may I see thee more.
XII.
Nor deem, because I loiter in the shade,
I bear a breast unequal in the deed;
I hear the blasts of terror undismayed,
Though pleased I listen to the rural reed.
XIII.
For I was nursed in virtue's rigid lore,
Nor will the goddess disavow my claim;
She bade my steps the arduous path explore,
Where sacred honor points the way to fame.
XIV.
But now far other cares distract my soul,
Joyless the laurel wreaths of fame I see;
In vain her animating thunders roll,
If with her blasts she mix no notes of thee.
XV.
Then listen, DELIA, to a swain undone,
Ah! hear a slave condemned -- thy chains to wear,
So may thy days in peace glide gently on,
Unmixed with grief, unsullied with a tear.
XVI.
For ah! in vain thy gentle tear would slow,
To see thy lover press an early tomb;
Then let thy pity mitigate his woe,
Ere sickness wither and despair consume.
XVII.
Wretch that I am! ah! rather let me bind
Hope's dear delusive chaplet to my brows,
Let fancy paint thee to my wounded mind,
All sweetly smiling on thy lover's vows.
XVIII.
O! how I long, by arching shades o'erhung,
Where breezes sport and fountains murmur bland,
To hear the tuneful accents of thy tongue,
To press the glowing softness of thy hand.
XIX.
O! how I long to lead thee to the bowers
Where FLORA scatters all her thousand dies,
To braid thy glossy hair with dewy flowers,
And catch the mild effulgence of thy eyes.
XX.
Thus with ideal bliss I fondly try,
Beneath the woodbine shade to soothe my pains,
But ah! too soon the lovely phantoms fly,
And stern reality alone remains.
XXI.
She bursts with thunders armed upon my dreams,
She tears me struggling from the woodbine shade,
She points to other groves and other streams,
But ah! she points me to no heavenly maid.
XXII.
I come the mournful victim of despair,
Adieu, my DELIA, and my hopes of rest!
So flies the wounded deer the hunter's snare,
Yet bears the arrow in his bleeding breast.
ELEGY.
Addressed to the Lady to whom this book is dedicated.
Virtus nobillor auro.
I.
OH! great APOLLO, mighty prince of verse,
Do thou assist a feeble mortal's lays;
Whose poor attempt in song is to rehearse
And celebrate a lovely maiden's praise.
II.
Her sparkling eyes outshine the di'mond's light
Or brighter SOL'S refulgent noontide ray;
When they are closed, with me it is endless night;
While open, I enjoy eternal day.
III.
No rose or lilly, with her heavenly face,
Will I endeavor vainly to compare;
Superior red and white her cheeks does grace,
Than the most blooming flowers ever wear.
IV.
The beauties of her matchless shape and mein,
Through the cold breast of age darts amorous fire;
Brighter than HELEN, or the CYPRIAN queen,
Is lovely B --, the whole of my desire.
V.
Now to sublimer heights* my muse, arise,
Inspire more lofty numbers now to tell
The intellectuals of the maid I prize,
The hidden charms which in her bosom dwell.
VI.
No sudden rush of unsubstantial joys
The settled peace of her calm mind molest;
No heavy weight of grief too much annoys
The sweet tranquillity reigning in her breast.
VII.
Her spotless soul, from ill, never knew a stain,
But is with strictest honor amply stored;
Virtue and truth, with their angelic train,
Complete the nymph by all mankind adored.
VIII.
Would the indulgent powers of heaven decree
This fund of endless blisses for my wife,
No kings in happiness should vie with me;
Oh! how delightfully would pass my life.
IX.
My pleasures she should share -- and all my woe
I Would soothe on the soft bosom of my love;
And when death came to strike the fatal blow,
Pass from a heaven on earth to one above.
VERSES
To Miss BETSEY N -- N.
Omnia vincit amor.
I.
WHILE others rest in balmy sleep,
And banish every care,
Into my mind thy beauties creep,
My sweet angelic fair.
II.
Then strait they drive each languid joy,
There wound each quiet thought;
My heart's the seat of beauties boy,
With all his armor fraught.
III.
Believe me, BETSY, lovely fair,
Believe thy captive swain,
Thy charms alone engross my care,
Alone can give me pain.
IV.
When round my neck with winning grace,
Thy snowy arms are thrown;
By heaven, the dear, the kind embrace,
Bears all my reason down.
V.
Gods! when from thy vermillion lips,
*Where all the graces meet)
Reclined upon thy breast I sip
Ambrosial heavenly sweets.
VI.
What fancy can conceive the bliss,
What language can express
The extatic joy, the rap'trous kiss,
The glowing warm caress.
AN EXTEMPORE.
Addressed to a young lady that was going to be married to a pastry-cook,
lately in business for himself.
O tempora! O mores!
I.
OH! sye Miss J-NES The name of the lady.
, how can you think
To wed a pastry-cook?
For though he is got a little chink,
He scarce can read a book.
II.
A downright pigmy sure is he,
In stature very low.
Yet, by the bye, he may please thee
When rolling of his dough.
III.
But ah! dear Miss, where is your taste?
Though do not be too vain;
But yet I think a maid so chaste
Would shun so poor a swain.
IV.
Although he is master for himself,
And keeps a little shop,
Whereby he hopes of getting pelf
By selling tarts and slop.
V.
Excuse these lines my lovely fair,
For they are meant in jest;
Then deign to soothe the author's care,
And set his heart at rest.
VERSES
To Miss POLLY H -- V -- D, on the charms of her voice.
-- O dea certe.
VIRG. Aen. i. v. 332.
I.
THY tuneful pipe, fair H -- V -- D, flows
Like Daulia's A term for a nightingale.
in the shade;
My heart with ardent rapture glows
At thy sweet serenade.
II.
Ah! melody to thee belong,
In thee it does reside;
The sweet effluvia of thy tongue
Shall ever be my pride.
III.
EUTERPE'S child, fair maid, thou art,
And sure my only care;
Thy voice it strikes like CUPID'S dart!
My charming, lovely fair.
IV.
Then sill thy lover's heart with bliss,
With thy enchanting strain;
Ah! all I ask of thee is this,
Thou pride of every swain.
V.
Then doubly tune thy plaintive tale,
And rid me of all strife;
O! let me on thy charms regale,
And make me blessed for life.
VERSES
Received from a young Lady for presenting her with BELL'S edition of
SHAKESPEARE.
GIVE me but WALLER'S pen, his ease of rhyme,
Or else assist me all ye beauteous nine;
For much I wish, however plain it is dressed,
My thoughts in simple elegance expressed;
Truth needs no disguise -- no outward show,
It Is from the heart that sentiment does flow;
All this you know, and better can explain,
But, female like, you see I must be vain.
I Will say no more -- you will not criticize --
Your heart is honest, and your head is wise;
And generous friendship can my faults excuse,
Often as you will the following lines peruse;
Let them my grateful thanks of tribute pay,
For sense and sentiment's conveyed in play;
And for morality -- that better part,
May every sentence search into my heart;
That while I read I may the better grow,
And thank that friend who did the gift bestow.
EPISTLE
To Miss W -- N, in answer to the foregoing.
^am qui^quid agit, queque vestigia ^^^ctit,
Componit surtim, subsequitur que decor.
TIBUL. Eleg. ii. l. 4. ver. 8.
YE sacred nine with ease conduct my song,
And let my numbers smoothly glide along,
To answer W -- N'S sweetly plaintive strain,
Which slows like Daulia's pipe upon the plain;
With every sense true gratitude is joined,
In all the taste of elegance refined;
Ah! could my feeble pen but write like thee,
What joy, what rapture would then glow in me;
But feeble as it is -- do, pray, excuse,
And take compassion on my tender muse;
For she is young and stubborn you must know,
And no harmonious sounds from her will slow;
Accept then, madam, these unpolished lays,
That Is wrote to celebrate your verses praise;
But ah! they claim much better praise than mine,
The words are flowing -- and the language fine,
I Will say no more, for fear you should complain*
And think my simple praises somewhat vain;
Though flattery's a thing I most detest,
Plain dealing, madam, surely is the best;
And such, by experience, I Have found to bear
The greatest sway amongst the prudent fair;
Though flattery to some gives much delight,
But to the prudent it is disgusting quite;
And sure to you it must obnoxious be,
Or to any endu'd with sense like thee;
For thou have prudence, learning and good skill,
Sense most refined, and wit at your own will;
Wherever you go, by every one caressed,
For gaudy pomp never harbors in thy breast;
Naught but goodnature, gentility and ease,
In short, your company is sure to please;
Whether thou art amongst the rich and great,
Or whether amongst those of an humbler state;
In these extremes thou justly art admired,
But ah! my feeble muse at length grows tired;
For she, a sluggish jade, with all her arts,
Can never paint nor celebrate thy parts;
Thy virtues are extravagantly great,
Beyond a pen like mine for to relate;
And of the little gift bestowed on thee,
May it improve -- and your instructor be.
Such is my wish and such has been my aim,
But pardon if I say -- your smiles to claim;
"Smiles, forsooth!" (methinks I hear you say)
"Where could he quote this? surely from some play;
"Impudence and insolence to the last degree!
"Why did the monster send his books to me?
"Strange fashion this; or sure he is lost to shame;
"'It Is all a farce -- he wants to blast my fame."
No, madam, no; let virtue have its price,
The books were only sent to break the ice;
Honor and honesty ever is my guide,
And would each Britain make it but his pride,
England would flourish, noise and tumult cease,
And all might live -- in sweet tranquillity and peace.
W. H.

For BRITAIN'S cause -- however I Will remain,
Then if deserving -- name me for your swain.
PROLOGUE.
Spoken on a young Gentleman's first appearance on the stage, in the character
of GEORGE BARNWELL.
Maxima debetur pueris reverentia.
JUV. Sat. 14, v. 47.
BEFORE this awful court -- tonight appears
A youth of tragic parts -- yet full of fears;
Bashful and young, he ventures on the stage,
Hoping your kind attention to engage;
BARNWELL'S the theme, wherein he means to show
That youth's misfortunes and excessive woe;
By which he hopes to draw a tender tear
From you, kind auditors, who are sitting here,
But ah! he fears that some stern wag will say,
"That stripling sure can never BARNWELL play;
"He has not courage, wants a bolder face
"To act young BARNWELL -- with a decent grace."
But soft [pauses] I think he told me, if I Am right,
He dreamt a dream most wonderful last night;
He thought that he was acting on the stage,
And, in an instant, burst into a rage,
On hearing of a critic -- in the pit,
Exclaim against him -- with his nauseous wit;
But presently he thought he was appeased,
By generous friendship -- which to him increased;
'Twas Lady DOROTHY that stood his friend,
And with this critic did herself contend.
For she, quite vexed, he thought, rose up at last,
And cried, "Sir critic, you condemn too fast;
"For know that I Am a judge, and sure can tell,
"That he is the very thing for young BARNWELL;
"Behold his figure, action, voice and mein,
"Gods! was there ever such a BARNWELL seen?
"By heavens for the lad I Am all on sire!
"For his success my heart glows with desire;
"Then, t'oblige me, critic, I prithee stop,
"And over your censures -- let the curtain drop."
On these imagined things the youth relies,
For your indulgence in this enterprise;
And he his utmost efforts means to try,
For reasons many -- and I Will tell you why!
First, then, your praises, which he hopes t'obtain;
Secondly, for honor, if he is not too vain;
And lastly, for pleasure -- and some little gain.
Thus I conclude, for I no more must say,
[Pulling out his watch. Our time is past The usual time of performance.
-- we must begin the play;
[Warning bell rings. And hark! the prompter calls -- I must away!
AN EXTEMORE.
Addressed to Mrs. GREVILLE, on seeing her in the Irish Widow.
WHEN first I viewed thy lovely form, fair lady,
'Twas in character of widow Brady;
Where, I confess, you struck me with surprise,
You caught my heart, and ravished both my eyes.
Ah! cruel GREVILLE! thus to wound a youth,
Whose heart for you has hoarded up it is truth;
Then pray restore his injured sight again,
Nor let him thus bemoan his loss in vain;
O! did you know the anguish of his heart,
Some unfeigned kindness you would sure impart;
Nor let a tender soul thus humbly sue,
Ah! dearest madam, for the charms of you.
O! give your smiles, and ever ease the pain
Of your submissive -- and expiring swain.
Adieu!

LINES To a deceitful Friend.
-- Absentem qui rodit amicum;
Qui non desendit alio culpante; solutos
Qui captat risus hominum, famamque dicacis;
Fingere qui non visa potest; commissa tacere
Qui nequit; hic niger est: hunc tu, Roman, caveto.
HOR. Sat. iv. l. 1. v. 81.
Imitated by SELF --
ACCURSED be he who wears a double face,
For such a man is void of every grace;
He Will promise friendship when his heart's averse,
'Till proved a traitor -- with a traitor's curse;
Then friends and friendship he at once defies,
'Till death o'ertakes him -- then most wretched dies.
On Mrs. YATES'S first appearance in the character of MANDANE, in CYRUS.
Written at twelve years of age.
YE nine harmonious maids, attune my lyre,
To paint the poet's -- and the player's fire;
In YATES the excellence of both we view,
Just to herself -- and to her author true;
MANDANE is my theme -- ah! that is the part,
Wherein she reigns the monarch of the heart;
Her graceful action! piercing eyes and voice!
Ye Gods! how lucky was the author's choice!
To choose such sterling merit for his queen,
And paint delight in every ardent scene;
Such skill combined -- with scarce a single clause,
Deserves success -- and every hand's applause.
On seeing Mr. and Mrs. BARRY in the characters of OTHELLO and DESDEMONA.
THOU great in action -- in a just degree*
OTHELLO, BARRY -- SHAKESPEARE meant for thee,
For thee alone -- he wisely drew the part,
To charm the soul and melt the frozen heart;
In lovely DESDEMONA'S tender strain,
Thy consort there does equal honor claim;
She shines transcendently through all the part,
The throng she charms -- and rends the critic's heart;
O! may such merit -- ever grace the stage,
And rest distinguished -- in its latter age.
AN EPIGRAM, On the character of JUNO, in the burletta of the Golden-Pippin.
Written extempore.
WHEN 'HARA O'Hara.
took his pen to write,
The part of JUNO, with his might;
He sure had C-TL-Y in his eye;
For nature is, in all the part,
Decked out with matchless skill and art,
Though in burlesqued poetry.
True it is, the bard was never
Half so natural or so clever,
If he the part for C-AT-LY drew;
For he with judgment has prefixed,
Her artful and her vulgar tricks,
And formed her wondrous just and true.
VERSES
On the death of Mr. MOSSOP, the celebrated tragedian.
MOSSOP farewell, my honest friend, adieu!
No more is heard the piercing voice of you;
But all is hushed -- the muses 'gin to weep,
And, for a time, you are only gone to sleep;
'Till called upon by the Supreme above,
(That God of mercy and eternal love)
Ah! then thy awful trial thou must take,
And of thy sins a just confession make;
Then will thou know thy everlasting fate,
Whether a happy or a wretched state.
But O! my friend, my constant wish is this,
That thou may ever find "Eternal bliss."
EPITAPH
On a favorite young Lady, lately deceased.
Intended to be engraved on her monument.
SOFT as the balm when gentle Zephyr blows,
Fair as the morn, and fragrant as the rose;
Lovely as crystal or the noontide ray,
Sweeter than the lilly or the new mown hay;
Matchless in wisdom, excellent in skill,
"Sense most refined, and wit at her own will."
Ever most glad her willing voice to raise
To sound her blessed, her dear Redeemer's praise.
From every ill her spotless soul was free,
Loved by all friends, but most adored by me.
Such were the charms of this angelic maid,
'Till called by grace to her e'erlasting shade.
W. H.

From heartfelt love shall flow a grateful tear,
O! beauteous maid I Will ever weep over thy bier.
EPITAPH
On a late Attorney of the Middle Temple.
HERE lies JOHN SC-TT,
As great a sot
As most, when he was living;
"And what is worse,
"Ah! that is the curse," For these lines see "The Sandman, a Cantata."

He got his bread by thieving.
He used to write,
Both day and night,
To pocket people's treasure.
He was so sad,
So mortal bad,
His crimes were out of measure.
EPITAPH
On a poor poet.
IF you would know it,
Here lies a poor poet,
Who in the regions used to dwell:
But now, alas!
It Is come to pass,
He Is fallen from heaven down to hell.
Yet he may be
From torment free,
(Though that is a thing I really doubt)
For he, poor wit,
His brain had split
In finding of the devil out.
A REBUS.
MY anxious soul once loved a maid,
I thought most charming fair;
Though she, alas! never gave me aid,
But urged my pain and care.
Ah! cruel girl, thy name I Will tell,
In justice to my smart,
Which thou have ever caused full well
From thy ungen'rous heart.
Half of an herb begins her name,
Esteemed of perfect use;
Every one of physical fame
It Is virtues can produce.
Two sixths of an instructing book,
When it is judicious wrote,
And if in it you chance to look,
A science you may quote.
Three fifths of a sharp piercing wind,
A human being take;
Add all these together, you will find
The fair one's name they will make.
SOLUTION of the foregoing REBUS,
By an unknown hand.
BETONY's a plant this country produces,
And greatly esteemed for it is physical uses;
When books are complete they are called a system,
(If I meet with any I seldom miss them)
The north wind is most cutting sharp and keen,
The human being man is plainly seen;
So it is BETSY NORMAN, 'thout any doubt,
You have so much anxiety about.
Now, Mr. HAWKINS, let a friend advise,
(If she your care and love does still despise)
Regard her as little as she does you,
And query, Sir, if that will not bring her to.
VERSES
Received from a genius in the country, (with whom I had some private pique) on
perusing my works in manuscipt.
MY sweet BILLY HAWKIN,
What argusi^s talking,
The grammar you put in a fright;
Your own dear conceit
To you may be sweet,
To me it is an antidote quite.
My ANSWER.
MY sweet pretty doctor of Malling The person here alluded to, living at
Town-Malling, in Kent, and by profession a surgeon, in which art he is very
eminent for curing insanity, and not a bad writer in the poetical way.
fair town,
Thou art surely stark mad or a simpleton grown;
For no man in his senses could ever have writ
Such bombastical nonsense, had he the least wit;
But thy poetry, I doubt, has cracked thy brain,
And made thee, alas! like thy patients, insane;
Or MIDAS'S fate has again come to pass,
And thou, my dear doctor, art turned to an ass.
Pray send me no more such illiterate stuff,
For I think you have made yourself foolish enough.
LINES
Sent with a present to a friend.
THIS trifle accept, (as a favor I ask it)
But pray don't forget to send back the basket The present being two chickens,
sent in a basket belonging to an acquaintance.
.
On seeing a young Lady that was prodigiously vain and affected.
AH! why so vain? though blooming in thy spring,
Thou false adored and truly wretched thing;
Old age will come, disease may come before,
For you're as mortal now as if threescore.
HOPS.
A SONG, for the year M DCC LXXVI.
Addressed to the farmers of Kent.
Tune, As I was a driving my wagon one day.
I.
YE farmers of Kent, who are jolly and gay,
Come listen a while, and pray mind what I say
May this season be crowned with plentiful crops,
And off of an acre a load of good hops.
Geho dobbin, etc.
II.
Oh! may they prove fine too -- and fetch a great price,
That ye, my brave boys, may get rich in a trice;
For as ye are ever both hearty and free,
Success to ye all for to fill ye with glee.
Geho dobbin, etc.
III.
To crown your repast in the hoping this year,
I wish that the weather may be fine and clear;
For when it is wet, it is wretched and sad,
From morning till night in a hop ground to pad.
Oh! sad hoping! etc.
IV.
Then to see the poor hopers, alas! what a sight,
It Is enough to put modesty into a fright;
For they are so draggl'd and wet to the skin,
And show all for nothing, their cloathing's so thin.
Oh! poor creatures! etc.
V.
In case of this weather let there be no flaw,
Take care to provide them with plenty of straw The hopers, during the season*
mostly lie upon straw, in barns, etc. which the farmers provide for them.
,
That when the poor wretches retire to their nest*
They may lie in comfort, and all take their rest.
Oh! poor hopers! etc.
IV.
But above all that is said, pray don't cheat the king,
For if you do that, it is sure a sad thing,
As he will have his duty by hook or by crook!
Beware, oh! beware, lest you're in the black book.
Oh! sad doings! etc.
VII.
Though ye have more honor, at least so I trust,
(I Would have ye be always quite upright and just)
For honor and honesty carries the sway,
Then from these great maxims never venture to stray
Oh! rare hoping! etc. * As the above song was wrote at a very short notice
(and entirely to oblige a few gentlemen farmers in Kent) it is hoped the
critical reader will excuse the badness of the poetry, and attribute it to
hurry and the sing-song measure it is wrote in.

POETICAL STRICTURES AND NOTES, ON MOST OF THE PRINCIPAL PERFORMERS BELONGING
TO THE THEATRES-ROYAL, IN DRURY LANE AND COVENT GARDEN.

POETICAL STRICTURES, etc.
Natio comoeda est --
JUV. Sat. iii. ver. 100.
On Mr. GARRICK,
Before he left the stage.
THE tragic muse her laurel crown bestows,
To fix it blooming on her GARRICK'S brows;
The comic muse her mask has made his own,
And SHAKESPEARE lives, whilst lives his darling son.
On Mr. BARRY.
BARRY once blessed with person to excel,
In vain my muse thy merit spares to tell.
IERNE'S boast, the stage's second pride;
The plaintive virtues in thy breast reside.
On Mrs. BARRY.
O! BARRY, when my muse but thinks on thee,
She thinks of merit, grace and tragedy,
On Mrs. HEARTLEY.
"IF to her share some female errors fall,
"Look in her face -- and you will forgive them all."
On Mr. ROSS.
GIVE Ross his partridge -- give him too his claret Mr. Ross being passionately
fond of what is here alluded to, but rather to excess, which I am apt to think
is the cause of that mountain of flesh he is so much encumbered with.

N. B. He has left the London stage, and is now performing at Edinburgh.


,
Ross will act well -- but better if you bar it.
On Mr. SMITH.
SMITH is at once the manly and genteel,
Feels all himself -- would he but teach to feel This gentleman has too much
levity in his manner of playing and wants expression.
.
On Mrs. YATES.
YATES is possessed of every charm to please,
Majesty, grace, gentility and ease.
On Miss YOUNG.
YOUNG, if to true perfection you would aspire,
Give nature freedom, and we must admire.
On Mr. KING.
WHEN lively sense, and fancy ever new,
The path dramatic with their posies strew,
Their sweet effluvia to our senses bring,
Their lavish essence -- by their envoy, KING Mr. King being often extolled by
the critics.
.
On Mr. WOODWARD.
WOODWARD for farce and pantomime Mr. Woodward used formerly to exhibit the
part of Harlequin in pantomimes, and has composed some of this species of
entertainment himself, viz. Harlequin Fortunatus, Harlequin Doctor Faustus and
Queen Mabb. See Theatrical Biography.
renowned,
With wreathes of praise by every hand is crowned.
On Mrs. ABINGTON.
GRACE in her steps, in every motion love,
She looks a being from the realms above.
On Mrs. MATTOCKS.
MADE to engage all eyes, and win all hearts,
We'll name her queen of Cytherean darts.
On Mr. REDDISH.
REDDISH forbear thyself to over-rate This actor being very ambitious, by
pronouncing himself second to none but Mr. Garrick, as a theatrical performer,
when it is too evident he is many degrees inferior to Messrs. Barry, Ross, etc.
,
And let not vanity contaminate.
On Mr. AICKIN.
AICKIN was formed by judgment and by use Mr. Aickin is a very decent and
useful performer, but no ways capital.
,
Which seldom fail some merit to produce.
On Miss MACKLIN.
THALIA's darling child in MACKLIN see,
She looks -- she is -- the maid for comedy.
On Mrs. BULKLEY.
TERPSICHORE to BULKLEY gave the part This lady was formerly a dancer.
,
By graceful motion to attract the heart.
On Mr. SHUTER.
SHUTER -- sweet laughter's child -- what humour's thine!
From thee impetuous slows each comic line.
On Mr. YATES.
THIS actor's wife I Have frequently heard tell,
That on the stage he plays the Miser Old Lovegold, in Mr. Fielding's
celebrated comedy of this name, a part Mr. Yates is eminent in, but is too apt
to forget himself from the stage, and (as his wife very justly observes) plays
it with wonderful precision at home.
well;
But when at home, she justly has decreed,
That he is a miser to a truth indeed.
On Mr. MOODY.
MOODY, to thee, what height of mirth we owe,
What high burlesque -- and mimicry that is low.
On Miss POPE.
HER lively fancy can the stoic draw,
In peals of laughter to confess her law. This actress (at present) has quitted
the London stage.

On Mrs. BADDELEY.
THY conduct BADD'LEY, was it like thy face,
In virtue's path 'twould claim the foremost place.
On Mr. D This gentleman being as contemptible a coxcomb in private life, as he
is excellent in the representation of himself upon the stage.
DD.
D This gentleman being as contemptible a coxcomb in private life, as he is
excellent in the representation of himself upon the stage.
DD, play the coxcomb, the affected beau!
But in thy conduct be not really so This gentleman being as contemptible a
coxcomb in private life, as he is excellent in the representation of himself
upon the stage.
.
On Mr. PARSONS.
PARSONS, well skilled attention to engage,
Though young, supports each requisite of age.
On Mrs. GREEN.
GAY comedy to GREEN descends in smiles,
And wins applause through all her little wiles.
On Miss BARSANTI.
IN Miss BARSANTI each improving grace
Glows ripening from her bosom to her face.
On Mr. LEWIS.
LEWIS, the space between a laugh and cry,
Look in your mirror, and for once descry,
Then shall I give you all your merit's praise;
Perhaps you will shine in future -- better lays. Mr. Lewis is pretty equal both
in tragedy and comedy, but his abilities want cultivating.

On Mr. BENSLEY.
BENSLEY's no actor -- match him if you can
Ye greatest actors -- he is a worthy man This performer bears a very amiable
character in private life.
.
On Mr. BADDELEY.
SMILES comedy by every feature won,
And owns that BADDELEY'S her real son.
On Mrs. HUNTER.
WHO can the sweetly plaintive HUNTER This lady's real name is Hunt, but for
reasons best known to herself, she has been pleased (since she came upon the
stage) to change it to that of Hunter, a circumstance very common among
theatrical performers, especially those who are not willing to disgrace their
family by their profession.
hear,
And not emit the sympathetic tear.
On Mr. CLARKE.
DOES CLARKE rough honesty in play present?
No -- CLARKE is really in his heart a KENT Kent in King Lear, a character
which, in some measure, corresponds with Mr. Clarke's disposition, being a man
of a friendly turn of mind, just in his principles, literally respected, and
has no inconsiderable share of merit as an actor* particularly in the rough
honest paths of tragedy, such as Henry the Eighth, Sciolto, Clytus, etc.
.
On Mr. PALMER.
PALMER with caution act your part, and try
To win our praises and to fix our eye.
On Miss CATLEY.
THE sportive loves, without the least disguise,
Appear unsham'd in CATLEY'S wanton eyes. Miss Catley is now performing in
Ireland.

On Mrs. SMITH.
WHEN SMITH pours forth her sweetest serenade,
She rivals Daulia in the vernal shade.
On Mr. VERNON.
MUSIC held judgment, nature held a voice,
Of music's present VERNON made his choice.
On Mr. MATTOCKS.
TO charm us MATTOCKS borrows from the spheres,
His mein how sweet -- his voice delights our ears.
On Mr. QUICK.
HUMOR and wit from QUICK does daily rise,
To please at once our ears, our hearts and eyes.
On Mr. LOVE.
Before his decease.
FOR Falstaff, Jaques, for Belch or Caliban,
LOVE is the monster, if you please -- the man.
On the DEATH of Mr. DYER.
DYER I weep for thy departed shade,
For wept each muse when thy last debt was paid.
On the GENTLE Mr. C -- TH -- LEY.
OF C -- TH -- LEY if aught the muse should say,
For scribling's sake she must advance the lay;
Though she avows, and faith it is no pun,
That she will never notice such a bastard son. Where this gentleman is at
present I cannot pretend to say, but O! dearest me! he has left the London
stage for these two seasons past.

SONG.
Addressed to the Critical Reviewers on my publishing a certain pamphlet.
I.
MY worthy good critics attend to my lay,
And hear what a juvenile bard has to say;
Though perhaps you will be nettl'd at what I set down,
Since the song that I sing is about the Half-crown This being (I am informed)
their customary fee.
.
Derry down, down, down derry down.
II.
Some little time since you attacked me sore,
For writing of prose, but I Will never write more;
Then take this poetical brat, and never frown,
Although I forgot -- for to send the Half-crown.
Derry down, etc.
III.
This Half-crown I speak of you surely must know,
It Is only been standing a twelvemonth, I trow When the book was published.
;
Yet rigid was you, by my faith, I must own,
And all on account of the wonted Half-crown.
Derry down, etc.
IV.
"How could such a noodle," ye cried, "dare to "write,
"He Is sure an impostor -- a plagirist quite,
"Then him we'll ever blast to all fame and renown,
"For see -- the poor devil's forgot the Half-crown."
Derry down, etc.
V.
But now honest critics, come, let us be friends,
Extol but this pamphlet, I Will make you amends;
For if, by your praises, the work should go down,
I swear, by the muses, I Will send you a crown.
Derry down, etc.
IV.
And now, my kind readers, you plainly may see,
That critics, like courtiers, expect a small fee;
In short these extortions so common are grown,
That all want a fee, from the prince to the clown.
Derry down, etc. * The readers are desired to observe, that some hints of the
above have been taken from a song, wrote a few years ago, by a friend, on much
the same plan, and is to be found amongst a collection of poems, entitled, "The
Laurel "Wreathe."


