THE PATRIOT ENTERPRISE: OR An Address to BRITAIN. A POEM.

Inscribed to the Right Hon. WILLIAM PIT, etc. etc.

By Mr. JONES, Author of the Earl of ESSEX.

To which is added, the PRUSSIAN CAMPAIGN, A POEM.

Celebrating The ACHIEVEMENTS of FREDERICK the GREAT, in the Years 1756 -- 57.

By WILLIAM DOBSON, L.L.B.

LONDON, Printed, and DUBLIN: Reprinted for WILLIAM WHITESTONE, opposite
Dick's-Coffee-House in Skinner-Row. 1758.

THE PATRIOT ENTERPRISE.
ONE Briton yet asserts that aweful name,
One Patriot yet supports the glorious theme!
Amidst Corruption's flood still spotless seen,
A heart still faithful, and a hand still clean.
Assist him, Seraphs, stoop from heaven ye few
That once were Patriots, once were firm and true
To Britain's cause, ye kindred Spirits glow,
Descend, and shield him in this storm below;
Your sheltering wings around his virtue spread,
Inspire his heart, and crown with wreaths his head;
With gleams of Heaven's pure light his soul array,
And all the glories of the Just display
Full in his sight; parental Heroes smile;
His virtue aid -- O snatch from fate this Isle;
Point out the paths you trod, the arms you bore,
Bid Truth return, and ancient worth restore;
Let Britain lift once more her laureled head
Above the waves, and strike the world with dread.
Thou, PIT, this verse with patient soul attend,
Her buckler, sword, her guardian, and her friend;
Whose steadfast heart no virtuous toil can tire,
Whose tongue is touched with Heaven's resistless fire,
In Heavens own injured cause supreme to shine
With dazzling force, with splendors all divine.
Thou Man beloved! thy country's boast and choice,
To whom afflicted millions lift their voice,
Thou last remaining champion of the state,
On thee Integrity and Wisdom wait,
Still lift thy dreaded arm, still, still pursue
The monstrous Python, and his poisonous crew;
Repeat each righteous blow, repeat each wound,
And bring the bloated Hydra to the ground:
Lo earth, and sea, and heaven shall then rejoice,
In one triumphant Paean lift their voice.
The marks of gratitude, ye Britons, pay,
And strew with thankful wreaths the Patriot's way;
Let breathing brass, let feeling stone confess,
Whilst arches bend, and story'd piles express
To ages yet unborn the glorious Man,
His falling country's prop, whose godlike plan
On cursed Corruption trod, on Faction fell,
Who drives the infernal monsters back to hell,
Spurning their gilded bait -- who strikes down Fraud,
At home our bosom pest, our bane abroad,
That sap'd the vitals of our sinking power,
When hungry Vengeance urged the ripening hour:
Then stood forth PIT, unaided and alone,
The People's friend, yet faithful to the Throne;
Trampling on British bribes with Roman scorn,
Another TULLY for his country born,
To counterwork each villain's dark designs,
For Britain too may dread her CATILINES:
He comes exulting in a heart sincere,
A tongue that strikes Corruption's soul with fear;
An arm still ready to redress the cause
Of Majesty oppressed, or injured Laws;
Like CECIL bold in Virtue's sacred might,
Like HAMPDEN glorious, when restrained by right,
Like FAULKLAND servid for his country's good,
No pride provokes, no faction fires his blood;
For Britain's lasting weal his wishes glow,
His Patriot heart see pant, his blood see flow:
Embrace him, Britain, to thy bosom press
One Patriot Son, long, long that Son possess.
O quickly come, thou Genius that sustains
Of Britain's ancient worth the small remains,
O quickly come, and kindle up those fires
With Freedom's breath that warmed our godlike sires;
The blessed occasion snatch, perhaps the last,
And round your liberties a rampart cast,
That shall, like Nature's laws, remain entire,
Till Virtue darkens and the stars expire;
The immortal task begin; see Virtue rise,
And lift her glorious flag to Britain's eyes;
Leaning on PIT her dreaded sword she draws,
Whilst angels trumpet wide the eternal cause:
See panting millions to her standard crowd;
See Truth assert, see Faith proclaim aloud
The grand behest -- from heaven the sound is spread
(Whilst crushed Integrity uprears her head.)
Britons, be honest to yourselves, be just,
In this unblemished man repose your trust;
PIT the firm phalanx forms with manly pride,
Integrity his shield, and Truth his guide;
See, see each venal pest before him fly,
Shrink from his voice, and shudder at his eye;
Such heav'n-fraught powers appal the guilty soul,
Where vengeance lightens, and where thunders roll;
Dreadful he marches on, and void of fear,
With Fortitude his front, with Worth his rear;
With every virtue see his soul supplied,
With Loyalty, with Honor near his side;
Auxiliars worthy of a cause designed
To rescue Nature's right in human kind:
From venal leprosy to purge the land,
And all the taints of soul Corruption's hand;
To push the barrier back that Freedom braves,
To mark the bounds of subjects, not of slaves,
To call up British honesty once more,
And every virtue to its reign restore.
Ye Britons join with heart, with voice unite,
It Is Wisdom calls you forth, and native Right;
Let future deeds your present crimes efface,
Your fleets and armies that bring back disgrace,
Council's overthrown by Caution's ghastly dreams,
Orders rejected, unattempted schemes;
O biot -- for ever blot the hateful page,
Quick cancel, Time, the ignominious age
From out thy records -- See, a train appears!
Of British worthies, and of glorious years!
See Time (by Virtue led) over Albion smile,
Returning Justice bless once more the isle;
Exulting Commerce issuing from the main,
And Britain's thunder shake the poles again:
See Truth ascend her adamantine throne,
Despotic Truth, eternal, and alone;
Parent of Wisdom, whose unbounded sway
The Virtues bend to and the Worlds obey;
Great queen of harmony, whence order springs,
Whose moral scepter rules the hearts of kings,
Before thy throne with Concord's emblems graced,
See all the Virtues in their order placed:
Hail, sacred Truth, O stretch thy ancient reign
Over Britain's kindred isle, call back again
Her golden age of plenty, power and wealth,
Her honor, temperance, fortitude and health,
Her justice, courage, conquest and renown,
Let tyrants start, and tremble at her frown,
New brace her arm, her trident's strength restore,
Hark! hark! her thunder shakes yon hostile shore;
Around the globe her dreaded flag display,
Let ocean's utmost bounds her flag obey;
Her crimson cross invincible let fly
Above the waves, triumphant in the sky.
It Is done; see direful Fraud, see Discord bound,
See hell-born Faction gasping on the ground,
See bloated Luxury with famished jaws,
See cursed Corruption with her gilded claws,
See poisonous Perfidy with patriot air,
See venal Villainy, see mad Despair,
A ghastly groupe! in fell confusion lie
Beneath thy aweful frown, O Truth, and die.
The caverns yawn, the rocky bars give way,
See Genius burst her bands, and spring to day,
Spurning the cave, accursed Corruption's cell,
Where Envy broods, where venal vapors dwell,
Thy bane, O Truth; see, see, she joyful soars,
She drinks the etherial ray, she high explores
Her native heaven, by Virtue's hand set free
She gains new strength, her piercing eye shall see
With tenfold force where Wisdom's secrets lie
Beneath the abyss, above the starry sky;
Through Nature's works her mimic hand shall play
Where Freedom prompts, where Virtue points the way:
Ambition there to blameless heights shall rise,
There guiltless Glory gain the immortal prize;
See Sculpture rear her life-creating hand,
See thinking stone on story'd basis stand;
There classic piles attract the wondering ken,
Here Genius dips the pencil and the pen;
In kindred lights with friendly ray shall shine
A MASON's muse, a HAYMAN's groupe divine,
Unrivaled loved; see HOGARTH's fancy reign
In BUTLER's rich, unborrow'd matchless vein;
Through blissful scenes the raptured mind shall rove,
New POPES shall sing, new LAMBERTS paint the grove:
Did PHIDIAS there indent the magic steel?
Did ROUBILIAC instruct the rocks to feel?
A HUDSON's teint, by beauty's beam refined,
Shall through the expansive features call the mind;
Nature and Art their utmost power shall show,
And SHAKESPEARS yet unborn, and GARRICKS glow.
The Arts exult at Virtue's great command
With Taste, with Liberty in either hand;
Triumphant Britain smiles, near, near each side
See native Honesty, see native Pride,
With Grecian worth, with Roman bent to vye,
Fame at her heart, and Glory in her eye,
With ancient Rome in her MAECENAS' days,
When Judgment gave, when Genius wore the bays,
With both shall Britain now maintain the strife,
To lift up nature and to polish life.
Be hence thy high concern, be hence thy care,
From Gallia's haughty brow provoked to tear
The rival wreaths; a twofold empire gain,
Science at land, and conquest on the main.
By both MINERVAS crowned, O Britain, shine,
Let learning still, let conquest still be thine;
Let courage, taste, and truth thy sons adorn,
Let BACONS yet, let MARLBOROUGHS yet unborn,
For arts and arms above mankind revered,
By Europe honored, and by Europe feared,
Expand the circles of thy vast renown;
Let PIT, let Virtue wear the immortal crown.
THE PRUSSIAN CAMPAIGN, A POEM: CELEBRATING The ACHIEVEMENTS OF FREDERICK the
GREAT, In the Years 1756 -- 57.

By WILLIAM DOBSON, LLB.

LONDON: Printed, and DUBLIN Reprinted for WILLIAM WHITESTONE, in Skinner-Row.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Lord Viscount CHARLEMONT, PATRON Of Literature,
Sciences, and Arts, This Poem is Inscribed: An unworthy Testimony Of truly
affectionate and indeliable Gratitude From his Sincerest Friend WILLIAM DOBSON.

THE PRUSSIAN CAMPAIGN, etc.
A PRINCE, unrivaled in puissant deeds,
Of noblest prowess and unconquered soul,
I sing; and with ambition lyre this verse
Attune the mighty FRED'RICK's honored name.
Blessed, while my CHARL'MONT his propitious ear
Inclines, attentive to the glorious theme:
How amply blessed, if, by the Bard invoked
So often, descending Health her genial balm
Would round thee pour benign, rekindling fair
Thy roseate bloom, thou amiable Youth,
Crowned with each virtue, with each grace adorned!
O that a ray of the celestial flame,
That erst illum'd the animated Bard,
(Who sung of Eden, and over Eden's bowers
High-soaring, traced the embattel'd Seraphim
In fiery conflict on the ethereal plains,)
Beamed on this breast: that I might swift pursue
Through every vast design, through every high
Emprize, the great, the inimitable Chief.
The Muse, in various raptures sweetly lost,
This shining path, and that, by turns surveys,
Bewildered; unresolved, the adventurous task
Where to begin; which splendour first, which last,
To celebrate in song: his matchless might,
His martial discipline exact, or kind
Indulgence to the Brave; his active soul
Rapt with fierce fury, through the glorious field,
Or steddiest counsels, and deliberate care.
But hark! the trumpet's clangor rends the sky,
And the loud clarions sound the voice of war.
Forth issue Prussia's troops, in various bands;
While these to Leipsic's walls their rapid march
Direct, those to proud Dresden's royal towers.
When lo, the impetuous monarch in just ire
Arose, and with unerring clue pursued
The wily labyrinths of the ambitious foe,
By keen perception traced: and all their dark
Device, and machinations dire, disclosed.
Near thrice three circling years his generous Soul
Had cultivated peace, whose studious arts
Of peace, and martial deeds alike expert.
When roused at length his wrath, with various clouds
From various climes beset, the perilous storm
Soon as he saw concentring from afar,
Furious he flew; and borne on swiftest wing,
Pierced the perfidious Saxon's inmost realms.
At FREDERICK'S dread advance, the timorous Pole
Instant the court, the capital deserts,
Leaves his afflicted consort, bathed in tears,
Disconsolate; and speeds with eager course
His martial powers to Pirna's close retreats:
Pirna, whose strong-fenc'd camp access defied,
Proud of high battlements and ramparts vast,
Fort above fort, impenetrably firm.
As when the towering Eagle soars the sky,
Sublime, in numerous flocks th'aerial train
Speed their swift flight to many a winding cell
Deep in the caverns of some craggy rock,
Cleft by Time's rigid hand; there pant immured,
With shuddring wings. -- Mean time the vigilant Chief
Three several hosts their several charge assigned;
There to secure Silesia's plains, and here
His native realms defend, should Russia pour
The unnumber'd legions from her fertile loins.
Himself the Saxon troops, as couched they lay
Wrapped in the bosom of their sheltering camp,
Nor daring to the field, with powerful force
Invests, on every hand environed round.
Yet still the generous Prince his ire repressed:
And while the avenging sword his arm displayed,
That stretched the gentle olive forth, fair pledge
Of amicable peace. The Pole that pledge
Disdained, through Austrian's vaunted aid, secure.
Forthwith, from every circle, stem decrees,
Loud-echoing mandates, comminations dire,
Fraught with each pompous circumstance of wrath,
Pour through the Empire, levelling their rage
At mighty Brandenburgh. In furious tides
Russia rolls down her thundering menaces:
Whom thy vain insolence, superb Versailles,
Thy haughty taunts succeed. He unappall'd
With ample breast receives the united storm:
Firm, as the stately promontory's height
Erect, by surges lashed on every side,
Foaming redundant on the big-swoln main:
His elevated brow over the mad waves
Rears it is dread honors, and disdains their roar.
Now while the Saxons with their hapless Prince
Clung to the trenches, and the fort embraced,
In deep despair involv'd' no succor nigh,
Exhausted, spiritless, by Prussian troops
Encompassed sore: at length the auxiliar host
From Austria's land in numerous squadrons move,
Led by their mightiest Chieftain Count Brown.
. Swift they march.
As swift great FREDERICK (whose quick-darting eye
No hostile motion escaped) his troops to join
Hastes, where experienced KEITH his standard reared
All in a moment towering in the van,
Of choice battalions formed, to Tournitz's walls
He drives his rapid way. Thither anon
March his whole host, in two main columns ranged,
Obsequious to his high behests. Nor staid
The impatient Hero, till Welmina's plains
He reached: thence to his view at once appeared
Austria's vast powers, from wing to wing displayed.
Ever yet the parting Sun his western goal
Attained, light's scant remains the vigorous Chief
Seized, and explored the plains, whence to assail
The foe at earliest dawn. The night's long stage
His troops the rigor of the inclement sky
With hearts unchill'd endure. He in the front,
Pre-eminent in danger and in toil,
Unmindful of repose, his listening bands
Incessant animates: with liveliest cheer,
And with endearing accents fires their souls.
"My glorious partners in the bold emprize
On many a well-fought field: in me your friend,
In me your fire behold. The morning sun,
(Or my presages err) shall see the plains
With Austrian corses strown. Myself shall share
Each perilous attempt, each brave exploit
Witness, and amply recompense. Pursue
Yon path, where glory, where your country's love
Invites, and Pruassia's still unsullied fame.
Thus while he spoke, th'invigorated troops
Glow with fresh fire, and feel the generous flame
Glance through their thrilling veins: the loit'ring Sun
They chide, impatient, panting for the field.
Scarce blushed the morn with streaks of orient day;
FREDERICK up-sprung: with his attendant Chiefs
Led forth the valiant troops: their various bands
In strong battalions regularly ranged;
Line after line, and file succeeding file;
Here the right wing displayed, and there the left,
Each on a towering hill. In order due
Onward they march: when in broad front appear
Austria's equestrian bands, arrayed for war.
"Advance (said mighty Brandenburgh) advance;
Rush to the plains, and Horse to Horse oppose.
Swift they descend, and with impetuous force
Burst on the foe: when from the hostile rear
Sudden the latent enginry disgorge,
Hurled from their brazen throats, the flaming balls
Innumerable: at the dire din alarmed
And storms of thundering metal, back they bend
Their not imprudent steps: then formed afresh,
To the brisk charge return. Now nor the roar
Of bellowing cannon, nor incessant fire,
Nor wide-extended dyke, nor obvious mound
Retard: with furious onset the fierce steeds
And their dismounted warriors down they trod,
In groans expiring, welt'ring in their gore,
In heaps on mangled heaps overthrown: nor ceased,
Till undistinguished sunk the imperial Horse,
All sunk, in universal ruin whelmed.
Forthwith, down-rushing from the mountain's brow,
FREDERICK's fierce Infantry, with furious speed
Through iron tempests and through floods of fire,
To Low' schatz's walls intrepid flew, assailed
With unresisted force, the astonished foe
Repelled, and from their boasted fortress drove,
With rout on rout confounded. The fell stroke
Vienna's General mourns, his scattered host
Driving precipate to Budin's plains.
FREDERICK, triumphant on the foughten field
Stands, and surveys the soil, with thousands slain,
And thousands wide o'erspred whose nobler doom
The captive warriors envy and admire.
Amid the ill-star'd train, galled at his fate,
Undaunted Lobkowitz' superior towers
With clouded aspect and indignant mien.
Hail, mighty Prussia, hail! With eagle wing,
Hovering around thee, Victory attend
They every march! -- Beneath the hallowed shade
Rest thee awhile: thy noble toil suspend:
Deign over thy brows to bind this laurel wreath,
The Ambitious Muse with pleasing labor wove.
How did thine heart exult, when thou surveyd'st
Thy daring legions, by thy conduct fired,
And all thy emulous Chiefs: above those Chiefs
High-blazing, as the peerless Star, that leads
Th'ethereal host over the wide azure poured,
Resplendent train! Next thee, great BEVERN shone
Sublime, and darted terror on the foe,
Reflecting his illustrious Monarch's rays.
Nor, valiant MULLER, shall thy prowess pass
Unsung; who with resistless might dispersed
Th'embattel'd ranks, like clouds of sleeting sand
Driven by the impetuous whirlwind's rapid wing.
With these, the tribute of th'applauding bard
Unnumber'd heroes claim, whose various deeds
Were long to trace. The generous FREDERICK's love
Shall crown their merits, and their glorious names
Live in the records of immortal fame.
Thence to the Saxon bands, in Pirna's fort
Immured, he wings his way, bent to subdue
That treacherous foe. Nor long, ever from the camp
The Imprisoned squadrons start, over Egra's streams
From the bridg'd path, while sable Night resumed
Her reign alternate, and th'incumbent mists
Spread over heaven's face impenetrable gloom,
Deep'ning the wonted shades. How vain the attempt!
Their wiles how frustrate! The vast summit's height,
Fronting thy turrets, Koningstein, with march
Laborious as they climb, th'uprising sun
Showed them to PRUSSIA's view; whose strong defiles
Enclosed them round. What gleam of hope remains?
Where shall they fly? how force th'obstructed way?
Aghast, and thunderstruck, th'obdurate King
His high-swoln pride submits, in suppliant terms
Sues for that peace he insolently scorned.
Thus quelled proud Austria, and the ambitious Pole
Flung from his towering hopes, the wint'ry storms,
On blustering Boreas and bleak Eurus' wings
Rushing impetuous, with malignant blasts
Warn to retire from forth the tented field.
His troops the indulgent Chief, albeit inured
To each severe extreme, his well-lov'd troops
Withdraws, and to his Saxon camp retires.
Soon as the balmy Zephyrs' earliest gales
Led on the genial spring, great FREDERICK's breast
Fraught with deep counsels in still silence formed,
Sudden unfolds. His every valiant band
Instant he summons: at his great command
Their tacit march they speed; and swift attain
Bohemia's realm, three formidable hosts.
This the famed BEVERN, that brave SCHWERIN led;
The third their Monarch's favorite conduct boasts.
War soon resumes his flaming torch. -- Again
Imperial Austria's congregated powers.
Appear, in numerous squadrons firmly ranged,
A mighty host: and KONINGSEGG commands.
Deep was their rear entrenched; by village walls
Their right was sheltered, by impervious woods
Encompassed the left wing. Yet not the less
BEVERN impetuous drove his rapid bands,
By every valiant Chieftain well sustained;
Stormed the strong cover, through the intrenchments rushed,
And pierced their dense array. In sudden rout
All their vast cavalry involved the Foe
Astonished views: while gallant LESWITZ springs
Fierce and undaunted 'mid the hostile fire,
Swift flies through many a perilous defile,
And with dread chase pursues the timorous host,
(Havoc and ruin marching in their rear)
From hill to hill in wild confusion driven.
To join thee, BEVERN, bends his eager course
Intrepid SCHWERIN, to thy soul endeared
By kindred Virtue's ever sacred tie.
Him to ensnare, within covered dale
Lurks the secreted foe, a numerous band!
Soon their insidious wiles the wary chief
Espied; encountered, and discomfited.
Thence his impetuous progress onward rolls
Wide over the land, unbounded, uncontrolled,
With torrent force. Before his fiery sword
On every hand they scour, nor dare confront
His mighty rage: inactive, down they throw
Their unavailing arms. The regions round
Bend to the victor, and confess his sway.
Now mighty FRED'RICK with observant ken
Saw, where the foe their various squadrons drew
From the towered fortress, and each banner'd host;
Ranged in proud pomp beneath their mightiest Chief,
Who from the terror of dread PRUSSIA's arm
So late retreated, with sad overthrow
Galled on Welmina's memorable plains:
Yet dares again, by conscious valor fired.
Again his thundering arm dread PRUSSIA rears.
Impatient of delay, with instant march
Over Moldaw's streams he passed: when lo! in camp.
High-fenc'd, by nature's favor and by art
Strong-cover'd, deep-entrench'd, proudly deemed
Impregnable, the imperial Army lay,
Much glorying in their strength, in numbers far
Superior. Still undaunted his bold march
FRED'RICK pursues: He nor their 'vantag'd ground,
Nor high-fenc'd camp, nor trenches deep regards,
Nor numbers far superior. On he leads
To the fierce combat his courageous bands.
They, by their Monarch's voice, (that favorite voice,)
Enlivened, joyous spring, with sweet presage
Of victory; their standards wide unfurled
In awful pomp, with rich emblazonry
Of vivid colors, streaming to the wind:
And over the horrent plain of glittering steel
A wavy Harvest formidably gleam'd,
Innumerable faulchions, the sun's blaze
(Often as his radiant beams from fleecy cloud
Emerg'd) reflecting fierce with burnished sheen;
Ever long to be imbrued in Austrian gore.
Ever long to be imbrued in Austrian gore.
Nigh to the foe advanced, each Warrior brave,
Commanders, and Commanded, with like zeal
Inflamed, and emulation high, contend,
Who first shall the untrodden path explore,
Who tempt the marish, who the threatening mound
Clime hazardous, plunge through the hostile fire
Foremost, and burst their serried files. Now 'gan
The onset dire, enkindled at the alarm
Of drums loud-thundring, and the trumpet's clang
Sonorous. Fierce the conflict raged 'twixt host
And host: The field throughout, was seen no glimpse
Of dastard fear: each nobly signalized
Their valorous ardor. Front to front they met,
Warrior with warrior closed, and steed with steed
In stern encounter. The hoarse cannon's voice
Echoes with bellowing roar: redundant smoke
Pours over the envelop'd sky, with horrid flash
Pierced frequent, and quick glance of sulfurous flames.
Swift through the ranks undaunted FRED'RICK sprung,
High brandishing his faulchion, Austria's dread,
From wing to distant wing unwearied flew,
Now in the Van, now Rear: on every part,
Through each vicissitude, each varying scene,
With splendid conduct, animating sounds,
And brave example, his obsequious bands
Inspired, directed, instigated, cheered,
And all his various powers by turns displayed:
Fervid, yet vigilant; with tempered fire
Guiding the rapid war's alternate reins.
On every part his victor arm prevails.
At length o'erpow'r'd, discomfited, recede
Austria's faint troops, abandoning the field
Drenched in their slaughtered friends' commingled blood.
How shall the Muse the wondrous havoc paint,
The various images of horror trace
Over the wide champain? Now fierce-issuing balls
Swept mighty numbers: now the impetuous sword
Clove with keen edge the tortured foe in twain.
Through many a valiant breast with adverse stroke
Pierced the sharp wound, and fixed a glorious scar.
Here from the quivering trunk the severed head
Swift flies: here the lop'd limb their lord desert,
His agonizing groans, and fruitless plaint
In the rude clamor drowned. With giant strides
Death traversed the dread plain, with all his pomp
Of terrors, and each ghastly form, enclosed.
What multitudes, great FRED'RICK, by thy arm,
Thy just avenging arm, what crowds on crowds
Descended to the baleful realms of night,
E'erwhile with Austrian's thronged! of adverse stars
There jointly they complain, their mutual woe
Sooth with condolence bland, and enterchange
Sad gratulation: soon with gloomy joy
Hailing their mightiest Chieftain, new arrived,
Thy great Antagonist; who gored with wounds
On the same fatal plain (heart-piercing wounds,
That barred each glorious prospect of renown)
At length groaned forth indignant his high soul,
In Prague's vain sheltering walls -- The illustrious Shade
Stalks on, nor deigns return the unwelcome Hail.
Pass we these dolorous regions, cheerful Light
Revisiting; with wonder to survey
The living monuments of PRUSSIA's fame:
The thousands foiled, who yet this vital air
Breathe, and in thraldom grace the Conqueror's train,
Lo what unnumber'd Trophies, what rich Spoils
Torn from the grasping foe, the solemn pomp
Attend: their ravished Ensigns, waved sublime,
With splended painture sloating through the air,
Display puissant FREDERICK's ample fame.
See how the imperial Cannon, many a row,
Move in slow pageantry; the brazen throats
Silenced, till FREDERICK bid them the dire roar
Renew, and on their late Possessors proud
Pour the retorted rage. -- Yet 'mid this Scene,
In all thy height of luster, matchless Prince,
To check thy triumph with the ingenious tear
Due to the mighty slain, on the dread plains
Where grasped whole squadrons of the expiring Foe,
Fell valiant SCHWERIN, by each virtuous breast
Loved and lamented: gloriously he fell,
With many a Chieftain of exalted name
Accompanied; who prodigal of life,
Poured in their Country's cause their generous blood.
Austria's deep consternation and dismay,
(Of every aid, of her whole camp bereft)
What tongue can utter? Or what power describe
FREDERICK's vast victory? -- But other Scenes
Arise, of different hue. O had thou never
Deserted Prague's 'sieg'd wall, to charge the foe
High-posted on the aerial mountain's brow,
With legions heaped on legions, firm arrayed
Beneath the imperial DAUN! Forgive the Muse,
Great Chief, who with thy sundry glories charmed,
Yet void of adulation, while she strives
With faintest pencil to delineate
Shadowy thy godlike virtues, paints thee man;
The wisest of whose race, discreetest, best,
'Mid all his shining faculties betrays
Some tincture of the impure alloy, derived
From his frail Ancestor. -- Sagacious DAUN
With skill the important situation chose;
And looked disdainful down. Though fierce defiles,
Though thundering batteries intercept the way,
Undaunted FREDERICK with his furious host,
Through thundering batteries and through fierce defiles,
Up the steep cliff his arduous road maintained.
Thrice he assayed the Austrian's powerful wing
To burst; repelled them thrice; yet thrice returned.
Then calm receding with serene retreat
Soft he descends to the subjacent vale,
(Where Elbe her liquid course obliquely rolls
Meand'ring) unretarded, unpursu'd.
Soon Russia's legions (from her populous clime
With tardy steps advanced) their lingering march
Accelerate, and FREDERICK'S realms invade.
Thus though insulted, the considerate Chief
With terms of mild composure deigns invite
Moscow's imperial Queen his plan to embrace,
Surceasing hostile rage; and war's dire flames
Extinguishing, over harrass'd Europe pour
The salutary boon of prosperous Peace.
His generous terms disdained, his power defied,
His territories spoiled, war he declares
Immediate; trusting in his righteous Cause,
And Heaven's protecting Arm. LEWHALD led on
The squdrons, and encountered more than twice
His force, entrenched on towering hill secure.
Nathless he vigorous charged; their foremost lines
Burst, and on every hand destruction dealt
Wide-wasting. Yet, lest the superior Foe
Crush his brave host, by the unfriendly site
Disfavour'd, by enormous multitudes
Oppressed, to Velau's camp the Chief mature
Retreated, unrepulsed. The Moscovites
Dismayed, nor studious of pursuit, lament
Their thousands slaughtered and, their General Lapuchin.
General thrall'd.
Now in their several camps each Host enwrapt
Retire; and War's tremendous thunder rests
Suspended: when at once, their sudden flight
Assaying, Russia's troops with rapid speed
Scud as precipitant, as slow they advanced
E'erwhile. -- But lo! the fierce confed'rate Powers
Vaunting united terrors, onward move
Under their gallant Leaders, great SOUBISE
And HILDBURGHAUSEN. Their proud threats to oppose
FREDERICK delayed not: his assembled troops
He ranged in just array, and thus addressed:
"My Friends, my Warriors brave! -- The Foe's advanced;
PRUSSIA shall meet them. Haste we to the field.
With you your FREDERICK conquers or expires.
Think how we have fought! what glorious laurels won!
Think on the equitable plea, that drew
These valiant swords, and vindicate the cause:
God be our Guardian, Confidence and Shield.
He ended; on he led his valiant files
Dauntless, and bid them storm the the adverse wing:
But on the edge of onset (his quick eye
Determining) instant as lightning's glance,
Invert they their position, lest the foe
Surround them unnaware. Now Prussia's Horse
Spring furious on the Gaul, in front direct
Opposed, of vast immeasurable depth;
The Gaul as furious, the brisk charge receive
With equal brav'ry. Long in dubious scale
Hung the fierce conflict: till the Gallic bands
Swerved; to the neighboring summit's resuge flew,
And recent formed. FREDERICK their rallied force
Soon disarray'd, and with pursuit severe
Drove, as the Lion drives his trembling chase.
Then from each host the Cannon's bellowing voice
Incessant roared. Prussia's bold infantry
Rush forth, and battery after battery gain,
With storms impetuous and unwearied fire
Rage their artillery, on either wing
The foe sore galling: till, constrained, they speed
Their ignominious flight, with soul defeat
Confounded, and in ruin dire involved.
And, but the Sun now prone descended swift
To the Ocean waves; and all-involving night
Threw her deep-shaded mantle over the plains,
Favoring their trepid flight; of that vast host,
Who spread at morning dawn their vaunted files
So proud, how few had from the deathful field
Returned, to tell the melancholy tale.
Thou Miracle of Chiefs! and will our Sons
Believe, by storied Chronicles informed
How Brandenburgh's illustrious Prince, with force
Immensely disproportionate, subdued
Thousands on thousands of confederate Hosts!
What numerous squadrons of the slaughtered foe
Fell in their prime of Youth: Of Prussian blood
How slight the effusion: what redundant tides
Of captived troops the Victor's camp o'erflow'd.
The generous FREDERICK his triumphant joy
Attempers sweet with piety humane
For guiltless Widows and for Orphan babes,
Thus multiplied by his victorious arm.
Nobly compassionate to the fallen foe,
With blandest treatment he beguiles their pain,
Pours the soft balm in their fresh-bleeding wounds;
And bids Captivity her dejected head
Rear, and unbend her brow with grateful smile.
Now shall the humbled Gaul his vaunts suspend;
And Moscow tremble at the Prussian name.
Austria has felt, by often repeated scourge,
What martial discipline effects; what the wise Chief's
Assiduous Care: how fires each manly breast
To bold emprizes FREDERICK'S generous Soul,
His fond Affection and paternal Love,
In boundless streams impartially diffused.
And thou, ambitious POLE, thy lawless pride
Repress; nor with vain arrogance aspire,
Grasping at alien realms: with wiser aim
Guard well thy own, and to fair Truth adhere.
Hark how the Sons of Albion's glorious Isle
Tune in harmonic choir the Conqueror's praise!
Thee, FREDERICK, all her glist'ning cliffs resound,
Thee her gay valleys, thee her mossy caves;
And grove to grove repeats the pleasing song
Britannia, resting on her ported spear,
Majestic smiles; and with the pleasing song
Enraptured, venerates the Prince, so bright
Resembling her loved Lord; to valorous GEORGE
In magnanimity, as in blood, allied.
Still other wars, still other triumphs rise.
The muse, unequal to the arduous task,
Breathless pursuing her unwearied Chief
From plain to tented plain, at length retires.
O could she from the turmoils of the field,
The clang of trumpets and the cannon's roar,
Convey thee, FREDERICK, to thy dear Retreat, POTSDAM.

Wrapped in the arms of Peace! In sweet repose
There would the royal Bard through echoing shades
With other notes than these, with loftier strains
To his resounding lyre, hymn the great POWER,
Whom ever he adores with filial love,
And reverential awe: Whose out-stretch'd arm
Bows down the obdurate fierceness of the proud,
The un-ambitious rears; who with a breath
Wields all the thunder of the various war,
OMNIPOTENT; and with his sovereign nod
The sat of mightiest Monarchies decides.
FINIS.
BOOKS just Published by W. WHITESTONE, Bookseller, in Skinner-Row.
THE Life of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, with the Lives of the APOSTLES
and ENANGELISTS. By the Reverend THOMAS STACKHOUSE, A. M. late Vicar of Beenham
in Berkshire, and Author of the History of the Bible, etc. Price bound and
Lettered, 5s. 5d. A Supplement to the Works of Alexander Pope, Esquire Containing
such Poems, Letters, etc. as are omitted by the Reverend Doctor Warburton; with
the Comedy of, The Three Hours after Marriage, and a Key to the Letters: To
which is added (not in the London Edition) A Key to the Three Hours after
Marriage; and and a Letter giving an account of the Origin of the Quarrel
between Cibber, Pope and Gay. Price bound 2s. 8 d. half. Covered in blue Paper
2 s 2 d. A Sermon Preached before the Society Corresponding with the
Incorporated Society in Dublin, for promoting English Protestant Working
Schools, in Ireland. By Thomas Seckor, late Bishop of Oxford, now Archbishop of
Canterbury. Price 3 d. The Justice of the Supreme Being. A Poem; which obtained
Mr. Seaton's Premium, at the University of Oxford, neatly printed in Quarto.
Price 6 d. half. Pope's Essay on Man. Price 6 d. half.

