LIKE MASTER, LIKE MAN. A COMEDY OF TWO ACTS.

Altered from Sir JOHN VANBRUGH.

As Performed at the THEATER, in SMOCK-ALLEY

DUBLIN:

Printed by and for O. ADAMS and T. RYDER, in Cope Street; and Sold by P.
WILSON, J. EXSHAW, in Dame Street; H. SAUNDERS, in Castle-Street; and E. WATTS,
in Skinner-Row, 1766.

[Price THREEPENCE.]

Dramatis Personae.
Smock-Alley. Crow-Street. Carlos, Mr. MOSSOB. Mr. T. BARRY. Sancho, Mr. RYDER.
Mr. HAMILTON. Lopez, Mr. EDWIN. Leonora, Miss SLACK. Mrs. KELF. Jacinta, Mrs.
JEFFERYS. Miss AMBROSS.

LIKE MASTER, LIKE MAN, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Street. Enter Carlos and Sancho. Car. I Tell thee, I am
satisfied, I Am in Love enough to be suspicious of every Body.


San. And yet methinks, Sir, you should leave me out.


Car. It may be so; I cannot tell: but I Am not at Ease. If they don't make a
Knave, at least they will make a Fool of thee.


San. I don't believe a Word on it: But good faith, Master* your Love makes
somewhat of you; I don't know what it is; but methinks when you suspect me, you
don't seem (...) Man of half those Parts I used to take you for. Look i^ my
Face, it is round and comely, not one hollow Line of (...) Villain in it: Men of
my Fabric don't use to be suspecte^ for Knaves; and when you take us for
Fools, we never tak^ you for wise men. For my Part, in this present Case, I
tak^ myself to be mighty deep. A Stander-by, Sir, sees more than a Gamester.
You are pleased to be jealous of your poo^ Mistress without a Cause, she uses
you but too well, in my humble Opinion; she sees you, and talks with you, till
I am quite tired on it sometimes; and your Rival that you are so scared about,
forces a Visit upon her, about once in a Fortnight.


Car. Alas, thou art ignorant in these Affairs: He that is the civill'st
received is often the least cared for: Women appear warm to one, to hide a
Flame for another. Lorenzo in short appears too composed of late to be a
rejected Lover, and the Indifference he shows upon the Favors I seem to
receive from her, poisons the Pleasure I else should taste in them, and keeps
me upon a perpetual Rack. No -- I would fain see some of his jealous
Transports, have him fire at the Sight of me, contradict me whenever I speak,
affront me wherever he meets me, challenge me, fight me --


San. -- Run you through the Guts.


Car. But he is too calm, his Heart's too much at Ease, to leave me mine at Rest.


San. For my Part, Master, I Am not so great a Philosopher as you be, nor (thank
my Stars) so bitter a Lover, but what I see -- that I generally believe; and
when Jacinta tells me she loves me dearly, I have good Thoughts enough of my
Person never to doubt the Truth on it. See, here the Baggage comes.


Enter Jacinta, with a Letter. Hist! Jacinta! my Dear.


Jacin. Who Is that? Blunderbuss! Where Is your Master?


San. Hard by.


Showing him. Jacin. O, Sir, I Am glad I have found you at last; I believe I
have traveled five Miles after you, and could neither find you at home, nor in
the Walks, nor at Church, nor at the Opera, nor --


San. Nor any where else, where he was not to be found; if you had looked for
him where he was, 'twas ten to one but you had met with him.


Jacin. I had, Jack-a-dandy!


Car. But prithee, what is the Matter? Who sent you after me?


Jac. One who is never well but when she sees you, I think; 'twas my Lady.


Car. Dear Jacinta, I fain would flatter myself, but am not able; the
Blessing's too great to be my Lot: Yet it is not well to trifle with me; how
short soever I am in other Merit, the Tenderness I have for Leonora claims
something from her Generosity; I should not be deluded.


Jacin. And why do you think you are? methinks she is pretty well above board
with you, what must be done more to satisfy you?


San. Why, Lorenzo must hang himself, and then we are content.


Jacin. How! Lorenzo!


San. If less will do, he will tell you.


Jacin. Why, you are not mad, Sir, are you? Jealous of him! Pray which Way may
this have got into your Head? I took you for a Man of Sense before. -- Is this
your Doings. Log?


To Sancho. San. No forsooth, Pert, I Am not much given to Suspicion, as you can
tell, Mrs. Forward -- If I were, I might find more Cause, I guess, than your
Mistress has given our Master here. But I have so many pretty Thoughts of my
own Person, Housewife, more than I have of yours, that I stand in dread of no
Man.


Jacin. That Is the Way to prosper; however, so far I Will confess the Truth to
thee; at least if that don't do, nothing else will, Men are mighty simple in
Love-matters, Sir: When you suspect a Woman's falling off, you fall a plaguing
her to bring her on again, attack her with Reason, and a sour Face: Udslife,
Sir, attack her with a Fiddle, double your good Humor -- give her a Ball --
powder your Periwig at her, -- let her cheat you at Cards a little, and I Will
warrant all is right again.


Car. Say no more; I have been to blame, but there shall be no more on it.


Jacin. I should punish you but justly however for what is past, if I carried
back what I have brought you; But I Am good natured, so here it is; open it, and
see how wrong you timed your Jealousy.


Car. reads. If you love me with that Tenderness, you have made me long believe
you do, this Letter will be welcome; it is to tell you, you have Leave to plead
a Daughter's Weakness to a Father's Indulgence? and if you prevail with him to
lay his Commands upon me, you shall be as happy as my Obedience to them can
make you.

LEONORA.


Then I shall be what Man was never yet; (Kissing the Letter.) ten thousand
Blessings on thee for thy News, I could adore thee as a Deity.


Embracing Jacinta. San. True Flesh and Blood, every Inch of her, for all that.


Car. reads again. And if you prevail with him to lay his Commands upon me, you
shall be as happy as my Obedience to them can make you O haypy, happy Carlos!
But what shall I say to thee for this welcome Message? ( To Jacinta) Alas! I
want Words -- But let this speak for me, and this, and this, and --


Giving her his Ring Watch and Purse. San. Hold, Sir; pray leave a little
something for our Board-Wages. You cannot carry them all, I believe: ( To
Jacinta) Shall I ease thee of this?


Offering to take the Purse. Jacin. No; but you may carry -- That, Sirrah.


Giving him a Box of the Ear. San. the Jade's grown Purse-proud already.


Car. Well, dear Jacinta, say something to your charming Mistress, that I am
not able to say myself: But above all, excuse my late unpardonable Folly, and
offer her my Life to expiate my Crime.


Jacin. The best Plea for Pardon will be never to repeat the Fault.


Car. If that will do, it is sealed for ever.


Jacin. Enough; but I must be gone: Success attend you with the old Gentleman.
Good-by to ye, Sir.


Exit Jacin. Car. Eternal Blessings follow thee.


San. I think she has taken them all with her; the Jade has got her Apron full.


Car. Is not that Lorenzo's Man coming this Way?


San. Yes, it is he. Shall I draw him on a Scotch Pair of Boots, Master, and
make him tell all?


Car. Some Questions I must ask him; call him hither.


San. Hem, Lopez, hem!


Enter Lopez. Lop. Who calls?


San. I, and my Master.


Lop. I cannot stay,


San. You can indeed, Sir.


Laying hold of him. Car. Whither in such Haste, honest Lopez? What! upon some
Love Errand!


Lop. Sir, your Servant; I ask your Pardon, but I was going --


Car. I guess where; but you need not be shy of me any more, thy Master and I
are no longer Rivals, I have yielded up the Cause; the Lady will have it so, so
I submit.


Lop. Is it possible, Sir? Shall I then live to see my Master and you Friends
again?


San. Yes; and what is better, thou and I shall be Friends too. There will be no
more Fear of Christian Bloodshed, I give thee up Jacinta; she is a slippery
Housewife, so Master and I are going to match ourselves elsewhere.


Lop. But is it possible, Sir, your Honor should be in Earnest? I Am afraid
you're pleased to be merry with your poor humble Servant.


Car. I Am not at present much disposed to Mirth, my Indifference in this Matter
is not so thoroughly foem'd; but my Reason has so far mastered my Passion, to
show me it is in vain to pursue a Woman whose Heart is already another's. It Is
what I have so plainly seen of late, I have roused my Resolution to my Aid, and
broke my Chains for ever.


Lop. Well, Sir, to be plain with you, this is the joyfullest News I have heard
this long Time; for I always knew you to be a mighty honest Gentleman, and good
Faith it often went to the Heart of me to see you so abused. Dear, dear, have I
often said to myself (when they have had a private Meeting just after you have
been gone --


Car. Ha!


San. Hold, Master, don't kill him yet.


To Car. aside Lop. I say I have said to myself, what wicked Things are Women,
and what Pity it is they should be suffered in a Christian Country; what a
Shame they should be allowed to play Will-in-the-Wisp with Men of Honor, and
lead them through Thorns and Briars and Rocks, and rugged Ways, till their
Hearts are torn in Pieces, like an old Coat in a FoxChace? I say, I have said
to myself --


Car. Thou have said enough to thyself, but say a little more to me: Where were
these secret Meetings thou talk of?


Lop. In sundry Places, and by diverse Ways; sometimes in the Cellar, sometimes
in the Garret, sometimes in the Court, sometimes in the Gutter; but the Place
where the Kiss of Kisses was given was --


Car. In Hell.


Lop. Sir!


Car. Speak, Fury, what do thou mean by the Kiss of Kisses?


Lop. The Kiss of Peace, Sir; the Kiss of Union; the Kiss of Consummation.


Car. Thou lie, Villain.


Lop. I don't know but I may, Sir. -- What the Devil's the Matter now?


Aside. Car. There Is not one Word of Truth in all thy cursed Tongue has uttered.


Lop. No, Sir, I -- I -- believe there is not.


Car. Why then did thou say it, Wretch?


Lop. O -- only in Jest, Sir.


Car. I am not in a jesting Condition.


Lop. Nor I -- at present, Sir.


Car. Speak then the Truth, as thou would do it at the Hour of Death.


Lop. Yes, at the Gallows, and be turned off as soon as I Have done.


Aside. Car. What Is that you murmur?


Lop. Nothing but a short Prayer.


Car. I am distracted, and fright the Wretch from telling me what I am upon the
Rack to know. (Aside) Forgive me, Lopez, I am to blame to speak thus harshly to
thee: Let this obtain thy Pardon. (Gives him Money) Thou see I Am disturbed.


Lop. Yes, Sir; I see I have been led into a Snare; I have said too much.


Car. And yet thou must say more; nothing can lessen my Torment, but a farther
Knowledge of what causes my Misery. Speak then; Have I any Thing to hope?


Lop. Nothing; but that you may be a happier Bachelor, than my Master may
probably be a married Man.


Car. Married, say thou?


Lop. I did, Sir, and I believe he will say so too in a Twelvemonth.


Car. O Torment! -- But give me more on it: when, now, to who, where?


Lop. Yesterday, to Leonora, by the Parson in the Pantry.


Car. Look to it, if this be false, thy Life shall pay the Torment thou have
given me: Be gone.


Lop. With the Body and the Soul of me.


Exit Lopez. San. Base News, Master.


Car. Now my insulting Rival's Smile speaks out: O cursed, cursed Women!


Enter Jacinta. Jacin. I Am come in Haste to tell you, Sir, that as soon as the
Moon's up, my Lady will give you a Meeting in the Close-Walk by the Backdoor
of the Garden; she thinks she has something to propose to you will certainly
get her Father's Consent to marry you.


Car. Past Sufferance! this Aggravation is not to be borne: go, thank her --
with my Curses: Fly -- and let them blast her, while their Venom's strong.


Exit Car. Jacin. -- Will Not thou explain? What Is this Storm for?


San. And dare thou ask me Questions, smooth-faced Iniquity, Crocodile of
Nile, Siren of the Rocks? Go, carry back the too gentle Answer thou have
received; only let me add with the Poet:

We are no Fools, Trollop, my Master, nor me;
And thy Mistress may go -- to the Devil with thee

Exit Sancho Jacinta sola. Am I awake! -- I fancy not; a very idle Dream this.
Well; I Will go talk in my Sleep to my Lady about it; and when I awake, we'll try
what Interpretation we can make on it.


ACT II.
Enter Leonora and Jacinta. Jancin. YOU see me as much enraged at it, as you
are yourself, yet my Brain is roving after the Cause, for something there must
be; never Letter was received by Man with more Passion and Transport; I was
almost as charming a Goddess as yourself, only for bringing it. Yet when in a
Moment after I come with a Message worth a dozen on it, never was Witch so
handled; something must have passed between one and the other, that is sure.


Leo. Nothing could pass worth my enquiring after, since nothing could happen
that can excuse his Usage of me; he had a Letter under my Hand which owned him
Master of my Heart; and till I contradicted it with my Mouth, he ought not to
doubt the Truth on it.


Jacin. Nay I confess, Madam, I ha'nt a Word to say for him, I Am afraid he is
but a Rogue at bottom, as well as my Shameless that attends him; we are bit, by
my Troth, and happily well enough served, for listening to the glib Tongues of the
Rascals.


Leo. Well: Let him laugh; let him glory in what he has done: He shall see I
have a Spirit can use him as I ought.


Jacin. And let one Thing be your Comfort by the Way, Madam, that in spite of
all your dear Affections to him, you have had the Grace to keep him at Arms
End. You have not thanked me for it; but good Faith 'twas well I did not stir out
of the Chamber that fond Night. For there are Times the stoutest of us are in
Danger, the Rascals wheedle so.


Leo. In short, my very Soul is sir'd with this Treatment: and if ever that
perfidious Monster should relent, though he should crawl like a poor Worm beneath
my Feet, nay plunge a Dagger in his Heart, to bleed for Pardon; I charge thee
strictly, charge thee on thy Life, thou do not urge a Look to melt me toward
him, but strongly buy me up in brave Resentment; and if thou see (which
Heavens avert) a Glance of Weakness in me, rouse to my Memory the vile Wrongs I
have born, and blazon them with Skill in all their glaring Colors.


Jacin. Madam, never doubt me; I Am charged to the Mouth with Fury, and if ever
I meet that Traitor of mine, such a Volly will I pour about his Ears -- Now
Heaven prevent all hasty Vows; but in the Humor I am, methinks I Would carry my
Maidenhead to my cold Grave with me, before I Would let it simper at the Rascal,
but come, come Madam we'll be revenged on them never fear.


Exeunt. Enter Don Carlos and Sancho. Car. Repulsed again! This is not to be
borne. What though this Villain's Story be a Falsehood, was I to blame to hearken
to it? This Usage cannot be supported: How was it she treated thee?


San. Never was Ambassado worse received. Madam, my Master asks ten thousand
Pardons, and humbly begs one Moment's Interview: -- Be gone, you Rascal you.
Madam, what Answer shall I give my Master? -- Tell him he is a Villain. Indeed,
fair Lady, I think this is hasty Treatment -- Here, my Footmen, toss me this
Fellow out at the Window; and away she went to her Devotions.


Car. Did you see Jacinta.


San. Yes; she saluted me with half-a-score Rogues and Rascals too. I think our
Destinies are much alike, Sir: And of my Conscience, a couple of scurvy Jades we
are hampered with.


Car. Ungrateful Women, to receive with such Contempt so quick a Return of a
Heart so justly alarmed.


San. Ha, ha, ha.


Car. What, no Allowance to be made to the first Transports of a Lover's Fury,
when roused by so dreadful an Appearance? As just as my Suspicions were, have I
long suffered them to arraign her?


San. No.


Car. Have I waited for Oaths or Imprecations to clear her?


San. No.


Car. Nay, even now is not the whole World still in suspense about her? whilst
I alone conclude her innocent.


San. It Is very true.


Car. She might, methinks, through this profound Respect, observe a Flame another
would have cherished; she might support me against groundless Fears, and save
me from a Rival's Tyranny; she might release me from these cruel Racks, and
would, no doubt, if she could, love as I do.


San. Ha, ha, ha


Car. But since she don't, what do I whining here? Curse on the base Humilities
of Love.


San. Right.


Car. Let Children kiss the Rod that fleas them, let Dogs lie down and lick the
Shoe that spurns them.


San. Ay.


Car. I am a Man by Nature meant for Power; the Scepter's given us to wield,
and we betray our Trust whenever we meanly lay it at a Woman's Feet.


San. True, we are Men, boo -- Come, Master, let us both be in a Passion;
here is my Scepter, (Showing a Cudgel) Subject Jacinta, look about you. Sir, was
you ev^r in Muscovy? the Women there love the Men dearly; why? because --
(Shaking his Stick) there is your Love-powder for you. Ah, Sir, were we but wise
and stout, what Work should we make with them; But this humble Love making
spoils them all. A rare Way indeed to bring Matters about with them; we are
persuading them all Day they are Angels and Goddesies, in Order to use them at
Night like human Creatures; we are like to succeed truly.


Car. For my Part, I never yet could bear a Slight from any Thing, nor will I
now. There Is but one Way however to resent it from a Woman; and that is to drive
her bravely from your Heart, and place a worthier in her vacant Throne.


San. Now with Submission to my Betters, I have another Way, Sir, I Will drive my
Tyrant from my Heart, and place myself in her Throne. Yes; I will be Lord of my
own Tenement, and keep my Household in Order. Would you, would do so too,
Master; for, look you, I have been Servitour in a College at Salamancha, and
read Philosophy with the Doctors; where I found that a Woman, in all Times, has
been observed to be an Animal hard to understand, and much inclined to
Mischief. Now as an Animal is always an Animal, and a Captain always a Captain,
so a Woman is always a Woman: Whence it is that a certain Greek says, her Head
is like a Bank of Sand; or, as another, a solid Rock; or, according to a third,
a dark Lanthorn. Pray, Sir, observe, for this is close Reasoning; and so as the
Head is the Head of the Body; and that the Body without a Head, is like a Head
without a Tail; and that where there is neither Head nor Tail, it is a very
strange Body: So I say a Woman is by Comparison, do you see (for nothing
explains things like Comparisons) I say by Comparison, as Aristotle has often
said before me, one may compare her to the raging Sea; for as the Sea, when the
Wind rises, knits its Brows like an angry Bull, and that Waves mount upon
Rocks, and Rocks mount upon Waves; that Porpusses leap like Trouts, and Whales
skip about like Gudgeons; that Ships roll like Beer Barrels, and Mariners pray
like Saints; just so, I say, a Woman -- A Woman, I say, just so, when her
Reason is shipwrecked upon her Passion, and the Hulk of her Understanding lies
thump, thump, thumping against the Rock of her Fury; then it is, I say, that by
certain Immotions, which -- um -- cause, as one may suppose, a sort of
Convulsive -- yes -- hurricanious -- um -- like -- in short, a Woman is like
the Devil. But here come the Crocodiles to weep us into Mercy.


Enter Leonora and Jacinta. Master, let us show ourselves Men, and leave their
briny Tears to wash their dirty Faces.


Car. It is not in the Power of Charms to move me.


San. Nor me, I hope; and yet I fear those Eyes will ook out sharp to snatch up
such a Prize.


Pointing to Jacinta. Jacin. He Is coming to us, Madam, to beg Pardon; but sure
you will never grant it him?


Leo. If I do, may Heaven never grant me mine.


Jacin. That Is brave.


Car. You look, Madam, upon me, as if you thought I came to trouble you with my
usual Importunities; I Will ease you of that Pain, by telling you, my Business
now is calmly to assure you, but I assure it you with Heaven and Hell for
Seconds; for may the Joys of one fly from me, whilst the Pains of the other
overtake me, if all your Charms displayed ever shake my Resolution; I Will never
see you more.


San. Bon.


Leo. You are a Man of that nice Honor, Sir, I know you will keep your Word; I
expected this Assurance from you, and came this Way only to thank you for it.


Jacin Very well.


Car. You did, imperious Dame, you did: How base is Woman's Pride? How wretched
are the Ingredients it is formed of. If you saw Cause for just Disdain, why did
you not at first repulse me? Why lead a Slave in Chains, that could not grace
your Triumphs? If I am thus to be contemned, think on the Favors you have done
the Wretch, and hide your Face for ever.


San. Well argued.


Leo. I own you have hit the only Fault the World can charge me with; the
Favors I have done to you, I am indeed ashamed of; but since Women have their
Frailties, you will allow me mine.


Car. It Is well, extremely well, Madam. I Am happy however, you at last speak
frankly. I thank you for it; from my Soul I thank you: but don't expect me
greveling at your Feet again; don't, for if I do --


Leo. You will be treated as you deserve; trod upon.


Car. Give me Patience; -- but I don't want it; I am calm: Madam, farewell; be
happy if you can; by Heavens I wish you so, but never spread your Net for me
again; for if you do --


Leo. You Will be running into it.


Car. Rather run headlong into Fire and Flames; rather be torn with Pincers Bit
from Bit -- But I am wrong; this sounds like Passion, and Heaven can tell I am
not angry: Madam, I think we have no farther Business together; your most
humble Servant.


Leo. Farewell to ye, Sir.


Car. Come along.


To Sancho. Goes to the Scene, and returns. Yet once more before I go (lest you
should doubt my Resolution) may I starve, perish, rot, be blasted, dead,
damned, or any other Thing that Men or Gods can think on, if on any Occasion
whatever; Civil or Military, Pleasure or Business, Love or Hate, or any other
Accident of Life, I, from this Moment, change one Word or Look with you


Going off, Sancho clap; him upon the Back. Leo. Content: Come away, Jacinta.


Carlos returns. Car. Yet one word, Madam, if you please; I have a little Thing
here belongs to you, a foolish Bawble I once was fond of. (Twitching her
Picture from his Breast) Will you accept a Trifle from your Servant?


Leo. Willingly, Sir; I have a Bawble too I think you have some Claim to;
you will wear it for my Sake.


Breaks a Bracelet from her Arm, and gives it him Car. Most thankfully; this
too I should restore you, if once was yours --

Giving her a Table Book By your Favor, Madam -- there is a Line or two in it,
I think you did me once the Honor to write with your own fair Hand. Here it is.

(Reads) You love me, Carlos, and would know
The secret Movements of my Heart:
Whether I give you mine or no,
With yours, methinks, I Would never, never part.
Thus you have encouraged me, and thus you have deceived me.


San. Very true.


Leo. I have some faithful Lines too; I think I can produce 'em.


Pulls out a Table Book; reads, and then gives it him. How long soever to sigh
in vain
My Destiny may prove,
My Fate (in Spite of your Disdain)
Will let me glory in your Chain,
And give me Leave eternally to love.
There, Sir, take your Poetry again


Throwing it at his Feet. It Is not much the worse for my wearing; 'till serve
again upon a fresh Occasion.


Jacin. Well done.


Car. I believe I can return the Present, Madam, with -- a Pocket full of your
Prose -- There --


Throwing a Handful of Letters at her Feet, Leo. Jacinta, give me his Letters.
There, Sir, not to be behind hand with you.


Takes a Handful of his Letters out of a Box, and throws them in his Face.
Jacin. And there, and there, and there, Sir.


Jacinta throws the rest at him. San. 'Cods my Life, we want Ammunition; but
for a ^hift -- There, and there, you saucy Slut you.


Sancho pulls a Pack of dirty Cards out of his Pocket, and throws 'em at her;
then they close; he pulls off her Head-Cloaths, and she his Wig, and then part,
she running to her Mistress, he to his Master. Jacin. I think, Madam, we have
clearly the better on it.


Leo. For a Proof, I resolve to keep the Field.


Jacin. Have a Care he don't rally and beat you yet though: pray walk off.


Leo. Fear nothing.


San. How the Armies stand and gaze at one another after the Battle; What think
you, Sir, of showing yourself a great General, by making an honorable Retreat?


Car. I scorn it.


San. Sir!


Car. I scorn it.


San. Oh!


Car. Oh Leonora! Leonora! A Heart like mine should not be treated thus.


Leo. Carlos! Carlos! I have not deserved this Usage.


Car. Barbarous Leonora! but it is useless to reproach you; she that is capable
of what you have done, is formed too cruel ever to repent of it Go on then,
Tyrant; make your Bliss complete; torment me still, for still, alas! I love
enough to be tormented.


Leo Ah Carlos! little do you know the tender Movements of that Thing you name;
the Heart where Love presides, admits no Thought against the Honor of its
Ruler.


Car. It Is not to call that Honor into Doubt, if conscious of our own
Unworthiness, we interpret every Frown to our Destruction.


Leo. When Jealousy proceeds from such humble Apprehensions, it shows itself
with more Respect than yours has done.


Car. And where a Heart is guiltless, it easily forgives a greater Crime.


Leo. Forgiveness is not now in our Debate; if both have been in Fault, it is
fit that both should suffer for it; our Separation will do Justice on us.


Car. But since we are ourselves the Judges of our Crimes, what if we should
inflict a gentler Punishment?


Leo. 'Twould but encourage us to sin again.


Car. And if it should --


Leo. 'Twould give a fresh Occasion for the pleasing Exercise of Mercy.


Car. Right; and so we act the Part of Earth and Heaven together, of Men and
Gods, and taste of both their Pleasures.


Leo. The Banquet's too inviting to refuse it.


Car. Then thus let us fall on, and feed upon it for ever.


Carries her off, embracring her, and kissing her Hand. Jacin. Ah Woman!
foolish, foolish Woman!


San. Very foolish indeed


Jacin. But don't expect I Will follow her Example.


San. You would, Mopsy, if I Would let you.


Jacin. I Would sooner tear my Eyes out; ah -- that she had a little of my Spirit
in her.


San. I believe I shall sind thou have a great deal of her Flesh, my Charmer;
but 'twont do; I am all Rock, hard Rock, very Marble.


Jacin. A very Pumice-stone, you Rascal you, if one would try thee; but to
prevent thy Humilities, and show thee all Submission would be in vain; to
convince thee thou have nothing but Misery and Despair before thee, here --
take back thy paultry Thimble, and be in my Debt, for the Shirts I have made
thee with it.


San. Nay, if y're at that 'port. Mistress, I believe I shall lose nothing by
the Balance of thy Presents. There take thy Tobacco-stopper, and stop thy --


Jacin. Here -- take thy Satin Pincushion, with thy curious half Hundred of
Pins in it, thou made such a vapouring about Yesterday: Tell them carefully,
there is not one wanting.


San. There Is thy Ivory-hasted Knife again, whet it well; it is so blunt 'twill
cut nothing but Love.


Jacin. And there is thy pretty Pocket Scissars, thou have honored me with,
they will cut off a Leg or an Arm, Heaven bless them.


San. Here Is the enchanted Handkerchief you were pleased to endear with your
precious Blood, when the Violence of your Love at Dinner, the other Day made you
cut your Fingers. -- There.


Blows his Nose in it, and gives it her. Jacin. The Rascal so provokes me, I
will not even keep his paultry Garters from him. Do You see these? You pitiful,
beggarly Scoundrel you: -- There, take 'em, there.


She takes her Garters off, and flaps them about his Face. San. I have but one
Thing more of thine. (Showing his Cudgel) I own it is the Top of all thy
Presents, and might be useful to me; but that thou may have nothing to
upbraid me with, even take it again with the rest of them.


Lifting it up to strike her, she leaps about his Neck. Jacin. Ah cruel Sancho!
-- Now beat me, Sancho, do.


San. Rather, like Indian Beggars, beat my precious self.
Rather let Infants Blood about the Streets,
Rather let all the Wine about the Cellar,
Rather let -- *Oh Jacinta -- thou have overcome.
Throws away his Stick, and embraces her. How foolish are the great Resolves of
Man!
Resolves, which we neither would keep, nor can.
When those bright Eyes in Kindness please to shine,
Their Goodness I must needs return, with mine:
Bless my Jacinta in her Sancho's Arms --

Jacin. And I my Sancho with Jacinta's Charms.


Exeunt. FINIS.

