THE CHILDREN IN THE WOOD, AN OPERA, IN TWO ACTS.

AS PERFORMED AT THE ROYAL THEATERS OF DRURY LANE AND THE HAY-MARKET.

LONDON: PRINTED for the Curious, and NOT Sold by the Booksellers in general.

M.DCC.XCIV.

[PRICE SIXPENCE.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE,
MEN.
Sir Rowland, -- Mr, Barrymore. Lord Alford, -- Mr. Dignum. Walter (the
Carpenter) Mr. Bannister. jun Oliver, (Servant to Sir Rowland) Mr. Caulfield,
1st. Russian, -- Mr. Burton. 2d. Russian, -- Mr. Cook. The Boy, -- Master
Menage. Apathy, (the Tutor) Mr. Suet. Servant (to lord Alford) Mr. Maddocks.
And Gabriel, -- Mr. Benson.
WOMEN.
Josephine, -- Mrs. Bland. Lady Helen, -- Miss. De Camp. Winefred, -- Mrs.
Hopkins. And The Girl, -- Miss Menage.
THE CHILDREN IN THE WOOD.
ACT -- I.
SCENE -- I. A Room in Sir ROWLAND's Castle, APATHY discovered at a Table,
Books, etc. lying before him.
(A Bottle and Glasses.) APATHY. WHAT a set of fools are philosophers, who
advise to study away life for the benefit of posterity -- that is -- die while
you live, that you may live after you are dead! these (showing the book) may do
well enough to garnish the brains of fools, but this (showing the bottle) This
is the true feast of reason. (Drinks) As tutor of these orphans, I lead a
tolerable easy life of it -- I teach the children idleness -- that is no
difficult matter -- I pimp for my patron, their uncle -- that is no difficult
matter -- I find Latin enough to puzzle the parson of the parish -- that is no
difficult matter -- I go into the cellar for an hour or two -- that is no
difficult matter -- come out again -- that is no -- yes, egad that, sometimes is
a very difficult matter.

(Drinks)
Enter JOSEPHINE. JOS. Oh fie Mr. Apathy! What drinking in a morning?


APA. Why -- my patron bid me plead his passion for you, and so I was just
taking a drop to inspire me.


JOS. I wonder Sir Rowland will continue his importunities. what can he have to
say to a poor girl like me?


APA. So as I -- he says, he is unhappy, and how a man that has such a cellar as
Sir Rowland has, can be unhappy, is to me something very amazing -- but have
you no feeling?


JOS. Feeling indeed -- don't you remember when poor Walter, the carpenter's
house was burnt down?


APA. I have a shrewd guess that Walter has drilled a hole through your heart.


JOS. Don't you remember, I say? that instead of enquiring after the poor
sufferers by the fire -- the first question you asked, was, whether the young
sucking pigs were safe? was that feeling?


APA. No; -- that was philosophy.


JOS. Philosophy!


APA. Yes, my philosophy! and this is the source from whence it springs [shews
the bottle.] By eating we arrive at the highest preferments of church and state
-- how do you arrive at the dignity of Lord Mayor? Why you eat your why to it,
and by drinking we appro^h the gods who never walked, they slid. --

[gets up staggering.]
JOS. looking out, Ha! What do I see -- my dear Walter! -- Mr. Apathy, go to
the children -- now go.

[pushes him]
APA. But what shall I say to Sir Rowland?


JOS. Oh! say any thing -- what you please -- now go.

[pushes him] Exit Apathy [ reeling] SONG -- JOSEPHINE.
WHEN love gets you fast hold in her clutches,
And you sigh for your sweetheart away;
Old Time cannot move without crutches,
Alack! how he hobbles! -- well-a-day!
But when Walter my trembling hand touches,
And love's colorings over my cheeks stray;
Old Time throws aside both his crutches,
Alack! how he gallops! -- well-a-day!

Enter WALTER. WALL. My dear Josephine --


JOS. Well, Walter, how do you do?


WALL. Very well Josephine, but I say it is devilish hard to be so poor, I, that
every body says am such an industrious clever fellow -- now a coffin -- I Would
make a coffin with ever an undertaker in Norfolk, and at a bed -- why the
carpenters' wives say, that at a bed I Am the very thing.


Jos. I should not have thought indeed of your making beds for the carpenter's
wives.


WALL. Ah, Josephine, I Am making a bed for us, my girl.

SONG -- WALTER.
There was Dorothy Dump would mutter and mump,
And cry 'my dear ll'alter, heigho!'
But no step she could take, would my constancy shake --
For she had a timber toe.
There was Deborah Rose, with her acquiline nose,
Who cried 'for you. Walter, I die,'
But I langh'd at each glance, she threw at me askance
For she had a gimlet eye.
There was Tabitha Twist, had a mind to be kissed,
And made on my heart an attack;
But her love I derided, for she was lopsided,
And cursedly warped in the back.
There was Barbara Brian, who always was crying,
'Dear youth. put an end to my woes,'
But to save in her head all the tears that was shed,
Nature gave her a bottle nose.
Josephine came at last, to nail my heart fast,
Fi^^ as oak will I prove to my dear:
And when parson Fether has tacked us together,
Some chips of the block may appear.
I tell you what Josephine, if you don't consent to run away from the castle, I
shall believe you listen to Sir Rowland.


Jos. Lord! Walter, don't be a fool now -- when my dear Lady Elinor went away
to meet her husband, Lord Alford -- Josephine, savs she, "the only comfort I
have, is, to know you will take as much care of my dear little innocents as a
mother" -- and while the poor little orphans are at the castle, I am determined
not to leave it.


WALL. Ah! Heaven rest their souls, we shall never see them again at the castle.
--


Enter SIR ROWLAND, and OLIVER, with two RUFFIANS. SIR ROWLAND. Ha! Walter here
-- Walter, what brought you here?


WALL, Your honor -- why -- only a job, Sir.


JOS. Yes -- A job, Sir.


SIR ROW. A job was it -- seize that fellow there.

( Ruffians to seize Walter)
WALL. Oh Lord! here is a pretty job!

(children laugh) --
SIR ROW. Silence those brats -- and prepare them for a visit, they must pay
their gossips. [Children again] Silence them I say -- [aside] Soon, their
silence shall be eternal, my brother being concluded dead, that 'lustrious orb
being set in night, shall these pigmy satellites eclipse me -- no -- that
fellow -- ( pointing to Oliver) I am sure of -- from his eye, remorse is
banished, and unmasked murder low'rs upon his brow -- he shall dispatch them
while on this seeming visit -- but to send him alone may breed distrust, were
it not good to ply this Walter? -- release from present fears -- the hopes of
Josephine -- with with large rewards backed with tenements and bevy will surely
ply the conscience of a hind. [to Oliver] -- Oliver I have found you a
companion for our purpose, he shall accompany you.


Slave follow to [Walter] SCENE -- II. Another Apartment in the Castle, APATHY
discoscovered asleep with Books at his feet, the Children playing about the
Room.
Enter JOSEPHINE. What asleep, Mr. Apathy?

APA. [wakes] 'Egad I Have had a very comfortable nap, what o'clock is it?


JOS. Exactly midday -- the children are going to visit their godfathers
directly.


APA. Is dinner ready yet?


JOS, No; it is'nt ordered.


APA. Not ordered! Oh Lord! -- the dinner not ordered -- talk to me of the
children, and nonsense, and dinner not ordered! -- here cook. cook.


Exit. BOY. Who goes with us to our godfathers?


JOS. Oliver, my dear.


BOY. I will not go with Oliver.


JOS. Why, my love?


BOY. Because of what I heard Walter say.


JOS. What was that?


BOY. Why, that Oliver was a damned black-looking rascal,


JOS. Heavens! my dear, I shall scould Walter for saying such words before you.


GIRL. I know you will not, though you say so.


JOS. Why, my dear?


GIRL. Because of what I heard you say last night. --


JOS. I don't recollect it -- What was it?


GIRL. Why, you cried out in the middle of your sleep, Oh Walter how I love you
-- and I know it is true because you blush so.


JOS. Oh! you little tell-tale -- (to the boy) Have you forgot that song I
learnt you the other day!


BOY. No -- I Will try to sing it, if you will help me.


DUET -- JOSEPHINE. and BOY.
Josephine. -- Young Simon in his lovely Sue,
Beheld her darling treasure.

BOY. -- Yo^ng Simon in his lovely Sue,
Beheld a darling treasure.

JOS. -- The toilsome day before him flew,
For love makes labor pleasure.

BOY. -- The toilsome day before him slew,
For toil makes love a pleasure.

JOS. -- Oh! fie dear boy, cannot you discern,
It Is love makes labor pleasure.

BOY. -- Oh! yes, dear girl, I soon sha I learn,
That love makes labor pleasure.

JOS. -- Oh fie!

BOY. -- Oh! yes.

JOS. -- Dear Boy.

BOY. -- Dear girl.

JOS. -- Oh! fie, you cannot disoern,

BOY. -- Oh! yes, dear girl, I soon shall learn,
That love makes labor pleasure.
But I am loath to sour sweet music's strain,
Shall we begin?

JOS. -- Yes.

BOY. -- We will begin again!

[Repeat over again both together] GIRL. Have you finished your song?


BOY. Yes.


GIRL. I Am glad of it -- an't you my darling. to her doll Time way --


SIR ROWLAND. (without) (...) (...) run away (...) of him dear (...)


(...) ^.

Exeunt.
Enter SIR ROWLAND, sollowea by WALTER. WALL. What -- your honor?


SIR ROW. Murder the children -- that is my resolve -- the reward. -- Josephine.


WALL. Murder innocents -- Tempt me in the form of an angel, to do the ^ct of a
devil. (aside) -- Damme, I have a great mind to thiottle him (aside) Eh -- stop
-- suppose I only seemingly consent, and then if I can but save them -- the
very thought makes me cry for joy.


SIR ROW. What! whimpering, fool!


WALL. Consider your honor -- I Am not much used to butcher children, its rather
out of my line.


SIR ROW. What Is your determination?


WALL. But then to be scorned --


SIR ROW. Look through the world -- where points scorn his finger at ermin'd
guilt? -- no, at houseless merit. It is not levelled at the wealthy cheat, but
at ragged honesty -- be wise -- be wise.


WALL. Why, to be sure, as your honor says -- but my honor. --


SIR ROW. Honor? -- that is a tinsel toy -- Wise men plate it over with gold,
that gives the worthless metal currency, and brings wealth to the holder of it
-- think of that.


WALL. Why -- indeed that is very true again -- very true. -- Oh! the Devil damn
him -- [aside] Well then, your honor, I consent, and if I don't, --


SIR ROW. Hush! take this sword -- but first swear.


WALL. Oh, your honor, I never swear -- never swear.


SIR ROW. No trifling, fool, but swear -- when next we meet this sword shall be
sheathed with blood.


WALL. takes the sword. Well, for once I will swear -- By all my hopes of mercy
hereafter -- it shall be sheathed in blood.


SIR ROW. Oliver will accompany you.


WALL. Zounds! that blood-thirsty villain. -- You had better let me do it
myself, your honor


SIR ROW. Silence -- follow.


Exit Sir Rowland and Walter. SCENE -- III. Another Apartment in the Castle.
Enter JOSEPHINE and the two CHILDREN. Come, my dears -- which of you will have
your mama's picture.

BOY. I will.


GIRL. I Am sure I ought to have it -- I Am a very funny little girl, and ought
to be made a pet of.


JOS. She was an elegant woman.


GIRL. And every body says I Am very much like her.


JOS. [looking out,] Ha! Walter in earnest conversation with Sir Rowland!

Enter WALER with a sword on.
WALL. Oh Josephine! -- I Have such news to tell you, as will make your hair stand
on end -- I am in high favor with Sir Rowland -- and am to go with the children
to their godfathers.


CHILDREN. I Am glad Walter is to go with us.


WALL. Aye, and what do you think, Josephine? Oh! do you know that -- Oh! -- um
--


Enter SIR ROWLAND with OLIVER. SIR ROW. Well, my little cherubs -- what,
delighted with your walk?


BOY and GIRL. Oh! yes, uncle.


(Sir Rowland retires up the stage) JOS. ( Aside to Walter.) Why, Walter, you
have got on your sword.


WALL. A sword -- have I -- [confused] Why yes, it is a bit of a kind of a
sword, as you say, to be sure -- but --


SIR ROWLAND comes down. Well, take your leave of Josephine.


CHILDREN. Come kiss us, Josephine -- good bye dear Josephine -- don't cry --
we'll soon come back again -- shall not we uncle?


SIR ROW. Certainly sweetlings -- Farewell! and Heaven take you to its care.


WALTER (aside) (Amen! say I) -- come.

Exit Oliver first. Walter following with the children, one in each hand.


JOS. I shall be glad when they come back again -- I cannot bear melancholy.


SIR ROW. Then, why love to inflict it?


JOS. Sir, I wonder you can think of a poor girl like me -- besides were your
passions such as with honor I could listen to, -- I could never love you.


SIR ROW. Mark, Josephine, though gratitude is dead in you -- fear, I perceive
still exists, and what has hitherto been entreaty, shall now be force.


AIR -- JOSEPHINE and APATHY.
Enter APATHY, with a Bill of Fare, Josephine. -- Great sir, consider my honor
is steady,

Apathy. -- Great sir, consider the dinner is ready.

Jos. An humble domestic is not worth your care.

Apa Dear sir, give me leave to present the bill of fare,

Jos. Take a lady with honor, if handsome and young.
Dressed in bodice so fine, and in kirtle so tasty.
But ah! sir, beware of jealousy,
Or else you will prove by your care,
Your love is to hot,
My fume you would blot,
And believe me great sir, to my honor I Am steady,
And believe me great sir the dinner is ready.

Apa. Here Is tongue and mutton,
What a feast for a glutton,
With bittern, and quails, and a venison pasty, and mustard.
A Goose and a bustard, --
The mutton over boiled,
And the pig will be spoiled.
Believe me, etc.

Exit Sir Rowland, Apathy, Exit and Josephine. SCENE -- IV. A WOOD, AND CUT
WOOD.
Enter OLIVER through Cut Wood, he beckons to WALTER, who comes forward with the
Children. BOY to WALTER. It Is a long way, Walter, to our godfather's.
Yes, dreary it is --
[Aside to boy]
OLIV. I say Walter -- this place will do delightfully!


WALL. Nay! I don't much like this place -- let us find some other.


OLIV. I say this place will do -- and shall be the place.


WALL. [Aside] Shall it, -- There, little dears, go and play there -- while I
talk to Oliver a bit.

(Children go to play at the bock) I say, Oliver, you have one failing.


OLIV. Aye! -- what is it?


WALL. Why you are too tender hearted.


OLIV. Am I?


WALL. Now I am, you know, such a blood-thirsty rascal; that I could murder for
amusement, therefore, I say, Oliver, suppose you leave this job to me.


OLIV What, you will dispatch them, will you?


WALL. Yes, to be sure on it -- so my dear fellow -- you may go back to the
castle -- get the reward, and leave them to me -- go.


Endeavoring to urge him. OLIV. Why, must not you think me a pretty scoundrel?


WALL. Aside Why -- I do for that matter.


OLIV. To receive money for doing a bit of work and not completing it.


WALL. I say, Oliver, suppose --


OLIV. Suppose, what?


WALL. Why -- suppose -- suppose we were just to save 'em, Oliver.


OLIV. Save 'em, eh!


WALL. Me save 'em -- Eh -- what you -- you will, -- eh? Aye, you wish it -- and
I consent, how pity becomes you, Oliver? aside how savage he looks!


OLIVER impatiently Why should we save 'em?


WALL. Why, to be sure, there are two or three trifling reasons -- first, it
is'n't very manly to murder innocents -- next, we shall be damned for it -- and
--


OLIV. Why an't you a pretty rascal?


WALL. Well, Oliver, you must consent to save them! look at 'em poor little
dears! Ah! I perceive a tear standing in the corner of your eye

[wiping one from his own.]
OLIVER Draws his sword. I am determined so --

going to cross to the children. Walter stops him -- the children frightened,
come down and kneel to Walter.
CHILDREN. Oh! Walter save us!


WALL. Stop, Oliver; only two words more.


OLIV. Well.


WALL. Look at them -- have you a heart hard enough to kill 'em?


OLIV. I have.


WALL. Why then, have you an arm strong enough to fell me down, you damned dog?


(Walter draws his sword directly) OLIV. Fell you?


WALL, Yes, for you must do that before you shall touch a hair of their heads.


OLIV. Indeed! we'll try that.


They fight, Oliver gains ground upon Walter, and strikes his sword out of his
hand -- the girl runs and picks up Walter's sword, gives it to him, just as
Oliver is aiming to run him through the body -- Walter renews the fight, and
kills Oliver -- off. Re-enter Walter with his Sword and Hand Bloody. WALL.
Damme, I did not think I had so much pluck in me -- there he lies -- come forth
my little tremblers, I am your champion.


CHILDREN. Have you killed Oliver?


WALL. Dead as a door nail!


BOY. Go kill him again -- such a rascal as he cannot be too dead.


GIRL. Walter your hand is all bloody -- come I Will kise it, and make it well --


BOY. Shall we return to our uncle's, Walter?


WALL. Alas! poor dears, you have no home -- let me consider what is best to be
done -- I Will return to that rascal their uncle, get the reward and Josephine,
and steal something from the buttery -- then we'll go far enough out of the
reach of that villain -- I say, dears, I Will go and bring Josephine to you, will
stay here till I come back?


BOY. We'll do any thing that Walter bids us.


WALL. I Will soon come back -- see here is a nice arbor, and here is my cloak to
sit down upon -- and here are victuals -- now don't stir from this spot, I
charge you -- Good bye, I will not be long.


Exit Walter. BOY. Look sister what quantities of blackberries and nuts there
are in that bush, let us go, pluck them.


GIRL, we can soon find the place out again, and they are better than the beef
and manchets, Walter le^t us.


DUET -- Accompanied by a Flagolet.
SEE brother! see on yonder bough
The robin sits! hark hear it now!
Listen brother to the note,
From pretty Robin red-breast's throat --
Sweetest bird that ever flew,
Whistle Robin, loodle loo!
As the Curtain drops they retire hand in hand up the Stage. END OF FIRST ACT.
ACT -- II.
SCENE -- I.
Enter SIR ROWLAND, followed by a Servant. SIR ROW. TO speak with me! if its
Oliver or Walter! Heaven foresend any ill should come to my children.


SERVE. I never saw this man before, Sir; he says his business is urgent.


SIR ROW. Admit him. [Exit Servant] who can it be!


Enter GABRIEL, (Drunk) SIR ROLL Ha! my brother's servant -- should he be
alive. [Aside] Gabriel I am glad to see you.


GAB. The joy is mutual your honor, but your honor looks a little pate, your
countenance has'n't that rosy appearance mine has.


SIR ROW. Grief, Gabriel.


GAB. True, your honor -- grief brings on drinking, and then what is man? -- O
never drink, your honor -- never drink!


SIR ROW. Now to know my fate -- [aside] I shall soon meet my brother, where
grief cannot come.


GAB. True you will meet very soon.


SIR ROW. All Is safe I find (aside) where are my brother's sad remains?


GAB. Remains -- Oh he remains but a little way off, your honor.


SIR ROW. This drunken guise, little becomes your mournful errand.


GAB. Why, you see you honor, I was sent before to get every thing in
readiness, but living on salt provisions at Sea, gave me such a confounded
thirst, that I was forced to stop every mile, to moisten my mouth with a quart
of ale; so on my second day's journey, my master overtakes me -- so says he --
says he -- Gabriel -- says he, --


SIR ROW. Say! who say? --


GAB. My master, your honor -- Gabriel, says he, I discharge you -- but my
sweet mistress cried, I might stay, for says she, if ever we part with Gabriel,
we shall loose the only sober servant we have got -- so my master only gave me
a kick, and set me forwards again.


SIR ROW. Idiot! -- wretch he is dead.


GAB. Dead, is he? I could show you the mark he made with his foot, and if you
call that a blow for a dead man to give -- why, however, if you will not credit
the mark of his soot, here is the mark of his hand.

( Shows a letter, Sir Rowland snatches the letter)
SIR ROW. Damnation!


GAB. Damnation -- A comical way of expressing joy -- your brother arrived says
I -- damnation says he -- but I hope your honor has taken care of the children?


SIR ROW. Aye, aye -- they are taken care of.


GAB. If that cursed thirst had not seized me, I would have been here yesterday.


SIR ROW. Oh! had you come but yesterday -- begone, leave me, drunkard.


GAB. Yes, your honor, I Will go to the cellar, for I feel a kind of dryness on
my palate -- yet your brother and his lady will soon be here your honor -- they
are not far behind me. I have a notion I did not come here quite staight, your
honor.


Exit reeling. SIR ROW. Confusion! ruin! yet if the hand of Heaven has been
stretched forth to save the innocent, if the children live.


Enter WALTER with caution, say quick. -- (WALTER draws his Sword and shows it
Bloody) SIR ROW. It is concluded -- where is Oliver?


WALL. Gone -- Heaven knows whither -- I have fulfilled my oath -- just mention
the reward your honor, the prize of angels, your honor -- Josephine your honor
-- the --


SIR ROW. Wretch! Murderer! avoid me -- take my curses -- such ever be the
reward of villainy.


WALL. So say I. [aside] But your honor consider I killed --


SIR ROW. Dare but to name the ^ou^ act, and by hell thou shall be rewarded --
a ^al^^r v^^lain -- go from their haunts of men and devour thy heart in misery
and contempt.


WALL. I should be a devil of a fool to do that, make a companion of my
conscience, does your honor find yours so pleasant a one?


SIR ROW. I cave me fellow --

(putting his hand on his sword.)
WALL. I go -- I Am gone, Sir -- Heigo! (putting his hand (...) heart) What now
he would give to do this -- now to (...) something from the buttery -- endeavor to
find Josephine -- and away again to the children -- Oh sier and foam -- They
say vi^ains inflict ^^^ery on their fellow creatures -- but I think they (...)
make none so miserable as they make themselves.


Exit. SIR ROW. Lost beyond hope -- how shall I act -- How -- how! but on -- my
purpose was, my brother's family should ^^^t in Heaven, and it shall be
acc^^^^^shed -- I Will chaunt my coffers, and to some t^i^^^less rascal. throw
down the dazzling ore, and while their ternes are risled by the damning dear
delation. I Will lead them to destroy this hated brother -- Forture continue dull
and blind -- now for happiness or perdition.


Exit. SCENE -- II. A WOOD.
Inter Children. BOY supporting the GIRL. How do you do, sister:


GIRL. Very (...) and very hungry -- I could eat some of ^he meat Walter left
us.


BOY. BOY. I w^^^ we (...) the place -- let us try to (...).


GIRL (...) I Am so sleepy -- and (...) brother. (...) may (...) picture (...),
and should sleep a long while, I should go where my mamma is -- so she^^l know
us (...) the picture

(...) the picture, and then gives (...) it in her bosom. (...). (...) app^a^
(...) and ^^ing together.
BOY. Are you frightened, sister?


GIRL. No -- not much.

(Trending)
BOY. Look yonder is a place to hie us -- for sure the thunder cannot shoot us
there. -- Come sister.


GIRL. I cannot walk -- indeed I cannot -- I Am so sick -- Don't cry, brother.


BOY. I don't cry. (Thunder) do try to walk a I it -- there -- see, I Will help
you -- very well -- very well.

(Thunder and rain)
Exit Boy, supporting the Girl. SCENE -- III. Another part of the ^ood.
Enter WALTER. with a Basket, Cloak on. Zounds, what a peppering storm -- sweet
souls how glad they will be to see me -- The cunning rogues have got under the
cloak -- and I dare say have got fast aslcep -- sets down the basket on the
cloak, is alarmed at not seeing them -- (runs to the front of the stage) Gone,
murder, murder -- Oh! they have hid themselves to frighten me. I see you, I see
you -- you may as well come, I see you -- (pauses) -- They Are gone! I can never
sleep more -- Ha! the print of a foot --

pursues the step and Exit. (Reenters greatly alarmed at not sinding them)
What the devil do I stand here for? I Will roar myself dumb -- I Will hollo! --
Hollo!

Runs off. SCENE -- IV, A ROAD.
Enter Sir Rowland masked. and two Ruffians, armed. SIR ROW. Look out.


1st. RUFFIAN. The travelers have gained the hills, and are dismounted.

It Is well -- behind that thicket wait their approach -- be firm -- here is
encouragement. (Gives him a purse) This way -- this way.


Exit Enter Lord and Lady ALFORD, with Servant. LORD ALFORD. Thou art weary
Helen,


LADY. In truth, most ^^dly, but let us on.


LORD, No -- here rest a while, this place is most dear to my r^m^mbrance, when
my good falcon urged on his quarty to this forest's ve^ge, reclined beneath
this aged oak, I first ^aw thee, my Helen.


LADY Ah! these times my Alford, what were then our hopes and fears, the
remembrance is strong within me still.

SONG, LADY ALFORD.
Mark the true test of passion, where a lover is nigh,
It Is hue is the rose, its language a sigh;
But where doubts interfere, and no lover is nigh,
When its hue is a ^illy, its language a sigh.
But look my lord, this avenue displays your castle's stubborn turrets. The
western tower contains our lovely children -- Oh how sweetly fancy passing the
bounds of vision, picture to me my babes -- At great nature's bidding,
stretching forth their little hands to clasp their mother -- the thought's
rapture -- On -- on -- my dear lord, you never saw the youngest -- indeed he is
most like you, the image of my Alford -- pardon these foolish tears, they are a
mothers joy.


SERVANT. (looking out.) Master -- defend yourself

Alford puts his lady behind him. [Ruffians rush on him, and his Servant, from
one of the Ruffians, with Sir Rowland attack Alford, the other attacks the
Servant, and is beat off.
Then enter WALTER, from the Wood. WALL. What two to one! --

Attacks Sir Rowland, wounds him, and drives the Ruffian off. Alford retires
into the wood with lady. The two Ruffians enter, supporting Sir Rowland.
1st. RUFFIAN. Are you hurt, Sir?


SIR ROW. Never heed that -- Have you succeeded?


1st. RUFF. No, sir, the travelers escaped in the wood.


SIR ROW. Providence, I thank thee!


1st. RUF. Shall we pursue them?


SIR ROW. No -- on your souls, forbear -- convey me to the castle.


1st. RUF. Shall I fly for assistance?


SIR ROW. No -- I Will none -- do as I ordered you.


Exit. [Ruffians supporting him.] Enter WALTER. WALL. What the devil does all
this mean -- where are the people l've been fighting for -- or where are the
people l've been fighting with -- I Am pretty sure I Have drilled one of them --
Damm^, now my hand's in, I shall be killing a man every day, I suppose -- But
these poor children -- I Am almost mad -- night coming on too -- Ha! -- Another
Ruffian -- I Will soon do his business.


[Runs off, as if in pursuit.] SCENE -- V. A WOOD.
Moonlight, lamps down, Banks on -- and Children discover d, seeming dead,
folded in each others arms, on the Bank, with leaves strewn over them.
Enter Lord and Lady ALFORD. from the top of the Stage. Lord supporting Lady.
LORD. Courage, my Helen.


HELEN. I Am wondrous faint.


LORD. Droop not, my love -- we are safe -- here we'll remain tonight.


HELEN. 'Twas most strange -- spoil was not their aim, but blood -- a thousand
fears press on me -- the vigor'd ruffian had an air me thought of.


LORD. Dearest love, calm thy troubled mind -- rest on that verdant bank.
(Helen retires on the bank. My servants, ever this have gained the castle --
I Am sure my brother's anxious care will find us ever the morning.

AIR -- LORD ALFORD.
WHEN first to Helen's lute
I sung, as she played to me,
How came these then to shoot
A thrilling sense all through me?
O! 'twas love, 'twas love!
In my eyes it glisten'd:
'Twould inspire a brute
To sing if Helen listened --
O! my love, my love!
Why call I with delight
This ditty's plantive numbers,
To wrap my fair in night.
And sooth my Helen's slumbers?
O! it is love, it is love;
Lullaby, my dearest
Care from thee take flight,
And peace thy heart be nearest!
O! my love, my love!
She sleeps -- I Will forth, and under covert of the friendly shade, de^^ry if
danger be aloft. (Advances where the children are, starts at seeing them)
Heavenly powers, what is here! two infant's! cold even to death! poor wretched
babes. -- poor wretched parents -- what pangs must rend their hearts -- How
shall I thank thee Heaven, for giving mine, a brother's fostering care. [Takes
the girl in his arms] Cold and breathless! Hold -- life seems newly ebbed --
[put's his hand on her breast, pulls out the picture, comes forward, and
looking on it, exclaims! Merciful powers! my own children!


[Helen alarmed, awakes] HELEN. My Alford! [Advances and snatches the picture
from him, on looking on it, shrieks, falls on the bank and embraces the boy] My
child -- my child! my darling boy (...)! [takes him in her arms -- Alford takes
up the girl.] How is my girl?


LORD. She will recover.


HELEN How came they here? but let us away.


LORD. -- At the eastern exremity of this forest, stands an humble cottage --
there we'll hasten -- thy feeble arms cannot sustain.


HEEN, Away -- away -- under my own disasters I might droop -- but a mother's
fears have amagozonian strength -- away, my lord.


SCENE -- VI. Inside of Walter's house, door open.
Enter Jofephine, Winifred, and a female Servant. Winifred and Servant being at
a Table, on which is placed wooden Trenchers, A roast fowl, knives and forks,
etc. Lamps up. WINIFRED. Speaking as she enters I thought so -- well, and so --


Jos. And so, goody, a servant came to the castle, and Sir Rowland ordered him
to be confined in the dark tower, and do you know old King says it is a servant
of Lord Alford.


WIN. I thought so -- well, and s --


Jos. Why, then Sir Rowland went out disguised with four men -- and in the
confusion I stepped out -- but goody -- where is Walter?


WIN. Oh! Heaven knows whether we shall ever see the dear boy again.


Jos. Oh dear you frighten the -- why goody --


WIN. Why do you know, I saw a spider crawl up the fide of the chimney, and the
horse-shoe was last night taken off the door,


WALTER. without Hallo!


Enter Walter, at door, and shuts it after him. JOS. Here is Walter.


WIN. I thought so.


Wasted in extreme dejection -- pale -- and takes a chair -- brings it forward
-- and sits down. WIN. looking at him. Why, child, what is the matter? -- have
you seen a ghost? Sit cross legged my dear boy.


WALL. There -- will that please you? [Josephine taps him on the shoulder. he
jumps up alarmed] Ah! Josephine is it you?


JOS. Well, Walter, where did you leave the children?


WALL. Under a tree, and told them to stay there till I --


JOS. Under a tree! Oh! in the Gentleman's garden.


WALL. No. no. (recollecting) Yes, yes, where else should I leave them -- For a
wood where they might be starved?


JOS. No -- that I Am sure you would not.


WALL. I never was afraid of Goblins -- but to night I though^ every tree a
ghost -- and took old Jowler for the Devil.


WIN. Ay, ay, old Tab did not scratch under her ear for nothing -- a sure sign
that somebody will be hanged.


WALL. Damn old Tab.


JOS. Aye, Walter, you have been drinking.


WALL. My own tears then.

(aside)
WIN. But come, here is a capon for your supper.


WALL. Oh, if the dear children had that capon.


JOS. Lord! Walter why they have plenty.


WALL. Plenty have they! [(...) ring] to be sure I know that as well as you,
Josephine.


JOS. Had I known how cross you would have been, I would not have come.

(rought)
WALL. I beg your pardon. Josephine -- don't cry my girl; I Am almost mad

sits down side of the table -- knocks over the fall.
WIN. Sitting behind the table. Oh! he is spilt the salt (throw some over her
shoulder) And I see here is a winding sheet in the candle.


WALL. Damn it mother don't frighten me so -- Josephine, my dear girl, sing me a
song.


JOS. I Will sing you what I bought of the old blind pedlar who passed by this
morning -- Its entitled and call d, the Norfolk tragedy, showing how the ghost
of a murdered babe.


WALL. No -- do -- don't sing that.


WIN. Yes, yes, sing it, Josephine.


JOSEPHINE -- SINGS.
A Yeoman of no mean degree,
For thirst of gain, and lucre, he
A pretty babe did murder strait,
By reason of its large estate.
To vex him to his heart's content,
To him he murdered (...) sent;
Full (...) appeared (...) c^n^le flame,
And a knocking at (...) window came.
His con^erence (...) him.
And made him tremble every limb;
With that the ghost began to roar,
And strait way but sted open the door.
End of 2d. verse, a knock without at window. All start up from table greatly
alarmed. JOS. Walter -- why do you tremble, are you frightened?


WALL. Me frightened -- bless your soul -- nonsense.go on.


JOS. Sings 3d. verse, at the end of which a knocking at the door without. They
all start, the door is burst open, Winifred and Josephine retire greatly
alarmed. Walter remains near the table, fearing to look toward. WALL. Mother,
mother, mother; don't leave me.


Enter LORD and LADY AITORD, the and two Children. What, alive, Oh Lord! oh
lord! oh lord! -- children run to Walters, he fal^s on his knees, huggs and
kisses them.] What, my honored lord, and lady too! Oh! it is to much. --
Josephine, come here, down on your knees.

HELEN My faithful girl, explain these wonders? --
I cannot, my lady, -- Walter can.

WALL. The -- I know nothing, yes, I know every thing; you see, my lord, -- your
brother, aye, you little rogue to run away, -- and so so my lord, your brother
sent, and I -- my lord, -- I, -- I, cannot tell you not --

[kissing the children.]
GIRL. I Am very hungry.


WALL. Hungry are you! [then snatches them up, cuts fowl and helps them with
great joy]


APATHY without. Let none pa^^
(...) with constables.] Seize that murdurer of innocents.
[Walter laughs] Do you laugh, you murderer.

WALL. Laugh! look there.

(sheaving the children.)
APA. Eless my soul! there they are at supper; a ca, pon. I declare; vert
pretty eating, I could like to pick a bit. -- Oh! my lord your brother is dying
-- he has confessed he employed Oliver, and Walter, to murder your children.


WALL, True; I killed Oliver.


LORD My gallant fellow.


APA. He then planned your destruction.


LORD. A cursed ambition, wretched brother.


APA. And went out with armed ruffians to attack you.


HELEN. But heaven, sent an unknown friend to save us. Walter could thou but
find him.


WALL. Why, my lady, I could find him, I believe,

(with modest hesitation)
HELEN Sure that look, -- you protected us.


WALL. I believe I did.


HELEN My preserver!


LORD. My friend!


WALL. Dear, my lord, sweet dear lady! don't kill me with kindness, I cannot ^ear
it I Am too happy -- (...) ill g^t^en wealth do this?


HELEN Name some reward.


WALL. A treasure!


LORD. If India can produce it, it is yours.


WALL, My lord, you need not go so far, there is the treasure I want; give, give
me, my little Josephine, and I am happy.


HELEN. My dearest girl -- receive from my hand your faithful Walter, and it
shall be my study to reward his services.


WALL. Madam I Will serve you with my latest breath! but I trust the children in
the wood will, to night, find better friends than poor Walter the carpenter.


FINALE.
Solo Wall. Have I saved this girl and boy?
Is It so understood, Sirs?
May I hollow, now for joy?
Are we out of the wood, Sirs?
Have I saved, etc.

Solo Apa. Providence has smiled on me,
Happy I, as may be;
A father here -- at either knee,
A rosy dimpl'd baby.
Have we saved, etc.

Solo Helen Fullest mine of mother's bliss,
Fuller naught can make it;
Since all tonight who witness this.
Seem kindly to partake it.

Solo Jos. Now my Walter, I shall wed,
Gay my heart, and light, Sirs --

Solo Wall. And! my girl, have made a bed,
To fit us right and tight, Sirs --
We have saved, etc,

FINIS.

