THE CASE OF THE SURGEONS of London.
THE Barbers of the City of London were incorporated by King Edward the IVth, 1
Edw. IV. 1461.
in order to promote and improve the Science and Faculty of Surgery, upon
Consideration of the many public Mischiefs which had arisen from the Ignorance
and Unskilfulness of Persons practicing that Art.

To remedy such Evils for the Time to come, which the Charter recites to have
been owing to the Want of a proper Oversight, Correction, and Punishment of
such as were not sufficiently skilled in the Faculty of Surgery, the Mystery
and Commonalty of Barbers were created a Body Corporate, with Power to make
proper Statutes and Ordinances for their good Government.

And the Masters and Governors of that Company were to have the Oversight,
Correction, and Government of all Persons using the Mystery of Surgeons, within
the City of London, and Suburbs thereof; and the Punishment of them, for their
Offenses, in improperly exercising and practicing their Art; and likewise the
Oversight and Inspection of all Instruments, Plasters, and other Medicines, by
them used.

And, in order to attain the End of their Institution, no Persons whatsoever
were to be admitted or received into their Company, except Persons sufficiently
skilled and instructed in the Art of Surgery.

This Charter was afterward confirmed by King Henry the VIIth, in the 15th
Year of his Reign, and by King Henry the VIIIth, in the 2d Year of his Reign.

In the 32d Year of Henry the VIIIth, when Persons of better Education, and
greater Abilities, began to apply themselves to the Study and Practice of
Surgery, the Legislature thought proper to unite this Company, which were still
all Surgeons, and, by the Terms of their Charter, could be composed of no other
Persons, with another Body of Men, likewise practicing Surgery, but not
incorporated.

The Act recites, That there then were, within the City of London, Two several
and distinct Companies of Surgeons, occupying and exercising the Science and
Faculty of Surgery; the one Company called The Barbers of London, the other
called The Surgeons of London.

And the End proposed by the Legislature in uniting these Two distinct
Companies of Surgeons, and making them One Body Corporate, is declared to be,
That, by their Union and frequent Assembly together, the good and due Order,
Exercise, and Knowledge in the Science and Faculty of Surgery, should be, as
well in Speculation as in Practice, obtained, both to themselves and their
Apprentices.

The Legislature then thought proper likewise to Enact, for particular Reasons
mentioned in the Act, That, for the future, the same Persons should not
practice both as Surgeons and Barbers, but that, from thenceforth, they should
be separated Professions.

The Surgeons having, since the Making of that Act, been more liberally and
regularly educated, have directed and applied their whole Study and Attention
toward the Advancement and Improvement of their Art.

The Barbers have ever since been engaged in a different Way of Business,
altogether foreign to the Practice of Surgery.

It is evident therefore, that neither the Ends, which the Crown had in view at
the original Incorporation of this Company, or those which were afterward
proposed to be attained by the Legislature, can be answered by their continuing
united in the same Body.

As the sole End of their Incorporation was, that they should oversee and
superintend the Practice of Surgery; and as the Legislature proposed, that, by
their Meeting and Assembly together, the Science of Surgery should be promoted,
as well in Speculation as in Practice; it is plain, that their whole Union and
Meeting with the Barbers, if it were no Obstacle, cannot in the least be any
Ways conducive toward attaining those Ends.

But, if the Surgeons were incorporated, as a distinct Body, by themselves,
they would not then be deprived of the Help and Assistance of many ingenious
Practisers of their Profession, who, at present, decline being Members of a
Company, the Majority of which, being Strangers to their Art, cannot be
supposed to have in their Views the Advancement and Improvement of it.

The Majority of Persons practicing Surgery, would not then be discouraged and
prevented, as they now are, from being Members of the Company, by the
Inconveniences and Expenses which necessarily attend the Execution of the
several Offices of the present Company, which have no Relation to the
Improvement and Profession of Surgery; by which Means, those who practice
Surgery are again divided, contrary to the Intention of the Legislature: The
Number of these, at present, who are not Members of the Company, being almost
double the Number of those who are.

The Public Lectures, Examinations of Surgeons, and other Assemblies,
instituted for the Advancement of Surgery, would not then meet with any
Interruption from Persons, only Barbers, insisting, as they now do, that they
shall always be present at such Meetings.

Since therefore, there are distinct and peculiar Privileges and Powers lodged
with the Surgeons, which the Barbers ought neither to take Part or Trouble in;
particularly that important Trust, of examining Surgeons for the Royal Navy,
which they have duly executed with the greatest Cheerfulness, to the great
Advantage, as they hope, of the Public:

And, as the desired Separation is founded upon Reasons of general and public
Utility;

The Surgeons of London humbly pray, To be separated from the Barbers, as those
of other Countries have been, each to be made an independent Corporation, and
vested with the same Privileges which they now enjoy under their present
Charters.

And, as all the Members of the present Company have an equal Interest in the
Property belonging to the said Company; and the original Members, who first
acquired that Property, could only be Persons skilled in Surgery (those,
practicing as Barbers only, not having been Members of this Company till the
Reign of King Henry the VIIIth); they hope, That an equitable and
proportionable Division and Distribution of their Property shall be made, in
such Manner as the Legislature shall think fit.

THE CASE OF THE SURGEONS of London.


