TO THE NOBLEMEN, GENTLEMEN AND Proprietors of Lands in Scotland, and
Inhabitants at large.
SCOTLAND as a part of the united kingdoms although having a right to the same
protection from Government with its sister kingdom, England; yet labors under
some hardships, and even imposed by Act of Parliament, which the people of
England know nothing about. And these are Burrow duties known by the name of
imposts on Malt Liquors, which have of late years spread themselves as a plague
over the face of this country. They began first in the capital of the kingdom
in the year 1693, an era, when few classes of men in this country knew their
rights and privileges as subjects, or if they had been as well understood as at
present, were unacquainted with the mode of application to parliament; all of
which circumstances, contributed to the Bill in favors of the town of
Edinburgh passing without opposition imposing a duty of two pennies Scots on
the pint of all malt liquors brewed, tap'd, or vended within the privileges of
said city. From which not only the Burrows and towns of consequence, but every
petty town have taken the hint, and have successively applied to Parliament for
similar Acts, and is now become almost an universal tax on this country, viz.
the towns of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dundee, Dunbar, Kelso, Arbroath, Dalkeith,
Preston-pans, Bo-ness, Paisley, Port-glasgow, Greenock, etc. and there is great
reason to believe, that private gentlemen, who have the smallest villages
situated on navigable rivers, and who are not yet arrived at such a degree of
consequence as to have a magistrate of any kind, allured by the surprising
revenue which this tax raises, intend applying to Parliament for grants of the
same nature; and Parliament, by no opposition having ever been made, have
overlooked them as unconnected either with the revenue, the landed interest, or
the welfare of the people in general, but which are connected with all these
three to a degree of more consequence than is in general understood or attended
to.

It is the universal complaint, that the malt liquors of Scotland, particularly
porter and pale malt liquors, are not equal in quality to that brewed in
London, and the other towns in England, but it ceases to be a matter of any
wonder, when the Public are informed that the malt liquors of Scotland is
loaded with 30 per cent. of the King's excise in impost payable to royal
borrows and other smaller towns.

The trifling opinion, which the country entertains of two pennies Scots, and
mankind in general of the fractions of a penny, has made this oppressive tax
pass unnoticed, not only by parliament, but by the landed interest of this
country, both of whom ought to have set themselves in opposition to so partial
and oppressive a burden on this part of the kingdom. Trifling as two pennies
Scots may appear, when taken by the pint, it is no less than 1 s. sterling on
every 9 gallons which is 1/9 of the whole value of malt liquor at 1 s. per
gallon; but burdensome and oppressive as this must appear to every considerate
person, it is enormous when considered as a tax added to the excise, which is
so heavy already, that when Lord North in the year 1779, laid 5 per cent. on
the amount of the customs and excise, out of compassion to the laborious part
of the nation who are the consumers of malt liquors, he exempted the brewery in
both kingdoms; and in his subsequent taxes he has still paid such an attention
to the brewery (no doubt from a consciousness of its not being able to bear
more) that he has all along exempted it, and even in the additional taxes on
the malt, he provided a drawback of 10 d. per barrel on all malt liquor above
the denomination of small beer, and 3 d. per barrel on this last species, in
lieu of the additional duty on the malt, and although this drawback is not an
exact equivalent for the additional duty on the malt, yet it is plain he meant
it to be so, according to the best of his judgment and the information he had
For every 10 Gallons Scots (of all strong ale) which is equal to a barrel of 34
Gallons Winchester measure, the neat Excise L0 7 1 6/2^ For every 10 Gallons
Scots, of small Beer Do. 0 1 2 1/13 L0 8 3 ^/^^ For the above two barrels of
malt liquor, which is 21 gallons, the brewer in Scotland pays 2 s. 4 d. of
impost, which every body will find that will take the trouble of calculating is
upon 8 s. 3 d. the amount of the excise on a barrel of porter and a barrel of
small beer, no less than within the meerest trifle of 30 per cent. upon the
amount of the duty taken complexly; and on small beer is no less than the exact
double duty. What would the Noblemen and Gentlemen and Inhabitants of Scotland
say, were Government to lay a double tax or even 30 per cent. on the malt
liquor of Scotland more than in England? The very mention of it must strike
every person of any consideration with astonishment, how any species of
manufacture could support such a load of taxes, especially when it is
considered that the price of no kind of malt liquor has been raised in
Scotland, notwithstanding of this enormous local tax. The fact is, that at the
time the impost was imposed, the brewers found themselves in possession of a
pretty good trade from the very low price of materials at that time, and having
no denomination of money equivolent to two pennies Scots the amount of the tax,
and not being allowed by the law to add it to the price of the pint or gallon,
without exposing themselves to be charged the next highest duty, viz. strong
ale, were under the necessity, in order to indemnify themselves of taking the
value of the tax (which is one ninth) out of the quality of the liquor.

Every body will see what a debasement of the liquor would ensue by taking the
ninth part of malt out of the quality; to this debasement of the liquor must be
attributed the decrease of the brewing business in Scotland, which is evidently
demonstrated by the decrease of the malt tax, as any body may be informed of,
by appyling to the Excise Office at Edinburgh. This debasement of the liquor
does not operate in a common and ordinary proportion on the interest of the
country, but in a threefold proportion. It is not only the loss of 1/9 part of
the consumption of the barley to the landed interest and to the farmer, but
also 1/9 part of the revenue of the malt tax to Government, besides this
debasement of the malt liquor, makes at the most moderate calculation 1/9 less
consumption of the liquor that is brewed, and 1/9 decrease of quantity of malt
is 2/9= nearly, (being only 1/36 part less) so that it is plain this tax does
not operate to the prejudice of the revenue as 1/9, but as decrease on the
revenue of malt, likewise not as 1/9 but as decrease of barley to the prejudice
of the landed interest.

This tax in proportion as it decreases the revenue of the malt tax 2/9, it
decreases the revenue of the excise on the ale in the proportion of one ninth
less consumed than would have been if this tax had not taken place, so that it
affects government in no less a proportion than 3/9, or loss on the revenue of
excise in Scotland.

The author might have availed himself of Mr. Arnot's is history of Edinburgh,
page 521, for the incontestible evidence of the above facts, (who had full
access to the records of the city) wherein he shows, that in the year 1724, at
or after the time that the town obtained an act extending the impost to the
parishes of St. Cuthbert's, Canongate, South and North Leiths, that the revenue
of the impost paid to the town of Edinburgh was no less a sum annually in the
year 1724 -- L. 7939 16 0 1736 6101 10 8 1750 4758 18 8 1764 3550 00 0 1776
2197 00 0 During the period betwixt 169^ (...) first act the town of Edinburgh
procured for levying an impost, which was confined to the city alone, the
impost did not exceed l. 4000 annually, because, as soon as the act took place,
the greatest part of the brewers either removed out of the town, or settled in
the invirons of the city, which included the above parishes. The amount of this
noble income of l. 7939 16 s. shows in the most forcible manner the great
extent and flourishing state of the brewing business at said period. For at 16
d. every 12 gallons, equal to an English barrel of 36 Winchester gallons, it is
119, 097 barrels, and in the year 1776, a period not seven years ago, the
number of barrels brewed, and consequently that paid revenue to government (for
the town of Edinburgh takes the charge of the impost from the gaugers return)
was no more than 32, 955 barrels, so that there is an annual decrease,
comparing these two periods together, of 86, 142 barrels, and suppposing them
all two penny ale, and at the old duty of 2 s. per barrel, is no less a sum
than an annual loss to Government of l. 8614 12 s. on the excise only, for the
presumption is, that the revenue on the brewery, would not have fallen short of
the above quantity, had the impost act not taken place, as the nation instead
of a retrograde motion toward ^^^^ension has been advancing since that period,
( viz. the year 1724) in a rapid progress to wealth and opulence, and therefore
no other good cause can be assigned for the decrease of the revenue on this
article, but the debasement of the liquor which took place in consequence
thereof. On the same principle the malt duty has likewise fallen short in
proportion, for 119, 097 barrels the amount of the quantity brewed in the year
1724 in the city of Edinburgh, allowing six bushels Winchester measure to every
2 barrels or 27 gallons of two penny, will take 317, 592 bushels, which at 4
per bushel the duty exigible till the year 1776 amounts to l. 5954 17 s. In
that year the impost revenue of the town of Edinburgh, had fallen to 32, 955
barrels only, which at the above calculation, viz. six bushels to every 2
barrels produces 87, 880 bushels, at 4 is Bushels. l. 1647 15 0 Malt made in
Edinburgh in 1724 317, 592 at 4 5954 17 0 Ditto 1776 87, 880 ditto 1647 15 0
229, 712 4307 2 0 By the above calculation there is lost annually on the ale
duty l. 8614 12 0 On the malt duty annually as above 4307 2 0 Lost to the
country on the reve^^^ ^921 14 0 This enormous sum is not all the loss that the
country has sustained by this absurd tax, for the landed interest has lost the
consumption of 38, 285 bolls of barley at 10 s. per boll, (a very moderate
medium price) is the immense sum annually of l. 19142 0 0 Lost annually l.
32,063 14 0 If the principle of these calculations is founded on right reason
and common sense, this country has lost betwixt 1693, and the present period
(88 years) the enormous sum of l. 2, 821, 544.

Few instances, perhaps, have occurred that shows in a more forcible light the
dangerous tendency of admitting the most trifling tax to be levied on a common
necessary of life. This estimation the author hopes, will be thought very
moderate, when it is considered, that additional duties have been laid on both
malt and ale; and the price of materials have been annually advancing during
the above period, all of which shows, that the author's supposition of 1/9 less
consumption of ale in consequence of the impost tax taking place in this
country, from which all these calculations, (...) taken, Are too, too well
founded, more especially when it is considered, that the above enormous sum has
been lost to the country on the consumption of Edinburgh alone, exclusive of
all the other parts of Scotland.

The author hopes, what he has said, will meet the attention of the Noblemen
and Gentlemen, Lords of Council and Session, Barons of Exchequer, and
Commissioners of Customs and Excise, as likewise the worthy Manufacturers and
useful Mechanic and Labourer, who are also interested that this oppressive tax
should be abolished in Scotland, to put them on a footing with their brethren
manufacturers and laborers in England, as also house-holders of all
denominations, whose interest it is to have as in England, a nourishing, sound
and wholesome malt liquor.

The impost acts have the effect of a monoply against the inhabitants of every
town where it is established, in loading with an additional tax, one of the
commodities of life, and prevents people at a distance from relieving them by
serving them better and cheaper than their own brewers either can or choose to
do, it being the interest of every community, to open the most free
communication for all sorts of provisions, and therefore it is their interest
to oppose all such Acts.

In short, it is the interest of the community at large, and of the inhabitants
of towns in particular to guard against magistrates introducing by act of
parliament, and without their own consent; any species of taxation, and
carefully watching over any bill in its progress through the House of Commons,
and the author of this address takes the liberty to advise the inhabitants of
corporated towns in all cases where magistrates propose getting new acts of
parliament, to choose a committee of the most worthy and respectful of their
number, unconnected with the council, to watch over the steps the magistrates
and council take in such a piece of business, and that they would always employ
a council at law to take care of their interest in the House of Commons, the
expense of which would be a mere trifle. But of all the ranks of men in the
community, he would advise the brewers in Scotland at large, to be upon their
guard when any revenue laws are applied for, more especially those whose avowed
purpose is to subject them alone to a tax exclusive of the rest of the
inhabitants, as all impost taxes on malt liquor are -- taxes to the prejudice
of the revenue, the landed interest, and the ruin of a respectable rank of
citizens, who are subjected (...) partial, local and unequal tax which their
brethren the brewers of England know nothing about.

It has been said, and is still averred by the abettors of this tax, that it is
the inhabitants that pay the tax and not the brewers, and as this doctrine is
industriously propagated among the inhabitants of the different towns, the
author begs the reader's indulgence, until he explodes this magisterial
doctrine calculated to mislead the well meaning citizen who would spurn the
idea of contributing by his consent to load his neighbor and fellow-citizen
with a burdensome and oppressive tax, of which he himself bears no part. It is
well known that two-penny ale, at the Union of the two kingdoms, was sold at
twopence the Scots pint, the brewer had then the malt 50 per Cent. cheaper
than at present, and yet every body knows, that the two-penny ale all over
Scotland, is sold at the same price at this very moment. If this is the fact,
the author begs the favor that the advocates for this impost tax will say,
where the impost (which is of a penny) is added to the price: But however
trifling it appears on the pint, it is 1 of a penny on the gallon, and on a
barrel of 36 (...) ^^^chester measure, or twelve Scots gallons, is 16 d. which
is the exact duty of excise on small beer, and consequently small beer in
Scotland, pays exactly double duty of what it is charged with in England. It is
in this way (say the trifling denomination of the tax) that the iniquity and
oppression of it has escaped the notice of the legislature and all good
citizens. And unless the inhabitants at large pay the tax, where is the equity
of charging a few individuals as much as all the inhabitants besides, for the
ornamenting of any town whatever. And what is more extraordinary, perhaps those
very people who pay this oppressive tax, do not reside within the precincts of
the town, as is the case in many places having an impost. In short, every view
you take of this tax, it is fraught with absurdity.

It is much to the honor of this country at the present period, that a spirit
of patriotism prevails among the Noblemen and Gentlemen, to promote the
manufactures of their own country, which if followed out with steadiness and
perseverance will raise this country to a degree of opulence unknown to former
ages. It is therefore from them we are to expect (...) ^^pport in opposition to
all our oppressions, and as there never was at any period, a Prime Minister,
who seemed to be more the friend of the manufacturer, or lower class of the
people, we have every reason to expect, that he will oppose attempts, that are
prejudicial to them in any shape, provided the representatives in parliament
from Scotland, show a truly spirited zeal for the public welfare. It is to them
we have to look for redress, and as they are mostly men of patriotic
principles, we cannot entertain a doubt, but they will be the guardians of our
interest. The author, in the firm persuasion that the Legislature and Public at
large, will unite in redressing the evil complained of,

REMAINS, Their most obedient, humble servant, JOHN CUNNINGHAM, Senr. (BREWER
GREENOCK.)


