LINES, etc.
By THOMAS PAIN,
THE Rain pours down, the City looks forlorn,
And gloomy subjects suit the howling morn,
Close by my sire, with door and window fast,
And safely sheltered from the driving blast,
To gayer thoughts, I bid a days adieu,
To spend a scene of solitude with you.
So often has black Revenge engros'd the care,
Of all the leisure hours man finds to spare;
So often has guilt in all her thousand dens,
Called for the vengeance of chastising Pens;
That while, I fain would ease my heart on you,
No thought is left untold, no passion new.
From flight to flight the mental path appears,
Worn with the steps of near six thousand years,
And fill^d througout with every scene of pain.
From CAIN to G*****, and back from G***** to CAIN.
Alike in cruelty, alike in hate,
In guilt alike, but more alike in fate,
Both cursed supremely for the blood they drew,
Each from the rising world, while each was new.
Go second CAIN, true likeness of the first,
And strew thy blasted head with homely dust
In ashes sit -- in wretched sackcloth weep
And with unpitied sorrows cease to slee^,
Go haunt the tombs, and single out the place
Where earth itself shall suffer a disgrace.
Go spell the letters on some mouldring urn,
And ask if he who sleeps there can return.
Go count the numbers that in sile^^^ lie,
And learn by study what it is to die,
For sure that heart -- if any heart you own
Conceits that man expires without a Groan:
That he who lives receives from you a grace,
Or death is nothing but a change of place:
That peace is dull, that joy from sorrow springs,
And War the Royal raree show of things,
Else why these s^enes that wound the feeling mind
This sport of death -- this Cockpit of Mankind.
Why sobs the widow in perpetual pain?
Why cries the Orphan? -- "Oh my Father's slain"
Why hangs the Sire his paralytic head?
And nods with manly grief -- "My Son is dead."
Why drops the tears from off the sisters cheek?
And sweetly tells the sorrows she would speak,
Or why in lonely steps does pensive John?
To all the neighbors tell, "Poor masters gone."
Oh could I paint the passion, I can feel,
Or point a horror that would wound like steel
To thy unfeeling, unrelenting mind
I Would send a torture and relieve mankind.
Thou that art husband, father, brother, all
The tender names which kindred learn to call.
Yet like an image carved in massey stone,
Thou bear the shape, but sentiment has't none,
Allied by dust and figure, not by mind,
Thou only herd'st, but liv'st not with mankind.
And prone to love, like some outrageous ape,
Thou know each class of beings by their shape.
Since then no hopes to civilize remain
And all petitions have gone forth in vain,
One prayer is left which dreads no proud reply,
That he who made thee breath will make thee die.
COMMON SENSE. Passages for Insertion in the Hiatuses.
In the INTRODUCTION.
No. 1. "by the King and Parliament they have" Page 2 No. 2. "reject the
oppressions o^ either" -- No. 3. "nor a General as in England a man" Page 11
No. 4. "In England the king has little" -- No. 5. "by the king and h^s" page
13 No. 6. "made known, I rejected the hardened, sullen-temper'd Pha^aoh of
England for ever; and disdained the wretch that with the pretended title of
"FATHER OF HIS PEOPLE*" can unfeelingly hear of their slaughter, and composedly
sleep with their blood upon his soul! -- Bu^^ Page 17 No. 7. -- "And as he has
shown h^mself such an inveterate enemy to Liberty* and discovered such a thirst
for arbitrary power -- Is he? or is he not a proper man" No. 8. "petitioning.
-- We are already greater than the king wishes us to be: and will he not
endeavor hereafter to make us less? -- To bring the" -- No. 9. "l^ws, or
whether the King, the greatest enemy we have, or can have, shall tell us,
"There shall be no laws but such as I like? -- But" -- No. 10. "dangerous and
fatal than it" Page 18 No. 11. "policy in the king at this" -- No. 12.
"reinstating himself in the government of the Provinces in order that he may
accomplish by fraud and subtity in the long run, what he cannot do by force and
violence in the short one: Reconciliation and Ruin are nearly related.
Secondly." No. 13. havoc of mankind, like the royal brute of Great Britain. --
Yet that" Page 20 No. 14. "eternal tyranny, by keeping vacant the seat of
Government. -- There are" -- No. 15. the tyranny but the TYRANT -- Stand
forth!" Page 21 No. 16. it cam^ ^ut, the King's Speech made" Page 28 No. 17.
"revenge. And the king's speech, instead of terrify." -- No. 18. naturally
follows, that the king's speech, as being a piece of finished villainy,
deserved" No. 19. "that the king's speech has not before" -- No. 20. "The
speech, if it may be" -- No. 21. "of kings; for a^ Nature" -- No. 22. "The
speech has one" -- No. 23. "savage than the King of Great Britain. -- Sir"
Page 28 No. 24. "like a worm. However it matters very little now, what the king
either says or does. He has w^cke^^^ broken through every moral and human
obligation; (...) Nature and Conscience underfoot; and by a steady and
constitutional spirit of insolence and cruelty, procured for himself an
universal hatred! -- It it now" Page 29 No. 25. "the King and his worthless"
Page 30 No. 26. "authority under him whom ye No. 27. "tell the wretch his ^^^s,
and warn" No. 28. "a proof that the man whom ye are so"

