FOUR DISSERTATIONS, ON THE Reciprocal ADVANTAGES OF A Perpetual UNION BETWEEN
GREAT BRITAIN AND HER AMERICAN COLONIES.

WRITTEN For Mr. SARGENT'S PRIZE-MEDAL.

To which (by Desire) is prefixed, AN EULOGIUM, Spoken on the Delivery of the
MEDAL at the Public Commencement in the College of Philadelphia, May 20th, 1766.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM and THOMAS BRADFORD, at the London
Coffee-House. M,DCC,LXVI.

A LIST of the SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
A.
HONORABLE WILLIAM ALLEN, Esquire Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, 12 Cop. Andrew
Allen, Esquire James Allen, Esquire Francis Alison, D. D. Vice-Provost of the College
of Philadelphia, 2 Cop. Revd. Patrick Alison, A. M. of Baltimore, Maryland.
John Andrews, A. B. Lancaster. Mr. Lewis Antill, New Jersey. Mr. John Archer,
of Mount-holly. Ralph Assheton, M. D. Mr. Thomas Assheton. Samuel Auchmuty, D.
D. Rector of Trinity Church, etc. New York.
B.
Mr. John Baynton, 12 Cop. Alexander Barclay, Esquire 2 Cop. Revd. Thomas Barton,
A. M. Missionary at Lancaster. Mr. Samuel Bard, of Mount-holly. Dr. James A.
Bayard, 2 Cop. Mr. Charles Batho, 2 Cop. Mr. John Barnes, junior. Mr. John
Bayard. Mr. George Bartram. Mr. David Beveridge. Mr. John Beveridge, Professor
of Languages in the Coll. of Philadelphia. Mr. John Benezet. Mr. Philip
Benezet. Mr. Owen Biddle. Mr. Thomas Biddle. Dr. Phineas Bond, 2 Cop. Dr.
Thomas Bond. Dr. James Boggs. Mr. William Bradford, 6 Cop, George Bryan, Esquire 3
Cop. Mr. James Bremner. Mr. J. B. Bordley, of Baltimore. 2 Cop. Beale Bordley,
Esquire 4 Cop. Dr. John Boyd, of Baltimore. Mr. Charles Brown, of Kent County,
Maryland.
C.
Benjamin Chew, Esquire Attorney General of Pennsylvania, 6 Cop. Dr. Thomas
Cadwalader, 2 Cop. Revd. Miles Cooper, A. M. President of King's College,
New York. William Cox, Esquire Mr. Charles Cox. Dr. John Cox. Mrs. Cox, of Trenton.
Mr. Edward Cotterell. Mr. Thomas Clifford. Mr. George Clymer. Dr. Gerardus
Clarkson. Mr. Matthew Cushing, Tutor in King's College, New York. Mr. David
Cowell. Mr Julius Clare, Maryland.
D.
Revd. Jacob Duche, A. M. 2 Cop. John De Normandy, Esquire Mr. David Douglass. Mr.
Joseph Deane. Thomas Dungan, A. B. Mathematical Master, in the Coll. of
Philadelphia.
E.
Revd. Nathaniel Evans, A. M. Missionary in Gloucester County, New Jersey.
F.
His Excellency William Franklin, Esquire Governor of New Jersey. Mr. Moore Furman,
6 Cop. Mr. Thomas Fisher, 3 Cop. Mr. Paul Fooks, Professor of French and
Spanish Languages, in the Coll. of Philad. Mr. William Frazer.
G.
George Glentworth, M. D. Mr. John Griffiths. Mr. William Goddard, Providence,
Rh. Ifland.
H.
Mr. David Hall. Mr. Joseph Carvill Hall. Andrew Hamilton, Esquire 2 Cop. William
Hamilton, Esquire 2 Cop. Richard Hockley, Esquire Francis Hopkinson, Esquire 6 Cop. Mrs.
Mary Hopkinson. Thomas Hopkinson, A. B. Mr. James Hockley. Mr. Thomas Hockley.
Dr. Robert Harris. Gilbert Hicks, Esquire Mr. Samuel Hastings. Mr. Jonathan Haight.
Revd. Jeremiah Halsey, A. M. Mr. John Heart. Mr. Joseph Hogg.
I.
John Inglis, Esquire Revd. Mr. Charles Inglis of New York, 2 Cop, Mr. George
Jenkins. Mr. Heathcote Johnson, Amboy. Mr. Daniel Jones, sen. Mount-Holly.
K.
Dr. John Kearsley, jun. 2 Cop. Mr. Samuel Kenlock. Revd. Mr. Nathan Kerr. Mr.
Ravaud Kearney. Revd. Ebenezer Kinnersley, Professor of English and Oratory, in
the Coll. of Philad. Mr. Thomas Kiemer. Mr. Mahlon Kirkbride. Revd. Mr. William
Kirkpatrick.
L.
John Lawrence, Esquire Mayor of the City of Phil. 4 John Lawrence, Esquire Mayor of
the City of Burlington. Lynford Lardner, Esquire 2 Cop. Alexander Lawson, Esquire of
Baltimore, 3 Cop. Richard Lee, A. B. of Virginia. Mr. Hugh Lennox. William
Logan, Esquire 4 Cop. Mr. Benjamin Lukens. Mr. Alexander Lunan, 6 Cop. Mr. William
Lux, 2 Cop. Dr. William Lion.
M.
Thomas M'Kean, Esquire of New Castle, 6 Cop. Revd. Robert M'Kean, A. M. Missionary
at Perth-Amboy. 2 Cop. John M'Kinley, Esquire 2 Cop. Mr. William M'Kinsey, 4 Cop.
Mr. George Morgan, 6 Cop. Nathaniel Manning, A. M. Mr. Thomas May. Mr. Robert
Martin. William Moore, Esquire Chester County. Mr. William Moore, 3 Cop. Mr. George
Meade, 3 Cop. Mr. John Moale. Mr. Evan Morgan. Mr. Samuel Meredith. Mr.
Cadwallader Morris. Mr. Robert Morris. John Montgomery, A. B. Tutor, in the
Coll. of Philadelphia. Mr. William Maynadier. Revd. Mr. William Marshal. Revd.
Mr. Alexander Murray, Missionary at Reading.
O.
Revd. Mr. John Ogilvie, of New York. Dr. Samuel Ormes.
P.
Hon JOHN PENN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania, 12 Cop. Hon. Richard
Penn, Esquire 6 Cop. Samuel Powell, Esquire 6 Cop. Revd. Mr. Richard Peter's, Rector of
Christ-Church and St. Peter's, in Philad. 4 Cop. Edward Physic, Esquire Mr. John
Potts, senior. Mr. Thomas Potts. Mr. Samuel Potts. Mr. John Potts, junior. Mr.
David Potts, 3 Cop. Mr. Joseph Potts. Mr. Jonathan Potts, 2 Cop. Mr. Samuel
Purviance, jun. 3 Cop. William Paca, Esquire Maryland. John Patton, Esquire Reading.
Mr. John Pope. Robert Friend Price, Esquire Gloucester County, New Jersey. Dr.
Frederic Phyle.
R.
Mr. George Roberts, 3 Cop. John Redman, M. D. Mr. Joseph Redman, sen. Revd.
Philip Reading, A. M. Missionary at Apoquiniminck. Mr. James Read, Thomas
Read, A. B. Tutor in the Coll. of Phil. Mr. Burnet Richards. Benjamin Rush, A.
M. Mr. William Rush. Mr. Thomas Rutter.
S.
Right Hon. Earl of Stirling, 2 Cop. Thomas Smith, Esquire of Maryland, 12 Cop. Mr.
Amos Strettell, 6 Cop. Mr. John Stewart, 6 Cop. William Smith, D. D. Provost of
the Coll. of Philad. 6 Copies. Cortlandt Skinner, Esquire Attorney General,
New Jersey, 2 Copies. Edward Shippen, Esquire Joseph Shippen, Esquire Secr. Province
Pennsyl. Mr. Samuel Spencer Skinner, 2 Copies. Dr. Isaac Smith of Trenton. Mr.
William Smith. Mr. Jonathan Smith. Dr. Peter Sonmans. Dr. Alexander Stenhouse.
Dr. John Stevenson. Mr. Samuel Sansom. Mr. Peter Stretch. Mr. P. E. Du
Simitierre. James Sykes, Esquire of Kent, on Delaware.
T.
Joseph Turner, Esquire 2 Copies. Revd. Mr. William Thompson, Missionary in
Cumberland. Mr. James Tilghman, jun. Revd. Mr. David Telefair. Mr. John Tweedy,
jun. Mr. William Thornton.
U.
Mr. Aeneas Urquhart, 2 Copies.
V.
Hon. John Vining, Esquire Chief Justice of the three lower Counties.
W.
Thomas Willing, Esquire 4 Copies. Mr. Benjamin Wynkoop, 4 Copies, William White,
A. B. 2 Copies. Mr. Robert Wilson. James Wilson, A M. Mr. John Wilday. Mr.
Joseph Watkins, jun.
Y.
Mr. Thomas Yardley.
PREFACE, ADDRESSED TO JOHN SARGENT, Esquire Member of Parliament, etc.
Worthy SIR,
AS the following Dissertations owe their birth to your judicious choice of the
subject, and liberal encouragement of it, they now naturally wait upon you for
your protection and countenance. Your original design having been only to
excite a noble emulation among the youth of an infant Seminary, in a remote
part of the world, and to turn their early attention to a matter of very high
and national importance, you will not look for any thing in the execution
beyond their years, their experience, or opportunities of information.

YOUR known candor will likewise lead you to consider the peculiar
difficulties, arising from the times and circumstances, in which these pieces
were composed. An act of the British parliament had become the fatal cause of
an unhappy breach of that UNION which had so long subsisted (and ever ought to
subsi^^) between the Colonies and the mother country; and very general were the
agitations and uneasiness thereby produced on this side of the Atlantic. Even
hoary age, and men of the most subdued passions among us, admi^ting the most
plenary jurisdiction of a British Parliament, could not, in this particular
case, but consider their conduct as at least unkind to their American fellow
subjects, in desiring (without any present necessity that appeared to us) to
come between us and our Sovereign, and to lay a foundation which might easily
have been drawn into a precedent for depriving us of all future opportunities
of testifying our loyalty, by the free and voluntary grant of our own money.

If, then, such was the light in which the cool and the aged considered this
matter, expressions of a warmer and more unguarded kind might have dropped from
the pens of youth! Yet no such thing appears in the following Dissertations,
which are laid before the public in the genuine form and dress wherein they
were presented by their authors. Nor was it possible that the smallest
additions or alterations could be made consistent with the plan pursued in the
execution of your trust; which plan you ought to have an account of, and it may
also be of use to preserve it here, by way of precedent for future occasions of
the like kind.

SEVERAL considerations having prevented the Trustees of the College from
proposing your MEDALS to be contended for by the youth, the first year after
the receipt of them; they were at last proposed, by an advertisement as
follows, viz.

College of Philadelphia, March 6, 1766.
WHEREAS John Sargent, Esquire merchant in London, and member of Parliament, has
presented to this College a Only so much of the advertisement is here inserted
as relates to the disposition of the Medal, which produced the following
Essays; Mr. Sargent's other Medal not being yet disposed of.
GOLD MEDAL, for the best English essay on the reciprocal advantages of a
perpetual UNION between Great Britain and her American Colonies. -- Notice is
hereby given, by order of the Trustees, that the said Medal will be disposed of
at the ensuing commencement in May, for the best essay that shall be produced
on the subject proposed, by any of those who have received any degree, or part
of their education in this College -- And as the said subject is one of the
most important which can at this time employ the pen of the patriot or scholar,
and is thus left open to all those who have had any connection with this
College, either as students or graduates, it is hoped, for the honor of the
Seminary, as well as their own, they will nobly exert themselves on a subject
so truly animating, which may be treated in a manner alike interesting to good
men, both here and in the mother country.

Each candidate is desired to prefix a motto, and a mark or device to his
performance, and seal it up, without his name, in a separate cover. He is then
to put his name under another s^aled cover, writing on the outside of this
cover the same motto and mark or device, which he has prefixed to his
performance.

THE utmost impartiality will be observed by the Trustees and Professors in
examining the several performances, without opening any of the covers that
contain the names, till it is first determined which of the performances is
entitled to the Medal, and then only that cover will be opened on which the
motto is written that directs to the name of the person entitled to the prize,
which shall be given in public at the ensuing commencement; and therefore the
several candidates are desired to send their compositions and names sealed and
covered as aforesaid, to the Provost, on or before the 8th day of May. --


ON the 8th day of May accordingly nine different performances were produced,
on a careful perusal of which, the three immediately following were laid aside
for a second reading; after which the Medal was unan^mously decreed to the
first. The second also was judged a masterly, judicious and sensible
performance, worthy of a Medal also, if there had been another for the same
subject; and the third was likewise greatly approved of as a spirited
performance, so far as it went; and it was agreed that the publication of both,
together with the prize-piece, would be of service at this crisis; which
determination was immediately inserted in the public papers; in pursuance
whereof the modest and ingenious youth, who is author of the second
Dissertation, gave leave to publish it with his name. The author of the third
Dissertation, wrote, concerning his piece, that he had but two days to spare,
from a particular hurry of business in his profession, to prepare it in; and
that so far from thinking it disgraced by being the third best, he would have
rejoiced, for the honor of the Seminary in which he received his first
education, if all the other six had been superior also; and that if there were
any observations in it which had not occurred to the other gentlemen, or were
likely to serve as hints for abler pens to set so important a subject in a
proper light, he readily consented to its publication; but requested, for
particular reasons, that his name might not be annexed to it.

THE fourth little piece is the production of an ingenious son of the college,
in his own easy unpremeditated way. He has by many compositions done honor to
the place of his education; and by this, which was only the sudden work of a
few hours of that day, in which the other pieces were under examination, he
meant not to come in competition for the prize, but only to throw his mite into
the general stock. After his departure to England, some of his friends having
desired it to be published, with the three first pieces, it was accordingly
annexed; and had any of the authors of the other five remaining pieces, or
their friends, made the like request, they would have been indulged in it.
Indeed most of them would have well deserved to be laid before the public, had
we not been afraid that the repetition of many of the same sentiments, which
must unavoidably run through them all, on the same subject, would at length
become tiresome to the reader.

WE have only now to mention the occasion of the following Eulogium. By your
own proposal, as well as by order of the Trustees of the College, the Medal was
to be conferred at a public commencement, Wherefore, at the commencement, May
20th, 1766, immediately after the valedictory oration, the Hon. JOHN PENN, Esquire
Governor of the province, as President of the Trustees of the College,
delivered the Medal to the Provost, ordering him to confer it in public
agreeable to their previous determination. The Provost accordingly acquainted
the audience that the same had been decreed to JOHN MORGAN, M.D. F.R.S. etc.
and professor of the theory and practice of physic in the College of
Philadelphia; and then requested Dr. Morgan to deliver his Dissertation in
public; which being finished, the EULOGIUM accompanied the conferring of the
Medal.

AN EULOGIUM, On the delivery of Mr. SARGENT's Prize-Medal at the public
Commencement in the College of Philadelphia, May, 1766.
By WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. Provost of that College. (Published by desire.)
SIR,
AS the reward of your great merit in this elegant performance, I am, in the
name of the Trustees and Faculty of this College, as well as in behalf of the
worthy Donor, to beg your acceptance of this GOLD MEDAL -- Its intrinsic value
may not be an object of much consideration to you; but the truly honorable
circumstances, by which it now becomes yours, must render it one of the most
valuable jewels in your possession.

ADORNED though you have been with honors in distant lands, yet we trust those
will not be the least acceptable to you, which your native country bestows.

THAT the first literary prize, contended for in this Institution, should fall
to the share of one of its eldest sons, who, to much genius and application,
has joined much knowledge of the world, will not seem strange. Yet still, for
the honor of the Seminary, and what will not derogate from your honor, it will
appear that you have obtained this pre-eminence over no mean competitors.

SOME of our younger sons (among whom we ought not to omit the name of the
modest and candid Author of the second of the following Dissertations.
WATTS, with some others even of inferior standing) have exhibited such
vigorous efforts of genius, and tread so ardently on the heels of you and
others their seniors, that it will require the utmost exertion of all your
faculties, the continual straining of every nerve, if you would long wish to
lead the way to them, in the great career of Fame.

O NOBLE contest! O happy seat of Science! to behold such a divine emulation
among thy sons, kindled by the ardent desire of glory, and supported on those
liberal principles which true Literature alone can inspire!

MUCH do we owe to you, Gentlemen, on this occasion, much every way -- much for
the pains you have taken to do honor to the p^ace of your education; and much
for the public testimony you have given in its favor, declaring that here you
have imbibed the true principles of Liberty, and have learned from your early
See Dr. Morgan's Dissertation, who was one of the first graduates.
youth that your head, your heart and your hand should ever be at the service
of your country --

TRUE it is, Gentlemen, that we have publicly inculcated -- and it was our
duty to inculcate, on you, that These quotations are from a charge delivered by
the author of this Eulogium, to the first class of graduates in the College of
Philadelphia, May 17th, 1757. Dr. Morgan was one of this class.
if there be any thing on this earth suited to the native dignity of the human
mind, and worthy of contention, it must be to assert the cause of Religion and
Truth; to support the fundamental rights and liberties of mankind; and to
strive for the constitution of your country, and a government by known laws,
freely consented to by yourselves, or your certain delegates.

WE have exhorted you, when your country calls, to be all eye and ear and heart
and voice and hand, in a cause so glorious; proceeding with a manly and
intrepid spirit, with a fervent and enlightened zeal; fearless of danger,
undaunted by opposition, and convincing the world that Liberty is your
unconquerable delight, and that you are sworn foes to every species of bondage
either of body or of mind.

BUT however much it might have been our duty to deliver lessons of this kind,
small would have been the honor we should have derived from them, if you,
Gentlemen had not nobly called those lessons forth into Action, demonstrating
by your living example, that the education you received in this place, was not
a mere art of furnishing the Head, but a true discipline of the Life and
Manners.

TRULY delicate and difficult, we confess was the subject prescribed to you --
to treat of the reciprocal advantages of a perpetual UNION between
Great Britain and her American Colonies, at a time when a fatal
Misunderstanding had untwisted all the cords of that UNION, and the minds of
many were too much inflamed. This difficulty was likewise increased to us by
other considerations.

Great Britain, who, by her liberality, had raised this College from a helpless
to a flourishing state, had an undoubted demand on us, in our particular
capacity, for all the returns of gratitude. Yet we could not, we durst not,
divert the streams of Learning from their sacred course. Our country, nay all
America, had a right to demand that those streams should be directed pure
along, to water the goodly TREE OF LIBERTY, nor ever be suffered to cherish any
foul weed, that would choke its growth.

IN this most difficult conjuncture, we rejoice to behold you, in your early
youth, exercising all the temper and prudence of the most experienced Patriots;
freely and dutifully acknowledging in behalf of the mother country, that, See
Dissertation third.
as the design of colonizing, was not to found a new empire, but to extend the
old, the Colonies owe obedience under all constitutional and legal
restrictions, and a due subordination in all commercial purposes; yet firmly
asserting in behalf of the Colonies that they are entitled, in return, to the
full and free enjoyment of BRITISH LIBERTY, and necessary protection from all
external violence -- and that a policy which would ensure a small immediate
revenue, at the expense of a great, though indirect, national gain, is mean and
sordid, unworthy of the generous enterprizing spirit of a commercial nation;
and radically destructive of the mutual confidence.

WE rejoice that ever we had the least share in forming sentiments like these,
which have led you to draw the true line, and powerfully to show that on the
everlasting basis of reciprocal Interest, and a participation of constitutional
priv^leges, and on this alone, our UNION shall be perpetuated, and our See Mr.
WATTS's Dissertation.
bleeding wounds healed up, without so much as a scar by way of remembrance.

HERE you have shown yourselves entitled to the name of true SONS OF LIBERTY --
SONS OF LIBERTY INDEED! neither betraying her sacred cause on the one hand, nor
degenerating into Licentiousness on the other --

THE occasion now calls me to address a few things to you, Gentlemen, who have
just received your degrees in this Seminary; but I would not trespass on the
patience of this candid audience.

YOU have observed the honors to which literary merit, and integrity of
principles, have already advanced those who have gone before you in their
studies here; and you cannot but be sensible, that of all the glories reflected
on this Institution, we judge those the most solid and transporting which we
derive from our own sons.

THE time is fast approaching, and I trust your bosoms now glow for it, when
you too shall, in your turn, have an opportunity of doing honor to your
education, by your conduct in public life. When that time shall come, educated
as you have been in the principles of sound Liberty, permit us to promise
ourselves, that you will ever think it your glory, to be enlisted under her
banners, and to follow her exalted call.

WHAT we have often given in solemn charge to those who have gone before you,
and what you have often heard delivered in the course of your studies here, is,
I hope, engraven on your memories, and need not now be repeated.

YOU will consider all arts, all sciences, all eloquence, all philosophy, as
intended to discipline the soul for eternity, and so far as they center not
ultimately in this grand view, they are at best but empty trifles. Always look
on the scriptures of God as that master system of knowledge, by which all other
wisdom is to be regulated and perfected.

IN whatever station of life you are, we hope you never will forget your
obligations to this seminary, which will travail, as it were in pain for you,
till you appear on the theater of action with dignity; and will expect to find
its own children and sons, at least, among the number of its friends -- We wish
you every felicity, and bid you farewell. --

AND here I ought to conclude -- But the joyous occasion calls me to return
particular thanks to this splendid audience for the countenance they have given
us this day; and to congra^ulate them on the glorious and happy turn in the
affairs of America, whereof yesterday The account of the repeal of the American
stampact was received at Philadelphia, the day before the delivery of this
Elogium, viz. May 19, 1766.
gave us the certain and confirmed accounts.

WHEN I look back on the dreadful state of suspense, in which these Colonies
have been so long agitated; when, in the room of foreboding doubt and painful
solicitude, I behold joy in every look, the clouds dispersed, the sun breaking
in upon us again, and an assembly around me in which every man, rejoices to
salute his neighbor as Free -- I Feel, I Feel, a sympathy unutterable, and an
exultation of soul never felt before!

O GLORIOUS day! O happy America! if now we but know how to prize our happiness
-- The unguarded sallies of intemperate zeal will soon be forgotten; but the
steadfast, the noble, the patriotic efforts of cool and good men, in the
vindication of native and constitutional rights, will more and more claim the
regard of all the Free, in every clime and age; and perhaps be consecrated by
time into one of the brightest transactions of our story; asserting our
pedigree, and showing that we were worthy of having been descended from the
illustrious stock of Britons!

THE cause of Liberty, Civil and Religious, is the cause of Britain herself --
nay it is the cause of heaven; and it was with inexpressible satisfaction that
I beheld more than one of the gentlemen, who have written on the ties of UNION
between Great Britain and her colonies, deriving a very capital argument from
the ties of a Common Religion.

WHEN I review the history of the world, and look on the progress of Knowledge,
Freedom, Arts and Sciences, I cannot but be strongly persuaded that Heaven has
yet glorious purposes to serve through America.

CIVIL Liberty, the Protestant Religion, the principles of Toleration, in their
purity, honorable as they are to human nature, subsist but in few places of the
globe; and Great Britain is their principal residence.

UNDER her auspices they were transplanted into America; where they have got
firm root, and are flourishing into immense growth and will bring such an
accession of strength to the general cause of Liberty and Protestantism, that
we trust no power on earth shall ever be able to prevail against their united
strength.

THIS sentiment, it is hoped, will more and more gain ground among good men
both here and in the mother country; convincing them that to check the spirit
of Freedom, or discourage the propagation of knowledge here in America, would,
on the part of Great Britain, be to wound her own members, and weaken or
destroy that glorious public system of Truth, Freedom and Happiness, whereof
she is the Guardian and the head!

ANIMATED by these principles, and guided by an enlightened zeal, it will
become us to manifest our gratitude and love to the mother country, by every
means in our power. Let us make our moderation known to all the world; bending
our whole thoughts to a virtuous industry, beneficial to ourselves and to
Great Britain; acting as Free, but not using our liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness or of Licentioussness.

DISSERTATION ON THE Reciprocal ADVANTAGES OF A Perpetual UNION Between
GREAT BRITAIN And her AMERICAN COLONIES, FOR WHICH Mr. SARGENT'S PRIZE-MEDAL
WAS ADJUDGED TO JOHN MORGAN, M. D. F. R. S. etc. and Professor of the Theory
and Practice of Physic in the College of Philadelphia.

TO JOHN SARGENT, Esquire MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, etc. THIS ESSAY, AS A SMALL
TESTIMONY OF GRATITUDE FOR MANY PERSONAL FAVORS RECEIVED, AND FROM A DUE SENSE
OF HIS ACCURATE JUDGMENT AND PUBLIC SPIRIT, MANIFESTED AS WELL IN THE CHOICE OF
THE SUBJECT FOR THE FOLLOWING PERFORMANCE, AS IN THE POLITE AND GENEROUS MANNER
IN WHICH HE PROPOSED IT, IS MOST HUMBLY INSCRIBED, BY HIS MUCH OBLIGED, MOST
OBEDIENT, AND VERY HUMBLE SERVANT,

JOHN MORGAN.

DISSERTATION I. On the reciprocal ADVANTAGES OF A PERPETUAL UNION BETWEEN
GREAT BRITAIN AND Her AMERICAN COLONIES.
NEVER has the cause of Liberty employed the pen of any of her votaries upon a
subject of greater importance to Britain and her Colonies, Introduction.
than the reciprocal advantages of which a perpetual UNION between them must
necessarily be productive. To investigate these advantages, and to place them
in a clear and conspicuous point of view, requires much skill and ingenuity,
and affords ample scope for a vigorous exertion of the brightest genius,
assisted and improved by the most extensive literature. A competent knowledge
of the great and fundamental principles of government, of the nature of the
British constitution, the particular rights and privileges of the several
Colonies, together with the history of their produce, trade and commerce, is
indispensably necessary to such an undertaking.

UNEQUAL as I am to the arduous task, Motives for this undertaking.
and trembling, lest the subject should suffer under my unpractised hand, I
have been almost tempted to decline it; but when I consider myself at once as a
Briton and an American, and reflect upon the invaluable privileges and
benefits, to which, in both these characters and capacities, I am so happy as
to be entitled, every apprehension vanishes; an honest confidence takes place,
and I venture to deliver my sentiments, rude and unpolished as they are, upon
this interesting theme, depending for success upon that love of liberty, and
that warm zeal for my country's welfare, with which my bosom does, and, I
trust, will always glow. It Is this alone gives me reason to hope for that
candor from my dear countrymen, to which I am well convinced my poor abilities
can lay no claim.

BUT I have an additional incentive to this undertaking: for I am called to it,
Further motive.
as the son of an Institution, wherein I imbibed the true principles of
Liberty, and was taught to admire the beauty and excellency of that civil
constitution, in which the governing powers mutually control, and are
controuled by each other, in which the rights of prince and people are
accurately discriminated, and liberty and property effectually secured by a
government of laws, not of men; in which civil and religious rights and
privileges are held sacred and inviolable, and declared to be no less the
birthright of the meanest subject, in the most distant and obscure corner of
the realm, than of the highest courtier that basks in the sunshine of royal
favor.

THIS British American seminary, which was founded upon these principles, and
is careful to transmit them pure and uncorrupted to all her children, is justly
entitled to a greater tribute from me than I have it in my power to pay. She
has often inculcated this lesson upon my youth, "That my head, my hand and my
heart should be at the service of my country." My head and my hand perhaps may
fail of rendering her such assistances as she receives from better heads and
abler hands: but the present occasion will, at least, enable me to show, that I
have an heart as deeply interested in my country's welfare, as any of her sons.
It Is upon this principle alone, that I stand a candidate for the honors which
are now proposed "to the best dissertation on the reciprocal advantages of a
perpetual Union between Great Britain and her colonies."

IN treating of this important subject, The plan of treating the subject.
was I to enter upon a full and complete enumeration of all these advantages, I
should doubtless exceed the limits usually prescribed to performances of this
nature. The principal arguments that I shall advance in favor of this
perpetual union, shall be derived from one or other of these two sources.

First, From a consideration of the nature and extent of the Commerce that
subsists between Great Britain and her Colonies, and the amazing increase of
riches and power which they reciprocally derive from that Commerce.

Secondly, From the glorious prospect of the advancement of the Protestant
Religion, which they profess, and spreading the Gospel in its purity, through
the vast benighted regions of this western world.

BUT a full discussion of the several arguments to be drawn even from these two
sources, would require a volume, instead of a short dissertation. I shall
therefore confine myself chiesly to those which may be drawn from the first
source, and only touch upon the second, in the close of the performance.

IN the first place then, A general view of the present state of the colonies
if we do but take a general view of the present flourishing condition of the
Colonies, and reflect upon the very small beginnings from which they have rose,
in so short a time, to such a height as now renders them the richest jewel in
the crown of Britain; if we consider the figure that New England, New York, the
Jerseys, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina make at this day,
compared with the state of these countries in the hands of their original
proprietors; if we attend a little to the amazing increase of their
inhabitants, their products and exports, the prodigious quantities of
manufactures they take off from England, and the balance of trade which she
obtains from their commodities, the shipping this commerce requires, the seamen
it raises, the mouths it feeds, the hands it employs, and the accumulated
wealth which it brings to thousands, nay millions of subjects, we cannot but be
fully convinced of the vast importance and advantage of a perpetual Union
between Great Britain and her American colonies.

CAN the warmest imagination form to itself an idea of aught more sublime and
delightful, Their great improvement.
than those happy effects which commerce, and the full enjoyment of civil and
religious liberty, have so suddenly produced in countries, which were not long
since the dreary haunts of savage beasts and savage men. Where ignorance and
barbarity frowned over the uncultivated earth, gay fields now smile, bedecked
in the yellow robe of full-eared harvest; cities rise majestic to the view;
fleets too crowd the capacious harbor with their swelling canvas, and swarms
of cheerful inhabitants cover the shore with monuments of their industry,
through a long tract of two thousand miles.

FROM this general view of the amazing ^ncrease of our American Colonies, A
detail of the subject.
I naturally proceed to a particular detail of the advantages which are derived
from them to the mother country.

CERTAIN it is, Advantages of planting colonies.
that nothing can contribute more to the flourishing state of any trading
nation, than the establishing of settlements in foreign parts. Experience
evinces the truth of this. Their American plantations heretofore rendered the
Portuguese and Spaniards rich and powerful; and these are now, not only the
greatest and constant, but almost the only source of their wealth. Nor have
either the French or Dutch been inattentive to this important object. Witness
the settlements of the latter in the East Indies, which, by their application
to commerce, under the blessings of a moderate government, in a few score
years, from the low and distressed states of Holland, rendered them high and
mighty. Witness the efforts which France made the last war for the conquest of
America, a prize worthy to be contended for by the most powerful nations. The
city of Tire, "whose merchants were as princes, and her great men the
honorable of the earth," was, like Great Britain, situated upon an island, and
like Great Britain, maintained the dominion of the sea by her commerce. The
principal seat of her trade, and great source of her wealth, was the noble
colony of Carthage, which she founded; the power and naval strength of which
was carried to such a height, by means of commerce, that forty years were spent
by the Romans, before they were able to subdue this mighty people. Preceptor
Vol. 2, On Trade and Commerce.


To a nation situated on an island, Particularly to Great Britain.
as Great Britain is, accommodated with every convenience for trade, the
establishing of foreign plantations to promote her commerce is particularly
beneficial, since the inhabitants have no other way of conveying abroad their
product and manufactures but by navigation, which breeds seamen, and brings in
wealth to maintain them. This renders England considerable by her fleets,
respected by her allies, and the scourge of her enemies. Such hands therefore
as are employed for those useful purposes, deserve all kind of encouragement,
for on the pillars of her commerce depend the safety and strength of England.

ONE of the most considerable advantages therefore, One of the most
considerable.
which Great Britain derives from her American colonies, arises from their
supplying her with commodities of her own, whereby a vast treasure is saved to
the nation, which would otherwise be spent in foreign Kingdoms.

IN North America, Natural advantages of America.
we have almost every kind of climate as well as soil, to the extent of seven
hundred leagues or upwards, on the seacoast, from North to South. These lands
are capable of the greatest improvement by cultivation. They yield some of the
most valuable commodities for trade, and such as are in the highest demand in
other countries, such as cotton, silk, indigo, rice, and great quantities of
all kinds of corn of the best quality; and the number of commodities might be
easily augmented. Vines are natural to many parts of the country; a variety of
medicinal drugs, gums and plants, is not wanting; flax for linen, and hemp for
cordage, are brought here to very great perfection; the woods yield materials
for ships, houses and cabinet work; the pine trees will furnish a plenty of
masts and yards, with pitch, turpentine, tar and rosin. The woods also abound
in game; furs, and all sorts of peltry are furnished from hence. In the bowels
of the earth there are mines of iron, copper and coal, in great abundance;
there are various sorts of useful earths for bricks and tiles, and a variety of
useful stones for building. Lastly, North America has spacious and safe
harbors for shipping; and navigable rivers variously intersect the country, to
facilitate the communication from one part to the other.

Now if the planting of colonies is so beneficial to a commercial people; Its
conveniences for settling of colonies.
if these are more especially advantageous to an island, surrounded with ports,
and where every inle: may prove a convenient harbor; and if a country
abounding with useful commodities, blessed with a fertile soil, and a variety
of healthy climates, is particularly calculated for the planting, growth and
increase of colonies we may readily conclude that the settlement of the British
American colonies must have proved of the utmost advantage to Great Britain.
Nor is such a conclusion void (...) foundation, as we shall be fully convinced,
b^ comparing the present condition of England with what it was, whilst yet she
had no plantations.

BEFORE that period, Condition of England before she had any colonies.
it is computed that the people of London did not exceed one sixth part of
their present number. England was then obliged to pay to foreigners for all the
commodities she now gets from America, at a most exorbitant price, and now
exports those very goods to the very same nations from which she was wont to
get them. It is ingeniously observed by an able pen, that rum, sugar and
tobacco, if we had no plantations, would prove so many issues to drain us of
our circulating cash, which are now the sources of private wealth and the
public revenue.

AT the time when queen Elizabeth entered upon her government, In queen
Elizabeth's reign.
the customs produced but thirty-six thousand pounds a year, a sum far less
than what one of her colonies now brings into the treasury. The legal interest
of money was then at 12 per cent. It is now but 5, and England abounds in
riches. Her shipping too is increased to the most astonishing degree. In the
year 1575, queen Elizabeth's time, the whole royal navy consisted but
twenty-four ships, and all the shipping then in England, both great and small,
fell short of eight hundred fail; a number not equal to half the vessels which
are employed at this time to carry on the commerce of America. According to an
abstract made about thirty years ago, See the Preceptor on Trade and Commerce,
Vol. 2.
the royal navy consisted of three hundred and twenty-two sail, carrying twelve
thousand two hundred and seventy pieces of cannon; and since that time has been
continually increasing. If the whole royal navy had been in commission at the
end of the last war, and manned to its full compliment, it could not have
amounted to much less than one hundred thousand seamen.

ALTHOUGH the manufactures of England are, The colonies are useful in taking
off the manufactures of Great Britain.
within a very few years, prodigiously augmented, the plantations alone take
off near one half. By their consumption of English manufactures, great are the
advantages which redound to Great Britain from her empire in America. The
plantation trade is by far the most valuable of any whereof England can boast
the enjoyment. What we may place great stress upon, it is continually
improving. It is a mine in which we still find richer and nobler veins. Whilst
other springs of commerce are drying up, this overflows. It is permanent,
whilst others are shifting place. What crowns its value, it is our own, in
which other nations cannot rival England, nor can they deprive her of it.

GREAT as the present product of our trade is, The American trade may be
rendered still more beneficial
it might be made much more beneficial, as it is computed by intelligent
writers, that above a million annually might be saved or added to the stock, by
a proper encouragement of many articles that might be raised in America. By the
purchase of them abroad, we contribute to enrich other nations, who extort very
exorbitant sums from us, and who have it in their power to disappoint us of
them, perhaps, when they become most necessary to us.

SEEING then, It is impolitic to import American commodities from other nations.
from the preceding account of the colonies, England may be supplied from
thence with some of the most valuable commodities, such as raw silk from
Georgia, for her own manufactures; hemp for cordage, iron for various arts, a
great abundance of naval stores of all kinds from Pennsylvania, Carolina,
New Jersey, New York, and New England, as planks, timber, masts, yards, and all
materials for ship-building, it is a reflection on our politics to expend our
money with other nations for these articles. For hemp, indeed, exported from
the plantations a bounty has lately been allowed by parliament, from which
England will unquestionably derive great benefit to herself. The same
encouragement will produce the same good effect in regard to iron and potashes.
A bourty allowed on these articles, though inconsiderable, must soon be
reimbursed manifold, by saving vast sums of money yearly remitted to foreigners
for these commodities.

THE bounty allowed upon pitch, Pitch, tar and turpentine.
tar and turpentine, has brought the price of these commodities in England to
ten shillings sterling a barrel, which used to amount to fifty shillings; for
which too was paid ready money. This regulation therefore prevents five time
the sum of its cost from going out of the kingdom to Sweden and other northern
power^ and aids the colonies to make returns for the immense quantity of goods
sent to them from England. The above articles now come so cheap to the
ship-builders of Great Britain, that the charge is hardly felt by them; and the
bounty that is paid by the nation on the importation of those commodities, is
doubly repaid by lessening the proportion between the importation and
exportation that was against us in these articles, which is called the balance
of trade. Introduction to the British Empire in America.
"It is agreed by all who pretend to understand trade, Balance of trade, what.
says judge Littleton, that a country does then grow rich, and then only, when
the commodities exported out of it are of more value than those that are
imported into it." Judge Littleton's Treatise on the Groans of the Plantations.
It is but wisdom therefore in Britain to encourage the raising of every
commodity in America, of which she stands in need herself, or which may
increase the balance of trade in her favor.

AND here we may properly take notice of the considerable advantages derived
from an interchange of manufactures and commodities between Great Britain and
America. Benefits of an interchange of manufactures and commodities.
The labor that is necessary in manufactures, the expenfive carriage and
different hands they pass through, must greatly heighten their value. Whilst
commodities generally employ but one set of people, manufactures employ many.
They afford a subsistence to the poor, collect people into villages, extend the
buildings of towns and cities, improve the soil, enhance the property of
landlords, and create a considerable intercourse between artificers and
merchants. Value of the manufactures from the hands they pass through.
The consumers of English woolen manufactures in America, are obliged to pay
about 75 per cent. advance on the first cost, by way of profit to the different
hands, which these manufactures pass through before they arrive to them, viz. To
the woolstapler, the clothier, the woolen draper, the merchants in England and
America, for freight and insurance, and to the retailer. This calculation is
made by an ingenious and intelligent merchant of Philadelphia, well versed in
this subject. Whence it appears, that manufactures are not more valuable in
themselves, than from the number of persons they support.

HENCE it follows likewise, The export of American commodities reco^mmended.
that while Great Britain is employed in manufactures, America ought to be
encouraged in raising all sorts of commodities, and exporting them to Britain.
By which means the mother country will be supplied with materials for carrying
on her manufactures, and the Colonies be enabled to purchase those manufactures
of which they stand in need; and thus they will become reciprocally necessary
to each other.

IT is judged, The trrade of America with England
that the whole trade of America to all parts of the globe employs, one year
with another, above two thousand sail of English ships, by which treasures of
greater wealth are conveyed to Britain, than are derived from Mexico or Peru.
The amount of the cash and bills of exchange, and of the commodities sent to
England in payment for her goods, and of the duties on these commodities,
cannot be less than two millions yearly. From the commodities of America,
chiefly manufactured in England, and conveyed through innumerable channels of
trade to every quarter of the globe, Great Britain acquires immense wealth,
keeps up a spirit of industry among her inhabitants, and is enabled to support
mighty fleets, great in peace and formidable in war.

BUT further, The American Colonies advantageous to Britain in time of war.
the American Colonies are not only very beneficial to the trade of Britain in
time of peace, but are highly advantageous to her in case of war with France or
Spain, the most common and natural enemies of Britain. The very situation of
the British islands in America renders it easy to annoy those of the French or
Spaniards. The continental Colonies too, on an emergency, are able to furnish
many thousand brave men, who, when joined by any body of regular forces from
England, and convoyed by a British squadron, would effectually shake the French
and Spanish dominions, both in North and South-America. This has been done, and
may be done again, when any future provocation calls them to unite their force
with that of Britain against their common enemy. Thus it appears, I think, with
the highest degree of evidence, that Britain owes much of her well-being, her
riches and her power, to her American colonies. It Is from her union with them
she draws the sinews of war, whereby she is enabled to conquer and prescribe
terms of peace to her enemies, and to fix her glory upon a sure and lasting
basis.

BUT if, from what has been said, It is the interest of the American Colonies
to perpetuate their union with Great Britain.
it appears to be the interest of Britain to perpetuate her union with her
Colonies in America, it will appear no less manifest, by the sequel, that it is
the interest of those Colonies to perpetuate their union with Britain.

THE American Colonies, Proved from the support and commerce of England.
by the support and commerce of Britain, have emerged, as it were, out of
darkness into light, and in less than two centuries have become a numerous and
happy people. Between two and three millions, at least, of subjects, by
transplantation from Europe, and by natural increase, now inhabit these
colonies. For this increase of numbers, wealth and power, they are indebted
originally to Britain, from whence they derived their mild government, their
equal laws and secure property. Must they not then naturally desire a perpetual
union with their mother country, whilst they taste the sweets of British
liberty, and enjoy the advantages of her trade and commerce.

AND this leads me to mention another reason why the Colonies should wish to
perpetuate their union with Britain, The demand for British manufactures.
viz. the considerable benefit which they derive from the British manufactures.
The price of labor in America is too great to allow the inhabitants to
manufacture for themselves. They supply all their wants from Britain, and are
enabled to make good remittances by their commodities, which might otherwise
lie useless on their hands.

AGAIN, And the advantageous alliance (...) America (...) Great Britain.
were the American colonies to be considered as having no union or connection
with Britain, what power could secure them from her conquering arm, whenever
she was disposed to stretch it forth? But while the Union is perpetuated
between them, and the colonies are considered as a part of the British empire,
Britain surely, by her formidable fleets, and brave and disciplined armies,
could afford them speedy succor in the day of danger, and effectually secure
them from the hostile attempts of any power in Europe. I ask once more then,
must not the colonies naturally desire a perpetual union with their mother
country, since it is from her they enjoy the sweets of British liberty, the
advantages of British commerce, and the protection of British power?

I HAVE said the less of the importance of Great Britain to the American
Colonies, An erroneous principle considered.
because this is a subject, upon which every writer seems to be agreed; whereas
there have been some narrow, short-sighted politicians, who have attempted to
diminish the importance of the colonies to Great Britain. It Is for this reason,
that I have entered upon a more minute detail of the latter, and have moreover
subjoined to the end of this dissertation, an Appendix, containing a summary
view of the American commerce, the produce and exports of the several colonies,
whereby the national stock is so considerably augmented.

THUS have I endeavored to point out the reciprocal advantages of a perpetual
union between Great Britain and her Colonies, Conclusions to be drawn from this
view of commerce.
from a particular view of the nature and extent of the commerce that subsists
between them, and the vast accessions of wealth and power which they
reciprocally derive from that commerce. I have shown how necessary they are to
one another, and that they must suffer and decline in proportion as the present
union betwixt them is weakened or destroyed. I have only to add further, under
this head, a few observations upon the most probable methods of preserving and
perpetuating this union.

WITH respect to Great Britain, The surest means of preserving this union
considered on the part of Great Britain.
I think, the surest method she can take to preserve this union inviolate is to
consider the interests of America as her own, to encourage the willing
obedience of a dutiful and loyal people, by equal laws and a free and open
commerce, rather than attempt, by unequal laws and too severe restrictions, to
force an unwilling subjection. The balance of trade will return more clear
money from the American Colonies, than can be extorted from them either by
armies, taxes or tribute. "It is more safe, as well as virtuous, to accept the
chaste embraces of conjugal affection, than by violence to extort forbidden
pleasures, which commonly fail the expectations." Cato's letters.


IT is an ill-judged policy, Impolitic restrictions of trade.
therefore, which would prevent the Colonies from enriching themselves by trade
at the expense of their neighbors. For these are only the channels through
which the riches of foreign nations are poured into the coffers of Britain. And
if these channels are once dried up, the watchful enemies and rivals of Britain
would soon avail themselves of our errors. Commerce, once forced from her
wonted course, is seldom or never brought into it again. Foreigners would soon
usurp our trade, and thrive in proportion as we decline.

To secure the liberty and property of all its subjects is, or ought to be,
What is, or ought to be the end of government, and common standard of action.
the end of every government. So long as this end is kept in view, so long are
the people united by the firmest bond of society, the interest of the whole.
This end must be the common standard, by which the particular actions of the
several members toward each other ought to be regulated. Particular ranks of
men have particular feelings peculiar to themselves, and often contrary to the
interests and feelings of the rest of the society, and therefore have no right
to make, and much less to impose laws on their fellow subjects, inconsistent
with and opposite to those interests and those seelings; therefore a society,
government or real public, must consist of freemen, choosing or consenting to
laws themselves. "To watch over such a system, and to promote its good as much
as lies in our power, to resist every encroachment on it, and to defend it to
the utmost, is the political duty of every citizen." See Preceptor, Vol. 2, on
Ethics.
But to sacrifice the interests of one part to those of another part weakens
the affection of subjects, inasmuch as the preservation of our rights, the
security of our persons, liberties and property, on the one hand, and obedience
to government, on the other hand, are the reciprocal duties of the rulers and
ruled.

IF the superstructure of a government be raised on any other foundation than
the general interest of the whole community, viz. The general interest of the
whole community.
it can not be durable. Like the image of Daniel's vision, the head whereof was
of fine gold, the belly and thighs of brass the legs of iron, and the feet part
of iron and part of clay, which cannot cleave together, it must, when smote
upon, be broken to pieces. But the constitution of a country, in which the
happiness of the whole community is regarded, is like a firm oak that
withstands the fury of the jarring elements roused up into a storm, fixes its
roots deeper in its native earth, and lifts its majestic head to the skies.
Whilst this principle is kept up in its full vigor, it will endure the shocks
of contending nations, and be still more firmly established. It will yield to
naught but time, before which the "Sun himself shall fail, and nature sink in
years."

WHEN the public is safe and trade encouraged, Which is the happiness and
support of a country.
every man participates of the common felicity, and has means of acquiring
property. The riches of a good King consist in the wealth of his subjects. The
affections of his people are his security and happiness. All they possess,
their fortune and property, are at his disposal, because they are employed to
secure both him and themselves. A wise government ought therefore to secure the
possession of property, and raise no taxes but what they shall see a real
necessity for doing, and continue them no longer than that necessity requires.
It should be done in a manner most agreeable to the sentiments of the people,
who best know what they can endure; for a virtuous and public spirit, a spirit
of Liberty, is the chief, if not the only support of a country. See Cato's
letters on the subject of Liberty.


SHOULD any ignorant or selfish politicians in the mother country ever have
influence enough to get such laws enacted, An opposite conduct in what respect
pernicious.
as would bear hard upon the liberty or property of the Colonies; this measure
would doubtless have a natural tendency to sow the seeds of discontent among
them, and to alienate their affections. Instead of considering Britain then as
connected with them by the natural ties of a mother country, they would begin
to look upon her as a foreign power, treating them as her tributaries, and
attempting to enslave them. For the same noble spirit of freedom, which
actuates an Englishman, born in the island of Britain, beats in every pulse and
pants in every breast of the British subjects in America. Add to this, the
Colonies were settled upon a presumption, that the same extensive privileges,
which were originally granted to them, should not in aftertimes be contracted
or withdrawn. When Great Britain has attained to such a pitch of grandeur by
the industry and success of her Colonies, as has rendered her the admiration
and envy of her neighbors, would it be consistent with the maxims of justice,
for her to resume the privileges she has granted, under which they have so
amazingly flourished, and which they have never forfeited? No, the rights of
Americans are established on the same foundation with those of Britain herself.
She cannot violate them, without, at the same time, undermining her own
constitution; and the same sword that is sheathed in the bowels of America must
inevitably pierce the vitals of Britain too, Far other returns, however, may be
hoped for by a people, whose commerce has proved so beneficial to Britain; who
have, at the expense of so much treasure and so much blood, assisted her in
gaining a complete ascendency over their common enemy. They are a people too,
who contributed much by their bravery, in a former war, to procure an
honorable and unlooked for peace to their mother country, when she was of
herself in no condition to prescribe her own terms. The island of Cape-Breton,
which was esteemed the Dunkirk of America, was taken by the troops of
New England, with little or no assistance from home; and this was all the
English had to restore to France at the treaty of Aix la Chapelle, 1748, for
the restitution of Bergen opzoom to her allies, and for other terms of peace.


THUS it appears, A violation of the American rights impolitic.
that the most effectual method, which Great Britain can take to perpetuate her
union with the Colonies, is to continue them in the full exercise of those
liberties and privileges, both with respect to commerce and taxes, which they
have hitherto enjoyed; and to do nothing that can justly be looked upon as a
violation of their rights, which might end in a breach of this desirable union.

WITH respect to the Colonies, The method by which the Colonies may preserve
the present union.
the surest method they can take to preserve inviolate their union with Britain
is, upon every occasion, to demonstrate their loyalty to the best of Kings, and
their subordination to the government of Great Britain, by exerting their
united efforts, in the support and defense of the dignity of the British crown,
and the rights of the British parliament; and by cheerfully and constantly
submitting to the just determination of the grand council of the realm. A
conduct opposite to this would make them forfeit the rights of sons, and justly
bring upon them the indignation and chastisement of the mother country.

THESE are the methods, The effects of such a conduct
which to me appear most likely to perpetuate the glorious union between
Great Britain and her Colonies, which will ensure strength and success to the
common cause, and baffle every attempt of their enemies to injure or molest
them. Thus will the commerce, riches and power of Britain, be carried to an
envied pitch of greatness, and as far surpass what they now are, as they do at
this day exceed what they were, before Great Britain could boast of a colony.

I HAVE enlarged so much upon the advantages of a perpetual union between
Great Britain and her Colonies, Benefits of this union to Religion and the
Protestant interest.
collected from a view of the nature and extent of the commerce that subsists
between them, and the immense accession of riches and power, which they
reciprocally enjoy from that commerce, that I can now say but little of the
glorious prospect, which this union presents to us, in the promotion of the
Protestant Religion, which they profess, and extending the Gospel in its
purity, throughout the vast benighted regions of the western world.

THIS consideration is indeed as far superior to that which I have hitherto
dwelt upon, Superior to that of mere commerce, etc.
as things eternal are to those of a mere temporal nature. One relates to the
greatest of this world's good, even liberty and property. The other extends to
a future and eternal world; and is employed upon such objects as are most
likely to secure the happy enjoyment of it. It Is the glory of Britain, that she
enjoys both these advantages in the highest degree; that the means of
preserving the former is secured to her by the best civil constitution, and the
means of obtaining the latter by the best religious establishment in the world.

WITH the sons of Britain the Protestant religion was transplanted into the
Colonies. By the spreading of the Gospel.
It has taken root, grown and flourished in the kindly soil. It has already
become a fair and lofty tree, and, if it is still well nurtured and
sufficiently watered, it may ever long extend its boughs beyond the setting
sun, even to the verge of the eastern world, and perhaps shelter the native
country from whence it originally sprung. Thus Britain has already been an
happy instrument in the hands of Heaven, of bearing the tidings of the Gospel
to one of the darkest corners of the globe, to nations, who had long sat in
darkness and the shadow of death. By perpetuating an union with her Colonies,
she may likewise, through them, carry these glad tidings further still, even to
the utmost ends of the earth, and thus hasten, if I may so speak, that glorious
period, when "righteousness shall overflow the earth as the waters cover the
seas." And when all the kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of the
Lord and of his Christ.

IF such, then, are to be the happy consequences of this glorious union,
Conclusion.
should not every American, every British Protestant, ardently wish and pray,
that it may be faithfully and inviolably preserved and continued "as long as
the Sun and Moon endure?"

APPENDIX.
Containing a general view of the trade of the American Colonies, their
produce, exports, etc. chiefly extracted from approved histories and authentic
memoirs.
IN this Appendix, to observe some order, I shall begin with an account of the
British settlements to the Northward; and first with Newfoundland. This great
island, which is above three hundred miles long and two hundred broad, forms
the Eastern boundary of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and extends from thence
Southward near ten degrees of latitude, along the Eastward part of Nova Scotia.
It is chiefly valuable for the great Fishery upon those shoals, Newfoundland,
its Fishery.
which are called the Banks of Newfoundland. The plenty of Cod, and several
other species of Fish here, is almost inconceivable, as well as along the
shores of the island of Cape-Breton, the coasts Nova Scotia and New England,
which pours in a treasure of riches on Great Britain. Our share of the
Newfoundland fishery was formerly computed to increase the national stock at
least three hundred thousand pounds sterling a year in gold and silver,
remitted for the Cod we sell in the different parts of Europe, in Spain,
Portugal, Italy and the Levant, etc. See Account of European settlements in
America, by Dodsley.
of how much more wealth must it be productive at present to the mother
country, as Newfoundland and Nova Scotia belong now so entirely to
Great Britain? The advantages which attend an extensive and well-managed
fishery are great and obvious. The sea may be considered as a mine out of which
the treasure is taken at a very little expense, and even that expense is
advantageous, since it promotes several manufactures, and goes entirely amongst
our own people. Fish is a valuable commodity, both at home and abroad.
According to some writers, the Dutch make more of their fishery in our seas,
than the Spaniards do by the West Indies. Besides, this fishery, properly
attended to, would infalliably furnish us with a constant supply of
experienced, active and healthy sailors for manning our fleets; the gradual
increase of which would prove not only a constant and inexhaustible source of
wealth, and add to the balance of trade in our favor, but augment our
maritime force, to a degree that would make us a match for all Europe in naval
power. Preceptor.


ADJACENT to Newfoundland is the country of Nova Scotia, which, Nova Scotia.
although the progress of it was at first but slow, is now become a
considerable settlement, and is a very advantageous place for fishing.
Twenty-five thousand quintals of fish have been caught there in one year.
British Empire in America.


BUT much more considerable is the colony of New England. New England.
This colony is in length near three hundred miles, and in some part near two
hundred miles in breadth, lying between the forty-first and forty-fifth degrees
of North latitude, and comprizes the four provinces of Massachusetts Bay,
Connecticut, Rhode Island and New Hampshire.

THERE is a noble Cod-fishery on this coast, Its Fishery.
which employs a vast number of their people, and proves a very considerable
article of trade. They are enabled by this to export annually above thirty
thousand quintals of choice Codfish to Spain, Italy and the Mediterranean, and
near twenty thousand quintals of the refuse sort to the West Indies, as food
for the Negroes, besides a large quantity to Madeira and Fyal, for wines and
brandy.

THE business of ship-building is one of the most considerable which Boston,
Its Tiade.
or the other seaport towns in New England carry on. This country has
materials enough to build ships for half the employment of Britain. It can
furnish the trade and navy too with naval stores, for the supplies of which
from the Baltic, two or three hundred thousand pounds sterling annually was
wont to be expended. In their trade to foreign parts, the profits of their
voyage are generally received in bills of exchange upon London, or in returns
of goods through the hands of English factors. By this circuitous commerce,
they pay in Great Britain for various sorts of goods got from thence, to the
amount of some hundred thousand pounds sterling a year. Although their commerce
is not carried on immediately with Great Britain, nor with British vessels, yet
here the profits chiefly center, where all the money, which the Colonies, can
make in any manner, must center at last. Potashes, a most necessary article in
manufactures, particularly in bleaching, as many thousand barrels are annually
consumed for this one purpose in Ireland, have, within these few years, proved
a very advantageous article of trade in several of the Colonies, particularly
in New England, and is likely to become a very valuable and growing remittance
to the mother country. The amount of the potashes exported home from
New England only, within the last twelve months, is said to be not less than
thirty thousand pounds sterling; and it is imagined that the quantity this year
will arise to a much more considerable sum. The spirit of gain which the making
of potashes has already inspired, it is probable, will every year continue to
render this manufacture an object of much greater importance to America than
has been generally imagined. Near six hundred sail of ships have been laden in
a year for Europe and the British plantations. From Christmas 1747, to
Christmas 1748, five hundred vessels cleared out from the port of Boston only,
for a foreign trade, and four hundred and thirty were entered inwards. Great is
the advantage therefore of the New England trade and navigation, if only
considered as a nursery of seamen; how much more by considering the addition it
makes to the national stock? History of the British Empire in America.


THE three contigious provinces, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, their
trade
viz. New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, to the Southward of New England,
are with very little difference the same in their climate, productions, and the
commodities in which they trade; the soil being in general very fertile,
abounding not only in its native grain, the Indian corn, but few parts of the
world exceed these provinces in the abundance and excellence of their Wheat,
Barley, Rye, Oats, Buck-wheat, etc.

GREAT quantities of Flax and Hemp are raised in these provinces. Mines of iron
have been opened in them all, and a rich mine of copper has been successfully
worked in East-Jersey, which may prove highly advantageous to the manufactures
of Great Britain. The trade of these provinces to the West Indies is very
considerable in Provisions, Hides, Tallow, Lumber and Soap, etc. for which they
can procure Sugars, and from this find some resource of making remittance to
England for the goods they get from thence. They carry on a trade also with
Spain, Portugal, Italy, Madeira and Fyal; they trade likewise to England and
Ireland in Hemp, Flax-seed, Linseed Oil, Furs, and Deer-skins. Flaxseed is a
very promising article of Commerce; as Ireland must be dependant on the
American Colonies for an annual supply. In times of scarcity, prodigious
quantities of wheat are shipped to England and Ireland, as well as to other
parts of Europe. Thus the Americans send home to their fellow subjects of
Great Britain, both goods to increase the national stock, and also bread for
their subsistence. Amongst the several acts which passed the House of Commons,
and gained his Majesty's royal assent, the last sessions of Parliament, is an
Act for allowing the importation of Wheat from America, duty free, for a
limited time.
The importations from England into the province of Pennsylvania only, it is
estimated, has in several years amounted to more than half a million sterling
per annum. Memorial of the Merchants and Traders of the city of Philadelphia.


THERE cannot be less than seven or eight hundred sail of ships annually
employed to keep up the extensive trade of these provinces.

Maryland and Virginia, Trade of Maryland and Virginia.
which are to the Southward of Pennsylvania, agree very much in their soil and
product.

TOBACCO is the standing commodity of both these colonies. A late sensible
writer computes that there are shipped from these places annually, 90,000
hogsheads of Tobacco at an average of 952 weight each; 30,000 of these are
expended in home consumption, the duty of each is twenty-seven pounds sterling,
and the amount of the whole duty on them is above eight hundred thousand
pounds; and of the remaining 60,000 hogsheads, after the imports and part of
the subsidy are drawn back, about one-fifth of the sum is produced into the
Exchequer from every hogshead that is re-exported, which is above three hundred
thousand pounds more. The whole amount for the customs of Tobacco is more than
a million. Such is the immense advantage which the Mother Country derives from
the article of Tobacco alone, which she gets from her Colonies. See
Considerations on the propriety of imposing taxes on the British Colonies, for
raising a revenue by Act of Parliament; and also a Computation by Sir Thomas
Dally, in the History of the British Empire in America.


North and South Carolina, North and South Carolina
to the Southward of Virginia, lie between the thirty-first and thirty-sixth
degrees of North latitude, in a very fine climate.

THE trade of Carolina has three great staple commodities, Rice, Indigo, and
Naval Stores, which it yields more abundantly than all the rest of our
Colonies. Rice anciently formed by itself the staple of Carolina. The export of
this commodity from Charlestown, in the year 1731, amounted only to 41,957
barrels. In a few years afterward, the product of it was computed to return to
Great-Britan at least L. 80,000 per annum, including freight and commissions,
which are the most profitable articles in the British commerce. In the year
1754, the export of Rice from Charlestown, amounted to 104,682 barrels. In the
year 1757, this branch of commerce was computed to be annually worth, at the
lowest estimation, L. 150,000 sterling. Great has been its increase since; and
we may well reckon it to be at this time worth L. 200,000 sterling.

IT was long before Carolina went into the profitable trade of Indigo; they
began it since the year 1750, and in the year 1754, was exported from
Charlestown, to the amount of above 200,000 lb. weight; and 500,000 lb. weight
was made in the year 1757. If the inhabitants continue to improve the
advantages with the same spirit in which they have begun, they must naturally
and necessarily come to supply the whole consumption of the world with this
commodity, and consequently make their country the richest part of the British
dominions. See Account of European Settlements, printed by Dodsley.


To the Southward of Carolina, on the borders of Florida, Georgia.
was erected the province of Georgia, in 1732.

Georgia is of importance at present, and will be of future benefit to England,
by raising raw Silk; the goodness of its Silk has been tried by a proper
engine, and according to Sir Thomas Lombe, is better than the finest Silk of
Piedmont, for which half a million a year has been paid. Potashes too has been
imported from hence to England, besides Peltry, Drugs and Dyers ware of several
sorts.

WE come next to the Spanish settlement of St. Augustine, to the Southward of
Georgia. St. Augustine.
It belongs now to the English, as well as Canada and Louisiana, by the last
treaty of peace; so that they claim the whole of North America upon the
Atlantic sea.

WE shall say nothing of the newly formed Colonies in Florida, as being but yet
in their infancy, or of the settlements in Hudson's- Bay, as not very
considerable hitherto; but how great must be the advantage of trade with the
Indians in Canada and Louisiana, now ceded to the English, which encouraged and
enabled the French to hem in all the English Colonies, by a chain of forts on
their back settlements, extended in a tract of above 2000 miles? See Account of
the British Settlements in America, and History of the British empire in
America.


Canada borders to the Northward upon the provinces of Nova Scotia, New England
and New York. It is the oldest of all the French establishments, and prior to
the settlement of New England. Quebec is the capital of this province. It is
built on the river St. Lawrence, upon which are the principal settlements of
this Colony. A vast trade already is, and a much greater may in time be carried
on with the Indians, on the prodigious fresh water Lakes, of which there are
five in number, in extent to be considered as so many seas. They communicate
with one another, and the last of them with the river St. Lawrence, which
effectually commands the trade of the Lakes, and has an influence upon all the
nations of Indians which confine upon them.

THE principal produce of the West Indies is Sugar. Of the West Indies.
It is amazing what riches have been acquired to England by this commodity, and
what a surprizingly great number of ships are employed in the trade, especially
of Barbados and Jamaica. This last place is of great consequence to annoy the
enemy, in time of war with France or Spain. No plate fleet from Carthagena can
arrive at the Havannah, which is the general place of rendezvous for the Flota,
without passing by one end of Jamaica. Whilst we continue masters of these
seas, we shall always have it in our power to prevent the junction, and greatly
distress them. In time of peace, the trade is of no less consequence in drawing
from the Spaniards great sums of money.

IF the Sugar Islands are of such consequence to England, on account of the
great trade, shipping, and number of hands employed, the persons subsisted
thereby, and the customs and imposts they pay; the importance of the Colonies
on the continent of North America is enhanced from their supplying the
West Indies with Lumber and provisions of all sorts.

In whatever light we view the connection between Great Britain and her
American Colonies; Conclusion.
the reciprocal advantages of the present union almost exceed computation, and
yet fall every way far short of those immense benefits which will accrue to
both, from this union being rendered firm and perpetual.

End of the APPENDIX.
AN ESSAY On the reciprocal ADVATTAGES OF A PERPETUAL UNION BETWEEN
GREAT BRITAIN AND Her AMERICAN Colonies.

By STEPHEN WATTS, M. A.

ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
THE author is very sensible, that it would have been proper, in composing the
following Essay, to have consulted with gentlemen who reside in the several
places he had occasion to speak of, and are well acquainted with the nature and
extent of their commerce. Would the time, allowed for these performances, have
affored him an opportunity of procuring such information, he flatters himself
his piece would have been more original, with respect to matters of trade, and
more worthy of public notice. He would have been thereby enabled to form a more
exact estimate of the present state of trade in Great Britain and America.
Deprived of this advantage, he was obliged to have recourse to commercial
writers, amongst whom he is chiefly indebted to Gee and Beawes. And when it is
considered, that few persons, though of far greater abilities and experience in
the commercial world than the author, would be able of their own knowledge to
furnish an adequate account of every material branch in the British and
American trade, he cannot despair of the Reader's indulgence.

DISSERTATION II.
THE situation of Great Britain, separated from the rest of the world by the
surrounding ocean, and destitute of those endless resources, which an extent of
continent affords its inhabitants, very early suggested to judicious and
observing men, that a naval force would be the easiest and most sure means of
her defense, against foreign encroachments. The great Alfred, of glorious and
immortal memory, was fully convinced of this important truth. He knew, by sad
experience, that the want of such a force had subjected the island to the
insults and depredations of the Danes, and other Northern robbers. Animated
with affection for his subjects, and fired with a just resentment of the
injuries they had received, he resolved, if possible, to supply such a fatal
defect. By equipping, with incredible expedition, a fleet, considerable in
those days, he rendered himself master of the sea, and freed his people from
the dread of being plundered. But in a few years, this beneficial, this
glorious project, unsupported by a sufficient fund, was almost entirely laid
aside. The inhabitants, employed in the exercise of arms, or agriculture, and
raising what was barely necessary for their own subsistence, could not possibly
defray the expense of having a fleet always in readiness. The Danes, taking
advantage of their remissness in this important affair, soon overrun and
subdued the greatest part of the island; but inattentive to a lesson, which
their own success might have taught them, they, in their turn, fell a prey to
an innundation of Normans.

THUS the British navy, though several attempts were made to render it
respectable by monarchs, who understood their own interests, continued,
nevertheless, to make no great figure, till the reign of queen Elizabeth. Till
this time also the trade of England was very small, and contracted within a
narrow compass. It consisted chiefly in exporting Tin, Lead, Wool, and a few
other articles, which served to purchase what foreign goods were wanted. That
wise queen, assisted by a wise and experienced ministry, discovered the grand
secret unknown to her predecessors; they knew the advantages of a fleet, but
the consequent expenses they knew not how to defray. An extensive commerce was
now very judiciously considered as the only source adequate to such large and
continual disbursements. This it was thought, would not only afford a supply of
money, sufficient to equip and maintain a powerful navy, but would also be a
school or nursery of seamen.

ON these considerations, encouragement was given to the persecuted Walloons to
remove and settle in England. They very willingly embraced an opportunity of
transporting themselves to a land of freedom, and brought with them the Woollen
manufactory, which, favored with the countenance and protection of a wise
government, soon arrived at great perfection. In pursuance of the same plan, a
trade was opened to Turkey, Muscovy, the East Indies, and almost every
considerable country in the known world. Under the auspices of the same queen,
plantations were begun in AMERICA, and prosecuted with vigor. They at first
met with nearly insuperable difficulties; nevertheless, by the indefatigable
industry and perseverance of the planters, and the generous assistance of their
mother Country, those difficulties were surmounted, and the Colonies brought to
a pitch of greatness, that, considering the short time of their growth, is
almost incredible.

I HAVE taken this retrospect in order to show, that the British Trade, the
British Navy, and the British Colonies in America, sprung up together. They are
most nearly allied, being children of the same good policy; and it is worthy
the notice and attention of every politician, who studies to promote his
country's welfare, that as they had their rise at the same time, they have ever
since continued to increase and flourish in proportion. Their dependence is
mutual, and if either of them be affected, the others sooner or later will feel
it in a very sensible manner.

GREAT has been my surprise at the ignorance or malevolence of several late
productions. The writers of them, either blinded by passion, or employed and
instigated by the enemies of the British empire, have endeavored to sow
discord and dissension between the Mother Country and her American Colonies.
Some have strove to render the colonists suspected, by representing them as an
ungrateful, licentious people, aiming at independence, and impatient of any
subordination to Great Britain; whilst others, no less enemies to the welfare
and prosperity of both, would excite their jealousy, by undervaluing the
assistance she has offerded them, and placing her in the light of a cruel
Stepmother.

I am too well convinced of the good sense of my countrymen, both of Britain
and America, to imagine them capable of being deluded by such partial
representations, Considering themselves as members of one grand body politic,
they will naturally conclude, that the good of the whole must result from a due
connection and harmony of all the parts; and from the mutual exchange and
intercourse of friendly offices. Nevertheless, as this point seems to have been
controverted, a few observations, tending to evince, that a "perpetual UNION
between Great Britain and her American Colonies, will be mutually and
reciprocally advantageous," may not be less agreeable, than necessary, in the
present Dissertation.

THIS is a subject, the most truly important and interesting, which can claim a
Briton's notice, and does honor to that worthy gentleman who proposed its
discussion by the Sons of this Seminary. Struck with its vast delicacy and
importance, and conscious of inability to treat it in a manner suited to its
dignity, I had almost declined the arduous task; but it is a glory even to fail
in great attempts; and if I should afford a hint to some abler pen, or
contribute to remove the smallest prejudice, I shall think myself extremely
happy in being so far beneficial to the public.

WE have already observed, that the defense, the strength and glory of Britain,
principally depend on her Navy; and that her Navy can only be maintained by
Trade and Commerce. These are points too plain to be denied or disputed by the
most obstinate and perverse skeptic: and it is a very natural inference from
these premises, that whatever contributes to enlarge and extend her commerce,
is highly advantageous to Great Britain.

IT must likewise be acknowledged, that new settlements and young countries
stand in need of the assistance and protection of some powerful commercial
state. Destitute of these, they would be exposed to the attacks of lawless
invaders, for want of strength to defend themselves, and to the inclemency of
weather for want of proper clothing; for manufactures cannot be brought to any
degree of perfection, or extended to advantage, except in well-settled
countries; although agriculture, where the land is tolerably fertile, and the
settlement secure, may enable the inhabitants to procure the necessary
manufactures in return for its productions.

I HOPE therefore to make it appear, that a reciprocal emolument will arise
from a perpetual union between Britain and her American Colonies; as she may by
their means greatly enlarge her trade and commerce, and become still more rich
and powerful; and as they will reap the advantage of her riches and power, by
being protected from their enemies, and supplied with the conveniences of life
at a cheaper rate, and of a better quality than if manufactured by themselves.

IF we take a survey of the commerce of Britain, we shall find it extended to
almost every part of the known world; there is scarcely any place considerable
for trade that is not visited by her adventurous merchants. The means which
have enabled her to acquire, and support with dignity and advantage, such large
mercantile connections, are to be sought for in her various manufactories;
amongst which the Woollen is universally allowed the preference. Commercial
writers have taken much pains to enumerate the particular kinds of British
manufactures; to show their mutual dependence, and wherein the peculiar
advantage of each consists. As their works are in every one's hands, it is the
less necessary for me to repeat their substance, and to particularize the
articles which contribute to support the trade of Britain.

BUT there are two branches of commerce, whcih though not so generally attended
to, are nevertheless most highly beneficial. The Fisheries of Newfoundland,
Cape-Breton and St. John's, and there-exportation of foreign goods, have
greatly increased the British navigation, riches and power. It is supposed that
2000 sail of vessels are employed in those fisheries: the number of hands
necessary to navigate them, to cure and dry the fish, must be very large; and
great the consumption of provisions, nets and other utensils, brought almost
entirely from England.

GOODS for re-exportation are received from different quarters; some from
Germany, Flanders, etc. but in the greatest quantities from the East Indies and
America. The bullion sent to the former, is made an objection to that trade,
the force of which it is not my province to determine. Nothing of this sort
can, however, be objected to the trade to the American plantations, which is of
all most advantageous to the nation. There is scarcely any one species of
English manufactures, that is not vended in America; those of India likewise
come here to a ready market. In short, it is from Great Britain, that the
Colonies import almost every thing, requisite for clothing, agriculture, and
other uses. In return for these, they send her Sugar, Tobacco, Rice, Furs,
Pot-ash, Naval Stores, Gold and Silver, and the balance of a considerable
trade with Portugal, Spain, and other countries, bordering on the
Mediterranean, in Bills of Exchange.

HERE is an occasion to expatiate on the benefits derived to Britain from each
of these particulars; to observe the prodigious prices she paid for them to
foreigners, before their production in British America, and the
comcomparatively small prices for which they are procured at present. The large
quantities re-exported to foreign markets, and producing a demand upon them for
very great sums annually, might also be mentioned with much propriety. Nor
would it be amiss to show the immense addition these articles bring to the
revenue. But all these topics have been so largely insisted on in late
pamphlets and detached pieces, and must be so well known to every one, that
further mention of them is unnecessary. Only I would beg leave to observe a
particular still unnoticed; in the year 1703, the government of Sweden refused
a supply of Pitch and Tar, unless for ready money, at their own price, and in
Swedish bottoms. Such a gross imposition awakened the indignation and
resentment of Britain, and taught the true policy of deriving them from the
Colonies. Encouragement was thereupon given, and soon produced a sufficient
quantity to answer all her demands. But the spirit of the nation was again
lulled; the Sweeds resumed their trade, and that of America was very much
neglected.

SOME, perhaps, will readily grant, that the exportation of these articles from
America, is beneficial to her, and serves to enrich her inhabitants; but in
what respect can it be esteemed advantageous to Britain?

THIS question admits a very obvious solution. It is advantageous to Britain in
various respects. It affords freight for many thousand ton of her shipping, and
a nursery of seamen for the royal navy; the commissions enrich her merchants,
and the re-exportation brings abundance of wealth into the kingdom. The duties
they pay are an immense increase of the revenue, and they are received from the
plantations in return for British productions and manufactures, of which the
Colonies take off more than any foreign market whatever. The importation of
British goods, and those received by the way of Britain, has, on a medium, for
several years past, amounted to upwards of two millions annually; a sum so
immense, that although the Colonies abound with valuable articles, extremely
well adapted to the British market, and very beneficial to her trade and
navigation, and though they make large remittances by the way of Spain,
Portugal and Italy, in bills of exchange, yet the produce of all these sources
leaves a large balance in favor of Britain, which they pay her in gold and
silver. This in part furnishes bullion for the East India trade; on account of
which, and the vast consumption of India goods, the flourishing condition of
that valuable branch of commerce, may, in no small degree, very justly be
attributed to the American Colonies.

THUS we see, that not only every species of the manufactures of Britain, but
also her foreign trade and navigation are much indebted to America. Hence
riches have flowed into her coffers, and enabled her to support a fleet,
sufficient to maintain the empire of the ocean. And whoever considers the state
of the Colonies, must conclude, that they have not been losers by their
intercourse with their mother country. Consideration being had of the short
time the American settlements have been made, the inhabitants have increased in
riches and number to admiration; though far from enjoying that affluence, of
which some would represent them possessed. The advantages of their trade have
been mutual. She, by their means, has continued to rise in wealth and power;
whilst they, in the sunshine of her assistance and protection, and the
enjoyment of a beneficial commerce, have grown up and flourished, and still
continue to flourish, the equal advantage, ornament, and glory of Britain.

BUT, should we only take a retrospect, should we confine ourselves barely to
what is past, much injustice would be done to this animating subject, and we
should lose a prospect which cannot but afford the highest pleasure to every
Briton. Let us therefore look forward to the mutual benefits, which, with
proper attention, may hereafter arise.

IN order to this, it will be necessary briefly to enumerate those articles of
Great-Britain's foreign importations, which have relation to the present
subject. They are raw, thrown and wrought Silk, Velvets, Linens, Timber,
Boards, Pot-ash, and all kinds of Naval Stores. Several writers on trade have
computed the balances paid by Britain for those sorts of goods to France,
Italy, Germany, Flanders, Norway, Denmark, Sweeden and Russia; and none I have
met with make the amount less than two millions annually; this she discharges
in gold and silver. Perhaps matter of fact may be opposed to this estimate,
because there is not so great an exportation of bullion; but the argument is
not hereby invalidated. If the balance on some other trade: which would else
be brought home and added to the national stock, be diverted and sent to those
places, it is equally pernicious to the kingdom, as if it was imported and then
exported. And this is certainly the case. Britain on her particular trade with
Holland, for instance, has a right to a very large balance in specie; but the
latter, by keeping in her Debt the nations abovementioned, or several them, who
have demands on Britain, is enabled by their means to satisfy her British
creditors, and save her money; and besides this, bullion is sent to Holland to
answer bills of exchange drawn in favor of those nations.

THE consideration of this must deeply affect every one, who has at heart the
trade and prosperity of Great Britain, and would preserve her independent of
her European neighbors; especially as the woollen manufactory is in its
decline. France not only supplies her own people with woollens, but by the
cheapness of her goods, and the countenance of the court of Spain, has in a
great measure supplanted England in the Spanish markets. The Spaniards
themselves, sensible of their impolitic conduct, seem determined to persist no
longer in an error, the result of ill-grounded principles and mistaken notions
of honor. They have made several efforts to establish manufactories of their
own Wool, which have by no means proved fruitless. Other nations of Europe,
observing the success of France, have copied her example, by which England has
lost much of her woollen trade, particularly with Portugal, where the
importation of this staple commodity seems to meet with many discouragements.

FROM this reflection our attention is naturally turned to America, which will
be her surest, and perhaps in time, her only market, as restored fabrication is
likely to take place in every part of Europe. If under these circumstances,
such large sums are continually paid for foreign imports, the balance of trade
in favor of Britain will be materially diminished. The only remedy for this
growing evil is to be found in America, who can furnish a variety of the most
useful raw materials on terms mutually beneficial.

GREAT quantities of Furs and Peltry have been, and still are, sent from the
Colonies to Britain, the acquisition of Canada having thrown that whole trade
into our hands; but it is capable of greater improvement, and may well
supersede the fur trade to Russia. The Northern Indians, with a little
encouragement, will bring their Ermines and other fine furs from the 70th
degree of latitude, which is parallel with the European countries, where the
most valuable Furs are procured. The distance those people will travel to trade
with our settlements, is well known to all acquainted with their affairs. This
would likewise be a means of dispersing British manufactures amongst a
multitude of Indian tribes, at present unknown to our traders.

IRON mines are so plenty in almost every province on the continent, that it is
thought with good reason, they could supply all the markets in Europe.

As for Timber, Boards, Pitch and Tar, they may likewise be procured here in
great abundance. British America, extended along the coast more than 2000
miles, and reaching an unknown, but prodigious way into the continent, is
almost one continued forest, filled with every kind of useful timber,
notwithstanding the great devastions made within the two last centuries.

HERE it may possibly be objected, that the expensive freight of these bulky
articles, would render them unfit for the English markets. The Danes, Swedes,
and others, employed at present in the Lumber trade, are no doubt by long
experience become skillfull and can afford their goods at the cheapest. rates:
but the Colonies might be put upon a par with them by encouragement from the
legislature. Greater difficulties in other instances have yielded to the
efforts of British adventurers. America may vie with any country whatever in
plenty of materials, and other conveniences; and if large bulky ships were
built, of seven or eight hundred tons, capable of being navigated by fewer
hands in proportion to their burden, than those in present use, the expense of
navigation would be much diminished. The difference of distance between
America, and the Gulphs of Bothnia and Finland, from London, is inconsiderable;
and America is nearest to Lisbon, Cadiz, and all the markets to the Southward
of Cape Finisterre, and therefore might more conveniently supply those markets.

THE inconvenience, and even absurdity of being supplied with Naval Stores by
foreigners, besides the disadvantage of consuming the national wealth, is very
evident. Every one knows, that should a war be entered into with those nations,
or should they be confederated with the enemies of Britain, by cutting off the
sinews of her strength, they might reduce her to the utmost distresses. Both
inconveniences would be remedied, if Naval Stores were entirely procured from
America; who, being connected with the Mother Country by every powerful tie,
would not fail to afford them in plenty on any emergency.

HEMP, Flax and Silk, manufactured and unmanufactured, are articles for which
Britain pays large sums to foreigners, as was observed before. Rough materials
may be procured in the Colonies, which abound with low bottoms and deep rich
soils, requiring only cultivation to produce the most luxuriant crops of Hemp
and Flax, particularly in the Southern Colonies. To confirm this, I might
mention the fertility of Egypt, which lies nearly under the same parallels of
latitude with Florida, Georgia, Carolina and Virginia and is famous for the
production of these commodities in the greatest perfection; but experience is
preferable to a thousand arguments.

I MENTION Silk, because the abundance of Mulberry-trees in the Southern
Colonies, seems naturally to point out the cultivation of that valuable
article. To this may be added, that their soil, climate and marme situation,
are pretty much the same with Nankin and Chekiang, the most famous Silk
provinces in all China. These circumstances afford good reason to believe, the
Silkworm would thrive very well here, and experience heightens the belief into
certainty. Small trials have been made, and some silk produced in Carolina, was
esteemed by good judges equal to the finest of China or Italy. The hands
employed in the cultivation of Hemp and Flax, will have sufficient leisure to
gather the leaves and feed the worms, which will enable the planters to afford
all these articles cheaper than may at first be imagined.

FROM this it seems evident, that materials for carrying on the Silk and Linen
manufactories to the greatest extent, may be procured from America. And in
Great Britain are prodigious numbers of poor, who would cheerfully work to
maintain themselves and families, doomed to misery for want of employment. To
establish manufactories of those goods by public encouragement, would therefore
be an undertaking of the highest utility both to Britain and the Colonies. "Fas
est et ab host doceri." It could be no disgrace to imitate in this respect the
policy of France, who knowing that trade is the only solid foundation of
greatness, is endeavoring to monopolize the three grand branches of
manufactures.

NOR need the woollen manufacturer be afraid, that his business would hereby
receive the smallest prejudice. There is a sufficient number of hands in the
three kingdoms to carry on each of them to the greatest advantage. Many who at
present cannot afford themselves the necessary covering, would then be able to
purchase more decent and comfortable clothing; and the Colonies having their
sources of remittance enlarged, would increase their already enormous demands
for British manufactures.

SHOULD this beneficial scheme be carried into execution, more than two
millions would be annually saved to the nation; adequate employment provided
for an incredible number of hands in Britain and America; and the trade,
navigation and riches of both would receive very large additions.

IT may possibly be thought from my appearing to confine fabrication to
Great Britain, that I am no friend to the Colonies, as there has of late been
so many proposals for erecting manufactories in America. I should esteem myself
very unhappy in the displeasure of my countrymen. None of the numerous sons of
British America more ardently wishes her prosperity than myself, or has a heart
more devoted to her service. Conscious therefore of the rectitude of my
intentions, I will not doubt of being heard with candor, though I venture to
maintain, that to divert their hands from their present lucrative Employments,
and set them to work on manufactories, would be incompatible with the true
interest of the Colonies.

THE number of their inhabitants, though near three millions, is small in
proportion to the extent of continent they possess. Lands are consequently
cheap, and labor dear; whatever therefore can be produced by means of the land
with little labor, must prove most advantageous. Hence arises the propriety of
ship-building, wherein the materials, thus procurable, are of primary
consideration.

For the same reason, agriculture will bring more emolument to the Colonies,
than could possibly arise from manufacturing goods, whose chief value depends
on the artificer's labor. Nor will this circumstance render them at all more
dependent. Abounding with the necessaries of life, and materials for
fabrication, the produce of the willing earth, they can at any time command a
supply of the goods they want, in greater plenty, and of a better quality than
would have been the result of their labor, employed in manufactures. I would
not be understood by this reasoning, to exclude the industrious farmer from
working up his Wool, and other coarse articles, unfit for exportation; this
will be doubly advantageous, it will be a saving to himself, and enable him to
pay for the finer goods he may purchase with greater ease and punctuality.

Now upon a review of the whole we find, that the trade of Great Britain to
some places is vastly advantageous, bringing large sums of money into the
kingdom; to others, although no returns are made in specie, but as much of
their produce and manufactures received as is sent them of British, it is
nevertheless profitable, affording employment for her people; to a third sort,
though perhaps lucrative to some private merchants, it is very pernicious, and
unprofitable to the nation in general, as it drains the kingdom of great
quantities of gold and silver. We may also observe, that the necessity of
continuing the latter is removed by the colonies, which are capable of
furnishing, at least, materials for manufacturing all the particulars procured
thereby, with mutual benefit. It likewise appears, that a great part of her
most advantageous trade depends on the Colonies, and that it may be still
farther improved by America; that whilst the Colonies have contributed so much
to enrich and aggrandize their mother country, they have themselves been
enriched and protected; and that the scheme for rendering them still more
advantageous to Britain, promises them an equal share of profit.

WHOEVER considers these circumstances, will, I am persuaded, anticipate my
conclusion; but I cannot dismiss the subject without suggesting another
argument, which will not be esteemed a trifling one by men of seriousness and
reflection. The benefits arising from the Protestant Religion to those states
which have embraced it, and indeed to the world in general, are very obvious.
Every one, acquainted with the affairs of Europe, must acknowledge their
situation is far better than it was four or five centuries ago; the religious
and civil liberties of mankind, are understood with more clearness and
precision; the human mind, which before was crampt and confined in its
researches, has become more expanded, and acquired much clearer knowledge in
the Arts, in Philosophy and Divinity. It is now very well known, that
Philosophy does not consist in monkish jargon, and that without Virtue there
can be no Religion. Even those countries, that are enemies to Protestantism,
have been sharers in its happy essects; the rays of knowledge have, in some
measure, illuminated their clouded understandings; but like those of the sun
within the Polar climates, they are weak and languid.

Great Britain has been the bulwark of the Protestant interest, ever since its
existence; and by her the attacks of its enemies have been repelled. The
British Colonies, established on principles of Civil and Religious Liberty,
have hitherto been protected therein by their own noble efforts, and her kind
assistance; and while they remain united, the enjoyment of their liberties of
both kinds, will, no doubt, be continued in its full extent. What would be the
consequence of a disunion, none can tell; but there is more than a probability,
that these particulars would be deeply affected. France, our ever-watchful
enemy, will be ready to seize any advantage that may offer. She would have her
armaments prepared to enter by St. Lawrence and the Missisippi, and might
possibly overrun all the Colonies. Should this be the case, the candle of
Science would be soon extinguished, and Ignorance introduced, in order to keep
up a blind devotion and implicit obedience. The Genius of Liberty would be
driven from British America, where she has hitherto delighted to reside; and
whether the mother country would be more fortunate, I leave to the
consideration of her Patriot Sons. ALL

SINCE, then, so many reciprocal advantages are the result of Union between
Britain and America; to render that Union perpetual, will be the only means of
securing and transmiting them to posterity, together with those immense
benefits, which are yet in prospect. Interest and affection, -- all the tender
and endearing ties, which connect mankind, -- backed by the venerable authority
of Religion, plead for it with irresistible eloquence.

WHETHER the Union ought to remain on its present establishment, or whether it
should receive a new form and impression, are matters foreign to my purpose:
Only permit me to suggest that, in the important determination, no partial
views should be pursued; but the interest of each, and its relation to the
whole, should have a proper consideration. -- He must be either a madman, or a
novice in politics, who would set the interest of one in competition with that
of the other. -- They are inseperably connected, and must stand or fall
together. -- That maxim of Mr. Pope may be here applied with much truth and
propriety; -- "Self love and social are the same:" each will find their
accounts in promoting the others happiness and prosperity, In the discussion,
the trade of the colonies merits a peculiar attention. Should those methods, I
have taken the liberty to mention, be fallen upon to enlarge it, and free ports
established in some parts of British America, the national riches would be
greatly increased. The inhabitants of the Spanish, Portuguese, and other
American settlements, would resort thither for supplies of British
manufactures, and the produce of the Colonies; leaving in exchange for them
large quantities of gold and silver; a very considerable part of which would
ultimately center in Great Britain.

WARMED and animated with a sincere love for my country, I cannot but indulge a
pleasing hope, that Britain and her colonies, sensible of their true interest,
will steadily and with unremitting zeal pursue measures calculated to cement
this Union. -- The repeal of a late The American Stamp Act.
act of the British parliament, and the present favorable disposition of that
most respectable body, fill us with the highest joy, and promise redress of all
our grievances: and I am well persuaded, my fellow subjects of America will not
be wanting in any proper expressions of deference and subordination to the head
of the British empire..... The wound, which seemed to be attended with symptoms
fatal to the mutual confidence subsisting between them, will now be healed, and
I flatter myself without a scar, by way of remembrance. Jealousies will
subside; animosities be forgotten; harmony will be preserved in every part of
the body politic; and innumerable blessings entailed on posterity.

END OF SECOND DISSERTATION.
DISSERTATION III.
Divide et impera.
HOWEVER mankind, as individuals, may be swayed by the different motives of
passion, prejudice, and honor; yet, when formed into states and communities,
these all subside; and Interest becomes the grand prevailing principle that
actuates all their motions. It is the Pole Star by which the political pilot
must ever guide the helm of government, where too keen a pursuit of it does not
interfere with the faith of treaties, or the natural rights of mankind. An
accurate discernment therefore of the true interest of a nation, and a steady
active prudence in the pursuit of it, constitute the true political wisdom that
ought to distinguish every statesman. And so sensible are ministers of every
complexion of the truth of this doctrine, that, however selfish and pernicious
their views, they seldom fail to cover them over with the plausible and
specious coloring of national advantage.

THE establishing a grand COMMERCIAL INTEREST seems now to be the great object
of the regard and attention of the different states of Europe. To this they are
every day sacrificing the less important considerations of national pride and
prejudice. Whatever, therefore, tends to promote or obstruct this great
principle of government, is now become a matter of serious consequence, which
deserves the closest attention and the tenderest care. And amidst the rivalship
and contention of the several European powers in attaining this capital point,
happy will that nation be, whose administration shall lead to such measures as
are most conducive to this end, as a superiority may now be gained that may
blast the hopes, and at once dash the expectations, of its aspiring competitors.

IF there is any one, who at present bids fairest for this pre-eminence, it is
Great Britain, whose free and happy constitution most admirably protects and
cherishes an enterprizing commercial spirit. A security of person and property
is essentially necessary to the very being of a commercial nation, and in this
respect none of its rivals can claim superiority to the happy subjects of
Britain, whose wise and valiant ancestors have handed down to them this
glorious security, sealed with their blood. But not even this, nor her natural
situation so well adapted for safety from her enemies and the advancement of
her trade, nor yet the active genius and temper of her children may be
sufficient to ensure her success, if her colonies are neglected or oppressed.
If properly attended to, they will prove the true sources of her wealth and
power, and enable her to soar above her emulating neighbors, who will view her
rapid progress with envy and admiration. To enumerate the many mutual
advantages they have already received from their close and intimate connection
would be no easy task -- but it would require little less than inspiration to
forsee all the reciprocal advantages that will attend a future Union between
them formed upon proper, upon generous principles.

To point out those that are most obvious, and which must necessarily follow,
is the design of this Essay, which pretends to no more than sketching out the
imperfect out-lines of a picture, whose beauty has indeed been shaded: but we
trust and believe that time and experience will point out those blemishes, and
soon restore it to its former purity and luster. To facilitate this has been
the design of the generous friend to this institution, who proposed the
discussion of the present subject; and it is a design worthy the benevolent
patriotic spirit of an English Senator.

Rome the mistress of the world and arbiter of nations, by her wise policy and
prudent conduct to her allies and colonists, raised herself to an astonishing
pitch of grandeur and power; she encouraged, she incorporated, and never
deprived them of any essential privileges. By these rules she gained their
affections, and of factious, turbulent citizens, and often of invererate
enemies she made faithful, zealous, and useful subjects. Great Britain has at
much expense of blood and treasure secured and protected her American colonies
from the designs of France, who viewed their rising power and growing
importance with a jealous eye, and therefore determined to nip them in the bud,
before they could ripen to any degree of formidable perfection. Happily for us
these ambitious and fatal projects were crushed by the united valor and skill
of Great Britain and her provinces. To a happy and successful Union in War, let
us then add the happy and harmonious Union of Peace, nor lose its blessings by
in-attention to, or disregard of, the inestimable advantages that may, nay that
must attend it.

Colonies are emigrations from the mother country, either occasioned by a quick
Population, so as to render it too small for the support of its growing
inhabitants; or by Oppression, Tyranny, and undue exercise of Power; or
sometimes by the distresses and desolation of War.

In the first case, they are always formed not only with the countenance, but
with the express encouragement and direction of the mother country. -- In the
second instance unless prohibited by legal authority, they generally go with
its employed consent. In the last, which was the case of the Trojans after the
destruction of Troy, they go under a necessity which is superior to all law. In
either of these cases then, but especially the two first, they cannot be
supposed to relinquish their claim to any of the rights and privileges of the
country from which they go, nor yet to have forfeited it. No; however remote,
they still continue subjects of the same kingdom, and unless specially
relinquished, entitled to all the liberties, privileges, and immunities of
that country, of which they form one or more of the constituent parts. If this
be as true in fact as it is grateful in supposition, the analogy made by an
eminent writer Dr. Strahan's Preface to Domat's Civil Law.
between the American colonies and those of Spain, which he supposes to be
settled upon the same principles, and therefore to be governed by the same
policy, must appear very strange. But the principle upon which it is founded,
is as erroneous as the consequence deduced from it is derogatory to ENGLISH
LIBERTY.

The AMERICAN COLONIES have been entiresettled by those who came under the
immediate protection and countenance of the government, or fled to it as an
asylum from arbitrary and oppressive power. A due consideration of the rights
they claim, and the duties they owe to the mother country, may be necessary in
some degree to ascertain with precision the advantages that will accrue from a
complete, and perfect Union. These rights and duties are RECIPROCAL, as well as
the Interest which arises from them.

THE Rights we claim are the full and free enjoyment of CONSTITUTIONAL LIBERTY,
PROTECTION from foreign invasions, and encouragement in every commercial
interest, which does not directly interfere with that of the mother country.

THE Duties we owe, are OBEDIENCE under constitutional and legal restrictions,
and an exclusive preference to the mother country in every article of commerce
and trade. Under one or other of these heads, however widely diffused, may be
comprised every duty, either owing to or from the mother country. And and it is
by a due and mutual observance of these only, that their respective and
reciprocal interests can be promoted. From this just and wise policy will flow
all those advantages which render a close and perfect Union so desirable an
object -- and these may be considered either as they tend to increase the power
and glory of Great Britain, or as they advance its grand commercial interest,
and become the channels of its wealth. Or with regard to the Colonies, as they
conduce to their safety, nourishment and protection; for though the true riches
of a nation are said to consist in the number of its inhabitants, and treasures
are called the sinews of war, it is very certain a nation may be very poor, and
very powerful at the same time; or abound with wealth, and yet be weak and
impotent. Rome, in its early ages, was poor in every thing but the public
spirit and bravery of her people, while she was the dread and terror of the
nations round her. And Spain is at present a lively instance that wealth and
power are not inseparable; who, as the treasures of the Indies have flowed in
upon her, has lost the martial animated spirit of her ancestors.

As subjects of the same kingdom, bearing allegiance to the same Prince, and
controuled by the same executive power, the Americans are bound to contribute,
in proportion to their numbers and abilities, to the defense and safety of the
common cause. What an accession of power to the British empire then is three
millions of subjects, dutiful, loyal and brave, who have on many occasions
distinguished themselves, and shown they were not unworthy the glorious stock
from which they sprung; who interest themselves in the honor and glory of the
nation, and partake of the veneration and respect due to it?

HERE is a fund of hardy, brave soldiers, inured to fatigue and frugality,
ready to engage in the service of Great Britain, whenever she thinks proper to
require them. From this fruitful, this increasing source, her armies and navies
may receive constant supplies, not of mercenary hierlings ready to engage in
the service of the highest bidder, but faithful, dutiful children, animated
with becoming fortitude, freedom and loyalty. These, if encouraged, cherished
and protected, will indeed prove

"Of Britain's empire the support and strength." Thompson. IN order to make a
colony of the most use and benefit to the mother country, it is necessary that
its climate, its soil, and natural produce, should be essentially different
from hers. This will create a necessary connection and dependence between them.
The Interchanging the commodities and produce of the one, for those of the
other, will not only destroy the heart-burnings and jealousy of a competition,
but produce an intercourse equally beneficial and durable to both. It is happy,
therefore, when the subjects of Commerce cannot be the same, as they thereby
reap an advantage, from which other nations are excluded, who might either by
withholding distress them, or raise the balance against them when their
necessities were not mutual and equal. In this respect, Great Britain is
peculiarly happy in her Colonies, whose wide extent and different situations
include a variety of climates, soils and produce, and thus form a proper basis
for the commercial interest, to which every other consideration should submit.
The islands produce commodities which the mother country must use, and yet
cannot raise; these therefore she must procure by an intercourse with her
colonies, or lie at the mercy of those powers whose interest it might
occasionally be to distress her. But what adds to the advantage is, that the
subjects of commerce are not only easily procured, but procured by a mutual
exchange, equally convenient and satisfactory to both; and at the same time a
large revenue secured, not only upon the home consumption, but on the surplus
beyond their respective wants and necessities. Thus also, as to the continent,
Great Britain, both as a naval and commercial nation, would be in a critical,
dangerous situation, if she did not hold within her own reach, all the
materials necessary for the support of both. An entire dependence upon any of
her neighbors for one necessary article would, in some degree, make her
subject to that neighbor. But her Colonies set her above every apprehension of
this kind. Her Northern provinces abound with timber of every kind, necessary
for building and equipping her navies. Immense bodies of Ore, both Iron and
Copper, are already discovered and usefully employed; and, doubtless, much more
lies still concealed in the bowels of the earth, whose soil, it properly
cultivated and encouraged, is richly productive of Hemp and Flax; for the
former of which Great Britain pays, communibus annis, L. 300,000 sterling. Her
more Southern Colonies furnish her with the few remaining marine articles of
Pitch, Tar and Turpentine.

HERE then are found all the materials of Timber, Iron, Cordage, and every
other species of Naval Stores, necessary for the support, nay, the existence of
Great Britain as a maritime power. Should I here mention bodies of Saltpetre,
the spontaneous produce of the earth, I may perhaps be thought too premature;
but if the promising appearances of that useful and expensive, but neccssary
commodity, be happily confirmed, here is a new source of national wealth and
independance. A large and constant balance, which Great Britain pays to the
Indies in specie, will be instantly saved, and a surer, quicker, and cheaper
supply at once secured. Next to the subjects of COmmerce, which are necessary
to enable the mother country to maintain her independance and rank among the
other powers or Europe, we may place all these, which are articles of
convenience, Luxury, and the surplus of those commodities which are not applied
to naval purposes. The real and absolute necessaries of life are but few, the
subjects of Commerce are many and various, as they contribute not only to the
real, but the imaginary, capricious wants, of mankind. To provide therefore
against these wants, upon advantageous terms, is a just and necessary policy;
and there are few, very few, of these articles, which the colonists cannot
furnish, under proper encouragements. The islands tender the various produce of
their climate equal in quantity and quality with those of their neighbors. The
Southern Colonies of North America have, as far as the infancy of the country
will permit, produced the different articles of Silk, Rice, Indigo, Tobacco,
and even the Tea plant has not been altogether uncultivated. Some of these have
been carried to a much greater degree of cultivation than others; but where it
has, Great Britain has received a proportionate benefit. In the instance of
Tobacco only, she has become not only the sole vender, but almost the sole
manufacturer for Europe, besides the immense revenue flowing immediately into
her exchequer.

WINES are an article of luxury, and it is perhaps upon that account they have
not been so much attended to by the frugal, temperate American; but it is
certain, not only from theory, but experience, that the situation and soil of
many parts of this extended continent, are well adapted for producing them. To
what degree of perfection not only the cultivation of these, but the other
articles of convenience and luxury may arrive, is difficult to determine; but
it is easy to see, that the great, the eventual profit, will terminate in
Great Britain. I mentioned before the produce of the Colonies as Naval Stores,
but considered as the raw materials of great and extensive manufactories, which
give bread to thousands; and of idle, clamorous starving subjects, make useful
and industrious citizens, I cannot err, when I say they are immensely useful to
their mother country. Upon a view of the foreign trade of Great Britain, we
shall find, that except that to Portugal, the balance is against her in every
one. To Russia, to Sweden, to Denmark, to Germany, she pays annually large sums
in specie, for those very commodities which her American Colonies can and do
produce; and a great writer has observed, That a country which constantly
exports fewer manufactures or commodities than it receives, will soon find the
balance sinking, will receive less and less, till falling into extreme
poverty, it will receive nothing at all.

HERE then we may trace the great utility of the Colonies, not only that they
afford a constant and sure supply of the subjects of commerce, necessary for
the support of the power and manufactures of the mother country, but in that
she has an indisputable exclusive preference in the sale of them; and the
Colonies in return are the fixed and constant customers for all her
manufactures and commodities, to which they are indispensably obliged to give
the preference over those of other countries; for as the design of colonizing
was not to found a new empire, but to extend the old, there is no impropriety
in appropriating the trade of the Colonies to the mother country only. If the
balance was therefore in favor of Colonies, as is the case between
Great Britain and the East Indies, it would be more eligible it should fall
into the hands of its own subjects, however remote, than into those of a
foreign power. But where that balance is actually and greatly in favor of the
mother country, it becomes an interest that ought to be very dear; to the
cultivating of which, the greatest care and attention of government should be
applied. That this is the case of Great Britain and her continential Colonies,
the vast exportation of bullion, and the still remaining debt of five millions,
most evidently evince. With what a rapid, astonishing progress, this
beneficial, this lucrative trade has advanced, the growing increase of the
exports declare, which arose from the Year 1744, from L. 1,436,227, to the
amazing amount of L. 2,710,520. To this the mother country, in a great measure,
owes her continuance as a trading nation, when deprived of her valuable Levant
trade and her intercourse even with Portugal greatly diminished, and lessened
by her active industrious rivals, the French and Dutch. It is from this
fountain those treasures flow, which enable her to pay the respective balances
to those countries with whom she trades, on a disadvantageous footing. America,
it is true, does not extract them immediately from her own bowels. She has a
more valuable and durable resource, in in the labor and industry of her
inhabitants; who exchange the surplus of their commodities, beyond their own
consumption, (and which might, in some respects, interfere with the staples of
the mother country, or at least be useless to her) for those treasures which
are only valuable to the colonists, as they enable them to discharge past, and
contract future engagements for the manufactures of Great Britain.

WHILE, therefore, she possesses a market, which she can call exclusively her
own, subject to her own regulations, and the balance always in her favor;
whatever the Colonies may acquire from any collateral branches of trade, will
quickly flow to the mother country, as the great center of all their external
prosits. To restrain, therefore, or rather stop up those channels of
remittance, is, in effect, to prohibit the consumption of the manufactures of
Great Britain, as our desires to procure them have at all times been equal to,
and sometimes exceed, our ability to pay for them. Whence it follows, that a
policy which ensures a small immediate revenue, at the expense of a great,
though indirect national gain, is mean and sordid, unworthy the noble
enterprizing spirit of a commercial nation.

BUT I should leave this subject very imperfect indeed, if I should omit two
great funds of national wealth and power, the FISHERIES and the FUR-TRADE. The
first of these is a mine richer than that of Potosi, and more inexhaustible.
For while our Fisheries serve as a great subject of commerce, they are also a
fruitful nursery of brave, hardy seamen, trained up to fatigue, to difficulty
and danger.

THE FUR-TRADE, which is now secured almost beyond the reach of accident, is
doubly valuable, as it is enjoyed solely and exclusively -- an advantage which
is not confined to a monopoly of the raw materials, and enhances their price
only, but enables Great Britain to be both the merchant, and the manufacturer
also, and that upon her own terms; while other nations must depend upon a
precarious uncertain supply, which which may either be raised in its price, or
totally withheld, as the fluctuating policy of interest or friendship shall
require. This acquisition is not only valuable, as it will probably revive a
languishing, dying manufactory, but as it is a present, an actual, and
considerable source of revenue, both on the home consumption, and also on that
of foreigners.

THESE are a few of the principal advantages with which a proper cultivation,
establishment and tender regard of the Colonies may be attended to the mother
country. She has likewise many inferior ones. The residence of those of
affluent fortunes who may be led thither by veiws of education, or mere
curiosity is not altogether unworthy regard. These all depend on, and can only
flow from a perfect complete Union -- by supporting that relationship between
the Mother country and her Colonies, which has planted in their bosoms so
strong and lively an affection, as to distinguish Great Britain by the tender
endearing appellation of HOME.

BUT it is time now that we should turn to the COLONIES and see what advantages
they may propose to themselves from a dutiful and affectionate UNION with the
mother country; and from our past feelings we shall readily acknowledge we
stand in need of her protection, nurture and care. Exposed by our situation, by
a rivalship and competition of Interests, and yet in a state of infancy, it
would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to form any Union among
ourselves that would be sufficient to repel the attacks of a formidable
invader. In this weak, this defenseless state, therefore, we must look up to
our indulgent parent, whose vigorous, salutary aid we have so often already
experienced. Upon her we must rely for support, and under her wing shelter
ourselves against any attempts of those, whose principles and government are
incompatible with our Religion and Liberty. A separation would be attended with
certain ruin to the Colonies, in their present situation, as they must
necessarily fall a prey to one or other of those powers, who would snatch with
eagerness so tempting a prize.

THE first principle of nature, self-preservation, therefore, dictates to the
Colonies, a steady, a strict adherence to the mother country, as upon that
depends the enjoyment of every invaluable privilege of a civil or religious
nature. But we may not only consider her as the protector, but as the nursing
mother of her Colonies. Arts, Sciences, Agriculture and Commerce, rise by slow
degrees, and are long before they arrive to any degree of perfection. They are
not of quick or spontaneous growth. They must be planted, cherished and
encouraged. And have we not experienced the tenderness of our mother country in
this respect, by her bounties dispersed not only in public channels, but by
private societies and patriotic individuals? Have we not reason to expect a
continuance and perhaps an increase of her benevolent efforts in our behalf?
Thus taking our enterprizing genius by the hand, and leading it on in the paths
of industry and useful improvements.

To turn the attention of the Colonies to the cultivation of those subjects of
Commerce which the mother country does not, or cannot produce, though to her it
may be eventually profitable, is to the Colonies immediately and directly so;
and when it is done by mild, by bountiful measures, deserves our gratitude and
thankful returns. A fixed and permanent UNION between Great Britain and her
Colonies, is absolutely necessary for the preservation of the peace and harmony
of their internal administration. For to form the constitution and plan of a
new government, or even to new model and revise the old, is no easy or
inconsiderable task. That of the mother country has been the work of ages; and,
to use the words of an eminent writer, seems dictated by wisdom itself. While,
therefore, the colonists can enjoy all the blessings of an English constitution
undiminished and uninterrupted, it would be superlative madness and folly to
run the risk of a change, which could not possibly be for the better, and might
be infinitely worse. Unconnected and divided as they are at present, both in
situation and interest (owing to the difference of Settlement, of Charters, of
Religion, and Commerce, which are often clashing) how difficult, and next to
impossible, would it be to rescue them from a state of anarchy; and form a
constitution, for which I will venture to say from the extent of America, there
can no precedent be found; a constitution which at the same time that it
reconciles these jarring interests, must preserve every religious and civil
Liberty entire?

THE difficulties of an Union for the purposes of empire, are almost
insuperable. To canton out the provinces into petty independent kingdoms,
besides the arduous task of settling the internal police, would subject them
not only to perpetual quarrels with each other, but render them an easy prey to
some foreign power, as they would singly be weak, though united under one head,
truly formidable. The only remaining resource of desperate distress, must be to
form the provinces into districts, having full power of legislation within
themselves -- but subject to the control of some supreme, superintendant
authority raised out of the collective body, as in some instances in Germany,
or with more probability like Holland or Switzerland. But this the vast extent
of the Colonies will render almost impossible, as it would give being to an
aristocracy -- a kind of government as repugnant to the genius and temper of
America, as despotic monarchy.

I THEREFORE repeat it, that the preservation of our laws, commerce, and every
other blessing of domestic peace, by the wise policy of the mother country, can
only be made the basis of a close and firm connection between her and them.

NEXT to the security of a state, its wealth and convenience are to be
regarded, and to judge how beneficial Great Britain is to the Colonies in this
respect, it may be proper to remark, that as other countries produce the same
commodities, and have hitherto been able to undersell the Americans in a
variety of articles, wherever an exclusive, or even a preferable market has
been given to the latter, the advantage must be obvious. This has been done in
many instances by prohibitions, or by duties charged on such commodities as
interfered with those from the Colonies, which in some cases amount to a
prohibition. The British Whale Fishery has been almost wholly given up, in
favor of the American Fisheries. Sugars, Hemp, Indigo and Tobacco, besides a
variety of other articles from the Colonies, have met with every mark of
encouragement, while the same commodities from other countries have been
discountenanced, or wholly prohibited. This is wise and just policy in the
mother country, at the same time that it discovers a tender regard to her
children, and makes it their interest to unite more closely. In short they have
every thing that can make a nation great, happy and powerful to hope from a
Union, every thing that is dangerous to fear from a division.

"Divide et impera," was the Roman motto. May it not be applicable to
Great Britain and her American Colonies, who, if united, have proved themselves
equal, nay superior to two of the principal powers of Europe; but if divided,
if struggling with intestine commotions and civil discord, I fear will prove
unable to contend with either. This, to use the expression of a great and
eminent friend of the Colonies, is the grand FAMILY COMPACT, which must be
cemented by every tie of duty, loyalty and affection from the Provinces, and
every mark of kind protecting tenderness from the mother country. A fatal,
underscerning policy had almost snapt these interesting cords asunder, never
perhaps to have been closed again; but the guardian genius of Britain and of
America stepped between them and ruin, and with outstretched hand saved a sinking
nation.

THE Romans decreed a crown to him who saved the life of a citizen in battle;
but what crowns or statues can do sufficient honor to the Man or Men who save
a country, a kingdom, in the hour of distress, and rescue a falling state from
the brink of ruin? Rome may justly boast her Brutus's, her Curtius's, her
Cato's and her Tully's -- they were the PITTS, the Conways and the Bars of
that age, alike warmed by the sacred fire of Liberty, alike crowned with
Immortality, and handed down to posterity the wonder and delight of admiring
nations. These glorious architects, nobly aided by many others whose names will
be held in long veneration, have prop'd the tottering fabric of the British
EMPIRE, and pointed out that noble, generous policy, which will make one great
system of government, whereof Britain will be the common center of attraction.

UNDER such a policy, we can with joy look forwards, and behold PEACE, LIBERTY
and COMMERCE diffusing their kindly influence over all the parts of
GREAT-BRITAIN's Empire; whose true happiness and permanent security can be no
way effectually established but by "a perpetual UNION between her and her
AMERICAN COLONIES!"

End of DISSERTATION III.
DISSERTATION IV.
By FRANCIS HOPKINSON, Esquire
AT this important juncture, when the eyes of all America are lifted to the
mother country in anxious expectation; when trembling fear or bold defiance,
enlivening hope or mysterious surmise, distract every breast and sit in every
brow; what subject can be more interesting than the "Reciprocal advantages of a
perpetual Union between Great Britain and her Colonies"? and yet there is no
subject, perhaps, which the public is so little disposed to receive with
candor, and judge of with impartiality. How then shall a native of America,
and an unexperienced writer, especially in matters of such high importance,
presume to draw his pen? But the worthy Gentleman who has proposed this
subject, and backed his proposal with the reward of distinguished honor, has
raised in us who are candidates on this occasion, that ambition which has, in
all ages, prompted men to greater undertakings than cooler judgment would have
suffered them to engage in.

I Do not mean, in this little Essay, to calculate the advantages of trade
between Great Britain and her Colonies, in order to show that they are
reciprocal. By the very nature of Commerce they must be so. There is no country
in the world that exports staple commodities or manufactures, but for an
advantage to be gained; or imports them, but for the same reason.

As the God of nature has adapted different countries to abound in different
kinds of produce, or excel in various useful arts; it is evident, that a
commercial intercourse must redound to the benefit of the whole. But how must
this advantage be increased when we consider that Great Britain, in her trade
with her Colonies, does not support a foreign people, whose religion, politics
and customs are different from her own; but she supports and nourishes her own
offspring, at the same time that she enriches herself by the natural profits of
an extensive trade; and she strengthens herself by protecting and encouraging
her own religion, government and customs, transplanted to America.

COMMERCE between Great Britain and her Colonies, is like the wholesome food
which a man eats. He cannot say, his head, his hands or his feet, are more
particularly benefited by it; but the finer parts thereof circulate through the
whole body, and the whole body is nourished and supported.

THE three grand objects worthy the attention of a wise people, are the state
of their Commerce, Liberty and Religion. If the Commerce, the Liberty, and
Religion, both of Great Britain and her Colonies can alone be supported and
strengthened by a close and lasting Union between them, then the reciprocal
advantages of such an UNION must be self-evident.

I HAVE slightly touched the first of these. There have been so many accurate
mercantile calculations made in almost every pamphlet that has been lately
published on the subject, that I take it for granted, as a truth universally
admitted, that the advantages of trade between Great Britain and her Colonies
are reciprocal.

WITH respect to political Liberty, should it not be the glory of England to
transplant, to water and carefully to nurse, even in a distant land, a system
of government which is the admiration of the world; and should not America
adopt, and cheerfully submit to such a government? Were it possible for
Great Britain, with an high and arbitrary hand, to think of snatching from her
Colonies the essential privileges of Englishmen, and yet would have them submit
as Englishmen to her government, and bear only the name and appearance of the
freeborn sons of Liberty; it would be to dress her slaves in livery, and deck
America in robes of paper, to make her the contempt and derision of every other
nation. On the other hand, should the Colonies, with base ingratitude, attempt
to throw off all dependence on the mother country, they would put themselves in
the situation of a silly girl, who leaves the guidance and protection of a wise
and affectionate parent, and wandering away exposes herself to ruin by the
artful insinuations of every wicked and designing stranger. But why should the
mutual connection between the parentcountry and her Colonies ever come into
question? Are we not one nation and one people? And do we not own obedience to
one common King? Those who adopt the same religion, the same plans of
government, and the same customs, are undoubtedly of the same nation. Different
climates and different soils mark out countries, but not nations. We of
America, are in all respects Englishmen, notwithstanding that the Atlantic
rolls her waves between us and the throne to which we all own allegiance. Nor
can we, though in ever so flourishing a state, throw off our dependence, or
dissolve this Union, without breaking the very bonds of nature. As well might
the branch say unto the trunk, See how I glow with blossoms and wave with
foliage: I have no further need of thy sap, keep it for thy own nourishment!

ON the other hand, does not Great Britain by transplanting her constitution
into America, as a scion from the stock, propagate her own likeness? Nay, does
she not make unto herself another crown and another scepter?

IN all attacks that shall be made upon Great Britain by the numerous rivals of
her power, and enemies to her prosperity; her colonies, like a number of
dutiful and promising children, growing up round her, will more and more add to
her strength, and contribute to her importance. And should it ever happen, amid
the revolution of things human, that those enemies should prevail against her,
what could her sons lose but the beautiful island they have so long possessed?
Even in that case (which we trust and believe will never happen) they might
find in the Colonies a sure asylum; thither they might remove with all the
noble privileges of their constitution, as to a people and country they can
call their own; and the British throne might yet shine with undiminished glory
even in the present wilds of America.

LASTLY, with respect to the religious liberties of the people of England, how
precious they are, let the price which has been paid for them declare -- And
these will be as much strengthened by a perpetual Union with the colonies, as
their civil liberties.

BUT exclusive of this consideration, it certainly must be the glory of
Great Britain to propagate, protect and encourage in her colonies that sacred
system of religious truth which she holds so dear. Indeed that she herself
judges in this manner is evident from her many charitable donations for
promoting the interest of learning and virtue in America.

IN short, the Protestant Religion, and particularly that excellent branch of
it the national Church of England, is the pure and healthful air in which the
political constitution of Great Britain, moves and breathes with health and
vigor; religious Liberty being hereby fixed on as firm and broad a basis as
Civil Liberty; both of which are so essentially interwoven with the nature of
her government, that it cannot be administered without them. Nor can her empire
be more effectually strengthened, than by extending with it whatever she finds
valuable in her own possession. This is her interest, and it must be her
honor, as it is likewise the interest and honor of the Colonies to receive,
nourish and join with her in the support of every thing of this kind, which can
only be done by a perpetual Union between them.

How detestable then must the politician be, who shall ever attempt to kindle
the destructive flames of jealousy between two friends, whom nature seems to
have united in the closest bonds, and whose hearts and interests are and ever
ought to be one? Should any one ever succeed in this (which God forbid) I doubt
not but that after much cruel contention and unnatural bloodshed, each would
rush into the other's arms, and emphatically cry out, "We are both in the
wrong."

THIS subject might be expanded into volumes, and no doubt will be; but I leave
the full discussion of it to more able hands; and humbly hope this little Essay
will be accepted as the oblation of one who intimately feels the importance of
this great truth, that "a perpetual Union between Great Britain and her
Colonies will ever be reciprocally advantageous."

FINIS.

