AN ESSAY ON SLAVERY, Proving from SCRIPTURE its Inconsistency with HUMANITY
and RELIGION; In Answer to a late Publication, entitled, The AFRICAN TRADE for
Negro Slaves shown to be consistent with Principles of HUMANITY, and with the
LAWS of REVEALED RELIGION.

BY GRANVILLE SHARP, ESQUIRE.

With an introductory PREFACE, containing the Sentiments of the Monthly
Reviewers on that Publication; and the Opinion of several eminent Writers on
the Subject.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, An ELEGY on the miserable State of an African Slave, by the
celebrated and ingenious WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Esquire.

The Lord also will be a Refuge for the Oppressed -- a Refuge in Time of
Trouble. Psalm. ix. 9.

BURLINGTON: Printed and Sold by ISAAC COLLINS, M.DCC.LXXIII.

PREFACE.
THE following Essay, though wrote, as the Author signifies, in haste, is
thought to have such merit as to deserve a publication. -- The copy was sent to
one of the Writer's particular friends, whether for his own peculiar
satisfaction, or the press, is uncertain; but as the subject is Liberty, so it
is expected the Freedom which is here taken cannot justly give him offense, or
be unacceptable to the public.

IT was designed to confute a piece wrote by Thomas Thompson, M. A. some time
fellow of C. C. C. entitled, The African trade for Negro Slaves shown to be
consistent with principles of humanity, and with the laws of revealed religion.
Printed at Canterbury.

IN order to show that the Essay Writer has not misrepresented the text, nor is
single in his observations upon it, the sentiments of the Monthly Reviewers on
that pamphlet in May 1772 are here inserted.

"We must acknowledge," say they, that the branch of trade here under
consideration is a species of traffic which we have never been able to
reconcile with the dictates of humanity, and much less with those of religion.
The principal argument in its behalf seems to be, the necessity of such a
resource, in order to carry on the works in our plantations, which, we are
told, it is otherwise impossible to perform. But this, though the urgency of
the case may be very great, is not by any means sufficient to justify the
practice. There is a farther consideration which has a plausible appearance,
and may be thought to carry some weight; it is, that the merchant only
purchases those who were slaves before, and possibly may, rather than
otherwise, render their situation more tolerable. But it is well known, that
the lot of our Slaves, when most favorably considered, is very hard and
miserable; besides which, such a trade is taking the advantage of the ignorance
and brutality of unenlightened nations, who are encouraged to war with each
other for this very purpose, and, it is to be feared, are sometimes tempted to
seize those of their own tribes or families that they may obtain the hoped for
advantage: and it is owned, with regard to our merchants, that, upon occasion,
they observe the like practices, which are thought to be allowable, because
they are done by way of reprisal for theft or damage committed by the natives.
We were pleased, however, to meet with a pamphlet on the other side of the
question; and we entered upon its perusal with the hopes of finding somewhat
advanced which might afford us satisfaction on this difficult point. The writer
appears to be a sensible man, and capable of discussing the argument; but the
limits to which he is confined render his performance rather superficial. The
plea he produces from the Jewish law is not, in our view of the matter, at all
conclusive. The people of Israel were under a theocracy, in which the Supreme
Being was in a peculiar sense their King, and might therefore issue forth some
orders for them, which it would not be warrantable for another people, who were
in different circumstances, to observe. Such, for instance, was the command
given concerning the extirpation of the Canaanites, whom, the sovereign Arbiter
of life and death might, if he had pleased, have destroyed by plague or famine,
or other of those means which we term natural causes, and by which a wise
Providence fulfils its own purposes. But it would be unreasonable to infer from
the manner in which the Israelites dealt with the people of Canaan, that any
other nations have a right to pursue the same method. Neither can we imagine
that St. Paul's exhortation to servants or slaves, upon their conversion, to
continue in the state in which christianity found them, affords any argument
favorable to the practice here pleaded for. It is no more than saying, that
Christianity did not particularly enter into the regulations of civil society
at that time; that it taught persons to be contented and diligent in their
stations: but certainly it did not forbid them, in a proper and lawful way, if
it was in their power, to render their circumstances more comfortable. Upon the
whole, we must own, that this little treatise is not convincing to us, though,
as different persons are differently affected by the same considerations, it
may prove more satisfactory to others.

IN another place they observe, since we are all brethren, and God has given to
all men a natural right to Liberty, we allow of no Slavery among us, unless a
person forfeits his freedom by his crimes.

THAT Slavery is not consistent with the English constitution, nor admissable
in Great Britain, appears evidently by the late solemn determination in the
court of King's Bench at Westminster, in the case of -- Somerset, the Negro; --
and why it should be revived and continued in the colonies, peopled by the
descendents of Britain, and blessed with sentiments as truly noble and free as
any of their fellow subjects in the mother country, is not easily conceived,
nor can the distinction be well founded.

IF natural rights, such as life and Liberty, receive no additional strength
from municipal laws, nor any human legislature has power to abridge or destroy
them, unless the owner commits some act that amounts to a forfeiture: 1
Blackstone's Commentaries 54.
If the natural Liberty of mankind consists properly in a power of acting as
one thinks fit, without any restraint or control unless by the law of nature;
being a right inherent in us by birth, and one of the Gifts of God to man at
his creation, when he endued him with the faculty of free will: do. 125.
If an act of Parliament is controulable by the laws of God and nature; 4
Bacon's Abridg. 639.
and in its consequences may be rendered void for absurdity, or a manifest
contradiction to common reason: 1 Black. Com. 91.
If Christianity is a part of the law of England; Stra. Reports, 1113.
and Christ expressly commands, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them, at the same time declaring, for this is the law and the
prophets: Matt. vii. 12.
And if our forefathers, who emigrated from England hither, brought with them
all the rights, liberties, and privileges of the British constitution -- (which
has of late years been often asserted and repeatedly contended for by
Americans) why is it that the poor sooty African meets with so different a
measure of justice in England and America, as to be adjudged free in the one,
and in the other held in the most abject Slavery?

WE are expressly restrained from making laws "repugnant to," and directed to
fashion them, as nearly as may be, agreeable to, the laws of England. Hence,
and because of its total inconsistency with the principles of the constitution,
neither in England or any of the Colonies, is there one law directly in favor
of, or enacting Slavery, but by a kind of side-wind, admitting its existence,
(though only founded on a barbarous custom, originated by foreigners) attempt
its regulation. How far the point litigated in -- Somerset's case would bear a
fober candid discussion before an impartial judicature in the colonies, I
cannot determine; but, for the credit of my country, should hope it would meet
with a like decision, that it might appear, and be known, that Liberty in
America is not a partial privilege, but extends to every individual in it.

I MIGHT here, in the language of the famous JAMES OTIS, Esquire. ask, Is it
possible for a man to have a natural right to make a Slave of himself or of his
posterity? What man is or ever was born free if every man is not? Can a father
supersede the laws of nature? Is not every man born as free by nature as his
father? 1 American Tracts by Otis, 4.
There can be no prescription old enough to supersede the law of nature, and
the grant of God Almighty, who has given to every man a natural right to be
free. American Tracts by Otis, 17.
The Colonists are by the law of nature free born, as indeed all men are, white
or black. No better reason can be given for the enslaving those of any color,
than such as Baron Montesquieu has humourously assigned, as the foundation of
that cruel Slavery exercised over the poor Ethiopeans; which threatens one day
to reduce both Europe and America to the ignorance and barbarity of the darkest
ages. Does it follow that it is right to enslave a man because he is black?
Will short curled hair like wool, instead of christians hair, as it is called
by those whose hearts are as hard as the nether millstone, help the argument?
Can any logical inference in favor of Slavery, be drawn from a flat nose, a
long or a short face? Nothing better can be said in favor of a trade that is
the most shocking violation of the laws of nature; has a direct tendency to
diminish every idea of the inestimable value of Liberty, and makes every dealer
in it a tyrant, from the director of an African company, to the petty chapman
in needles and pins, on the unhappy coast. d^. 43, 44.


To those who think Slavery founded in Scripture, a careful and attentive
perusal of the Sacred Writings would contribute more than any thing to
eradicate the error; they will not find even the name Slave once mentioned
therein, and applied to a servitude to be continued from parent to child in
perpetuity, with approbation -- The term used on the occasion in the sacred
text is Servant; and, upon a fair construction of those writings, there is no
necessity, nor can the service, consistent with the whole tenor of the
Scripture, be extended further than the generation spoken of; it was never
intended to include the posterity.

THE mistaken proverb which prevailed in that early age, that The fathers had
eaten four grapes, and the childrens teeth were set on edge, was rectified by
the prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel, who declared to the people, that they should
not have occasion to use that proverb any more; -- Behold all souls are mine,
as the soul of the father, so the soul of the son, the soul that sins it
shall die; -- the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall
the father bear the iniquity of the son; -- the righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Jer.
xxxi. 29. Ezekiel. xviii. 3, 4, and 20.
And the apostle Peter assures us, after the ascension of our Savior, that God
is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him is accepted
of him. Acts x. 34.
It is also remarkable, that at that time an Ethiopean, "a man of great
authority," Acts viii. 27.
was admitted to the freedom of a Christian, whatever we may think of the
color now, as being unworthy of it.

BUT admitting Slavery to be established by Scripture, the command of the
Sovereign Ruler of the universe, whose eye takes in all things, and who, for
good reasons, beyond our comprehension, might justly create a perpetual Slavery
to effect his own purposes, against the enemies of his chosen people in that
day, cannot be pleaded now against any people on earth; it is not even
pretended to in justification of Negro Slavery, nor can the sons of Ethiopia,
with any degree of clearness, be proved to have descended from any of those
nations who so came under the Divine displeasure as to be brought into
servitude; if they are, and those denunciations given in the Old Testament were
perpetual, and continue in force, must we not look upon it meritorious to
execute them fully upon all the offspring of that unhappy people upon whom they
fell, without giving quarter to any?

MANY who admit the indefensibility of Slavery, considering the subject rather
too superficially, declare it would be impolitick to emancipate those we are
possessed of; and say, they generally behave ill when set at liberty. I believe
very few of the advocates for freedom think that all ought to be manumitted,
nay, think it would be unjust to turn out those who have spent their prime of
life, and now require a support; but many are in a fit capacity to do for
themselves and the public; as to these let every master or mistress do their
duty, and leave consequences to the Disposer of events, who, I believe, will
always bless our actions in proportion to the purity of their spring. But many
instances might be given of Negroes and Mulattoes, once in Slavery, who, after
they have obtained their liberty, (and sometimes even in a state of bondage)
have given striking proofs of their integrity, ingenuity, industry, tenderness
and nobility of mind; of which, if the limits of this little Piece permitted, I
could mention many examples; and why instances of this kind are not more
frequent, we may very naturally impute to the smallness of the number tried
with freedom, and the servility and meanness of their education whilst in
Slavery. Let us never forget, that an equal if not a greater proportion of our
own color behave worse with all the advantages of birth, education and
circumstances; and we shall blush to oppose an equitable emancipation, by this
or the like arguments.

LIBERTY, the most manly and exalting of the gifts of Heaven, consists in a
free and generous exercise of all the human faculties as far as they are
compatible with the good of society to which we belong; and the most delicious
part of the enjoyment of the inestimable blessing lies in a consciousness that
we are free. This happy persuasion, when it meets with a noble nature, raises
the soul, and rectifies the heart; it gives dignity to the countenance, and
animates every word and gesture; it elevates the mind above the little arts of
deceit, makes it benevolent, open, ingenuous and just, and adds a new relish to
every better sentiment of humanity. Blackwell's Court of Agustus.
On the contrary, Man is bereaved of half his virtues that day when he is cast
into bondage. Homer.


THE end of the christian dispensation, with which we are at present favored,
appears in our Savior's own words, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal
the broken hearted; to preach deliverance to the captives; and recovery of
sight to the blind; to set at liberty them that are bruised; to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. Luke iv. 18.


THE Editor is united in opinion with the author of the Essay, that Slavery is
contrary to the laws of reason, and the principles of revealed religion; and
believes it alike inimical and impolitick in every state and country; for as
righteousness exalts a nation, so sm is a reproach to any people. Prove. xiv.
34.
Hence whatever violates the purity of equal justice, and the harmony of true
liberty, in time debases the mind, and ultimately draws down the displeasure of
that Almighty Being, who is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look
on iniquity. Habakkuk i, 13.
Yet he is far from censuring those who are not under the same convictions, and
hopes to be understood with charity and tenderness to all. Every one does not
see alike the same propositions, who may be equally friends to truth, as our
education and opportunities of knowledge, are various as our faces. He will
heartily confess to any one who shall kindly point it out, any error which in
this inquiry has fell from his pen. There can be but one beatific point of
rectitude, but many paths leading to it, in which persons differing in modes
and non-essentials, may walk with freedom to their own opinions; we may much
more innocently be under a mistake, than continue in it after a hint given,
which occasions our adverting thereto; for it seems a duty to investigate the
way of truth and justice with our utmost ability.

A much more extensive and perfect view of the subject under consideration, has
of late prevailed than formerly; and he believes nothing is wanting but an
impartial disinterested attention to make still greater advances. Thus, by a
gradual progression, he hopes the name of Slavery will be eradicated by the
general voice of mankind in this land of Liberty.

THE mode of manumitting negroes in New Jersey is such as appears terrific, and
amounts almost to a prohibition, because of its incumbering consequences, which
few prudent people choose to leave their families liable to. It is much easier
in several other colonies. In Pennsylvania a recognizance entered into in
THIRTY POUNDS to indemnify the township, is a complete discharge. In Maryland,
where Negroes are so numerous, I am informed, the master or mistress may at
pleasure give Liberty to their Slaves without the least obligation, and be
clear of any future burden. Both these are exceptionable, and may be improved.
Proper distinctions are necessary; for as the freedom of all gratis might be
unjust, not only to the public but the Slave, so any clog upon the owner who
gives up his right at an age when he cannot have received much or any advantage
from the labor of the individual, would be unreasonable. The wisdom of a
legislature earnestly disposed to do good, will, I hope, be directed to
surmount every little difficulty in pointing out a scheme more equal and
perfect, by steering a middle course; and proper care being kindly taken to
assist and provide for the usefulness of those deserving objects of
benevolence, the approbation of Divine Providence will I doubt not attend such
laudable endeavors, and crown them with success. -- That the legislative body
of each province in America, may give due attention to this important engaging
subject, and be blessed to frame and establish a plan, worthy of the united
jurisprudence, wisdom, and benevolence of the Guardians of Liberty, is the
sincere wish of

THE EDITOR.

AN ESSAY ON SLAVERY, etc.
AREVEREND author, Mr. Thomas Thompson, M. A. has lately attempted to prove
that the African trade for Negro Slaves is consistent with the principles of
humanity and revealed religion.

FROM Leviticus xxv. 39 to 46, he draws his principal conclusion, viz. that the
buying and selling of Slaves is not contrary to the law of nature, for (says
he) the Jewish constitutions were strictly therewith consistent in all points:
and these are in certain cases the rule by which is determined by learned
lawyers and casuists, what is, or is not contrary to nature. I have not leisure
to follow this author methodically, but will, nevertheless, examine his ground
in a general way, in order to prevent any ill use that may be made of it
against the important question now depending before the judges. Meaning, I
suppose, the case of Somerset, which then depended.


THE reverend Mr. Thompson' s premises are not true, for the Jewish
constitutions were not "strictly consistent" with the law of nature in all
points, as he supposes, and consequently his principal conclusion thereupon is
erroneous. Many things were formerly tolerated among the Israelites, merely
through the mercy and forbearance of God, in consideration of their extreme
frailty and inability, at that time, to bear a more perfect system of law.
Other laws there are in the five books (besides the ceremonial laws now
abrogated) which are merely municipal, being adapted to the peculiar polity of
the Israelitish commonwealth, on account of its situation in the midst of the
most barbarous nations, whom the Hebrews were at all times but too much
inclined to imitate.

THE universal moral laws, and those of natural equity are, indeed, every where
plentifully interspersed among the peculiar laws abovementioned; but they may
very easily be distinguished by every sincere christian, who examines them with
a liberal mind, because the benevolent purpose of the Divine Author is always
apparent in those laws which are to be eternally binding; for it is the reason
of the law which constitutes the life of the law, according to an allowed maxim
of our own country, "Ratio Legis est anima Legis," (Jenk. Cent. 45.) And with
respect to these moral and equitable laws, I will readily agree with the
reverend Mr. Thompson, that they are the best rule by which learned judges and
casuists can determine what is, or is not, contrary to nature.

BUT I will now give a few examples of laws, which are in themselves contrary
to nature or natural equity, in order to show that Mr. Thompson' s premises are
totally false:

THE Israelites were expressly permitted by the law of Moses to give a bill of
divorce to their wives whenever they pleased, and to marry other women; and the
women, who were put away, were also expressly permitted, by the Mosaic Law, to
marry again, during the lives of their former husbands.

ALL which practices were manifestly contrary to the law of nature in its
purity, though not perhaps to the nature of our corrupt affections and desires;
for Christ himself declared, that "from the beginning it was not so," Matt.
xix. 8, 9. and at the same time our Lord informed the Jews, that Moses, because
of the hardness of their hearts, suffered them to put away their wives.

NEITHER was it according to the law of nature, that the Jews were permitted in
their behavior and dealings, to make a partial distinction between their
brethren of the house of Israel, and strangers. This national partiality was
not, indeed, either commanded or recommended, in their law -- but it was
clearly permitted or tolerated, and probably, for the same reason as the last
mentioned instance -- thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, etc. --
unto a stranger thou may lend upon usury, etc. Deuteronomy. xxiii. 19. -- Again --
of a foreigner thou may exact; (that is, whatsoever has been lent, as appears
by the preceding verses) but that which is "thine, with thy brother, thine hand
shall release," Deuteronomy. xv. 3.

Now all these laws were contrary to the law of nature, or "natural equity,"
(whatever Mr. Thompson may think) and were certainly annulled, or rather
superseded, as it were, by the more perfect doctrines of universal benevolence
taught by Christ himself, who came not to destroy, but to fulfill the law.

IN the law of Moses we also read, Thou shall not avenge or bear grudge against
the children of thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
Leviticus xix. 18.

THE Jews, accordingly, thought themselves sufficiently justified, if they
confined this glorious perfection of charity, viz. the loving others as
themselves, to the persons mentioned in the same verse, viz. the children of
their own people; for they had no idea that so much love could possibly be due
to any other sort of neighbors or brethren. But Christ taught them by the
parable of the good Samaritan, that all strangers whatever, even those who are
declared enemies, (as were the Samaritans to the Jews) are to be esteemed our
neighbors or brethren, whenever they stand in need of our charitable
assistance.

"THE Jewish institution," indeed, as Mr. Thompson remarks, permitted the use
of Bondservants, but did not permit the bondage of brethren: STRANGERS ONLY
could be lawfully retained as Bondmen -- of the heathen, (or, more agreeably to
the Hebrew word, (...) of the nations) that are round about you, of them shall
ye buy Bond men and Bond maids. Moreover of the children of strangers that do
sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, etc. -- " They shall be your Bondmen
for-ever." Levit. xxv. 39 to 46.

THIS was the law, I must acknowledge, with respect to a stranger that was
purchased; but with respect to a brother or Hebrew of the seed of Abraham, it
was far otherwise, as the same chapter testifies; (39th verse) for, If thy
brother that dwells by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee, thou shall
not compel him to serve as a Bondservant, but as a hired servant, and as a
sojourner, he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of
jubilee, and then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him,
etc. This was the utmost servitude that a Hebrew could lawfully exact from any
of his brethren of the house of Israel, unless the servant entered voluntarily
into a perpetual servitude: and, let me add, that it is also, the very utmost
servitude that can lawfully be admitted among christians; because we are bound
as christians to esteem every man our brother, and our neighbor, which I have
already proved; so that this consequence, which I have drawn, is absolutely
unavoidable. The Jews, indeed, who do not yet acknowledge the commands of
Christ, may perhaps still think themselves justified by the law of Moses, in
making partial distinctions between their brethren of Israel, and other men;
but it would be inexcusable in christians to do so, and therefore I conclude,
that we certainly have no right to exceed the limits of servitude, which the
Jews were bound to observe, whenever their poor brethren were sold to them: and
I apprehend that we must not venture even to go so far, because the laws of
brotherly love are infinitely enlarged, and extended by the gospel of peace,
which proclaims "good will toward men," without distinction; and because we
cannot be said to "love our neighbors as ourselves;" or to do to others as we
would they should do unto us -- whilst we retain them against their will, in a
despicable servitude as Slaves, and private property, or mere chattels.

THE glorious system of the gospel destroys all narrow, national partiality;
and makes us citizens of the world, by obliging us to profess universal
benevolence: but more especially are we bound, as christians, to commiserate
and assist to the utmost of our power all persons in distress, or captivity;
whatever the worshipful committee of the company of merchants trading to
Africa, may think of it, or their advocate, the reverend Mr. Thompson.

CHARITY, indeed, begins at home; and we ought most certainly to give the
preference to our own countrymen, whenever we can do so without injustice; but
we may " not do evil that good may come;" (though our statesmen, and their
political deceivers may think otherwise) we must not, for the sake of
Old-England, and its African Trade, or for the supposed advantage, or imaginary
necessities of our American colonies, lay aside our christian charity, which we
owe to all the rest of mankind: because, whenever we do so, we certainly
deserve to be considered in no better light than as an overgrown society of
robbers, a mere banditti, who, perhaps, may love one another, but at the same
time are at enmity with all the rest of the world. Is this according to the law
of nature? -- For shame Mr. Thompson!

I HAVE much more to communicate, but no more time to write: -- if I had, I
could draw from the scriptures the most alarming examples of God's severe
judgments upon the Jews, for tyrannizing over their brethren, and, expressly,
for exceeding the limits of servitude just now mentioned. I must find time
however to adopt one observation even from the reverend Mr. Thompson, (p. 11)
viz. This subject will grow more serious upon our hands, when we consider the
buying and selling Negroes, not as a clandestine or piratical business, but as
an open public trade, encouraged and promoted by acts of parliament; for so,
if being contrary to religion, it must be deemed a national sin; and as such
may have a consequence that would be always to be dreaded. May God give us
grace to repent of this abominable national oppression, before it is too ate!

If I have vindicated the law of Moses, much easier can I vindicate the
benevolent apostle Paul, from Mr. Thompson's insinuations, with respect to
Slavery; for he did not entreat Philemon to take back his servant Onesimus "in
his former capacity," as Mr. Thompson has asserted, in order to render Bondage
consistent with the principles of revealed religion, -- but St. Paul said
expressly, not now as a servant, but, above a servant, a brother beloved, etc.
So that Mr. Thompson has notoriously wrested St. Paul's words.

IN the other texts where St. Paul recommends submission to Servants, for
conscience sake, he at the same time enjoins the master to entertain such a
measure of brotherly love toward his Servants, as must be entirely subversive
of the African trade, and West-Indian Slavery. And though St. Paul recommends
christian patience under servitude, yet, at the same time, he plainly
insinuates, that it is inconsistent with christianity, and the dignity of
Christ's kingdom, that a christian brother should be a Slave. "Can thou be
made free?" (says he to the christian servants) choose it rather, for he that
is called of the Lord, being a servant, is the Freeman of the Lord; and, in
like manner, he that is called, being free, is the servant of Christ -- Ye are
bought with a price; BE NOT THEREFORE, THE SERVANTS OF MEN. The apostle,
indeed, had just before recommended, to his disciples to abide in the same
calling wherein they were called, and, "being servants, not to care for it:"
That is, not to grieve on account of their temporal state; for he was unwilling
to advance any doctrine that might seem to interfere with the temporal
establishments of government, and the supposed rights of men; yet it plainly
appears, by the insinuations, which immediately follow, that he thought it
derogatory to the honor of christianity, that men, who "are bought," with the
inestimable price of Christ's blood, should be esteemed servants; that is, the
Slaves, and private property of other men; and had christianity been
established by temporal authority, in those countries where Paul preached, as
it is at present in these kingdoms, we need not doubt but that he would have
urged, nay, compelled the masters, as he did Philemon, by the most pressing
arguments, to treat their quondam Slaves, NOT NOW AS SERVANTS, BUT ABOVE
SERVANTS -- AS BRETHREN BELOVED.

AN ELEGY On the miserable STATE of an AFRICAN SLAVE, by the celebrated and
ingenious WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Esquire.
-- SEE the poor native quit the Lybian shores,
Ah! not in love's delightful fetters bound!
No radiant smile his dying peace restores,
Nor love, nor fame, nor friendship heals his wound.
Let vacant bards display their boasted woes,
Shall I the mockery of grief display?
No, let the muse his piercing pangs disclose,
Who bleeds and weeps his sum of life away!
On the wild beach in mournful guise he stood,
Ere the shrill boatswain gave the hated sign;
He dropped a tear unseen into the flood;
He stole one secret moment, to repine.
Yet the muse listened to the plaints he made;
Such moving plaints as nature could inspire;
To me the muse his tender plea conveyed,
But smoothed, and suited to the sounding lyre.
"Why am I ravished from my native strand?
What savage race protects this impious gain?
Shall foreign plagues infest this teeming land,
And more than sea-born monsters plough the main?
Here the dire locusts horrid swarms prevail;
Here the blue asps with livid poison swell;
Here the dry dipsa wriths his sinuous mail;
Can we not here, secure from envy, dwell?
When the grim lion urged his cruel chase,
When the stern panther sought his midnight prey,
What fate reserved me for this Spoke by a savage.
christian race?
O race more polished, more severe than they!
Ye prouling wolves pursue my latest cries!
Thou hungry tiger, leave thy reeking den!
Ye sandy wastes in rapid eddies rise!
O tear me from the whips and scorns of men!
Yet in their face superior beauty glows;
Are smiles the mien of rapine and of wrong?
Yet from their lip the voice of mercy flows,
And even religion dwells upon their tongue.
Of blissful haunts they tell, and brighter climes,
Where gentle minds conveyed by death repair,
But stained with blood, and crimsoned over with crimes
Say, shall they merit what they paint so fair?
No, careless, hopeless of those fertile plains,
Rich by our toils, and by our sorrows gay,
They ply our labors, and enhance our pains,
And feign these distant regions to repay.
For them our tusky elephant expires;
For them we drain the mine is embowel'd gold;
Where rove the brutal nations wild desires? --
Our limbs are purchased, and our life is sold!
Yet shores there are, blessed shores for us remain,
And favored isles with golden fruitage crowned,
Where tufted flowerets paint the verdant plain,
Where every breeze shall medicine every wound.
There the stern tyrant that embitters life
Shall, vainly suppliant, spread his asking hand;
There shall we view the billow's raging strife,
Aid the kind breast, and waft his boat to land."

