THE FEMALE OFFICER, OR THE HUMORS of the ARMY, A COMEDY.

Altered from SHADWELL.

DUBLIN: Printed by JAMES HOEY, at the Mercury (...) Skinner-Row, MDCC LXIII.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Major O'ROURK, Mr. BARRY. Brigadier CONQUEST, Mr. HEAPHY. Colonel MAGKENTOSH,
Mr. GLOVER. Major CADWALLADER, Mr. MESSINK. Captain WILDISH, Mr. REDDISH.
Captain HEARTY, Mr. HEATTON. WILLMOT, Mr. T. BARRY. Major BUCK, Mr. AUSTIN.
SURLY, Mr. MORRIS. Ensign RAGG, Mr. OLIVER. Ensign STANDARD, Mr. ADCOCK.
BISKETT, Mr. HARTRY. Sergeant FILE-OFF, Mr. SPARKS. Captain LA CUNETTE, Mr.
HAMILTON.
WOMEN.
Mrs. CONQUEST, Mrs. ADCOCK. VICTORIA, Mrs. BARRY. LUCINDA, Miss MASON. CLARA,
Miss WILLIS. The FEMALE OFFICER, Mrs. DANCER.
SOLDIERS, TRULLS, etc, etc.

The HUMORS of the ARMY.
ACT I.
SCENE The CAMP. Enter Captain Hearty, and Captain Wildish. Hearty. A Good Day
to my dear Friend, what News have you?


Wildish. I have been with the General to reconnoitre the Enemy, they have not
disturbed our Foragers, but lie within their own Camp very quiet.


Heart. Sure if the Marquess De Bay had a true Intelligence of the Weakness of
our Intrenchments, and the Mortality of our Men, he would have attacked us
before now.


Wild. In all the Campaigns I have served on these Frontiers, I never knew it
so sickly; the General continues very much out of Order at Estremoz, they think
both the Major Generals will die, and my Brigadier was carried to Elvas last
Night.


Heart. Then at present Brigadier General Conquest commands our Forces.


Wild. Most certainly.


Heart. The Death of half a Dozen of these great Men, would make a fine
Alteration in our Titles.


Wild. I will assure you, Brigadier General Conquest could observe you were not
at his Levee this Morning.


Heart. Why? I was upon the Piquet where you know, Drinking hard is the main
Part of the Duty -- besides, I never appear at the General's but upon Business,
for I cannot slatter, and have a Stiffness between my Shoulders, that makes me
incapable of Bowing low; the Noise of the Peace gives me no prospect of rising,
being pretty well assured the youngest Captain of an old Regiment, must wait
for another War to get a better Title.


Wild. Why? I was once of the Gang of those silly Fellows, whose Ambition
climbed no higher than a Company in an old Regiment, which gave me a very
distant Prospect of being provided for in Peace, when 'twas fifty to one I was
knocked on the Head before the War was over.


Heart. Human Nature has always imprinted in us a Desire for Something above
us, so gives us a Rotation of Uneasiness; and scarce in an Age do we meet with
a Man that sits down pleased with his Condition, but we all lay Schemes, and
make the present Time a Plague to us, in seeking after the next Plague, which
is still to make us but the more miserable


Wild. The Fever, or the Bullet converts us to Dust and Ashes, and our next
Heirs are left at Liberty to play the Fool after the same Manner; but hang
these dismal Reflections.


Heart. Is there no Courier from Lisbon, or News of a Packet from England.


Wild. We hourly expect one -- since our Forces have been ill, the Portugueze
avoid us, and what is strange, none of their Men have the Distemper amongst
them.


Heart. Their Beads, the Priest's Blessing, and their Garlic are strong
Preservatives of Health -- But see, either my Sight fails me, or that Officer
coming this Way, is my dear Major Buck.


Wild. And with him a clever Parcel of Recruits.


Heart. They come to our Regiment very apropos, for we have scarce Men enough
to mount the Guard.


Enter Major Buck, Wilmot in Granadier's Clothes, Sergeant File-off, several
other Recruits with two Soldier's Wives. Major Buck. Dear Charles!


Heart. Dear Major!


Major Buck. Dear Frank (to Wildish,) I Am entirely yours!


Wild Dear Boy! I Am overjoyed to see you well.


Major Buck. I am very much surpised to find you so; for on our March, we
heard a raging Sickness had swept most of you away.


Wild. The Distemper and false Musters have taken off most of our Men; but
prithee what news from England? I know thou art a concise pretty Fellow, that
can abbreviate an Account, without giving us Cause to ask impertinent Questions.


Major Buck. I left all our Friends well at London, paid my Taylor's Bill,
which was due last Voyage, adjusted my Accounts with our Rogue of an Agent,
gave Security to St. Martin's Parish for my Washerwoman's Bastard, mounted my
Post-Horse at Noonday, reached Falmouth the Moment the Mercury, honest Captain
Green, was failing, which had on Board my strapping Recruits, reached Lisbon in
five Days; and after a fatiguing March of ten more, am this moment arrived to
my great Satisfaction, having met with my two best Friends.


Heart. Well, But prithee --


(pulling him.) Wild. P'shaw Hearty! Hold thy Tongue, and let me ask him some
Questions --


(pulling him.) Major Buck. Looky' Gentlemen! These hailing Digressions of
yours will very much prolong the Time my Story might be told in; come not
within Arm's Length of me, and I will give you all the News, all the Scandal,
all the Fashions and all the Pleasures of the Town.


Heart. and Wild. Agreed then.


Major Buck. First I left our Royal Mistress in a very good State of Health,
reigning entirely in the Hearts of her People, whose Representatives are doing
Wonders; and by their well timed Zeal, and vast Supplies, show the World they
are still able to Balance Europe's Power?


Heart. and Wild. Very good.


Major Buck. The Taxes are paid cheerfully, there is no Discount upon Exchequer
Bills, and honest Soldiers are trusted by every Body. St James's Coffee-House
is full of grave Statesmen, whimsical Gentry, and coxcombly Physicians. Young
Man's is filled with Military Beau's Sea Gentlemen, and Admiralty Clerks.
Garraway's with Knaves, Aldermen, Agents, Commissioners of Excise, and now and
then a straggling Beau. And the Court of Request with Country Gentlemen,
Petitioners, Freeholders, Sheriffs, and Politicians that hate Business. The
Women of Quality have that discerning Taste of good Sense, that they always
crowd the front Boxes at a good Play: And our rakelly young Fellows, live as
much by their Wits as ever; and to avoid the clinkling Dun of a Box-keeper, at
the End of one Act, they Sneak to the opposite Side 'till the End of another;
then call the Box-keeper saucy Rascal, ridicule the Poet, laugh at the Actors,
march to the Opera, and sponge away the rest of the Evening. The Women of the
Town take their Places in the Pit, with their wonted Assurance. The middle
Gallery is filled with the middle Part of the City: And your high exalted
Galleries are graced with handsome Footmen, that wear their Master's Linen, and
their Mistresses Favors.


Wild. P'thaw! These are Generals, make haste and come to Particulars.


Major Buck. Why! About three Months since in a Rencounter with a Lady, I got a
Wound in my Constitution, which was patched up by Bucheir.


Heart. With whose help, I suppose, you slatter yourself you are sound.


Major Buck. As a military Constitution can be: In short I levee'd all the
Generals, and rising Statesmen, I taked and broke Windows, talked Politics,
beat the Watch, and bilk'd Coachmen, went into Mourning for my Father, and was
drawn into half a Dozen Duels on my Friends Account, and killed no Body, won
Money at Gaming, and yet used no false Dice; I went through all the Pleasures
of the Town, without being a Bubble to any of them; saw all the handsome Women,
without falling in Love; and am come to serve under our General without
Reluctance.


Wild. Mighty concise truly.


Heart. Our Regiment is encamped on the Right of the Rear Line; you had best
give Order, that your Men pitch your Tent next mine.


Major Buck. My Baggage will be here immediately.


Wild. Are there any new Fashions?


Major Buck. This is my last new Coat, made exactly after the Manner of Beau
Whimsey's: This is the smart new fashion Cock -- and this is the genteel
walking Air; we salute thus -- we ogle as we used to do; we have cut off all
the superstitious Ceremonies that attended our Love Passions, improve every
Opportunity, come slap dash Alamode de Paris to the Question at once; give the
Women no Time to think of the Spirit, and you are sure of their Persons.


Heart. Who came over in the Packet with you?


Major Buck. Half a Dozen very wretched Volunteers, with prodigious strong
Recommendations; and a Couple of small Ware Pedlars, who call themselves Lisbon
Merchants, of whom I bought these Baubles.


Enter as from Horseback, Victoria and Belinda. Vict. Did you observe, Belinda,
the profound Respect we were received with, as we rid along the Line; my
Spanish Jennet, was himself proud of my Father's Commanding the British Forces,
and carried me with an Air of Greatness.


Bell. I never saw the Brigadier look better than he does to Day, the Morning is
extremely fine.


Vict. I think our whole Family are pretty well seasoned with the Country, and
could I disengage myself from the mean spirited Creature my Father has provided
for a Husband, you and I should pass our Time most pleasantly.


Bell. Prithee pluck up a Spirit, and tell him down right; you will not be married.


Vict. He has been in every thing else the best of Fathers, and if possible,
I Will strive to oblige him in this; though, if it were not for my Mother's
violence, I believe I might persuade him from it, ( espying Major Buck.) Dear
Child, what pretty Fellow is that with Wildish and Hearty?


Bell. It Is Major Buck -- I suppose just arrived from England, he will be the
Talk of the Camp for one Month.


Vict. Prithee, why so?


Bell. For rakish Exploits -- in Lisbon every Street used to be alarmed by him;
his Father died since he has been in England, and has left him a thousand
Pounds a Year, which will give him the Opportunity of committing a Thousand
more Vices than he used to do.


Vict. He Is really a pretty Fellow, Why could not my Father have picked out
such a Man for me.


Bell. Oh fie, Child! He Is the wickedest young Fellow in the World, and will not
suffer any Body to speak in the Behalf of a virtuous Woman.


Vict. If he is a Man of Sense that Wildness and Gayety will wear off.


Bell. Oh! Never! Never! He Is a nauseous Fellow, I cannot help thinking the
Santista, Mr. Biscuit, a much more agreeable Man than he.


Vict. Now you rally me Belinda, I am but just come to bear the fight of him,
and fear I never can be brought to like him.


Bell. Mr. Bisket's assable Temper and good Nature, will soon work upon you.


The Gentlemen talk. Wild. These are pretty Baubles for a Man of an Estate to
Murder Money with?


Heart. Very pretty Trifles truly.


Major Buck. What charming Creatures are these?


Heart. One is your old Friend Belinda, the Daughter of your late Colonel, who
left her to the Care of the Brigadier: And the other is Brigadier General
Conquest's Daughter, who with her Mother was sent for from Lisbon on his late
Illness; they say she is to be married to Mr. Biscuit, the Santista, who
supplies the Army with Bread and Forage.


Major Buck. I protest she has fine brilliant piercing Eyes, and therefore I Will
forbid the Banes; she gives me a pretty thrilling Pain about my Heart; she sets
my Soul on Fire, and I must have her: Sergeant, prepare the Men for an Attack,
I am resolved to countermine Biscuit, blow up all his Outworks, and take that
fair Citadel Sword in Hand.


Wild. Most heroickly expressed.


Major Buck. Now will I fix myself in a very languishing Posture, fire both my
Eyes at her, and I Will lay my Life on it, one of them shall do Execution in some
Corner of her Heart; ha, Faith she returns the Ogle! I am sure she must be a
Prize -- (Kisses her Hand.) Oh these dear charming Eyes have captivated my very
Soul!


Heart. Prithee be more modest, consider her Father is your General.


(Holding him.) Bell. Impudent Creature to take no Notice of me. (Aside.)
(Victoria.) Did you ever see any Thing so saucy?


Vict. Nor so agreeable, upon my Word.


Bell. Why! Sure you cannot like so profligate a Fellow!


Vict. I am not desperately in Love with him, but should not be mighty uneasy
were he to deliver me from my frightful Coxcomb.


Bell. Why, It was but this Moment you were talking of Duty and Gratitude to
Parents.


Vict. It Is probable, the next Moment I shall talk of them again; but, Child,
I Am Flesh and Blood, and a handsome young Fellow, will give me some fluttering
Airs, and a Palpitation about my Heart, in spite of my Duty and resigned Will.


Bell. He Is a satirical ugly Fellow that writes Lampoons; I was sorry to see you
return his Ogle, in a Week's Time, he will swear he has been intriguing with you.


Vict. That certainly will secure my Reputation; for you and I know, what a Red
Coat says of our Sex goes for Nothing.


Bell. I Am vexed to see her have so little Spleen; (Aside.) come, Victoria, your
Mother expects us to drink Tea with her.


Vict. One look more and I go.


Bell. Faugh upon the Fellow.


(Exeunt Women.) Wild. So, very well, you have drove 'em away; I suppose
they will tell the Mother of your Rudeness, she acquaints the Brigadier General,
he sends you out upon the next dangerous Attack, and off goes a Cannon, and a
pretty Fellow within half a Minute of one another.


Major Buck. Why? that very Accident will prove I died for Love of her.


Heart. Ergo, your saucy Love was the Occasion of your Death.


Major Buck. But prithee. Wildish, do thou believe when I shall have
aquainted the General with the Death of my Father, that my Estate will not be a
more prevailing Argument, than Bisket's Riches?


Wild. No! The old Woman hates a Soldier, and the Brigadier General loves Money
so much, that I believe he cannot have the Heart to part with any to his
Daughter; they say all Things are agreed on, and he is expected up from Lisbon
on purpose to marry her.


Heart. He is to give her no Money, and the Lover has sent her Silk for Wedding
Clothes.


Major Buck. Heark'e I Will take her stark Naked, and settle all I have upon her!
I Will immediately go to the General, I have a Packet for him.


Wild. It Is your Duty to acquaint him with your Arrival, and you must give in a
list of your Recruits.


Heart. I warrant you imagine all those tall handsome Fellows must be Part of
your Company.


Major Buck. Most certainly.


Wild. No, no, The Regiment is to draw Cuts for them; therefore if you have any
Fancy to a particular Man, write Servant against him in the List.


Major Buck. Why, I have one clever Fellow, I should be much concerned should I
lose him. March forward, Straitup.


Wild. A well built Fellow of Ireland, I suppose?


Will. No, Sir -- I Am of England.


Heart. The Fellow has the Air and Mein of a Gentleman.


Will. (Aside.) I Am sorry he thinks so.


Wild. What was the Reason of your coming into the Army, Friend?


Will. Why, Sir, Besides, having had a Bastard laid to me, I had committed some
Roguery in the Country, was afraid of being hanged, and so listed myself for a
Soldier.


Wild. Which, Friend, is only a Reprieve from Death, and the next Attack may
sign your dead Warrant.


Heart. If this Fellow falls to my Lot, I Will make a Corporal of him.


Wild. Were he mine, I Would give him Serjeant's Pay, and his Duty should be
Combing my Wigs, and Pimping for me.


Major Buck. The Account he gives you of himself is fictitious, and I am
informed by his Comrades, he has something of the Gentleman in him; for he
lifts up his Eyes when they steal a Pig, cut the Throat of a Portuguese, or
build a Sconce.


Heart. Heark'e, Friend; if you have any Notion of Conscience, you had better
have staid in England to have been lawfully hanged.


Wild. See yonder is the General alighted from his Horse. That Portuguese
Nobleman's House is his Quarters.


Major Buck Sergeant, march the Men to yonder Gate, Come, my Friends, will you
introduce me?


Wild. and Heart. With all our Hearts.


Exeunt. File off. Fall into the Rank, you.


Will. Oh! for a happy Hour to encounter the Enemy in, that I may be rid of this
weary Load of Clay, which clings round my Immortal Soul.


Fill off. Fall back you -- Silence there -- Heark'e, Women, be dumb, or you
shall all be mustered as Harlots -- whipped out of the Camp, without the
Preferment of being made Nurses to the Hospital.


1st Soldier's- Wife. Why, Sergeant, you shall be Judge now; this ragged face
Hussy here, has the Assurance to say, that she is more my Husband's lawful
Wife than I.


2d Soldier's- Wife. Your Husband! that is confident indeed. Have not I lain
with him the whole March? Carried his Knapsack from Lisbon? And what is the
main Sign of a Wife, but doing all his Drudgery? Nay, and to prove I am so, not
one Day has past over his Head, but he has beat me.


File-off. A very convincing proof of conjugal Love. Therefore, Mrs. Sneaker,
let me advise you to choose a new Husband, or hire yourself out to a Company of
Grenadiers, in order to wash their Linen.


1st Trull. If you please, Sergeant, I Will take up with Staitup here?


Will. Be gone, Insolence, or I Will spurn thee from me!


1st Trull. What, Offer to strike a Woman? you an't married too, Sirrah!


2d Trull. Ay! Or refuse a Woman that asks him the Question.


1st Trull. Or dare to live in Camp without a lawful Wife.


File-off. Look'e, Campaigners! This Gentleman Soldier is but a young Beginner,
I will not have him balked: Therefore withdraw your saucy Conversation, till
he has been long enough in the Army, to be as impudent as yourselves; I say,
leaping over a Sword is a serious Ceremony, and the Laws of your spiritual
Court military, tell you no Wife ought to be turned off till the end of a
Campaign. Nor no Man ought to be drawn into the Noose unwillingly, lest the
Point of that Sword which most religiously, joined him, should be the Cause of
most barbarously unjoining of him.


1st Trull. Nay, That Is very true, noble Sergeant, a provoking Tongue, and a
froward Woman will run a Man into strange Desperations: I cannot help owning it
was the Death of my seventh Husband.


1st Sold. Ay, and your eighth too, Moll, to my Knowledge.


1st Trull. No, Indeed Roger, he was hanged for Sheep Stealing.


Will. What a hellish Crew are I most unfortunately thrown myself among?


Aside. File-off. Come, It Is Time enough to talk of Settling yourself, when you
are got into your Tents -- Silence -- March.


Exeunt. SCENE Draws to Brigadier General Conquest's Quarters. Enter the
Brigadier General, Colonel Mackentosh, Major Cadwallader, and Major O'Rourk.
Brig. Genesis Con. The Portuguese are more afraid of us than of the Spaniards; the
General would scarce give me Audience to Day.


Cad. Cot knows, her own Countrymen are prout enough, but then indeet they have
a Reason for it; but truly the Brigadier General scruple't seeing of you,
because he was afraid of getting the Sickness, a cout Soultier is neither
afrait of a Pullet, the Pelly-Ack, nor a Fever: And I declare it he that runs
away from the Defle, should be brought to a Court Martial, and condemnt for a
Cowart.


Mac. It Is a vary malancholy Tale, Sir, that we must die here like a parsal of
Duggs, when we maight Gallantly have our Brains knocked out in the Bad of Honor.


Maj. O'Rourk. Buy my Shoul 'tes a deplorable Story, that we must tay suddenly
of a lingering Shackness, when we might march away to the Enemy, and have Time
to repent of our Shins.


Mac. Waunds Mon, wan wad thank you studdy'd to talk mistically on purpose; I
have heard mare Iricisims fram you, than a whole Gang of the Nation, Sir.


Cad. Come, Cornel, praise for a Man her Toings, and not for her Speakings;
here is our Frient the Major, has Murtert his share this Campaint.


Brig. Genesis Con. Hang your Words, Truth and Honesty may be expressed by Signs,
never find fault with a Man that does not speak as you do.


Maj. O'Rourk. Why, By St. Patrick, the Colonel is a very straange Man; for if
I do spaak, he does find saut upon my Words; and by my Shoul, if I am dumb, he
is angry upon vat I am a thinking: But I believe he vill be after owning vhen I
have bean out on a Paarty with him, I have vrit as goot a Hant vid my Swoart on
the Skull of a Spaniard, as if I was a most scholastic Man.


Mac. May the Deel claw my Wem, Major O'Rourk, an I find fault with your
Braavery; but your an uncouth comical Fellow, Sir, and were two Bullets hurled
through my Craig, Sir, I must bag my lauging Time.


Cad. Look her there now, Kiss and Frients like loving Brother Officers.


Mac. Waunds, Sir, I Will slabber no Man, an he must be an antimate Frant that I
vouchsafe to gave my Hont too.


Cad. Well! Cot knows, I have known it otherwise with your Countrymen, I have
seen 'em crinch and palaver like a Whore to a Cully, Sir, or like a Wiset that
has her Mint to Coucholt her Huspant.


Mac. An ay Coult caatch my Countrymen, at an Cencerity, Sir, waunds I Would be a
Satazen of the World; but of aw your Kingdoms, there is neen so hopeful gallant
Lads; and gued Faith when I gat any Secrats, Sir, I Will trust 'em with none but
the bonny Boys of NorthBritain.


Brig. Genesis Con. That Is the Indiscretion of being National Abroad; the honest
Englishman makes a Friendship with all Mankind, never supports the Villain of
his own Country, and always stands by the honest Man, be he Turk, Jew, or
Infidel.


Enter Engineer Luconnel. Luc. Gentlemen's, your Serviteurs ten thousand Time
ever; my goot General I have make a de very great a Discovery of de Situation,
of vat you call the Camp of de Enemy, dear is de Plang of every Ting.


Brig. Gen Con. Have you showed it the Portuguese General?


Luc. I have taken pain to represent de Ting to him; put you know very vell,
how dey make de ridicule upon de Engineer, for dey never taken de Town, dey has
no Siege, dey lauf at de Fortification, and de Engineer is of no more Use among
them, den de Protestant, dey don't care if dey were bot Hanged.


Cad. Splutter her Nails, to their praise be it spoke, Sir; for in the Tays of
coot Kingt Catwallater, whose Heir at Law is the Shentillmans that stants here;
there was no Fortifications put your Mountains, and your pig Rivers; there was
none of your cowartly Tings calt Canons, and Powter, and Pullets; there was her
Enemy wit her proat Swort, and here was her Assailant with as coot a won, ant
in a few Strokes, they always mayt an Ent of her Pattle; but now a Days, goot
lack, while her is looking for her Enemy there, here is a cowartly Pullet
Steals upon her Shoulters, throws her Heat upon the Crownt, and so her has not
one plow for her Life.


Luc. I find you have just so little Notion of de Fortification, as de
Portuguese demselves.


Mac. Sir, An ye had served so lang under 'em as I have done, theyad maak you
know they were a wise People, when the mat with sicka ratch'd Matematacians, as
your sal, Sir, geud Faith, thayr in the rat to laugh at you, Sir, I Will say that
for your Countrymen, your all Engineers, or Barbars, especially when you gang
to le Englant for your Religion.


Cad. Cots knows your Refu-g's are the Refuss of the Kingtom of France: there is
no Poty loss 'em, and tank our Stars, their is known of them in Wales.


Luc. Jerney blew; because no body care to live dear, but yoursalfs and your
Goats.


Brig. Genesis Con. So a fine Parcel of Nations thrown on their Backs truly?


Mac. Geud Sir, I Will flatter no Mon.


Cad. Nor I, put when I am in a Pashon.


Maj. O'Rourk. Oh! By my shoul, dear Joy, dear is a great Deal of Solidity in
your conversations, when you are holding your Tongues about de French: By my
Shoul dey are a shad People, dey have no Potatoes, a growing upon dem^


Luc. Jerney blew Gentlemen's, if I hat you in France, I make you change your
Opinion, and your Religion too, it vas a my Conscience make me leave a de
Kingdom, or I hat been long Time fore dis de Marschal of France.


Mac. An you war a Laakey, Sir, the Mercury in your Bones would make you talk
like a French Count.


Enter Servant. Ser. May it please your Honor Major Buck this Moment arrived
from England, is to wait on you.


Brig. Genesis Con. Come, Gentlemen, shall we hear what News?


(Exit.) Captain Luconnel going first, Colonel Mackentosh takes bold of him.
Col. Mac. I Will give you Leave to jump down my Throat, Sir, before you shall
gang in the Front of me.


Cadw. (He takes Capt. Luconnel by the Shoulders.) Heark'e, you Cozen-in-Law,
tossed thou know my Name is Catwalater, and that the Parchment of my Petrige, ish
long enough to reach from Toloon to Callice, and that my Ancestors were
Shentilmen, pefore your Kingdom was pepult: Now you know this, pray keep your
Distance.


Maj. O'Rourk. (Takes hold of Capt. Luconnel.) Arah, by my Shoul I will be
after coming before you.


Capt. Luc. Poor filly Shentilmens, it is not vort my Vile to cut all your
Troats for your Folly -- Besides, in France, de great Shentilman always come
last; ha! dat is very goot.


ACT II. Brigadier General Conquest's Quarters.
Enter Brigadier General Conquest, and Major Buck. Brig. Genesis Con. I Am glad to
hear, Sir, every Thing is so quiet in England, and that all our Friends are
well. I have ordered Colonel Mackentosh, to take Care of the Distribution of
your Men: I dine about Two, and shall be glad of your Company.


Maj. Buck. You are extremely obliging.


Enter Mrs. Conquest, Victoria, and Belinda. Mrs. Con. Oh! my dear! I am
informed there is a Packet come; have you no Letters for me?


Brig. Genesis Con. Not one.


Maj. Buck. (Aside.) The nearer I come to that charming Angel, the more
piercing are her Eyes.


Mrs. Con. Is this the Officer that is arrived from England?


Brig. Genesis Con. Yes, that is Major Buck.


Mrs. Con. We Women are very inquisitive Mortals?


Brig. Genesis Con. Ay, Major, you must expect to be asked a Million of
impertinent Questions.


Mrs. Con. We shall only enquire after new Fashions, new Songs, new Amors --


Vict. And new Country Dances, Sir.


Bell. (Aside.) So she will be acquainted with him, I find.


Maj. Buck. There are abundance of each, Madam. As to new Fashions, indeed they
have not flourished with that Life and Vigor, since the Death of the
Pewterer's Wife in Bedlam, as they did before: But there are some fashionable
Creatures at the other End of the Town, that give great Hopes of their being
very odd and whimsical; for their Head Dresses are no bigger than the Skull
caps they used to wear; their Petticoats are up to their Knees; their Stays up
to their Chins; and their Fanns up to their Nostrils; and the mody Shrug makes
'em wear their Shoulders up to their Ears; their Lappets reach down to the
Fringing of their Petticoats, which are widen'd with abundance of Whalebone:
They stoop forward when they should walk upright; they shuffle along a tip Toe,
courtesy on one Side, smile on those they would ridicule, and look very grave
on their intimate Acquaintance.


Mrs. Con. Very diverting, good Sir.


Brig. Genesis Con. I warrant you, Victoria will have all these whimsical
Representations of the Sex, by Tomorrow Noon.


Bell. Shall we go to our Chamber, Victoria?


Vict. Presently, my Dear. Pray, Sir, what new entertaining Music have you in
England?


Maj. Buck. As to new Songs, Madam, there is Abundance of them, that have very
little Wit in them, set to most excellent Italian Tunes: Every Body that goes
to the Opera, beats Time, though not one in a Hundred knows when to do it, and
their not understanding the Language, makes 'em ignorant of the Business; so,
between the Tune, and the Words, they go away as unedified, as a Libertine from
a Presbyterian Meeting.


Bell. (Aside.) How he Eyes her! unmannerly Fellow, he never Looks at me!


Mrs. Con. And good now, Major, what Scandal is stirring? What Reputations are
blown upon, and who has the finest Equipage?


Maj. Buck Madam, the Citizen's Wives pay as much for handsome young Fellows,
as ever they did; there are Women of Figure fond of Gamesters, and Courtiers
that take as much Pride in keeping Strumpets, that all the Town has had, as
those Strumpets take in making Cullies of 'em; they give 'em fine Clothes, fine
Equipages, and they spend 'em a fine Deal of Money. Harlots keep visiting Days,
as well as Women of Honor; they appear at the Church, and the Playhouse, with
a very modest Assurance; to be called my Lord Whatd'callm's Mistress, is as
genteel and more Modish a Name, than my Lord Whata'callm's Wife: And at the End
of an Opere, you often hear my Lord-Duke's Footman called for, Mrs. Simper
having ordered her Flambeaux to be lighted.


Brig. Genesis Con. Why! then the Town is as wicked now, as it was, when I made a
Figure in the Side Box?


Vict. I doubt, Major, you are too satirical upon our poor Sex?


Maj. Buck. Oh! Madam! When I have an Opportunity, I can tell you Abundance of
generous kind noble Acts, that have been done by the virtuous Part of your Sex.


Bell. (Aside.) So, they are intimate already.


Vict. You have said nothing of Country Dances yet, Major?


Maj. Buck. As to Dancing, Madam, all the Time of the Parliament's Sitting, Mr.
Bays's grand Dance is practiced over in the Court of Request; where Party Men
go Sides all, Whig and Tory Back to Back, Beaus and Politicians right Hand and
left, your Waiters for Preferment and Men of Interest run the Hay, Republicans
go the Figure of Eight, and Lawyers lead you down two Couple.


Bell. (Aside.) I must be miserable, for I find she does nothing but Eye him.


An Alarm Gun. Enter Colonel Mackentosh. Col. Mac. Waunds, Sir, the Enemy are
on their March toward us, and the Gun is fired for us, to make ready to
receive 'em.


Brig. Genesis Con. Why! by the Account I have this Morning, we have not fifteen
Hundred English Men that are fit to bear Arms?


Col. Mac. The Deel jump down my Throat, Sir, an we do no bang aw the Spanish
Army, and the Portugueze General will let us attack 'em.


Maj. Buck. There spoke the true Spirit of a Britain.


Brig. Genesis Con. Would these Women were safe at Lisbon again.


Maj. Buck. (Aside.) Now, notwithstanding the share of Honor I am like to get
by Beating the Enemy; methinks I had rather be sent with a Detachment to guard
the General's Baggage there.


Mrs. Con. Don't be concerned for us, my Dear; I have not attended you so many
Campaigns in Flanders, to be frighted with a foolish Alarm here: Courage, my
Girl!


Vict. Oh! Madam; I am too much my Father's Daughter to fear.


Maj. Buck. (Aside.) Her Courage unmans me; and I shall now be careful of my
Life, in Hopes of preserving Here Is.


Enter Mr. Biscuit, and Charlot. Bisk. General, your most devoted; Ladies, your
most humble, (to Victoria.) Madam, this Journey is on your Account.


Maj. Buck. (Aside.) So, I suppose this is my rascally Rival.


Bell. (Aside.) I am glad he is come, I Will hasten the Match, and be revenged on
that false Devil Major Buck.


Bisk. General, this young Gentleman came over in the last Packet, and has
Letters from England for you: Mr. Hickumbuz, come forward, that I may introduce
you to the General -- that is Brigadier General Conquest, and this is Mr.
Hickumbuz.


Bell. An agreeable young Fellow.


Char. This Packet of Letters is from my Lady Lovemore, Sir; and this is for
your Lady, whom I expected to have seen at Lisbon.


Mrs. Con. Pray, Sir, give it me; I hope my Lady was well when you left England.


Char. She was at my coming away in a most agreeable State of Health, and
particularly ordered me to let Mrs. Victoria know, she had a great Share in her
Heart.


Vict. I am pleased to hear my Aunt is well, Sir.


Bisk. Did not I tell you, Mr. Hickumbuz, you would be kindly received --
Heark'e! How may you like my Mistress -- Ha!


Char. So well, that I believe I shall make Love to her.


Brig. Genesis Con. Sir, the Letters you brought are much in your Favor; my
Sister tells me, you are her Husband's near Relation, and begs I would provide
for you in my Regiment; there happens to be a Vacancy of a youngest Lieutenant
of Grenadiers in your Company, Major Buck; order my Secretary to sill up the
Commission the General left, with his Name.


Bisk. Heark'e, Mr. Hickumbuz, it was my Interest got it, don't forget that Sum
you promised me, my Dear.


Char. P'shaw! it is too late now; I Am an Officer, therefore know your Distance,
and don't be saucy, Merchant.


Bisk. Pert and military enought.


Enter Major O'Rourk. Maj. O'Rourk. By my Shoul my Nobility General, there is
an Aid de Camp come from the General of the Portugueze, vid an Order to desire
that veder he she is you or not, he may spaak vid you out of Hand.


Col. Mac. Waunds, I houpe it is a Resalution to fight the Enemy: Geud Faith, I
yern to be banging their Lugs for 'em.


Brig. Genesis Con. Well, I Will go and hear what Resolutions are to be taken. Mr.
Biscuit, I leave you in Possession of my Family, and if we engage the Enemy. I
expect you should retire with the Woman to Elvas. Come, Colonel, you shall go
with me to the General's?


Col. Mac. By Edenborough Cross, I houpe, we shall persuade him to give Battle.


Maj. O'Rourk. By my Shoul, when de Fait is over, I will swear we have had a
Battle.


Brig. Genesis Con. Adieu -- Women.


Exeunt Conquest, Mackentosh, and O'Rourk. Mrs. Con. We have had so many false
Alarms, that I Am in no Fear of Danger: However, Belinda, let us pack up our
Implements for a March.


Bell. Come, Victoria.


Bisk. Madam! I am the proper Animal deputed to take Care of her adorable
Person?


Mrs. Con. Major, your most humble Servant. Young Gentleman, when the Hurry is
over, we shall be glad of seeing you, for I must have a great Deal of Talk with
you about my Sister. Come, Belinda.


Bell. You will not stay, Victoria?


Exeunt Mrs. Conquest, and Belinda. Bisk. Madam! permit me to participate of
the last Joint of your Ladyship's little Finger.


He takes hold of her Hand. Maj. Buck. (Rushing in between 'em) Pardon the
Freedom I take, dear Madam.


Bisk. I protest very rude and comical.


Maj. Buck. But I Am obliged to improve every Opportunity, and break through
those Forms of awful Adoration, which is due to so much Beauty, and tell you I
am desperately in Love with you, and we both must be for ever miserable, should
you marry that Coxcomb.


Bisk. Bear Witness, Mr. Hickumbuz.


Vict. (Aside.) I Will swear, his Impudence is very agreeable.


Char. Mr. Biscuit, if you will take my Advice in this Affair, a Word in your Ear.


They go aside. Vict. You Gentlemen in Red have a Notion, the greatest Favor
you can do our Sex is, to tell us you're desperately in Love with us; but we
know your fashionable Ways of talking too well to believe you -- Besides, I Am
already engaged to that Gentleman, whom you this Moment showed so much Rudeness
to.


Maj. Buck. It Is in your Power, Madam, to save both our Lives, for I never can
suffer so fine a Creature to be thrown away on so arrant a Puppy: Therefore, I
shall, if you persist, first cut his Throat, and then my own.


Vict. If the Passion you prosess for me is sincere, I slatter myself you will
do nothing, that may call either my Reputation or your Prudence in Question;
all I can now say is, I wish I could come off my Engagements with Honor.


Bisk. (To Charlot) Why look'e, Mr. Hickumbuz, as you say, I ought to demand
Satisfaction of him.


Char. Nay, more, Sir -- a Word in your Ear.


Maj. Buck. Oh heavenly Sound! Leave the Management of that Affair to n.e, and
expect all the Invention that is in the Power of a warm, desiring, wishing
Lover to perform!


Enter Belinda. Bell. Hell and Tortures -- Are they so close (goes before 'em.)
Victoria, your Mother is very angry that you stay so long. (Leading her away.)


(Exeunt Belinda, and Victoria. Maj. Buck. The Malice of that Creature, if she
lives long enough, will qualify her for a Witch -- but till she deals with the
Devil. I may out wit her.


Bisk. (To Charlot.) Oh Fellow Traveller! your Servant for that -- I will not run
the Hazard of Fighting for a Mistress I Am already sure of; but if ever I catch
him in the Way of Trade, and I don't overreach him, may I be a Bankrupt.


Exit, staring at Major Buck. Maj. Buck. Go thy Ways for an egregious Coxcomb,
(to Charlot.) Sir I sind I am obliged to you, for the Opportunity of telling my
Passion to my Mistress, it is a very good Foundation for our future Friendship;
and since the General has ordered you my Lieutenant, I shall be proud of every
Opportunity of serving you.


Char. You in every Action show so much the Gentleman, that I think it a great
Happiness of falling under your Command: I come very raw into the Service, and
know little of the Discipline of the Army, nor can I tell what true Courage is,
but am sure I have Resolution enough to do every Thing I am commanded.


Maj. Buck. Thou show a Spirit that is noble, and next to my Mistress shall
share my Heart; I would have you improve your Acquaintance with the General's
Wise, which may give me an Opportunity of telling my Passion to my dear, dear
Victoria.


Char. I have been a Page, Sir, in which Office we learn the whole Language of
the Eyes; and I am much mistaken, if the fair Lady you adore, burns not with an
equal Passion for you.


Maj. Buck. Your Pages are very apt to slatter, my Dear; but do thou really
think she met my Glances with any manner of Warmth?


Char. I saw the little Cupids dancing in her Eyes; and still, the more she
looked the more she sighed, the more she warmed, and so, of course, she more
desired.


Maj. Buck. My dear Boy! Thou firest my Blood: Look'e, I Will give you the
Prosits of the Company; thy Man shall have Serjeant's Pay; thy Washerwoman
shall be in the Muster Roll as a Soldier; and thou thyself shall do no Duty,
provided thou assistest me in gaining the Affections of that dear soft
bewitching Creature, Victoria.


Char. Believe me, Sir, She Is yours, and will herself contrive Means to tell
you all her Mind.


Maj. Buck. Say thou so, my Boy -- I Will go to the Secretary, and take out
your Commission; meet me at my Tent in half an Hour, and I Will present you to
the Company; my Sergeant will soon teach you to Exercise, your Gallantry will
recommend you to the General; and I Am entirely devoted to your Interest. I hope
you have a sharp Servant to take care of your Baggage: Look Big upon your
Brother Officers, and pray have no Quarrels without my being your Second --
Adieu, my Dear Boy.


Exit. Char. His Generosity and Friendship much obliges me -- But, Oh! my Dear
Wilmot! What have I suffered for thee? Fatiguing Journeys, a Tempestuous
Voyage, and all those Dangers which my Sex are unaccustomed too; will not this
atone for the III Usage thou have met with from me? -- Let me once more read
the dismal Letter, that Cause of all my Woe and Hardships.


Takes out the Letter, Reads. False, Unkind and Perjured Charlotte.
TOO long I Have bore mith Torment at my Heart your Wounding, Piercing, Killing
Usage; I have now got so much the better of my Love as to find out your Pride,
your insolence and false Coquetting Airs; I have tore you from my Soul, and
would have you dote on every foolish Coxcomb, which no more shall give me Pain.
I am this Moment going on Board the Packet for Portugal. I have bought such a
Post in our Army there, as will soon give me an Opportunity of rushing amidst
the thickest shower of Bullets, one of which I hope, will take that possession
of my Heart, which I once designed for you; I believe my Death will soon be
known to you, and you may expect the Upbraiding of my Ghost:

Adieu for Ever, WILLMOT.


Char. Too well I have deserved this Barbarous Usage; Curse the Folly of my
Sex, which led me unto that false Notion of believing I could secure to myself,
that Lover which I used most scurvily:


Enter her Maid Clara in a Footman 's Habit. Well, Dear Clara, what News of
Willmot?

Cla. Oh! Madam, I have walked through all the Camp, enquired at the Head of each
Regiment, but can hear no tidings of him.


Char. Break! Stubborn Heart, break -- no Tidings of him -- why then he has
given us a false Account of his Voyage, and naught but Misery can ere attend me.


Cla. Remember, Madam, with how many Tears and moving Words, I begged you not to
leave your Native Country; I wish when you had sent me to your Aunt for that
Letter to Brigadier General Conquest, that I had told her it was not for a
Friend but yourself.


Char. Then you had for ever forfeited my Love, nothing grieves me now, but the
Hardships thou art like to meet with.


Cla. Fear not me, my dearest Lady; if you can support yourself under the
Difficulties, I shall hear them with Pleasure.


Char. Come on then, the General has already promised me a Lieutenancy; and
since Willmot has so barbarously resented the Weakness of my Sex, I Will now
Revenge it on all his; my Captain is indeed a Gallant Man, his Friendship is
what I most shall covet, but for the rest stand clear.


Cla. I yet comfort myself with the Hopes of hearing of your Lover.


Char. No, Clara, I Will shake him from my Heart; put on all the saucy Airs of a
real Man, and make my Brother Officers stand in fear of me.


Enter Lieut. Surly. Sur. Brother, your Servant, as I may say.


Char. From whence, good Sir, does your Familiarity proceed?


Sur. So, so, a pert Boy, some Man of Quality's Bastard, I suppose, (Aside.) --
Look'ye, Child, I met my Captain, who informed me you were to be youngest
Lieutenant to our Granadiers; if so I Am to be your Commanding Officer.


Char. The longest Sword must decide that.


Sur. Very good -- you are beginning to mutiny already, prithee, Child, did
thou ever serve?


Char. I had Lodgings near Charing Cross; I kept a Bank at a Gaming Table; I
have broke Windows with Field Officers; and have been tossing Subalterns in
Blankets.


Sur. Heark'e, dear Boy, what might thy Commission cost thee?


Char. I gained it by my Merit.


Sur. No, no, my Child; it was a confounded modest fort of Assurance, called
Impudence, that got it thee.


Char. Sir.


Sur. That smooth Countenance of thine is not made for Frowning; if thou
valuest thy Life, or thy Commission, thou most be more civilized, or thou will
be the Thirteenth young handsome Impertinent Fellow we have run through the Body
this Campaign; lookey, if you will go to the Sutler's, we'll Kiss and Friends
over a Dram of Geneva; thou shall have a Pipe of Tobacco out of my Box here, or
if thou have an Antipathy to Smoking, I can give thee a Chew of the best
Oronoko in the Universe, which is an Offer that many a Sub would jump at.


Char. Faugh upon thy nasty Weed, Sir, you have used me Ill, and therefore I
demand Satisfaction --


She draws. Sur. Ha, ha, prithee Babe, put up thy Sprat Spit, it is fit only to
make a Busk for thy Mistress.


Cla. Sir, my Master never puts up any thing till he has Satisfaction --

(Lord! how I tremble. (Aside.
Sur. Ha, ha, What then thy Master is a Knight Errant and thou art his Dwarf.


Char. These Affronts are so gross, they put me past Patience -- (Aside.) (Oh!
yonder is Company a coming.) (to him) Villain have at thy Heart.


Sur. Nay, if I must lug out, remember, young Fellow, it was thy own Fault,
thou art guilty of SelfMurder, therefore come on to the Hilt of my Sword.


Draws. Enter Cadwallader and Luconnel. Cad. What is the meaning of her drawing
her Sworts, have you no poty's Troats to cut put your hone?


Luc. Jerney Devil Gentlemen's vat is de meaning of your Animosity, are you mad
to kill yourselves, ven de vant two tree Tousand Gentry Country People to vight
de Enemy?


Cad. Holt your Tongue, mint your puissness, and leave 'em to my known self;
come, what is your Quarrel?


Sur. Why, Major, your Servant the Young Lad, has a mind to have his Throat
cut, I suppose, he provoked me a long Time before I drew.


Cad. Well come, what has her to say for herself now?


Char. I have been most scandalously abused by him, and without he begs my
Pardon, I cannot put it up.


Cad. Beg her parten, why, I suppose, in all Quarrels, every poty is in Fault,
and it is your Tutys, and for your Honors to peg one another's Partens.


Luc. But he dat give de Injury should aska de Pardon first.


Cad. What does her mean py crouting in her Worts to interrupt her, am I not
Juge upon the Quarrels, I will decite it for you, or I will cut all your
Throats: Young Gentlemen, when you have been at our Traite as long as myself
you vill have more Wit than to Fight for nothing.


Luc. It Is very well against de Enemy, dear is de very great a Satisfaction in
Plunder de Camp, Burn de Town, Ravish de Women, and so fort; but for one Friend
to an oder make a push shoes against de Body; it is a great jest begar.


Cad. Cott knows, you are always a trushing yourself into Gentleman's
Puissnesses, have a care of your provoking me into a Passion, get her gone
quickly, or I protest I will pe in her Poty.


Luc. I am sorry I cannot stay no longer vid you, but I am in great haste to go
take Care and raise a de Battery for fear de Enemy should attack us.


Exit. Cad. It Is a goot Excuse for saveing your Lives; come, put up your
Sworts, shake Hants, Kiss and Frients.


Char. On your Account Sir I do forgive him, but let him take care how he
affronts me hereafter.


Sur. So I find I must either own myself in a Faul^, or cut the Boy's Throat.


Enter Sergeant File-off. File. (to Char.) Sir, Major Buck is in his Tent, and
wants to speak with you.


Cad. When you have another Quarrel, pray pe sure to kiss and Frients pefore
you draw your Sworts.


Exit. Sur. Brother, your Servant, come, Sergeant, go to the Sutler's, and I Will
give you a Dram for your welcome to Camp; which had you rather have Rum or
Geneva.

Exeunt Surly and File-off.
Cla. Dear Madam, I tremble every Joint of me, what could you mean by running
yourself into all this Danger.


Char. This, Child, was the Way to secure myself from Quarrels.


For he, they say, is Brave who makes a Noise,
Your Gallant Fighters are your Blustering Boys.
ACT III. Brigadier General Conquest's Quarters.
Enter Mrs. Conquest and Belinda. Bell. MADAM; I have known him long. He was an
Officer in my Father's Regiment. He has been the ruin of half our Sex.


Mrs. Con. And do you say Victoria seemed to receive his Addresses?


Bell. With glowing Cheeks and a consenting Eye.


Mrs. Con. Cunning Creature! She always has pretended to show excess of Duty in
every Thing.


Bell. But to me, Madam, who knew the inmate Secrets of her Heart, she has
expressed much Hatred to the Husband you have provided for her.


Mrs. Con. Dissembling Hussy! I Will make her consent, I warrant you. I think
Mr. Biscuit is an extraordinary Match for her, He Is worth Twenty Thousand Pound,
is Santista to the whole Army, and has a Prospect of getting Forty more -- But
if the Peace comes, and he loses this Post, he is the richest Merchant in
Lisbon; and will maintain her like a Princess -- Rather than she should marry a
Rake'lly Officer, I Would wish her Dead. I know too well the Plague of trudging
after a Soldier. It Is indeed a State of Laced Clothes and Starving, but there is
little of the Love and Cherish in it.


Bell. Too well I know it Madam: it broke my poor Mother's Heart. But this is
the most Profligate Rake the Army ever bred: He is well versed in all
Intriguing, and by his Usage of Mr. Biscuit, if you hasten not the Match, most
certainly he will break it off.


Mrs. Con. I Will be too Cunning for him: And if the Spaniards don't disturb us,
my Husband's Chaplain shall Marry 'em this Evening.


Bell. (Aside.) Were it once done, I should be Happy.


Mrs. Con. Where is Victoria now?


Bell. In her Chamber; providing for our Journey to Elvas if there should be
occasion.


Mrs. Con. I would have you take no Notice to my Husband of what has passed;
his Heat of Temper may occasion some Mischief. I Will prepare her myself for the
Matter; first acquaint her with my Resolutions, and then her Father shall lay
his commands on her. --


Exit Mrs. Conquest. Bell. Which I fear she will be very averse to. Since Major
Buck has basely slighted me, this Revenge will be some Satisfaction to me: And
so long as I prevent his marrying any Body else, some lucky turn may make him
mine. For though now I hate him for despising me, one kind Look will soon get the
better of my weak Resolves. I am vexed this Coxcomb Biscuit should give 'em an
Opportunity of talking together. See where the Fool comes!


Enter Biscuit. Bis. Adorable Mrs. Belinda! I am your most devoted Shoe-Leather.
I must beg you to lay your Head to mine, and help me to Revenge myself in some
manner or another upon the Major. He took my Mistress from me in a most
Audacious manner: Ridiculed my Parts and Person before her, and I protest, for
aught I know, he has made such an Impression on her, to my Prejudice, that all
the sine Things Vows, and Oaths, which I shall say to her for a Month, I fear,
will scarce set her at Rights again.


Bell. I can tell you, if before tomorrow Morning you are not Married to her,
she will be the Major's Wife.


Bis. I protest you bring my Heart to my Mouth -- Though upon second Thoughts, if
the Major has a Fancy to her, I had much rather he should sall in Love with her
before I have her, than afterward -- Though I am pretty well assured she cannot
be false to my person.


Bell. You must not tell the General what has happened, but press him to have
the Wedding Celebrated to Night.


Bis. He and I are agreed upon all Matters; and I have deposited six Thousand
Pounds, to be laid out in England, which was to be her Jointure. A great deal
of Money to give for a Wife, especially should she prove a Jade -- Ha, Mrs.
Belinda.


Bell. I would advise you not to be out of her Sight, till you are Married to
her.


Bis. Ay, and I Will watch her Waters after I Am Married to her: And I will have
an Eye upon the Major's heavy Cannon, for fear he should lay Siege to her.


Bell. Come, you must go and Attack her yourself, Let her have no Correspondence
with the Enemy, and she must fall into your Hands.


Bis. I Will find out all her Mines and take her Glacis, Sword in Hand.


Bell. By Conversing with Military Men, you are become a perfect Soldier.


Bis. Ay, if I could but Fight, or be in a Passion big enough to draw a Sword,
I could soon Cammand an Army.


Bell. Come along and try to Command your Mistress.


Exeunt. SCENE Draws and discovers Victoria. Vict. Well! This agreeable Major
runs so in my Head, that I am prodigiously Divided; betwixt Hoping, and Fearing
and Wishing; Desiring, Suspecting and Doubting. Let me see. I warrant you
they will pretend to say, I have given my Word to have this Coxcomb Biscuit. 'Twas
all Compulsion -- And I never can consent to have him.


Enter Mrs. Conquest. Mrs. Con. See, Victoria, are you prepared for a March?


Vict. Ready on the first Alarm, Madam.


Mrs. Con. How came you to let that Saucy Major Talk to you with so much
Freedom just now?


Vict. To me, Madam?


Mrs. Con. Ay, to you, Madam. Come, come, Victoria, he is a Dangerous Fellow: He
has used Mr. Biscuit very ill, and if your Father was to know it, a terrible
Quarrel would ensue. I would have you prepare yourself, to be married this
Night.


Vict. So soon, Madam!


Mrs. Con. Come, come, Mr. Biscuit is a Prize not to be neglected.


Vict. Oh, dear Madam! He Is so disagreeable a Coxcomb, that I shall be for ever
Miserable if I have him.


Mrs. Con. Your Disobedience surprises me; have not your Father and I agreed
upon the Matter? Don't we know what is best for silly Girls, who are not fit
Judges for themselves? One must have a great share of Experience, abundance of
Knowledge, and prudent Management before we know what is best for us. Mr. Biscuit
is no Fool.


Vict. But he has a great want of Sense.


Mrs. Con. You are a fine Judge of Sense: a Rake'lly dressed Fellow, with a Laced
Coat, Hat and Feather, is all the Notion you have of a Man of Sense


Vict. N^, Madam; I reckon a M^n of Sense, is one who! a read the World as well
as Books, and knows how to discern betwixt the good and evil of it; and has so
true a Notion of himself, as never to launch out into conceited Praises of his
own Perfections; he has Honor enough to scorn to do an ill Thing, and Courage
to resent an Injury from an impertinent Coxcomb; he knows how to put a true
value upon Virtue; he has Religion enough to keep his Marriage vow Sacred, and
Discretion enough to make a Woman his Friend, as well as Wise.


Mrs. Con. So so, a fine Character truly; and where do you expect to find such
a Husband as this -- Your Father laid out all his ready Money to buy the
Regiment, if there should come a Peace -- it is a young one: He Will be broke, and
half pay will not maintain us -- Here you will be at the Head of the Factory;
keep your Chaise and your Litter; be visited by the Envoy, and sit next the
Consul's Lady.


Vict. And Dine with my Book-keepers, and Newfound-Land Chaplains; know how to
buy a Bargain of Stock Fish; Go on Board an India-Man and beg Coffee and
Calicoes: Be pent up all the Sultry Weather in a Quinito of my own; where none
but the Worshipful Wretch my Husband and a Portuguese Gardener must come near
me.


Mrs. Con. On your Duty, I command you to hold your Tongue: Here would be fine
Work if your Father was to hear you; it is my Resolution, you shall be Married
to Night: if you dare disobey, you shall be turned out of Doors before to
Morrow.


Vict. You know, Madam, I have always been most Obedient; but when I tell you
this Man is my greatest aversion, sure you will not Sacrifice me to him.


Mrs. Con. You may set your Heart upon him if you please: I know all Things
depend upon Resolution; and therefore resolve and be happy forthwith.


Vict. Well, Madam, to show you how much my Duty gets the better of my
Inclinations, I Will bury myself in this Monument of your own choosing. But since
I must be Sacrificed to this Creature, I have one Request to beg of you, Madam.


Mrs. Con. Thou can ask nothing in Reason, my Dear Child, but I will grant
it you.


Vict. I fear (though my Resolution's Strong,) when I come to the fatal Ceremony,
I shall want Spirits to support me through it. It Is probable were I not to see
the Author of my Woe (...) I was made his Wise, I might in Time bear the Sight
of him, though not Love him.


Mrs. Con. That Is Vapors; mere Fancy Child -- But to Humor you the Chaplain
shall Marry you in the Dark. --


Enter Belinda and Biscuit. Oh Belinda! My Daughter is very good -- If the
General returns, you may prepare this Evening for your Wedding, Mr. Biscuit.

Bis. Excellent News, my dear Mother-in-Law! At the coming in of the
Brazil-Fleet, I will give you an Ingot of Gold to make a -- Chocolate Mill on
-- Thank my Stars! The Ceremony of Courtship is over; it has cracked more
Brains than Projecting and Poetry has done. Dear Angel (to Victoria.) Let me
Salute the hard Knuckles of your soft Hand.


Vict. (Ironically.) You have such Winning ways with you, there is no denying
any Thing.


Bisk. Ah! thy words are as Sweet as the best Lisbon Sugar. Adso, though we
Merchants are obliged to wear these Dresses in the Way of Trade, yet upon so
joyful an Occasion as this, I may be allowed to jump into a laced Coat, and a
full-bottom'd Wig. Madam Victoria. I Will give you my Person in the handsomest
manner I can; and in half an Hour, show a most complete Bridegroom. Adieu,
deary, for an Age I may say, a Moment is to me.


Exit. Bell. This is very joyful Tidings my dear Victoria, that you have so true
a Sense of Happiness, as to choose the Man of all the World that is most
capable of making you so.


Vict. My good Mother has used so many prevailing Arguments with me, that I can
no longer stand in my own Light.


Mrs. Con. She is the best of Daughters -- I Will go and enquire if there is no
Tidings of your Father. I know not any Thing will so much rejoice his Heart, as
this Wedding.


Exit Mrs. Conquest. Bell. I Am pleased to hear your Will is so resigned -- I was
desperately afraid, what Major Buck said to you this Day, would have made some
Impression on you: For know, I love him to Desperation: And could I fix him
mine, I Have Vanity to think, I Have Charms enough to cure him of his rakish and
inconstant Temper. Indeed I was a little Jealous of you, and therefore
persuaded your Mother to hasten the Match: For which, my Dear, I hope you will
thank me now.


Vict. (Aside.) This is Friendship with a Vengeance -- (to her.) I suppose his
Pretensions to me were only Gallantry. But were they sincere, my being married
to another will be a Means of making him yours: I, you need not doubt, will
contribute all I can toward it.


Bell. Let me embrace my dear, my prudent, and my Bosom Friend.


Vict. (Aside.) Dissembling Witch -- (to her.) When next I meet the Major, I Will
find a Way to tell him how much you love him.


Enter Captain Hearty. Hearty. Your Servant, Ladies. I suppose, Madam, I was
not to have overheard that last Sentence of yours.


Vict. Yes truly, Sir, it is no Secret. Belinda is desperately in Love with
Major Buck, I only promised her my Assistance in forwarding the Match.


Bell. I in Love with that Fellow: I wonder at your Assurance, Victoria: I
protest I blush for you. I Will go tell your Mother what an idle Girl you are.


(Exit Belinda. Hearty. You have put the Lady into some Disorder by this
Confession.


Vict. Not half so much as she has put me into, by her Hypocrisy and false
Friendship. 'Twas but some few Minutes since my Mother forced from me my Word
to marry Biscuit; which Ceremony is to be performed this Evening. All the Favor
she would grant me, was to marry in the Dark. If my Imagination's strong, I
shall fancy it is not he. Were I to see him, sure I am, my saultring Tongue
would never consent I should be his: I sacrifice my Ease, my Quiet, and my
Peace of Mind, to my rigid Parents harsh Commands.


Hearty. The Law of Nature never meant we should take Duty in that ridiculous
Sense: This would be dismal News to poor Major Buck, whose Happiness and Peace
of Mind depends on one kind Look from you.


Vict. It Is now too late! my Word is past: Besides, how can I be certain he is
sincere? This may only be a loose Air he gives himself; a Gallantry that often
happens, with Men of his Character.


Hearty. I dare answer for him -- It Is your Person now he doats on: But I Am
well assured, when he is acquainted with the Beauties of your Mind, he more and
more will love you: Give me but Hopes you like him, and for all the Time's so
short, I Will engage the Major delivers you from this wretched Coxcomb; and with
your Father's Consent to.


Vict. In this Exigency, I think I may be allowed to say, I do not hate the
Major -- And could wish -- I can say no more.


Hearty. It Is enough; I Will instantly to the Major, and you soon will hear from
him.


Vict. My Prayers will attend you.


(Exeunt severally. SCENE changes to the Camp. Enter two Ensigns, Sergeant
File-off following. 1. Ensi. Pox on it, I shall die of this Pinch-Office.
There Is all my two Months Subsist gone upon that last Card; our Dog of an Agent
will advance nothing without Cent per Cent. Oh, for a Battle! to send a Pound
of Lead into my Body, or a Pound of Gold into my Pocket.


2. Ensi. If we had but dined before we had been stripped, I should have had a
Stomach for fighting, but I Am always a damned Coward with an empty Belly.


1. Ensi. Ha, Sergeant! How long have you been come up to Camp.


File-off. This Day, Sir.


1. Ensi. Let me see, Sergeant? As I remember, I owe you four Crusades, if you
can give me six more, I Will give you a Moeda.


File-off. (Aside.) A good lucky Thought of his: the Devil a Farthing he owes
me -- but however, I Will put the Old Soldier upon him (to him.) Noble Ensign,
your Servant. You may let it alone if you please. I am not in haste (pulling
out his Money.)


1. Ensi. I am ashamed, Sergeant, it has been so long due.


File-off. Sir, your Servant, there is six Crusades, Sir.


1. Ensi. (He takes 'em) Very well, Sergeant, and there is a, (feeling in his
Pocket.) Adso! I thought I had a Moeda: Here, take my Key, and bid my Man give
you one out of my green Purse, and bring me the Key again.


File-off. Sir, your Servant.


(Exit Sergeant. 2. Ensi. Thou art an excellent Soldier Brother Rugcarrier, and
for this one Invention, ought to command an Army. Those are the greatest
Generals that have the best Turns, Tricks, and Stratagems; and to overreach is
to overcome. But heark'e, shall we go and eat with this Money.


1. Ensi. No, as Fortune got it us, we will venture it (...) upon a Card; pinch
it to Trantleva be paid -- Purchase half a Dozen of Almudes of Wine; send my
Man to steal a Sheep; and so keep a Table till all our Money is gone.


2. Ensi. Ha, Brother Surly, well met.


Enter Surly. 1. Ensi. My Fingers itch to be venturing of it: I Will bring you
Word before the Bauker is got through the Pack, how it is like to go with me.


Exit. Sur. What then your Head will always run upon Gaming: Could you but
taste the Pleasure of smoking Tobacco, and drinking Drams, you would never run the
Hazard of starving as you do. I have the best Notion of living that any Man in
Camp has; I can get drunk for six Vintins, and when I have a Stomach, six
Whiffs of Mundungus take it away, as effectually as a couple of Pound of Beef
would do.


2. Ensi. Heark^e, Brother Surly, I know a Soldier that has a Parcel of right
French Brandy to sell, which I suppose he has stolen, for he offers it for a
Crusade a Gallon.


Sur. Ay? why I can sell it to the Sutler for five; I Will go and buy it all.


2. Ensi. Hold, hold, the Fellow is not willing to be discovered, and therefore
will trust no Body but myself; Look'e, give me Money for ten Gallons, and send
your Man about half an Hour hence to my Tent for it.


Sur. With all my Heart (giving him a Moeda.) and pray take care you have very
good Measure.


(Exit Surly. 2. Ensi. Ay, ay. I have taken Care to get the Measure of your
empty Head, and now Fortune assist me.


Exit. Enter Captain Wildish. Wild. This damned Agent of ours will ruin the
Regiment; what an Abstract is here? Peace and half Pay, will be a much better
Subsist -- (reads.) To Poundage -- hum. The Royal Hospital -- hum. To 13-1-2 of
127-11-6. For Tents -- hum. To a Charge on the Regiment for Arms sent by the
Ordnance, and by Money paid to the Commissary of Stores for his Civility, in
not changing those Arms for worse -- hum. To sick Men sent to the Hospital --
hum. Paid the Santista for you -- hum. To the Widow's Man -- By a Man allowed
the Judge Advocate -- hum: that is for his Assistance in hanging half a Dozen
more. To a Man allowed the Commissary of the Musters; that is not ill given, it
may save me half a Dozen in the Muster Roll. By a Man for the Colonel --
Another for the Agent in England, and Poundage for myself, to balance this
Account. You owe me twenty two Pounds, four Shillings and Six pence, to be
stopped out of the next two Months Subsist; what a Bead-roll of Articles is here!


Enter Captain Hearty. Heart. What art thou meditating on, dear Wildish?


Wild. Why my Abstract; which is as full of roguish Articles as a Taylor's
Bill, or a Chancery Suit, and yet there is no quarrelling with this Fellow,
without flying in the Face of the Colonel; we may as well ask for a new
Clothing once in three Years, or an Account of the off Reckonings every twelve
Months.


Heart. Pho -- hang the sordid Pelf, good Soldiers, like good Poets, should
always be very poor; we fight for Honor, and they scribble for Fame. Did you
see Major Buck this Way?


Wild. He Is in his Tent.


Heart. Come along with me to him, there is an Affair on Foot will make him
have an Occasion for all his Friends.


Wild. Some Woman in the Case, I suppose.


Heart. No less a Person than Victoria; come along and I Will tell you more.


Exeunt. Enter Willmot, still dressed like a Soldier, two Soldiers following of
him. 1. Sold. Of all the Comrades that ever I had, thou art the dullest Dog,
that is certain; he can neither play at All Fours, Put, nor One and Thirty.


2. Sold. Why, how easily might we have robbed the Portuguese and his Wife just
now, I Am sure his Clothes would have paid for the Trouble of murdering him,
and I think the Woman was well worth ravishing.


1. Sold. I have given ready Money for worse, many a time.


2. Sold. Why, he would not let me steal the Sheep there, though it was one of
the fattest I ever stole in my Life.


1. Sold. Ay, and then he told Corporal Primer I was a Bed with his Wife, and
made the Fellow come and catch me there: If he had not been a good-natured Man,
and an old Comrade of mine, it might have occasioned a Quarrel betwixt us.


2. Sold. Ay, it is a mischievous dogged Cur, a Fellow of few Words and many
Blows.


1. Sold. Ay, ay, he will never make a good Soldier, I gad, he is only fit for an
Officer.


2. Sold. For nothing else in the whole World, I sagers.


Willm. Impertinent Rascals, why do you follow me, you Villains?


1. Sold. Heark'e, Brother, keep good Words in your head, or --


Willm. Or what, you Dog?


1. Sold. Will you stand by me, Roger?


2. Sold. No Faith, not I -- this Morning gave me enough of him, I did but call
him a Son of a Whore, and told him he ly'd, and he laid me on, as if he had
been exercising of me.


1. Sold. What is he so proud, that he will not take jocular, merry Language, when
he is sick, I faith he shall go to the Hospital, and that will be Plague enough.


Enter Major O'Rourk. Maj. O'Rourk. Arrah, by my Shoul, dear Joys, what a
plague maakes you stand running about from your Regiments, cannot you stay in
your Tents, Sirs, and then you may go where you please about your Puisnesses.


Enter Cadwallader. Cadw. Whell, what is her Uproar here?


1. Sold. Why, an please your noble Honor, we was afraid that my Comrade here
had a mind to desert, he came to the Camp but this Morning, and he stroles out
at every Corner of it; I fancy he is either troubled in Mind, or is a Papish in
his Heart.


Maj. O'Rourk. Heark'e, by St. Patrick, now if you run away, whether you are
ever caught or not, by my Shoul I will see you hanged.


Cadw. You are too rash in your Judgments, stant you py tere and here me recite
this Affair; come, you Soultier, speak for your self.


Willm. Sir, I am as true to the Service as any Body, and will never flinch my
Duty when it is commanded me; these two Villains would run me into murdering and
thieving, which my Conscience and Honesty abhors.


Cadw. Cot knows, if you can make Proof of that, you shall pe mate a Corporal,
and these two Rogues shall pe hangt.


Maj. O'Rourk. Oh! by my Shoule, if you have never so little Inside into that
Matter, I would have you swear it heartily, and arrah, they shall not be
discharged from their Tuty till they have hangt themselves half an Hour.


Cadw. Splutter her Nails, will you leave her alone with this Puisness, pray
now.


Maj. O'Rourk. Arrah, by my Shoule, Major, I do only hold my Tongue as a
stander-by, and vat I have beer saying is of no Service to you, for by St.
Patrick I did nean nothing by it, for all I have talked so much to the Purpose.


Cadw Well. it is a thousand Pittys the greatest Part of the Worlt are not dumb,
then I shoult have an Opertuni^^ of doing every Poty Justice: You, Sirs, what
is your Answer?


2. Sold. Why all that we have to say for ourselves, an pl^ase your Honors, we
are Gentlemen Soldiers, and h^ve been so long in the Service, we are weary on it;
our Officers have so good an Opinion of us, that in Case o^ an Attack, we
should be the Men picked to have our Br^^ns knocked out first.


1. S^^d. So as we are Men of Courage, I hope your Honor will take our Words
before his there, that has not yet ^^gnaliz'd himself.


Cadw* Why, look you, I will decite the Matter thus, you are (...) a Parcel of
Rogues, therefore kiss and Frients, and go t^ your Tutys.


Exit Cadwallader. Maj. O'Rourk. By my Shoule I should have decided it just so,
though I had not been after hearing one Word of the Matter.


Enter Coptain Luconnel. Capt. Luc. Serviteur, Major, is de General returned
yet from de Counseill of War.


Maj. O'Rourk. Arrah, I am resolved not to be possitive in any Thing, I know
nothing on it, therefore I cannot swear what the General is a doing on, but I
believe in my Conscience there will be no Battle till we are altogether running
away from one another.


Capt. Luc. Vill you just take a de valk to de Battery I have mait; for though
you are no Ingenier, you may give a de Judgment veder you tink it vill do
execution if de Enemy make a de Attack upon us.


Maj. O'Rourk. By my Shoulvation, Sir, I vid give nothing for a Battery that
vill not be after doing execution veder de Enemy attack us or not, but I will
give you my Opinion of it before I do see it, that I may not be surpised with
the Shite of it.


Capt. Luc. Come to de Place den presentalee.


Maj. O'Rourk. (Takes him by the Shoulder.) A^ah, pride^, dear Joy, I will go
last before you.


Exeunt Major O'Rourk, and Captain Lucomel. 1. Sold. Roger, I believe you and I
had best make off the Premises, for my Comrade there looks with anevil Eye
upon us --


2. Sold. Ay, his Countenance is a little upon the horrid; therefore march.


Exeunt two Sodiers. Willm. I that could never taste the Pleasures o Life, in
all the gaudy Show and Greatness that I one was Master on, must think it, in my
present State, despicable one, and yet I dare not hasten Death, or SelfMurder
is a horrid Sin.


Oh! for a happy Action in the Field,
To Death we there most lawfully may yie.
ACT IV.
SCENE the Camp. Enter Major Buck, Captain Wildish, Hearty, Charlotte, Sergeant
File-off and Servant. Major Buck. (to the Servant.) LOok'e, Sirrah, if you make
any Mistake in the delivery of this Letter, I shall demolish your Carcass.


Serve. Sir, I Will most punctually follow your Orders.


Major Buck. (to Charlotte.) Sir, the General, before he left the Camp, Signed
some Commissions that were vacant, and left it to Brigadier General Conquest to
insert the Names of whom he thought fit; this by his Order entitles you to be
youngest Lieutenant of Granadiers, I have presented you to my Company, and wish
you Joy of your Commission.


Wild. And I, Sir.


Heart. And I, Sir.


Maj. Buck. I fear our great scarcity of Officers will occasion your coming
immediately upon Duty, the Instructions I have already given you, will be some
help to you, but my Sergeant shall attend you till you have got a true
Knowledge of our Discipline; in an Hour's Time, I would have you meet me at the
General's, where, I believe, I shall have occasion for your Service.


Char. With a great deal of Satisfaction I shall obey your Orders. Gentlemen,
your Servant -- Come, Sergeant.


Exeunt Charlotte and Sergeant. Heart. A pretty pert young Fellow.


Wild. By the Civility of Major Buck, I sancy it is a Wench of his, that he has
fob'd upon the General for an Officer.


Heart. He has a very Womanish Face.


Maj. Buck. Upon my Honor, I never saw him before to Day, he is a Relation, I
think, of Mrs. Conquest, he is Mannerly, and industriously willing to know his
Duty, which made me take a Fancy to the Boy.


Wild. Shall we go and view yonder Battery, that our conceited French Engineer
makes such a-do about.


Maj. Buck. With all my Heart, so we keep within view of my Servant.


Heart. You Will soon know whether he succeeds in the delivery of your Letter or
not.


Maj. Buck. If he does the Lady's mine, in spite of that envious Creature
Belinda.


Wild. Good Luck attend you.


Heart. He has the Lady of his Side, which is half the Battle.


Maj. Buck. And myself to Command her, which is the other half.


Exeunt. SCENE Draws to Brig. Genesis Conquest's House. Enter Belinda. Bell. I find
by Victoria's exposing me to Captain Heart^, her consenting to have Biscuit, is
all Hypocrisy, I Am resolved to watch her well, and no Messenger from Major Buck
shall enter here without my Examination; what a miserable Passion Love is, like
Poverty, it forces us to many mean Actions we are asnamed on; I have some
Remorse on Victoria's Account -- and think it shocking that she must be forced
to marry the Man she hates, but what would I not do to gain my Major Buck.


Enter Major Buck's Footman. Foot. (Aside.) This must be the Lady, by the
Description my Master has given me -- Madam, if your Name's Victoria, I was
ordered to deliver this Letter into your own Hands.


Bell. (Aside.) Ha! it is Major Buck -- his Footman -- opening a Letter directed
to Victoria is Barbarous -- but the little God of Love must Answer for every
Action that Passion hurries us to --


she Reads. MADAM,
CAPTAIN Hearty has given me some Hopes of your not liking the Coxcomb your
Parents have provided as a Husband for you; I beg you would give me leave to
put it out of the Power of their making you Miserable; Hearty has informed me
they have agreed you shall Marry in the Dark, and if you give me the least
Hopes -- I Will personate the Santista, and your Father shall give you to me; and
as it will be his own Act and Deed, I doubt not of his being soon reconciled to
us, for all my Estate stall be settled as he thinks fit; If you agree not to
this, I am the miserablest Wretch now living.

I am, Your Admirer, MAJOR BUCK.


Bell. Heark'e, Friend -- tell the Major I like his Plot exceedingly well, and
will punctually observe his Letter -- there is something for your Pains --
(gives him Money.)


Foot. (Aside) -- By this Light a Moeda.


Bell. If you meet any of the Family, deny your Business here and to whom you
belong.


Foot. I was ordered by my Master, Madam, to Foreswear every Thing -- Lying
handsomely was the first Qualification he took a liking to me for.


Exit Footman. Bell. Admirable cunning Witch, I Will spoil their Dark Intrigue,
and fit 'em with Hypocrisy; and since he will Personate this Biscuit, I Will be
his Victoria, and make him mine in spite of all his cunning Plots.


Exit. SCENE Draws to the Camp. Enter Brigadier General Conquest, Mackentosh,
and Cadwallader. Brig. Genesis Con. I knew it must be a Feint of the Enemy; they
had only a mind to change the Situation of their Camp, for the better
convenience of Forage.


Mac. Af the Portuguese General were of my Mind, and the Spaniards wonnot
Attack us, bred we would Attack them.


Cad. Cot knows, if I was within Arms length of a Tozen of my Enemies, here I
wot has them, and there I wot has them, till they looked like a Plew Apron.


Brig. Genesis Con. Your Bravery, Gentlemen, wants some Conduct to govern it, the
Consequence of a Battle, were we beaten, might be the ruin of Portugal, for the
Enemy would March immediately to Lisbon.


Mac. B^t an we laid about us with a gued Will, we wanno leave Lags enough for
them to March thither with, Sir.


Cad. And py my good will many of them shou't go thither without their Heads.


Brig. Genesis Con. If the whole Army had your Gallantry and Resolution, much
might be done, but in a Number of Men there are always some Bashful on^.


Mac. Gued Faith, I Will answer for our own Regiment, not a Man of us will duck
his Head at a Cannon Ball.


Cad. Splutter her Nails I have a Company of pol^ Prittains shall make Toasted
Cheese of 'em, and devour 'em when they have ton.


Brig. Genesis Con. I hope before the Campaign is over, we shall have occasion to
Try their Courage -- have you many Criminals for the Court Martial.


Mac. Only a Fellow that committed a Rape, with Thieves and a Deserter.


Cad. Indeed we want Men, so that it it is for the goot of the Service to Hang
no Poty.


Brig. Genesis Con. They are Summoned to appear at my Quarters, and you are
President.


Mac. Yes, gend Sir, and it is now about the Time of meeting, and they can pack
out Officers that are well enough to make a Board.


Enter Major Buck, Wildish, Hearty, O'Rourk, Luconnel, and Footman. Major Buck.
(to his Fostmon,) thou have performed wonders, and she was very much pleased.


Serve. Prodigiously overjoyed, Sir.


Brig. Genesis Con. (E^^^ing of them.) So, Gentlemen, you may Sleep in whole
Skins, for this Night.


Major Buck (Aside) I am very glad on it, for methinks I Would willingly be married
before I Am knocked on the Head.


Maj. O'Rourk By my Shoule, I did lay a Vager with my nownself, dat dear vid be
no Battle, and fait now I have won.


Col. Mac. Wall, Sir, -- (to ORourk.) than you will be stall at your ^ricism,
waunds, Sir, I naver mat a Man of Sance that came out of your country, but
Major Buck, there.


Capt. Luc. He is de very pretty Gentilman, he love de Ingenneer very well.


Maj. O'Rourk. Arrah, by my Shoul now I have caught you, dear joy, for he was
born at Mac Farty, in the County of Tipperary, as well as my self, he did Suck
of the same Nurse, he did Eat his Potatoes out of the same Backside, and his
Bonny Clabber came from my Moder's Bull: Den how de Devil should he have more
Sense den I, by St. Patrick, he only speaks his vords one way, and I do speak
them an oder vay, but we do mean de same Ting.


Maj. Buck. Exactly, my dear Country man.


Brig. Genesis Con. You are merry Gentlemen truly.


Capt. Luc. Jerny Divil if de Enemy no make a de Attack, vat vil de Battery
signisie.


Col. Mac. Jast as much, Sir, as if they had made an Attack, it would have been
of no use.


Cad. Cot knows, then it wout have pin like him self.


Capt. Luc. You are de Gentilmens Soultiers, dat know hou to mount de Brech,
beat a de Parley, Exchange a de Hostage, make a de Article, and take a de Town,
but you know noting of de Fortifications, I am de Gentilman, dat can make a de
Hornwork, and de Crownwork before de curtain, de single Tenaille, de double
Tenaille, de Fort, de Citadell, de Mine, and de Draw-Brige, begar, clap a de
Ravelin upon de Ravelin, and keep a de Town from a Surrenter, ten Undred
Thousand Year.


Cad. If I hat a Prittain in my Company, shout tell me such a story, I know
what I wot tell him.


Wild. I have seen him throw a Bomb into a Snuff Box.


Cad. Will you justify this to any Shentleman's face, Sir.


Capt. Luc. It Is very true begar.


Heart. Ay and seen him shoot a Cannon Ball point blank between a Spanish
Horse's Legs, and take away nothing but his Tale.


Cad. Are you a Man of Honor, Sir, and tell such a parcel of what shall I call
'em.


Capt Luc. I remember de Ting ver well, it was upon de Wager.


Maj. Buck. But I shall never forget his Blowing up the Citadel without
springing a Mine, or having any Gunpowder to do it with.


Capt. Luc. Oh I had served twenty Citadels so before dat.


Cad. Plow up the Citadel without Gun Powder, dear is my Glove -- any
Shentleman that will pretent to insist upon the truth of this Tings, by St.
Tavit, I will have his Plout.


Brig. Genesis Con. What do you mean by that?


Cadw. I toe mean, Sir, that every Soultier ought to pe a Man of Honor, that
will stant to every Ting he says, or peg Parten for telling of Lies; who takes
up my Glove?


Brig. Genesis Con. Prithee Cadwallader, take up the Glove your self, or I shall
confine you, don't you perceive these Gentlemen are merry.


Col. Mac. Can you not find out, Man, that they talk these storys to laugh at
tha French man, and not affront you, Sir, but you would be a better Man than
you are, if you could govern your Passions better.


Cadw. Why if the General to think me in the wrong, Cot knows, I will eat my
Glove my self, and kiss you all rount, put the Frenchman here.


Capt. Luc. Ha, ha, for all dat, I cannot help tinking my self de greatest
Ingeneer in de hole Vorld, notwithstanding your Vauborn, Cohorn, and them
Gentlemen


Col. Mac. Wounds, Sir, an I cannot help thinking another Thing.


Capt. Luc. Vat is that, my good Colonel?


Col. Mac. That you are the conceitedest sally Fellow, that your Country ever
bred, Sir, and ge^d faith, they have b^ed abundance.


Maj. O'Rourk By my Shoul, and so they have, Sir, arrah, I know several of his
Countrymen, dat have been Born and Bred in Ireland, and dey have been very
silly Fellows, but very great Matematicians, by my Shoul.


Maj. Buck. Well said, my dear Countryman.


Brig. Genesis Con. Will these Animosities and Country Reflections never cease,
for shame Gentlemen, be more united amongst yourselves, if you're so mutinous
when Sober, shure you're very quarrelsome in your Drink.


Col. Mac. Geud faith, Sir, Sober or Drunk I Will always speak Truth, an I would
have Flattered, Sir, I woul't have a Regiment before now.


Cadw. An I whot have pin as unjust as other People, I wot have pin very Rich.


Brig. Genesis Con. Are all these Gentlemen upon the Court Martial.


Col. Mac. Ary Soul on 'm, Sir.


Brig. Genesis Con. The more haste you make to dispatch it in, the more time we
shall have for Mirth; generous Wine is the great preservative of our Healths,
in these sickly Times, and I Will give you a Bottle of the best in Portugal, --
come, Gentlemen, let us March, -- (he goes out, the rest of the Company
following him.)


Maj. O'Rourk. (To Major Buck.) by my Shoul, my dear Major, I was very glad to
see you, before I did hear you was come from England


Maj. Buck. (Mimtcking of him,) Arrah, my dear Countryman, I will be after
kissing of you for your Friendships.


Maj. O'Rourk. If I was to live a Hundred Years, by my Shoul I would tay to
Morrow, that I might serve you.


Exeunt. Enter Sergeant File-off, Charlotte, Clara, Willmot, and other
Soldiers. File off. So, Sir, March 'em this way -- take long strides, turn out
your Toes -- keep the distance of your Pike from 'em, and once in four Steps
look back with a scornful Countenance, -- very well, now halt, face about upon
one Heel, stick your Pike in the Ground, shake your Head, -- and with a
terrible Voice, cry Silence.


Char. Silence.


File-off. Now pull out your Snuff Box, walk pragmatically two or three Times
along the Front, give your half Pike to your Footboy -- and Erect your Cane
with a sort of a Flourish -- now you may if you please Swear a Hundred Oaths at
each Soldier -- though of late that part of the Discipline is left off, for the
more Substantial one of Caning, -- see that every Soldier stands Erect, turns
out his Toes and lets his Firelock hang easy on his Shoulder -- now, Sir, give
your self a few Military Airs.


Char. (Strikes one of the Fellows.) Is that a Posture for a Gentleman Soldier,
Sirrah, (to another.) who cockt your Cap for you. Dog, ha! -- (to another) I Will
teach you to roll your Neckcloth better Villain, (to another) how dare you
appear without powdered Hair, and a clean Shirt, do you think you five Pence a
Day is allowed you only to Eat and Drink with, Rascal -- to Willmot -- what the
Devil for a Fellow have we got here, clap your Piece thus, Sirrah, your Hand
here, and hold up your Head, or I Will knock it off your Shoulders.


Wilm. This is a worse Plague than any I have yet met with.


Aside. File off. Upon my Honor, Sir, you take Notice of every Thing as
exactly, as if you had been a Major this thirty Years.


Char. What Is the meaning of your Lock being so rusty, Sirrah.


Sold. Why I stood Centry in the Rain, I Am put upon double Duty, and had not
Time to clean it.


Char. (Beats him.) do you mutter, Sirrah, how dare you pretend to give a
Reason for any Thing I have a mind to find Fault with.


File-off. No General Officer could have said a more Soldier like Thing, than
that.


Cla. I find my Mistress is resolved to be Revenged upon the whole Sex --


Aside. File-off. Now, Sir, pray try if you can Remember the Exercise.


Char. Silence -- Clap your Right Hand to your Firelocks.


File-off. (To the Soldiers) altogether there.


Char. Porse your Firelocks -- to Wilmot -- Villain, I Will stick you if thou
do not mind the Words of Command.


Wilm. I wish he would, that I might be eased of his Damned Impertinence.


Aside. Char. Rest your Fire locks, Fools, Blockheads, Dogs, do it all together.


File off. That Passion of Yours is very graceful, and is one of the politest
Parts of the Art Military.


Char. (beats Wilmot.) Villain, I Will have thee tied Neck and Heels immediately,
thou awkward Dog.


Wilm. My Soul's above taking a Blow from such a Rascal as thou art (presenting
his Piece.) therefore at they Heart.


The Sergeant knocks the Piece out of his Hand, and they seize him. File-off.
What is the Fellow mad, mutinying against your Officer, and Conspiring his
Death, thou will be Shot, my Dear.


Cla. Oh! Heavens what an Escape was here.


File-off. If you please, Sir, we'll carry him to the Prova's, the Court
Martial sits immediately, he may be Condemned to Day and Shot to morrow.


Wilm. The sooner the better, I Am weary of my Life, and wish to lose it.


1. Sold. Nay I can come in as a witness to prove he is a bloody minded Dog.


2d Sold. And I heard him say when Roger and I were talking politickly of our
coming from England to support the Portuguese against Arbitrary Power and
Popery, and to maintain them in Liberty and Property and so forth, he made
Answer they might go and he Damned.


1. Sold. No, he did not say so bad as that, neither, he only wished 'em all at
the Devil.


Char. Drag him along murdering Rascal, I Will see the End of him.


Wilm. As I would of thee if was I at Liberty.


Cla. Pray hold him fast.


File-off. Here -- you two March before him, -- and you two follow him if he
offers to make his Escape, shoot him Dead on the Spot.


1. Sold. As a Herring Sergeant, I warrant you -- I have an old Ninimosity
against him, and therefore will be sure to lodge my Bullets as near his Heart
as I can.


File-off. (At the Head of 'em) march.


Exeunt all but Charlotte and Clara. Clara. It Is well he is secured, I tremble
every Joint of me; what, dear Madam, could provoke you to run this Hazard.


Char. Revenge, Revenge, my dear Clara, I Am weary of my Life, and since I Have
lost my Willmot, I Will conspire the Death of all his Sex.


Clara. And so die in the Attempt; pray give over these bloody-minded
Resolutions, confess yourself a Woman, and let us take the first Opportunity of
returning to England.


Char. I Am resolved to signalize myself before I leave the Army, and let the
World see how much they are mistaken in my Sex's Cowardice. Come along, Clara
I Will gain a Regiment, and make thee a Captain.


Clara. Nay, Madam, I vow I think your Courage inspires me.


Char. It Is about the Time I promised my Captain to attend him at the
General's, come along, my Girl.


How well, how great 'twill look in after Story,
When they shall read a Woman gained this Glory,
To fight, to vanquish, govern and command,
And like a Hero died with Sword in Hand.
Exeunt. Enter Second Ensign. 2. Ensi. Why, here now have I taken Money for
Brandy, and gone and lost it at the Pinch-Office; nay, Brandy will not setch it
again: I must lug out my Livelihood the Moment Brother Surly comes, that is
certain -- why the Devil should I grudge fighting with him for thirty
Shillings, when every Day I venture my Life for Two and Six pence.


Enter Surly. Sur. Oh! your Servant, Sir; well, where is the Brandy.


2. Ensi. Why, hav'ent -- you -- got it -- I -- I -- and you hant it; my Dog of
a Servant; and so you have not got it.


Sur. Lookee, Sir, I Am well assured neither you nor I have it; you have lost my
Money at the Pinch-Office, bragged of overreaching me, and made me the laughing
Stock of the Company; therefore draw.


2. Ensi. Draw -- ay, with all my Heart; and you positively have not had the
Brandy; why then, I Will make it my Bargain, if I kill you, it shall be in full
of all Accounts: I Will give your Executors and Administrators no farther
Satisfaction -- then Witness my Hand, and so forth.


Sur. I Will give you a Receipt in full for your Jest immediately; come, Sir --
as they are going to fight, enter first Ensign, his Hat full of Money, goes
between 'em.


1. Ensi. What, because the Enemy will not fight with us, we must quarrel amongst
ourselves, must we? Put up your Swords, or I swear by the Pinch-Office I Will
throw a Handful in your Faces, and demolish your Countenances, so that you
shall lose the Use of 'em.


2. Ensi. Ha! Gold (throwing away his Sword) Sir, I beg my Life with all my
Heart, I Am sorry I have offended you: my dear Comrade, I adore thee; put on my
Hat, you will catch cold.


1. Ensi. None of your coaxing -- here, take a Pocket full, and pay your Debts.


2. Ensi. There, Sir, (to Surly.) there is your paultry Sum, I scorn to be in
any Man's Debt, I love to pay every Body his own, and no Body can charge me
with doing any Thing that is unlike a Man of Honor, and an Officer.


Sur. Why, Brother, your Friend and Servant, and so forth.


1. Ensi. Do you know of any Body that has a mind to part with a Regiment; I Will
either buy a Regiment, or go and keep a Bank.


2. Ensi. By all means keep a Bank: If we thrive, there will be Money enough to
buy two Regiments.


Sur. And if you don't.


2. Ensi. Why we shall be just in the same Condition we were in an Hour ago.


Enter Sergeant File-off. 1. Ensi. Oh! Sergeant, did you go to my Man.


File-off. Ay, Sir, and he told me you had bamboard me, and he was sure, I was
bit: For there had not been a Moeda in your green Purse since the last Pay-Day.


1. Ensi. An impudent Dog, to disgrace his Master so; I Will pay him his Wages,
and force him to carry Arms. -- Here, Sergeant, I never let a Man come twice
after me for Money.


File-off. I always said you were an honorable Gentleman -- there is a
Court Martial at the General's Quarters. I was ordered by the President to
desire you would all attend there immediately: I suppose you have been summoned
already.


1. Ensi. Adso, must I spend none of my Money till the Court Martial is over;
that will be a devilish Self-denial; but come along.


2. Ensi. Let Us be serious, we are to be Judges of Life and Death.


Sur. And to hang, draw and quarter with ourselves.


Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE the General's. Enter Mrs. Conquest and Belinda. Mrs. Con. I Have told
the General my Resolution, and he is well pleased they should be married this
Night; he thinks it a very silly Whim of the Girl to have the Ceremony
performed in the Dark; but however I have persuaded him to consent to it.


Bell. Since it is her Fancy, I would by no means have you against it, (aside.)
it is the only Stratagem I have, or can propose, to make Major Buck mine.


Mrs. Con. After the Court Martial, my Husband has invited all the Officers to
sup with him; he will steal out and have the Ceremony performed, and then
surprise them with the Wedding.


Bell. Then I hope Mirth will crown the Evening, (Aside.) and much Company will
favor my Design.


Enter Biscuit dressed like a Fop. Bisk. How do you like me now, my dear Mother
inLaw -- will not this Sight win her Heart, Belinda*


Bell. Your Dress is very elegant.


Bisk. Do but smell how I Am perfumed.


Mrs. Con. Ah! dear Son-in Law, don't come near me, your Perfumes strike me
dead, I Am all over Vapors.


Bisk. Heigh day! good lack! why then my Essence is become a Nuisance, I am
sorry I put myself to the Charge of offending you, and wish with all my Heart I
had come as I used to do.


Bell. Your natural Smell will soon get the better of those stinking Sweets.


Bisk. I vow I hope they will; I protest I thought Perfumes had been a Mark of
Gentility.


Mrs. Con. Well, the General has agreed to all our Proposals, your Mistress has
consented, and therefore you may in a few Hours prepare to be happy. I must
about my Family Affairs.


Exit. Bisk. I don't care how-soon the Ceremony is over, -- for I met that
terrible-looking Fellow, my Rival, just now, and he cast such an inveterate Eye
at me, that my poor Heart has fluttered up and down, like a wild Jack-Daw in a
Wicker Cage, ever since.


Bell. Oh! there is no fear of him, I Will take care he shall not molest you, it is
your Mistress's Pleasure you should marry in the Dark, the Company is to be
surpised with your good Fortune, for you are to steal out one by one -- I Will
tell you when it is your Cue.


Bisk. Adad very pretty, that will be wiping the Major's Nose with one of my
own Handkerchiefs. Thou art a delicate Creature, Mrs. Belinda, and for your
good Offices, I protest when my Wife dies, you shall be my second, if you
please, (Aside.) though I Would as lieve be married to the Devil.


Bell. Well, when that Day comes, I shall claim your Promises, (Aside.) though
Death to me would be much pleasanter to me than such a Coxcomb -- (to him.)
Come, Sir, we'll go to your Mistress, keep close to her, lest she changes her
Mind.


Bisk. Oh! when she sees me thus completely dressed, 'twill be impossible for her
to deny me any thing; methinks I do look very bewitchingly, Belinda.


Bell. I have much a-do, to keep from admiring you.


Bisk. Say thou so, poor Girl; why then I will not look lovely on you, but
squint when I turn toward you.


Bell. Come, keep your fine Words, and look for your Victoria.


Bisk. I protest and so I will.


Exeunt. Enter the Provost, several Criminals, Willmot in Chains, with a Guard,
and Soldiers Wives. Before they come in, they cry make Way there.

Prove. Stand by, have a nice Eye upon that dogget Fellow, he has a very hanging
Look.


1. Trull. Ah! my dear Husband, I Am the unfortunatest Woman in the World, to be
married to eleven, and to have 'em all come to untimely Ends, it is a great
Grief.


2. Trull. No, no, it is no Misfortune to you, it is what you have been used to,
and use is a second Nature; but I that have had thirteen Husbands, and the last
only to come to an ill end, it is a terrible, dismal, horrid Story, so it is.


1. Crim. Prithee hold thy Tongue, I Would rather die than be sent sick to the
Hospital; as for you, Moll, an I Am condemned, I bequeath you to my Comrade.


2. Trull. Ah, good now, don't, dear Salt Petre, any Body but he my good
Husband.


1. Crim. Hold your Tongue, Fool, it is my last Will and Testament, and I will
have it obeyed, or I will not die quietly.


2. Trull. Cries.


2. Crim Well, Alice, my last dying Speech is even marry whom you will, all my
Comfort is, when I Am once hanged, I cannot be married to you again.


1. Trull. Ah, ah, I knew you were nigh your end, by your talking so light
headedly about the Wise of your Bosom.


1. Crim. Well, hanging to me is a strange thing, I Am like a Fish out of Water
-- and don't know whether I should repent of my Sins before I Am condemned, or
after.


2. Crim. Ah, the sooner you begin the better, for you have a woundy many to
answer for; now thank my Stars, my Conscience is not much troubled, I have only
the common Army Sins, of whoring, drinking, thieving, murder, lie at my Door.


Willm. Oh! horrid -- such wicked Wretches I never met with; the Misery of
suffering with 'em, is more than the Pains of Death can be -- well, Fellow,
what do we stand here for; why don't you lead on?


Prove. I loiter the Time away, that you may prepare yourself for dying, for you
will be hanged, Friend, very suddenly.


Willm. Make haste, and lead me to it; I wish for it, that I may be rid of thee,
Rascal.


Prove. Lookee, an you don't give good Words, you shall not be hanged this Week,
nay, may be never.


1. Crim. The Devil's in the Fellow I think, for provoking of him; would I was
over Head and Ears in Death, and then I should be out of my Pain.


2. Trull. I Am sure I shall have no Comfort of my Life till it is over with you,
either one way or other.


Prove. Come -- march on -- (they go out in the Order they came in, and the
Women cry)


SCENE draws to the Generals. A Table and Chairs for the Court Martial. Enter
Judge Advocate, and his Clerk. Judge. Come, take out the Copy of all the
Courts-Martial, and lay the Articles of War, and the Book to swear Witnesses
with, in their proper order; we have but little Business Today, no intricate
perplexing Matters, nothing but down right Sentence of Death; it will be soon
over.


Clerk. Ah, there is a great deal of Pleasure in our Trade, where a Man's Life
depends upon one single Article; a Sentence of Death is given in a Moment, but
when they come to fending and proving, it occasions a great deal of Writing.


Enter Colonel Mackentosh, Major O'Rourki, Major Buck, Cadwallader, Wildish,
Hearty, Captain LaCunette, Surly, Rag, Standard, and three other Officers, to
make up the Court Martial. Col. Mac. Come, bonny Lads -- tak your Sessions
according to'll your Qualities; our Officers are so sackly, that we were forced
to summons aw you Subalterns; come, seat your sals. Wall, Mr. Judge, lat us
begin as soon as you please.


Judge. Gentlemen, you are by Virtue of a Warrant, signed by the General, to
enquire into all Complaints and Misdemeanors that shall come before you; and
upon Witness, or Confession of the Party, you are to proceed to give judgment,
according to the Articles of War. You have already been sworn, Gentlemen, and
may proceed


Col. Mac. Have you a List of the Prisoners, and their Crimes.


Clerk. It lies before your Honor.


Cadw. Here, give it me, I will look it over.


Col. Mac. (Snatches it from him.) waunds, that is when I have done with it, Sir.


Cadw. Coot now, what a Passion hur is in; if we were not upon Pussiness, hur
cout be in as great a Passion as herself, Cot knows.


Col. Mac. Well, my Ladds, an you thank fat we'll gang upon the Affairs.


Aito. As soon as you please.


Judge. Call in John Tinder-Box, and the Witnesses against him.


Enter one Criminal, and two Witnesses. Clerk. (To the Witnesses.) Come here,
you. (He makes as if he swears 'em.)


Judge. Friend -- what have you to say against the Prisoner? -- stand forward.


1. Wit. Exce'entissimos Esta Ladrono, Diabolo Soldada vincoe, me a causaitomar
um porca and todos: neos couses -- per mangero -- se senhor procerto.


Maj. O'Rourk. By my Shoule, dear Joy, I do not think he is a good Vitness;
for, as de Fellow must be tried by the Laws of his own Country, so it ought to
be upon de Allegatory of de Vitnesses of his own Country too.


Maj. Buck. Well said, Countryman.


Cadw. Look here now, this is a nice Point, and a very knotty Part of the Law.


Col. Mac. Geud Sir, and you understand Portugueze as wile as oy, you would find
the Prisoner that is before you has been a Rogue, that has stole aw the
Fellow's Vittals; I think we should agree to hang him; what Desance have you to
make for your sal, Sir?


Crim. Why, and please your Judge-ship, none at all, but that he is a Papish.


Cadw. Well, that is a pretty Court Reason too.


Maj. Buck. And your Hatred to his Religion made you steal his Provisions.


Crimi. I plundered him out of pure Zeal, noble Major; besides, I must have
starved if I had not don't; so I plead the General Statute, which is, Necessity
has no Law.


Capt. Wild. Why, are you not paid your Subsist?


Crim. Why, not enough to subsist on: One Year indeed I have a new Coat; next
Year I make a Waistcoat on it; the third Year a Pair of Breeches; and after
that, it makes a Cap; the Commissary of the Stores makes my Captain pay Four
and Sixpence for an Irish Pair of Shoes, worth Half a Crown; and he stops but
Five Shillings oat of my Subsist for 'em.


Capt. Hearty. The Fellow looks as if he would tell us our own.


Crim. I have heard of Contingencies, and People's doing Justice; but I never
met with any Thing but Stoppages and Hardships.


Judge. Friend, the Court has been so favorable, as to give you the Liberty of
justifying yourself, instead of which you are accusing other Folks.


Crim. No, Sir; I Am only showing you, that their stealing from me, is the main
Cause of my stealing from others.


Capt. La Cu. He is a damned Rogue; he ought to be hanged for speaking against
all de Perquisites of de Army.


Cadw. Cot knows you are a Man of pretty Conscience, to hang a Gentleman
Soultier for speaking Truth.


Judge. (To the other Witness.) Are you a Witness, Friend?


2. Witn. I Am the Interpreter to this Portugueze, and will swear any Thing he
says.


Col. Mac. You may all withdraw, Sir; charge the Provost with his Prisoner
there.


Crim (to the Clerk.) Sir, here is half a Crusade for you, only to tell me how
you think it will go with me.


Clerk. Why, Friend, you know I Am Sworn to Secresy, but provided you will never
declare it to any Body, I will tell you.


Crim. Not I, upon my Soul, Sir.


Clerk. Then you will certainly be hanged, as I Am now alive.


Crim. Sir, I thank you, it shall go no further for me.


( Exeunt Criminal and Witnesses.) Judge. Call in Straitup, and the Witnesses
against him.


Wild. That Is your sine Gentleman I think, Major Buck.


Maj. Buck. Yes truly a very sine Fellow he would have Murdered his Officer.


Enter Willmot, Charlotte, and File-off. Judge. Stand there, Sir, what have you
to say against the Prisoner?


Char. As I was upon my Duty, exercising some Soldiers, this Fellow behaved
himself very awkwardly, and with an air of stubbornness, for which I very
gently corrected him; he immediately presented his Piece at me, and if it had
not been for the Sergeant here, had shot me through the Head.


File-off. Yes had I not prevented him, he had lodged a brace of Bullets in my
Officer's Skull.


Mac. Wounds, Sir, this was an insolency that an you had ran him through the
Body, Sir, or cut him to pieces, ye had been justified, but we'll take care to
see him hanged, as an Example to aw bloody Rogues.


Cad. Cot knows I am for roasting him alive, hat you the Desle pefore your
Eyes, you Villain you


O'Rourk. By my shoul he sholt be twenty Years hanging upon a Gibbet, and then
he will die a lingering Death.


La Cu. Jerney blew, serve him like de Protestant in France.


Willm. Gentlemen, I Am sensible this Court has great Power, and therefore are
Judges of Life and Death; I have long been weary of my Life, and wished to have
lost it nobly in the Field; I was never used to Blows, and therefore the
insolence of this young Fellow provoked the Passion, which led me into that
rash Action; and since your Sentence is passed on me, I Will die contented, --
but know I Am a Gentleman of a plentiful Estate, and good Family, in Cornwall; I
was imposed on by an ungrateful Woman, whom I long had loved, her usage forced
me from my native Country, and was the cause of this my shameful Sentence! O
cruel barbarous Charlotte!


Char. Oh Heavens! what do I here:


she swoons in the Serjeant's Arms. Major Buck. (Rises.) What ails the young
Fellow?


Char. (Recovers.) Oh! Willmot, Willmot, wretched, most wretched Charlotte!


Will. Ha, did she say Charlotte, Fool that I was, not to find her out; it is
she, it is she, the perjured, charming, false deluding, Charlotte.


Major Buck. It Is indeed a Woman, and a very soft bewitching one.


Mac. Waunds an Women begin to turn Officers, it is Time for Men to gang Hame
about their affairs.


Judge. The Clock has struck One, so we must adjourn the Court till tomorrow
at Ten.


Maj. O'Rourk. By my Shoul, it is high Time to adjourn a Court, ven so intricate
an Affair as this comes upon us.


Cad. Cot knows, it is a point in Law, put if I was alone py my shelf, I could
decite it to poth theirs Satisfactions.


La Cu. It Is de very knotty point, a begar ve don't know veder he is to be
married or hanged.


Will. Her sits are very strong, for Heaven's sake, call the Ladies and acquaint
the General with this accident, to him I Am known.


Wild. That shall be my Arrant.


Major Buck. if you have an Opportunity, acquaint Victoria with our design.


Aside. Wild. You may assure yourself I will.


Exit Wildish. Char. (Recovers.) Oh! where is my Willmot?


Will. Here, perfidious Charmer!


Char. Have I run all the Hazards in the World to find thee out, repented of my
ill usage to thee, and thus far followed you to take away your Life, it is a
grief I never can survive.


Enter Clara. Cla. -- Oh! Heavens what ails my dear Lady.


Char. Oh! Clara, see there my Wilmot, no sooner found than lost, and it is by
my prosecution he must suffer Death.


Cla. Say not so, my dear Lady.


Mac. Waunds, Madam, an that be your Grief; we shall never hang a Man for a
Woman, an you had been a real Officer, geud faith aw his Estate should not have
bought his Life.


Char. And is he not to suffer Death?


Mac. An you dono kall him with kindness, he may live till he is weary of you.


Maj. O'Rourk. By my Shoul, that is all our opinions.


Cad. Nay, and it is mine too.


Enter Brigadier General Conquest, Mrs. Conquest, Belinda, and afterward
Wildish, and Victoria.

Wild. (to Victoria.) nothing can redeem you but that.


Mrs. Con. Willmot, my dear Friend, it is with wonder and surprise, I Have heard
your Story.


Wilm. See there, Sir, is your Niece Charlotte.


Women. Charlotte!


Mrs. Con. I Am all amazement, come to my Arms, my dearest Child.


Vict. Cousin, this is romantic truly.


Brig. Genesis Con. Have you served me so, Mad-cap; you are under my Command now,
and I Will take care to give you a Post for Life; there, Willmot, lift her under
you, and if she offers to desert, the Court Martial she brought you too, is
still in being.

Come, Gentlemen, this is a joyful Day, you have been Judging on Life and
Death; you now shall at the same Table, try the Cause over a Bottle: Some Wine
here, pray use no Ceremony, you all are welcome.


Bell. Observe, Madam, how he eyes her (to Mrs. Conquest.) if you hasten not the
Match, he certainly will find means to break it off, and then she is miserable.


Mrs. Con. The Chaplain is in the Parlour waiting for 'em, it shall be done
immediately.


Enter Biscuit. Bis. A Woman my Friend, Mr. Hickumbuz, a Woman at last, and my
Cousin that is to be; adad, if, I had known that as we Traveled, I should have
made use of the Opportunity of lying in the same Room with her.


Mrs. Con. (to her Husband.) My dear, I have particular Reasons, for hastening
the Marriage, the Chaplain waits for you in the Alcove, and the Room is
darkened.


Brig. Genesis Con. It shall be done forthwith -- (to them.) come, Gentlemen,
pray, drink about, Colonel Mackintosh, my Service to you, this Couple's health.
(pointing to Wilmot and Charlotte.) -- I must beg your Pardons, for a Moment,
I Will wait on you again, before the Bottle goes round, and we will be very merry
( to Biscuit unobserved.) do you follow me to the Alcove, the Chaplain waits for
you.


(Exit Brig. Genesis Conquest. Bisk. He shall not wait long for me, I warrant you.


Vict. So my Father's gone, they need not have bid me counterfeit a Swoon;
Heaven knows, I soon shall do it naturally.


Major Buck. The General's gone, with a cue for me.


Exit. Victoria swoons away in her Mother's Arms. Mrs. Con. Ha, what ails the
Child!


Bell. Her swooning away was a lucky accident, and Major Buck, now must
certainly be mine.


Exit. Bisk. So, so, she comes to herself, (speaks to her.) I Will go to Father,
you will follow, deary.


Vict. Immediately.


Bisk. Ah! Biscuit, thou art a happy Dog.


Exit. Mrs Con. So how is it, my dear?


Char. Her Pulse are very quick.


Vict. Oh! I must have a little Air, or I shall faint again.


Mrs. Con. Your Father waits for you.


Vict. The open Air, Madam, or I shall die.


Mrs. Conquest and Charlotte lead her out. Mac. The Women are all bewitched
with swooning away, come, Mr. Willmot, will you drink a Bottle, at the same
Table you had like to be condemned at?


Will. There is a strange turn in my affairs, truly.


Cad. Cot knows, the Tuty of a Husbant, is as grevious, as that of a Granadier,
there is a goot deal of slavery in poth Services.


O'Rourk. By my Shoul, Mr. Willmot, I can by my own knowledge, foretell, that
your Life hither too, has been a very odd sort of a one.


Luc. Begar, de Shentilman come into the Army, to avoid his Mastress -- it is
very like a my case, for I come here to avoid my Wife begar, and she is de
Officer when ever she pleasses.


Wild. Come, Hearty, here is success to Maj. Buck.


Heart. We shall either be very merry, or blown up, my Heart aches for him.


O'Rourk. By my Shoul, he is my Townsman, and my Heart does ache for him
always, vedere he is in Danger or not.


La Cu. He is de very pretty Gentleman, he has de very good understanding, and
he seemed very much pleased vid my Battery, he has a pretty smattering in the
Mattematicks, allons Bouvont Chante he Sings.


Cad. Cot pless hur, what a silly Language is here, come hur will Sing hur a
Welsh Song, set to the Music of Wales. be Sings.


O'Rourk. By my Shoul, dear Joy, where is de English of that now.


Cad. Cot knows, it is an Original, and you have no English that can express it.


Mac. Well, of aw your Songs, there is neen like the Bag Pipe Tweedales of Sawny
and Jockey.


Enter Mrs. Conquest, Victoria, and Charlotte.


Mrs. Con. So, my Dear, I Am glad to see you recovered, your Father, and Mr.
Biscuit wait impatiently for you in the Alcove, the Rooms are darkened on
purpose as you desired.


Vict. What will be the end of this Day's Work, and what has Major Buck done,
to save me from this Coxcomb ha --


Enter Major Buck, be smiles on her, and sleals to bis Place at the Table. He
seems pleased, and comes from the Parlour; then sure I may venture to advance,
Madam, (to her Mother.) I hope you will attend me to my Father.

Mrs. Con. Most willingly, my Dear.


Vict. And my Dear Cousin too. they go toward the Stage Door. Brig. Genesis
Conquest speaks without.


Brig. Genesis Con. You would have the Frolic of being married in the Dark, but
I Will lead you to the light, and we will be very merry.


Mrs. Con. What says my Husband?


He enters with Biscuit in one Hand, and Belinda in the other. Brig. Genesis Con.
Hell and Furies, what a mistake is this?


Bell. Torment and Confusion, am I outwitted, Condemned to this Coxcomb.


Bis. Ah, Gemini, I have brought my Hogs to a Fair Market, Cozened by such a
-- so so Creature, when my Head run of nothing but the beautiful Victoria, I Will
go and hang myself, and so be dvorc'd.


Exit Bisk. Bell. See how the Monster Triumphs in his Looks, I Will go where I may
never see him more.


Exit. Brig. Genesis Con. Who can unfold this trickish Riddle?


Mrs. Con. I fear Victoria is deeply concerned in this Plot, I know she hated
Biscuit mortally.


Brig. Genesis Con. Did she so, why then I Am glad she missed him.


Major Buck. Ha! there is some Hope for me, so I must Beg your Pardon, when I
tell you I was the cause of this Mistake, I doated on your Daughter, but by the
ill-natured Contrivances of Belinda, found it was impossible to make my
Addresses known; hearing your Daughter desired to be married in the Dark, I
directed a Letter for her, but took care it should fall into Belinda's Hands,
wherein I offered to personate the Santista, she believing I would drop into
the Snare I laid for her, which was the only means I ever could Hope to save
Victoria from the Man she hates.


Brig. Genesis Con. I did indeed design Biscuit for my Daughter's Husband, but
since you have ordered it otherwise, Sir, I shall be proud of your Alliance I
knew your Father well, and your behavior in the Army has not lessened my
Esteem of your Family, here, Victoria, since he has taken this Pains about you,
I think he deserves you.


Major Buck. I receive her with all the Joy Imaginable.


Vict. Very much with my Inclinations I am sure.


Mrs. Con. Nay, since it is so, I wish you happy.


Mac. May ye be as happy, as it is possible for married Folks to be.


Enter Messenger. Mess. Sir, I was sent Express from the Generals at Estermas
with this Packet.


Brig. Genesis Con. (Reads.) Ha! -- then the show is over, and there is no more
Work for us. Gentlemen here is an Order to proclaim a Gessation of Arms for four
Months, between Britain, France, and Spain.


Mac. Wounds, Sir, then I Will gang to Edinburgh, and live cheap upon half pay.


O'Rourk. By my Shoule, I will go into the County of Tipperary, where I can
live cheaper than you, for fait now I can live for nothing.


Cad. I will go to my Seat in Wales, and keep my hant in with Shooting of Hares
and Rabbits, and WildFowls, I will fatten myself up with Welsh Ale, and pray
for another War.


La Cu. Vat must the poor French Gentilman do?


Mac. You must take Lodgings in Scho, Sir, make Perriwigs, and shave for two
Pence.


Heart. Thank our Stars, Wildish, ours is an old Regiment, and we shall be
turned adrist at last.


Sur. We poor Subs have but a dismal prospect.


Char. Well, Brother Lieutenant, 'ts better than fighting of Duels though.


Cad. Truly, fair Laty, it was a goot Jest, that I mait up the matter, or he
woot have pin too strong for you.


1 Ensign. Come, Brother, let us steal off, for I am very uneasy with all this
money in my Pocket.


Brig. Genesis Con. Come, Gentlemen, after so long a War, it is high Time that we
should all retire, that our Nation may Recruit the Blood and Treasure they have
lost.


The Turns and Tosses that we meet abroad,
In our Retirement Pleasure will afford:
Britons have gained in War a glovious Name,
And Soldiers will be eccbo'd out by Fame.
But since the Nation's Welfare to increase,
All bostile Jars and warlike Acts must cease,
The Scns of Mars shall be revered in Peace.
FINIS.
ERRATUM. For Captain Luconnel, read every where Captain La Cunette.


