AN EPISTLE To the AUTHOR of The FOUR FARTHING CANDLES. BY The AUTHOR of The
ROSCIAD of C-v-nt-G-rd-n.

-- -- Diram qui contudit hydram,
Notaque fatali portenta labor subegit,
Comperit invidiam supremo fine domari.
HOR. LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by J. GRETTON, in Old
Bond-Street; and W. NICOLL, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1762.

AN EPISTLE To the AUTHOR of The FOUR FARTHING CANDLES.
SINCE, though unknown to mine, or me,
You with my ROSCIAD make so free,
And vent your pointless, senseless spite,
Before your Muse has learned to write:
I, in return, my gentle friend,
Will scan your work from end to end;
And show the critic town at once,
(Whatever I am) that you're a dunce.
FIRST, to defend a hackney'd thought,
Which forty different Bards have taught,
Without or pity, or remorse,
You drag poor HORACE in by force,
Whose verse thy ears could never reach,
But through the stupid lines of CREECH;
And yet you bring one sentence pat in,
To show you have got a little Latin,
And tell us, with your usual wit,
(Poeta nascitur, non fit.)
See page 7, of The Four Farthing Candles.
THY mean abuse is next employed
On SHIRLEY, COLMAN, CHURCHILL, LLOYD.
Here take some good advice, dull friend,
Abuse not, till you can amend.
And why, because my Muse dared raise
Her feeble notes to CHURCHILL's praise,
Must thy prodigious wisdom find;
See page 21, of the same.
A refuge only was designed?
Whilst you to S -- T meanly sneak,
And pilf'ring M -- 's favor seek:
It Is true, I said that CHURCHILL's rhimes
Soared far beyond these leaden times;
But that nor rose from partial views,
Nor terror of the two Reviews:
To me the bounteous hand of heaven,
A fairer, happier lot has given;
Should those two giants both unite
Their Critical, and Monthly spite;
Should all the nation with them join,
And, right or wrong, damn every line,
By lavish fortune frankly graced,
I scorn their rage, and spurn their taste;
Yet if a moment, to beguile,
Should SHIRLEY on my numbers smile;
Should tuneful LLOYD, with wit endowed,
Superior to the common crowd;
Or COLMAN happily condescend
One single sentence to commend;
Should HE, whose manly, nervous song,
With strength and sweetness rolls along;
Whose every verse with candor flows,
Whose every thought with spirit glows;
With pleasure find one faultless strain,
I might, indeed, be something vain.
THOU next have found, with searching eyes,
(Lord! some folks, sure, are mighty wise!)
That times are altered since the days,
"When POPE attun'd his deathless Lays See page 16, of The Four Farthing
Candles.
;"
That stupid, dull, unmeaning head,
No syllable of his ever read;
For expletives their aid do join,
To lengthen out each feeble line:
Nay, what I think is still more odd,
You write fal-len, and pe-ri-od:
That man that would our ears delight,
Must always fallen, and period write.
In time, I shall expect to see,
You Will put for HENRY HE-NE-RY.
IF, as thou say, my sickly song See page 21, of The Four Farthing Candles.

In lazy numbers crawl, along,
Sure thou against it should not bawl,
Whose song no numbers has at all;
Thy muse, a foul, misshapen elf,
Is rude, and hideous, as thyself:
Thy mortal frame's to me unknown;
I Am speaking of thy mind alone;
Where keen reproaches all resort,
Where biting scandal holds her court;
From whence she throws her poisonous dart
At every unprovoking heart.
See page 22, of The Four Farthing Candles.
WHEN common-sense again shall smile
On BRITAIN's long deserted isle,
Thou dullness shall no longer handle,
Thy favorite theme, a Farthing Candle;
Thy similies no longer bring,
Which stink, and vainly strive to sting:
But, leaving all poetic strains
To those whom Heaven has blessed with brains,
Thou shall thy old employment choose,
Of sweeping streets, or cleaning shoes.
FINIS.

