ESSAY ON THE NATURE and CURE OF THE KING's EVIL; DEDUCED FROM OBSERVATIONS and
PRACTICE.

[Price One Shilling.]

AN ESSAY ON THE NATURE and CURE OF THE KING's EVIL; DEDUCED FROM OBSERVATIONS
and PRACTICE.

The SECOND EDITION: With an ADDITION of REMARKABLE CASES of poor Sufferers,
cured by the Author.

Seriously recommended to the Perusal of all unhappy Persons and Families
laboring under any Scrophulous Complaints, which have hitherto eluded all
Attempts to remove them.

Facts are stubborn Things. LONDON: Printed for JAMES BUCKLAND, at the Buck, in
Paternoster Row; and Sold by T. TOFT, in Chelmsford. M.DCC.LXIII.

INTRODUCTION TO THIS SECOND EDITION.
IT is not from any Vanity of appearing in Print, especially a second time,
after such ungenerous Usage as I have met with from Persons calling themselves
Reviewers, but to make myself useful in my Generation to unhappy Sufferers, as
far as I am able. I refuse not the poorest Person my Assistance (as well as the
Rich) if they come to my House. The Pleasure I feel by relieving the Afflicted,
overbalances all the Cavillings, Sneers, and ill-natured Reflections of
Reviewers, or any other Writers for Bread, who speak Evil of the Things that
they understand not. Let them answer me by solid Arguments, confirmed by as
many real Cures as I have done; then I shall rejoice to hear so many more
miserable Objects have been relieved from their Disorders by my stirring up the
Attention or Ambition of others to Practice with more Success.

As the King's Evil is a Disease few of the better Sort care to own, I must beg
to be excused from naming such Persons, but only some few of their Cases. As to
the lower Sort, I shall give their Cases in the plainest Manner I can, that the
People of common Understanding, without any Physical Knowledge, may in a great
Measure judge whether their Complaints are Scrophulous or not. I have also
inserted the Names, and Places of Abode, of such Persons, that by discoursing
with the Parties themselves, their Friends or Neighbors, they may be satisfied
of the Truth of the Matters of Fact, and receive farther Information as to
their own Complaints. And as I make no Profit by my Practice, it is evident, I
need no Arts to influence People to declare Untruths in my Favor. Greater
Numbers of Cures I might have added, but hope these will be sufficient, to
satisfy any unprejudiced Person, that the King's Evil, or other Scrophulous
Disorders, may be relieved much oftener, and with more Ease and Safety, as well
as with less Charge to the Patients, than the Generality of Practitioners are
willing to allow, or the unhappy Sufferers have hitherto experienced.

THE PREFACE.
A LADY of my Family having many Years made it her Pleasure, to endeavor the
Relief of all such poor Persons as were afflicted with scrophulous Disorders,
or the King's Evil, and were recommended to her by Surgeons, or other
Practitioners; and having been very successful in curing many such Cases, as
they had given up and recommended to her, made me very inquisite with her after
her Method of Practice. She very readily informed me of the Nature and Way of
applying her Remedies, but would never (during her Life) impart to me the Names
of the Things she made use of, or the Method of Preparation, but always told me
I should find a full Account amongst her Papers after her Death, which I did
(being her sole Executor.) With other Things, I found the following Letter to
her, from an eminent Surgeon.

MADAM,
I ONCE more solicit your heavenly Benediction, and the salutary Effects of
your renowned Secret, which the World is from God and yourself, greatly obliged
for, in Behalf of this poor unhappy Lad ( B. P. by Name) who is attended with
the King's Evil in his Foot, and has been so for eleven Months; who I entirely
submit to your Care (Providence being your peculiar Guide) in the mean while, I
remain in Conformity to Facts,

Your sincere Convert, And a Public Well-wisher, etc.


THIS Letter, among many others, from Surgeons and Apothecaries, together with
the great Cures which she daily did, made me very seriously reflect, how useful
a Person she had been to all the human Species, which had applied to her in
Time, being chiefly of the lowest Class of Mankind, whose Health and Limbs were
their only Livelihood: These were often relieved with her Purse, and always
with her Medicines, and Advice Gratis; as also all others, who applied to her
for Relief in this deplorable Malady. These Considerations, and the great
Number of unhappy Poor, (unable to pay a Surgeon or Apothecary) daily
presenting themselves to me; and I knowing the Safety of the Method, and
Medicines used in this Disorder, was imboldened to endeavor the Relief of my
Fellow Creatures, by following the Lady's Rules of doing good, for Charity
Sake; which I have followed some Years, with such Success (for which I thank
God) as surprises even my own self. Such Objects of Compassion having been
relieved, as pass all Belief of any, but such as have been Eyewitnesses of the
Facts, from first to last. Since I have been in Possession of the deceased
Lady's Notes and Memorandums, I have read over many Authors who have treated of
this Disorder. Dr. Gibbs on this Subject, writes, "That if we take a View of
what the most eminent Authors have said of this Disease, we shall find their
Notions of it to be of little Use, and very few Accounts of their Success in
curing Disorders of this Nature." And truly I am much of the same Opinion. But
this great Good have I learnt by reading their Works, and from thence observing
the Operations of my own Prescriptions, that I have much improved both the
Method and Medicines I at first used. I prescribe no painful Applications,
cutting or cauterizing, blistering, or nauseous Loads of Physic, but such
Things only, as Children of half a Year old, to the Aged of Seventy, may have
without the least Hurt or Pain, and with great Safety be administered to them.
And I can justly challenge any Person that has been under my Care, and followed
my very easy Directions only, to allege the contrary. So that I can, with great
Truth assert, That I have done some Good, and no Harm. The Cure of this
Distemper by the Lady's Method, is no new Thing, but has been in some Measure
used one hundred and fifty Years ago, as I have met with in an old Author; and
having seen such wonderful Effects from it, admire what can be the Reason of
its being forgot, shall I say, or not used by the Gentlemen of the Faculty: But
it is not according to their Method of Practice. That I am no Physician,
Surgeon, or Apothecary, the Reader will easily see, by my not using hard Words,
or technical Terms of Art, to puzzle and confound him; and my Patients all know
I am none of the Faculty, by refusing Fees. All that come to me, are welcome to
my Advice and Assistance Gratis. What Necessaries are wanted, they may buy of
whom, and where they please. The inward Pleasure I enjoy on seeing any poor
Sufferers relieved by my Means, makes me very ample Satisfaction for all the
Pains I can take for their Recovery.

August 28, 1760. JOHN MORLEY.

AN ESSAY, etc.
THE Scrophula, or what is vulgarly called the King's Evil, I shall now
consider. The Word Scrophula (says a learned Writer) signifies a praeternatural
Tumor or Humor, produced by a particular Acidity of the Serum of the Blood,
either in Gland, Muscle, or Membrane, which it both coagulates and indurates,
or in the Marrow, which it always dissolves, and also putrifies the Bone. Let
us consider a little this Definition: It says, it is a praeternatural Tumor,
or Humor; who doubts the Truth of the King's Evil, Tumors and Ulcers being
contrary to the Intention and Design of Nature, and consequently are
praeternatural? Next it says, it is produced (that is, a Tumor or Humor) by a
particular Acidity of the Serum of the Blood. This seems indeed to be the
general Opinion of most Authors I have met with on this Subject, who usually
follow each other, like Pack-Horses in the same Track: But that other Causes
may have the same Effects, I shall by and by endeavor to demonstrate. The
Nature of Acidity, according to this Definition, both coagulates and indurates.
Coagulation is performed on Milk by Acids, that is, turning the Milk into a
Curd, it supposes the Acidity, or Sourness of the Serum of the Blood does the
same, that is, curdles in the fine Vessels it enters into. But because Vinegar,
Lemon Juice, etc. are acid on the Tongue, must they be so in the Blood? What
mad Work must Vinegar, or other Acids produce, mixed with it, let every one
judge? Pray think what Quantities of Vinegar Newmarket Jockeys drink for a
Month or two together, to reduce themselves to a proper Weight for Riding
Races, and then tell me of any Instance of the Scrophula being produced by that
Regimen. Besides, if this was the Case, why should not the Serum be as soon
coagulated or curdled in the large Vessels as in the finer? which we see it is
not, though the Serum of the Blood contains a proportional Quantity of this
particular Acidity in the large Vessels, as well as in the small: And I am apt
to think, that the larger the Quantity of Liquor, the sooner it will turn sour,
and more sharp the Acidity; which I take to be the Reason, why the Vinegar
Makers use such large Casks, even to the holding a hundred Barrels of Liquor in
one Body.

I HAVE observed my Patients that have had Sores or Ulcers in their Mouths or
Throats, have never complained of, or perceived any Sourness or Acidity of
Taste, from the purulent Matter they have spit out, though I have been very
inquisitive in that Particular, but they have always declared they had a very
salt Taste from the Matter discharged by Spittle.

THAT there is in the Spirit of human Blood a great Hostility (according to Mr.
Boil) or an Antipathy in reference to Acids, has been plainly intimated, and
likewise to many Sorts of Acid Spirits, as of Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Nitre,
Spirit and Oil of Vitriol, etc. and not only against factitious Acids, but
natural ones too, which he proves by many Experiments, as the Curious may see
in his Natural History of human Blood, where he also says, as far as he has
been able to observe, the Spirit of human Blood is manifestly preferable to
that Classis, that many call Volatile Alcalies, because it makes such great
Conflicts with diverse Acid Spirits, as Spirit of Salt, Aqua Fortis, etc. and it
will immediately turn Syrup of Violets from blue to green, etc. performing such
other Things, that may be expected from Volatile Alcalies as such. And he seems
strongly to intimate, that there are very few (if any Acid Particles at all) in
the Blood, or even in the digestive Ferment of the Stomach. But that great
Quantities of Volatile alcalious Salts are contained in the Spirit of human
Blood, he proves by many undeniable Experiments, which if true, must naturally
destroy all Acidity in the Blood itself; so that consequently, it cannot be a
particular, or any Acidity at all in the Blood, that produces the Scrophula.

THOUGH Spirit of Salt and Oil of Vitriol (which are strong Acids) will produce
a Curd-like Substance dropped into the Serum of the Blood, so will Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium (which is a strong alcalizate Salt) and also highly
rectified Spirit of Wine, and many other alcalious Substances, do the like.

FROM what has been said, it appears, that there can be no Acidity at all in
the Blood: But much Alcaline Salt there is very capable of producing all the
Symptoms and scrophulous Complaints attending this Disorder.

THE Induration spoken of in the same Definition, I take to be only the
Curdlike Matter, hardened by Length of Time, and thrust or squeezed closer
together by the Addition of more of the same Matter. That the Marrow in the
Bones is dissolved, I have had no Opportunity to observe, by not seeing any
Amputation performed in this Disorder. That the Bones often scale, and throw
off Honeycomb-like Exfoliations, or Pieces, and are also much corroded, I have
frequently met with. But why will not a sharp corosive Salt cause this
Corrosion on human Bones, as well as common Sea Salt on the softer Bones and
Gristle-like Substances of raw Beef, when long salted in the Pickling-Tub? I
make no doubt but it will.

THE Reason why this Disease is called the King's Evil, as I apprehend, is
because it has been often cured by the Royal Touch of our Kings in this Island,
from Edward the Confessor's Time (and how long before I have seen no Account)
down to the late Queen Anne's Reign. This has been the Subject of much debate
amongst the Learned, because great Cures have been sometimes effected that Way,
when other Means have miscarried; and other Means have often succeeded, when
the Royal Touch has failed. What then shall we say? In my humble Opinion, there
is something in the Nature of Gold itself very beneficial in this Disorder, I
don't mean laid into the Hand of the Physician by Way of Fee, or pocketed by a
Surgeon or Apothecary, but worn about the Patient's Neck, by a white Satin
Ribband, hanging down to the Pit of the Stomach. How often are Gold Earrings
and Gold Beads for Necklaces worn for what People call Kernels, in and about
the Neck and Throat, and for sore Eyes, which are all common Appearances in
this Distemper, and not without some Benefit, as I believe many young Women can
testify?

I VERILY believe that Gold being continually worn at the Pit of the Stomach,
next the Skin, has often had great and good Effects, but then People will not
attend with Patience enough the Success of such a gentle operating Remedy; for
no doubt, but the fine Effluvia of the Gold being constantly heated by the
Stomach, and continually rubbed against it, will insinuate many of its fine
Particles through the Pores of the Skin into the Blood and Spirits, and mixing
in Time with the Juices of the Body, have very salutary Effects. But then I
would recommend a Piece of fine Gold, without alloy, as large as a 36 s. Piece,
to be used for that Purpose. But this is too chargeable an Application for my
poor Patients Use, though I sincerely think in many Cases it would be very
beneficial, especially to young Subjects, whose Stomachs are warm, and the
Disease in its Infancy. Scrophulous Cases, says Dr. Leigh, may be ranked
amongst the opprobria Medicorum, or Scandal of Physicians; and after his
Description of the Distemper in its various Appearances and Effects, concludes;
I could wish our learned Surgeons in this Case, would make their utmost
Applications, for the Discovery of some Specific, to correct this Humor. You
see, this learned Gentleman ingeniously owns, the Nature and Cure of this
Disease was very little known by any of the Faculty in his Time.

SIR Richard Blackmore says it exceeds the Penetration and Capacity of human
Understanding, to unravel and display those anomalous Clues and Convolutions
proper to strumous Swellings, and to set their Nature and Constitution in a
clear and distinct View; and that the acutest Men cannot penetrate and clearly
unfold the essential Difference of this Disease. This, I think, sufficiently
strengthens Dr. Leigh's Observations of the small Progress that has been made
in the Nature and Cure of the King's Evil. Having but just mentioned the
Opinions of these two learned Physicians, for more particular Accounts I refer
the Reader to their Works, and shall proceed with my own Thoughts and
Observations.

SETTING aside then the Doctrine of Acid and Alcaly, let us consider the Nature
of Salts, and whether they are capable of producing the Complaints and
Appearances appendent to scrophulous Disorders. That human Blood abounds with
great Quantities of Volatile Salts (is sufficiently demonstrable by observing
only the Sweat and Urine) which are composed of Corpuscules, or Particles of
very differing Shapes and Sizes, as Mr. Boil clearly proves, who after many
Experiments, has found, that these saline Concretions exhibit very different
Appearances; some are strait, some crooked, with various Interferings,
representing Branches of Trees, Hartshorn, Feathers, etc. Yet, says he, these
seem not to be constant Representations depending upon the particular Nature of
human Blood, but casual Figurations that depend upon several accidental Causes
and Circumstances. Now this Scrophula is very often an hereditary Disease, and
conveyed by Parents: How fine then must the Seeds (if I may so call them) of
this Distemper be? yet so it is. As every Acorn contains an Oak rapt up within
its Surface, till Time and Vegetation discover its Trunk and spreading
Branches; so is it with this Disorder. If the Seeds are born with us, they lie
dormant in our Blood till a proper Time and a convenient Disposition of that
Liquor, and the nervous Juices of the Body, cause them to grow and expand into
grievous Complaints, and terrible Symptoms.

THE Blood, which seems to be the principal Seat of this Disorder, is divided
into two Parts; the one called the Fibrous, consisting of great Numbers of fine
smooth red Globules, continually floating in the other, which is a clear lympid
Liquor, called the Serum, or serous Part, which conveys these fine Globules to
all Parts of the human Fabric, in some Degree or other. Now if any of these
red Globules are broken change their Figure, or are obstructed in their Passage
by the Serum becoming glutinous, or being in too small or too large a Quantity,
or disordered by any praeternatural Commotion or Ferment, the Circulation
through the finest Vessels will be the first impeded and hindered, as in the
Glands, etc. Now think, if it is not agreeable to Reason, that as the Globules
and Serum of the Blood may both contain a larger Portion of these Volatile
Salts when the Blood is disordered by any praeternatural Cause; and may not
these Salts shoot into very different Figures and Sizes from what they were in
their natural State, according to the Nature of the Humors or Distempers that
are latent in the Blood? And as these Salts are frequently of very perplexing
and entangling Figures, may we not reasonably suppose, that those irregular
figured Bodies (carried along in the Road of Circulation) by crossing and
entangling each other, may cause Stoppages and Obstructions in the fine Tubes
and Strainers of the Body, as the Glands particularly are? And by a continual
Accession of these perplexing Bodies, distend the obstructed Vessels (by Length
of Time) into Tumors, which are often indurated or hardened, till sometimes by
their corrosive Quality they fret their Way through the Skin, and break into
Ulcers. What can this proceed from, but the red globular Particles, or fibrous
Part of Blood, being stopped by the figured Salts, and the serous Part strained
as through a Net or Sieve from the fibrous? The Serum for want of these smooth
red globular Particles being mixed with it, becomes clear, tenacious, and
sizey, the minute Parts of the Serum not being sufficiently separated and
divided by those smooth Globules as before, and rubbing against each other, are
thereby rendered acrimonious and fretting, and become productive of grievous
Complaints, hard to be removed. Tumors and Ulcers generated by these or the
like Means, are brought to a good Digestion with great Difficulty, and very
probably not till the remaining red globular Particles of the Blood can be
again mixed in some Degree with the clear Serum, and form one circulating Fluid
of Blood and Spirits as before, which I suppose to be effected by melting,
absorbing, altering or removing those saline acrimonious Particles that formed
the Obstructions.

Now let us consider likewise the fibrous Part of the Blood, or red Globules,
which being unable to pervade or pass this Rete or Strainer produced by these
irregular figured Salts, and to accompany the Serum in its Progress, are there
stopped, and being spqueezed and crowded close together for want of this Liquor
to float them forward through the fine Vessels, obstruct the Spirits, putrify
and turn into a Curd-like Substance, till it is digested by Art or Nature into
a soft Pus or Matter, and so expelled its Nest. What is more common than to see
large scrophulous Ulcers (especially in the more fleshy Parts) look of a deep
red Color far round their Lips or Edges, which I apprehend to proceed from
these red Globules being separated from the Serum, and stagnating in those
Parts, until a proper Digestion is procured, and then the Redness gradully
disappears, and at the same Time you may often observe a clear transparent
Liquor stand in dewy Drops on that red Surface of the Skin through which it has
exudated? Which I think a sufficient Demonstration that the serous Part of the
Blood is in this Disorder strained or separated from the fibrous, and visible
even to the naked Eye. And I have always found by Experience, that as the
Quantity of this clear limpid Liquor has decreased, the Ulcer has discharged a
more laudable Pus, the Redness insensibly worn off, and then the Ulcer has
healed up with very little Application more than dry Lint.

SHOULD I attempt to mention all Parts subject to this Disorder, I must name
every individual of the human Fabric, for I know of none exempt from this
terrible Malady, no not even the Bones themselves; for in my Course of Practice
I have had this verified by repeated Observations: I have had a Patient
afflicted with Tumors and Ulcers from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the
Foot, and in above twenty different Places besides at once, the major Part of
which have been cured by the Application of dry Lint only, and the Remainder by
very simple Applications, and but very little Physic. But such bad Cases
require much Time to make a perfect Cure. For anybody must think, that a
Disease brought into the World with one, and so interwoven with the
Constitution, and grown up with it, must have much Time and Patience ere it can
be totally subdued and eradicated from the Blood and Spirits. Though I have
never seen any Dissections of the human Body, yet I may guess from what I
observe without, that the Stomach, Bowels, and Intestines, etc. are no less
disordered within, which must infallibly be the Source of many fatal
Consequences, unless removed by Art or Nature, as sometimes may be the Case.
Every the least Tube or Strainer in the whole human Frame may possibly be
tormented by the Seeds of this Disorder, as they begin to expand, and long
before they arrive to a Bulk perceiveable by the Eye or Touch. Unusual
Prickings and Dashings, and Sickness at the Stomach, and Uneasiness in many
Parts, are common Complaints in the beginning of this Disease: What can these
proceed from, but the Assemblage of sharp, saline, interfering Particles,
endeavoring to force their Way through these fine Strainers by Stops and
Starts. The upper Lip swelled, Eyes inflamed, the Glands about the Jaws, Neck,
Throat, and Shoulders, tumified, show this Disorder rather sooner (though not
always) than most other Parts. The Backs of the Hands, Elbows, Armpits, Ribs
and Ancles, are frequently affected, and as the Disorder increases, the softer
Bones feel its Effects, which if they exfoliate, are often cured, if not,
usually terminate in malignant Ulcers of a cancerous Nature, and bring the
Patient at Length to an End.

THAT the King's Evil is a Disease, sui Generis, or after its own Kind, I can
readily admit. But then how often is it complicated and blended with others, as
the Gout, Venereal Evil, White Swellings in the Knees, etc. which seem to have
a near Affinity with it, by affecting the Bones and Joints much in the same
Manner? But the various Combinations and Degrees of each particular Malady that
may at the same Time seize on the human System, I believe is impossible to be
distinguished and ascertained. Then how can we range the various Swellings
common or extraordinary, that arise on the Surface of the Body, or lie almost
concealed among the Muscles, and are attended with such novel Appearances every
Day, without knowing every particular Degree, of every particular Disease, and
their Consequences, that may possibly be at once uniting in the same Body and
its Members? What may probably be the immediate Cause of this Distemper, I have
already hinted at; but the more remote ones, I may venture to assert, are as
numerous as the different Appearances of Tumors and Ulcers in all Parts of the
Body put together. I should soon wade out of my Depth, if I attempted to unfold
such intricate and perplexing Combinations, or the Forms and essential
Properties of those fine Particles of hidden Matter, as may contribute to the
Formation of the King's Evil, and have puzzled so many judicious and learned
Physicians, and may still do so for Ages to come.

I SHALL now proceed to say something relative to the Cure of this obstinate
Disease. If we search the most eminent Authors in pursuit of a Cure for this
Distemper, we shall find ourselves miserably disappointed, says a late Writer:
I say so too. Therefore as their Prescriptions seldom answer the desired End, I
shall take no Notice of them, but pursue my own Way of Thinking. I have no
great Opinion of discussing of Tumors (unless the Face is likely to be much
deformed by them, especially of the Female Sex; or when the Eyes are inflamed,
and very troublesome, then I think such a Remedy is justifiable) because the
peccant Matter is only removed from one Part to another, and not cured, but
still subsists in the Blood and Spirits, and may possibly be thrown on a more
noble and dangerous Part, and do much more Harm than can be easily imagined.

MY Patients have often told me (to use their own Way of Expression) that they
have had Swellings in their Necks, or other Places, and Neighbor such a one
told 'um, if they did them with Vinegar, 'twould put them away, which it
sometimes did, but in a little Time others arose in their Stead in other Parts,
that would not yield to their old Remedy. If they were Parish Poor, and looked
after by the Year, they fell to my Share, because nothing was to be got by
them, and 'twould cost a deal of Trouble and Expense for Physic for such poor
Wretches, who were better out of the Way. How unhappy are poor People, to be
thus cruelly used by some mercenary Physick-Mongers? How many funest Examples
are in every one's Memory (if they would recollect a little) of some
Neighbors, or Acquaintance, that have even destroyed themselves, by backing or
striking in Humors (as it is called) and repelling them to some mortal Part?
This Practice is too frequent with the Fair Sex; I hope they will think
seriously for the future, and do so no more. If any Reasons occur to make
Repellents necessary, I then order proper Purgatives to carry off the morbifick
Matter, cleanse the Blood, and prevent any Danger from such a Revulsion. Issues
or Setons I never use, and often dry them up, for I could never perceive any
Benefit accrue to the Patient from them. If Ulcers discharge the offending
Matter lodged in or near them, why should we invite it another Way, and not
follow the Road Nature has pointed out? What are Ulcers, but so many natural
Issues, which will discharge themselves, if a good Digestion is procured, as
long as any offending Matter subsists in or near them, and then dry up of
course, unless hindered by Art? Why then should we make an artificial Ulcer that
Nature wants not? Nay, is even detrimental to it, by increasing a Discharge,
which we are endeavoring to diminish, and wholly subdue.

SALT Water being much in Vogue, I shall give my Thoughts on it as a Remedy for
the King's Evil. I had a Patient troubled with a very painful Inflammation of
the Eyes, which had baffled the Skill of all she had applied to in London, (and
being a Person of Fortune, be sure no Advice was wanting) she was sent to the
Sea Side to drink the Salt Water, which she did for a Month, and returned much
worse: When I saw her, I soon perceived the Disorder to be scrophulous; she
kept in a dark Room, not being able to abide the least Gleam of Light,
complained of intolerable dashing Pains in her Forehead, and Eyes, which
discharged great Quantities of clear Water, so scalding and corrosive, that it
excoriated the Skin where it flowed down the Cheeks. This Lady's Complaints
were afterward removed by a most simple and easy Remedy, which I apply in
those Cases, and seldom miss of a Cure. What I would observe from this is, that
the saline Particles of the Water, which she drank so long, added more Matter
of a similar Nature to what was too abundant in the Blood and Spirits already,
which entirely convinces me that drinking Salt Water is wrong in scrophulous
Cases of the Eyes; and bathing for them, I believe, to be equally hurtful, for
we know many saline Particles may in bathing be absorbed through the Pores of
the Skin by the Blood, and so unite with those already there. Observe what Lord
Bacon says, "As it seems Salt draws Blood, as well as Blood draws Salt."
That is, they reciprocally attract each other. Extirpating of tumified Glands
(which is no unfrequent Practice) I have never used, either by the Knife, or
Cautery, actual or potential; neither can I approve the Method, though I own
its the most painful. I have had some Patients with me, whose Glands have been
thus treated, and to all Appearance quite cured, and for a Time well; but as
the Humor was not thereby eradicated out of the Blood and Spirits, it broke
out again in fresh Places, which brought them to me. These fresh Complaints I
have afterward cured with easy and gentle Applications. Sometimes indeed,
where the Disorder has been mild, and invaded but few Glands, and the Seeds of
the Disease wholly contained in them, Extirpation has done the Deed. But if
these tumified Glands can be reduced to their natural State by a less dangerous
and painful Way (though indeed not so quickly) and no Danger of any Tumors
arising elsewhere: Which shall we choose, the more quick, painful, and
uncertain, or the more slow, easy, and sure Method of Cure? How many have been
salivated without receiving any Good? Instances of this Kind I have met with in
my Practice, more than once. A learned Physician writes, "A Salivation is found
by Experience incapable of eradicating this obstinate Disease, notwithstanding
it has such peculiar Specific, and almost certain Virtue to remove the
Venereal Evil. Which plainly proves (as I think) the Seeds or Causes of the two
Distempers to be very different; and confutes the vulgar Notion, that the
Venereal Evil is the Parent of the King's Evil; for if they both spring from
the same Original, why are they not removed by the same Means? Which we find
they are not; but when united in the same Subject, its rational to think they
increase each others Malignity, and render the Cure more uncertain and
difficult.

MOST People afflicted with scrophulous Disorders in their Eyes, are very fond
of hood-winking or covering them from the Light and Air, which is the worst
Method they can take, for it not only increases the Inflammation, but invites
the Humor that Way, and consequently occasions a greater Discharge from them,
which should be carried off another Way, and which is often of so corrosive a
Nature, as to excoriate and fret the Skin of the Face, as it distills down the
Cheeks: I always make them throw away their Coverings, either going to Bed, or
rising in the Morning, to prevent taking Cold, by too suddenly exposing their
Eyes; and my Success has always warranted this Practice. After disapproving
others Proceedings in the Cure of this Disorder, it may be asked, why I don't
publish my own, which I think so much better? To such Enquirers I answer: The
Medicines I use are very innocent and common Things, but the Preparation is
curious and difficult, and takes much Time to complete. Should I divulge it,
very few People (except the Compounders of Medicine) would attend the Process,
or take the Trouble of it; and how little Good will a vitiously prepared
Medicine do, is obvious to any one: And as the common Laborers, and
Handicraftsmen, their Wives and Children, make the Bulk of my Patients, it is
above their Capacity, and of no Use to tell them any Thing about it, more than
what is necessary to their right managing themselves under the Regimen I
direct, and to give them the plainest and simplest Directions possible, as well
as to use the easiest Means for their Recovery. As to the Sellers of Medicines,
I think they can have no claim to reap any Advantage from my Labor and
Experience. The better Sort of Families infected by this Disease are really
more to be pitied, than the very lowest Class of the People, for they are but
too often amused with fallacious and flattering Accounts of their own real
Disorders (of this in particular, and as Dr. Radcliff truly observed) kept in
Misery for their Money. And to every one in general I say, nobody has any Cause
to complain of keeping the Thing to myself, for every one that pleases, and has
the King's Evil, may apply to me, and reap the same Benefit, as well as if they
knew the whole Process. (Great I know) is the general Clamor against Secrets,
Nostrums, and old Wives Medicines, as some please to call them; but I would
fain know, if any prudent Person would refuse to be cured by a safe and
innocent Medicine, unless he knew the whole particular Preparation and
Composition; or because I don't choose to make that Discovery of my Methods
that public Curiosity or Censure may expect? Did Dr. James publish the
Preparation of his Fever Powder, yet I believe few People in their Senses would
scruple the Use of it? If the candid, humane, and generous Physicians an
Surgeons smile on my Endeavors for the Public Good, let the envious,
snarling, and covetous Practitioners blame me if they please, for not treating
my Patients Secundum Artem (as they term it) that is, by not making long Bills.

I SHALL mention but one Thing more: Many People who have seen the amazing
Effects of my Applications, often tell me, they hope I will not let the Secret,
and its Improvements, die with me; I do not intend it shall; for I carefully
write down every Patient's Complaints, the Methods I use, and the Success that
follows, as far as I can be informed by themselves or Neighbors, who come to
me on their Recommendation, by which Means I frequently hear of People I have
cured, who living at a Distance, and being free from their Complaints, take no
further Notice of me; though all I desire for my Trouble is, to hear from
themselves, either by Letter, or Word of Mouth, when they are well: But all my
Patients are not so forgetful of their Benefactor. My Papers and Observations
relating to the Cure of the King's Evil, I hope will fall into the Hands of my
Executor: And may he use them to the Benefit of Mankind in general, an the Poor
in particular, with the same Success, and charitable Intentions, as I have done.

FINIS.
PHILIP WINTERFLOOD, late of Halsted in Essex, a Journeyman Barber, aged 35,
now living at the Sign of the Periwig over against the White Horse at Mile-End
near London, was about Eight Years ago miserably afflicted with several
strenuous Ulcers under both Breasts; and being a fat Man some of them were
above an Inch deep and discharged much foul corrupted Matter, and had done so a
long Time, had evaded all Methods of Cure, and when I saw him was a very
deplorable Object. This Person had the Disorder hereditary, many of his Family
having been greatly afflicted with it. He has traveled many Parts of England
since, and been seen with much Admiration by many Persons who have talked with
him. I cured him in about Six Months, and he continues well to this Day, and
has sent me several poor Patients who have traveled on Foot near Fifty Miles
to my House, who I believe don't repent their Journeys.

WIDOW of Joseph Prentice of Halsted, aged 70 Years, some Years ago had the
Evil in her Eyes, and was relieved, and held well several Years, but her Eyes
growing very bad again with great dashing Pains in her Head, and a small Tumor
arising on her Shoulder, she applied to me; I cured her Eyes and the Tumor
subsided with very little Trouble, and she remained perfectly free from her
Complaints, till her Death, some Years after.

JACOB HOGYOTT, Son of Samuel Hogyott, Husbandman, of Grinsted-Green in
Halsted, aged 18, had a large Scropholous Swelling under his Chin, and many
Scropholous Tumors and Ulcers on each Side the Neck; some broke and run clear
Water, and some good Matter. This Lad I cured in Nine Months, and is now gone
to Service and capable to earn his Living as a Husbandman; was recommended by
Mr. Vaughan, a very eminent Surgeon, who could do him no Service.

REBECCA BROWN, Daughter of Jerry Brown of Coln Engain, Essex, Husbandman, aged
12 Years, had several running Scropholous Sores about her Neck and Shoulders,
otherwise a florid well looking Girl; my very easy Methods cured her in about
Four Month.

JONATHAN WADE, of Braintree, recommended to me for the King's Evil by Mr.
Stapletyon Surgeon, of Braintree, Essex. When he came to me, he had two large
running Sores near the Elbow on the left Arm, and one about an Inch above the
Ancle on the left Leg, and a Sore in the Palm of his left Hand; had all the
Sores Six Months before I saw him; most of his Relations had the Evil. About a
Year after his Brother came and told me he was quite cured.

WILLIAM BROWN, belongs to Gosfeld in Essex, aged 19, had the Evil much in both
Eyes, very much inflamed with great Pains in the Forepart of his Head; run
sometimes clear Water very salt, and sometimes Corruption from the Corners of
his Eyes, and very impatient of Light. His Mother had the Evil in her Family,
and came to tell me her Son was now quite well by my Means.

SARAH NORMAN, Daughter of Francis Brewer, on the Burr-Walls at Bath in
Somersetshire, aged 14 Years. Her Upper-lip much swelled, and both Eyes much
inflamed; these Disorders I soon cured by a very easy Method.

EDWARD POTTER, Son of Richard Potter of Pedmarsh in Essex, aged 12 Years, sent
by Mr. Manistree, Apothecary of Halsted, had when he came to me a Sore on the
Back of both Hands and four running Ulcers in the Calf of his left Leg; he is
now quite well, and his Father has got him out to Service, and came to thank me
for the Cure of his Son.

ROBERT WADE, of Bocking in Essex, Shoemaker, aged 15 Years. A Sore on the
Inside of the right Knee, and a large Swelling (broke about a Week before he
came to me, and run clear Water) on the Outside the left Thigh, from a small
Orifice, and very hollow for two or three Inches above and below. About eight
Months after his first coming to me, he came to thank me being quite well.

SARAH EVERITT, Daughter of John Everitt of Earl's Coln, Husbandman, aged 19
Years; she had a large Swelling on the left Side the Neck, and the same Side of
the Face and under the Chin much swelled, had this Complaint four Years before
she came to me; she had been with a Surgeon, who tried to cure her, but not
succeeding, pronounced it the King's Evil, gave her up, and then she came to
me, and is now well.

ANN MEAD, Wife of Samuel Mead, of Great Wrating in Suffolk, Husbandman, aged
34, came recommended to me by Mr. John Smith, Surgeon of Little Theorloe, for
the Evil very bad in her Eyes, in November 1757; and in April 1758, I received
the following Letter from her.

SIR, This comes to acquaint you, that by God's Blessing and your Kindness to
me, I am quite restored to Sight. I am so well recovered that at present I have
not the least Disorder in my Eyes. I return you my sincere Thanks for the
Trouble you gave yourself on my Behalf, having received that Benefit from you
which I could not find from several Doctors I applied to, which was very
chargeable to me. That Almighty God will be pleased to shower down his
Blessings upon you, both temporal and spiritual, for extending your Charity to
the Distressed, is and shall be the constant Prayer of,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Ann Mead.
April 23, 1758.

TITUS WELLS, Son of John Wells of Sudbury in Suffolk, aged 14 Years, sent to
me by Mr. E. Grove Surgeon; when he came to me, he had a large running Sore on
the left Side his Neck, had been so about a Year, and a very bad Ulcer on the
left Thigh, a Sore on the Back of his left Hand, and several small Swellings
about the Neck and left Elbow; was with me about a Twelvemonth after, all his
Sores quite well.

SIMON SMITH, of Great Wadingfeild in Suffolk, was recommended to me by Mr.
Robert Upcher, Surgeon of Sudbury, being greatly afflicted with the King's Evil
in his Eyes; he had some Swellings under his Chin, upon removing of which, the
Humor fell into both his Eyes, and resisted all Endeavors to remove it, till
he came to me; he is now very well by my Assistance.

JOHN TUFF, of Stebing in Essex, aged 14, came to me with a scropholous running
Sore on the Side of the left Foot, and a small Sore on each Groin, his Nose
inflamed and run much clear Water and very scabbed; his Brother Thomas Tuff,
aged 11 Years, had several Sores broke on the right Side his Neck. The above
Brothers were sent to me by Mr. Stapleton, Surgeon of Braintree, I have cured
them both.

CATHERINE ANDERSON, aged 11 Years, living with Mrs Whitting in Cullum-street,
London, had the King's Evil very much in both Eyes, had Advice to no Purpose. I
was then desired to see her. I soon removed the Disorder and cured der Eyes.

MARY PRENTICE, of Coln Engain, Essex, single Woman, aged 50. This Woman was
cured about 30 Years ago of the King's Evil with many bad Sores all over her,
held well till within six Months, when a large Sore broke out on the Outside of
the left Leg a little above the Ancle and greatly inflamed; I removed this
Complaint entirely in a few Months.

Let the following speak for itself; the Lad is quite well by my Endeavors.

SIR, sonce more offer my Solicitations in Behalf of a poor Lad belonging to
Great Waldingfield (Tho. Newton), who has labored under the King's Evil, for
twelve Months past, in his Eyes. I hope your Assistance to the above Subject,
which I know will be gratefully acknowledged, and may the Almighty grant you
Success in this and all others, and great may be your Reward both here and
hereafter, which are the hearty Prayers of,

Sir, Your humble Servant (though unknown) Robert Upcher, Surgeon in Sudbury.
Sudbury, Jan. 31, 1759.

ELIZ. BAYLEY, Daughter of Mr. Robert Bayley, Baker at Chelmsford, aged 10
Years, had a Scropholous Disorder fell into her left Eye after the Small Pox,
with a large white Speck on the Pupil, which continued seven Years before I saw
it. Her Father and Mother both joined in a genteel Letter of Thanks, to
acquaint me that her Sight was perfectly well, and she returns me all the
Thanks she can possibly give.

ANN GAY, Daughter of George Gay Soldier, of Bocking Church-street in Essex,
aged 6 Years. A small running Sore on the right Arm and one under the left Ear,
and a large Tumor gathering under the left Eye, and very bad in her Health; the
Tumor afterward broke withinside of the lower Eyelid, and discharged a great
Quantity of thick Matter; is now perfectly recovered by my Methods, and in a
very good State of Health; her Mother brought her to show me, and thanked me.

MARY ANN ALSTONE lived at Mrs. Hancock's, on the Burr-Walls at Bath in
Somersetshire, aged seven Years and a half, had her upper Lip greatly swelled,
and some small Tumors in her Neck. I was at Bath some time after, and found her
perfectly well by my Directions. Her Mother went a nursing, and was removed to
one Mattins a Scourer in Horse-street, Bath.

MARY, Daughter of Geo. Newman, Gardener in the Hollow Way, over the Bridge in
Bath, aged 10 Years, had a Scropholous Ulcer on the Point of her right Elbow,
and one on the Back of her right Hand; on my next being at Bath, her Mother
brought her to me quite well, and showed me a large Piece of Bone that had
separated from her Elbow, all perfectly sound.

SARAH LAMB, of Booking Church-street, aged 31 Years, sent by Mr. Stapleton
Surgeon, Jo. Blawer Churchwarden, and Tho. Chandler Overseer; had many Tumors
and Ulcers on her Arms, and Legs, and Face, some opened by a Surgeon, several
Sores in her Mouth and Throat, with great Difficulty of Swallowing, and great
Heat in her Throat and Stomach, and raised much corrupt Matter by Spit, which
she told me always tasted very salt, but not sour, bitter, sweet, or acid like
Vinegar. This Woman came to me about a Year after, to thank me for the Benefit
she had received; the Tumors all gone, the Ulcers healed up, raises no putrid
Matter, and has no Complaint, but a very little Stiffness sometimes in the
Throat, after swallowing a large Morsel. Her Mother died of the King's Evil.

WILLIAM BURGETT, aged Eight Years, Son of William Burgett, belonging to
Cripplegate Parish, London, works with Mr. Ashmole at Holloway Mount, helps to
make Lamp-black. This Boy had the King's Evil very bad in both Eyes, and the
upper Lip much swelled, about three Months. After he was with me, I received a
Message from his Father, to thank me, for curing his Son, who was now very well
by my Directions.

MABLE BULLINGBROOKE, Daughter of John Bullingbrooke, Carpenter of Long Melford
in Suffolk, aged 16 Years, sent by Mr. Fairfax, Surgeon: Both her Eyes much
inflamed, upper Lip swelled, and the Nose discharged much clear Water. This
Disorder had been increasing four Years since it first appeared; she is now
well, as I have heard from many People that know her, but never heard from
herself, according to Promise.

Mr. AMBROSE DEATH the Younger, is troubled with an Opthalmy, which from its
Stubborness in not yielding to the usual Evacuations in that Case prescribed, I
do imagine to be strumous, and upon that Account do recommend him as a King's
Evil Patient.

John Burch, Surgeon in Lavenham, Suffolk,
Nov. 5, 1759.

This Person I cured in a little Time, and he has remained very well, without
the least Complaint to this Day.

ROBERT HEATHERLY, Son of the Reverend Mr. Heatherly, late Minister of
Clavering in Essex, formerly Master of the School in St. Bartholomew's
Hospital, London, aged 23 Years, had been an Out-patient there, for the King's
Evil, had the second Joint of his Thumb so affected that the Bone was digested
out, and had several other Places healed up. Not long after, the Disorder fell
into both his Eyes with some small unbroken Tumors in the Neck, and under both
Ears, and had been blind some Months, and thus came to me with both Eyes
covered over, unable to do any Thing. He had a Brother a Surgeon, whose
Endeavors with the Hospital Surgeons proving ineffectual, he came to me. I
have restored his Sight so well that he kept a Writing School since, and
afterward went a Privateering, and told me himself that he was quite well, and
had not the least Scropholous Complaint, and was two or three Days at my House
after his Cure.

ANN NUNN, Daughter of John Nunn, Farmer, of Laindon Hills in Essex, aged 21
Years, had a large Scropholous Tumor on the right Side of the Jawbone, opened
by Mr. Earl of Horndon, but as he could not heal it up, she came to me; I
perfected the Cure, and she was well, at Service, when I heard of her some time
after.

I was desired to see a young Gentleman in London, aged 26 Years, about a Year
after he had fell down on both his Knees, a white lymphatick Swelling had been
increasing on his right Knee, notwithstanding the following Means had been
used, as he himself told me; first the Knee was treated as a common Bruise, and
rubbed with Oils, to no Effect; afterward poulticed with white Bread and Milk,
Lees of Beer near a Month, without Advantage; then fomented with an Infusion of
Camomile, to no Purpose; then a Blister, (run but little) no Benefit; then
Leeches applied twice, six at a Time, signified nothing; was at Bath,
afterward at Southampton, and used the usual Methods at both Places, and all
these Trials had no Effect on the Swelling. He had also a small Scropholous
Tumor, red and inflamed, on the Point of the Breast Bone. Some Months after he
had been under my Care, he wrote me as follows: I am sure all the Pleasure I
enjoy this Summer is totally to be attributed to your Kindness; for had I not
been so happy as to have been under your Direction, most likely I should not
have gained the Use of my Limbs so soon, if ever, which lays an everlasting
Obligation on your very humble Servant.


And afterward, in another Letter, he says, I am surprizingly recovered in
regard to my Knee. These, I hope, will satisfy any reasonable Person of the
Benefit this Gentleman received by my Means.

Great Stambridge, near Rochford in Essex, October 5, 1762. Mr. Morley, Sir,
I JOSEPH LAMBERT return you kind Thanks for curing my Daughter Ann Lambert of
the King's Evil. She is as well as ever. Sir, I can but love and thank you for
your Civility.


This little Girl was six Years old, had her upper Lip very much swelled three
Quarters of a Year. Mr. Swain, an Apothecary at Rochford, judged it Scropholous.

The following Letter I received July the 17th, 1762, from PHILIP SHELLY,
Weaver at Clove Clare in Suffolk.

Mr. Morley, Sir,
I send to you, returning many humble and hearty Thanks for the great Benefits
I have received by you, being at your House, May the 28, 1762, having the Evil
in my Eyes, and not able to bear the Light in the House, and by your Help and
God's Mercy, is able to work abroad; Thanks be to God and you for it; I being a
poor Man, am not able to make you any other Amends. If I was, I should not
think any Thing too much for you, for the great Benefits I have received by
you; but I hope you will accept the same as if I sent you a Present, so I remain

your humble Servant, Philip Shelly.


I give the Reader his Letter verbatim, as I do all others that I quote. This
Man's Eyes had been much disordered six Months, run hot scalding Water, and
much white Matter from the Corner of his left Eye, and his upper Lip swelled.

SUSANNA SPOWERS, Wife of Martin Spowers, Mariner, aged 26, lately living at
Mr. Vines's near Sir William Warron's Square in Wapping, London, had a large
Tumor, very hard and livid, on the lower Part of the left Breast next the Arm,
which had been extirpated by Mr. Caywood, Surgeon and Apothecary, near by,
judged to be a Cancer; but as he did not cure it, about a Month after, she came
to me. Then the whole Breast was inflamed, with two more Tumors rising on the
lower Part, and some small Scropholous Complaints running about. These Tumors
afterward broke, and discharged Matter as the other, which are all now well;
and one other large Tumor, about the Middle of the Breast, I dispersed without
breaking. The whole Breast is now quite firm and well, smooth, soft, and of its
natural Color and Size, as before, except the Sear, which still remains as a
Proof the Surgeon had been there. Whilst in the Country under my Care, the
Surgeon let her know, she had better come to London, and he would go with her
to an Hospital, to have her Breast taken off, before the Cancer should be fixed,
for then it would be incurable. Note; Many scrophulated Breasts are mistaken
for Cancers, and have been treated as such, to the irreparable Damage of the
poor Sufferers.

A young Lady in London, at the Age of 4 Years, had two Scrophulous Ulcers, on
each Arm one, both dried up by the Use of the Bark, by Order of one of the
principal Physicians in London; but soon after the Disorder broke out, with a
deep Ulcer on the Calf of each Leg. Then I was applied to, and healed them up,
but soon after neglecting my Directions, the Humor fell into both Eyes; then I
was again applied to, and removed that Disorder; and she is now free from any
Scrophulous Complaints whatever.

Mr. John Joseph, Surgeon at Whitham in Essex, recommended to my Care Susanna
Milbanks, aged 18 Years, for the King's Evil. She had six or seven Tumors
opened by him, and healed, and kept well six Months: then the Disorder fell
into both her Eyes. Her right Eye had been burnt when a Child very much, so
will never be otherwise, the left Eye perfectly clear and well, and all her
Sores perfectly well and sound, and herself in good Health.

JOHN BUTCHER, of the Parish of Booking in Essex, Bayweaver, aged 30 Years,
came to me from Bugden in Huntingtonshire, being quartered there, and belonging
to Captain Carter's Company of the Essex Militia. He first felt a dashing Pain
suddenly strike into the lower Joint of the Forefinger of his right Hand, and
in about a Month all the other Fingers and Thumb were affected in the same
Manner, and so contracted, that he could not stir them even with the other
Hand, without great Pain, and then but very little. No Discoloration, or any
perceivable Tumor, or preternatural Heat to the Touch of himself, or others.
His Captain who was a Surgeon, and knowing several of his Relations were
greatly afflicted with the King's Evil, pronounced it such; he soon after was
discharged as incapable of Service. I restored this Man to the full Use of his
Hand, Fingers and Thumb, by the Means I make use of in Scrophulous Cases; which
I think is a Proof this was a Species of the King's Evil. He was afterward
again admitted as a Militia Man in Captain Mayhews Company, being perfectly
well, having the Use of his Hand as formerly.

ELIZ. REYNOLD, Wife of Jo. Reynold of Halsted, Farmer, aged 25 Years, came
with her Lips much swollen, the Inside of the Nose and upper Lip broke out, and
very scabby, a large conglomerated Tumor being increasing three Quarters of a
Year, under the right Ear, and several small Tumors on the left Side the Neck.
She told me some Months after, that all the Swellings were entirely gone, her
Health never better, and not the least Complaint. Note; I dispersed all the
Tumors, so that no visible Signs remain to show she ever had the King's Evil.

MARY COOK, Wife of Ed. Cook, Husbandman of Coln Earls in Essex, aged 27 Years.
Ten Years before she came to me, a large Stick fell on the Middle of the
Outside of her right Thigh, and bruised it much, and was very painful at times
for five Years; then a large Swelling arose where 'twas bruised, broke and run
above a Quart of white Matter, and now discharges chiefly Water, scalding and
corrosive. The Orifice small as a Pea, the Discharge very great, and a Surgeon
having probed the Ulcer and found it very hollow, several Inches both above and
below the Orifice. About four Months after, her Husband came and told me, his
Wife was twenty Pound better, and some Months after that her Mother came and
told me, she was quite well.

MARY PRENTICE, Daughter of Abraham Prentice, Jun. of Coln Engain, aged a Year
and a half, had a Tumor under the left Ear, and several small Swellings arising
in diverse Parts, inherited this Scrophulous Disorder from her Father's Family,
who came to thank and tell me, the Child was quite cured.

BENJ. REED of Gosfeild in Essex, Husbandman, aged 35, recommended by Mr.
Manistree, Apothecary, both his Eyes much inflamed, and discharged some very
scalding Water, and was so blind he had not seen the Sun or any Object for two
Months before he came to me, and had a small Tumor under his left Ear, and is
now well by my Remedies.

JOHN DRINKMILK, Son of Adam Drinkmilk of Barrow in Suffolk, Farmer, aged 24
Years, had about a Year ago a large Swelling under the left Arm dispersed by a
Surgeon, and afterward the Humor fell into the left Wrist and Hand, which were
much swelled, and growing useless. His Father had the King's Evil helped thirty
Years ago, and now I have removed the Son's Complaints.

WILL. ARDLEY, Weaver of Coggeshall in Essex, aged 40 Years, had been much
troubled with the Toothache and Ear-ach; then a Sore broke Withinside the left
Cheek, and discharged near a Pint of stinking Matter at several times; then a
large Tumor arose on the left under Jaw Bone, and broke into three Ulcers, and
discharged much Matter; then the Ulcer within the Mouth healed up, and it was
with some Difficulty he could open his Mouth. All these running Sores I quite
cured in about five Months, with the perfect Use of his Jaw-bones, and has no
Complaints whatever remaining, and came to thank me for the Cure.

SARAH ROWLAND, of Wickham Brook in Suffolk, aged 18 Years, had a very large
soft Tumor under the right Ear, been four Months increasing, and pronounced
scrophulous by Mr. Dunthorne Surgeon of Lidgate in Suffolk, some of her Family
having had the King's Evil; she is now well by my Means.

ANN BAKER, of Braintree in Essex, Widow, aged 45 Years, recommended by the
Rev. Mr. Morgan the Vicar. She had several Holes in her Toes, with an
Appearance like the St. Anthony Fire, on both Arms, Neck, Breast and Face, and
very hot, and many small Water-bladers and running Pains about her Joints, and
some small Swellings about the Neck and Throat, but none broke; several of her
Relations had the King's Evil. She came to thank me sometime after, being quite
well.

A little Miss in London, aged 5 Years, had a troublesome Scurfiness on her
Head, which made it very difficult to be kept clean, and small Eruptions often
appearing and disappearing on diverse Parts, leaving a dry Scurf, and many small
Tumors like Peace about the Neck. She is now very well by my Directions.

WILL. FIELD, Sergeant in the 109th Company of Marines, belongs to Chatham in
Kent, aged 23 Years; he came to me with a Tumor rising under each lower
Jaw Bone. He is now well; and brought his Wife afterward, with a bad
Scropholous Complaint; but are both gone from my Neighborhood, so I can say
nothing as to her.

A Lady in Norfolk, about 25, had a large Scrophulous Ulcer near the left
Ancle, and pricking dashing Pains in her Joints. When I first saw her, she
bathed daily in the Salt Water, which had so swelled and inflamed her Leg, she
could hardly stand. I begged her to leave off Bathing, which she did, and in
forty-eight Hours she found Ease; and in some Months after I had a Letter from
her, that her Complaints were by my Directions entirely removed.

A young Lady in Norfolk, aged 12 Years, about three Years ago had a small hard
Tumor under the left Nipple, which seems now no more; but when she came to me,
had a smooth, flatish, soft Tumor about the Bigness of half a Crown, gathering
above the Nipple of the same Breast, which had been under the Management of a
regular Physician sometime without any apparent Advantage; but is now by my
Assistance entirely removed.

Mrs. BROWN, Wife of Mr. Brown at the Bell in Clare Suffolk, aged 27 Years,
brought me the following from Mr. Hawes a Surgeon.

SIR,
Mrs. Brown, the Bearer hereof, has for some Months labored under a Disease
in her Breast, which the Surgeons term a Schirrhus. Various Applications has
been tried, and many Medicines taken, which have only served to alleviate her
Complaints, without laying a Foundation for healing. This Disease has so near
an Affinity with the Evil, that I do not think but it may be really called
such. I wish you may be so fortunate as to direct somewhat that may be
serviceable, and am,

SIR, Your humble Servant, Rich. Hawes.
Cavendish, Aug. 23, 1761.

Mrs. Brown was a fat lusty Woman: About a Year ago had a large Tumor rose in
her right Breast, and gathered in nine several Places, and opened by a Surgeon,
and discharged much, but that being though insufficient to lessen the Breast,
two Setons were made quite through the Breast, (which was very large) close to
the Ribs, in the Form of a Cross, and as the Silk rotted out, in ten or twelve
Days, more Silk was put in, and she had seven or eight Ulcers in other Parts of
the Breast. Several Surgeons met, to take off the Breast, and told her if it
was not taken off she could not live to Michaelmas Day following; that her
Breast would rot off in a Week or two, if not cut off. This was the State of
the Breast when I undertook it. November the 30th following, I saw this Woman;
all the Ulcers well healed, and the Breast firm, and the Woman in good Health a
Spirits, without any Complaints whatever. Feb. 27, 1762, she was with me again,
and showed me her right Breast sound and firm, but told me that about three
Weeks before, on taking Cold, she felt a dashing Pain in her left Breast, which
she showed me. There was a smooth soft Tumor rising on the upper Part, above
the Nipple, which had increased fast, with some dashing Pains. I ordered her
proper Remedies for this new Complaint. April the 4th, her Husband came to tell
me the Tumor was broke, and discharged in several Places round the Nipple. I
ordered accordingly, and Sept. the 6th, 1762, her Husband came again and told
me her Breast had been quite well 2 Months past, and his Wife in good Health a
Spirits, no Complaint at all, and that the Day before he came she was brought
to-bed of a fine Girl, and both like to do very well. I saw her some Days
after, examined her right Breast, which had lost the Nipple, all continued
firm, and also her left Breast, but she had no Milk in it, but no Complaint
whatever. Note, it is very easy to observe from this Case that if Mrs. Brown's
right Breast had been taken off, it would have availed nothing, from the other
being disordered in the like Manner. After having cured Mrs. Brown's right
Breast, I received from the beforementioned Mr. Hawes the following.

SIR,
I must now congratulate your Success in curing this Disease, which is more
rife by far than used to be, and likely to make sad Ravages among Mankind. Mrs.
Brown I hear is purely. I am,

Worthy Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, R. Hawes.
Cavendish, Nov. 26, 1761.

Febr. The 17th, 1763, her Husband came to my House, told me his Wife was in
all respects perfectly well, and his little Girl a fine thrifty Child.

A young Woman unmarried, aged 26, had a large Tumor on the left Buttock, had
been opened four times by a Surgeon, at least six Inches in Length, who told
her he durst not cut any more, but must apply Causticks. She had two small
Ulcers on the Small of her Back, and her Eyes greatly inflamed. The Buttock
seemed almost divided into two. About eight Months after, this young Woman came
to thank me, being well, without any Remains of her Disorder, and used no other
Means for her Recovery than I had directed.

To Mr. Morley,
SIR, I send you a Man from Bradfield Mainger, afflicted with the running Evil,
owing in my Opinion to the ill Management of the Apothecary, when ill with the
Fever; if you can possibly assist him, hope your good Endeavors will not be
wanting,

from yours, etc. R. R. Cox, a Surgeon at Great Welnetham, Suffolk.


This Man was Rob. London, Son of Rob. London of Bradfield in Suffolk, aged 32
Years. About twelve Weeks after having had this Fever, thirteen Tumors rose
about the Legs, Thighs and Buttocks, and had been all opened by Mr. Cox, and
had discharged monstrously, which had reduced him to a mere Skeleton: he was
brought to me in a Cart with a Bed made in it, being unable to move Hand or
Foot, or to be moved without great Trouble. I went out to see this poor Man in
the Cart: he looked so like a dead Corpse, that People that saw him set out from
home never expected to see him return alive, his Stomach gone, and Visage so
ghastly. This was Aug. 31, 1761: and Sept. the 10th, I received the following
from Mr. Cox the Surgeon.

SIR,
According to your Orders, have made use of the Medicines, but have since been
obliged to open three more Abscesses, from which found a Sanguinous Matter,
filled with a corrupted, from each Sore a large Quantity. Think the others
begin to heal, excepting two, which are in the Calf, the other in the muscular
Part of the Thigh: the Stomach holds well, and cannot find by the Face and
Pulse, he is so much exhausted, as Nature would be thought to be under his
Afflictions.


The 23d of October following, Mr. Cox wrote me Word my Patient at Bradfeild
was well, and in October 1762, I saw his Father, who told me his Son held well,
and went to London every Week with Carrier's Wagon from Bury in Suffolk.

Mr. HARRISON, Apothecary, sent me Susan Ottley of Barking in Essex, single
Woman, aged 26 Years. She came to me with almost numberless Ulcers, and fungous
Excrescencies, extended from the Top of the right Shoulder, quite down to the
Nipple of her right Breast, which discharged a most foul and stinking Matter.
She had an Ulcer on the Inside the Arm, close to her Arm-pit, and a deep one on
the Shoulder almost by her Arm-pit, and one withinside the Arm, about 3 Inches
above the Elbow, and one almost under the right Buttock, a bad Stomach, and
very had State of Health; had the Evil hereditarily, having a Sister died of
it, and another Sister who had it much in her Eyes, which I cured. This Woman
has now all her Ulcers entirely well, the fungous Excrescences all healed up,
smooth and sound, has recovered a good Stomach, a florid well-looking
Countenance, and perfect good State of Health, by my Endeavors only; but this
Subject was many Months under my Care, so that I usually saw her every eight or
ten Days, or I could have been of little Service in such a bad Case.

MARY BINGHAM, Wife of Adam Bingham, Husbandman, late of Crassing, now living
at Patiswick in Essex, aged 28 Years, was led to me, being totally deprived of
her Sight. She told me she had not seen her Hand or Child for 12 Months past.
Both her Eyes looked almost as covered over with Cobwebs of a leaden dead
Color, run much scalding Water, mixed with thick white Matter from the Corners
of her Eyes, and almost continually dashing Pains about her Forehead, and many
Scrophulous Breakings out, about the Corners of her Mouth, and several other
Places. I bless God, I have restored this poor Woman to her Sight, so well as
to dress her Children, and spin, which she does for her Livelihood daily, as
she did before she was diseased.

FINIS.

