AN EPISTLE TO THE Right Honorable Sir ROBERT WALPOLE, KNIGHT of the Most
Noble Order of the Garter.

By RICHARD SAVAGE Esquire

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane. MDCCXXXII. Price one Shilling.

AN EPISTLE To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT WALPOLE.
STILL let low Wits, who Sense nor Honor prize,
Sneer at all Gratitude, all Truth disguise;
At living Worth, because alive, exclaim,
Insult the Exiled, and the Dead defame!
Such paint what Pity veils in private Woes,
And what we see with Grief, with Mirth expose;
Studious to urge -- (whom will mean Authors spare?)
The Child's, the Parent's, and the Consort's Tear:
Unconscious of what Pangs the Heart may rend,
To lose what they have never deserved -- a Friend.
Such, ignorant of Facts, invent, relate,
Exposed persist, and answered still debate:
Such, but by Foils, the clearest Luster see,
And deem aspersing Others, praising Thee.
FAR from these Tracks my honest Lays aspire,
And greet a generous Heart with generous Fire.
Truth be my Guide! Truth, which thy Virtue claims!
This, nor the Poet, nor the Patron shames:
When Party-Minds shall lose contracted Views,
And History question the recording Muse;
It Is this alone to Aftertimes must shine,
And stamp the Poet and his Theme divine.
LONG has my Muse, from many a mournful Cause,
Sung with small Power, nor sought sublime Applause;
From that great Point she now shall urge her Scope;
On that fair Promise rest her future Hope;
Where Policy, from State, Illusion clear,
Can through an open Aspect shine sincere;
Where Science, Law, and Liberty depend,
And own the Patron, Patriot, and the Friend;
(That Breast to feel, that Eye on Worth to gaze,
That Smile to cherish, and that Hand to raise!)
Whose best of Hearts her best of Thoughts inflame,
Whose Joy is Bounty, and whose Gift is Fame.
WHERE, for Relief, flies Innocence distressed?
To you, who chase Oppression from the Oppressed:
Who, when Complaint to you alone belongs,
Forgive your own, though not a People's Wrongs:
Who still make public Property your Care,
And thence bid private Grief no more despair.
ASK they what State your sheltering Care shall own?
It Is Youth, it is Age, the Cottage, and the Throne:
Nor can the Prison 'scape your searching Eye,
Your Ear still opening to the Captive's Cry.
Nor less was promised from thy early Skill,
Ere Power enforced Benevolence of Will!
To Friends refined, thy private Life adhered
By thee improving, ere by thee preferred.
Well had thou weighed what Truth such Friends afford,
With thee resigning, and with thee restored.
Thou taught'st them All extensive Love to bear,
And now Mankind with thee their Friendships share.
AS the rich Cloud by due Degrees expands,
And showers down Plenty thick on sundry Lands,
Thy spreading Worth in various Bounty fell,
Made Genius flourish, and made Art excel.
HOW many, yet deceived, all Power oppose?
Their Fears increasing, as decrease their Woes;
Jealous of Bondage, while they Freedom gain,
And most obliged most eager to complain.
BUT well we count our Bliss, if well we view,
When Power Oppression, not Protection grew;
View present Ills that punish distant Climes;
Or bleed in Memory here from ancient Times.
MARK first the Robe abused Religion wore,
Storied with Griefs, and stained with human Gore!
What various Tortures, Engines, Fires, reveal,
Studied, empowered, and sanctified by Zeal?
STOP here my Muse! -- Peculiar Woes descry!
Bid 'em in sad Succession strike thy Eye!
Lo, to her Eye the sad Succession springs!
She looks, she weeps, and, as she weeps, she sings.
SEE the doomed Hebrew of his Stores bereft!
See holy Murder justify the Theft!
His ravaged Gold some useless Shrine shall raise!
His Gems on superstitious Idols blaze!
His Wife, his Babe, denied their little Home,
Stripped, starved, unfriended, and unpitied roam.
LO, the Priest's Hand the Wafer-God supplies!
A King by consecrated Poison dies!
SEE Learning range you broad Etherial Plain,
From World to World, and God-like Science gain!
Ah! what avails the curious Search sustained,
The finished Toil, the God-like Science gained?
Sentenced to Flames th'expansive Wisdom fell,
And Truth from Heaven was Sorcery from Hell.
SEE Reason bid each mystic Wile retire,
Strike out new Light! and Mark! -- the Wise admire!
Zeal shall such Heresy, like Learning, hate;
The same their Glory, and the same their Fate.
Lo, from sought Mercy, one his Life receives!
Life, worse than Death, that cruel Mercy gives:
The Man, perchance, who Wealth and Honors bore,
Slaves in the Mine, or ceaseless strains the Oar.
So doomed are these, and such perhaps, our Doom,
Owned we a Prince (avert it Heaven!) from Rome.
NOR private Worth alone false Zeal assails;
Whole Nations bleed when Bigotry prevails.
What are sworn Friendships? What are Kindred Ties?
What Is Faith with Heresy? (the Zealot cries.)
See, when War sinks the thundering Cannon's Roar;
When Wounds, and Death, and Discord are no more;
When Music bids undreading Joys advance,
Swell the soft Hour, and turn the swimming Dance:
When, to crown these, the social Sparkling Bowl
Lifts the cheered Sense, and pours out all the Soul;
Sudden he sends red Massacre abroad;
Faithless to Man, to prove his Faith to God.
What pure persuasive Eloquence denies,
All-drunk with Blood, the arguing Sword supplies;
The Sword, which to the Assassin's Hand is given!
The Assassin's Hand! -- pronounced the Hand of Heaven!
Sex bleeds with Sex, and Infancy with Age;
No Rank, no Place, no Virtue stops his Rage.
Shall Sword, and Flame, and Devastation cease,
To please with Zeal (wild Zeal!) the God of Peace?
NOR less Abuse has scourged the Civil State,
When a King's Will became a Nation's Fate.
Enormous Power! Nor noble, nor serene;
Now fierce and cruel; now but wild and mean.
See Titles sold, to raise the unjust Supply!
Compelled the Purchase! or be fined, or buy!
No public Spirit, guarded well by Laws,
Uncensur'd censures in his Country's Cause.
See from the Merchant forced the unwilling Loan!
Who dares deny, or deem his Wealth his own?
Denying, See! where Dungeon-Damps arise,
Diseased he pines, and unassisted dies.
Far more than Massacre that Fate accursed!
As of all Deaths the lingering is the worst.
NEW Courts of Censure grieved with new Offense,
Taxed without Power, and fined without Pretense;
Explained, at Will, each Statute's wrested Aim,
'Till Marks of Merit were the Marks of Shame;
So monstrous! -- Life was the severest Grief,
And the worst Death seemed welcome for Relief.
IN vain the Subject sought Redress from Law,
No Senate lived the partial Judge to awe:
Senates were void, and Senators confined
For the great Cause of Nature and Mankind;
Who Kings superior to the People own;
Yet prove the Law superior to the Throne.
WHO can review, without a generous Tear,
A Church, a State, so impious, so severe;
A Land uncultur'd through Polemic Jars,
Rich! -- but with Carnage from intestine Wars;
The Hand of Industry employed no more,
And Commerce flying to some safer Shore;
All Property reduced, to Power a Prey,
And Sense and Learning chased by Zeal away?
Who honors not each dear departed Ghost,
That strove for Liberty so won, so lost:
So well regained when God-like William rose,
And first entailed the Blessing George bestows?
May Walpole still the growing Triumph raise,
And bid These emulate Eliza's Days;
Still serve a Prince, who, over his People Great,
As far transcends in Virtue, as in State!
THE Muse pursues thee to thy rural Seat;
Even there shall Liberty inspire Retreat.
When solemn Cares in flowing Wit are drowned,
And sportive Chat and social Laughs go round:
Even then, when pausing Mirth begins to fail,
The Converse varies to the serious Tale.
The Tale pathetic speaks some Wretch that owes
To some deficient Law reliefless Woes.
What instant Pity warms thy generous Breast?
How all the Legislator stands confessed?
Now springs the Hint! it is now improved to Thought!
Now ripe! and now to public Welfare brought!
New Bills, which regulating Means bestow,
Justice preserve, yet softening Mercy know:
Justice shall low vexatious Wiles decline,
And still thrive most, when Lawyers most repine.
Justice from Jargon shall refined appear,
To Knowledge through our native Language clear.
Hence may we learn, no more deceived by Law,
Whence Wealth and Life their best Assurance draw.
THE freed Insolvent, with industrious Hand,
Strives yet to satisfy the just Demand:
Thus ruthless Men, who would his Powers restrain,
Often what Severity would lose obtain.
THESE, and a thousand Gifts, thy Thought acquires,
Which Liberty benevolent inspires.
From Liberty the Fruits of Law increase,
Plenty, and Joy, and all the Arts of Peace.
Abroad the Merchant, while the Tempests rave,
Adventurous sails, nor fears the Wind and Wave;
At Home untir'd we find the auspicious Hand
With Flocks, and Herds, and Harvests, bless the Land:
While there, the Peasant glads the grateful Soil,
Here mark the Ship-Wright, there the Mason toil,
Hew, square, and rear magnificent the Stone,
And give our Oaks a Glory not their own!
What Life demands by this obeys her Call,
And added Elegance consummates all.
Thus stately Cities statelier Navies rise,
And spread our Grandeur under distant Skies.
From Liberty each nobler Science sprung,
A Bacon brightened, and a Spenser sung;
A Clarke and Lock new Tracks of Truth explore,
And Newton reaches Heights unreach'd before.
WHAT Trade sees Property that Wealth maintain,
Which Industry no longer dreads to gain;
What tender Conscience kneels with Fears resigned,
Enjoys her Worship, and avows her Mind;
What Genius now from Want to Fortune climbs,
And to safe Science every Thought sublimes;
What Royal Power, from his superior State,
Sees public Happiness his own create;
But kens those Patriot-Souls, to which he owes
Of Old each Source, whence now each Blessing flows?
And if such Spirits from their Heaven descend,
And blended flame, to point one glorious End;
Flame from one Breast, and thence on Britain shine,
What Love, what Praise, O Walpole, then is thine?
FINIS.
ERRATVM.
Page 6, Line 17, leave out the Comma after State.


