depiction of a rhus toxicodendron (poison oak)

AN ESSAY ON THE RHUS TOXICODENDRON, PUBESCENT POISON OAK, OR SUMACH, WITH
CASES SHOWING IT IS EFFICACY IN THE CURE OF PARALYSIS, AND OTHER DISEASES OF
EXTREME DEBILITY.

BY JOHN ALDERSON, M. D.

Member of the Ro^al Medical Society, EDINBURGH;

-- Philosophical and Literary Society, NEWCASTLE

And Physician to the General Infirmary at HULL.

Hinc Genoe penduloe tremuloeque Manus.

PLIN. -- Saepe Venenum

Vergebant; nunc dant aliis solertius ipsi.

LUCRET. HULL; PRINTED AND SOLD BY RAWSON AND CO. SOLD ALSO BY J. JOHNSON, ST.
PAUL'S CHURCH YARD, LONDON; AND W. CREECH, EDINBURGH.

PRICE IS. 6d.

TO JOHN WIDDRINGTON, Esquire. OF HAUXLEY, IN THE County of Northumberland,
PRESIDENT of the LITERARY and PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY at NEWCASTLE,
IN TESTIMONY OF THE ESTEEM WHICH THE AUTHOR FEELS, AND AS A MARK OF
FRIENDSHIP, NATURALLY OCCASIONED BY A FAMILY CONNECTION WITH SO AMIABLE A
CHARACTER, THIS ESSAY IS, WITH SINCERE REGARD,

INSCRIBED.

HULL, Dec. 31, 1793.
A distinguishing feature of the present times, in a medical point of view, is
the prevalence of nervous disorders, and a great increase of paralytic
affections. Their origin is not difficult to be ascertained. A determination
appears to pervade all ranks, to call forth into immediate action all the
resources of existence, by an employment of the most powerful agents; and, in
the gratification of a moment, to risque their whole stock of nervous energy.
To such inordinate movements, kept up by a repeated use of the most active
stimulants, may we justly look for the cause of that derangement, which
physicians have to encounter under the multiplied forms of nervous debility.
Various chemical, pncumatic, and mechanical operations, it is well known, are
constantly going forward in the human body: and when any of these is too much
accelerated, or precipitately urged, the machine itself is destroyed, or is
rendered useless. Strongly incited to animal gratifications, men become
insensible to the condition of their present existence, which, so far from
implying an incessant series of pleasures, in many cases seems to produce the
highest enjoyments by preceding pain; thus inculcating upon human creatures the
necessity of temperance, and, in many instances, the utility of self-denial.
However, as was said, but fewattend to the admonitions of their animal
constitution. They aim at acquiring what Nature, more provident than they, has
prohibited to be attained; and by a lavish use of wine, spirits, or laudanum,
endeavor to procure to themselves the power of perpetual enjoyment. They bid
defiance to the warnings of experience in the fate of others: and solicitous
only to appear replete with spirit and animation in the eyes of those with whom
they associate, (who probably have recourse to the same incitements) they
continue to urge on the processes of life, till some part of the apparatus
gives way, and they suddenly feel all the symptoms of a ruined constitution,
not to be repaired by the utmost efforts of medical skill. Hence proceed that
train of nervous symptoms, which no less impede the operations of the mind,
than occasion painful bodily sensations: sensations so acute, as to drive the
unhappy victims into the hands of daring empirics, to whose pretended skill
they too often sacrifice those lives and fortunes, which ought to have been
devoted to the good of their connections.

In the prosecution of my subject, I shall endeavor carefully to avoid every
thing that has the appearance of abstract speculation. I wish only to announce
what, I conceive, will prove a benefit to the public, in alleviating some of
the most distressing disorders, that are incident to the human frame. I will
simply relate what has taken place under my own observation. I will not attempt
to account for the modus operandi of the plant, which is the subject of the
present essay; nor take upon me to decide whether it acts by renewing the
irritability of the system, or only by giving energy to the natural powers: nor
shall I presume to determine whether the nerves, acting as conductors of
electricity, are, by its means, made capable of transmitting a larger quantity
of this subtle fluid through the whole frame, as Aurum Musivum, when applied
to the rubber of an electrical apparatus, enables the cylinder to accumulate a
much larger quantity of that agent -- It is my intention only, by the relation
of facts, to establish the use of this powerful drug in those disorders, which
usually attend upon an enervated constitution. As the plant is not to be found
in our Materia Medica at present, I shall, as briefly as possible, describe it,
give it is history, and relate the cases in which I have successfully employed
it; in hopes that the faculty will be induced to make a fair trial of it, and,
if found worthy of further notice, that they will furnish the world with the
result of their observations.

My first acquaintance with the subject of this essay began while I was
examining, about four years ago, the plants in the Nursery Grounds at
Cottingham. I was told by the proprietor, of the wonderful effect of the Poison
Oak; that, if touched by the fingers, and not immediately washed off, the
acrimony it imparts would be retained for a long time; that should a person
accidentally touch his eyelids, or any part of the body where the skin usually
corrugates, whilst the virulence of the deleterious particles thus contracted
continues unimpaired, a swelling and troublesome itching would come on, and
continue for some time; and that even some of his men had suffered so much as
to lose such parts of the skin by sphacelation, as the acrid juice had touched.
This determined me to make further enquiries into it is powers; and I soon after
saw in the Analytical Review (to the conductors of which I beg leave to make my
acknowledgements) some account of experiments made in France, with the Rhus
Radicans, to which this plant is closely allied, by Mons. Fresnoi; from which
it appeared, that he had given the distilled water and extract of this plant,
in cases of paralysis of the lower extremities, with success. This information
induced me to hope, that the Sumach I now possessed, might be exhibited with
equal advantage, in the same and similar complaints: and though, in the form of
distilled water and infusion I was not successful, yet the event of the cases
subjoined, in which I have given it in substance, has made me ample amends. I
must, however, confess, that it is use has not been uniformly attended with
complete success. Having always advised extreme caution in it is first
exhibition, it has required a greater length of time to produce the desired
effects, than the general impatience, which, I apprehend, all medical men have
to combat with in their practice, will allow; an impatience continually
increased by the bold advertisers of specifics for the cure of every disease.

I have not found that an attempt has at any time been made in this country, to
ascertain, by experiments, the power of the Toxicodendron, as a medicine. In
France it seems to have been made the subject of enquiry for some time; for
Monsieur Fontana, speaks of the many celebrated writers, "Que les Ecrivains les
plus celebres ont communement regard comme un poison tres puissant, quoique
quelques Physiciens modernes ne l'aient pas trouve tell pour certains Ammaux."
Fontana.
who have considered it as a most virulent poison. The experiments however,
which he made upon animals, and has related, are not necessary to be introduced
here, since I hold all experiments on animals as insignificant, and irrelevant
to the effects of any medicine on the human subject. And those made on himself
go to show merely the manner in which it affected the skin, and seem to have
terrified "Mais jai ete force d'abandonner, des le commencement mes recherches
fur cette plant, parceque j'ai eu le malheur de m' en poisonner moimeme par
trois fois de suite, avee ses feuilles." Fontana.
him from any internal exhibition.

RHUS TOXICODENDRON, For the following botanical description of the
TOXICODENDRON, I am much indebted to my truly ingenious friend, A. H. HAWORTH,
Esquire. late of Cottingham, now of Little Chelsea, whose indefatigable industry in
investigating and critical acumen in distinguishing plants, I have frequently
witnessed.
PUBESCENT POISON-OAK, OR, SUMACH.
RHUS. Lin. Genesis Pl. 369. PENTANDRIA TRIGYNIA, Flores inferi.

Call. 5. partitus. Petala 5. Bacca 1. Sperma.

Juss. Genesis Pl. p. 369.

Tournef. 381.

Sectio ** foliis ternatis.

RHUS Toxicodendron foliis ternatis: foliolis petiolatis angulatis
pubescentibus, caul radicante, Lin. Sp. Pl. 381. Syst. Veg. ed. Murr. p. 293.
Syst. Veg. Lichf. Soc. v. 1. p. 230. Syst. Not. ed. 13. Gmel. Tom. 2. 494. Ait.
Hort. Kew. v. 1. p. 367. Walter Flo. Carolin. p. 255. Gaert. de Fr. et Sem.
Cent. 3. t. 44. f. 5. Bulliard. Herb. Franc. t. 143. Gron. Virg. 149.

RHUS foliis ternatis: foliolis petiolatis angulatis pubescentibus. Clayt. Flo.
Virg. 46.

RHUS Toxicodendron Hill's Hort. Kew. p. 453.

TOXICODENDRON. 2. (pubescens.) foliis ternatis: foliolis ovatis
incisoangulatis pubescentibus. Mill. Guard. Dict. ed. 6? Mill. Guard. Call. ed.
14. octavo. p. 166.

TOXICODENDRON tryphyllum folio sinuato pubescente. Tournef. Inst. 611.

TOXICODENDRON 2. Boerh. Ind. Hort. Batt. 1727. 2. p. 229.

HEDERA Virginiensis trifolia. Park. Theat. 679. f. 5.

HEDERAE Trifoliae Canadensi affinis Planta, Peregrina, arbor venenata
quorundam. H. R. Par. 84.

HEDERAE Trifoliae Canadensi affinis, surrecta, Arbor Tinctoria, virginiana
multis. Pluken Alm. 181. H.

EDERA Trifolia Canadensis. Corn. Can. 96. t. 97. Bar. Icon. 228.

VITIS Canadensis. Muntin Phytogr. t. 60.

ARBOR Trifoliata venenata virginiana, folio hirsuto. Raj. Hist. 1779.

THE Pubescent Poison-Oak or Sumach, is a deciduous shrub of moderate growth,
rising to the height of about four feet, it is covered with a greyish colored
somewhat striated bark, which is usually marked with minute spots, or glandular
appearances, not greatly unlike the effect of an insect, they have also a
distant resemblance to some of the smallest species of Sphoeria, for like
Sphoerioe they seem to arise from the wood, and finally cause a sort of
bursting or opening of the bark, immediately over them equal to their own size,
they further resemble Sphoerioe in being largest on the older and more stunted
shoots, particularly in the winter season; but in all likelihood they are the
common excretory ducts of the plant, whose fluid being excessively acrid, may
possibly require more capacious outlets, than shrubs of a milder juice.

The lower shoots, on and near the ground, in moist shady situations, which the
plant most affects, trail considerably like the Rhus radicans Linnoei, (smooth
rooting Poison-Oak or Sumach) and have like that shrub, the property of sending
down radicles into the earth, by which the plant admits of great increase, in
any of the winter months.

In such situations, however, I have not seen it produce seeds so readily, as
in drier and more pinching places, where it looses in a great degree, it is
radicating principle, grows more stiff and robust, and produces annual crops of
pale yellow striated berries.

There is a remarkable instance of this kind, (the singularity of which induces
me to mention it) now existing in a wall, in the Physic Garden of the Company
of Apothecaries at Chelsea, out of a chink in the side of which, and near the
ground, grows a strong plant of this Rhus, that has prospered there ever since
the time of the celebrated Miller, and which Mr. Fairbairn, the Company's
present gardener, obligingly assured me, was what Miller called the second
species of Toxicodendron, in his Gardener's Dictionary; it is, in all
probability, the identical plant from which the description in that well known
work was made; it seeds annually, but none of it is lower shoots exhibit the
least radicating propensity, although other plants of the same kind, in the
shady parts of the same garden, have that quality in great perfection, but I
believe they rarely produce seeds; so much do local circumstances affect and
alter the most permanent and distinguishing characters of vegetables.

I believe it is pretty generally known to Gardeners, and others concerned in
the pleasant and instructive employment of horticulture, that many other
fibrous plants, which, like the Rhus Toxicodendron, possess the power of
increasing ing themselves in any considerable degree by their roots, have that
property materially lessened, when the place they grow in happens to be dry and
poor, for nature has chiefly allotted them rich and moist habitations, and,
with her usual care, constructed their constitutions accordingly; the
alteration such plants undergo, in such a soil, is doubtless in the direction
of their juices, which (being fewer) appear to pass by the lower and less noble
parts, (they had before rendered luxuriantly radicant or prolific) and mount
upwards by a natural and almost instinctive impulse, to feed and mature, with
collected force, the infant germs which they had before too sparingly supplied
with nourishment.

Thus Nature checked by art or accident, in any customary channel of renewing
her works, kindly searches out and perfects another, that she may not be
disappointed in the multiplication of her productions, for " -- each moss,
Each shell, each crawling infect, holds a rank,
Important in the plan of Him who framed
This scale of Beings; holds a rank, which lost
Would break the chain, and leave a gap behind
Which Nature's self would rue."


I am not acquainted with any common plant, that more abundantly exemplifies
the above doctrine, than the Lilly of the Valley, Convallaria majalis Lin.
which is well known to all who possess a garden, to flower freely, and increase
amazingly by the root, in a moist north border, yet few, I fancy, have seen it
produce perfect seeds in that situation, notwithstanding the vigor of it is
growth; but when it is planted and confined in a garden pot, and it is increase
by the root consequently checked, it will frequently produce good seeds.

Vinca major et minor, greater and lesser Periwinkle, Tussilago Petasites,
Butter Burr, and many other plants, as remarkable for the sterility of their
seeds, as their great increase by roots, might, in all probability, experience
a similar effect, if under similar circumstances; their supposed sterility
therefore, should seem to result chiefly from the peculiarity of their
situation and constitutions, and not from any real defect in the formation of
all, or any of their parts of fructification, as has sometimes been ingeniously
conjectured by botanists and others; but, to return to the Rhus Toxicodendron,

The leaves are alternate and three'd, and F^^nd upon remarkable long petioles,
the lateral leafits are usually supported on very short petioles, which
frequently loose themselves by a kind of dilatation, in the substance of the
leafits; the terminal leafit has often a footstalk half an inch long or
upwards: all the leafits are dull green, have a drooping posture, and an
unpleasant aspect, they are oval-angulate and nervose, with a kind of undulated
margin, which sometimes forms distant tooth-like crenatures. The young
wood-buds, petioles, and the nerves on the undersides of the leafits, are
furnished with a very visible degree of pubescence, on which account I have
ventured to give the plant the English name of Pubescent Poison Oak, or Sumach,
for the purpose of distinguishing it from the Rhus radicans Lin. which has
constantly smooth leaves and shoots.

The flowers are produced in June, July, and August, on short, crowded axilleay
racemi, which are paniculate, and in a state of nature, dioecious. In our
specimens, however, (which were cultivated luxuriant ones, and the only ones
which we could procure in a state of fructification) a few of the flowers were
hermaphrodite, and had an increased number of parts, particularly, a minute six
cleft calyx, six small lance-oval whitish, rather striated, petals; and six
short stamina, supporting as many antherae.

When not rendered unnaturally luxuriant by cultivation, the male flower
consists of a minute calyx with five shallow clefts, a corolla of five small
petals, and five stamina which support as many antherae, and the germen in the
female flower is roundish, and when a little magnified, appears somewhat
bottle-shaped, and supports a short stylus, which is crowned with three very
small stigmata.

The fruit or seed arrives at maturity in England about the month of October
and November, it is a round, dry, pale-yellow striated berry, which is somewhat
scariose, and nearly the size of a small pea, and encloses one hard compressed
end-nicked kernel, which has a thick furrowed mealy covering.

The germination of the seed, I am sorry to add, I have had no opportunity of
observing.

The Rhus Toxicodendron is a native of North America, it has been introduced
into England ever since the year 1640, and was cultivated in this country as a
curious shrub in the time of Parkinson, who figures it in his Theater. See
Parkinson's Theatrum Botanicum and Aiton's Hortus Keweensis.


I shall conclude this long account of so common a shrub, by observing, that my
specimens did not in all points accord with those preserved in the Herbarium of
the great Linnaeus, which were very obligingly twice compared with mine, by the
present learned and well known possessor of that inestimable treasure; my
specimens are larger in all their parts, their leafits are less undulate, and
possessed of somewhat longer footstalks than those of Linnaeus, the lateral
leafits of which are nearly sessile, but his specimens are said to have been
gathered wild in North America, by Kalme, and mine were the luxuriant produce
of young plants, in the strong moist loam of a Yorkshire nursery, The nursery
of Messrs. Phillipson and Scales, at C^ttingham, near Hull, in Yorkshire.
which circumstances, I humbly trust, sufficiently account for the
abovementioned disparity.

A short account of cases in which it has been employed, will enable the reader
to judge of it is power as a medicine.

The following case is inserted as drawn up by my ingenious friend Mr. B --, an
eminent surgeon in this neighborhood, who paid the greatest attention to the
exhibition of the medicine, and has related, in a clear and interesting manner,
the gradual recovery of his own wife.

CASE I.
Mrs. B --, aged 38, always enjoyed remarkable good health, till about eight
years ago, at which time she complained of a disorder in her bowels, which she
described to feel as if the bowels had lost their sensation, and that a cold
wind seemed to rise up the oesophagus. As she was costive, two ounces of the
Ol. Ricini were given at four doses, which having no effect, stronger
purgatives were administered, but without producing a stool; after which the
smoke of tobacco was thrown up, the warm bath applied, a dose of calomel given,
and a blister put upon the belly. At length an evacuation was obtained; and
from the large quantity of cathartic remedies used, the bowels now took on the
other extreme, and a violent purging ensued. -- She now complained of a
pricking pain on the right side of the abdomen, which went off upon her voiding
by stool a piece of a large plumb stone, one side of which was worn as sharp as
the edge of a knife. After this she was frequently troubled with obstinate
constipations of the bowels, and obliged to have recourse to purgative
medicines. In the year 1789, she had two fits, which, I believe, were
epileptic; but, as I happened not to see her in either of them, I cannot be
certain. In the month of September, she was seized with pains in her hands and
feet, which were supposed to be gouty; and when these went off, she lost
entirely the use of the extensor muscles of the wrists, and soon after those of
the feet, which was followed by the loss of the extensors of the fingers and
toes. A tumor now arose upon the metacarpal bones of each hand, which seemed a
swelling either of the pcriosteum or bone itself, and had greatly the
appearance of a scrophulous affection, The tumors seemed sometimes likely to
suppurate, but about the end of the year 1790, they gradually disappeared. The
hands now looked livid, and the extensor muscles upon the arms and hands wasted
and shrivelled; her feet felt like logs of wood, and the fingers and toes were
contracted from the action of the flexor muscles; she could not walk without
help, and when she attempted it, always complained of something drawing her
backwards. During this time, she took a variety of volatile, cardiac, and tonic
medicines, but without any good effect. In the month of September, 1791, Dr.
ALDERSON was consulted, and advised her to take the TOXICODENDRON. Six grains
of the powdered leaves of that plant were infused in eight ounces of boiling
water, a table spoonful to be given three times a day. The whole of this was
taken without any sensible effect, except a slight pricking sensation in the
feet and hands:

Oct. 3d, She took one fourth of a grain of the powdered leaves made into a
bolus with Cons. Cort. Aurant. twice a day.

4th, The same; the pricking sensation continues, and the arms, to the ends of
the fingers, feel as if warm water was running-down them.

5th, Medicines continued three times a day.

6th, The same. In the evening, had an irregular spasmodic fluttering in the
toes.

Oct. 7th, Medicines continued. Was agreeably surprised to find she could
extend her fingers and toes a little. Her hands a little swelled, and her feet
and ancles much more so. She has, in a great measure, recovered the use of the
extensor pollicis of the right hand, and that of the left in a smaller degree;
has also lost the dead hard sensation in her finger ends, which was always her
constant attendant.

8th, Medicines continued.

9th, One third of a grain ter die.

10th, The same. Walked up stairs without help, her hands also stronger and
better, but the extensors of the wrists still inactive.

11th, The same.

Oct. 12th, Took half a grain ter die. Begins to walk tolerably well, and can
use her hands better, the extensor, adductor, and abductor muscles of the
thumbs, having recovered their action.

15th, Three grains were made into four boluses, and one taken three times a
day. At night the sensation, as if hot water was running down the arms, very
troublesome, with the pricking feel in the fingers.

17th, One grain ter die.

30th, Takes one grain and a half ter die; and this day perceived that she had
recovered the use of the extensor muscles of the wrists.

She continued the medicine, gradually increasing the dose to four grains ter
die, for some time longer. It seemed to act as a gentle aperient, and
frequently, when the large doses were taken, occasioned a slight vertigo, with
a pain across the forehead, and a nausea for about half an hour after taking
it. She has now left off the medicine twelve months, has entirely recovered the
use of her hands, and walks a mile or two very well; but the muscles of the
feet are not so well recovered as those of the hands, and she always lifts the
feet very high when she walks; which may be owing to a remembrance that in her
former state, if she attempted walking, and met with the smallest obstacle, a
fall on the face was generally the consequence.

Barton, July 25, 1793.

CASE II.
GREG, mariner, complained of the loss of one side, which he attributed to
falling asleep upon the deck, after being exhausted by fatigue during a gale of
wind. I ordered him half a grain of the powdered leaves of the TOXICODENDRON,
three times a day. On the second day, he felt an unusual twitching, or
convulsive motion, in the arm and leg affected; and when I saw him on the
Monday following, he could, without any assistance, bring the diseased leg
across the other, and had much more use of his arm. He continued his medicine a
week longer, when, finding himself so far recovered, that he could be employed
as a pilot on the river, he was content not to complete his cure, lest it
should subject him to be impressed. He has continued in much the same state for
some time past, having gotten more use of his limbs than he ever expected. It
is but right to observe, that during two years previous to his application to
me, every other means had, in vain, been employed, to restore the action of his
leg and arm.

CASE III.
Mr. B --, surgeen, aged 47, after having endured a complication of ills,
haemoptysis, jaundice, mesenterie obstruction, and general atrophy, lost the
total use of all his limbs; and even his mental faculties underwent a similar
paralysis. All his powers of ratiocination were suspended, and he was reduced
to a state nearly as helpless as that of a child only six months ^^d. In this
situation I gave him the TOXICODENDRON, half a grain three times a day, which,
in the course of a week, improved his appetite, and removed the habitual
costiveness to which he had long been liable. The dose was gradually increased
to one grain, three times a day. It produced some twitching across the abdomen,
with irregular or convulsive motion in the limbs; and when the nervous
influence seemed to pass to the extremities, (...) excited in the brain such a
sensation of pain, as made him frequently exclaim most violently: but when any
one asked him where his pain was, he answered, he could not mention any
particular place, but that all his limbs were, as if stretched forcibly. This
was more especially the case after sleep.

The dose was gradually increased to three grains four times a day, and he has
now taken it for three months. His brain has recovered its wonted functions;
his stomach and bowels do their office more completely than for years; he rests
without opium, though for a long time in the constant habit of taking it; his
animal spirits are wonderfully invigorated; and although he has not yet
acquired the perfect use of his limbs, they seem to be recovering their tone,
and I have every reason to hope, that he will, in time, be restored to the full
enjoyment of life.

CASE IV.
GEORGE. FORD, ship carpenter, aged 24, of a strong athletic make, and full
habit of body, was admitted into the Hull General Infirmary, on Wednesday the
13th of November, 1793, for a paralytic affection, which had deprived him of
the use of his right side; his recollection was so impaired, that he could not
give any account of the attack himself, but his wife informed me, that, for a
week before he lost the use of his limbs, he had, at times, complained of a
dull pain in his head, and numbness in his right hand and foot; that, by the
advice of some old woman, he had been blooded on the Monday, and that upon
going out of doors soon afterward, he was suddenly seized with hemiplegia. In
which state he was admitted into the Infirmary, on the Wednesday following.

A vomit was given him soon after his admission, which was followed the next
day by a warm purgative, and volatile and stimulant medicines for the course of
the first week; but finding that I was not likely to gain any ground from the
usual plan, and being desirous of trying the power of the TOXICODENDRON in a
recent case, I ordered him half a grain of the powdered leaves of this plant in
pills, three times a day; on the second day, after the exhibition of this
medicine, he felt a sudden convulsive twitching, or involuntary motion in
certain muscles of the affected side; from that moment he found he had the same
motion at will; every succeeding day he felt some muscle or other convulsively
moved, and it was always remarked, by the other patients in the same ward, that
he possessed the power of voluntarily employing all those muscles that had been
once convulsively affected in consequence of the TOXICODENDRON. He regularly
pursued the medicine, and gradually increased it to one grain every four hours,
taking care always to add to the dose, till he found some convulsive action was
produced.

In the course of three weeks, in which time every injured muscle had felt the
influence of this powerful drug, he regained the free and perfect motion of his
leg and arm; and recovered the full enjoyment of his mental faculties, which
had been equally affected from the first attack.

December 24, 1793.
LATELY PUBLISHED, BY THE SAME AUTHOR, AN ESSAY ON CONTAGION.

PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.


