THE Horse and the Olive: OR, WAR and PEACE.
WITH Moral Tale let Ancient Wisdom move,
Which thus I sing to make the Moderns wise:
Strong Neptune once with sage Minerva strove,
And rising Athens was the Victor's Prize.
By Neptune, Plutus (Guardian Power of Gain),
By Great Minerva, Bright Apollo stood:
But Jove superior bad the Side obtain
Which best contrived to do the Nation Good.
Then Neptune striking, from the parted Ground
The Warlike Horse came pawing on the Plain,
And as it tossed its Mane, and pranc'd around,
By this, he cries, I Will make the People Reign.
The Goddess smiling gently bowed the Spear,
And, rather thus they shall be blessed, she said;
Then upwards shooting in the Vernal Air
With loaded Boughs the fruitful Olive spread.
Jove saw what Gifts the Rival Powers designed,
And took the impartial Scales, resolved to show,
If greater Bliss in Warlike Pomp we find,
Or in the Calm which Peaceful Times bestow.
On Neptune's part he placed Victorious Days,
Gay Trophies won, and Fame extending wide:
But Plenty, Safety, Science, Arts, and Ease,
Minerva's Scale with greater weight supplied.
Fierce War devours whom gentle Peace would save,
Sweet Peace restores what angry War destroys,
War made for Peace with that rewards the Brave,
While Peace its Pleasures from it self enjoys.
Hence vanquished Neptune to the Sea withdrew,
Hence wise Minerva ruled Athenian Lands,
Her Athens hence in Arts and Honor grew,
And still her Olives deck pacifick Hands.
From Fables thus disclosed, a Monarch's Mind
May form just Rules to choose the Truly-Great:
And Subjects wearied with Distresses find
Whose kind Endeavors most befriend the State.
Even Britain here may learn to place her Love,
If Cities won her Kingdoms Wealth have cost,
If ANNA's Thoughts the PATRIOT-SOULS approve
Whose Cares restore that Wealth the Wars had lost.
But if we ask the Moral to disclose
Whom best EUROPA'S Patroness it calls,
Great ANNA's Title no Exception knows,
And unapply'd in this the Fable falls.
With Her no Neptune or Minerva vyes;
Whenever she pleased her Troops to Conquest flew,
Whenever she pleases Peaceful Times arise:
She gave the Horse, and gives the Olive too.
FINIS.
Printed for John Morphew, near Stationers' Hall.


