A COMEDY, CALLED, THE Basset-Table.

THE BASSET-Table. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane,
by Her Majesty's Servants.

By the Author of the Gamester.

LONDON: Printed for William Turner at the Angel at Lincolns-Inn-Back-Gate; and
Sold by J. Nutt near Stationers' Hall, 1706. Price 1 s. 6 d.

To the Right Honorable ARTHUR Lord ALTHAM, BARON of ALTHAM, In the Kingdom of
IRELAND.
My LORD,
POetry, in its first Institution, was principally designed to Correct, and
rectify Manners. Thence it was that the Roman and Athenian Stages were
accounted Schools of Divinity and Morality; where the Tragic Writers of those
Days inspired their Audiences with Noble and Heroic Sentiments, and the Comic
laughed and diverted them out of their Vices; and by rediculing Folly,
Intemperence, and Debauchery, gave them an Indignation for those
Irregularities, and made them pursue the opposite Virtues.

This caused the Dramatic Poets, in ancient Times, not only to be reverenced by
the lower sort of People, but highly Esteemed and Courted by Persons of the
first Rank; and though the Writers of latter Ages, have, in a greater Measure,
not to say in a scandelous Manner, deviated from the Footsteps, and Examples
of their Predecessors; yet have they found Protection and Favor with those,
who have been so Generous as to ascribe the Faults of the Poets to the
Degeneracy of the Age wherein they lived.

This consideration, my Lord, has imbolden'd me to this Address, for though on
the one Hand I am sensible, that the following Piece does little Merit your
Lordship's Patronage; yet your innate Goodness and Generosity give me hopes,
that your Lordship will Pardon this Intrusion, in which I have the Examples of
all those that wrote before me to bear me out. I heartily wish this Play were
more worthy of your Lordship's Acceptance: Yet so much, I hope, will be
forgiven to the fondness of a Mother for her Production; if, I say, in its
Favor, that through the whole Piece, I have had a tender regard to good
Manners, and by the main Drift of it, endeavored to Redicule and Correct one
of the most reigning Vices of the Age. I might say, as many of my Brethren have
done upon slighter Grounds, that this Play has had the good Fortune to Please
and Divert the Nicest, and Politest Part of the Town; but I should set little
Stress on their Applause, had I not some reason to depend upon your Lordship's
Approbation, whose Judgment, Penetration and Discernment, are alone sufficient
to do full Justice to a performance of this Kind.

And now, my Lord, if I followed the beaten Road of Dedicators, it would
naturally Engage me in a Panegirick, upon your Lordship's Personal Virtues, and
those of your Noble and Pious Family; but I shall purposely decline a Talk to
which I freely own my Ability is Unequal, and which, though managed by a Masterly
Pen, would make your Modesty suffer. Therefore I shall conclude, with begging
your Lordship's leave to Subscribe my self, with all imaginable Respect and
Sincerity.

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient, and most Devoted Humble Servant,

PROLOGUE
Spoke by Mr. Penkethman. IN all the Faces that to Plays Resort,
Whether of Country, City, Mob or Court;
I Have always found that none such hopes Inspire,
As you -- dear Brethren of the Upper Tire.
Poets in Prologues, may both Preach and Rail,
Yet all their Wisdom, nothing will avail,
Who writes not up to you, it is ten to one will fail.
Your thundering plaudit it is that deals out Fame,
You make Plays run, though of themselves but Lame:
How often have we known your Noise Commanding,
Impose on your Inferior Masters Understanding;
Therefore, Dear Brethren, (since I am one of you)
Whether adorned in Gray, Green, Brown or Blue,
This day stand all by me, as I will fall by you,
And now to let --
The poor Pit see how Pinky's Voice Commands,
Silence -- Now rattle all your Sticks, and clap your grimy Hands*
I greet your Love -- and let the vainest Author show,
Half this Command on clearer Hands below,
Nay, more to prove your Interest, let this Play live by you.
So may you share good Claret with your Masters,
Still free in your Amors from their Disasters;
Free from poor Housekeeping, where Peck is under Locks*
Free from Cold Kitchings, and no Christmas Box:
So may no long Debates in the House of Commons,
Make you in the Lobby Starve, when hungar Summons:
But may your plentious Vails come flowing in,
Give you a lucky hit, and make you Gentlemen;
And thus preferred, never fear the World's Reproaches,
But shake your Elbows with my Lord, and keep your Coaches:
EPILOGUE
Spoke by Mr. Esthcourt. THis goodly Fabric to a gazing Tarr,
Seems Fore and Aft, a Three Deckt-man os War.
Abaft, the Hold's the Pit, from thence look up,
Aloft! that Swabber's Nest, that is the Main-Top.
Side-boxes manned with Beau, and modish Rake,
Are like the Fore-castle, and Quarter Deck.
Those dark disguised, adventurous, black-nos'd few,
May pass for Gunners, or a Fire-ship's Crew.
Some come like Privateers a Prize to seize,
And catch the French within the Narrow Seas.
The Orange-Ladies, Virgins of Renown,
Are Powder-Monkies running up and down.
We Have here our Calms, our Storms, and prosperous Gales,
And shift our Scenes as Seamen shift their Sails.
The Ship's well manned, and not ill Woman'd neither,
So Ballast'd and Stowed, my Lads, she will bear the Weather.
But greater Dangers ventring Players alarm,
This Night's Engagement's worse than any Storm.
The Poet's Captain, but half dead with fright,
She leaves her Officers to maintain the Fight;
Yon'd middle Teer with Eighteen Pounders mauls us,
That Upper-Deck with Great and Small-Shot gauls us.
But from this Lower-Teer most Harm befalls,
There Is no opposing their prevailing Balls.
As either Foe or Friend their Chain-shot flies,
We sink or swim, we Conquer, Fall or Rise.
To fit and rig our Ships much Pains we take;
Grant we may now a Saving-Voyage make.
Here we are Embarked, and as you Smile or Frown,
You are our Stars, by You we Live or Drown.
Dramatis Personae.
Men.
Mr. Mills, Lord Worthy -- In Love with Lady Reveller, a hater of Gaming. Mr.
Wilks, Sir James Courtly -- An airy Gentleman, given to Gaming. Mr. Bigerstaff,
Lovely an Ensign -- In Love with Valeria. Mr. Bullock. Sir Rich. Plainman --
Formerly a Citizen, but now lives in Covent Garden, a great lover of a Soldier,
and an Inverate Enemy to the French. Mr. Esthcourt, Captain Hearty -- A Sea
Officer, designed by Sir Richard to Marry Valeria. Mr. Johnson, Sago -- A
Drugster in the City, very fond of his Wife. Mr. Penkethman Buckle. -- Footman
to Lord Worthy
Women.
Mrs. Oldfield, Lady Reveller -- A Coquetish Widow, that keeps a Basset-Table.
Mrs. Rogers, Lady Lucy -- Her Cousin, a Religious sober Lady. Mrs. Montford,
Valeria -- A Philosophical Girl, Daughter to Sir Richard, in Love with Lovely.
Mrs. Cross, Mrs. Sogo -- The Drugster's Wife, a Gaming profuse Woman, great
with my Lady Reveller, in Love with Sir James. Mrs. Lucas, Alpiew. -- Woman to
Lady Reveller.
Ladies, Gentlemen, for the Basset-Table. Chairman, Footmen, etc.
Scene. Lady Reveller^s Lodgings in Covent Garden; the Time; Four of the Clock
in the Morning. THE Basset Table.
ACT I.
A large Hall, a Porter with a Staff, several Chairs Waiting, and Footmen
a-sleep, with Torches and Flambeauxs standing about the Room. Footman CErtainly
they will Play all Night, this is a cursed Life.


Port. How long have you lived with your Lady?


Foot. A Month, too long by thirty Days, if this be her way of living; I shall
be dead before the Year's out; she Games all Night, and Sleeps all Day.


Port. As long as you sleep, what is Matter?


Foot. But I do not, for while she sleeps, I Am Employed in Howdee's, from one
end of the Town to the other.


Port. But you rest while she is Gaming; What would you do, if you led my Life?
This is my Lady's constant Practice


Foot. Your Lady keeps a Basset Table, much good may do you with your Service
-- Hark, they are broke up. [within.] ha, hy, my Lady Gamewel's Chair ready
there -- Mr. Sonica's Servant (The Footmen wake in a hurry.


1st. Foot. Where the Devil is my Flambeaux?


2d. Foot. So-hey -- Robin, get the Chair ready, my Lady's coming; stay, stay,
let me light my Flambeaux.


3d. Foot. [waking] Hey, hoa, what han't they done Play yet?


Port. They are now coming down, but your Lady is gone half an hour ago.


3d. Foot. The Devil she is, why did not you call me?


Port. I did not see you.


3d. Foot. Was you Blind? -- She has lost her Money, that is certain -- She
never flinches upon naW inning-Hand -- her Plate and Jewels Walks to Morrow to
replenish her Pocket -- a Pox of Gaming, I say.

[Exit.
[Within.] Mr. Looseall's Man --


4th Foot. Here -- So-ho, who has stole my Flambeaux?


[Within.] My Lady Umbray's Coach there. --


5th Foot. Hey! Will, pull up there

(Exeunt Omnes.)
Enter Lady Reveller and Alpiew, her Woman. Lady. My Lady Raffle is horridly
out of humor at her ill Fortune, she lost 300 l.


Alp. She has generally ill luck, yet her Inclination for Play is as strong as
ever. -- Did your Ladyship win, or lose, Madam?


Lady. I won about 50 l. -- prithee what shall we do, Alpiew? It Is a fine
Morning, it is pity to go to Bed.


Alp. What does your Ladyship think of a Walk in the Park? -- The Park is
pleasant in a Morning, the Air is so very sweet.


Lady. I don't think so; the sweetness of the Park is at Eleven, when the Beau
Monde makes their Tower there, it is an unpolished Curiosity to walk when only
Birds can see one.


Alp. Bless me, Madam! Your Uncle -- now for a Sermon of two Hours.


Enter Sir Richard Plainman, in a Nightgown as from Bed. Sir Rich. So Niece! I
find you're resolved to keep on your course of Life; I must be waked at Four
with Coach, Coach, Chair, Chair; give over for shame, and Marry, Marry, Niece.


Lady. Now would I forfeit the Heart of my next Admirer, to know the cause of
this Reproach. Pray, Uncle, explained your self; for I protest I cannot guess
what Crime I have unhappily committed to merit this advice.


Sir Rich. How can you look me in the Face, and ask me that Question? Can you
that keep a Basset-Table, a public Gaming-House, be insensible of the shame
on it? I have often told you how much the vast concurse of People, which Day and
Night make my House their Rendevouze, incommode my Health; your Apartment is a
Parade for Men of all Ranks, from the Duke to the Fiddler, and your Vanity
thinks they all pay Devoir to your Beauty -- but you mistake, every one has his
several end in Meeting here, from the Lord to the Sharper, and each their
separate Interest to Admire -- some Fools there may be, for there is seldom a
crowd without.


Lady. Malice -- some Fools? I cannot bear it.


Alp. Nay, it is very affronting, truly Madam.


Lady. Ay, is it not Alpiew? -- Yet, now I think on it, it is the defect of Age
to rail at the Pleasure's of Youth, therefore I shall not disorder my Face with
a frown about it. Ha, ha, I hope, Uncle, you will take peculiar care of my Cousin
Valeria, in disposing of her according to the Breeding you have given her.


Sir Rich. The Breeding I have given her! I would not have her have your
Breeding, Mistress, for all the Wealth of England's Bank; no, I bread my Girl
in the Country, a stranger to the Vices of this Town, and am resolved to Marry
her to a Man of Honor, Probity and Courage.


Lady. What the Sea Captain, Uncle? Faugh, I hate the smell of Pitch and Tarr;
one that can Entertain one with nothing but Fire and Smoke, Larboard and
Starboard, and the other Bowl of Punch, ha, ha, ha.


Alp. And for every fault that she commits he will condemn her to the Bilboes,
ha, ha.


Lady. I fancy my Cousin's Philosophy, and the Captain's Courageous Bluster,
will make Angelick Harmony.


Sir Rich. Yes, Madam, sweeter Harmony than your Sept and Le^^ Fops, Rakes and
Gamesters; give me the Man that serves my Country, that preserves both my
Estate and Life -- Oh, the glorious Name of Soldier; if I were Young, I Would go my
self in Person, but as it is --


Alp. You Will send your Daughter --


Sir Rich. Yes, Minx, and a good Dowry with her, as a reward for Virtue like
the Captains.


Alp. But suppose, Sir, Mrs. Valeria should not like him?


Sir Rich. I Will suppose no such thing, Mistress, she shall like him.


Lady. Why, there it is now, indeed, Uncle, your're too positive.


Sir Rich. And you to Impertinent: Therefore I resolve to quit your House; you
shall not keep your Revels under the Roof where I am.


Alp. I Would have you to know, Sir, my Lady keeps no Revels beneath her Quality.


Sir Rich. Hold your Tongue, Mrs. Pert, or I shall display your Quality in its
proper Colors.


Alp. I don't care, say your worst of me, and spare not; but for my Lady -- my
Lady's a Widow, and Widows are accountable to none for their Actions -- Well,
I shall have a Husband one of those days, and be a Widow too, I hope.


Sir Rich. Not unlikely, for the Man will hang himself the next day, I warrant
him.


Alp. And if any, Uncle, pretends to control my Actions --


Sir Rich. He Would loose his labor, I Am certain --


Alp. I Would treat him --


Sir Rich. Don't provoke me, Houswife, don't.


Lady. Be gone, and wait in the next Room.

(Ex. Alpiew.
Sir Rich. The Insolence of a Servant, is a great Honor to the Lady, no doubt;
but I shall find a way to humble you both.


Lady Lookee, Uncle, do what you can, I Am resolved to follow my own
Inclinations.


Sir Rich. Which infallibly carries you to Noise, Nonsense, Foppery and Ruin;
but no matter, you shall out of my Doors, I Will promise you, my House shall no
longer bear the Scandalous Name of a Basset Table: Husbands shall no more have
cause to date their Ruin from my Door, nor cry there, there my Wife Gam'd my
Estate away -- Nor Children Curse my Posterity, for their Parents knowing my
House.


Lady. No more threatening, good Uncle, act as you please, but don't scold, or I
shall be obliged to call Alpiew again.


Sir Rich. Very well, very well, see what will come on it; the World will
censure those that Game, and, in my Conscience, I believe not without Cause.

For she whose Shame, no good Advice can wake,
When Money's wanting, will her Virtue Stake.
(Exit.)
Lady. Advice! Ha, ha, ridiculous Advice. (Enter Lady Lucy) No sooner rid of
one mischief, but another follows -- I foresee this is to be a day of
Mortification, Alpiew.


Enter Alpiew. Alp. Madam.


Lady. My Uncle's gone, you may come in, ha, ha, ha.


L. Lucy. Fie, Cousin, does it become you to Laugh at those that give you
Council for your good?


Lady. For my good! Oh, mon cour? Now cannot I Divine what it is, that I do more
than the rest of the World, to deserve this blame.


Alp. Nor I, for the Soul of me.


L. Lucy. Should all the rest of the World follow your Ladyship's Example, the
order of Nature would be inverted, and every good, designed by Heaven, become a
Curse, Health and Plenty no longer would be known among us. -- You cross the
purpose of the Day and Night, you Wake when you should Sleep, and make all who
have any dependence on you, Wake while you Repose.


Lady. Bless me, may not any Person Sleep when they please?


L. Lucy. No, there are certain Hours, that good Man^^^^ Modesty and Health
require your Care; for Exam^^^ disorderly Hours are neither Healthful nor
Modest -- (...) not Civil to make Company wait Dinner for your (...).


Lady. Why, does any body Dine before four a Clock in London? For my part I
think it an Ill-bred Custom, to make my Appetite Pendulum to the Twelfth hour.


Alp. Besides, it is out of Fashion to Dine by Day light, and so I told Sir
Richard yesterday, Madam.


L. Lucy. No doubt, but you did, Mrs. Alpiew; and then you entertain such a
Train of People, Cousin, that my Lady Reveller is as noted as a public
Ordinary, where every Fool with Money finds a Welcome.


Lady. Would you have me shut my doors against my Friends -- Now she is jealous
of Sir James Courtly. (aside.) Besides, is it possible to pass the Evenings
without Diversions.


Alp. No certainly --


L. Lucy. I think the Playhouse, the much more innocent and commendable
Diversion.


Lady. To be seen there every Night, in my Opinion, is more destructive to the
Reputation.


L. Lucy. Well, I had rather be noted every Night in the front Box, then, by my
absence, once be suspected of Gaming; one ruins my Estate and Character, the
other diverts my Temper, and improves my Mind. Then you have such a number of
Lovers.


Lady. Oh Cupid, is it a Crime to have a number of Lovers? If it be, it is the
pleasantest Crime in the World. A Crime that falls not every day, to every
Woman's Lot.


L. Lucy. I dare be positive every Woman does not wish it.


Lady. Because wishes have no Effect, Cousin, ha, ha.


L. Lucy. Methinks my Lord Worthy's Assiduity might have banished the admiring
Crowd by this time.


Lady. Banished 'em? Oh, Mon cour! what pleasure is there in one Lover; it is
like being seen always in one Suit of Clothes; a Woman, with one Admirer, will
never be a Reigning Toast.


L. Lucy. I am sure those that Encourage more, will never have the Character of
a Reigning Virtue.


Lady. I slight the malicious Censure of the Town, yet defy it to asperse my
Verture; Nature has given me a Face, a Shape, a Mein, an Air for Dress, and Wit
and Humor to subdue. And shall I lose my Conquest for a Name.


Alp. Nay, and among the unfashionable sort of People too, Madam; for Persons
of Breeding and Quality will allow, that Gallantry and Virtue are not
inseparable.


L. Lucy. But Coquetry and Reputation are, and there is no differerence in the
Eye of the World, between having really committed the Fault, and lying under
the Scandal; for, my own part, I would take as much Care to preserve my Fame,
as you would your Virtue.


Lady. A little pains will serve you for that, Cousin; for I never once heard
you named -- A Mortification would break my Heart, ha, ha.


L. Lucy. It Is better never to be named, than to be ill spoke of; but your
Reflections shall not Disorder my Temper. I could wish, indeed, to convince you
of your Error, because you share my Blood; but since I see the Vanity of the
attempt, I shall desist.


Lady, I humbly thank your Ladyship.


Alp. Oh! Madam, here is my Lord Worthy, Sir James Courtly, and Ensign Lovely,
coming down; will your Ladyship see them?


Lady. Now have I a strong Inclination to Engage Sir James, to discompose her
Gravity; for if I have any Skill in Glances, she loves him -- but then my Lord
Worthy is so peevish since our late Quarrel, that I Am afraid to Engage the
Knight in a Ducl; besides, my Absence, I know, will teize him more, therefore,
upon Consideration, I Will retire. Cousin Lucy; Good Morrow. I Will leave you to
better Company, there is a Person at hand may prevent your Six-a-Clock Prayers.

(Exit.)
Lucy. Ha! Sir James Courtly -- I must own I think him agreeable -- but am
sorry she believes I do. I Will not be seen; for if what I scarce know my self be
grown so visible to her, perhaps, he too may Discover it, and then I am lost.

While in the Breast our Secrets close remain,
It Is out of Fortunes power to give us Pain.
[Exit.
Enter Lord Worthy, Sir James, Ensign Lovel. Sir James. Ha! was not that Lady
Lucy?


Ensign. It was -- ah, Sir James, I find your Heart is out of Order about that
Lady, and my Lord Worthy languishes for Lady Reveller.


Sir James. And thou art sick for Valeria, Sir Richard's Daughter. A poor
distresled Company of us.


Ensign, It Is true, that little she-Philosopher has made me do Penance more
heartily than ever my sins did; I deserve her by mere Dint of Patience. I have
stood whole hours to hear her Assert that Fire cannot Burn, nor Water Drown,
nor Pain Afflict, and forty ridiculous Systems -- and all her Experiments on
Frogs, Fish -- and Flies, ha, ha, ha, without the lcast Contradiction.


Ensign. Contradiction, no, no, I allowed all she said with undoubtedly, Madam,
-- I am of your mind, Madam, it must be so -- natural Causes, etc.


Sir James. Ha, ha, ha, I think it is a supernatural cause which Enables thee
to go through this Fatigue, if it were not to raise thy Fortune, I should think
thee Mad to pursue her; but go on and prosper, nothing in my Power shall be
wanting to assist you -- My Lord Worthy -- your Lordship is as Melancholy as a
losing Gamester.


Lord. Faith, Gentlemen, I Am out of Humor, but I don't know at what.


Sir James. Why then I can tell you, for the very same reason that made your
Lordship stay here to be Spectator of the very Diversion you hate -- Gaming --
the same Cause makes you uneasy in all Company, my Lady Reveller.


Lord. Thou have hit it, James, I confess I love her Person, but hate her
Humors, and her way of Living; I have some reasons to believe I Am not
indifferent to her, yet I despair of fixing her, her Vanity has got so much the
Mistress of her Resolution; and yet her Passion for Gain furmounts her Pride,
and lays her Reputation open to the World. Every Fool that has ready Money,
shall dare to boast himself her very humble Servant; 'ds Death, when I could
cut the Rascal's Throat.


Sir James. your Lordship is even with her one Way, for you are as testy as
she is vain, and as fond of an opportunity to Quarrel with her, as she of a
Gaming Acquaintance; my Opinion is, my Lord, she will never be won your Way.

To gain all Women there is a certain Rule,
If Wit should sail to please, then Act the Fool;
And where you find simplicity not take,
Throw off Disguises -- and Profess the Rake;
Observe which Way their chiefest Humors run,
They Are by their own loved, cannot the surest Way undone.

Lord. You Are of a happy temper, Sir James, I wish I could be so too; but
since I cannot add to your Diversion, I Will take my leave, good Morrow, Gentlemen.

(Exit.)
Sir James. This it is to have more Love than Reason about one; you and I
Lovely will go on with Discretion, and yet I fear it is in Lady Lucy's Power to
banish it.


Ensign. I find Mrs. Sago, the Drugsters Wife's Interest, begins to shake, Sir
James.


Sir James. And I fear her Love for Play begins to shake her Husband's Baggs
too -- faith, I am weary of that Intreague, lest I should be suspected to have
a hand in his Ruin.


Ensign. She did not lose much to Night, I believe; preethy, Sir James, what
kind of a tempered Woman is she? Has she Wit?


Sir James. That she has -- A large Portion, and as much Cunning, or she could
never have managed the old Fellow so nicely; she has a vast Passion for my Lady
Reveller, and endeavors to mimick her in every thing -- Not a suit of Clothes,
or a Top-knot, that is not exactly the same with hers -- then her Plots and
Contrivances to supply these Expenses, puts her continually upon the Rack; yet
to give her her due, she has a fertile Brain that Way; but come, shall we go
home and sleep two or three Hours, at Dinner I Will introduce you to Capt.
Hearty, the Sea Officer, your Rival that is to be, he is just come to Town.


Ensign. A powerful Rival, I fear, for Sir Richard resolves to Marry him to his
Daughter; all my hopes lies in her Arguments, and you know Philosophers are
very positive -- and if this Captain does but happen to Contradict one
Whimsical Notion, the Poles will as soon join, as they Couple, and rather then
yield, she would go to the Indies in search of Dampier's Ants.


Sir James. Nay, she is no Woman if she Obeys.

Women like Tides with Passions Ebb and Flow,
And like them too, their source no Man can know.
To watch their Motions, is the safest Guide,
Who hi^s their Humor, Sails with Wind and Tide.
[Exit.
The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
Enter Buckle, meeting Mrs. Alpiew. Alp. GOod Morrow.


Buckle. Good Morrow.


Alp. Good Morrow, good Morrow, is that all your business here; What means that
Affected Look, as if you longed to be examined what is the Matter.


Buc. The Capricio's of Love, Madamoselle; the Capricio's of Love.


Alp. Why -- are you in Love?


Buc. I -- in Love! No, the Devil take me if ever I shall be infected with that
Madness, it is enough for one in a Family to Fall under the whimsical
Circumstances of that Distemper. My Lord has a sufficient Portion for both;
here -- here -- here is a Letter for your Lady, I believe the Contents are not
so full of Stars and Darts, and Flames, as they used to be.


Alp. My Lady will not concern her self with your Lord, nor his Letters
neither, I can assure you that.


Buc. So much the better, I Will tell him what you say -- Have you no more?


Alp. Tell him it is not my fault, I have done as much for his Service, as lay
in my Power, till I put her in so great a Passion, it is impossible to Appease
her.


Buckle. Very good -- my Lord is upon the Square, I promise ye, as much enraged
as her Ladyship to the full. Well, Mrs. Alpiew, to the longest Day of his Life
he fwears, never to forget Yesterday's Adventure, that is given him perfect,
perfect Liberty.


Alp. I believe so -- What was it, pray?


Buckle. I Will tell you; 'twas a matter of Consequence, I assure you, I Have known
Lovers part for a less Triffle by half.


Alp. No Disgressions, but to the point, what was it?


Buckle. This -- my Lord, was at the Fair with your Lady.


Alp. What of that?


Buckle. In a Raffling-shop she saw a young Gentleman, which she said was very
handsome -- At the same time, my Lord, praised a young Lady; she redoubles her
Commendations of the Beau -- He enlarges on the Beauty of the Bell; their
Discourse grew warm on the subject; they Pause; she begins again with the
Perfections of the Gentleman; he ends with the same of the Lady; Thus they
persu'd their Arguments, still finding such mighty Charms in their new
Favorites, till they found one another so Ugly -- so Ugly -- that they parted
with full Resolutions never to meet again.


Alp. Ha, ha, ha, pleasant; well, if you have no more to tell me, adieu.


Buckle. Stay a Moment, I see my Lord coming, I thought he would follow me. Oh,
Lovers Resolutions --


Enter Lord Worthy. Lord. So, have you seen my Lady Reveller? (To Buckle.


Alp. My Lord --


Lord. Ha! Mrs. Alpiew.


Buckle. There Is your Lordship's Letter.

(Gives him his own Letter.
Lord. An Answer! She has done me very much Honor.


Alp. My Lord, I am commanded --


Lord. Hold a little, dear Mrs. Alpiew.

(All this while he is opening the Letter, thinking it from the Lady.)
Buckle. My Lord, she would not --


Lord. Bequiet, I say --


Alp. I am very sorry --


Lord. But a moment -- Ha, why, this is my own Letter.


Buckle. Yes, my Lord.


Lord. Yes, my Lord -- what, she would not receive it then?


Buckle. No, my Lord.


Lord. How durst you stay so long.


Alp. I beg your Lordship not to harbor an ill Opinion of me, I opposed her
anger with my utmost Skill, praised all your Actions, all your Parts, but all
in Vain.


Lord. Enough, Enough, Madam, she has taken the best method in the World --
Well, then we are never to meet again?


Alp. I know not that, my Lord --


Lord. I am overjoyed at it, by my Life I am, she has only prevented me; I
came a purpose to break with her --


Buckle. (aside) Yes, so 'twas a sign by the pleasure you discovered, in
thinking she had writ to you.


Lord. I suppose, she has entertained you with the Cause of this?


Alp. No, my Lord, never mentioned a Syllable, only said, she had for ever done
with you; and charged me, as I valued her favor, to receive no Message nor
Letter, from you.


Lord. May I become the very'st Wretch alive, and all the Ills immaginable fall
upon my Head, if I speak to her more; nay, ever think of her but with Scorn --
Where is she now?

(Walks about)
Alp. In her Dressing Room.


Lord. There let her be, I am weary of her fantastic Humors, affected Airs,
and unaccountable Passions.


Buckle. For half an Hour. (Aside)


Lord. Do you know what she is a doing?


Alp. I believe, my Lord, trying on a Mantua; I left her with Mrs. Pleatwell,
and that used to hold her a great while, for the Woman is saucily Familiar with
all the Quality, and tells her all the Scandal.


Lord. And conveys Letters upon occasion; it is tacked to their Profession --
But, my Lady Reveller may do what she pleases, I am no more her Slave, upon my
Word; I have broke my Chain -- She has not been out then since she Rose?


Alp. No, my Lord.


Lord. Nay, if she has, or has not, it is the same thing to me; she may go the
end of the World, if she will; I shall not take any pains to follow her -- Whose
Footman was that I met?


Alp. I know not, my Lord, we have so many come with How-dee's, I never mind
them.


Lord. You are uneasy, Child, come, I Will not detain you, I have no curiosity, I
protest I Am satisfied if she is so, I assure ye, let her despise me, let her
hate me, it is all one, adieu. (Going.


Alp. My Lord, your Servant.


Lord. Mrs Alpiew, let me beg one favor of you, (turns back.) not to say I was
here.


Alp. I Will do just as you please, my Lord.


Lord. Do that then, and you will oblige me,


Alp. I will. (Is going, and comes back often.)


Lord. Don't forget.


Alp. Your Lordship may depend upon me.


Lord. Hold, now I think on it -- Pray ^^ll her you did see me, do ye hear?


Alp. With all my Heart.


Lord. Tell her how indifferent she is to me in every respect.


Alp. I shall not fail.


Lord. Tell her every thing, just as I expressed it to you.


Alp. I will.


Lord. Adieu (going.)


Alp. Your Servant.


Lord. Now, I think on it, Mrs Alpiew, I have a great mind she should know my
Sentiments from my own Mouth.


Alp. Nay, my Lord, I cannot promise you that.


Lord. Why?


Alp. Because she has expressly forbid your admittance.


Lord. I Would speak but one Word with her.


Alp. Impossible.


Lord. Pugh, prithee do, let me see her, (entreating Mrs Alpiew.)


Buckle. So now, all this mighty rage ends in a begging Submission.


Lord. Only tell her I Am here.


Alp. Why should you desire me to meet her Anger, my Lord?


Lord. Come, you shall oblige me once.

(Puts a Ring upon her Finger.)
Alp. Oh, dear, my Lord, you have such a command over your Servant, I can
refuse nothing.

Exit.)
Lord. Have you been at the Goldsmiths about the Bills, for I am fixed on
Traveling.


Buck. Your Lordship's so disturbed, you have forgot you Countermanded me, and
send me hither.


Lord. True.


Enter Mrs. Alpiew. Alp. Just as I told your Lordship, she fell in a most
violent Passion, at the bare mention of your Name; tell him, said she, in a
heroic Strain, I Will never see him more, and command him to quit that Room,
'cause I Am coming to it.


Lord. Tyrant, curse on my Follies, she knows her Power; well, I hope, I may
walk in the Gallery; I would speak with her Uncle.


Alp. To be sure, my Lord.

(Exit. Lord Worthy.)
Buck. Learn, Mistress, learn, you may come to make me Mad in time, ha, ha, ha.


Alp. Go Fool, follow your Lord.

(Exit. Buckle.)
Enter Lady Reveller. Lady. Well, I Will swear, Alpiew, you have given me the
Vapors for all Day.


Alp. Ah! Madam, if you had seen him, you must have had Compassion; I would not
have such a Heart of Adamant for the World; poor Lord, sure you have the
strangest Power over him.


Lady. Silly -- one often Fanices one has Power, when one has none at all; I Will
tell the Alpiew, he vexed me strangely before this grand Quarrel; I was at
Picquet with my Lady Love-Witt four Nights ago, and bid him read me a new Copy
of Verses, because, you know, he never Plays, and I did not well know what to
do with him; he had scarce begun, when I being eager at a Pique, he rose up,
and said, he believed I loved the Music of my own Voice, crying Nine and
Twenty, Threescore, better than the sweetest Poetry in the Universe, and
abruptly left us.


Alp. A great Crime, indeed, not to read when People are at a Game they are
obliged to talk to all the while.


Lady. Crime, yes, indeed was it, for my Lady loves Poetry better than Play,
and perhaps before the Poem had been done had lost her Money to me. But, I
wonder, Alpiew, by what Art it is you engage me in this Discourse, why should I
talk of a Man that is utterly my Aversiou -- Have you heard from Mrs. Sago this
Morning?


Alp. Certainly, Madam, she never sails; she has sent your Ladyship the finest
Cargo made up of Chocolate, Tea, Montifiasco Wine, and 50 Rarities beside, with
something to remember me, good Creature, that she never forgets. Well, indeed,
Madam, she is the best natured Woman in the World; it grieves me to think what
Sums she loses at Play.


Lady. Oh fie, she must, a Citizen's Wife is not to be endured amongst Quality;
had she not Money, 'twere impossible to receive her --


Alp. Nay, indeed, I must say that of you Women of Quality, if there is but
Money enough, you stand not upon Birth or Reputation, in either Sex; if you
did, so many Sharpers of Covent Garden, and Mistresles of St. James's, would
not be daily admitted.


Lady. Peace, Impertinence, you take strange Freedoms.

[Enter Veleria running.] Why in such have Cousin Valeria. [Stopping her.]


Val. Oh! dear Cousin, don't stop me, I shall lose the finest Infect for
Desection, a huge Flesh Fly, which Mr. Lovely sent me just now, and opening the
Box to try the Experiment away it flew.


Lady. I am glad the poor Fly escaped; will you never be weary of these
Whimsies?


Val. Whimsies! natural Peilosophy a Whimsy! Oh, the unlearned World.


Lady. Ridiculous Learning?


Alp. Ridiculous, indeed, for Women; Philosophy Suits our Sex, as Jack Boots
would do.


Val. Custom would bring them as much in Fashion as Furbeloes, and Practice
would make us as Valiant as e're a Hero of them all; the Resolution is in the
Mind, -- Nothing can enslave that.


Lady. My Stars! this Girl will be Mad, that is certain.


(...) Mad^ so Nero Banished Philosophers from Rome, and the first Discoverer
of the Antipodes was Condemned for a Heretic.


Lady. In my Conscience, Alpiew, this pretty Creature's spoiled. Well, Cousin,
might I Advise, you should bestow your Fortune in Founding a College for the
Study of Philosophy, where none but Women should be admitted, and to
Immortalize your Name, they should be called Vale^^ans, ha, ha, ha.


Val. What you make a Jest of, Id'e Execute, were Fortune in my Power.


Alp. All Men would not be Excluded, the handsome Ensign, Madam.


Lady. In Love? Nay, there is no Philosophy against Love, Solon for that.


Val. Pisha, no more of this Triffling Subject; Cousin, will you believe
there is any thing without Gaul?


Lady. I am satisfied I have one, when I lose at Play, or see a Lady Addressed
when I am by, and it is equal to me, whether the rest of the Creation have or
not.


Val. Well, but I Will convince you then, I have dissected my Dove -- and
positively I think the Vulgar Notion true, for I could find none.


Lady. Oh, Barbarous; killed your pretty Dove! [Starting.


Val. Killed it! Why, what did you Imagine I bred it up for? Can Animals,
Insects or Reptils, be put to a Nobler use, than to improve our Knowledge?
Cousin, I Will give you this Jewel for your Italian Greyhound.


Lady. What, to Cut to Pieces? Oh, horrid! he had need be a Soldier that
ventures on you, for my part, I should Dream of nothing but Incision,
Dissection and Amputation, and always fancy the Knife at my Throat.


Enter Servant. Madam, here is Sir Richard, and a --


Val. A -- What, is it an Accident, a Substance, a Material Being, or, a Being
of Reason?


Serve. I don't know what you call a Material Being; it is a Man.


Val. P'sha, a Man, that is nothing.


Lady. She Will prove by and by out of Discartes, that we are all Machines.

(Enter Sir Richard, and Capt. Firebrand.)
Alp. Oh, Madam, do you see who observes you? My Lord walking in the Gallery,
and every Minute gives a Peep.


Lady. Does he so? I Will fit him for Eves-dropping --


Sir Rich. Sir, I like the Relation you have given me of your Naval Expedition,
your Discourse speaks you a Manfit for the Sea.


Capt. You had it without a flourish, Sir Richard, my Word is this, I hate the
French, Love a handsome Woman, and a Bowl of Punch.


Val. Very Blunt.


Sir Rich. This is my Daughter, Captain, a Girl of sober Education; she
understands nothing of Gaming, Parks and Plays.


Mrs. Alp. But wanting these Diversions, she has supplied the Vacancy with
greater Follies. [Aside.]


Capt. A Tite little Frigate, [Salutes her] Faith, I think, she looks like a
freshman Sea-sick -- but here is a Gallant Vessel -- with all her Streamers out,
Top and Top Gallant -- with your leave, Madam, (Salutes her) who is that Lady,
Sir Richard?


Sir Rich. It Is a Niece of mine, Captain -- though I am sorry she is so, she
values nothing that does not spend their days at their Glass, and their Nights
at Basset, such who never did good to their Prince, nor Country, except their
Tailor, Peruke-maker, and Persumer.


Lady. Fie, fie, Sir, believe him not, I have a Passion, an extreme Passion, for
a Hero -- especially if he belongs to the Sea; methinks he has an Air so
Fierce, so Piercing, his very Looks commands Respect from his own Sex, and all
the Hearts of ours.


Sir Rich. The Devil -- Now, rather than let another Female have a Man to her
self, she will make the first Advances. (aside.)


Capt. Ay, Madam, we are preferred by you fine Ladies sometimes before the
sprucer Sparks -- there is a Convenience in it; a fair Wind, and we hale out, and
leave you Liberty and Money, two things the most acceptable to a Wife in Nature.


Lady. Oh! ay, it is so pretty to have one's Husband gone Nine Months of the
Twelve, and then to bring one home fine China, fine Lace, fine Muslin, and fine
Indian Birds, and a thousand Curiosities.


Sir Rich. No, no, Nine is a little too long, six would do better for one of
your Constitution, Mrs.


Capt. Well, Madam, what think you of a cruising Voyage toward the Cape of
Matrimony, your Father designs me for the Pilot, if you agree to it, we'll
hoist Sail immediately.


Val. I agree to any thing dictated by good Sense, and comprehended within the
Borders of Elocution, the converss I hold with your Sex, is only to improve and
cultivate the Notions of my Mind.


Sir Rich. What the Devil is she going upon now? [Aside.]


Val. I presume you are a Mariner, Sir --


Capt. I have the Honor to bear the Queen's Commission, Madam.


Val. Pray, speak properly, positively, Laconically and Naturally.


Lady. So she has given him a Broadside already.


Capt. Laconically? Why, why, what is your Daughter? Sir Richard, ha


Sir Rich. May I be reduced to Wooden-Shoes, if I can tell you, the Devil; had
I lived near a College, the Haunts of some Pedaunt might have brought this
Curse upon me; but to have got my Estate in the City, and to have a Daughter
run Mad after Philosophy, I Will never suffer it in the rage I am in, I Will throw
all the Books and Mathematical Instruments out of the Window.


Lady. I dare say, Uncle, you have shook hands with Philosophy -- for I Am sure
you have banished Patience, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Rich. And you Discretion -- By all my hatred for the French, they will drive
me Mad; Captain I Will expect you in the next Room, and you Mrs Laconick, with
your Philosophy at your Tail.

(Exit.)
Lady. Shall Not I come too, Uncle, ha, ha.


Capt. By Neptune, this is a kind of a whimsical Family; well, Madam, what was
you going to say so positively and properly, and so forth?


Val. I would have asked you, Sir, if ever you had the curiosity to inspect a
Mermaid -- Or if you are convinced there is a World in every Star -- We, by our
Telliscopes, find Seas, Groves and Plains, and all that; but what they are
Peopled with, there is the Query.


Capt. Let your next Contrivance be how to get thither, and then you will know a
World in every Star -- Ha, ha, she is fitter for Moorfields than Matrimony,
pray, Madam, are you always infected, full and change, with this Distemper?


Val. How has my reason erred, to hold converse with an irrational Being --
Dear, dear Philosophy, what immense pleasures dwell in thee!


Enter Servant. Serve. Madam, John, has got the Fish you sent him in search of.


Val. Is it alive?


Serve. Yes, Madam.


Val. Your Servant, your Servant, I would not lose the Experiment for any
thing, but the tour of the new World.

(Exit.
Capt. Ha, ha, ha, is your Ladyship troubled with thief Vagaries too; is the
whole House possessed?


Lady. Not I, Captain, the speculative faculty is not my Talent; I am for the
practick, can lissen all Day, to hear you talk of Fire, substantial Fire, Rear
and Front, and Line of Battle -- admire a Seaman, hate the French, -- love a
Bowl of Punch? Oh, nothing so agreeable as your Conversation, nothing so Jaunty
as a Sea Captain.


Alp. So, this engages him to Play, -- If he has either Manners or Money.
(aside.


Capt. Ay, give me the Woman that can hold me tack in my own Dialect -- She Is
Mad too, I suppose, but I Will humor her a little. (aside) Oh, Madam, not a fair
Wind, nor a rich Prize, nor Conquest over my Enemies, can please like you;
accept my Heart without Capitulation -- It Is yours, a Prisoner at Discretion.

(Kisses her Hand.
Enter Lord Worthy. Lord. Hold, Sir, you must there contend with me; the
Victory is not so easy as you imagine.


Lady. Oh fie, my Lord, you will not fight for one you hate and despise? I may
trust you with the Captain, ha, ha, ha.

(Exit.
Capt. This must be her Lover -- And he is Mad another way; this is the most
unaccountable Family I ever met with. (aside) Lookye, Sir, what you mean by
contending I know not; but I must tell you, I don't think any Woman I have seen
since I came ashore worth Fighting for. The Philosophical Gimcrack I don't
value of a Cockle Shell -- And am too well acquainted with the danger of Rocks
and Quicksands, to steer into to others Harbor.


Lord. He has discovered her already; I, only I, am blind. (aside.)


Capt. But, Sir, if you have a mind to a Breathing, here tread upon my Toe, or
speak but one Word in favor of the (...), or against the Courage of our Fleet,
and my Sword will start of its self, to do its Master, and my Country, Justice.


Lord. How ridiculous do I make my self -- Pardon me, Sir, you are in the
right. I confess I scarce knew what I did.


Capt. I thought so, poor Gentleman, I pity him; this is the effect of Love on
shore -- When do we hear of a Tarr in these ^its, longer then the first fresh
Gale -- Well, I Will into Sir Richard, Eat with him, Drink with him: but to Match
into his Generation, I Would as soon Marry one of his Daughters Mermaids.

(Exit.)
Lord. Was ever Man so stupid as my self? But I will rouse from this Lethargick
Dream, and seek elsewhere what is denied at home, absence may restore my
Liberty.


Enter Mr. Sago. Sago. Pray, my Lord, did you see my Keecky.


Lord. Keecky, what is that?


Sago. My Wife, you must know, I call her Keecky, ha, ha.


Lord. Not I, indeed --


Sago. Nay, pray my Lord, ben't angry, I only want her, to tell her what a
Present of fine Wine is sent her just now; and ha, ha, ha, ha, what makes me
Laugh -- Is that, no Soul can tell from whence it comes.


Lord. Your Wife knows, no doubt.


Sago. No more than my self, my Lord -- We have often Wine and Sweetmeats;
nay, whole pieces of Silk, and the duce take me, if she could devise from
whence; nay, sometimes she has been for sending them back again, but I cried,
whose a Fool then --


Lord, I Am sure thou art one in perfection, and to me insupportable. [Going]


Sago. My Lord, I know your Lordship has the Privilege of this House, pray do
me the Kindness if you find my Wife to send her out to me.

[Exit Lord.] I never saw so much of this Lord's Humor before; he is very
Surly Methinks -- Adod there are some Lords of my Wives Acquaintance, as Civil
and Familiar with me, as I am with my Journeyman -- Oh! here she comes.


Enter Mrs. Sago and Alpiew. Mrs. Sago. Oh Puddy, see what my Lady Reveller has
presented me withal.


Sago. Hey Keecky, why sure you Rise -- as the saying is, for at Home there is
Four Hampers of Wine sent ye.


Mrs. Sago. From whence, Dear Puddy?


Sago. Nay, there is the Jest, neither you nor I know. I offered the Rogue that
brought it a Guinea to tell from whence it came, and he Swore he durst not.


Mrs. Sago. No, if he had I Would never have Employed him again. [Aside.]


Sago. So I gave him Half a Crown, and let him go.


Mrs. Sago. It comes very Opportunely pray Puddy send a Couple of the Hampers
to my Lady Revelleras a small Acknowledgement for the Rich Present she has made
me.


Sago. With all my Heart, my Jewel, my Precious.


Mrs. Sago. Puddy, I am strangely obliged to Mrs. Alpiew, do, Puddy, do, Dear
Puddy.


Sago. What?


Mrs. Sago. Will ye, then? Do, Dear Puddy, do, lend me a Guinea to give her,
do. [Hanging upon him in a Wheedling Tone.]


Sago. P'shaw, you are always wanting Guineas, I Will send her Half a Pound of
Tea, Keecky.


Mrs. Sago. Tea -- sha -- she Drinks Ladies Tea; do, Dear Pudd, do; can you
deny Keecky now?


Sago. Well, well, there.

(Gives it her.)
Mrs. Sago. Mrs. Alpiew, will you please to lay the Silk by for me, till I send
for it, and accept of That?


Alp. Your Servant Madam, I Will be careful of it.


Mrs. Sago. Thank ye, Borrow as much as you can on it, Dear Alpiew. [Aside to
her.]


Alp. I warrant you, Madam.

[Exit.]
Mrs. Sago. I must Raise a Sum for Basset against Night.


Mr. Sago. Preethy Keecky, what kind of Humored Man is Lord Worthy? I did but
ask him if he saw thee, and I Thought he would snapp'd my Nose off.


Mrs. Sago. Oh a mere Woman, full of Spleen and Vapors, he and I never agree.


Mr. Sago. Adod, I thought so -- I guest'd he was none of thy Admirers -- Ha,
ha, ha, why there is my Lord Courtall, and my Lord Harncit, bow down to the
Ground to me wherever they meet me.


Enter Alpiew. Alp. Madam, Madam, the Goldsmith has sent in the Plate.


Mrs. Sago. Very well, take it along with the Silk. [Aside to her.]


Alp. Here Is the Jeweller; Madam, with the Diamond Ring, but he don't seem
willing to leave it without Money.

[Exit Alpiew.]
Mrs. Sago. Humph? I have a sudden Thought, bid him stay, and bring me the Ring
-- Now for the Art of Wheedling. --


Sago. What are you Whispering about? Ha? Precious. --


Mrs. Sago. Mrs. Alpiew says, a Friend of her has a Diamond Ring to Sell, a
great Penny-worthand I know you love a Bargain Puddy.


Enter Alpiew, gives her the Ring.
Sago. P'shaw, I don't care for Rings; it may be a Bargain, and it may not; and
I cannot spare Money; I have Paid for a Lot this Morning; consider Trade must go
forward, Lambkin.


Alp. See how it Sparkles.


Mrs. Sago. Nay, Puddy, if it be not Worth your Money I don't desire you to Buy
it; but don't it become my Finger, Puddy? See now. --


Sago. Ah! that Hand, that Hand it was which first got hold of my Heart; well
what is the Price of it; Ha, I am ravished to see it upon Keecky's Finger. --


Mrs. Sago. What did he say the Price was? [To Alpiew.]


Alp. Two Hundred Guineas, Madam. [Aside to Mrs. Sago.]


Mrs. Sago. Threescore Pound, Dear Pudd, the Devils in it if he will not give that.
[Aside.]


Sago. Threescore Pounds? Why it is Worth a Hundred Child, Richly -- it is Stole
-- it is Stole. --


Alp. Stole? I Would have you to know the Owner is my Relation, and has been as
great a Merchant as any in London, but has had the Misfortune to have his Ships
fall into the Hands of the French, or he would not have parted with it at such a
Rate; it Cost him Two Hundred Guineas.


Mrs. Sago. I believe as much; indeed it is very fine.


Sago. So it is Keecky, and that Dear little Finger shall have it to let me
Bite it; a little Tiny bit. --

[Bites her Finger.]
Mrs. Sago. Oh! Dear Pudd, you Hurt me.


Sago. Here -- I have not so much Money about me, but there is a Bill, Lambkin --
there now, you will Buss poor Puddy now, will not you?


Mrs. Sago. Buss him -- yes that I will again, and again, and again. Dear Pudd.

[Flies about his Neck.]
Sago. You Will go Home with Puddy now to Dinner, will not you?


Mrs. Sago. Yes -- a -- Dear Puddy, if you desire it -- I will -- but -- a --


Sago. But what?


Mrs. Sago. But I promised my Lady Reveller to Dine with her, Deary -- do, let
me Pudd -- I Will Dine with you to Morrow-day.


Alp. Nay, I Am sure my Lady will not Eat a bit if she don't stay.


Sago. Well, they are all so Fond of my Wife, by Keecky, show me the Little
Finger again -- Oh! Dear Little Finger, by Keecky. [Aside.]


Mrs. Sago. By own Pudd -- Here Alpiew give him his Ring again, I have my End,
tell him it is to Dear.


Alp. But what will you say when Mr. Sago. Misses it.


Mrs. Sago. I Will say -- that it was two big for my Finger, and I lost it; it is
but a Crying-bout, and the good Man melts into Pity --

In The Married State, this only Bliss we find,
An Easy Husband to our Wishes kind.
Iv'e Gained my Point, Replenished Purse once more,
Oh! cast me Fortune on the Winning Shore.
Now let me Gain what I have Lost before.
[Exit.]
ACT. III.
The Scene draws, and discovers Valeria with Books upon a Table, a Microscope,
putting a Fish upon it, several Animals lying by. Val. SHA! Thou fluttering
Thing. -- So now I Have fixed it.


Enter Alpiew. Alp. Madam, here is Mr. Lovely; I have introduced him as One of
my Lady's Visitors, and brought him down the Back-stairs.


Val. I Am obliged to you, he comes opportunely.


Enter Lovely. Oh! Mr. Lovely, come, come here, look through this Glass, and
see how the Blood Circulates in the Tale of this Fish.

Lovely. Wonderful! but it Circulates prettier in this Fair Neck.


Val. Pshaw -- be quiet -- I Will show you a Curiosity, the greatest that ever
Nature made -- [opens a Box] in opening a Dog the other Day I found this Worm.


Lovely. Prodigious! it is the Joint-Worm, which the Learned talk of so much.


Val. Ay, the Lumbricus Latus, or Foescia, as Hippocrates calls it, or Vulgarly
in English the Tape-Worm. -- Thudaeus tells us of One of these Worms found in a
Human Body 200 Foot long, without Head or Tail.


Lovely. I wish they be not got into thy Brain. [Aside.]

Oh you Charm me with these Discoveries.


Val. Here Is another Sort of Worm called Lumbricus teres Intestinalis.


Lovely. I think the First you showed me the greatest Curiosity.


Val. It Is very odd, really, that there should be every Inch a Joint, and every
Joint a Mouth. -- Oh the profound Secrets of Nature!


Lovely. It Is strangely Surprising. -- But now let me be heard, for mine is the
Voice of Nature too; methinks you neglect your self, the most Perfect Piece of
all her Works.


Val. Why? What Fault do you find in me?


Lovely. You have not Love enough; that Fire would Consume and Banish all
Studies but its own; your Eyes would Sparkle, and spread I know not what, of
Lively and Touching, over the whole Face; this Hand, when Pressed by him you
Love, would Tremble to your Heart.


Val. Why so it does, -- have I not told you Twenty Times I Love you, -- for I
hate Disguise; your Temper being Adapted to mine, gave my (...) the First
Impression; -- you know my Father's Positive, -- but do not believe he shall
Force me to any Thing that does not Love Philosophy.


Lovely. But that Sea Captain Valeria.


Val. If he was a Whale he might give you Pain, for I should long to Dissect
him; but as he is a Man, you have no Reason to Fear him.


Lovely. Consent then to Fly with me.


Val. What, and leave my Microscope, and all my Things, for my Father to break
in Pleces?


Sir Rich. Valeria, Valeria. [Within.]


Val. Oh Heavens! Oh Heavens! he is coming up the Back-stairs. What-shall we do?


Lovely. Humph, ha, cannot you put me in that Closet there?


Val. Oh no, I have not the Key.


Lovely. I Will run down the Great Stairs, let who will see me. [Going.]


Val. Oh no, no, no, no, not for your Life; -- here, here, here, get under this
Tub.

Throws out some Fish in Have, and Turns the Tub over him. Sir, I Am here.


Enter Sir Richard. Sir Richard. What, at your Whims -- and Whirligigs, ye
Baggage? I Will out at Window with them. [Throwing away the Things.]


Val. Oh Dear Father, save my Lumbricus Latus.


Sir Rich. I Will Lamprey and Latum you; what is that I wonder? Ha? Where the
Devil got you Names that your Father don't understand? Ha?

[Treads upon them.]
Val. Oh my poor Worm! Now have you destroyed a Thing, that, for ought I know,
England cannot produce again.


Sir Rich. What is it good for? Answer me that? -- What Is this Tub here for?
Ha?

[Kicks it.]
Val. What shall I do now? -- it is, a it is a -- Oh Dear Sir! Don't touch the
Tub, -- for there is a Bear's Young Cub that I have brought for Dissection, --
but I dare not tonch it till the Keeper comes.


Sir Rich. I Will Cub you, and Keeper you, with a Vengeance to you; is my Money
laid out in Bears Cubs? -- I Will drive out your Cub. --

Opens the Door, stands at a Distance off, and with his Cane, lifts up the Tub,
Lovely rises.
Lovely. Oh the Devil discovered, your Servant Sir.

[Exit]
Sir Rich. Oh! your Servant Sir -- What is this your Bear's Cub? Ha Mistress?
His Tailor has licked him nto Shape I find. -- What did this Man do here? Ha
Huswife? -- I doubt you have been studying Natural Philosophy with a Vengeance.


Val. Indeed, Sir, he only brought me a strange Fish, and hearing your Voice I
was afraid you should be Angry, and so that made me hide him.


Sir. Rich. A Fish, -- it is the Flesh I fear; I Will have you Married to Night.
-- I believe this Fellow was the Beggarly Ensign, who never Marched farther
than from Whitehall to the Tower, who wants your Portion to make him a
Brigadier, without ever seeing a Battle -- Huswife, ha -- though your
Philosophical Cant, with a Murrain to you -- has put the Captain out of
Conceit, I have a Husband still for you; -- come along, come along, I Will send
the Servants to clear this Room of your Bawbles, -- (pulls her off) I will so.


Val. But the Servants will not, Old Gentleman, that is my Comfort still.

(Exit.)
Re-enter Lovely. Lov. I Am glad they are gone, for the Duce take me if I could
hit the Way out.


Enter Sir James. Sir James. Ha -- Ensign! luckily met; I have been Laboring
for you, and I hope done you a Piece of Service. Why, you look surpised.


Lov. Surpised! so would you, Sir Harry, if you had been whelmed under a Tub,
without Room to Breath.


Sir James. Under a Tub! Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. 'Twas the only Place of Shelter.


Sir James. Come, come, I have a better Prospect, the Captain is a very Honest
Fellow, and thinks if you can bear with the Girl, you deserve her Fortune;
here is your Part, [Gives a Paper] he will give you your Cue, he stays at his
Lodging for you.


Lov. What Is the Design?


Sir James. That will tell you; quick Dispatch.


Lov. Well, Sir James, I know you have a Prolifick Brain, and will rely on your
Contrivances, and if it succeeds the Captain shall have a Bowl of Punch large
enough to set his Ship afloat.

[Exit.]
Lady Reveller, Lady Lucy, Mrs. Sago, appear. Sir James. The Tea-Table broke up
already! I fear there has been but small Recruits of Scandal to Day.


Mrs. Sago. Well, I Will swear I think the Captain's a Pleasant Fellow.


Sir James. That Is because he made his Court to her. [Aside.]


Lady Revel. Uh -- I Nauseate those Amphibious Creatures.


Sir James. Umph, she was not Addressed to.


Lady Lucy. He seems neither to want Sense, Honor, nor True Courage, and
methinks there is a Beauty in his Plain Delivery.


Sir James. There spoke Sincerity without Affectation.


Lady Revel. How shall we pass the Afternoon?


Sir James. Aye, Ladies, how shall we?


Lady Revel. You here! I thought you had Listed your self Volunteer under the
Captain to Board some Prize, you whispered so often, and sneaked out one after
another.


Sir James. Who would give one self the Pains to Cruise Abroad, when all one
Values is at Home?


Lady Revel. To whom is this Directed? Or will you Monopolize and Ingross us
all?


Sir James. No, -- though you would wake Desire in every Beholder, I resign you
to my Worthy Friend.


Lady Lucy. And the rest of the Company have no Pretense to you.


Mrs. Sago. That Is more than she knows. [Aside.]


Sir James. Beauty, like yours, would give all Mankind Pretense.


Mrs. Sago. So, not a Word to me; are these his Vows? [In an uneasy Air.]


Lady Lucy. There Is One upon the Teaze already. [Aside.]


Lady Revel. Why, you are in Disorder, my Dear; you look as if you had lost a
Trant-Leva: What have you said to her, Sir James?


Sir James. I said, Madam? I hope I never say any Thing to offend the Ladies.
The Devils in these Married Women, they cannot conceal their own Intriegues,
though they Swear us to Secrecy. [Aside.]


Lady Lucy. You mistake, Cousin, it is his saying nothing to her has put her
upon the Fret.


Lady. Revel. Ah, your Observations are always Malicious.


Mrs. Sago. I despise them, Dear Lady Reveller, let us in to Picquet; I suppose
Lady Lucy would be pleased with Sir James alone to finish her Remarks.


Lady Lucy. Nay, if you remove the Cause, the Discourse ceases.


Sir James. [Going up to her.] This you draw upon your self, you will discover
it. [To her.]


Mrs. Sago. Yes, your Falsehood.


Lady Revel. Come my Dear, Sir James, will you make One at a Pool?


Sir James. Pardon me, Madam, I Am to be at White's in Half an Hour, anon at the
Basset-Table. I Am Yours.


Mrs. Sago. No, no, he cannot leave her. [Going, still looking back.]


Lady Lucy. They play Gold, Sir James.


Sir James. [Going up to Lady Lucy] Madam, were your Heart the Stake I Would
Renounce all Engagements to win that, or retrieve my own.


Lady Lucy. I must like the Counterstake very well er'e I play so high.


Mrs. Sago. Sir James, hearkee, One Word with you.

Breaking from Lady Reveller's Hand, pulling Sir James by the Sleeve.
Lady Lucy. Ha, ha, I knew she could not stir; I Will remove your Constraint,
but, with my wonted Freedom, will tell you plainly -- your Husband's Shop would
better become you than Gaming and Gallants. Oh Shame to Virtue, that we should
Copy Men in their most Reigning Vices!

Of Virtue's wholesome Rules unjustly we complain,
When Search of Pleasures gives us greater Pain.
How slightly we our Reputation Guard,
Which lost but once can never be Repaired.

Lady Revel. Farewell Sentences.


Enter Alpiew. Alp. Madam -- [Whispers her Lady.]


Mrs. Sago. So then, you would persuade me 'twas the Care of my Fame.


Sir Harry. Nothing else I protest, my Dear little Rogue; I have as much Love
as you, but I have more Conduct.


Mrs. Sago. Well, you know how soon I forgive you your Faults.


Sir James. Now to what Purpose have I Lied my self into her good Graces, when
I would be glad to be rid of her? [Aside.]


Lady Revel. Booted and Spurred say you? Pray send him up, Sir James; I suppose
Trusty Buckle is come with some Diverting Embassy from your Friend.


Enter Buckle in a Riding Dress. Mr. Buckle. Why in this Equipage?


Buckle. Ah! Madam. --


Lady Revel. Out with it.


Buckle. Farewell Friends, Parents, and my Country; thou Dear Playhouse, and
sweet Park, Farewell.


Lady Revel. Farewell, why, whither are you going?


Buckle. My Lord and I am going where they never knew Deceit.


Sir James. That Land is Invisible, Buckle.


Lady Revet. Ha, ha, ha.


Sir James. Were my Lord of my Mind your Ladyship should not have had so large
a Theme for your Mirth. Your Servant Ladies.

[Exit.]
Lady Revel. Well, but what is your Business?


Buckle. My Lord charged me in his Name to take his Everlasting Leave of your
Ladyship.


Lady Revel. Why, where is he a going pray?


Buckle. In search of a Country where there is no Women.


Mrs. Sago. Oh dear, why what have the Women done to him pray?


Buckle. Done to him, Madam? He says they are Proud, Perfidious, Vain,
Inconstant, Coquets in England.


Mrs. Sago. Oh! He Will find they are everywhere the same.


Lady Revel. And this is the Cause of his Whimsical Pilgrimage? Ha, ha.


Buckle. And this proceeds from your ill Usage, Madam; when he left your House,
-- he flung himself into his Coach with such a Force, that he broke all the
Windows, -- as they say, -- for my Part I was not there; -- when he came Home
he beat all his Servants round to be Revenged.


Alp. Was you there, Buckle?


Buckle. No, I thank my Stars, when I arrived the Expedition was over; -- in
Haste he Mounted his Chamber, -- flung himself upon his Bed, -- Bursting out
into a Violent Passion, -- Oh that ever I should suffer my self to be imposed
upon, said he, by this Coquetish Beauty!


Lady Revel. Meaning me, Buckle, Ha, ha?


Buckle. Stay till I have finished the Piece, Madam, and your Ladyship shall
judge; -- she is as Fickle as she is Fair, -- she does not use more Art to Gain a
Lover, said he, than to deceive him when he is fixed. -- Humph. [Learing at
her.]


Lady Revel. Pleasant -- and does he call this taking Leave?


Mrs. Sago. A Comical Adieu.


Buckle. Oh, Madam, I Am not come to the Tragical Part of it yet, starting from
his Bed. --


Lady Revel. I thought it had been all Farce, -- if there be any Thing Heroic
in it I Will set my Face and look Grave.


Buckle. My Relation will require it, Madam, for I am ready to weep at the
Repetition: Had you but seen how often he Travast the Room, [Acting it] heard
how often he stamped, what distorted Faces he made, casting up his Eyesthu^,
Biting his Thumbs thus.


Lady Revel. Ha, ha, ha, you will make an Admirable Actor, -- shall I speak to
the Patentees for you?


Mrs. Sago. But pray how did this end?


Buckle. At last, Madam, quite spent with Rage, he sunk down upon his Elbow,
and his Head fell upon his Arm.


Lady Revel. What, did he faint away?


Buckle. Oh, no.


Mrs. Sago. He did not die?


Buckle. No, Madam, but he fell asleep.


Lady Revel. Oh Brave Prince Pretti^an.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.


Buckle. After Three Hours Nap he Waked -- and calling hastily -- my Dear
Buckle, said he, let us to the End of the World; and try to sind a Place where
the Sun Shines not here and there at one Time -- for it is not fit that it
should at once look upon Two Persons whose Sentiments are so Different -- She
no longer regards my Pain, Ungrateful, False, Inhumane, Barbarous Woman.


Lady Revel. Foolish, Fond, Believing, Easy Man; there is my Answer -- Come,
shall we to Piquet, my Dear?


Buckle. Hold, hold, Madam, I have not half done --


Mrs. Sago. Oh! Pray my Dear Lady Reveller, let us have it out, it is very
Diverting --


Buckle. He called me in a feeble Voice; Buckle, said he, bring me my little
Serutore -- for I will write to Lady Reveller before I part from this Place,
never to behold her more -- what, don't you Cry, Madam?


Lady Revel. Cry -- No, no, go on, go on.


Buckle. It Is done, Madam -- and there is the Letter.

[Gives her a Letter.]
Lady Revel. So, this Compleats the Narration. [Reads.] Madam, Since I cannot
Live in a Place where there is a Possibility of seeing you without Admiring, I
resolve to Fly; I am going for Flanders; since you are False I have no Business
here -- I need not describe the Pain I feel, you are but too well Acquainted
with that -- therefore I Will choose Death rather than Return. --

Adieu.




Buckle. Can any Man in the World write more Tenderly, Madam? Does he not say
it is Impossible to Love you, and go for Flanders? And that he would rather hear
of your Death then Return. --


Lady Revel. Excellent, Ha, ha.


Buckle. What, do you Laugh?


Mrs. Sago. Who can forbear?


Buckle. I think you ought to Die with Grief; I warrant Heaven will punish you
all. [Going.]


Mrs. Alp. But hearkee, Buckle, where are you going now?


Buckle. To tell my Lord in what Manner your Lady received his Letter; Farewell
-- now for Flanders. --


Mrs. Alp. A fair Wind, and a good Voyage to you.

[As he goes out enter Lord Worthy.]
Buckle. My Lord, here? So now may I have my Head Broke for my long Harangue if
it comes out.


Lady Revel. Oh! Miraculous -- my Lord, you have not finished your Campaign
already, have you? Ha, ha, ha; or has the French made Peace at hearing of your
Lordship's intended Bravery, and left you no Enemies to Combat?


Lord. My worst of Foes are here -- here, within my Breast; your Image, Madam.


Lady Revel. Oh Dear, my Lord, no more of that Theme, for Buckle has given us a
Surfeit on it already -- even from your Breaking the Glasses of your Coach -- to
your falling fast Asleep. Ha, ha, ha.


Lord. The Glasses of my Coach! What do you mean, Madam -- Oh Hell! [Biting his
Thumbs.]


Buckle. Ruined quite. -- Madam, for Heavens sake what does your Ladyship Mean?
I Li'd in every Syllable I told you, Madam.


Lady. Nay, if your Lordship has a Mind to Act it over again we will Oblige you
for once -- Alpiew set Chairs -- come, Dear Sago, sit down -- and let the Play
begin -- Buckle knows his Part, and upon Necessity could Act yours too my Lord.


Lord. What has this Dog been doing? When he was only to deliver my Letter, to
give her new Subject for her Mirth -- Death, methinks I hate her, -- Oh that I
could hold that Mind -- what makes you in this Equipage? Ha! Sirrah? [Aside.]


Buckle. My Lord, I, I, I, I,


Lord. Peace Villain --

[Strikes him.]
Lady. Hey -- this is Changing the Scene --


Buckle. Who the Devil would Rack his Brains for these People of Quality, who
like no Body's Wit but their own? -- [Aside.]


Mrs. Sago. If the Beating were Invention before, thou have it now in Reality;
if Wars begin I Will Retire. They may agree better alone perhaps.

[Exit.]
Lady. Where did you learn this Rudeness, my Lord, to Strike your Servant
before me?


Lord. When you have deprived a Man of his Reason how can you blame his Conduct?


Buckle. Reason -- Egad -- there is not Three Drams of Reason between you both
-- as my Cheek can testify. [Aside.]


Lady. The Affront was meant to me -- nor will I endure these Passions -- I
thought I had forbid your Visits.


Lord. I thought I had Resolved against them to.


Alpiew. But Resolutions are of small force of either side. [Aside.]


Lord. Grant me but this One Request and I Will remove this hated Object.


Lady. Upon Condition it is the last.


Lord. It shall -- I think it shall at least -- Is there a Happy Man for whom I
am Despised?


Lady. I thought 'twas some such ridiculous Question; I Am of the Low-Church, my
Lord, consequently hate Confessors; ha, ha, ha.


Buckle. And Penance to I dare Swear. [Aside.]


Lord. And every thing but Play.


Lady. Dare you, the Subject of my Power -- you, that Petition Love, Arraign my
Pleasures? Now I Am sixth -- and will never see you more.


Buckle. Now would any Body Swear she is in Earnest.


Lord. I cannot bear that Curse -- see me at your Feet again, (Kneels) Oh! you
have Tortured me enough, take Pity now Dear Tyrant, and let my Suffering end.


Lady. I must not be Friends with him, for then I shall have him at my Elbow
all Night, and spoil my Luck at the Basset-Table. [Aside.] Either Cringing or
Correcting, always in Extremes -- I am weary of this Fatigue.

He that would gain my Heart must Learn the Way
Not to Control, but readily to Obey.
For he that once Pretends my Faults to see,
That Moment makes himself all Faults to me.
[Exit.]
Buckle. There Is the Inside of a Woman. [Aside.]


Lord. Gone -- now Curses on me for a Fool -- the worst of Fools -- a Woman's
Fool --

Whose only Pleasure is to feed her Pride,
Fond of her Self, she cares for none beside.
So true Coquets on their numerous Charms Display,
And strive to Conquer on purpose to betray.

ACT. III.
Enter Lord Worthy and Sir James. Sir James. Well, my Lord. I have left my
Cards in the Hand of a Friend to hear what you have to say to me. Love I Am sure
is the Text, therefore Divide and Subdivide as quick as you can.


Lord. Coud'st thou Infuse into me thy Temper, Sir James, I should have thy
Reason too; but I am Born to Love this Fickle, Faithless Fair -- what have I
not Essayed to Race her from my Breast? But all in Vain; I must have her, or I
must not Live.


Sir James. Nay, if you are so far gone, my Lord, your Distemper requires an
Able Physician -- what think you of Loveley's bringing a File of Muscqueteers,
and carry her away, Via and Armis?


Lord. That Way might give her Person to my Arms, but where is the Heart?


Sir James. A Trifle in Competition with her Body.


Lord. The Heart's the Gem that I prefer.


Sir James. Say you so my Lord? I Will Engage Three Parts of Europe will make
that Exchange with you; Ha, ha, ha.


Lord. That Maxim would hold with me perhaps in all but her, there I must have
both or none; therefore Instruct, me Friend, thou who negligent in Love, keeps
always on the Level with the Fair -- what Method should I take to Sound her
Soul's Design? For though her Carriage puts me on the Rack when I behold that
Train of Fools about her, yet my Heart will plead in her Excuse, and Calm my
Anger Spite of all Efforts.


Sir James. Humph? I have a Plot, my Lord, if you will comply with it.


Lord. Nothing of Force.


Sir James. Whatever it be you shall be Witness of it, 'twill either Quench
your Flame, or Kindle hers. I only will appear the Guilty; but here is Company,
I Will tell you all within.


Enter Captain and Lovely Dressed like a Tar. Lord. I Will expect you.

[Exit.]
Sir James. Ha, Captain, How sits the Wind between you and your Mistress? Ha?


Capt. North and by South, Faith; but here is one Sails full East, and without
some unexpected Tornado, from the Old Man's Coast -- he makes his Port I
warrant ye.


Lovely. I wish I were at Anchor once.


Sir James. Why, thou art as arrant a Tar as if thou had made an East India
Voyage, ha, ha.


Lovely. Ay, am I not, Sir James? But Egad I hope the Old Fellow understands
nothing of Navigation; if he does I shall be at a loss for the Terms.


Sir James. Oh! no matter for Terms -- look big, and Bluster for your Country
-- describe the Vigo Business -- public News will furnish you with that, and
I Will engage the Success.


Capt. Ay, Ay, let me alone, I Will bear up with Sir Richard, and thou shall
Board his Pinnace with Consent never fear. -- ho, here he comes full Sail.


Enter Sir Richard. Sir Richard. I Am glad to see you; this is my Kinsman which
I told you of, as soon as he Landed; I brought him to Kiss your Hands.


Sir Rich. I Honor you, you are welcome.


Lovely. I thank you Sir, -- I Am not for Compliments; it is a Land Language I
understand it not; Courage, Honesty, and Plain-dealing Truth, is the Learning
of our Element; if you like that I am for ye. [Aside to the Captain.]


Sir James. The Rogue does it to a Miracle.


Capt. He Is an improving Spark I find, ha, ha.


Sir James. Like it, Sir, why it is the only Thing I do like, hang Compliments,
and Court-Breeding, it serves only to make Men a Prey to one another, to
Encourage Cowardice, and Ruin Trade -- No, Sir, give me the Man that dares meet
Death and Dinner with the same Appetite -- one who rather than let in Popery,
would let out his Blood; to Maintain such Men I Would pay Double Custom; nay, all
my Gain should go for their Support. Gaptain lanch off a round Lie or Two.
[Aside to the Ensign.]


Sir James. The best Well-wisher to his Country of an Englishman I ever heard.


Lovely. Oh, Sir Richard, I wish the Nation were all of your Mind, 'twou'd give
the Soldiers and the Sailors Life.


Capt. And make us Fight with Heart and Hand; my Kinsman, I Will assure you, fits
your Principle to a Hair; he hates the French so much he never fails to give
them a Broadside wherever he meets them; and has Brought in more Privateers
this War than half the Captains in the Navy; he was the first Man that Boarded
the French Fleet at Vigo -- and in Gibraltar Business -- the Gazettes will
inform you of the Name of Captain Match.


Sir James. Is this that Captain Match?


Lovely. For want of better, Sir.


Sir James. Sir, I shall be Proud of being known to you.


Sir Rich. And I of being Related to you, Sir, -- I have a Daughter Young and
Handsome, and I Will give her a Portion shall make thee an Admiral Boy; for a
Soul like thine is fit only to Command a Navy -- what say thou, art thou for
a Wife?


Sir James. So, it is done, ha, ha, ha. [Aside.]


Capt. A prosperous Gale In Faith.


Lovely. I don't know, Sir Richard, mehap a Woman may not like me; I am Rough
and Storm-like in my Temper, unacquainted with the Effeminacy of Co^rts; I was
Born upon the Sea, and since I can remember never Lived Two Months on Shore; if
I Marry my Wife must go Abroad, I promise you that.


Sir Rich. Abroad Man? Why she shall go to the Indies with the -- Oh! such a
Son-in-Law -- how shall I be Blessed in my Posterity? Now do I foresee the
Greatness of my Grandchildren; the Sons of this Man shall, in the Age to come,
make France a Tributary Nation.


Lovely. Once in an Engagement, Sir, as I was giving Orders to my Men, comes a
Ball and took off a Fellow's Head, and struck it full in my Teeth; I wipp'd it
up, clapped it into a Gun, and shot it at the Enemy again.


Sir Rich. Without the least Concern?


Lovely. Concern, Sir, -- ha, ha, ha, if it had been my own Head I would have
done the like.


Sir Richard. Prodigious Effect of Courage! -- Captain I Will fetch my Girl, and
be here again in an Instant: -- What an Honor 'twill be to have such a Son!

[Exit.]
Capt. Ha, ha, ha, ha, you outdo your Master.


Sir James. Ha, ha, ha, ha, the Old Knight's Transported.


Lovely. I wish 'twas over, I am all in a Sweat; here he comes agrin.


Enter Sir Richard and Valeria. Sir Rich. I Will hear none of your Excuses, --
Captain your Hand, -- there take her, -- and these Gentlemen shall be
Witnesses, if they please, to this Paper, wherein I give her my whole Estate
when I die, and Twenty Thousand Pounds down upon the Nail; I care not whether
my Boy be worth a Groat, -- get me but Grandsons and I Am Rich enough.


Capt. Generously said In Faith -- much Good may do him with her.


Lovely. I Will do my Eedeavour, Father, I promise you.


Sir James. I wish you Joy, Captain, and you, Madam.


Val. That Is Impossible; -- can I have Joy in a Species so very different from
miy own? Oh my Dear Lovely! -- We were only formed one for another; -- thy Dear
Enquiring Soul is more to me -- than all these useless Lumps of Animated Clay:
Duty compels my Hand, -- but my Heart is subject only to my Mind, -- the
Strength of that they cannot Conquer; -- no, with the Resolution of the Great
Unparalleled Epictetus, -- I here protest my Will shall never assent to any
but my Lovely.


Sir Richard. Ay, you and your Will may Philosophize as long as you please, --
Mistress, -- but your Body shall be taught another Doctrine, -- it shall so, --
Your Mind, -- and your Soul, quotha! Why, what a Pox has my Estate to do with
them? Ha? It Is the Flesh Huswife, that must raise Heirs, -- and Supporters of
my Name; -- and since I knew the getting of the Estate, it is fit I should
dispose of it, -- and therefore no more Excuses, this is your Husband do you
see, -- take my Word for it.


Val. The outward empty Form of Marriage take
But all beyond I keep for Lovely's Sake.
Thus on the Ground for ever fix my Eyes;
All Sights but Lovely shall their Balls despise.

Sir Rich. Come, Captain, -- my Chaplain is within, he shall do the Business
this Minute: If I don't use the Authority of a Father, this Baggage will make
me lose such a Son-in-law that the City's Wealth cannot purchase me his Fellow.
[Aside.]


Lovely. Thanks Dear Invention for this Timely Aid.

The Baits gone down, he is by himself betrayed.

Thus still where Arts both True and Honest fail,

Deceitful Wit and Policy prevail.


Val. To Death, or any Thing, -- it is all alike to me.

[Exit cum Valeria.]
Sir Rich. Get you in I say, -- Hussy, get you in. In my Conscience my Niece
has spoiled her already; but I Will have her Married this Moment; Captain, you
have bound me ever to you by this Match, command me and my House for ever. --
But shall I not have your Company, Gentlemen, to be Witnesses of this Knot,
this joyful Knot?


Capt. Yes Faith, Sir Richard, I have too much Respect for my Kinsman to leave
him -- till I see him safe in Harbor; Ill wait on you presently.


Sir James. I am engaged in the next Room at Play, I beg your Pardon, Sir
Richard, for an Hour; I Will bring the whole Company to Congratulate the Bride
and Bridegroom.


Sir Rich. Bride and Bridegroom? Congratulate me, Man: Methinks I already see
my Race Recorded amongst the foremost Heroes of my Nation. -- Boys, all Boys,
-- and all Soldiers.

They shall the Pride of France and Spain pull down,
And add their Indies to our English Crown.
[Exit.]
Sir James. Ha, ha, ha, never was Man so Bigoted before; -- how will this end
when he discovers the Cheat? Ha, ha, will not you make One with the Ladies,
Captain?


Capt. I don't care if I do venture a Piece or Two, I Will but dispatch a little
Business and meet you at the Table, Sir James.

[Exit.]
Enter Lady Lucy. Sir James. Ha, Lady Lucy! Is your Ladyship reconccil'd to
Basset yet? Will you give me leave to lose this Purse to you, Madam?


Lady Lucy. I thank Fortune I neither wish, nor need it, Sir James; I presume
the next Room is furnished with Avarice enough to serve you in that Affair, if
it is a Burden to you; or Mrs. Sago's ill Luck may give you an Opportunity of
returning some of the Obligations you lie under.


Sir James. Your Sex, Madam, extorts a Duty from ours, and a well-bred Man can
no more refuse his Money to a Lady, than his Sword to a Friend.


Lady Lucy. That Superfluity of good Manners, Sir James, would do better
Converted into Charity; this Town abounds with Objects -- would it not leave a
more Glorious Fame behind you to be the Founder of some Pious Work; when all
the Poor at mention of your Name shall Bless your Memory; than that Posterity
should say you Wasted your Estate on Cards and Women?


Sir James. Humph, it is pity she were not a Man, she Preaches so Emphatically.
[Aside.] Faith, Madam, you have a very good Notion, but something too Early --
when I am Old, I may put your Principles in Practice, but Youth for Pleasure
was designed --


Lady Lucy. The truest Pleasure must consist in doing Good, which cannot be in
Gaming.


Sir James. Every thing is good in its Kind, Madam; Cards are harmless Bits of
Paper, Dice insipid Bones -- and Women made for Men.


Lady Lucy. Right, Sir James -- but all these things may be perveted -- Cards
are harmless Bits of Paper in themselves, yet through them what Mischiefs have
been Done? What Orphans Wronged? What Tradesmen Ruined? What Coach and Equipage
dismissed for them?


Sir James. But then, how many fine Coaches and Equipages have they set up,
Madam?


Lady Lucy. Is it the more Honorable for that? How many Misses keep Coaches
too? Which Arrogance in my Opinion only makes them more Eminently Scandalous --


Sir James. Oh! those are such, as have a Mind to be Damned in this S^ate,
Madam -- but I hope your Ladyships don't Rank them amongst us Gamesters.


Lady Lucy. They are Inseparable, Sir James; Madam's Grandeur must be Upheld --
though the Baker and Butcher shut up Shop.


Sir James. Oh! your Ladyship wrongs us middling Gentlemen there; to Ruin
Tradesmen is the Qualities Prerogative only; and none beneath a Lord can
pretend to do it with an Honorable Air, ha, ha.


Lady Lucy. Their Example sways the meaner Sort; I grieve to think that Fortune
should Exalt such Vain, such Vicious Souls -- whilst Virtue's Clothed in Rags.


Sir James. Ah! Faith, she would make but a scurvy Figure at Court, Madam, the
Statesmen and Politcians would Suppress her quickly -- but whilst she remains
in your Breast she is safe -- and makes us all in Love with that Fair Covering.


Lady Lucy. Oh! Fie, Fi, Sir James, you could not Love one that hates your
chief Direction.


Sir James. I should Hate it too, Madam, on some Terms that I could Name.


Lady Lucy. What would make that Conversion pray?


Sir James. Your Heart.


Lady Lucy. I could pay that Price -- but dare not Venture upon one so Wild --
[Aside.] First let me see the Fruit ever I take a Lease of the Garden, Sir
James.


Sir James. Oh! Madam, the best Way is to Secure the Ground, and then you may
Manure and Cultivate it as you please.


Lady Lucy. That Is a certain Trouble and uncertain Profit. and in this Affair;
I prefer the Theory before the Practick But I detain you from the Table, Sir
James -- you are wanted to Tally -- your Servant --

[Exit.]
Sir James. Nay, if you leave me, Madam, the Devil will Tempt me -- she is gone,
and now cannot I shake off the Thought of Seven Wins, Eight Loses -- for the
Blood of me -- and all this Grave Advice of hers is lost, Faith -- though I do
Love her above the rest of her Sex -- she is an exact Model of what all Women
ought to be, -- and yet your Merry little Coquetish Tits are very Diverting --
well, now for Basset; let me see what Money have I about -- me. Humph! about a
Hundred Gnineas -- half of which will set the Ladies to Cheating -- false
Parolies in Abundance.

Each Trifling Toy would Tempt in Times of Old,
Now nothing Melts a Woman's Heart like Gold.
Some Bargains Drive, other's more Nice then they,
Who'd have you think they Scorn to Kiss for Pay;
To Purchase them you must Lose Deep at Play.
With several Women, several Ways Prevail;
But Gold's a certain Way that cannot Fail.
[Exit.]
The Scence Draws, and Discovers Lady Reveller, Mrs. Sago, and several
Gentlemen and Ladies round a Table at Basset. Enter Sir James. Lady Revel. Oh!
Sir James, are you come? We want you to Tally for us.


Sir James. What Luck, Ladies?


Lady Revel. I have only won a Sept and Leva.


Mrs. Sago. And I have lost a Trante and Leva -- my Ill Fortune has not forsook
me yet I see.


Sir James. I go a Guinea upon that Card.


Lady Revel. You lose that Card.


Mrs. Sago. I Mace Sir James's Card Double.


Banker. Seven wins, and Five loses; you have lost it, Madam.


Mrs. Sago. Again? -- sure never was Woman so Unlucky --


Banker. Knave wins, and Ten loses; you have Won, Sir James.


Lady Revel. Clean Cards here.


Mrs. Sago. Burn this Book, 'thas an unluckly Air. (Tears them.) Bring some
more Books.


Enter Captain. Lady Revel. Oh! Captain -- here set a Chair, come, Captain you,
shall sit by me -- now if we can but Strip this Tarr. [Aside.]


Capt. Withal my Heart, Madam -- come, what do you Play Gold? -- that is
something High though -- well a Guinea upon this Honest Knave of Clubs.


Lady Revel. You lose it for a Guinea more.


Capt. Done, Madam.


Banker. The Five Wins, and the Knave loses.


Lady. Revel. You have lost it, Captain.


Sir James. The Knave wins, for Two Guineas more, Madam.


Lady Revel. Done Sir James.


Banker. Six Wins -- Knave Loses.


Sir James. Oh! the Devil, I Am Faced, I had rather have lost it all.


Banker. Nine wins, Queen loses -- you have won,


Mrs. Sago. I Will make a Paroli -- I Mace as much more; your Card loses, Sir
James, for Two Guineas, yours, Captain, loses for a Guineas more.


Banker. Four wins, Nine loses -- you have Lost, Madam.


Mrs. Sago. Oh! I could Tear my Flesh -- as I Tear these Cards -- Confusion --
I can never win above a wretch'd Paroli; for if I push to Sept and Leva, it is
gone.

[Walks about Disorderly.]
Banker. Ace wins, Knave loses.


Capt. Sink the Knave, I Will set no more on it.


Lady Revel. Faced again -- what is the meaning of this Ill-luck to Night? Bring
me a Book of Hearts, I Will try if they are more Successful, that on the Queen;
yours and your Cards loses.


Mrs. Sago. Bring me a fresh Book; bring me another Book; bring me all Diamonds.

Looks upon them One by One, then throws them over her Shoulders.
Lady Revel. That can never be lucky, the Name of Jewels don't become a
Citizen's Wife. [Aside.]


Banker. King wins, the Tray loses.


Sir James. You have great Luck to Night, Mr. Sharper.


Sharper. So I have Sir James -- I have won Sonica every time.


Lady Revel. But if he has got the Nack of winning thus he shall sharp no more
here, I promise him. [Aside.]


Mrs. Sago. I Mace that.


Lady Revel. Sir James, pray will you T^lly.


Sir James. With all my Heart, Madam.

[Takes the Cards and shuffles them.]
Mrs Sago. Pray give me the Cards, Sir.

[Takes 'em and shuffles 'em, and gives 'em to him again.]
Capt. I set that.


Lady Revel. I set Five Guineas upon this Card, Sir James.


Sir James. Done Madam, -- Five wins, -- Six loses.


Mrs. Sago. I Set that.


Sir James. Five don't go, and Seven loses.


Capt. I Mace double.


Lady Revel. I Mace that.


Sir James. Three wins, Six loses.


Mrs. Sago. I Mace, I Mace double, and that -- Oh ye malicious Stars! -- again.


Sir James. Eight wins Seven loses.


Capt. So, this Trante and leva makes some Amends; -- Adsbud I hate Cheating,
-- What Is that false Cock made for now? Ha, Madam?


Lady Rev. Nay, Mrs. Sago, if you begin to play foul.


Mrs Sago. Rude Brute, to take Notice of the Slight of Hand in our Sex -- I
protest he wrongs me, Madam, -- there is the Dernier, Stake, -- and I Will set it
all, -- now Fortune Favor me, or this Moment is my last.


Lady Revel. There Is the last of Fifty Pounds, -- what is the Meaning of this?


Sir James. Now for my Plot, her Stock is low I perceive.

[Slips a Purse of Gold into the Furbeloes of Lady Reveller's Apron.]
Lady Revel. I never had such ill Luck, -- I must fetch more Money: Ha; from
whence comes this? This is the Genteelest Piece of Gallantry, the Action is Sir
Harry's, I see by his Eyes.

Discovers a Purse in the Furbeloes of her Apron.
Sir James. Nine wins, Six loses


Mrs. Sago. I am ruined and undone for ever; oh, oh, oh, to loose every Card,
oh, oh, ho.

[Burst out a Crying.]
Capt. So there is one Vessel sprung aleek, and I am almost ashore -- If I go on
at this Rate, I shall make but a lame Voyage on it I doubt.


Sir James. Duce wins, King loses.


Capt. I Mace again, -- I Mace Double, I mace again; -- now the Devil blow my
Head off if ever I saw Cards run so; Dam 'em.

[Tears the Cards, and stamps on 'em.]
Sir James. Fie, Captain, this Concern among the Ladies is indecent.


Capt. Dam the Ladies, -- may not I swear, -- or tear my Cards if I please, I Am
sure I have paid for them; pray count the Cards, I believe there is a false
Tally.


Sir James. No, they are Right, Sir.

[Sir James counts em.]
Mrs. Sago. Not to turn One Card! Oh, oh, oh.

[Stamps up and down.]
Lady Revel. Madam, if you play no longer pray don't disturb those that do. --
Come, Courage, Captain, -- Sir James's Gold was very lucky; -- who could endure
these Men did they not lose their Money? [Aside.]


Capt. Bring another Book here; -- that upon Ten, -- and I Mace that. --

[Puts down a Card, and turns another.]
Sir James. King face't, Eight wins, Ten loses.


Capt. Fire and Gunpowder.

[Exit.]
Lady Revel. Ha, ha, ha, what is the Captain vanished in his own Smoke? --
Come, I Bett with you, Mr. Sharper; your Card loses.


Re-enter Captain, pulling in a Stranger, which he had fetched out of the
Street. Capt. Sir, do you think it possible to lose a Trante and Leva a
Quinse-leva, -- and a Sept-et-leva, -- and never turn once


Stranger. No sure, it is almost Impossible.


Cap. Ounds you lie, I did Sir.

[Laying his Hand on his Sword.]
Lady Revel. and all the Women. Ah, ah.

[Shrieks and run off.]
Captain. What the Devil, had I to do among these Land-Rats? -- Zounds, to lose
Forty Pounds for nothing, not so much as a Wench for it; Ladies, quotha, -- a
Man had as good be acquainted with Pick-pockets.

[Exit.]
Sir James. Ha, ha, ha, the Captain has frighted the Women out of their Wits,
-- now to keep my Promise with my Lord, though the Thing has but an ill Face, no
Matter.

They join together to Enslave us Men,
And why not we to Conquer them again.

ACT. V.
Enter Sir James on one side, and Lady Reveller on the other. Lady Revel. SIR
James, what have you done with the Rude Porpois?


Sir James. He is gone to your Uncle's Apartment, Madam, I suppose. -- I was in
Pain till I knew how your Ladyship did after your Fright.


Lady Revel. Really, Sir James, the Fellow has put me into the Spleen by his
ill Manners. Oh my Stars! That there should be such an unpolished Piece of
Humane Race, to be in that Disorder for losing his Money to us Women. -- I was
apprehensiev he would have beat me, ha, ha.


Sir James. Ha, ha, your Ladyship must impute his ill Breeding to the Want of
Conversation with your Sex; but he is a Man of Honor with his own, I assure
you.


Lady Revel. I hate out of fashioned Honor. -- Bu^ where is the Company, Sir
James? Shall Not we play again?


Sir James. All disperss'd, Madam.


Lady Revel. Come, you and I Will go to Picquet then.


Sir James. Oh I Am tired with Cards, Madam, cannot you think of some other
Diversion to pass a cheerful Hour? -- I could tell you One if you would give me
leave.


Lady Revel. Of your own Invention? Then it must be a pleasant One.


Sir James. Oh the pleasantest one in the World.


Lady Revel. What is it I pray?


Sir James. Love, Love, my Dear Charmer.

[Approaches her.]
Lady Revel. Oh Cupid! How came that in your Head?


Sir James. Nay, it is in my Heart, and except you pity me the Wound is Mortal.


Lady Revel. Ha, ha, ha, is Sir James got into my Lord Worthy's Class? -- You
that could tell me I should not have so large a Theme for my Diversion, were
you in his Place, ha, ha, ha; what, and is the Gay, the Airy, the Witty,
Inconstant, Sir James overtaken? Ha, ha.


Sir James. Very true, Madam, -- you see there is no jesting with Fire. -- Will
you be kind?

[Gets between her and the Door.]
Lady Revel. Kind? What a dismal Sound was there? -- I Am afraid your Feaver's
high, Sir James, ha, ha.


Sir James. If you think so, Madam, it is time to apply cooling Medicines.

[Locks the Door.]
Lady Revel. Ha, what Insolence is this? The Door locked! What do you mean Sir
James?


Sir James. Oh it is something indecent to Name it, Madam, but I intend to show
you.

[Lays hold on her.]
Lady Revel. Unhand me, Villain, or I Will cry out. --


Sir James. Do, and make your self the Jest of Servants, expose your Reputation
to their vile Tongues, -- which if you please shall remain safe within my
Breast; but if with your own Noise you Blast it, here I bid Defiance to all
Honor and Secrecy, -- and the First Man that enters dies.

[Struggles with her.]
Lady Revel. What shall I do? Instruct me Heaven -- Monster, is this your
Friendship to my Lord? And can you wrong the Woman he Adores.


Sir James. Ay, but the Woman does not care a Souse for him; and therefore he
has no Right above me; I love you as much, and will possess.


Lady Revel. Oh! hold -- Kill me rather than destroy my Honor -- what Devil
has Debauched your Temper? Or how has my Carriage drawn this Curse upon me?
What have I done to give you cause to think you ever should succeed this hated
Way.

[Weeps.]
Sir James. Why this Question, Madam? Can a Lady that loves Play so
passionately as you do -- that takes as much Pains to draw Men in to lose their
Money, as a Town Miss to their Destruction -- that Caresses all Sorts of People
for your Interest, that divides your time between your Toylet and the
Basset-Table; (can you, I say, boast of Innate Virtue? -- Fie, fie, I am sure
you must have guessed for what I Played so Deep -- we never part with our Money
without Design -- or writing Fool upon our Foreheads; -- therefore no more of
this Resistance, except you would have more Money.


Lady Revel. Oh! horrid.


Sir James. There was Fifty Guineas in that Purse, Madam -- here is Fifty more;
Money shall be no Dispute.

[Offers her Money.]
Lady Revel. [Strikes it Down.] Perish your Money with your self -- you Villain
-- there, there; take your boasted Favors, which I resolved before to have
Repaid in Specie; Basest of Men I Will have your Life for this Affront -- what
ho, within there.


Sir James. Hush -- Faith, you will Raise the House. [Lays hold on her.] And it is
in Vain -- you are mine; nor will I quit this Room till I Am Possessed.

[Struggles.]
Lady Revel. Raise the House, I Will raise the World in my Defense, help,
Murder, Murder, -- a Rape, a Rape --


Enter Lord Worthy from another Room with his Sword Drawn. Lord. Ha! Villain,
unhand the Lady -- or this Moment is thy last.


Sir James. Villain, Back my Lord -- follow me.

[Exit.]
Lady Revel. By the Bright Sun that Shines you shall not go -- no, you have
saved my Virtue, and I will preserve your Life -- let the vile Wretch be
punished by viler Hands -- yours shall not be Prophan^d with Blood so Base, if
I have any Power --


Lord. Shall the Traitor Live? -- Though your Barbarous Usage does not Merit this
from me, yet in Consideration that I Loved you once -- I will Chastise his
Insolence.


Lady Revel. Once -- Oh! say not once; do you not Love me still? Oh! how pure
your Soul appears to me above that Detested Wretch.

[Weeps.]
Sir James. [Peeping.] It takes as I could Wish --


Lord. Yet how have I been slighted, every Fop preferred to me? -- Now you
Discover what Inconveniency your Gaming has brought you into -- this from me
would have been unpardonable Advice -- now you have proved it at your own
Expense.


Lady Revel. I have, and hate my self for all my Folly -- Oh! forgive me -- and
if still you think me Worthy of your Heart -- I here Return you Mine -- and
will this Hour Sign it with my Hand.


Sir James. How I Applaud my self for this Contrivance.


Lord. Oh! the Transporting Joy, it is the only Happiness I Covet here.

Haste then my Charmer, haste the longed-for Bliss.
The only Happy Minutes of my Life is this.
[Exit.] Sir James. Ha, ha, ha, ha, how am I Censured now for doing this Lady a
iece of Service, in forcing that upon her, which only her Vanity and Pride
Restrained.

So Blushing Maids refuse the Courtd Joy,
Though wishing Eyes -- and pressing Hands Comply,
Till by some Stratagem the Lover Gains,
What she denied to all his Amorous Pains.

As Sir James is going off, enter Lady Lucy meeting him. Sir James. Ha, Lady
Lucy! -- Having Succeeded for my Friend, who knows but this may be my Lucky
Minute too? -- Madam, you come Opportunely to hear.

[Takes her by the Hand.]
Lady Lucy. Stand off Basest of Men, I have heard too much; coud'st thou Choose
no House but this to Act thy Villainies in? And cou'd'st thou fairly offer Vows
to me, when thy Heart, Poisoned with vicious Thoughts, harbored this Designs
against my Family?


Sir James. Very fine, Faith, this is like to be my Lucky Minute with a
Witness; but Madam --


Lady Lucy. Offer not at Excuses, it is height of Impudence to look me in the
Face.


Sir James. Egad she Loves me -- Oh! Happy Rogue -- this Concern can proceed
from nothing else. [Aside.]


Lady Lucy. My Heart till now unused to Passion swells with this Affront, would
Reproach thee -- would Reproach my self, for having Harbored one favorable
Thought of thee.


Sir James. Why did you, Madam? -- Egad I owe more to her Anger than ever I did
to her Morals.


Lady Lucy. Ha! What have I said?


Sir James. The only kind Word you ever uttered.


Lady Lucy. Yes, Imposture, know to thy Confusion that I did love the, and
fancied I Discovered some Seeds of Virtue amongst that Heap of Wickedness; but
this last Action has betrayed the Fond Mistake, and showed thou art all over
Feigned.


Sir James. Give me leave, Madam --


Lady Lucy. Think not this Confession meant to advance thy Impious Love, but
hear my Final Resolution.


Sir James. Egad I must hear it -- I find for there is no stopping her.


Lady Lucy. From this Moment I Will never --


Sir James. (Clapping his and before Her Mouth.) Nay, nay, nay, after Sentence
no Criminal is allowed to Plead; therefore I will be heard -- not Guilty, not
Guilty. Madam, by -- if I don't prove that this is all a Stratagem, Contrived,
Studied, Designed, Prosecuted, and put in Execution, to reclaim your Cousin,
and give my Lord Possession -- may you Finish your Curse, and I Doomed to
Everlasting Absence -- Egad I Am out of Breath --


Lady Lucy. Oh! Cond'st thou prove this?


Sir James. I can, if by the Proof you will make me Happy; my Lord shall Convince
you.


Lady Lucy. To him I will refer it, on this Truth your Hopes Depend.

In Vain we strive our Passions to Conceal,
Our very Passions does our Loves Reveal;
When once the Heart, yields to the Tyrants Sway,
The Eyes or Tongue will soon the Flame Betray.
[Exit.]
Sir James. I was never out at a Critical Minute in my Life.


Enter Mr. Sago and Two Bailiffs meeting Alpiew. Mrs. Sago. Hearkee, Mistress,
is my Wife here?


Alp. Truly I shant give my self the Trouble of seeking her for him; now she
has lost all her Money -- your Wife is a very Indiscreet Person, Sir.


Mr. Sago. I Am afraid I shall find it so to my Cost.


Bailiffs. Come, come, Sir, we cannot wait all Day -- the Actions are a
Thousand Pound -- you shall have time to send for Bail, and what Friends you
Please.


Mr. Sago. A Thousand Pound? [Enter Mrs. Sago.] Oh! Lambkin have you Spent me a
Thousand Pound.


Mrs. Sago. Who, I Pudd? Oh! undone for Ever --


Mr. Sago. Pud me no Pud, -- do you Owe Mr. Tabby the Mercer Two Hundred
Pounds? Ha.


Mr. Sago. I, I, I, don't know the Sum Dear Pudd -- but, but, but I do Owe him
something; but I believe he made me Pay too Dear.


Mrs. Sago. Oh! thou Wolfkin instead of Lambkin -- for thou have Devoured my
Substance; and do thou Owe Mr. Dollor the Goldsmith Three Hundred Pound? Do
thou? Ha, speak Tygress.


Mrs. Sago. Sure it cannot be quite Three Hundred Pound. [Sobbing]


Mr. Sago. Thou Island Crocodile thou -- and do thou Owe Ratsbane the Vintner
a Hundred Pound? And were those Hampers of Wine which I received so Joyfully
sent by thy self, to thy self? Ha.


Mrs. Sago. Yes indeed, Puddy -- I, I, I, beg your Pardon. [Sobbing.]


Mr. Sago. And why did not thou tell me of them? Thou Rattle-Snake? -- for
they say they have sent a Hundred times for their Money -- else I had not been
Arrested in my Shop.


Mrs. Sago. Be, be, be, because I, I, I was afraid, Dear Puddy. [Crying.]


Mr. Sago. But were not thou afraid to Ruin me tho, Dear Pudd. Ah! I need ask
the, no more Questions, thou Serpent in Petticoats; did I Dote upon thee for
this? Here Is a Bill from Calico the Linnen-Draper, another from Setwell the
Jeweller -- from Coupler a Mantua-Maker, and Pimpwell the Milliner; a Tribe of
Locusts enough to undo a Lord Mayor.


Mrs. Sago. I hope not, truly, Dear, Dearey, I Am sure that is all.


Mr. Sago. All with a Pox -- no Mrs. Jezebel, that is. not all; there is Two
Hundred Pound Due to my self for Tea, Coffee and Chocolet, which my Journey-man
has Confessed fince your Roguery came out -- that you have Imbezell'd, Huswife,
you have; so, this comes of your keeping Quality Company -- even let them keep
you now, for I have done with you, you shall come no more within my Doors I
promise you.


Mrs. Sago. Oh! Kill me rather; I never did it with Design to part with you,
indeed Puddy. [Sobbing.]


Mrs. Sago. No, no, I believe not whilst I was Worth a Groat. Oh!


Enter Sir James. Sir James. How! Mrs. Sago in Tears, and my honest Friend in
Ruffins Hands; the meaning of this.


Mrs. Sago. Oh! Sir James -- my Hypocritical Wife is as much a Wife as any Wife
in the City -- I Am Arrested here in an Action of a Thousand Pound, that she has
taken up Goods for, and Gam'd away; get out of my sight, get out of my sight, I
say.


Mrs. Sago. Indeed and indeed. [Sobbing.] Dear Puddy but I cannot -- no, here
will I Hang forever on this Neck.

[Flies about his Neck.]
Mrs. Sago. Help, Murder, Murder, why, why, what will you Collar me?


Sir James. Right Woman, I must try to make up this Breach -- Oh! Mr. Sago, you
are unkind -- it is pure Love that thus Transports your Wife, and not such Base
Designs as you Complain of.


Mrs. Sago. Yes, yes, and she run me in Debt out of pure Love to no doubt.


Mrs. Sago. So it was Pudd.


Mr. Sago. What was it? (Ha Mistress) out of love to me that you have undone
me? Thou, thou, thou, I don't know what to call thee bad enough.


Mrs. Sago. You will not hear your Keckey out, Dear Pudd, it was out of Love for
Play, -- but for Lo, Lo, Love to you, Dear Pudd; if you will forgive me I Will
never play again. (Crying and Sobbing all the while.)


Sir James. Nay, now, Sir, you must forgive her.


Mrs. Sago. What, forgive her that would send me to Jayl?


Sir James. No, no, there is no Danger of that, I Will Bail you, Mr. Sago, and try
to Compound those Debts. -- You know me Officers.


Officers. Very well, Sir James, your Worship's Word is sufficient.


Sir James. There Is your Fees, then leave here your Prisoner, I Will see him
forth coming.


Officers. With all our Hearts; your Servant, Sir.

[Exit.]
Mr. Sago. Ah thou wicked Woman, how I have doated on those Eyes! How often
have I kneeled to kiss that Hand! Ha, is not this true, Keckey?


Mrs. Sago. Yes, Deary, I, I, I, I do confess it.


Mr. Sago. Did ever I refuse to grant wbatever thou asked me?


Mrs. Sago. No, never, Pudd. --

[Weeps still.]
Mr. Sago, Might thou not have eaten Gold, as the Saying is? Ha? -- Oh
Keecky, Keecky!

[Ready to weep.]
Sir James. Leave Crying, and wheedle him, Madam, wheedle him.


Mrs. Sago. I do confess it, and cannot you forgive your Keckey then that you
have been so Tender of, that you so often confessed your Heart has jumped up to
your Motuh when you have heard my Beauty praised.


Mr. Sago. So it has I profess, Sir James, -- I begin to melt, -- I do; I am a
good-natured Fool, that is the Truth on it: But if I should sorgive you, what
would you do to make me Amends? For that Fair Face, if I turn you out of Doors,
will quickly be a cheaper Drug than any in my Shop.


Sir James. And not maintain her half so well; -- promise largely, Madam. [To
Mrs. Sago.]


Mrs. Sago. I Will Love you for ever, Deary.


Mr. Sago. But you will Jigg to Covent Garden again.


Mrs. Sago. No, indeed I will not come within the Air on it, but take up with City
Acquaintance, rail at the Court, and go Twice a Week with Mrs. Outside to
Pin-makers-hall.


Mr. Sago. That would rejoice my Heart.

[Ready to weep]
Sir James. See, if the good Man is not ready to weep; your last Promise has
conquered. -- Come, come, Buss and be Friends, and end the Matter. -- I Am glad
the Quarrel is made up, or I had had her upon my Hands. (Aside.)


Mrs. Sago. Pudd, don't you hear Sir James, Pudd?


Mr. Sago. I can hold no longer, -- yes, I do hear him, -- come then to the
Arms of thy n'own Pudd.

(Runs into one another's Arms.)
Sir Jam. Now all is well; and for your Comfort Lady Reveller is by this Time
married to my Lord Worthy, and there will be no more Gaming I assure you in
that House.


Mr. Sago. Joys upon Joys. Now if these Debts were but Accommodated, I should
be happier than ever; I should indeed Kickky.


Sir Jam. Leave that to me, Mr. Sago, I have won Part of your Wife's Money, and
will that Way restore it you.


Mr. Sago. I thank you, good Sir James, I believe you are the First Gamester
that ever Refunded.


Mrs. Sago. Generously done, -- Fortune has brought me. off this Time, and I Will
never trust her more.


Sir James. But see the Bride and Bridegroom.


Enter Lord Worthy and Lady Reveller, Lady Lucy, Buckle, Alpiew. Lady Lucy.
This Match which I have now been Witness to, is what I long have wished, your
Course of Life must of Necessity be changed.


Lady Revel. Ha, Sir James here! -- Oh if you love me, my Lord let us avoid
that Brute, you must not meet him.


Sir James. Oh, there is no Danger, Madam. -- My Lord, I wish you Joy with all
my Heart; we only quarreled to make you Friends, Madam, ha, ha, ha.


Lady Revel. What, am I tricked into a Marriage then?


Lord. Not against your Will, I hope.


Lady Revel. No, I forgive you; though had I been aware of it, it should have
cost you a little more Pains.


Lord. I wish I could return thy Plot, and make this Lady thine, Sir James.


Sir James. Then I should be paid with Interest, my Lord.


Lady Lucy. My Fault is Consideration you know, I must think a little longer
on it.


Sir James. And my whole Study shall be to improve those Thoughts to my own
Advantage.


Mr. Sago. I wish your Ladyship Joy, and hope I shall keep my Kickey to my self
now.


Lady. With all my Heart Mr. Sago, she has had ill Luck of late, which I am
sorry for.


Mrs. Sago. My Lord Worthy will confine your Ladyship from Play as well as I,
and my Injunction will be more casie when I have your Example.


Buclke. Nay it is Time to throw up the Cards when the Games out.


Enter Sir Richard, Captain Hearty, Lovely and Valeria. Capt. Well, Sir James,
the Danger's over, we have doubled the Cape, and my Kinsman is Sailing directly
to the Port.


Sir James. A Boon Voyage.


Sir Rich. It Is done, and my Heart is at Ease. -- Did you ever see such a
perverse Baggage, look in his Face I say, and thank your Stars, for their best
influences gave yon this Husband.


Lovely. Will not Valeria look upon me? She used to be more Kind when we have
sish'd for Eals in Vinegar.


Val. My Lovely, is it thee? And has natural Sympathy forborne to inform my
Sense thus long?

[Flies to him]
Sir Rich. How! how! This Lovely? What does it (...) the Ensign I have so
carefully avoided!


Lovely. Yes, Sir, the same; I hope you may be brought to like a Land Soldier
as well as a Seaman.


Sir Rich. And, Captain, have you done this?


Capt. Yes, Faith, she was too whimsical for our Element; her hard Words might
have Conjured up a Storm for ought I know -- so I have set her ashore.


Lady Revel. What, my Uncle deceived with his Stock of Wisdom? Ha, ha, ha.


Buckle. Here Is such a Coupling, Mrs. Alpiew, have not you a Month's Mind?


Mrs. Alp. Not to you I assure you.


Buckle. I was but in Jest, Child, say nay when you're asked.


Sir James. The principal Part of this Plot was mine, Sir Richard.


Sir Rich. Would 'twas in my Power to hang you for it. [Aside.


Sir James. And I have no Reason to doubt you should repent it, he is a
Gentleman, though a younger Brother, he loves your Daughter, and she him, which
has the best Face of Happiness in a married State; you like a Man of Honor,
and he has as much as any one, that I assure you, Sir Richard.


Sir Rich. Well, since what is past is past Recall I had as good be satisfied as
not, therefore take her, and bless ye together.


Lord. So now each Man's Wish is Crowned, but mine with double Joy.


Capt. Well said, Sir Richard, let us have a Bowl of Punch, and Drink to the
Bridegroom's good Voyage to Night, -- steady, steady, ha, ha.


Mr. Sago. I Will take a Glass with you Captain, -- I reckon my self a Bridegroom
too.


Buckle. I doubt Kickey will not find him such. [Aside.]


Mrs. Sago. Well, -- poor Keckky's bound to good Behavior, or she had lost
quite her Puddy's Favor.

Shall I for this repine at Fortune? -- No.
I Am glad at Heart that I Am forgiven so.
Some Neighbors Wives have but too lately shown,
When Spouse had left 'em all their Friends were flown.
Then all you Wives that would avoid my Fate.
Remain contented with your present State

FINIS.

