LOVE for LOVE. A COMEDY. Acted at the THEATER in Little-Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,
BY His Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mr. CONGREVE.

Nudus agris, nudus nummis paternis,
Insanire parat certa ratione modoque.
Hor. The FOURTH EDITION.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson: And Sold by R. Wellington, G. Strahan, and
B. Lintott. 1704.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain
of His Majesty's Household, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter,
etc.
MY LORD,
A Young Poet is liable to the same Vanity and Indiscretion with a Young Lover;
and the Great Man that smiles upon one, and the Fine Woman that looks kindly
upon the other, are each of 'em in Danger of having the Favor published with the
first Opportunity.

But there may be a different Motive, which will a little distinguish the
Offenders. For though one should have a Vanity in ruining another's Reputation,
yet the other may only have an Ambition to advance his own. And I beg leave, my
Lord, that I may plead the latter, both as the Cause and Excuse of this
Dedication.

Whoever is King, is also the Father of his Country; and as no Body can dispute
Your Lordship's Monarchy in Poetry; so all that are concerned, ought to
acknowledge Your Universal Patronage: And it is only presuming on the Privilege
of a Loyal Subject, that I have ventured to make this my Address of Thanks to
your Lordship, which at the same time includes a Prayer for Your Protection.

I am not Ignorant of the Common Form of Poetical Dedications, which are
generally made up of Panegyricks, where the Authors endeavor to distinguish
their Patrons, by the shining Characters they give them above other Men. But
that, my Lord, is not my Business at this time, nor is Your Lordship now to be
distinguished. I am contented with the Honor I do my self in this Epistle,
without the Vanity of attempting to add to, or explain Your Lordship's
Character.

I confess it is not without some struggling, that I behave my self in this
Case as I ought: For it is very hard to be pleased with a Subject, and yet
forbear it. But I choose rather to follow Pliny's Precept, than his Example,
when in his Panegyric to the Emperor Trajan, he says, Nec minus considerabo
quid aures ejus pati
possint, Quam quid virtutibus debeatur.


I hope I may be excused the Pedantry of a Quotation, when it is so justly
applied. Here are some Lines in the Print, (and which Your Lordship read before
this Play was Acted) that were omitted on the Stage; and particularly one whole
Scene in the Third Act, which not only helps the Design forward with less
Precipitation, but also heightens the ridiculous Character of Foresight, which
indeed seems to be maimed without it. But I found my self in great Danger of a
long Play, and was glad to help it where I could. Though notwithstanding my Care,
and the kind Reception it had from the Town, I could heartily wish it yet
shorter: But the Number of different Characters represented in it, would have
been too much crowded in less room.

This Reflection on Prolixity, (a Fault for which scarce any one Beauty will
atone) warns me not to be tedious now, and detain Your Lordship any longer
with the Trifles of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, William
Congreve.

A PROLOGUE FOR The Opening of the New Playhouse, proposed to be spoken by
Mrs. Bracegirdle in Man's Clothes.
Sent from an unknown Hand.
CUstom, which every where bears mighty Sway,
Brings me to Act the Orator to Day:
But Women, you will say, are ill at Speeches,
It Is true, and therefore I appear in Breeches:
Not for Example to you City-Wives,
That by Prescription's settled for your Lives.
Was it for Gain the Husband first consented?
O yes, their Gains are mightily augmented:
Making Horns with her Hands over her Head. And yet, methinks, it must have
cost some Strife:
A Passive Husband, and an Active Wife!
It Is awkward, very awkward, by my Life.
But to my Speech. Assemblies of all Nations
Still are supposed to open with Orations:
Mine shall begin, to show our Obligations.
To you, our Benefactors, lowly Bowing,
Whose Favors have prevented our Undoing;
A long Egyptian Bondage we endured,
'Till Freedom, by your Justice, we procured:
Our Taskmasters were grown such very Jews,
We must at length have Played in Wooden Shoos,
Had not your Bounty taught us to refuse.
Freedom's of English Growth, I think, alone;
What for lost English Freedom can atone?
A Freeborn Player loathes to be compelled;
Our Rulers Tyrannized, and We Rebelled.
Freedom! the Wise Man's Wish, the Poor Man's Wealth;
Which you, and I, and most of us enjoy by Stealth;
The Soul of Pleasure, and the Sweet of Life,
The Woman's Charter, Widow, Maid or Wife,
This they would have cancelled, and thence grew the Strife.
But you, perhaps, would have me here confess
How we obtained the Favor; -- Cannot you guess?
Why then I Will tell you, (for I hate a Lie)
By Brib'ry, errant Brib'ry, let me die:
I was their Agent, but by Jove I swear
No honorable Member had a share,
Though young and able Members bid me Fair:
I chose a wiser way to make you willing,
Which has not cost the House a single Shilling;
Now you suspect at least I went a Billing.
Y^ see I Am Young, and to that Air of Youth,
Some will add Beauty, and a little Truth;
These powerful Charms, improved by powerful Arts,
Prevailed to captivate your opening Hearts.
Thus furnished, I preferred my poor Petition,
And bribed ye to commiserate our Condition:
I laughed, and sighed, and sung, and leer'd upon ye,
With roguish loving Looks, and that way won ye:
The Young Men kissed me, and the Old I kissed,
And luringly I led them as I list.
The Ladies in mere Pity took our Parts,
Pity's the Darling Passion of their Hearts.
Thus Bribing, or thus Bribed, fear no Disgraces;
For thus you may take Bribes, and keep your Places.
PROLOGUE. Spoken at the Opening of the New House, By Mr. Betterton.
THE Husbandman in vain renews his Toil,
To cultivate each Tear a hungry Soil;
And fondly hopes for rich and generous Fruit,
When what should feed the Tree, devours the Root:
The unlanden Boughs, he sees, bode certain Dearth,
Unless transplanted to more kindly Earth.
So the poor Husbands of the Stage, who found
Their Labors lost upon the ungrateful Ground,
This last and only Remedy have proved;
And hope new Fruit from ancient Stocks removed.
Well may they hope, when you so kindly aid,
And plant a Soil which you so rich have made.
As Nature gave the World to Man's first Age,
So from your Bounty we receive this Stage;
The Freedom Man was born to you have restored,
And to our World such Plenty you afford,
It seems like Eden, fruitful of its own Accord.
But since in Paradise frail Flesh gave way,
And when but two were made, both went astray;
Forbear your Wonder, and the Fault forgive,
If in our larger Family we grieve
One falling Adam, and one tempted Eve.
We who remain, would gratefully repay
What our Endeavors can, and bring this Day,
The First-fruit Offering of a Virgin Play.
We hope there is something that may please each Taste,
And though of homely Fare we make the Feast,
Yet you will find Variety at least.
There Is Humor, which for cheerful Friends we got;
And for the thinking Party there is a Plot.
We Have something too to gratify ill Nature,
(If there be any here) and that is Satire.
Though Satire scarce dares grin, it is grown so mild;
Or only shows its Teeth, as if it smiled.
As Asses Thistles, Poets mumble Wit;
And dare not bite, for fear of being bit.
They hold their Pens, as Swords are held by Fools,
And are afraid to use their own Edge-Tools.
Since the Plain-Dealer's Scenes of Manly Rage,
Not one has dared to lash this Crying Age.
This time, the Poet owns the bold Essay,
Yet hopes there is no ill Manners in his Play:
And he declares by me, he has designed
Affront to none, but frankly speaks his Mind.
And should the ensuing Scenes not chance to hit,
He offers but this one Excuse, 'Twas writ
Before your late Encouragement of Wit.
EPILOGUE, Spoken at the Opening of the New House. By Mrs. Bracegirdle.
SURE Providence, at first, designed this Place
To be the Player's Refuge in Distress;
For still in every Storm they all run hither,
As to a Shed, that shields 'em from the Weather.
But thinking of this Change which last befell us,
It Is like what I have heard our Poets tell us:
For when behind our Scenes their Suits are pleading,
To help their Love, sometimes they show their Reading;
And wanting ready Cash to pay for Hearts,
They top their Learning on us, and their Parts.
Once of Philosophers they told us Stories,
Whom, as I think, they called -- Py -- Pythagories.
I Am sure it is some such Latin Name they give 'em,
And we, who know no better, must believe 'em.
Now to these Men (say they) such Souls were given,
That after Death never went to Hell nor Heaven,
But lived, I know not how, in Beasts; and then,
When many Years were past, in Men again.
Methinks, we Players resemble such a Soul,
That does from Bodies, we from Houses stroll.
Thus Aristotle's Soul, of old that was,
May now be damned to animate an Ass;
Or in this very House, for ought we know,
Is doing painful Penance in some Beau:
And this our Audience, which did once resort
To shining Theaters to see our Sport,
Now find us tossed into a Tennis-Court.
These Walls but the other Day were filled with Noise
Of roaring Gamesters, and your Damme Boys:
Then bounding Balls and Rackets they encompassed,
And now they are filled with Jests, and Flights, and Bombast!
I vow, I don't much like this Transmigration,
Strolling from Place to Place, by Circulation.
Grant, Heaven, we don't return to our first Station.
I know not what these think, but for my Part,
I cannot reflect without an aching Heart,
How we should end in our Original, a Cart.
But we cannot fear, since you're so good to save us,
That you have only set us up to leave us.
Thus from the past, we hope for future Grace,
I beg it --
And some here know I have a begging Face.
Then pray continue this your kind Behavior,
For a clear Stage will not do, without your Favor.
Personae Dramatis.
MEN.
Sir Sampson Legend, Father to Valentine and Ben. By Mr. Underhill. Valentine,
Fallen under his Father's Displeasure by his expensive way of living, in love
with Angelica. Mr. Betterton. Scandal, His Friend, a Free Speaker. Mr. Smith.
Tattle, A half-witted Beau, vain of his Amors, yet valuing himself for
Secrecy. Mr. Bowman. Ben. Sir Sampson's Younger Son, half homebred, and half
Sea-bred, designed to marry Miss Prue.Mr. Dogget. Foresight, An illiterate Old
Fellow, peevish and positive, superstitious, and pretending to understand
Astrology, Palmistry, Phisiognomy, Omens, Dreams, etc. Uncle to Angelica. Mr.
Sanford. Jeremy, Servant to Valentine. Mr. Bowen. Tr^^^^nd, A Scrivener. Mr.
Triffusis. Buckram, A Lawyer. Mr. Freeman.
WOMEN.
Angelica, Niece to Foresight, of a considerable Fortune in her own Hands. By
Mrs. Bracegirdle. Mrs. Foresight, Second Wife to Foresight. Mrs. Bowman. Mrs.
Frail, Sister to Mrs. Foresight, a Woman of the Town. Mrs. Barry. Miss Prue,
Daughter to Foresight by a former Wife, a silly, awkward, Country Girl. Mrs.
Ayliff. Nurse to Miss. Mrs. Leigh. Jenny, Maid to Angelica. Mrs. Lawson.
A Steward, Officers, Sailers, and several Servants.
The SCENE in LONDON. LOVE for LOVE.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Valentine in his Chamber Reading. Jeremy Waiting. Several Books upon the
Table. Val. JEremy.


Jere. Sir.


Val. Here, take away; I Will walk a Turn, and digest what I have read --


Jere. You Will grow Devilish Fat upon this Paper-Diet. [Aside, and taking away
the Books.


Val. And do you here, go you to Breakfast -- There Is a Page doubled down in
Epictetus, that is a Feast for an Emperor.


Jere. Was Epictetus a real Cook, or did he only write Receipts?


Val. Read, read, Sirrah, and refine your Appetite; learn to live upon
Instruction; feast your Mind, and mortify your Flesh; read, and take your
Nourishment in at your Eyes; shut up your Mouth, and chew the Good of
Understanding. So Epictetus advises.


Jere. O Lord! I have heard much of him, when I waited upon a Gentleman at
Cambridge: Pray what was that Epictetus?


Val. A very rich Man. -- Not worth a Groat.


Jere. Humph, and so he has made a very fine Feast, where there is nothing to
be eaten.


Val. Yes.


Jere. Sir, you're a Gentleman, and probably understand this fine Feeding: But
if you please, I had rather be at Board-Wages. Does your Epictetus, or your
Seneca here, or any of these poor, rich Rogues, teach you how to pay your Debts
without Money? Will they shut up the Mouths of your Creditors? Will Plato be
Bail for you! Or Diogenes, because he understands Confinements, and lived in a
Tub, go to Prison for you? 'Slife, Sir, what do you mean, to mew your self up
here with three or four musty Books, in Commendation of Starving and Poverty.


Val. Why, Sirrah, I have no Money, you know it; and therefore resolve to rail
at all that have: And in that I but follow the Examples of the wisest and
wittiest Men in all Ages; these Poets and Philosophers whom you naturally hate,
for just such another Reason; because they abound in Sense, and you are a Fool.


Jere. Ay, Sir, I am a Fool, I know it: And yet, Heaven help me, I Am poor
enough to be a Wit -- But I was always a Fool, when I told you what your
Expenses would bring you to; your Coaches and your Liveries; your Treats and
your Balls; your being in Love with a Lady, that did not care a Farthing for
you in your Prosperity; and keeping Company with Wits, that cared for nothing
but your Prosperity; and now when you are poor, hate you as much as they do one
another.


Val. Well; and now I am poor, I have an opportunity to be revenged on 'em all;
I Will pursue Angelica with more Love than ever, and appear more notoriously her
Admirer in this Restraint, than when I openly rivaled the rich Fops that made
Court to her; so shall my Poverty be a Mortification to her Pride, and perhaps
make her compassionate the Love, which has principally reduced me to this
Lowness of Fortune. And for the Wits, I Am sure I Am in a Condition to be even
with them. --


Jere. Nay, your Condition is pretty even with theirs, that is the truth on it.


Val. I Will take some of their Trade out of their Hands.


Jere. Now Heaven of Mercy continue the Tax upon Paper; you don't mean to Write!


Val. Yes, I do; I Will write a Play.


Jere. Hem! -- Sir, if you please to give me a small Certificate of three Lines
-- only to certify those whom it may concern, That the Bearer hereof, Jeremy
Fetch by Name, has for the space of seven Years truly and faithfuly served
Valentine Legend, Esquire and that he is not now turned away for any Misdemeanour,
but does voluntarily dismiss his Master from any future Authority over him. --


Val. No, Sirrah, you shall live with me still.


Jere. Sir, it is impossible -- I may die with you, starve with you, or be
damned with your Works: But to live even three Days, the Life of a Play, I no
more expect it, than to be Cannoniz'd for a Muse after my Decease.


Val. You are witty, you Rogue, I shall want your help; -- I Will have you learn
to make Couplets, to tag the Ends of Acts; do you hear, get the Maids to Crambo
in an Evening, and learn the knack of rhiming, you may arrive at the height of
a Song, sent by an unknown Hand, or a Chocolate-House Lampoon.


Jere. But Sir, is this the way to recover your Father's Favor? Why Sir
Sampson will be irreconcilable. If your younger Brother should come from Sea,
he would never look upon you again. You're undone, Sir; you're ruined; you will not
have a Friend left in the World, if you turn Poet -- Ah Pox confound that
Will's Coffee-House, it has ruined more Young Men than the Royal-Oak Lottery --
Nothing thrives that belongs to it. The Man of the House would have been an
Alderman by this time with half the Trade, if he had set up in the City -- For
my part, I never sit at the Door, that I don't get double the Stomach that I do
at a Horse-Race. The Air upon Banstead-Downs is nothing to it for a Whetter;
yet I never see it, but the Spirit of Famine appears to me, sometimes like a
decayed Porter, worn out with Pimping, and carrying Billet-doux and Songs; not
like other Porters for Hire, but for the Jest's sake. Now like a thin
Chairman, melted down to half his Proportion, with carrying a Poet upon Tick
to visit some great Fortune; and his Fare to be paid him like the Wages of Sin,
either at the Day of Marriage, or the Day of Death.


Val. Very well, Sir; can you proceed?


Jere. Sometimes like a bilk'd Bookseller, with a meagre terrified Countenance,
that looks as if he had written for himself, or were resolved to turn Author,
and bring the rest of his Brethren into the same Condition. And lastly, in the
Form of a worn-out Punk, with Verses in her Hand, which her Vanity had
preferred to Settlements, without a whole Tatter to her Tail, but as ragged as
one of the Muses; or as if she were carrying her Linen to the Paper-Mill, to
be converted into Folio Books, of Warning to all young Maids not to prefer
Poetry to good Sense; or lying in the Arms of a needy Wit, before the Embraces
of a wealthy Fool.


Enter Scandal. Scan. What, Jeremy holding forth?


Val. The Rogue has (with all the Wit he could muster up) been declaiming
against Wit.


Scan. Ay? Why then I Am afraid Jeremy has Wit: For wherever it is, it is always
contriving its own Ruin.


Jere. Why so I have been telling my Master, Sir: Mr. Scandal, for Heaven's
sake, Sir, try if you can dissuade him from turning Poet.


Scan. Poet! He shall turn Soldier first, and rather depend upon the outside of
his Head than the Lining. Why, what the Devil has not your Poverty made you
Enemies enough? Must you needs show your Wit to get more?


Jere. Ay, more indeed; for who cares for any Body that has more Wit than
himself?


Scan. Jeremy speaks like an Oracle. Don't you see how worthless great Men, and
dull rich Rogues, avoid a witty Man of small Fortune? Why, he looks like a Writ
of Enquiry into their Titles and Estates, and seems Commissioned by Heaven to
seize the better half.


Val. Therefore I would rail in my Writings, and be revenged.


Scan. Rail? At whom? the whole World? Impotent and Vain? Who would die a
Martyr to Sense in a Country where the Religion is Folly? You may stand at Bay
for a while; but when the full Cry is against you, you will not have fair Play for
your Life. If you cannot be fairly run down by the Hounds, you will be
treacherously shot by the Huntsmen. -- No, turn Pimp, Flatterer, Quack, Lawyer,
Parson, be Chaplain to an Atheist, or Stallion to an Old Woman, any thing but
Poet; a Modern Poet is worse, more servile, timorous and fawning, than any I
have named: Without you could retrieve the Ancient Honors of the Name, recall
the Stage of Athens, and be allowed the force of open honest Satire.


Val. You are as inveterate against our Poets, as if your Character had been
lately exposed upon the Stage. -- Nay, I am not violently bent upon the Trade
-- [One knocks.] Jeremy, see who is there. [Ex. Jeremy.] But tell me what you
would have me do? -- What do the World say of me, and my forced Confinement?


Scan. The World behaves it self as it used to do on such Occasions; some pity
you, and condemn your Father; others excuse him, and blame you; only the Ladies
are merciful, and wish you well, since Love and pleasurable Expense have been
your greatest Faults.


Enter Jeremy. Val. How now?


Jere. Nothing new, Sir; I have dispatched some half a Dozen Duns, with as much
Dexterity as a hungry Judge does Causes at Dinnertime.


Val. What Answer have you given 'em?


Scan. Patience, I suppose, the old Receipt.


Jere. No, Faith Sir; I have put 'em off so long with Patience and Forbearance,
and other fair Words, that I was forced now to tell 'em in plain downright
English --


Val. What?


Jere. That they should be paid.


Val. When?


Jere. To Morrow.


Val. And how the Devil do you mean to keep your Word?


Jere. Keep it? Not at all; it has been so very much stretched, that I reckon
it will break of course by to Morrow, and no Body be surpised at the Matter --
[Knocking.] -- Again! Sir, if you don't like my Negotiation, will you be
pleased to answer these your self.


Val. See who they are,

[Exit Jere. By this, Scandal, you may see what it is to be great; Secretaries
of State, Presidents of the Council, and Generals of an Army lead just such a
Life as I do; have just such Crowds of Visitants in a Morning, all soliciting
of past Promises; which are but a civiller sort of Duns, that lay claim to
voluntary Debts.


Scan. And you, like a true great Man, having engaged their Attendance, and
promised more than ever you intend to perform, are more perplexed to find
Evasions, than you would be to invent the honest Means of keeping your Word,
and gratifying your Creditors.


Val. Scandal, learn to spare your Friends, and do not provoke your Enemies;
this Liberty of your Tongue, will one Day bring a Confinement on your Body, my
Friend.


Re-enter Jeremy. Jere. O Sir, there is Trapland the Scrivener, with two
suspicious Fellows, like lawful Pads, that would knock a Man down with
Pocket-Tipstaves -- And there is your Father's Steward, and the Nurse with one
of your Children from Twitnam.


Val. Pox on her, could she find no other time to fling my Sins in my Face?
Here, give her this [Gives Money.] and bid her trouble me no more; a thoughtless
two-handed Whore, she knows my Condition well enough, and might have over-laid
the Child a Fortnight ago, if she had had any Forecast in her.


Scan. What, is it bouncing Margery, and my God-son?


Jere. Yes, Sir.


Scan. My Blessing to the Boy, with this Token of my Love. [Gives Money.] And
do you hear, bid Margery put more Flocks in her Bed, shift twice a Week, and not
work so hard, that she may not smell so vigorously. -- I shall take the Air
shortly.


Val. Scandal, don't spoil my Boy's Milk: -- Bid Trapland come in. If I can
give that Cerberus a Sop, I shall be at rest for one day.

[Exit Jeremy. Enter Trapland and Jeremy. O Mr. Trapland! my old Friend!
Welcome. Jeremy, a Chair quickly: A Bottle of Sack and a Toast -- fly -- a
Chair first.


Trap. A good Morning to you Mr. Valentine, and to you Mr. Scandal.


Scan. The Morning's a very good Morning, if you don't spoil it.


Val. Come sit you down, you know his way.


Trap. sits. There is a Debt, Mr. Valentine, of 1500 l. of pretty long standing
--


Val. I cannot talk about Business with a thirsty Palate. -- Sirrah the Sack.


Trap. And I desire to know what Course you have taken for the Payment?


Val. Faith and Troth, I am heartily glad to see you, -- my Service to you --
fill, fill, to honest Mr. Trapland; fuller.


Trap. Hold, Sweetheart. -- This is not to our Business: -- my Service to you,
Mr. Scandal -- [Drinks.] -- I have forborne as long --


Val. The Other Glass, and then we'll talk. Fill, Jeremy.


Trap. No more, in truth. -- I have forborne, I say --


Val. Sirrah, fill when I bid you. -- And how does your handsome Daughter? --
Come, a good Husband to her.

[Drinks.
Trap. Thank you -- I have been out of this Money --


Val. Drink first. Scandal, why do you not drink?

[They Drink.
Trap. And in short I can be put off no longer.


Val. I was much obliged to you for your Supply: It did me signal Service in my
Necessity. But you delight in doing good. -- Scandal, Drink to me, my Friend
Trapland's Health. An honester Man lives not, nor one more ready to serve his
Friend in Distress, though I say it to his Face. Come, fill each Man his Glass.


Scan. What! I know Trapland has been a Whoremaster, and loves a Wench still.
You never knew a Whoremaster, that was not an honest Fellow.


Trap. Fie, Mr. Scandal, you never knew --


Scan. What don't I know? -- I know the Buxom black Widow (...) the Poultry --
800 l. a Year Jointure, and 20000 l. in Money. A hah! Old Trap.


Val. Say you so, In Faith? Come, we'll remember the Widow: I know whereabouts
you are; come, to the Widow --


Trap. No more indeed.


Val. What, the Widow's Health; give it him -- off with it:

[They drink. A lovely Girl, In Faith, black sparkling Eyes, soft pouting
Ruby-Lips! better sealing there, than a Bond for a Million; hah!


Trap. No, no, there is no such thing, we'd better mind our Business -- You're a
Wag.


Val. No faith, we'll mind the Widow's Business; fill again -- Pretty round
heaving Breasts -- a Barbary Shape, and a Jut with her Bum, would stir an
Anchoret: And the prettiest Foot! Oh if a Man could but fasten his Eyes to her
Feet, as they steal in and out, and play at Bo-peep under her Petticoats, ah!
Mr. Trapland?


Trap. Verily, give me a Glass -- you're a Wag, -- and here is to the Widow.

[Drinks.
Scan. He begins to Chuckle; -- ply him close, or he will relapse into a Dun.


Enter Officer. Off. By your Leave, Gentlemen, -- Mr. Trapland, if we must do
our Office tell us. -- We have half a dozen Gentlemen to arrest in Pall Mall
and Covent Garden; and if we don't make haste the Chair-men will be abroad, and
block up the Chocolate-Houses, and then our Labor's lost.


Trap. Udso that is true. Mr. Valentine, I love Mirth, but Business must be
done, are you ready to --


Jere. Sir, your Father's Steward says he comes to make Proposals concerning
your Debts.


Val. Bid him come in: Mr. Trapland, send away your Officer, you shall have an
Answer presently.


Trap. Mr. Snap, stay within Call

[Exit Officer. [Enter Steward and whispers Valentine.
Scan. Here Is a Dog now, a Traitor in his Wine; Sirrah refund the Sack: Jeremy,
fetch him some warm Water, or I Will rip up his Stomach, and go the shortest way
to his Conscience.


Trap. Mr. Scandal, you are uncivil; I did not value your Sack, but you cannot
expect it again when I have drank it.


Scan. And how do you expect to have your Money again, when a Gentleman has
spent it?


Val. You need say no more, I understand the Conditions, they are very hard,
but my Necessity is very pressing, I agree to 'em; take Mr. Trapland with you,
and let him draw the Writing -- Mr. Trapland, you know this Man, he shall
satisfy you.


Trap. Sincerely, I am loath to be thus pressing, but my necessity


Val. No Apology, good Mr. Scrivener, you shall be paid.


Trap. I hope you forgive me, my Business requires --

[Exeunt Steward, Trap. and Jere.
Scan. He begs Pardon like a Hangman at an Execution.


Val. But I have got a Reprieve.


Scan. I am surpised; what, does your Father relent?


Val. No; he has sent me the hardest Conditions in the World: You have heard of
a Booby-Brother of mine, that was sent to Sea three Years ago? This Brother my
Father hears is landed; whereupon he very affectionately sends me word, If I
will make a Deed of Conveyance of my Right to his Estate after his Death to my
younger Brother, he will immediately furnish me with four thousand Pound to pay
my Debts, and make my Fortune. This was once proposed before, and I refused it;
but the present Impatience of my Creditors for their Money, and my own
Impatience of Confinement, and Absence from Angelica, force me to consent.


Scan. A very desperate Demonstration of your Love to Angelica: And I think she
has never given you any Assurance of hers.


Val. You know her Temper; she never gave me any great reason either for Hope
or Despair.


Scan. Women of her airy Temper, as they seldom think before they act, so they
rarely give us any Light to guess at what they mean: But you have little reason
to believe that a Woman of this Age, who has had an Indifference for you in
your Prosperity, will fall in love with your ill Fortune; besides, Angelica has
a great Fortune of her own; and great Fortunes either expect another great
Fortune, or a Fool.


Enter Jeremy. Jere. More Misfortunes, Sir.


Val. What, another Dun?


Jere. No Sir, but Mr. Tattle is come to wait upon you.


Val. Well, I cannot help it, -- you must bring him up; He knows I don't go
abroad.

[Exit Jeremy.
Scan. Pox on him, I Will be gone.


Val. No, prithee stay: Tattle and you should never be asunder; you are Light
and Shadow, and show one another; he is perfectly thy Reverse both in Humor
and Understanding; and as you set up for Defamation, he is a Mender of
Reputations.


Scan. A Mender of Reputations! ay, just as he is a Keeper of Secrets, another
Virtue that he sets up for in the same manner. For the Rogue will speak aloud
in the posture of a Whisper; and deny a Woman's Name, while he gives you the
Marks of her Person: He will forswear receiving a Letter from her, and at the
same time show you her Hand upon the Superscription: And yet perhaps he has
counterfeited the Hand too, and sworn to a Truth; but he hopes not to be
believed; and refuses the Reputation of a Ladies Favor, as a Doctor says No to
a Bishopric, only that it may be granted him. -- In short, he is a public
Professor of Secrecy, and makes Proclamation that he holds private
Intelligence. -- He Is here.


Enter Tattle. Tatt. Valentine, good Morrow; Scandal, I am yours, -- that is,
when you speak well of me.


Scan. That is, when I am yours; for while I am my own, or any body's else,
that will never happen.


Tatt. How Inhuman!


Val. Why, Tattle, you need not be much concerned at any thing that he says:
For to converse with Scandal, is to play at Losing Loadum; you must lose a good
Name to him, before you can win it for your self.


Tatt. But how barbarous that is, and how unfortunate for him, that the World
shall think the better of any Person for his Calumniation! -- I thank Heaven,
it has always been a part of my Character, to handle the Reputation of others
very tenderly.


Scan. Ay, such rotten Reputations as you have to deal with, are to be handled
tenderly indeed.


Tatt. Nay, but why rotten? Why should you say rotten, when you know not the
Persons of whom you speak? How cruel that is?


Scan. Not know 'em? Why, thou never had to do with any Body that did not
stink to all the Town.


Tatt. Ha, ha, ha; nay, now you make a Jest of it indeed. For there is nothing
more known, than that no Body knows any thing of that nature of me: As I hope
to be saved, Valentine, I never exposed a Woman since I knew what Woman was.


Val. And yet you have conversed with several.


Tatt. To be free with you, I have -- I don't care if I own that -- Nay more
(I Am going to say a bold Word now) I never could meddle with a Woman that had
to do with any Body else.


Scan. How!


Val. Nay Faith, I Am apt to believe him -- Except her Husband, Tattle.


Tatt. Oh that --


Scan. What think you of that Noble Commoner, Mrs. Drab?


Tatt. Pooh, I know Madam Drab has made her Brags in three or four places, that
I said this and that, and writ to her, and did I know not what -- But, upon my
Reputation, she did me wrong -- Well, well, that was Malice -- But I know the
bottom of it. She was bribed to that by one that we all know -- A Man too. Only
to bring me into Disgrace with a certain Woman of Quality --


Scan. Whom we all know.


Tatt. No matter for that -- Yes, yes, every Body knows -- No doubt on it, every
Body knows my Secrets -- But I soon satisfied the Lady of my Innocence; for I
told her -- Madam, says I, there are some Persons who make it their Business to
tell Stories, and say this and that of one and the other, and every thing in the
World; and, says I, if your Grace --


Scan. Grace!


Tatt. O Lord, what have I said? my unlucky Tongue!


Val. Ha, ha, ha.


Scan. Why, Tattle, thou have more Impudence than one can in reason expect: I
shall have an Esteem for thee, well, and ha, ha, ha, well, go on, and what did
you say to her Grace?


Val. I confess this is something extraordinary.


Tatt. Not a Word, as I hope to be saved; an errant Lapsus Linguae -- Come,
let us talk of something else.


Val. Well, but how did you acquit your self?


Tatt. Pooh, pooh, nothing at all, I only rallied with you -- a Woman of
ordinary Rank was a little jealous of me, and I told her something or other,
Faith -- I know not what -- Come, let us talk of something else.

[Hums a Song.
Scan. Hang him, let him alone, he has a Mind we should enquire.


Tatt. Valentine, I Supped last Night with your Mistress, and her Uncle Old
Foresight: I think your Father lies at Foresight's.


Val. Yes.


Tatt. Upon my Soul Angelica's a fine Woman -- And so is Mrs. Foresight, and
her Sister Mrs. Frail.


Scan. Yes, Mrs. Frail is a very fine Woman, we all know her.


Tatt. Oh that is not fair.


Scan. What?


Tatt. To tell.


Scan. To tell what? Why, what do you know of Mrs. Frail?


Tatt. Who I? Upon Honor I don't know whether she be Man or Woman, but by the
smoothness of her Chin, and roundness of her Lips.


Scan. No!


Tatt. No.


Scan. She says otherwise.


Tatt. Impossible!


Scan. Yes Faith. Ask Valentine else.


Tatt. Why then, as I hope to be saved, I believe a Woman only obliges a Man to
Secrecy, that she may have the Pleasure of telling her self.


Scan. No doubt on it. Well, but has she done you Wrong, or no? You have had
her? Ha?


Tatt. Though I have more Honor than to tell first; I have more Manners than to
contradict what a Lady has declared.


Scan. Well, you own it?


Tatt. I am strangely surpised! Yes, yes, I cannot deny't, if she taxes me with
it.


Scan. She Will be here by and by, she sees Valentine every Morning.


Tatt. How!


Val. She does me the Favor -- I mean of a Visit sometimes. I did not think
she had granted more to any Body.


Scan. Nor I, Faith -- But Tattle does not use to belie a Lady; it is contrary
to his Character -- How one may be deceived in a Woman, Valentine?


Tatt. Nay, what do you mean, Gentlemen?


Scan. I Am resolved I Will ask her.


Tatt. O Barbarous! why did you not tell me --


Scan. No, you told us.


Tatt. And bid me ask Valentine.


Val. What did I say? I hope you will not bring me to confess an Answer, when you
never asked me the Question.


Tatt. But, Gentlemen, this is the most Inhuman Proceeding --


Val. Nay, if you have known Scandal thus long, and cannot avoid such a
palpable Decoy as this was, the Ladies have a fine time, whose Reputations are
in your keeping.


Enter Jeremy. Jere. Sir, Mrs. Frail has sent to know if you are stirring.


Val. Show her up when she comes.

[Exit Jere.
Tatt. I Will be gone.


Val. You Will meet her.


Tatt. Have you not a back way?


Val. If there were, you have more Discretion, than to give Scandal such an
Advantage; why, your running away will prove all that he can tell her.


Tatt. Scandal, you will not be so ungenerous -- O, I shall lose my Reputation
of Secrecy for ever -- I shall never be received but upon Public Days, and my
Visits will never be admitted beyond a Drawing Room: I shall never see a
Bedchamber again, never be locked in a Closet, nor run behind a Screen, or
under a Table; never be distinguished among the Waiting-Women by the Name of
Trusty Mr. Tattle more -- You will not be so cruel.


Val. Scandal, have Pity on him; he will yield to any Conditions.


Tatt. Any, any Terms.


Scan. Come then, sacrifice half a Dozen Women of good Reputation to me
presently -- Come, where are your familiar -- And see that they are Women of
Quality too, the first Quality. --


Tatt. It Is very hard -- Will Not a Baronet's Lady pass?


Scan. No, nothing under a Right Honorable.


Tatt. O Inhuman! You don't expect their Names.


Scan. No, their Titles shall serve.


Tatt. Alas, that is the same thing: Pray spare me their Titles; I Will describe
their Persons.


Scan. Well, begin then: But take notice, if you are so ill a Painter, that I
cannot know the Person by your Picture of her, you must be condemned, like
other bad Painters, to write the Name at the bottom.


Tatt. Well, first then --

Enter Mrs. Frail. O unfortunate! she is come already; will you have Patience
'till another time -- I Will double the number.


Scan. Well, on that Condition -- Take heed you don't fail me.


Mrs. Frail. Hey Day! I shall get a fine Reputation by coming to see Fellows in
a Morning. Scandal, you Devil, are you here too? Oh Mr. Tattle, every thing is
safe with you, we know.


Scan. Tattle.


Tatt. Mum -- O Madam, you do me too much Honor.


Val. Well Lady Galloper, how does Angelica?


Frail. Angelica? Manners!


Val. What, you will allow an absent Lover --


Frail. No, I Will allow a Lover present with his Mistress to be particular --
But otherwise I think his Passion ought to give place to his Manners.


Val. But what if he have more Passion than Manners?


Frail. Then let him Marry and reform.


Val. Marriage indeed may qualify the Fury of his Passion, but it very rarely
mends a Man's Manners.


F^^il. You are the most mistaken in the World; there is no Creature perfectly
Civil but a Husband. For in a little time he grows only rude to his Wife, and
that is the highest good Breeding, for it begets his Civility to other People.
Well, I Will tell you News; but I suppose you hear your Brother Benjamin is
landed: And my Brother Foresight's Daughter is come out of the Country -- I
assure you, there is a Match talked of by the Old People -- Well, if he be but
as great a Sea-Beast as she is a Land-Monster, we shall have a most Amphibious
Breed -- The Progeny will be all Otters; he has been bred at Sea, and she has
never been out of the Country.


Val. Pox take'em, their Conjunction bodes me no good, I Am sure.


Frail. Now you talk of Conjunction, my Brother Foresight has cast both their
Nativities, and Prognosticates an Admiral and an eminent Justice of the Peace
to be the Issue-Male of their two Bodies; it is the most superstitious Old Fool!
He would have persuaded me, that this was an unlucky Day, and would not let me
come abroad: But I invented a Dream, and sent him to Artimedorus for
Interpretation, and so stole out to see you. Well, and what will you give me
now? Come, I must have something.


Val. Step into the next Room -- and I Will give you something.


Scan. Ay, we'll all give you something.


Frail. Well, what will you all give me?


Val. Mine Is a Secret.


Frail. I thought you would give me something, that would be a Trouble to you
to keep.


Val. And Scandal shall give you a good Name.


Frail. That Is more than he has for himself. And what will you give me, Mr.
Tattle?


Tatt. I? My Soul, Madam.


Frail. Pooh, No I thank you, I have enough to do to take care of my own. Well;
but I Will come and see you one of these Mornings: I here you have a great many
Pictures.


Tatt. I have a pretty good Collection at your Service, some Originals.


Scan. Hang him, he has nothing but the Seasons and the Twelve Caesar's, paultry
Copies; and the Five Senses, as ill represented as they are in himself: And he
himself is the only Original you will see there.


Frail. Ay, but I hear he has a Closet of Beauties.


Scan. Yes, all that have done him Favors, if you will believe him.


Frail. Ay, let me see those, Mr. Tattle.


Tatt. Oh Madam, those are sacred to Love and Contemplation. No Man but the
Painter and my self was ever blessed with the Sight.


Frail. Well, but a Woman --


Tatt. Nor Woman, 'till she consented to have her Picture there too -- for then
she is obliged to keep the Secret.


Scan. No, no; come to me if you would see Pictures.


Frail. You?


Scan. Yes faith, I can show you your own Picture, and most of your
Acquaintance to the Life, and as like as at Kneller's.


Frail. O lying Creature -- Valentine, does not he lie? -- I cannot believe a
Word he says.


Val. No indeed, he speaks Truth now: For as Tattle has Pictures of all that
have granted him Favors, he has the Pictures of all that have refused him; if
Satires, Descriptions, Characters and Lampoons are Pictures.


Scan. Yes, mine are most in black and white. -- And yet there are some set out
in their true Colors, both Men and Women. I can show you Pride, Folly,
Affectation, Wantonness, Inconstancy, Covetousness, Dissimulation, Malice, and
Ignorance, all in one Piece. Then I can show you Lying, Foppery, Vanity,
Cowardice, Bragging, Lechery, Impotence, and Ugliness, in another Piece; and
yet one of these is a celebrated Beauty, and the other a professed Beau. I have
Paintings too, some pleasant enough.


Frail. Come, let us hear 'em.


Scan. Why, I have a Beau in a Bagnio, Cupping for a Complexion, and Sweating
for a Shape.


Frail. So.


Scan. Then I have a Lady burning of Brandy in a Cellar with a Hackney-Coachman.


Frail. O Devil! Well, but that Story is not true.


Scan. I have some Hieroglyphics too, I have a Lawyer with a hundred Hands,
two Heads, and but one Face; a Divine with two Faces, and one Head; and I have
a Soldier with his Brains in his Belly, and his Heart where his Head should be.


Frail. And no Head?


Scan. No Head.


Frail. Pooh, this is all Invention. Have you never a Poet?


Scan. Yes, I have a Poet weighing Words, and selling Praise for Praise, and a
Critic picking his Pocket. I have another large Piece too, representing a
School, where there are huge proportioned Critics, with long Wigs, laced
Coats, Steinkirk Cravats, and terrible Faces; with Cat-calls in their Hands,
and Hornbooks about their Necks. I have many more of this kind, very well
Painted, as you shall see.


^^ail. Well, I Will come, if it be only to disprove you.


Enter Jeremy. Jere. Sir, here is the Steward again from your Father.


Val. I Will come to him -- will you give me leave, I Will wait on you again
presently.


Frail. No, I Will be gone. Come, who Squires me to the Exchange? I must call my
Sister Foresight there.


Scan. I will; I have a mind to your Sister.


Frail. Civil!


Tatt. I will; because I have a Tender for your Ladyship.


Frail. That Is somewhat the better Reason, to my Opinion.


Scan. Well, if Tattle entertains you, I have the better Opportunity to engage
your Sister.


Val. Teli Angelica, I am about to make hard Conditions to come abroad, and be
at Liberty to see her.


Scan. I Will give an account of you and your Proceedings. If Indiscretion be a
sign of Love, you are the most a Lover of any Body that I know: You fancy that
parting with your Estate, will help you to your Mistress -- In my Mind he is a
thoughtless Adventurer,

Who hopes to purchase Wealth, by selling Land;
Or win a Mistress, with a losing Hand.
[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Room in Foresight's House. Enter Foresight and Servant. Fore. HEY day! What,
are all the Women of my Family abroad? Is not my Wife come home? Nor my Sister,
nor my Daughter?


Serve. No, Sir.


Fore. Mercy on us, what can be the meaning of it? Sure the Moon is in all her
Fortitudes. Is my Niece Angelica at home?


Serve. Yes, Sir.


Fore. I believe you lie, Sir.


Serve. Sir?


Fore. I say you lie, Sir. It is impossible that any thing should be as I would
have it; for I was born, Sir, when the Crab was ascending, and all my Affairs
go backward.


Serve. I cannot tell indeed, Sir.


Fore. No, I know you cannot, Sir: But I can tell, Sir, and foretell, Sir.

[Enter Nurse. Nurse, where is your Young Mistress?


Nurse. Wee'st heart, I know not, they are none of 'em come home yet: Poor
Child, I warrant she is fond o'seeing the Town -- Marry, pray Heaven they have
given her any Dinner -- Good lack aday, ha, ha, ha, O strange; I Will vow and
swear now, ha, ha, ha, Marry, and did you ever see the like!


Fore. Why how now, what is the matter?


Nurse. Pray Heaven send your Worship good Luck, Marry and Amen with all my
heart, for you have put on one Stocking with the wrong side outward.


Fore. Ha, How? Faith and troth I am glad of it, and so I have, that may be
good Luck in troth, in troth it may, very good Luck: Nay I have had some Omens,
I got out of Bed backwards too this Morning, without Premeditation; pretty good
that too: But then I stumbled coming down Stairs, and met a Weasel; bad Omens
those; some bad, some good, our Lives are checkered: Mirth and Sorrow, Want
and Plenty, Night and Day, make up our Time. -- But in troth I am pleased at my
Stocking, very well pleased at my Stocking -- Oh here is my Niece! --

Enter Angelica. Sirrah, go tell Sir Sampson Legend I Will wait on him, if he is
at leisure, -- it is now Three a Clock, a very good Hour for Business, Mercury
governs this Hour.

[Exit Servant.
Ang. Is not it a good Hour for Pleasure too, Uncle? Pray lend me your Coach,
mine is out of Order.


Fore. What, would you be gadding too? Sure all Females are mad today -- It is
of evil Portent, and bodes Mischief to the Master of a Family -- I remember an
old Prophecy written by Messehalah the Arabian, and thus translated by a
Reverend Buckinghamshire Bard: When Housewifes all the House forsake,
And leave good Man to Brew and Bake,
Withouten Guile then be it said,
That House does stond upon its Head;
And when the Head is set in Grond,
Ne marl, if it be fruitful fond.
Fruitful, the Head fruitful, that bodes Horns; the Fruit of the Head is Horns.
-- Dear Niece, stay at home -- for by the Head of the House is meant the
Husband; the Prophecy needs no Explanation.


Ang. Well, but I can neither make you a Cuckold, Uncle, by going abroad; nor
secure you from being one, by staying at home.


Fore. Yes, yes; while there is one Woman left the Prophecy is not in full Force.


Ang. But my Inclinations are in force; I have a mind to go abroad, and if you
will not lend me your Coach, I Will take a Hackney, or a Chair, and leave you to
erect a Scheme, and find who is in Conjunction with your Wife. Why don't you
keep her at home, if you're Jealous when she is abroad? You know my Aunt is a
little Retrograde (as you call it) in her Nature. Uncle, I Am afraid you are not
Lord of the Ascendant; ha, ha, ha.


Fore. Well, Jill-flirt, you are very pert -- and always ridiculing that
Celestial Science.


Ang. Nay Uncle, don't be angry -- If you are, I Will reap up all your false
Prophecies, ridiculous Dreams, and idle Divinations. I Will swear you are a
Nuisance to the Neighborhood -- What a Bustle did you keep against the last
invisible Eclipse, laying in Provision as 'twere for a Siege? What a world of
Fire and Candle, Matches and Tinderboxes did you purchase! one would have
thought we were ever after to live under Ground, or at least making a Voyage to
Greenland, to inhabit there all the dark Season.


Fore. Why, you malapert Slut. --


Ang. Will you lend me your Coach, or I Will go on -- Nay, I Will declare how you
Prophesied Popery was coming, only because the Butler had mislaid some of the
Apostle's Spoons, and thought they were lost. Away went Religion and Spoon-meat
together -- Indeed, Uncle, I Will Indite you for a Wizard.


Fore. How Hussy! was there ever such a provoking Minx?


Nurse. O merciful Father, how she talks!


Ang. Yes, I can make Oath of your unlawful Midnight Practices; you and the Old
Nurse there. --


Nurse. Marry Heaven defend -- I at Midnight Practices -- O Lord, what is here
to do? -- I in unlawful Doings with my Master's Worship -- Why, did you ever
hear the like now -- Sir, did ever I do any thing of your Midnight Concerns --
but warm your Bed, and tuck you up, and set the Candle, and your Tobacco-Box,
and your Urinal by you, and now and then rub the Soles of your Feet? -- O Lord,
I! --


Ang. Yes, I saw you together, through the Keyhole of the Closet, one Night,
like Saul and the Witch of Endor, turning the Sieve and Sheers, and pricking
your Thumbs to write poor innocent Servant's Names in Blood about a little
Nutmeg-Grater, which she had forgot in the Caudle-Cup -- Nay, I know something
worse, if I would speak of it. --


Fore. I defy you, Hussy; but I Will remember this, I Will be revenged on you,
Cockatrice; I Will hamper you -- You have your Fortune in your own Hands -- but
I Will find a way to make your Lover, your Prodigal Spendthrift Gallant,
Valentine, pay for all, I will.


Ang. Will you? I care not, but all shall out then -- Look to it, Nurse; I can
bring Witness that you have a great unnatural Teat under your Left Arm, and he
another; and that you Suckle a young Devil in the shape of a Tabby-Cat, by
turns, I can.


Nurse. A Teat, a Teat, I an unnatural Teat! O the false slanderous thing;
feel, feel here, if I have any thing but like another Christian, [Crying.] or
any Teats but two that han't given Suck this Thirty Years.


Fore. I will have Patience, since it is the Will of the Stars I should be thus
tormented -- This is the Effect of the malicious Conjunctions and Oppositions
in the Third House of my Nativity; there the Curse of Kindred was foretold --
But I will have my Doors locked up -- I Will punish you, not a Man shall enter my
House.


Ang. Do, Uncle, lock 'em up quickly before my Aunt come home -- You Will have a
Letter for Alimony tomorrow Morning -- But let me be gone first, and then let
no Mankind come near the House, but Converse with Spirits and the Celestial
Signs, the Bull, and the Ram, and the Goat. Bless me! there are a great many
Horned Beasts among the Twelve Signs, Uncle. But Cuckolds go to Heaven.


Fore. But there is but one Virgin among the Twelve Signs, Spitfire, but one
Virgin.


Ang. Nor there had not been that one, if she had had to do with any thing but
Astrologers, Uncle. That makes my Aunt go abroad.


Fore. How? how? is that the reason? Come, you know something; tell me, and
I Will forgive you; do, good Neice -- Come, you shall have my Coach and Horses,
-- Faith and Troth you shall -- Does my Wife complain? Come, I know Women tell
one another -- She is young and sanguine, has a wanton Hazle Eye, and was born
under Gemini, which may incline her to Society; she has a Mole upon her Lip,
with a moist Palm, and an open Liberality on the Mount of Venus.


Ang. Ha, ha, ha.


Fore. Do you laugh? -- Well Gentlewoman, I Will -- But come, be a good Girl,
don't perplex your poor Uncle, tell me -- will not you speak? Odd I Will --


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Sampson is coming down to wait upon you. --


Ang. Good bu'y Uncle -- Call me a Chair -- I Will find out my Aunt, and tell
her, she must not come home.

[Exit Angelica and Servant.
Fore. I Am so perplexed and vexed, I am not fit to receive him; I shall scarce
recover my self before the Hour be past: Go Nurse tell Sir Sampson I Am ready to
wait on him.


Nurse. Yes, Sir.

[Exit.
Fore. Well -- Why, if I was born to be a Cuckold, there is no more to be said
--


Enter Sir Sampson Legend with a Paper. Sir Samp. Nor no more to be done, Old
Boy; that is plain -- here it is, I have it in my Hand, Old Ptolomee; I Will make
the ungracious Prodigal know who begat him; I will, Old Nostrodamus. Why, I
warrant my Son thought nothing belonged to a Father, but Forgiveness and
Affection; no Authority, no Correction, no Arbitrary Power; nothing to be done,
but for him to offend, and me to pardon. I warrant you, if he danced 'till
Doomsday, he thought I was to pay the Piper. Well, but here it is under Black
and White, Signatum, Sigillatum, and Deliberatum; that as soon as my Son
Benjamin is arrived, he is to make over to him his Right of Inheritance.
Where Is my Daughter that is to be -- Hah! old Merlin! Body of me, I Am so glad
I Am revenged on this undutiful Rogue.


Fore. Odso, let me see; let me see the Paper -- Ay, Faith and Troth, here
it is, if it will but hold -- I wish things were done, and the Conveyance made
-- When was this Signed? what Hour? Odso, you should have consulted me for the
time. Well, but we'll make haste --


Sir Samp. Haste, ay, ay; haste enough, my Son Ben will be in Town to Night --
I have ordered my Lawyer to draw up Writings of Settlement and Jointure -- All
shall be done to Night -- No matter for the time; prithee, Brother Foresight,
leave Superstition -- Pox of the time; there is no time but the time present,
there is no more to be said of what is past, and all that is to come will happen.
If the Sun shine by Day, and the Stars by Night, why, we shall know one
another's Faces without the help of a Candle, and that is all the Stars are good
for.


Fore. How, how? Sir Sampson, that all? Give me leave to contradict you, and
tell you, you are ignorant.


Sir Samp. I tell you I am wise; and sapiens dominabitur astris; there is Latin
for you to prove it, and an Argument to confound your Ephemeris -- Ignorant! --
I tell you I have traveled old Fircu, and know the Globe. I have seen the
Antipodes, where the Sun rises at Midnight, and sets at Noonday.


Fore. But I tell you I have traveled, and traveled in the Celestial Spheres,
know the Signs and the Planets, and their Houses. Can judge of Motions Direct
and Retrograde, of Sextiles, Quadrates, Trines and Oppositions, Fiery Trigons
and Aquatical Trigons. Know whether Life shall be long or short, happy or
unhappy, whether Diseases are curable or incurable. If Journeys shall be
prosperous, Undertakings successful; or Goods stolen recovered, I know --


Sir Samp. I know the length of the Emperor of China's Foot; have kissed the
Great Mogul's Slipper, and rid a Hunting upon an Elephant with the Cham of
Tartary, -- Body of me, I have made a Cuckold of a King, and the present Majesty
of Bantam is the Issue of these Loins.


Fore. I know when Travelers Lie or speak Truth, when they don't know it
themselves.


Sir Samp. I have known an Astrologer made a Cuckold in the twinkling of a
Star; and seen a Conjurer, that could not keep the Devil out of his Wives
Circle.


Fore. What does he twit me with my Wife too? I must be better informed of
this, -- [Aside.] -- Do you mean my Wife, Sir Sampson? Though you made a Cuckold
of the King of Bantam, yet by the Body of the Sun --


Sir Samp. By the Horns of the Moon, you would say, Brother Capricorn.


Fore. Capricorn in your Teeth, thou Modern Mandevil; Ferdinand Mendez Pinto
was but a Type of thee, thou Liar of the first Magnitude. Take back your Paper
of Inheritance; send your Son to Sea again. I Will Wed my Daughter to an Egyptian
Mummy, ever she shall Incorporate with a Contemner of Sciences, and a Defamer
of Virtue.


Sir Samp. Body of me, I have gone too far; -- I must not provoke honest
Albumazar, -- an Egyptian Mummy is an Illustrious Creature, my trusty
Hieroglyphick, and may have Significations of Futurity about him; Odsbud, I
would my Son were an Egyptian Mummy for thy sake. What, thou art not angry for
a Jest, my good Haly -- I reverence the Sun, Moon and Stars with all my Heart.
-- What, I Will make thee a Present of a Mummy: Now I think on it, Body of me, I
have a Shoulder of an Egyptian King, that I purloin'd from one of the Pyramids,
powdered with Hieroglyphics, thou shall have it sent home to thy House, and
make an Entertainment for all the Philomaths and Students in Physic and
Astrology in and about London.


Fore. But what do you know of my Wife, Sir Sampson?


Sir Samp. Thy Wife is a Constellation of Virtues; she is the Moon^ and thou art
the Man in the Moon: Nay, she is more Illustrious than the Moon; for she has
her Chastity without her Inconstancy, 'Sbud I was but in Jest.

Enter Jeremy. How now? who sent for you? Ha! what would you have?


Fore. Nay; if you were but in Jest -- Who Is that Fellow? I don't like his
Physiognomy.


Sir Samp. My Son, Sir; what Son, Sir? My Son Benjamin, hoh?


Jere. No, Sir, Mr. Valentine, my Master, -- it is the first time he has been
abroad since his Confinement, and he comes to pay his Duty to you.


Sir Samp. Well, Sir.


Enter Valentine. Jere. He is here, Sir.


Val. Your Blessing, Sir.


Sir Samp. You Have had it already, Sir, I think I sent it you to Day in a Bill
of Four Thousand Pound: A great deal of Money, Brother Foresight.


Fore. Aye indeed, Sir Sampson, a great deal of Money for a young Man, I wonder
what he can do with it!


Sir Samp. Body of me, so do I. -- Hark ye, Valentine, if there is too much,
refund the Superfluity: Do hear Boy?


Val. Superfluity, Sir; it will scarce pay my Debts, -- I hope you will have
more Indulgence, than to oblige me to those hard Conditions which my Necessity
signed to.


Sir Samp. Sir, how, I beseech you, what were you pleased to intimate
concerning Indulgence?


Val. Why, Sir, that you would not go to the extremity of the Conditions, but
release me at least from some part. --


Sir Samp. Oh Sir, I understand you. -- that is all, ha?


Val. Yes, Sir, all that I presume to ask. -- But what you, out of fatherly
Fondness, will be pleased to add, shall be doubly welcome.


Sir Samp. No doubt of it, sweet Sir, but your filial Piety and my fatherly
Fondness would fit like two Tallies. -- Here Is a Rogue, Brother Foresight,
makes a Bargain under Hand and Seal in the Morning, and would be released from
it in the Afternoon; here is a Rogue, Dog, here is Conscience and Honesty; this
is your Wit now, this is the Morality of your Wits! You area Wit, and have been
a Beau, and may be a -- Why Sirrah, is it not hereunder Hand and Seal -- Can
you deny it?


Val. Sir, I don't deny it. --


Sir Samp. Sirrah, you will be hanged; I shall live to see you go up Holborn-Hill
-- Has he not a Rogue's Face? -- Speak, Brother, you understand Physiognomy, a
Hanging-look to me -- of all my Boys the most unlike me; he has a damned
Tyburn-face, without the Benefit of the Clery.


Fore. Hum -- truly I don't care to discourage a young Man, -- he has a violent
Death in his Face; but I hope no Danger of Hanging.


Val. Sir, is this Usage for your Son? -- for that old Weatherheaded Fool, I
know how to laugh at him; but you, Sir --


Sir Samp. You, Sir; and you, Sir. -- Why, who are you, Sir?


Val. Your Son, Sir.


Sir Samp. That Is more than I know, Sir, and I believe not.


Val. Faith, I hope not.


Sir Samp. What, would you have your Mother a Whore! Did you ever hear the
like! Did you ever hear the like! Body of me --


Val. I would have an Excuse for your Barbarity and unnatural Usage.


Sir Samp. Excuse! Impudence! why Sirrah, may not I do what I please? Are not
you my Slave? Did not I beget you? And might not I have chosen whether I would
have begot you or no? Ouns who are you? Whence came you? What brought you into
the World? How came you here, Sir? Here, to stand here, upon those two Legs,
and look erect with that audacious Face, hah? Answer me that: Did you come a
Voluntier into the World? Or did I beat up for you with the lawful Authority of
a Parent, and press you to the Service?


Val. I know no more why I came, than you do why you called me. But here I am,
and if you don't mean to provide for me, I desire you would leave me as you
found me.


Sir Samp. With all my Heart: Come, uncase, strip, and go naked out of the
World, as you came into it.


Val. My Clothes are soon put off: -- But you must also deprive me of Reason,
Thought, Passions, Inclinations, Affections, Appetites, Senses, and the huge
Train of Attendants that you begot along with me.


Sir Samp. Body of me, what a many-headed Monster have I propaged!


Val. I am of my self a plain easy simple Creature, and to be kept at small
Expense; but the Retinue that you gave me are craving and invincible; they are
so many Devils that you have raised, and will have Employment.


Sir Samp. 'Oons, what had I to do to get Children? -- Cannot a private Man be
born without all these Followers? -- Why nothing under an Emperor should be
born with Appetites. -- Why at this rate, a Fellow that has but a Groat in his
Pocket may have a Stomach capable of a ten Shilling Ordinary.


J^^e. Nay that is as clear as the Sun; I Will make Oath of it before any Justice
in Middlesex.


Sir Samp. Here Is a Cormorant too, -- 'S'heart this Fellow was not born with
you? -- I did not beget him, did I? --


Jere. By the Provision that is made for me, you might have begot me too: --
Nay, and to tell your Worship another Truth, I believe you did, for I find I
was born with those same Whoreson Appetites too, that my Master speaks of.


Sir Samp. Why look you there now, -- I Will maintain it, that by the rule of
right Reason, this Fellow ought to have been born without a Palate. --
'S'heart, what should he do with a distinguishing Taste? -- I warrant now he would
rather eat a Pheasant, than a piece of poor John; and smell now, why I warrant
he can smell, and loves Perfumes above a stink, -- why there is it; and Music,
don't you love Music, Scoundrel?


Jere. Yes, I have a reasonable good Ear, Sir, as to Jiggs and Country Dances,
and the like; I don't much matter your Sola's or Sonata's, they give me the
Spleen.


Sir Samp. The Spleen, ha, ha, ha, a Pox confound you -- Sola's and Sonata's?
'Oons, whose Son are you? how were you engendered, Muckworm?


Jere. I am by my Father the Son of a Chairman, my Mother sold Oisters in
Winter, and Cucumbers in Summer; and I came up stairs into the World, for I was
born in a Cellar.


Fore. By your Looks, you should go up stairs out of the World too, Friend.


Sir Samp. And if this Rogue were anatomized now, and dissected, he has his
Vessels of Digestion and Concoction, and so forth, large enough for the Inside
of a Cardinal, this Son of a Cucumber. -- These things are unaccountable and
unreasonable, -- Body of me, why was not I a Bear, that my Cubs might have lived
upon sucking their Paws? Nature has been provident only to Bears and Spiders;
the one has its Nutriment in his own Hands, and to other spins his Habitation
out of his Entrails.


Val. Fortune was provident enough to supply all the Necessities of my Nature;
if I had my right of Inheritance.


Sir Samp. Again! 'Ouns have not you four thousand Pound? -- if I had it again, I
would not give thee a Groat. -- What, would thou have me turn Pelican, and
feed thee out of my own Vitals? -- 'S'heart, live by your Wits, -- You were
always fond of the Wits, -- Now let us see, if you have Wit enough to keep your
self? -- Your Brother will be in Town to Night, or to Morrow Morning, and then
look you perform Covenants, and so your Friend and Servant. -- Come Brother
Foresight.

[Exeunt Sir Samp. and Foresight.
Jere. I told you what your Visit would come to.


Val. It Is as much as I expected -- I did not come to see him, I came to
Angelica: But since she was gone abroad, it was easily turned another way; and
at least looked well on my side: What Is here? Mrs. Foresight and Mrs. Frail,
they are earnest, -- I Will avoid 'em, -- Come this way, and go and enquire when
Angelica will return.


Enter Mrs. Foresight and Mrs. Frail. Frail. What have you to do to watch me?
-- 'S'life I Will do what I please.


Mrs. Fore. You will?


Frail. Yes marry will I -- A great piece of Business to go to Covent Garden
Square in a Hackney-Coach, and take a Turn with one's Friend.


Mrs. Fore. Nay, two or three Turns, I Will take my Oath.


Frail. Well, what if I took twenty -- I warrant, if you had been there, it had
been only innocent Recreation, -- Lord, where is the Comfort of this Life, if we
cannot have the Happiness of conversing where we like.


Mrs. Fore. But cannot you converse at home? -- I own it, I think there is no
Happiness like conversing with an agreeable Man: I don't quarrel at that, nor I
don't think but your Conversation was very innocent; but the Place is public,
and to be seen with a Man in a Hackney-Coach is scandalous: What if any Body
else should have seen you alight, as I did? -- How can any Body be happy, while
they are in perpetual Fear of being seen and censured? -- Besides it would not
only reflect upon you, Sister, but me.


Frail. Pooh, here is a Clutter -- why should it reflect upon you? -- I don't
doubt but you have thought your self happy in a Hackney-Coach before now. -- If
I had gone to Knights-bridge, or to Chelsey, or to Spring-Garden, or Barn-Elms
with a Man alone -- something might have been said.


Mrs. Fore. Why, was I ever in any of these Places? What do you mean, Sister?


Frail. Was I? what do you mean?


Mrs. Fore. You have been at a worse Place.


Frail. I at a worse Place, and with Man!


Mrs. Fore. I suppose you would not go alone to the World's-End.


Frail. The World's End! What, do you mean to Banter me?


Mrs. Fore. Poor innocent! You don't know that there is a Place called the
World's-End? I Will swear you can keep your Countenance purely, you would make an
Admirable Player.


Frail. I Will swear you have a great deal of Impudence, and in my Mind too much
for the Stage.


Mrs. Fore. Very well, that will appear who has most, You never were at the
World's-End?


Frail. No.


Mrs. Fore. You deny it positively to my Face.


Frail. Your Face, what is your Face?


Mrs. Fore. No matter for that, it is as good a Face as yours.


Frail. Not by a dozen Years wearing. -- But I do deny it positively to your
Face then.


Mrs. Fore. I Will allow you now to find fault with my Face; -- for I Will swear
your Impudence has put me out of Countenance: -- But look you here now, --
where did you lose this Gold Bodkin? -- O Sister, Sister!


Frail. My Bodkin!


Mrs. Fore. Nay, it is yours, look at it.


Frail. Well, if you go to that, where did you find this Bodkin? -- Oh Sister,
Sister! -- Sister every way.


Mrs. Fore. O Devil on it, that I could not discover her without betraying my
self. [Aside.


Frail. I have heard Gentlemen say, Sister, that one should take great care,
when one makes a Thrust in Fencing, not to lie open ones self.


Mrs. Fore. It Is very true, Sister: Well, since all is out, and as you say,
since we are both wounded, let us do that is often done in Duels, take care of
one another, and grow better Friends than before.


Frail. With all my Heart, ours are but slight Flesh Wounds, and if we keep 'em
from Air, not at all dangerous: Well, give me your Hand in token of Sisterly
Secrecy and Affection.


Mrs. Fore. Here it is with all my Heart.


Frail. Well, as an Earnest of Friendship and Confidence, I Will acquaint you
with a Design that I have: To tell Truth, and speak openly one to another, I Am
afraid the World have observed us more than we have observed one another. You
have a Rich Husband, and are provided for, I am at a loss, and have no great
Stock either of Fortune or Reputation; and therefore must look sharply about
me. Sir Sampson has a Son that is expected to Night; and by the Account I have
heard of his Education, can be no Conjurer: The Estate you know is to be made
over to him: -- Now if I could wheedle him, Sister, ha? You understand me?


Mrs. Fore. I do; and will help you to the utmost of my Power -- And I can tell
you one thing that falls out luckily enough; my awkward Daughter-in-Law, who
you know is designed for his Wife, is grown fond of Mr. Tattle; now if we can
improve that, and make her have an Aversion for the Booby, it may go a great
way toward his liking of you. Here they come together; and let us contrive
some way or other to leave 'em together.


Enter Tattle and Miss Prue. Miss Prue. Mother, Mother, Mother, look you here.


Mrs. Fore. Fie, fie, Miss, how you bawl -- besides, I have told you, you must
not call me Mother.


Miss Prue. What must I call you then, are you not my Father's Wife?


Mrs. Fore. Madam; you must say Madam -- By my Soul, I shall fancy my self Old
indeed, to have this great Girl call me Mother -- Well, but Miss, what are you
so overjoyed at?


Miss Prue. Look you here, Madam then, what Mr. Tattle has given me -- Look you
here Cousin, here is a Snuff Box; nay, there is Snuff in it; -- here, will you
have any -- Oh good! how sweet it is -- Mr. Tattle is all over sweet, his
Perruke is sweet, and his Gloves are sweet, -- and his Handkerchief is sweet,
pure sweet, sweeter than Roses -- Smell him Mother, Madam, I mean -- He gave me
this Ring for a Kiss.


Tatt. O fie Miss, you must not kiss and tell.


Miss Prue. Yes; I may tell my Mother -- And he says he will give me something to
make me smell so -- Oh pray lend me your Handkerchief -- Smell Cousin; he says
he will give me something that will make my Smocks smell this way -- Is not it
pure? -- It Is better than Lavender mun -- I Am resolved I will not let Nurse put
any more Lavender among my Smocks -- ha, Cousin?


Frail. Fie, Miss; amongst your Linen, you must say -- You must never say
Smock.


Miss Prue. Why, it is not Bawdy, is it Cousin?


Tatt. Oh Madam, you are too severe upon Miss; you must not find Fault with her
pretty Simplicity, it becomes her strangely -- pretty Miss, don't let 'em
persuade you out of your Innocence.


Mrs. Fore. Oh, Demm you Toad -- I wish you don't persuade her out of her
Innocence.


Tatt. Who I, Madam? -- Oh Lord, how can your Ladyship have such a Thought --
sure you don't know me?


Frail. Ah Devil, sly Devil -- He Is as close, Sister, as a Confessor -- He
thinks we don't observe him.


M^s. Fore. A cunning Cur, how soon he could find out a fresh harmless
Creature; and left us, Sister, presently.


Tatt. Upon Reputation --


Mrs. Fore. They Are all so, Sister, these Men -- they love to have the spoiling
of a Young Thing, they are as fond of it, as of being first in the Fashion, or
of seeing a new Play the first Day, -- I warrant it would break Mr. Tattle's
Heart, to think that any Body else should be beforehand with him.


Tatt. Oh Lord, I swear I would not for the World --


Frail. O hang you; who will believe you? -- You Would be hanged before you would confess
-- we know you -- she is very pretty! -- Lord, what pure red and white! -- she
looks so wholesome; -- never stir, I don't know, but I fancy, if I were a Man
--


Miss Prue. How you love to jeer one, Cousin.


Mrs. Fore. Hark ye, Sister, -- by my Soul the Girl is spoiled already -- do you
think she will ever endure a great lubberly Tarpawlin -- Gad I warrant you, she
will not let him come near her, after Mr. Tattle.


Frail. OF my Soul, I Am afraid not -- eh! -- filthy Creature, that smells all
of Pitch and Tar -- Devil take you, you confounded Toad -- why did you see her,
before she was Married?


Mrs. Fore. Nay, why did we let him -- my Husband will hang us -- He Will think
we brought 'em acquainted.


Frail. Come, Faith let us be gone -- If my Brother Foresight should find us
with them; -- he would think so, sure enough.


Mrs. Fore. So he would -- but then leaving 'em together is as bad -- And he is
such a sly Devil, he will never miss an Opportunity.


Frail. I don't care; I will not be seen in it.


Mrs. Fore. Well, if you should, Mr. Tattle, you will have a World to answer for;
remember I wash my Hands of it, I Am thoroughly Innocent.

[Exeunt Mrs. Foresight and Frail.
Miss Prue. What makes 'em go away, Mr. Tattle? What do you mean, do you know?


Tatt. Yes, my Dear -- I think I can guess -- But hang me if I know the reason
of it.


Miss Prue. Come, must not we go too?


Tatt. No, no, they don't mean that.


Miss Prue. No! what then? what shall you and I do together?


Tatt. I must make Love to you, pretty Miss; will you let me make Love to you?


Miss Prue. Yes, if you please.


Tatt. Frank, I Gad, at least. What a Pox does Mrs. Foresight mean by this
Civility? is it to make a Fool of me? or does she leave us together out of good
Morality, and do as she would be done by -- Gad I Will understand it so. [Aside.


Miss Prue. Well; and how will you make Love to me -- Come, I long to have you
begin -- must I make Love too? You must tell me how.


Tatt. You must let me speak, Miss, you must not speak first; I must ask you
Questions, and you must answer.


Miss Prue. What, is it like the Catechism? -- Come then ask me.


Tatt. Do You think you can Love me?


Miss Prue. Yes.


Tatt. Pooh, Pox, you must not say yes already; I shall not care a Farthing for
you then in a twinkling.


Miss Prue. What must I say then?


Tatt. Why you must say no, or you believe not, or you cannot tell --


Miss Prue. Why, must I tell a Lie then?


Tatt. Yes, if you would be well bred. All well-bred Persons Lie -- Besides,
you are a Woman, you must never speak what you think: Your Words must
contradict your Thoughts; but your Actions may contradict your Words. So, when
I ask you if you can Love me, you must say no, but you must Love me too -- If I
tell you you are Handsome, you must deny it, and say I flatter you -- But you
must think your self more Charming than I speak you; -- and like me, for the
Beauty which I say you have, as much as if I had it my self -- If I ask you to
Kiss me, you must be angry, but you must not refuse me. If I ask you for more,
you must be more angry, -- but more complying; and as soon as ever I make you
say you will cry out, you must be sure to hold your Tongue.


Miss Prue. O Lord, I swear this is pure, -- I like it better than our old
fashioned Country way of speaking ones Mind; -- and must not you Lie too?


Tatt. Hum -- Yes -- But you must believe I speak Truth.


Miss Prue. O Gemini! well, I always had a great mind to tell Lies -- but they
frighted me, and said it was a Sin.


Tatt. Well, my pretty Creature; will you make me happy by giving me a Kiss?


Miss Prue. No, indeed; I Am angry at you. --

[Runs and kisses him.
Tatt. Hold, hold, that is pretty well -- but you should not have given it me,
but have suffered me to take it.


Miss Prue. Well, we'll do it again.


Tatt. With all my Heart, -- Now then, my little Angel.

[Kisses her.
Miss Prue. Pish.


Tatt. That Is right, -- Again, my Charmer.

[Kisses again.
Miss Prue. O fie, nay, now I cannot abide you.


Tatt. Admirable! That was as well as if you had been born and bred in
Covent Garden all the Days of your Life; -- And will not you show me, pretty Miss,
where your Bedchamber is?


Miss Prue. No, indeed will not I; but I Will run there, and hide my self from you
behind the Curtains.


Tatt. I Will follow you.


Miss Prue. Ah, but I Will hold the Door with both Hands, and be angry; -- and
you shall push me down before you come in.


Tatt. No, I Will come in first, and push you down afterward.


Miss Prue. Will you? then I Will be more angry, and more complying.


Tatt. Then I Will make you cry out.


Miss Prue. Oh but you shall not, for I Will hold my Tongue --


Tatt. Oh my dear apt Scholar.


Miss Prue. Well, now I Will run, and make more haste than you.

[Exit Miss Prue.
Tatt. You shall not fly so fast as I Will pursue.

[Exit after her.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Nurse. Nurse. MIss, Miss, Miss Prue -- Mercy on me, marry and Amen. Why,
what is become of the Child? -- Why Miss, Miss Foresight -- Sure she has not
locked her self up in her Chamber, and gone to Sleep, or to Prayers: Miss,
Miss; I hear her -- Come to your Father, Child: Open the Door -- Open the Door,
Miss -- I hear you cry hushed -- O Lord, who is there? [Peeps.] What Is here to
do? -- O the Father! A Man with her! -- Why Miss I say, God's my Life, here is
fine Doings toward -- O Lord, we are all undone -- O you young Harlotry
[Knocks.] Od's my Life, will not you open the Door? I Will come in the back way.

[Exit.
Tattle and Miss at the Door. Miss. O Lord, she is coming -- and she will tell my
Father, what shall I do now?


Tatt. Pox take her; if she had staid two Minutes longer I should have wished
for her coming.


Miss. O Dear, what shall I say? Tell me, Mr. Tattle, tell me a Lie.


Tatt. There Is no occasion for a Lie, I could never tell a Lie to no purpose --
But since we have done nothing, we must say nothing, I think. I hear her --
I Will leave you together, and come off as you can.

[Thrusts her in, and shuts the Door.
Enter Valentine, Scandal, and Angelica. Ang. You cannot accuse me of
Inconstancy; I never told you that I loved you.


Val. But I can accuse you of Uncertainty, for not telling me whether you did
or no.


Ang. You mistake Indifference for Uncertainty; I never had Concern enough to
ask my self the Question.


Scan. No^ good Nature enough to answer him that did ask you: I Will say that to^
you, Madam.


Ang. What, are you setting up for good Nature?


Scan. Only for the Affectation of it, as the Women do for ill Nature.


Ang. Persuade your Friend that it is all Affectation.


Val. I shall receive no Benefit from the Opinion: For I know no effectual
Difference between continued Affectation and Reality.


Tatt. coming up. Scandal, are you in private Discourse, any thing of Secrecy?
[Aside to Scandal.


Scan. Yes, but I dare trust you; we were talking of Angelica's Love for
Valentine; you wont speak of it.


Tatt. No, no, not a Syllable -- I know that is a Secret, for it is whispered
every where.


Scan. Ha, ha, ha.


Ang. What is, Mr. Tattle? I heard you say something was whispered every where.


Scan. Your Love of Valentine.


Ang. How!


Tatt. No, Madam, his Love for your Ladyship -- Gad take me, I beg your Pardon
-- for I never heard a Word of your Ladyship's Passion, 'till this Instant.


Ang. My Passion! And who told you of my Passion, pray Sir?


Scan. Why, is the Devil in you? Did not I tell it you for a Secret?


Ta^t. Gadso; but I thought she might have been trusted with her own Affairs.


Scan. Is that your Discretion? Trust a Woman with her self?


Tatt. You say true, I beg your Pardon; -- I Will bring all off -- It was
impossible, Madam, for me to imagine, that a Person of your Ladyship's Wit and
Gallantry, could have so long received the passionate Addresses of the
accomplished Valentine, and yet remain insensible; therefore you will pardon
me, if from a just Weight of his Merit, with your Ladyship's good Judgment, I
formed the Balance of a reciprocal Affection.


Val. O the Devil, what damned Costive Poet has given thee this Lesson of
Fustian to get by Rote?


Ang. I dare swear you wrong him, it is his own -- And Mr. Tattle only judges
of the Success of others, from the Effects of his own Merit. For certainly Mr.
Tattle was never denied any thing in his Life.


Tatt. O Lord! yes indeed, Madam, several times.


Ang. I swear I don't think it is possible.


Tatt. Yes, I vow and swear I have; Lord, Madam, I Am the most unfortunate Man
in the World, and the most cruelly used by the Ladies.


Ang. Nay, now you're ungrateful.


Tatt. No, I hope not -- it is as much Ingratitude to own some Favors, as to
conceal others.


Val. There, now it is out.


Ang. I don't understand you now. I thought you had never asked any thing, but
what a Lady might modestly grant, and you confess.


Scan. So faith, your Business is done here; now you may go brag somewhere else.


Tatt. Brag! O Heavens! Why, did I name any body?


Ang. No; I suppose that is not in your Power; but you would if you could, no
doubt on it.


Tatt. Not in my Power, Madam! What, does your Ladyship mean, that I have no
Woman's Reputation in my Power?


Scan. Ouns, why you will not own it, will you? [Aside.


Tatt. Faith, Madam, you are in the right; no more I have, as I hope to be
saved; I never had it in my Power to say any thing to a Lady's Prejudice in my
Life -- For as I was telling you, Madam, I have been the most unsuccesful
Creature living, in things of that Nature; and never had the good Fortune to be
trusted once with a Lady's Secret, not once.


Ang. No!


Val. Not once, I dare answer for him.


Scan. And I Will answer for him; for I Am sure if he had, he would have told me:
I find, Madam, you don't know Mr. Tattle.


Tatt. No indeed, Madam, you don't know me at all, I find: For sure my intimate
Friends would have known --


Ang. Then it seems you would have told, if you had been trusted.


Tatt. O Pox, Scandal, that was too far put -- Never have told Particulars,
Madam. Perhaps I might have talked as of a Third Person -- or have introduced
an Amor of my own, in Conversation, by way of Novel: But never have explained
Particulars.


Ang. But whence comes the Reputation of Mr. Tattle's Secrecy, if he was never
trusted?


Scan. Why thence it arises -- The Thing is proverbially spoken; but may be
applied to him -- As if we should say in general Terms, he only is Secret who
never was trusted; a Satirical Proverb upon our Sex -- There Is another upon
yours -- As she is chaste, who was never asked the Question. That Is all.


Val. A couple of very civil Proverbs, truly: It Is hard to tell whether the
Lady or Mr. Tattle be the more obliged to you. For you found her Virtue upon
the Backwardness of the Men; and his Secrecy upon the Mistrust of the Women.


Tatt. Gad, it is very true, Madam, I think we are obliged to acquit our selves
-- And for my part -- But your Ladyship is to speak first --


Ang. Am I? Well, I freely confess I have resisted a great deal of Temptation.


Tatt. And I Gad, I have given some Temptation that has not been resisted.


Val. Good.


Ang. I cite Valentine here, to declare to the Court, how fruitless he has
found his Endeavors, and to confess all his Solicitations and my Denials.


Val. I am ready to plead, Not guilty, for you; and Guilty, for my self.


Scan. So, why this is fair, here is Demonstration with a Witness.


Tatt. Well, my Witnesses are not present -- But I confess I have had Favors
from Persons -- But as the Favors are numberless, so the Persons are nameless.


Scan. Pooh, pox, this proves nothing.


Tatt. No? I can show Letters, Lockets, Pictures, and Rings; and if there be
occasion for Witnesses, I can summon the Maids at the Chocolate-Houses, all the
Porters of Pall Mall and Covent Garden, the Door-keepers at the Playhouse, the
Drawers at Locket's, Pontack's, the Rummer, Spring-Garden; my own Landlady and
Valetde Chamber; all who shall make Oath, that I receive more Letters than the
Secretary's Office; and that I have more Vizor-Masks to enquire for me, than
ever went to see the Hermaphrodite, or the Naked Prince. And it is notorious,
that in a Country Church, once, an Enquiry being made, who I was, it was
answered, I was the famous Tattle, who had ruined so many Women.


Val. It was there, I suppose, you got the Nickname of the Great Turk


Tatt. True; I was called Turk-Tattle all over the Parish -- The next Sunday,
all the Old Women kept their Daughters at home, and the Parson had not half his
Congregation. He would have brought me into the Spiritual Court, but I was
revenged upon him, for he had a handsome Daughter whom I initiated into the
Science. But I repented it afterward, for it was talked of in Town -- And a
Lady of Quality that shall be nameless, in a raging Fit of Jealousy, came down
in her Coach and Six Horses, and exposed her self upon my Account; Gad, I was
sorry for it with all my Heart -- You know whom I mean -- You know where we
raffled --


Scan. Mum, Tattle.


Val. 'Sdeath, are not you ashamed?


Ang. O barbarous! I never heard so Insolent a piece of Vanity -- Fie, Mr.
Tattle -- I Will swear I could not have believed it -- Is this your Secrecy?


Tatt. Gad so, the Heat of my Story carried me beyond my Discretion, as the
Heat of the Lady's Passion hurried her beyond her Reputation -- But I hope you
don't know whom I mean; for there was a great many Ladies raffled -- Pox on it,
now could I bite off my Tongue.


Scan. No don't; for then you will tell us no more -- Come, I Will recommend a Song
to you upon the Hint of my two Proverbs, and I see one in the next Room that
will sing it.

[Goes to the Door.
Tatt. For Heaven's sake, if you do guess, say nothing; Gad, I Am very
unfortunate.


Re-enter Scandal, with one to Sing. Scan. Pray sing the first Song in the last
New Play.


SONG.
Set by Mr. John Eccles.
A Nymph and a Swain to Apollo once prayed,
The Swain had been filted, the Nymph been Betrayed;
Their Intent was to try if his Oracle knew
Ever a Nymph that was Chaste, or a Swain that was True.
2.
Apollo was mute, and had like to have been posed,
But sagely at length he this Secret disclosed;
He alone will not Betray in whom none will Confide,
And the Nymph may be Chaste that has never been Tried.

Enter Sir Sampson, Mrs. Frail, Miss and Servant. Sir Samp. Is Ben come? Odso,
my Son Ben come? Odd, I Am glad on it: Where is he? I long to see him. Now, Mrs.
Frail, you shall see my Son Ben -- Body of me, he is the Hopes of my Family -- I have not seen him these Three Years -- I warrant he is grown -- Call him in, bid
him make haste -- I Am ready to Cry for Joy.

[Exit Servant.
Frail. Now Miss you shall see your Husband.


Miss Prue. Pish, he shall be none of my Husband. [Aside to Frail.


Frail. Hush: Well he shall not, leave that to me -- I Will beckon Mr. Tattle to us.


Ang. Will Not you stay and see your Brother?


Val. We are the Twin-Stars, and cannot shine in one Sphere; when he rises I
must set -- Besides, if I should stay, I don't know but my Father in good
Nature may press me to the immediate Signing the Deed of Conveyance of my
Estate, and I Will defer it as long as I can -- Well, you will come to a Resolution.


Ang. I cannot. Resolution must come to me, or I shall never have one.


Scan. Come, Valentine, I Will go with you; I Have something in my Head to
Communicate to you.

[Ex. Val. and Scandal.
Sir Samp. What, is my Son Valentine gone? What, is he sneaked off, and would
not see his Brother? There Is an Unnatural Whelp! There Is an Ill-natured Dog!
What, were you here too, Madam, and could not keep him! Could neither Love, nor
Duty, nor Natural Affection oblige him. Odsbud, Madam, have no more to say to
him; he is not worth your Consideration. The Rogue has not a Dram of generous
Love about him: All Interest, all Interest; he is an undone Scoundrel, and
Courts your Estate: Body of me, he does not care a Doit for your Person.


Ang. I Am pretty even with him, Sir Sampson; for if ever I could have liked any
thing in him, it should have been his Estate too: But since that is gone, the
Bait's off, and the naked Hook appears.


Sir Samp. Odsbud, well spoken; and you are a Wiser Woman than I thought you
were: For most young Women now adays are to be tempted with a naked Hook.


Ang. If I Marry, Sir Sampson, I Am for a good Estate with any Man, and for any
Man with a good Estate: Therefore if I were obliged to make Choice, I declare
I Would rather have you than your Son.


Sir Samp. Faith and Troth you're a Wise Woman, and I Am glad to hear you say
so; I was afraid you were in Love with the Reprobate: Odd, I was sorry for you
with all my Heart: Hang him, Mungrel; cast him off; you shall see the Rogue
show himself, and make Love to some desponding Cadua of Fourscore for
Sustenance. Odd, I love to see a young Spendthrift forced to cling to an Old
Woman for Support, like Ivy round a dead Oak: Faith I do; I love to see 'em hug
and cotton together, like Down upon a Thistle.


Enter Ben. Legend, and Servant. Ben. Where Is Father?


Serve. There, Sir, his Back's toward you.


Sir Samp. My Son Ben! bless thee my dear Boy; Body of me, thou art heartily
welcome.


Ben. Thank you, Father, and I Am glad to see you.


Sir Samp. Odsbud, and I Am glad to see thee; kiss me Boy, kiss me again and
again, dear Ben.

[Kisses him.
Ben. So, so, enough Father -- Mess, I Would rather kiss these Gentlewomen.


Sir Samp. And so thou shall, -- Mrs. Angelica, my Son Ben.


Ben. Forsooth an you please -- [Salutes her.] Nay Mistress, I Am not for
dropping Anchor here; about Ship, In Faith -- [Kisses Frail.] Nay, and you too,
my little Cock-boat -- so -- [Kisses Miss.


Tatt. Sir, you're welcome a-shoar.


Ben. Thank you, thank you, Friend.


Sir Samp. Thou have been many a weary League, Ben, since I saw thee.


Ben. Ey, ey, been! Been far enough, an that be all -- well Father, and how do
all at home? How does Brother Dick, and Brother Val.


Sir Samp. Dick, Body of me, Dick has been dead these two Years; I writ you
Word, when you were at Legorne.


Ben. Mess, and that is true; marry I had forgot. Dick's dead as you say --
Well, and how, I have a many Questions to ask you; well, you ben't married
again, Father, be you?


Sir Samp. No, I intend you shall marry, Ben; I would not marry for thy sake.


Ben. Nay, what does that signify? -- An you marry again -- why then I Will go
to Sea again; so there is one for the other, an that be all -- Pray don't let me
be your hindrance; even marry a God's Name an the Wind sit that way. As for my
part, may-hap I have no Mind to marry.


Frail. That would be pity, such a Handsome Young Gentleman.


Ben. Handsome! he, he, he, nay forsooth, an you be for Joking, I Will Joke with
you, for I love my Jest, an the Ship were sinking, as we sayn at Sea. But I Will
tell you why I don't much stand toward Matrimony. I love to roam about from
Port to Port, and from Land to Land: I could never abide to be Port-bound, as
we call it: Now a Man that is married, has as it were, do you see, his Feet in
the Bilboes, and may-hap may not get 'em out again when he would.


Sir Samp. Ben's a Wag.


Ben. A Man that is married, do you see, is no more like another Man, than a
Gally-slave is like one of us free Sailors, he is chained to an Oar all his
Life, and may-hap forced to tug a leaky Vessel into the Bargain.


Sir Samp. A very Wag, Ben's a very Wag; only a little rough, he wants a little
Polishing.


Frail. Not at all; I like his Humor mightily, it is plain and honest, I should
like such a Humor in a Husband extremely.


Ben. Say'n you so Forsooth? marry and I should like such a Handsome Gentlewoman
for a Bedfellow hugely; how say you, Mistress, would you like going to Sea?
Mess, you're a tight Vessel, and well Rigged, an you were but as well Manned.


Frail. I should not doubt that, if you were Master of me.


Ben. But I Will tell you one thing, an you come to Sea in a high Wind, or that
Lady -- You may not carry so much Sail o'your Head -- Top and Top-gallant, by
the Mess.


Frail. No, why so?


Ben. Why, an you do, you may run the risk to be over-set, and then you will
carry your Keels above Water, he, he, he.


Ang. I swear, Mr. Benjamin is the verriest Wag in Nature, an absolute Sea-wit.


Sir Samp. Nay, Ben has Parts, but, as I told you before, they wa^ a little
Polishing: You must not take any thing ill, Madam.


Ben. No, I hope the Gentlewoman is not angry; I mean all in good part: For if
I give a Jest, I Will take a Jest: And so Forsooth you may be as free with me.


Ang. I thank you, Sir, I am not at all offended; -- but methinks, Sir Sampson,
you should leave him alone with his Mistress. Mr. Tattle, we must not hinder
Lovers.


Tatt. Well, Miss, I have your Promise. [Aside to Miss.


Sir Samp. Body of me, Madam, you say true: -- Look you, Ben; this is your
Mistress, -- Come, Miss, you must not be shamefaced, we'll leave you together.


Miss. I cannot abide to be left alone, may not my Cousin stay with me?


Sir Samp. No, no. Come, let us away.


Ben. Look you, Father, may-hap the Young Woman may not take a liking to me. --


Sir Samp. I warrant thee, Boy; come, come, we'll be gone; I Will venture that.

[Exeunt all but Ben. and Miss.
Ben. Come Mistress, will you please to sit down? for an you stand a stern a
that'n, we shall never grapple together -- Come, I Will haule a Chair; there, an
you please to sit, I Will sit by you.


Miss. You need not sit so near one, if you have any thing to say, I can hear
you farther off, I an't deaf.


Ben. Why that is true, as you say, nor I an't dumb, I can be heard as far as
another, -- I Will heave off to please you. [Sits further off. An we were a
League asunder, I Would undertake to hold Discourse with you, an 'twere not a main
high Wind indeed, and full in my Teeth. Look you forsooth, I am as it were
bound for the Land of Matrimony; it is a Voyage, do you see, that was none of my
seeking, I was commanded by Father, and if you like of it, may-hap I may steer
into your Harbor. How say you, Mistress, the short of the thing is this, that
if you like me, and I like you, we may chance to swing in a Hammock together.


Miss. I don't know what to say to you, nor I don't care to speak with you at
all.


Ben. No, I Am sorry for that -- But pray, why are you so scornful?


Miss. As long as one must not speak one's Mind, one had better not speak at
all, I think, and truly I will not tell a Lie for the matter.


Ben. Nay, you say true in that, it is but a folly to lie: For to speak one
thing, and to think just the contrary way; is as it were, to look one way, and
to row another. Now, for my part do you see, I Am for carrying things above Board,
I Am not for keeping any thing under Hatches, -- so that if you ben't as willing
as I, say so a God's name, there is no harm done; may-hap you may beshamefac'd;
some Maidens, thof' they love a Man well enough, yet they don't care to tell'n
so to's Face: If that is the Case, why Silence gives Consent.


Miss. But I Am sure it is not so, for I Will speak sooner than you should believe
that; and I Will speak Truth, though one should always tell a Lie to a Man; and I
don't care, let my Father do what he will; I Am too big to be whipped, so I Will
tell you plainly, I don't like you, nor love you at all, nor never will, that is
more: So, there is your Answer for you; and don't trouble me no more, you ugly
thing.


Ben. Look you, Young Woman, you may learn to give good Words however. I spoke
you fair, do you see, and civil. -- As for your Love or your Liking, I don't
value it of a Rope's end; -- And may-hap I like you as little as you do me: --
What I said was in obedience to Father; Gad, I fear a whipping no more than you
do. But I tell you one thing, if you should give such Language at Sea, you would
have a Cat of Nine-tails laid cross your Shoulders. Flesh! who are you? You
heard the other handsome Young Woman speak civilly to me, of her own accord:
Whatever you think of your self, Gad I don't think you are any more to compare
to her, than a Can of Small-beer to a Bowl of Punch.


Miss. Well, and there is a handsome Gentleman, and a fine Gentleman, and a
sweet Gentleman that was here, that loves me, and I love him; and if he sees
you speak to me any more, he will thrash your Jacket for you, he will, you great
Sea-calf.


Ben. What, do you mean that fair-weather Spark that was here just now? Will he
thrash my Jacket? -- Let'n -- let'n -- But an he comes near me, may-hap I may
given a Salt Eelfor's Supper, for all that. What does Father mean, to leave me
alone as soon as I come home with such a dirty Dowdy. -- Sea-calf? I an't Calf
enough to lick your chalked Face, you Cheese-curd you, -- marry thee! Oons,
I Will marry a Lapland Witch as soon, and live upon selling of contrary Winds,
and wracked Vessels.


Miss. I will not be called Names, nor I will not be abused thus, so I will not. -- If I
were a Man -- [Cries.] -- You durst not talk at this rate -- No you durst not,
you stinking Tar-Barrel.


Enter Mrs. Foresight and Mrs. Frail. Mrs. Fore. They have quarreled, just as
we could wish.


Ben. Tar-barrel? Let your Sweetheart there call me so, if he will take your
part, your Tom Essence, and I Will say something to him; Gad I Will lace his
Musk-Doublet for him, I Will make him stink; he shall smell more like a Weasel
than a Civet-Cat, before I have done with 'en.


Mrs. Fore. Bless me, what is the matter, Miss? What, does she cry? -- Mr.
Benjamin, what have you done to her?


Ben. Let her cry: The more she cries, the less she will -- she has been
gathering foul Weather in her Mouth, and now it rains out at her Eyes.


Mrs. Fore. Come, Miss, come along with me, and tell me, poor Child.


Frail. Lord, what shall we do? There Is my Brother Foresight and Sir Sampson
coming. Sister, do you take Miss down into the Parlour, and I Will carry Mr.
Benjamin into my Chamber, for they must not know that they are fallen out. --
Come, Sir, will you venture your self with me?

[Looks kindly on him.
Ben. Venture, Mess, and that I will, though 'twere to Sea in a Storm.

[Exeunt.
Enter Sir Sampson and Foresight. Sir Samp. I left 'em together here; What, are
they gone? Ben's a brisk Boy; he has got her into a Corner, Father's own Son,
faith, he will touzle her, and mouzle her: The Rogue's sharp set, coming from
Sea; if he should not stay for saying Grace, old Foresight, but fall to without
the help of a Parson, ha? Odd if he should I could not be angry with him;
'twould be but like me, A Chip of the Old Block. Ha! you are melancholy, old
Prognostication; as melancholy as if thou had spilt the Salt, or pared thy
Nails of a Sunday: -- Come, cheer up, look about thee: Look up, old Star-Gazer.
Now is he poring upon the Ground for a crooked Pin, or an old Horse-nail, with
the Head toward him.


Fore. Sir Sampson, we'll have the Wedding to morrow Morning.


Sir Samp. With all my Heart.


Fore. At Ten a Clock, punctually at Ten.


Sir Samp. To a Minute, to a Second; thou shall set thy Watch, and the
Bridegroom shall observe its Motions; they shall be married to a Minute, go to
Bed to a Minute; and when the Alarm strikes, they shall keep time like the
Figures of St. Dunstan's Clock, and Consummatum est shall ring all over the
Parish.


Enter Scandal. Scan. Sir Sampson, sad News.


Fore. Bless us!


Sir Samp. Why, what is the Matter?


Scan. Cannot you guess at what ought to afflict you and him and all of us, more
than any thing else?


Sir Samp. Body of me, I don't know any universal Grievance, but a new Tax, and
the Loss of the Canary Fleet; without Popery should be Landed in the West, or
the French Fleet were at Anchor at Blackwall.


Scan. No. Undoubtedly, Mr. Foresight knew all this, and might have prevented
it.


Fore. It Is no Earthquake!


Scan. No, not yet; nor Whirlwind. But we don't know what it may come to -- But
it has had a Consequence already that touches us all.


Sir Samp. Why, body of me, out with it.


Scan. Something has appeared to your Son Valentine -- He Is gone to Bed upon it,
and very ill -- He speaks little, yet says he has a World to say. Asks for his
Father and the wise Foresight; talks of Raymond Lully, and the Ghost of Lilly.
He has Secrets to impart I suppose to you two. I can get nothing out of him but
Sighs. He desires he may see you in the Morning, but would not be disturbed to
Night, because he has some Business to do in a Dream.


Sir Samp. Hoity toity, what have I to do with his Dreams or his Divination --
Body of me, this is a Trick to defer Signing the Conveyance. I warrant the
Devil will tell him in a Dream, that he must not part with his Estate: But I Will
bring him a Parson to tell him, that the Devil's a Liar -- Or if that will not do,
I Will bring a Lawyer that shall out-lie the Devil. And so I Will try whether my
Black-Guard or his shall get the better of the Day.

[Exit.
Scan. Alas, Mr. Foresight, I Am afraid all is not right -- You are a wise Man,
and a conscientious Man; a Searcher into Obscurity and Futurity; and if you
commit an Error, it is with a great deal of Consideration, and Discretion, and
Caution --


Fore. Ah, good Mr. Scandal.


Scan. Nay, nay, it is manifest; I do not flatter you -- But Sir Sampson is
hasty, very hasty; -- I Am afraid he is not scrupulous enough, Mr. Foresight --
He has been wicked, and Heaven grant he may mean well in his Affair with you --
But my Mind gives me, these things cannot be wholly insignificant. You are
wise, and should not be over-reached, methinks you should not --


Fore. Alas, Mr. Scandal -- Humanum est errare.


Scan. You say true, Man will err; mere Man will err -- but you are something
more -- There have been wise Men; but they were such as you -- Men who
consulted the Stars, and were Observers of Omens -- Solomon was Wise, but how?
-- by his Judgment in Astrology -- So says Pineda, in his Third Book and Eighth
Chapter --


Fore. You are learned, Mr. Scandal --


Scan. A Trifler -- but a Lover of the Art -- And the Wise Men of the East owed
their Instruction to a Star, which is rightly observed by Gregory the Great in
Favor of Astrology: And Albertus Magnus makes it the most valuable Science,
Because, says he, it teaches us to consider the Causation of Causes, in the
Causes of Things.


Fore. I protest I honor you, Mr. Scandal -- I did not think you had been read
in these Matters -- Few young Men are inclined --


Scan. I thank my Stars that have inclined me -- But I fear this Marriage, and
making over this Estate, this transferring of a rightful Inheritance, will
bring Judgments upon us. I prophecy it, and I would not have the Fate of
Cassandra, not to be believed. Valentine is disturbed, what can be the Cause of
that? and Sir Sampson is hurried on by an unusual Violence -- I fear he does
not act wholly from himself; methinks he does not look as he used (...) do.


Fore. He was always of an impetuous Nature -- B^ as to this Marriage I have
consulted the Stars; and all Appearances are prosperous --


Scan. Come, come, Mr. Foresight, let not the Prospect of worldly Lucre carry
you beyond your Judgment, nor against your Conscience -- You are not satisfied
that you act justly.


Fore. How!


Scan. You are not satisfied, I say -- I am loath to discourage you -- But it
is palpable that you are not satisfied.


Fore. How does it appear, Mr. Scandal, I think I am very well satisfied.


Scan. Either you suffer your self to deceive your self, or you do not know
your self,


Fore. Pray explain your self.


Scan. Do you Sleep well of Nights?


Fore. Very well.


Scan. Are you certain? You do not look so.


Fore. I am in Health, I think.


Scan. So was Valentine this Morning; and looked just so.


Fore. How! Am I altered any way? I don't perceive it.


Scan. That may be, but you Beard is longer than it was two Hours ago.


Fore. Indeed! Bless me.


Enter Mrs. Foresight. Mrs. Fore. Husband, will you go to Bed? it is Ten a
Clock. Mr. Scandal, your Servant.


Scan. Pox on her, she has interrupted my Design -- But I must work her into
the Project. You keep early Hours, Madam.


Mrs. Fore. Mr. Foresight is punctual, we sit up after him.


Fore. My Dear, pray lend me your Glass, your little Looking-glass.


Scan. Pray lend it him, Madam -- I Will tell you the reason. [She gives him the
Glass: Scandal and she whisper.] My Passion for you is grown so violent -- that
I am no longer Master of my self -- I was interrupted in the Morning, when you
had Charity enough to give me your Attention, and I had Hopes of finding
another Opportunity of explaining my self to you -- but was disappointed all
this Day; and the Uneasiness that has attended me ever since, brings me now
hither at this unseasonable Hour. --


Mrs. Fore. Was there ever such Impudence, to make Love to me before my
Husband's Face? I Will swear I Will tell him.


Scan. Do, I Will die a Martyr, rather than disclaim my Passion. But come a
little farther this way, and I Will tell you what Project I had to get him out of
the way; that I might have an Opportunity of waiting upon you.

[Whisper. [ Foresight looking in the Glass.
Fore. I do not see any Revolution here; -- Methinks I look with a serene and
benign Aspect -- pale, a little pale -- but the Roses of these Cheeks have been
gathered many Years; -- ha! I do not like that sudden Flushing -- Gone already!
-- hem, hem, hem! faintish. My Heart is pretty good; yet it beats; and my
Pulses, ha! -- I have none -- Mercy on me -- hum -- Yes, here they are --
Gallop, gallop, gallop, gallop, gallop, gallop, hey! Whither will they hurry
me? -- Now they are gone again -- And now I Am faint again; and pale again, and
hem! and my hem! -- breath, hem! -- grows short; hem! hem! he, he, hem!


Scan. It takes, pursue it in the Name of Love and Pleasure.


Mrs. Fore. How do you do, Mr. Foresight?


Fo^^ Hum, not so well as I thought I was. Lend me your Hand.


Scan. Look you there now -- Your Lady says your Sleep has been unquiet of late.


Fore. Very likely.


Mrs. Fore. O, mighty restless, but I was afraid to tell him so -- He has been
subject to Talking and Starting.


Scan. And did not use to be so.


Mrs. Fore. Never, never; 'till within these three Nights; I cannot say, that
he has once broken my Rest, since we have been married.


Fore. I will go to Bed.


Scan. Do so, Mr. Foresight, and say your Prayers; -- He looks better than he
did.


Mrs. Fore. Nurse, Nurse!


Fore. Do you think so, Mr. Scandal?


Scan. Yes, yes, I hope this will be gone by Morning, taking it in time. --


Fore. I hope so.


Enter Nurse. Mrs. Fore. Nurse, your Master is not well; put him to Bed.


Scan. I hope you will be able to see Valentine in the Morning, -- you had best
take a little Diacodion and Couslip-water, and lie upon your Back, may be you
may Dream.


Fore. I thank you, Mr. Scandal, I will -- Nurse, let me have a Watch-light,
and lay the Crumbs of Comfort by me. --


Nurse. Yes, Sir.


Fore. And -- hem, hem! I am very faint --


Scan. No, no, you look much better.


Fore. Do I? And do you hear -- bring me, let me see -- within a Quarter of
Twelve -- hem -- he, hem! -- just upon the turning of the Tide, bring me the
Urinal; -- And I hope, neither the Lord of my Ascendant, nor the Moon will be
combust; and then I may do well.


Scan. I hope so -- Leave that to me; I will erect a Scheme; and I hope I shall
find both Sol and Venus in the sixth House.


Fore. I thank you, Mr. Scandal, indeed that would be a great Comfort to me.
Hem, hem! good Night.

[Exit.
Scan. Good Night, good Mr. Foresight; -- and I hope Mars and Venus will be in
Conjunction; -- while your Wife and I are together.


Mrs. Fore. Well, and what Use do you hope to make of this Project? You don't
think that you are ever like to succeed in your Design upon me.


Scan. Yes, Faith I do; I have a better Opinion both of you and my self than to
despair.


Mrs. Fore. Did you ever hear such a Toad -- harkye Devil; do you think any
Woman honest?


Scan. Yes, several, very honest; -- they will cheat a little at Cards,
sometimes, but that is nothing.


Mrs. Fore. Pshaw! but Virtuous, I mean.


Scan. Yes, Faith, I believe some Women are Virtuous too; but it is as I believe
some Men are Valiant, through Fear -- For why should a Man court Danger, or a
Woman shun Pleasure.


Mrs. Fore. O Monstrous! What are Conscience and Honor?


Scan. Why, Honor is a Public Enemy, and Conscience a Domestic Thief; and he
that would secure his Pleasure, must pay a Tribute to one, and go halves with
the other. As for Honor, that you have secured, for you have purchased a
perpetual Opportunity for Pleasure.


Mrs. Fore. An Opportunity for Pleasure!


Scan. Ay, your Husband, a Husband is an Opportunity for Pleasure, so you have
taken care of Honor, and it is the least I can do to take care of Conscience.


Mrs. Fore. And so you think we are free for one another?


Scan. Yes, Faith, I think so; I love to speak my Mind.


Mrs. Fore. Why then I Will speak my Mind. Now as to this Affair between you and
me. Here you make Love to me; why, I Will confess it does not displease me. Your
Person is well enough, and your Understanding is not amiss.


Scan. I have no great Opinion of my self; yet, I think, I Am neither Deformed,
nor a Fool.


Mrs. Fore. But you have a Villainous Character; you are a Libertine in Speech,
as well as Practice.


Scan. Come, I know what you would say, -- you think it more dangerous to be
seen in Conversation with me, than to allow some other Men the last Favor; you
mistake, the Liberty I take in Talking is purely affected for the Service of
your Sex. He that first cries out stop Thief, is often he that has stolen the
Treasure. I am a Juggler, that act by Confederacy; and if you please, we'll put
a Trick upon the World.


Mrs. Fore. Ay; but you are such an universal Juggler, -- that I Am afraid you
have a great many Confederates.


Scan. Faith, I Am sound.


Mrs. Fore. O, fie -- I Will swear you're Impudent.


Scan. I Will swear you're Handsome.


Mrs. Fore. Pish, you would tell me so, though you did not think so.


Scan. And you would think so, though I should not tell you so: And now I think we
know one another pretty well.


Mrs. Fore. O Lord, who is here?


Enter Mrs. Frail and Ben. Ben. Mess, I love to speak my Mind -- Father has
nothing to do with me -- Nay, I cannot say that neither; he has something to do
with me. But what does that signify? If so be, that I ben't minded to be
steered by him; it is as tho'f he should strive against Wind and Tide.


Frail. Ay, but my Dear, we must keep it secret 'till the Estate be settled;
for you know Marrying without an Estate, is like Sailing in a Ship without
Ballast.


Ben. He, he, he; why that is true; just so for all the World it is indeed, as
like as two Cable Ropes.


Frail. And though I have a good Portion; you know one would not venture all in
one Bottom.


Ben. Why that is true again; for may-hap one Bottom may spring a Leak. You have
hit it indeed, Mess you have nicked the Channel.


Frail. Well, but if you should forsake me after all, you would break my Heart.


Ben. Break your Heart? I Would rather the Mary-gold should break her Cable in a
Storm, as well as I love her. Flesh, you don't think I Am false-hearted, like a
Land-man. A Sailer will be honest, thof' may-hap he has never a Penny of Money
in his Pocket -- May-hap I may not have so fair a Face, as a Citizen or a
Courtier; but for all that, I Have as good Blood in my Veins, and a Heart as
sound as a Biscuit.


Frail. And will you love me always?


Ben. Nay, an I love once, I Will stick like Pitch; I Will tell you that. Come,
I Will sing you a Song of a Sailor.


Frail. Hold, there is my Sister, I Will call her to hear it.


Mrs. Fore. Well; I will not go to Bed to my Husband to night; because I Will retire
to my own Chamber, and think of what you have said.


Scan. Well; you will give me leave to wait upon you to your Chamber Door; and
leave you my last Instructions?


Mrs. Fore. Hold, here is my Sister coming toward us.


Frail. If it will not interrupt you, I Will entertain you with a Song.


Ben. The Song was made upon one of our Ships-Crew's Wife; our Boat-swain made
the Song, may-hap you may know her, Sir. Before she was married, she was called
Buxom Joan of Deptford.


Scan. I have heard of her.

[ Ben. Sings.
BALLAD.
Set by Mr. John Eccles.
A Soldier, and a Sailor,
A Tinker, and a Tailor,
Had once a doubtful Strife, Sir,
To make a Maid a Wife, Sir,
Whose Name was Buxom Joan.
For now the Time was ended,
When she no more intended,
To lick her Lips at Men, Sir,
And gnaw the Sheets in vain, Sir,
And lie of Nights alone.
2.
The Soldier swore like Thunder,
He loved her more than Plunder;
And showed her many a Scar, Sir,
That he had brought from far, Sir,
With fighting for her sake.
The Tailor thought to please her,
With offering her his Measure.
The Tinker too with Mettle,
Said he could mend her Kettle,
And stop up every Leak.
3.
But while these three were prating,
The Sailor slily waiting,
Thought if it came about, Sir,
That they should all fall out, Sir:
He then might play his Part.
And just even as he meant, Sir,
To Loggerheads they went, Sir,
And then he let fly at her,
A Shot 'twixt Wind and Water,
That won this Fair Maid's Heart.

Ben. If some of our Crew that came to see me are not gone, you shall see, that
we Sailors can Dance sometimes, as well as other Folks. [Whistles.] I warrant
that brings 'em, an they be within hearing.

Enter Seamen. Oh here they be -- And Fiddles along with 'em: Come, my Lads,
let us have a Round, and I Will make one.

[Dance.
Ben. We Are merry Folk, we Sailors, we have not much to care fore. Thus we live at
Sea; eat Biscuit, and drink Flip; put on a clean Shirt once a Quarter -- Come
home, and lie with our Landladies once a Year, get rid of a little Money; and
then put off with the next fair Wind. How do you like us?


Frail. O you are the happiest, merriest Men alive.


Mrs. Fore. We Are beholding to Mr. Benjamin for this Entertainment.

I believe it is late.


Ben. Why, forsooth, an you think so, you had best go to Bed. For my part, I
mean to toss a Can, and remember my Sweetheart, a-fore I turn in; may-hap I
may dream of her.


Mrs. Fore. Mr. Scandal, you had best go to Bed and dream too.


Scan. Why Faith, I have a good lively Imagination; and can dream as much to
the purpose as another, if I set about it: But Dreaming is the poor Retreat of
a lazy, hopeless, and imperfect Lover; it is the last glimpse of Love to
worn-out Sinners, and the faint Dawning of a Bliss to wishing Girls, and
growing Boys.

There Is naught but willing, waking Love, that can
Make blessed the Ripened Maid and Finished Man.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Valentine's Lodging. Enter Scandal and Jeremy. Scan. WELL, is your Master
ready; does he look madly, and talk madly?


Jere. Yes, Sir; you need make no great Doubt of that; he that was so near
turning Poet yesterday Morning, cannot be much to seek in playing the Madman to
Day.


Scan. Would he have Angelica acquainted with the Reason of his Design?


Jere. No, Sir, not yet; -- He has a mind to try, whether his playing the
Madman, will not make her play the Fool, and fall in Love with him; or at least
own, that she has loved him all this while, and concealed it.


Scan. I saw her take Coach just now with her Maid; and think I heard her bid
the Coachman drive hither.


Jere. Like enough, Sir, for I told her Maid this Morning, my Master was run
stark mad only for Love of her Mistress; I hear a Coach stop; if it should be
she, Sir, I believe he would not see her, 'till he hears how she takes it.


Scan. Well, I Will try her -- it is she, here she comes.


Enter Angelica with Jenny. Ang. Mr. Scandal, I suppose you don't think it a
Novelty, to see a Woman visit a Man at his own Lodgings in a Morning?


Scan. Not upon a kind Occasion, Madam. But when a Lady comes tyrannically to
insult a ruined Lover, and make manifest the cruel Triumphs of her Beauty, the
Barbarity of it something surprises me.


Ang. I don't like Raillery from a serious Face -- pray tell me what is the
matter?


Jere. No strange matter, Madam; my Master's mad, that is all: I suppose your
Ladyship has thought him so a great while.


Ang. How do you mean, mad?


Jere. Why faith, Madam, he is mad for want of his Wits, just as he was poor for
want of Money; his Head is even as light as his Pockets; and any body that has a
mind to a bad Bargain, cannot do better than to beg him for his Estate.


Ang. If you speak Truth, your endeavoring at Wit is very unscasonable --


Scan. She Is concerned, and loves him. [Aside.


Ang. Mr. Scandal, you cannot think me guilty of so much Inhumanity, as not to
be concerned for a Man I must own my self obliged to -- pray tell me Truth.


Scan. Faith, Madam, I wish telling a Lie would mend the matter. But this is no
new Effect of an unsuccessful Passion.


Ang. aside.] I know not what to think -- Yet I should be vexed to have a Trick
put upon me -- May I not see him?


Scan. I Am afraid the Physician is not willing you should see him yet --
Jeremy, go in and enquire.

[Exit Jere.
Ang. Ha! I saw him wink and smile -- I fancy it is a Trick -- I Will try -- I
would disguise to all the World a Failing, which I must own to you -- I fear my
Happiness depends upon the Recovery of Valentine. Therefore I conjure you, as
you are his Friend, and as you have Compassion upon one fearful of Affliction,
^o tell me what I am to hope for -- I cannot speak -- But you may tell me, tell
me, for you know what I would ask?


Scan. So, this is pretty plain -- Be not too much concerned, Madam; I hope his
Condition is not desperate: An Acknowledgment of Love from you, perhaps, may
work a Cure; as the Fear of your Aversion occasioned his Distemper.


Ang. aside.] Say you so; nay then I Am convinced: And if I don't play Trick for
Trick, may I never taste the pleasure of Revenge. -- Acknowledgment of Love! I
find you have mistaken my Compassion, and think me guilty of a Weakness I am a
Stranger to. But I have too much Sincerity to deceive you, and too much Charity
to suffer him to be deluded with vain Hopes. Good Nature and Humanity oblige me
to be concerned for him; but to Love is neither in my Power nor Inclination:
And if he cannot be cured without I suck the Poison from his Wounds, I Am afraid
he will not recover his Senses 'till I lose mine.


Scan. Hey, brave Woman, In Faith -- Will Not you see him then, if he desire it?


Ang. What signify a Madman's Desires? Besides, 'twould make me uneasy -- If
I don't see him, perhaps my Concern for him may lessen -- If I forget him, it is
no more than he has done by himself; and now the Surprise is over, methinks I
am not half so sorry as I was --


Scan. So, Faith good Nature works apace; you were confessing just now an
Obligation to his Love.


Ang. But I have considered that Passions are unreasonable and involuntary; if
he loves, he cannot help it; and if I don't love, I cannot help it; no more than
he can help his being a Man, or I my being a Woman; or no more than I can help
my want of Inclination to stay longer here -- Come, Jenny.

[Exit Ang. and Jenny.
Scan. Humh! -- An admirable Composition, Faith, this same Womankind.


Enter Jeremy. Jere. What, is she gone, Sir?


Scan. Gone; why she was never here, nor any where else; nor I don't know her
if I see her, nor you neither.


Jere. Good-lack! What Is the Matter now? Are any more of us to be mad? Why,
Sir, my Master longs to see her, and is almost mad in good earnest, with the
joyful News of her being here.


Scan. We are all under a Mistake -- Ask no Questions, for I cannot resolve you,
but I Will inform your Master. In the mean time, if our Project succeed no better
with his Father than it does with his Mistress, he may descend from his
Exaltation of Madness into the Road of common Sense, and be content only to be
made a Fool with other reasonable People. I hear Sir Sampson, you know your
Cue; I Will to your Master.

[Exit.
Enter Sir Sampson Legend with a Lawyer. Sir Samp. Do You see, Mr. Buckram,
here is the Paper signed with his own Hand.


Buck. Good, Sir. And the Conveyance is ready drawn in this Box, if he be ready
to Sign and Seal.


Sir Samp. Ready, Body of me, he must be ready; his sham Sickness shall not excuse
him -- O, here is his Scoundrel. Sirrah, where is your Master?


Jere. Ah, Sir, he is quite gone.


Sir Samp. Gone! What, he is not dead?


Jere. No, Sir, not dead.


Sir Samp. What, is he gone out of Town, run away, ha! has he tricked me?
speak, Varlet.


Jere. No, no, Sir, he is safe enough, Sir, an he were but as sound, poor
Gentleman. He is indeed here, Sir, and not here, Sir.


Sir Samp. Hey-day, Rascal, do you banter me? Sirrah, do you banter me, -- Speak
Rascal, where is he, for I will find him.


Jere. Would you could, Sir; for he has lost himself. Indeed, Sir, I have a
most broke my Heart about him -- I cannot refrain Tears when I think of him,
Sir: I Am as melancholy for him as a Passing Bell, Sir; or a Horse in a Pound.


Sir Samp. A Pox confound your Similitudes, Sir -- Speak to be understood, and
tell me in plain Terms what the Matter is with him, or I Will crack your Fools
Scull.


Jere. Ah, you have hit it, Sir; that is the matter with him, Sir, his Skull's
cracked, poor Gentleman; he is stark mad, Sir.


Sir Samp. Mad!


Buck. What, is he Non Compos?


Jere. Quite Non Compos, Sir.


Buck. Why then all is obliterated, Sir Sampson, if he be Non Compos mentis, his
Act and Deed will be of no Effect, it is not good in Law.


Sir Samp. Oons, I will not believe it; let me see him, Sir -- Mad, I Will make him
find his Senses.


Jere. Mr. Scandal is with him, Sir; I Will knock at the Door.

[Goes to the Scene, which opens and discovers Valentine upon a Couch
disorderly dressed, Scandal by him.
Sir Samp. How now, what is here to do?


Va^. Ha! Who Is that?

[Starting.
Scan. For Heaven's safe softly, Sir, and gently; don't provoke him.


Val. Answer me: Who is that? and that?


Sir Samp. Gads bobs, does he not know me? Is he mischievous? I Will speak gently
-- Val, Val, do thou not know me, Boy? Not know thy own Father, Val! I am
thy own Father, and this is honest Brief Buckram the Lawyer.


Val. It may be so -- I did not know you -- the World is full -- There are
People that we do know, and People that we do not know; and yet the Sun shines
upon all alike -- There are Fathers that have many Children; and there are
Children that have many Fathers -- it is strange! But I am Truth, and come to
give the World the Lie.


Sir Samp. Body of me, I know not what to say to him.


Val. Why does that Lawyer wear Black? -- Does he carry his Conscience
without-side? -- Lawyer, what art thou? Do thou know me?


Buck. O Lord, what must I say? -- Yes, Sir.


Val. Thou lie, for I am Truth. It Is hard I cannot get a Livelihood amongst
you. I have been sworn out of Westminster Hall the first Day of every Term --
Let me see -- No matter how long -- But I Will tell you one thing; it is a
Question that would puzzle an Arithmetician, if you should ask him, whether the
Bible saves more Souls in Westminster-Abby, or damns more in Westminster Hall:
For my part, I am Truth, and cannot tell; I have very few Acquaintance.


Sir Samp. Body of me, he talks sensibly in his Madness -- Has he no Intervals?


Jere. Very short, Sir.


Buck. Sir, I can do you no Service while he is in this Condition: Here Is your
Paper, Sir -- He may do me a Mischief if I stay -- The Conveyance is ready,
Sir. If he recover his Senses.

[Exit.
Sir Samp. Hold, hold, don't you go yet.


Scan. You Would better let him go, Sir; and send for him if there be occasion; for
I fancy his Presence provokes him more.


Val. Is the Lawyer gone? It Is well, then we may drink about without going
together by the Ears -- heigh ho! What a Clock is it? My Father here! Your
Blessing, Sir?


Sir Samp. He recovers -- bless thee, Val -- How do thou do, Boy?


Val. Thank you, Sir, pretty well -- I have been a little out of Order? will not
you please to sit, Sir?


Sir Samp. Ay, Boy, -- Come, thou shall sit down by me.


Val. Sir, it is my Duty to wait.


Sir Samp. No, no, come, come, sit you down, honest Val: How do thou do? let
me feel thy Pulse -- Oh, pretty well now, Val: Body of me, I was sorry to see
thee indisposed: But I Am glad you are better, honest Val.


Val. I thank you, Sir.


Scan. Miracle! the Monster grows loving. [Aside.


Sir Samp. Let me fell thy Hand again, Val; it does not shake -- I believe thou
can Write, Val: Ha, Boy? thou can Write thy Name, Val? -- Jeremy, step
and overtake Mr. Buckram, bid him make haste back with the Conveyance -- quick
-- quick.

[In Whisper to Jeremy.] [Exit Jere.
Scan. Aside.] That ever I should suspect such a Heathen of any Remorse!


Sir Samp. Do thou know this Paper, Val: I know you are honest, and wilt
perform Articles.

[Shews him the Paper, but holds it out of his reach.
Val. Pray let me see it, Sir. You hold it so far off, that I cannot tell
whether I know it or no.


Sir Samp. See it, Boy? Ay, ay, why thou do see it -- it is thy own Hand,
Val. Why, let me see, I can read it as plain as can be: Look you here [Reads.]
The Condition of this Obligation -- Look you, as plain as can be, so it begins
-- And then at the bottom -- As witness my Hand, VALENTINE LEGEND, in great
Letters. Why, it is as plain as the Nose in one's Face: What, are my Eyes better
than thine? I believe I can read it farther off yet -- let me see.

[Stretches his Arm as far as he can.
Val. Will you please to let me hold it, Sir?


Sir Samp. Let thee hold it, say thou -- Ay, with all my Heart -- What
matter is it who holds it? What need any Body hold it? -- I Will put it up in my
Pocket, Val. and then no Body need hold it [puts the Paper in his Pocket.]
There Val; it is safe enough, Boy -- But thou shall have it as soon as thou have
set thy Hand to another Paper, little Val.


Re-enter Jeremy with Buckram. Val. What, is my bad Genius here again! Oh no,
it is the Lawyer with an itching Palm; and he is come to be scratched -- My Nails
are not long enough -- Let me have a Pair of Red-hot Tongues quickly, quickly,
and you shall see me act St. Dunstan, and lead the Devil by the Nose.


Buck. O Lord, let me be gone; I Will not venture my self with a Madman.

[Exit Buckram.
Val. Ha, ha, ha; you need not run so fast, Honesty will not overtake you --
Ha, ha, ha, the Rogue found me out to be in Forma Pauperis presently.


Sir Samp. Oons! What a Vexation is here! I know not what to do, or say, nor
which way to go.


Val. Who Is that, that is out of his Way? -- I am Truth, and can set him right
-- Hark ye, Friend, the straight Road is the worst Way you can go -- He that
follows his Nose always, will very often be led into a Stink. Probatum est. But
what are you for? Religion or Politics? There Is a couple of Topics for you,
no more like one another than Oil and Vinegar; and yet those two beaten
together by a State-Cook, make Sauce for the whole Nation.


Sir Samp. What the Devil had I to do, ever to beget Sons? Why did I ever marry?


Val. Because thou were a Monster; old Boy? -- The two greatest Monsters in
the World, are a Man and a Woman; what is thy Opinion?


Sir Samp. Why, my Opinion is, that those two Monsters joined together, make
yet a greater, that is a Man and his Wife.


Val. A ha! Old Truepenny, say thou so? Thou have nicked it -- But it is
wonderful strange, Jeremy!


Jere. What is, Sir?


Val. That Gray Hairs should cover a green Head -- and I make a Fool of my
Father.


Enter Foresight, Mrs. Foresight, and Frail. Val. What Is here! Erra Pater? or a
bearded Sybil? If Prophecy comes, Truth must give Place.

[Exit with Jere.
Fore. What says he? What, did he Prophecy? Ha, Sir Sampson, bless us! How are
we?


Sir Samp. Are we? A Pox of your Prognostication -- Why, we are Fools as we use
to be -- Oons, that you could not foresee, that the Moon would predominate, and
my Son be mad -- Where Is your Oppositions, your Trines, and your Quadrates? --
What did your Cardan and your Ptolome tell you? Your Messahalah and your
Longomontanus, your Harmony of Chiromancy with Astrology. Ah! pox on it, that I
that know the World, and Men and Manners, that don't believe a Syllable in the
Sky, and Stars, and Sun, and Almanacks, and Trash, should be directed by a
Dreamer, an Omen-hunter, and defer Business in Expectation of a lucky Hour.
When, body of me, there never was a lucky Hour after the first Opportunity.

[Exit Sir Samp.
Fore. Ah, Sir Sampson, Heaven help your Head -- This is none of you lucky
Hour; Nemo omnibus horis sapit. What, is he gone, and in contempt of Science!
Ill Stars and unconverted Ignorance attend him.


Scan. You must excuse his Passion, Mr. Foresight; for he has been heartily
vexed -- His Son is Non compos mentis, and thereby incapable of making any
Conveyance in Law; so that all his Measures are disappointed.


Fore. Ha! Say you so?


Frail. What, has my Sea-Lover lost his Anchor of Hope then? [Aside to Mrs.
Foresight.


Mrs. Fore. Oh Sister, what will you do with him?


Frail. Do with him? Send him to Sea again in the next foul Weather -- He Is
used to an inconstant Element, and will not be surpised to see the Tide turned.


Fore. Wherein was I mistaken, not to foresee this?

[Considers.
Scan. Madam, you and I can tell him something else, that he did not foresee,
and more particularly relating to his own Fortune. [Aside to Mrs. Foresight.


Mrs. Fore. What do you mean? I don't understand you.


Scan. Hush, softly -- The Pleasures of last Night, my Dear, too considerable
to be forgot so soon.


Mrs. Fore. Last Night! and what would your Impudence infer from last Night?
last Night was like the Night before, I think.


Scan. 'S'death, do you make no difference between me and your Husband?


Mrs. Fore. Not much, -- he is superstitious; and you are mad, in my Opinion.


Scan. You make me mad -- You are not serious -- Pray recollect your self.


Mrs. Fore. O yes, now I remember, you were very impertinent and impudent, --
and would have come to Bed to me.


Scan. And did not?


Mrs. Fore. Did not! With that Face can you ask the Question?


Scan. This I have heard of before, but never believed. I have been told, she
had that admirable quality of forgetting to a Man's Face in the Morning, that
she had lain with him all Night, and denying Favors with more Impudence than
she could grant 'em -- Madam, I Am your humble Servant, and honor you. -- You
look pretty well, Mr. Foresight; -- How did you rest last Night?


Fore. Truly, Mr. Scandal, I was so taken up with broken Dreams and distracted
Visions, that I remember little.


Scan. 'Twas a very forgetting Night. -- But would you not talk with Valentine,
perhaps you may understand him; I Am apt to believe, there is something
mysterious in his Discourses, and sometimes rather think him inspired than mad.


Fore. You speak with singular good Judgment, Mr. Scandal, truly -- I am
inclining to your Turkish Opinion in this Matter, and do reverence a Man whom
the Vulgar think mad. Let us go in to him.


Frail. Sister, do you stay with them; I Will find out my Lover, and give him his
Discharge, and come to you. Of My Conscience here he comes.

[Exeunt Foresight, Mrs. Fore. and Scandal.
Enter Ben. Ben. All mad, I think -- Flesh, I believe all the Calentures of the
Sea are come ashore, for my part.


Frail. Mr. Benjamin in Choler!


Ben. No, I Am pleased well enough now I have found you, -- Mess, I have had
such a Hurricane upon your account yonder. --


Frail. My account, pray what is the matter?


Ben. Why, Father came and found me squabbling with yon chitty-fac'd thing, as
he would have me marry, -- so he asked what was the matter. -- He asked in a
surly sort of a way -- (It seems Brother Val. is gone mad, and so that put'n
into a Passion; but what did I know that, what is that to me?) -- So he asked in
a surly sort of manner, -- and Gad I answered 'en as surlily, -- What tho'f he
be my Father, I an't bound Prentice to'en: -- So faith I told'n in plain terms,
if I were minded to marry, I Would marry to please my self, not him: And for the
young Woman that he provided for me, I thought it more fitting for her to learn
her Sampler, and make Dirt-pies, than to look after a Husband; for my part I
was none of her Man -- I had another Voyage to make, let him take it as he will.


Frail. So then, you intend to go to Sea again?


Ben. Nay, nay, my Mind run upon you, -- but I would not tell him so much -- So
he said he would make my Heart ache; and if so be that he could get a Woman to his
Mind, he would marry himself. Gad, says I, an you play the Fool and marry at these
Years, there is more danger of your Head's aching than my Heart. -- He was woundy
angry when I gav'n that wipe. -- He had'nt a Word to say, and so I left'n and
the Green Girl together; may-hap the Be may bite, and he will marry her himself,
with all my Heart.


Frail. And were you this undutiful and graceless Wretch to your Father?


Ben. Then why was he graceless first, -- if I am undutiful and graceless, why
did he beget me so? I did not get my self.


Frail. O Impiety! how have I been mistaken! what an inhuman merciless Creature
have I set my Heart upon? O I am happy to have discovered the Shelves and
Quicksands that lurk beneath that faithless smiling Face.


Ben. Hey toss! what is the matter now? Why you ben't angry, be you?


Frail. O see me no more, -- for thou were born amongst Rocks, suckl'd by
Whales, cradled in a Tempest, and whistled to by Winds; and thou art come forth
with Fins and Scales, and three Rows of Teeth, a most outrageous Fish of Prey.


Ben. O Lord, O Lord, she is mad, poor young Woman, Love has turned her Senses,
her Brain is quite over-set. Well-a-day, how shall I do to set her to rights?


Frail. No, no, I am not mad, Monster, I am wise enough to find you out. --
Had thou the Impudence to aspire at being a Husband with that stubborn and
disobedient Temper? -- You that know not how to submit to a Father, presume to
have a sufficient stock of Duty to undergo a Wife? I should have been finely
fobb'd indeed, very finely fobb'd.


Ben. Hark ye, Forsooth; if so be that you are in your right Senses, do you see,
for ought as I perceive I Am like to be finely fobb'd, -- if I have got Anger
here upon your Account, and you are tacked about already. -- What do you mean,
after all your fair Speeches, and stroaking my Cheeks, and Kissing and Hugging,
what would you sheer off so? would you, and leave me a-ground?


Frail. No, I Will leave you a-drift, and go which Way you will.


Ben. What, are you false-hearted then?


Frail. Only the Wind's changed.


Ben. More shame for you, -- the Wind's changed! -- It Is an ill Wind blows no
Body good, -- may-hap I have good riddance on you, if these be your Tricks, --
what do you mean all this while, to make a Fool of me?


Frail. Any Fool, but a Husband.


Ben. Husband! Gad I would not be your Husband, if you would have me, now I
know your Mind, tho'f you had your weight in Gold and Jewels, and tho'f I loved
you never so well.


Frail. Why, can thou love, Porpoise?


Ben. No matter what I can do; don't call Names, -- I don't love you so well as
to bear that, whatever I did, -- I Am glad you show your self, Mistress: -- Let
them marry you as don't know you: -- Gad I know you too well, by sad
experience; -- I believe he that marries you will go to Sea in a Hen-peck'd
Frigate -- I believe that, young Woman -- and may-hap may come to an Anchor at
Cuckolds-point; so there is a dash for you, take it as you will; mayhap you may
holla after me when I will not come too.

[Exit.
Frail. Ha, ha, ha, no doubt on it. -- My true Love is gone to Sea -- [Sings.

Enter Mrs. Foresight. O Sister, had you come a minute sooner, you would have
seen the Resolution of a Lover, -- Honest Tar and I are parted; -- and with the
same Indifference that we met: -- OF my life I am half vexed at the
Insensibility of a Brute that I despised.


Mrs. Fore. What then, he bore it most Heroically?


Frail. Most Tyrannically, -- for you see he has got the start of me; and I the
poor forsaken Maid am left complaining on the Shore. But I Will tell you a Hint
that he has given me; Sir Sampson is enraged, and talks desperately of
committing Matrimony himself. -- If he has a mind to throw himself away, he
cannot do it more effectually than upon me, if we could bring it about.


Mrs. Fore. Oh hang him Old Fox, he is too cunning, besides he hates both you
and me. -- But I have a Project in my Head for you, and I have gone a good way
toward it. I have almost made a Bargain with Jeremy, Valentine's Man, to sell
his Master to us.


Frail. Sell him, how?


Mrs. Fore. Valentine raves upon Angelica, and took me for her, and Jeremy says
will take any Body for her that he imposes on him. -- Now I have promised him
Mountains, if in one of his mad Fits he will bring you to him in her stead, and
get you Married together, and put to Bed together; and after Consummation,
Girl, there is no revoking. And if he should recover his Senses, he will be glad
at least to make you a good Settlement -- Here they come, stand aside a little,
and tell me how you like the Design.


Enter Valentine, Scandal, Foresight and Jeremy. Scan. And have you given your
Master a hint of their Plot upon him? [To Jere.


Jere. Yes, Sir; he says he will favor it, and mistake her for Angelica.


Scan. It may make Sport.


Fore. Mercy on us!


Val. Hushed -- Interrupt me not -- I Will whisper Prediction to thee, and thou
shall Prophecy; -- I am Truth, and can teach thy Tongue a new Trick, -- I have
told thee what is past, -- Now I tell what is to come; -- Do thou know what
will happen to Morrow? -- Answer me not -- for I will tell thee. To Morrow
Knaves will thrive through Craft, and Fools through Fortune; and Honesty will go as
it did, Frost-nipp'd in a Summer Suit. Ask me Questions concerning to Morrow.


Scan. Ask him, Mr. Foresight.


Fore. Pray what will be done at Court?


Val. Scandal will tell you; -- I am Truth, I never come there.


Fore. In the City?


Val. Oh, Prayers will be said in empty Churches, at the usual Hours. Yet you
will see such Zealous Faces behind Counters, as if Religion were to be sold in
every Shop. Oh things will go methodically in the City, the Clocks will strike
Twelve at Noon, and the Horned Herd Buz in the Exchange at Two. Wives and
Husbands will drive distinct Trades, and Care and Pleasure separately Occupy
the Family. Coffee-Houses will be full of Smoke and Stratagem. And the cropped
Prentice, that sweeps his Master's Shop in the Morning, may, ten to one, dirty
his Sheets before Night. But there are two things that you will see very
strange; which are Wanton Wives, with their Legs at Liberty, and Tame Cuckolds,
with Chains about their Necks. But hold, I must examine you before I go
further; you look suspiciously. Are you a Husband?


Fore. I am Marrry'd.


Val. Poor Creature! Is your Wife of Covent Garden Parish?


Fore. No; St. Martins in the Fields.


Val. Alas, poor Man; his Eyes are sunk, and his Hands shrivelled; his Legs
dwindl'd, and his Back bowed: Pray, pray, for a Metamorphosis -- Change thy
Shape, and shake off Age; get thee Medea's Kettle, and be boiled anew; come
forth with laboring callous Hands, a Chine of Steel, and Atlas Shoulders. Let
Taliacotius trim the Calves of Twenty Chairmen, and make thee Pedestals to
stand erect upon, and look Matrimony in the Face. Ha, ha, ha! That a Man should
have a Stomach to a Wedding Supper, when the Pigeons ought rather to be laid
to his Feet, ha, ha, ha.


Fore. His Frenzy is very high now, Mr. Scandal.


Scan. I believe it is a Springtide.


Fore. Very likely truly; you understand these Matters -- Mr. Scandal, I shall
be very glad to confer with you about these things which he has uttered. -- His
Sayings are very Mysterious and Hieroglyphical.


Val. Oh, why would Angelica be absent from my Eyes so long?


Jere. She Is here, Sir.


Mrs. Fore. Now, Sister.


Frail. O Lord, what must I say?


Scan. Humor him, Madam, by all means.


Val. Where is she? Oh I see her -- she comes, like Riches, Health, and Liberty
at once, to a despairing, starving and abandoned Wretch.

Oh welcome, welcome.


Frail. How do you, Sir? Can I serve you?


Val. Hark ye; -- I have a Secret to tell you -- Endymion and the Moon shall
meet us upon Mount Latmos, and we'll be married in the dead of Night. -- But
say not a Word. Hymen shall put his Torch into a Dark-Lanthorn, that it may be
secret; and Juno shall give her Peacock Poppy-water, that he may fold his
Ogling Tail, and Argos's hundred Eyes be shut, ha? No Body shall know but
Jeremy.


Frail. No, no, we'll keep it secret, it shall be done presently.


Val. The sooner the better -- Jeremy, come hither -- closer -- that none may
over-hear us; -- Jeremy, I can tell you News; -- Angelica is turned Nun, and I
am turning Friar, and yet we'll marry one another in spite of the Pope -- Get
me a Coul and Beads, that I may play my Part -- For she will meet me two Hours
hence in Black and White, and a long Vail to cover the Project, and we will not
see one another Faces, 'till we have done something to be ashamed of, and then
we'll blush once for all.


Enter Tattle and Angelica. Jere. I Will take care, and --


Val. Whisper.


Ang. Nay, Mr. Tattle, if you make Love to me, you spoil my Design, for I
intend to make you my Confident.


Tatt. But, Madam, to throw away your Person, such a Person! and such a Fortune
on a Madman!


Ang. I never loved him 'till he was Mad; but don't tell any Body so.


Scan. How Is this! Tattle making Love to Angelica!


Tatt. Tell, Madam! alas you don't know me -- I have much ado to tell your
Ladyship how long I have been in Love with you -- but encouraged by the
Impossibility of Valentine's making any more Addresses to you, I have ventured
to declare the very inmost Passion of my Heart. Oh, Madam, look upon us both.
There you see the Ruins of a poor decayed Creature -- Here a complete and
lively Figure, with Youth and Health, and all his Five Senses in Perfection,
Madam, and to all this, the most passionate Lover --


Ang. O fie for shame, hold your Tongue, a passionate Lover, and Five Senses in
Perfection! When you are as mad as Valentine, I Will believe you love me, and the
maddest shall take me.


Val. It is enough. Ha! Who Is here?


Frail. O Lord, her coming will spoil all. [To Jeremy.


Jere. No, no, Madam, he will not know her; if he should, I can persuade him.


Val. Scandal, who are these? Foreigners? If they are, I Will tell you what I
think -- get away all the Company but Angelica, that I may discover my Design
to her.

[Whisper.
Scan. I will, -- I have discovered something of Tattle, that is of a piece
with Mrs. Frail. He Courts Angelica, if we could contrive to couple 'em
together -- Hark ye --

[Whisper.
Mrs. Fore. He will not know you, Cousin, he knows no Body.


Fore. But he knows more than any Body, -- Oh Neice, he knows things past and
to come, and all the profound Secrets of Time.


Tatt. Look you, Mr. Foresight, it is not my way to make many Words of Matters,
and so I shall not say much, -- But in short, do you see, I will hold you a Hundred
Pound now, that I know more Secrets then he.


Fore. How! I cannot read that Knowledge in your Face, Mr. Tattle. -- Pray,
what do you know?


Tatt. Why, do you think I Will tell you, Sir! Read it in my Face? No, Sir, it is
written in my Heart. And safer there, Sir, than Letters writ in Juice of Lemon,
for no Fire can fetch it out. I am no Blab, Sir.


Val. Acquaint Jeremy with it, he may easily bring it about, -- They are
welcome, and I Will tell 'em so my self. [To Scandal.] What, do you look strange
upon me? -- Then I must be plain. [Coming up to them.] I am Truth, and hate an
Old Acquaintance with a new Face.

[ Scandal goes aside with Jeremy.
Tatt. Do you know me, Valentine?


Val. You? Who are you? No, I hope not.


Tatt. I am Jack Tattle, your Friend.


Val. My Friend, what to do? I am no married Man, and thou can not lie with
my Wife: I am very poor, and thou can not borrow Money of me: Then what
Employment have I for a Friend.


Tatt. Hah! A good open Speaker, and not to be trusted with a Secret.


Ang. Do you know me, Valentine?


Val. Oh very well.


Ang. Who am I?


Val. You're a Woman, -- One to whom Heaven gave Beauty, when it grafted Roses
on a Briar. You are the Reflection of Heaven in a Pond, and he that leaps at
you is sunk. You are all white, a sheet of lovely spotless Paper, when you
first are Born; but you are to be scrawl'd and blotted by every Goose's Quill.
I know you; for I loved a Woman, and loved her so long, that I found out a
strange thing: I found out what a Woman was good for.


Tatt. Ay; prithee what is that?


Val. Why to keep a Secret.


Tatt. O Lord!


Val. O exceeding good to keep a Secret: For though she should tell, yet she is
not to be believed.


Tatt. Hah! good again, faith.


Val. I would have Music -- Sing me the Song that I like --


SONG.
Set by Mr. Finger.
I Tell thee, Charmion, could I Time retrieve,
And could again begin to Love and Live,
To you I should my earliest Offering give;
I know my Eyes would lead my Heart to you,
And I should all my Vows and Oaths renew,
But to be plain, I never would be true.
2.
For by our weak and weary Truth, I find,
Love hates to center in a Point assigned,
But runs with Joy the Circle of the Mind.
Then never let us chain what should be free,
But for Relief of either Sex agree,
Since Women love to change, and so do we.

No more, for I am melancholy.

[Walks musing.
Jere. I Will do it, Sir. [To Scandal.


Scan. Mr. Foresight, we had best leave him. He may grow outrageous and do
Mischief.


Fore. I will be directed by you.


Jere. to Frail. You Will meet, Madam; -- I Will take care every thing shall be
ready.


Frail. Thou shall do what thou will, have what thou will, in short, I will
deny thee nothing.


Tatt. Madam, shall I wait upon you? [To Angelica.


Ang. No, I Will stay with him -- Mr Scandal will protect me. Aunt, Mr. Tattle
desires you would give him leave to wait on you.


Tatt. Pox on it, there is no coming off, now she has said that -- Madam, will
you do me the Honor?


Mrs. Fore. Mr. Tattle might have used less Ceremony.

Exeunt Fore. Mrs. Fore. Tatt. Frail.
Scan. Jeremy, follow Tattle.

[Exit Jere.
Ang. Mr. Scandal, I only stay 'till my Maid comes, and because I had a mind to
be rid of Mr. Tattle.


Scan. Madam, I am very glad that I overheard a better Reason, which you gave
to Mr. Tattle; for his Impertinence forced you to acknowledge a Kindness for
Valentine, which you denied to all his Sufferings and my Solicitations. So
I Will leave him to make use of the Discovery; and your Ladyship to the free
Confession of your Inclinations.


Ang. Oh Heavens! You will not leave me alone with a Madman?


Scan. No, Madam; I only leave a Madman to his Remedy.

[Exit Scan.
Val. Madam, you need not be very much afraid, for I fancy I begin to come to
my self.


Ang. Ay, but if I don't fit you, I Will be hanged. [Aside.


Val. You see what Disguises Love makes us put on; Gods have been in
counterfeited Shapes for the same Reason; and the Divine Part of me, my Mind,
has worn this Mask of Madness, and this motly Livery, only as the Slave of
Love, and menial Creature of your Beauty.


Ang. Mercy on me, how he talks! poor Valentine!


Val. Nay faith, now let us understand one another, Hypocrisy apart, -- The
Comedy draws toward an end, and let us think of leaving Acting, and be our
selves; and since you have loved me, you must own, I have at length deserved
you should confess it.


Ang. Sighs.] I would I had loved you -- for Heaven knows I pity you; and could
I have foreseen the bad Effects, I would have striven; but that is too late.

[Sighs.
Val. What sad Effects? -- What Is too late? My seeming Madness as deceived my
Father, and procured me Time to think of Means to reconcile me to him, and
preserve the Right of my Inheritance to his Estate; which otherwise by Articles
I must this morning have resigned: And this I had informed you of to Day, but
you were gone, before I knew you had been here.


Ang. How! I thought your Love of me had caused this Transport in your Soul;
which it seems you only counterfeited, for by mercenary Ends, and sordid
Interest.


Val. Nay, now you do me wrong; for if any Interest was considered, it was
yours; since I thought I wanted more than Love, to make me worthy of you.


Ang. Then you thought me mercenary -- But how am I deluded by this Interval of
Sense, to reason with a Madman?


Val. Oh, it is barbarous to misunderstand me longer.


Enter Jeremy. Ang. Oh here is a reasonable Creature -- sure he will not have
the Impudence to persevere -- Come, Jeremy, acknowledge your Trick, and confess
your Master's Madness counterfeit.


Jere. Counterfeit, Madam! I Will maintain him to be as absolutely and
substantially mad, as any Freeholder in Bethlehem; nay, he is as mad as any
Projector, Fanatic, Chemist, Lover, or Poet in Europe.


Val. Sirrah, you lie; I am not mad.


Ang. Ha, ha, ha, you see he denies it.


Jere. O Lord, Madam, did you ever know any Madman mad enough to own it?


Val. Sot, cannot you apprehend?


Ang. Why he talked very sensibly just now.


Jere. Yes, Madam; he has Intervals: But you see he begins to look wild again
now.


Val. Why you thick'd-skull'd Rascal, I tell you the Farce is done, and I will
be Mad no longer.

[Beats him.
Ang. Ha, ha, ha, Is he mad, or no, Jeremy?


Jere. Partly, I think -- for he does not know his Mind two Hours -- I Am sure I
left him just now in a Humor to be mad, and I think I have not found him very
quiet at this present. Who Is there?

[One knocks.
Val. Go see, you Sot. I Am very glad that I can move your Mirth, though not your
Compassion.

[Exit Jeremy.
Ang. I did not think you had Apprehension enough to be exceptious: But Madmen
show themselves most, by over-pretending to a sound Understanding; as Drunken
Men do by over-acting Sobriety; I was half inclining to believe you, 'till I
accidentally touched upon your tender Part: But now you have restored me to my
former Opinion and Compassion.


Enter Jeremy. Jere. Sir, your Father has sent to know if you are any better
yet -- Will you please to be mad, Sir, or how?


Val. Stupidity! You know the Penalty of all I Am worth must pay for the
Confession of my Senses; I Am mad, and will be mad to every Body but this Lady.


Jere. So -- Just the very backside of Truth -- But Lying is a Figure in
Speech, that interlards the greatest part of my Conversation -- Madam, your
Ladyship's Woman.

[Goes to the Door.
Enter Jenny. Ang. Well, have you been there? -- Come hither.


Jenny. Yes, Madam, Sir Sampson will wait upon you presently. [Aside to
Angelica.


Val. You are not leaving me in this Uncertainty?


Ang. Would any thing but a Madman complain of Uncertainty? Uncertainty and
Expectation are the Joys of Life. Security is an insipid thing, and the
overtaking and possessing of a Wish discovers the Folly of the Chase. Never let
us know one another better; for the Pleasure of a Masquerade is done, when we
come to show Faces: But I Will tell you two things before I leave you; I am not
the Fool you take me for; and you are mad, and don't know it:

[Exit Ang. and Jenny.
Val. From a Riddle you can expect nothing but a Riddle. There Is my
Instruction, and the Moral of my Lesson.


Re-enter Jeremy. Jere. What, is the Lady gone again, Sir? I hope you
understood one another before she went?


Val. Understood! she is harder to be understood than a Piece of Egyptian
Antiquity, or an Irish Manuscript; you may pore 'till you spoil your Eyes, and
not improve your Knowledge.


Jere. I have heard 'em say, Sir, they read hard Hebrew Books backwards; may be
you begin to read at the wrong End.


Val. They say so of a Witches Prayer, and Dreams and Dutch Almanacks are to be
understood by contraries. But there is Regularity and Method in that; she is a
Medal without a Reverse or Inscription; for Indifference has both Sides alike.
Yet while she does not seem to hate me, I will pursue her, and know her if it
be possible, in spite of the Opinion of my Satirical Friend, Scandal, who says,

That Women are like Tricks by Slight of Hand,
Which, to admire, we should not understand.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
A Room in Foresight's House. Enter Angelica and Jenny. Ang. WHERE is Sir
Sampson? Did you not tell me, he would be here before me?


Jenny. He Is at the great Glass in the Dining Room, Madam, setting his Cravat
and Wig.


Ang. How! I Am glad on it -- if he has a Mind I should like him, it is a sign he
likes me; and that is more than half my Design.


Jenny. I hear him, Madam.


Ang. Leave me; and do you hear, if Valentine should come or send, I am not to be
spoken with.

[Exit Jenny.
Enter Sir Sampson. Sir Samp. I have not been honored with the Commands of a
fair Lady a great while -- Odd, Madam, you have revived me -- Not since I was
Five and Thirty.


Ang. Why, you have no great reason to complain, Sir Sampson, that is not long
ago.


Sir Samp. Zooks, but it is, Madam, a very great while, to a Man that admires a
Fine Woman as much as I do.


Ang. You're an absolute Courtier, Sir Sampson.


Sir Samp. Not at all, Madam: Odsbud you wrong me; I am not so old neither, to
be a bare Courtier, only a Man of Words: Odd, I have warm Blood about me yet,
and can serve a Lady any way -- Come, come, let me tell you, you Women think a
Man old too soon, Faith and Troth you do -- Come, don't despise Fifty; odd
Fifty, in a hale Constitution, is no such contemptible Age.


Ang. Fifty a contemptible Age! Not at all, a very fashionable Age, I think --
I assure you, I know very considerable Beaus, that set a good Face upon Fifty;
Fifty! I have seen Fifty in a Side-Box by Candlelight out-blossom Five and
Twenty.


Sir Samp. O Pox, Outsides, Outsides; a pize take 'em, mere Outsides: Hang your
Side-Box Beaus; no, I Am none of those, none of your forced Trees, that pretend
to Blossom in the Fall, and Bud when they should bring forth Fruit: I am of a
long lived Race, and inherit Vigor, none of my Family married 'till Fifty; yet
they begot Sons and Daughters 'till Fourscorce: I am of your Patriarchs, I, a
Branch of one of your Antideluvian Families, Fellows that the Flood could not
wash away: Well, Madam, what are your Commands? Has any young Rogue affronted
you, and shall I cut his Throat? or --


Ang. No, Sir Sampson, I have no Quarrel upon my Hands -- I have more occasion
for your Conduct than your Courage at this time. To tell you the Truth, I Am
weary of living single, and want a Husband.


Sir Samp. Odsbud, and it is pity you should -- Odd, would she would like me,
then I should hamper my young Rogues: Odd, would she would; Faith and Troth
she is devilish Handsome. [Aside. Madam, you deserve a good Husband, and 'twere a
pity you should be thrown away upon any of these young idle Rogues about the
Town. Odd, there is never a young Fellow worth hanging, -- that is a very young
Fellow -- Pize on 'em, they never think beforehand of any thing; -- And if they
commit Matrimony, it is as they commit Murder, out of a Frolic: And are ready
to hang themselves, or to be hanged by the Law, the next Morning: -- Odso, have
a care, Madam.


Ang. Therefore I ask your Advice, Sir Sampson: I have Fortune enough to make
any Man easy that I can like; if there were such a thing as a young agreeable
Man, with a reasonable Stock of good Nature and Sense -- For I would neither
have an absolute Wit, nor a Fool.


Sir Samp. Odd, you are hard to please, Madam; to find a young Fellow that is
neither a Wit in his own Eye, nor a Fool in the Eye of the World, is a very
hard Task. But, Faith and Troth, you speak very discreetly; for I hate both a
Wit and a Fool.


Ang. She that marries a Fool, Sir Sampson, commits the Reputation of her
Honesty or Understanding to the Censure of the World: And she that marries a
very witty Man, submits both to the Severity and insolent Conduct of her
Husband. I should like a Man of Wit for a Lover, because I would have such an
one in my Power; but I would no more be his Wife than his Enemy. For his Malice
is not a more terrible Consequence of his Aversion, than his Jealousy is of
his Love.


Sir Samp. None of old Foresight's Sybills ever uttered such a Truth. Odsbud,
you have won my Heart: I hate a Wit; I had a Son that was spoiled among 'em; a
good hopeful Lad, 'till he learned to be a Wit -- And might have risen in the
State -- But, a Pox on it, his Wit run him out of his Money, and now his Poverty
has run him out of his Wits.


Ang. Sir Sampson, as your Friend, I must tell you, you are very much abused in
that matter; he is no more mad than you are.


Sir Samp. How, Madam! Would I could prove it.


Ang. I can tell you how that may be done -- But it is a thing that would make
me appear to be too much concerned in your Affairs.


Sir Samp. Odsbud, I believe she likes me -- [Aside.] -- Ah, Madam, all my
Affairs are scarce worthy to be laid at your Feet; and I wish, Madam, they
stood in a better Posture, that I might make a more becoming Offer to a Lady of
your incomparable Beauty and Merit. -- If I had Peru in one Hand, and Mexico in
the other, and the Eastern Empire under my Feet, it would make me only a more
glorious Victim to be offered at the Shrine of your Beauty.


Ang. Bless me, Sir Sampson, what is the matter?


Sir Samp. Odd, Madam, I love you -- And if you would take my Advice in a
Husband --


Ang. Hold, hold, Sir Sampson. I asked your Advice for a Husband, and you are
giving me your Consent -- I was indeed thinking to propose something like it in
Jest, to satisfy you about Valentine: For if a Match were seemingly carried on
between you and me, it would oblige him to throw off his Disguise of Madness,
in apprehension of losing me: For you know he has long pretended a Passion for
me.


Sir Samp. Gadzooks, a most ingenious Contrivance -- If we were to go throw
with it. But why must the Match only be seemingly carried on? -- Odd, let it be
a real Contract.


Ang. O fie, Sir Sampson, what would the World say?


Sir Samp. Say, they would say you were a wise Woman, and I a happy Man. Odd,
Madam, I Will love you as long as I live; and leave you a good Jointure when I
die.


Ang. Ay; but that is not in your Power, Sir Sampson; for when Valentine
confesses himself in his Senses, he must make over his Inheritance to his
younger Brother.


Sir Samp. Odd, you're cunning, a wary Baggage! Faith and Troth I like you the
better -- But, I warrant you, I have a Proviso in the Obligation in Favor of
my self -- Body of me, I have a Trick to turn the Settlement upon the Issue Male
of our two Bodies begotten. Odsbud, let us find Children, and I Will find an
Estate.


Ang. Will you? well, do you find the Estate, and leave the the other to me --


Sir Samp. O Rogue! But I Will trust you. And will you consent? Is it a Match
then?


Ang. Let me consult my Lawyer concerning this Obligation; and if I find what
you propose practicable, I Will give you my Answer.


Sir Samp. With all my Heart; -- Come in with me, and I Will lend you the Bond,
-- You shall consult your Lawyer, and I Will consult a Parson; Odzooks I Am a
young Man: Odzooks I Am a young Man, and I Will make it appear -- Odd, you're
devilish Handsome: Faith and Troth you're very Handsome, and I Am very Young, and
very Lusty -- Odsbud, Hussy, you know how to choose, and so do I; -- Odd, I
think we are very well met; -- Give me your Hand, Odd let me kiss it; it is as
warm and as soft -- as what? -- Odd, as the other Hand -- give me the other Hand,
and I Will mumble 'em, and kiss 'em 'till they melt in my Mouth.


Ang. Hold, Sir Sampson -- You're profuse of your Vigor before your time:
You Will spend your Estate before you come to it.


Sir Samp. No, no, only give you a Rent-roll of my Possessions -- Ah! Baggage
-- I warrant you; for little Sampson: Odd, Sampson's a very good Name for an
able Fellow: Your Sampsons were strong Dogs from the Beginning.


Ang. Have a care, and don't over-act your Part -- If you remember, the
strongest Sampson of your Name pulled an old House over his Head at last.


Sir Samp. Say you so, Hussy? -- Come, let us go then; Odd, I long to be pulling
down too, come away -- Odso, here is some Body coming.

[Exeunt.
Enter Tattle and Jeremy. Tatt. Is not that she, gone out just now?


Jere. Ay, Sir, she is just going to the Place of Appointment. Ah, Sir, if you
are not very faithful and close in this Business, you will certainly be the Death
of a Person that has a most extraordinary Passion for your Honor's Service.


Tatt. Ay, who is that?


Jere. Even my unworthy self, Sir -- Sir, I have had an Appetite to be fed with
your Commands a great while; -- And now, Sir, my former Master having much
troubled the Fountain of his Understanding, it is a very plausible Occasion for
me to quench my Thirst at the Spring of your Bounty -- I thought I could not
recommend my self better to you, Sir, than by the delivery of a great Beauty
and Fortune into your Arms, whom I have heard you sigh for.


Tatt. I Will make thy Fortune; say no more -- Thou art a pretty Fellow, and
can carry a Message to a Lady in a pretty soft kind of Phrase, and with a
good persuading Accent.


Jere. Sir, I have the Seeds of Rhetoric and Oratory in my Head -- I have been
at Cambridge.


Tatt. Ay; it is well enough for a Servant to be bred at an University: But the
Education is a little too Pedantick for a Gentleman. I hope you are secret in
your Nature, private, close, ha?


Jere. O Sir, for that, Sir, it is my chief Talent; I Am as secret as the Head of
Nilus.


Tatt. Hye? Who Is he, though? A Privy-Counsellor?


Jere. O Ignorance! [aside.] A cunning Egyptian, Sir, that with his Arms would
overrun the Country, yet no body could ever find out his Headquarters.


Tatt. Close Dog! A good Whoremaster, I warrant him -- The Time draws nigh,
Jeremy. Angelica will be veiled like a Nun; and I must be hooded like a Friar;
ha, Jeremy?


Jere. Ay, Sir, hooded like a Hawk, to seize at first sight upon the Quarry. It
is the Whim of my Master's Madness to be so dressed; and she is so in Love with
him, she will comply with any thing to please him. Poor Lady, I Am sure she will
have reason to pray for me, when she finds what a happy Exchange she has made,
between a Madman and so Accomplished a Gentleman.


Tatt. Ay Faith, so she will, Jeremy: You're a good Friend to her, poor
Creature -- I swear I do it hardly so much in Consideration of my self, as
Compassion to her.


Jere. It Is an Act of Charity, Sir, to save a fine Woman with Thirty Thousand
Pound, from throwing her self away.


Tatt. So it is, faith -- I might have saved several others in my time; but I
Gad I could never find in my Heart to Marry any body before.


Jere. Well, Sir, I Will go and tell her my Master's coming; and meet you in half
a quarter of an Hour, with your Disguise, at your own Lodgings. You must talk a
little madly, she will not distinguish the Tone of your Voice.


Tatt. No, no, let me alone for a Counterfeit -- I Will be ready for you.


Enter Miss. Miss. O Mr. Tattle, are you here! I Am glad I have found you; I
have been looking up and down for you like any thing, 'till I Am as tired as any
thing in the World.


Tatt. O Pox how shall I get rid of this foolish Girl? [Aside.


Miss. O I have pure News, I can tell you pure News -- I must not marry the
Seaman now -- my Father says so. Why will not you be my Husband? You say you love
me, and you will not be my Husband. And I know you may be my Husband now if you
please.


Tatt. O fie, Miss: Who told you so, Child?


Miss. Why, my Father -- I told him that you loved me.


Tatt. O fie, Miss; why did you do so? And who told you so, Child?


Miss. Who? Why you did; did not you?


Tatt. O Pox, that was Yesterday, Miss; that was a great while ago, Child. I
have been asleep since; slept a whole Night, and did not so much as dream of
the matter.


Miss. Pshaw, O but I dreamed that it was so though.


Tatt. Ay, but your Father will tell you that Dreams come by Contraries, Child
-- O fie; what, we must not love one another now -- Pshaw, that would be a
foolish thing indeed -- Fie, fie, you are a Woman now, and must think of a new
Man every Morning, and forget him every Night -- No, no, to marry is to be a
Child again, and play with the same Rattle always: O fie, Marrying is a paw
thing.


Miss. Well, but don't you love me as well as you did last Night then?


Tatt. No, no, Child, you would not have me.


Miss. No? Yes but I would though.


Tatt. Pshaw, but I tell you, you would not -- You forget you're a Woman, and
don't know your own Mind.


Miss. But here is my Father, and he knows my Mind.


Enter Foresight. Fore. O, Mr. Tattle, your Servant, you are a close Man; but
methinks your Love to my Daughter was a Secret I might have been trusted with,
-- Or had you a mind to try if I could discover it by my Art -- hum, ha! I
think there is something in your Physiognomy, that has a Resemblance of her;
and the Girl is like me.


Tatt. And so you would infer, that you and I are alike -- what does the old
Prig mean? I Will banter him, and laugh at him, and leave him. [aside.] I fancy
you have a wrong Notion of Faces.


Fore. How? What? A wrong Notion! How so?


Tatt. In the way of Art: I have some taking Features, not obvious to Vulgar
Eyes, that are Indications of a sudden turn of good Fortune, in the Lottery of
Wives; and Promise of great Beauty and great Fortune reserved alone for me, by
a private Intrigue of Destiny, kept secret from the piercing Eye of
Perspicuity; from all Astrologers, and the Stars themselves.


Fore. How! I will make it appear, that what you say is impossible.


Tatt. Sir, I beg your Pardon, I Am in haste --


Fore. For what?


Tatt. To be married, Sir, married.


Fore. Ay, but pray take me along with you, Sir --


Tatt. No, Sir, it is to be done privately -- I never make Confidents.


Fore. Well; but my Consent I mean -- You will not marry my Daughter without my
Consent?


Tatt. Who I, Sir? I Am an absolute Stranger to you and your Daughter, Sir.


Fore. Hey day! What time of the Moon is this?


Tatt. Very true, Sir, and desire to continue so. I have no more Love for your
Daughter, than I have Likeness of you; and I have a Secret in my Heart, which
you would be glad to know, and shall not know; and yet you shall know it too, and
be sorry for it afterward. I Would have you to know, Sir, that I am as knowing as
the Stars, and as secret as the Night. And I Am going to be married just now,
yet did not know of it half an Hour ago; and the Lady stays for me, and does
not know of it yet -- There Is a Mystery for you, -- I know you love to untie
Difficulties -- Or if you cannot solve this, stay here a quarter of an Hour, and
I Will come and explain it to you.

[Exit.
Miss. O Father, why will you let him go? Will Not you make him to be my Husband?


Fore. Mercy on us, what do these Lunacies portend? Alas! he is mad, Child,
stark wild.


Miss. What, and must not I have ever a Husband then? What, must I go to Bed to
Nurse again, and be a Child as long as she is an Old Woman? Indeed but I will not:
For now my Mind is set upon a Man, I will have a Man some way or other. Oh!
methinks I Am sick when I think of a Man; and if I cannot have one, I would go to
sleep all my Life: For when I Am awake, it makes me wish and long, and I don't
know for what -- And I Would rather be always asleep, than sick with Thinking.


Fore. O fearful! I think the Girl's influenced too, -- Hussie, you shall have
a Rod.


Miss. A Fiddle of a Rod, I Will have a Husband; and if you will not get me one,
I Will get one for my self: I Will marry our Robbin the Buttler, he says he loves
me, and he is a Handsome Man, and shall be my Husband: I warrant he will be my
Husband and thank me too, for he told me so.


Enter Scandal, Mrs. Foresight, and Nurse. Fore. Did he so -- I Will dispatch him
for it presently; Rogue! Oh, Nurse, come hither.


Nurse. What is your Worship's Pleasure?


Fore. Here take your Young Mistress, and lock her up presently, 'till farther
Orders from me -- Not a Word, Hussie -- Do what I bid you, no Reply, away. And
bid Robbin make ready to give an Account of his Plate and Linen, do you hear,
begone when I bid you.

Ex. Nurse and Miss.
Mrs. Fore. What Is the matter, Husband?


Fore. It Is not convenient to tell you now -- Mr. Scandal, Heaven keep us all
in our Senses -- I fear there is a contagious Frenzy abroad. How does Valentine?


Scan. O I hope he will do well again -- I have a Message from him to your
Niece Angelica.


Fore. I think she has not returned, since she went abroad with Sir Sampson.


Enter Ben. Mrs. Fore. Here Is Mr. Benjamin, he can tell us if his Father be
come home.


Ben. Who, Father? ay, he is come home with a Vengeance.


Mrs. Fore. Why, what is the Matter?


Ben. Matter! Why he is mad.


Fore. Mercy on us, I was afraid of this.


Ben. And there is the Handsome Young Woman, she, as they say, Brother Val. went
mad for, she is mad too, I think.


Fore. O my poor Niece, my poor Niece, is she gone too? Well, I shall run mad
next.


Mrs. Fore. Well, but how mad? how do you mean?


Ben. Nay, I Will give you leave to guess -- I Will undertake to make a Voyage to
Antegoa -- No, hold, I may not say so neither -- But I Will sail as far as Legorn,
and back again, before you shall guess at the matter, and do nothing else;
Mess, you may take in all the Points of the Compass, and not hit right.


Mrs. Fore. Your Experiment will take up a little too much Time.


Ben. Why then I Will tell you, There Is a new Wedding upon the Stocks; and they
two are a going to be married to rights.


Scan. Who?


Ben. Why Father, and -- the Young Woman. I cannot hit of her Name.


Scan. Angelica?


Ben. Ay, the same.


Mrs. Fore. Sir Sampson and Angelica, impossible!


Ben. That may be -- but I Am sure it is as I tell you.


Scan. 'S'death it is a Jest, I cannot believe it.


Ben. Look you, Friend, it is nothing to me, whether you believe it or no. What
I say is true; do you see, they are married, or just going to be married, I know
not which.


Fore. Well, but they are hot mad, that is, not Lunatic?


Ben. I don't know what you may call Madness -- But she is mad for a Husband,
and he is Horn-mad, I think, or they would never make a Match together -- Here they
come.


Enter Sir Sampson, Angelica, with Buckram. Sir Samp. Where is this old
Soothsayer? This Uncle of mine Elect? A ha, Old Foresight, Uncle Foresight,
wish me Joy, Uncle Foresight, double Joy, both as Uncle and Astrologer; here is
a Conjunction that was not foretold in all your Ephemeris -- The brightest Star
in the blue Firmament -- is shot from above, in a Jelly of Love, and so forth;
and I Am Lord of the Ascendant. Odd, you're an Old Fellow, Foresight; Uncle, I
mean, a very Old Fellow, Uncle Foresight; and yet you shall live to dance at my
Wedding; Faith and Troth you shall. Odd, we'll have the Music of the Spheres
for thee, Old Lilly, that we will, and thou shall lead up a Dance in Via Lactea.


Fore. I Am Thunderstruck! You are not married to my Niece?


Sir Samp. Not absolutely married, Uncle; but very near it, within a Kiss of
the matter, as you see.

[Kisses Ang.
Ang. It Is very true indeed, Uncle; I hope you will be my Father, and give me.


Sir Samp. That he shall, or I Will burn his Globes -- Body of me, he shall be thy
Father, I Will make him thy Father, and thou shall make me a Father, and I Will
make thee a Mother, and we'll beget Sons and Daughters enough to put the Weekly
Bills out of Countenance.


Scan. Death and Hell! Where Is Valentine?

[Exit Scan.
Mrs. Fore. This is so surprising --


Sir Samp. How! What does my Aunt say? Surprising, Aunt? Not at all, for a
young Couple to make a Match in Winter? Not at all -- It Is a Plot to undermine
Cold Weather, and destroy that Usurper of a Bed called a Warming-Pan.


Mrs. Fore. I Am glad to hear you have so much Fire in you, Sir Sampson.


Ben. Mess, I fear his Fire's little better than Tinder; may-hap it will only
serve to light up a Match for some Body else. The Young Woman's a Handsome Young
Woman, I cannot deny it: But Father, if I might be your Pilot in this Case, you
should not marry her. It Is just the same thing, as if so be you should Sail so
far as the Straights without Provision.


Sir Samp. Who gave you Authority to speak, Sirrah? To your Element, Fish, be
mute, Fish, and to Sea, rule your Helm, Sirrah, don't direct me.


Ben. Well, well, take you care of your own Helm, or you may not keep your new
Vessel steady.


Sir Samp. Why, you impudent Tarpawlin! Sirrah, do you bring your Fore-castle
Jests upon your Father? But I shall be even with you, I will not give you a Groat.
Mr. Buckram, is the Conveyance so worded, that nothing can possibly descend to
this Scoundrel? I would not so much as have him have the Prospect of an Estate;
though there were no way to come to it, but by the North-East Passage.


Buck. Sir, it is drawn according to your Directions; there is not the least
Cranny of the Law unstopp'd.


Ben. Lawyer, I believe there is many a Cranny and Leak unstopp'd in your
Conscience -- If so be that one had a Pump to your Bosom, I believe we should
discover a foul Hold. They say a Witch will sail in a Sieve -- But I believe
the Devil would not venture abroad o'your Conscience. And that is for you.


Sir Samp. Hold your Tongue, Sirrah. How now, who is there?


Enter Tattle and Frail. Frail. O, Sir, the most unlucky Accident!


Mrs. Fore. What Is the matter?


Tatt. O, the two most unfortunate poor Creatures in the World we are.


Fore. Bless us! How so?


Frail. Ah, Mr. Tattle and I, poor Mr. Tattle and I are -- I cannot speak it out.


Tatt. Nor I -- But poor Mrs. Frail and I are --


Frail. Married.


Mrs. Fore. Married! How?


Tatt. Suddenly -- before we know where we were -- that Villain Jeremy, by the
help of Disguises, tricked us into one another.


Fore. Why, you told me just now, you went hence in haste to be married.


Ang. But I believe Mr. Tattle meant the Favor to me, I thank him.


Tatt. I did, as I hope to be saved, Madam, my Intentions were good -- But this
is the most cruel thing, to marry one does not know how, nor why, nor wherefore
-- The Devil take me if ever I was so much concerned at any thing in my Life.


Ang. It Is very unhappy, if you don't care for one another.


Tatt. The least in the World -- That is for my Part, I speak for my self. Gad,
I never had the least thought of serious Kindness -- I never liked any Body
less in my Life. Poor Woman! Gad I Am sorry for her too; for I have no reason to
hate her neither; but I believe I shall lead her a damned sort of a Life.


Mrs. Fore. He Is better than no Husband at all -- though he is a Coxcomb.


Frail. to her.] Ay, ay, it is well it is no worse -- Nay, for my part I always
despised Mr. Tattle of all things; nothing but his being my Husband could have
made me like him less.


Tatt. Look you there, I thought as much -- Pox on it, I wish we could keep it
secret, why I don't believe any of this Company would speak of it.


Frail. But, my Dear, that is impossible; the Parson and that Rogue Jeremy will
publish it.


Tatt. Ay, my Dear, so they will, as you say.


Ang. O you will agree very well in a little time; Custom will make it easy to
you.


Tatt. Easy! Pox on it, I don't believe I shall Sleep to Night.


Sir Samp. Sleep Quotha! No, why you would not Sleep o'your Wedding Night? I Am
an older Fellow than you, and don't mean to Sleep.


Ben. Why there is another Match now, as tho'f a couple of Privateers were
looking for a Prize, and should fall foul of one another. I Am sorry for the
Young Man with all my Heart. Look you, Friend, if I may advise you, when she is
going, for that you must expect, I have Experience of her, when she is going,
let her go. For no Matrimony is tough enough to hold her, and if she cannot drag
her Anchor along with her, she will break her Cable, I can tell you that. Who Is
here? the Madman?


Enter Valentine dressed, Scandal and Jeremy. Val. No, here is the Fool; and if
occasion be, I Will give it under my Hand.


Sir Samp. How now?


Val. Sir, I Am come to acknowledge my Errors, and ask your Pardon.


Sir Samp. What have you found your Senses at last then? In good time, Sir.


Val. You were abused, Sir, I never was distracted.


Fore. How! Not Mad! Mr. Scandal?


Scan. No really, Sir; I Am his Witness, it was all Counterfeit.


Val. I thought I had Reasons -- But it was a poor Contrivance, the Effect has
shown it such.


Sir Samp. Contrivance, what to cheat me? to cheat your Father! Sirrah, could
you hope to prosper?


Val. Indeed, I thought, Sir, when the Father endeavored to undo the Son, it
was a reasonable return of Nature.


Sir Samp. Very good, Sir -- Mr. Buckram, are you ready? -- Come, Sir, will you
Sign and Seal?


Val. If you please, Sir; but first I would ask this Lady one Question.


Sir Samp. Sir, you must ask me leave first; that Lady, no, Sir; you shall ask
that Lady no Questions, 'till you have asked her Blessing, Sir; that Lady is to
be my Wife.


Val. I have heard as much, Sir; but I would have it from her own Mouth.


Sir Samp. That Is as much as to say I lie, Sir, and you don't believe what I
say.


Val. Pardon me, Sir. But I reflect that I very lately counterfeited Madness; I
don't know but the Frolic may go round.


Sir Samp. Come, Chuck, satisfy him, answer him; -- Come, come, Mr. Buckram,
the Pen and Ink.


Buck. Here it is, Sir, with the Deed, all is ready.

[ Val. goes to Ang.
Ang. It Is true, you have a great while pretended Love to me; nay, what if you
were sincere? Still you must Pardon me, if I think my own Inclinations have a
better Right to dispose of my Person, than yours.


Sir Samp. Are you answered now, Sir?


Val. Yes, Sir.


Sir Samp. Where Is your Plot, Sir? And your Contrivance now, Sir? Will you
Sign, Sir? Come, will you Sign and Seal?


Val. With all my Heart, Sir.


Scan. 'Sdeath, you are not Mad indeed, to ruin your self?


Val. I have been disappointed of my only Hope; and he that loses Hope may part
with any thing. I never valued Fortune, but as it was subservient to my
Pleasure; and my only Pleasure was to please this Lady: I have made many vain
Attemps, and find at last that nothing but my Ruin can effect it: Which, for
that Reason, I will Sign to -- Give me the Paper.


Ang. Generous Valentine!


Buck. Here is the Deed, Sir.


Val. But where is the Bond, by which I am obliged to Sign this?


Buck. Sir Sampson, you have it.


Ang. No, I have it; and I Will use it, as I would every thing that is an Enemy
to Valentine.

[Tears the Paper.
Sir Samp. How now!


Val. Ha!


Ang. Had I the World to give you, it could not make me worthy of so generous
and faithful a Passion: Here Is my Hand, my Heart was always yours, and
struggled very hard to make this utmost Trial of your Virtue. [To Val.


Val. Between Pleasure and Amazement I am lost -- But on my Knees I take the
Blessing.


Sir Samp. Oons, what is the meaning of this?


Ben. Mess here is the Wind changed again. Father, you and I may make a Voyage
together now.


Ang. Well, Sir Sampson, since I have played you a Trick, I Will advise you, how
you may avoid such another. Learn to be a good Father, or you will never get a
second Wife. I always loved your Son, and hated your unforgiving Nature. I was
resolved to try him to the utmost; I have tried you too, and know you both. You
have not more Faults than he has Virtues; and it is hardly more Pleasure to me,
that I can make him and my self happy, than that I can punish you.


Val. If my Happiness could receive Addition, this kind Surprise would make it
double.


Sir Samp. Oons you're a Crocodile.


Fore. Really, Sir Sampson, this is a sudden Eclipse --


Sir Samp. You're an illiterate Fool, and I Am another, and the Stars are Liars;
and if I had Breath enough, I Would curse them and you, my self and every Body --
Oons, Cully'd, Bubbl'd, Jilted, Woman-bobb'd at last, I have not Patience.

[Exit Sir Samp.
Tatt. If the Gentleman is in this Disorder for want of a Wife, I can spare him
mine. Oh, are you there, Sir? I Am indebted to you for my Happiness. [To Jere.


Jere. Sir, I ask you Ten Thousand Pardons, 'twas an errant Mistake -- You see,
Sir, my Master was never mad, nor any thing like it -- Then how could it be
otherwise?


Val. Tattle, I thank you; you would have interposed between me and Heaven, but
Providence laid Purgatory in your way -- You have but Justice.


Scan. I hear the Fiddles that Sir Sampson provided for his own Wedding;
methinks it is pity they should not be employed when the Match is so much
mended. Valentine, though it be Morning, we may have a Dance.


Val. Any thing, my Friend, every thing that looks like Joy and Transport.


Scan. Call 'em, Jeremy.


Ang. I have done dissembling now, Valentine; and if that Coldness which I have
always worn before you, should turn to an extreme Fondness, you must not
suspect it.


Val. I Will prevent that Suspicion -- For I intend to dote on at that immoderate
rate, that your Fondness shall never distinguish it self enough to be taken
notice of. If ever you seem to love too much, it must be only when I cannot love
enough.


Ang. Have a care of Promises: You know you are apt to run more in Debt than
you are able to pay.


Val. Therefore I yield my Body as your Prisoner, and make your best on it.


Scan. The Music stays for you.

[Dance.
Scan. Well, Madam, you have done Exemplary Justice, in punishing an inhuman
Father, and rewarding a faithful Lover: But there is a third good Work, which
I, in particular, must thank you for; I was an Infidel to your Sex, and you
have converted me -- For now I am convinced that all Women are not like
Fortune, blind in bestowing Favors, either to those who do not merit, or who
do not want 'em.


Ang. It Is an unreasonable Accusation, that you lay upon our Sex: You tax us
with Injustice, only to cover your own want of Merit. You would all have the
Reward of Love, but few have the C^^stancy to stay 'till it becomes your due.
Men are generally Hypocrites and Infidels, they pretend to Worship, but have
neither Zeal nor Faith: How few, like Valentine, would perserve even unto
Martyrdom, and sacrifice their Interest to their Constancy! In admi^ing me, you
misplace the Novelty.

The Miracle to Day is, that we find
A Lover true: Not that a Woman's kind.
[Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.

