AN ESSAY ON HUMANITY: OR A VIEW OF ABUSES IN HOSPITALS. WITH A PLAN for
CORRECTING them.

By WILLIAM NOLAN.

To sooth the hapless plaints of human woe,
And purge the tainted fount from whence they flow;
To bring to sinking nature sweet relief,
And wipe the tear from unrelenting grief;
To heal the body and instruct the mind,
Are the great works which dignify mankind.
LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and Sold by J. MURRAY, No. 32, in
Fleet Street. 1786.

[Price One Shilling.]

TO JOHN MACNAMARA, Esquire; MEMBER of PARLIAMENT for the City of Leicester.
SIR,
I HOPE you will not be offended at the liberty I take in recommending the
following Work to your protection -- And I am the rather confirmed in this hope
as well from its Name, An Essay on Humanity, as its object, so virtually
corresponding with such name. --

It has been remarked of Authors, that their writings were the justest
description of their dispositions, and I think the Observation may with great
propriety be extended to their Patrons; for, in the constitution of human
concerns, I believe there has seldom a work been inscribed to a patron, the
qualities of whose mind, or dispositions of whose heart, did not bear a
congenial relationship to the subject treated of. The Gentleman, which I now
have the honor and happiness to address, is a living example of the justice of
this observation, whose private life is one uniform exertion of the diffusive
virtues of generosity and benevolence. It is upon this expanded principle, Sir,
that I ground my hopes of your indulgence in patronizing -- An Essay on
Humanity, and which, by a species of relative attraction, you have drawn to
seek shelter under your fostering protection.

I must here restrain the effusions of a grateful mind, lest malignity might
construe the genuine language of heartfelt gratitude into unworthy adulation
-- which I am perfectly confident, you are as much averse to receive as I am to
offer: -- Justice, however, demands this public declaration, that whatever
benefit (which I hope will not be inconsiderable) may hereafter result to
society from the present Performance, will be, principally, attributable to you
in consequence of your liberality to the author. --

I have the honor to be, SIR, With all becoming respect, Your most devoted And
most obedient humble servant, WM. NOLAN.
St. Catherine's-court, near the Tower, July 9, 1786.
To the PUBLIC.
AS the institution of public charities is universally applauded, so their
abuse should be universally condemned: to correct, therefore a public evil of
this tendency is the object of the following sheets.

The nation is loud in its praises on the benevolence of the Humane Society,
instituted for the recovery of persons apparently dead; and certainly praise
could never be more judiciously bestowed nor more justly merited. As a grateful
individual of society, it claims my particular veneration: and as the plan
which I have recommended here, is projected upon the same principles of
indiscriminate benevolence, I fondly anticipate a portion of the public
approbation for attempting to promote a public good.

The Humane Society may in the exercise of ten experiments be successful
perhaps but in one, their exertions are nevertheless laudable: but the
institution of a Humane Committee (which I have in the course of this Essay
recommended to be appointed in hospitals) may exercise the functions, annexed
to it with greater probability of success, as, perhaps, that in ten attempts to
restore health and prolong life, one will not miscarry. As therefore the object
of the Humane Society is to rescue from premature death our fellow creatures,
surely that institution formed upon similar principles of universal benevolence
and which has in its comprehension the probability of saving Ten for one of the
human race, must be allowed a decided superiority, and consequently command a
proportionate earnestness in its being established into a system of permanency.

I am well apprized, that imputations adduced against public institutions, or
public characters, are generally supposed to "take their rise in envy or
disappointment, and not from any disinterested or public spirited motives." How
far the degeneracy of human-nature will justify such an illiberal charge, it is
not for me here to investigate, therefore shall not attempt to refute the
injustice, or acknowledge the propriety of it: nevertheless I think it
absolutely necessary thus publicly to declare, that such motives have not the
least influence, either immediate or remote, in the present undertaking, and
that however singular the licentiousness of the times may make the declaration
appear, I profess myself a volunteer in the cause of humanity only.

Upon this principle it will not be esteemed presumptious to hope, that this
pamphlet will obtain a dispassionate investigation from the benevolent
governors and subscribers to the different hospitals in and about London, and
also a candid examination of its utility from a discerning, generous, and
impartial public, whose judgment I hope, in this respect, will be directed by
the magnitude of the object recommended by it, and for whose benefit it is
avowedly written.

I also think it necessary to declare, that I was not influenced by any general
disapprobation I did or do entertain of the profession of physic or surgery, or
against any particular professor of those half-divine arts; on the contrary, it
has ever been my opinion, that benevolent and intelligent physicians and
surgeons, were characters that gave additional dignity to human nature: but the
gentlemen of the faculty themselves will be my witnesses, when I say that there
are several characters in the profession who do not come strictly under this
venerated denomination; and in whose hands a man's life would be in as much
danger, as his property in those of an unprincipled pettifogging attorney.

The sarcasms so liberally thrown out against both professions, are the
greatest pannigerycks upon the respectable part of the professors. -- It is
only for ignorance, insensibility and injustice, to smart under the rod of
satirical chastisement, intelligence, humanity and integrity will be ever above
its reach.

That want of literary merit which must ever distinguish maiden productions
(and which is so very conspicuous in the following Essay) will I hope in some
measure be overlooked by the critic eye of classical accuracy, in consideration
of the benignity of its intention; for though my capacity in pourtraying this
subject in the affecting colors it would admit of, is inferior to many, yet,
in a benevolent anxiety for its happy accomplishment, I am inferior to none: --
For if ever I could entertain so inordinate a wish, as to be possessed of the
captivating, pathetic, and persuasive eloquence of Mr. Burke, it would be, that
I might (like him) with more success plead the cause of humanity.

The ancient Romans, the most unsullied model of human perfection which history
presents us with, carried their love of humanity to so exalted a pitch, that
they decreed the particular honor of a civic crown to every individual who
should save the life of one citizen. This was a generous incitement, -- an
honorable stimulative to the virtues of humanity and benevolence! And as the
British nation is the only living copy on the face of nature of so illustrious
an original, I hope that my feeble endeavors, which are levelled at the
preservation of the lives of thousands of my fellow-citizens and
fellow creatures (in future) will entitle me to the more envied distinction --
their approbation. And though I should not be so happy as to gain this
flattering reward -- yet I shall not relax my perseverence in endeavoring to
deserve it, by availing myself of every opportunity of discharging the
benevolent duties of A CITIZEN OF THE WORLD.

AN ESSAY ON HUMANITY, etc.
IT is no less a compliment to the liberality and wisdom, than to the humanity
of Great Britain, that it takes precedence of all other states in Europe for
the number, variety, and affluence of its charitable institutions. The large
voluntary subscriptions in supporting hospitals for every species of calamity,
entailed on human nature, excite sentiments of the most exalted sensibility in
the feeling breast. -- All benevolent descriptions of mankind must
sympathetically partake of blessings thus indiscriminately diffused. And though
our feelings may be wounded, either by the sight or recital of the afflictions
inseparable from the constitution of human nature, yet we are in a great
measure consoled by the reflection, that these mansions of hospitality are
erected for their alleviation. -- The great mass of mankind ever has been, and
ever will be, formed of two component parts, good and bad. -- The one ever
solicitous to promote the happiness of their fellow creatures; the other to
counteract these laudable efforts. This is a truth so well established by the
experience of successive ages, that a further commentation on it here, might be
justly considered an impertinent prolixity. I am led to this reflection from
the wanton abuse which is known but too generally to prevail in the above
mentioned god-like institutions. -- Where avarice and insensibility in the
officers and servants (not to say neglect in the physicians and surgeons)
belonging to these establishments frequently prevent the unhappy patients from
receiving that consolation in them that the nature of their malady demands, and
which was the primitive object of their pious and humane founders. To correct
these enormities is the avowed object of the present work, and success in the
undertaking, will be to me the most acceptable reward of my labor. It will
ever be admitted by the advocates for humanity, that the greater the distress
of the object, the greater his recommendation to the care of philanthropy; but
some instances, which I shall hereafter mention, seem to confirm, that they
maintain a contrary opinion in hospitals; and that the greater the distress of
an object, soliciting relief there, the greater the difficulty of removing it
should seem necessary. -- The following circumstance (which may be depended
upon as authentic) I shall mention, as well for its singular cruelty, as a
confirmation of the imputation just mentioned Curiosity led me to St.
Bartholomew's hospital on a taking-in-day, as it is termed) when a patient was
admitted into the ward where I was; and after passing through the
extra-formalities necessary for such admission, he was introduced by one of the
beadles to the sister of the ward, who at first received him with that affected
cordiality and seeming tenderness which pecuniary expectations make low minds
assume; after which she asked him, -- "Had he got his wardage?" -- The unhappy
man said, "He had no money -- That the last sixpence he had in the world he
gave to the beadle who showed him into the ward." The tender hearted sister on
this information flew into the most outrageous passion, and in an imperious
elevation of voice, in which were blended insolence, ignorance, and barbarity,
demanded, "How he dare come there without it? Did he not know it was customary?
and that it was her due or perquisite?" -- with a number of other
interrogatories equally divested of decency, as humanity. The trembling patient
modestly replied, He believed it might be customary; but alleged his inability
as his only reason for noncompliance to it. This affecting confession, so far
from softening the heart of the inexorable sister, exasperated her still more,
in so much, that she absolutely insisted on his turning out of the ward
immediately, and actually proceeded to push him out: shocked at such unexampled
inhumanity, I arrested her in the execution of her unfeeling purpose. -- "Hold,
monster, said I, here is your wardage, and may the gin you procure for it, rid
human nature of so great a reproach to it!" This inveterate imprecation I could
not restrain, in the moment of my indignant resentment and detestation, for
such unparrallelled insensibility of soul!

I shall leave the mind of sensibility to make its native sympathetic comment
on unfortunate wretches in the situation above described, and shall only
observe, that such inhumanity is in diametric opposition to the very name and
nature of an hospital; and shows a lamentable degeneracy of the institution.

This perquisite of wardage operates variously to the disadvantage of patients;
-- It makes the sister look with the eye of anxiety on the patient in all the
progressive situations and stages of his cure; not from a humane concern for
the restoration of his health, but with an avaricious expectation of having him
discharged, as she is to get 3s. from the person whom accident or decease makes
his successor; and as, perhaps, she has no other bed in her ward to accommodate
such casual successor with, but that occupied by some half-cured patient. It is
therefore very evident, that the number of cures effected in the ward committed
to her humane superintendance, is not so much the object of her solicitude, as
the number of patients admitted into it, as she has 3s. for each. It is very
reasonable to infer, from this circumstance that her tenderness will not be
much exerted toward the patients: the very reverse is justly to be
apprehended, as she must know from experience, that moroseness and brutality
might induce some to quit the hospital before their cures were accomplished,
though tenderness and humanity would be an additional inducement to them to
stay for that very desirable purpose, to be accomplished.

Another infamous practice of these wretches, to multiply their perquisites, is
to prefer complaints to the steward against the unhappy patients; for if in the
acuteness of their pains they are guilty of the least vehement expression, they
are immediately represented to the steward as intollerably noisy and
troublesome. Thus for not having the constancy to maintain an equality of
temper in the extremity of pain, they are painted out as intolerable and for no
other human reason, than that perhaps their agonies are so! and a dismission
soon after, notwithstanding any pathetic remonstrance to the contrary, is
frequently the consequence.

This despotic act of power in the Lord Steward is faithfully copied by the
Lady Matron in her department, with this difference only, that the delicacy of
the complaints, which females frequently labor under, will not dispense with
so immediate a dismission, but in any circumstances where they will, her
plenitude of arbitrary authority will be as severely, and as instantaneously
exercised; and for the same iniquitous reason already mentioned.

Is it not a melancholy consideration, that the health, or perhaps the life, a
useful member of society should thus fall a facrifice either to the avarice of
the sister, or the captice of the steward? and it amounts to more than a
presumption, that this is frequently the case, when patients are turned out of
the hospital before their cures are effected. The disorder, upon the point,
perhaps, of being conquered by the regimen prescribed and followed, when the
process of medicinal application is interrupted, returns to its wonted
strength, at a time that the body is considerably exhausted by the abstinence
imposed by regimen: when a conflict between recruited disease, and harrassed
nature ensues, which must necessarily terminate in human dissolution.

The number of evils arising from this pernicious perquisite of wardage, are as
obvious as they are distressing to the poor afflicted part of the community; it
is therefore hoped, the governors and subscribers to hospitals will apply a
radical cure to the evil, by totally suppressing it, and substitute in its room
an additional equivalent of salary to the sisters and nurses; for, to the
eternal reproach of human nature, I must own, that while the degraded principle
or passion of self-interest, stands in opposition to the discharge of any duty,
there will be found very few, especially in the inferior orders of mankind, who
will not make that duty subservient to their interest, however important to
society the faithful discharge of such a trust may be! And indeed I may venture
to affirm, that the ills and calamities ideally ascribed to Pandora's box, will
be realized by the continuance of this, with other prohibitions on humanity,
which I shall hereafter mention. How many are the unfortunate objects, who from
having large families, painful illness, or a long want of employment, are in
actual want of subsistence, it is not therefore strange, that under the
pressure of any, or all of these calamities, they should want a few shillings;
but it is very strange indeed, that this want should be the foundation on which
the want of being cured is built, as they can not get into the hospital without
it, as has been already sufficiently demonstrated? This illustrates and
explains that negative text in the scripture, so remarkable for its obscurity,
"And from those that have nothing, even that which they have will be taken from
them." -- It applies immediately to the peculiarly unfortunate wretches I have
been just describing -- having nothing but hope, and even that is taken away
from them by this ill-timed rejection of their double claim to compassion.

It is also customary (nay indeed it is indispensibly necessary, in order to be
admitted into the hospitals) for the patient to bring two clean shirts with him
besides the shirt he wears, which must be clean also; to the propriety,
decency, and utility of this regulation, I very readily subscribe, where the
circumstances of the patient will admit of a conformity to it. I admit it is
also a co-operative assistance in the restoration and preservation of health in
the course of medical application -- for as filth is as obnox ous to health as
to sense so is cleanliness as useful to the one as agreeable to the other. But
do all these reasons united justify the cruelty of rejecting an unhappy patient
for non-conformance to this hospital mandate, especially when unrelenting
necessity is the cause? Will any good, intended to be promoted by it,
counterbalance the evil promiscuously entailed on every unhappy wretch thus
rejected? No -- I am confident it will not! Let us for a moment enter into the
thoughts of the unhappy creature thus disappointed. -- All his less acute
sorrows, which before lay in a state of torpitude, are now new-edged by this
recent aggravation of his calamities! His poverty, his hapless helpless
irremediable poverty he justly considers as the cause of this consummation of
human woe! his mind is alternately torn with the passions of grief and
despondence, when he sees even the probability extinguished of having his
health re-established!

Though the above is a melancholy, yet it is a true picture of the human mind
bending under the complicated lead of grief, poverty, and pain. -- Therefore,
however commendable it may be, to relieve the misfortunes of our fellow
creatures, it is much more so to prevent them, by the timely exertions of
wisdom and liberality in their behalf. For accomplishing so meritorious a
purpose, I would recommend it to the governors, etc. to have half a dozen or a
dozen of coarse cloth shirts in each ward, and that the sisters and nurses
might be ordered to accommodate such unfortunate patients as above described,
in such manner as their respective necessities should demand. The object of
additional expense on this occasion would be very inconsiderable, but when put
in competition with the blessings resulting to individuals, and to society at
large from it, it would entirely vanish. This indulgence not to be extended to
any but those whose necessities alone should entitle them to it. How many
useful members of society, by the extension of this well timed benevolence,
would be enabled to resume a life of honorable industry, who might, through
the want of this means of seeking to recover their health, become an
encumbrance to society, as would also their relatives, whose immediate
subsistence was drawn from the exercise of their trade?

WORKHOUSE PATIENTS.
It frequently happens, that parish patients are brought to Hospitals, to the
very great prejudice of the patients who are before warded in them, as these
parish patients have a distinction paid them very injurious to the convenience,
and sometimes to the health of those other patients, who are removed out of
their beds, though they should be even in the extremity of a fever, to make
room for the parish patients; and only for the pitiful consideration of
fourpence a day! which the parish allows in such cases; and which becomes the
perquisite of the servants belonging to the hospitals. This is a barefaced
partiality, and a flagrant outrage on the rights of humanity, and consequently
calls loudly for redress.

The FOOD for PATIENTS.
With respect to the quality and quantity of food appointed for the use of the
patients, it appears to me, in a general sense, tolerably well calculated to
answer the ends proposed by it; but notwithstanding, some alterations and
additions might be made in some particular cases, exclusive of the hospital
allowance, especially to such patients as are afflicted no otherways than by
wounds or sores of little or no malignity, and whose constitutions are not
debilitated through antecedent excess. An abstinence from a sufficiency of
food, in a constitution thus circumstanced, lays the foundation of several
disorders -- as belchings, windy cholics, dizziness in the head, etc. etc. and
in juvenile constitutions it is the undoubted forerunner of a consumption -- a
line of distinction should be therefore accurately drawn between those who,
from the nature and malignity of their complaints, can not eat so much as the
hospital allowance, and those who from contrary reasons could eat more, without
endangering their health, or retarding their cure. Such patients should by all
means have an additional allowance, lest the restraining them in this
particular should be productive of the unhappy consequences above
particularized.

Though this increase of food would incur a small additional expense, yet it
would be a temporary one, and in its consequences would prove a saving. As this
assertion has the mysterious appearance of a paradox, I solve it thus -- Many
patients, of the description now in question, contract those windy consumptive
complaints when in the hospital for want of a sufficiency of food, who are
obliged to go back there again for their cure, and perhaps stay there until
they become infinitely more expensive, than by giving them the necessary
addition of nourishment above mentioned, the first time they were in the
hospital.

Security to bury Patients who die in the Hospital, or to lodge a Deposit equal
to the Expense that such Interment may amount to.
THIS regulation appears to me fraught with cruelty and inhumanity; as it is
undoubtedly the cause of several of the most unhappy of our fellow creatures
breathing their last in the poor and obscure environs of this extensive
metropolis!

Every patient is (according to this law or regulation) obliged to find one or
two housekeepers, to subscribe to an undertaking to bury him, in case he dies
in the hospital; and unless he can procure such responsibility, or advance a
stipulated deposit himself, to defray the incidental expense, whatever may be
his claim to humanity, from the complicated wretchedness of his condition, he
is utterly precluded admission. The degrading vice of self-interest, which in a
great measure pervades all descriptions of mankind, will immediately point out
the insurmountable difficulties which will attend -- a friendless -- sickly --
and pennyless individual in procuring such responsibility! But this is not the
only instance which shows a manifest perversion of the intention of those
temples of compassion! -- Though it is enough to show, that at present the
internal as well as external regulations of them are only directed to the
relief of such as are in part distressed, those that are wholly so, they seem
to think, should remain so -- as is sufficiently evinced in the instance now
under consideration! Why should not this inexorable law be dispensed with, in
cases where there is not the least human likelihood of the patient's dying in
the hospital? And in cases where such a fatality may with justice be
apprehended -- is not (though shocking to humanity to relate) the wretched
objects body a sufficient forfeiture for this temporary mitigation of the
calamities which terminate with life!

PHYSICIANS and SURGEONS.
Having now pointed out some of the Enormities of the Servants, I shall take
the Liberty of making some Observations on the Conduct of the Gentlemen
belonging to the Hospitals.
Immediately antecedent to a patient's discharge from the hospital, he passes
through a very ridiculous unnecessary formality: -- He is called into a room
where the Physicians and Surgeons attend, and asked -- If he has any complaint
against the sisters or nurses, etc. In the name of common sense I would ask --
admitting he had -- Of what consequence would it, or could it be, to say so
then? What advantage would result to him, to tell the gentlemen, That he was
not treated with the tenderness he expected? and which from the intention, as
well as constitution of the charity, should be shown him? or that the peculiar
circumstances of his complaint demanded: -- Of what utility could it possibly
be to him, just at the moment he was to be discharged, to say, he was not
tenderly or carefully nursed. Such information now, would, like a malicious
accusation, especially when it could not have for its object the redress of
such grievances, as to himself! Had these questions been proposed to him during
his residence in the hospital, for instance (the first week after his
admission) the fear of incurring the displeasure of the gentlemen might exact
that tenderness from the sisters and nurses, which the fear of violating the
obligations of humanity could no. This therefore I take to be an after-piece of
attention, and consequently nugatory and unavailing: for if any thing can equal
its absurdity, it is its palpable inutility.

Without intending the least disparagement to the respectibility of their
profession, or the integrity of their principles, I would earnestly recommend
to these gentlemen a more humane regard to the feelings of their unhappy
patients. I have frequently heard, and beheld with astonishment, gentlemen who
arrived to the highest pitch of eminence in their profession, use exceeding
harsh language and apparently unfeeling treatment to their patients, when in
the most agitating mental anxiety, and under the most excruciating corporeal
pain. This is a conduct which is by no means reconcilable to the dignity of
the gentleman, the sensibility of the man, or the profession of a surgeon.
People of this assumed or natural austerity of manners, should reflect, that
there are some constitutions so delicately constructed by nature, that though
they have arrived to maturity in years, are but infants in the great virtues of
patience and resignation; and consequently require the same cordiality and
affability in their treatment.

Another prevailing practice in an hospital, and which, to excite general
indignation, needs only to be mentioned, is, That if a Surgeon's patient has
the misfortune to have a leg or an arm dangerously afflicted, amputation is
immediately proposed, without any previous consultation, whether a possibility
exists of effecting a cure, without having recourse to this desperate
alternative! Surely in a matter of such magnitude to human nature, as the
mutilation or dissolution (which frequently follows it) of one of our species,
it merits the utmost professional deliberation, before such unrelenting
resolutions are decidedly adopted. -- For, exclusive of the horrible fears that
anticipation unavoidably excites in the patient's mind, preparatory to
amputation, the excrutiating pain of the operation must be indescribeably
great! Why then wantonly or incautiously condemn a fellow creature to such
intolerable pains of mind and body, if there are any possible human means to
avoid it!

But long experience and impartial observation suggest to me a consideration,
which at the same time that it accounts for this inhuman premature propensity
to amputation, reflects very little honor on the principles of the chirurgical
tribe, which is, -- That experiments of this desperate nature are made on the
POOR, that they may be practiced with more probability of success on the RICH.
Though this is a harsh imputation, yet I conscientiously believe it to be true
in various instances; but, for the honor of human nature, I hope there are a
number of exceptions to it.

Indeed I am confident to assert, and ready to prove, that in many instances,
there is not that attention paid to hospital patients that there ought to be;
for, unless some singular affliction attracts the attention of the gentlemen,
the patients frequently languish under common complaints with as little
prospect of redress in the hospital, as out.

In order to the substantiating what is alleged above relating to amputation,
I shall recite the following instance, which came under my own immediate
knowledge.

Some few years ago there was a patient in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, who
labored under a violent inflammation in his left arm: a certain great
professional character, whose amputating abilities are as universally known as
admired, ordered amputation immediately on the first sight of the arm, without
ever consulting the patient, or giving himself a moment's time to enquire into
his habit of body, or disposition of mind, on so momentous an event. The man
anticipated his advice from his general character, but absolutely refused to
comply with it, very rationally considering, that if a course of medicine was
prescribed, for the purpose of correcting and purifying the blood, it would
probably abate the inflammation, and on that event's taking place, external
applications might operate more effectually. This reasonable expectation was
soon afterward justified, for in less than the short space of a month, the
patient was discharged from the hospital with his arm perfectly healed! a
living monument of the cruelty and justice of having recourse to amputation,
unless in cases where the unequivocal symptoms of mortification make it
indispensibly necessary. I have every reason to apprehend the instances of such
cruel inattention are not few, nor the still more cruel consequences with which
they are attended; nor can the circumstance of this unrelenting practice, not
being more generally known, in the least invalidate the probability of those
humane apprehensions being just, as can be very rationally inferred from the
case just mentioned.

Respecting the Clergyman who attends the Hospital.
Having now represented what bodily inconveniences patients labor under, I
shall proceed to examine the inattention shown to the still more exalted and
important concern, their souls.

Ingratitude, it is justly observed, is a crime of Syrian dye; but alas! it is
a crime from which very few of the human race can plead an exemption;
particularly to that supreme Being whose mercies to us demand our most animated
gratitude! while in the meridian of health and prosperity we neglect those
great duties we ought to perform, and which, when descended under the clouded
horizon of sickness and adversity, we cannot perform. It is in this state the
mind resumes its salutary attribute of reflection -- It is then she would wish,
by a life of prudence and penance in future, to ward off calamities which
antecedent intemperance or impiety make her dread for the present, both as to
body and soul! When the human mind is in this susceptible disposition, a wise
and humane clergyman should avail himself of its situation (as in it we are
more inclined to hear and follow good advice than at any other time) by
visiting patients in such situations, and admonishing them to refrain from a
repetition of those irregularities, which perhaps laid the foundation of their
present sickness; and that such sickness was the consequent punishment, of
their criminal neglect of the performance of their religious duty:" or in any
other pathetic manner, that the love or duty of Christianity might dictate. --
For, as the state of heat, in metallic substances, is the state wherein they
are made capable to assume new or beautiful forms, so the state of affliction
is the state to mould the human mind to every pursuit that is congenial to the
dignity of its nature. But, I am extremely sorry to say, that there is very
little attention paid to the discharge of this indispensible duty in an
hospital; more especially at the time that it is most necessary, toward the
approach of death! -- For, it is truly lamentable to see, how shamefully
negligent in this momentous concern, are the people about an expiring wretch in
an hospital -- to whom custom, joined to innate insensibility, has made it as
indifferent to see a patient leaving the world, as leaving the hospital! This
conduct is not only inhuman, but impious in the highest degree; as at this
awful tremendous moment, desponding fears and infidel doubts find an easy
conquest of a mind, which, though not strengthened by Christian philosophy, is
considerably weakened by disease. This, therefore, is the time to administer to
the exhausted mind the lenient balsam of Christianity, by infusing into the
anxious, trembling, palpitating soul a conviction, a hope, and a belief of its
divine and merciful author's protection in a future state! I would not dwell so
long on this matter, but from an internal conviction, that virtue and good
morals are as often the means of preserving health, as medicine is in restoring
it. A proper method of treating the minds and morals of patients shall be
pointed out hereafter in its place; that is, immediately after suggesting a
plan for the removal or mitigation of all the antecedent bodily inconveniences
alluded to.

The PLAN for Reformation.
Having now shown the neglect and abuse of hospitals, I shall proceed to the
method of correcting them; and in their room to recommend regulations which, if
adopted, will be productive of the most salutary effects, with very little
additional expense to the institutions. For the accomplishment of this
desirable purpose, I would recommend it to the governors, subscribers, etc. to
appoint a committee from amongst themselves, to be called, The Humane
Committee, whose office might be to examine minutely into the arrangement and
treatment of the patients; to discover any neglect or inattention to the cure
of their respective maladies, in order as well to remedy them, as trace out the
source from which such inhuman negligence originates.

This Committee should have a discretionary power from the governors, etc. to
examine, with the most scrupulous attention, the disposition and character of
those who are candidates for any office, internal or external, belonging to
hospitals. In order to have ample satisfaction in this momentous particular, I
would recommend that each candidate should undergo the following, or some
similar examination, viz.

What life did they lead antecedent to this particular period? whether moral or
debauched? religious or profligate?

What capacity in the commerce of society did they fill? whether they
discharged with probity the relative duties annexed to such employment?

And particularly, what was generally reputed to be the natural bent of their
dispofition; whether morose or humane? for, from the man of humanity, the
discharge of all social obligation is as reasonably expected, as their
violation is to be apprehended from a man of a contrary stamp.

If the candidates could undergo a liberal examination of this tendency,
corroborated by some respectable characters of their acquaintance, they might
with propriety be admitted, otherwise not.

This would infallibly annihilate partial recommendation -- the contaminated
source from which various evils flow to the human race -- as there is no line
of discrimination or distinction drawn by it, between the worthy and unworthy,
often bestowing upon ignorance and inhumanity appointments, to which in moral
rectitude genius, us and philanthropy have the justest claim. I am very well
convinced from my observations on human nature in the melancholy stages of
perturbation of spirit, and corporeal pain, that a patient's cure is as much
accelerated by the tenderness and humanity of the nurse, as by the most
obedient conformity to the prescriptions of the doctor; and that to effectuate
a cure in the body, I hold it absolutely necessary to maintain peace in the
mind. It is evident from this, how essential it is to the health of a patient,
to have an affectionate tender nurse; and consequently how necessary the
precaution here recommended for the admission of such -- as also the rejection
of such others, as do not fall under this denomination.

This committee should have a power of suspending any officer or servant
already employed in the hospitals, on preferring and substantiating any charge
of injustice, inattention, or inhumanity against them; and also of substituting
in their room others, who, after examination, should be found possessed of the
qualifications already particularized.

The committee should consist of about eight persons, of which number a
physician and surgeon should always make two. The necessity of adding
professional gentlemen will appear obvious for the following reasons: First.
The patients under a physician may have a very just cause of complaint, and
though the Humane Society might be disposed to remove it, yet from a want of
professional knowledge, they might (through the insinuations of the sisters and
nurses) be induced to believe, that such treatment as the patient received, was
necessary for the correction of his disorder; and that it was the doctor's
express requisition to pursue invariably such and such prescriptions: a
gentleman of the faculty being of the committee, will easily discover, whether
the treatment such patient receives is or was adapted to remove his complaints;
or whether the process prescribed is sanctified by experience, for being
efficacious in removing maladies similar to those under which the patient
labors. -- If not, the report of the physician belonging to the Humane
Committee to the Humane Committee at large, would point out an abuse, which,
for want of this professional investigation, would remain concealed; and which,
in my opinion, would deserve particular reprehension. And if a remonstrance,
from the Humane Committee to such physician, did not immediately produce a
variation in the subsequent treatment of his patients, a report then to be made
to the governors, subscribers, etc. at large, who, on the impartial
confirmation of such dangerous inattention, should prevent a repetition of such
delinquency by the suspension of its author. Secondly, The surgeon, to be added
to the Humane Committee, to have an equal superintending control, and
unlimited privilege of inspection as the doctor, into the surgeons patients,
their maladies and manner of treatment; and also any neglect, incapacity, or
inattention in those gentlemen, whose immediate province it should be to attend
this description of patients, and to make the necessary report as in the case
of the physician.


It is a matter of no consequence to the unhappy patient, who loses his health
for want of due care, whether his misfortune is attributable to the inhumanity
of the nurse, or the inattention or ignorance of his doctor; and here I cannot
avoid observing, that as much from these causes, as from any incurable
obstinacy of his disorder, the patient's dissolution happens. -- Whether abuses
of this magnitude, fraught with consequences the most conspicuously subversive
of the original intention of these institutions, demand the interposition of
the protecting hand of humanity, I leave it to the sensibility of the feeling
mind to determine!

I would not be understood here to make the most distant insinuation, that the
instances are many, where patients suffer through the ignorance of the
physicians or surgeons, and even when they do it is more from negligence than
any professional inability; for if they will not sedulously examine the
patient's complaint, they undoubtedly must be ignorant of it, and consequently
of the most efficacious manner of treating it. An imputation of this species of
ignorance they very frequently and very justly deserve. I think inclination
should cooperate with duty, in expediting the cure of disorders which time
makes -- multiply in malignity -- to the insupportable multiplication of the
unhappy patient's afflictions!

These affecting considerations should be particularly attended to by the
Humane Committee.

With respect to the young gentlemen who walk the hospital for information,
that levity which is almost the inseparable characteristic of youth in any
profession, prevents them from paying that compassionate attention to the
present disorder (which without being radically cured lays the foundation of
the future calamity) of patients, that they so pressingly demand. -- To remedy
this evil, it is indispensibly incumbent on the senior practitioners to
recommend by precept, and enforce by example, the humane attention here
recommended, and a doubt cannot remain of such conduct being circumspectly
copied: it would not only imperceptibly introduce a professional, but also a
humane emulation amongst them, especially when they consider, that humanity
gives the highest polish to their professional character. I must assert with
regret, that at present, the majojority of the young gentlemen who walk our
different hospitals are very little under the dominion of the humane power of
sympathy; for it is no uncommon thing to hear some of them (wrapped up in all the
coxcombical consequence^ of self-admiration) hum an opera tune while an
operation is performing on a fellow creature. To this perhaps it may be
replied, that the frequency of operations and amputations familiarizes them to
such affecting sights, and that there is a professional necessity for a
surgeon's being divested of the feminine weakness of pity, in desperate eases.
To the propriety of this I readily subscribe, so far as courage is necessary to
the performance of those hazardous undertakings; but this admission by no means
implies, that insensibility is a necessary qualification in the constitution of
a surgeon: the contrary, as has been already shown, is the case. He must set
out with very little humanity indeed, who has lost it all before he has
acquired so much knowledge in his profession as will in some sort apologize for
the want of it. But as the consideration of youth makes this matter as much the
object of admonition as reprehension, I would recommend it to those young
gentlemen to consider, that humanity will always stamp a dignity on the
profession, which moroseness will rob it of; and that in their endeavors to
become surgeons, they should never forget -- that they are men -- and gentlemen
-- appellations, to which a perseverance in an unfeeling conduct of this kind,
will utterly exclude them from having the least pretentions.

The Humane Committee should visit the hospital every week, that is, a
physician and three other members, one week; and a surgeon and three other
members, the next; and so on alternately: but if the intervention of any
unexpected or extraordinary circumstance made it necessary, according as each
division informed the other, the whole to attend.

That in the course of these joint examinations, they should make a report to
the governors or subscribers, etc. at their general meetings of every thing,
which in the course of such enquiry, presented itself to them as a proper
object of reformation or correction, which must be collected principally from
the state and information of the patients -- such as inattention, severity, or
partiality, or any other inconvenience arising to the patients by omission or
commission, from the servants, nurses, etc. either by a censurable neglect, or
a wanton violation of the sacred obligations of the institution.

It will probably be objected here, by some critic who has more imaginary
wisdom than real humanity, that giving a power of so extensive a latitude to
one physician and one surgeon, as to superintend the practice and conduct of
all the physicians and surgeons attending each respective hospital, where this
regulation should be established, would multiply the evil it was calculated to
remove, by being productive of professional alteration. But this objection will
be entirely obviated, when it is considered, that the physician and surgeon
belonging to the Humane Committee being inverted with no further authority,
than to see that the patients are not neglected in their respective
professional department, their office consequently cannot be considered as a
tribunal to bring characters of well established abilities in their profession,
to the bar of examination. Their abilities are not the subject or object of the
committee's enquiry: it is the impartial, attentive and humane exercise of
those abilities which will fall under their investigation. And as the idea of
their superior abilities is generally and I think justly acquiesced in, so the
exercise of them in the line of their dute should be enforced. Merit, it is
true, is the principal recommendation to any public employment whatever; but it
is not the only one, for next to the indispensible necessity of knowing any
public professional duty is that of saithfully performing it. But care should
be always taken in accurately drawing a line of distinction between accidental
and intentional guilt. That is, acting contrary to the spirit of the
institution from ignorance, or from a depravity of sentiment. It will in such
cases be in the discretion of the Committee to proportion the punishment to the
crime.

This committee should be perpetual, as well to prevent future, as to correct
present abuses. It should be chosen annually, or quarterly, etc. as the wisdom
of the governors should point out, or as the necessity of the patients might
demand. A salary to be appointed to the use of the physician and surgeon,
bearing proper proportion to their merit, and the fidelity with which they
would be found to discharge the humane appointment they should be now called to.

Wisdom and experience have found it necessary in discharging the great
commercial constitutional duties of the state, to institute reciprocal checques
in the different departments of it -- and to this institution is principally
owing the fidelity with which these important trusts are discharged. The rule
will immediately apply to the discharge of the offices of humanity in
hospitals, -- and surely the one is not less important than the other --
consequently demands an equal vigilance in its administration.

I would have the Humane Committee see that the clergyman should visit the
hospital every day -- preparing those that are likely to die, for so tremendous
a change, and admonishing those that are likely to live, to pursue the paths of
virtue, as the most likely means of preserving future health, and procuring
happiness -- for it is an indelible reproach to Christianity, the general
neglect of this great -- this important consideration at present. And as
divines in general are not remarkable for doing more than their duty, I would
see that in the present case they should not do ^^ less. And that this
additional labor should not militate against their interest, they should have
an additional salary for performing it. This would make their duty their
interest. -- and I believe (without intending any offense to the cloth) I may
say would be one reason why they would perform such duty with alacrity.

Observations to enforce the foregoing Motives of Reform.
Though the internal regulations of hospitals may vary in particulars, yet
their general object is the same. They are all appropriated to some benevolent
purpose or other -- for the relief of human misery, in whatever variety of
shapes it may assume, and to comfort the comfortless. As this is a fact
universally known, what I write respecting one applies to all. I therefore most
pathetically recommend a general enquiry to be made into the abuses here
complained of -- and sincerely wish, that a general reformation may be the
consequence. There cannot be a more ample field for the exercise of general
benevolence than such an investigation -- and if entered upon with the spirit
of unanimity, must rescue the national character from the illiberal, though
unjust imputation of foreigners, on the intolerable abuse of our public
charities, who say, "That there are very few monuments of our humanity here
besides stone!"

I have chalked out the foregoing line for accomplishing this much-to
be-wished-for reformation, without being the least tenacious, whether the plan
I have delineated will be literally pursued or not. To the superior wisdom of
the governors, etc. I implicitly submit my humble efforts, in recommending a
better regulation in our hospitals than at present characterizes them, and if
the moae I have suggested does not meet their approbation, as to manner, I have
the pleasure to anticipate it will be adopted as to matter. It is indifferent
to me what means are pursued so the end is obtained. An effectual reformation
of the abuses here alluded to, was my motive in taking up my pen, and I have a
secret pleasure in hoping, that the cooperation of the governors, etc. will
bring, to a benevolent conclusion, what I had the good fortune to begin, not
doubting, but their humanity will adopt the hint, and their wisdom point out
the most effectual means of carrying it into execution.

The French nation (though distinguished for peculiar levity and national
volatility) are by no means divested of the exalted feelings of humanity. Their
hospitals are many, and under excellent regulations, particularly since a
reformation of the nature here recommended has taken place there, which brought
to light a number of enormities that otherwise would have lain covered in the
oblivion of venality. But there is not so extensive a field for abuse in their
charities as in ours -- as in point of wealth our hospitals have a decided
superiority -- and this advantage, which could be converted to the additional
accommodation of these receptacles of affliction, is one of the sources from
whence the majority of the evils here complained of flow -- for, extensive
wealth will ever give birth to peculation, and peculation to infidelity, in the
discharge of lucrative trusts. --

As it must be admitted, that we frequently copy the fashionable absurdities of
our Gallic neighbors, let us convince them and the world, that we are also
capable of imitating their virtues, by adopting a plan similar to that they
have pursued, for correcting the flagrant abuses committed in the
administration of our public charities: a work, which whoever sets on foot,
that will redound no less to their immortal honor, than the endowments of
these hospitals do to their godlike founders, and will, in conjunction with
such dignified names, hand theirs down to the latest posterity, with the
veneration and respect, that disinterestedness and humanity will ever receive
from a sensible and generous people.

Humanity is the most distinguishing characteristic of human perfection -- any
man divested of it, should be divested of all the social privileges of a
rational being. It is in man, what mercy is in the gracious author of our
existence! and the greatest possible degree of excellence our nature
(considering its inseparable imperfections) is capable of arriving at, is to be
humane -- It comprehends every social obligation that unites man to man.
Religion is but a name, and man a two legged monster without it. As humanity is
therefore the unadulterated religion of nature, I would wish to impress this
consequential truth on the minds of mankind; THAT AN EXTERNAL CONFORMITY TO
GOSPEL INJUNCTIONS, CAN NEVER BE ACCEPTABLE TO GOD, UNACCOMPANIED BY INTERNAL
MOTIVES OF HUMANITY, AND THE ACTUAL DISCHARGE OF ITS OBLIGATIONS.

The love of God is religion; the love of man, humanity. So that it is evident
it is no less a Christian duty, "To love God above all things, than our
neighbors as ourselves." -- The latter duty, left unperformed, makes the
pretentions to the former as absurd as impious. How necessary therefore to
recommend and enforce this secondary obligation of mankind! especially as our
own happiness is so immediately connected with the discharge of this benevolent
duty -- as we have the most unequivocal assurance, from the divine author of
our redemption, that if we act with humanity toward our distressed brethren,
he will act with mercy toward us; that is, if we show benevolence, we shall
find mercy. This is a consideration of the greatest magnitude that can possibly
attract the attention. or exercise the rational faculties of man! and
consequently the most useful to be preached and practiced. This is the religion
which every man should openly profess and inwardly believe; and in which no man
need be ashamed to live or afraid to die! Humanity with any system of Chistian
religion must be acceptable to heaven; any without it, an abomination!

I hope therefore the united motives of Christianity and humanity will animate
every generous spark of benevolence in the mind of the governors, etc. (in
which those virtues appeared to be suspended by suffering with impunity the
abuses and neglects here complained of), and that they will accordingly take
such necessary steps as will guard those benevolent institutions from abuse,
neglect, or degeneracy. What a heartfelt congratulation it must be to them, in
every subsequent stage of life, to reflect, that at one and the same time, they
have discharged the sacred duties of Christianity, and complied with the
natural dictates of humanity! but, on the contrary, how agonizing would it be
to their exalted sensibility, to apprehend that those pious and humane
intentions should be counteracted by the depravity of the persons entrusted
with the execution of them. The native benevolence of his own mind, prevents a
good man from even suspecting that such depraved characters as are here
described, have an existence -- his own innate goodness being the standard by
which he charitably, though erroneously, estimates the characters of others by:
but though this unsuspicious goodnature is the most infallible characteristic
of a generous mind; yet it by no means implies a necessary knowledge of
mankind, for it is well known, that both in principle and practice, no two
distinct things, stand in more diametric opposition to one another, than man
and man. It is therefore but half of a good man's duty to act well himself; the
other half consists in making those under his immediate control act well also.

In a matter of such importance to society at large, as the restoration of the
health of perhaps some thousands, so as to be enabled to resume lives of
independent industry, too much care cannot be taken, to see that the operations
for so salutary a purpose are not retarded by the intervention of any sinister
or interested motives, or even by the neglect of those, whose immediate
province it is to see these benevolent purposes carried into execution.
Humanity is capable of degenerating into a criminal forgiveness in good-natured
minds. From this misguided notion of its principle, good-natured men frequently
forgive through compassion, what they ought to punish through justice. This
error they are insensibly led into by endeavoring to avoid the opposite
character of severity. But, it should be engraved with an damantine pencil, on
tablets of the most lasting tempered steel, as a maxim for the regulation of
the conduct of mankind -- That there should always be a WREATH for the
ADVOCATES, and a ROD for the ENEMIES of Humanity.

I shall make no apology for the above digression, from a conviction, that my
humane readers will coincide with me in the opinion, that any deviation from
the immediate subject which is calculated to enforce the absolute necessity
that exists of a reformation in our Hospitals (and also the general good likely
to arise from it) cannot be considered as uninteresting or unimportant.

Should the adoption of the foregoing hints of reformation be thought likely to
conduce to the obtaining the ends proposed, The Humane Committee would, in the
exercise of their new-invested authority, inavoidably be presented with
numberless objects of correction and reformation at the same time. This
consideration restrains a great many particulars; which I otherwise would here
recommend to their attention. But should I have the happiness to see, that
these labors of mine should be productive of an enquiry into the abuses
alluded to, and that any consequent resolutions should be entered into for the
final accomplishment of so benevolent a purpose, I will cheerfully give any
assistance in the power of my circumscribed abilities, toward suggesting or
digesting a plan, for the better disposition and arrangement of the reformation
here recommended; and for the facilitating and carrying into execution, such a
scheme in all its possible latitude, and with as little additional expense as
may be, to the respective institutions.

There is shortly, it is reported, a general regulation and reformation
intended to take place in our prisons and work houses by a revision of the
statutes relating to them. I devoutly wish it may be true! for humanity calls
loudly for it. Why should the temporary legislators of hospitals be backward in
setting or copying so laudable an example? The objects in hospitals have a
stronger claim to compassion than either the inhabitants of prisons or
workhouses, upon this very interesting ground of humanity. -- That the latter
are generally in ^ealth, and the former generally first ^or ^^ pain; and it
will, I think, be admi^^^^ without hesitation, that sickness and corpo^al pain
are the bitterest ingredients in the (...) cup of life, and consequently more
(...) ^^m^diate objects of human compassion (...) subordinate calamities
incident (...) For -- Beneath the weight of sickness and of pain,
The body and mind an equal share sustain.


FINIS.

