THE FRIENDLY PHYSICIAN. A NEW TREATISE: CONTAINING Rules, Schemes, and
particular Instructions, how to Select and Furnish SMALL CHESTS With the most
approved necessary Medicines; and full Directions how to apply them.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED Many excellent RECEIPTS for particular DISORDERS.

Collected from private Practice, By F. SPILSBURY, Chemist.

Sold by Mr. WILKIE, Bookseller, in St. Paul's Church Yard; Mr. STEVENSON, at
Newry, in Ireland; Mr. SWINNEY, at Birmingham; Mr. GILBERT, in Dublin; Mr.
CROWSE, at Norwich; Mr. SAINT, Printer. at Newcastle on Tyne; and by the
AUTROI, at No. No. 5, in Mount Row, near Westminster Bridge. 1773.

CONTENTS.
DIrections for furnishing Medicine Chests page 5 Elixir Paregoric page 8
Balsam Anodyne page 9 Balsam Traumatic, or Beaume de Commandeur ditto Soot
Drops, or Tincture of Soot page 10 The Styptic Tincture page 11 Spirit of
Rosemary, otherwise Hungary Water ditto Simple Spirit of Lavender ditto Wine of
Ipecacohana, commonly called the Sack Vomit ditto Hartshorn Drops page 12 Salts
of Hartshorn ditto Tincture of Martial Flowers, or of Iron ditto Sweet Spirit
of Nitre ditto The Sweet Spirit of Vitriol page 13 Acid Elixir of Vitriol page
13 Sweet Elixir of Vitriol page 13 The Volatile Tincture of Valerian ditto
Tincture of Jalap ditto Stomachic Elixir, otherwise Stoughton's Elixir page 14
Tincture of Sena, or Daffy's Elixir ditto Spirits of Wine and Camphor ditto
Liquid Laudanum, or Thebaic Tincture, an Opiate page 15 Bitter Tincture ditto
The Aromatic Tincture ditto Huxham's Wine of Antimony ditto Spirit of Lavender
Compound page 16 An Imitation of Baume de Vie ditto Jesuits Drops, or Balsamic
Tincture page 17 Compound Powder of Contrayerva ditto Magnesia page 18 Rhubarb,
the Powder ditto Nitre, White Powder ditto Cream of Tartar, a White Powder page
19 Sperma Ceti ditto The Royal Basilican Powder, from Quincey ditto White
Emulsion for a Cough, or Pain in the Side page 20 For the Ague ditto For the
Gout ditto For the Jaundice ditto A Tincture for the Teeth page 21 For the
Ear-Ach ditto For the Cure of a Crumb of Bread, or any other Ingredient, going
down the throat the wrong-way, as is commonly expressed ditto The Headache; a
Temporary Relief page 22 A Gargle for a Sore Throat ditto Carminative for
Children when in pain, etc. ditto Huxham's Tincture of Bark page 23 Barley
Water ditto Tincture of Japan ditto Scorbutic Juices page 24 Spirit of Minderus
ditto Stomach Pills page 25 The Decoction of Bark ditto Tooth Powder ditto A
very good Sudorific Tincture page 26 Salt of Wormwood Draught ditto Distilled
or Essential Oils page 27 Essential Oil of Anniseeds ditto Oil of Cinnamon page
28 Essential Oil of Juniper Berries ditto Essential Oil of the Leaves of Common
Mint page 29 Essential Oil of the Leaves of Peppermint ditto Essential Oil of
Nutmegs page 29 Ditto of Jamaica Pepper page 30 Ditto of the Leaves of
Pennyroyal ditto Ditto of Rosemary ditto Ditto of Rhodium page 31 Ditto of
Sassafras ditto Oil of Lavender Flowers ditto Syrup of Meconium or White
Poppies page 32 Syrup of Saffron page 33 The Simple Syrup ditto Diacholon
Plaster ditto Yellow Basilicon page 34 Pomatum ditto Blistering Plaster ditto
Ladies Plaster, and Sweet Oil of Olives ditto Turner's Cerate ditto Ointment
for the Itch page 35 Arabic Clyster ditto Domestic Clyster page 36 Astringent
Gargarism ditto Gargle for a Sore Throat ditto Cooling Gargarism ditto
Astringent Gargarism ditto Glauber's Cathartic Salt page 37 Rochel Salt ditto
Lemon Decoction ditto Dr. Butler's Ale page 38 Camphor Julep with Vinegar ditto
Chalk Julep -- Stomachic Julep -- Cordial Julep page 39 Diaphoretic Julep --
Foetid Julep page 40 Hydragogue Julep for the Dropsy -- Binding Julep page 41
Cordial Mixture -- Valerian Mixture -- Saline Cathartic Draught page 42
Diaphoretic Draught -- For a cracked Lip -- For the Cramp page 43 A Wash for
the Ladies Faces ditto For the Hiccup -- Eye Waters -- Beef -- Tea -- Tincture
of Rhubarb page 44 Sacred Tincture -- Volatile Aromatic Tincture -- Tincture of
Hiera Picra page 45 Tincture of Castor ditto Spirituous Alexeterical Water --
Carraway Water, or Anniseed Compound page 46 Spirituous Cinnamon Water, or Aqua
Mirabilis ditto Nutmeg Water -- Spirituous Pennyroyal Water page 47 Spirituous
Jamaica Pepper Water -- Hysteric Julep ditto Stomachic Tincture -- Snuff for
the Head Ach -- Nervous Tincture page 49 Opodeldoc -- To sweeten the Breath --
Simple Waters ditto
TO THE PUBLIC.
I HAVE frequently taken notice of the Medicine Chests In furnishing Medicine
Chests, particular regard must be had to the different climates; and to the
disorders that are most prevalent in those countries. -- The same in Traveling
Chests. -- Each person, knowing their own constitution, will endeavor to
accomodate themselves accordingly.
in the cabinet-shops, some containing six bottles, some nine, and some twelve;
others larger, with drawers to hold different Medicines; which are extremely
convenient in any exigency, and would be more universally made use of, if a
simple and safe plan could be adopted: and I think it is a pity no person has
ever given a hint how to furnish those small ones. There are frequently
advertised large Chests, the plan of which I do not altogether approve of;
because, when a persons buys one, and takes it many miles in the country, and
is out of the several Medicines, he is obliged to send up to the first
proprietor, otherwise they cannot have the same; therefore all Medicines in the
Chests should bear the title of the London Dispensatory, as directed by the
College of Physicians, unless there may be something added more efficacious;
and then the Recipe should be given, or say where it is taken from. -- I do not
mean to enter largely on the Dispensatory, as those have done; but only to
endeavor at a scheme for furnishing small ones, from 1 l. 1 s. to about 4 l. 4
s. each, first cost; (persons suiting their own stations;) to be ready at any
time when any sudden illness should seize any of the family.

The necessity of such a plan is too obvious, especially when we consider the
many accidents human nature is subject to; in which, without immediate help, we
are either lost, or kept in great pain; which would be in a great measure
prevented, if masters or mistresses of families would keep a small Chest by
them; and particularly those who reside in a country village, often many miles
from a town where an Apothecary is to be met with.

I shall now proceed to select such Medicines as I think necessary, and choose
those chiefly which the the College of Physicians have ordered the Apothecaries
to keep in their shops; that, by asking for the Medicines by their names, you
will always have the right, if you deal with a person of credit. -- I will not
recommend any Medicine where there may be danger in it, without pointing it out
likewise. Electuaries, on account they are so disagreeable to take, I leave out;
as I can always substitute something more agreeable in a liquid; and, as my
design is to curtail Physic, I shall chiefly confine myself to those Medicines
that lie in a small compass, whose virtues I have often so happily experienced.

At my first writing of this, I had no thoughts of offering my service to the
public, to furnish those small Chests; but, if any person is desirous of my
service, I will very readily give my advice, and explain more particularly the
Recipes, and Nature of the Medicines, and take care they shall be supplied with
the best of them: And, as I am the first who has endeavored to make these
small Chests universal, without any reserve; I hope, at least, I may meet with
candor; and any hints that will improve the whole will be gratefully received,
By

their humble Servant, Francis Spilsbury, CHEMIST, (No. 5.) Mount-Row,
Westminster-Bridge, SURRY.

DIRECTIONS FOR FURNISHING MEDICINE CHESTS.
I HAVE, in the course of this work, exceeded the bounds I, at first, intended;
and have taken notice of several Medicines, which are useful on particular
occasions, (and which the public may be furnished with, if they think proper)
though not absolutely necessary to be kept in every house. The small Chests,
with a few bottles, will ever be found the most serviceable; the use of which I
most strongly plead for, without interest; as I am entirely against any secret
nostrums being put in; and hope no one will encourage any such practices.

A TABLE OF WEIGHTS.
Twenty Grains make One Scruple. Three Scrupies make One Dram. Eight Drams
make One Ounce. Twelve Ounces make One Pound. A Gill in Measure is called Four
Ounces in Weight.
Glass Mortars are handy and cheap; and, with care, will last some time.

FIRST SCHEME. Which no family ought to be without.
Elixir Paregoric. Anodyne Balsam. Traumatic Balsam, or Turlington's. Wine of
Ipecacoanha. Tincture of Jalap. The chief recommendation of the Tincture of
Jalap is its lying in a small compass, and purging briskly; otherwise some
people may choose Tincture of Rhubarb, or Sena, commonly called Daffy's Elixir;
or an imitation of Baume de Vie.
Salts, or Hartshorn Drops.

If you should choose a nine-bottle Case, then add the three following.

Tincture of Soot. Styptic Tincture. Aromatic Tincture.

If a twelve-bottle Case, then add the following, or any others you may think
proper.

Spirit of Lavender compound. Tincture of Valerian volatile. The Basilicon
Powder.

A SCHEME To furnish a large Medicine Chest. Others may be added.
Elixir Paregoric. Balsam Anodyne. Tincture of Soot. Hartsh. Drops, or Salts.
Wine of Ipecacoanha. Styptic Tincture. Volatile Tinct. of Valerian. Tincture of
Jalap. An Imitation of Beaume de Vie. Jesuits Drops. Balsam Traumatic. Wine of
Antimony. Compd. Powder Contrayerva. Basilicon Powder. Tinct. of Sena, or
Daffy's Elixir. Spirit of Wine and Camphor. Liquid Laudanum. Bitter Tincture.
Aromatic Tincture. Cream of Tartar. Magnesia. Nitre. Spermaceti. Yellow
Basilicon. Diachylon Plaster. Turner's Cerate. Rhubarb. Glauber Salts, and
Manna. Hysteric Water. Spirit of Lavender compound.

And the following dried Articles will be found very useful.

All-Spice, Alum, Gum Arabic, Ginger, Pearl-Barley, Cinnamon.

Also the following dried Herbs, Marshmallows, Mint, Peppermint, Chamomile
Flowers, Pennyroyal, Ground Ivy, Balm, and Sage, to make Teas or Infusions.

As Medicine Chests are made of different sizes, each person may adopt which
they please: the first, nine, or twelve, I particularly recommend to every
family. Those who keep the whole will have a very good Apothecary's shop; and a
Physician or Apothecary may make a good Medicine up quickly, to suit any
exigency. I have omitted the Bark, and several other valuable Medicines,
because there is time sufficient to procure them, when wanted: and, first, for
Colds and Coughs, is

ELIXIR PAREGORIC.
This excellent Elixir was invented by Le Mort, a French Surgeon, and was
called the Elixir Asthmatic. It is a Medicine of great efficacy in fresh Colds
or Coughs, and may be given to children in the Chin-Cough, commonly called the
Whooping-Cough. Dose, a tea-spoonful, (not more) going to bed. Grown people may
take more, up to a tea-spoonful and a half. It is a gentle opiate.

N. B. Persons who are subject to a bad Cough, of long standing, and Shortness
of Breath, must take care not to meddle with it, an account of the Opium in it,
which would almost choke them. When a person has got a Cold, they should put on
a double nightcap, and a woollen stocking round their neck. Children are
frequently troubled with a Cough that proceeds from eating trash, which
occasions tough phlegm to be lodged in the stomach: in that case, or where it
is a Whooping-Cough, a gentle vomit of Ipecacoanha wine, (dose, two drams, in
any pleasant liquor, for a child of six years old) may be given; or a gentle
purge; as, Take manna, half an ounce; dissolve it in a cup of tea; and add
Tincture of Jalap, one tea-spoonful: but, where Worms are suspected, a dose of
Basilicon Powder must be given.

Observe, in taking of Medicines, to begin with a small dose, and so increase
or diminish as you find them operate: by this you will discover what is
commonly called the Constitution. In Fevers this should be given very
sparingly, as it will rather increase the heat.

BALSAM ANODYNE.
This is a valuable composition. It cures fresh Aches and Pains, arising from
Colds, almost to a wonder. Those who are troubled with the Gout, or Rheumatism,
must use Opodeldoc.

It likewise cures the Tooth and Headache, and is the basis of those Tinctures
advertised. For Outward Pains, rub half an ounce well in before the fire, and
wear a flannel. For Nervous Cholics, or Gravelly Complaints, it is sometimes
used. Dose, twenty drops to sixty, for a grown person. This is a stronger
Opiate than the former.

BALSAM TRAUMATIC, OR, BAUME DE COMMANDEUR.
This is similar to the Fryar's and Turlington's Balsam, and is used for the
same purposes, viz. Fresh Cuts. It is good for inward Decays, and tickling
Coughs. As it is so generally known, I shall not say any more to recommend it.
It is rather thinner than the advertised Medicines, but no ways inferior.

SOOT DROPS, OR, TINCTURE OF SOOT.
Where children are these Drops should always be at hand; there is not any
Medicine of so great efficacy as this is in bringing people out of Fits, when
properly applied. I have known a grown person seized with Fits, which before
used to hold an hour, and could not be brought to herself by any of those
cruel, mis-judged methods very often made use of by strangers, as forcing open
the hands, pinching, burning, etc. which is wrong. My method was, to pour a
pap-spoonful of these Drops down the Patient's throat by itself, and almost
immediately they would recover; if not, I gave the second, which seldom failed;
indeed, I never knew it to fail. It is a safe Medicine for children from one to
four years old: I lower it for them by mixing two or three parts water with it,
as one tea-spoonful of Drops and three of water; when children either purge or
vomit, the danger is over: rubbing their limbs and soles of the feet is good.
The best preservative against Fits is an Issue, and purge off the acids with
Magnesia and Rhubarb. In Lethargy Fits, a strong vomit must be forced down, as
the Wine of Antimony, the Sal Vitriol; these two last Medicines require
judgment.

The STYPTIC TINCTURE.
As sometimes accidents happen by breaking a blood-vessel, or too great an
effusion of blood, I have thought proper to recommend this to be kept ready,
and will answer all the end of the celebrated Styptic of Helvetius or Eaton.
Dip a piece of cloth in it, and apply to the part.

SPIRIT OF ROSEMARY, OTHERWISE, HUNGARY WATER. SIMPLE SPIRIT OF LAVENDER.
Both of these, when made in perfection, are very grateful and fragrant: they
are frequently rubbed on the temples, etc. under the notion of refreshing and
comforting the nerves; and likewise taken internally, to the quantity of two or
three tea-spoonfuls, as warm cordials, in wine, etc.

WINE OF IPECACOHANA, COMMONLY CALLED, The SACK VOMIT.
It is mild, safe, and serviceable in Dysenteries: The Powder of Ipecacohana is
best for small Chests. Dose of the Wine for a child six years old is six drams,
in Powder four grains; grow^ people one ounce and a half of the Wine, and in
Powder ten grains.

HARTSHORN DROPS.
Their use is well known. Dose from ten Drops to sixty.

SALTS OF HARTSHORN.
The dose is from a grain or two to ten or twelve.

TINCTURE OF MARTIAL FLOWERS, OR OF IRON.
People who live at a distance from chalybeat waters may supply themselves by
substituting this Tincture, by dropping from ten to twenty drops in any vehicle
twice or thrice a day.

SWEET SPIRIT OF NITRE.
A pleasant, cooling, diuretic Medicine. Dose from ten to fifty drops. Good in
Fevers.

The SWEET SPIRIT OF VITRIOL, ACID ELIXIR OF VITRIOL, AND SWEET ELIXIR OF
VITRIOL,
Are often used, on particular occasions, for weakness and relaxations of the
Stomach, and decays of Constitution.

The VOLATILE TINCTURE OF VALERIAN.
Is a very good hysteric Medicine in nervous cases and lowness of spirits.
Dose, three times a day, from one to two tea-spoonfuls in a glass of any
liquor, as wine, or wine and water.

TINCTURE OF JALAP.
Is a useful, safe purgative; if it had not that burning heat in the throat, it
would not be unpleasant: It is handy to mix in small quantities in any
effusion, especially for children, whose aversion to Physic creates much
trouble. Dose for children six years old a small tea-spoonful; grown people two
spoonfuls, in any liquor. Jalap is frequently used in Scurvy Grass, and
concentrated juices sold as Quack Medicines, and when dropped in water or beer
turns whitish.

STOMACHIC ELIXIR, OTHERWISE, STOUGHTON's ELIXIR.
Take of Gentian root two ounces, Orange peel one ounce, Virginian snake-root
half an ounce, Cochineal half a dram, French brandy two pints.


Let them steep for three days, then filter the Elixir. -- This safe Medicine,
being so generally known, needs no further comment. Dose from one to four
tea-spoonfuls, in any liquor.

TINCTURE OF SENA, OR, DAFFY's ELIXIR.
This mixture is warm and comfortable to the stomach and bowels, and somewhat
proper in cholic complaints, and for the wind. Dose for grown persons one ounce
or two; if given to children, lower the dose, as it is too hot for their tender
mouths.

SPIRITS OF WINE AND CAMPHOR
Is very handy for sprains, inflammations, discussing tumors, preventing
gangreens, etc.

LIQUID LAUDANUM, OR, THEBAIC TINCTURE, An OPIATE.
A good Medicine in skilful hands, but very dangerous in ignorant. The white
Syrup of Poppies is a very good opiate, and not so dangerous. Peppermint-water,
sweetened with this Syrup, is good to stop vomiting, or an over purging. One
grain of Laudanum in substance is equal to thirty drops of the liquid for
strength.

BITTER TINCTURE.
Is handy for those who like to drink it in wine, or make purl of it; is very
safe, and helps digestion. Dose thirty to sixty drops.

The AROMATIC TINCTURE
Is a very warm Medicine for weakness of the stomach, in languors and
flatulencies, and other like complaints. Dose a tea-spoonful or two in a glass
of wine, or wine and water.

HUXHAM's WINE OF ANTIMONY
I prefer to that directed by the College of Physicians: it is a noble
Medicine. In proper hands good to be given against the Smallpox, as a
preparative for Inoculation, for coughs as an alterative and diaphoretic, and
apoplectic cases. None ought to meddle with it but with great care. Dose for a
child eight years old one tea-spoonful in a glass of water, grown people two;
three is a large dose, it vomits very strong. Rectified Spirits of Wine, pou^ed
on the glass of Antimony, will neither vomit nor purge, and is the basis of
Norris's and Rysseeg's Medicines.

SPIRIT OF LAVENDER COMPOUND.
This is the red drops of Lavender, very good to snuff up the nose when you
have got cold: it comforts the head, and raises the spirits. Dose from twenty
to sixty drops, on sugar or in wine and water.

An IMITATION OF BAUME DE VIE.
Take of the Sacred Tincture two ounces, of the Stomach Tincture one ounce,
Syrup of Saffron two drams, mixed. This is a very pleasant, safe, easy purge,
and no ways inferior to that boasted Medicine "Baume de Vie" in it is virtues.
Try and believe.

Observe, People that are troubled with the Piles must not meddle with aloetic
Medicines, as this and the Baume de Vie, likewise Scotch Pills.

JESUITS DROPS, OR, BALSAMIC TINCTURE.
Take Balsam of Capivi one ounce, Gum Guiacum two drams, Balsam of Peru four
drams, Oil of Sassafras two scruples, Salt of Tartar twelve grains, rectified
Spirits of Wine nine ounces: digest them together for four days, and pour off
what is fine for use. This is partly taken from Le Mort, who gave the
Proprietor the first hint. It is an admirable warm Medicine, and a pity it is
not more known in some cases: it has long been advertised for curing a certain
disorder, which it will not cure. This Medicine is exceeding good for
ulcerations, decays of the lungs and kidneys, fresh cuts, etc. and for that
painful complaint the stone in the gall, or the gravel. Dose one tea-spoonful
to three or four, when required. It turns water like milk, as Balsams will do
when lowered. With this I have often cured a pain in the bowels or stomach much
sooner than the Tincture of Rhubarb so often prescribed.

COMPOUND POWDER OF CONTRAYERVA.
This is a Powder much superior to the Gascoigne's; it is a warm, sudorific,
cordial Medicine, and given in low fevers, or where a sweat is wanted to be
raised. Dose ten grains to half a dram, every fourth and sixth hour.

MAGNESIA.
An exceeding good, safe, useful Medicine; no family should be without it:
given with Rhubarb to correct and purge off the acids in the stomach. Solutions
of Magnesia in all acids are bitter and purgative, while those of the other
earths are more or less austere and astringent. A large dose of the Magnesia,
if the stomach contains no acid to dissolve it, does not purge, or produce any
sensible effect; a moderate one, if an acid is lodged there, or if acid liquors
are taken after it, procures several stools; whereas the common absorbents, in
the same circumstances, instead of loosening, bind the belly.


RHUBARB.
The POWDER
Is well known: it is good for strengthening the stomach, and purging off
crudities. Dose for one seven years old twelve grains, a grown person half a
dram.

NITRE.
WHITE POWDER.
A cooling diuretic. Dose from ten grains to twenty-four, twice a day. It
should be taken in warm water, with a little spirit and sugar, to sweeten and
correct the coldness. It will allay heat.

CREAM OF TARTAR. A WHITE POWDER.
This is an agreeable acid, and sometimes, in making of punch, supplies the
place of lemon-juice: it purges very gently. Dose from ten grains to two drams.
A safe Medicine.

SPERMA CETI.
Is useful in lying-in cases and miscarriages, or inward bruises or coughs.

The ROYAL BASILICAN POWDER, From QUINCEY.
Quincey says, and not without reason, this is one of the best purges for gross
children, that are apt to breed worms, and have large bellies. The ingredients
are efficacious; it is operation is mild, and wonderfully clears the bowels of
slime. This Cathartic is very proper to be given to persons when they are to be
inoculated. It is a very good Family Medicine, and will be of service in the
Gout, Rheumatism, Itch, Leprosy, Evil, and other cutaneous disorders. Take care
not to catch cold. Dose for children from six grains to fifteen, for grown
people from fifteen to forty, mixed with a syrup; for it is a heavy powder, and
a mercurial preparation.

WHITE EMULSION, for a COUGH, or PAIN in the SIDE.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds, and Syrup of Balsam, of each two ounces; four
ounces of barley-water, and thirty drops of Sal Volatile: shake them well
together, and take two large spoonfuls. If this does not answer, it will be
necessary to be blooded.

For the AGUE.
Best Bark two drams, Salt of Wormwood half a dram, and Snake-root half a dram:
divide it into four doses; one dose in a morning fasting, two hours before the
fit comes on.

For the GOUT.
A safe, simple remedy, which will give ease, and keep the Gout off: -- Take
Flower of Brimstone one tea-spoonful, in milk, fasting, every morning: it must
be continued every day throughout the year, and begin after a fit is over; it
will gripe at first before you are used to it. If you doubt, try.

For the JAUNDICE.
Take a pint and a half of Ale, and heat a poker red hot, and quench it in the
Beer, stirring it till the hissing is off: let this be repeated four or five
times; then run the Ale through a cloth, and put in the Ale that is left two
table-spoonfuls of Treacle, Saffron, ten grains, and Tamarind, in powder, a
scruple: stir it, and take the whole nine mornings fasting. This has been
seldom known to fail, and has been kept a secret.

A TINCTURE for the TEETH.
Take proof Spirits of Wine eight ounces, Spirit of Vitriol sufficient to give
it an agreeable acid, and Cochineal a scruple: let it stand six hours, then
filter it through a glass funnel. This is what is sold at a shilling a bottle at
the shops. If I mistake not, a Boy's Patent was granted for it -- Who can help
smiling?

For the EAR-ACH.
The Smoke of Tobacco blown into the ear is excellent; or the Oil of Almonds
dropped in the ear, mixed with a little Spirit of Lavender Compound.

For the CURE of a CRUMB of BREAD, or any other Ingredient, going down the
Throat wrongway, as is commonly expressed.
Take a bit of fresh Butter the size of a small nut, and swallow it gently; if
that don't cure, add the second bit: it gives ease, and stops the fit of
coughing. Sweet Oil will do as well as Butter.

The HEADACHE. A Temporary Relief.
Take Spirit of Vitriol, pour a little into the palm of the hand, and rub it on
the forehead, keeping the hand there some time; or the thin peel of a Seville
Orange fresh cut, without the white, put on the forehead, is the best remedy:
it makes the place smart, and draws the pain out.

A GARGLE for a SORE THROAT.
Take the best Vinegar half a pint, Red Port Wine a gill, Alum two drams;
dissolve it in the Vinegar and Wine, then add honey half an ounce: mix, and
gargle the throat often. A Blister round the throat is the best remedy to draw
the humor off; or rub the Volatile Liniment on the part, and keep the body
gently open.

The following is a CARMINATIVE for CHILDREN when in pain, and purge too much.
Take Mint-water a gill; Rhubarb; sixteen grains, Diascordium two scruples;
sweeten it with sugar: dose a small pap-spoonful for a child six months old,
going to bed. It comforts the bowels, eases the griping pain, and makes them
sleep. Some simmer the Mint-water and Rhubarb together.

HUXHAM's TINCTURE OF BARK.
Take Peruvian Bark in powder two ounces, Seville Orange-peel one ounce and a
half, Virginia Snake-root three drams, Saffron four scruples, French Brandy
twenty ounces: and let it stand four days. Dose, dram to half an ounce. This is
given with success in slow nervous fevers, and in the decline of putrid,
spotted, and pestilential Fevers, though the remissions are very obscure: it
strengthens the solids, prevents the farther dissolution and corruption of the
blood, and in the event restores its crasis.

BARLEY WATER.
Take Barley one ounce, Water two pints, often washing the Barley; boil it two
minutes, throw the Water away, then add fresh Water three pints, boil it to a
quart.

TINCTURE OF JAPAN.
It is astringent, corroborates a relaxed stomach and bowels, stops defluxions,
catarrhs, vomiting diarrheaas, uterine fluxes. Dose half a spoonful to a
spoonful, in Red Wine or Mint Water. The Tincture of Cinnamon, or one made of
Cassia, will do as well to keep.

SCORBUTIC JUICES.
Take the juice of Seville Oranges, and of Garden Scurvy Grass, each a quart;
the juice of Brook-lime, and of Watercresses, of each a pint; mix them, and
when the dregs are subsided strain them through a flannel: these juices, given
from two to four ounces, two or three times a day, and continued for some time,
are of considerable use in scorbutic disorders. Similar to this, with the
addition of Dandelyon and Honey, is the Vegetable Syrup which has been so often
advertised. If Mankind lived on a vegetable diet, then would this be sufficient
to extirpate the disorders; but as we live so high in our sauces and made-up
dishes, the mineral kingdom, which is more ponderous, must be called in.

SPIRIT OF MINDERUS.
This is an excellent deobstruent, diuretic, and diaphoretic, neutral spirit;
and as it operates without heat, it may be given in febrille and inflammatory
disorders, where Medicines of the warm kind, if they fail of procuring sweat,
aggravate the distemper. This dose is from one dram to half an ounce, more or
less, according to its strength, which is somewhat precarious, either by
itself, or rather with other Medicines adapted to the intention.

STOMACH PILLS.
Take of Rhubarb one ounce, Socotrine Aloes six drams, Myrrh half an ounce,
Vitriolated Tartar one dram, Essential Oil of Mint half a dram, Syrup of
Orange-peel a sufficient quantity: make them into a mass. This Pill is intended
for moderately warming and strengthening the stomach, and evacuating crude,
viscid humors. A scruple of the mass may be taken twice a day. Some use a
Stomach-plaister for bad complaints.

The DECOCTION OF BARK.
Take Jesuits Bark in Powder one ounce, and boil it in a quart of pure water to
a pint; toward the end add Liquorice-root cut half an ounce, to the colature
add Nutmeg-water two ounces, and mix them. The dose is a small wine-glass, with
ten, twenty, or forty drops of the Volatile Tincture of Guiacum. A small
quantity of Winter's Bark gives it a grateful warmth, and renders a quantity of
the compound water less necessary. This Receipt will make the simple Decoction,
only leave out the Nutmeg-water.

TOOTH POWDER.
Take Dragon's Blood, Alum, Myrrh, Cream of Tartar, equal parts, in fine
powder, which mix; to give it a fine color some add Vermillion, but it is
better to be let alone. This Powder may be used by itself; but if the gums are
wasted, you may make a Paste, by mixing it with Honey of Roses, and use it
gently with your finger.

A very good SUDORIFIC TINCTURE.
Take Virginia Snake-root six drams, Cochineal and English Saffron each two
drams, Opium one scruple, Spirit of Minderus one pint: digest them together in
a gentle heat for three days, and then pass the Tincture through a strainer.
This Composition is an efficacious Sudorific, to be taken for a Sweat. Dose
half an ounce in a glass of simple water or wine; taken for easing pain, and
composing the Patient to sleep.

SALT OF WORMWOOD DRAUGHT.
Take a scruple of Salt of Wormwood, pour upon it by little and little fresh
Lemon-juice, till it has quite done fomenting, and tastes quite insipid; about
one large spoonful is sufficient; then add a little fine Sugar, to make it
palatable. About a wine-glass of Spring or Barley Water, and a pap-spoonful of
Cinnamon Water, make a most pleasant draught. Above the age of fourteen it may
be given once in six or eight hours, in any little feverish complaints,
sickness at stomach, watchings, parched dryness of the mouth, and suchlike
ills, and is often preferable to the Fever Powder; from seven to fourteen years
half a draught is sufficient; under that age still decrease the quantity.

DISTILLED OR ESSENTIAL OILS
Are never given alone, on account of their extreme heat and pungency, which,
in some, is so great, that a single drop, let fall upon the tongue, produces a
gangrenous eschar. They are readily imbibed by pure dry sugar, and in this form
may be conveniently exhibited. Ground with eight or ten times their weight of
sugar, they become soluble in aqueous liquors, and thus may be diluted to any
assigned degree. Mucilages also render them miscible with water in an uniform
milky liquor. They dissolve likewise in spirits of wine, the more fragrant in
an equal weight, and almost all of them in less than four times their own
quantity. Their solutions may either be taken on sugar, or mixed with syrup, or
the like: on mixing them with water, the liquor grows milky, and the oil
separates.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF ANNISEEDS.
This Oil possesses the taste and smell of the Anniseeds in perfection. It is
one of the mildest of the distilled Oils: fifteen on twenty drops may be taken
at a time without dagger, though common practice rarely goes so far as half the
number. Its smell is extremely durable and diffusive. Milk drawn from the
breast after taken, it is found impregnated with it is odor; and possibly this
may be, in part, the foundation of pectoral virtues usually ascribed to it. In
Flatulences and Cholics it is said by some to be less effectual than the seeds
themselves.

OIL OF CINNAMON.
This valuable Oil is extremely hot and pungent, of a most agreeable flavor,
like that of Cinnamon itself. In cold languid cases, and debilities of the
nervous system, it is one of the most immediate cordials and restoratives. The
dose is one, two, or three drops, which must always be carefully diluted by the
mediation of sugar, etc. for so great is the pungency of this Oil, that a
single drop, let fall upon the tongue undiluted, produces (as Boerhaave
observes) a gangrenous eschar.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF JUNIPER BERRIES.
This Oil is a very warm and pungent one, of a strong flavor, not unlike that
of berries. In the dose of a drop or two it proves a serviceable carminative
and stomachic, in one of six or eight, or more, as stimulating, detergent,
diuretic, and emmenagogine: it seems to have somewhat of the nature of the
Turpentines, or their distilled Oils, like which it communicates a violent
smell to the urine.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF THE LEAVES OF COMMON MINT.
This Oil smells and tastes strongly of the Mint; but it is, in both respects,
somewhat less agreeable than the herb itself. It is a useful stomachic
Medicine, and not unfrequently exhibited in want of appetite, weakness of the
stomach, reachings to vomit, and other like disorders, when not accompanied
with heat or inflammation. Two or three drops, or more, are given for a dose.
It is likewise employed externally for the same purposes, and is an excellent
ingredient in the stomachic plaster of the shops.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF THE LEAVES OF PEPPERMINT.
This possesses the smell, taste, and virtues of the Peppermint in perfection.
The color is a pale greenish yellow. It is a Medicine of great pungency and
subtility, and diffuses, almost as soon as taken, a glowing warmth through the
whole system. In Cholics, accompanied with great coldness, and some hysteric
complaints, it is of excellent service. A drop or two are in general a
sufficient dose.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF NUTMEGS.
The essential Oil of Nutmegs possesses the flavor and aromatic virtues of the
Spice in an eminent degree. It is similar in quality to the Oil of Mace, but
somewhat less grateful.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF JAMAICA PEPPER.
This is a very elegant Oil, and may be used as a succedaneum to those of some
of the dearest spices. It is of a fine pale color, in flavor more agreeable
than the Oil of Cloves, and not far short of that of Nutmegs. It sinks in
water, like the Oils of some of the Eastern Spices.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF THE LEAVES OF PENNY ROYAL.
This Oil in smell and taste resembles the original Plant, the virtues of which
it likewise possesses. It is given in hysteric cases from one to four or five
drops.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF ROSEMARY.
The Oil of Rosemary is drawn from the Plant in flower. When in perfection, it
is very light and thin, pale and almost colorless, of great fragrancy, though
not quite so agreeable as the Rosemary itself. It is recommended in the dose of
a few drops in nervous and hysteric complaints. Boerhaave holds it in great
esteem against epilepsies and suppressions of the uterine purgations,
occasioned by weakness and inactivity.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF RHODIUM.
This Oil is extremely odoriferous, and principally employed as a perfume in
scenting pomatums and the like. Custom has not as yet received any preparation
of this elegant aromatic Wood into internal use. It is a very dear Oil.

ESSENTIAL OIL OF SASSAFRAS.
This is the most ponderous of all the known essential Oils, but rises in
distillation with sufficient ease; it appears limpid as water, has a moderately
pungent taste, a very fragrant smell, exactly resembling that of the Sassafras.
It stands greatly recommended as a sudorific, and for purifying the blood and
juices: it is likewise supposed to be of service in humoural Asthmas and
Coughs. The Dose is from one drop to eight or ten.

OIL OF LAVENDER FLOWERS
Is of considerable service, both externally and internally, in paralytic
complaints, and in debilities of the whole nervous system in general. The dose
is from two to five or six drops.

SYRUPS.
Syrups are saturated solutions of sugar made in water, or watery, or vinous
infusions, or in juices. They were formerly considered as Medicines of much
greater importance than they are thought to be at present. Syrups and distilled
waters were for some ages made use of as the great alteratives, insomuch that
the evacuation of any peccant humor was never attempted till, by a due course
of these, it had first been regularly prepared for expulsion: hence arose the
exuberant collection of both which we meet with in Pharmacopoeias, and like
errors have prevailed in each. As multitudes of distilled waters have been
compounded from materials unfit to give any virtue over the helm, so numbers of
Syrups have been prepared of ingredients which, in this form, cannot be taken
in sufficient doses to exert their virtues; for two-thirds of a Syrup consist
of sugar, and greatest part of the remaining third is an aqueous fluid. Syrups
are at present chiefly regarded as convenient vehicles for Medicines of greater
efficacy, and made use of for sweetening Draughts and Juleps; for reducing the
lighter Powders into Boluses, Pills, or Electuaries; and other like purposes.
Some likewise may not improperly be considered as Medicines themselves, as
those of Saffron or Buckthorn-berries.

SYRUP OF MECONIUM OR WHITE POPPIES.
This Syrup, impregnated with the opiate matter of the Poppy-heads, is given to
children in doses of two or three drams, to adults from half an ounce to an
ounce, and upwards, for obtunding and incrassating acrimonious humors, easing
pain, procuring rest, and answering the other intention of mild opiates.

SYRUP OF SAFFRON.
Saffron is very well fitted for making a Syrup, as in this form a sufficient
dose of it is contained in a reasonable compass. This Syrup is at present more
frequently prescribed, than the Wine from which it is made; it is a pleasant
cordial, and gives a fine color to Juleps.

The SIMPLE SYRUP.
Take of white Sugar and water each equal quantities, boil them into a Syrup.
These preparations are plain, liquid, sweets, void of flavor or color; they
are convenient for sundry purposes, where these qualities are not wanted, or
would be exceptionable.

OINTMENTS.
I recommend the following, which will serve in any common accident.

DIACHLON PLASTER.
This plaster is the common application in excoriations of the skin, slight
fresh wounds, and the like; it keeps the part soft, and somewhat warm, and
defends it from the air, which is all that can be expected in these cases from
any plaster.

YELLOW BASILICON.
This is commonly employed in dressings for digesting, cleansing, and
incarnating wounds and ulcers.

POMATUM.
The use is well known.

BLISTERING PLASTER
Is handy to be kept for the Apothecary to apply

LADIES PLASTER, AND SWEET OIL OF OLIVES.
Their virtues are well known.

TURNER's CERATE,
Is commonly used for cuts, scalds, bruises, chilblains, and other trifling
complaints, where the skin is worn off.

OINTMENT FOR THE ITCH.
Take of Sulphur one ounce, White Helebore Root in powder, or Crude Sal
Ammoniac two drams, Hog's Lard two ounces, mix arid make them into an ointment.
Sulphur is a certain remedy for the itch, more safe and efficacious than
Mercury; for, as Dr. Pringle observes, unless a Mercurial Unction was to touch
every part of the skin, there can be no certainty of success. The quantity of
ointment above directed; serves for four Unctions; the patient is to be rubbed
every night; but, to prevent any disorder that might arise from stopping too
many pores at once, a fourth part only of the body is to be rubbed at one time.
Though the itch may thus be cured by one pot of ointment, it will be proper to
renew the application, and to touch the parts most affected for a few nights
longer, till a second quantity is exhausted.

CLYSTERS.
ARABIC CLYSTER.
Take an ounce of Arabic Mucilage, and six ounces of Barley-water, or
Mutton-broth, and mix for a clyster.

DOMESTIC CLYSTER.
Take half a pint of thin Gruel, an ounce and half of Oil Olive, and a spoonful
of brown Sugar, mix them together; sometimes a teaspoonful of common Salt may
be added.

GARGARISMS.
ASTRINGENT GARGARISM.
Take of Tincture of Roses fifteen ounces, Alum two drams, Honey of Roses one
ounce, mix them together.

GARGLE FOR A SORE THROAT.
Red Wine and Vinegar, each equal parts, sweetened with Honey.

COOLING GARGARISM.
Take half a pint of Rose Water, the whites of two new laid Eggs, beat up to
water, two drams of white Sugar Candy, and half a dram of Nitre, make a
Gargarism.

ASTRINGENT GARGARISM.
Take of Tincture of Roses fifteen ounces, Alum two drams, Honey of Roses one
ounce, mix them together.

GLAUBER's CATHARITIC SALT.
This Salt, commonly called Sal Mirabile, taken from three drams to an ounce,
or more, proves a very mild and useful purgative.

ROCHEL SALT.
This elegant purging Salt, taken from the last edition of the Paris
Pharmacopoeia, 1748, under the title of Sal Polycrestum Solubile Vulgo de
Seignette, has, for a long time, been much valued in France, and now very
deservedly begins to be greatly esteemed in this country. It is infinitely
pleasanter than either Glauber's, or Epsom Salts, so called, and operates very
gentle without griping. Its dose is from half an ounce to one ounce, ten drams
or more, dissolved in warm water, thin gruel, or oatmeal tea.

LEMON DECOCTION.
Take of the yellow rind of fresh Lemonpeel six drams, boiling water one pint,
or twelve ounces; let them infuse together for a quarter of an hour, and after
the shortest boiling, only three or four bubbles, strain the liquor, and add
four ounces of Rose Water, two ounces of Lemon Juice, and two ounces of double
refined Sugar. This elegant, grateful, and cooling liquor, is a most desirable
drink in febrile, bilous or inflammatory distempers; for it abates the heat of
the blood and stomach, quenches thirst, and gently promotes the salutary
excretions. It may be drank at pleasure without any limitation.

DR. BUTLER's ALE.
Take of Boteny, Sage, Agrimony, Garden Scurvy Grass, Roman Wormwood, each
three hands full; Elecampane Roots, Horse Radish Roots, each four ounces, new
Ale four gallons. The Herbs and Roots are to be put in a bag, and hung in the
Ale while it works. This liquor has so far obtained among the common people, as
to have been frequently made and sold in public-houses. It is used in the
Spring for purifying the blood, and preventing scorbutic disorders.

JULEPS.
CAMPHOR JULEP WITH VINEGAR.
Take of Camphor one dram, Gum Arabic two drams, double refined Sugar half an
ounce, Vinegar one pint; grind the Camphor with a few drops of Spirit of Wine,
till it grows soft, then add the Gum, previously reduced to a mucilage, with
equal its quantity of water, and rub them together till perfectly mixed; to
this mixture add by degrees the Vinegar, with Sugar dissolved in it.

CHALK JULEP.
Take of the White Chalk prepared, one ounce, double refined Sugar six drams,
Gum Arabic two drams, Water two pints, mix them together. This Julep is
designed for heartburns, and other like disorders, arising from acid juices in
the first passages; the chief use of the gum is, to give a greater degree of
consistence to the water, and enable it to keep the, powdered Chalk suspended.

STOMACHIC JULEP.
Take of Simple Mint-water six ounces, Spirituous Mint-water two ounces, Syrup
of Saffron two drams. Or,

Take of Cinnamon Water six ounces, Nutmeg-water, and Stomachic Tincture, each
one ounce, Syrup of Orange-peel half an ounce.

The titles of these mixtures express the intentions for which they are
calculated; four or five spoons full maybe taken of either occasionally, or
used as weakeners and diluters of medicines of greater efficacy.

CORDIAL JULEP.
Take of Alexterical-water four ounces, Aromatic-water two ounces, Volatile
Oily Spirit, and Tincture of Saffron, each two drams, White Sugar half an
ounce, mix and make them into a Julep. This mixture is a useful cordial in all
depressions of the spirits, in the sinkings of low fevers, and the languors to
which hysterical and hypocondriacal persons are subject; an ounce, or two
spoons full, may be taken for a dose two or three times a day.

DIAPHORETIC JULEP.
Take Alexterical-water four ounces, Spirit of Minderous two ounces, Salt of
Hartshorn ten grains, White Sugar six drams, mix them for a Julep. This
excellent composition is a very powerful sudorific, and answers its intentions
more effectually, and with greater certainty, than many others calculated for
the same purpose. Where a copious sweat is to be excited, as in rheumatic
diseases, two spoons full are to be taken warm in bed every hour, or two hours,
till the sweat breaks out; if warm diluting liquors are not sufficient to keep
it up, the same is to be occasionally repeated.

FOETID JULEP.
Take of Asafoetida one dram and a half, Rue-water six ounces, Compound
Valerian-water two ounces, Oil of Hartshorn twenty drops, White Sugar ten
drams; rub the Asafoetida in the Rue-water till it dissolves, and having dropped
the Oil upon the Sugar, mix the whole together. This composition is not a
little foetid and unsightly; it is nevertheless a medicine of great effic^^^ in
hypochondriacal and hysteric disorders, asthmas, and other nervous complaints;
the dose is one spoonful to be taken thrice a day. It is sometimes prepared
without the Oil of Hartshorn.

A HYDRAGOGUE JULEP For the DROPSY.
Take of Camomoile Flower Water six grains, Emetic Tartar ten grains, Syrup of
Buckthorn two ounces mix them together. Two spoons full of this Julep are given
in hydropic cases every two hours, till it takes sufficient effect, as a
purgative, which it generally does before the quantity here prescribed has been
made use of. Emetic Tartar thus exhibited, in small doses, and frequently
repeated, proves as certain and powerful a cathartic, as it does an emetic,
when given in a larger quantity at once. It operates nevertheless for the most
part with sufficient ease.

BINDING JULEP.
Take of Alexterical-water four ounces, Aromatic-water two ounces, Japonic
Confection two drams, Japan Earth, in powder, two drams, Liquid Laudanum forty
drops, White Sugar half an ounce, mix them well together. This Julep is
calculated against disentries and diarrhoeas, in which, after proper
evacuations, it generally eases the gripes, and restrains the flux. It is to be
given three or four times a day, in the quantity of a spoonful at a time.

CORDIAL MIXTURE.
Take of Simple Cinnamon Water four ounces, Spirituous Cinnamon Water two
ounces, Extract of Saffron one scruple, Confection of Kermes six drams, mix
them together. In great languors and depressions a spoonful of this rich
Cordial Mixture may be taken every half hour.

VALERIAN MIXTURE.
Take Simple Pepper Mint-water twelve ounces, Wild Valerian Root in powder, one
ounce, Compound Spirit of Lavender half an ounce, Syrup of Orange-peel one
ounce, mix them together. Wild Valerian Root, one of the principle medicines in
epilepfies and vertigoes, seems to answer better when thus exhibited in
substance, than if given in form of a tincture or infusion; the liquors here
joined to it, excellently coincide with, and by their warmth and pungency,
greatly improve its virtues. Two spoons full of the Mixture may be taken twice
or thrice a day.

SALINE CATHARTIC DRAUGHT.
Take of Glauber's Cathartic Salts and Manna, each six drams, Boiling Water
three ounces, Tincture of Cardamom one dram. Dissolve the Salt and Manna in the
water, and ^^^ing strained off the liquor, add to it the Tincture of Cardamoms.

DIAPHORETIC DRAUGHT.
Take of Spirit of Minderus, Syrup of Meconium, each half an ounce, Salt of
Hartshorn five grains, mix them together. This Draught is a very powerful
Saline Diaphoretic; it is given with safety, and often with great benefit, in
the beginning of inflammatory fevers after bleeding, where theriaca and other
warm substances usually employed, if they fail in bringing out a sweat,
increase the fever.

For a CRACKED LIP, which is apt to bleed on any slight pressure.
Take a bit of Sticking Plaster, and apply to the part.

For the CRAMP.
To stretch the limbs out, and move the toes about briskly.

A WASH FOR THE LADIES FACES.
Take Oil of Bitter Almonds two ounces, Oil of Tartar par Deliquium one ounce,
Oil of Rhodium four drops, shake them together till thoroughly mixed. It may be
lowered with Pump (...) Rose Water. It is a fine cream color, and will make
the skin admirably smooth and white, and free it from specks or pimples.

A FEW SIMPLE EFFICACIOUS RECEIPTS.
FOR THE HICCUP.
Take a wine bottle cork, and hold it between the teeth longways for three
minutes.

AN EASY EYE WATER.
Take Brandy one table-spoonful, and three of Spring Water, mix them together.

ANOTHER EYE WATER.
Take Sugar of Lead two grains, dissolve it in a pint of Spring Water. -- For
sore eyes, the Ointment of Tutty is good.

BEEF TEA.
Cut a pound of lean Beef into very thin slices, add to it a quart of Water,
put it over a quick fire, let it boil five minutes, take off the scum, and
decant the liquor for use.

TINCTURE OF RHUBARB.
There are three forts, the Spirituous, the Vinous, and the Bitter. This
Tincture is a proper purge in loosenesses, vomitings, cholics ^s, etc. Dose
from two drams to an ounce.

SACRED TINCTURE.
It cleanses the first passages, attenuates viscid juices, warms the blood, is
good in the green sickness, and hysteric diseases, and promotes the menses.
Dose from one tea-spoon full to one ounce; it purges easily -- An Aloetic
medicine.

THE VOLALILE AROMATIC TINCTURE.
Volatile Salts thus united with Aromatics, are very agreeable, and more
acceptable to the stomach; good to smell at; dose is five drops to sixty, in
wine and water.

TINCTURE OF HIERAPICRA.
Take of Succotrine Aloes powdered one ounce, Lesser Cardamon Seeds, and
Virginia Snake Root each one dram, Cochineal one scruple, Spanish White Wine
one pint and half, digest it in a very gentle heat two days, then strain off
the Tincture. This is similar to the Sacred Tincture. Dose from one tea-spoon
full to four, in Wine, or any other liquor: it purges gently.

TINCTURE OF CASTOR.
This Tincture is recommended in most kinds of nervous complaints and hysteric
disorders; dose ^m twenty drops to fifty, or more. A safe medicine.

In order to furnish those who may choose elegant distilled Spirituous Waters, I
recommend the following, which may be kept in common bottles, viz.

SPIRITOUS ALEXETERIAL WATER,
Is tolerably pleasant, and is an Alexipharmic and Stomachic, used in Juleps.

CARRAWAY WATER.
A cordial in common use, good for the wind.

SPIRITUOUS CINNAMON WATER,
Is an agreeable, grateful cordial water, it is a great astringent, and good in
fluxes.

N.B. It is hard to get good Cinnamon Bark, as the Dutch frequently draw the
oil out first, before it comes over; for this reason I have often recommended
the Cassia, for a Spirituous Water, which, when good, makes an agreeable water.

AROMATIC WATER; OR AQUA MIRABILIS.
Take Cinnamon two ounces, fresh Yellow Rind of Lemons, and Angelica Seeds each
one ounce, Mace half an ounce, Pepper Mint three (...), French Wine one gallon,
digest it for two days, and then distill off one gallon. This Water is very rich
of the spices, and proves a pleasant warm cordial and carminative; it often
gives present relief in languors, flatulencies, cholicky pains, and other like
complaints.

NUTMEG WATER.
This Water is regarded only as an agreeable spirituous liquor, lightly
impregnated with the Nutmeg flavor.

SPIRITUOUS PENNYROYAL WATER.
This Water has great share of the flavor of the Pennyroyal, and is pretty
much in use as a carminative and anti-hysteric.

SPIRITUOUS JAMAICA PEPPER WATER.
This Water is far more agreeable than a simple water drawn from the same
spice, and has long had a place among the cordials, both of the distiller and
apothecary; though it has not yet been received into any public Pharmacopaeia.

HYSTERIC JULEP.
Take Pennyroyal Water four ounces, Compound Valerian Water two ounces,
Tincture of Castor two drachms, Salt of Hartshorn ten grains, and loaf Sugar
six drams. The dose two tablespoons full every four or six hours; it is
calculated against hysteric and paralytic disorders.

STOMACHIC TINCTURE.
Take of Raisins stoned four ounces, Cinnamon half an ounce, Carraway Seeds,
Lesser Candamoms hulk'd, and Cochineal, each two drams, Proof Spirit two pints.
This is a grateful, elegant cordial Tincture, pleasanter than the Usquebaugh,
and may be taken from half an ounce to an ounce.

SNUFF FOR THE HEADACHE.
Take of Betony, Lavender Flowers, and Marjarom, of the leaves of each equal
parts, beat them together into powder. This Snuff may be safely used in all
complaints of the head: it is prepared from herbs which have a particular
efficacy in those cases, as it is manifest from the infinite service from it in
old and settled pains of the head. It may be taken as freely as you please.

NERVOUS TINCTURE.
Take Russia Castor one ounce, Assafoetida half an ounce, Spirit of Sal
Volatile one pint, digest them for ten days in a close stopped phial,
frequently shaking the vessel, and then strain off the Tincture. This Tincture
is very serviceable in lowness of spirits, faintings, and hysterical cases; the
dose is from one to two tea-spoons full two or three times a day, in a glass of
Wine a (...) Water or Valerian.

OPODELDOC
Is very serviceable in bruises and strains; it should be rubbed in with the
warm hand three or four times a day.

TO SWEETEN THE BREATH.
At night going to bed chew about the quantity of a small nut of fine Myrrh.

Of the Number of SIMPLE WATERS, the following are the best.
Viz. Mint -- Pepper Mint -- Pennyroyal -- Rose -- Cinnamon and Fennel Water.
The dried herbs kept and made into infusions as wanted, I think is better.
Observe in making of infusions, let not the water stand too long on the
ingredients, for in all infusions, tinctures, etc. the finer particles are
drawn out first.

There are several other medicines you may put into a chest, that are not
mentioned in the scheme; as the Sweet and Acid Spirit of Vitriol, Sacred
Tincture, Stomach Tincture, Nervous Tincture, Liquid Laudanum, Calomel, a
Mercurial Powder, Tincture of Castor, the Spirit Volatile Aromatic, Tincture of
Rhubarb, Eau de Luce, Lavender and Rosemary Water, etc. and as Powders, keep
better in bottles than drawers, I have ordered some bottles in the 12 and 16
chests to be made with wide mouths. Since the first publication of this book, I
have considered and made an estimate of several chests, and those who have
honored me with their commands, have thought me reasonable: in order that the
public may judge, I will lay the particulars before them.

Each chest is neatly made of mahogany wood, with brass handles and locks; the
bottles are square, with glass stoppers, holding either an ounce or two ounces;
labeled, and filled with the particular medicines.

The Price of a Medicine Chest complete, with medicines included,
l. s. d. A 6 bottle Case, one ounce each 0 16 0 9 Ditto 1 2 0 12 Ditto 1 8 0
16 Ditto 1 16 0 20 Ditto 2 5 0

These Chests, when ordered, are packed up in another case, without any extra
charge.

The Price of the Chests furnished complete, with two ounce bottles each, as
before.
l. s. d. A 6 bottle Case, of two ounce each 1 1 0 9 Ditto 1 10 0 12 Ditto 2 2
0 16 Ditto 2 12 6 20 Ditto 3 3 0

Any person may choose their medicin^ (...) no extra charge, excepting for the
fine O^ Scents, as Musk, Oil of Rhodium, Laven^^^ etc. which are very dear, and
are often sold (...) 1d. and 2d. a drop in the shops.

I likewise furnish Cordial Chests of the ^tron, Cinnamon, and other Waters;
and (...) Chests of the fine Scents and Traveling Ch^ at the same reasonable
Rate; but they var^ (...) much, that I cannot minutely fix the price.

All other medicines and drugs-prepared, an^ sent into the country with care.

Ladies and Gentlemen who reside in the country, will hereby be enabled to
assist their family and poor neighbors; and by a little practice, will soon
become acquainted with medicine sufficient to answer domestic purposes, till
further assistance can be procured. There are some receipts which I have put
down, which, because they are simple and easy, may create a laugh, though they
are a sure remedy for the complaint.

All letters, post paid, will be duly answered, and Chests sent according to
the directions given.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
P. 21. for a Boy's Patent, read a Royal Patent.

Advertisements.
^r. MARDON'S TREATISE on the SCURVY. 2d Edition, (...) only. Being a new
Treatise on the method of curing (...) leprosy, elephantiasis, and evil, with
other cutaneous (...) Showing the rise and progress of these diseases, and by
(...) ^edicines they are cured. Illustrated by many cases, ex^ from the
writings of the most eminent men of the faculty, (...) author's own
observations and advice. The whole inter^ with variety of efficacious receipts,
collected, and now ^d for the good of the public.

(...). The UNIVERSAL ANTI-SCORBUTIC DROPS, with ^^provemeats: By the author of
the new Treatise on the Scurvy. ^^ld in 2 s. 6 d. 4 s. and 1 l. 1 s. bottles,
at Mr. Wilkie's, bookseller, ^t. Paul's Church Yard; and at the proprietor's,
F. Spilsbury, ^hymist, No. 5, Mount Row, near Westminster Bridge.

N. B. These are the much esteemed Drops that have performed so many remarkable
cures in the scurvy, leprosy, pimpled faces, and other scorbutic disorders,
when others failed.

3. The CARTHUSIAN STOMACH TINCTURE. This elegant, safe and pleasant medicine,
composed of the most valuable ingredients, both of foreign and native growth,
is a sovereign remedy in all complaints of the stomach and bowels, which are
too numerous to mention. It quickly gives relief in all oppressions and
heaviness, strengthens the stomach, removes painful cholics to the aged, to
those who have weak nerves it is remarkably salutary; and, by its being in a
fluid state, very readily mixes with other liquors, and enters in the small
channels with ease, which renders this Tincture preferable to Powder or Pills.
Sold in molded bottles ^ s. ^ d. each, at Mr. Wilkie's, bookseller, St. Paul's
Church Yard; and at the Proprietor's, F. Spilsbury, chemist, No. 5, in Mount
Row, near the Turnpike, Westminster Bridge, London. Where persons purchasing a
bottle, and not finding any relief, may have their money returned.

Gentlemen instructed in the art of assaying gold and silver, by F. Spilsbury.


