Captain TOM's Remembrance to his Old Friends the MOBB of London, Westminster,
Southwark, and Wapping.
Gentlemen,
FOR so I love still to call you, on the Score of old Acquaintance and
Friendship. I take this occasion to wish you Joy on the happy Deliverance of
our good Queen from the bloody Design of the Popish Assassin Count Guiscard,
and on your own Escape, at the same time, from being dragoon'd into Popery and
Slavery, and becoming Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water to the French King,
and his Journy-Man the Pretender. For could his Unchristian Majesty have once
got the Collar on your Necks, and saddled you with the St. Germain's Yonker;
pray think, what a whipping Bill of Charges he would have brought in, for nursing,
boarding and tutoring that Babe of Grace? He has no Conscience, you know, in
his Demands; and a Child so dutifully bred up as that is, would not have had
the Boldness to higgle with his Foster-Father, and make him abate. No, he would
have paid him to the full; and you must have found where-withal to quit the
Reckoning. And so your selves and your Sons must have been chained to the Oar,
and turned Swabbers under French Boatswains, or been transported into Foreign
Countries, to have had your Brains knocked out in the French King's Quarrel, to
make him Monarch of all Europe. And your Wives and Daughters must some of 'em
have been common Strumpets to an Outlandish Jacobite Army, and others the
handsomest of 'em have been mewed up in Nunnerys for the Use of Priests and
Friars.

Instead of substantial Beef and Pudding, your Stomachs would have been taken
down with brown husky Bread, and Herbs, and Rot-gutSoop. And for Sunday
Apparel, you must have been content with coarse tattered Jackets, Canvass
Shirts, and Wooden Shoes. Thus, my Boys, you had for ever lost all the
Pleasures of Easter, Whitsontide, and Christmas: No more Holy Day Clothes, no
more Cakes and Ale, no more Beans and Bacon in the Summer: no more
Plum-Porridge, Mince-Pyes, and roasted Sir-Loins in the Winter.

Instead of being eased of Taxes, the Nation must have been drained to satisfy
the French King for the Expenses of the War. And this would have been skrew'd
up to One Hundred and Fifty Millions, at least, besides the Charge of keeping a
Standing Army at home, and Troops abroad, to help him to ruin the Allies. All
this Money, you may be sure, could never be raised without selling the Land, and
the Stock, and Shipping of Great Britain. And then what would you have done for
Employment to get your Living?

The Popish Gimcracks and Idolatry must have been set up in your Churches, your
Benefices have been given to Romish Priests, and the Chief of our Protestant
Lords, Gentlemen, and Clergy must have been murdered in their Houses, butchered
in the Streets, or pil'd up in Smithfield Bonfires, and you must have carried
Faggots to the Flames, or have been fried your selves. For it is impossible the
French and their St. Germain's Nursling, and Popery and Slavery should be
established in this Island, without making a Wilderness of our Country, a
Sacrifice of our Persons, and a Seizure of our Estates.

Don't think, Gentlemen, I carry things too far here: Consider how the French
King has laid waste his own Country, in order to establish Arbitrary Power and
Romish Bigotry in it. Call to mind how many Massacres the Papists have made in
France since the Reformation; how many hundred thousands of his own Protestant
Subjects that King has destroyed by Sword, Jails, Galleys and Banishment: And
can you imagine that He and the Pretender would use British Protestants better?
Consider how many Protestant Countries he has ruined in Germany, and forced the
Inhabitants to beg their Bread in other Lands: and do you believe he would be
more favorable to Great Britain, which has been the chief Hindrance of his
becoming Universal Monarch? Call to mind how the late King James cut off your
Noble Patriots, under the Notion of Plotters: how he sent your Bishops to the
Tower, filled your Armies, Universitys, and Councils with Papists, and set up a
High Commission Court, to turn out the best of your Clergy. Remember how he
designed to govern you with a Standing Army, and impose a Sham-Successor on
you, to make Popery and Slavery perpetual. How did you bless the Day when our
late Glorious Deliverer the Prince of Orange arrived, to rescue you from all
these Miserys? Did not your Hearts overflow with Joy? And did not you shout him
to Town with loud Acclamations, as the Savior, under GOD, of our Church and
State? Did not you then take Heart of Grace, and under my Conduct rout the
Monks and Priests, frighten the Standing Army of the Popish King, and force him
and his Irish Teagues to scamper? Did we not on all Occasions stand by the
Revolution, Heart and Hand, in which we and our Brethren all over the Kingdom,
had so great a Share? And yet, to see the Impudence of a late Gallimaufry of
mercenary Tatterdemalions, they would fain top it on the World, that, forsooth,
this same freeborn Mob of Great Britain had forsworn their Principles, turned
Tail, and become arrant Enemies to the Revolution, and to the Memory of the
Glorious Prince who was the Instrument of it, and had run in with a Herd of
Jacobites and Papists, to raise Tumults and Rebellions.

But to prevent your being gulled with any Flam-Storys they may buz in your
Ears, pray consider, Gentlemen, if Guiscard and his Fellow Bravo's had carried
their Point, to murder the Queen and your best Patriots, and to fire the City,
what Havoc the Pretender and the D. of Berwick would have made among you, with
their French, Irish, and Popish Cutthroats, while we had no Army to oppose
them, nor any Protestant Prince to make Head against them?

Gentlemen, I hope these things have opened your Eyes, and brought you to your
Senses, and that you are convinced of the Errors some of your Number have been
drawn into; and of the Knavery of those who misled them, and began to act the
Tragedy last Winter that was to have been concluded in this. Attend therefore
to the Advice of your old Captain, who exhorts you to continue faithful in the
Duty you owe to your Queen and Country, to the Protestant Succession, to your
Religion and Liberty, and to your Selves and Families, as becomes true
Britains; and to be ever ready to defend all these against Papists and
Jacobites, who are still brewing their Plots, and endeavoring to disgrace and
ruin the Authentic Mob of Great Britain, by false, spurious Anti-Mobs of their
own Cast. But I am confident you understand your selves better than to be thus
deceived; and that you will take Care not to forfeit your former Honor, and
the Favor of your old trusty Leader,

TOM.


