THE CURE OF THE MILIARY FEVER.

THE CURE OF THE MILIARY FEVER.

To which is Annexed, Advice to the Apothecaries.

By CHARLES HALES, Surgeon.

You, whosoever you are, insigniz'd or not insigniz'd with the Degree of
Doctor, Master, or Bachelor, whether skilful in Art, or by some other
Privilege promoted, pause a while, and hear what I have here to say. I will
show you the Truth, without any Mixture of Falsity. I will make you understand
who proceeds rightly, and who unadvisedly.

You Apothecaries; you, I say, who hitherto have been blind, suffer a Collyrium
to be poured into your Eyes, and permit them to be anointed with Balsam, that
the most thick Skin of Blindness may fall from your Sight, and you behold the
Truth as in a most clear Glass.

BASIL VALENTINE. THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for C. SAY, in Newgate-Street.

MDCCLIV.

THE PREFACE.
THE miliary Fever, either in its simple or compound State, is the most
frequent Disease that happens to Men, Women, and Children, of all Degrees, and
almost all Ages, throughout all Seasons of the Year; in Childbed Women it is
rare to meet with any other Fever of Consequence: Notwithstanding hitherto it
has been less taken Notice of by Authors in general, is less known by the
Physicians and Apothecaries, and its right Method of Cure less understood, than
any other acute Distemper that afflicts Mankind.

How to account for this general, but unpardonable Ignorance, I am much at a
Loss, except the prevailing Opinion of some Physicians, That this Fever is a
Creature of our own making, and that the Eruption is brought forth by the Use
of too hot Medicines; I say, except that prevailing Opinion has run through the
whole College, and from thence the dangerous Infection been conveyed to the
Apothecaries; of whom the greatest Part are indeed so very inconsiderate and
negligent, and so little inquisitive into the Nature of Distempers, that they
must of Consequence be great Strangers to Observation and Experience, the most
faithful Guides to a right Practice of Physic. I would not romance, or speak
with Malice, but can assert with great Confidence, that I have had an
Opportunity of discoursing with some Physicians, and many Apothecaries,
concerning the Nature and Treatment of this Distemper; but, good God, how great
their Ignorance, how unaccountable their Stupidity and Obstinacy! I can hardly
forbear blushing when I think of it, and yet all the Assurance I could give
them of my Success, by Word of Mouth, had no Effect, they still resolutely
persisting in their destructive Treatment, though half of their Patients fell
under their Hands; till I had an Opportunity of convincing them by ocular
Demonstration, with how much Safety, Ease, and Expedition, I cured those who
were under my own Care; and almost with as much Certainty as Intermittents by
the Bark; not more than one in twenty dying, except I have been called in at
the last Stage of the Distemper, when I found their Mittimus already signed.
During several of my younger Years, I had an Opportunity of attending one of
these Gentlemen, very eminent in his Profession, and in great Practice; but,
all the Time I was with him, I only once heard mentioned the Words miliary
Fever, and those in so slight a Manner, as not sufficiently to attract my
Attention; but knew nothing of the Nature of the Distemper, or the miliary
Eruption, having not seen one Patient, who, it was said, had them, although this
Gentleman had been in the Profession Twenty Years;

Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, cui Lumen ademptum.

Virg. And that it is a Fever sui generis, and altogether as different from
other Fevers, as the Measles from the Smallpox, is with me out of Dispute; and
that it existed, long before my Time, is sufficiently recorded by the
Testimonies of Sir Richard Blackmore and Sir David Hamilton; the last of whom
Dr. Cheyne mentions with great Reverence and Respect And here I am obliged, by
many Ties, to do Justice to that very worthy and skilful Gentleman, Sir David
Hamilton, Physician, lately deceased, who in our conjunct Attendance on a
Person of Quality in this last Distemper (the miliary Fever) did, to my great
Satisfaction, so readily foretell every succeeding Change, and so aptly furnish
out a Remedy for every Accident, as did abundantly show it familiar to him, and
justify the History and Method of Cure published by him, of this tedious and
dangerous Disease, the miliary Fever. A Disease, though less common, This is a
Mistake of the Doctor's, through Want of Observation.
yet as various and as nice, and much more tedious than the Smallpox itself.
Cheyne.


That the Eruption is caused by the Use of too hot Medicines and Regimen, I
absolutely deny, although such Method, I know, will prolong the Cure, if it does
not soon kill the Patient; for I have often attended poor Men, Women, and
Children, who have scarcely had Clothes to cover them, and have taken no
Medicines, but drank cold Water, or Small-Beer, four or five Days or longer,
before I have been called to them, and yet this Fever, according to the best
Account I could collect, has gone through its various Symptoms, but in a terrible
Manner, even to a very plentiful Eruption of the crystalline Pustles; but, by
the Use of too cold a Regimen, then almost ready to expire for Want of other
Assistance, such as cordial and diaphoretic Medicines, to conduct them safely
through the last Stage of the Disease, which was by such Means very soon and
surprisingly effected.

In the Year 1741, this Fever in its worst Degree was more epidemical than ever
I have found it within my Time, and swept away great Numbers of People of all
Degrees and Ages under Fifty, (for few above that Age were then seized with
it,) insomuch that the Bills of Mortality amounted weekly to twelve or fifteen
Hundred, for a considerable Time: In the Beginning of this Constitution,
Patients were treated, by other Practisers as well as myself, with Bleeding and
Vomiting indiscriminately, Blistering early and without Mercy, Sal Nitri, or
Saline Draughts, with or without Sal. Vol. C. C. which were continued four or
five Days without real Advantage, and were then changed for Conf. Raleigh,
which, doing no more Service than the former, was again changed in three or
four Days more for Sal. C. C. Pulv. Serp. etc. which then brought on Delirium
and Subsultus Tendinum, Symptoms which introduced a Succession of Blistering
Plasters from Head to Foot, which were not likely to relieve the Patient in
any Degree, so long as the Causes of all this Mischief, too hot Medicines, were
daily repeated, till the Scene closed in Death; but which did not frequently
happen till the 15th, 20th, or sometimes the 25th Day; with this Satisfaction
only to their surviving Relations and Friends, that they had, as they thought,
done all that could be done for the Deceased; although, to speak the Truth, they
could not take a more effectual Method to remove them out of the World. This
shocking Success, which made me almost weary of my Profession, as I could not
avoid thinking, that we all treated this Fever after a wrong Manner, obliged me
often to think seriously upon the Matter, and examine many of the best Authors,
who had wrote of Fevers; I could find nothing in them that suited my Purpose,
and but very few that even mentioned such a Fever; till, dipping into Allen's
Synopsis, I found that Sir David Hamilton's Treatise upon that Subject was my
chief Dependence I did not know that Sir Richard Blackmore had wrote upon that
Subject, till very lately I accidentally read his Discourse of the Plague,
wherein I found a previous Account of the miliary Fever.
This I procured, and, after reading it over and over again with great
Attention, determined to follow the same Method in that Case, with all the
Patients who should happen afterward to fall under my sole Management; as I
religiously observed the speculative, as well as the practical Part, so did I
ever after as happily conduct my Patients through every Stage of the Disease;
for, as before, not more than five out of ten lived, so now not one in ten
died, and those only who had some other Disease in Conjunction with this Fever;
with this Inconvenience only, that the Cure, though almost certain, was very
tedious, even 20, 25, or 30 Days. But happy was I, that I had met with even a
tedious Cure; nothing now remained for me to do, but farther to consider if it
was not practicable to contract the Cure within a shorter Compass, by more
powerful Medicines, and yet such as would by no Means aggravate the Symptoms.
Whilst I was thus pondering, I recollected that my Author observed, as a
favorable Prognostic, that the drowsier Patients are, the happier they recover
A Physician may as certainly take the curative Indications from the smallest
Circumstances of the Disease, as he does the Diagnostic from them. SYDENHAM.
. Reasoning with myself upon this Principle, I luckily hit upon a speedier
Method, which from Time to Time, with the greatest Care and Attention, I
altered, till I had reduced the Cure of this devouring Fever to as great
Certainty, as almost any we can boast of in the Practice of Physic: Thus I
fixed the Rule of my Practice for the future, and which I have continued from
that Time to this, with so much Success, that, for seven Years past, I
confidently affirm, I have not lost above four Patients out of a Hundred, of
that Fever in its simple State; nay furthermore, for one Patient that I have
had under my Care fifteen Days, ten have perfectly recovered in two Thirds of
the Time, and, even in many, all dangerous Symptoms have been absolutely
removed before the Eruption appeared; which, although it may seem strange to most
of our Profession, is nevertheless no more strange than true, as they
themselves may prove, if they diligently observe the Nature of the Disease, and
exactly follow the Method of Cure, as I have done before them.

For the present Purpose, I have abstracted from Sir David Hamilton, and Sir
Richard Blackmore, all that I judge necessary in Relation to the Description
and Nature of this Fever; to which I have added occasional Remarks, and my own
Method of Cure, which by repeated Trials, and diligent Observation, I have
proved to be more easy, speedy, and safe, than even theirs, or any other, that
I know of; if any Body shall hereafter publish a better, I shall receive the
same with as much Satisfaction as I communicate mine, having nothing more at
Heart than the Service of my Profession, and the Use of all possible Means for
the public Welfare. I have taken the Liberty to give Advice to the Apothecaries
in general, which (how much soever I may be censured for it) I am sure they
stand much in Need of at this Time of Day, as their own Consciences must
undoubtedly tell them; for it is not the Physician's Attendance and
Prescriptions, on which they so much rely, that will alone cure Diseases; there
are many other Requisites absolutely necessary, which of Consequence fall to
the Medicaster's Share.

OF THE MILIARY FEVER.
By the late Learned Sir DAVID HAMILTON, Fellow of the Royal College of
Physicians, and of the Royal Society; as likewise Physician in Ordinary to her
late excellent Majesty Queen Anne.
THE PREFACE.
I Have chosen to describe, before all other Diseases, the Nature and Method of
curing a Miliary Fever; because I know of none who have hitherto treated of
this Fever, as of a different Sort, at least, in any satisfactory Way; when,
notwithstanding, I have known it, in several, to turn either into a chronical
Distemper, or in a short Time to prove fatal. For this sometimes comes to pass,
in a mild Beginning of this Distemper, from a Neglect of themselves, or through
an Impatience of the Sick at its long Continuance; and sometimes also from the
Ignorance of the Physicians, being deluded with its fallacious Symptoms; or,
lastly, through an unreasonable Fear The Patient will be in no Danger, on that
Account, now; for that Sort of Fear has been long since banished.
of being thought greedy of Gain, they omit continuing their necessary Visits.
Wherefore, I have thought it a Work worthy of my Time, if by these my
Observations, being diligently collected from the daily Inspection, or
Attendance upon sick Persons, I might afford some Light to young Practitioners;
and by these Means stir up the more skilful to publish their own; and the
Reader may assuredly believe, that I have acted with great Veracity.

OF THE MILIARY FEVER.
Of the Name, Kind, and Sorts of this Distemper.
A Miliary Fever take its Name from the Pustles, or Vesicles, in some Sort
resembling the Form of Gromwel Seeds, appearing chiefly about the upper Parts;
yet I think it ought rather to be called a vesicular Fever, because the Pustles
are Vesicles, or little Blisters, filled at first with a limpid Serum, and
afterward with a whitish, not unlike to the Color of Pearls.

There are some who think, that only the pestilential and spotted Fevers ought
to be reckoned amongst the malign Kind; but I am of Opinion, that there are
likewise others of a different Species, which may very well be referred to the
malign Class.

1. What Kind of Fevers soever, which are acquired by Contact, or Breathing
(Vapor) or any other Manner of Infection.

2. Also those Sorts of Fevers, which, immediately from the Beginning, are
accompanied with a violent Pain, and fixed to some Part; as to the Head, or
Region of the Guts, or Kidneys, or even to the Limbs: Like as if the Patient
should be affected with a Pain of the Head, or a Cholic, or a nephritic, or a
gouty, or a rheumatic Pain; or even with the Pains (like those) of Childbirth,
as if the same was an original Distemper; when, notwithstanding, such Sort are
the Symptoms of a miliary Fever; they will not give Way to Remedies which are
wont to be of Service, when the Diseases so named are primary.

3. Also in whom the animal Spirits are suddenly oppressed and eclipsed; and
where the aforesaid Symptoms seem to depend on no evident Cause, but on a
certain latent Poison, called, by the Ancients, an occult Quality, and by the
Moderns, Vapors.

Or, Lastly, where sudden Death arises from a Cause which seems to be void of
Danger; all which, as they denote a Malignity, so also have I observed the same
to happen in a miliary Fever.

And it is worthy of Remark, that this Fever rages with the same Malignity, as
the petechial or spotted Fever in the Indies.

This Kind of Fever is twofold, simple and compound. I call it simple, as
often as no Pustles besides the miliary appear, whereof I am going to
discourse; but compound, when red, papillary Pustules are interspersed with the
miliary, and which, when they are solitary, are commonly called a Rash. And it
is farther to be observed that miliary Pustules are sometimes intermixed with
the Smallpox, and, while the Smallpox rises up, those gradually wither away;
but remain standing, after the papillary are dried up.

A Description of the Miliary Fever.
That I may the better describe the History of a miliary Fever, I shall reckon
up the Antecedents, Concomitants, and Consequences.

The Antecedents are, a weak Constitution of Body, whether the same be natural
or adventitious, caused by immoderate Evacuations, or too spare Diet; a serous
or watery Blood; a weak and timorous Mind, and easily annoyed by external
Accidents, as in Women and effeminate Men; much and deep Study (or
Thought-fulness) or Sorrow; an Obstruction, or Ulcer in any Part, attended with
Pain: Whence those Persons who have been long afflicted with a Cholic Pain,
Gout, or Stone, or an Ulcer of the Kidneys, are more obnoxious to this Fever.
Also an inward Heat in Women, with or without Thirst, and especially about the
Time of their Delivery, whereby also the Pains of Childbearing are less severe
than usual, and the Spirits, without any evident Cause, are very much
depressed, with an Oppression of the Breast, causing Sighs; wherein, as in all
other Fevers, here also generally happens an external Coldness.

The Concomitants, or Symptoms accompanying this Fever, are oftentimes a Pain
resembling that of the Cholic, Stone of the Kidneys, Pleurisy, Rheumatism, or
that of Childbirth; likewise an Oppression of the Breast, with a Sinking of
the Spirits: And, two or three Days after the said Pain is gone off, there
comes on a Shivering of the whole Body, and then a Coldness and an Heat
alternately arise. Yet this Heat is milder than in a common continual Fever,
and comes nearer to that of natural; the Palms of the Hands are affected with a
more intense Heat, while the Back-part is much cooler; the Pulse also is
frequent, but weak; the Spirits often flag very much; and the Breast, being
oppressed as it were with a great Weight, causes Sighings; the Sleep stealing
on is suddenly interrupted, the most inseparable Token of all the Symptoms; for
the Patients are often without Sleep for many Days and Nights together This
Symptom will scarcely, or ever, be met with, if the Fever be treated in the
Manner, as hereafter directed.
without a Delirium, or a Pain of the Head, and generally much longer than in
other Fevers. I met with a very singular Example of this Case, in a certain
Lady who was under the Care of the learned Dr. Bernard. She was a whole Month
in this Fever, without Sleep; yet free of a Delirium, or any Pain in the Head.

The Tongue is sometimes covered over with white Aphthoe, or a Thrush, and
sometimes like that of Persons in Health; the Urine is one while as pale as
common Water, at others, of a natural Color: Which Symptoms, deceiving young
Physicians, make them frequently attribute this Effect to the Vapors, as they
term it. They who are seized with this Fever, are some times afflicted with a
Sickness at Stomach, especially after Sleep; and sometimes with a Soreness,
either by their own Negligence, or a bad Practice; to wit, while heating
Medicines, usual in hysteric Paroxysms, are prescribed, without Diaphoretics;
whence in Lieu of a mild Procedure of Nature, expelling the morbific Matter by
a gentle Sweating, a rapid Fermentation throws down the same into the Guts. The
Belly is sometimes bound, and sometimes loose, with a Sickness at the Stomach,
and Pains of the Bowels; one while they are thirsty, at others, very little;
sometimes the Hands and Tongue, being stretched out to the Physician, tremble,
and the Patient speaks in a trembling Manner; they are also often molested with
convulsive Motions, a Delirium, and a difficult Respiration; the Exacerbations
of which Symptoms return like the Paroxysms of an intermitting Fever. An
Oppression of the Breast with Sighing, or a greater Sinking of the Spirits,
without manifest Cause; Watchings, and a Commotion of the Spirits, commonly
called a Hurry in the Head, as often as the Sick compose themselves to Sleep;
as likewise a frequent and weak Pulse, being conjoined with certain other
Symptoms, are always the Forerunners of the miliary Pustles at Hand: And they
are all wont to continue till the miliary Pustles break out, and then the
Patients are freed from most of them.

These Pustles generally appear in the Breast, Neck, and Interstices of the
Fingers, sometimes also in the whole Body; and, after a daily and gradual
Increase, they at last vanish away, leaving the Skin rough in the Seats of the
Pustles. They sometimes itch, especially in a complex miliary Fever; that is,
where red papillary Pustles are mixed with the miliary. And it is to be
observed, that, by how much simpler this Fever is, by so much slighter are the
Symptoms, and which for this very Reason frequently creates a Neglect, both in
the unwary Physicians, and in the Patients; whereby this Fever either becomes
more perilous, or another Disease often arises; for, by taking less Care at
first than ought to have been used, it sometimes begins with more grievous
Symptoms; as, with a Sickness of the Stomach, Loss of Appetite, an inward Heat,
an Oppression of the Breast, Sinking of the Spirits, Sighing and irregular
Returns of Heat and Cold, Watchings, and the like. In the Declination of this
Fever, the upper Part of the Hands are often moistened with a cold Sweat.

It is very difficult to observe, whether the miliary Pustles are wont to
appear on a certain Day; seeing the first Appearance of this Distemper, and the
Patient's Account of the same, are so uncertain. But, as far as I can learn, I
take them mostly to appear about the Tenth or Eleventh Day from the Beginning,
if so be the Fever have a regular Progress, and are dried up about the
Eighteenth; or, where there is Plenty of morbific Matter, about the
Twenty-first or Twenty-second Day.

I have chiefly endeavored to observe the Time of the Eruption in those Women,
to whom I have been called, on the Third Day after their Delivery; and have
heard them complaining of a Shivering or Coldness, followed with an Heat: For
when I found, in looking upon their Breast and Neck, the miliary Pustles there,
I concluded, that they had been seized many Days before with a miliary Fever;
and, upon a strict Scrutiny made even from the Beginning of the Distemper, I
understood that they had perceived either a preternatural Heat, or a Pain of
some Part, with or without Thirst, and a vehement Oppression of the Breast,
with Sighings, and a Sinking of the Spirits before they were brought to-bed;
which Symptoms being supposed to depend on the approaching Birth, they hoped
all would be well, when it was over. Moreover, although they have the Pains of
Childbirth milder than usual, yet the great Oppression of the Breast in such,
with the Sighing and Deficiency of Spirits (called by the Midwives Fear and
Vapors) and the quick and weak Pulse are sure Prognostics of the approaching
miliary Pustles; to whose Eruption in Childbed Women, a Way is made by their
composing in Bed to sweat: Therefore I commonly reckon eleven Days from the
first inward Heat, or Pain before the Birth, to the Eruption after the Birth.
But the Ignorance, and preposterous Relation the Patients give of their own
State, do, for the most Part, so confound the Physician's Prognostic, that even
the most curious cannot find out the very Day.

The Consequences of a miliary Fever, as far as my Observation reaches, are a
Swelling of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet, not always free from Pain; a Swelling
and Abscess of the Breasts; an immoderate Flux of the Lochia, and of Urine;
Hypocondriac or Hysteric-like Affects; an inward Heat joined with a Weakness,
Faintness; and Loss of Appetite: One or other of these, I say, are generally
the Consequences, as often as this Fever, either by Reason of its own
Ill Nature, or bad Treatment of the Physician, makes an unhappy Ending The
Symptoms of the miliary Fever, in the Year 1741, were these; Shivering or
Coldness, and Heat alternately; a Pain of the Head, Limbs; Back, like the Stone
in the Kidneys; Belly, like the Cholic; Sickness, bilious Vomiting, Looseness;
Sinking of the Spirits, Oppression at the Breast; a moist Tongue, little
Thirst; the Urine of an Amber Color, like that of a Person in Health; a
strong, full, quick Pulse at the Beginning, but three or four Days afterward,
weak, low, and swift; Delirium, Subsultus Tendinum, difficult Respiration; the
Heat milder than in other continual Fevers. The Appearance of the Eruption,
which was chiefly of the crystalline Kind, did not happen till the 14th, 15th,
or 16th Days; which, I have now Reason to believe, would have appeared sooner,
if it had not been retarded, by the bad Conduct of the Patient or Nurse, or
imprudent Treatment of the Physician.


.

Of the Prognostic Signs in this Fever.
A Prognostic is thus to be made in this Fever; if the Sick has not observed a
due Regimen in the Beginning, or the Physician prescribed heating Medicines,
not raising a Sweat; although the Symptoms were milder from the Beginning, yet
the Distemper often turns to the worse, and threatens either Death or a
lingering Illness.

If some Part should be pained from the Beginning; or the Patient grow hot
without Pain; or be sick at the Stomach; and afterward should have irregular
Returns of hot and cold Fits, and a Sinking of the Spirits, and an Oppression
of the Breast, with Sighings, attended with a free Breathing, and the Pustles
come out at last with a gentle and continued Sweating; the Case is generally
hopeful. If a Delirium, convulsive Motions, a Convulsion, or an Apoplexy,
should accompany the Pathognomonic Signs of the Fever, that is, a great
Oppression of the Breast, with Sighing, and Sinking of the Spirits, and they
should happen in the Beginning, they yield more easily to a regular and
diligent Practice: But in a more advanced State of the Distemper, and in the
Declination, where the Sick is weaker, and the miliary Pustles, either by
catching Cold, or perhaps by an irregular Management, do not appear, a deadly
Translation is made upon the Brain and Nerves, and Death the speedy Consequence
of it.

A yellow Color of the Urine, which suddenly turns pale, warns the Physician,
that a Translation is to be feared.

A Looseness in Childbed Women, seized with this Fever, is a dangerous
Symptom; for it not only hinders the Eruption of the Pustles, but also the
Flowing of the Lochia.

A difficult Breathing, an intercepted Speech, and a Trembling of the Tongue,
are to be ranked amongst the perilous Symptoms, especially a nervous Dyspnaea,
or Difficulty of Breathing

The drowsier the Patients are, the happier they recover.

Those who are of a milder Nature, escape more easily, than the furious and
wrathful Tempers do.

If Nature and the Physician concur together, the Sick immediately recovers
Strength, after the drying up of the Pustles; unless, by Reason of the
Abundance of morbific Matter, the Relics be thrown upon some certain Part.

If in a Scarlet Fever miliary Pustles should arise, dying away with a red
Color, they promise Safety.

OF THE MILIARY FEVER.
BY Sir Richard Blackmore, M. D.
OF THE MILIARY FEVER.
THE miliary Fever, so called from the small red Eruptions that resemble
Millet-seed, is the most frequent in this Country of all the malignant Kind.

The Patient often seems to himself at first only somewhat faint and
indisposed, his Strength and Appetite diminished, and his Sleep interrupted,
and his Dreams disorderly and tumultuous, while he goes abroad and applies to
his usual Business, and hopes his Indisposition will soon wear off, not
suspecting that he nourishes a malignant Fever in his Bosom. At length after
about seven or eight Days, when he has taken to his Bed, by Means of copious
and profuse Sweats, the miliary Eruptions before mentioned appear in the
Temples, the Neck and Breast, and sometimes spread over the whole Body. If the
Quantity be not great, as in the distinct Kind of the Smallpox, they generally
presage a happy Event; but if they are very numerous, and cover the whole
Surface of the Skin, then, like the Smallpox of the confluent Kind, they are
often fatal, and always dangerous; and they are in this too like that Sort of
Smallpox, that, as I have seen, in their Ripening, they sometimes flow or run
into each other There are, notwithstanding, Physicians, who, to this Day,
ignorantly presage the happiest Event, from the greatest Quantity of Pustles;
of which I have often been an Ear-witness.


These little red Eruptions grow by Degrees to Maturity, acquire white Heads
full of Matter, and then grow dry, and die away; which Course, in the more
kindly Sort, is generally accomplished in seven Days; but, in the worst Sort,
the Time is much farther protracted, and this happens also in the worst Sort of
Smallpox; and it is very remarkable, that it sometimes falls out, that in this
Sort of Fevers, after one Eruption of a more malignant Kind has completed its
Course, and the Skin is cleared of its putrid Crop, yet a swift, troubled
Pulse, great Drought and Want of Spirits, shall continue, and the Physician may
be assured, that either Death, or another Eruption (i) A second Fever and
Eruption, I likewise know, often succeed the first, but that is only when the
Patient has been ill-treated, or when the Continuance of proper Medicines, for
a sufficient Time, has been obstinately refused.
like the first is at Hand, to carry off the Matter of the Fever, which the
first was unable wholly to perform: And this I have seen repeated the third
Time, and even after that the Patient has recovered, which but rarely happens.

The great and profuse Sweats, that precede the miliary Eruption, are by no
Means such as critically discharge the Putrefaction that causes the Disease;
but they arise from the violent Conflict and Agitation of the Blood, while the
sound and active Parts exert their Force, to digest and expel the Matter of the
Disease; and therefore they do not relieve oppressed Nature, but sink and
weaken the Spirits by an excessive Evacuation This brings to my Mind the Case
of a Female Patient, who, at my first Visit, I found drowning, if I may so say,
in those Sweats; with an interrupted Pulse, and the Feet and Hands growing
cold; at which, I presaged Death in a short Time. The Apothecary, being told,
upon Enquiry, my Opinion, said, He could not see any Thing which had that
Appearance, for that she was in a fine breathing Sweat, and a most sweet Sleep;
but, fine and sweet as they were, she died in twenty-four Hours afterward.
; which however is necessary, that the putrid Parts may be excluded from the
Blood by the miliary Eruptions that follow, in which consists the critical
Separation by which Nature is delivered, and the Blood recovers its healthful
State; as it does by casting out the Matter of the Smallpox, at first
complicated and entangled with the Mass of Blood.

Some Physicians, too fond of the cool Method in the Management of Fevers, from
their Observation of the Usefulness of that Conduct in inflammatory Distempers,
such as the Smallpox, Rheumatisms, Pleurisies, Quinsies, and St. Anthony's
Fire; have injudiciously extended it to the Cure of malignant Cases, in which a
considerable Quantity of the Blood is putrefied or perished by the Dissolution
or Separation of the Parts, as before described; but they seem not to act under
the Guidance of Reason, but, in a mechanical Way of Practice, apply the same
Method of Cure to all Sorts of Fevers, though their Nature be ever so much
distinguished. And hence it is, that these Gentlemen will not allow, that the
miliary Eruptions are a regular Discharge of the Feverish Matter from the
Blood; but, say they, they are the Effect of an unskilful Conduct, in using
Remedies of too hot a Nature, by which the Blood is put into too great a Hurry
and Agitation: But this Assertion affronts all Reason and Observation. They may
as well affirm, that the Smallpox, Measles, and Scarlet Suffusions, Boils, and
Blanes, would never appear on the Skin, were they not produced and excluded by
the Administration of too warm and active Remedies. I have often seen those
Eruptions break out in great Abundance, where the cool Method has been exactly
observed; and of this every Practiser may be soon convinced, if he carefully
attends to the Growth and Progress of this Distemper. In this, as in the
Diseases above-named, the hurtful Matter, admitted into the Blood, is by
Nature's Determination to be first concocted, and then separated by the
Strainers of the Skin, where being entangled, and not suffered to perspire, it
produces a miliary Harvest; and a Physician, being but a Servant of Nature,
ought to follow her Steps, promote her Intentions, and not to turn her from her
Path, and oppose her Operations When the opposite Practice is made use of, by
Mistake, it is manifestly preductive of great Evils; as when, for Example, the
miliary Fever is taken for an Intermittent; saline Draughts, succeeded by the
Bark, are then not only confidently prescribed, but the Practiser without
Hesitation declares the Danger entirely over, not knowing that he is at once
giving a fatal Stab to his own Reputation, and his Patient's Life; for Death
most assuredly, and to the Surprise of the Doctor, as well as all about the
poor Sufferer, must soon close the Tragedy. As when, likewise, that Fever is
taken for a Cholic, the Stone in the Kidneys, or the Rheumatism, the same fatal
Issue must be the Consequence; with this Difference only, that, in these latter
Cases Death makes his Approach, more slow, but more terrible; for it is then
not uncommon for an Abscess to be formed in the Breast or Belly, or other
lingering Disorders to follow, which, together with an hectic Fever, at length,
finish Life.

Some eminent and worthy Physicians, of my Acquaintance, know what I say to be
true, because they must be sensible how much they have suffered in their
Reputations, by these fatal Mistakes; particularly, by the Mal-administration
of their adored Cortex.

I could relate many Histories of these tragical Events, but I think these
Hints are alone sufficient to mark out the dangerous Rocks, which lie in the
Way to a safe Harbor.




When a Patient has long struggled with a Fever accompanied with Putrefaction,
and, after twelve Days, no miliary Breakings out are observed, it is usual that
small watery Bladders, from their Transparency, called crystalline, appear in
the Temples, Neck, and Breast, which often gradually ripen, and become full of
Matter; these perform the Office of the former Eruptions, by freeing the Blood
of the noxious Ferment that disturbs it, but not so safely and effectually I
must confess, that it is a Matter of Doubt with me, whether these Bladders do
not rather only portend the gangrenous State of some Part of the Fluids, than
that they are a critical Discharge of the noxious Matter; any more than the
Vesications, which are usual in Gangrenes of the Solids, free the diseased
Subject from the impending Danger, which, of Consequence, threatens the Loss of
the Limb, Life, or both.
.

It is to be observed, that there is a Fever, which I call hypochondriacal or
hysteric, though it be not ranged in the Classes of that Disease by any Authors,
as far as I know, that, by its Similitude to the malignant Kind, often imposes
on Physicians, and induces them to believe that it is of that Sort. And this is
the only true Fever of the Spirits, and which I have often seen. It imitates
closely the malignant Sort in the greatest Parts of its Symptoms, but it
differs in this, that the Exercise of their Reason is not interrupted, or
suspended, during its whole Course, which runs out sometimes to more than
twenty Days; whereas most commonly the Head is much, if not chiefly affected,
and the Faculties of Reason and Memory are greatly disturbed and broken, in
malignant Fevers. Another Distinction is, that in the first Sort the Patient is
not troubled with Looseness, or Thrush; nor do there ever appear in the Skin
any miliary Eruptions, or Spots, of any Sort whatsoever. But on the contrary,
in the last Kind, some putrefied Matter is always excluded from the Blood, and
determined to the Skin, or ought to be so, if sufficient Force remains in the
Blood to effect: it Or if the Intention of Nature be not reversed by
Mal-practice.
. It is true, that in simple Fevers, where no Parts of the Blood are corrupted,
there needs no critical Separation, but by Sweats and Transpiration, which cool
the feverish Flame, carry off the offensive Matter from the Blood, and restore
Nature to its regular Constitution; but, when many Parts of the Blood are
actually mortified, how can Nature ordinarily be restored to a healthful State,
without expelling them to the Skin? Can a Gangrene in the solid Parts be healed
till the sound Flesh be freed from the mortified Fibers? No more can the Mass
of Blood be cured, till it is cleared and purged from its putrid and perished
Portions; which usually must be done by excluding them from its Bosom by
friendly Sweats, or lodging them in the Surface of the Body; I said usually,
because sometimes this putrid Matter may be discharged by the Glands or
Strainers of the Guts, though that does not often happen; for frequently the
Looseness, that at the latter End attends malignant Fevers, if the Patient
recovers, is taken up by a Thrush or sore Mouth; and hence it appears, that the
hypochondriacal Fever, mentioned before, has not the essential Properties of
the malignant, and therefore does not arise from Putrefaction; though it is
certain, that the malignant Kind have, at their Beginning, such a Conformity of
Symptoms and Appearances to hypochondriacal Passions, that it is difficult to
discern, whether the Patient be attacked by a putrid Fever, or an hysteric
Disorder, or Perturbation of the Spirits: For Instance, Chilness, Shiverings,
and rigorous great Inquietude, Vomitings, Dejection of Appetite, Anxiety,
Sickness, and immoderate Sweats, Wakefulness, a low weak Pulse, Faintness, and
great Diminution of Strength, are Symptoms common to both; and therefore for
several Days a malignant Fever has so near a Resemblance to one, that is only
hysteric, that many Physicians and Standers-by, I am apt to believe, mistake
the first for the last, and look upon a great and dangerous Disease to be only
the Spleen, or a Fit of the Vapors, to the great Hazard of the Patient.

OF THE CURE OF THE MILIARY FEVER.
By CHARLES HALES, Surgeon.
OF THE CURE Of the SIMPLE MILIARY FEVER.
WHEN I am sent for to a Patient in a Fever, I attentively listen to the
Account he gives of himself, without Interruption, and then carefully examine
into the Progress of every Symptom For by what more compendious, or other Way,
can the curative Indications, or the morbific Causes we are to oppose, be
searched for, than by a certain and distinct Perception of peculiar Symptoms?
SYDENHAM.


from the first Seizure; I mean, from the first Hour that he found himself in
the least disordered in order to find out, with as much Certainty as possible,
the Nature of the Fever; for on that depend the Hopes of an expeditious Cure;
although, for the most Part, I can certainly foretell, whether, or not, it will
prove of the miliary Kind, from the Pulse alone, the Moment I touch it, which,
in this Case, discovers itself to me, in a more extraordinary and
distinguishing Manner, than in any other I have ever met with; for although in
the Beginning of the Fever, in a robust Constitution, it is sometimes frequent,
full and vigorous, yet it seldoms fails, in three or four Days, to become
remarkably swift, weak, and depressed; which also happens in most People at the
Beginning: But these nice Distinctions are not to be acquired, without long
Observation and Experience, arising from constant and unwearied Attendance, in
a Multiplicity of Practice; so that the young Practitioner must not only
content himself with forming a Judgment from the general Indications, but be
particularly careful not to hazard his Patient's his Life, of his own own
Reputation, by mistaking the Case for an inflammatory, nervous, or intermittent
Fever, which may easily happen to the unexperienced and unwary For there are
found Diseases, which are reduced under the same Genus and Name, and, as to
Symptoms, are like one another, yet they are different in their Natures, and
require a different Way of Cure. -- The Cure whereof had not been now to seek,
if Writers, in communicating their Experiments and Observations, had not took
one Disease for another. SYDENHAM.


; nay, to my certain Knowledge, has often so happened, even to many old, but
very eminent in the Profession, Physicians as well as Apothecaries, to the
Destruction of Numbers; who might otherwise have been now living Monuments of
their Knowledge and Success. I would therefore by all Means advise the young
Practitioners to stand upon their Guard; to study Nature For the sagacious Man
(Hippocrates) percei that Nature cures Diseases, and does all, being helped by
a few simple Forms of Remedies, and sometimes without any. SYDENHAM.


, and pursue her to her most intricate Recesses; to search out diligently the
Nature and Properties of Medicines, and to attend indefatigably the Poor as
well as the Rich; which will not only teach them to ward off the furious
Attacks of a most potent Enemy, but may, one Time, or other, prevent themselves
and Families, from falling Victims to their own Ignorance.

From what I have said, if any Body expects to see a copious and pompous Form
of Remedies, he will be much disappointed; for I delight in Simplicity of
Medicine, for the Cure of acute Diseases, as much as in simple Diet, for the
Preservation of Health and long Life.

In my Preface, I have objected to the Method of Practice in 1741, for that the
Sal Nitri and Saline Draughts are too cold, and Sal. Vol. C. C. Conf. Raleigh,
etc. are of too hot a Nature, and quite inconsistent with that moderately
cordial and diaphoretic Quality, necessary in this Case; therefore cannot by
any Means he admitted into the Rank of Remedies for a miliary Fever, without
manifest Hazard of prolonging the Distemper with dire Symptoms It often happens
that the Face of the Disease varies according to the various Processes of
Healing; and some Symptoms rather proceed from the Physician than the Disease.

SYDENHAM.
, or Death itself: What a preposterous Fashion have some of our modern
Physicians crept into? A sudden Transition from cold to hot, or hot to cold;
either of which not having sufficient Efficacy to produce the desired End, they
agree in Consultation, the dernier Resort, to sign a Neutrality Sal. Vol. C. C.
with Sal. Nitri, or Saline Draughts.
, their extreme Unction Though many Patients fall under the wisest Application of
Remedies, and the Physician is not to be condemned for killing all that he
cannot cure; it must, however, be acknowledged, that some unable Physicians of
little Sagacity and Judgment, of a cloudy Imagination, and whose weak Reason is
continually puzzled, as well as other bold and rash Practisers, do often
increase the Distemper, and make it more dangerous, by an injudicious Method,
and improper Remedies; and if the Patient recovers, and Nature prevails against
the Doctor, he is greatly satisfied in himself, and confirmed in the Opinion of
his Medicines, believing he has cured the Patient, who had only the good
Fortune to escape.

BLACKMORE.
: Would they not account it Madness in a Man, who not being able to endure the
extreme Cold of Greenland, would from thence, if possible, instantly fly to the
extreme Heat of the Indies? Therefore,

O Medici, Medici! Quae vos dementia cepit?
If I am called within the first three Days to a Man of a robust Constitution,
with a vigorous Pulse, I immediately order eight Ounces of Blood to be taken
from the Arm, and then as follows:

. Croc. Castor opt. pulv. ana gr. x Sir. Croc. q. s. ut f. Bol. h. s. sumend.
et mane repetend. cum Haust. seq.

Vin.

Vin. Coccinel. Vinum Coccinellae. Coccinellae pulv. j. Vin. Canarin. lbj.
Macera sine Calore and Cola.
j. Aq. Alexet. Simp. j. ss. ejusd. Spirituos. ij. Sir. Albi j. M. F. Haust.

The next Day, if Nauseousness and Inclination to vomit indicate the Necessity
of an Emetic, the following may be given:

. Rad. Ipecac. pulv. gr. x. vel xv. Aq. Alexet. Simp. M. F. Haust. pomerid.
sumend. superbib. infus. Flor. Chamaem lb j. vel ij. pro Ratione Operationis.

Afterward,. Conf. Damocrat.. ss. Croc. gr. v. Sir. Alb. q.s. f. Bol. H. S.
post Emetic. sumend. and singula nocte repetend.

. Pulv. Contrayerv. comp. j. Croc. gr. v. Vin. Coccinel. gut. 30. Aq. Alexet.
Simp. j. ss. ejusd. Spirituos. ij. Sir. Alb. j.f. Haust. sexta. qq. Hora
sumend. incipiend. Hor. sex. post Bolum.

But if there should be no Occasion for Bleeding or Vomiting, I begin with the
Draughts and Bolus last prescribed, the first Time I see the Patient, and
continue them till about the sixth Day, I mean, from the first Complaint; but,
after that Time, prescribe thus:

. Conf. Damocrat. ss. Croc. Castor. ana gr. v. Sir. Alb. q. s. ut f. Bolus
sexta qq. Hot. sumend. superbib. Coch. iv. Julep seq.

. Aq. Alexet. Simp. vj. ejusd. Spirituos. ij. Sir. Alb. ss. Vin. Coccinel. ij.
M. F. Julep.

These are to be continued to the Appearance of the miliary or crystalline
Eruption, separately or together, which if all Things have been well conducted,
will generally happen, in small Quantity, about the Eighth or Tenth Day; about
that Time also, the dangerous Symptoms will abate, and the Fever soon after
vanish, without Danger of Relapse or more to do, than keeping out of the cold
Air, observing a proper Diet, and taking a Bolus, with some of the Julep, Night
and Morning, for a Week longer. I have often found but three or four
crystalline Pustles, which, however, prove the Nature and Degree of the
Disease: But if any considerable Errors have been committed by the Sick, or
those about him, then will no Eruption, appear, till about the sixteenth Day,
and that generally of the crystalline Kind alone, often in great Quantity, and
very large; I have seen Thousands as big as the largest Pin's Head I have
lately seen a Child, two Years of Age, afflicted with that Fever, and Breeding
the Teeth, with Bladders of clear Water upon the Wrists, whose Circumferences
were larger than that of a Shilling, besides many others of prodigious Size all
over the Body. The Child died.
, crouding all over the Body, the Extremities not excepted, like the confluent
Smallpox, portending Death. Here is an evident Mark of great Putrefaction;
greatly, if I may be allowed the Simile, tending to a Gangrene of the whole
Mass of Blood; therefore here is the Touchstone of Skill; here the Field,
wherein to try the Power and Efficacy of Medicine!

If by the tenth Day no Eruption appears, and the Symptoms run high, Delirium
and Subsultus Tendinum beginning, a Blistering Plaster must be applied
immediately between the Shoulders, and, the Morning after that, the whole Feet
wrapped up in cephalic Plaster two Thirds, Blistering Plaster one Third, spread
moderately thick; the following Prescription must also take Place:

. Conf. Damocrat, ss. Croc. Castor. a gr. x. Sir. Croc. q. s. ut f. Bol. sexta
qq. Hor. sumend. superbib. Coch. iv. Julep praescr.

. Vin. Coccinel. Vin. Croc, a ss. M. cap. Gut. 40. saepe in Ser. Lact. Vin.
Alterat. vel Apozem seq.

. Aq. Hord.lb ij ss Gum. Arabic. j. ss. M. bibat. Haustul. saepe tepide.

If the Delirium continues very long, I have sometimes added five Grains of
Camphire to every Bolus, with good Effect.

This Method, without Alteration, must be continued till Death, or a Recovery,
turns the Scale; if Death should take Place, I know of no better Method whereby
to prevent it; but a Recovery will most commonly ensue, if all Things, in this
Stage of the Disease also, are faithfully and rightly managed; and then
Security from a Relapse depends, as I said before, in keeping the Room, proper
Diet, and a Continuance of the Bolusses and Julep, Night and Morning, for a
Week longer, when the Fever is gone off.

If, in any Stage of the Disease, a Pain of the Head becomes very troublesome,
the Application of six or eight Leeches to the Temples will be not only
absolutely necessary, but greatly advantageous; and so it will also be of
Consequence, at any Time of the Delirium.

If Costiveness intervenes, a Clyster may be injected every third or fourth Day:

. Decoct. Malv. 8. Ol. Olivar. ij. Mel. Solutif. j ss. M. f. Enema.

I allow for Drink, always to be made warm, Mint, Baum, or Sage Teas,
Barley-water, Water Gruel, White Wind Whey, Panada, Chicken-broth, Sago boiled
thin; and sometimes, if the Sick is earnestly desirous of it, half a Pint of
good Small-beer, with a Toast and grated Nutmeg in it; but no Juice of Orange
or Lemon in any Drink.

If profuse Sweats render the Linen disagreeable, I allow a clean Cap, Shirt,
and Sheets, well dried and warmed; but then for this Purpose, the Sick must be
wrapped up in a warm Blanket, and carefully laid on another Bed in the same Room;
for I am well assured, that less Mischief will accrue from this Change, than
from the cold Air rushing into the Bed, when all is wet, and while they tumble
to and fro' with great Restlessness; these Sweats being only symptomatical.

The Plasters upon the Feet, which I design for continuing Blisters, to avoid
the Cruelty of fleaing alive from Head to Foot, the present Vogue, but not half
so easy or effectual as mine, may be taken off in three or four Days, if there
is is great Complaint of Soreness, snipping the Bladders, without tearing off
the Skin; the Sores may be dressed every Day with a Cerate of Wax and Oil, and
a little yellow Basilicum: I used to order equal Parts of the Plasters, but
since the College have increased the Quantity of Flies in the Emp. Vesicat. I
have been obliged to diminish the Quantity of that Plaster; for my Intention
is thereby to raise Blisters very gradually, so that sometimes the Plasters
may lie on a Week, with proper Effect, and without great Uneasiness.

Women and Children, in general, may be treated, in the same Manner I have
directed for Men, with this Difference only, that as they are the weaker
Vessels, and of a more delicate Texture, less Doses of Medicine, with little or
no Loss of Blood, except by Leeches, will best answer the Purpose; which any
Practiser, who has but a Grain of Sense, may, I think, judge of, and
proportionate according to the various Symptoms and Degrees of the Disease, and
Circumstances of the Patient, without my Directions; which for every Individual
would render this Account too prolix and tedious, and serve only to puzzle and
confound the Reader. And so much for the Cure of the simple miliary Fever; I
will now proceed to that called compound.

Of the Cure of the compound miliary Fever.
I call this Fever compound, when it attacks Women with Child or in Childbed;
when it is consequent to Children breeding their Teeth, or having a convulsive
Cough; when joined with the confluent Smallpox, Measles, Scarlet Fever, an
Asthma, acute Rh^umatism or the Gout; Or when it is rendered so, by a wrong
Method of Cure, or imprudent Management on one Side or the other.

When it attacks a Woman with Child, Bleeding, according to the Time of her
Pregnancy, is absolutely necessary in the Beginning; then the Method I have
prescribed in general, with the Omission only of the Emetic and Castor.

Women in Childbed may omit Bleeding, and begin with the following at any
Stage of the Disease:

. Conf. Damocrat. j. Croc. Castor. ana gr. v. Sir. Alb. q. s. ut f. Bol. sexta
qq. Hora sumend. cum Coch. iv. Julep. seq.

. Aq. Puleg. vj. Alex. Spirituos. ij. Sir. Alb. ss. Vin. Coccinel. ij. M. F.
Julep.

If Costiveness ensue, a Clyster may be injected once in four Days.

There is seldom Occasion for more than I have here laid down, having recovered
Scores in this Manner, without the Loss of one Patient, since I have been in
Practice; but, if the Symptoms should perchance become more violent, Blisters
and increased Doses of Medicine may take Place: Some Practitioners think, that
Opiates suppress or retard the Lochia, but I have always found it otherwise.

Children, breeding their Teeth, must have their Gums cut, if necessary, and
take the following Mixture:

. Pulv, e C. C. C. j. Croc. subtiliss. pulv. gr. iv. Conf. Damocrat. gr. x. vel
xv. Aq. Alexet Simp, j ss. Sir. Croc. i. f. Mist. cujus cap. Coch. parvum sexta
qq. Hora.

Applicentur etiam Emp. Vesicat. nuchae
Et Emplastra pedibus totis, pro re nata.
Children, having a convulsive Cough, may be bled in the Arm, or with Leeches,
in the Neck, at the Beginning of the Fever; may have a Blister, and take the
same Mixture as above, augmenting or diminishing the Dose, according to Age,
till the Fever is gone off; and then nothing will avail, but Change of Air,
Asses Milk, and Manna, to keep the Body laxative; which last is generally
necessary in both recited Cases, or a Clyster in its Stead, if they have not a
Stool once in a Day.

When joined with the confluent Smallpox, in adult Age, Sydenham's Method may
be followed, till within forty-eight Hours, that the Turn of the Pustles is
expected; then;

. Sir. de Mecon. ss. Aq. Alexet. Simp. j ss. ejusd. spirituos. ij. M. f. Haust.
Hora sexta matutina and vespertina sumend. quotidie.

. Conf. Damocrat, j. Croc. gr. x. Sulph. Aurat. Antimon, gr. iij. Sir. Alb. q.
s. ut f. Bol. for. duodecima Meridie and media nocte sumend. superbib. Coch.
iv. Mist. seq.

. Sperm. Ceti iij. Vitel. ovi q. s. Aq. Alexet. simp. vj. ejusd. spirituos. ij.
Sir. Alb. ss. f. Mist. cujus etiam cap. Coch. iv. saepe.

The Sulphur Auratum promotes Expectoration better than any Thing, I know of,
and the other Medicines cause a Diaphoresis; Evacuations absolutely necessary
in this Case, to remove impending Danger; I have met with great Success by this
Treatment, therefore I think it my Duty to recommend it to others.

With the Measles or Scarlet Fever, my general Method of Cure for the simple
miliary Fever will likewise avail here, without Alteration, as no Symptoms in
these two eruptive Fevers in the least contra-indicate.

With an Asthma; Bleeding in the Beginning, and Blistering about the eighth
Day, are without doubt necessary; but Opiates of every Kind must be utterly
rejected; therefore,

. Croc. Castor. Pulv. Contrayerv. comp. ana gr. x. Sir. Alb. q. s. ut f. Bol.
s. xta qq. Hora sumend. superbib. Coch. iv. Mist. seq.

. Sperm. Ceti iij. Vitel. Ovi q. s. Aq. Alexe. simp. vj. ejusd. spirituos. ij.
Sir. Alb. ss. f. Mist.

. Spt. Volat. Aromat. Vin. Coccinel. ana ss. f. Mist. cujus cap. Gutt. 40. bis
terve die in Aq. Hord. cum Gum. Arabic.

The Cure, in this Case, will be generally more tedious and difficult, than in
the others; but, for the most Part, with Care, may be safely conducted.

With an acute Rheumatism; Bleeding in the Beginning ought not to be here
neglected; and the following may be prescribed through the whole Course of the
Diseases, augmenting or diminishing the Doses, according to the Urgency of the
Symptoms:

. Conf. Damocrat. j. Pulv. Rad. Polygal. Virgin. (Senekka Rattle-Snake Root)
Cin. Antimon. Croc. Castor. ana gr. v. Sir. Croc. q. s. ut f. Bol. sexta qq.
Hora sumend. superbib. Coch. iv. Julep, praescr. cum Vin. Coccinellae.

A Blistering-Plaister to the Back, and Leeches to the Temples, may be applied,
if great Pain of the Head requires them.

Bleeding often, giving Sal. Nitri, or Gum Guajac, as usually practiced in this
Case, will generally prove fatal.

With the Gout; this Fever rarely invades People afflicted with that Opprobrium
Medicorum in a regular Manner, except external Applications, imprudently
applied, disturb the gouty Matter in the Extremities, its usual Residence, and
force it to mingle again with the whole Mass of Blood; when this is the Case,
it generally fixes upon the Brain, Lungs, Stomach, or Intestines, or produces
a Fever of the miliary Kind; if the last happens alone, or is complicated with
a small Degree of Pain, in any of the Parts before-nam'd; the same Method may
be used, as directed before for this Fever, with the Rheumatism, with the
Alteration only of the Doses, and Times of Administration:

. Conf. Damocrat. Pulv. Rad. Polygal. Virgin. Cin. Antimon. Croc. Castor. ana
gr. x. Sir. Alb. q. s. ut f. Bol. quarta qq. Hora sumend. superbib. Coch. iv.
Julep, seq.

. Tinct. Aromat. vj. Vin. Coccinel. ij. Aq. Alexet. simp. vj. ejusd. spirituos.
ij. Sir. Alb. ss. M. f. Julep.

The Tinct. Aromatic. may be omitted, if the Stomach and Intestines are free
from Pain.

It must be remarked, that, as I have endeavored to be as concise as possible,
in Relation to these compound Diseases, I have only directed what is necessary
to be done, in the Presence of the Fever; when that is gone off, leaving the
rest to be managed by the skilful Practitioner, as he shall think fit. And
here, as an Apology for myself, I cannot help quoting a Passage from the
judicious Sydenham, one of the worthiest and best Men that ever lived:

"If any one should here object, that others that are as much conversant in
Practice as I, are not of my Mind; it does not concern me to enquire what
others think, but to propose faithfully my own Observations, in doing which, I
beg the Reader's Patience, not his Favor; for the Thing itself will shortly
show whether I have acted sincerely, or whether I have been a Manslayer."

Only I beg Pardon, for that I have not regarded a pure Diction, or an elegant
Style, being not at all heedful of nice Matters, if I only write so as to be
clearly understood.

ADVICE TO THE APOTHECARIES.
I DO not take upon me here to give Advice to all, for I know there are many of
you undoubtedly honest, generous, and judicious, who scorn to be guilty of a
mean or base Action, either in public or private; but a much greater Number in
City and Country, of the opposite Character, are vilely industrious, ignorant,
and penurious to a Sin; who set no Value upon Lives, and study nothing so much
as amassing Money at any Rate; there is another Species of you Gentlemen, who
are Men of good natural Parts and genteel Education, have been brought up
regularly in Pharmacy, and by your easy Address, and engaging Behavior,
attract Esteem, and command Employment in a great Number of Families; but are,
on the other Hand, so strangely attached to Taverns and public Diversions, that
you have neither Time or Inclination to make a right Progress into the
Knowledge of Diseases or their Remedies: It is to you, of these two last
opposite Characters, that I present my Address: Therefore, first of all, let me
entreat you to be particularly careful in the Choice of the best Drugs, and
exact in the Composition of your Galenicals and Chymicals; otherwise you hazard
your Reputation, deceive the Physician, and either kill your Patients, or
prolong the Disease, till Nature at length forcibly gets the better. How many
People suffer from bad Bark, Rhubarb, Ipecacoanha Jalap, Castor, Saffron, etc.?
The Dead are past telling the Tale, but you yourselves must be conscious of it,
or else confess your great Ignorance of Medicine; many of you, as I said
before, are too generous to act so base a Part; but a great Number are
penurious to such an excessive Degree, that, although your exorbitant Profits
exceed those of any other Trade or Employment in the whole World, you would not
privately advance a Shilling extraordinary to save the Life of the most
valuable Man in the Kingdom. How many periodical Cases bring on chronic
Diseases, and enslave poor Mortals to a miserable Life, by the Use of bad Bark?
How do the vital Liquids run off, in Diarhoea's and Dysenteries, from the Use
of the worst Rhubarb, Ipecacoanha, Diascordium, etc.? How much deceived is the
Physician, when the Apothecary substitutes a cheaper Medicine for a dearer,
although the Price of the dearest would not amount to Sixpence a Dose? Lastly,
How many perish in Fevers, and linger on with other Diseases, only for Want of
good Drugs, Galenicals and Chymicals? For God's Sake, Gentlemen, ye
Surveyors-general, I speak to now, who by Authority search the Apothecaries
Shops, Search them narrowly from Stem to Stern, and where you see Cause, give a
severe Reprimand; though you should forfeit the Six Shillings, which are usually
given you, like Bolusses, to ease the Pain of your Stomachs.

The wholesale Apothecaries and Chemists are often the Sources of these
terrible Disasters, who basely sophisticate, for the Sake of a little Profit,
Medicines which circulate not only through this Kingdom, but many foreign
Countries, and destroy five Times more People, than would die of Distempers in
a natural Way; and the Druggists, whose Principles are little better, for
vending bad Drugs, excuse themselves, by saying, If they buy the Devil, they
must sell the Devil; but, if the Apothecaries did not purchase him from Time to
Time, they would soon be tired with exposing him to Sale.

When you have got good Medicines, I must then beseech you to learn the Use of
them; but hold! you must first learn the Nature of Diseases, and know well how
to distinguish one from another; I speak chiefly to you young Ones, though the
old Ones, many of them, would not do amiss to take my Advice: For this Purpose,
search out the best Authors, which will enrich your Senses; read them over and
over again, till their most remarkable Precepts are strongly impressed on your
Minds; but, in the mean time, abstain from Wine, and other strong Liquors, lest
they drown all your reasonable Reflections, and hurt your Memory. Attend
diligently the sick Poor, as well as the Rich; for, though the latter may best
suit your Pockets, the former will serve you for experimental Knowledge, which
in the End, if you have natural good Principles, will bring you more
Satisfaction, than the Mines of Mexico; but be especially careful in your
Experiments, that you do no Harm, for that shoud always be your first Principle
in Practice. Whenever you venture out of the beaten Track, or even follow the
old one, go on with Caution in giving small Doses of a doubtful Remedy, and be
frequent in your Visits to see the Effect of it; then proceed gradually Step by
Step, and never quit the Disease, or the Remedy, till you are Master of both.
When a Physician attends your Patients, which you too often recommend, from, I
am afraid, a just Sense of your own Inabilities, or to swell your Bill to a
greater Bulk, don't think that your Business is then done, for it more nearly
concerns you now to attend with Diligence, as you have a greater Work set
before you; now your timorous Mind is set at Liberty, to inspect narrowly into
the Nature of the Disease, the Remedies prescribed by the Physician, and to
compare the Effects of them with your own Practice in the like Cases. The
exorbitant Fees of the Doctor will seldom admit of more than one Visit a Day,
and that at a Time when, in acute Distempers, the frightful but informing
Symptoms of the Night are either going, or chiefly gone off; therefore it is
your Duty, if you have any Fellow-feeling for your Patient, or Regard for
yourself, to be constant in your Evening-Attendance, that thereby you may be
ready the next Day to give a just Account of the Patient's Welfare or
Sufferings, from the Disease and the Remedy, as well as to establish yourself
firm in that Opinion of the Sick, by your Diligence, which coud not be brought
about by your Judgment alone; this will never fail from Time to Time to advance
your Reputation, till your Age and Success fix you on a more solid Foundation.
But now presents the dismal Scene: To do all this, you must leave your darling
Pleasures, Taverns, and Bottle Companions, Play Houses, Gaming-houses, and
other public Diversions; to advance happily and successfully in your
Profession, and to arrive at the Pinnacle of universal good Character and
Esteem, you must forego all jovial Appointments, for the Sake, sometimes, of
one Patient only, and even that a poor one, to whom you must perhaps give your
Advice and Medicines gratis; who, notwithstanding that, has a Life at Stake, as
valuable in his Station as that of an Emperor; for his Family are his loving
Subjects, and his Cottage is his Kingdom, which must all droop and fall to
Decay, after the Demise of their only King; therefore you must absolutely
attend him as diligently as the Rich, lest, by a Surmise of Neglect, you lose
more Reputation in one Day, than you will be able to recover by the greatest
Diligence in many Months; especially too, if you are but just tenter'd into
Life: Do but succeed, though Nature does all, you will have all the Glory; but,
if you miscarry, Shame and Confusion will be your Attendants, till, by Time and
constant Rubbing, you are sufficiently burnished, to stand the Fire of a
censorious Age: This is a long Lesson, a hard Task; but be assured from me,
that you will not have it in your Power to make any considerable Figure in your
Profession, according to the old Phrase, till you have no Teeth to eat your
Bread, without you pursue the Course I have laid down; except indeed, as
sometimes happens, you have the Luck to have the Bread put into your Mouths, by
some well established Practitioners, who take you into Partnership in an early
Age: This is the good Fortune of some remarkable Boobies, who, from not being
able to get Shoes and Stockings, if they were set on their own Legs barefoot,
begin soon to get an Estate; while others of Merit, Knowledge, and Success, are
obliged to trudge early and late, only for the Sake of a genteel Support.

Now I have explained the Duty which more immediately concerns the Apothecary,
I will give you farther Instructions for the Benefit of your Patients, which
will not altogether be useless to yourselves.

Be sure to keep a watchful Eye over the sleepy senseless Nurses, suffer no
Error or Neglect in their Conduct to pass unregarded, as many of you do, to
gain their Esteem, and thence their Commendation, or otherwise to avoid their
weak and low Aspersions, and ungrounded Prejudices: Pay the same Deference also
to the mighty knowing Midwives, who are only a better Sort of Locusts, that
will take the Bread out of your Mouths, if you do not smother their Errors, and
proclaim their Qualifications; but mind this, you must be thorough-pac'd in
your Profession, and have given repeated Proofs of your Judgment, before you
make this hazardous Attempt, Nothing less than a forlorn Hope; for Women are,
by a Sort of Infatuation, so excessive fond of this Sort of Creatures, who from
thence take such Liberties, that sometimes even in desperate Cases, they will,
with an uncommon Stock of Impudence, tell you to your Face, in their Language,
that sure they have not been so many Years Nurses or Midwives, but that they
know what belongs to the Cure of such and such an Ailment, better than a young
Apothecary. This you must irresistibly oppose, and never leave them, till you
have fairly proved that they are Fools and Liars; otherwise, in Return, they
will, much to your Disadvantage, prove you to be a very ignorant Fellow, which
will soon spread amongst the neighboring Women, your Body Guards; but then, I
say, you must be conscious that you certainly know how to vanquish the
Disorder, which has set you at Variance, or must come to a Parley upon worse
Terms. But, leaving this Digression, condescend to examine the several liquid
Foods you have ordered for your Patients Subsistence; be not content with one
or two Sorts only, but have Plenty where it can be admitted, that the constant
Supply which is necessary not only for the Disease, but from the Quality of the
Medicines, may not nauseate the Stomach, and rob you of Part of your Dependence
in the Cure of the Patient; and indeed nothing contributes more to the Ease and
Satisfaction of the Sick, than Choice of Liquors properly made; for weak
Stomachs are soon disgusted.

As the Physician is often discharged, so soon as the Danger is over, the
future Conduct of the Patient lies wholly upon your Care; therefore now is the
Time to bestir yourself, to procure a perfect Recovery, by continuing the
Medicines ordered by the Physician; for at your Peril do not alter them, lest
by any Accident the Patient shoud grow worse, and you incur the Blame; I say,
continue the Medicines, as long they are absolutely necessary, but no longer,
and take upon you, with becoming Authority, to order the necessary Diet from
Time to Time, and strictly scrutinize into the Execution of your Orders; which
will not only always gain the Attention and Esteem of the whole Family, but
convince them of your upright Intention to prevent a Relapse.

One Thing more I must add, and that is this, Revere the Profession to which
you belong, and treat every Member of it, who shall deserve it, with the utmost
Marks of Sincerity and Respect; be not reserved, but with an engaging Air and
Freedom, in your mutual Correspondence, communicate every Thing you know for
the public Welfare; let no good Thing be buried in the Grave, the Seat of
Oblivion; be courteous and affable to all Mankind, especially the sick Poor,
who, in their great Distress have little else to alleviate their Sorrows, than
your sympathizing Nature, mild Deportment, and benevolent Hand; in short,
always endeavor to act the Part of the real Gentleman, which, if you do not
gain Riches, will generally procure you a contented Mind, the next Step to a
happy Life.

These are the Requisites, which, I have told you in my Preface, must be joined
with the Physician and his Prescriptions, in order to a happy and successful
Practice: But what with the Pride, Inability, and Self-conceit of many
Physicians, the Negligence, Ignorance, and Penury of many Apothecaries,
Sophistication and Villainy of many Chemists and Druggists, I must, upon the
Whole, conclude, that we are, in general, in no proper Condition to make many
great Advances or Improvements in Physic.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PREFACE page vi, last Line, read Eruptions. p. 23. l. 1. read takes. p. 61. l.
9. after Simp. read j. omitted. p. 64. l. 14. read ana s. l. 17. read Aq.
Hord.lb ij. p. 66. l. 2. read Solutiv. p. 69. l. 16. read vj. p. 73. l. 7. read
sexta.

If I have overlooked any Errors of the Press, I hope the Reader will be
careful to rectify them.


