AN ESSAY ON THE GOUT, With an Account of the Nature and Qualities OF THE BATH
WATERS.

Intended for the Benefit of RICHARD TENNISON, Esquire;

By GEO. CHEYNE, M. D. and F. R. S.

The THIRD EDITION.

DUBLIN: Reprinted by and for GEORGE GRIERSON, at the TWO BIBLES in
ESSEX-STREET. 1721.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THIS small Treatise was originally intended for a private Paper of
Instructions to the GENTLEMAN, whose Name it bears, to direct him how to manage
himself under the Gout. It is, indeed, an Abstract of a larger one, on the same
Subject, which has lain by me these seven Years; which, yet, I have not had
Leisure or Humor to finish. Several Copies of this having got Abroad, and the
pitiful Condescendence of Pyrating Booksellers, even to such Trifles as these,
have constrained me to let it come out in Print, as it is, to prevent its
coming out from them. The Gentlemen of the Profession may easily perceive, by
the Grossness of the Philosophy, and the low Detail of the Pharmacy, it was not
designed for them. If any shall think fit to dispute or criticize on the
Doctrine here laid down, they may do it securely, as if the Author were as much
dead, as these his Labors will shortly be: I hope I know the Value of Time and
Pains, and the Vanity of all Human Speculations better, than to employ them in
defending such Trifles. All I undertake for them, is, That the Facts may be
depended upon for their Truth. And the Method and Medicines for their Efficacy,
toward the End, in the Circumstances proposed. If any Person under them, shall
either amuse himself, by reading this Paper; or lighten his Gain by following
its Directions, I shall have obtained all I proposed by it.

As to the Account of the Bath Waters given here, it came naturally in the way
of my Subject; and is such as the Observations I have made suggested to me. I
scarce know, and have taken no Notice of what others may have written or
observed on these Waters; nor, indeed, had it been possible for me, in my
present Situation, being without my Books, and confined to Bounds, by the
Nature of my Design. I have often observed, with Admiration, the Wisdom and
Goodness of Providence, in furnishing so wonderful an Antidote, to almost all
the Chronical Distempers of an English Constitution and Climate, which are
chiefly owing to Errors of Diet, or rather, as a sacred Writer expresses it, To
Idleness and Fullness of Bread. The Rankness of the Soil; the Richness of the
Provisions; the living so much on Flesh Meats; the Inconstancy of the Weather,
and the indulging in sedentary Amusements, or speculative Studies, directly
leading thereto. To remedy all which, kind Heaven has provided Bath Waters as
the most Sovereign Restorative in all the Weaknesses of the Concoctive Powers.

Bath, July 1719.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1.. 1. That the reason why, of two Persons in all other
Circumstances the same, the one has the Gout, the other is free from it, is,
That the small Vessels of the Gouty Person in their original Conformation are
narrower and more stiff than those of the other. p. 2.. 2. That the Cause of an
acquired Gout in the first Person, or those born of sound Parents; is the
abundance of Tartarous, Urinous, or other Salts introduced into the Blood by
the Food. p. 2.. 3. Hence we learn the reason why, on the first Attacks of the
Gout, in otherwise healthy People, the Humors generally fall on the Joints of
the Limbs. p. 4.. 4. Hence we may likewise see the reason, why the first Fits
enrage and remit once in twenty four Hours: why the whole Fit lasts fourteen
Days; and lastly, why the Accesses and Remissions of those broken with the
Gout, happen only in fourteen Days: And why the whole Duration in such is made
up of several such Accesses and Remissions. p. 4.. 5. Hence we may discover the
reason why Gouty Persons are People of good natural Parts, large Feeders, and
long-lived. p. 6.. 6. Hence we may conclude, that a Fit of the Gout is an
Effort of Nature to throw off this abundance of Salts, through the more stiff
and narrow Strainers; or we may consider it as a Crisis of a putrid Fever,
where the noxious Humor is discharged on some of the Muscles or Joints. Ibid..
7. Hence we may discover the Vanity of all Pretenders to an universal and
certain Remedy for the Gout. p. 7.. 8. Hence there can be but two direct ways
of treating the Gout; one by widening the Capacities of the small Vessels; the
other by lessening the Quantity of the Salts. p. 8.. 9. The Difference between
Hereditary and Acquired Gouts. p. 8.. 10. From hence is concluded the Necessity
of a much more strict Management in an Hereditary than in an Acquired Gout. p.
9.. 11. The Advantages of Labor and Exercise in the Gout; to which however,
two Conditions must be added: 1. That it be not too violent: 2. That a moderate
Diet be joined to it. Ibid.. 12. Two ways of lessening the Quantity of Salts in
the Blood. The first by a vegetable Diet, and the Inconveniences thereof.
Cornaro's Diet recommended. p. 11.. 13. The other way is by Evacuations in the
Intervals, and by a gentle slow Perspiration in the Fits. p. 13.. 14. The
Secondary Methods of relieving the Gout are two: 1. Dilution by proper Liquids,
such as Bath and German Spaa Water, or other Chalybeat Waters; Dwarf Alder Tea,
Trifoil Tea, light, quick Green Tea, small spicy Bitters on Water, and the
like. p. 14.. 15. 2. Strengthners of the Instruments of Digestion: the Peruvian
Bark especially; where its Virtues and Qualities are explained. p. 15.. 16. The
Advantages of Mercurial Medicines in the Gout considered. A Salivation will
banish the Gout for some time; but then it tears and rends the small Fibers,
whereby the future Fits become more painful and obstinate. p. 17.. 17. The
Method by which one is to treat himself under the Fit, in its beginning, middle
and end. p. 19.. 18. Opiats not to be given in the Gout, but in the last
Extremity; with two ways of ordering Forms of such Medicines. p. 21.. 19. The
manner of treating the Gouty after the Pain is over: Stomach Purgers first,
then Asses Milk is recommended; and lastly, Spaa or Bath Waters with Aromatic
Bitters. p. 22.. 20. Rhubarb recommended as an excellent Preservative from the
Gout, taken in the Intervals of the Fits; with the Reasons thereof. p. 23.. 21.
The manner of using Rhubarb, with other succedaneous Purgatives, in case of its
disagreeing. p. 25.. 22. Sulphur, and its Flowers, recommended as the most
noble of all Medicines, for the Cure of the Gout, with the Reasons thereof; its
Nature and Qualities, and the manner of using it. p. 26.. 23. Several Dilutors
recommended, especially a weak Decoction of the Bark of the Root of Sarsa; with
Observations on Roselli's Drops; and the famous Pox Doctor's Medicines. p. 31..
24. Drinking freely of light, clear Spring Water of great use after
Intemperance in Gouty Persons. p. 34.. 25. Bath Waters the best of all Dilutors
in the Gout. The Nature, Cause, and Original Principles of Bath Waters, to wit,
Steel and Sulphur. Aethiops Mineral recommended: The Diseases where it is
proper; and the manner of using it. p. 35.. 26. That there is a greater
Proportion of Steel in Bath Waters, than is discoverable by the Senses or
common Experiments: A Comparison between these and the other European hot
Waters; with the manner how Bath Waters are generated. p. 40.. 27. The Reasons
why the Bath are such an excellent Remedy in the Gout, and other Chronical
Distempers. p. 43.. 28. Bathing in the hot Baths in the Intervals of the Gout
recommended. p. 45.. 29. The Nature of Contraction and Relaxation of Animal
Fibers; and how Bath Waters come to cure both. p. 46.. 30. The other Chronical
Cases and Disorders whereof the Bath Water is an absolute Cure, or a powerful
Relief. BATH recommended as the fittest Place in Britain for weak tender People
to spend their Lives in, with the Reasons thereof. p. 47.. 31. The Necessity of
preparing the Body, before and after a Course of Bath Waters: As also of
joining Specific Medicines with them in Chronical Cases. p. 49.. 32. The
Quantity of Bath Waters to be drunk daily. That a less Quantity ought to be
drunk daily than is usual; and a longer time allowed for drinking them. Of the
Afternoon and Night Doses. p. 50.. 33. A Comparison between Gouty Chalk-stones
and Gravel-stones. That those who are severely treated by the Gout, seldom fail
to have the Stone or Gravel. The Cause of the Stone and Gravel in general.
Cyprianus his Observation on those who drink Malt Liquors. That the Methods
that cure the Gout, will prevent the Gravel's increasing. p. 53.. 34. How the
Gout in the Head is to be treated. p. 57.. 35. After what manner the Gout in
the Stomach is to be treated. p. 58.. 36. How the Gout in the Guts is to be
treated. p. 59.. 37. The Difference between Humorous and a Nervous Gout. That
White Wind is better than Red in the Fit, and Red better than White in the
Intervals; but that nothing but inveterate Custom makes either necessary. p.
60.. 38. Of Cold Bathing in general: Its Use to strengthen after a Fit of the
Gout. p. 61.. 39. Of Nervous Distempers in general; and of the Nervous Gout in
particular. Of the Nature of Nervous and Elastick Fibers. Of Hypocondriac,
Hysteric and Nervous Disorders. p. 65.. 40. The Method of treating Nervous
Gouts and other Nervous Distempers. Vomits preferred to Purges in weak Nerves.
The Bark recommended in all such Cases; but with some Limitations. p. 68.. 41.
The only Difficulty, grounded on any Probability, against the Bark answered.
The true State of the Distinction between Vernal and Autumnal Agues. p. 70..
42. Of the true and infallible Cure of the genuine Sciatica, or Hip Gout. A
Detail the whole Methods and Medicines, with the Reasons of their Virtue and
Efficacy in this Case. p. 73.. 43. Of Topics or outward Applications in a Fit
of the Gout; and of Symptomatic Gouts. p. 76.. 44. TEMPERANCE and
Abstemiousness recommended, as the only Cure or certain Relief in the Gout. p.
80.. 45.
SOME SHORT OBSERVATIONS Concerning the due METHOD Of Treating the GOUT, etc.
Theories of the Distemper, as far as is consistent with giving the Reason of
my Opinions. For after having laid down two Propositions (which will be found
the Principles of my Reasoning through this Discourse) I proceed to the
Observations themselves.

Prop. 1. Of two Men having all other Circumstances alike, as near as may be;
Of the same Parents; Born Healthy; Of the same Stature, Complexion, Diet, Air,
Exercise, etc. It seems to me impossible to assign a solid Reason, why the One
should be afflicted with the Gout, the Other be absolutely free from it, but
this, That the Capillaries.
smallest Vessels of the Gouty Person must be in their natural Make.
Conformation narrower and more Tense.
stiff, than those of the Other, who is free from the Gout, in respect of their
common Stature and Size. For thereby the Crude and Gross Humors, which are
confined, or pass with Pain, in the Gouty Person, will easily flee off by
Perspiration and the other Drains of the Body, in the Person free from the Gout.

Prop. 2. The Cause of an acquired Gout in the first Person, or in those born
of sound Parents, seems to me, to be the Abundance of Tartarous, Urinous, or
other Salts, introduced into the Blood by the Food. Salts seem neither to
perish, nor to be begotten; but to be constant and incorruptible Parts of
Animal and Vegetable Bodies. The Delicacy and Flavor of Flesh and Fish, is
entirely owing to their abounding with a fine, soft, oily, or urinous Salt, as
is evident in Venison and Wild Fowl. Wines, of all kinds, have a greater or
lesser Quantity of Tartar in them: And other strong Liquors abound in their
peculiar Salts, in Proportion to their Strength. Spirits are nothing but a
great Quantity of Vegetable Salts crowded together in a little Water and Oil.
These Salts received in abundance, but neither sufficiently broke by the
Digestive Powers, nor driven out of the Habit by due Exercise; but by their
Plenty and Nearness, uniting in greater Clusters, must necessarily form
Obstructions, and give Pain, when, by the Force of the Circulation, they are
thrust through narrower and stiffer Capillaries.
small Vessels. Nothing either received or bred within the Body, besides these
Salts, can account for this Difference.

Coroll. 1. Hence we may learn the Reason why, on the first Attacks of the
Gout, in otherwise healthy People, the Humors generally fall on the Joints of
the Limbs: Because, in the Joints, the smallest Vessels are more compressed, by
the larger Heads or Protuberancy of the Bones, and are thereby rendered
narrower and more readily obstructed. These Obstructions fall on the Joints of
the Limbs; because of the greater Length of these small Vessels, between the
Heart, the Origin of the Motion of all the Fluids, and these Joints; their
other Extremity: Whereby the Quickness of the Circulation diminishing,
Obstructions are there more readily formed.

Coroll. 2. Hence likewise we may see the Reason, why the first Fits, of
otherwise healthy Persons, Enrage and Remit once in Four and Twenty Hours. The
When it begins to enrage.
Access being at Sunset, and the When it begins to be easier.
Remission about Daybreak. Why the whole Fit in such lasts about fourteen
Days. And lastly, why the particular Accesses and Remissions, of Persons
advanced in Years, and broken with the Gout, happen only once in fourteen Days.
And why the whole Duration of the Fit is made up of several such Accesses and
Remissions in equal Times. In the first Stages of the Gout, the Fluids being
less Sizy and Glutinous, their Salts and Siziness are sooner broken and
dissolved, by the Action of the Solids in the Circulation; and are thereby
sooner brought into a Condition to be carried off by Perspiration; which makes
an Access and a Remission. The greater Weight and Grossness of the Air (which
hinders Perspiration) at Sunset, beyond what it is at Daybreak, together with
the particular Degree of Siziness, seems to determine the Times. The greater
Degree of Siziness in the Fluids, of People advanced in Years, and broken with
the Gout, lengthens out the Duration of these Accesses and Remissions. And the
precise Period of fourteen Days, seems to arise from the special Nature of the
Siziness of the Fluids; and its Resemblance to that of a Regular intermittent
Fever. The whole Duration of whose Fits put together, Sydenham has observed
already, to be equal to fourteen Days. But the particular Explication of all
these Things, would require more Room than can be allowed them, in the Bounds I
have prescribed to my self. My Friend, if he pleases, may consult Bellini on
this Head.

Coroll. 3. Hence we may discover the Reason of the common Observation, that
Gouty Persons are People of good Natural Parts, large Feeders, and longliv'd:
Because the Fibers of the smallest Vessels, being more stiff and springy than
ordinary, The Circulation is brisker, more full and free: Whereby the That is
Eating, Digesting, and Evacuating, etc.
Natural Functions are more readily and regularly performed; and therein the
best Health and truest Sensations consist: Strong Health requires liberal
Supplies; and both together lengthen our Life.

Coroll. 4. From these also, we may discover what a Fit of the Gout is, to wit,
An Effort of Nature, to throw off this Abundance of Salts, through more stiff
and narrow Secretory Ducts.
Strainers. Salts of all Kinds are more or less Caustic.
Burning: The Urinous most of all, as is evident from Spanish Flies, and that
unextinguishable Substance, called the Phospheros, so readily and plentifully
to be had from Human Urine. (The Reason of which may be from their pointed
Figure, piercing more readily, by its being besmeared with a light Oil: Or from
their greater attractive Force; or from some other Quality, not yet, or perhaps
never to be discovered.) What is certain is this, That Persons of a large
Appetite, as Gouty Persons generally are, feeding plentifully of Flesh and
Fish, and drinking liberally of generous Wines, or other strong Liquors, and
using, either too little, or too much Exercise, must necessarily overstock
their Blood with these fixed and incorruptible Parts of Animal and Vegetable
Bodies; which in their Nature being Hard and Burning, cannot fail, first, to
raise a Tumult and Fever; and then to give violent Pain, as they are driven out
of the Habit, through more stiff and narrow small Vessels, by the Force of the
Circulation: So that a Fit of the Gout may be considered, as a Crisis of a
putrid Fever, wherein the noxious Humor is thrown upon some of the Muscles or
Joints of the Body.

Coroll. 5. Hence we may discover the Vanity of the Pretenders to a certain and
universal Remedy for the Gout. For unless a Remedy could be found, which at
once could change and new-mould the solid Parts of Human Bodies; alter the
Nature and Qualities of Animal and Vegetable Bodies; and destroy Parts, that
are in their own Nature fixed and permanent, it is impossible it should be
certain and universal; and how possible such a Remedy is, I leave every one to
judge.

Coroll. 6. Hence it is evident, there can be only two direct Ways of Treating
the Gout, with any Prospect of Success. The one is, by stretching and widening
the Capacities of the small Vessels, and Slackning.
relaxing their Fibers. The other is, by lessening the Quantity of the Salts
introduced into the Fluids by the Food; these being the two Antidotes or
Opposites to the two fundamental Causes of acquired Gouts.

Gouts. The latter is produced in a Person, otherwise sound, from Ignorance or
Negligence of the exact Rules of living. For though there be a natural
Configuration of Parts, that disposes one Man more than another to the Gout;
yet there might be a Method of Diet ordered, which should prevent it. The
former is a Stain.
Taint (compounded perhaps of Scurvy, Stone and Pox) transmitted to the Patient
with the Principles of Life, together with a Disposition in this Taint, to
unite it self to any Malignity, introduced into the Habit, through Excesses.

Coroll. Hence we may observe the Necessity of a much more strict and careful
Management, in hereditary Gouts, than what is necessary in acquired ones. In
the first, the Gouty Humor is ingrain'd and transubstantiated into the Solids,
and other Principles of Life, and impossible to be rooted out by human Art and
Industry: The most that can be done is, to lessen and relieve the Symptoms.
Whereas in acquired Gouts, the noxious Humor being more confined to the
Fluids, a proper Diet, due Exercise, and a few well-chosen Remedies, may go a
great way; if not to a perfect Cure, yet to make Life tolerably easy under them.

Gouty Person can safely undertake for his Health, wisely managed Exercise,
seems that alone, which can best answer one part of the first Intention, viz.
The widening the Capacities of the small Vessels. Labor or Exercise assists
the Gouty three different ways: First, as it increases the In^^^tine M^tion.
Motion of the Parts of the Fluids among themselves; so that their Salts, by
their Collision.
striking one against another, are broken and made less, that they may pass
more readily through the small Vessels. Secondly, as it adds a new and foreign
Force to the Blood, and thereby promotes its Circulation from the Heart through
the small Vessels; driving some of the grosser Parts of the Fluids through
them; which in the ordinary Course of the Circulation would not pass so freely;
and thereby opening their Obstructions and enlarging their Capacities. Thirdly,
as it increases the natural Perspiration; the Action of the Muscles in Labor
and Exercise, and the Spring of the Solids by their multiplied Efforts,
squeezing the Strainers of all their Contents. But to make Labor and Exercise
as useful as they may be, two Cautions must be added to them: First, that they
be not too violent, in respect of the Patient. For too violent Exercise will,
necessarily, either spend the Spirits, whereby the Digestions and Circulation
will be impaired; and so a regular Gout be brought into an irregular one: Or by
shaking all the Gouty Salts at once upon the Extremities, a regular Fit will be
forced out; which, in less violent Exercise, might have been spent by
Perspiration. Secondly, that Moderation in eating and drinking be joined to it;
For commonly Gouty Persons are large Feeders; and Exercise emptying the
Stomach, the Guts and small Vessels, if the Appetite be satisfied to its
craving, the Evil is rather increased than diminished thereby.

Gout. The first is, by a total Abstinence from, or a great Abstemiousness in
Flesh, Fish and strong Liquors, which introduce those Salts into human Fluids:
But this Course is never to be undertaken, but with great Caution, and in the
last Extremity: For these two Reasons; First, because an entire Vegetable Diet
weakens all the digestive Powers, and all the Functions of Life; impoverishes
the whole Mass of the Fluids; impairs the Strength, and dispirits the Man: And
thereby necessarily begets the worst kind of Hysterical and Hypocondriacal
Disorders, and all their black and dismal Consequences (at least till the Body
has been long accustomed to it) which is a Disease far worse than the Gout it
self: And to which the Gout only brings the Patient, in its last and fatal
Stages. Secondly, because this Diet, once entered upon, is never after to be
changed, under the Danger of certain Death, or the most violent enraging of all
the Gouty Symptoms. For a Vegetable Diet, as has been just now hinted,
weakening the Digestive Powers, and all the Functions of Life, etc. the Patient
can never after be brought to bear with a free way of living, without the
Hazard of certain Death, or a violent enraging of the Gouty Symptoms; as is too
plain from many Vid. the Life of the P. of Conde.
fatal Instances. If any Diet is ever to be tried in the Gout, it is to be
ordered in Cornaro's Method; that is, by living on the white Foods; eating
Flesh and Fish of the lightest Digestion, and drinking generous, unmixed Wines,
both of them in small, and constantly equal Quantities; in Weight and Measure;
under the Craving of the Appetite, and proportioned for the mere Support of
Life.

Sydenham, otherwise a most accurate Observer of Nature, and a most judicious
Practitioner, has been the Occasion, I think, of a great Mistake in the
Management of the Gout; by forbidding almost all Evacuations, either in the
Fit, or in the Intervals, for fear of weakening the Constitution. There are two
Seasons, to wit, Spring and Fall, when the Periodical Fits of regular Gouts
commonly happen; which I consider as Cardinal and Critical Discharges, under
general and mechanical Influences, for purifying the Blood, and discharging the
Gouty Salts: In which, Nature is no more to be disturbed in its Operations (I
mean as to purging, for even then a gentle, slow, constant and uniform
Perspiration and Breathing Sweat may be promoted, not only safely, but with
great Advantage) than in the Monthly Purgations of the Sex. But in light,
flying Touches of the Gout, out of these Seasons; and in the Intervals of the
Fits, gentle, warm, stomachick Purgers will be an excellent Remedy to send
these a going, to lessen the Fits, and lengthen the Intervals. A Person out of
the Pain and Inflammation of the Fits, and in their Intervals (except his
natural Disposition to breed another Fit) is, to all Intentions of Medicines,
the same as a well Person. And all Medicines levelled against other Diseases
incident to human Bodies, may be as safely administered to a Gouty (regard
being had to his particular Constitution) as to any other Person. Wherefore,
the general and direct Methods of relieving the Gout, are, In the Fits, a
gentle, uniform, continued Perspiration and Breathing Sweat. In the Intervals,
Labor or Exercise, and gentle, Stomachick Purgers.

Gout, are principally these two, First, Dilution, by proper Liquors. Secondly,
Strengthners of the Instruments of the Digestion. Nothing is more likely to
thin the Blood, to dissolve and break the Salts, and keep them at a distance
from running into Clusters, than proper Diluters; as we see in Fevers,
Rheumatisms, and other inflammatory Distempers. For this Reason, among others,
it is, that Bath and German Spaw Waters, and all other Mineral Chalybeat
Waters; Dwarf-Elder Tea; Trifoil Tea; light, quick, Green Tea; small spicy
Bitters on Water, and such like, drunk freely, Blood warm, on an empty Stomach,
become so useful in Intervals of the Gout. Water is the universal Dissolvent of
Salts of all sorts; and being replenished with the spicy, bitter and active
Parts of other Bodies, it strengthens the Stomach, and Bowels; breaks and
dissolves the Salts; cleanses the insides of the Vessels from the foulness that
constantly adheres to them, and carries it out of the Body, by increased
Perspiration and Urine.

Gout. If the Digestions be true and good; the Parts of the Chyle be made
sufficiently small, and the Circulation be full and complete (all which are the
common Effects of Stomachick Medicines) the Salts will be less; the
Obstructions of the small Vessels fewer, and the Impurities of the Fluids will
more easily pass by Perspiration, and the other Drains of the Body; and so the
Fits of the Gout become more easy, and less frequent. Among all the
Strengthners of the Digestions, I would recommend a strong Infusion of the
Jesuit's Bark, in generous Claret, as being the coolest Bitter, the most
powerful Strengthner of relaxed Fibers in the Instruments of Digestion; and the
greatest Antidote of the urinous Salts, especially if joined with Chalybeats,
and some Qualifiers of its mawkish and nauseous Taste. The Bark has the same
Effect on the Coats and Fibers of the Vessels, that Oak Bark has on raw
Leather; and the same Effects on the Fluids to prevent their Coagulation; and
to render them uniform, that the Testaceous Powders have on Vinegar, or as they
have on Milk, to prevent its Curdling: But more especially, as it produces such
Wonders on the Solids and Fluids in intermittent Fevers; to the State and
Condition of both which, the Solids and Fluids of Gouty Persons bear so near a
Resemblance, as has been observed in Coroll. 2. Wherever the Bark is proper, I
recommend the Glans Quercina, or Acorn, as of the same Class of Medicines, and
in some Cases of Relaxation exceeding the other. It is cool and easily
digested. But they do best united. All bitter and spicy Medicines have more or
less of the same Quality; but heat the Body more, and brace the Fibers less.

Mercury, by its Weight, and its constantly forming it self in little Spheres
(or perhaps from its greater attractive Force) throughout all its possible
Divisions, seems to offer fairest, of any internal Medicine, for breaking the
Gouty Salts; for relaxing the Fibers; and enlarging the Capacities of the small
Vessels. And the Fact is, that by a full and free Salivation Gouty People have
been freed from all its Symptoms for several Years. But it is also Matter of
Fact, and Experience, that a full and free Salivation does so break, rend and
tear all the smallest, tenderest and finest Vessels and Fibers, that the Body
becomes in a worse State, in respect of the future Fits, than it would have
been in several Years Time, under the common Symptoms. For though a Salivation
may open all the Obstructions of the small Vessels; cleanse their insides from
the Foulness that cleaves to them; purify the Blood, and break its saline
Impurities; yet by its great Weight, and the excessive Force it adds to the
Blood, rending and tearing the finest Vessels and Fibers; when the Gouty Person
comes to his former Diet, and the other Circumstances of Living; and the Fluids
become thereby loaded with their Salts, they stick more obstinately to the
Joints, than if the Parts had been subdued and broken by regular Fits of the
Gout. So that a Salivation, though it banish the Fits for some Time, yet when the
Blood is replenished again with Gouty Salts, the Habit is reduced to a worse
Condition, in respect of the future Fits, than if they had never been
interrupted: And, indeed, it is observable, that after a full, or repeated
Salivation, the Man is seldom or ever the same, as to the Quickness of
Sensation; or the Usage of the most beautiful animal Faculties. But there is an
absolute Necessity of having recourse to Mercurial Vomits and Purges, when the
Gout becomes fixed to, and permanent in a Place, as also when it is dispersed
all over the Habit, like a Rheumatism. These active Medicines must first render
the Humors fluid, which Gum Guajac with Diaphoretick Antimony persisted in
will afterward carry off. I come now to consider the Gouty Person under two
different Circumstances. First, under a regular Fit. And, Secondly, in the
Intervals.

Madera Wine; Water boiled with a few Spicy Seeds, mixed with these Wines:
Water Gruel with some Wine, or Hartshorn-Drink with Cinnamon; and little or no
Flesh Meat, will succeed best during all the Time of the Fever. After the Fit
is distinctly formed, the milder Cordial and Stomachick Medicines, which
promote a gentle Breathing Sweat (I mean in the more compounded and tedious
Fits of the Gout, chiefly in Persons advanced in Years) such as Gascoin Powder,
Goa Stone, Bezoar; Sir Walter Rawleigh's Cordial, Diascordium, Confection of
Alkermes, and the like, washed down with clear Blood-warm Sack-whey; in every
Draught of which ten or fifteen Drops of Spirit of Hartshorn has been first
poured; with Flannel on the Parts, and much lying a Bed; such a Method, and
such Medicines, I say, will best forward the Fit. Toward the Decline, the
Stronger, Warmer, Spicy and Stomachick Medicines; such as Serpentary Root,
Casamunair, Zedoary, old Venice Treacle, Electuarium de Ovo, and such like;
with a few Grains of Camphir, and Salt of Vipers; and a good Stomach Bitter on
Wine to wash them down, will finish this Affair, strengthen the Bowels, and
prevent the Recoil of the Gouty Humor on them. And here it may be taken Notice
of, that as the Fever, that ushers in the Gout, is, so will the Fit be: If the
Fever is short and sharp, the Fit will be so likewise, in regular Gouts: If it
be feeble, long and lingering, the Fit will be such also. In the Management of
the foregoing Method and Medicines, two Cautions are to be minded: First, That
during the whole Fit, Liquors may be more freely and safely indulged, than
solid Foods. For Repletion from solid Foods, in a Fit of the Gout, might be of
fatal Consequence, by rendering a regular Fit of the Gout irregular: Whereas
Fluids will certainly pass, either by Perspiration, Sweating, or Urine.
Secondly, The Cordial Medicines are always to be regulated, by their Lightness
on, and Agreeableness to the Stomach of the Patient; (for whatever makes him
sick, will more or less draw in the Gouty Humor on the Stomach) and by their
not rendering him more hot and restless, than the Gout it self would naturally
make him: For if they produce an agreeable Sensation on the Stomach, and do not
inflame, they will necessarily procure Coolness and Quiet.

Opiats may be safely given in a Fit of the Gout, to procure Rest, and
alleviate Pain. In the general, it is the safest side, not to administer any
kind of Opiats in the Fits; because they constantly pall the Appetite, and
leave a Nauseating, and perhaps a Reaching on the Stomach, the readiest way to
bring the Gout there. But in Extremities, when the Patient has been many Days
without Rest, and the Pain becomes intolerable, all other Means failing, or
equally Dangerous, Opiats may be so qualified, and their mischievous Effects so
bridled, by joining spicy, nervous and Stomach Medicines to them, that they may
become an excellent Remedy. Thus liquid Laudanum, with Tincture of Castor, of
Snakeweed, of Diambra, of Saffron, Sal Volatile, Compound Spirit of Lavender,
Hysteric Water, and some agreeable simple Water; some of these mixed in a due
Proportion, and proper Dose, will not only procure Rest, and ease Pain, but
answer all the other Intentions in the Cure of a Fit of the Gout. Thus also,
London Laudanum, with old Venice Treacle, or Mythridate, Serpentary Root, and
unscented Species of Diambra made into a Bolus, with any agreeable Syrup, and
cautioned, as before, will produce the same Effect.

Gouty Humor. This premised, especially after long and severe Fits, which have
impaired the Strength, and wasted the Muscular Flesh; I should advise Asses
Milk with Pearl, half a Pint, or a Pint, in the Morning early, and five or six
a Clock in the Afternoon; to lengthen out the Morning Sleep, to pulp up the
exhausted Muscles, to cool and refresh the parched Fibers, and keep the Body
soluble; which Asses Milk commonly does. And to keep up the Appetite, which the
Milk commonly palls, and to prevent its too cooling Effects on the Stomach, a
light Bitter made of Gentian, Cinnamon, and Orange Peel only, the last double
of the other two, infused in Sherry or White Wine, and taken two Hours before
Meals, may be used most conveniently. This Course might be continued for two or
three Weeks: After which I should order a Course of Bath or German Spaw Waters,
with Steel, riding, a light Whitefood Diet, and generous Wines drunk
temperately.

Gouty. The Methods, both general and particular, I have touched upon. I come
now to recommend some special Medicines, which have been found useful in this
Case. It is certain that great Abstinence from Flesh, Fish, and Wines, would
prevent the Fluids from being overloaded with Gouty Salts. It is also certain,
that if the Food be carried out before it is digested, it will be pretty near
the same Thing, as if the Quantity carried out, had not been taken down. Now if
a Medicine can be found, that without weakening the Stomach and Bowels, shall
carry off the greater part of the Food, before it is quite robbed of its Salts,
it cannot fail to be of great Use in the Intervals of the Gout. For this
Purpose, I would recommend fine Rhubarb, taken regularly once, twice, or oftener
a Week, in such a Dose, as to procure two or three Motions: For these Reasons,
First, Because it is an excellent Stomach Bitter, as is evident from its Taste,
and from the sharp Appetite it gives those that take it frequently. Secondly,
Because it is one of the noblest Astringents hitherto known, as is evident from
its Cure of Fluxes, and intestine Haemorrhages; and from the Tightness it
leaves on the Bowels. Thirdly, Because it requires neither Diet, nor keeping
warm, nor any other particular Management; and yet taken frequently and
regularly, it will carry off any Proportion of the Food one pleases; and so
reduce the Dier, as near as needs be, to Cornaro's, which, in Article XIII, has
been shown to be of so excellent Use in the Gout. I knew a Noble Lord, of great
Worth, and much Gout, who, by taking from the Hands of a Quack, a Dram of
Rhubarb, tinged with Cochineal to disguise it, every Morning for the Space of
six Weeks, lived in Health for four Years after, without any Symptom of it.

Take Gentian and Zedoary of each a Dram, Serpentary Root, and unscented
Species of Diambra, of each half a Dram. Cochineal and Saffron of each a
Scruple; Orange Peel an Ounce: infuse in a Quart of Mountain in a warm place
twenty four Hours, strain, and to the Liquor add three Ounces of the best
Rhubarb; Salt of Wormwood a Dram and half: set in a warm Sand heat twelve
Hours; and then strain a second time. Of this four Spoonfuls every Night, or
every other Night, as occasion required, I have found an excellent Remedy in
this and other Chronical Cases. Where no Preparations of Rhubarb will agree
with the Constitution, as there are many such, then Elixir Salutis, Tincture of
Hiera Picra; a Solution of Gum Guajac, or the Scottish Pills, might take place;
but that all the preparations of Aloes are apt to throw out both Gout and
Piles. However in this matter there is great Variety; out of which every one
may fit themselves with what is most agreeable to their own Constitution; which
if they use regularly and frequently, they cannot fail to prevent violent Fits
of the Gout, and perhaps most other, both Acute and Chronical Distempers.

Sulphur, as one of the best Remedies in the Intervals of the Gout. It is but
in little Use at present in Physic, except in the Itch, and the Piles; and yet
in the whole Extent of the Materia Medica, I know not a more safe and more
active Medicine. Its wonderful Efficacy, and particular manner of Operating in
these common Cases, might, I think, have encouraged its Trial in other
Chronical Cases, especially considering the Facility of its Working, and the
little Trouble it gives in taking it. Its principal Qualities are these. 1. The
Parts of Sulphur, and those of Light and Fire, act mutually upon one another,
more powerfully than those of other Bodies. It is to their Sulphur that Bodies
owe reflecting and refracting Virtues; from whence its Inflammability proceeds.
Vide Sir Isaac Newton's Treatise of Light and Colors, 1 Edit. in English
toward the end.
The Particles of Sulphurous Bodies receive and retain those of Light and Fire,
more strongly than any other Bodies: And the Rays of Light and Particles of
Fire, separate, move and turn the Parts of Sulphurous Bodies into Fire and
Flame. 2. The Parts of Sulphurous Bodies are very small, even smaller than
those of Water it self, whereby it comes to pass that they will enter those
small Vessels, where Water it self (our best and most universal Diluent) cannot
come; this is evident from hence, that Water will not dissolve Sulphur, and
that no Moisture will stick to fat Substances, or the Feathers of Water Fowl:
As also from its cure of all cutaneous Foulness; which it could never
effectuate but by entering all those smallest Vessels, which scarce any other
Medicine can enter. And lastly, by its dissolving the sizy Juices of the
smallest internal Glands, when obstructed; particularly those of the Lungs,
Mesentery and Rectum; as in the humorous Asthma, Scrophula and Piles. 3.
Sulphurous Bodies will readily unite with, and destroy the Effects of all
Saline Particles, but especially those of the acid kind. And in this their
great Energy seems to consist. Sulphur yields the most piercing, active, and
agreeable Acid in the World; such as Spirit of Sulphur, Gas of Sulphur, and the
like. 4. The fat and oily Parts of Sulphur, like other fat and unctuous Bodies,
are the lightest, the most coherent, and the most springy of all Bodies. These
two last Qualities are most manifest from the artificial Sulphur made of Oil of
Turpentine and Spirit of Vitriol (the strongest Glue, and the most penetrating
Acid) duly digested and carefully managed, which in all respects is the same
with natural Sulphur. No Body denies (says Tournefort in his Voyage to the
Levant, Page 122. Part I. English Edit.) that Sulphur is only a fat Substance,
fixed by an acid Spirit: The Sulphur which is artificially made, and the
Analysis of common Sulphur, put this Truth out of all Dispute. For the Sea
Water being fat by the Oil of the Sea Fish continually corrupting there, and
bitter and saltish from its saline Rocks, produces in proper Nests natural
Sulphur. And Sir Isaac Newton says, in his last Edition of his Optics, page
359. By dissolving Flower of Brimstone in Oil of Turpentine, and distilling the
Solution, it is found, that Sulphur is composed of an inflammable thick Oil, or
fat Bitumen, an acid Salt, a very thick Earth, and a little Metal: The three
first were found not much unequal to one another; the fourth in so small a
Quantity, as scarce to be worth the considering. Join all these Qualities
together, and you have one of the most admirable Remedies in the World, for all
Intentions in the Cure of the Gout: By its agreeable Taste and Lightness on the
Stomach, (especially when washed down with any milky Vehicle) its Tenacity,
Ropiness and Elasticity; the smallness of its Parts; their Efficacy in
destroying the Mischief of all saline Particles, with their natural Warmth,
joined to the Activity of its acid Salt, (making it a kind of natural Soap) it
enters the small Vessels, where no other Diluent, hitherto known, can come;
cleanses their insides from the Foulness that sticks to them; imbibes and
retains all the Gouty Salts, and carries them out of the Body by Perspiration;
softens, smooths and relaxes the parched and stiffen'd Fibers; and by leaving
some of its oily Parts on their Surfaces, sheaths and defends them from the
Points of the Salts afterward introduced. And the Fact is, from repeated
Trials I can recommend Sulphur, as a most powerful Remedy in the Intervals of
the Gout. For I have known half a Dram of powdered Sulphur, or Flowers of
Brimstone, taken regularly twice a Day in a Spoonful of Milk, prevent the Fit
for many Years; and lessen both its Pain and Duration when it happened: For it
moved the Body gently once or twice a Day. I have in my Possession Testimonies
under the Hands of some treated and tended by my self; and of others of
undoubted Credit, witnessing to the great Success of this Medicine in the
Intervals of the Gout. Nothing hitherto discovered, I believe, equals it
obstinately persisted in.

Gout; by diluting and breaking its Salts, and carrying them off by
Perspiration and Urine. And certainly Roselli's Drops, (perhaps the Tinctura
Metallorum somehow altered) which were said to work gently by Stool and Sweat,
in the Hands of a prudent and knowing Physician, had been an admirable Remedy,
as answering both the Intentions mentioned, in the Intervals of the Fits; and
even in the Fits themselves, it had not been without its Use (always excepting
the Vernal and Autumnal regular Fits) had he dealt with recent Gouts, and firm
Constitutions only. That which I would particularly recommend here, is, a weak
Decoction of the BARK of Sarsa Root (in the BARK the Virtues of the Plants
chiefly consist: For being replenished with most part of, if not all the
Juice-circulating Vessels, it contains all its Salts and most active Parts; and
being Spungy and Tender, it is thereby more easily digested: And where Roots
are most in Use, the Bark of the Root is more eminently useful, for the Reasons
assigned: As also because, toward the End of the Autumn, when Roots are
gathered, the Cold has already driven the Juices into their Bark. And this may
be one Reason why the famous Pox-Doctor succeeds in some Cases, when mismanag'd
Mercurial Treatments have failed: His Diet-Drink chiefly consists of a
Decoction of the Bark of this Root: His Pill is Mercurial, perhaps the Arcanum
Corallinum, or Panacaea, and these two persisted in for so long a Time, must
necessarily sweeten the tainted Juices, and expel the entangled and grosser
Mercurial Parts, which clustering together, could not perform the Circulation,
but were retained within the Habit, by former mismanag'd Salivations, and
thereby rendered ineffectual to the Cure; especially, if to these be added, the
low and starving Diet he prescribes. For I have heard of a famous
Sea-Commander, who effectually cured the first Stages of Venereal Distempers by
living twenty Days on Water Gruel only, in which a little Cream of Tartar had
been first dissolved; (and higher Degrees of the same by the like Diet
continued twice the Time;) with a little Milk, drunk freely Blood warm every
Morning, which I have known wonderfully relieve Gouty Persons, when drunk all
the Winter between the Cardinal Fits. And even Cow's Milk warm, taken for
Breakfast and Supper, has been of great Service to those Gouty Persons who
drink not much Wine; for those who drink Wine freely, have too hot and sour
Stomachs to deal in Milk.

Gout. It is well known that warm Water alone, drunk in a Morning fasting
freely, and at Meals, from its Heat, its Dilution, and cleansing Qualities, has
been a sovereign Remedy in restoring decayed Appetites, and strengthening weak
Digestions, when other more pompous Medicines have failed. Lower very justly
observes, that Persons that have drunk beyond the Rules of Temperance, may be
much relieved from the ill Effects of it, by exposing themselves to the free
Air, to cool the Blood, and to force off the Liquors by Urine. I Am of Opinion,
were there neither Sin nor Shame in it, as there are eminently both, a Gouty
Person ought to avoid Intemperance, as he would avoid the Bite of a Snake or
mad Dog. But since such Accidents do happen, let the Gouty Person, after the
Excess either in Meat or Drink, swill down as much fair Water as his Stomach
will bear, before he go to bed; whereby he will reap these Advantages: First,
Either the Contents of the Stomach will be thrown upwards, and he freed from a
great part of the Load. Or, Secondly, Both Meat and Drink will be much diluted;
and the Labor and Expense of Spirits in Digestion much saved. And Thirdly, the
Gouty Salts will thereby be dissolved and distanc'd from one another; and so be
more readily carried off by the free Perspiration, Sweating and Urine which
ensue.

Bath Waters, with Chalybeats and warm Bitters, and a frequent and regular Use
of Stomach Purgers will be found to succeed best in Gouty, as well as other
Chronical Cases. The Learned have been divided, and much perplexed about the
Heat of Bath Waters. I have always endeavored to account to my self for it,
from the common Experiment of mixing filings of Steel, and Powder of Sulphur,
working them into a Paste with Water, and putting them in a Cellar, under a
Cock, dropping Water slowly and regularly; the Paste will ferment to such a
degree, that the Water running from it shall be of the same Heat and Virtue
with the Bath Waters; though not so pleasant, nor so well fitted to human Bodies.
This is a common Experiment, and these are the only natural Bodies known, which
meeting together will produce Heat in Water, without artificial Fires.
Tournefort, in the Place before mentioned, says, Its certain that Filings of
Iron steeped in common Water will grow considerably warm, and much more so in
Sea Water: And if you mingle therewith some Sulphur powdered, you will see this
Mixture really burn. Sir Isaac Newton, in his last Edition of his Optics, page
354, says, That even the gross Body of Sulphur powdered, and with an equal
Weight of Iron filings, and a little Water made into a Paste, acts upon the
Iron; and in five or six Hours grows too hot to be touched, and emits a Flame.
That the Heat of the Bath Waters is owing to a Principle within themselves, is
evident, from their retaining it longer than any other Water, heated to the
same Degree, will. Wherefore there can be no Necessity of having Recourse to
Vulcano's or subterraneous Fires, to account for this Appearance. There are no
burning Mountains known in this our Northern Climate; and it is pretty hard to
conceive, how Fires should have burned so long under Ground without a Vent, or
any other remarkable Sign. The Sulphur in the Bath Waters is evident to the
Senses, swimming in large Clusters on the Tops of the Baths mixed with Earth,
and some vegetable Substances, wherewith the Guides commonly gild Silver; and
is found an excellent Remedy in Scurvies, Leprosies, Ring-worms, and other
Foulnesses of the Skin. The Steel is manifested by the bluish Tincture given
to the Water from the Pump, by an Infusion of Nut-gall. It is true, this
Tincture is neither so deep, nor is it to be had from the Water, in any short
Time after it comes hot from the Pump, thereby to manifest any great Quantity
of Steel in the Composition, such as can have the full Proportion to the
Experiment now mentioned. But, to set this in a clearer Light, let us put
together these Considerations. First, That upon Distillation of Bath Water,
there remains little in the Bottom of the Glass, but the common Calx or Sea
Salt, that is found in the Distillation of Spring Water, if we except some Sand
or Earth, that is forced up by the Violence of the Pump; wherefore the Bath
Waters not being impregnated with any Quantity of a saline Mixture, can retain
nothing in their own proper Substance but the lightest Parts of the Steel and
Sulphur. Secondly, That this Water is as fully impregnated with Sulphur, as it
can bear, has been already shown: And that there must be a greater Proportion
of Steel in Bath Water than is manifested to the Senses, or discovered by any
Experiment hitherto made, is evident from its healing Effects, which no known
Medicine but Steel can bring about, or account for: None but those who have
seen it, can believe the wonderful Efficacy it has, in most Chronical Cases.
What, but Steel, in a few Weeks, can make the Blood, from a white bluish or
Tallow Hue, resisting the Knife, like Glue, swimming in its Serum, like an
Island amidst the Ocean, look all of a Piece, of a Scarlet Color, and a due
Proportion between its nourishing and its watery Parts? Nothing but Steel can
make a pale ash-colored Countenance, hollow and deep Eyes, no Appetite, little
Strength, and less Sleep; eat, and drink, and sleep, look gay and sleek, like
the best Health. Thousands of such Instances may be seen every Season at these
healthful Springs. Thirdly, The Effects of Sulphur in bridling the sensible
Appearances and Operations of most active Medicines, is very well known.
Instances of which, in natural Bodies, are, Antimony and native Cinnabar; in
artificial ones, Aethiops Mineral, and Cinnabar of Antimony: In all which the
Mercury is so bridled up by the Sulphur, that none of their sensible Operations
and Appearances are felt, while they produce the most wonderful Changes on
animal Bodies. I cannot pass over Aethiops Mineral without pressing its more
universal Use than, for ought I know, it has yet had in common Practice. It is
one of the most certain and universal Alteratives, if dos'd sufficiently and
long enough persisted in, of all the Dispensatory. It radically extirpates the
Itch, the Piles, scorbutic and scrophulous Ulcers; all cutaneous Foulnesses;
all Inflammations and Fluxions of the Eyes; all internal Ulcers, Rheumatisms,
white Swellings; sharp Humors in the Stomach and Guts, and almost all
Distempers arising from sizy Juices. I say, it cures these, if Art can do it;
for some of these (like hereditary Gouts) are so transubstantiated into the
Solids, that nothing but a new Conformation of Parts can cure them. It may be
given almost to half an Ounce a Day, especially with interspersed Mercurial
Purges, without Trouble, or any sensible Operation, and continued for a
Twelvemonth, if one pleases. The finest Sulphur, and fittest to make Aethiops
of, is common Sulphur powdered, and boiled seven or eight Times in Spring
Water, whereby it becomes as light on the Stomach as prepared Pearl, and as
effectual in the Cases mentioned, as the celebrated Sulphur of Aix la Chappelle
Waters. But to return to the Business.

Bath Waters derive their Heat from a Principle within themselves; since no
natural Body, but Sulphur and Iron can produce such a Degree of Heat, as is in
them; since nothing but Steel can produce those wonderful Cures on human
Bodies, which Bath Waters do; since Sulphur will lock up and bridle the
sensible Appearances and Effects of the most active Bodies, and yet not destroy
their healthful and medical virtues; it is plain, that Bath Waters must owe
their Heat to a Mixture of steely and sulphurous Particles; and their healthful
Effects to a greater Proportion of Steel, than is sensible, or easily
discoverable by any Experiment hitherto made, joined to a light Sulphur, whose
Virtues and Efficacy in all Chronical Cases, we have already shown. The
Mountains which surround the Place, which every Body now knows, to be but the
Nests of Minerals, and the Receptacles of the Waters, which feed the Springs,
(which Mountains are continued even to the Sea) confirm this Opinion. The
manner I conceive thus: The Dews drilling and dropping through the Cranies of
the Mountains, fall upon a Bed of Iron Oar, and are there as fully impregnated
with Chalybeat Particles as such Water can bear; and gently owzing down upon a
Nest of Sulphur, and there fermenting to such a degree, that requiring more
room, they bubble up at the Foot of the Mountains, with their sulphurous
Spoils, and furnish out this healing and balsamic Fluid. All hot Waters seem
chiefly to consist of these two Principles; and to differ only as the Sulphur
or Steel predominates in them. Where the Sulphur predominates, they are hotter,
more nauseous, and more purgative. Of the three hot European Waters of Note,
the Aix la Chapelle, Bourbon, and Bath; the first abounds more eminently in
Sulphur, which makes its Heat, Nauseousness and Purgative Faculty so great,
that few weak Stomachs can bear its Heat and Nauseousness; and fewer weak
Constitutions, the Violence of its purging. The Bourbon are of a middle Nature,
between the Aix la Chapelle and the Bath Waters, and are less hot, nauseous and
purgative than the Aix la Chapelle, but more than the Bath Waters. The Bath
partake less of the Sulphur and more of the Steel than either of these two; and
are by far the most pleasant; of a milky Taste, never purge, except they be
drunk either too fast, or in too great Quantities, and always mend the
Appetite, and raise the Spirits. The weakest hot Waters are but of little Use,
except in the lowest Cases, and in hectic or consumptive Constitutions; but
for medical Uses, the weaker hot Waters may be made pretty near equal to the
stronger by Evaporation, as to the sulphurous Principle; as the stronger may be
brought down to the weaker by Dilution, as I have experienced; though Nature be
always the wisest and most perfect Operator. But neither the same Proportion of
Steel, nor Sulphur, nor Heat, indifferently fit all Constitutions. Generally
the Strength ( i. e. the Quantity of Steel and Sulphur) of the same hot Waters
is in proportion to their Heat; and therefore to fit the same Waters to weaker
Constitutions, they need only be drunk proportionably cooler.

Bath Waters having such an Origin, and such Qualities, must needs be an
excellent Remedy in the Gout, and other Chronical Cases, for these Reasons; 1.
Because of their Warmth, just suited to the Wants of Nature, and a little above
the Heat of human Bodies, sufficient to introduce a foreign Warmth and Motion
to cold and decayed Bowels and Fluids; whereby the natural Warmth and slow
Circulation is increased and enlivened. 2. This, with its agreeable Taste and
milky Softness, makes it sit so easily on the Stomach, and become so excellent
a Vehicle, to wash into the Blood other proper and specific Medicines, without
that Nauseousness and Fret on the Spirits, which all other hot Waters, hitherto
known; or that Chillyness and Damp, which all cold Mineral Waters, give:
whereby they are rendered useless or hurtful in some low and nervous Cases. To
these add, 3. Their Chalybeat Principle, so peculiarly locked up in Sulphur,
that the Patient reaps all the Benefit and healthful Effects of the best
Preparations of this Medicine (and what are not two such powerful Medicines
combined able to effect? (without the nauseous Taste, and frequent Disorders
upon the Stomach, that every other way of giving Steel produces. 4. The Sulphur
united with the Steel, makes it a natural kind of Soap, for cleansing the
insides of the Vessels from the Foulness that cleaves to them; and for opening
the Obstructions of the small Vessels. But 5. That which, together with the
others, makes it specific in the Gout, is, its relaxing Quality, whereby it
softens and supples the rigid and stiff Fibers, so as the Gouty Humors may
pass freely by Perspiration. Much more might be said of this wonderful Remedy
provided by the Hand of Nature, to relieve the Miseries of human Life; but this
the innumerable Crowds of Cripples of all sorts, and those other Persons made
miserable by Chronical Distempers, sent thence, every Year, cured, or relieved,
do witness, more convincingly than either Philosophy or Rhetoric can.

First is, concerning Bathing in the Intervals of the Gout. The only Reason
given for this Difficulty is, lest the Gouty Humor should be driven inwards
upon the Bowels. But this seems to me a mere groundless Jealousy: For in
regular Gouts, when the Fit is over, it is to be supposed, that the Gouty Fluid
or Matter is mostly or altogether spent, and the Fluids in a healthy sound
Condition. And therefore it might be as reasonably doubted, if in the Intervals
of two putrid Fevers (of which many have had more than two in their Lifetime)
a Person might safely bath. There is no Question, but that a Gouty Person may
both as safely bath, and take any Medicine, for any incident Disease, as any
other Person; regard being had to his particular Constitution. And it is Matter
of Fact, that those who have been crippl'd by the fixing of the Gouty Salts
upon the Joints, or disabl'd by the Tenderness of the Parts, have been
extremely relieved by a long Course of drinking and bathing in these hot
Waters, which by relaxing the Fibers, dissolving the sizy Humors, diluting the
Gouty Salts, and making them pass by Perspiration, have restored them to the
Use of their Limbs.

Fibers, as in the Gout and Rheumatism; and yet contract and brace relaxed
Fibers, as in the Palsy and wasted Limbs. That the Matter of Fact is so, is
past all Doubt in these and many other Cases of Contraction and Relaxation. But
to clear up this, we need only to consider what Contraction and Relaxation are.
Since all the Fluids of the Body are contained in Vessels, Contraction can
arise from nothing but from the Blood and other Fluids (or whatever is the
Cause of Muscular Motion) Their being retained and obstructed by their
Siziness; or from some external Injury, in the Substance of the Muscle it self;
whereby it becomes fuller and firmer, and so acts as upon its Office of
Contraction. Relaxation, upon the other hand, is an Obstruction of the Nerves
or Vessels of the Fluids, before they arrive at the Muscles; as is seen in
Palsies and the Nervous Atrophy of the Limbs; so that in both Cases,
Obstructions are the Cause both of Contraction and Relaxation. Wherefore,
whatever Medicine can dissolve the Siziness of the Fluids; open the
Obstructions of the small Vessels; make the Perspiration full and free, and
brace the Fibers; will both contract Relaxations, and relax Contractions: And
that these are some of the Effects of Bath Waters, has, I think, been made
sufficiently appear.

Gout, Bath Waters may be useful in; the Answer will be obvious from the
Account now laid down; to wit, That they must be beneficial in all Cases, where
Steel or Sulphur is; that is, in almost all Chronical Cases whatsoever. In
Acute and Inflammatory Cases, in all Cases attended with a strong, quick Pulse,
no Mineral Water, nor Chalybeat Medicine can be proper. But in all other Cases
(excepting those only attended with a Bleeding or Haemorrhage) they are not
only safe, but exceedingly beneficial. More particularly, their wonderful
Efficacy has been often experienced in Cachexies, Scurvies; in the Stone,
Rheumatism and Jaundice; in Hypocondriacal and Hysterical Affections; in
Vapors and Melancholy; in Palsies, Epilepsies, and other Cephalic and Nervous
Distempers; in Disorders of the Stomach and Bowels; Obstructions of the Liver
and Gallbladder; in green and breeding Sicknesses; in Barrenness and Weakness
after Childbirth; in Obstructions of the Monthly Purgations; and all other
peculiar Diseases of the Sex. And truly, if a Person afflicted with a low,
broken or tender Constitution, suffering under the tedious Pains and
Inquietudes of any of the lingering Distempers now mentioned, where the Viscera
or Bowels are yet sound, would know the fittest Place in Britain to spend their
Lifetime with the greatest Ease and Pleasure; take all the Advantages of the
Place together, the Agreeableness of the Waters to the Stomach; the Certainty
of their procuring a good Appetite, when it fails, and the no less certain
Consequence thereupon, Freedom and Cheerfulness of Spirits; the regular way of
living; the Excellency of the Provisions; the Warmness, Cleanness and Neatness
of the Housing; the Convenience of the free, fresh and open Air of the
neighboring Downs for Exercise; the Easiness of the Amusements; and the
Advantage of what Conversation one desires; I say, taking all these Advantages
together, I can affirm, from near twenty Years Experience, without Suspicion of
Flattery, or Fear of Contradiction, that Bath is the Place.

Bath Waters, without a previous cleansing of the Stomach and Bowels, lest they
wash into the Blood through the Lacteals, by the perpetual Dilution of the Bath
Waters, those Impurities, which constantly cleave to them; nor that they ought
to expect a perfect Cure of a long breeding and lingering Distemper, without
the Assistance of those other Medicines which are reckoned Specific in the
Case; and to which the Bath Waters are so pleasant and so assistant a Vehicle.
For it is but Prudence to bring all the Forces one can raise, against so potent
and so formidable an Enemy as a Chronical Distemper.

Bath Waters, which it is convenient to drink daily; that being to be varied
according to some Circumstances of the Patient, and the Nature of the
Distemper: Strong, full and large Bodies bear more Waters than tender, thin and
lesser ones, the younger more than the elder; those of strong and firm, than
those of weak and relaxed Nerves; those who labor under the Gravel and
Rheumatism, than those who are disordered in the Alimentary Passages, or are
subject to Scorbutic or Nerv^us Weaknesses, and the like. But in general, it
were to be wished, that People who come to Bath for their Healths, drunk less
daily than they commonly do; and allowed more Time for a Chronical Distemper. I
think it may be safely advanced, That any Quantity greater than an English
Quart, in a Morning, drunk in two Hours Time, half a Pint every half Hour, is
more than what is reasonable. For, drinking in this Proportion, all the rest of
the Day; at Meals, to wit, in the Afternoon, and going to Bed, they must take
down no less than five Pounds in about sixteen Hours; viz. two Pounds in the
Morning, a Pint and an half with Wine at Dinner, half a Pound in the Afternoon,
and as much at Supper and at going to Bed. This every Body must see is fully
sufficient to answer all the Intentions of drinking Mineral Waters. A greater
Quantity than this will serve only to distend and relax the Alimentary
Passages; to force its way through the largest, and most patent Tubes; and to
propagate the Circulation through the Branches and Inosculations of the larger
Arteries and Veins, where the least Foulness and fewest Obstructions can
happen: So that it will scarce ever reach the finest Capillary Vessels, in
which alone the Danger lies. And the late Ingenious and Learned Doctor James
Keill Page 49. Tent am. Medico-Physic. Jac. Keill.
has made it evident, that the most expeditious way of altering the whole Mass
of the Blood, by Mineral Waters, is, by small and frequent Draughts. In most
Cases a Pint in a Morning is sufficient, and in low Constitutions and Disorders
in the Alimentary Passages, tending to Vomiting and Purging, half a Pint is
enough; and whatever Quantity is to be drunk, it is always best to take it in
small Quantities, and at good Distances, provided it come within the Compass of
the Morning. What is drunk at Meals, though cold, yet being fresh, and not
altogether drained of its Principles and Virtues, contributes near as much to
the Cure, as that which is taken in the Morning. The Afternoon and Evening's
Draughts are more Arbitrary, and must depend upon the Observation of the
Patient, as he finds them agreeable to his Stomach, and sit easily or not:
Where too great Quantities have not been swallowed down in a Morning, they are
very proper, provided they be in Proportion to the Morning's Quantity, and
never taken under four or five Hours after Dinner; and that at Night, not under
two or three Hours after Supper; these Times being the most proper to assist
the Digestion, and carry off the Remains of the Food. But the Truth is, as
nothing is more necessary, in a Course of these Waters, than setting out right
at first; so nothing requires more the Experience and Judgment of a Physician,
than the accommodating the previous Preparations, the Quantities to be drunk,
and the Medicines to be taken with them, to the Distemper and the Constitution
of the Patient. For these once settled, the rest generally goes on successfully.

Gouts. When the original Constitution is broken and impaired; the Parts
subdued and full of Gouty Salts; the Force of the Circulation, by Age and
frequent Fits, weakened, and continued only through the Inosculations of the
great Vessels; the Humor recoils inwardly upon the Bowels. And this is called
an irregular Gout. While it is in any Joint, or any Muscular Part, it is still
esteemed regular, though the nearer it comes to those outward Parts, the least
remote from the Heart and Bowels, the nearer it comes to an irregular one, and
so consequently to its last and fatal Stages. To which it seldom comes
unattended; for it generally brings the Stone along with it: Of which it may not
be amiss to make this one Observation, to wit,

Gouty Persons, and the Gravel Stones found in the Bladders of such as were
afflicted with this Distemper (perhaps the Stones found sometimes in the
Gallbladder, but of this I can affirm nothing) are, to all their essential
Qualities, the same. They have both the same Color, Taste and Smell; they
yield both the same Principles, and produce the same Appearances, when treated
chymically. They have both the same internal Texture of Parts, as far as can be
known, and even the same outward Shape, when unbroken and unconfined by hard
Substances; and they generally happen to one and the same Person: At least it
seldom comes to pass, that any one is much troubled with the Gout, but he has
the Stone at last. And this shows that they are both owing to the same
Conformation of Parts, and other general Causes. It is true, some have suffered
violently by the Stone, who never had the Gout; but this may be owing to a
special, hereditary Narrowness and Stiffness of the Urinary Passages, in
respect of the other Vessels; and a particular unhappy Texture of Parts, as it
happens to some other Organs in other Persons: For fat People have smaller
Vessels in proportion to their Stature than lean. But in the general, it is
pretty constant, that those who suffer long under severe Fits of the Gout,
seldom escape the Stone. Dr. Cyprianus, the late ingenious Cutter for the
Stone, had observed, that those who only drunk Malt Liquor were seldom ever
violently afflicted with that Distemper: And among many hundreds he had cut, he
had never found one, who had only drunk Ale or Beer. Whether this was owing to
the lesser Quantity of Salts in those Liquors than in Wine, or to the
Slipperiness they induce upon the Bowels and other Vessels, or to both, I will
not here take upon me to determine. But I believe the Fact is, both in the
Stone and acquired Gouts, that those who only drink Malt Liquors, without Wine
or Spirits, are seldom violently afflicted with either. And for the same
Reasons it comes to pass, that the Gouts and Gravels of the Sex, are seldom so
severe as in Men; they generally drinking less Wine, and feeding less of Fish
and Flesh Meats. And that in the Gouts, both of Men and Women, who drink no
Wine nor Spirits, any little proper Medicine has entirely kept off the Pain,
and prevented the Fits. I know an ancient Gentleman, formerly treated pretty
roughly by the Gout, who drinking only Malt Liquors, has, for several Years,
with certain Success, entirely kept off the Pains and Fits of the Gout, by
taking only every Morning, regularly, a Pint of warm White Wind Whey, to
encourage Perspiration: Which when he neglects to do, they as certainly return.
We may therefore conclude, 1. That since the Gout and Gravel Stones are, as to
their essential Qualities, much the same; and since it is hardly possible to
account for the breeding of the Stone, but from a particular Narrowness and
Stiffness of the Urinary Vessels, and an Abundance of such Salts in the Fluids;
it is highly probable, that the Gout must proceed from the same general Causes:
And this is some kind of Confirmation of the two first Propositions laid down
in the beginning of this Discourse. 2. The same Method and Medicines that have
been deduced from the first two Propositions, for relieving Gouty Persons, in
the Intervals of the Fits, will likewise serve for preventing the Increase of
the Stone and Gravel; as we are certain they do from the best Experience and
Practice in this Case. I will now go on with my purpose, and consider an
irregular Gout, fixed on these three great Instruments of human Life, the Head
the Stomach, and Guts.

Gout has seized on the Head, it is to be treated as any other violent
Headache, or as an Inflammation on the Brain, or its Membranes; by Bleeding at
the Arm or Jugular; Cupping on the Back; Blistering between the Shoulders, but
especially on the Ancles, to give the Gouty Humor a Vent downwards. In young
and strong Constitutions, Mercurial and Antimonial Vomits will do Wonders, though
they are seldom to be ventured upon in any Constitution above Forty. The
Intention here to be had in View (as in all other irregular Gouts) is to expel
the Gouty Humor outwardly upon the Muscles or Joints, and to fix it there.
Wherefore in order to carry it to as great a Distance from the noble Organs as
may be, a free Passage is to be opened to it on the Limbs, by blistering the
Ancles and Wrists; and to promote its Conveyance thither, gentle Stomach
Purgers are to be poured down continually, two or three Spoonfuls every third
Hour, 'till the Effect is obtained. And for this end, I recommend principally
Tincture of Hiera Picra with, compound Spirit of Lavender, and a few Drops of
Tincture of Snake-weed, and Tincture of Diambra, as being one of the most
powerful Expellents, and an excellent Strengthner of the Stomach and Bowels.
Its common Mischief is little to be minded here, for the forcing Blood or the
Piles will carry the Gouty Humor along with it; and these Disorders are but
Trifles in respect of an irregular Gout. This Method will either spend the
Gouty Humor, or turn it to a regular Fit. But here Care is to be taken that
the Medicines be not too hot, especially in young sanguine Complexions, lest an
Inflammation on the Brain, or its Membranes should turn to a Phrenzy or Fever:
but there is less Danger of this, because the Gout in the Head seldom happens
to the younger, except through much and long Intemperance.

Gout in the Stomach is a common and less dangerous Case; for the Gout seldom
comes on and goes off without touching there by the way. In the slight Touches
of it, any little Stomach Purge will set it a packing. But it is more obstinate
toward the Decline of Life; when it settles in a constant Pain, nauseating and
kecking in the Stomach. Vomits are reckoned dangerous in the Gout, lest they
should derive the Humor on the Stomach: But there can be room for no such a
Suspicion here. Wherefore upon the first Seizure of the Stomach, a Vomit is
instantly to be administered, and repeated according to the occasion of the
Case: After that Hiera Picra as is before cautioned and qualified, with a hot
Sinapism, or Blister oh the Ancles: And last of all, the highest Cordials, and
most generous Wines, may be freely indulged, without fear of Inflammation.
Among the Cordials, I would recommend the Electuarium de Ovo, as containing
Camphir (the most constant and active Diaphoretic, and the most useful one for
that purpose) and some other of the richest Cordials. After all this
Management, should the Gout still continue in the Stomach and become habitual
(which it seldom does after such a Method taken in time) nothing but a long
Course of the Bath Waters with Steel, Bitters, and gentle Stomach Purgers, a
regular Diet, and proper Exercise, can effectually cure it.

Gout in the Guts, on its first Seizure, may be easily treated, as a bilious
Cholic; only the Opiats, commonly and justly given in the Cholic, are not here
to be used, but in the last Extremity. But this Distemper ought to be treated
altogether in the manner prescribed in the former Section, about the Gout in
the Stomach.

Gout, and one which has not hitherto been much considered: For as the Cholic
or Asthma is, so the Gout may be, divided into the Humorous and Nervous; though
this Distinction depends more upon the Complexion of the Patient, than the
abstracted Nature of the Distemper. The Humorous Gout happens only to people of
grosser Habits, more robust Constitutions, and more stiff and springy Fibers,
and is the Gout which I have been hitherto treating. All I can further add to
what has been said, is, that under the Fit, White Wines are more eligible than
Red; because those part more readily with their Spirits, and are less
astringent than these. And for the same Reason in the Intervals, the Red is
preferable to the White: Though neither of them, in either Case, be useful or
necessary, but because Custom or Habit, which it is not safe to alter suddenly,
has made them so. For in all the Ottoman Empire, where little Flesh Meat, and
no Wine is used; and in Spain, where they use them very moderately; and among
the wild Mountaineers in the Northern Countries; and the lower Rank of the
People in every Country, where they can procure neither, there is little or no
Gout. Rubbing the Part affected with a soft Hand, or warm Napkin, as strongly
as the Patient can bear it, is the ready way to make the Humor perspire in the
Fit. And Cold Bathing, and rubbing with a Flesh Brush, Morning and Night, are
some of the most certain outward Means, to bring Strength and Nourishment into
it, in the Intervals.

Gout, in a clearer Light; because a groundless Jealousy of the Danger of its
throwing the Gout inwardly, has made it universally disused. Nothing made a
greater Noise upon its first Restoration, and nothing could have sunk lower in
its Reputation since, than Cold Bathing: And it will always happen so in Things
fitted to the vulgar Capacity, when they are universally prescribed, without
Distinction and without Choice. Those who know how greatly Foulness and
Uncleanliness promote Epidemical, Pestilential and Infectious Distempers, can
only tell what Cleanness contributes to Health. The Eastern People (whose
Laziness, in other Things, is owing to their Climate) have found Cold Bathing
and Ablution so necessary to their Health, that they have made it a part of
their Religion, as it is a Precept of a Religion of a nobler Extract, from
whence they borrowed it. If the modern Doctrine be true, as I really think it
is, that the smallest Fibers, or those of the last Division, in animal Bodies,
be not open and pervious, but solid; then it may be affirmed, that warm Water
(I mean pure Element, endu'd with no Medical Principle) by the active Power of
its Heat, must necessarily relax such Fibers. And that cold Water from the
Nitre, which produces its Coldness, must necessarily contract them. The Tumor
of the Gout, like other inflammatory Swellings, is owing to an Obstruction, or
to the Gouty Humors flowing faster by the Arteries, than it can be received by
the Veins; the Smallest or Capillary Vessels are thereby extended and
stretched, beyond their natural Power of Restitution; so that when the Gouty
Humor is spent by Perspiration, or driven into the Veins by the successive
Strokes of the Circulation; the Obstruction removed; and the Pain entirely gone
off; the Vessels continue thus widen'd and stretched, beyond their Power of
Restitution, for a long Time after. And this is the sole Cause of the long and
tedious Weakness on the Part after the Fit is over; which would yet continue
longer, did not the Coolness and Pressure of the Ambient Air, and the now
sufferable Weight of the Clothing, give the first Impulses to the Fibers
toward their contracting themselves again: Now nothing in Nature can so
readily or so certainly bring this about, as Bathing in cold Water: For the
Nitre in the Water, which is the Cause of its Coolness; and also the uniform
equal Pressure upon the Part, which arises from its Gravity and Fluidity,
concur to communicate to the Fibers a strong and lasting Impulse toward
restoring themselves to their natural State of Contraction. And the Gouty
Humor now being spent, and the Obstruction entirely removed, as is supposed,
how can any such Humor be translated upon another part, by cold Bathing, more
than if the Person had never had the Gout? Now to make this Remedy still more
effectual, after a previous Course of cold Bathing, cold Pumping on the part,
by the Force of a Pump, or the Fall of Water from a Height, may be conveniently
used: The wonderful Efficacy of which is no less certain here, than it is in
White Swellings on the Joints, where, I think, it is a never failing Remedy. I
am very well informed of the Case of a very considerable Person, who, for many
Years before, being tormented with constant and uninterrupted Pains of the
Gout, Summer and Winter, by daily bathing in a Tub of cold Water, has, for
these several Years bypast, brought them to regular and periodical Fits, at
the Cardinal and Critical Seasons only; and of no longer Duration than usual. I
know also an ingenious Physician, who, after a Fit of the Gout, goes daily into
the cold Bath, till the part has recovered its natural Strength, which
constantly happens in much less Time than it would do otherwise. And many
others, who are considerably strengthened, and preserved from catching Cold, by
cold Bathing in the Intervals of the Gout; though this Practice is very
cautiously to be gone about by the old and weak.

Nervous or Flying Gout (both which I take to be the same, and to differ from
the Windy Gout, which is nothing but a Hypochondriacal or Hysterical Symptom)
is owing to the Weakness, Softness, or Relaxation of the Nerves of those
Persons who labor under it. All the Solids of the Body are made up of small
Threads or Filaments of different Natures and Textures. They are divided into
the Fleshy, the Nervous, the Membranous, and the Bony; and make up the solid
Substance of the whole Animal Body: But all of them agree in a greater or
lesser Degree of Springiness or Elasticity. And it is observable, that some of
the most perfect springy Bodies, are made of animal and vegetable Substances;
such as Ivory, Ebony and Whalebone. Wherein the general Nature of Elasticity
consists, or what is the particular Cause of the eminent Springiness of animal
Fibers, is as hard to explain as conceive; which notwithstanding, is the
noblest Instrument of all the Actions and Functions of an animated Body. All
the Attempts hitherto made to discover the particular Nature of a Contractile
and Distractile Animal Fiber, to me seem insufficient and conjectural.
Lewenhoeck has discovered, by his Glasses, that the smallest Fiber of an
Elephant is not bigger than that of the smallest Insect: And if the modern
System of Generation be just, to wit, That an Animal or Plant comes from
another lesser one; then Growth is nothing, but the unfolding the original
Membranes and Fibers: And the length of every Fiber is the same in the
youngest, as in the full grown Animal or Plant. So Growth and Motion both, that
is, the whole Business of the Animal Life, is owing to the Springiness of these
Fibers. The best Resemblance I can make of them, is that of a long Hair, or
small twisted Gut, which, when stretched to any length beyond its natural
State, will restore it self again to its former Dimensions. And in this
Contraction and Restitution of an Animal Fiber; the greatest Mysteries of the
whole Structure consist. As there are some People who have hard, gross, stiff
Hair, with a strong Spring; so there are others, who have soft, fine, weak
Hair, with a feeble Spring: And generally speaking, as the Hair is, so the
Threads, Filaments and Fibers of the Body are. Those whose Fibers are soft,
fine, weak and of a feeble Spring, are generally said to be of weak Nerves, and
liable to Nervous Distempers. And here we may observe the Difference between
more tense and stiffer Fibers, and more springy and elastick ones. All the
Fibers of the Body are in a State of Distension, as is evident from the gaping
Lips of Wounds. Two Persons may have Fibers of the same Degree of Springiness
and Elasticity; and yet in their natural State, and original Formation, the
Fibers of the one may be more stretched, bent and distracted, and consequently
more stiff and tense than those of the other; whereby the more stiff or tense
Fibers making a greater Resistance, and being with more Difficulty stretched
and widen'd, will give more Pain, when a gross Fluid passes through them, than
less stiff or tense Fibers will. Which gives an Account why of two Persons,
both of them of weak Nerves, the one should have the Gout, the other be free
from it. Persons of weak Nerves must necessarily have less Strength, a weaker
Pulse and Digestion; a slower and more imperfect Circulation of the Fluids, and
a less free and perfect Perspiration; and if they happen to indulge in strong
Meats and generous Wines, they must become subject to Hysteric, Hypochondriac
and Cephalic Disorders. But if, together with weak Nerves, a greater Degree of
Tensity or Stiffness be joined, under the same Circumstances, they will be
liable to Gouty, together with the forementioned Disorders. But by reason of
the Natural Weakness and less Original Springiness of their Nervous Fibers, the
Fits of these Gouts will be less painful and more constant.

Coroll. From this Account of the Nervous Gout and other Nervous Distempers,
it is plain, all Evacuations (except the most gentle) must be prejudicial in
them. Gentle Vomits, as they cleanse the Stomach and Bowels, and principally as
they free the Nerves from all extraneous Bodies, and increase the Perspiration,
by the violent Convulsions and Contractions of the internal Muscles and
Membranes; Blisters, as they open the Obstructions of the small Vessels, by
their external, and thin the sizy Juices by their internal Efficacy; I say,
both these Evacuations, may not only safely, but with great Advantage, be used
in Nervous Cases. But all violent Purges and excessive Bleedings, are
religiously to be abstained from, as increasing the original Weakness. Purges
in People of weak Nerves, in Chronical Cases, carry off a great part of the
Nourishment of almost three Days. Vomits, on the contrary, carry off only those
Crudities, that send up to the Head and Nervous System, the noxious Fumes and
Vapors that cause their Misery. Purges relax and weaken the Fibers of a
natural and necessary Function, to wit, those of Digestion: Whereas Vomits can
but weaken the Action of Muscular Fibers, less used, strong in themselves, and
not so necessary to Concoction; as is evident from Monsieur Chirac's Experiment
about Vomiting. Purges carry off little, but what would otherwise pass off, in
Time, by the natural Course of the Peristaltic Motion; and generally leave
behind them what wants the inverted Motion, as they found it. Whereas Vomits
pump up those Crudities, that Nature it self would (gladly, so to speak) throw
up, by the same Organs, the same way Nature tends. Lastly, four and acid
Humors, lodged in the Stomach and Guts, must necessarily weaken both, more
than either gentle Vomits, or Purges possibly can; with this Difference, though
that a very gentle, natural, or artificial Purging, continued for any long
Time, in Persons of weak Nerves, shall both weaken the Person, and waste the
Muscular Flesh. Whereas you shall find, after several Months daily Vomiting, in
a Sea-Voyage, a Day or two's Refreshment ashore, restores the Person to a
greater Degree of Alacrity and Strength than before: Whence it comes to pass,
that Persons of weak Nerves are so much relieved and raised by Vomits; and, on
the contrary, so much sunk and depressed by rough and strong Purges in
Chronical Cases. What farther is to be expected in such Cases, is to be done by
a regular and strict Diet, fitted to the mere Necessities of Nature.
Strengthners of the Digestive Faculties, (and here the Bark and Steel claim the
first place, as being the most certain Strengthners of weak Nerves) gentle and
constant Exercise, as encouraging the Perspiration: Aromatic and Spicy
Bitters, Volatile and attenuating Medicines, and whatever may be thought fit to
nourish, comfort and support the Animal Functions.

Bark, as being absolutely necessary to the Subject I treat; it may not be
amiss to remove one Objection against it; and the only one I have ever heard or
read made with any Show of Reason. I have taken as much of it my self, and as
often, and have prescribed it as freely as any of my Age; I believe; and never
observed it, either in my self or others, do any Hurt, except when it has been
injudiciously and improperly prescribed, and that in continued acute Cases
only. The Objection is, that it often leaves behind it a bad Habit, a
Scorbutic, Cachectic, or Hectic Constitution; bad Lungs, Liver, or Stomach; or
some of the great Viscera spoiled or corrupted. But the Mistake in this
Objection lies here, to wit, that few Constitutions break, and seldom any of
these great Organs become vitiated; but they begin with an intermittent or
periodical Fever. And these I have constantly observed to be of that kind, and
approaching that Season, which Sydenham most judiciously distinguishes from
Vernal ones, and calls Autumnal Agues; and are indeed symptomatical only,
arising from beginning Obstructions in the whole Habit, or in these greater
Viscera: where all Nature is at work, and the whole Organs labor and struggle
to thin the sizy Fluids, and to open the obstructed Bowels; but not being able
to bring about this End, Nature succumbs after every Feverish Fit, thus
excited, into a worse State. And even here too, the Bark does all its proper
Office, in quenching, to wit, the violent Paroxysms of the Fever, which only
can endanger the Life of the Patient: and allows time for other Medicines to
act. But when the Habit is already broken, and the great Viscera already
unsound; it cannot be blamed that it does not restore these; nothing like that
being expected from it, or ascribed to it. When the Bark has extinguished the
Feverish Fits, which threaten Death to the Patient, a Reprieve is obtained: in
which, by deobstruent and attenuating Medicines, Health and Life may be
secured. In relaxed Nerves of the Primaeviae; in almost all sorts of Nervous
and Cephalic Diseases depending on these; in all Gouty Disorders in the
Alimentary Passages; in all Nervous Gouts; in all Intermittent and Periodical
Distempers, or Pains whatsoever: it is preferable to any thing hitherto used;
only in very cold Stomachs and Constitutions, I have found a Decoction of the
Indian Bark, by some called Elatherium to be yet more effectual and
strengthening; as it will also more readily remove the periodical Disorders of
such. But the Peruvian Bark I never found did any Hurt, but in acute continued
Cases; where it runs into violent Purgings: And in the Monthly Purgations of
the Sex, which sometimes it will obstruct; and therefore it ought not to be
given without Steel; which ought also to be added, when it is given in
Chronical Cases. It were to be wished only, in these Cases it gave the same
Relief the second and succeeding times it does the first.

Mercurial Vomits and Purges were absolutely necessary to dislodge it. But
there is one Species of the Gout which miserably torments its Subjects, and yet
yields not to that, or very rarely to any of the Methods in use; I mean the
Gout on the Hip-Joint, when fixed and constant, commonly called the Sciatica;
and yet treated after the manner I Am to explain, never fails of a perfect Cure.
The Foundation of the Method I had from the late most Learned and Eminent
Physician Doctor Archibald Pitcairn; he having communicated it to me under no
Restriction of Secrecy, I think my self obliged to publish it to the World, for
the Benefit of the afflicted. I have used it with great Success these several
Years, and I think have improved it in several Particulars of the Management;
and so never fail of a perfect Cure, if the Distemper is a genuine Sciatica,
though of many Years standing; and after having baffled all other Attempts. It
consists in taking from one, two, three Drams, to half an Ounce (according to
the Strength of the Patient's Stomach) of the Aetherial Oil of Turpentine (that
which comes off between the Spirit and Oil, in drawing off the common Oil of
Turpentine) in triple the Quantity of Virgin Honey in a Morning fasting, for
four, five, six, or eight Days at farthest, intermitting a Day now and then, as
the Patient's Occasions require, or his Stomach suffers by it: In drinking,
after it is down, large Draughts of Sack Whey, to settle it on the Stomach, and
carry it into the Blood: And lastly, in taking a proper Dose of Matthew's Pills
every Night, that Day the Medicine is swallowed. This Course never fails to
remove the Violence of the Pain, and to leave only a Weakness en the Part. To
remove the grosser Remains, and strengthen the weakened Part, I order a Dram or
two Drams of Flower of Brimstone, for some time, twice a Day, in a Tea cup full
of Milk. If through great Intemperance, or a violent Cold, the Patient
relapses, I order the Repetition of the former Medicines for a Day or two,
which commonly sets it a packing. And lastly, to strengthen the Primaeviae, and
enliven the Spirits, I advise Bath or Spaw Waters with Steel, and Bitters with
Volatiles; and perhaps pumping on the Part affected, which never fails to
perfect the Cure in a genuine Sciatica. And I hope it may be of some use, to
have a Method of Cure for this Distemper, so plainly laid down, so effectual in
it self, so easy to the Patient, and so restorative of his Constitution in
general, in respect of those Tortures and the nauseous Load of Medicines the
afflicted are forced to go through in common Practice. The great Efficacy of
this Course consists in the Aetherial Oil: It has been common to prescribe a
few Drops of the Oil of Turpentine in cold Rheumatisms and fixed Pains on the
Joints: But this seldom proves effectual in the Sciatica: Whereas this
Aetherial Oil, having all the Penetration of the Spirit, together with the
Softness and Detergency of the finest Balsam, but chiefly being of such
Lightness, that any Quantity of it may be given, that can stay on the Stomach,
or be kept down by frequent Draughts of any soft Liquor, especially Sack-Whey:
which by its Milkiness uniting readily with the Aetherial Oil; Penetrates into
the least and finest Vessels, and the most secret Recesses of the Animal
Economy; opens their Obstructions; dissolves the glutinous Gellies in the
Joints; cleanses the insides of the Tubes, and makes all pass by Perspiration.
The Rule whereby to accommodate the Dose to the Patient, is to order it so,
that it may not be so much as to recoil upwards; to prevent which, a large
Quantity of Sack-Whey is ordered: And it seldom moves above once downwards; but
lest it should go farther, in the subsequent Doses, the Pills take place.

Topics or outward Applications, to ease or relieve the Part affected in a Fit
of the Gout, they are dangerous, unless discreetly managed. In the frequently
mentioned Cardinal Fits of Spring and Autumn, when, through Ignorance or
Neglect of the Methods hitherto laid down, they shall happen Regular; I would
by no Means encourage any such outward Application of what kind soever hitherto
discovered, except in the very last Extremities (...) Pain. In the Regular
Gouts at those Seasons, these Fits are not to be tampered with in any Manner,
but in the way formerly directed. For the Habit being loaded with the Gouty
Humor and Salts, must be allowed a Time to discharge it self, and drive them
out of the Body; otherwise Life must be endangered by a putrid or malignant
Fever: And these being the Seasons when the Humors naturally undergo some
Alterations; if the Gout be thrown upon the extreme Parts, Nature must not be
disturbed in her Operations: But whatever is to be done, is to be directed to
encourage and fortify her in her own way; and to assist her to expel the last
Breathings of this Humor upon the Parts most remote from the Head and Heart,
the two Sources of the Motion of all the Fluids: (which has been the Intention
of all the Methods and Medicines prescribed in this Treatise:) For thus the
Blood will be purified; the Spirits relieved from their Oppression; the Joints
rendered pliable, and all the natural Functions set at liberty. When these Fits
are over, any thing that is just and probable, and attended with no Danger, for
lessening the future Fits, and lengthening their Intervals, may be tried. But
in the Fits falling out (...) these Seasons; in the tedious and lingering Fits
of those broken with Age, and Habitual Gouts; a well chosen outward Application
may be safely and successfully used; especially, if at the same Time gentle
Stomachic Purges be administered; or a Blister on the Ancles or Wrists be
opened, to let out what may be repelled by the Topic; and thereby to secure
the noble Organs. For let Pretenders brag what they will, I know of no outward
Application, hitherto discovered, but what by its Sluggishness stops the
natural Perspiration: Or by its Activity counter-acts the Direction of the
Circulation; and consequently repels the Humor in some degree or other. But by
thus opening a Way for the Humors to pass elsewhere, the Part affected may be
much relieved by proper Applications. Fuller and Bates give the Forms of some;
and Doctor Pitcairn was exceeding fond of, and held as a great Secret, that
which himself has published in the last Edition of his Treatises, which is made
of two Ounces of white Arsenick, and six Ounces of Live-Lime Stone, put into
four Quarts of boiling Water, set in a warm place twenty four Hours: Stoups of
this applied warm to the Part, he had found ^^^ectual and safe. That which I
would rather recommend is, Stoups of a Decoction (...) Butterbur, Ground Pine
or Camomel Flowers, or any Aromatic bitter Plant in Milk; or a Pultis of the
Head of a Sack-Whey Posset, or any such soft and active Application, to
moisten, soften, relax and open at first; and toward the Decline of the Fit a
Mithridate or Venice Treacle Plaster; the Emplastrum Stomachicum Magistrale,
or the like, to strengthen, warm and comfort; especially if with these last a
stomachic warm Purge be joined. As to Symptomatic Gouts, there can be no place
for them, in the Doctrine hitherto laid down. For on the Supposition, that the
Gout is owing to a particular Texture and Conformation of Parts; where that
Texture and Conformation of Parts is, and the Materials for forming the Gouty
Humor is supplied, there the Gout must necessarily be, without the Concurrence
of any other Distemper: And where these are not, there it cannot be, let the
Person be subjected to what other Distemper soever. And if a Person be
subjected to two Distempers, in the Cure of the one, due regard is to be had to
the Cure of the other. What has been said is all I intend at present on this
Subject.

Rich, the Lazy, the Voluptuous; who suffer most by the Gout: (I mean Acquired
Gouts, and those hereditary ones enraged by Luxury) so those only, who have
spent their Lifetime under its Tortures best can tell, what astonishing
Miseries Wealth and Vice bring upon Human Kind! When the Gouty Humor has
seized upon all the Noble Principles of Life, when it has broken, subdued and
obstructed all the fine Pipes, and slender Passages, in whose Openness and
Soundness all the Exquisite Sensations, all the Delicate Usages of the Animal
Faculties consist. When nothing but Pain, and Melancholy, frightful Ideas,
horrible Dreams and black Despair remain; who would not have parted with the
Richest Delicacies, the most Delicious Wines, and the most Enticing Vices, for
a plain, simple Diet, an useful laborious Life, Freedom from Pain, and a good
Conscience? TEMPERANCE only, Divine, Innocent, Indolent and Joyous Temperance
can Cure or effectually Relieve the Gout. For let Us, or our Brethren the
Quacks, brag what we will,

Tollere Nodosam nescit Medicina Podagram. FINIS.

