THE FLIGHTS OF FANCY; Being a COLLECTION of ORIGINAL PIECES, IN VERSE and
PROSE, Never before Published.

Thoughts wondrous honest, though of mean Degree,
And strangely liked for their Simplicity.
POPE. LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and Sold by J. WILLIAMS, near the
Mitre-Tavern, in FLEET STREET; W. FLEXNEY, opposite GRAY'S-INN-GATE, HOLBOURN;
T. TOFT and R. LOBB, also L. HASSALL, in CHELMSFORD.

MDCCLXVI.

(PRICE 2s. 6d. sewed.)

A LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
MR. Arne Mr. Arnold Mr. Bensley, 2 Books Mr. Biggs, 2 Books Mrs. Bellamy Mr.
Brooks Mr. Benson Mr. Bennet Mr. Ballard Mr. Brown Mr. Brooks Mr. Bonnick Mr.
Baker Mr. Burton Mr. Burn Mr. Brentnall Geo. Buxton, M. D. George Colman, Esquire
4 Books Miss Carey Mr. Clee Mr. Child Mr. Cook Mr. Cotterel Mr. Clark Mr.
Colebourn Mr. Croft Mr. Creek Mr. Clarke Mr. Dodd Mr. Du-Bellamy Mr. Darval
junior Mr. Efford Mr. Erwin Mr. Few Mr. Frost Mr. Ferrel Mr. Forest David
Garrick Esquire George Garrick, Esquire Mr. Gray Mr. Griffin Mr. Hayes Mr. Harrison Mr.
Hawkins Mr. Hall Mr. Hazard, 2 books Mr. Joseph Hazard 2 books William Howard
Esquire Mr. Harriot Mr. Hawtyn Mr. Handasyd Mrs. Hazard Mr. Robert Hazard Mr. Hunt
Rev. Mr. Houlton Mr. Hookam Mr. Hucman Mr. Hassall Mr. Johnston Mr. Jones Mr.
Thomas Jones Mr. Judd Mr. Kilbourn Mr. Langton Mr. Lobb, 2 books Mr. Mun Mrs.
Mun Mr. Mustgrove John Mantell Esquire Mrs. Mattocks Mr. Morgan Mr. Mapleton Mr.
Ogborne Mr. Powell, 6 books Mr. Jos. Powell Mrs. Pritchard Mrs. Powell Mr. Peck
Mr. Peele Mr. Pain Mr. Rust Mr. Rapley Mr. Scot Mr. Stains Mr. Smith Mr.
Shuter Mr. Squibb Mr. Stock Mr. Steel Mr. Stead Mr. Smithson Mr. Stonard Mrs
Smithson Mr. Turner Mr. Thomas, 2 books Tho. Vincent, Esquire James Worsdale, Esquire
Mr. Wotty Mr. Wood Mr. Weston Mr. Warner Mr. Williams Mr. Wilson Mr. Yates Mr.
Zuckert.
TO Mr. WILLIAM POWELL,
SIR,
THE following Pieces are the Production of my leisure Hours; they are
imperfect to a Degree, too full of Expletives and Incongruity; nothing could
have induced me to have published them now, but my having promised them my
Friends these two Years; and rather than they should accuse me of being worse
than my Word, I have ventured to expose myself to the Censure of the World, and
the Judgment of the Reviewers; but as they are my first Productions, I could
wish to be overlooked, on the Promise they shall be my last, -- when I wrote
them indeed I had the Vanity (like all young Authors) to think I was smitten
with the Muses, but now to my Grief I too clearly see that I have smitten them
with a Stab of Disgrace; having disturbed and made muddy the peerless Stream of
Helicon. My Pretensions to Letters must appear the highest Presumption, from
many Reasons; first from my humble and obscure Situation, and secondly from my
being deprived of a Classical Education, etc. for great Scholars, like great
Rogues, can take such Liberties as little ones dare not think of; -- I have
only this one Consolation; that as my Reputation as an Author is but little, I
have the less to loose; -- I don't doubt but this will be an unwelcome
Offering; but I have presumed to inscribe it to you, because I know you bear me
that Friendship, that (were you sure to derogate by such a Reception) you would
take it as it was meant, the only Acknowledgment I had left, in Return for the
many Favors I have received, and the good Endeavors you have made to serve
me, though they unfortunately proved ineffectual. Dependence on Theaters are as
fatal, and as transitory as at Court; and the Promises of a Manager are as
baseless as those of a Statesman; so fond are all Degrees of apeing their
Betters; this I have a Right to speak, being prompted both by Fact and
Experience; I cannot say indeed I had ever any great Dependence at Court; But
to my Sorrow I know it, and at this Moment feel, the fatal Consequence of
depending on Theaters; and the alluring Promises (bound with the sacred Ties of
Honor and Friendship) of Managers, -- had I not been told by my Friends (and
these too, in my Opinion, the best Judges of the age, such as Mr. Churchill,
Mr. Lloyd, Mrs. Cibber, and yourself) that I was possessed of some Requisites
for the Stage, I had never attempted it; prompted by this, and conscious of the
Right, I as an Individual, had to an Attempt, and strenghten'd by the
Obligations that the Theaters, when in a drooping State, were once under to my
Father, for his many excellent and received Entertainments; I was flattered
into Hope and Expectation, giving up all my other Connections in Life, and
sacrificing all other Interests to the seeming Friendship and solemn Promises
of Mr. L --; who, like a Sorcerer, led me into a Labyrinth of Delusion, and
left me to bewail my Situation in Oblivion. Could I but recall the whole two
Years Expense, the Loss of Time, and prevent the inevitable Destruction of a
dear and tender Family, I would forgive the heavy Load of Anxiety, the daily
Expectations, and the hourly Disappointments that I met with; their Frowns of
Authority, their Shafts of Impunity, their Stare of Despotism, and their Sneers
of Contumely; all these I could forget, but that my Wounds still bleed, and
Pain begets Remembrance.

I am, dear Sir with the greatest respect and sincerity Your very humble
Servant, GEORGE SAVILLE CAREY.

THE INOCULATOR, A COMEDY IN THREE ACTS.

Dramatis Personae
PITTEM, an Inoculating Doctor BLANDFORD, a young Gentleman in Love with Miss
DANBURY. HIERAPICRA, PITTEM's Apothecary. PESTLE his Servant. JERRY, Servant to
BLANDFORD's Uncle. KNABBEM, a Bailiff. Mrs. BUZBY, Mr. BLANDFORD in Disguise.
THE INOCULATOR.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Pittem's Parlour. Pittem Solus. WHAT a Pleasure there is in getting Money;
could we but forget we were to die, it would be the Zenith of Felicity.

Enter Pestle. Pestle. Sir, Mr. Blandford is below, and desires to speak with
you.


Pit. Odds so; I am very busy too just now: Tell him to call again by-and-by;
-- no, no, Pestle, Pestle, tell him to walk up, do you hear?


Pestle. I will, Sir. Exit. Pestle.


Pit. What the plague does he want here again so soon? It was but Yesterday
that he was plaguing me to Death about Miss Danbury, and if I thought he had
been come again on the same Errand, I would have sent him Word I was sick. But
here he comes.


Enter Blandford. Bland. Good Morning to you, Doctor.


Pit. Mr. Blandford, your very humble Servant; how do you, this dull Morning?
I'Gad I was threatening to go to Bed again.


Bland. To Bed, Doctor! What before you are well up? Or have your medical
Studies kept you from sleeping all Night?


Pit. No -- but I have got a nasty something hanging on my Spirits.


Bland. You're safe enough, you know; a Dog and a Doctor, know how to choose
their Physic.


Pit. An excellent Compliment! [Aside.] As your Kind of Gentry know how to
choose the best Wh -- res.


Bland. I beg your Pardon, Doctor, there is no best in the Case; the best of
the bad, is not worth choosing; but if you have no more Skill in Medicines,
than I have in Filles de Joye, I would not give a Fig for your Practice.
Talking of the Fair, puts me in Mind of poor Miss Danbury; never was so good a
Heart so much depressed: With blooming Beauty, and a Soul angelic, she drags a
Life of Woe, and keeps the Shield of Virtue on her Arm; while her Hand rejects
with Scorn, the tempting Bribes of gay Debauchery.


Pit. What then, you young Rogue, you have tried her, I suppose? But she knew
you had nothing to give her but Promises, and so thought in that Case she might
as well put on the Prude as not.


Bland. Let me tell you, Doctor, that is a damned ill-natured Surmise, and did I
not think you spoke it more out of Raillery, than Sincerity, I should for ever
hold the most contemptible Opinion of you as a Man.


Pit. Why you did not think I was in Earnest, did you, Ned?


Bland. No -- If I had!


Pit. You Would have been for running me through the Body, I suppose; but I assure
you the World says strange Things of the Girl.


Bland. Aye, it is a strange World, Doctor.


Pit, Nay, but from the many pitiful Tricks, that I have detected her in
myself, I am determined to have nothing to do with her.


Bland. You would have had (it is well known) if she would have let you.


Pit. There Is for you now! that is like her, I did imagine, indeed, (when I
ceased to support the ungrateful Hussy, in her flaunting Expectations) she
would raise some scandalous Report or other, to hurt me in my Character and
Business. Oh, the Jade! had it not been for the great Regard I had for the
Father, she should have shifted for herself long ago.


Bland. Your Regard for her Father!


Pit. Aye, my Regard for her Father.


Bland. Why what great Regard could you have for him, when I have often heard
you say he died five hundred Pounds in your Debt?


Pit. Why though he was an unfortunate Man, he was an honest one, as far as his
Circumstances would go.


Bland. That Is one of the most grateful Confessions I ever heard you make of
any Man before.


Pit. I had ever the most favorable Opinion of every Man, and was always more
inclined to hide, than expose their Misfortunes.


Bland. That Is well again; so shall your own Words convict you.


Pit. As how?


Bland. Why, if you were inclined to think the most favorably of Man, you must
in Reason think the same of Woman Kind.


Pit. And so I do.


Bland. Good again; and what has poor Miss Danbury done, that every Thought of
her is bad, and your best Opinion but a sordid one?


Pit. Aye, but Facts, my dear Ned, are Facts, and the general and perpetual
Complaints of the World are Circumstances too glaring to be overlooked.


Bland. What the World says in those Cases, ought never to be regarded; for
such Reports generally arise from the inventive Gossips of a Tea table; and
there is a Species of Barbarity that reigns predominant in the Breasts of the
low-minded Vulgar. Whenever they perceive an Object of Merit, that was once
their Envy, under the least Misfortune, they are never so happy as when doing
that Person some secret Injury, or till, by some malignant Conspiracy, they
have reduced them to a State of Adversity.


Pit. And can you say that this is her Case?


Bland. Yes, truly; for it is well known that Miss Danbury was (scarce three
Years ago) the Admiration and Envy of the Country for ten Miles round, and now,
the veriest Drab that was wont to think herself honored with a Court'sy from
her, will, with a provoking Sneer, tell her to shorten her Furbelows; and since
they have found her whole Dependence is on you, they have injured her, by
imposing on you some malicious Falsehood, on the mere Supposition of which, I
find you are determined to complete her Misery.


Pit. Nay, Mr. Blandford, it is not for that entirely, but from the very great
Expense she has been to me of late, and as I find that hurts my Circumstances
considerably, it is a Duty I owe myself not to let her ruin me entirely. I have
made her many good Offers; nay I made Interest for her to a Gentleman and Lady
who were going to South Carolina, where they told her she would have the
greatest Opportunity in the World of making her Fortune; all which she
ungratefully rejected; and as I am under no Manner of Obligation to her, or
hers, I think I have done for her already what hundreds would not have done; in
Truth therefore she must now shift for herself as well as she can.


Bland. Poor Girl! I cannot blame her; it is strange so great a Tenderness Mr.
Danbury had for her when living, that he did not make some Provision for her at
his Death.


Pit. That Is the Astonishment of every one, but what could a Man do that had
it not in his Power?


Bland. That is still more strange, for every Body thought him a Man of
Property.


Pit. Ah, Ned, you see with what Art some People can support a false
Reputatian, and when their Affairs come once to be laid open to Inspection,
many a worthy Family that has trusted their All in their Hands, from too good
an Opinion of their Circumstances, find too often a broken Back in the
Consequence.


Bland. Well, I wish the dear Creature was better provided for, or that I had
it in my Power to make her the happiest Woman in the Universe.


Pit. How would you do that?


Bland. Why, I would endeavor to do it, by marrying her, and setting her above
the Frowns of the World.


Pit. And a promising Dame you would get for your Pains. -- Ah, Ned. I pity
you I must confess. -- But Plague on it, if you are so wonderfully smitten with
the Wench, why don't you marry her.


Bland. Because I am not at present possessed of those Requisites, that would
be essential to our Happiness.


Pit. That is a little Money, I suppose.


Bland. You suppose right; would the kind Powers be pleased to take that dear,
pious, mercenary Uncle to themselves, I should be glad to fill up his Vacancy
here below, without any further Consideration.


Pit. Aye, my dear Boy, but your Uncle takes a deal of Care of his
Constitution, and is as likely to live thirty Years longer, as yourself; you
should have taken better Care of the last five Hundred, Ned.


Bland. Why I confess if I had been as penurious as you, I probably might have
increased it to a Thousand by this Time; and neither have done myself nor any
body else any Good with it.


Pit. If you had it now I don't think you would do yourself much Good with it
by marrying Miss Danbury.


Bland. You are determined, I find, to do her no Good either by Word or Deed;
and therefore, Doctor, I beg you would not give me any more of your cool
Opinions; since you cannot give her a good Word, you shall not dare to give her
a bad one in my Company without the warmest Resentment.


Pit. Well, well, mighty well then; there let it drop -- there let it drop; in
the Name of Goodness may not one talk of Matrimony without having one's brains
beat out. -- Zounds I wish -- I could meet with a good wife with all my Heart.


Bland And a special good Husband you would make, if you thought you could kill her
with kindness. -- If I thought you serious, now, I would help you to a good
one; but what will you give me for my trouble?


Pit. Give you? -- What do you call a good one though?


Bland. The Lady is not very handsome to be sure, nor yet very young; but she
is worth a confounded deal of Money I assure you, and such a Woman can have
nothing bad about her I am persuaded, at least in your Eyes.


Pit. She cannot be bad that is certain, if she is rich; (for Money was never
bestowed on any but those that were good, and knew how to keep it when they had
got it.) But how rich do you think the Lady may be?


Bland. Why, I have heard my Uncle say, that she is worth Ten Thousand Pounds
at least; but don't take the least notice of it to him; for he wants to get her
himself; only she thinks him rather too old. -- Now such a middle-ag'd Man as
you, would be the very Thing. Besides she was asking me who was our best
Inoculator in this Neighborhood. I told her I knew a very infallible one,
meaning you; and she has been teazing me about you ever since.


Pit. Odds, so, but that is one of the most lucky Circumstances that could
have happened, in my Favor. Where does the Lady live, and I Will pay her a visit
tomorrow?


Bland. Oh no, not for the World, she has boarded some Time in a private Family
in this Neighborhood; but as the major Part of them have not had the Smallpox,
it is to be kept a profound Secret.


Enter Pestle. Pestle. Sir, there is a Gentleman below, desires to speak with
you.


Pit. Tell the Gentleman I Will wait on him immediately. [ Exit. Pestle.]
In Faith Ned if you can bring this matter to bear, I Will make you a Present the
greatest Gentleman in the Land would not refuse. Exit. Pit.


Bland. And that is a Pill, or a Dose of Physic, to take when I am sick, to
make me the more so; for I know he has neither the Spirit or Resolution to do
any thing like a Man; the yellow Mammon has caught his Soul, and Avarice holds
his Purse Strings. I don't know what the Hopes of getting this pretended Wife
may do; -- but if he should put me to the Proof, I don't know where I should
find one that would choose to throw herself away upon him. I must do something
to deceive him, hey? let me see, Egad I think I could do very well for an Old
Maid myself; -- An excellent thought! -- but what shall I do for a Dress? -- a
Plague on it I have Interest enough among the fair Sex to get such a Thing as
that to be sure. -- The Old Maid and her Money is the Thing yet; Bait for
Gudgeons with Worms, and a Miser with Gold, and you are sure to catch 'em. I Will
even go after the Doctor, and tell him I am going to the Lady directly. Exit.
Bland.


SCENE II.
Enter Pittem. Pit. So Ned is gone after the Lady. Ten Thousand Pounds! a
charming Sum, -- nay, a Fortune; a very good Fortune of itself -- let me see;
Ten Thousand Pounds; and Five Thousand of my own, makes just Fifteen Thousand
Pounds; -- that will certainly enable me to keep a Chariot of my own, the Thing
I have been striving for these fourteen Years: for what is a Doctor without a
Chariot? the Appearance of a Chariot is the Sign of good Practice; and it is a
common Remark, when the World thinks you have much, you shall have more; and
when but little, you shall have less. [a Knock at the Door] Pray walk in.

Enter Hierapicra. O is it you, Mr. Hierapicra? what News, what News, any more
Patients?


Hi. We have just now lost one, Sir.


Pit. Lost one! how do you mean?


Hi. Dead Sir.


Pit. Dead!


Hi. I assure you, Sir, it it true.


Pit. O he must certainly have had the Itch or the King's Evil. What Noise is
that? [a disturbance without]


Hi. Pestle and Jerry I fancy Sir, I left them in a high Dispute.


Pit. Pestle and Jerry?


Hi. Yes, Sir.


Pit. I wish you would send Jerry to me, I want to speak to him.


Hi. I will. Sir. Exit. Hi.


Pit. The Deuce take me but I have walked upon Thorns and laid upon
Nettle-beds ever since I first heard of this Fortune, and I am terribly afraid
that Old sly Uncle of Ned's will snap her up before me.


Enter Jerry, Jerry. Did you want any Thing with me, Sir?


Pit. Yes, my little Jerry; your Master is not at home I suppose.


Jerry. He was not when I came out.


Pit. Pray, Jerry, (I hope it is no secret) have not you a maiden Lady, of
about forty, that often pays your old Master a Visit?


Jerry. We have, Sir.


Pit. Know you where she lives?


Jerry. A few Miles off.


Pit. You do not know the Name of the Place then, do you?


Jerry. Why, yes I do.


Pit. Could not you inform me then?


Jerry. I should not choose to do such a Thing, without my Master's Authority.


Pit. No! -- pray what could be the Consequence?


Jerry. A very bad one, Sir, for aught I know, as she is a kind of a
Sweetheart of my old Master's, and is worth a Deal of Money; I don't know, if
you should find out where the Lady lives, but you may endeavor to rival him;
the Consequence would then be very bad on my Side, I believe.


Pit. Why he should never know who told me.


Jerry, That he would.


Pit. 'Twill be impossible man; -- he never shall from me.


Jerry. But in the Course of his Examination it would come to my Turn, and then
I must confess, or tell him a Lie, which I will not do for you, or any Body
else, and therefore, Sir, to avoid any Apprehensions of that Kind, it will be
the best Way to say nothing at all about it.


Pit. A stubborn son of a Gun. [Aside.] You seem to have a great Regard for
your Word, Jerry, and I applaud you for it; -- though I should be glad to know
one Thing however, which cannot be of much Consequence to you, or Danger to any
Body -- and that is, whether the Lady keeps much Company, or no?


Jerry. Very little, I believe.


Pit. Hum -- ah -- she has a pretty good Stomach, I suppose --


Jerry. Sir?


Pit. A good Stomach I say.


Jerry. A very moderate one, and as worthy a Lady as ever was born. -- What a
miserable Wretch! [Aside.]


Pit. Is she indeed; she often gives you Money then I suppose?


Jerry. Sometimes, Sir -- what a scurvy Scoundrel! [aside]


Pit. Ha!


Enter Pestle. Pestle. Sir, Mr. Blandford desires to speak with you.


Exit Pestle. Pit. Odds so, I Am glad of that -- well Jerry, your Servant, I am
glad to see you.


Jerry. Sir, your Servant -- I am glad my young Master is come to release me,
for I have been tired of my Company some Time. I hope he will play his Part
well, and work the physical Jesuit out of a few Hundreds. [Aside]


Exit Jerry. Pit. Oh! here comes Ned.


Enter Blandford. Pit. Welcome, welcome, my dear Boy, welcome, what News, what
News?


Bland. What News Doctor? why such News I believe, as will make you completely
happy.


Pit. Then you have seen the Lady.


Bland. Yes that I have, and to some Purpose; why she will call upon you
Tomorrow herself, Man.


Pit. Happy News indeed! --


Bland. But the Merrythought take me, now I think on it, if I did not forget to
tell her your Name, and where you lived.


Pit. O lack-a-day, lack-a-day now, was there ever any Thing so provoking in
this World?


Bland. Nay, upon second Consideration, though, I Am glad on it.


Pit. How so, how so, pray? that is strange indeed!


Bland. Why, because I look upon it, that were she to visit you, the Business
would be half done.


Pit. So much the better, so much the better, Man.


Bland. And pray what am I to have for my Trouble?


Pit. Plague on it, have not I told you I would make you a handsome Present?


Bland. Yes. But what Surety have I for that but your own bare Word, which I
would not take for a Shilling, where Money is concerned. I must have your Note,
Doctor, I must have your Note.


Pit. And so you shall: I will give you a Note of five Pounds on Demand, from
the very Moment she consents to marry me.


Bland. A Note of five Pounds; scandalous and pitiful! -- Wretch, Devil! why
thou art a very Skinflint; -- five Pounds for ten Thousand' Oh, horrible,
horrible! the very Summit of Meanness! -- A Gentleman who knew what Influence I
had over the Lady, but this very Day, offered me two hundred Pounds, only to be
introduced to her -- Five Pounds for ten Thousand! Doctor, your Servant. Exit.
Blandford.


Pit. Nay, but Mr. Blandford, hear me, hear me, [hollowing after Blandford]
Was there ever such a hotheaded Rascal; 'Sdeath if I should lose her now. He
talks of an Offer of two hundred Pounds. A great Sum! A very great Sum! But ten
Thousand! -- I must outbid the Gentleman I believe; for if I should read of
Miss Such-a-one, a maiden Lady of ten thousand Pounds being married to -- oh, I
shall go distracted; the very Thought of losing such a Prize is worse than
being the next to the 10,000l. Lottery Ticket -- But he is gone -- Where Is
Pestle [rings the Bell and calls] Pestle! Pestle! -- From Fears and
Apprehensions I cannot keep a Bone of me still. Pestle! I say; the Devil pound
the Fellow, he cannot hear -- Pes -- t -- le --


Pest. [without.] Who calls?


Pit. Pestle!


Pest. [entering.] I, I, I Am a coming, Sir.


Pit. Come along, then, you deaf-headed Booby.


Pest. Yes, Sir.


Pit. Yes, Sir -- what a Plague is come to the Fellow? Run after Mr.
Blandford, and tell him that I beg he would come back -- run, run.


Pest. O, yes, Sir it has been done some Time.


Pit. Done! what is done, you Puppy, you? what are you talking of?


Pest. Sir --


Pit. I shall go distracted, -- go to Mr. Blandford, -- no, no, no, go to the
Devil you hammer-headed Rascal, and I Will go myself. Exit Pittem.


Pest. Poor Master is in a Passion, I doubt, and talks of going to the Devil,
but mortar me if I follow him.


Exit Pestle. The End of the first ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Blandford Solus. I AM glad my fair one approves of my intended Stratagem,
however; but her Father's Letter astonishes me; it is strange she never showed
it me before; he informs her, (but three Hours before his Death) that he had
provided for her very handsomely; instead of that we find her destitute and
forlorn; and, by what I understand, Pittem was the only person that attended
him in his latest Hours. 'Sdeath, there must have been foul Play. Pittem is
either an errant Knave, or her Father must have deceived her; but when I
compare the two Characters, the first Surmise carries with it many glaring
Circumstances, and the latter seems improbable; I will not rest till I am
satisfied.


Enter Pestle with a Letter. Pestle. Sir, my Master desired I would give this
Letter into your own Hands.


Bland. Very well -- is he at home?


Pestle. Yes, Sir. Ex. Pestle.


Blandford reads. Dear Ned.
I Have considered of your Proposal, and shall be glad to see you on that
Business directly; I shall object to nothing that may prove to your Advantage.

Your humble Servant, Tobias Pittem.


Ho! ho! have I touched you my little Skin-flint? -- This is an excellent
Stratagem I find; but there must be no Time lost in this Affair; it is the best
Time to catch a Fox when he is hungry; and so I Will be with you, my little
Doctor, in a Crack. Ex. Blandford.

SCENE II.
Enter Pittem and Pestle. Pit. So Pestle, you saw Mr. Blandford?


Pest. Yes, Sir.


Pit And what did he say to you?


Pest. Mortar me, Sir, if I heard him say any Thing at all; I saw him open his
Mouth and nod his Head, as much as to say it was very well; --


Pit But did not he seem pleased?


Pest. I did not stay to see, Sir, 'cause I thought it would be ill Manners.


Pit. Poh, Pox, you Blockhead you!


Pest. What do you say, Sir, has he got the Small Pox? -- poor Soul he had
better have been inoculated.


A Knock at the Door. Pit. Go and see who is at the Door, make haste, [Exit
Pestle] What a blunder-headed Puppy it is; -- his Deafness is of little
Inconveniency to me, however; -- for as Secrets are generally whispered, there
is but little Danger of his hearing any, and less of his telling 'em; and this
Country is the very Mart for Scandal.


Re-enter Pestle. Pest. Sir, Mr. Blandford desires to speak with you.


Pit. Tell him to walk up. [Exit Pestle.] Plague on it what a flutter I Am in,
were I going to receive a Challenge I could not be worse. But here he comes.

Enter Plandford. Mr. Blandford, I Am sorry I made --


Bland. Pray Doctor make no Ceremony, there is no Occasion for it.


Pit. I Am glad on it; I was afraid I should have found you as I left you, full
of Gunpowder.


Bland. No, no, Doctor, your Letter stopped all Fear of Explosion.


Pit. To tell you the Truth, I was under great Apprehensions of your accepting
of the Gentleman's Proposal that you told me of.


Bland. No, Doctor, though I received a letter from the Gentleman (since I saw
you last) importuning me in the most pressing Manner, to introduce him; yet,
from the Regard I bear you, I was determined to give you the Preference, and
intended to have waited a Day or two till you had better considered the Matter.


Pit. That was acting the Friend indeed! but to the Purpose my dear Boy; you
read my Letter I presume?


Bland. I did.


Pit. And have you any Objection to a couple of Hundreds?


Bland. Not the least.


Pit. Then I think I have nothing to fear; no Doubt of Success.


Bland. None in the World.


Pit. Flea me, but I shall think every Hour an Age till I see her.


Bland. So I suppose.


Pit. Had I not better go give her an Invitation myself; as I am an utter
Stranger to the Lady, she will undoubtedly expect that Compliment?


Bland. I beg you would not think of such a Thing, but bless your Stars that
she has consented to visit you; for as I have been acquainted with her from my
Infancy, I think myself a tolerable Judge of her Disposition.


Pit. Well, I shall be advised by you.


Bland. If you hope to succeed, I beg you would; one material Thing I should
advise you to, that is, not to make above twelve Hours Courtship on it, for I
have often heard her say she could never bear to be courted above a Day. And
this Resolution she has taken (I am informed) from being crossed in her first
Love.


Pit. That is an excellent Notion, I assure her; -- for I should hate one of
your plaguey long Courtships myself; to have an hundred Fallings-out, and
Fallings-in, in a Week; flying like Cats at one-another Today, and breaking
Heart to make it up again Tomorrow. 'Sdeath I long to see her.


Bland. I Will cure you of your Longing Tomorrow.


Pit. Tomorrow?


Bland. Aye, Tomorrow.


Pit. O brave? it will be necessary to know what Time Tomorrow, that I may be
the better prepared for her Reception?


Bland. About Six, I fancy.


Pit. What, in the Morning?


Bland. No hardly, Doctor; ha, ha, ha, surely you will be able to survive your
Impatience till the Afternoon.


Pit. You Will come with her then, will not you?


Bland. Not I, indeed; you will court best by yourselves -- Well, Doctor, your
Servant, I Have got a little Business to do for my Uncle, and must be gone; I
shall hardly see you again, till you have seen the Lady. Blandford going.


Pit. Bye, bye, well Success attend thee.


Bland. [returning] But Doctor, Doctor; there is one material Matter to settle
before I go; -- the Note, Doctor, the Note.


Pit. O lack a day! right, very right as you say. -- I was in Hopes he had
forgot that. Aside.


Bland. And another Thing I have to hint to you, which will prove more to your
Advantage than mine.


Pit. I Am all Attention.


Bland. You must know I owe the Sum of 200L. to Mrs. Buzby --


Pit. Buzby!


Bland. That is the Lady's Name; -- now I shall give the Note to her, and pay
off my Debt; and if she should desire you to make it into Money Tomorrow, to
show her what a Principle you bear, you may pay it her, which will be only
paying to receive again you know, Doctor.


Pit. With all my Heart; follow me into the next Room and I Will give you the
Note directly.


Exeunt Pittem and Blandford. SCENE III.
Enter Jerry with a Portmanteau. Jer. Lie thou there [throwing the Portmanteau
on the Ground] I Will even rest me a little -- Mercy upon me, what a Parcel of
Things have I got! a Gown from one, a Petticoat from another, Ruffles and Caps,
and the Plague knows what from another. -- Odds my Life, but here comes Pestle.


Enter Pestle. Pestle. Ah, Master Jerry; what is your Load too much for you; or
are you (like the Man in the Story Book) praying to Jacob to carry it for you?


Jerry. To Jacob? a pretty Story indeed -- to Jove, you Fool you.


Pestle. To Job?


Jerry. To Jove, I say.


Pestle. To Jove! ha, ha, ha; to Jove indeed, where will you find such a word
in the Bible?


Jerry. In the Bible? -- I Am wrong too I believe, I should have said Harclus.
Aside


Pestle. Aye, in the Bible.


Jerry. What do you make a Story Book of the Bible? -- Pray let us have no more
of your Nonsense; what do you think of your Master's being married Tomorrow;
-- how do you like that Story?


Pestle. Why very well if it should prove a true one, and I believe there is
something in it too! if he should get him a Wife, I hope she will teach him to
keep a better House than he does at present; -- our Bellies and Dishes are
generally empty.


Jerry. I hate such mean spirited Chaps; I Would sooner take a Voyage to the Indies
than serve such a miserable Devil.


Pestle. Why I have some Thought of leaving him to tell you the Truth, and set
up for myself.


Jerry. Set up for what?


Pestle. Why a Noculator, a Doctor.


Jerry. You! a Doctor? ha, ha, ha, you might spread the Infection, I believe,
but you could never cure it, I am sure.


Pestle. You are mistaken, Jerry, you are mistaken, I have got the Secret.


Jerry. The Secret! what of poisoning People? that is a common Secret enough,
any body knows that.


Pestle. I wish I had the poisoning of you for your ill Opinion. Pray why may
not I hope for Success as well as my Master? once upon a Time he knew no more
than myself.


Jerry. Nay, as for that Matter, I don't think he knows much more now.


Pestle. Why, as you say, I know a great deal; I had as good Learning as ever
he had; I learnt Multiplication, Extraction -- Mortar me, but here he comes.


Jerry. Mortar me but here I go then, if that is the Case [takes up his
portmantua] and so Mr. Pestle, your Servant.


Exit Jerry. Enter Pittem. Pit. Where have you been, you Blockhead, all this
Time? I have wanted you to go of a hundred Errands for me.


Pestle. Sir, I was here.


Pit. You was here, pray what Business had you here?


Pestle. I -- I -- I -- only -- Sir, you have got a Hole in your Stocking.


Pit. And what is that to you?


Pestle. No, Sir, no, it is nothing new.


Pit. You impudent Scoundrel you, I Will break your Head -- what do you mean by
that?


Pestle. Nothing, Sir.


Pit. Nothing, Sir? -- I believe you have more Meaning than you seem to have
[aside] but since you have put me in Mind on it, you may as well go and buy me a
new Pair; -- Here Is two Shillings, let 'em be good ones, do you hear, -- Stay,
here is Sixpence more. I may as well have the best Pair at once, now I am about
it, especially as I shall have Company Tomorrow. Exit Pestle.


Ned, I suppose, thinks I Will be a mighty great Friend to him now, for this
Recommendation -- No, no, the Devil a Bit, I Have no Notion of hurting myself by
too much Good Nature. But if my Wife should cuckold me, I shall get myself
finely laughed at: -- Never mind that, I shall have a Salve for that Sore, My
budding Horns shall never give me Pain,
Ten Thousand Pounds will hide the darkest Stain.



The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
Enter Pestle. Pestle. WAS there ever such a narrow-soul'd mean-spirited
Creature as my Master! He has promised me an old Coat of his this Twelvemonth,
which has been threadbare these two Years; and never had the Heart to part
with it yet; he is got a Lady coming Today too, and I Am as ragged as a
Braintree Beggar, I shall be ashamed to be seen by any Body. It Is my Opinion
he is afraid I shall rival him, because he knows that when I am dressed, I look
more like a Gentleman than himself. But here he comes.


Enter Pittem. Pit. Run to the Door, Pestle, Some body knocks.


Pest. Yes, Sir. Ex. Pestle.


Pit. If it should be Mrs. Buzby, now -- let me see, let me see -- what Time
is it? -- [looks at his Watch.] past six, by Jupiter! I think I look pretty
well, she cannot find Fault with my Dress.


Re-enter Pestle in a Hurry. Pest. Sir there is a Lady would be glad to speak
to you.


Pit. Hey, a Lady! Did you ask the Lady's Name?


Pest. Yes, Sir, its Mrs. Buzgig.


Pit. Buzgig, you Blockhead, Buzby.


Pest. Yes, Sir.


Pit. Run, give my Compliments to the Lady, and desire her to walk up. Now for
my own Honor, and the Honor of the Faculty, Zounds I Have got the Palpitation
of a Boy of sixteen, 'Sdeath but here she comes, and a fine Presence indeed. --
A Gentlewoman every Inch of her take my Word for it.


Enter Mrs. Buzby. Mrs. Buz. Sir your Servant, you will excuse my troubling you
with a Visit? --


Pit. Pray Madam, I beg Madam, you would not begin to apologize, the Honor
you do my poor House, is a Pleasure, unspeakable Pleasure, Madam.


Mrs. Buz. O Sir, I beg you would not make me ashamed of myself.


Pit. O confound it what have I said now. [Aside] so that I do not make you
ashamed of me, I shall be happy, [ Tumbles backwards over a Chair, in making
his Obedience with an extroadinary Air, Mrs. Buzby cries out.]


Pit. I have made her ashamed of me now, and to some Purpose [Aside and
getting up]


Mrs. Buz. I hope Sir you have not hurt yourself.


Pit. Not in the least Madam, not in the least, I hope you will excuse my
putting you in a Fright.


Mrs. Buz. O my dear Sir, accidents are unavoidable; Perhaps you are in Love
Sir; if so it may be easily accounted for; that Rogue Cupid generally leads his
People blindfold, for we often read of a Gentleman or a Lady's falling into a
River, or, (from the mere Imagination they are loosing their Loves) tumbling
out of a two Pair of Stairs Window.


Pit. I do assure you, Madam, if I am in love, it is with no one but yourself.


Mrs. Buz. With me, Sir! in love with me? I am confident, Sir, there is nothing
about me, so attracting, that can kindle the least Affection, at least from so
short an Interview.


Pit. Ha Diffidence, Diffidence, Madam, often makes Merit look too coolly on
itself.


Mrs. Buz. Why true, Sir, true, it is very certain where (...) is real Ability,
Diffidence is sure to oppress it, and J^^gment is often referred to the vain
and talkative Coxc^^b, while it sets doubtful and timorous in the Breast of
Modesty, -- But don't think, Sir, I meant to pay myself a Compliment by such an
Observation.


Pit. I do not imagine you did, Madam, but give me Leave to say, it is a very
sensible, a nay a very excellent Observation indeed, Madam. -- What a charming
Tongue she has, if I should loose her now, I shall wish I Would never seen her.
Aside.


Mrs. Buz. But Love, Sir, was not the Business I came here upon, it was of
another Nature; my Business was of another Nature, quite.


Pit. No to be sure, Madam, I had not the Vanity to imagine it was Love. Pray,
Madam, what might it be?


Mrs. Buz. Inoculation, Sir; -- I have been under the greatest Apprehensions of
catching the Smallpox, for this Month past, it being almost so generally
spread about the Country; and as my Cousin Ned has persuaded me that you have
discovered a most infallible Method of eradicating that malignant Disorder, I
have made bold to visit you on that Business.


Pit. Madam I am infinitely obliged to Mr. Blandford for his kind and generous
Recommendation, and more so to you, Madam, for imbibing so good an Opinion of
me. -- But I could wish, pardon me, Madam, I could wish you would consent to
evade the Subject of Inoculation a few Minutes, and dwell a little longer on
that more excellent Topic, Love.


Mrs. Buz. Sir if you can convince me that the Danger of the one is not more
imminent to me, than the other is to you, I shall very readily comply with your
Request.


Pit. Then, Madam, I fancy I shall prevail with you.


Mrs. Buz. Pray explain youself, Sir.


Pit. Does your Apprehensions of the Smallpox give you at present any real
Pain?


Mrs. Buz. I cannot say it does, Sir.


Pit. But mine of Love, Madam, really does.


Mrs. Buz. How can that be, Sir, even supposing me the Object of your
Affections, since both Passions proceed from Fear, yours of losing what you
never had, and there it ends. Mine, of catching that I would not wish to have;
which may possibly end in Death? But however, Sir, since you are so very
desirous of continuing the Theme of Love, I Will even set aside my Apprehensions
a few Minutes, and listen to you. -- I fancy it will be best to get that Part
over first, least I should be discovered before I nail him for the two hundred.
Aside.


Pit. Such a Condescension, Madam, bespeaks you every Thing that is amiable.


Mrs. Buz. Sir, if I thought I was really so in your Eyes, I would endeavor to
return the Compliment in the best Manner I could.


Pit. If there was any other Way in the World more expressive than simple
Words, I wish I knew it, that I might convince you, Madam, I really think you,
-- nay, you really are, the most amiable Lady I ever met with in my Life, and
the only Woman I ever yet wished my Wife.


Mrs. Buz. Sir!


Pit Pardon me, Madam, if my Passion has made my Tongue o'er-run the Bounds
of Decency; if I have offended you, Madam, I beg your Pardon, -- but hope you
will forgive me.


Mrs. Buz. I believe the Doctor is in Love with me indeed. ( Aside.) Sir, I
forgive you with all my Heart, but cannot help thinking it the strangest Thing
in the World, that so slight an Acquaintance should breed so strong an
Affection.


Pit. O Madam, the very illustrious Character Mr. Blandford has often given
you to me, made me almost in Love with you before you came; but since I have
seen you, I am in Love indeed, to find you so far exceed the best of Characters.


Mrs. Buz. Sir, I am infinitely obliged to my Cousin Ned; but must confess he
has always been very liberal in his Commendations of you.


Pit. I am equally obliged to Mr. Blandford, Madam, but am afraid you have
found that he has said more in my Behalf, than you find true.


Mrs. Buz. Sir, I must confess I don't find that he has deceived me in the
least.


Pit. Madam, you make me very happy, indeed.


Mrs. Buz. I Am glad on it Sir, and should be very glad if it were in my Power to
make you always so.


Pit. That it is in your Power, Madam, there is nothing so sure.


Mrs. Buz. Then, Sir, you may depend upon it, I will do my utmost.


Pit. But suppose, Madam, nothing would make me so but your own Person and
Liberty.


Mrs. Buz. Sir, I should have no Objection of resigning them both, were I sure
they would make you happy.


Pit. I would venture my Happiness, nay my Life, Madam, on such a Resignation;
if you would venture to give me your Hand on this fair Promise, I shall be
completely happy.


Mrs. Buz. Then here it is with all my Heart; for to tell you the Truth, Sir, I
have long been tired of the Appellation of old Maid, and most terribly afraid
of dying one.


Pit. ( Takes her Hand and kisses it with great Eagerness.) And I do assure
you, Madam, the musty and fulsome Name of old Bachelor has been no less hateful
to me, nor do I care how soon I get rid of it.


Mrs. Buz Though I cannot help thinking but I have made too brief a
Capitulation; Forwardness in Women generally gives Disgust. But to be plain,
you must know, Sir, I hate to be courted; the Hey-day of Youth is over in me;
about sixteen or seventeen Years, I used to take a Pleasure in denying, on
purpose to obtain a Number of new and useless Solicitations, 'till at last I
teased my Lovers out of Patience.


Pit. Well I declare to you, Madam, I have been served so twenty times, for I
never paid my Addresses to a young Lady in my Life, but before I could settle
my Affections, she tired my Patience with a feigned Coyness, giving me the
greatest Encouragement Today, and Tomorrow would hardly look at me, 'till I
had dangled from Morning to Night after her, and all the Excuse she had for it
was, -- I should not think her too forward, but I soon let her see I could be
as capricious as herself and so broke her Acquaintaintance with a cool
billet-doux, and farewell.


Mrs. Buz. I cannot help thinking this Visit was an arch Design of my Cousin
Ned's, and to get us acquainted with no other View, than what it has turned
out; He Is a strange Creature! he has great good Nature, but it is great Pity he
has not a little more Economy in regard to his Pocket; money's like chaff to
him, it flies with every wind that blows.


Pit. O that is an unpardonable Sin, Madam, in my Opinion.


Mrs. Buz. And in mine too, Sir; though his great Fault is, I believe, being
too charitable; he pretends that when he sees a Friend or a Neighbor in
Distress, he cannot sleep 'till he has relieved 'em.


Pit. Ah, that is an abominable Fault; for what is another's Poverty to me? let
every one take Care of themselves I say. Besides, giving to the Poor is the
most unprofitable Way of bestowing Charity in the World; you are sure of never
having any Return.


Mrs. Buz. True, Sir, very true; I Have been obliged to lend him Money, at
different Times, to the Amount of two hundred Pounds, though it went very much
against me to do it, had he not been a pretty near Relation, I would not have
done it on any Account. But he has certainly a deal of good Nature; and I know
too that he will pay when he has it, for I lent him a hundred and twenty Pounds
before, and I must say he paid me very honestly again, with good Interest into
the Bargain. But if I could get him to pay the good two hundred Pounds he owes
me now, I should hardly risk any more with him, I think.


Pit. I Am glad to find you are come to that Resolution, Madam, I assure you --
once or twice a Person may do a good natured Thing, but I Would have em beware of
the third Time, least they be flung at last.


Mrs. Buz. He has no given me a Note of two hundred Pounds on you, Sir; I Am
amazed to think what he can have done for it.


Pit. Why it was a particular Kind of Business to be ^ure, Madam, the Purport
of which I shall make bold to acquaint you with some other Opportunity.


Mrs. Buz. I have no very great Relish for Secrets, Sir.


Pit. Then you are not a Native of this Country I am sure, Madam; for the
People here make it as great a Merit to discover the Secrets of their
Neighbors, as the Astronomers do to discover new Spots in the Sun, and take as
great a Pride in declaring 'em to the World.


Mrs. Buz. That Is a very despicable Character. Pray what Time of the Day is it?
I must begin to think of going, I promised to call on a Lady in my Way home,
upon some very particular Business. I should be glad now to know your Terms of
Inoculation. Perhaps it is not convenient just now, Sir, to pay the Note I
mentioned.


Pit. Quite so, quite so, Madam, I have it at Hand, I am never so happy as
when my Debts are paid..


Mrs. Buz. Nay, as for that Matter, if it had not been convenient, you need not
have been under any Uneasiness on my Account, Sir; it will save me the Trouble
of sending to my Banker's Tomorrow, that is all.


Pit. Here it is, Madam.


Mrs. Buz. And here is your Note, Sir, with a Receipt in full on the Back.


Pit. Madam, I am very much obliged to you.


Mrs. Buz. O, Sir, it is I that am obliged. Puts it in her Pocket.


Pit. Now, Ma'am, now for Inoculation; when shall you be ready to prepare.


Mrs. Buz. Immediately, Sir.


Pit. Very well, Madam; you shall have your Medicines Tomorrow Morning.


Mrs. Buz. My Heart almost fails me already I declare.


Pit. My dear Madam you need not be under the least Apprehensions of Danger.
It is the mildest undertaking in the World. I have had some hundred thousands
under my Hands, but never had a Patient, while under the Operation, that had
the least Apprehensions of Death, nor one that ever made the least Complaint
since they left me.


Mrs. Buz. Amazing!


Pit. It is amazing, indeed, Madam; but you must imagine I have taken no small
Pains in the Studies of Physics and Metaphysics, to have made a Discovery of
this Nature.


Mrs. Buz. That is very apparent, Sir.


Pit. I do assure you, Madam, it has been a Work of thirty Years Study. I have
spared no Pains in consulting the best Authors, and was at a vast Expense in
traveling for Experience, to the most celebrated Capitals in Europe, and am
happy to find at last that my Endeavors were not thrown away, but that my
Discovery has proved of such general Utility.


Mrs. Buz. What an excellent Knack the Doctor has at lying. ( Aside.) There is
nothing more conducive to Happiness, than the general Approbation of the
Public, nor nothing so hard to obtain.


Pit. Very well observed indeed, Madam, but I can very well sa^, with a
favorite Author of mine "Successo filicitatibusque." And in another Part,
where he compares a great Genius to a Sky-rocket, "Skirockitum Skirocteribus.


Mrs. Buz. So, so, the Doctor is going to purge me with Dog-Latin. ( Aside)
Your Author's Excellence is thrown away upon me, Sir, I am quite a Stranger to
Latin; French was always my favorite Language, I ever considered Latin as too
masculine a Study for the Ladies.


Pit. Madam, there is such a Melody in the Sounds! -- but as you say, Madam, it
may be too masculine for the Ladies, too sonorous.


Enter Pestle. Pest. Sir, Mrs. Bugg bid me tell you she was a-going, and desire
you would let her have the Lotion with her.


Pit. Tell her I Will wait on her directly. ( Exit Pestle.) You must know,
Madam, the Lady is now and then troubled with a Pimple, and she is terribly
afraid of spoiling her Face; I promised her something to prevent 'em, and I
dare say she would not go without it for the World.


Mrs. Buz. I am sometimes troubled with 'em myself; though I am not afraid that
they will spoil my Beauty, I assure you, Sir, -- but have you really a Medicine
of that Kind.


Pit. A most infallible one, Madam, which beautifies the Skin, amazingly, for
which I have had the King's Patent long since.


Mrs. Buz. You must have a wonderful Knowledge in your Profession, Sir, to have
been able to make so many great and useful Discoveries.


Pit. Tolerable, Madam, tolerable.


Mrs. Buz. And so you have obtained a Patent, Sir? I should like vastly to see
the Nature of a Thing of that Kind.


Pit. Should you, Madam?


Mrs. Buz. I should, Sir, I must confess.


Pit. With your Leave, Madam, I Will just go and send Mrs. Bugg off, and bring
it with me.


Mrs. Buz. Sir I am ashamed of giving you the Trouble.


Pit. Not any Trouble, not the least I assure you, Madam. Ex. Pittem.


Mrs. Buzby, solus. Mrs. Buz. What a ridiculous Liar he is! he knows no more of
Medicine, than a Rat-catcher; about four Years ago he was nothing but a
Horse-doctor, or a Cow-leech; I think I have nailed the Fox though, but the
sooner I Am off the better I fancy. Here he comes again.


Enter Pittem. Pit. Here, Madam, is my Patent -- Odds, so, hey! I am mistaken,
I fancy; Poh, Pox, what a Blockhead am I! I Have brought the Lease of my House,
[lays it on the Table.] Excuse me, Madam, and I Will fetch the Patent in a
Minute. ( Exit Doctor) Mrs. Buzby takes up the Lease ( as she imagines)


Mrs. Buz. Now, thank my Stars, I have secured my Prize -- But I wish I was
fairly out of the House -- and yet my Heart is wounded at the Deed, and tells
me I Am to blame. The Doctor has forgot his Lease ( takes up the Lease, as she
supposes, and opens it.) Ah! what is here! by all my Hopes, Mr. Danbury's Will!
-- O thou pernicious Fiend! -- Yes, thou cursed Villain, it is a Lease which
thou shall hold no more. What shall I do? I Will secure me this, however; and if
he asks me for it, I Will disown it; I shall hate to trifle longer in this
Disguise. But here he comes.


Re-enter Pittem. Pit. I protest, Madam, I am quite ashamed of myself, I have
mislaid my Patent by some Accident or other, and cannot find it; if it were not
for the Fear of tiring your Patience, Madam, I would go and make farther Search.


Mrs. Buz. O by no Means, Sir, another Opportunity will do quite as well; --
besides, Sir, I cannot possibly stay any longer, I shall be benighted, and I am
one of the most fearful Creatures in Nature.


Pit. May Health and Happiness go with you, Madam, good Night, good Night.
Exit Mrs. Buzby.


Pittem Solus. A charming Lady! an excellent Lady! upon my Word; I have won her
(as the Player says) all the World to Nothing; what a lucky Dog I am! But she
has smit me, she thas smit me to the very Heart, and I love her from Top to
Toe; now for my Chariot! and then I shall have nothing to take Care of but my
Health, and pray for a long Life; let me see who shall I employ to make it? hum
-- O my old Friend Mr. Skeleton, in Long-acre, he has got half a Score of
Children, and I Will insist upon his having them all Inoculated in Return; a good
Thought, a good Thought, there is nothing like making one's Thought turn out to
Account, I Will take care Nobody shall get too much by me; I am never under the
Necessity of laying out Money, but I can always find out some Way to get Part
of it returned again.


Scene the Street. Enter Jerry and Pestle. Jerry. And so you have taken a House
then, hey?


Pestle. Aye and a good House too, I assure you.


Jerry. A good House? how do you mean?


Pestle. Why you must know I hired it of a Methodist Preacher of my
Acquaintance, that has lost his Flock, poor Soul, it was formerly a preaching
House, he was glad to part with it I believe, for you must know I have got the
whole House and Pulpit into the Bargain for Twenty Shillings a Year.


Jerry. How many rooms have you got in it though?


Pestle. Why let me see, there is the Preaching Room, that is one; a Room over
that, that is two; then three's the Wash house, that is three; and one of the
most snuggest Rooms over that, that is four; a Stable and Hay-loft, which makes
as you may say six Rooms.


Jerry. And all for Twenty Shillings a Year!


Pestle. What do you say it is dear?


Jerry. No, I think it is very cheap. But if the World should expect you to
write a Treatise by-and-by, what will you do then?


Pestle. Why I can easily get Somebody to write it for me, when I have Money,
and I shall get Laps full of that when I set up for myself.


Enter Pittem. Pit. Set up for yourself, ha, set up for yourself! what' the
reason you cannot keep within call? I must forever have you to seek when I want
you; I do assure if you serve me so again, I Will send you about your Business.
Pray get you in. [ Exit. Pestle.] I shall be glad if you would not keep my Man
from his Business so often. [to Jerry.] It would better become you to stay at
Home methinks and mind your Master's Business Sirrah. Exit Pittem.


Jerry. Why you are a scurvy Fellow for your Pains now, If you had stayed a
little longer with your Sauce, in my Opinion I should have been provoked to
have given you both a hearty Trimming. Blessings on him, here comes my young
Master, I long to hear what News.


Enter Blandford, and Knabbem the Bum-Bailiff. Bland. O here is Jerry; -- you
Rogue you I Have been in great want of you.


Jerry. I Am glad you have found me Master, I hope it is not too late to do you
some Service -- But I long to know how you have cook^d the Doctor [Whispers
Blandford]


Bland. Stay you hereabout with Knabbem within call, and I Will make a Man of you
yet Jerry. You shall know all presently. [ Exeunt Blandford at one Door, and
Jerry and Knabbem at another.]


Scene Pittem's Parlour. Pit. Here, here, I got another Letter from that
plaguey Girl. I wish with all my Heart, I could get her transported, and then I
should be easy.


Enter Pestle. Pestle. Sir there is Mr. Blandford below, desires to speak with
you.


Pit. I wish the Devil had him, I thought he would be here again, I Have a good
Mind to deny myself to him, he can be of no Service to me now. I Will see him
this once and affront him, that he may not trouble me any more [Aside] tell him
to walk up. Exit Pestle. What can have become of my Lease, it gives me a deal
of uneasiness to think I have lost it so strangely.


Enter Blandford. Bland. Doctor how do you, Egad I am devilish tired, but was
determined to call and give you joy, I don't doubt but you have made a Conquest
of the Lady.


Pit. Why yes Ned, I think I have settled that Business.


Bland. I give you joy, Doctor I give you joy, and now I think I may venture to
entreat you to do some little Service for poor Miss Hetty.


Pit. I tell you Mr. Blandford again and again, I will have nothing to do with
the Huzzy, and I am sorry to tell you that you are become very troublesome
yourself, for soliciting in her behalf.


Bland. Then I am sorry that I am under the Necessity of telling you, that you
are an ungrateful Scoundrel.


Pit. You are a very impertinent Fellow Sir, and I desire you would leave my
House this Minute, and never dare to set foot in it again


Bland. I will, but not before I have convinced you that you are the greatest
and most ungrateful Knave on Earth.


Pit, I Will make you suffer for this Language, how dare you call me a Knave,
Sir?


Bland. How dare I? I Will tell you how I dare; because I have found you to be an
arrant Knave and Villian,


Pit. This is not to be borne. Here Hierapicra, Pestle; [ Enter Hierapicra and
Pestle] I desire you would take this Scoundrel by the Neck and Heels and turn
him out of my House?


Bland. What ho; Knabbem, Jerry, hollo'! [ Enter Jerry and Knabbem.] secure
this Villain, this notorious Thief. [ Locks the Doors, Hierapicra and Pestle
stand astonished.]


Pit. What do you intend to murder me! O Mrs. Buzby, Mrs Buzby!


Bland. I was Mrs. Buzby, that thou would have deceived with a Thousand
scandalous Falsehoods.


Pit. Thou Mrs. Buzby, what do take me for a Fool?


Bland. Yes, but a knavish one, let me have been Mrs. Buzby, or no, you made me
a Present of 200L. this Afternoon, and here it is.


Pit. O Thief! Thief! give me my Note, or I Will have thee hanged.


Bland. Thou art the Thief; this thou gave me, which I will bestow to them
thou owe it to, Miss Danbury.


Pit. Owe it her?


Bland. Yes owe it her.


Pit. I say it is false; O I shall go mad.


Bland. I say it is true.


Pit. Thou art a lying Knave; and I Will have thee hanged for stealing my Note.


Bland. Thou art a most infamous Fiend and I Will have thee hanged for robbing a
Lady of her whole Fortune.


Pit. What Lady, thou Murderer, thou Cutpurse, what Lady?


Bland. Miss. Danbury.


Pit. She a Huzzy, she a Fortune.


Bland. Yes thou Wretch, and here it is, here is the Lease thou left behind.


Pit. My Lease, O thou Thief! have stole that too!


Bland. Look at it, do you know it?


Pit. [He starts.] O horrible, horrible! what have I done? what a cursed
Mistake was this! I thought the Flames had received that, and I have certainly
burnt my Lease in its stead. [ aside he endeavors to snatch it out of
Blandford's hands.


Bland. Hold Caitif, thou have missed thy Aim, thou shall never see it more [he
endeavors to make his Escape] secure him [Knabbem and Jerry hold him]


Knabbem. Doctor you are my Prisoner. [the Doctor shows great Confusion and
Horror]


Pit. At whose Suit, pray?


Knabbem. Mr. Blandford's, for five thousand Pounds, and three Years Interest.


Pit. Mr. Blandford has no Business with her Fortune, or the Will, he only
wants to cheat her.


Bland. Villain it is false, I have Business with 'em both, she is my wife, my
dear and lawful Wife, and you shall find I will use my Authority in her Behalf.


Pit. O dreadful, dreadful! O what a Turn is here! I shall die r^ving mad, my
whole Frame is convulsed already.


^land. Now Doctor, you may see that Justice was better acquainted with you,
than you was with her, and though you thought you could have flung her, you are
deceived, for she is always at an honest Man's Heart, and a Knave's Elbow.


Pit, O Mr. Blandford, I am convinced, I am convinced indeed, but pray on my
Knees, I beg you will spare my Life.


Bland. And can you wish to live, beneath such a Load of Ignominy? remember
what Cruelty thou have been guilty of, to one of the dearest of Women, and then
beg to die; but if the Law will show thee Mercy, I shall be satisfied; in such
a Case I would have you to transport yourself to South Carolina, or some
distant Land, that your Name may never be heard of more; you will stand a
greater Chance of mak^ng your Fortune there, than my poor innocent Girl, whom
thou wanted to force thither, by starving her to it, whilst thou would have
basely enjoyed her Fortune here. O savage Barbarity! the very Thought on it
fills me with Vengeance, can such a Wretch as thou art, hope for Mercy, Justice
would accuse me of Ingratitude, and forsake me, were I not to punish thee. Take
him away, let her be obeyed


Pit. O dear, dear Mr. Blandford.


Bland. Out hypocrite, once more I beg you to carry him away.


Jerry. Now Pestle, you will make your Fortune, you have all the Business to
yourself; come, come along, Doctor, I long to get rid of you. Exeunt Pittem,
Jerry, Knabbem, and Pestle.

Knaves self-secure, may for a Season thrive,
And like the Fox their roguish Tricks survive,
Till Justice hunts 'em from their latent Holds,
And to the World their Knavery unfolds;
In vain they seek for Peace, in vain they try,
To 'scape unseen, her penetrating Eye.

THE END.
POEMS on several OCCASIONS.
An Epistle to D. G. Esquire;
MAY I not hope your Patience will endure
The plain wrought Offering of a Muse obscure.
For once be pleased set Ceremony by,
Nor think me wanting in Sincerity
Because I Have sent no stale Apology;
Say, shall it be less welcome 'cause it came
Signatur'd by one beneath the Heed of Fame?
Reduced by Fortune to an humble State,
Denied by Genius ever to be great.
Alas! I Am lost in thinking what to say,
'Till Thought kills Thought and drives my Muse away:
At length I doze, and wander in my Dreams,
Hunting new Epithets, Sentiments and Themes;
Then pleased I wake, but find my Treasures flown,
Before my eager Hand can set 'em down.
How hard to please myself -- what shall I do
In such a Case, how please the World and you!
My fancy breeds apace, no Mortal's more,
But then the Produce proves so very poor,
'Twill scarce deserve Admittance at your Door,
My Days, thank Fate, are well employed; at Night
I spin a Rhyme or two by Candlelight.
To aim at Fame is dangerous indeed;
Scores make Attempt but very few succeed.
Far be the Thought, the fatal Thought from me;
For ever let me boast Humility;
To please a few, and that same few my Friends,
Will be the Summit of my Hopes, -- my Ends
Would be fulfilled, could I with humble Stride
Tread the smooth Plain with H -- d by my Side.
Let others try the lofty Hill to climb,
Soaring Scholastic 'bove the Reach of Rhyme;
Clad in the Vest of Sophs regardless stand,
The Praise or Censure of the Critic's Hand;
Thirsting for Pathos to confound the Sense,
Like useless Gew-gaws shaming the Expense:
O be it mine to speak in Nature's Strain!
At once to picture, and at once explain; --
No Pomp of Words could ever enrapture me,
Like pure-wrote Sounds, in plain Simplicity,
To trace out Nature's wild and endless Scene,
Her painted Valleys and her Woodlands green:
There can I seek for Themes when Fancy dies,
Walk through the Forest, and observe the Skies;
Nor seek in vain -- each Day sends something new,
Some newborn Beauty rises to my View.
Could I but steal the Art of painting here
These Scenes in Verse, as they to me appear;
Had I the Power with that Art to please,
To paint 'em well, and paint 'em too with ease,
Could I like you, at once ensnare the Mind,
Engage the Eye, and keep the Heart confined,
And do it too with such engaging Grace,
With manly Strides the Paths of Nature trace,
The Muses then should claim each Mite of Time,
And every Thought I Would jingle into Rhyme.
Vain Hopes alas -- But hopes are apt to please,
And fancied Pleasures sometimes give us ease.
Credulity, a mild and simple Maid,
Too often alas! by Promises betrayed,
Follows the Fantom Hope with Steps so fast,
Till Disappointment, kills her at the last.
Never let me be so cursed, as to depend
Upon a Promise, or to lose a Friend,
Nor pin my Hopes too closely on the Sleeve
Of Old or Young; I Have found 'em both deceive;
The silvered Pole is ap er ever to sin,
Than he who never felt Razor on his Chin;
Old Age breeds Craft, and near his Elbow Chair
Sets Folly placed, his Favorite and Heir;
Peace to all such, if such can Peace enjoy
Whose shallow Promise tends but to destroy
Their Neighbors Peace, -- that Wretch I envy not
Who boasts a Name by broken Friendship got;
For ever will I bar my homely Door,
Against the greatest Knave so meanly poor.
Conscience shall haunt the disingenuous slave
And Time shall lead him blindfold to his Grave.
I boast no Art, thence can no Credit lose:
I paint to show my Meaning, not confuse:
No Rogue to flatter, nor no Friend abuse.
The meanest Figure, claims as great a Share
Of Skill to paint it well, as the most fair.
But those the meanest of the mean I call
Who gain with all my Pains no Praise at all.
You that by Nature have an Heart designed
To hear and heal the Sufferings of Mankind,
May you never trust the Wretch whose Friendship tends
To no one's Good, but his own private Ends.
THE BANKS of CHELMER.
THOUGH Windsor boasts her Tyrants and her Kings,
Her shady Groves, her Forest and her Springs;
Her lofty Temples, and her costly Gems,
Her murmuring Loddon, and her sister Thames,
Admit my Muse, to tread in humble lays,
And sing, though lowly, in fair Chelmer's praise.
What though thy Banks by Kings were never trod,
No stately Savage graced thee with a Nod;
Thou happ'ly 'scap'd the arbitrary Frown,
Nor felt the Curse of being near a Crown.
Once on a Time there lived a rural Pair,
The gentle Philo and Salina fair,
The sad Leander loved not more than he,
When, armed with Love, he dared the raging Sea;
No story'd Fair could ever boast a Mind
More pure; no Maid could show an Heart more kind
Than she; her Tresses played about her Waist
In flowing Curls; her Head, with Posies graced,
Like the fair Lilly essenc'd every Gale,
While over the Lawn she trip't, or through the Dale.
On Chelmer's Banks the gentle Pair first trod,
Ere this fair Land felt vile Oppression's Rod;
In golden Times, when Love over Interest stood,
And Statesmen sought their King and Country's Good;
He tended Flocks, while she the Distaff played,
Upon the Brow, or near some friendly Shade.
Long had their Breast's felt Cupid's gentle Flame,
And stifled Love with common Friendship's name;
Till bursting forth, the Blaze dispelled the Smoke
And Philo first to his Salina spoke: --
We Have long my fair Salina, trod these Plains,
In Summer's Heat, and Winter's drenching Rains;
We often steal the Honey from the Bees,
And often we pluck the Blossom from the Trees,
Their tempting Sweetness urge us to the Deed,
But yet we find 'em cloy us as we feed.
There grows one Flower, yet, that I revere,
Survives in Bloom throughout the killing Year;
Whose tempting Blush, and never-fading Smell,
By far all Blossoms of the Spring excel;
Whose damask Leaves distill a balmy Dew,
That breeds Desire, and maintains it too;
I often behold it as I tread the Mead,
And every Day my longing eyes I feed
With fond Desire; till at last I pine,
Sigh to myself, and wish the Blossom mine.
Still must I pine, still must I sigh in vain,
It Is ^ou must ease my Hopes and cure my Pain;
Within your Reach it hangs, within your Breast,
To make me wretched, or to make me blessed.
Nay cease to grieve, the fair Salina cried,
Have you ever asked me ought that I denied?
Sure you have found me selfish and unkind
To think I bear about so poor a Mind:
Did ^ou a Lambkin or an Heifer choose,
You never knew me such a Boon refuse.
Then bring me, Philo, where this Wonder grows,
Be it a Lilly, Hyacinth or Rose;
Be (...) the fairest Bud that ever sprung,
The sweetest Blue-bell ever Fair rung,
Within my Reach, or in my Power to give,
If Philo ask it, Philo shall receive.
Thanks lovely Maid, -- but O! you will change your Mind,
When you this fair, this blooming Beauty find.
Nay doubt me not, nor yet my Truth decry,
Let not my Word upon Suspicion die;
Let not your Thoughts be timid and unkind,
Till I Have my promise and my Truth declined:
No tempting Sweet, no Rose that ever sprung,
Shall make me faulter in my Heart or Tongue;
Never let me tread these fertile Banks again,
Nor walk with Philo over the verdant Plain,
When I forget the Promise I have made,
Banish Salina to some distant Shade.
Nay lovely Maid be ever, ever near,
Should you, should fair Salina disappear,
These lonely Plains, would be more lonely still,
And Burs and Thistles grow on every Hill;
To yonder Brook then let us bend our way,
And there behold the Prodigy of May;
And there behold my Heart, my Soul's Delight,
My wish by Day and all my Dreams by Night.
Methinks it is strange that one poor simple Flower
Should over an Heart like yours obtain such Power;
The Be, it is true, and Butterfly will rove,
And sport around with animated Love,
When every Flower rising to their Sight,
Invites the Heart and yields 'em new Delight; --
The Sun declines apace let us instant go,
And try if I Will not keep my Word or no.
Then straight they tript together over the Plain,
And Bands of Cupids followed in a Train,
To bind two Hearts with Wreaths that never fade,
And prove the Promise of a tender Maid;
The Banks they reach, and next the crystal Brook,
In which young Philo bid Salina look.
The Banks are pleasant, and the Stream is clear,
But yet I see Rose or Lilly near,
Some cruel Swain has stole it ever we came;
In such a Case can I be ought to blame?
Say can you nothing in the Stream behold?
No perfect Beauty of celestial Mould?
See you not something like yourself appear?
The Substance of that Shadow I revere; --
Thou art the Substance, thou my boasted Bloom,
It Is thou must ease my Heart, or seal my Doom.
Ungen'rous Swain, how could you thus ensnare
With studied Arts, a poor unguarded Fair!
Am I the fairest Philo ever saw,
Could poor Salina such Desire draw?
Alas! I grieve to think what I have done,
Things end in Sorrow that are rash begun;
Let me recall it, sure I was asleep;
Must I indeed my artless Promise keep?
Must I perforce then give myself away,
To be the Idol of a single Day?
To be forgot if Philo ere should see,
Some other Maid, still fairer yet than me?
But O! remember should you ever find
Some other Maid, more fair, more true, more kind.
Forget not then who once you deemed a Prize*
Nor make your captive Fair a Sacrifice.
O never! never! talk not so again,
Such fancied Ills will rive my Heart in twain. --
Here do I vow, and when I prove unkind,
Teem down ye Clouds, and unloose the Wind;
Let forked Lightning through my Cottage shoot,
And Thunder tear whole Forests by the Root;
Let every Lamb that in my Pastures stray
By turgid Floods be caught and washed away;
Let me be sunk in Famine and Despair
Beneath the Horror of the warring air.
Nay, gentle Swain, my Heart would bleed to see
Thee made the Spectacle of Misery;
Should thou prove kind, and keep thy Passion true,
I would not wish a fairer Swain than you.
When I prove false, -- but that can never be,
My Health, my Life, my every Hope's in thee;
If this fond Heart should ever a Traitor prove,
And violate the sacred Laws of Love,
Let Shame be painted on my guilty Breast,
And Sorrow hunt me from the Bed of Rest.
What shall I say; -- for O I cannot feign
What I am not, were I the World to gain;
What shall I say, to make my fair believe,
These Tears are real,
Cease, O! cease to grieve;
Here take my Hand, my Heart I would resign,
But that has fled this many a Day to thine;
My Breast, forlorn, often led me to despair,
Save when methought I felt my Philo's there.
O! let me clasp it to my panting Breast,
Heal my fond Heart, and give it endless Rest.
Ye Woods and Vales, that heard the lovely Sound,
Tell it in Ecchos to the Plains around;
Let the sweet Woodlark raise his Notes divine,
Telling each Swain that fai^ ^^^^^a's mine.
THE PROLOGUE TO THE Merry Midnight Mistake.
WITH much Reluctance they have brought me here,
To try your Patience, and to cure my Fear;
But if, in trying, I should chance to fail,
You soon shall see me (Frenchman-like) turn Tail.
Our Author's here behind in a such a Taking,
Scratching his Head, shivering and shaking,
I or fear his comic Bantling should not please --
He here presents you with his Prologue Fees;
A little Ca^ting and a thousand Smiles --
For complimenting more than Truth beguiles:
So he, poor man! since Canting is the Mode,
Must needs go plodding in the common Road;
Begs you would permit his Brat walk unmolested,
Should the poor Thing chance to be divested
Of Congreve's Wit, or Dryd^n's nice Conn^^tion:
For sure the poorest Child claims some Protection.
And if, in walking, it should chance to trip,
Or, falling, cut its little Nose or Lip,
You Will please to save the poor declining thing,
By kindly catching hold the leading-string.
Some proudly pleased in finding out a Fault,
But mostly those who cannot digest a Thought;
Rude nature gave 'em Rancour to condemn,
But buried all their Candor in their Phlegm.
Or (like enough) some sage good Dame may frown,
Displeased with every Notion but her own,
And in her Pride, from pious Motives, say,
"There Is nothing good can come from out a Play;"
And kindly showing it is not from her Spleen,
But judges wisely what she is never seen.
For many Author's have unjustly ble^d;
Their plays being damned before a Line was read.
The Actors too your candor must implore,
If Actors those who never played before;
Unskilled, unstudied in these Stage Affairs --
They Have other Business to engross their cares --
They only do it to oblige a Friend;
No other Motive, secret Pride, or End,
Save this -- to force a gentle Smile from you --
We'll do our best -- it is all the Best can do.
THE EPILOGUE TO THE Merry Midnight Mistake.
I Tell you I will -- Plague on it I Am so teased --
The Author thinks his Firstling has not pleased:
I say he is quite mista'en; but all wont do;
He Will not be easy 'till he hears from you.
He wants poor me your Anger to amuse,
By trumping up some frivolous Excuse.
I fain would lay it on the Acting now;
But that is Modesty will not allow --
I Would lay it on the Prompter -- if I knew how.
You plainly see I Have no Excuse at all,
The best way'll be to let the Curtain fall. --
Yet hold -- I Have something yet to say -- aye right;
We'll do it better, Sirs, another Night;
We'll be more perfect, act with better Spirit,
For Application is the Way to Merit.
Fear's the great Tyrant in a doubtful Breast,
From thence our first Attempts are seldom best,
Could we have acted as we did intend,
Not one Soul here but would have been our Friend.
Thanks for that Smile -- by Jove mehinks I hear
You kindly say -- "We need not be in Fear"
"Because there is none but Friends and Neighbors here."
Thanks for this good Confession, it is very kind,
I long to carry this good News behind.
They Are all distressed to know what I have done;
And I Am as much impatient to be gone.
THE PROLOGUE TO Redowald, a Masque.
WERE it not, Sirs, impossible to find,
A Subject suiting every Readers Mind,
A Prologue or a Preface would be vain,
Because we know that no one would complain;
And yet I Have seen a well wrote Piece go down,
And please (though rare) the better half the Town;
An half bred Prig, to show superior Skill,
That scarce could read, or knew the use of Quill,
Has sallied forth with Envy in each Eye,
And Spite of Fate, would Shame itself defy,
And Critic like, to do the Thing he ought,
Would find a Beauty in an errant Fault;
That not enough, to prove himself a Fool,
Would murder Beauties by the self same Rule.
Our infant Author hopes his Piece may fall
In better Hands, or else in none at all;
Just from the Lap of Genius bends his Way
To famed Panassion Fields, where Poets stray;
But finds it culled and shorn, a barren Field,
That Is furnished Ages, now will hardly yield
A single Shrub, but what we have seen before
Be-clipt and turned, and twined into a Score.
Such as they are he brings to public View,
And if you find there is old ones with the New,
Pray tell me, Sir, that famous Poet's Name,
That living Bard that does not do the same.
If near his Neighbor's Produce he intrudes,
For Nature's self has her Similitudes;
The self-same Thought might strike both you and me,
And I the least stand charged of Piracy.
You Have here in Hand a little moral Piece,
Nor Stole from France, nor Italy, nor Greece,
A Child of Fancy nurtured by the Mind,
If bad comes on it I know 'twas well designed.
THE EPILOGUE TO Redowald, a Masque.
Should some grave wit our Author's Piece decry,
And damn the Plot from mere Acerbity;
Let gentle Candor rise and take his Part,
And own he is shown more Genius than Art.
To write a Play you will own is no small Task,
Then what must be the Labor of a Masque?
Fancy must aid the Bard where Nature fails,
And daring Genius muster all her Sails;
Our nonag'd Poet unregarding Time,
Slipped from his Wing; and, touring forth sublime,
Surveyed the Muses with enraptured Eyes,
Adored their Tracks and mounted to the Skies --
Should it be said Ambition was the Cause
That urged him first to write; -- or vain Applause;
Ere you convict him of a Thirst for Fame,
Turn to the Title, and find out his Name.
The Pretty Maid of Chelmsford.
A Pretty Maid both kind and fair
Dwells in Chelmsford Town,
Her pleasing Smiles, her easy Air,
Engages Fop and Clown.
Being accosted the other Day
By a clumsy 'Squire,
Who asked her if she knew the Way
To quench a raging Fire.
Water, Sir, replied the Maid,
Will quench it in a Trice,
O no, said he, you little Jade,
I Have tried that once or twice.
Then Sir, said she, it is past my Skill
To tell you what will do;
I Am sure, said he, you know what will;
There Is nothing can but you.
Alas-a-day what do you mean,
Replied the pretty Fair;
I Would have you try it once again;
You never should despair.
Despair I cannot, cried the 'Squire,
While you are in my Sight,
It Is you must quench the burning Fire,
You set it first alight.
Then strait he clasped her round the Waist,
And forced from her a Kiss,
Ho! ho; said she, is that your Taste;
Then pray you, Sir, take this.
And with a Pail, placed at the Door,
She sluic'd the amorous 'Squire;
Your'e welcome, Sir, to this and more,
To quench your raging Fire.
THE COTTAGERS, AN OPERA, IN THREE ACTS.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Brainly, a Country Squire Celon, a beautiful Shepherd Hylas, Father to Celon
Simon, his Cousin Trusty, Steward to Brainly First Reaper Second Reaper Third
Reaper Hermit A little Boy, his Son Traveller Thieves WOMEN. Mrs. Brainly, Wife
to 'Squire Brainly Eddie, her Daughter.
Housebreakers. Attendants on the Squire.

ACT I.
SCENE I. A Room in Brainly 's House.
Enter Brainly, Mrs. Brainly and Trusty. Brainly. ALong with Celon, say you?
I Am astonished! O she is a forward young Hussy! but I Will stop her Gadding; --
Are you sure of this? To Trusty.


Trusty. Yes, truly, Sir, for she has been out for this Month past, at four and
five o'Clock in the Morning; I could not think where she went to, till the
other Day when going over the green Pastures; there I saw Celon and she,
billing and cooing together like two young Pigeons.


Brain. Indeed? odds my Life, I remember now; -- ah she is a coaxing young Pug;
that is where she gets her Posies from I suppose, which she comes holding up to
my Nose in a Morning, with a how do you do? my dear Papa, [Mimicks her] O the
Jade.


True. I thought it were best to tell your Worship, least some Harm might come
of it.


Mrs. Brain. A mighty industrious Soul indeed! thou had better have been
minding thy own Business, I think, than to strive like an ill-natured Fool to
set my Child and her Father at Variance.


Brain. Hold your Tongue pray Madam, and let him speak; he sees her Follies,
though you cannot, and it is honest in him to tell me of them.


Mrs. Brain. Why sure Mr. Brainly I may speak in my Turn.


Brain. It Is not your Turn yet Madam.


Mrs. Brain, I Am sorry my Dear, to see you so angry, -- don't think that I
approve of her Proceedings; no, far be it from me; but I cannot help taking
Notice how ready the Fellow is to tell you of her Faults; for he sees they work
upon you to Excess, and you are as eager to hear what gives you so much Pain;
if he had generously told me of it before, I would have put a Stop to it ere
now, and you might have escaped all this Uneasiness; for if our Children are to
bear the Censure of our Servants, what Child will escape Slander? I don't doubt
what he has said to be true, but while he sees it feeds your Anger, and he
finds himself listened to, he may turn Surmises into Facts, and she may be
stigmatized where ever she goes, as being guilty of what she never dreamt of.


Brain. Well, well, it does not signify holding this Harangue about her, -- I Am
determined to have her kept at Home, and then I Am sure she will be safe, let the
World then sa^ what they please; -- go fetch her hither Trusty.


Exit. Trusty. Mrs. Brain. Marry I doubt it much even then; and whether the
Creature (that has taken so much Pains to tell you her Faults) would not be the
first in the World that would strive to make her guilty of another; for I know
he is very sweet upon her when our Backs are turned.


Brain. Poh, Poh, what do you think the Fellow's a Fool?


Mrs. Brain. No, but I think he would make a Fool of you, and I and the whole
Family, if he could.


Brain. Pshaw, Pshaw, I see you have some Antipathy to the poor Fellow, because
he is honest, and so want me to turn him about his Business; but here he comes,
[ Enter Trusty] well Sirrah, what is the Reason you did not bring Eddie along
with you?


True. Why in good Truth I cannot find her.


Brain. Not find her! why what the Plague is the Wench set out already?


True. O yes Sir, she is been up and gone these three Hours.


Brain. Has she indeed? I fancy I shall fetch her home again in half that Time,
if Cupid has not furnished her with wings. -- Come along with me Trusty. -- My
Dear you may expect us here again presently. Exeunt Brainly and Trusty.


Mrs. Brain. I wish you Success with all my Heart, -- poor foolish Girl! I pity
her; it is natural -- for the Heart will follow where the Eye is pleased. Exit
Mrs. Brainly.


SCENE II.
Celon and Eddie seated in a Pasture. Edd. It Is the fairest Morn I ever saw; I
warrant they are all asleep at home, but hardly dream that I am here with you.


Celon. O let 'em sleep until the Sun sets again, then I shall have my Eddie
with me all the Day.

AIR I.
Cel. Thy Father and thy Mother sleeps --
There Love has had his Fill;
And Eddie to her Celon creeps,
When all the Plains are still;
The Sun and Eddie rise at once,
And gild the Hills around;
The Lark awakens at her Steps,
And leaves the dewy Ground.
My Lambkins skip at her Approach,
And all their Dams look gay;
While Zephyr, in his airy Coach,
Upon the Treetops plays.




Edd. If my Father should ever suspect my coming hither I Am afraid he would never
let me come again; would you not pity me?


Cel. I should pine myself to Death, and be like a wandering Lunatic in
Despair: for when you are from me but an Hour, I think that every Flower looks
drooping, and every Bird sets mourning for your Return.


Edd. Be witness for me all ye Hills and Groves, how dear I prize my Celon's
Love, not all the wealth my Father boasts should rob me of that joy.

AIR II.
Edd. O grant us thus to meet each Morn,
Upon so fair a Plain,
Where Linnets whistle on each Thorn,
In Love's melodious Strain.
While Celon whispers Notes more sweet
Than ever Linnet sung,
And thus each Morn such Blessings meet,
As fall from Celon's Tongue.




Cel. Would tomorrow were our wedding Day, I long to call thee mine, I Have had
sad Dreams of late; but I hope they tend to nothing ill toward us.


Edd. Pray tell me what they were, and I Will be your Interpreter.


Cel. Not now my Love, they will prey upon thy gentle Spirits, and dash our
promised joys. Let us go to yonder Valley now, and pick the sweetest Flowers
there, Blue bells and Violets, that I may weave a Crownet for my Queen.


Edd. Even where you please, nor will I ever complain so I go with you; --
here, [pulls out a Book] I Have brought thee another Book this Morning, it is the
prettiest I could find; and thou shall read it to me.


Cel. You're ever kind -- But I fear my Love you will get some Anger from your
Father, if he should chance to miss it -- What is it you have brought me now?


Edd. The Nut-brown Maid. [gives him the Book] My Father never will miss it, he
minds nothing but his Horses and his Dogs; so pray thee set down and read it to
me.


Cel. Nay, but you must excuse me now; I can read when you are gone; now it
will be killing too much precious Time.

AIR III.
Cel. Whilst thou art here I cease to read,
Throw by my Pipe, forget my Reed,
Nothing on Earth such Pleasures bring,
As when I hear my Eddie sing;
But when you are gone, I Will learn from this,
When I no more can toy and kiss,
How other Shepherds bore their Pain,
Until they met their Loves again.




Edd. Very well, Celon.


Cel. Nay be not angry, I own I Am much obliged to you for these Indulgencies;
and but from the Instruction of those Volumes you have brought me, I should
have been a poor Companion for my Eddie; they have, in some Measure, taught me
how to please; to know my humble Situation; blessed when you are with me, and
more serenely to bear the Pain when you are gone.


Edd. Listen listen! methought I heard the voice of some one near; and now I
see 'em too. O, it is Trusty and my Father.


Cel. They have beheld us, and 'twill be in vain to fly. Alas! what shall we
do! -- how could this happen?

Brainly within.) I see you, you Jade. I Will stop your Strolling, I will Hussy:
[Enters] And as for thee, thou Sheepbiting Dog, I Will have thee sent into
another Country, [ takes Eddie from him.]


Cel. I matter not where you send me, or where I go, since you have taken her
away looking tenderly on Eddie.


Brain. The Boy's certainly in Love; I'Gad it grieves me to see them look so
pitiful at each other; I could find in my Heart to leave 'em together again.


True. Aye truly it is pity, Sir, but consider the Consequence, it will be the
Talk of the whole ^ountry, that 'Squ^re ^rainly's Daughter is cour^d by a
Shepherd


Brain. Ods-bud and so it will; come, Hussy, come; -- thou may stay behind
and whine a little, to Celon.


Edd. Dear Father permit me to take a parting Kiss.


Brain. A parting Kiss! what before my Face! why they have bewitched one another
I believe! No, no, no, no more kissing here? come along; and if you cannot live
without kissing, there is your great Doll at home, you may kiss and hug that all
Day if you please, come away I say.


Edd. O can you forget yourself, or did you never love; surely, if you did, you
would not practice so hard a Trial for so small a Crime.

AIR IV.
Edd. Adieu my Love, ye Flocks adieu,
Farewell ye happy Plains,
More blessed than I, by far are you,
While Celon here remains.
Farewell ye little Warblers all,
Ye Larks that upward rise,
No more shall I attend your call,
Or meet my Celon's Eyes.




Brain. Come along I say, or I Will break thy Neck.


Cel. O do not hurt her, for indeed she is done no Harm.


Brain. If thou have done her none, I shall be satisfied, and I Will take Care
thou shall do her none hereafter.


Exeunt all but Celon. Cel. This is the sorest Wound I ever felt; would she had
been born as poorly as myself, or that I had been a 'Squire's Son.

AIR IV.
Cel. Unequal Fortune, equal Fate,
Was ever Lot like mine?
Thus high and low in every State,
Beneath some Grief repine.
The rich are cursed with Fears and Pride,
The poor Man with Despair;
The Lover's Patience often is tried
By some unfeeling Fair.
But mine is the worst of Woes indeed;
The Maid that I adore,
Is by a Father's Hand decreed,
Never to see me more. Exit.




SCENE III.
Brainly 's House. Enter Brainly, Trusty, and Eddie. Brain. Here Mrs. Brainly
we have brought your Daughter home, and I desire you will make it your Business to
keep her there so long as she lives, -- what piping again, what the Devil ails
thee now?


Edd. Have I not Cause to weep, to hear myself doomed a Prisoner for I ife, and
by my Father too?


Brain. You Would better be a Prisoner here Hussy, with a good House over your
Head, and Victuals in your Belly, than strolling the Mountains, and starving
under a Hedge, along with that Booby you would got along with this Morning.


Mrs. Brain. What could induce thee, Child, to make so strange a Choice?


Edd. His gentle Nature, besides he loves me dearly as himself.


Brain. No doubt but he loves himself well enough; but what do think he
loves thee for, hey, Fool?


Edd. For loving him, which I will do for ever.


Brain. So, so, so, so, there is for you now! take her out of my Sight, or I
shall certainly do her a Mischief; -- O you wanton young Jade; go take her up
Stairs, and lock her in her Bedchamber directly. Ex. Mrs. Brainly and Eddie.


Brainly sings. AIR VI.
Was ever father living,
So distres^'d as I,
These Women are deceiving
As the very Sky;
They first look clear,
And promise fair,
Then rises up a Cloud
That covers all the Atmosphere,
And Thunders burst aloud.
Exeunt Brainly, and Trusty.

SCENE V.
Celon by the Side of a Wood. Cel. I Will rest me here a little; nothing that I
see or hear will give me Comfort now. comes forward.

AIR VII.
Cel. Full eighteen Years I lived in Bliss.
Upon yon verdant Plain,
From many a Maid I stole a Kiss,
But never felt a Pain;
'Till Eddy's Face I first beheld
I knew nor Grief nor Care;
My Eyes against my Heart rebelled,
If ever I shed a Tear.




Enter Hylas and Simon in Conversation. Hyl. I tell thee the Girl has made her
Escape from the Help of a Tree, that hung against her Window, for somebody has
told her that Celon was fled into another Country, and I am sorely afraid I
shall find it too true.


Cel. True thou wilt find it indeed, if Eddie is gone, I Will search every Country
round but I will find her.


Aside and Exit. Sim. Marry Luck forbid, Cousin, for I loved him as if he had
been a Child of my own, and did intend to leave him all I have when I die.


Hyl. Ha, thou art very kind; for though I say it, he had as much to say for
himself as the Parson of the Parish; if I could but set eyes on him again, I
should be easy; I have not seen him since four o'Clock in the Morning, and if I
don't find him before night, I shall break my Heart.


Sim. I'fecks I think I see him yonder, running across the meadow.


Hyl. Where, where.


Sim. Yonder loo'thee 't'other Side that large Tree.


Hyl. Odds Heart and so it is; pray thee Cousin, for thou can run faster than
me, go thou before and I Will after and halloo lustily behind. Exeunt.


Enter three Reapers. 1st. Reap. Come along, come along, and be hanged to you,
what a yawning you make, indeed, why now because you have got your Bellies full,
I suppose you have not a Heart to go to work again.


2d. Reap. 'Swound what a Din thou make indeed, thy Bawling beats my Yawning
I Am sure; one would think thou had not had thy Belly-full this Month past;
I'fecks I Am afraid thou art one of those I heard our old Dame talking of
the other Day, more Noise than Work.


3d. Reap. No, no, I suppose he only wants to get his Work done before he
begins, that he may go a sweethearting; for as soon as he gets home he begins
to make such a washing and a combing of himself, with his Ribbands at his
Knees, and his Buckles at his Sho'en, that he never gives himself Time to eat
or drink, but out he goes to rosey faced Sue, down by the Mill.


2 Reap. Aye, Aye, I suppose he gets his Belly-full there. I believe in my
Heart Folks are bewitched, nowadays, there is the Dickens to pay, about Celon
and the Squire's Daughter; this Love's as bad as a Plague I think, its catching.


1 Reap. Take Care it does not catch thee then; 't'as many a Time caught a
wiser Man.


2 Reap. I'fecks if it does I know how to cure myself.


1 Reap. I don't doubt but thou have a good Opinion of thyself.


2 Reap. Marry if one don't like me, I Will seek out for another.


1 Reap. And love never a one above an Hour.

AIR VIII.
A foolish Lover like a Child,
That with a Toy does play,
Who Is gaudy Sides his Heart beguiled,
And pleased him for a Day.
But if by Chance his wandering Eyes,
Another should survey,
The last is thought a golden Prize,
The first is thrown away.



3 Reap. Heigh, ho! this Love is a strange Thing I think.


2 Reap. No, no, there is nothing so common. I heard our Parson say the World
was grown foolish, and this is a sure Sign he sometimes speaks the Truth.


3 Reap. Why so I think indeed, Celon must be a Fool now to think of marrying
the 'Squire's Daughter, I warrant the 'Squire would see him hanged first.


2 Reap. And must not she be a Fool to think of marrying Celon; why this makes
good the Text; the World's grown foolish and they are two of the greatest; I
think in my Heart they are even worse than this Fool here.


1 Reap. Fool! who do thou call Fool? if it were not now for losing so much
Time, I Would show thee who was the greatest Fool.


3 Reap. 'Swounds what a Passion he is in, I Have heard say these Lovers grow mad
sometimes, if you should teaze him too much, perhaps he will grow mad too, and
then I suppose he will be for biting.


2 Reap. Aye, aye, let him alone, let him alone, he may kiss and court all the
Guts out of his Belly for what I care.


3 Reap. Come let us to work again, or we shall have the Sun down ere we begin.


2 Reap. Troth and so it will, and it will not get up at thy bidding again, but
that shall not give me any uneasisness:

AIR IX.
My Heart is my own
And a Stranger to Care,
Content is my Throne,
I sit without Fear.
At Night I retire
With Health and with Ease;
The Lasses admire,
And study to please.
But if I don t find
They Will please in their Part
'T may fire the Mind,
But shall not touch the Heart.



1 Reap. That was my Mind once, but I could not help changing it.


3 Reap. That Is a sure sign you kind of Creatures never know your own Minds.


2 Reap. Why that is true enough; Celon used to swear and protest he would never
marry, and now you see how well he keeps his Word.


3 Reap. And he may not be the happier for all he is so great with the 'Squire's
Daughter; for they say there is nothing but snarling and biting among the Gentry
Folks.

AIR X.
The Poor with Content
Are richer by far,
Than a King in his Tent
Or a Lord at the Bar.
No fear of being worse
Ever troubles his Breast
Though empty his Purse
At Night he can Rest.
No Armies overthrown,
No causes ill tried,
Shall ever make me groan
Or turn for a Bribe.



2 Reap. Hold, hold, who are these coming across the Barley Field.


1 Reap. Odds life I Will be hanged, if it be'ont, our Master and his Cousin.


2 Reap. Let us sneak off then as fast as we can.


1 Reap. No, no, they see us now, and we'd better stay and know the worst on it.


3 Reap. The Dickens take your sweet-hearting I say, I suppose there'll be the
Duce to pay.


2 Reap. What a Pack of Fools we look like now.


Enter Hylas and Simon. Hyl. What in the Name of old Nick do ye all here, has
any of you seen Celon lately?


3 Reap. No not we Master, we han'not seen him this two Days.


Hyl. Why go seek him then, and he that finds him first shall have a hollyday
for a Week.


2 Reap. Shall he Master, I'fecks then I give a good Look out, and bring him
home an I can.


Hyl. Away with you then. [ Exeunt Reapers.] Come Cousin, thee and I Will go and
get us a Horse a piece, and we'll set out too; wayst-heart I Have run myself
almost out of Breath already, and I don't know how soon I may want a little.
Exeunt Hylas and Simon.


THE END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT. II.
SCENE I.
A Hermit's Cave. A Hermit, and Crito a little Boy his Son appears. Crito.
You Have often told me, I should see the Place where I was born, and where my
Mother died: believe me Sir, I should like it much; I think I Have seen it an
hundred Times in Dreams already, and if indeed it be so pleasing in Reality as
in Dreams, I Am sure it must far excel this sad dwelling.


Herm. I Am afraid indeed thou'll think it so, therefore it is, I fear to let
thee go.


Crit. Why fear? do you think I would not come again.


Herm. I hope so, but there is a thousand little Play-fellows would rival me,
and thou would want to stay thee there.


Crit. Indeed they should not, I Would rather stay here all my Days than you should
be in Fear.


Herm. You Are my Cherub again for that; and ever a Month I Will let thee go.
[Eddie crosses the Cave.]


Crit. O well-a-day, do but turn about, and see what is passing 'cross the Cave.


Herm. A Woman, or a Fairy, I Will speak to her however.


Crit. Believe me Sir, but she seems in Sorrow.


Herm. Peace with thee fair one, if thou will deign to tell, whither do thou
sojourn?


Edd. Alas! I cannot; first tell me Stranger, who ever thou art (for thou
bear the Face of Friendship) did thou not see a lovely Shepherd, sad as
myself, pass this Way.


Herm. In truth fair Maid no human Form save this of thine has passed this Cave
these many Years.


Edd. Alas! I Am sore distressed.


Herm. If thou dare trust me with thy Story, I Will promise thee all the Aid
that I can give.


Edd. I thank thee; nor do I think that I should fear to trust thee, for thou
bear as kind a Face as ever I saw, save his I look for; for O he is the
gentlest Swain that ever smiled on Maid, I first beheld him tending on his
Father's Sheep upon a Mountain's Brow; he humbly bowed and with a gentle Look
he stole my willing Heart, and I as willing gave my Hand; he knelt and kissed
it; and, with more than Shepherd's Grace, told me how much he loved; I believed
him because he wept, then sighed and took my Leave; but ev'ry-Morning ever the
Sun beams kissed the dimpl'd Brook, I stole to him again, so happy we like two
fair Vessels on a calm Sea borne long sailed together; till my Father's angry
Hand like a rude tempestuous Wave dashed us both asunder.


Herm. Alas I pity you, what was your Lover's Name?


Edd. Celon. [Crito weeps.]


Herm. What is it Child that makes thee weep?


Crit. The Story that she told you.


Herm. I love thee for thy Mother's Spirit, just so would she overflow when
ever she heard of suffering Virtue.


Edd. I love him too for his friendly Tears, come and let me kiss thee; my
Heart is full of Gratitude, but I Have no means of Recompense, save Tear for
Tear, Alas! I must yet go on, for while I live, I will pursue my Love, if ever
I return, I Will make you some Amends.


Crit. Pray don't go, my Father will be very kind.


Herm. Let me entreat you to stay a little, this little Boy is my only Child,
the only Comfort I have on Earth, he shall attend you; there is a Mountain, by
whose lofty Head over looks the country round for many a Mile, thither shall he
go, and with his young discerning Eyes try if he cannot see which way your Celon
wanders; I prithee Crito go this Instant and if thou should any one chance to
see, wind thou thy Horn and becken them to stay, [ Exit Crito] mean while I
would advise that you retire into yond Harbor and rest yourself, till I go and
seek for something that may comfort you.


Edd. Indeed you are too kind, I have not deserved these Indulgencies from you,
but since you have promised me to be my Friend, I do not know a Time that I
ever stood so much in need of one.


Herm. Be cheerful, and doubt not, but ere long we shall hear some tidings of
your Celon. Exit Hermit.


Edd. Then you will be a Friend indeed.

AIR XI.
Sings. Ye nodding Forests verdant Plains,
Ye limpid Brooks that murmur by,
In your Retreats there yet remains
A Friend to sad Calamity. Exit Eddie.



SCENE II.
A Heath. Enter Brainly and Trusty, etc. Brain. We Are certainly on the right
Road my Lads; but hold, who have we here, a fellow Traveller? perhaps he may
give us some Intelligence; I Will enquire however.

Enter Passenger. Save thee Friend, whither be'st going
Passen. To the first Cottage I can find; for I have had a long Day's Journey
of it, and have not seen a Dwelling where I could get me any Refreshment.


Brain. Nor did not meet with any body on the Road?


Passen. Yes waystheart a lovely Youth almost in Despair.


Brain. And did thou not speak with him then?


Passen. Yes, that I did, and wish I could have been his Friend.


Brain. Why? what was his Complaint then?


Passen. Alas-a-day, he told me he had lost the sweetest Maid on Earth, and
came this Way in Search of her.


Brain. Did he so? 'Slife that must be Celon, here I Will give thee this Purse,
if thou wilt tell me where he is gone,


Passen. Alas, I cannot tell thee, for when I could give him no Intelligence of
his Love, he left me; I stood awhile and watched him, and when he got to yonder
Oak that dipps his Brim into the Brook, he sat down and drank of the cold
stream, then rose again and made his Way to the top of yonder Hill; and turning
round seemed to search with his Eyes all the Vales below. Anon (as if he had
some one seen) he hurried off again; but descending on the other Side I lost
Sight of him.


Brain. We'll after him directly; as for thee my Friend thou will find a
Cottage hard by, take this and get thee some Refreshment.


Passen. Good Luck attend thee for thy Kindness.


Exit Passenger. Brain. Come along Lads we are upon the right Scent, and if we
should start this Puss we'll run her down and take her home alive. Exeunt Omnes


SCENE III.
The Hermit's Cave. Enter Hermit and Eddie. [Crito is seen by 'em.] Herm. Lo!
here comes Crito, I hope he brings some News.


Edd. I doubt there is none of Celon.


Herm. Doubt not, [Enter Crito] welcome my Darling; well what have seen.


Crit. A Man, who is making toward the Cave; I saw him straying near the
mighty Cliff; and then, as you desired, did wind my Horn; I waved my Hand, he
answered thus, and then set off with Speed this Way.


Her. Now what think you Fair-one?


Edd. It certainly is my Celon, and yet I think it most impossible, but if it
should some other prove, I fain would not be seen.


Herm. Therefore least it should, I would advise that you retire again into the
Cave, 'till I have made some sure Proof it is your Celon.


Edd, I will, -- but pray if it should prove my Love indeed, let it not be a
Moment ere you call me forth again.


Herm. You may be assured of that; haste, haste, methinks I hear his Footsteps
near already.


Edd. I Am gone -- Alas I tremble so my Legs will scarcely bear me. Ex. Eddie.


Crit. See Father, he is entering the Cave.


Herm. He bears the Form that she describes. [ Enter Celon] Welcome Youth, most
welcome, I invite thee for my Guest; thou seem aweary; I shall be glad to be
thy Comforter.


Cel. I thank you -- weary I am indeed, in Search of what I fear I never shall
see again.


Herm. Never despair, nothing is ever lost beyond our Hopes but Reputation. Is
it for the Living that you seek?


Cel. Living she was last Night, and well.


Herm. It is a Woman then; what is the fair-one's Name?


Cel. Eddie. Fair as the cristal Stream. Hermit whispers Crito.


Herm. You Would know her then, no Doubt, were you to see her?


Cel. Why do you ask me that? Is it possible I could not know the Thing I saw
but Yesterday?


Herm. Say, do you know that Fair-one? Crito and Eddie appear.


Cel. Know her! O ye miraculous Powers, it is my Eddie! He runs and embraces her.


Edd. Celon! O I scarcely can believe that I Am awake.


Herm. I bear Witness you're not in a Dream, and am glad that I have partly
been the Means of all this Happiness.


Cel. O may you be blessed with every Thing that is good, What shall we do to make
you amends?


Herm. I am amply satisfied in seeing you so happy.


Edd. He shall be our Father and we will stay here all our Days, and Crito too
shall be my Brother.


Herm. Say, Crito, would thou not like to have a Sister?


Crito Yes, and I should like to have a Brother too:


Herm. It Is well replied; but now it grieves me that I Have no Dish, but homely
Fare, that you might eat with me.


Cel. We are in no Need; this is Feast enough for me, I have no Room for any
Thing but Love.

AIR XII.
Sings. The Heart when thirsty with Desire
No Draught can quench the burning Fire,
Until the Spark that caused the Flame,
'Presented to the Eye again;
But when it comes again to View,
The Soul with Transport will renew
It Is native Ease, and fill the Breast
As mine is now, with Eddie Blessed.



Edd. I feel no Pain, nor Hunger, but my Sighs have made me thirsty.


Herm. Go, Crito, to the Spring, and haste back again, [ Ex. Crito] Pardon my
offering you so cool a Cordial, it is the best this World affords me.


Edd. It will be received as kindly as the most costly ore; and on Condition I
might stay me here with Celon, I could content me with it all my Days.

AIR XIII.
Eddie I will stay here all my Life,
When I am my Celon's Wife;
We'll taste each Spring,
And dance and sing,
Across the Hills so green;
Thou shall be my Lord and King,
And I will be thy Queen.

Celon. At Night when all the World's asleep,
I Will go fetch thee all my Sheep;
I Will watch the Dams,
Thou feed the Lambs,
And so we'll spend each Day;
Our Father here shall join our Hands,
And thou shall cry obey.




Edd. I Am glad they have drove us hither now, for here we can love in their
Despite, nor fear their parting us again.


Herm. I fear the Trial will prove worse than the Idea; the hard Means of Life
you will be obliged to submit to here, will, I fear, dash your future Hopes;
but believe me you are welcome as the Morning.


Cel. We are assurd of that, and free from Danger, they will hardly find us here
-- therefore we'll risque whatever else may happen.

AIR XIV.
Cel. Since Luck has brought us here together,
I fear nor Cold nor stormy Weather,
With this loved Mate,
I fear no Fate,
That may hereafter threat my State.
The Hand Today that brought us here,
May send us Comfort all the Year



Enter Crito.
Crit. Returning home from the Well I saw four Travelers coming on this Way;
and, seeing me, they eyed me to the Cave.


Herm. More Miracles? it is very strange, I now begin to fear some sad Event.


Cel. Some Travelers I suppose that have lost their Way and followed Crito for
Intelligence.


Herm. Some Ignis Fatuus sure has drawn the World this way.


Edd. Let us retire.


Cel. Be not afraid my Love, we have no Enemies here.


Brain. [within.] Here they are my Lads, here they are; make Haste or they will
give us the Slip again. [Eddie faints] hey day, who have we here! [ Enter
Brainly and the rest following him.]


True. The Devil and one of his Imps, I believe, only they have hid their cloven
Feet.


Brain. Odds heart my Child is dying, help some of you help, to hold her up. --
O thou damned Dog, I wish thou had been hanged a Twelvemonth ago, thou'st
killed my Child, thou have thou Dog, [ pushes Celon away.] my Dear, my Eddie,
[Eddie coming to Life] poor Creature! how she pants! softly, softly, she is
coming to herself again [fanning her with his Hat] how is it with thee? thy
Father is not angry with thee Child, come, come, don't be frightened, thou
shall not be hurt.


Edd. ( weeping) My Father! O well-a-day -- where is my Celon, you wont kill
him I hope.


Brain. Kill him? no not I! though I don't care how soon he were hanged.


Edd. Alas, alas, you said you was not angry, and now you have forgot your Saying,


Brain. No, not with you Child, I came to fetch you home; but we'll leave him
to find his Way himself.


Edd. Nay pray let him go with me too.


Brain. No, no, not I indeed, I Am not so fond of his Company.


Edd. Nor wont you let me see him when at home?


Brain. Not if I can help it, we'll have no more visiting of Witches and
Wizards here; nay he may be the Devil for ought I know.


Edd. Did not you say just now you would be kind?


Brain. So I think, I am for taking you away and carrying you to a good home
again.


Edd. If that is Kindness, I Would rather you would be unkind, and let me stay here
all my Life.


Brain. So I suppose; no, no, I did not come all this Way for nothing, so come
along, since you don't know when you're doing wrong, I shall make bold to tell
you when you don't do right.


Edd, Farewell my dearest Celon, farewell, I shall --

Brain. Come, come, no whining, a short Parting's always best, so help me some
of you to force her away.


Exeunt Brainly, etc. with Eddie. Cel. Farewell most lovely Maid, my Heart
shall follow thee wherever thou go, -- O most unnatural Father!

AIR XV.
Sings, O Cupid God of Love
Take now a wretched Pair
Beneath thy friendly Care,
Use all thy Art, while now apart,
To keep us from Despair.
Protect that lovely Maid
So injured and oppressed,
In Love so much distressed,
She is so meek, her Heart will break,
Except by thee redressed.



Herm. Alas I pity you from my Heart, and wish I could administer some Comfort
to your Sorrow, let us retire into the Cave and compose yourself a while.


Cel. No I will follow her, whatever fate befall me.


Herm. Whither will thou go? Night will overtake thee ever thou can reach thy
Father's Dwelling.


Cel. Aye and so it will if I stay here; I thank thee for thy Care, but I can
no where rest if Eddie be not near, I thank thee for all thy Friendship, think
me not ungrateful, thus to leave thee, but when the Heart is from the Body
torn, the Spirit soon must die; therefore I must follow, a kind Farewell to
both, my Heart is now so full of Grief, that I can nothing say; but once more
Farewell.


Exit Celon. Herm. Farewell kind Youth, and may thou never meet so hard a
Trial more; O wretched World, I have felt thee sharp as the keen Air, and now
methinks, I see myself in this sad Youth, a goodly Heart overwhelmed in Grief;
come, Crito, we'll in and rest, thou see what it is to mix with Man; how
hard they deal with one another.


Exeunt Crito and Hermit. THE END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A Moonlight Scene. Celon under Eddie's Window. Celon. HERE rests my Eddie,
would she knew that I were here, it would not be long ever I beheld her.

AIR XVI.
Sings. Thou Silver Moon, O lend thy Aid
And light me to my charming Maid,
Send forth some Power from above,
And help me once more to my Love.
O turn her cruel Father's Heart,
Let Mercy touch the hardest Part;
Let Pity stop his fiery Rage,
And think on Eddie's tender Age.



Enter Three Robbers, at the Squire's Door, trying to break into the House.
Cel. Alas, I am betrayed, and yet they are Strangers all to me; I fear some ill
Intent, they are breaking open the Door; I must interpose least my Eddie should
be in Danger. [They enter the House] hold you there, what mean you, by entering
the House in this Manner, and at this Time of the Night?


1 House Br. Knock him down! Knock him down! silence him or we shall miscarry.


2 Housebr. You proceed, -- I Will manage him I warrant me. [ Two of them enter
the House, the other stays behind and attacks Celon; Celon disarms him, and
afterward knocks him down with his own Weapon, then pursues the other two into
the House: mean while the other crawls off the Stage, and makes his Escape, --
there is a great Bustle within]


Brain. [within] Bring 'em along Lads, bring 'em along.


Enter Brainly in his Shirt, Mrs. Brainly, and a Number of Servants, in great
Confusion, with the Rogues, and Celon as a Confederate. Brain. We Have secured
the Villains, hold up the Lanthorn and let us see who we have got; 'Sdeath and
Heart, why this is Celon! Run Wife directly and see to the Girl, she may have
been in the Plot, and made her Escape for what I know. [ Exit Mrs. Brainly.]
Ho, ho, young Gentleman have we caught you; what, because I would not let thee
ruin my Daughter, thou and thy pretty Comrades came to cut my Throat; but I Will
stop your Course I assure you now; -- what break into my House at Midnight! O
you Villain, you damned Dog; this is your Love too the Devil take all love
Affairs I say.


Cel. You say so now, Sir, because you're past'em.


Brain. And so shall thou be soon; if I don't have thee hanged, I Will give any
body leave to hang me; -- go one of you and get a Halter and tie 'em all three
together, lock 'em in the Barn or the Stable till by and by, and I Will settle
Accounts with 'em all. Exit Servant


Cel. As I hope for Mercy --


Brain. Mercy! O yes, a deal of Mercy, thou shall be hanged, and that will
prevent thy doing any more Mischief. Come bring 'em away.


Exeunt Brainly and the rest. SCENE II.
Enter Mrs. Brainly and Eddie. Edd. To Prison, did you say Mamma?


Mrs. Brain. They Are all confined in the Barn or Stable together, and that is
much the same, your Father's determined to have 'em all hanged


Edd And Celon too? ( she weeps)


Mrs. Brain. Why does not he deserve it Child?


Edd. I hope not, I am sure he never meant Harm.

AIR XVII
Why thus ye Powers do ye strive
To heap Distress on me alone,
While Mercy in your Breasts survive
Let all my Grief his Ills atone.
Let not your Vengeance fall severe
Upon two Lovers so distressed,
O now release my Celon dear,
And pluck the Sting from Eddie's Breast.



Mrs. Brain. Here comes thy Father and Hylas, there'll be a strange too do I
suppose!


Edd. I fear so too.


Enter Brainly, Hylas, and Trusty. Brain, So Miss Thrifty you are up I see; --
it is a wonder thou'st not been out a Wooing ever now; but I suppose thou waits
for thy Deary's coming to thee this Morning; and therefore I Will send the
Gentleman an Invitation myself. -- Trusty, go take somebody along with thee and
fetch those Hang-dogs to me Exit Trusty


Hyl. I hope your Worship will have Mercy on my poor Boy!


Brain. Yes if he deserves it, not else I assure you.


Hyl. Ah, but consider.


Brain. I do consider, and pity thee with all my Heart; I would not have such a
Son for the World; and I think the sooner you get rid of him the better. -- He
must be dealt with according to Law; and that, I fancy, will hang him.


Hyl. O Law! that ever I should have any thing to do with thee? O my poor Boy
who ever thought thou were born to be hanged!


Edd. Hanged! my Celon hanged!


Brain. Hanged, aye and thee too, for aught I know, for being his Confederate.


Edd. O spare his precious Life!

AIR. XVIII.
If not my Celon, pity me;
Behold me at your Feet,
While thus upon my bended Knee*
Make not my Woes complete.
Will you throw that Rose away,
That once you thought so sweet;
And let it wither and decay,
Like Dasies under Feet.



Brain. Get out of my Sight.


Mrs. Brain. How can you plead so Child, for one that came to take away your
Father's Life?


Hyl. Her Father's Life! -- no, not he poor Soul.


Brain. Oh here he comes, -- now let him plead for himself, [ Enter Trusty,
Celon and House-breakers] a pretty set of Fellows truly.


Hyl. Wayst-heart how he looks; O my poor Boy [ runs to Celon] what has
bewitched thee to bring these Troubles on thy poor Father's Head?


Edd, Celon!


Brain. Get away Miss Fitchet; keep Silence till I examine 'em one by one. --
You Fellow in the black Coat, do you hear; Hem, hem. -- I admit thee King's
Evidence, -- stand forth, and speak like a Man, say what were your Intentions
for breaking into my House so abruptly; but mind you speak the Truth, the whole
Truth, and nothing but the Truth.


1st Thief. I will and please your Worship.


Brain. Well mind you do. -- Proceed.


1st Thief. Our Intentions were, and please your Worship, to have plundered the
House, forced away your Daughter and to have murdered all those that interposed.


Brain. There Is pretty Fellows for you, there is pretty Fellows. -- Now
Neighbor Hylas what do you think of your innocent Son? these are all his
Contrivances.


Hyl. Good lack, good lack-a-day, I know not what to think, I Am almost beside
myself.


Cel. If your Worship will please --


Brain. Hold your Tongue, Sirrah, till it comes to your Turn, if you interrupt
me again* I Will send you back without any further Examination. Well but again;
-- say who was the Contriver of this dreadful Plot.


1st Thief No one here, and please your Worship.


Brain. No one here? -- take care, if I find thee deviate from the Truth, I Will
have thee hanged up directly -- who was it then, and where is he?


1st Thief. He can tell you best [ pointing to Celon] we left him and the other
scuffling at the Door together when we two entered the House.


Brain. Who do you mean, Celon?


Thief. I don't know his Name; I know I felt the weight of his Fury; -- 'twas
he that gave me this Cut of the Head.


Brain. Odds Heart how is this! was not he in the Plot?


1st Thief. No and please your Worship (if I must speak the Truth) had it not
been for him we should have carried our Point


Hyl. Huzza! huzza! what think you of my Son now? what think you of my Son now?


Brain. I don't know what to think, this is a Point would puzzle a Lord Chief
Justice; -- stay, stay, I Have something yet to start, what Business in the Name
of old Nick, could he have there at that Time of the Night?


Cel. Waiting in hopes to see Eddie again.


Brain. Was that all?


Cel. Yes as I hope for Mercy; -- I had scarce been there a Moment, ere these
Ruffians came, accompanied with another; who (while these two entered the
House) they left to encounter me; but I proving Conqueror, left him on the
Ground; and in pursuing these was taken Prisoner as an Accomplice.


Brain. Is all this really true, you Sir? ( to the 1st Thief.)


1st Thief. Yes in good Faith, every Word.


Brain. Why then he deserves her, were she a Princess; here take her Boy, and a
thousand Blessings go with you both.


Cel. Ten thousand Blessings, and Thanks in Return.


Hyl. Let me give my Blessing too, -- may you be as happy, as the King and the
Queen, -- odds Heart I shall jump out of my old Skin again. ( gives a caper.)


Brain. Take this Fellow to Prison, the other I set at Liberty.


2d Thief. I have a Demand on your Worship before I go; -- will your Worship
stand to your own Words.


Brain. Thou saucy Rascal, do thou think a Man of Character, a Justice of the
Little dare break his Word? If thou ever find me breaking my Word, I Will give
thee Leave to send me to Prison in thy stead.


2d Thief. Then you must either hang Celon, or give me Leave to hang your
Worship.


Brain. What does the Rascal mean?


2d Thief. Your Worship promised when we were first taken, that if you did not
hang him, you would give any body Leave to hang you; now, if your Worship will
forgive me my Sins, I Will pardon you.


Brain. 'Sheart I believe he has me, and for thy Remembrance I Will forgive thee,
so get thee gone about thy Business. ( Ex. Thieves.) I plainly see if a man was
to be accountable for all he says in a Passion he might be hanged presently.
Come this has been a strange Day; but now we'll have nothing but Dancing and
Feasting for a Week.


Hyl. Odds bud Lad you are made for ever. -- Madam Brainly I must have a Buss
and wish you Joy of a Son. ( kisses her.)


Mrs. Brain. I Am overjoyed too, to find that we are all deceived.


Cel. And I Am overjoyed after all my Fears to find that I am not deceived, for
I Have got in Reality all I ever wished for.

AIR XIX.
Like Sailors surrounded at Sea,
For ever 'tween Hope and Despair;
But when they the Harbor once see,
Away flies their Troubles and Care.
And soon as they step on the Shore,
The Comforts still greater appear;
They relish the Blessing the more
By thinking they once were in Fear.



Brain. Ah you young Rogue, you have changed your Tune -- friend Hylas give me
thy Hand, I Will make thy Son a 'Squire.


Hyl. A 'Squire! hear'st thou that Lad? wounds and Wherrykins thou wilt be as
great as a Lord by-and-by.


Cel. I Am as great already in my Opinion, at least I Am as happy I Am sure.


Edd. And I Am much happier.


Brain. Heaven bless you both, you have fought hard for one another; we'll have a
merry Wedding on it.

AIR XX.
I never was so pleased in my Life,
At making of Husband and Wife,
Though I Have been at full Threescore,
I never saw a Pair,
That promised so fair,
In all my good Days before.



Hyl. Here comes Cousin Cymon; here Cousin, here Cousin, here is Celon as great
as the Lord Mayor of London.


Cy. I heard of it all as I came, and so came hobbling hither to see the young
Couple, and give 'em my Blessing too -- may you live to be as old as
Mathusalem, I say.


Cel. Thank you, Uncle; though ever that Time I fancy we shall be as weary of
the World as you sometimes appear to be.


Hyl. We Are to have such doings! ah the young Dog how he sniggers; -- 'Sdeath I
munnot call him Dog neither, that is a little too free now he is a 'Squire, did
hear that Cousin!

AIR XXI,
We'll ring the Bell,
And make a Fire;
While the Tune tells
My Boy's a 'Squire.



Cel This is more than you dreamed I believe Cousin.


Cym. I Am glad that I Am awake to see it.


Cel So am I, for I feel it in Reality.

AIR XXII.
He. Since Fate has ended all our Woe,
And brought my Eddie to my Arms;
All the Ills that teased us so
Vanish now before her charms

She. Our former Sufferings are repaid.
By this mutual Joy at last.
Nor shall our future Joys ever fade,
By thinking on the Ills that is past.

Both. But thus in Transport spend each Day
Until our Griefs are drove away.




THE END.
THE FIRST of MAY.
MY Tale I take from Times of old,
When Truth was more esteemed than Gold;
When Pride walked threadbare and despised,
When Folks were better exercised
Than nowadays, when Broils and Strife
Defiles the Narra' of each Life.
A Country Villa, near a Green,
Inhabitants but twice Sixteen;
An honest 'Squire held the Hall,
Surrounded by a Turfen Wall,
The Friend and Landlord of 'em all.
A Neighborhood so well inclined,
So simple, honest, and so kind,
Each tried his Neighbor to excel,
In Friendship and in doing well.
As soon as Morning Dawn appeared,
Or early Chanticleer was heard,
Ever the fond Herds began to feed,
Or Faires fled the rising Mead.
The thrifty Villagers arose,
And from the Bed of sweet Repose
They met the Labors of the Day
And cheerful, sung the Time away;
At Eventide, when Work was done;
They all returned at setting Sun,
And met upon the Plain -- with Glee
They pip'd and danced upon the Lee;
There in a lowly simple State
They felt the joys that fly the Great,
No Load of Conscience galled their Breast,
Content and Labor gave 'em rest.
'Twas now the rosy Morn of May,
When Flora in her best Array
Bedeek'd each little rising Hill
With Cowslips sweet, or Daffodil;
A May Pole tall with Garlands hung,
And rows of Birds Eggs neatly strung,
Was placed upon a verdant Green,
A Tribute to the Morning's Queen.
Each Rustic summons forth his Fair
And round the Pole they all repair.
The 'Squire amongst the rest arose,
As 'twas his Custom to dispose
Of various Gifts, upon that Day,
And gave good Ale and Cakes away.
Twelve Garlands one small Hillock graced,
In simple Order each was placed.
The honest 'Squire now proposed
That each by Choice should be disposed;
Said every Swain had equal Right
To any Garland now in Sight
And all beneath, if ought should be,
To claim his Right and Property.
For each some little Prize contained,
So that the Loser something gained,
Though some were greater than the rest,
Each Swain now strove to choose the best.
Young Ralph a fair and comely Swain;
The very Hero of the Plain,
Beheld fair Alecy on her Way,
No star so bright, no Nymph so gay;
Her small and easy Waist was bound
With Wreaths most sweet; her Head was crowned
With every Flower of the Field,
That Flora's self to her might yield.
She on her Head, a Garland bore
Its equal never was seen before.
Young Ralph set off full Speed to meet
This lovely Maid, this Nymph complete,
And struck the rest with great Surprise,
To see him claim her for his Prize,
He first bereaved her of her Crown,
And claimed the Maiden all his own.
Now every Youngster on the Plain
Looked with Envy on the Swain,
But all in Justice did declare
He won the Maid; -- the Trick was fair.
The 'Squire pauz'd, and shook his Head,
His hearty smile of Humor fled
To see his Child another's Claim,
And now he 'gan himself to blame.
The Swain beheld the good Man's Eyes,
With Tears he offered back his Prize.
The 'Squire charmed at such a Deed
Cried you deserve her now indeed!
It glads me much, young Swain to find,
Thou bear so great, so good a Mind;
Here take her Lad, -- I murmur not
If she is contented with her Lot,
She smiled Consent, and cheered the drooping Swain,
She gave her Hand, her Meaning to explain.
The 'Squire saw, and blessed the blooming Pair,
And three loud Vollies broke the peaceful Air.
CHRISTMAS EVE IN THE COUNTRY.
THE Mountain tops were tipped with driven Snow,
And Silver white were all the Vales below,
When, ceasing through the frozen Field to roam,
Each Country Bumpkin ambles to his Home;
Enjoys what often his betters do admire
In Winter Time, -- a comfortable Fire,
There with his Spouse and rosy Brats regale
In simple Mirth all round a Mug of Ale.
And now when some sage venerable 'Squire
Does from the Noise of this great Town retire,
To end his Days, forgetting King and Court,
And turns once more unto his youthful Sport;
But feels the Want of Strength, the Want of Sight,
And feels the Winter more severely bite,
Than when his Blood, some forty Years ago
Would reek with Ardour in December's Snow;
Climb the steep Hill, the flowing Riv'let fly,
And join with Speed the cheerful Huntsman's Cry
'Till the deep Valley echoed to the Sky.
Less Exercise poor Man will now content,
Infirmity will teach him to repent;
And make Atonement for a Life of Sin, --
At threescore Years it is Time sure to begin.
The Night approached, each Friend receives his Guest,
To drink an Health, or crack some merry Jest
To eat and drink in hearty free Good will,
And all the Troubles of the Day to kill.
Though Ven'son fumes never taint their homely Board,
The feast on what they better can afford;
A good Sir Loin, a Pudding full of Plumbs,
Smoking and hot upon the Table comes.
No Prince on Earth could here refuse to eat
So nice the Pudding and so sweet the Meat.
Once on a Time the Fire Side was graced
With six true pair of Lovers round it placed,
When biting Frost, and Snow bespread the Green,
The Lads here served their Lasses for a Skreen,
By holding them as we do often see
The Lads in Town -- their Lasses on their Knee;
Now each in Turn would Sing a merry Song,
And some would tell a Story very long,
While all attentive would with Wonder hear,
And showed with Eyes of Love an Heart of Fear;
One who refused in his Turn to sing,
Told a sad Story of a murdered King.
Another cried, he heard his Granny say
As she was passing through a lonely way,
The Night was dark and Glowworms did appear,
When every Tree then added to her Fear.
And passing by a lonely Church Yard Wall
The Grave Stones moved, the Steeple shook and all.
Another now began a woeful Tale
The very Thought of which often turned him pale. --
Once, said he, a Lady fair and tall
Did walk a Nights upon our Garden Wall;
She sometimes like a Sow and Pigs appeared
And sometimes like a Jew, with a long Beard,
And sometimes like a greyhound, sleek and trim,
Sometimes like a Lion very Grim.
And once my Father said he saw it stand
With a bleeding Heart grasp't within its Hand
And once he heard it like a Raven croak,
And thrice, they say, it to our Parson spoke.
At this sad Tale, not one in all the House,
But even feared the moving of a Mouse.
O lack A Day, cried one fair trembling Maid,
I fear to move, I am so much afraid.
Another, listening, thought she heard a Voice,
Another cried, I Am sure I heard a Noise.
Hush was the Word, while each with listening Fear,
Did, as it were, all statue-struck appear.
Nor Eye, nor Finger now was seen to move,
But each pale Maid cling'd fast about her Love;
And all, the more from Fear, than from Desire,
Moved by Degrees almost into the Fire.
A dreadful Clatter all at once was heard,
And in a Trice the Fire Side was cleared;
Out at the Door they helter-skelter ran,
Nor 'till the Morning did there one return;
The Parson and the Clerk at Noon were brought,
With Faces full of Fear and Heads of Thought;
Gravely they entered, with a solemn Look,
The Parson held his Breech, the Clerk his Book,
And step by step with Caution star'd around,
Thinking most sure 'twas all enchanted Ground,
But first they both into the Oven peept,
Thinking, perhaps, it might in there have crept,
But turning to the Cup-board, there did lie,
A nice Plumb-pudding, and a Christmas Pie,
That Puss had in her thieving Tricks thrown down,
And struck with Wonder all the simple Town.
The Parson, with a knavish Leer and Grin,
Stroak'd with great Sanctity his double Chin.
Cried 'twas a Shame such Pudding should be lost,
And in an Instant down his Throat he tossed
A Piece that would almost have choked a Hog,
And gave old Sly the Clerk a frienldy Jog.
Who likewise cried, indeed it was a Shame,
And by the Priest's Example did the same.
Then both turned home with Safety and Content,
And left the Losers only to repent;
Telling 'em of the worst to make the most,
To rest content, by giving up the Ghost.
FINIS.

