Mr. WHISTON's LETTER of Thanks To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
LONDON, For His late LETTER TO HIS CLERGY Against the USE of New Forms of
Doxology, etc.

LONDON: Printed for J. Senex at the Globe in Salisbury-Court, and W. Tailor at
the Ship in Paternoster Row; and are to be Sold by J. Roberts near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1719.

The first Clause of a LETTER from the Lord Bishop of London, to the Incumbents
of all Churches and Chapels in his Diocese, concerning their not using any New
Forms of Doxology, etc.
Reverend Brethren,
THERE is an Instance of your Care and Duty, which I conceive my self at this
time highly obliged to offer, and you to regard, as necessary for the
Preservation of the very Foundations of our Faith. Some Persons seduced, I
fear, by the strong Delusions of Pride and Self-conceit, have lately published
new Forms of Doxology, entirely agreeable to those of some Ancient Heretics,
who impiously denied a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead. I do
therefore warn, and charge it upon your Souls, as you hope to obtain Mercy from
God the Father, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, and by the
Sanctification of the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One God Blessed for ever,
that you employ your best Endeavors to prevail with your several Flocks to
have a great Abhorrence for the above mentioned new Forms, and particularly
that you do not suffer the same to be used, either in your Churches, or in any
Schools where you are able to prevent that most pernicious Abuse, etc.

Mr. WHISTON's Letter of Thanks, etc.
My Lord,
ALTHOUGH I have not the Honor of being One of those Incumbents in your
Lordship's Diocese, to whom you immediately direct your late Letter against the
Use of New Forms of Doxology, etc. Yet because I generally frequent one of your
Parish Churches, where a New Form of Doxology is every Day used; Vid.
Historical Pref. Edit. 2. p.128. -- 131.
where yet, according to your Lordship's laudable Admonition, I dissent from
that New Form of Doxology, and use an Old one; because I several Years ago at
Cambridge opposed that New, and therefore, by the same excellent Rule,
unjustifiable Form of Doxology, I cannot but think it very fit for me to own
the great Pleasure your Lordship's Caution against New Forms of Doxology has
given me; and in my own Name, and in the Name of many other good Christians,
who, with me, reject all such New Forms of Doxology whatsoever, I return your
Lordship this Public Thanks for your so open Approbation of our Conduct in
this Matter.

I take it here for granted, My Lord, that your Lordship is in earnest in this
Letter; that by New Forms of Doxology therein disapproved, without any
particular mention of the Forms themselves, you truly mean such as arose long
since the beginning of the Gospel; That also by New Forms of Doxology, entirely
agreeable to those of some ancient Heretics, your Lordship particularly means
those New Forms which were introduced by certain Heretics in the fourth
Century; though your Lordship seems indeed unhappily to have mistaken their Name
and Character.

I take it also for granted, My Lord, that it is impossible for a Christian and
a Protestant Bishop, both which your Lordship is known to be, to call the
ancient and sacred Doxologies of St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, St. Jude, etc.
with those of the rest of the most primitive Christians, New Forms of Doxology,
entirely agreeable to those of some ancient Heretics: And upon this reasonable
Supposition, I do again return your Lordship my most hearty Thanks for so
seasonable and Christian a Caution against the modern gross, and notorious
Corruption of this kind.

Now that this solemn Caution of your Lordship's against all New Forms of
Doxology may have the greater regard paid to it by all the Clergy of your
Diocese, I shall beg leave to supply what seems wanting in your Lordship's
Letter, and shall produce here all the certainly genuine Forms of Doxology,
that, upon a former diligent Enquiry, I met with in the Apostolic Age, or a
little later. And that your Lordship may be secure that none of them shall be
liable to the lea^^ suspicion of favoring any dangerous Opinions that arose in
the fourth Century, your Lordship will there find that the latest of them is
near two hundred Years older than the rise of either the Arian or Athanasian
Heresies. And I hope this Account may be farther useful to your Lordship's
Clergy, as affording them for Practice sure Original positive Rules or Forms of
Doxology, free from all suspicion of Heretical Pravity; which also your
Lordship has entirely omitted to give them in your Letter.

The Primitive Doxologies.
Romans I. 25
MORE than the Creator: who is blessed for ever. Amen. IX. 5.
Who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. [or, The God over all be blessed
for ever. Amen.] XI. 36.
Of him, and through him, and to him are all things. To him be Glory, for ever.
Amen. XVI. 27.
To the only wise God be glory, through Jesus Christ, for ever. Amen. 2 Cor.
XI. 31.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for evermore. Gal.
I. 4, 5.
According to the Will of God and our Father. To him be glory for ever and
ever. Amen. Ephesians. III. 21.
To him be glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen. Philip. IV 20.
Now to God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 1 Timothy I. 17.
Now to the King of Ages, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen. VI. 16.
Whom no man has seen, nor can see. To whom be honor and power everlasting.
Amen. 2 Timothy IV. 18.
The Lord: To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Heb. XIII. 21.
Now the God of Peace, -- through Jesus Christ: To whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen. 1 Pet. IV. 11.
That God in all things may be glorified, through Jesus Christ. To whom is
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. V. 11.
To God be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 2 Pet. III. 18.
Our Savior Jesus Christ: To him be glory both now and for ever. Amen. Jude v.
25
To the only wise God, our Savior, be glory, and majesty, dominion, and power,
both now and ever. Amen. Apoc. I. 6.
To Jesus Christ be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. IV. 1.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created. V. 13.
Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be to him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever. Amen. VII. 10.
Salvation unto our God which sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb. v. 12.
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and
might be unto our God, for ever and ever* Amen. XIX. 1.
Alleluiah: Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God.
Clem. Ep. I..20. p.159.
All these has the great Creator and Lord of all commanded to observe peace and
concord: being good to all; but especially to us who flee to his mercy through
our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom be glory and majesty for ever and ever.
Amen..32. p.164.
God Almighty: To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen..38. p.168.
He that made us, and formed us: To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen..43.
p.171.
That the name of the true and only God might be glorified: To whom be honor
for ever and ever. Amen..45. p.173.
The Most High: To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen..50. p.175.
Chosen by God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen..58. p.180.
Jesus Christ: By whom be glory, and majesty, and power, and honor unto Him,
now, and for evermore. Amen..59. p.180.
Through whom be honor, and glory, and might, and majesty, and an eternal
throne, from everlasting to everlasting. Amen. Constit. Apost. L.I. C.1. p.200.
Through whom glory be to God for ever. Amen. Vid. C.8. p.207. L.VII. C.25.
p.370. C.47. p.385. C.49. p.385. L.II. C.14. p.223.
The will of the God and Father of the Universe, which is revealed unto us by
Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom be glory for ever. Amen. L.IV. C.5. p.294.
Through whom glory be to God, in spirit and truth, for ever. Amen. L.V. C.6.
p.304.
Believing in the one and only true God and Father, through Jesus Christ, the
great High Priest, and Redeemer of our souls, and Rewarder of our sufferings:
To whom be glory for ever. Amen. Vid. L.VIII. C.3. p.390. L.VI. C.30. p.360.
Through him worship, and majesty, and glory be given to Almighty God, both
now, and for evermore. Amen. L.VII. C.27. p.371.
O God the Creator of the whole world: -- For thine is the glory, and the
power, for ever. Amen. C.33, 34. p.373, 374.
O thou great protector of the posterity of Abraham, thou art blessed for ever:
Thou art blessed, O Lord, the King of Ages. C.38. p.378.
Glory and worship be to thee for all these things, through Jesus Christ, now,
and ever, and throughout all Ages. Amen. C.45. p.382.
By whom glory be to thee, in the Holy Spirit, for ever. Amen. See Ignat. ad
Ephesians..21. p.55. ad Rom..8. p.77. ad Philad..11. p.86. C.48. p.385.
Praise becomes thee; Hymns become thee Glory becomes thee, the God and Father
through the Son, in the most Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Amen. Vid. L.VIII
C.5. p.392. C.6. p, 394. C.8. p.395. C.9 p.396. C.11. p.398. C.37. p.416. C.40
p.418. C.41. p.418. L.VIII. C.7. p.394.
For to thee is due glory, honor, and worship, and by thee to thy Father, in
the Holy Spirit, for ever. Amen. C.12. p.404.
For to thee belongs all glory, and worship, and thanksgiving, honor and
adoration, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, both now, and always, and
for everlasting and endless ages for ever. And let all the people say, Amen.
Vid. C.15. p.406. bi^ C.16. p.407. C.18. p.407. C.20. p.408 C.21. p.408. C.22.
p.409. C.29. p.41^ C.38. p.417. C.39. p.417. C.41. p.41^ See this form and the
Holy Spirit proved to b^ a later Interpolation instead of in the Ho^^ Spirit,
in my Primitive Christianity Reviv'^ Vol. IV. Append. p.10, 11, 12. C.13. p.404.
There one that is Holy, there is one Lord, one Jesus Christ, blessed for ever,
to the glory of God the Father. Amen. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, good will among men. Hosanna to the son of David. Blessed be he that
comes in the name of the Lord, being God and Lord, who appeared to us: Hosanna
in the highest. C.37. p.417.
With whom worthy Adoration is due from every rational and holy nature to Thee,
and to the Spirit, who is the Comforter, for ever. Amen. [See the foregoing
Note.] Martyr. Polycarp. ap. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. IV. 15.
Wherefore I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorify thee, for all things, O thou
God that can not lie, the True God, through thy eternal High Priest, Jesus
Christ, thy beloved Son. By whom, to thee, with him, in the Holy Ghost, be
glory both now, and to all succeeding ages. Amen. Just. Apol. I..85.
He that presides over the Brethren, receiving the Bread, and the Cup mixed of
Water and Wine, gives praise and glory to the Father of the Universe, through
the name of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit..87.
And indeed in all our Oblations, we bless the Maker of all things, through his
Son Jesus Christ, and through the Holy Spirit.
N.B. The Doxologies in Paul, twelve in number, are, as I understand them, all
directed immediately to the Father, or to the Father through the Son. Of the
three in Peter, two are directed, as those in Paul, to the Father, or to the
Father through the Son; and the other is expressly and only directed to Jesus
Christ himself. The single one in Jude is directed only to the Father. Of the
six in the Apocalypse of John, three are directed to the Father alone; one to
the Son alone; and the other two to the Father and to the Son jointly. So that
in the Sacred Writing owned to be Canonical, the Holy Ghost (...) never
mentioned in Doxologies at all; an^ the Son not often, any otherwise than as
the Mediator. Clement's eight, and the Apostl^ six Doxologies also in Clement's
Epistle, an^ former six Books of the Constitutions, ar^ exactly like those of
Paul, entirely directe^ to the Father, or to the Father through the Son^
without any mention of the Holy Ghost. The public Doxologies of the Jewish and
Gentile Liturgies, contained in the seventh an^ eighth Books of the
Constitutions, are directed sometimes to the Father alone, sometimes to the
Father through the Son; and the re^^ that we have reason to believe incorrupt,
to the Father, and the Son, in the Holy Ghost; especially in the Celebration of
the Sacramen^ of the Lord's Supper, when the Church di^ rather more solemnly
mention the Holy Ghost than upon any other occasion. The certain one in
Polycarp's Prayer before his Martyrdom, is in Eusebius's Copy, which is the
best, To the Father, through, and with the Son in the Holy Ghost. [See
Primitive Christianity Revived, Vol. IV. Append. p.1-9.

N.B. Here a common Mistake is to b^ rectified, as if in those Doxologies
whera^ the Supreme God the Father had been mentioned or worshipped through Jesus
Christ, t^ whom glory is immediately ascribed, in the usual Form of Doxologies;
that to whom related to Jesus Christ, and not to God the Father; as if upon an
occasional mention of the Mediator, by whom our Devotions are offered, ^he
Great Object of them were immediately ^o be forgotten by us, and all the Glory
con^in'd to the Mediator alone. This seems to me a gross Mistake; yet is it, I
doubt, a very ^ommon one. The first Doxology in Peter before inserted, when
well considered, will help to cure this Error among Christians. * Vid. ubi
supr. p. 14.]

And now after these really ancient and Chri^tian Doxologies, Give me leave, My
Lord, to present you and your Clergy with the Doxologies of Athanasius himself;
and with a short Epitome of his Follower Basil's Discourse concerning such
ancient Doxologies, both by me printed formerly, and belonging to that very
Time when the New Athanasian Doxologies were creeping apace into the Church.

Athanasius's Doxologies; according to the Times when he used them.
About A.D.313. De Incarnat. Verb. ult. Op. p.97.
THAT love God and the Father, in Christ Jesus our Lord: By whom, and with whom
be Honor, and Power, and Glory to the Father himself, with the Son himself, in
the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen. Time uncertain, Expos. ^d. ult. Op.
p.102.
By whom, Glory, Power, and Majesty be to the Father, before all Ages, and for
ever and ever. Amen. Before A.D.343. in Omn. mihi Trad. ult. Op. p.108.
His [the Son's] is the Kingdom: The Father's, the Son's, and the Holy
Spirit's, now, and for ever. Amen. About A.D.352. De Decret. Synod. Nicaen. ul^
Op. 238.
It Is fit to give Glory, Honor, an^ Adoration to God and the Father, with hi^
Coeternal Son and Word, together with the most holy and quickening Spirit, both
now* and for endless Ages of Ages. Amen. -- Before A.D.356. Epist. ad Amun. in
ca^ Op. p.961.
In Christ Jesus our Lord: With whom Glory and Power be to the Father, together
with the holy Spirit, for ever. Amen. -- About A.D.357. Apolog. de Fug. ult. Op
p.336.
In Christ Jesus our Lord: By whom Glory and Power be to the Father, in the
Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen. -- About A.D.357. Hist. Arian. ad Monach.
8^ Op. p.393.
Our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom Glory and Power be to thee the Father, even
with the Word himself, in the holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen. About
A.D.358. Orat. IV. contra Arian ult. Op. p.645.
To him [the Son] be Honor and Adoration, who was formerly, and is now, and
will be always, and for ever. Amen. About A.D.360. Epist. I. ad Sera^ 12. Op.
p.661. Epist. III. 5. Op. p.694.
[For when the Spirit was in the People God was in them, by his Son, in the
Spirit. For the Father himself operates and bestows all things by the Word, in
the holy Spirit.] ul^ p.696.
For as the Trinity always was, so is i^ now; and as it now is, so was it ever,
and i^ still; and therein the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit. And there
is one God the Father* who is over all, and through all, and in all* who is
blessed for ever. Amen. -- Ep. IV. 7. Op. p.701.
In Jesus Christ our Lord: By whom and with whom Glory and Power be to the
Father, with the holy Spirit, unto all Ages o^ Ages. Amen. -- ult. p.714.
In Christ Jesus our Lord: By whom, and with whom Glory and Power be to the
Father, together with the holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen. About A.D.361.
De Synod. 54. Op. p.767.
One Lord; one Faith; one Baptism; in Christ Jesus our Lord: By whom Glory and
Power be to the Father, for ever and ever. Amen. -- A.D.361. ad Episcop.
Egypt. ult. p.294.
Jesus Christ: By whom Glory and Power be to the Father, in the holy Spirit,
both now, and for all future Ages of Ages. Amen. -- About A.D.365. V^. Anton.
ult. Op. p.866.
In Christ Jesus our Lord: To whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen. [This
Doxology is wanting in Evagrius's Original Latin Version: However, see the like
afterward, Epist. ad Afr. ult. Op. p.900.]
Note here, (1) That Athanasius's only Doxology before the Council of Nice, and
not a few afterward also, were the same that has so long been called Arian; I
mean that of in, and not to, or with the holy Spirit: And that Athanasius
sometimes afterward used the one way of speaking as well as the other: Just as
Basil did also; and as the present Copies of the Liturgy in the Eighth Book of
the Constitutions do still exhibit it to us: While it appears by other
Evidence, and by Basil's own Accounts, that no other than that esteemed the
Arian Form of in the holy Spirit, can lay sure Claim to any public Original,
or sacred Authority in the Church.

Note, (2) That Basil has a full and remarkable De Spiritu Sancto ad
Amphilochium.
Discourse upon this Subject; a short Summary of which only, because of its
length, I shall here give the Reader; as highly worthy of his serious
Consideration upon this Occasion.

Basil then was accused by those that disliked the late Notions and Practices
brought into the Church, that he had ventured to alter the old Christian
Doxology, as to the Particle in, which used to be given to the holy Ghost; and
that he often made use of and, or with instead of it; as if Glory, and Honor,
and Adoration, were to be not only ascribed to the Father, and to the Son, in
the holy Ghost, or by his Assistance, but also directly to the holy Ghost
himself, as to a proper Object of Christian Adoration or Doxology. In answer to
which he owns that the Form in the holy Ghost is indeed certainly the ancient
and undoubted Christian Form of Doxology; and that he will sometimes make use
of it still accordingly; that however the other Forms and or with, if they be
not really genuine and original in Doxologies, which yet he would willingly
insinuate, they have however been used upon other Occasions indifferently; that
even in Doxologies he is not the first that has used those Particles,
concerning the Holy Ghost; but that several great Men had done the like before
him; at least since the beginning of the third Century, as he proves by
particular Instances; and that he therefore looks upon it as a piece of Arian
or Heretical Inclination to be so scrupulous of keeping to this one old
Particle in, out of Opposition to those that would show their Orthodoxy by the
use of the other Particles, and or with the holy Ghost. This is the Purport of
Basil's Reasoning in this Case. And I own that if Prudentials must govern, and
Christians are at liberty to make themselves a new Object of direct Invocation
or Doxology from remote Inferences of their own, and out of Compliance with a
prevailing Party, Basil may be in the right, as well as those that follow him
in these Matters. But if Divine Worship is only to be given in such a Manner,
and to such Objects, as Divine Institution ordains, He and all the Athanasians
run a great Hazard in such Matters, and must have a heavy Account to give of
this their rash and unjustifiable, and unchristian Procedure at the great Day.
[Vid. Collection of Monuments, p. 124-126.]

The former Doxologies, My Lord, and many of the latter also are for certain
the Old, the Christian, the Apostolical Doxologies; some Centuries before Arius
or Arthanasius were known in the World; by which Men gave Glory, and Praise to
God the Father, the Fountain and Origin of all Beings whatsoever; together
with, or through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, his Only-begotten Son; and by
the Aid and Assistance of his Holy Spirit.

And that your Lordship does fully approve of this ancient way of Worship and
Doxology, is plain by your own excellent and remarkable Words to the very same
purpose, which indeed describe exactly the manner of Christian Worship in the
three first Centuries, I do warn and charge it upon your Souls, says your
Lordship to your Clergy, as you hope to obtain Mercy from God the Father,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, and by the Sanctification of the
Holy Ghost. -- I omit the strange Clause that is added (...) this till
hereafter: But the Words before (...) are so truly Christian, so very
Primitive, (...) perfectly Apostolical, that I heartily wish you^ Lordship may
ever remember them, and a^ your Clergy may never forget them.

But then, My Lord, That Form which ascrib^^ Glory and Praise, equal Glory and
Praise, not (...) the Son only, but also to the Holy Spirit, is for certain A
New Form of Doxology; such as you^ Lordship justly condems; wholly unknow^ to
the Apostles, and all the first Christian for a long time; and never properly
settl^ or submitted to till those dangerous Innov^tors in Christianity,
Athanasius and his Adh^rents, were become of greater Authority tha^ St. Paul
and his fellow Apostles; and till indeed at length our Lord's own grand
Fundamental, Joh. XVII. 3.
This is life eternal to know Thee, t^ only True God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou ha^ sent; was obliged to give place to the contrary fundamental of even a
counterfeit Ath^nasius, that Athanasian Creed.
we must worship One God in Trin^ty, and Trinity in Unity: where None is
supposed before or after other; None to be great^ or less than another: but the
whole. Three Persons are asserted to be Coeternal together and C^equal, where
this Author also solemnly affirm^ that this strange and new Doctrine is the
C^tholick Faith, which except a Man believe fait^fully He cannot be saved.

But now, My Lord, does it not evident^ appear, on the comparison of the form^
Doxologies with the later, that They we^^ neither the Arians, nor Eusebians,
but the Athanasians that introduced a New Form (...) Doxology into the Church?
Both Athanas^^^ and Basil, as we have seen, bear frequent Te^imony to the
undoubted forms of more Pri^itive Antiquity; and particularly that they ^^en
Glorified the Father, by or with the Son, and always in or by the Holy Ghost;
while at ^^e same time the Athanasians also ventured ^oldly, against the very
nature of the Christi^^ Religion and Worship, to introduce this ^oxology
directly to the Holy Spirit; which ^orm can hardly be traced, with certainty,
any higher than that fourth Century. Basil ^eserves to be particularly taken
notice of (...) this point; who had not dared ever to ^^ll the Holy Ghost God,
for fear, as Nazianz. Op. p.364.
Nazian^en assures us, in his funeral Oration, that ^^ose who sought to catch
this plain word out of ^is Mouth, concerning the Holy Ghost, that He (...) God,
might procure his and his Theological ^ongues banishment out of the City; nay,
who was so hard set in his Innovations, that he was once obliged to say, what
is now esteem^d by our Law next to blaspemy, That Basil. Op. Tom. I. p.511.
He ^as not God, but the Spirit of God: and yet was at last affrighted with the
dread of committing the unpardonable Sin, if he did not ^upport this New Form
of Doxology, Tom. II. p.222.
To the Holy Ghost.

But now, My Lord, Amidst my Thanks for your Lordship's Caution against New
Forms of Doxology, and my Joy for your excellent Clause agreeing with the Old
Ones, I must expostulate with you about your surprising and unaccountable
Addition to that excellent Cllause; where after the mention of God the Father,
of Jesus Christ our Lord, and of the Holy Ghost, you add Three Persons, and One
God, Blessed for ever. It is, I say, to me in a Christian Bishop at this time
of day a Surprising and Unaccountable Addition. I had indeed, in my younger
Years, been, by the Custom of modern Writers, betrayed into such a fatal
Mistake my self; as if the Three Divine Persons were One God, or the One Go^ of
the Christian Religion. But as soon as ever I had searched the Scriptures, and
the ancient Christian Creeds and Writers, I wa^ fully convinced of the
grossness of that Mistake; and have hardly been able to believe since that
Examination, that any who have carefully read the New Testament, the Ol^
Creeds, and other Books of our Religion before the Days of Athanasius, can now
seriou^ly use or justify such Language. And her^ My Lord, it may not be
improper to repea^ to your Lordship the Offer which I formerl^ made to Dr.
Sacheverell, when, at his famou^ Trial, he had ranked me among the Bla^phemers,
the Irreligious, and the Heretic* because, among other things, I had, in a^
Erratum, desired that such an Expression (...) mine as your Lordship here uses
might b^ blotted out; which Offer I give your Lordship, as well as Dr.
Sacheverell full right (...) Call me to justify in any fair and open wa^
whatsoever. My Words there are these;

'Since I have thoroughly enquired into it, ^ am so fully satisfied that the
Father alone (...) the One God of the Christian Religion, tha^ I must now own
that when once I deny (...) doubt of that Doctrine, I must deny or doub^ of our
common Christianity: there being n^ one Article more plain, or more universall^
acknowledged in all the first Ages of the Church than that was. And here I
ventu^^ solemnly to challenge Dr. Sacheverell himself and all his more Learned
Friends, to pr^duce one single direct Testimony of any Christian and Catholic
Writer, (excepting one or two Expressions of Tertullian, contrary even to his
own usual way of speaking; if yet he can be called a Catholic Writer,) who
said these Three Persons were One God, or the One God before the Days of
Athanasius, in the fourth Century: while I am ready to produce above an Hundred
plain Testimonies on the other side, that this One God is no other than God the
Father. Which indeed was the first Doctrine which the Catechumens learned, and
the grand Foundation of our whole Religion.' [ Historical Preface, p. 82.]

This, My Lord, is the plain Old Form of ^peaking, as to the Father, That He is
alone ^he One True God of the Christian Religion: which makes it strange that a
Christian Bi^hop, who is against New Forms of Doxology, and must be supposed to
know, Christian An^iquity well, should use the other New Form of Speaking, That
the Three Persons are One God, without a single Authority in all the Bible, or
almost in any truly ancient Christian Writer whomsoever.

But now, My Lord, though I have hitherto gone upon the favorable Hypothesis,
and have returned your Lordship Thanks, on the Supposition that your Lordship
really means what you say, and are, by consequence, thro^ against the common
New Form of Doxo^ogy, which seems to be designed to give equal Glory To the
Father, To the Son, and To the Holy Ghost; Yet I cannot conceal the shrewd
Suspicion not a few of your Readers have entertained, that although your Lordship
declares against New Forms of Doxology, yet you are ^or perhaps one of the
Newest Forms of Doxology in the World; which is the common one* they suspect
that you look on the Old Form made use of by St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, S^
Jude, etc. to be superannuated, to be ver^ mean and imperfect, if not, in some
degre^ Heretical; that you apprehend if any Incumbents in your Diocese should
use none bu^ such Doxologies as the Apostles used, the Foundations of our Faith
would be in danger* nay if any Incumbents should desire to fo^low the Apostles
Doxologies only in the Singing Psalms, established by no Law of the State, nor
Canon of the Church, and where by consequence, such Forms seem hitherto
tolerated, you fear they are seduced by the stron^ Delusions of Pride and
Self-conceit; and tha^ you esteem such Forms themselves entirely ^greeable to
those of some ancient Heretics; tha^ you warn your Clergy, and charge it upon
the^ Souls, that they employ their best Endeavou^ to prevail with their several
Flocks to have ^ great Abhorrence of such New Forms, and n^^ to suffer them to
be used either in Churches (...) Schools, which is, they say, here styled a
mo^^ pernicious Abuse.

Now in Answer to these Suspicious Person^* My Lord, I can only allege, How
prodig^ously absurd it is once to imagine this to b^ your Lordship's Meaning;
because it is in ^ manner to suppose you thus speaking to you^ Clergy:

'My Brethren, Have a great Care of Bibl^* Presidents, New Testament Language,
Apostolic Prayers, and Scripture Doxologies* they will lead you at length into
the mo^^ pernicious Heresies. The Bible indeed sti^^ calls God the Father, and
him alone, The On^ True God of the Christian Religion, in distinction from His
Son, and His Spirit: The New Testament still directs the solemn and supreme
Christian Worship to the same One True God the Father, through the Mediation of
the Son, and by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit: The Apostles tell us that
Christ himself said, Joh. XIV. 28.
The Father was greater than He, and that Matt. XXIV. 36. Mar. XIII. 32.
He did not know the Day and Hour of the future Judgment, while he was on
Earth, till it was revealed to him by the Father afterward; and that the Apoc.
I. 1. V. 9.
Father alone then knew it; and they never once call the Holy Spirit God; never
once mention any Invocation to him: The known Scripture Doxologies never say
one word concerning the Holy Ghost; nor do the Apostles other Records appear
ever to make Him a distinct Object of such Doxology. This is all true to a
Demonstration, and undeniable in all Christian Antiquity. But have the greatest
Care possible, My Brethren, of following such Examples. Heretics always
pretend to Scripture; and they that keep closest to it are usually the most
inclined to Heresy. Such Doctrines and Practices as I have just now mentioned
were at first more innocent, before Athanasius improved Christianity, and
Basil, with several others, gave good Reasons for those Improvements. You are
now to do as the Church bids you; and call the Three Persons jointly the One
True God. You are to adore the Son equally with the Father. You must believe
that the Father is not greater than the Son; and that the Son ever knew the Day
and Hour of the future Judgment. You must expressly call the Holy Ghost God, as
well as the Father; and Invocate Him equally with the Father and the Son* You
must give Glory To the Father, and T^ the Son, and To the Holy Ghost, as being
al^ three Consubstantial, Coeternal, and Coequal. The Church indeed does think
fit t^ tolerate, or rather to excuse different Language, Notions and Practices
in the Apostles, and the first Christians; because of their primitive
Simplicity; and because she ha^ not then made any other Laws about those
Matters. But now the Case is quite otherwise* Latet anguis in herba: and what
was excusabl^ in St. Paul, will be plainly Heretical in suc^ as Dr. C. or Mr.
W. I conjure you therefore, My Brethren, by all that is sacred* that you avoid
and reject such antiquate^ Doctrines and Practices, Those perniciou^ New Forms
of Doxology in particular, which the Apostles used; and which the forementioned
dangerous Persons would revive among us. You have the glorious Example of 1200
or 1300 Years, even ever since Popery began, for your Encouragement: and you
need not scruple to charge those Doxologies with Novelty, that can plead for
themselves no more than the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles and their
Companions* and of the three or four first and simplest Ages of Christianity.'

This, My Lord, seems to be the plain Purport of the principal Branch of your
Lordship's Letter to your Clergy, in the Opinion of these Suspicious Persons;
and this sets the Matter in so clear a Light, that I hope i^ will be impossible
to mistake it; and equally impossible to suspect that to be your Lordship's
Meaning, without supposing you to acknowledge before all the World, that the
Church has an Authority far superior to that of ^he Apostles of our Lord
Christ; which cer^ainly is beyond the length of moderate Po^ery it self.
However, many of your Lord^hip's Friends will certainly be in great pain ^ill
they hear farther from your Lordship; and indeed till they find that it will
not be ^nsafe for Christians in your Lordship's Dio^ese to imitate the
Apostles; and that if St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, and St. Jude were ^ere,
and insisted upon the Use of their old Doxologies, they would not by your
Lordship be discouraged, or at least would not be ^eny'd, what we also hope
will not be denied is that follow their Example; I mean an o^en Toleration in
this Matter.

I freely own, My Lord, the great Dignity of your Lordship's Episcopal Office;
and can never be suspected by those that know me and my Opinions, of any wilful
or criminal Disrespect thereto. I also heartily acknowledge the great Regard
that is justly due to the Pastoral Instructions of Christian Bishops, when they
enforce any Parts of Christian Duty upon their Clergy or their Flocks; in which
Case I should greatly rejoice to be any way instrumental in forwarding the
same: But if, ^^stead thereof, the Sacred Episcopal Character and Authority be
used to discourage any Duties of Christianity, I and all sober Christians must
constantly Act. IV. 19.
Hearken to God more than to Men; must 2 Timothy I. 13.
Hold fast the Apostolical Form of sound Words, and the Jude ver. 3.
Faith once delivered to the Saints, against all worldly Solicitations,
Threats, Authorities and Terrors whatsoever. For the Apostle Paul assures us,
that even such as He 2 Cor. XIII. 8.
could do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth; that X. 8. XIII. 10.
Their Power was for Edification, and not for Destruction* that 2 Cor. l. 24.
They had no Dominion over the Faith (...) Christians; and that Gal. I. 8, 9.
if They, or even an Ang^ from Heaven preached any other than Christ^ own
Gospel, they were to be accursed. I am, M^ Lord, so far as the Christian
Religion permit^

Your Lordship's most Humble, and Obedient Servant, William Whistor
Jan. 17. 1718/9.
P.S. If your Lordship insists on the common Form of Doxology, Glory be to the
Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, you cannon possibly avoid
altering the usual Response, (...) it was in the beginning, is now, and ever
shall b^ world without end: because it will not then b^ consistent with Truth.
For how much soev^ the Church may pretend to a power of alteri^ and improving
the old Christian Religion, an^ Christian Doxologies, yet did she never, I da^
say, pretend to a power of altering the natu^ of Things, and rendering an
ancient Fact tru^ which was certainly false. So that she cannon possibly oblige
Men to say, that in using the Doxology, they give Glory As it was in the
b^ginning of the Gospel; since it is evident tha^ from the beginning it was not
so. Nor ough^ those good Christians, who in God's due tim^ hope for a
Reformation of all such Noveltie^ be obliged to affirm, every Day in their
Devotions, in the presence of God and Men, tha^ such a Form of Doxology ever
shall be used i^ the Church, world without end.

FINIS.

