Love in a Village; A COMIC OPERA. As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN
COVENT GARDEN.

LONDON: Printed by W. GRIFFIN; For J. NEWBERY, and W. NICOLL, in St. Paul's
Churchyard; G. KEARSLY, in Ludgate Street; T. DAVIES, in Russel Street,
Covent Garden; and J. WALTER, at Charing Cross. MDCCLXIII.

TO MR. BEARD.
SIR.
IT is with great pleasure I embrace this opportunity to acknowledge the
favors I have received from you. Among others I would mention in particular
the warmth with which you espoused this piece in its passage to the stage; but
that I am afraid it would be thought a compliment to your good nature, too much
at the expense of your judgment.

If this Opera is considered merely as a piece of Dramatic writing, it will
certainly be found to have very little merit: in that light no one can think
more indifferently of it than I do myself; but I believe I may venture to
assert, on your opinion, that some of the songs are tolerable; that the music
is more pleasing than has hitherto appeared in any composition of this kind;
and the words better adapted, considering the nature of the airs, which are not
common ballads, than could be expected, supposing any degree of poetry to be
preserved in the versification. More than this few people expect, in an Opera,
and if some of the severer critics should be inclined to blame your indulgence
to one of the first attempts of a young writer, I am persuaded the Public in
general will applaud your endeavor to provide them with something new, in a
species of entertainment, in which the performers at your Theater so eminently
excel.

You may perceive Sir, that I yield a punctual observance to the injunctions
you laid upon me, when I threatened you with this address, and make it rather a
preface than a dedication: And yet I must confess I can hardly reconcile those
formalities which render it indelicate to pay praises where all the world
allows them to be due; nor can I easily conceive why a man should be so
studious to deserve, what he does not desire: But since you will not allow me
to offer any panegyric to you, I must hasten to bestow one upon myself, and let
the public know (which was my chief design in this introduction) that I have
the honor to be,

SIR, Your most obliged, And most obedient servant, The AUTHOR.

Of the Publishers of this OPERA may be had, Price One Shilling, THOMAS and
SALLY, OR THE SAILOR'S RETURN. A MUSICAL FARCE. Written by the same AUTHOR.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir William Meadows, Mr. Collins. Young Meadows, Mr. Mattocks. Justice
Woodcock, Mr. Shuter. Hawthorn, Mr. Beard. Eustace, Mr. Dyer. Hodge, Mr.
Dunstall.
WOMEN.
Rossetta, Miss Brent. Lucinda, Miss Hallam. Mrs. Deborah Woodcock, Mrs.
Walker. Margery, Miss Davies.
Country Men and Women, Servants, etc.
Scene a Village,

Love in a Village.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A garden, with statues, fountains, and flower-pots. Several arbours appear in
the side scenes: ROSSETTA and LUCINDA are discovered at work, seated upon two
garden chairs. AIR I.
Rossetta. HOPE! thou nurse of young desire,
Fairy promiser of joy;
Painted vapor, glowworm fire,
Temperate sweet, that never can cloy.
Lucinda. Hope! thou earnest of delight,
Softest soother of the mind;
Balmy cordial, prospect bright,
Surest friend the wretched find.
Both. Kind deceiver, flatter still,
Deal out pleasures unpossest;
With thy dreams my fancy fill,
And in wishes make me blessed.

Lucin. Heigho -- Rossetta!


Ross. Well, child, what do you say?


Lucin. It Is a devilish thing to live in a village an hundred miles from the
capital, with a preposterous gouty father, and a superannuated maiden aunt. --
I am heartily sick of my situation.


Ross. And with reason. -- But it is in a great measure your own fault: Here is
this Mr. Eustace, a man of character and family; he likes you, you like him;
you know one another's minds, and yet you will not resolve to make yourself
happy with him.

AIR II.
Whence can you inherit
So slavish a spirit?
Confined thus, and chained to a log!
Now fondl'd, now chid,
Permitted, forbid,
It Is leading the life of a dog.
For shame, you a lover!
More firmness discover;
Take courage, nor here longer moap;
Resist and be free,
Run riot like me,
And to perfect the picture elope.

Lucin. And this is your advice?


Ross. Positively.


Lucin. Here Is my hand, positively I Will follow it. -- I have already sent to my
gentleman, who is now in the country, to let him know he may come hither this
day; we will make use of the opportunity to settle all preliminaries -- And
then -- But take notice, whenever we decamp, you march off along with us.


Ross. Oh! madam, your servant; I have no inclination to be left behind, I
assure you -- But you say you got acquainted with this spark, while you were
with your mother during her last illness at Bath, so that your father has never
seen him.


Lucin. Never in his life, my dear; and I am confident he entertains not the
least suspicion of my having any such connection; my aunt, indeed, has her
doubts and surmises; but, besides that my father will not allow any one to be
wiser than himself, it is an established maxim between these affectionate
relations, never to agree in any thing.


Ross. Except being absurd; you must allow they sympathize, perfectly, in that
-- But now we are on the subject, I desire to know what I am to do with this
wicked old justice of peace? this libidinous father of yours, he follows me
about the house like a tame goat.


Lucin. Nay, I Will assure you he has been a wag in his time -- you must have a
care of yourself.


Ross. Wretched me! to fall into such hands, who have been just forced to run
away from my parents to avoid an odious marriage -- you smile at that now, and
I know you think me whimsical, as you have often told me; but you must excuse
my being a little over-delicate in this particular.

AIR III.
My heart's my own, my will is free,
And so shall be my voice;
No mortal man shall wed with me,
'Till first he is made my choice.
Let parents rule cry nature's laws,
And children still obey;
And is there then no saving clause,
Against tyrannic sway?

Lucin. Well, but my dear mad girl --


Ross. Lucinda, don't talk to me -- Was your father to go to London, meet there
by accident with an old fellow as wrong headed as himself; and in a fit of
absurd friendship, agree to marry you to that old fellow's son, whom you had
never seen, without consulting your inclinations, or allowing you a negative,
in case he should not prove agreeable --


Lucin. Why, I should think it a little hard, I confess -- yet when I see you
in the character of a chambermaid --


Ross. It is the only character, my dear, in which I could hope to lie
concealed; and I can tell you, I was reduced to the last extremity, when, in
consequence of our old boarding-school friendship, I applied to you to receive
me in this capacity: for we expected the parties the very next week --


Lucin. But had not you a message from your intended spouse, to let you know he
was as little inclined to such ill-concerted nuptials as you were?


Ross. More than so; he wrote to advise me by all means, to contrive some
method of breaking them off, for he had rather return to his dear studies at
Oxford; and after that, what hopes could I have of being happy with him?


Lucin. Then you are not at all uneasy at the strange rout you must have
occasioned at home? I warrant, during this month that you have been absent --


Ross. Oh! don't mention, it, my dear; I have had so many admirers since I
commenced abigail, that I am quite charmed with my situation -- But hold, who
stalks yonder into the yard, that the dogs are so glad to see?


Lucin. Daddy Hawthorn as I live! He is come to pay my father a visit; and
never more luckily, for he always forces him abroad. By the way, what will you
do with yourself while I step into the house to see after my trusty messenger
Hodge?


Ross. No matter, I Will sit down in that arbor and listen to the singing of the
birds: you know I am fond of melancholy amusements.


Lucin. So it seems indeed: sure Rossetta none of your admirers have made a
hole in your heart; you are not in love, I hope?


Ross. In love! that is pleasant: who do you suppose I should be in love with
pray?


Lucin. Why let me see -- What do you think of Thomas, our gardener? there he
is at the other end of the walk -- He Is a very pretty young man, and the
servants say he is always writing verses on you.


Ross. Indeed Lucinda you are very silly.


Lucin. Indeed Rossetta that blush makes you look very handsome.


Ross. Blush! I am sure I don't blush.


Lucin. Ha, ha, ha!


Ross. Pshaw, Lucinda how can you be so ridiculous?


Lucin. Well don't be angry and I have done -- but suppose you did like him,
how could you help yourself

AIR IV.
When once love's subtle poison gains,
A passage to the female breast;
Like lightning rushing through the veins,
Each wish, and every thought's possessed.
To heal the pangs our minds endure,
Reason in vain its skill applies;
Naught can afford the heart a cure,
But what is pleasing to the eyes.

SCENE II.
Enter YOUNG MEADOWS. Y. Meadows. Let me see -- on the fifteenth of June, at
half an hour past five in the morning (having taken out a pocketbook) I left
my father's house unknown to any one, having made free with a coat and jacket
of our gardener's, which fitted me, by way of a disguise: -- so says my
pocketbook; and chance directing me to this village, on the 20th of the same
month I procured a recommendation to the worshipful justice Woodcock, to be the
superintendant of his pumpkins and cabbages, because I would let my father see
I chose to run any lengths rather than submit to what his obstinacy would have
forced me, a marriage against my inclination, with a woman I never saw. (puts
up the book, and takes a watering-pot) Here I have been three weeks, and in
that time I am as much altered as if I had changed my nature with my habit.
'Sdeath, to fall in love with a chambermaid! And yet, if I could forget that I
am the son and heir of sir William Meadows -- But that is impossible.

AIR V.
Oh! had I been by fate decreed
Some humble cottage swain;
In fair Rossetta's sight to feed,
My sheep upon the plain.
What bliss had I been born to taste,
Which now I never must know:
Ye envious powers! why have ye placed
My fair one's lot so low?
Hah! who was it I had a glimpse of as I past by that arbor? was it not she
sat reading there? the trembling of my heart tells me my eyes were not mistaken
-- Here she comes.


SCENE III.
YOUNG MEADOWS, ROSSETTA. Ross. Lucinda was certainly in the right of it, and
yet I blush to own my weakness even to myself -- Marry, hang the fellow for not
being a gentleman.


Y. Meadows. I am determined I will not speak to her, (turning to a rose tree, and
plucking the flowers.) Now or never is the time to conquer myself: Besides, I
have some reason to believe the girl has no aversion to me, and as I wish not
to do her an injury, it would be cruel to fill her head with notions of what
can never happen (hums a tune.) Psha; rot these roses, how they prick one's
fingers.


Ross. He takes no notice of me, but so much the better, I Will be as indifferent
as he is. I am sure the poor lad likes me; and if I was to give him any
encouragement; I suppose the next thing he talked of would be buying a ring;
and being asked in church -- Oh, dear pride, I thank you for that thought!


Y. Meadows. Hah, going without a word! a look! -- I cannot bear that -- Mrs
Rossetta, I am gathering a few roses here, if you will please to take them in
with you.


Ross. Thank you, Mr. Thomas, but all my lady's flowerpots are full.


Y. Meadows. Will you accept of them for yourself, then, (catching hold of
her.) What Is the matter? you look as if you were angry with me.


Ross. Pray, let go my hand.


Young Mead. Nay, pr'ythee, why is this? you shall not go, I have something to say
to you.


Ross. Well, but I must go, I will go; I desire Mr Thomas!

AIR VI.
Gentle youth, ah, tell me why
Still you force me thus to fly;
Cease, oh! cease, to persevere,
Speak not what I must not hear,
To my heart it is ease restore,
Go, and never see me more.

SCENE IV.
YOUNG MEADOWS. This girl is a riddle -- That she loves me I think there is no
room to doubt; she takes a thousand opportunities to let me see it, and yet
when I speak to her, she will hardly give me an answer, and if I attempt the
smallest familiarity is gone in an instant -- I feel my passion for her grow
every day more and more violent -- Well, would I marry her? would I make a
mistress of her if I could? Two things, called prudence and honor, forbid
either. What am I pursuing, then? a shadow. Sure my evil genius laid this snare
in my way. However, there is one comfort, it is in my power to fly from it! if
so, why do I hesitate? I am distracted, unable to determine any thing.

AIR VII.
Still in hopes to get the better,
Of my stubborn flame I try;
Swear this moment to forget her,
And the next my oath deny.
Now prepared with scorn to treat her,
Every charm in thought I brave;
Boast my freedom, fly to meet her,
And confess myself a slave.

SCENE. V.
A hall in Justice WOODCOCK's house. Enter HAWTHORN with a fowling piece in his
hand, and a net with birds at his girdle: and afterward Justice WOODCOCK. AIR.
VIII.
There was a jolly miller once,
Lived on the river Dee;
He worked, and sung, from morn 'till night,
No lark more blyth than he.
And this the burden of his song,
For ever used to be.
I ear for nobody, not I,
If no one cares for me.
House here, house; what all gadding, all abroad! house I say, hilli ho ho!


J. Woodcock. Here Is a noise, here is a racket! William, Robert, Hodge! why does
not somebody answer? Odds my life I believe the fellows have lost their
hearing: (Entering) Oh master Hawthorn! I guessed it was some mad cap -- Are
you there?


Hawth. Am I here, yes: and if you had been where I was three hours ago, you
would find the good effects of it by this time: but you have got the lazy,
unwholesome London fashion, of lying a bed in a morning, and there is gout for
you -- Why Sir I have not been in bed five minutes after sunrise these thirty
years, am generally up before it; and I never took a dose of physic but once in
my life, and that was in compliment to a cousin of mine an apothecary, that had
just set up business.


J. Woodcock. Well but master Hawthorn, let me tell you, you know nothing of
the matter, for I say sleep is necessary for a man, ay and I Will maintain it.


Hawth. What when I maintain the contrary! -- Look you neighbor Woodcock, you
are a rich man, a man of worship, a justice of peace, and all that; but learn
to know the respect that is due to the sound from the infirm; and allow me the
superiority a good constitution gives me over you -- Health is the greatest of
all possessions, and it is a maxim with me, that an hail cobbler, is a better man
than a sick king.


J. Woodcock. Well, well, you are a sportsman.


Hawth. And so would you too, if you would take my advice. A Sportsman quotha!
why there is nothing like it: I would not exchange the satisfaction I feel
while I am beating the lawns and thickets about my little farm, for all the
entertainments and pageantry in Christendom.

AIR. IX.
Let gay ones and great,
Make the most of their fate,
From pleasure to pleasure they run:
Well, who cares a jot,
I envy them not,
While I have my dog and my gun.
For exercise, air,
To the fields I repair,
With spirits unclouded and light.
The blisses I find,
No stings leave behind,
But health and diversion unite.

SCENE. VI.
Justice WOODCOCK, HAWTHORN, HODGE. Hodge. Did your worship call Sir?


J. Woodcock. Call Sir! where have you and the rest of those rascals been? but
I suppose I need not ask -- You must know there is a statute, a fair for hiring
servants, held upon my green to day, we have it usually at this season of the
year, and it never fails to put all the folks here-about out of their senses.


Hodge. Lord your honor look out, and see what a nice show they make yonder,
they had got pipers, and fiddlers, and were dancing as I com'd along for dear
life -- I never saw such a mortal throng in our village in all my born days
again.


Hawth. Why I like this now, this is as it should be.


J. WOODCOCK. No no, it is a very foolish piece of business; good for nothing
but to promote idleness and the getting of bastards: but I shall take measures
for preventing it another year, and I doubt whether I am not sufficiently
authorized already: For by an act passed Anno, undecimo, Caroli primo, which
impowers a justice of peace, who is lord of the manor. --


Hawth. Come come, never mind the act, let me tell you this is a very proper, a
very useful meeting; I want a servant or two myself, I must go see what your
market affords; -- and you shall go, and the girls, my little Lucy and the
other young rogue, and we'll make a day on it as well as the rest.


J. Woodcock. I wish master Hawthorn, I could teach you to be a little more
sedate: why wont you take pattern by me, and consider your dignity -- Odds
heart I don't wonder you are not a rich man, you laugh too much ever to be rich.


Hawth. Right neighbor Woodcock! health, good humor, and competence is my
motto: and if my executors have a mind, they are welcome to make it my epitaph.

AIR. X.
The honest heart whose thoughts are clear,
From fraud, disguise, and guile;
Need neither fortune's frowning fear,
Nor court the harlot's smile.
The greatness that would make us grave,
Is but an empty thing;
What more than mirth would mortals have?
The cheerful man's a king!

SCENE. VII.
LUCINDA, HODGE. Lucin. Hist, hist, Hodge!


Hodge. Who calls? here am I.


Lucin. Well, have you been?


Hodge. Been, ay I ha been far enough, an that be all? you never knew any thing
fall out so crossly in your born days.


Lucin. Why, what is the matter?


Hodge. Why you know, I dare not take a horse out of his worship's stables this
morning, for fear it should be missed, and breed questions; and our old nag at
home was so cruelly beat in the hoofs, that poor beast, it had not a foot to set
to ground; so I was fain to go to farmer Ploughshares, at the Grainge, to
borrow the loan of his bald filly: and would you think it? after walking all
that way, -- de'el from me, if the cross-grained tead, did not deny me the
favor.


Lucin. Unlucky!


Hodge. Well, then I went my ways to the King's head in the village, but all
their cattle were at plough: and I was as far to seek below at the turnpike: so
at last, for want of a better; I were forced to take up with dame Quicksets
blind mare.


Lucin. Oh, then you have been?


Hodge. Yes, yes, I have been.


Lucin. Psha! why did not you say so at once?


Hodge. Ay, but I have had a main tiresome jaunt on it for she is but a sorry
jade at best --


Lucin. Well, well did you see Mr. Eustace, and what did he say to you -- come
quick -- have you ever a letter!


Hodge. Yes, he gave me a letter, if I have na' lost it.


Lucin. Lost it man!


Hidge. Nay, nay, have a bit of patience, adwawns, you are always in such a
hurry (rummaging his pockets) I put it somewhere in this waistcoat pocket. Oh
here it is.


Lucin. So, give it me. (reads the letter to herself)


Hodge. Lord a mercy! how my arm achs with beating that plaguey beast, I Will be
hanged if I won'na' rather ha'thrash'd half a day, than have ridden her.


Lucin. Well Hodge, you have done your business very well.


Hodge. Well, have not I now?


Lucin. Yes, Mr. Eustace tells me in this letter, that he will be in the green
lane at the other end of the village, by twelve o'clock -- You know where he
came before.


Hodge. Ay ay.


Lucin. Well, you must go there; and wait 'till he arrives; and watch your
opportunity to introduce him across the fields, into the little summer house,
on the left side of the garden.


Hodge. That Is enough.


Lucin. But take particular care that nobody sees you.


Hodge. I warrant you.


Lucin. Nor for your life drop a word of it to any mortal.


Hodge. Never fear me.


Lucin. And Hodge --


AIR. XI.
Hodge. Well, well, say no more,
Sure you told me before;
I know the full length of my tether;
Do you think I Am a fool,
That I need go to school?
I can spell you and put you together.
A word to the wise,
Will always suffice,
Addsnigers go talk to your parrot;
I Am not such an elf,
Though I say it myself,
But I know a sheep's head from a carrot.

SCENE. VIII.
LUCINDA. How severe is my case? here am I obliged to carry on a clandestine
correspondence with a man in all respects my equal, because the oddity of my
father's temper is such, that I dare not tell him, I have ever yet seen the
person I should like to marry -- But hold -- is not the blame his then -- when
princes are oppressive in their government, subjects have a right to assert
their liberty -- perhaps my father has quality in his eye, and hopes one day or
other, as I am his only child, to match me with an earl or a duke -- vain
imagination!

AIR. XII.
Cupid god of soft persuasion,
Take the helpless lover's part;
Seize, oh seize, some kind occasion,
To reward a faithful heart.
Justly those we tyrants call,
Who the body would enthral;
Tyrants of more cruel kind,
Those who would enslave the mind.
What is grandeur? foe to rest;
Childish mummery at best;
Happy I in humble state,
Catch ye fools, the glittering bait.

SCENE. IX.
A field with a style. Enter HODGE, followed by MARGERY, and in some time
after, enter young MEADOWS. Hodge. What does the wench follow me for? Odds
flesh, folk may well talk, to see you dangling after me every where, like a
tantony pig; find some other road, cannot you, and don't keep wherreting me with
your nonsense.


Marg. Nay pray you Hodge stay, and let me speak to you a bit.


Hodge. Well; what fayn you?


Marg. Dear heart, how can you be so barbarous? and is this the way you serve
me after all? and wont you keep your word Hodge?


Hodge. Why no I wont, I tell you; I have changed my mind.


Marg. Nay but surely, surely -- Consider Hodge, you are obligated in
conscience, to make me an honest woman.


Hodge. Obligated in conscience, how am I obligated?


Marg. Because you are: and none but the basest of rogues would bring a poor
girl to shame, and afterward leave her to the wide world.


Hodge. Bring you to shame, don't make me speak Madge, don't make me speak.


Marg. Yes do, speak your worst.


Hodge. Why then if you go to that, you were fain to leave your own village
down in the West, for a bastard you had by the clerk of the parish, and I Will
bring the man shall say it to your face.


Marg. No no Hodge, it is no such a thing, it is a base lie of farmer
Ploughshare's -- But I know what makes you false hearted to me, that you may
keep company with young madam's waiting woman, and I am sure she is no fit body
for a poor man's wife.


Hodge. How should you know what she is fit for, she is fit for as much as you
mayhap, don't find fault, with your betters Madge. (seeing young Meadows) Oh!
master Thomas, I have a word or two to say to you; pray did not you go down the
village one day last week with a basket of somewhat upon your shoulder?


Y. Meadows. Well and what then?


Hodge. Nay not much, only the Ostler at the Greenman was saying as how there
was a passenger at their house as see'd you go by: and said he know'd you; and
(...) a mort of questions -- So I thought I Would tell you --


Y. Meadaws. The devil! ask questions about me, I know nobody in this part of
the country, there must be some mistake in it -- Come hither Hodge. (They walk
off discoursing)


Marg. A nasty ungrateful fellow, to use me at this rate, after being to him as
I have -- Well well, I wish all poor girls, would take warning by my mishap,
and never have nothing to say to none of them.

AIR. XIII.
How happy were my days till now,
I never did sorrow feel;
I rose with joy to milk my cow,
Or take my spinning wheel.
My heart was lighter than a fly,
Like any bird I sung,
Till he pretended love, and I,
Believed his flattering tongue.
Oh the fool, the silly, silly fool,
Who trusts what man may be;
I wish I was a maid again,
And in my own country.

SCENE X.
A green with the prospect of a village, and the representation of a statute or
fair. Enter Justice WOODCOCK, HAWTHORN, Mrs. DEBORAH WOODCOCK, LUCINDA,
ROSSETTA, Young MEADOWS, HODGE, and several Country People. Hodge. This way,
your worship, this way! Why don't you stand aside there? here is his worship a
coming.


Countryman. His worship!


J. Woodcock. Fie, fie; what a crowd's this; odd, I Will put some of them in the
stocks (striking a fellow) stand out of the way, sirrah.


Hawth. For shame, neighbor. Well, my lad, are you willing to serve the king?


Countryman. Why can you list ma? Serve the king, master! no, no, I pay the
king, that is enough for me. Ho, ho, ho!


Hawth. Well said, sturdy-boots.


J. Woodcock. Nay, if you talk to them, they will answer you.


Hawth. I would have them do so, I like they should. -- Well, madam, is not
this a fine sight? I did not know my neighbor's estate had been so well
peopled. -- Are all these his own tenants?


Mrs. Deb. More than are good of them, Mr. Hawthorn. I don't like to see such a
parcel of young husseys fleering with the fellows.


Hawth. There Is a lass (beckoning a country girl) come hither my pretty maid.
What brings you here? (chucking her under the chin) Do you come to look for a
service.


C. Girl. Yes, an't please you.


Hawth. Well, and what place are you for?


C. Girl. All work, an't please you.


J. Woodcock. Ay, ay, I don't doubt it; any work you will put her to.


Mrs. Deb. She looks like a brazen one. -- Go hussy.


Hawth. Here Is another (catching a girl that goes by) What health, what bloom!
-- This is nature's work; no art, no daubing. Don't be ashamed, child; those
cheeks of thine are enough to put a whole drawing room out of countenance.

AIR XIV.
The court, and the city, fine folk may extol,
Where beauties, all shining, a paradise make;
But show me the belles, at a play or a ball,
To equal the lass at a fair, or a wake.
Behold, in a garden, the roses new blown,
Such freshness smiles here upon every face;
While flowers in a chimney, your fair ones in town,
Look withered, and bear the dark hue of the place.

SCENE XI.
Justice WOODCOCK, HAWTHORN, LUCINDA, ROSSETTA, Young MEADOWS, HODGE, and men
and women servants. Hodge. Now your honor, now the sport will come. The gut
scrapers are here, and some among them are going to sing and dance. Why there is
not the likes of our statute, mun, in five counties; others are but fools to it.


Servant man. Come good people, make a ring, and stand out, fellow servants, as
many of you as are willing, and able to bear a bob: we'll let my masters and
mistresses see we can do something, at least; if they will not hire us it shall not
be our fault. Strike up the Servants Medley.


AIR XV.
GARDENER. Those who in gardens take delight,
Attend to what I say,
To pleasure you, with main and might,
I Will labor every day.
All sort of gardener-craft I know,
Though it be never so nice;
With me your fruits and flowers shall grow,
As 'twere in Paradise.
HOUSE-MAID. I pray ye, gentles, list to me,
I Am young, and strong, and clean to see;
I Will not turn tail to any she
For work, that is in the county;
Of all your house the charge I take,
I wash, I scrub, I brew, I bake,
And more can do, than here I Will speak,
Depending on your bounty.
HUNTSMAN. A Huntsman I am, with a merry ton'd horn,
Come here in the search of a place;
Hark away, jolly sportsmen, I Will rouse you each morn
To enjoy the delights of the chase -- my brave boys.
LANDRY-MAID. If for your Landry you desire
A sober, careful girl to hire,
I dare be bound, your linen all
To get up neat, both great and small;
I would not brag but where I might;
No driven snow shall be more white.
FOOTMAN. Behold a blade, who knows his trade
In chamber, hall, and entry;
And what though here, I now appear,
I Have served the best of gentry.
A footman would you have,
I can dress, and comb, and shave
For I a handy lad am,
On a message I can go,
And slip a billet-deux,
With your humble servant, madam.
COOKMAID. Who wants a good cook, my hand they must cross,
For plain wholesome dishes I Am never at a loss;
And what are your soups, your ragouts, and your sauce,
Compared to the fare of old England, etc.
GROOM. Clear the course, my boys, clear the course, and make room,
Ye gents of the turf, have you need of a groom?
Let me ride your match, and you will certainly win,
I Will teach you to take the knowing ones in.
DAIRYMAID. To prove the market be'nt afraid,
In me you will find a Dairymaid,
Whatever you can expect her;
I Have often had the place before,
And always gave content, and more,
Can have a good charackter.
CARTER. If you want a young man, with a true honest heart,
Who knows how to manage a plough and a cart,
Here Is one for your purpose, come take me and try;
You Will say you never met with a better nor I,
Ge ho Dobbin, etc.
CHORUS.
My masters and mistresses hither repair,
What servants you want you will find in our fair;
Men and maids fit for all sorts of stations there be;
And, as for the wages, we shall not disagree.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A parlour in justice WOODCOCK's house. Enter LUCINDA followed by EUSTACE in a
riding dress. Lucin. WELL, am not I a bold adventurer, to bring you into my
father's house at noonday? though, to say the truth, we are safer here than in
the garden; for there is not a human creature under the roof beside ourselves.


Eust. Then why not put our scheme into execution this moment? I have a
post-chaise ready --


Lucin. Fie! how can you talk so lightly? I protest I am afraid to have any
thing to do with you; your passion seems too much founded on appetite; and my
aunt Deborah says --


Eust. What! by all the rapture my heart now feels --


Luc. Oh to be sure, promise and vow; it sounds prettily, and never fails to
impose upon a fond female.

AIR XVI.
We women like weak indians trade,
Whose judgment, tinsel show decoys:
Dupes to our folly we are made,
While artful man the gain enjoys:
We give our treasure to be paid;
A paltry, poor return in toys.

Eust. Well, I see you have a mind to divert yourself with me; but I wish I
could prevail on you to be a little serious.


Lucin. Seriously then, what would you desire me to say? I have promised to run
away with you; which is as great a concession, as any reasonable lover can
expect from his mistress.


Eust. Yes, but you dear provoking angel, you have not told me, when you will
run away with me.


Lucin. Why, that I confess requires some consideration.


Eust. Yet remember, while you are deliberating, the season, now so favorable
to us, may elapse, never to return.

AIR. XVII.
Think my fairest how delay,
Danger every moment brings;
Time flies swift, and will away;
Time that is ever on it is wings:
Doubting, and suspense, at best,
Lover's late repentance cost;
Let us, eager to be blessed,
Sieze occasion ever it is lost.

SCENE. II.
LUCINDA, EUSTACE, Justice WOODCOCK, Mrs. DEBORAH WOODCOCK. J. Woodcock. Why,
here is nothing in the world in this house but catter-wawling from morning till
night, nothing but catter-wawling. Hoity toity! who have we here?


Lucin. My father and my aunt!


Eust. The Devil, what shall we do?


Lucin. Take no notice of them, only observe me, (speaks aloud to Eustace) upon
my word sir, I don't know what to say to it, unless the justice was at home; he
is just stepped into the village with some company, but if you will sit down a
moment, I dare swear he will return, (pretends to see the justice) Oh! sir,
here is my papa!


J. Woodcock. Here is your papa hussy! who is this you have got with you? hark
you sirrah, who are you, ye dog? and what is your business here?


Eust. Sir, this a language I am not used to.


J. Woodcock. Don't answer me you rascal -- I am a justice of peace, and if I
hear a word out of your mouth, I Will send you to jail, for all your laced hat.


Mrs. Deb. Send him to jail brother, that is right.


J. Woodcock. And how do you know it is right? how should you know any thing's
right? Sister Deborah you are never in the right.


Mrs. Deb. Brother this is the man I have been telling you about so long.


J. Woodcock. What man, goody wiseacre?


Mrs. Deb. Why, the man your daughter has an intrigue with, but I hope you will
not believe it now, though you see it with your own eyes. -- Come hussy
confess, and don't let your father make a fool of himself any longer.


Lucin. Confess what aunt? this gentleman is a music master, he goes about the
country teaching ladies to play and sing; and has been recommended to instruct
me; I could not turn him out when he came to offer his service, and did not
know what answer to give him 'till I saw my papa.


J. Woodcock. A music master?


Eust. Yes Sir, that is my profession.


Mrs. Deb. It Is a lie young man, it is a lie; brother, he is no more a music
master, than I am a music master.


J. Woodcock. What then you know better than the fellow himself, do you? and
you will be wiser than all the world?


Mrs. Deb. Brother, he does not look like a music master.


J. Woodcock. He does not look ha, ha, ha, was ever such a poor stupe, well,
and what does he look like then? but I suppose you mean, he is not dressed like
a music master, because of his ruffles, and this bit of garnishing about his
coat, which seems to be copper too; why you silly wretch, these whippersnappers
set up for gentlemen now adays, and give themselves as many airs, as if they
were people of quality. -- Hark you friend, I suppose you don't come within the
vagrant act, you have some settled habitation; -- Where do you live?


Mrs. Deb. It Is an easy matter for him to tell you a wrong place.


J. Woodcock. Sister Deborah don't provoke me.


Mrs. Deb. I wish brother you would let me examine him a little.


J. Woodcock. You shall not say a word to him, you shall not say a word to him.


Mrs. Deb. She says he was recommended here brother, ask him by whom?


J. Woodcock. No I will not now, because you desire it.


Lucin. If my papa did ask the question aunt, it would be very easily resolved
--


Mrs. Deb. Who bid you speak Mrs. Nimble Chops, I suppose the man has a tongue
in his head to answer for himself.


J. Woodcock. Will no body stop that prating old woman's mouth for me, get out
of the room.


Mrs. Deb. Well, so I can brother, I don't want to stay, but remember I tell
you; you will make yourself ridiculous in this affair, for through your own
obstinacy, you will have your daughter run away with before your face.


J. Woodcock. My daughter! who will run away with my daughter?


Mrs. Deb. That fellow will.


J. Woodcock. Go, go, you are a wicked censorious woman.


Lucin. Why, sure madam you must think me very coming indeed.


J. Woodcock. Ay, she judges of others by herself; I remember when she was a
girl, her mother dare not trust her the length of her apron string, she was
clambering upon every fellows back.


Mrs. Deb. I was not.


J. Woodcock. You were.


Lucin. Well, but why so violent.

AIR. XVII.
Believe me dear aunt,
If you rave thus and rant,
You Will never a lover persuade;
The men will all fly,
And leave you to die,
Oh, terrible chance! an old maid --
How happy the lass,
Must she come to this pass,
Who ancient virginity scapes:
'Twere better on earth,
Have five brats at a birth
Then in hell be a leader of apes.

Mrs. Deb. You are an impudent slut.


SCENE III.
Justice WOODCOCK, LUCINDA, EUSTACE. J. Woodcock. Well done Lucy, send her
about her business, a troublesome foolish creature; does she think I want to be
directed by her; -- Come hither my lad, you look tolerably honest --


Eust. I hope sir, I shall never give you cause to alter your opinion


J. Woodcock. No, no, I am not easily deceived, I am generally pretty right in
my conjectures; -- You must know, I had once a little notion of music myself,
and learned upon the fiddle; I could play the trumpet minuet and buttered
pease, and two or three tunes. I remember when I was in London, about thirty
years ago, there was a song, a great favorite at our club at Nando's
coffee-house; Jack Pickle used to sing it for us: a droll fish! but it is an old
thing, I dare swear you have heard it often.

AIR XVIII.
When I followed a lass that was forward and shy,
Oh! I stuck to her stuff, 'till I made her comply;
Oh! I took her so lovingly round the waist.
And I smack'd her lips, and I held her fast:
When hugged and hall'd
She squealed and squall'd;
But though she vowed all I did was in vain,
Yet I pleased her so well, that she bore it again.
Than hoity toity,
Wisking, firisking,
Green was her gown upon the grass:
Oh! such were the joys of our dancing days.

Eust. Very well sir, upon my word.


J. Woodcock. No no, I forget all those things now, but I could do a little at
them once; -- Well stay and eat your dinner, and we'll talk about your teaching
the girl: -- Lucy, take your master to your spinnet, and show him what you can
do -- I must go and give some orders; "then hoity, toity, etc.


SCENE. IV.
LUCINDA, EUSTACE. Lucin. My sweet, pretty papa, your most obedient humble
servant, hah, hah, hah! was ever so whimsical an accident! well sir, what do
you think of this?


Eust. Think of it! I am in a maze.


Lucin. O your aukwardness! I was frightened out of my wits, lest you should
not take the hint! and if I had not turned matters so cleverly, we should have
been utterly undone.


Eust. 'Sdeath! why would you bring me into the house? we could expect nothing
else: besides, since they did surprise us, it would have been better to have
discovered the truth.


Lucin. Yes, and never have seen one another afterward. I know my father
better than you do; he has taken it into his head, I have no inclination for a
husband, and let me tell you, that is our best security; for if once he has
said a thing, he will not be easily persuaded to the contrary.


Eust. And pray, what am I to do now?


Lucin. Why, as I think all danger is pretty well over, since he has invited
you to dinner with him, stay, only be cautious of your behavior; and in the
mean time, I will consider what is next to be done.


Eust. Had not I better go to your father?


Lucin. Do so, while I endeavor to recover myself a little, out of the flurry
this affair has put me in.


Eust. Well, but what sort of a parting is this, without so much as your
servant, or good by to you; No ceremony at all? can you afford me no token to
keep up my spirits 'till I see you again.


Lucin. Ah childish!


Eust. My angel!


AIR. XIX.
Eust. Let rakes and libertines resigned,
To sensual pleasures range;
Here all the sexes charms I find,
And never can cool, or change.
Lucin. Let vain coquets, and prudes conceal,
What most their hearts desire;
With pride my passion I reveal,
Oh! may it never expire.
Both. The sun shall cease to spread it is light,
The stars their orbits leave;
And fair creation, sink in night,
When I my dear deceive.

SCENE. VI.
Changes to the garden. Enter ROSSETTA musing. Ross. If ever poor creature was
in a pitiable condition, surely I am. The devil take this fellow, I cannot get
him out of my head, and yet I would fain persuade myself I don't care for him:
well, but surely I am not in love, let me examine my heart a little: I saw him
kissing one of the maids the other day; I could have boxed his ears for it, and
have done nothing but find fault and quarrel with the girl ever since. Why was
I uneasy at his toying with another woman? what was it to me? Then I dream of
him almost every night -- but that may proceed from his being generally
uppermost in my thoughts all day; -- Oh! worse and worse! -- Well, he is
certainly a pretty lad, he has something uncommon about him, considering his
rank: and now let me only put the case, if he was not a servant, would I, or
would I not, prefer him to all the men I ever saw? Why, to be sure, if he was
not a servant. -- In short, I Will ask myself no more questions, for, the farther
I examine, the less reason, I shall have to be satisfied.

AIR. XX.
How blessed the maid, whose bosom,
No headstrong passion knows;
Her days in joys she passes,
Her nights in calm repose.
Where ever her fancy leads her,
No pain, no fear invades her,
But pleasure,
Without measure,
From every object flows.

SCENE VII.
YOUNG MEADOWS and ROSSETTA. Y. Meadows. Do you come into the garden, Mrs.
Rossetta, to put my lilies and roses out of countenance; or to save me the
trouble of watering my flowers, by reviving them? The sun seems to have hid
himself a little, to give you an opportunity of supplying his place.


Ross. Where could he get that now? he never read it in the academy of
compliments.


Y. Meadows. Come don't affect to treat me with contempt; I can suffer any
thing better than that: in short I love you; there is no more to be said; I am
angry with myself for it, and strive all I can against it; but in spite of
myself I love you.

AIR. XXI.
In vain I every art assay,
To pluck the venomed shaft away,
That wrankles in my heart;
Deep in the center fixed, and bound,
My efforts but enlarge the wound,
And fiercer make the smart.

Ross. Really Mr. Thomas, this is very improper language, it is what I don't
understand; I cannot suffer it, and in short, I don't like it.


Y. Meadows. Perhaps you don't like me.


Ross. Well, perhaps I don't.


Y. Meadows. Nay, but it is not so: come, confess you love me.


Ross. Confess! indeed I shall confess no such thing; besides, to what purpose
should I confess it.


Y. Meadows. Why as you say I don't know to what purpose, only it would be a
satisfaction to me to hear you say so; that is all.


Ross. Why if I did love you, I can assure you, you would never be the better
for it -- Women are apt enough to be weak, we cannot always answer for our
inclinations but it is in our power not to give way to them; and if I was so
silly; I say, if I was so indiscreet, which I hope I am not, as to entertain an
improper regard, when people's circumstances are quite unsuitable, and there
are obstacles in the way that cannot be surmounted --


Y. Meadows. Oh! to be sure, Mrs. Rossetta, to be sure, you are entirely in the
right of it -- I -- know very well, you and I can never come together.


Ross. Well then, since that is the case, as I assure you it is, I think we had
better behave accordingly.


Y. Meadows. Suppose we make a bargain then, never to speak to one another any
more?


Ross. With all my heart.


Y. Meadows. Nor look at, nor, if possible, think of one another.


Ross. I am very willing.


Y. Meadows. And as long as we stay in the house together, after this day,
never to take any notice.


Ross. It is the best way.


Y. Mead. Why, I believe it is -- Well, Mrs. Rossetta.


AIR. XXII.
Ross. Be gone -- I agree,
From this moment we are free,
Already the matter I Have sworn;
Y. Mead. Yet let me complain.
Of the sates that ordain,
A trial so hard to be born.
Ross. When things are but fit,
We should calmly submit,
No cure in reluctance we find;
Y. Mead. Then thus I obey,
Tear your image away,
And banish you quite from my mind.

Ross. Well, now I think I am somewhat easier; I am glad I have come to this
explanation with him, because it puts an end to things at once.


Y. Meadows. Hold Mrs Rossetta, pray stay a moment -- the airs this girl gives
herself are intolerable: I find now the cause of her behavior, she despises
the meanness of my condition, thinking a gardener, below the notice of a lady's
waiting woman: Sdeath! I have a good mind to discover myself to her.


Ross. He seems in a brown study, poor wretch! I believe he is heartily
mortified, but I must not pity him.


Y. Meadows. It shall be so, I will discover myself to her, and leave the house
directly -- Mrs. Rossetta. (starting back) -- Pox on it, yonder is the justice
come into the garden --


Ross. Oh lord he will walk round this way, pray go about your business, I
would not for the world he should see us together.


Y. Meadows. The devil take him, he is gone across the parterre, and cannot
hobble here this half-hour, I must and will have a little conversation with you.


Ross. Some other time.


Y. Meadows This evening, in the green-house at the lower end of the canal, I
have some thing to communicate to you of importance. Will, you meet me there.


Ross. Meet you!


Y. Meadows. Ay, I have a secret to tell you, and I swear from that moment,
there shall be an end of every thing betwixt us.


Ross. Well, well, pray leave me now.


Y. Meadows. You Will come then.


Ross. I don't know, perhaps I may,


Y. Meadows. Nay but promise.


Ross. What signifies promising, I may break my promise, -- but I tell you I
will.


Y. Meadows. Enough -- Yet before I leave you, let me desire you to believe I
love you more than ever man loved woman, and that when I relinquish you, I give
up all that can make my life supportable.

AIR. XXIII.
Oh! how shall I in language weak,
My ardent passion tell;
Or form my falt'ring tongue to speak,
That cruel word, farewell!
Farewell -- but know though thus we part,
My thoughts can never stray:
Go where I will, my constant heart,
Must with my charmer stay.

SCENE VIII.
ROSSETTA, Justice WOODCOCK. Ross. What can this be that he wants to tell me, I
have a strange curiosity to hear it me thinks -- well --


J. Woodcock. Hem: hem: Rossetta!


Ross. So, I thought the devil would throw him in my way, now for a courtship
of a different kind, but I Will give him a surfeit -- did you call me Sir?


J. Woodcock. Ay, where are you running so fast?


Ross. I was only going into the house Sir.


J. Woodcock. Well but come here; come here I say (looking about) how do you do
Rossetta?


Ross. Thank you Sir, pretty well.


J. Woodcock. Why, you look as fresh and bloomy to day -- Adad you little slut
I believe you are painted.


Ross. Oh! Sir, you are pleased to compliment.


J. Woodcock. Adad I believe you are -- let me try --


Ross. Lord Sir!


J. Woodcock. What brings you into this garden so often Rossetta? I hope you
don't get eating green fruit and trash; or have you a hankering after some
lover in dowlas, who spoils my trees by engraving truelovers knots on them,
with your horn, and buck-handled knives? I see your name written upon the
cieling of the servants hall, with the smoke of a candle; and I suspect --


Ross. Not me I hope Sir -- No Sir, I am of another guess mind I assure you;
for I have heard say, men are so false and fickle --


J. Woodcock. Ay, that is your flanting idle young fellows; so they are; and
they are so damm'd impudent, I wonder a woman will have any thing to say to
them; besides, all that they want, is something to brag of, and tell again.


Ross. Why, I own Sir, if ever I was to make a slip, it should be with an
elderly gentleman -- about seventy or seventy-five years of age.


J. Woodcock. No, child, that is out of reason; though I have known many a man
turned of threescore with a hale constitution --


Ross. Then, sir, he should be troubled with the gout, have a good strong,
substantial winter cough -- and I should not like him the worse -- if he had a
small of the rheumatism.


J. Woodcock. Pho, pho, Rossetta, this is jesting.


Ross. No, sir, every body has their taste, and I have mine.


J. Woodcock. Well, but Rossetta, have you thought of what I was saying to you?


Ross. What was it, sir?


J. Woodcock. Ah! you know, you know, well enough, hussy.


Ross. Dear sir, consider my soul, would you have me endanger my soul?


J. Woodcock. No, no -- Repent.


Ross. Besides, sir, consider, what has a poor servant to depend on but her
character? And I have heard you gentlemen will talk one thing before, and
another after.


J. Woodcock. I tell you again, these are the idle, flashy young dogs; but when
you have to do with a staid, sober man --


Ross. And a magistrate! sir.


J. Woodcock. Right, it is quite a different thing. -- Well, shall we Rosseta,
shall we?


Ross. Really, sir, I don't know what to say to it.

AIR XXIV.
Young I am, and sore afraid:
Would you hurt a harmless maid?
Lead an innocent astray?
Tempt me not, kind sir, I pray.
Men too often we believe,
And should you my faith deceive.
Ruin first, and then forsake,
Sure my tender heart would break,

J. Woodcock. Why you silly girl, I will not do you any harm.


Ross. Will Not you, sir?


J. Woodcock. Not I.


Ross. But will not you, indeed, sir?


J. Woodcock. Why I tell you I will not.


Ross. Ha, ha, ha.


J. Woodcock. Hussy, hussy.


Ross. Ha, ha, ha! -- Your servant, sir, your servant.


J. Woodcock. Why you impudent, audacious --


SCENE. IX.
Justice WOODCOCK, HAWTHORN. Hawth. So, so, justice, at odds with gravity! his
worship playing a game at romps! -- Your servant, sir.


J. Woodcock. Hah: friend Hawthorn!


Hawth. I hope I don't spoil sport, neighbor: I thought I had the glympse of a
petticoat as I came in here.


J. Woodcock. Oh! the maid. Ay, she has been gathering a sallad. -- But come
hither, master Hawthorn, and I Will show you some alterations I intend to make in
my garden; how do you like my haha, have not I brought the country finely in?


Hawth. Pho, pho, I am no judge of it: -- besides, I want to talk to you a
little more about this -- Tell me, sir justice, were you helping your maid to
gather a sallad here, or consulting her taste in your improvements, eh? -- Ha,
ha, ha! -- Let me see; all among the roses! egad, I like your notion: but you
look a little blank upon it: you are ashamed of the business, then, are you?

AIR XXV.
Oons! neighbor, never blush for a trifle like this;
What harm with a fair one to toy and to kiss?
The greatest and gravest -- a truce with grimace --
Would do the same thing, were they in the same place.
No age, no profession, no station is free;
To sovereign beauty mankind bend the knee:
That power, resistless, no strength can oppose:
We all love a pretty girl -- under the rose.

J. Woodcock. I profess, master Hawthorn, this is all Indian, all Cherokee
language to me; I don't understand a word of it.


Hawth. No, may be not: well, sir, will you read this letter, and try whether
you can understand that: it is just brought by a servant, who stays for an
answer.


J. Woodcock. A letter, and to me! (taking the letter) Yes, it is to me; and
yet I am sure it comes from no correspondent. Where are my spectacles? not but
I can see very well without them, master Hawthorn; but this seems to be a sort
of a crabbed hand (reads the letter).

SIR,
I am ashamed of giving you this trouble, partly; but I am informed there is an
unthinking boy, a son of mine, now disguised, and in your service, in the
capacity of a gardener: Tom is a little wild, but an honest lad, and no fool
either, though I am his father that say it.


Tom, -- oh, this is Thomas, our gardener; I always thought that he was a better
man's child than he appeared to be, though I never mentioned it.


Hawth. Well, well, sir; pray let us hear the rest of the letter.


J. Woodcock. Stay, where is the place? I am come in quest of my runaway, and
write this at an inn in your village, while I am swallowing a morsel of dinner:
because, not having the pleasure of your acquaintance, I did not care to
intrude, without giving you notice


(whoever this person is, he understands good manners). I beg leave to wait on
you, sir; but desire you would keep my arrival a secret particularly from the
young man.

WILLIAM MEADOWS.


I Will assure you, a very well worded, civil letter. Do you know any thing of
the person who writes it, neighbor?


Hawth. Let me consider -- Meadows -- By dad I believe it is sir William
Meadows, of Northamptonshire; and, now I remember, I heard, some time ago, that
the heir of that family had absconded, on account of a marriage that was
disagreeable to him. It is a good many years since I have seen sir William, but
we were once well acquainted; and, if you please, sir, I will go and conduct
him up to the house.


J. Woodcock. Do so, master Hawthorn, do so. -- But, pray what sort of a man is
this sir William Meadows, is he a wise man?


Hawth. There is no occasion for a man that has five thousand pounds a year to
be a conjurer; but I suppose you ask that question because of this story about
his son; taking it for granted, that wise parents make wise children?


J. Woodcock. No doubt of it, master Hawthorn, no doubt of it. -- I warrant we
shall find, now, that this young rascal has fallen in love with some minx,
against his father's consent. -- Why, sir, if I had as many children as king
Priam had, that we read of at school in the destruction of Troy, not one of
them would serve me so.


Hawth. Well, well, neighbor, perhaps not; but we should remember when we were
young ourselves; and I was as likely to play an old don such a trick in my day,
as ever a spark in the hundred; nay, between you and me, I had done it once,
had the wench been as willing as I.

AIR XXVI.
My Dolly was the fairest thing!
Her breath disclosed the sweets of spring;
And if for summer you would seek,
'Twas painted in her eye, her cheek.
Her swelling bosom, tempting ripe,
Of fruitful autumn was the type:
But, when my tender tale I told,
I found her heart was winter cold.

J. Woodcock. Ah, you were always a scape-grace, rattle-cap.


Hawth. Odds heart, neighbor Woodcock, don't tell me, young fellows will be
young fellows, though we preach 'till we are hoarse again; and so there is an end
on it.


SCENE X.
Changes to justice Woodcock's hall. Enter LUCINDA, followed by HODGE. Hodge.
Mercy on us. -- I wish I may be hanged if I had not like to drop down with the
fright, when I saw the gentleman in the parlour with my master: I thought all
the fat was in the fire, and I should have lost my place, that is for certain.


Lucin. Well, but Hodge, things have fallen out more luckily; and my papa is
very well reconciled to the gentleman, but does not suspect who he is; so take
care you don't blab it.


Hodge. Blab it, did I ever? --


Lucin. I don't accuse you -- And, as I have often put confidence in you
before, I am now going to give you a fresh instance of my dependence on your
fidelity. -- I have just come to a resolution to leave the house, with Mr.
Eustace, this night.


Hodge. What! and his worship know nothing of the matter?


Lucin. Not a syllable; nor would I have him, till we are out of his reach,
which we shall be by tomorrow morning, for the world.


Hodge. Why, then you are going to run away, miss!


Lucin. I dare swear I shall return soon again, Hodge. -- When my father finds
that we are married, and what is done cannot be undone, you know. --


Hodge. Nay, ecod, you will be of the sure side of the hedge, then; but have you
any thing for me to do?


Lucin. That you shall be told, if you come into my chamber after dinner; Mr.
Eustace will be there -- And, in the mean time, as a reward for the services
you have done us already, there is somewhat (gives money).


Hodge. Five guineas! -- Mayhap you think it is for the value of this, now --
Why I Would go through fire and water for you, by day or by night, without ever a
penny -- But if his worship should come to know that I have meddled or made --


Lucin. Depend upon it, Hodge, I will insure you from all damages. -- But where
shall I find Rossetta, to tell her of this? -- Well, I am going to do a strange
bold thing, but I hope we shall be happy.

AIR. XXVII.
Oh Hymen, propitious, receive in thy train,
A pair unseduc'd by the selfish and vain;
Whom neither ambition, nor interest, draws,
But love cordial subjects, submits to thy laws:
Our souls for the sweets of thy union prepare,
And grant us thy blisses unblended with care:
Let mutual compliance endear all our days,
And friendship grow stronger, as passion decays.

SCENE. XI.
HODGE, MARGERY. Hodge. So mistress, who let you in?


Marg. Why, I let myself in.


Hodge. Indeed! Marry come up! why, then pray let yourself out again. Times are
come to a pretty pass; I think you might have had the manners to knock at the
door first. -- What does the wench stand for?


Marg. I want to know if his worship's at home.


Hodge. Well, what is your business with his worship!


Marg. Perhaps you will hear that. -- Look ye, Hodge, it does not signify
talking, I am come, once for all, to know what you intends to do; for I will not
be made a fool of any longer.


Hodge. You will not!


Marg. No, that is what I will not, by the best man that ever wore a head; I am the
make-game of the whole village upon your account; and I Will try whether your
master gives you toleration in your doings.


Hodge. You will?


Marg. Yes, that is what I will, his worship shall be acquainted with all your
pranks, and see how you will like to be sent for a soldier.


Hodge. There Is the door, take a friend's advice and go about your business.


Marg. My business is with his worship.


Hodge. Look you Madge, if you make any of your orations here, never stir if I
don't set the dogs at you: -- Will you be gone?


Marg. I will not.


Hodge. Here towzer, (whistling) whu, whu, whu.

AIR. XXVIII.
Was ever poor fellow so plaug'd with a vixen?
Zawns! Madge don't provoke me, but mind what I say;
You Have chose a wrong parson for playing your tricks on,
So pack up your alls and be trudging away:
You Would better be quiet,
And not breed a riot;
S'blood must I stand prating with you here all day?
I Have got other matters to mind;
May hap you may think me an ass;
But to the contrary you will find:
A fine piece of a work by the mass!

SCENE. XII.
ROSSETTA, HODGE, MARGERY. Ross. Sure I heard the voice of discord here, -- as
I live an admirer of mine, and if I mistake not, a rival -- I Will have some
sport with them -- how now fellow servant what is the matter?


Hodge. Nothing Mrs. Rossetta, only this young woman wants to speak with his
worship; -- Madge follow me.


Marg. No Hodge, this is your fine madam! but I am as good flesh and blood as
she, and have as clean a skin too, tho'f I may not go so gay; and now she is here
I Will tell her a piece of my mind.


Hodge. Hold your tongue will you.


Marg. No, I Will speak if I dye for it.


Ross. What is the matter I say.


Hodge. Why nothing I tell you; -- Madge --


Marg. Yes, but it is something, it is all along of she, and she may be ashamed
of herself.


Ross. Bless me child, do you direct your discourse to me?


Marg. Yes, I do, and to nobody else; there was not a kinder soul breathing
than he was 'till of late; I had never a cross word from him till he kept you
company; but all the girls about say, there is no such thing as keeping a
sweetheart for you.


Ross. Do you hear this, friend Hodge?


Hodge. Why, you don't mind she I hope; but if that vexes her, I do like you, I
do; my mind runs upon nothing else; and if so be as you was agreeable to it, I
would marry you to night, before to morrow.


Marg. Oh you base rogue, you deceitful fellow, you are parjur'd, you know you
are, and you deserve to have your eyes tore out.


Hodge. Let me come at her, -- I Will teach you to call names, and abuse folk.


Marg. Do, strike me; you a man!


Ross. Hold, hold, -- we shall have a battle, here presently, and I may chance
to get my cap tore off. -- Never exasperate a jealous woman, it is taking a mad
bull by the horns; -- Leave me to manage her.


Hodge. You manage her! I Will kick her.


Ross. No, no, it will be more for my credit, to get the better of her by fair
means; -- I warrant I Will bring her to reason.


Hodge. Well, do so then; -- But may I depend upon you? when shall I speak to
the Parson?


Ross. We'll talk of that another time; -- Go.


Hodge. Madge, good by.


Ross. The brutality of this fellow shocks me! -- Oh man, man, -- you are all
alike. -- A bumkin here, bred at the barn-door! had he been brought up in a
court, could he have been more fashionably vicious? show me the lord, 'squire,
colonel, or captain of them all, that can outdo him.

AIR. XXIX.
Cease gay seducers pride to take,
In triumphs over the fair;
Since clowns as well can act the rake,
As those in higher sphere.
Where then to shun a shameful fate,
Shall hapless beauty go;
In every rank, in every state,
Poor Woman finds a foe!

SCENE XIII.
ROSSETTA, MARGERY. Marg. I am ready to burst, I cannot stay in the place any
longer.


Ross. Hold child, come hither.


Marg. Don't speak to me, don't you.


Ross. Well, but I have something to say to you of consequence, and that will
be for your good; I suppose this fellow promised you marriage.


Marg. Ay, or he should never have prevailed upon me.


Ross. Well, now you see the ill consequence of trusting to such promises: when
once a man has cheated a of her virtue, she has no longer hold of him; he
despises her for wanting that which he has robbed her of; and like a lawless
conqueror, triumphs in the ruin he has occasioned.


Marg. -- Nan!


Ross. However, I hope the experience you have got, though somewhat dearly
purchased, will be of use to you for the future; and as to any designs I have
upon the heart of your lover, you may make yourself easy, for I assure you, I
shall be no dangerous rival, so go your ways and be a good girl.


Marg. Yes, -- I don't very well understand her talk, but I suppose that is as
much as to say she will keep him herself; well let her, who cares, I don't fear
getting better nor he is any day of the year, for the matter of that; and I
have a thought come into my head that may be will be more to my advantage.

AIR XXX.
Since Hodge proves ungrateful, no farther I Will seek,
But go up to town in the wagon next week;
A service in London is no such disgrace,
And register's office will get me a place:
Bet Blossom went there, and soon met with a friend,
Folks say in her silks, she is now standing an end!
Then why should not I the same maxim pursue?
And better my fortune as other girls do.

SCENE XIV.
Enter ROSSETTA, and LUCINDA. Ross. Ha! ha! ha! Oh admirable, most delectibly
rediculous. And so your father is content he should be a music master, and will
have him such, in spite of all your aunt can say to the contrary?


Lucin. My father and he child, are the best companions you ever saw: they have
been singing together the most hideous duets! bobbing joan, and old sir simon
the king; heaven knows where Eustace could pick them up; but he has gone
through half the contents of pills to purge melancholy with him.


Ross. And have you resolved to take wing tonight?


Lucin. This very night, my dear; my swain will go from hence this evening, but
no farther than the inn, where he has left his horses; and at twelve precisely,
he will be with a post-chaise at the little gate that opens from the lawn, into
the road, where I have promised to meet him.


Ross. Then depend upon it, I Will bear you company.


Lucin. We shall easily slip out when the family is a sleep, and I have
prepared Hodge already.


Ross. Nay, for that matter, you need not have a more expert pilot than myself
upon such an expedition, but hark you --


SCENE XV.
ROSSETTA, LUCINDA, HAWTHORN. Hawth. Lucy, where are you.


Lucin. Your pleasure, Sir.


Ross. Mr. Hawthorn, your servant.


Hawth. What my little water wagtail, the very couple I wished to meet, come
hither both of you.


Ross. Now Sir, what would you say to both of us.


Hawth. Why let me look at you a little -- have you got on your best gowns, and
your best faces? If not, go and trick yourselves out directly, for I Will tell
you a secret -- there will be a young bachelor in the house within these three
hours, that may fall to the share of one of you, if you look sharp, -- but
whether mistress or maid --


Ross. Ay, marry this is something, but how do you know, whether either
mistress or maid, will think him worth acceptance.


Hawth. Follow me, follow me, I warrant you.


Lucin. I can assure you, Mr. Hawthorn, I am very difficult to please.


Ross. And so am I Sir.


Hawth. Indeed!

AIR. XXXI.
Well, come, let us hear, what the swain must possess
Who may hope at your feet to implore with success?
Lucin. Ross. He must be first of all,
Straight, comely, and tall:
Lucin. Neither awkward,
Ross. Nor foolish;
Lucin. Nor apish,
Ross. Nor mulish.
Lucin. Ross. Nor yet should his fortune be small.
Hawth. What think of a captain?
Lucin. All bluster and wounds!
Hawth. What think of a squire?
Ross. To be left for his hounds.
Lucin. Ross. The youth that is formed to my mind,
Must be gentle, obliging, and kind;
Of all things in Nature love me,
Have sense both to speak, and to see,
Yet sometimes be silent and blind.
Hawth. Before George a most rare matrimonial receipt,
Ross, Lucin. Observe it ye fair in the choice of a mate;
Remember it is wedlock determines your fate.

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A parlour in Justice WOODCOCK's house. Enter Sir William MEADOWS, followed by
HAWTHORN. Sir Will. WELL this is excellent, this is mighty good, this is mighty
merry faith, ha, ha, ha; was ever the like heard of? that my boy Tom should run
away from me, for fear of being forced to marry a girl he never saw; that she
should scamper from her father, for fear of being forced to marry him; and that
they should run into one another's arms this way in disguise; by mere aocident;
against their consents, and without knowing it as a body may say: may I never
do an ill turn master Hawthorn, if it is not one of the oddest adventures
partly --


Hawth. Why Sir William it is romance, a novel, a pleasanter history by half,
than the loves of Dorastus and Faunia; we shall have ballads made of it within
these two months, setting forth, how a young 'squire became a serving man of
low degree: and it will be stuck up with Margret's ghost, and the Spanish lady,
against the walls of every cottage in the country.


Sir Will. But what pleases me best of all master Hawthorn, is the ingenuity of
the girl. May I never do an ill turn, when I was called out of the room, and
the servant said she wanted to speak to me, if I knew what to make on it: but
when the little gypsey took me aside, and told me her name, and how matters
stood, I was quite astonished as a body may say; and could not believe it
partly; till her young friend, that she is with here, assured me of the truth
on it. Indeed at last I began to recollect her face, though I have not set eyes
on her before, since she was the height of a full grown greyhound.


Hawth. Well Sir William, your son as yet knows nothing of what has happened,
nor of your being come hither; and if you will follow my council, we'll have some
sport with him -- He and his mistress were to meet in the garden this evening
by appointment, she is gone to dress herself in all her airs; will you let me
direct your proceedings in this affair.


Sir Will. With all my heart master Hawthorn, with all my heart, do what you
will with me, say what you please for me; I am so overjoyed and so happy -- And
may I never do an ill turn, but I am very glad to see you too, ay, and partly
as much pleased at that as any thing else, for we have been merry together
before now, when we were some years younger: Well and how has the world gone
with you master Hawthorn since we saw one another last.


Hawth. Why, pretty well Sir William, I have no reason to complain; every one
has a mixture of four with his sweets; but in the main I believe I have done in
a degree as tollerably as my neighbors.

AIR XXXII.
The world is a well furnished table,
Where guests are promisc'ously set;
We all fare as well as we are able,
And scramble for what we can get.
My simile bolds to a tittle,
Some gorge, while some scarce have a taste;
But if I am content with a little,
Enough is as good as a feast.

SCENE. II.
Sir WILLIAM MEADOWS, HAWTHORN, ROSSETTA. Ross. Sir William I beg pardon for
detaining you, but I have had so much difficulty in adjusting my borrowed
plumes. --


Sir Will. May I never do an ill turn but they fit you to a T, and you look
very well so you do; cockbones how your father will chuckle when he comes to
hear this -- Her father master Hawthorn is as worthy a man as lives by bread,
and has been almost out of his senses for the loss of her -- But tell me
hussy, has not this been all a scheme, a piece of conjuration between you and
my son; faith I am half persuaded it has, it looks so like hocus pocus as a
body may say.


Ross. Upon my honor Sir William what has happened has been the mere effect of
chance; I came hither unknown to your son, and he unknown to me: I never in the
least suspected that Thomas the gardener was other than his appearance spoke
him, and least of all, that he was a person with whom I had so close a
connection. Mr. Hawthorn can testify the astonishment I was in when he first
informed me of it: but I thought it was my duty to come to an immediate
explanation with you.


Sir Will. Is not she a neat wench master Hawthorn? May I never do an ill turn
but she is -- But you little plaguey devil, how came this love affair between
you?


Ross. I have told you the whole truth very ingenuously Sir; since your son and
I have been fellow servants, as I may call it, in this house, I have had more
than reason to suspect he had taken a liking to me; and I will own with equal
frankness, had I not looked upon him as a person so much below me, I should
have had no objection to receiving his courtship.


Hawth. Well said by the lord Harry, all above board, fair and open.


Ross. Perhaps I may be censured by some for this candid declaration; but I
love to speak my sentiments, and I assure you Sir William, in my own opinion, I
should prefer a gardener, with your son's good qualities, to a knight of the
shire without them.

AIR XXXIII.
It Is not wealth, it is not birth,
Can value to the soul convey;
Minds possess superior worth,
Which chance nor gives, nor takes away.
Like the sun true merit shows,
By nature warm by nature bright;
With inbred flames, he nobly glows,
Nor needs the aid of borrowed light.

Hawth. Well, but Sir, we lose time -- is not this about the hour you appointed
to meet in the garden?


Ross. Pretty near it.


Hawth. Oons then, what do we stay for? come my old friend come along, and by
the way we will consult how to manage your interview.


Sir Will. Ay, but I must speak a word or two to my man about the horses first.


SCENE III.
ROSSETTA, HODGE. Ross. Well, -- What Is the business?


Hodge. Madam, -- Mercy on us, I crave pardon!


Ross. Why Hodge, don't you know me?


Hadge. Mrs. Rossetta!


Ross. Ay.


Hodge. Know you, ecod I don't know whether I do or not: never stir, if I did
not think it was some lady belonging to the strange gentlefolks: why you ben't
dizen'd this way, to go to the statute dance presently, be you?


Ross. Have patience and you will see: -- But is there any thing amiss, that you
came in so abrutly?


Hodge. Amiss! why there is ruination.


Ross. How, where?


Hodge. Why with miss Lucinda: her aunt has caught, she, and the gentleman
above stairs, and overheard all their love discourse.


Ross. You don't say so.


Hodge. Ecod, I had like to have pop'd in among them this instant, but by good
luck, I heard Mrs. Deborah's voice, and ran down again, as fast as ever my legs
could carry me.


Ross. Is your master in the house?


Hodge. What his worship? no, no, he is gone into the fields to talk with the
reapers and people.


Ross. Poor Lucinda, I wish I could go up to her, but I am so engaged with my
own affairs --


Hodge. Mrs. Rossetta.


Ross. Well.


Hodge. Odds bobs, I must have one smack of your sweet lips.


Ross. Oh stand off, you know I never allow liberties.


Hodge. Nay, but why so coy, there is reason in roasting of eggs; I would not
deny you such a thing.


Ross. That Is kind, ha, ha, ha! -- but what will become of Lucinda? Sir William
waits for me, I must be gone. -- Friendship a moment by your leave, yet as our
sufferings have been mutual, so shall our joys; I already lose the remembrance
of all former pains and anxieties.

AIR. XXXIV.
The traveller benighted,
And led through weary ways;
The lamp of day new lighted,
With joy the dawn surveys.
The rising prospects viewing,
Each look is forward cast;
He smiles, his course pursuing,
Nor thinks of what is past.

SCENE. IV.
HODGE, Mrs. DEBORAH WOODCOCK, LUCINDA. Hodge. Hist, stay! don't I hear a noise?


Lucin. (within) Well, but dear, dear aunt.


Mrs. Deb. (within) You need not speak to me, for it does not signify.


Hodge. Adwawns they are coming here, ecod I Will get out of the way; -- Murrain
take it this door is bolted now -- So so.


Mrs. Deb. Get along, get along; (driving in Lucinda before her) you are a
scandal to the name of Woodcock! but I was resolved to find you out, for I have
suspected you a great while, though your father silly man, will have you such a
poor innocent.


Lucin. What shall I do.


Mrs. Deb. I was determined to discover what you, and your pretended music
matter were about; and lay in wait on purpose: I believe he thought to escape
me, by slipping into the closet when I knocked at the door; but I was even with
him, for now I have him under lock and key, and please the fates, there he
shall remain till your father comes in: I will convince him of his error,
whether he will or not.


Lucin. You will not be so cruel, I am sure you will not; I thought I had made you my
friend, by telling you the truth.


Mrs. Del. Telling me the truth quotha? did I not overhear your scheme of
running away to night, through the partition; did not I find the very bundles
packed up in the room with you ready for going off? No brazenface, I found out
the truth by my own sagacity, though your father says, I am a fool; but now
we'll be judged who is the greatest. -- And you Mr. rascal, my brother shall
know what an honest servant he has got.


Hodge. Madam!


Mrs. Deb. You were to have been aiding and assisting them in their escape, and
have been the go between it seems, the letter carrier!


Hodge. Who me madam!


Mrs. Deb. Yes, you sirrah!


Hodge. Miss Lucinda, did I ever carry a letter for you? I Will make my affidavy
before his worship --


Mrs. Deb, Go, go, you are a villain, hold your tongue.


Lucin. I own aunt I have been very faulty in this affair; I don't pretend to
excuse myself; but we are all subject to frailties, consider that, and judge of
me by yourself, who were once young, and inexperienced as I am.

AIR XXXV.
If ever a fond inclination,
Rose in your bosom, to rob you of rest;
Reflect with a little compassion,
On the soft pangs, which prevailed in my breast.
Oh where, where would you fly me,
Can you deny me, thus torn, and distressed;
Think when my lover was by me,
Would I, how could I, refuse his request?
Kneeling before you, let me implore you;
Look on me sighing, crying, dying;
Ah! is there no language can move?
If I have been too complying!
Hard was the conflict 'twixt duty, and love.

Mrs. Deb. This is mighty pretty romantic stuff! but you learn it out of your
play books, and novels. Girls in my time, had other employments, we worked at
our needles, and kept ourselves from idle thoughts: before I was your age, I
had finished with my own fingers, a complete set of chairs, and a fire screen
in tent stitch; four counterpanes, in Marsailles quilting; and the creed, and
the ten commandments, in the hair of our family: it was framed, and glazed, and
hung over the parlour chimney piece, and your grandfather was prouder of it,
than of ever a picture in his house. I never looked into a book, but when I
said my prayers, except it was the complete housewife, or the great family
receipt book: whereas you are always at your studies: Ah! I never knew a woman
come to good, that was fond of reading.


Lucin. Well, pray madam, let me prevail on you to give me the key to let Mr.
Eustace out, and I promise, I never will proceed a step farther in this
business, without your advice and approbation.


Mrs. Deb. Have not I told you already my resolution? -- Where are my clogs and
my bonnet? I Will go out to my brother in the fields; I Am a fool you know child,
now let us see what the wits will think of themselves, -- Don't hold me --


Lucin. I Am not going; -- I have thought of a way to be even with you, so you
may do as you please.


SCENE V.
HODGE. Well, I thought it would come to this, I Will be shot if I didn't; -- So
here is a fine jobb -- But what can they do to me; -- They cannot send me to jail
for carrying a letter, seeing there was no treason in it; and how was I
obligated to know my master did not allow of their meetings: -- The worst they
can do, is to turn me off, and I am sure the place is no such great purchase;
-- indeed, I shall be sorry to leave Mrs. Rossetta, seeing as how matters are
so near being brought to an end, betwixt us; but she and I may keep company all
as one: and I finds Madge has been speaking with gaffer Broadwheels, the
waggoner, about her carriage up to London; so that I have got rid of she, and I
am sure I have reason to be main glad of it, for she led me a wearysome life;
-- But that is the way of them all.

AIR. XXXVI.
A plague of those wenches, they make such a pother,
When once they have let'n a man have his will;
They Are always a whining for something or other,
And cry he is unkind in his carriage:
What tho'f he speaks them never so fairly
Still they keep teazing, teazing on:
You cannot persuade 'em:
'Till promise you have made 'em.
And after they have got it,
They tell you -- add rot it!
Their character's blasted, they are ruined, undone;
And then, to be sure, sir,
There is but one cure, sir,
And all the discourse is of marriage.

SCENE VI.
Changes to a Green-house. Enter Young MEADOWS. Y. Meadows. I am glad I had the
precaution to bring this suit of clothes in my bundle, though I hardly know
myself in them again, they appear so strange, and feel so unwieldy. However, my
gardener's jacket goes on no more. -- I wonder this girl does not come (looking
at his watch); perhaps she will not come -- Why, then I Will go into the village,
take a post- chaise, and depart without any farther ceremony.

AIR XXXVII.
How much superior beauty awes,
The coldest bosoms find;
But with resistless force it draws,
To sense and sweetness joined.
The casket, where, to outward show,
The workman's art is seen,
Is doubly valued, when we know
It holds a gem within.
Hark! she comes.


SCENE VII.
Enter Sir WILLIAM MEADOWS and HAWTHORN. Y. Meadows. Confusion! my father! What
can this mean?


Sir Will. Tom, are not you a sad boy, Tom, to bring me a hundred and forty
miles, here. -- May I never do an ill turn, but you deserve to have your head
broke; and I have a good mind, partly. -- What, sirrah, don't you think it
worth your while to speak to me?


Y. Meadows. Forgive me, sir, I own I have been in a fault.


Sir Will. In a fault! to run away from me because I was going to do you good.
-- May I never do an ill turn, master Hawthorn, if I did not pick out as fine a
girl for him, partly, as any in England; and the rascal run away from me, and
came here and turned gardener. -- And pray what did you propose to yourself,
Tom? I know you were always fond of Bottany, as they call it; did you intend to
keep the trade going, and advertise fruit trees and flowering-shrubs, to be had
at Meadows's nursery?


Hawth. No, sir William, I apprehend the young gentleman designed to lay by the
profession; for he has quitted the habit already.


Y. Meadows. I am so astonished to see you here, sir, that I don't know what to
say; but, I assure you, if you had not come, I should have returned home to you
directly. Pray, sir, how did you find me out?


Sir Will. No matter, Tom, no matter; it was partly by accident, as a body may
say; but what does that signify -- tell me, boy, how stands your stomach
toward matrimony? Do you think you could digest a wife now?


Y. Meadows. Pray, sir, don't mention it; I shall always behave myself as a
dutiful son ought: I will never marry without your consent, and I hope you
will not force me to do it against my own.


Sir Will. Is not this mighty provoking, master Hawthorn? Why, sirrah, did you
ever see the lady I designed for you?


Y. Meadows. Sir, I don't doubt the lady's merit; but, at present, I am not
disposed.


Hawth. Nay, but young gentleman, fair and softly, you should pay some respect
to your father in this matter.


Sir Will. Respect, master Hawthorn! may I never do an ill turn, but he shall
marry her, or I Will disinherit him! there is once. Look you, Tom, not to make any
more words of the matter, I have brought the lady here with me, and I Will see
you contracted before we part; or you shall delve and plant cucumbers as long
as you live.


Y. Meadows. Have you brought the lady here, sir? I am sorry for it.


Sir Will. Why sorry? what, then you will not marry her? we'll see that; pray,
master Hawthorn, conduct the fair one in. -- Ay, sir, you may fret, and dance
about, trot at the rate of fifteen miles an hour, if you please; but may I
never do an ill turn, but I am resolved.


SCENE VIII.
Sir WILLIAM MEADOWS, HAWTHORN, Young MEADOWS, ROSSETTA. Hawth. Here is the
lady, sir William.


Sir Will. Come in, madam, but turn your face from him -- he would not marry
you because he had not seen you; but I Will let him know my choice shall be his,
and he shall consent to marry you before he sees you, or not an acre of estate.
-- Pray, sir, walk this way.


Y. Meadows. Sir, I cannot help thinking your conduct a little extraordinary;
but, since you urge me so closely, I must tell you my affections are engaged.


Sir Will. How, Tom! how!


Y. Meadows. I was determined, sir, to have got the better of my inclination,
and never have done a thing which I knew would be disagreeable to you. --


Sir Will. And pray, sir, who are your affections engaged to? let me know that.


Y. Meadows. To a person, sir, whose rank and fortune may be no recommendations
to her; but whose charms and accomplishments entitle her to a monarch. I am
sorry, sir, it is impossible for me to comply with your commands, and I hope you
will not be offended if I quit your presence.


Sir Will. Not I, not in the least; go about your business.


Y. Meadows. Sir, I obey.


Hawth. Now is your time, madam.


AIR XXXVIII.
Ross. When we see a lover languish,
And his truth and honor prove,
Ah! how sweet to heal his anguish,
And repay him love for love.

Sir Will. Well, Tom, will you go away from me now?


Hawth. Perhaps, sir William, your son does not like the lady; and, if so, pray
don't put a force upon his inclination.


Y. Meadows. You need not have taken this method, sir, to let me see you were
acquainted with my folly, whatever my inclinations are --.


Sir Will. Well, but Tom, suppose I give my consent to your marrying this young
woman?


Y. Meadows. Your consent, sir!


Ross. Come, sir William, we have carried the jest far enough; I see your son
is in a kind of embarrassment, and I don't wonder at it; but this letter, which
I received from him a few days before I left my father's house, will, I
apprehend, expound the riddle. -- He cannot be surprised that I ran away from a
gentleman who expressed so much dislike to me; and what has happened since
chance brought us together in masquerade, there is no occasion for me to inform
him of.


Y. Meadows. What is all this? pray don't make a jest of me.


Sir Will. May I never do an ill turn, Tom, if it is not truth; this is my
friend's daughter.


Y. Meadows. Sir!


Ross. Even so; it is very true indeed. In short, you have not been a more
whimsical gentleman, than I have a gentlewoman; but you see we were designed
for one another, it is plain.


Y. Meadows. I know not, madam, what I either hear or see, a thousand things
are crowding on my imagination; while, like one just wakened from a dream, I
doubt which is reality, which delusion.


Sir Will. Well then, Tom, come into the air a bit, and recover yourself.


Y. Meadows. Nay, dear sir, have a little patience; do yon give her to me?


Sir Will. Give her to you! ay, that I do, and my blessing into the bargain.


Y. Meadows. Then, sir, I am the happiest man in the world. I enquire no
farther; here I fix the utmost limits of my hopes and happiness.


AIR XXXIX.
Y. Mead. All I wish in her obtaining,
Fortune can no more impart;
Ross. Let my eyes, my thoughts explaining,
Speak the feelings of my heart.
Y. Mead. Joy and pleasure never ceasing,
Ross. Love with length of years increasing.
Together. Thus my heart and hand surrender,
Here my faith and truth I plight;
Constant still, and kind and tender,
May our flames burn ever bright.

Hawth. Give you joy, sir; and you fair lady. -- And, under favor, I Will salute
you, too, if there is no fear of jealousy.


Y. Meadows. But may I believe this? -- Pr'ythee tell me, dear Rossetta.


Ross. Step into the house and I Will tell you every thing. -- I must entreat the
good offices of Sir William, and Mr. Hawthorn, immediately; for I am in the
utmost uneasiness about my poor friend Lucinda.


Hawth. Why, what is the matter?


Ross. I don't know, but I have reason to fear, I left her just now in very
disagreeable circumstances, however, I hope, if there is any mischief fallen
out between her father and her lover --


Hawth. The music master, I thought so.


Sir Will. What is there a lover in the case, may I never do an ill turn, but I
am glad, so I am; for we'll make a double wedding; and, by way of celebrating
it, take a trip to London, to show the brides some of the pleasures of the
town. And, master Hawthorn, you shall be of the party. -- Come, children, go
before us.


Hawth. Thank you, sir William, I Will go into the house with you, and to church,
to see the young folks married; but, as to London, I beg to be excused.

AIR XL.
If ever I Am caught in those regions of smoke,
That seat of confusion and noise,
May I never know the sweets of a slumber unbroke,
Nor the pleasures the country enjoys.
Nay, more, let them take me, to punish my sin,
Where, gaping, the Cockneys they fleece,
Clap me up with their monsters, cry, masters, walk in,
And show me for twopence a-piece.

SCENE IX.
Changes to Justice Woodcock's hall. Enter Justice WOODCOCK, Mrs. DEBORAH
WOODCOCK, LUCINDA, EUSTACE, HODGE. Mrs. Deb. Why, brother, do you think I can
hear or see, or make use of my senses? I tell you, I left that fellow locked up
in her closet; and, while I have been with you, they have broke open the door,
and got him out again.


J. Woodcock. Well, you hear what they say.


Mrs. Deb. I care not what they say; it is you encourage them in their
impudence. -- Hark'e, hussy, will you face me down that I did not lock the
fellow up?


Lucin. Really, aunt, I don't know what you mean; when you talk intelligibly,
I Will answer you.


Eust. Seriously madam, this is carrying the jest a little too far.


Mrs. Deb. What then, I did not catch you together in her chamber, nor
over-hear your design of going off to night, nor find the bundles packt up --


Eust. Ha, ha, ha!


Lucin. Why aunt you rave.


Mrs. Deb. Brother, as I am a christian woman, she confessed the whole affair
to me from first to last: and in this very place was down upon her
marrow-bones, for half an hour together, to beg I would conceal it from you.


Hodge. Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


Mrs. Deb. What sirrah, would you brazen me too, take that (boxes him)


Hodge. I wish you would keep your hands to yourself, you strike me, because
you have been telling his worship stories.


J. Woodcock. Why sister you are tipsey!


Mrs. Deb. I tipsey brother! -- I -- that never touch a drop of any thing
strong from year's end to year's end; but now and then a little Annyseed water,
when I have got the cholic.


Lucin. Well, aunt, you have been complaining of the stomach-ach all day; and
may have taken too powerful a doze of your cordial.


J. Woodcock. Come, come, I see well enough how it is, this is a lie of her own
invention, to make herself appear wise: but you simpleton, did not you know I
must find you out?


SCENE. X.
Enter Sir WILLIAM MEADOWS, HAWTHORN, ROSSETTA Young, MEADOWS. Y. Meadows.
Bless me Sir! look who is yonder.


Sir Will. Cocksbones, Jack, honest Jack, are you there.


Eust. Plague on it, this rencounter is unlucky -- Sir William your servant.


Sir Will. Your servant again, and again, heartily your servant; may I never do
an ill turn, but I am glad to meet you.


J. Woodcock. Pray Sir William, are you acquainted with this person?


Sir Will. What, with Jack Eustace? why he is my kinsman; his mother and I are
cousin-germans once removed, and Jack's a very worthy young fellow; may I never
do an ill turn if I tell you a word of a lie.


J. Woodcock. Well, but Sir William, let me tell you, you know nothing of the
matter; this man is a music master; a thrummer of wire, and scraper of cat-gut,
and teaches my daughter to sing.


Sir Will. What Jack Eustace a music master! no, no, I know him better.


Eust. God's Death, why should I attempt to carry on this absurd farce any longer?
-- What that gentleman tells you is very true, Sir; I am ^ music master indeed.


J. Woodcock. You are not, you own it then?


Eust. Nay, more Sir, I am as this lady has represented me, (pointing to Mrs.
Deborah) your daughter's lover; whom with her own consent, I did intend to have
carried off this night; but now that Sir William Meadows is here, to tell you
who, and what I am; I throw myself upon your generosity, from which I expect
greater advantages, than I could reap from any imposition on your unsuspicious
nature.


Mrs. Deb. Well brother, what have you to say for yourself now? you have made a
precious day's work of it! had my advice been taken: Oh I am ashamed of you,
but you are a weak man and it cannot be helped; however you should let wiser
heads direct you.


Lucin. Dear papa, pardon me.


Sir Will. Ay, do Sir forgive her; my cousin Jack, will make her a good
husband, I Will answer for it.


Ross. Stand out of the way, and let me speak two or three words to his
worship; -- Come my dear Sir, though you refuse all the world, I am sure you
can deny me nothing: love is a venial fault -- You know what I mean. -- Be
reconciled to your daughter, I conjure you, by the memory of our past
affections -- What not a word!

AIR XLI.
Go naughty man, I cannot abide you;
Are then your vows so soon forgot?
Ah! now I see if I had tried you;
What would have been my hopeful lot.
But hear I charge you -- Make them happy;
Bless the fond pair, and crown their bliss:
Come be a dear good-natured pappy;
And I Will reward you with a kiss.

Mrs. Deb. Come turn out of the house; and be thankful my brother does not hang
you, for he could do it, he is a justice of peace; -- turn out of the house I
say: --


J. Woodcock. Who gave you authority to turn him out of the house -- he shall
stay where he is,


Mrs. Deb. He shall not marry my niece.


J. Woodcock. Shall Not he? but I Will show you the difference now, I say he shall
marry her, and what will you do about it.


Mrs. Deb. And you will give him your estate too, will you?


J. Woodcock. Yes I will.


Mrs. Deb. Why I am sure he is a vagabond.


J. Woodcock. I like him the better, I would have him a vagabond.


Mrs. Deb. Brother brother!


Hawthorn. Come, come, madam all is very well, and I see my neighbor is what I
always thought him, a man of sense and prudence.


Sir Will. May I never do an ill turn, but I say so too.


J. Woodcock. Here young fellow, take my daughter; and bless you both together;
but hark you, no money till I dye; observe that.


Eust. Sir in giving me your daughter, you bestow upon me more than the whole
world would be without her.


AIR. XLII.
Eust. The merchant whose vessel, the winds made their sport
At last thus arrives with his treasure in port;
His labor requited, his duty he pays;
His dangers are past, and his heart is at ease.
Lucin. Were monarchs contending to make me a bride,
Undazzled I Would look on their splendor and pride;
Refused should their crowns, and their palaces be,
Contented to live in a cottage with thee.
Both. On Earth, if there is ought of substantial delight,
It Is sure when like us a fond couple unite;
When blessed in each other their struggles are over,
And pleasures are heightened by pains gone before.

Ross. Dear Lucinda, if words could convey the transports of my heart upon this
occasion --


Lucin. Words are the tools of hypocrites, the pretenders to friendship; only
let us resolve to preserve our esteem for each other.


Y. Meadows. Dear Jack, I little thought we should ever meet in such odd
circumstances -- but here has been the strangest business between this lady and
me --


Hodge. What then Mrs. Rossetta, are you turned false-hearted after all; will
you marry Thomas the gardener, and did I forsake Madge for this?


Ross. Oh lord Hodge! I beg your pardon; I protest I forgot; but I must
reconcile you and Madge I think; and give you a wedding dinner to make you
amends.


Hodge. N -- ah.


Hawth. Adds me Sir, here are some of your neighbors come to visit you, and I
suppose, to make up the company of your statute ball; yonder is music too I see,
shall we enjoy ourselves; if so give me your hand --


J. Woodcock. Why here is my hand, and we will enjoy ourselves, heaven bless you
both children I say, -- sister Deborah, you are a fool.


Mrs. Deb. You are a fool brother, and mark my words -- But I Will give myself no
more trouble about you.


Hawth. Fiddlers strike up.

AIR. XLIII.
Hence with cares complaints and frowning,
Welcome jollity and joy;
Every grief in pleasure drowning,
Mirth this happy night employ:
Let Us to friendship do our duty;
Laugh and sing some good old strain,
Drink a health to love and beauty,
May they long in triumph reign.

THE END.
A Table of the Songs, with the names of the several composers.
N B. Those marked thus * were composed on purpose for this Opera.

A New Overture by Mr. Abel.
ACT I.
1 Hope thou nurse of young desire Mr. Weldon 2 Whence can you inherit Abos 3
My heart's my own my will is free Arne 4 When once love's subtle poison gains
Arne 5* Oh had I been by fate decreed Howard 6 Gentle youth ah tell me why Arne
7* Still in hopes to get the better Arne 8 There was a jolly miller once 9 Let
gay ones and great Baildon 10 The honest heart whose thoughts are free Festing
11 Well well say no more 12 Cupid God of soft persuasion Gardini 13 How happy
were my days till now Arne 14 The court and the city fine folks may extol Arne
15 A Medley
ACT II.
16 We women like weak Indians trade Paradie 17 Think my fairest how delay Arne
18* Believe me dear aunt Arne 19 When I followed a lass that was froward and
shy 20 Let rakes and libertines resigned Handel 21 How blessed the maid whose
bosom Gallupi 22 In vain I every art assay Arne 23 Begone I agree Arne 24 Oh
how shall I in language weak Carry 25 Young I am and sore afraid Gallupi 26
Zooks neighbor never blush for a trifle like this Arne 27 My Dolly was the
fairest thing Handel 28 Oh Hymen propitious receive in thy train Arne 29 Was
ever poor fellow so plagued with a vixen Agu^ 30 Cease seducers pride to take
Arne 31 Since Hodge proves ungrateful, no farther I Will seek Arne 32* Well come
let us hear what the swain must possess. Arne
ACT III.
33 The world is a well furnished table Arne 34 It is not wealth, it is not
birth Guardini 35* The traveller benighted Arne 36 If ever a fond inclination
Geminiani 37 Plague o'these wenches they make such a pother 38* How much
superior beauty aws Howard 39 When we see a lover languish Arne 40 All I wish
in her obtaining Arne 41 If ever I am catched in those regions of smoke Boyce
42*Go naughty man I cannot abide you Arne 43 The merchant whose vessel the winds
make their sport Arne 44 Hence with cares complaints and frowing Boyce

