ATHELWOLD: A TRAGEDY. As it is acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE, BY
HIS MAJESTY's Servants.

LONDON: Printed for L. GILLIVER, at Homer's-Head, over against St. Dunstan's
Church, Fleet Street. M.DCC.XXXI.

Persons represented.
MEN.
Edgar, King of England, by Mr. Mills. Athelwold, Earl of Lancaster, by Mr.
Bridgwater. Leolyn, Prince of North Wales, by Mr. A. Hallam. Oswald, Minister
of State, by Mr. Theo. Cibber. Edwyn, a Gentleman, Attendant on Athelwold. by
Mr. Fielding.
WOMEN.
Elfrid, Daughter to the Duke of Cornwall, by Mrs. Booth. Ethelinda, Neice to
Oswald, by Mrs. Cibber. Lady, Attendant on Elfrid, by Mrs. Grace.
Officers, Guards, Men and Women Attendants.
The SCENE, Chester.

PREFACE to the Reader.
IF there is any Thing, in my Writings, that deserves to be remembered, They
will live, without Patronage: If They ought to be forgotten, They would die, in
spite of Protection. So I commit them to the World, unsustain'd by Dedication.
-- No Patron's Authority can protect a bad Work. -- And a good one can want no
Protection.

I am afraid, we need look no farther, than the Dedications of our Poetic
Writings, for the Source of that Neglect, which the Art, Itself, complains of.
-- While Poetry preserved its Honesty, it was considered with Distinction; But,
when it degenerated into a Traffic, between Praise and Reward, it became
despised, like the Gold of Utopia, not by Ignorance of its Value, but through
scorn of the Use, It was put to.

Before I speak of the following Tragedy, I am obliged to take Notice of
another, the first Dramatic Sally of my Youth: And which, I should be ashamed
to confess, I had the Folly to begin and finish in a Week, but that I have
Occasion, from that Confession, to hope Pardon of its Faults; and admire the
English Goodnature, which received it, with undeserved Indulgence. -- It was
written on the same Subject with This, (upon Mr. Booth's recommending it to my
Choice.) It was, also, acted at the same Theater; and is, still, a Living
Evidence, against me, under the Name of Elfrid; or, the Fair Inconstant.

As I knew nothing of the Rules of Writing, the Play was, consequently, an
unprun'd Wilderness of Fancy, with here and there, a Flower, among the Leaves;
but without any Fruit, of Judgment. -- I know not how it came to pass, that
Athelwold, even in That Piece, deserved some little Pity: But, I am afraid, I
was too Dull a Painter, to hit a Likeness for the Ladies. -- Elfrid suffered
more, by my ill Conduct, than Her own; and was a lighter Inconstant, than the
Histories of those Times have shown her: And, as for Edgar, The Monarch came
out of my Hands, as one of his Successors, out of the Archduke of Austria's;
stripped of Every Thing that became his Condition, and only a King in his Title.

I therefore considered myself as not deserving Pardon, from the Public, till
I had purchased it, with something, Better, on the same Subject. -- This was
the Original of Athelwold.

The New Play has neither Thought, Design, nor Expression, in the least,
resembling the Old one; And my only Reason, for troubling the Reader with this
little Story, is, because, should there be any Thing in the second Attempt,
greatly Preferable to the First, it will be a Proof, that Fancy (for, to say
Genius, would be making bold, with what is none of my own,) wants the Aid of
the Judgment; and should have Regard to the Rules, of an Art, which, like
Religion, had an Orthodox Establishment; but (like that too) has been warped,
and weakened, by mysterious Dullness, and the dry Pride of Commentators.

I am unable to execute any Thing in Poetry, if I have wasted the Care, I
bestowed on this Tragedy: -- Nor can I have so unjust an Opinion of the Public
Taste, (tho I think Nobody will celebrate it, for Poetry,) as not to know, that
should there be Merit in Athelwold, there are Spirits, in the Nation, who have
Influence, and Generosity, to awaken others, into their Sentiments. -- I say
this, for the sake of the Stage; for, as to myself, the Distinction of
Deserving to be Read, is all the Advantage I propose from my Writings.

A. HILL.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. WILKS. OUR Author's Wishes, partial to the Stage,
Not for himself, your Favor would engage:
Not his own Cause, but ours, he would defend,
Nor fears an Enemy, -- nor tasks a Friend:
But, frankly, bids me own, that from his Plays,
He means no Profit, and deserves no Praise.
Yet, has he one fond Passion to impart;
One favorite Weakness, that has warmed his Heart!
Constant, he doats on a declining Fair;
Yet, recommends his Mistress to your Care;
Though past her Bloom, still tempting she appears,
A mid-ag'd Matron, -- of three thousand Years!
Slight not Dame Tragedy, -- nor fancy, Sirs,
That Pain, and Spleen, and Age, alone, are hers:
Old, as you think her, still, she moves, and warms,
Smiles through the Soul, and swells the Heart with Charms.
But the vain Prude, too coy, to yield, at Pleasure,
Vows, she will be wedded, -- or withhold her Treasure.
Take her, to Wife; -- the Match could never be wrong,
But, for one Quality -- she will live too long.
Could ye, for once, forgive the serious Strain,
And bear a useful Truth, undressed, and plain? --
Fain would the Muse remind you, that the Stage
Received most Honor, from the wisest Age.
Athens shone brightest, when the crowded Scene
Fired her bold Sons, -- to dare, -- to act, -- to mean!
Greatly, to copy the departed Great,
And be the Chiefs, they learnt to emulate.
Warmed, by this Heat, which to their Plays they owed,
The guided Passions of a People glowed:
High beat their cherished Hearts, in Glory's Cause;
Firm stood their Freedom, and long lived their Laws:
Charmed into Virtue, and by Pleasure taught,
The raptured Youth, the meant Impression caught,
Grew up to Greatness, Liberty, and Arts,
And snatched the Hero's, from the Player's Parts.
Oh! could we live, to hail the future Day,
When sparkling Folly shall give Genius way;
When low, light, Scenes shall tempt the Eye, in vain;
And Passion's Power impress the Heart, again;
Then shall the Muses, like their Monarch, smile,
And all Heaven's Blessings crown his happy Isle!
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. BOOTH. THIS whining Tragedy has made me hoarse,
Yet, as an Epilogue's a Thing of course,
I cannot help telling ye, before we part,
I Am glad my Husband's dead, with all my Heart:
That Is one Confession, -- and one more shall be,
I wish the Author were as dead as he:
His murdering Muse, in downright Love of teizing,
Kills one, for being pleased, and one, for pleasing:
Stabs Ethy -- 'cause her Love was an untrue one,
Drowns my good Man, because he liked a new one:
Lud! Lud! -- what Work 'twou'd make among the Fair;
Should every Belle be drowned, that loves a Pair:
And, as for Beaux, -- who make no Bones of erring,
They Would fill the Seas, all round, like Shoals of Herring!
A fine Example, truly! don't it move ye?
Were it well followed -- how 'twou'd soon improve ye!
Send ye, in Pairs, to Heaven, where good Folks Trust is,
Martyrs, Lord help ye! of Poetic Justice!
I, for my Part, had a sweet Race to run,
I, -- not to be a Queen; -- must be a -- Nun!
No, Ladies, have a care os that: -- The Poet
Belies the Story, -- and, thank Heaven! I know it: --
Elfrid was wiser, and the King was kinder;
Even, in the Convent, he knew how to find her:
He, pious Prince! loved Penitence so well,
That, often, he traced it to the loneliest Cell;
Confessed the Saints Himself -- blessed Occupation!
Freely bestowed his Princely Consolation;
And eased the Father Girards of the Nation.
Nay, it is no laughing Matter -- I am serious,
I meant no Mischief, I: -- no Hint mysterious!
Ask Hollinshead; -- He Will tell ye, if it is new to ye,
That Edgar was a Lion -- at Church Duty.
One of His Virtues needs must Envy raise,
He was the veriest Patriot, of His Days!
He, not to Maids, alone, thought Pity due,
His will, unwearied, worked for Husbands, too.
Dependent Princes sent their Wives, by the Dozen,
To tax This Bounty of their Royal Cozen!
And Eight dubbed Monarchs, of his own Creation,
Rowed him, in grateful Triumph, round the Nation.
This being so -- what does our Author Merit,
Who wrongs a Prince -- of such a Public Spirit!
Hang him, dull Poet! -- I Will say nothing for him,
In good King Edgar's Quarrel, I abhor him: --
Take him among ye, -- and, if e're you would mend him,
To some kind Jesuit, for new Notions, send him.
ATHELWOLD: A TRAGEDY.
ACT 1. SCENE 1.
A Rocky Coast, without the City of Chester. Athelwold, Elsrid, Edwyn, Men and
Women Attendants. Athelwold, to an Attendant. BACK to the Boat; caution the
Mariners,
When asked, what Lady shared our illtim'd Wreck,
To answer, at their Peril, as I taught 'em.
Edwyn. -- [Exit Attendant.

Edwyn. My Lord?

Athelwold. Haste, watchful and unmarked,
Climb that high Path, and, entering my Apartment,
Through the close Grove that bounds the Palace Garden,
Warn Egbert to receive us: So shall we shun
The City's busy Eye. -- Elsrid, my Wife! [Exit Edwyn.
My Hope! my Fear! my Pride! my Soul's soft Joy!
Was ever fatal Shipwreek timed like ours?

Elsrid. Why kept we not the Sea? Those unseen Shoals
Had then been left, far distant.

Athelwold. Shame on this Pride
That swells the Hearts of Kings! -- But that I shunned
His wide-stretch'd Navy, whose expanded Wings
Enclosed you empty Triumph, we had, in Safety,
Held on our Course for Lancaster, -- and Edgar,
And Chester's dreaded Walls, been passed, unseen.

Elsrid. Why shunned you Edgar? You had struck no Shoal,
Had Jealousy not wrecked you. Where was the Danger,
Had we, amid the shouting Swarms, approached
His glittering Barge? that, proud of eight Kings Rowing,
Methought, moved, conscious of her glorious Freight,
And felt her Sovereign's Triumph!

Athelwold. Edgar is young,
Amorous, impatient, hot as the Summer Sun;
But as the Shadow changing. -- Emma, the Sister
Of Leolyn, my Friend, must be his Queen.
That Day once past, that Day, now near, my Elsrid,
Trembling no longer, for my Soul's best Treasure,
I shall unveil thee to the Eye of Edgar:
Then, in full Luster, break upon the Court,
Charm the glad World, and swell the Voice of Wonder.
Till then --

Elsrid. Till then, you think, a Woman's Honor
Is safest when not trusted? -- Come, be wise;
Laugh at your Sex's Notions, and see Truth,
Unprejudiced by Maxim. You have been taught
That a Man's Caution guards a Woman's Virtue:
Believe me, it is an Error. -- Wronged by the Doubt,
We make that Doubt our License, and grow light,
To justify Suspicion.

Athelwold. Of thee not jealous:
I fear the Heart of Edgar: There is a Secret
Which, yet, thou must not know! -- For all the Glory
Fortune could heap upon a happy Wisher,
I would not he had seen thee.

Elsrid. Why choose you then
To lodge me in the Gardens of his Palace?

Athelwold. Safely concealed, in my Apartment, there,
While Triumph busies the tumultuous Court,
Fair as thou art, thou may remain unknown,
Till soon we re-imbark for Lancaster:
But Fate has driven me under Edgar's Eye,
Nor can I shun his Presence. -- [A Shout at distance.
The Barge, triumphant,
'Twixt the two sounding Banks, floats proudly in;
See! the broad Sprinklings from the golden Oars,
Dashed, in gay Mists, against the glittering Sun,
Scatter a liquid Lightning! -- E're the King lands,
Retire, my Soul's soft Charmer. From this Boat,
That foremost strikes the Shore, descends a Lord,
Wily, suspicious, flattering, base, and busy:
Malice and Fear divide his motley Soul:
Softening Submission dwells on his cool Tongue;
But his Heart burns with Envy. -- See! he lands;
Oswald, the State's Prime Minister. -- Retire;
He must not see thee. -- Look! -- Edwyn attends thy Coming. [Exit, leading
Elfrid.

Enter Oswald, attended. Oswald. Away, -- away! -- Here! Eldred! -- Hubert! --
Arnold!
Creep you this reptile Pace, when a King's Honor
Hangs on your drowsy Motion! -- You to the Hall,
See the Port-Reeve prepared to line the Streets,
With his furred Gowns and Scarlet. -- You to the Castle: [Exit first Messenger.
Say to the Governor, the King lands short,
And means to pass the Bridge. -- Haste you too, fly; [Exit second Messenger.
Bid holy Dunstan, and his white-rob'd Train,
Throw wide the brazen Gates of the Cathedral. -- [Exit third Messenger.
All this was well provided for, before;
But it is no Fault, to seem too diligent,
Where Bustling goes for Loyalty. -- Earl Athelwold!
Re-enter Athelwold. Fortune befriend your Hopes, my noble Lord,
As she does ours: Who, on a Day like this,
When Sovereign Edgar triumphs like a God!
Brings back his Godlike Favorite, to partake
A Splendour, thought imperfect, wanting you.

Athelwold. Oh! it is too kind, my Lord, amidst your Cares,
To waste this fine Court Rhet'rick, on a Plainness
So unadorned as mine! -- In War's big Pomp,
The King, sometimes, in the broad Battle's Front,
Finds Athelwold, most near him: But, for a Day
So safely plumed as this, a thousand Feathers,
Loftier and far more gay than mine had been,
Were proud, no doubt, to wave in State about him.

Oswald. Nay, my good Lord! your Enemies must own
Your Valor's ablest Rival is your Reason.

Athelwold. Why will you angle, with too short a Line,
In Depths of cautious Honesty? -- I know you. --
Why will you still, you and your envious Faction,
Bow, to the happy Favorite you hate,
And smile your Curses on me? -- Shame on your Meanness!
If I deserve Esteem, give it, sincere:
If not, disdain to court the Man you fear,
And, with brave Truth, renounce me.

Oswald. Why, thus it is, ever!
Distrustful Men but nourish new Suspicions
From the best Means we use, to quench the old.
Still I am misconceiv'd. -- My Lord! My Lord!
Ill Agents have been busy. -- And here comes one,
Re-enter Edwyn. Whom Oswald should avoid. -- I Will charm the King
With News of your Return. [Exit Oswald.

Edwyn. A newborn Love
Is full of soft Impatience! -- Soon as arrived,
I was commanded to return, and press you
To shorten your meant Absence.

Athelwold. Is she safe?

Edwyn. Egbert is warned, should the King quit the Crowd,
And but approach the Garden, to conceal her.

Athelwold. Then I will fear
No longer, but expect the King; and meet him
With a masked Smile of Innocence. -- O Edwyn!
Should Ethelinda know I have married Elfrid,
How wretched would it make her! -- Oswald hates thee:
As if he read our Secret, through thy Heart;
Saw there thy generous Silence, which conceals
My dearstol'n Night of Joy with that soft Charmer.
Who that saw both, could think her Neice to Oswald?

Edwyn. So, my good Lord, would her false Servant say;
That doubly faithless Fair-one, who betrayed
To me her Lady's Honor, yet forsook me!

Athelwold. She wronged her Mistress; but she loved thee surely!
Who, in that Secret, gave up both our Honors,
To thy safe Keeping. -- But, since all was told thee,
'Twere now a fruitless Point of proud Reserve,
With thee, to keep that Silence, which the Favored
Should hold, in reverence of a Lady's Honor,
As sacred as his Glory. -- Oh! suppose not,
Because she blessed my Wishes, that Ethelinda
Yielded like common Beauties.

Edwyn. 'Twas plain, You loved her;
For, when her Horse was drowned, in Severn's Ford,
You, from your own, leapt, rash: Through the swol'n stream,
Plunged on, and snatched her, sinking.

Athelwold. True, I loved her,
But loved her with Desire: while, in Her Breast,
Love, which, at first, was generous Gratitude,
Drew all its Warmth from Pity. -- Never, never,
Shall I forget, how blissfully I won her!
'Twas the dear Night, before this fatal Journey;
I found her, Edwyn, sunk on her Couch, alone,
Weeping, with amorous Grief, for coming Absence:
Loose and enchanting-negligent her Dress;
Faint was her Air; and a kind nameless Languor
Sighed, in short Heavings, from her softened Heart;
And every Breath was Tenderness and Love!
There, while transported, on my trembling Knee,
Bending, I gazed, and hung devoutly over her,
Raptured, and charmed, I plunged amidst Attraction;
Sighed on her Eyes; breathed over her panting Bosom,
And snatched her Soul, unguarded: -- Millions of Vows,
Fierce, burning, Vows! of Everlasting Love,
Transport, and Marriage, and Eternal Truth,
Thawed her reluctant Virtue to Belief:
Then -- in the soft Desire's new Warmth, I pressed her,
Till, in the beating Tumult of her Heart,
She gave -- she knew not what -- nor meant Compliance!
Fortune renounce me, Edwyn, but my Reason
Prefers her, even to Elfrid: -- My Passion did not.
The Love she felt for me, I feel for Elfrid;
And am unwillingly undone -- like Her.
A warlike Symplony. Hark! -- the King lands. The Avenging Hand of Heaven
Points out my Baseness. -- How shall my guilty Eye
Meet the wronged Goodness of the Royal Edgar!
How shall I skreen the Charms of injured Elfrid
From the King's sight! -- What shall my bleeding Heart
Say, to lost Ethelinda? -- Yet, Edwyn, find her:
Tell her I come, while every busy Eye
Hangs on the Pomp, to sigh my Soul out to her.
Say in the Inmost Garden -- The Close Walk,
That points upon the Grotto.

Edwyn. Fatal Wreck!
Heaven, that commissioned it, avert my Fears. [Exit Edwyn.

Athelwold, alone. He comes -- I Will walk a Turn behind these Rocks;
And gather Firmness, to sustain his Eye,
Whom, most of Men I love; yet, most have wronged. [Exit.

SCENE. II.
Enter Edgar, from the Triumph, atttended by Leolyn, Oswald, etc. Edgar.
Chester, This Act, to Time's last Hour, renowns
Thy Name, with Edgar's. Far, as the bounded World
Gives Space for Fame to breathe in, shall be spread
The Boast of this Day's Triumph. -- Yet, Thou say,
Nations, whose Names lie deep, in unborn Time,
Will rise, and censure, and mistake our Purpose.

Leolyn. Many will judge amiss, and call it Insult.

Edgar. I know it, and despise it. My freed Soul
Then, stripped of her Encumb'rance, mounting strong,
Shall rise, above Ambition; nor hold Fame
By the faint Tenure of weak mortal Praise:
But from the Partners of her bright Enlargement!
Spirits! that judge unprejudiced, and move
Unbounded, and, in Millions, fill those Voids,
Which Thought even aches, to guess at!

Leolyn. The Forms of Homage
Differ, with Sovereign's Wills: yet are but Forms.
Kings suffer not by Seemings; if they did,
The Shame, that follows Insult, would cut double,
And wound the Wounder deepest.

Edgar. Nobly spoke!
Spoke like the Friend of Edgar, and of Athelwold!

Oswald. Malignant Envy will not dare misjudge
The Virtues of our Monarch. Raised to this Height,
Our Wishes are outstript; and all our Task
Is, to receive, and wonder at, our Blessings!

Edgar. No Flattery, Oswald. -- It Is my noblest Pride
To have deserved Applause: To listen to it
Sullies the conscious Glory. -- Athelwold! --
Re-enter Athelwold. Friend, of my Soul! my Life's best self! my, Light!
My every Wish at once, and every Blessing!

Athelwold, kneeling. My Gracious, partial, Sovereign!

Edgar. Rise -- nor distress me,
With this vain Ceremony. Bow, but to Heaven,
That made thee not a King, to make thee more;
And stamped thy Soul divinely! -- Cornwall's Daughter,
I find, deserved not, I so long should lose thee.
All thy long Letters, welcome, as they were,
Brought me no Hope from Elsrid: Fame, it seems,
Deceived us, and had flattered her.

Athelwold. She Is Fair:
But never could have been that striking Charmer,
So found and lost at once. She flames not out
With That strong Blaze of Charms; that living Fire!
That burns, unquench'd, upon your Royal Memory.

Edgar. No, Athelwold; -- I see, I hear, she cannot.
Else, had thy Eyes caught Fire, and streamed it on me.
Else, had thy laboring Heart, oppressed with Meaning,
Shook, like an Earthquake, in Discharge of Passion. --
Thou art a cold Describer! -- Oh! -- the Day!
The dear, remembered Day! when, at the Altar,
Where, in Thanksgiving, I had bowed to Heaven,
Heaven seemed descending on me! -- My raised Eye
Met her flashed Charms, amidst a gazing Crowd,
Who, from the Scaffolded Cathedral's Sides,
Poured their bold Looks upon me: Greatness, and Languor,
Flowed, in a softened Radiance, from her Mien,
And kindled every Shrine, with new Divinity!
Sweetness sat smiling, on her humid Eye Balls:
And light-wing'd Fancy danced and flamed about her!
Scarce were the solemn Duties of the Place
Remembered, while I saw her! -- At last -- with Pain, --
Slow -- dragging my reluctant Eyes away.
I lost her; -- e're Religion licensed Love
To steal a second Wonder.

Oswald. Strange! that since then,
Inquiry should have toiled in vain to find her!

Edgar. One would have thought, the Light that paints the World,
Might have been lost, as possibly as hers!
But, since all Search is vain, and far-fam'd Elsrid
Fails my last Hope, I will redeem my Heart,
And quench the blazing Image. -- Danger, and Arms,
Shall fright the trembling Softness from my Soul.
I will resume War's Thunder. -- Athelwold! -- Leolyn! --
Help me to conquer: Wake me again to Glory:
Tear me from Love, -- and guide me to Renown. [Trumpets without.
Hark! -- They move on. -- Stay; -- Friends have much to speak of.
Anon, we meet again. -- [Exit Edgar, followed by Oswald, etc.

Athelwold. Prince Leolyn,
You had a warlike, though unhappy, Father.
Yon rugged Hills have echoed with his Glory.
But, that his last too fatal Rashness forfeited
Half Wales, your Patrimony, Edgar blushing,
Must have remembered, when He spoke of Love,
You have a Sister's claim.

Leolyn. Emma, my Lord,
Was then a Sovereign's Daughter: now, she is sunk,
To Sister of a Subject. Time was, when Edgar,
Short of his present Fortune, weighed my Daring;
And vowed, my Sister should partake his Throne:
He sees me, now, grown tame: an humble suff'rer!
And, while he holds my Lands, neglects my Blood;
And boasts another Love, to shame my Patience.

Athelwold. Hope better from him. The King's Heart is Noble:
And his past Promise sacred. Passion's Tide
Bears him a-slant, and must, a while, have Way.
Unite your means with mine: my Fate requires
Your Sister should be Queen. Urge Rights of Faith,
And leave The Event to me.

Leolyn. I can urge nothing.
Let me consess, that Love, the smiling Ruin,
Love! has unmanned me, till my softened Heart
Wants even the Will to murmur. -- Ethelinda,
The gentle Ethelinda! fills my Soul.
Why start you at her Name? why have you shunned
To urge her Pity, in your Friend's Behalf?
You saved her Life, and must have Interest in Her,
To aid a Lover's Wishes.

Athelwold. Oh! Friendship! Friendship!
To what will thou reduce me!

Leolyn. I doubt not Friendship.
I speak of Love -- my Love to Ethelinda.

Athelwold. Be wise, and think no more of Ethelinda.

Leolyn. Bid me not live, and I Will obey you gladly.
But, when you bid me cease to think of Her,
You bid me live to Sense of all Death's Pains,
And die to all Life's Comforts.

Athelwold. How deaf is Passion!
You must not think of Ethelinda.

Leolyn. I must not?

Athelwold. Unless you cease to pres my Aid, you must not.

Leolyn. Great is your Power, it is true, and no where Greater
Than in the Breast of Leolyn. -- Yet, sure!
A Prohibition, of such fatal Weight,
Owes your Friend's Ear some Reason?

Athelwold. I have no Reason.
Ruin and Fate break in upon my Schemes,
And plunge me in Confusion.

Leolyn. Ruin and Fate!
Schemes and Confusion! -- This Disorder proves,
What I Have long feared, that where I hoped a Friend,
I fired a Rival's Jealousy.

Athelwold. You wrong me, Prince:
Widely, you wrong me!

Leolyn. Oh! -- Grant, Heaven, I may! --
Ease my Impatience, quickly then, and say,
Whence that Confusion rose?

Athelwold. From you; from you:
From Ethelinda, Friendship, Honor, Pity:
Spare me the Torment of a plainer Reason,
And, trust my Faith, there is one.

Leolyn. Is one? -- Ha!
What plainer Reason? -- Perish all my Hopes
Unpitied, -- Let my hated Name be blotted
From every List of Honesty and Fame,
If I renounce not Athelwold's false Friendship,
And, from this Moment, hold him for my Foe,
Till he discloses this pretended Secret,
That my Heart springs to snatch at.

Athelwold. Hot Leolyn!
Rash, headstrong Man! -- Now, by the eternal Power!
By Heaven's all-dreaded Throne! thou shall not. --

Leolyn. Shall not! What!
Not marry Ethelinda?

Athelwold. Impatient Leolyn!
Why do thou interrupt me? --

Leolyn. Impatient, said thou?
I am Frost, Rock, Ice, Adamant! -- Perdition!
Impatient? I am an Anvil. -- Shall not marry her?

Athelwold. I see you moved, -- and bleed with Pity for you.
You said I was your Rival: Hear me, rash Man!
For I will shame Suspicion, by a Trust
Your Levity deserves not. -- Am I thy Rival? --
Take then this Secret from me: Yes, Leolyn,
Woman and Love have made a Traitor of me.
I have, indeed, been false; but not to thee:
I have deceived the King, -- have married Elsrid;
And found her Beauty more than Fame had spoke her.
This known, destroys me: Yet even this I tell,
To ease the throbbing Doubt of thy fond Heart.

Leolyn. Ease! what! whom! -- said thou not that Ethelinda
Must not be mine? that Ethelmda shall not?
And, while Life trembles at it, thou would sooth me
With a slight Tale of Elsrid! -- Why do thou trifle with me?
Or do thou know, for, by my Heart's lost Hope,
Thou seem to mean it, -- some black secret Story
That her fair Fame is touched by? -- Ha! -- by that Heaven
That doomed me, from my Birth, to Wrongs and Shame!
Thou have thyself betrayed my Ethelinda!
My tortured Memory recollects your Looks,
Her Bluthes, your Confusion, when by chance
My Entrance has disturbed your Privacies,
With an unwish'd Intrusion. -- Oh! it is plain,
Thou have destroyed my Peace: Thou have possessed her.
Thou! -- Thou! -- thy guilty Silence owns it; proves it.
Was it not so? -- Say; answer me; -- speak; tell me?

Athelwold. Mad, as the Winds in Tempest! -- till thou cool'st
I will not answer thee.

Leolyn, drawing his Sword. Curse on my Life's best Wishes,
If I not force the Secret from thy Heart,
Or drown it in thy Blood.

Athelwold. Away, light Threat'ner! --
'Twas Friendship's undeserved and generous Delicacy,
That, in a tender and unguarded Moment,
Has waked a Jealousy, that will distract thee. --
Honor, forgive me, if, too nicely urged,
I seem to wrong thy Laws! -- and tell this Madman,
I have myself a Claim to Ethelinda,
That blots out his, for ever.

Leolyn. Married to Elfrid!
And yet a Claim to Ethelinda too,
That blots out mine! -- Die, and be dumb for ever,
Thou lying, babbling Traitor.

Athelwold. Nay, then,
Defend thyself, rash Boaster. They fight, Leolyn is disarmed.

Enter Oswald, with a Guard. Oswald. Shame, my good Lords!
Shame on this sudden Boldness of Dispute,
So near the Royal Presence! -- At the Hill's Foot
Your Warmth alarmed the King, and he requires
Your Presence, Prince.

Leolyn. Oh! that the King's Command
Were kind enough but to indulge the Death
Proud Athelwold despised the Power of giving me! Exit, with Oswald and Guards.

Athelwold alone. Why hoped I Peace, who had declined from Virtue!
The Innocent alone act steadily;
The Guilty can but mean it. -- O Ethelinda! --
In the dark Race of Vice, when once begun,
We start on Mischiefs we most wish to shun:
Pushed by the Fate of Guilt, and thence accursed,
New Crimes grow needful, to support the first;
Till, from Dishonor, we to Ruin fall,
And one disjointed Virtue loosens all. Exit.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Grove, in the Palace Garden. Athelwold, Ethelinda. Ethelinda. ALL this is
false in Reason; but your Eloquence,
Proud of its Power, provokes you to offend,
That you may force Forgiveness. -- Was it not cold,
Too cold for Love, in all this cruel Length
Of chearless Absence, when your dangerous Charge too,
Was but to gaze on Beauty, never to write?
Never to bid me hope, the much-fear'd Elfrid
Had left your Heart still partial to my Fondness?
A Fondness that destroyed me! Turn your Eyes from me;
-- They look as they would reproach me: Do not see me,
But tell me why you made such speed to leave me?
Had you but staid, to add one Hour of Peace
To those of guilty Softness; Had I been yours;
Your Wife, that fatal Morning, you do not know
What Tears it would have saved me.

Athelwold. Oh! speak no more;
Your Words are winged with Fire; they pierce my Soul:
They enter, and burn in me! -- Ost have I trembled,
As I do now, when Reverence and Desire,
Shot from those Angel Eyes, have warred within me:
Yet never was I thus distressed, before!

Ethelinda. That you are generous, my fond Heart confesses;
Else, how destroyed a Wretch were Ethelinda!
If, like the Base among your Sex, you shunned me,
Nor pitied the kind Weakness that betrayed me,
But added Shame to Guilt, and grew inconstant,
And left me, for another; Save me, ye Saints!
To what a dreadful Depth of startling Misery
Had my lost Honor plunged me!

Athelwold. Graced, as you are,
With artless Virtue, and unconscious Beauty,
Strengthened with Wisdom, sanctified by Truth,
And sainted over with Sweetness! -- Though your Voice
Is tuned to Transport, and each melting Accent
Shakes to my Soul, and swells Despair, to Music;
Yet is there something so disordered, here,
That I even wish thee silent! -- Thy soft Words,
Moving, and warm, and gentle as thy Bosom,
Strike me, like Death, when his eternal Frost
Creeps, in cold Anguish, over us!

Ethelinda. Oh! my kind Lord!
To feel this wondrous Ecstasy, for me!
This noblest, tenderest, Mark of mournful Passion!
Is such a sweet Atonement sor my Tears,
That I could weep for ever. -- Be it my Glory,
My Duty's Pride, and my full Heart's chief Joy,
To give unbounded Love, in soft Exchange,
For your indulged Endcarment. -- Let me not live,
If I prefer not that dear Name, your Wife,
To all those empty Sounds, those titled Nothings,
Which Edgar treasures for his unknown Queen!
-- My Lord! -- you start; -- and tremble, and look pale!
Come; -- this quick Sense of Gratitude and Love
Works too intense, and I must chide you for it.

Athelwold. It is too much: -- And Honor and Humanity
Disclaim the brutal Heart that could bear this,
And be less moved than I am. -- Curse on the wild,
The boundless Luxury of wanton Love!
What have I lost! What am I doomed to suffer!
Who could heap Sufferings here!

Ethelinda. Sufferings, my Lord!
And wanton Love? -- What Love? -- Whose Sufferings?

Athelwold. Mine, mine, thou injured Truth! -- who could name wanton,
And mix a Thought of thee?

Ethelinda. But you named Sufferings!

Athelwold. What Lover lives without 'em?

Ethelinda. A Lover's Sufferings
Once past, give present Joys a livelier Relish:
The sacred Tie that firms a Wife's fost Claim,
Will free pained Memory from the Blush of Weakness.

Athelwold aside. How mean is Guilt, that it must bow the Heart
To Falsehood and Disguise! -- New in Dissembling,
I shall betray my Grief, and shame my Art. --
-- The Suffering that I meant, my Ethelinda,
Was, that an ill-timed Chance, a while, withholds
Our Hands: But what are nuptial Forms, to Love!
Prince Leolyn, my Friend, -- alas! he loves you;
Loves you, my Soul's sweet Pain, to such Excess,
That his Life hangs but on his Hope of you!
Jealous, he dies with Fear, that I am now
His Rival in your Love: -- what will he feel
When I am owned your Choice! -- May not your Pity
Indulge Appearance, for my Friend's wished Ease,
Till Time, or Accident, gives means to save him?
Mean while. --

Ethelinda. What would you do, mean while, my Lord?
You would not sure! that I receive him? hear him?

Athelwold. That were too much. It might, perhaps, suffice,
Should I, more rarely, and with Caution, seek
The Blessing of your Presence.

Ethelinda. My Lord! my Lord!
You are detected. -- My taught Heart, at length,
Blind as Love made it, sees your Baseness through;
And burns with Shame; and bursts with Indignation.
This poor Deceit was formed, but to evade
My due Repair of Honor. 'Twas the word Wife,
That made this sudden Politician of you! --

Athelwold. Soften those angry Eyes, which sparkle on me.

Ethelinda. -- Away, -- nor bring Contagion to my Soul.
-- Oh! what a dreadful Change in my poor Heart
Has one weak Moment made! -- scorned, like the Vile,
Dishonored, infamous, despised, for ever,
I must become a Wanderer round the World;
Meet Cold -- and Hunger, -- Poverty and Shame;
Anguish and Insult. -- Better, all, than Man!
The faithless Murderer, Man! -- What am I doomed to?
Whom have I trusted! Oh! revenging Heaven!
See my Distress, and punish me with more;
I cannot be too wretched. -- Begone, Deceiver.
I would not curse thee. -- I will not wish thee Pain:
But, never, never, let me see thee more.

Athelwold. Be not transported thus. --

Ethelinda. Insolent Coldness!
But I deserve it all. -- My Fairy Dream
Must last no longer, and I wake, to Woe.
The pleasing Folly sinks; and, in its Room,
Rise Penitence, and Scorn, and lasting Pain.
Now, now, the shifting Scene makes haste to change!
Now, now, comes on the Race of Shame, and Grief,
Which every Woman is condemned to run,
Who trusts her Honor to betraying Man! --
Yet, every Woman, where she loves, believes;
Though, not to doubt, is thus to be undone!
Oh! what a Difference, 'twixt the Calms of Virtue,
And these heart-rending Pangs of Guilt, and Shame!
Far has your fatal Journey out-gone all
That my slow Fears forboded! -- These are the Joys,
The Sweets, the Transports, the Eternal Rounds
Of Love, and Tenderness, and Gratitude,
Which were to charm away my sense of Ruin! --
O Woman! Woman! -- What is Vanity!
What is Belief, that, though a Thousand fall,
We shall Conquer, and still hold our Conquests!

Athelwold. By the sweet Memory of that dearest Night!

Ethelinda. Curse on the ill-chosen Oath! -- All, you can swear
By That, will be as false and base as you are.
Loosen your hated Hold: -- I will not hear you.

Athelwold. Could you say hated?

Ethelinda. Off -- By the Eye of Heaven,
That saw my Faith betrayed, not all thy Arts
Shall sooth me to forgive thee. -- Away. -- Be gone.

Athelwold. Look yonder! --
By all my Hopes of Peace, your Uncle Oswald,
And Leolyn, in Conf'rence! -- Oh! think. -- Recover
Your scattered Spirits; and, round the neighboring Grot,
Let us take different Walks, and shun their Eye.

Ethelinda. When next I see thee, may my Woes!

Athelwold. Oh! hold. --
That Oath would kill me. -- Why do you tremble thus?
Shall we not meet again?

Ethelinda. Once -- and no more,
Till in Eternity.

Athelwold. An Hour hence, here. [Exeunt severally.

SCENE II.
Enter Oswald, and Leolyn. Oswald. What! and was this your doughty Cause of
Quarrel,
Because he boasts to have won from Ethelinda,
That Woman's Toy you sigh for?

Leolyn. I wish, indeed:
But cannot wish dishonourably.

Oswald. That is,
You would not tell, as he does: -- why that is generous!
Honor, in Love, is silence. -- But two such Friends
As you and Athelwold, cannot, methinks,
Have fought an amorous Quarrel. -- Your Rival's Thoughts
Are filled with high State Projects? something like Jealousy
Of Trust supposed betrayed? -- some Plot? some Schemings?
Some Aim your Caution started at? or which
Your Oath to Edgar checked your wished Assent to?
Something like this, no doubt, provoked proud

Athelwold. No matter. -- Fear him not. Oswald has Power:
And can procure you the King's Thanks, perhaps,
Even against favored Athelwold. -- As for his Tale
Of Ethelinda; Women are passive Agents;
And, when Love prompts them, can out-suffer Martyrs.
I would not swear he wrongs her: yet I think so.
Believe him not, till I have sounded her.
Half Wales, with Leolyn, a Prince restored,
Should please a Woman, better than Earl Athelwold,
A Traitor, fallen from Power. -- Was it not thus?
Speak frankly to your Mistress's Disposer,
And let Her thank your Loyalty.

Leolyn. Lord Oswald,
I am unpracticed in the Arts of Court;
And my free Thoughts range open as my Eye Balls.
Wronged as I am by Athelwold, my Heart
Disdains to hide his Virtues. -- He may have wishes:
He may deceive, in Love, but not in Loyalty.
A brave Man cannot serve a Prince, and wrong him.

Oswald. Nobly remarked. -- In Faith your Honor charms me!
We live in dangerous Times, and Men must learn
To try the Bosoms they would trust their Peace in:
What sudden Ruin might not careless Innocence
Draw on a great Man's Fortune? -- Had I unwarily
Espoused your Interest, e're my Art had poised
Your hoped Fidelity, I had not known you!
Now, all that Ethelinda holds is yours
But what is already Athelwold's.

Leolyn. By Heaven!
I cannot bear the insinuated Guilt.
The shadowy doubt distracts my tingling Heart;
And I could kill thee, but for trifling on it.

Oswald. Kind, temperate, Madman! -- Take my Thanks, so due
To your indulged Forbearance. -- By good Saint Austin!
These Lovers are the wildest of all Lunaticks;
Their Ravings have no Intervals! -- But see,
Your smiling Stars have sent your Mistress hither;
That Madness may be matched, and soothed with Folly.

Leolyn. Oh! my full Heart! -- It Is she. --

Oswald. Thou finished Lover!
Come -- Hear me charge her, for thee. -- So, Ethelinda!
Enter Ethelinda. Alone? and Cheeks thus rosy! -- One would have sworn,
The Sun, as lively as He looks to day,
Had wanted warmth, without a Lover's Aid,
To light up that Carnation!

Ethelinda. I meant, my Lord,
To have left the Garden -- But mistook the Walk,
I know not how -- I found the Inner Door
Fast locked -- So came about, this shadier Way.

Oswald. You seem confused, methinks?

Ethelinda. But warm, my Lord.

Oswald. It Is a good Omen to a Lover's Hopes,
That you bring Warmth about you. -- Prince Leolyn
Has sighed a thousand Raptures, in your Praise,
And, that he loves you truly, take this Mark;
Elsewhere he is Eloquent -- Dumb in your Company:
And never looked so like the Thing he is not,
As you now see him.

Leolyn. Oh! judge not of my Pain,
By this too light Description. -- Did not soft Termblings
Seize on my Tongue, I could have told my Passion,
In words, that humbler Truths have taught to speak it.

Ethelinda. It Is yours, my Lord, by Privilege of Blood,
To treat me without Ceremony. -- But -- Sir!
If you would have me think, you really love,
Swear but to grant the first Request I make,
And I shall wish you happy.

Leolyn. I swear, with Transport.

Ethelinda. This moment leave me, then, nor ever more,
Speak of your hopeless Passion. [Exit Leolyn, bowing.

Oswald. I did not think that thou had half this Brav'ry;
Nor knew thee for a Heroine! -- why, what a Pity!
This well-tim'd Fierceness, this high Flash of Spirit,
Met not the same deserved success, as now,
When tried against Earl Athelwold!

Ethelinda. Against Earl Athelwold?

Oswald. Against him, for him, on him, or about him.
I am not nice, in Women's Rhetoric: --
If I must speak it plainer, it had been well
You had defended your lost Honor, there,
As, here, your peevish Pride. -- Come, come, -- I know you!
These Secrets keep not long, in our Court Air:
Already it is the Whisper of the Drawing Room;
And by Tomorrow the King's Grooms will have it.

Ethelinda. What have I lived to hear! -- Is it, my Lord,
A wonder that I tremble? -- Who? what bold Villain,
Has gathered Malice, from the Forge of Hell,
To charge this Flashood on me?

Oswald. Why, thou would call him,
No Doubt, Sweet Athelwold! -- Ay, stare, -- no matter.
When next you meet, my Honor against yours,
Great odds, as Things go now! He Will be forgiven.

Ethelinda. Did Athelwold, the soft, the generous Athelwold!
Say This, of Ethelinda?

Oswald. Say it? -- He sings it;
Boasts it, proclaims it. -- Nay, within this Hour,
Hung it on his Sword's Point, and held it out,
To clear the love-dim'd Eyes of Leolyn.

Ethelinda. Oh! -- ill-known Athelwold!
Where shall afflicted Ruin rest concealed.
If in a Breast like thine it finds no shelter?
Only forbear to curse me. -- I do not kneel
In Hope of fruitless Pardon. -- Infamy,
And Scorn, and Want, and Shame, are light Revenge,
To what I feel, within me! -- Conscious Remorse,
And Rage, at my own Weakness, plunge Despair,
And Agony, and Madness, through my Breast;
And I thou would be a Slave, if I could wish
To live, and let the Sun's broad Eye look on me.

Oswald. Rise, Ethelinda, -- and hide thee in thy Chamber:
There, as thou can, be comforted. -- Anon
I will consider, with thee, what is due
To Pity, what to Honor. -- In yon cross Walk
Of meeting Sycamores, or my Eyes cheat me,
Or I diseem the King! -- It Is he! -- Begone. [Exit Ethelinda.
What brings him hither, at a Time like this?
His st^^ more hasty too, and his raised Look
More ardent, and intent, than I have seen it!

Enter Edgar. Edgar. Oswald! -- where is she? -- passed she not this Way?

Oswald. Who? Gracious Sovereign!

Edgar. She, -- the only She: --
Star of my Hope! The Phantom of Desire!
The Power! that, through my Eyes, rushed on my Soul,
And reigns, unnam'd, within me! -- Mounted, but now,
I led the shouting Thousands slowly on:
Rounding the Hill, beneath the terrass'd Garden,
There, from above, her Angel Form looked over,
And beamed Amazement on me. -- As once, in Arms,
Thou did behold me, like the Lightning's Flash,
Shoot from my Saddle, to the Aid of Athelwold,
Dismounted, and in Danger; such was the Fire
With which I leapt, from my wide-starting Horse,
That side-long fled my Shadow! Low on the Ground,
I knelt, and gazed up at her! -- The sudden Stop
Spread an Alarm throughout; and the checked Triumph
Halted, in short Confusion. -- This, when she saw,
Surpised, she darted inward from my Sight,
And left Despair behind her!

Oswald. Was it now,
My Ever-gracious Lord?

Edgar. This Instant; now.
Blessed by unusual Chance, a private Key
Gave me swift Entrance, through the Postern Door,
To seek her, in the Garden. -- Am I awake!
Enter Elfrid. Look! Oswald, look! -- Again, the shining Vision
Breaks on my glowing Eyes! -- Thou Pride of Daylight!
Thou fairest, loveliest, noblest Work of Nature!
If thou art mortal, as my beating Heart,
And my fierce Wishes promise, how have I lost thee?
Where is the Happy Corner of the World,
That could, thus long, conceal thee?

Elfrid aside. Again, the King! --
Such was the conquering, the commanding Softness,
With which he knelt, at the remembered Altar,
Whence my long Woes took Date! -- Sir, -- is it generous,
With this light Freedom of licentious Raillery,
To shock a Stranger's Modesty?

Oswald. Madam --

Edgar. Be dumb. -- [Exit Oswald.
Why have those piercing Eyes so ill distinguished
The Reverence of my Ardour? -- License and Freedom
Would, in your Presence, be dissolved to Awe,
And flow in Sighs to soften you. -- This Hand!
Oh! give it me, -- and I will swear upon it,
That my charmed Spirits never rose, till now,
In such a Tide of Extacy! -- That Heaven
Has left your Sex in shade, to light up you,
With every Grace that swells Desire in Mortals;
Or gives your Guardian Angel Pride to view you!

Elfrid. What am I doing? Whither am I drawn?
Oh the too charming, the persuasive Speaker!
I feel his powerful Voice, in every Vein,
As if my Heart expected, and confessed him.
Sir! -- if a Woman, flattered thus agreeably,
Can judge unprejudiced, you seem of Birth,
Of Honor, and of high Accomplishment:
I cannot therefore doubt, that when I tell you
Earl Athelwold protects me, you will forbear
To press upon the Solitude I seek,
And, for his sake, regard me.

Edgar. If Athelwold
Protects you, I am Athelwold's Protector;
And you are doubly safe. --

Elfrid. Perhaps, my Sovereign! --
Forgive an Ignorance, that could see and hear you,
Yet waited, to be told, you were a King.
Heaven has diffused around your speaking Air
A Glow of Majesty, that marks you Royal.
I should have knelt, before, and paid this Duty,
Undoubting that I owed it.

Edgar. Rise -- dear Divinity!
And charm me with the sweet, the heavenly, Name
You must be worshipped by? -- You said that Athelwold
Was your Protector: Are you of his Blood?
Nothing but that can make him dearer to me!

Elfrid. Ask me not, what I must of Force conceal,
And should have more concealed, but my Surprise
Drew it unpurpos'd from me. There is a Reason,
A powerful Reason! why I must insist
You suffer me to leave you: my Stay would ruin me.
If you have ever felt an amorous Tenderness,
And have not feigned it now, you will not wish
To make a Woman wretched. -- I dare no more
Than this -- You cannot love, if you detain me.

Edgar. Riddles and Torture! -- my charmed Soul is filled
With unspoke Meanings for an Age to come,
And you are measuring Moments!

Elfrid. Are you a King?
Is it your Right to rule? -- Command your Passion. --
There is a Liberty, that dwells with Love,
Too brave for forced Submission. -- Stir not to follow me:
For, if you do, by all that is holy here,
And dreadful in Eternity! I swear,
I will be lost for ever. [Exit Elfrid.

Edgar. The conscious Grandeur of her inborn Pride
Inflames her, for a Queen! Awed by her Frown,
I stood, insensible, and unresolved,
Nor knew that I obeyed her. -- How blind is Love!
Who would have hoped, this Soft'ner of my Soul,
While Athelwold was wandering in her search,
Was of the Blood, and in the House, of Athelwold.
In vain proud Man, with busy Blindness, strives:
And, through long Mazes, each dark Purpose drives.
Lost, on the Depth of Heaven's unsounded Will,
We still float doubtful, yet are active still:
Unwearied with Mistakes, err on, content,
And deviate into Blessings, never meant.

End of the Second ACT.
ACT III. SCENE continues.
Oswald and Leolyn. Leolyn. PAtience! -- Curse Patience: why do thou talk of
Patience,
With the same Breath, the same cold, tasteless, Calmness
That spoke Distraction to me? Have thou not told me
That she confesses it? that this proud Beauty,
This haughty, fierce, disdainful, marbly Virtue,
That scorned my honest Passion; this austere Frowner!
Has been -- Perdition on the Name! 'Twou'd choke me. --
Have thou not fired me with the basest Truth
That ever stung the Heart of a Fool Lover!
And do thou talk of Patience? -- Give it to Statesmen;
I spurn the servile Lesson. Patience! said thou?
Rage and Despair have broke upon my Soul,
And washed away all Patience.

Oswald. My Spirit,
Thank Heaven! is none of these wild fiery Racers;
That, like a Spark in Flax, if not strait smothered,
Burns up the Road it runs through; yet I feel Warmth,
When chafed by Provocation: And let me tell you,
There may be ways, and we may find 'em, Prince,
To reach this proud Presumer.

Leolyn. I must not aid thee:
He was my Friend; and then, my Life was his,
By Tie of Duty. -- He was, since, my Enemy;
And then, again, 'twas his, by Claim of Conquest.
I Have lost Revenge, to Honor. -- I have no Right
To lift my Arm against him: For, from a Hand
Obliged as mine has been, Justice itself
Would redden into Murder. -- But, were I Oswald,
Wronged, as thou art, and free to weigh those Wrongs,
Without this Counterpoise of Obligation,
I would hunt Athelwold to the World's Verge;
Nay, would leap after him, and snatch at Vengeance,
Through the unfathomed Depth of dark Eternity.

Oswald. I too, perhaps,
Who have as light a Spring as you, Prince Leolyn,
Might try that dreadful Leap, could I be sure
That it was bounded, but by Depth and Darkness:
But, should there lie some Realm of Light beyond,
I should look foolishly, when I fell through,
To find my State grown worse than 'twas before,
And no Road back again. -- Methinks, it is strange,
That you, hot Fighters, Friends of barefaced Anger,
Have never learnt our safer courtly Art
Of Vengeance without Danger! -- You injure me,
And I assault you openly: -- Man against Man
Gives Chance an equal Cast: It Is you or me:
Suppose, as first you wronged, you, now, should kill me?
Where Is Vengeance then? -- What Equity is here!
No; -- let me pay the Affront, with a first Blow,
Whereby I hazard nothing: That sets us equal;
And, if I not strike home, he is, then, at liberty
To stand on even Terms, and try, once more.

Leolyn. What dare thou do, for Ethelinda's Honor?

Oswald. Force him -- to please her on, and marry her.

Leolyn. He cannot marry her.

Oswald. Why truly, he who has, unmarried, won
What others marry for, will wed at leisure.

Leolyn. Cannot, -- I say. -- Death! thou art such a Trifler!

Oswald. If you had said he would not marry her,
Your Doubt had erred, with Likelihood. -- But that a Man
Has taught a Maid what Wives alone should learn,
And cannot therefore make that Maid his Wife,
Is a new Point in Logic! -- Troth, I have seen
The Court thick sown with these instructed Virgins,
Who all grew up, to Husbands; and, sometimes,
Have even learnt on, for Life, from their first Teachers.

Leolyn. Tire me no more, with this provoking Lightness,
Upon a Theme that stings me. -- I tell thee, he cannot; --
Mark me, -- he cannot marry Ethelinda;
Because -- he has already married Elfrid. --

Oswald. Elfrid! what Elfrid?

Leolyn. Why, that far-nois'd Elfrid;
What is her Father's Name? The Western Duke? --
Death! -- I remember nothing: -- Cornwall: -- He:
The Duke of Cornwall. -- She! whose fancied Charms
The King was wise enough to choose this Athelwold,
His Ear's Engrosser, and his Eye's Pourveyor,
To go and look at for him. -- A strange mad Humor
Worked in his Brain, that she might prove his Idol,
His wild Church Shadow that you have heard him talk of:
You know it as well as I. -- What do you gaze at?
You listen as if I prophesied!

Oswald. It Is Prophecy!
And happily foretells the long-wish'd Downfall
Of our State Column. -- This Atlas Athelwold!
Who bears the Heaven of Favor on his Shoulders,
And shadows all beneath him. -- But, are you sure?

Leolyn. I told it, not to aid thy dark Designings,
But to lament the ruined Ethelinda.
What will Fate do with that unhappy Charmer?
Honor forbids me, now, to wish her mine;
And he who has undone her is another's

Enter Edgar hastily. Edgar. Who is another's?

Oswald. The Prince, provoked to Warmth,
By News scarce credible, and lost in Wonder,
We heard not, Royal Sir! your near Approach.

Edgar. What News? What Wonder? -- Warm? -- The Prince was warm?
Yes; -- The hot British Blood, your Country's Proverb,
The Lightning of your Tempers, flames, I find,
To its full Violence. -- What mad Presumption
Licensed your Arroganee, so near my Presence,
To quarrel with Earl Athelwold to Day,
Whose Friendship is your Fortune?

Leolyn. Sir, -- a Prince,
Though Fortune wrongs him, in Restraint of Power,
Thinks, like a Prince, as when his Throne sustained him.

Edgar. His Throne? Proud Leolyn!
Thy Father was a Rebel. -- Detected Treason
Inverts the vanquished Traitor's Property,
And he and his lost Blood are Forfeits, all.
-- I love the fearless Bravery of free Spirits;
But thy blind Fierceness shocks me. -- Urge it no farther:
A moving Pity pleads thy Cause within me;
Nor wish I, thou should blast it.

Oswald. Gracious Sovereign!
The Prince, unlike his Father, fought your Cause;
And startles me with News, which (when I tell you
It joins the Names of Athelwold -- and Traitor)
Will justify the Wonder it has given me.

Edgar. Traitor -- and Athelwold? Profane Conjunction!
As well might the two Poles be pressed, to join,
And crush the unbelieving World, between them.
-- Take heed, rash Men! when ye dare touch the Honor
Of envied Athelwold, that ye not fail
To prove his Guilt, till, like a Sun-beam's Glare,
It dazzles my Faith's Eye, and makes it weep;
Or your vile Malice shall but fan the Fire,
That kindles to consume ye? -- What has he done?
Leolyn? -- Oswald? -- Speak: -- One of ye, speak? --
Or must I wait, till you invent some Wile,
To skreen your trembling Envy? -- What would ye say
Of Atheldwold?

Oswald. Prince Leolyn asserts,
That he has married the famed Western Beauty,
And has described her falsely.

Edgar, after a Pause. Malicious Ignorance!
Oh! that the Power that rules the Heart of Man
Would, ever, thus, make Mischief impotent!
-- See now this Falsehood! Learn to know this Traitor!
This Athelwold! whom your inferior Souls
Want Sympathy to judge of? -- His Heart's Refinement,
His Elegance of Will, adorning Duty,
Has plotted, with a Subject's sweet Deceit,
To cheat his King, to Ecstasy! -- By Heaven
I had not known, but for your bold mistaking,
That he had formed this dear Design against me.
To Night he means, when Triumph's weary Noise
Is hushed in Darkness, and my Mind, unbent,
Has room for mighty Pleasure, to surprise me;
To pour upon my unexpecting Soul
A Tide of Gladness. He but held it back,
To make its Flow more welcome. -- But I have seen her;
Thou, too, have seen her, Oswald. -- The big Joy
Bears down all Memory, that you both presumed
To wrong the Man I love; and I forgive it,
That you may learn to worship Athelwold!

Oswald. Nay, I have ever said, even to his Enemies,
That he was formed for Loyalty!

Leolyn. This doubling Statesman's Baseness, and the Joy
Of his imperious Master, have uprooted
The Prudence of my Patience: -- I must speak,
Though every Glance of his disdainful Eye
Shot a new Ruin at me. -- Sir! -- by this Transport
Of a blessed Lover, near his promised Joy,
Judge of the Vastness of my Sister's Grief;
Whom lone Despair, and Sense of hopeless Love,
Abandon to Distraction.

Edgar. Is it well done
To choose this Time, this Place, and this rash Manner,
To goad a conscious Frailty?

Leolyn. Tomorrow, Sir,
Had been too late: For, when your Heart is filled
With Elfrid, and with Rapture, how should I hope
There can be room, for Thoughts of a past Promise,
Or absent Emma's Claim?

Edgar. Now, by the Stings,
Which thy abrupt, unartful Insolence
Has roused, to fix their Points on my touched Heart,
The Power of Millions, warring on my Realms,
Should never force me to thy Sister's Arms.
Had she a Charm, for every Fault of thine,
Nature has cursed her with one single Stain,
That blots out all her Virtues. The Part, she shares
Of thy rebellious Blood, is Bane to Love.
-- O Athelwold! how am I blessed in thee!
The Guilt of others, held against thy Worth,
Reflects it stronger on me. -- Well may Traitors
Malign thy Loyalty. Antipathies
Hate, by the Law of Nature. -- Take his Sword:
Why have I Power, if not to curb Presumption,
When it insults my Pity? --
See him a Prisoner in the Castle-Tower?
And, when I am no longer angry, -- ask me
What I resolve concerning him? [Exit Edgar.

Leolyn. It Is well:
The World and I, grown weary of each other,
Can separate, without Sorrow.

Oswald. See, if good Fortune
Brings not Earl Athelwold into the Garden!
Dissemble your Concern; and I will move him
To stir in your Behalf, and reconcile you
To the King's Pardon.

Leolyn. Shame on thy supple Soul!
Thou art the moving Shadow, on the Dial:
Point'st at each different Hour, with equal Ease;
But, measuring all, art nothing. --

Oswald. By good Saint Austin,
An apt and keen Conceit! -- The Castle-Tower,
And Solitude, will ripen Meditation,
Till your Wit quickens, and your Fire flames double.

Enter Athelwold, starting at Sight of Leolyn. Athelwold. Prince Leolyn! -- of
all th'unwelcome World,
The last I would have met! [Retiring.

Leolyn. Hold, Sir; -- a Word. --

Oswald. He has bcthought him of my good Advice,
And takes the Hint, he scoffed at. --

Leolyn. When my Friend serves me, I forget him not. --
Let me discharge a Debt my full Heart owes you;
It may be long, e're we shall meet again;
Therefore, before we part, I judge it needful
To whisper in your Ear -- that Athelwold
Is a detested Villain. --

Athelwold, drawing. A Villain? Leolyn? -- [After a Pause.
Yet -- keep thy Life. -- Thou have been injured by me. --
The wrongs that I have done, forbid Revenge
Against the Wrongs I suffer. [Puts up his Sword.

Leolyn. Racks on thy Heart!
Forbid Revenge? how dare thou name Revenge?
Thou loose Betrayer! Thou Reproach of Greatness!
Thou dignified Deceiver! Revenge! -- Great Heaven!
Let Ethelinda's ruined Innocence
Rise-on thy trembling Soul, -- 'twill fright Revenge,
And shake thee into Sense of silent Shame.
Thou calm, cold, Ruiner!

Athelwold. Nay, now, thou know, thou wrong'st me:
I have been, too Resolved, and dared a Guilt,
I will not dare to justify. -- Farewell;
When, in some cooler Moment, thou deserve
To hear my serious Thoughts, I may confess
I have been faithless to thee.

Leolyn. Stay -- e're thou go,
Let my exulting Heart proclaim one Joy;
Edgar, betrayed like me, has Power, and Will,
To punish his Betrayer. -- I have told it,
Oswald already knows; -- the King too knows it;
And the whole World shall join; to curse thee for it,
That thou have married Elfrid. -- That happy Secret
Was all, that Fortune lest me, for my Vengeance,
And I have given it to the Tongues of Millions.

Athelwold. Thou have not done that Outrage on thy Honor?

Leolyn. Not done it? -- By the Pangs which wrung my Soul
For Ethelinda's Ruin, but I have --
Not done it? -- 'Twas the last, the liveliest Stroke,
That I could pierce thy Heart with. --

Athelwold, drawing again. Then, thou shall die.
My Guilt, absolved, by baser of thy own,
Disclaims Contrition, -- re-assumes Revenge,
And gives thee up, to my remorseless Anger. --
Defend thy Life, more bravely than before,
Or thy hot Blood shall blush upon my Point,
To expiate thy Dishoncsty. --

Leolyn. See, where my Sword,
Lodged in a colder Hand, secures thy Bravings.
Now boast the well-tim'd Triumphs of thy Tongue,
That, safely, dares a Prisoner.

Athelwold. Restore it, Oswald;
How, or by whose Command, it is thine, no matter. --
I have not Leisure now, to ask, or hear it:
Give him his Sword, this Instant. --

Oswald. My Lord, I hold it by the King's Command.

Athelwold, forcing the Sword from Oswald. Talk not to me of Kings! -- Less
than a God
Would now want Power to keep it; -- give me the Sword,
On Pain of thy own Life, refuse it not.
Away -- nor interrupt us.

Oswald. Alas! Alas!
How fruitless is good Counsel! [Runs out hastily.

Athelwold. Here, take thy Sword,
And teach it, if it can, to guard thy Baseness.

Leolyn. Oh! that my boiling Blood had no Restraint,
But Fear of what thou threaten'st! -- and that this Morning
Had left Resentment free; nor cursed my Memory
With that loathed Life, which, since 'twas spared by thee,
Is mine no more, against thee. --

Athelwold. Perish the poor Pretense
That covers thy Confusion! -- If aught, I did,
Had Merit to withold thy Arm, take Notice,
That I renounce it. -- I despise thy Gratitude,
False, as thy Boastings. -- If thou want yet more,
To re-inspire thy Rage, and wake thy Honor, --
I will invent Disgraces, to provoke thee!
If, in Contempt of thy too weak Resistance,
I spared thy Life, -- Against my Mercy, weigh
My Triumph, over her Innocence who charmed thee;
That makes the Balance even. -- Oh! Thou have raised me
To such a burning, such unmaster'd, Anger,
That I grow base, as thou art, -- and thy Blood
Will stream in vain to quench it.

Leolyn. Rail on. -- I Will wait,
'Spite of thy Arrogance, I Will wait, -- nor kill thee:
Till some new Injury sets free my Rage,
And blots out Obligation.

Athelwold. Tortures and Fire!
Shall thou inflame me thus, -- Unseat my Soul;
Tear out wronged Patience from my bleeding Heart,
And work me into Tempest! Then grow cool,
And, insolently mild, with Stoic Tameness,
Hope, -- thou coud'st stop me, in the steepest Fall
Of my whole hurried Vengeance. -- No, -- if thou wait'st
New Provocation, it attends thy Call;
This will enrage thee, to renew thy Rashness; [Strikes him.
And meet the Death I mean thee.

Leolyn, drawing. Yes -- That has done it:
Now, thou have freed me, from all fond Reluctance,
And sanctified the Will, that sinned before. [They fight.

Oswald, without. Haste -- or we come too late. --
[Enter Guards, and beat down their Swords.
Athelwold. We are prevented.

Leolyn. Then I must wait, and groan for Liberty,
To thank thee, as I ought.

Athelwold. For Liberty!
Oh! doubt it not. -- By Heaven it shall be thine:
I will, myself, find means to force thy Freedom,
That I may claim thy Life, in just Exchange.
Where shall we meet? [Softly.

Leolyn. West, on yon terrass'd Cliff.

Athelwold. Expect Deliverance, e're an Hour be past;
Then haste, -- and find me there.

Enter Oswald. Oswald. Quick -- seize Prince Leolyn.

Leolyn. It shall not need; my Sword is yours, again,
Conduct me, at your Pleasure.

Oswald, to the Guards. Lead to the Tower.
[Exeunt Leolyn, Oswald, and Guards.
Athelwold. Be hushed, my Heart; -- forget this rash Man's Rage,
And, till I meet him next, be weak as Woman;
For Ethelinda comes, and brings Reproach,
That bows me to the Dust, in conscious Shame.

Enter Ethelinda, to Athelwold. Ethelinda. Cooled, by a short Reflection, into
Hope,
That I mistook your Purpose, let me, yet, say,
You are well-met, my Lord.

Athelwold. Oh! -- would I were!
The Time has been, when if we two were met,
There was no World beyond us. --
But, now, I wander, like some fabled Ghost,
Trembling, and earnest to impart his Secret,
Yet wanting Power to speak it.

Ethelinda. Such Ghosts, they say,
Wait, to be spoke to, first; then, they reveal
Their dreadful Wills, and vanish. -- 'Twill be thus
With your proud Heart: Soon as I have accused you,
Covered with Shame, your Answer will be short,
Confused, and fatal; and you will vanish from me,
Alas! I fear, for ever. -- Look on me, Athelwold!
Raise your fallen Eyes: -- They once could gaze, delighted,
And hung their Beams on mine, as both were formed,
Of one divided Flame, which parted, hard,
And struggled for Reunion. -- Teach 'em, once more,
To fix an unmoved, steadfast, Look upon me;
Hold them, thus earnest, nor decline their Lids,
Till you have answered me this one sad Question:
What have I done, that could deserve, from Athelwold,
That he should boast my ruined Peace, to Leolyn?
Your conscious Eye sinks, guilty. -- My Lord! my Lord!
The Virtue that inspires this generous Shame,
Had shown a nobler Influence, had it taught you,
That Insult, always base, is doubly so,
When he who caused the Crime, upbraids it too.

Athelwold. Can you believe me so depraved a Wretch,
So lost to Honor, Gratitude, and Shame,
As to be conscious of a purposed Guilt,
Thus infamously vile?

Ethelinda. I do, by Heaven!
Nay, know you guilty; for, since I saw you last,
My Uncle cruelly reproached me with it,
And told me, you proclaimed it.

Athelwold. Proclaimed it! No:
I am unhappy, but I am not base.
It were too long, and too perplexed a Tale,
While Misery lies, unloaded, on my Heart,
To undeceive thee, now. -- If thou believ'st
I am that low unmanly Wretch thou speak me,
Take this dishonored Sword, pierce my false Breast,
Revenge thy Wrongs, and save my Tongue the Shame
Of what it, soon, must tell thee.

Ethelinda. What would thou tell me?
Thou tremblest! and I read some dreadful Meaning,
That struggles to break on me! -- Why will thou kneel?
There glows a generous Tenderness about thee,
Which half absolves thy Purpose, and bids me hear thee
With Firmness, and with Pity.

Athelwold. Oh! Ethelinda! --

Ethelinda. Out with it, -- speak, -- Would thou not say, -- I hate thee?

Athelwold. No, by my Soul, though Time has changed my Love,
It Is changed, but as the Diamond, that grows brighter,
And lost but Dust, in polishing. -- It Is, now,
No more a fierce wild Flame; but, in its Place,
Truth, calmer, and more lasting. It Is soft Respect;
It Is tender Thought, kind Will, and grateful Memory.
It Is Friendship. -- It Is such Love as Angels feel,
Who mix their meeting Fires; -- and flame together.

Ethelinda. Such was the false, the artful Eloquence,
That lured me to my Ruin. But my Heart,
Instructed by Distress, can now read Meanings.
Who, that is new in Passion, could believe,
That this fair Picture, of thy faded Love,
But proves, thou love another?

Athelwold. What will thou say,
When thou shall hear me own, That Fear is just?
When I confess, abhorrent of Deceit,
That Love, which seemed to root my Soul in thee,
Has new transplanted it, to Elfrid's Bosom?
You start! as if my Guilt were yet a Secret,
Though Leolyn, confesses he has told it:
For, in his ill-retaining Breast, I trusted
The fatal Secret, of my double Falsehood,
Both to my King, and thee. He should have added,
How I was lost. -- That Will, and Faith, and Reason,
At once gave Way, beneath a Weight of Passion;
And against Judgment, Honor, Love of thee,
Fame, and Allegiance, I was born away,
Till she, who should have been my Master's Queen,
Deceived, like thee, became, -- oh! -- turn aside
Thy Eyes -- while I have Voice to say -- my Wife.

Ethelinda. Go on. --

Athelwold. Thou art not moved. -- Some Power divine
Sustains thy gentle Soul!

Ethelinda. I pity thee So mean a Stratagem,
Shamefully formed, to force me upon Leolyn,
And free thee from the Pain of long dissembling.
Go on, -- that I may teach my Heart to hate thee.
This low Contrivance, this poor Trick of Art,
Is baser than Inconstancy!

Athelwold. Sorrow, like mine,
Sinks the sad Heart too low, for Artifice,
And my proud Soul out-swells, and floats above it.
That I am lost, beyond Redemption lost,
My Roof, that once grew proud, in Hopes of thee,
Conceals too clear a Witness. -- Yet may thou curse me,
If I not reverence and esteem thee, still,
With my Heart's inmost Softness. Thy Power improves,
Even by Defection. Lost, to my frailer Sense,
My Soul adores thee, like some nameless Being,
In which, the Woman mixes with the Angel,
And makes a new Divinity.

Ethelinda. Thy Words,
Thy Looks, disordered, and thy trembling Frame,
Fill me with Fear and Wonder. -- It cannot be,
Thou should, thus moved, and movingly, dissemble:
By Heaven! I will be satisfied. -- Thou say,
This Rival, this imaginary Elfrid,
Is now in thy Apartment: I will fly thither;
And, when I have unravel'd all thy Guilt,
Let loose Despair, at once, and die, distracted.

Athelwold. Oh! stay: -- For Pity's Sake! for your own Sake!
For mine! For the King's Quiet! --

Ethelinda. I Will not be held,
Though Kings, and Flames, and War, and Devastation,
And Death himself stood threatening. [Breaks away, and runs off.]

Edgar. [without.] What! hoa! -- Lord, Athelwold.

Athelwold. It Is the King's Voice!

Edgar. What has, thus long, disjoined thee from my Joy?
Hid from thy Sight, by the dark Grot between us,
Thy Voice took Pity on my Heart's Impatience,
And taught me how to trace thee. Pomp could not please,
While Friendship waited for me: Sudden, I left
The unfinished Triumph, filled with a nobler Joy,
And wanting Soul to taste it, in thy Absence.
-- But thou art grown a Lover, Athelwold!
An angry Lady left thee! -- Is it possible,
That the unjudging Sex have Wills, so blind,
That Athelwold, in Love, can sigh in vain,
Punish the peevish Beauty with Neglect,
And fly to thy King's Heart, for Refuge from her.

Athelwold. I blush, -- and am confounded, -- my gracious Lord!
To be surpised in my unguarded Weakness,
By your too piercing Eye. -- Yet Woman's Power --

Edgar. Teach the tall Pine to bend, before the Wind. --
What! has not Edgar felt the Power of Woman?
They toy with Scepters, -- and the Frowns of Kings
Serve them to smile at. When the wanton Tyrants
Play over their soft Triflings to the Heart,
They set their Eyes on Fire, to light us up,
Then, melt us into Warmth, that softens Wisdom,
And we receive the Stamp their Folly gives us.
But why have thou deceived thy Prince's Trust?
Thou art for ever forming some kind Plot,
To quicken Pleasure's Relish, by Surprise:
But I have now detected thee, -- and mean,
For once, to spoil the Grace of thy Design,
And break upon thy Purpose.

Athelwold. Royal Sir!
If some malicious Foe --

Edgar. Yes, yes, they charge thee,
And all thy Guilt lies open: -- But thy Plottings
Make Loyalty look dull, and shame plain Duty.
I have unveiled the Secret. Lead -- to thy Lodgings:
When we are there, I will convict thee, Athelwold,
Of such Designs against thy Sov'reign's Rest,
As more than I shall thank thee for.

Athelwold. [aside.] Whither will Fortune drag me? -- I am discovered,
And he but puts on Joy, to shame my Ruin
With the Contempt of Easiness.

Edgar. Yes, Athelwold,
Statesmen shall learn, from thy deserved Renown,
From Honors thou shall owe my strengthened Crown;
That, where the Monarch is not blind of Heart,
Affection is the Favourite's wisest Art:
While, to Self-servers, due Contempt is shown,
Let Friends, who seek our Interest, find their own.

End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE: Athelwold's Apartment.
Elfrid, and a Lady. Elfrid. WHAT does her Coming mean? -- He could not send
her.
Of what Distinction seems she?

Lady. In her Deportment,
Awfully sad, or proudly angry, Madam.

Elfrid. I saw her from the Window. She seems much moved,
And carries, in her Face, a kind of War,
Of Sorrow, against Pride; that shades, yet softens
The Rigor of her Beauty; as I have seen
A hovering Cloud obscure too fierce a Sun,
And make his Influence sweeter. -- Said she, my Lord
Commissioned her to see me. --

Lady. Madam, she did;
On sudden Business, of the utmost Consequence,
To your own Peace, and his.

Elfrid. Look! -- what Impatience!
She stays not your Return. -- Wait, within Call. [Exit Lady.
Enter Ethelinda. I thought myself so much a Stranger, here,
That I receive you, Madam, in Surprise,
I may have Cause to blush at, when I Have learnt
To whom I owe this Favor.

Ethelinda. You owe it, Madam,
To the too liberal Will of one, whose Favors
More of your Sex, than you, have been obliged to.
So kind a Purposer, as Athelwold,
Means much, he leaves imperfect. -- You had rather
He should have come, his own Ambassador,
Than sent a Representer, such as I am;
Unqualified to smooth your angry Brow,
That frowns cold Welcome at me.

Elfrid. I frown, indeed!
To hear the Name of Athelwold pronounced
With this familiar License! -- Sure! You know him
With more than common Intimacy, Madam,
Who treat him with this Frankness?

Ethelinda. If to have been his Intimate,
May license Frankness toward him, the Court has Claimers,
Who can dispute their Title to your Lover,
By Rights, of longer Date, and juster Tenure,
Than those you hold him by.

Elfrid. Your Pardon, Madam,
I find, I was mistaken in your Purpose;
But 'twas my Woman's Error. She informed me,
You came from Athelwold. Had she said for him,
I should have better known with what Respect
To entertain your Visit. -- On my Word,
He was unkind, to give a Lady Pain,
Who lost him thus reluctantly. -- You watch
His first Return to Court, with Eye, too keen,
To be so coldly looked at.

Ethelinda. Though he told me,
His Roof concealed a Witness of his Guilt,
I took you for a Shadow. But, I perceive,
His Falsehood may be trusted, when he speaks
Of his own Baseness. -- Think me not abrupt. --
If Oaths had Power to bind, he should be mine.
Triumphant in the prosperous Pride of Beauty,
Your easy Scorn insults the Miserable,
Unconscious of their Anguish. -- Sense of lost Peace,
Perhaps, transported an afflicted Heart,
And I appeared too warm. --
I shall no more invade your wished Repose;
All I would ask is -- Pardon the dreadful Question,
Are you the Wife of Athelwold?

Elfrid. The Wife!
What Right of Claim could he presume, to Me,
But what that Title gave him?

Ethelinda. Farewell -- for ever.
Kneel, and pray Heaven, to whose indulgent Hand
You owe Attraction, to increase, and guard it;
Else will your destined Ruin soon instruct you,
That he, who, tempted by your Charms, betrayed
His Heart's vowed Mistress, and deceived his King,
Will, for some new Temptation, give up you,
And leave you subject to another's Pity,
As I am, now, to yours.

Elfrid. Stay, Madam, stay.
You have alarmed me, to my inmost Soul;
And I adjure you, as you hope Return
Of your departed Peace, not to go hence,
Till you explain the fatal Mystery,
Which your last Words were filled with. --

Ethelinda. The Part I bear
In the black Meaning, my sad Soul determines
To feel in Silence, till I shake it off,
To Distance, whence it can return no more.
-- For you, the King, who sent this trusted Favorite,
To court you to the Bed of Royal Edgar,
Not that of Athelwold, -- The King, thus wronged,
Will punish your false Lover, with Revenge,
Which, amidst all my Agonies, I dread;
And tremble for his Woes, who has destroyed me.

Elfrid. O my foreboding Heart! -- A thousand Wonders,
A thousand Mysteries, at once revealed,
Come rushing on my Memory! -- Now, Athelwold,
No longer is it doubtful to my Thought,
Why the King's Eye was judged more dangerous
Than Shoals, and Rocks, and Shipwrecks! -- Now the Mystery
Of Royal Edgar's Words, so lately heard,
Opens, unveiled, upon my frighted Soul;
And Pain, and Terror, and Confusion, shake me.
Oh! cruel Undeceiver! why have you waked me?
Why have you torn me from my joyless Calm?
Which, though it gave no Transport, lulled me in Quiet,
And kept these Storms of Life from breaking on me.

Enter Lady. Lady. Madam! -- The King! --

Elfrid. What would thou say?

Lady. The King is entering here!
And my Lord with him. -- Scarce had I Breath, to fly
Before, -- and give you Notice.

Elfrid. Save him, kind Heaven! --
Teach me, some Angel, to avoid this King.
Teach my distracted Heart to 'scape this Precipice.
Which Way may we retire? -- Yon inmost Door
Opens upon the Gallery.

Lady. It Is locked, and they are here!

Ethelinda. Oh! the severe Resolve of righteous Heaven!
They come! -- I tremble, for this false Man's Fate;
And my unwilling Feet are rooted here!

Enter Edgar, followed by Athelwold. Edgar. Why do thou linger, Athelwold? --
Look here!
The Secret thou would have withheld, yet longer,
Shines out, like the Sun's Heat, to gladden Nature,
And make Creation smile! -- Elfrid! -- my Queen!
Soul of my Kingdom's Hopes! my Fame! my Glory!
Thou art his Gift! -- Oh! let thy Angel-Tongue
Join, to confirm my Vow, to this loved Friend!
This Friend, to whom I owe the sweet Surprise,
That I thus gaze upon thee, thus approach thee!
Lend me thy wished Consent, to firm this Oath,
Which, by my Soul's eternal Hopes, I swear!
That Day and Night shall cease, and Time be lost,
And Nature's slack'ning Springs unwind the World,
E're I forget his Interest in my Heart;
Or hold my Athelwold less dear than now.

Elfrid. Confirm his Oath, kind Heaven!

Edgar. Thou saint-like Goodness!
How shall my swelling Heart contain this Joy!
This over-pow'ring Gladness! -- Blessed, as I am,
Centered in Happiness, 'twixt Love and Friendship,
I can look down on my neglected Throne;
Can see the Pride of Power rise, far beneath me;
And Heaven has scarce reserved one Bliss, to wish for.

Ethelinda. Oh! blind, blind Man! [Exit disordered.

Elfrid. [Aside.] Her ardent Sense of Wrongs
Points at her Life, and Charity compels me,
To save her, from herself. [Exit Elfrid.

Edgar. What mean their Looks?
Signals of Terror, and disordered Partings!
Why are they vanished thus? -- Ha! By my Soul!
Thou, too, art touched with the contagious Madness!
Now has some Devil, malignant to thy Truth,
Wrought to perplex thee. -- No Part of Earth I govern,
Dares cherish Mischief that could wound my Friend,
With this quick Sense of Anguish!

Athelwold. Oh! that all Language
Could be expressed by Looks! or that my King,
Great Substitute of Heaven, could read my Heart;
Like that first Power who made it!

Edgar. What have thou suffered?
I think I should have said, what have thou done?
But that I speak to Athelwold.

Athelwold. How base,
How like a Coward, fighting blind, is he,
Who dares commit the Crime he dares not own;
And, bold enough to know himself a Villain,
Fears, least Another knows it!

Edgar. Stop. -- Say no more.
Art not thou Athelwold? Let me look on thee. --
No: -- By thy sacred Empire, in my Heart,
It cannot be. -- I am at Peace, again.
Go on -- thy Enemies, in vain, accused thee;
But thy own Words alarmed me. -- Yet, my glad Eyes
Have traced thee over, and absolve that Form,
Even from the Power to harbor a mean Mind,
Unsuited and deceitful.

Athelwold. What can I say?
Guilt, when it meets Suspicion, or Reproach,
Sustains itself, within, and learns to balance
Offense, by Punishment. But where it finds
Compassion, and has wronged a generous Confidence,
It ought to blush, in Blood; and has no Way
To Pardon, or to Peace, but this -- through Death.

Edgar. [Disarming him.] Hold thy rash Hand -- And, like my Subject, learn,
To die, when I command thee. -- Can it be possible,
One, brave, as Thou art, should have Guilt, to justify
This Fear of a Friend's Eye? -- Is Elfrid mine?
Or, trusted with the Wants that pressed my Soul,
Have thou, instead of giving, robbed me of more,
And left thy Prince a Bankrupt? Unblessed by Love,
And yet deprived of Friendship!

Athelwold. What has not Love
Made Honor guilty of! -- Turn, Royal Sir,
Turn your Eyes inward, and, in Emma's Tears,
Read the too fatal Power of Elfrid's Beauty.
How could weak Athelwold expect to conquer,
Where god-like Edgar fell!

Edgar. Heaven! it is Thy Hand,
When Subjects, thus, from Prince's Crimes, grow bold,
To charge their Treasons on their King's Example,
And shame us into Justice! -- True, I have erred;
But mark, what Difference 'twixt my Guilt, and that
Which thou nor dare to speak, nor I to hear.
By Elfrid won, from Emma; Love, in me,
Proved but too strong for Love. In thee, not Love,
To Love was treacherous. -- But Love, to Honor,
To Friendship, Loyalty, to sworn Obedience;
To all the violated Laws of Life! --
What Subject, though unfavour'd, dares invade
His Sovereign's Claim? -- But, when that Subject is
A Servant too, bound by the double Tie,
Of Duty and Allegiance; when, beyond all,
His King, his Master, whom he wrongs, selected him;
Treasured his Hopes and Wishes, in his Heart;
Lived in his Breast; partial but in his Cause;
And, against warring Worlds, would have defended him!
What can that faithless Traitor's Reason urge,
To match his Guilt, with mine?

Enter Elfrid hastily. Elfrid. Oh! -- Athelwold!
The injured Stranger, strong, by Despair's wild Rage,
Breaks, like a Tempest, from your Servant's Care,
And meditates Destruction. No Voice but yours
Will calm her into Patience. -- In her Heart's Anguish,
She calls on Athelwold, till Shrieks of Woe
Echo, from Tower to Tower, your Fatal Name,
And the wide Castle rings, with her Reproaches.

Edgar. Go -- and appease her Grief, thou Source of Sorrow!
Free my dimmed Eyes from aching at thy Presence,
And leave me to the Pain of sharp Reflection,
What thou should suffer, from a Prince's Hand,
Who is this Wretch, by thine! [Exit Athelwold.
Too fatal Beauty!
Why have I found thee, but to lose thee more,
And change a painful Hope, for certain Misery!

Elfrid. If, in your royal Heart, I hold such Influence,
Abate your Wonder at my Power in Athelwold's.
Why were you Friends, but that your Souls had Sympathy,
And purposed, each like other? -- It Is scarce a Moment,
Since I first learned, that when he pressed his Passion,
He wronged his Sov'reign's Meaning: Yet, already,
I find the Fault most yours. -- Love is a Leveller,
And all Degrees are equaled, where he reigns.
Why was another sent, if Edgar loved me?
Why was not Cornwall honored by your Presence,
When your unnumber'd Navy swept her Coasts,
In your last Guardian Circuit? -- Had you then landed,
Indulgent to my loyal Father's Prayer,
From what a dreadful Length of destined Woe,
Had my sad Heart been guarded!

Edgar. I saw thee, first,
Unknowing thou were Elfrid, at the dread Altar,
Where, from our aweful Dunstan's holy Hands,
The consecrated Oil confirmed me King. --
How were thou lost, so soon?

Elfrid. Swear but to pardon
The generous, though unfaithful, Athelwold,
And I will show you, we were doomed unhappy,
But by the Will of Heaven.

Edgar. Kings should be just:
And such compulsive Oaths, too lightly sworn,
Make That Necessity, which might be Choice,
And strip the Grace from Mercy.

Elfrid. Then hear my Vow:
Since you decline to bind your doubtful Will,
Thus, on my Knees, all-powerful Heaven! my Soul
Appeals thy righteous Throne. -- Hear, -- and afflict me
With every woeful Curse, thy Wrath has stored
For Perjury, if ever I consent
To quit the Breast, or Claim, of Athelwold.
Or, should he fall, by your revenging Hand,
If I not shun, for ever, even to Death,
The Sight, the Voice, the Name, of Royal Edgar.

Edgar. Cruel, cold, proud, disdainful, -- glorious Elfrid!
What has thy Rashness sworn? -- Yet, let me perish,
If to have sworn it, has not made thy Loveliness
As awful as Divinity! -- Was ever
Distress thus hopeless? Could your untouched Heart
Have Sense of what mine suffers, you would have feared
To wound me, with this Pain of fixed Despair.

Elfrid. Now, shielded by the Safeguard of my Oath,
Virtue may speak, secure, and own its Weakness:
There was a Time, ever Athelwold was mine,
When, to have been the Wife of uncrown'd Edgar,
Would have been more than Monarchy, to Elfrid. --
Fatally curious, from the deep Impression
Of an alarming Dream, I saw you crowned,
Hid, in a clamorous Press, that shouted, round me,
And shook the sacred Dome, with Peals of Joy.

Edgar. Oh! tell it me again. -- Was I so blessed,
That you then thought with Tenderness on Edgar?
What was that Dream? Charm me, thou rising Wonder,
With each soft Circumstance of pleasing Pain:
For, while I die, with Terror of my Fate,
It Is Heaven to hear it, from a Voice like thine.

Elfrid. Oh! sooth not Misery. -- Forbear to speak
With this untimely, this forbidden, Softness!
Awed, by Rememb'rance of my dreadful Dream,
I tremble, ign'rant of the Will of Heaven,
Too dimly gleam'd upon my distant Soul.
I dreamt I sat, and saw the Imperial Crown
Placed on your sacred Head: Your Form the same,
As when I, after, viewed you at the Altar,
And, fainting with Reflection, left the Throng!
Soon as the Diadem adorned your Brow,
You turned, methought, with Brightness more than mortal,
Held it, presented thus; and, high in Air,
Stepped to the Seat that bore me! When strait a cold,
A shadowy Hand divided us: Loud Shrieks
Rung through the Temple: The gay Pomp was darkened,
And a broad Sea of Blood rose high, between us,
And bore us from each other.

Edgar. Thy ominous Dream
Creeps, in cold Tides, and curdles all my Veins.
Seek we, thou lost Inflamer of Desire,
The false, the fated Athelwold. -- My Heart
Heaves, with unusual Bodings. Powerful Pity
Struggles with Justice; and it is more painful to me,
To think, my Friend, should fall, to need Forgiveness,
Than to forgive my Enemy.

Elfrid. This is, indeed,
To reign! So reigns the World's supreme Disposer.
All Things, but one, are subject to his Power;
But even his Power, itself, obeys his Mercy.
Proud of Dominion, yet enslaved to Fear,
Kings who love Blood, through one long Tempest steer,
While the calm Monarch, who with Smiles controuls,
Roots his safe Empire, and is King of Souls.

Edgar. When Woman, formed to soften Man to Peace,
Fans his Disquiet, and gives Care Increase,
Love is a Weakness, and to wish in vain,
Were a forced Freedom, and Escape from Pain:
But where our Hearts are charmed, by Forms like thee,
Where Passions sympathize, and Souls agree,
There to love hopeless, is, in Life, to die,
And, languid, in void Blanks of Being, lie.

End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE: The Garden.
ETHELINDA, alone. Ethelinda. OH! Shame! Why keep'st thou this alarming
Distance?
Cruelly kind, press inward, on my Heart;
But fright not Reason, cling not to my Thought,
Blot, blot Remembrance out, strike Home, at Life,
Pour, all at once, Oblivion on my Soul,
And quench me, into Quiet.

Enter Athelwold. Athelwold. Madam, --

Ethelinda. Murderer! --

Athelwold. I come. --

Ethelinda. How dare thou?

Athelwold. I would find a Voice
To tell thee, I could die, to bring thee Comfort.

Ethelinda. Comfort from thee! -- False Man! till thou were base
I never wanted Comfort. --
Till my wronged Heart had Weakness, to believe,
And share the Pains I gave, I knew no Grief:
Honor, and Peace, and Innocence were mine:
I never felt a Wish, that was my own,
Or Woe, but for another. -- Now, thou see me
Shunned, hopeless, blasted, infamous, and scorned;
Cut off from every social Joy of Life;
Pitied by others, hated by myself,
Forsaken even by thee, for whose sole sake,
All other Joys forsook me! -- Yet thou dare
Insult my murdered Peace; and, proudly charitable,
Feed famished Hope with the cold Alms of Pity!

Athelwold. Be Witness for me, That all-dreaded Power,
Who made my tortured Heart, and knows it best,
Till Elfrid's fatal Beauty forced my Will,
I never had a Wish, beyond thy Love.
My Hopes dwelt on thee, and my doting Soul
Drew Taste and Purpose from thee. At thy Voice
Awakened Life leapt, listening, to my Ear,
And I became all Eye, whenever I saw thee.
Thou were Possession and Desire, combined,
All that Ambition wished, or Fancy formed:
With thee there was no Grief, no Joy without thee.

Ethelinda. Inhuman Flattery all! and Smiling Murder!
The barbarous Elegance of Man's soft Art,
To cheat believing Innocence! -- Ever long
Thy Elfrid, the resistless Charmer! -- She!
Will hear thee poorly urge the same Excuse,
When some third Fool believes thee.

Athelwold. Would kind Fate
Point my lost Heart a Way to prove its Pain,
What would I not, with Transport, suffer for thee,
To ease the Woes I gave?

Ethelinda. One Way there is,
And Love, and Honor point it. But have a Care;
Refuse not to my kindled Hope its Claim;
Lest in my half-hush'd Bosom, thou should rouse
New Swarms of torturing Mischiefs, whose dire Stings
Will drive us both to Madness.

Athelwold. Name it to me,
And if I not obey the wished Command,
Think me, indeed, the Wretch thy Anger paints me.

Ethelinda. Redeem me from the Shame I suffer for thee:
Forsake this Woman, who usurps my Right,
And do a noble Justice, to my Love,
And thy own injured Honor.

Athelwold. She Is my Wife.
The Law's firm Knot has bound her mine, forever.

Ethelinda. The Wife! -- O patient Heaven! What less am I?
Did not, I, first, receive the plighted Vow?
Did not I fondly trust the affianc'd Faith
Of nuptial Contract? -- If to join her Hand,
In Breach of Oaths that bound thy Soul, to mine,
Firms her thy Wife, and sets aside my Claim,
So sacred, and so sworn! -- Then, solid Rights
Are Shadows; and the empty Forms of Time
Take Place of Truth, and Reason.

Athelwold. 'Twill not be. --
My Soul is torn with a vain War of Passions:
Honor, and Shame, and Grief, and generous Pity,
Desire perplexed, and strong divided Will,
To dote forever on the Guilt I hate,
And shun the Worth that charms me! -- Righteous Heaven!
Look down on Ethelinda! Revenge her Wrongs,
Do her that Justice, which in vain I wish her;
Curse this despairing Wretch, who cannot bless her,
And dart thy blastful Lightenings, on a Flame
No earthly Fire can conquer. -- I am a Traitor;
A mean abandoned Starter from my Faith;
A false forsworn Deceiver! -- Give me thy Pity;
And, if thou can have Goodness so extreme,
Refuse me not thy Pardon. -- But for Love! --
Alas! forget it. -- Fly me, -- hate me, -- fear me, --
Oh! share not in the Misery I am doomed to;
Join not thy Virtue to a Fate so cursed,
So fallen, beyond the Reach of lost Relief,
As the unhoping Athelwold's.

Ethelinda. I thank thee:
Thou have awakened me, to feel Heaven's Justice; --
But, now, so low, so poor, do thou appear
To my returning Reason, that I hate not
My Guilt itself more bitterly than thee,
Or than my own weak Heart, for having loved thee!
What Woman ever shall live, beloved, and flattered;
Yet, timely, wise enough to think it possible,
That one, she sees, and hears, as thou have been,
She ever can behold, as thou art now!
Inhuman Sex! who smile us into Ruin!
And love us into Infamy! -- Begone --
Fear for thyself: Kneel, pray, solicit Heaven,
Think not of me, or my Afflictions, more:
But, by Repentance, wash away the Stains
From thy own perjured Soul, lest my shocked Spirit,
When it meets thine, in a less guilty World,
Renews its Pangs, cv'n there, to see thee tortured,
Beyond my Power to bear, though doomed, for me. [Exit in Disorder.]

Athelwold alone. She Is gone! -- and I am left, to walk the World,
Like a pale Shade, that shuns the Paths of Men.
Light searches me too deep. -- My conscious Soul
Starts inward, and escapes the Eye of Day.
Oh! Bosom Peace, now lost! -- Were there, in Guilt,
No Weight more painful, than this Lower of Brow,
This eye-dejecting Sense of infelt Shame!
Yet shun it, all, you, who have Hearts like Men,
That you may raise the Front, and look like Virtue.
I hate myself, beyond the Taste of Hope.
Why live I then? There is a Gloom, in Death,
Will hide me from my Thoughts: -- Yet, weigh that well;
Should I die now, 'twou'd seem Despair, not Justice:
'Twou'd look like shrinking from a Sense of Pain;
Like wanting Strength, myself, to cope with Scorn;
Yet meanly leaving it to a wronged Woman.
O Ethelinda! -- What a Slave am I!
Thus to have killed thee, with Disgrace and Ruin,
Who never had a Stain on thy white Soul,
But one, thy Pity for thy Murderer gave thee?
For whom became I this black Wretch? -- For Elfrid! --
Her! who already scorns my Traitor Flame,
And burns, to the King's Wishes! -- Why staid she with him?
What could she hear? what say, in that nice Juncture?
Hell to my Heart! Into what reptile Poorness
Does a Man creep, who dares not see his Shame? --
Whose Crimes compel him to be dumb, when wronged,
Because Complaint is only due to Innocence!, [Throws himself on the Earth.]

Enter Edgar, and Elfrid. Edgar. Athelwold! I was once thy Friend, and thought
thee
The Wealth of a King's Heart. I trusted thee,
And was deceived. Thou! in whose Breast I lodged
My Hopes of Peace, have let in Misery on me!
What shall I do, to save insulted Majesty
From the Contempt of Weakness? -- Yet convince thee,
That I can bid my Pity be thy Punishment.

Elfrid. Alas! my gracious Sovereign, wound him not
With too severe Reproach, whom your great Soul
Determines to receive to unhop'd Mercy.
-- The King, my Lord! too generous to revenge
The Lover's Falsehood, on the Subject's Faith,
In kind Rememb'rance of your Virtue's Strength,
Forgets your amorous Weakness. -- 'Twere too much
For gaining me, to lose a Monarch's Love.

Athelwold! No -- Madam! -- I am fallen, beneath your Favor. --
KINGS, -- born to think supremely, know it is Glory
To rise, above Revenge. -- But you, who thus
Can speak, and look, the Queen you are not, yet,
Must find it difficult to pardon Guilt,
That robs you of your Royalty.

Elfrid. My Lord!
That jealous Brow, and those reproachful Accents,
Wrong the good Meaning of a Heart that loves you.

Edgar. Shame on thy Blindness, arrogant Mistaker!
So cold to Sense of thy own Guilt! so warm
To charge another's Innocence! -- Her Prayer
First won me from my Anger. -- For her Sake,
I force my struggling Soul to mean thee Pardon.
But take it, with Condition. -- Take it, thus, [Gives him his Sword.
And heedfully remark it. If, henceforth,
Thou dare aspire to Elfrid, call her thine,
Or talk, or think, or dream of thy bold Claim,
Thou shall not live an Hour. -- Till then, breathe on.
The Infamy of thy disloyal Act
Is Vengeance, as severe as I can wish thee.

Athelwold. Oh Sir! resume a Gift, I cannot stoop
To hold, on such Conditions. Death would bless me.
It Is what I wish, and merit. I deserve
All Punishments, but Life, with Loss of Elfrid.

Elfrid. Shocked, and unworthy a Debate, like this,
I should be still less worthy, could I hear it,
Unconscious of the Wound it gives my Honor.
-- Oh! Thou, Eternal Ruler of the World!
Here, by thy dreadful Name, I kneel and swear,
I will be neither Athelwold's nor Edgar's. --
Safe, at Thy Altar's consecrated Foot,
In some still Convent's solitary Gloom,
Aweful Religion shall benight my Eyes,
And hide me from the World. -- There will I weep,
And wish myself forgotten.

Edgar. Oh! -- recall,
Explain, or limit, the too-hasty Vow.
Thou mean but to retire, till I am dead,
Or till his Death who wronged thee.

Elfrid. Should he fall
For me, may Heaven refuse my parting Soul,
If I not keep my Vow, unbroke, for ever!

Edgar. Hear this -- and blush, at thy base Jealousy,
Thou blind Profaner! [A Shriek without.

Elfrid. That alarming Shriek
Rings to my trembling Heart, and wakes its Fear
For One, more wretched yet, -- more lost, than I.
[Exit hastily, and Athelwold is following.
Edgar. Athelwold! -- Come back.

Athelwold. A Curse on Guilt;
It sinks the Brave, to Cowards! -- It was, once,
My Heart's proud Joy, to meet my Sovereign's Eye.
It Is, now, my Soul's worst Torment. -- Hide me, Earth,
From Edgar's angry Brow: From my own Shame,
Not Death itself can hide me.

Edgar. I have bethought me,
That Love and Fate deny, we both should live;
The Heart of Elfrid, when thou art no more,
May teach her to forget thee. -- I, or Thou,
Must fall. -- It was the King's Intent to pardon
The Subject's Treason. The King does forgive thee;
But the Friend cannot pardon. -- Let us, then,
On equal Terms, dispute our doubtful Claim,
To Death and Quiet, or to Life and Elfrid.
Here I renounce Distinction, give Allegiance
To the wild Winds, as thou have done, before,
And seek an Equal's Vengeance for my Wrongs. [Draws.
-- I know that I descend, and that the Throne
Disdains a Subject Foe. But I disclaim
That cold Prerogative of a King's Safety;
To teach thee, that I need no borrowed Power:
Myself the Guardian of my injured Honor,
Myself my Strength, when my false Friend betrays me.

Athelwold. [Kneeling.] O generous Edgar! my Imperial Master,
Whose Spirit reigns, distinguished among Souls,
As among Kings, thy Person; think me not,
How plunged soever in the Guilt of Falsehood,
So lost to Sense of the unmeasured Distance,
Between my Prince and me, to dare defend
One aching Atom of this hated Breast,
Against a Wound he wishes me. -- No; take [Lays his Sword at the King's Feet.
My Sword. -- It has been drawn, with some Success,
In your loved Cause; direct it to the Heart
Of this new Traitor. At your sacred Feet,
The tainted Blood will flow, with willing Waste,
And wash away the Memory of his Crime,
Who lives too long, when he not lives for you.

Edgar. Rise, and provoke me, if thou would be kind,
By some wished Mark of Arrogance. -- Presume,
Talk insolently of thy Worth; defy me;
Smile at my Sword's raised Point; threaten, -- accuse, --
Deny, -- Calumniate. -- Any Thing, but this!
Spare this soft Sorrow, hide this sweet Humility,
And I shall keep my Purpose. -- O Athelwold!
Why have thou pained my Soul, with this sharp Conflict?
Why have thou wronged me, into Will to hurt thee? [Throws down his Sword.

Athelwold. How ill should I deserve your unwish'd Mercy,
Did not my Life become more odious to me
Than was the Guilt I fall for! -- From my Birth,
With fixed, unalterable, deadly Hate,
I punished faithless Rebels. Trust me, now,
Against myself. My Sovereign shall not need
Revenge his Wrongs, on Athelwold. -- One Prayer
Has Boldness, yet, to urge your royal Ear;
Then, I have done with Wishes, and the World. --
Prince Leolyn, whom I have made unhappy,
Now suffers, for my Guilt. So greatly wronged,
I shall not rest, in Death, till your tried Goodness
Permits his Freedom, and bestows on Him
My forfeit Honors, and the Lands I leave.

Edgar. I charge thee, as thy Heart would wish my Pardon,
Attempt not on thy Life. Wait, and expect
Thy Doom, from the slow Workings of my Soul,
That labors to resolve, but knows not how;
For Leolyn, thy generous Wish has moved me.
Go -- bring him to my Presence. -- I will walk,
And meditate, alone, till thy Return. [Exit Athelwold.

Edgar. [Alone.] How shall I move, in this dark Maze of Passion!
It Is true, my Favorite has betrayed me, basely;
But he was first, himself, betrayed by Love;
That Tyrant of the Heart, more King than I,
Ranks Monarchs with his Slaves. -- Let me weigh

Athelwold By my own Wishes, and, then, punish him,
When I can see, unmoved, those Eyes which charmed him.
How shall I act? at once, to shield my Fame,
And satisfy my Love. -- Could Reason's Force
Tear the unlicens'd Image from my Heart,
Or, patient, leave to Time, th'unhasten'd Means,
To bless my fierce Desires; Who knows what Chance,
Or Death, or Thought, or Woman's changeful Will,
Or my own conquered Wishes, may produce.
-- Kings should, however injured, do no Wrong:
They cannot err alone, since what They act,
They authorize in others. -- Let me, then,
Extinguish low Desires, lest, at my Flame,
I light a Nation's Wishes. -- I will strive
To check this rising Passion; and forget
That she who charms me thus is in my Power,
Till I can bend that Power, to Reason's Rule.
-- They come! -- I will avoid them, -- and reflect
What Measures to resolve on. [Exit Edgar

Re-enter Athelwold, followed by Leolyn. Leolyn. Turn -- whither would thou
lead me?

Athelwold. In this Place,
But now, I left the King. -- A little farther,
And we shall find him, soon.

Leolyn. Stay -- for we find,
In these provided Swords, what well reminds us
Of our late Parting. -- Thou have performed thy Promise,
With Bravery so noble, that, again,
'Spite of my burning Wrongs, I almost love thee.
-- It cannot need, that I should spur thy Will,
To what remains unfinished. [Taking up a Sword

Athelwold. I had forgot it.
Guilt, and Repentance, and the Tears of Shame,
Had washed the Indignation from my Heart.
-- Methinks we were not born for Enemies:
Enough, already, have we wronged our Friendship.
Let us be Foes no more.

Leolyn. First, perish Leolyn.
Did thou not blast my Honor by a Blow?
Fired with a Ruffian's Boldness, strike a Prince!
And can he live to pardon? -- Shame to thy Heart,
Or give my Glory the Revenge it claims,
Or I will brand thee with a Coward's Marks,
And teach light Boys to scorn thee.

Athelwold. If it must be,
Spare me a Moment's Pause -- 'Twill soon be past,
And Death will want to Time to sat his Purpose.
-- What shall I do? -- To trust him with my Softness,
To tell him what, at my Request, the King
Was won to grant him, were to seem afraid,
And shrink from his Revenge. -- O fatal Chain
Of long depending Woes, that Guilt is bound to!
Conflicting Passions blast the bad Man's Hopes,
And all his Thoughts are Whirlwind! --

Leolyn. Come on. --
Thy Blow burns hot, and I will wait no longer.

Athelwold. Hold -- Leolyn! Be slow. -- The Chance of Conquest
Is various, and unknown -- and, should I fall,
Thou will have Cause to grieve, thou did not hear me.

Leolyn. Never -- till Vengeance has been paid its Full,
Never will I grow tame, and hear thee more.

Athelwold. [Taking up the other Sword.] Take thy own Way then. -- Let
Destruction fall,
And find thee, without Shelter. -- But see, the King,
His coming -- (in this Place) prevents our Purpose,
On, to the appointed Terras. -- Follow me. [Exeunt together.

[Re-enter Edgar, with an Officer. Edgar. What Oswald told me, of a second
Quarrel,
Renews my Anger against Leolyn,
And wakes me, into Fear of some new Consequence,
From his Enlargement. -- Take a Guard, and bring him,
To answer this Presumption. -- [Exit Officer.

Enter Oswald. Oswald. Oh, Sir! -- Unhappy Ethelinda rests;
Her Sorrows are no more.

Edgar. What has Fate done?

Oswald. See, Sir! Yon Terras, which o'erhangs the Sea!
Thence, falling steep at once, the frighted Eye
Aches, down a Depth of Rocks, to reach the Surge,
That breaks, unheard, below! -- There walking swift.
With frantic Action, in a long, loud, Speech,
The poor distressed Complainer talked, and wept
To the wild Oceani; told the Waves her Woes;
And, listening, earnest, often, in dumb Suspense,
Paused, for an Answer: -- 'Till, at last, more shrill,
She scream'd Resentment, to the distant Deep.
-- Thou art, she cried, as cold, and deaf, as Athelwold.
Then, sudden, from her Breast, in rash Despair,
Snatching a Dagger. -- She, with all the Rage
Of a resolved Destruction, plunged it, thrice,
In her distracted Bosom.

Edgar. Alas! for Athelwold!
How will he meet this Sight?

Re-enter Officer, and Guards, with Leolyn. Edgar. Answer me quickly, -- where
is Athelwold?

Leolyn. Immortal, -- and at Peace.

Edgar. What! -- Have thou murdered him?
Ungrateful, and detested! Murdered Him!
Him, who alone obtained thy Freedom from me;
And, in the generous Anguish of his Guilt,
Prayed, that his Titles, and his forfeit Lands,
Might all be Thine! whom, as he wronged in Life,
He could not rest in Death, to leave unhappy.

Leolyn. This had been Daggers to my guilty Soul,
Could he have fallen, by me: -- But, like a God,
Who smiles, and pardons, when provoked by Mortals,
He met my Rage, with a serene Contempt,
Mastered, a second time, my failing Sword,
And gave me Life, in Punishment. -- Live, Leolyn!
He cried, and spoke it with an Air unmoved,
Superior, not insulting. -- Live -- and know,
That, had not conscious guilt a Point, more strong
Than thine, -- No Wound could reach the Breast of Athelwold.
-- Yet, though he will not be compelled to die,
He chooses not to live; -- for he has wronged thee.
Come, and see Justice done thee. -- At that Instant,
The Shock of Ethelinda's dreadful Fate,
Heard, as we passed, upon the extended Terras,
Alarmed his Care, too late. -- I saw him, Sir, --

Edgar. Go on. --

Leolyn. I saw him, Sir, as I drew near,
Raise his fallen Victim, from the bloody Ground,
And, on his Cheek, support her bending Head;
But her weak Joints soft sinking from their Trust,
She hung sustained, and bled upon his Bosom.
He groaned, -- looked wild, -- called loud upon her Name,
And, for a Moment, stopped her flying Soul.
Twice, at his Voice, she stretched her dying Eyes,
And gasp'd, -- and struggled, -- and would fain have spoke;
But, failing -- in a short, convulsive, Sigh,
Breathed out her Soul, -- and sunk upon his Bosom.
He! -- standing near the downfall of the Cliff,
Strained her, with Rapture, in his circling Arms,
O Leolyn! he cried, forgive me, now:
Tell the wronged King, I leave his Elfrid, free,
And, thus, too late, do Right to Ethelinda. --
Then, springing furious, over the dreadful Rock,
Leaped, with the Dead, to Death! -- Together, both
Fell, frightful, to the Deep; which, closing over them,
Veils them, from Sense of Woe, in Rest, forever.

Edgar. Great was his Guilt, and greatly it is atoned!
Nothing is safe, but Innocence! -- Be it your Care
To send out Boats, that their recovered Bodies
May rest, beneath one Marble; over which
I will erect a Cloister, and endow it,
For hourly Prayers to Heaven, to rest their Souls.
-- Haste, all! and watch the afflicted Elfrid, near,
Assist her, -- guard her, -- wait, at her Apartment,
And save her, from her Sorrow. --
Oh! Leolyn, be obstinately just;
Indulge no Passion, and deceive no Trust:
Let never Man be bold enough, to say,
Thus, and no farther, shall my Passion stray:
The first Crime, past, compells us into more,
And Guilt grows Fate, that was but Choice, before.

FINIS.

