PHILOSOPHY OF PHYSIC.

(PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.)

ENLARGED SYLLABUS OF PHILOSOPHICAL LECTURES DELIVERED By HUGH SMITH, M. D. Of
HATTON-STREET.

With the PRINCIPLES on which his CONJECTURES are founded concerning ANIMAL
LIFE, and the LAWS of the ANIMAL ECONOMY.

These Principles are applied not only to the general Doctrine of the Glands,
but likewise to some new Thoughts on the Nervous System, the Gout, and
Paralytic Complaints.

LONDON: Printed for L. Davis, Holborn; J. Robson, New Bond-street; J. Dodsley,
Pall Mall; T. Cadell, Strand; G. Kearsly, Fleet Street; G. Robinson, and T.
Evans, Paternoster Row; and Messrs. Richardson and Urquhart, Royal Exchange.

Where also Dr. SMITH 's other Publications are to be bought.

M DCC LXXVIII.

INTRODUCTORY PREFACE.
To those Gentlemen in particular who honored DR. SMITH by their obliging
Condescension in attending his Lectures on the Philosophy of Physic -- and to
the Public in general.
I SHOULD be much wanting in respect, much more so in gratitude, did I not in
this address acknowledge the pleasing remembrance of that very candid
reception, with which my noble and truly liberal auditors have been pleased to
honor some very imperfect endeavors to establish the first elements of Physic.

CONSCIOUS of the many inaccuracies to be discovered throughout the Course of
my Lectures, I have not presumed to style them more than rude preparatory
outlines; concluding there was little more to be expected than perhaps an
approbation of the design; and for this I trusted to the known indulgence of
liberal minds. In these expectations I have been agreeably deceived: -- I have
been most kindly supported by the favor and countenance of men distinguished
for abilities and learning: which emboldens me to hope the present enlargement
of my Syllabus may likewise escape the censure of the Public. -- In my
Introductory Lecture I mentioned that the design had been many years in
contemplation; but, fearful of my own want of importance, awed by the
formidable appearance of the task, and the almost infurmountable difficulties
attending the promulging a new doctrine, with such a degree of success as might
entitle it to a fair and candid disquisition, -- I could not before summon the
fortitude necessary to appeal to the Public.

WHEN the Lectures were compiled, many doubts remained concerning the propriety
of delivering the Conjectures on Animal Life; and had it not been for the
persuasion of some friends, whose judgments I have ever respected, the
Conjectures had been suppressed: they observed, and with propriety, my Lectures
would be imperfect, unless the Principles were communicated on which my own
maxims were founded.

To their determination I submitted, not without reluctance, being fearful of
the event; lest I should either have been deceived in my reasonings, or might
not be able to express myself, so as to be clearly understood.

IT is even now my most earnest desire, the Principles on which the Conjectures
are founded should be coolly and deliberately enquired into. Many of the
opinions are undoubtedly new and singular: Truth being the great object of my
pursuit, I should have reason to lament the partiality of my friends, if I
suffered myself to be prevailed on to propagate errors, however plausible they
might appear: For these reasons I have withstood many respectable applications
to deliver another Course of Lectures; and am determined not to repeat them,
till the Public have had a fair opportunity of examining the truth of the
Principles, on which those Conjectures are founded, that support the practical
observations delivered in the Lectures.

IT is well known, that all learned and wise men ever regard new systems with a
jealous eye; and their so doing is to be accounted a mark of wisdom. I wish my
principles to be received with a manly distrust; suffer them, however, to
undergo a full and candid examination. I am sensible it will require some
degree of attention for gentlemen to comprehend the whole of them; especially
those who have not seen the experiments, and who are unacquainted with the
reasonings by which the principles have been supported.

THESE difficulties may perhaps occasion doubts in the minds of some medical,
and other learned men; so far it must be acknowledged they will operate against
me. I am content it should be so. Possibly those doubts may excite some more
able persons to search after the truth; and, as I am not wedded to my own
opinions, I shall most readily join in their condemnation, whenever they are
proved to be erroneous.

THE enlargement of my Syllabus will, I apprehend, prove acceptable to many of
those Gentlemen who honored my Lectures by their presence; some of them
indeeed have applied to me on this subject. The Public at large, perhaps, may
be pleased with having an opportunity of knowing the principles; and generous
minds ever show favor to an attempt, however poorly executed, that has for its
objects the information and happiness of mankind.

I SHALL beg leave to repeat what was delivered in one of my Lectures --

"I LOVE the profession of physic. I honor able medical practitioners. I wish
to convince mankind of the benefits that may be derived from a practice of
physic founded on liberal and rational principles. I have used my best
endeavors to convey clear and adequate ideas concerning animal life, and the
laws of the animal economy; with a full hope and firm persuasion, that thereby
the practice of physic may be rendered more universally beneficial; and with a
sincere desire that farther dignity may be added to the profession."

WHETHER my maxims be true or false, permit me to add, if I cannot, by a
generous and candid behavior on my own part, suppress the envy and jealousy of
illiberal minds, -- I can pity and forgive such men.

IT is my earnest desire to promote medical knowledge; to render the philosophy
of physic, an easy, pleasing, and rational study; and to point out to gentlemen
of fortune the propriety of their becoming acquainted with the first elements
of a science -- founded in the knowledge of the Laws of Nature, respecting
animal life.

I MOST sincerely wish my fellow laborers, in the healing art, may with
unanimity join me in this undertaking -- let us endeavor to convince mankind
it is their interest, on all occasions, to apply to able medical practitioners
-- more especially in that class of complaints termed Chronic, which is at
present the great field of quackery.

Hatton-street, May 16, 1778. HUGH SMITH.

TO THE READER.
THE following is the Syllabus first published, in which no mention is made of
the Conjectures to be delivered after the Lectures, concerning the first
material cause of animal life, and the laws of the animal economy.

IF it be asked, why this part of the design was not taken notice of? -- I
refer my reader to the doubts already expressed in the Introductory Preface. --
I was likewise fearful this attempt might be treated as altogether chimerical
-- and did not care to run the risk of premature ridicule; well knowing that,
sometimes, where solid objections are not advanced, private whispers, and
ironical buffoonery, may create insuperable prejudices against a man who dares
to venture out of the beaten paths of Science.

PHILOSOPHICAL LECTURES ON THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC: By HUGH SMITH, M. D. Of
HATTON-STREET, LONDON.
THESE Lectures are intended to render the Practice of Physic a liberal
science; as derived from the known and established laws of Natural Philosophy
-- to open a new theory, adapted to practice, and correspondent to those laws.

No person, it is believed, on this plan, has ever yet attempted to bring the
rudiments of the science of Medicine, into one general and compendious point of
view.

IN the execution of the plan, possibly some practical rules may arise,
supported on established principles, tending to the improvement of the science
This alludes to matters of fact evident to the senses set forth in the Fourth
Lecture -- ON NUTRITION.
. By a chain of rational and philosophical reasoning it is designed to call
forth that knowledge obtained by detached studies; and to apply it to the great
end and purpose for which those studies were instituted.

MEN are often possessed of powers and talents, to which they themselves, in
some degree, are strangers -- and great abilities are often buried in oblivion,
for want of right rules in practice. The truth of this observation many medical
men have the mortification to experience; and on this account only perhaps they
pass their lives in obscurity; and their knowledge is lost to the world. The
present Lectures, therefore, are particularly recommended to medical students.

To men of letters human nature is acknowledged to be an agreeable object of
contemplation. Can it be less entertaining to any man of good natural
understanding? The knowledge of NATURE is not surely above the reach of common
sense -- Considered liberally, and freed from all unnecessary terms of art, it
will be found a pleasing science. These Lectures, probably, may throw a new
light on the subject; by opening to familiar view the first springs of life;
The reader may now perceive this passage alludes to the Conjectures on Animal
Life.
the causes of man's gradual rise; necessary decay; and the causes likewise of
the diseases to which he is liable. Is not every human being interested in this
inquiry? How many men have been rendered miserable by dipping into medical
authors, for want of a consistent view of the leading principles of the
science? In these Lectures, though on medical subjects, every thing mysterious
being removed, man properly becomes the object of rational, or philosophical
contemplation. -- It is to be hoped, likewise, the practice of physic may be
rendered more universally beneficial, and possibly fresh dignity may be added
to the profession.

SYLLABUS.
FIRST LECTURE -- Introductory. -- The Importance of the Design -- not confined
to men of the profession -- but of utility to all gentlemen of liberal
education -- the propriety of their becoming acquainted with the elements of
the science of Medicine enforced.

SECOND LECTURE -- Historical, -- but principally in regard to the Practice of
Physic. -- It is not only usual, but useful and entertaining, to trace the
origin of whatever engages our inquiry.

THIRD LECTURE -- On Animal Life. -- It is impossible to establish the Practice
of Physic, on liberal and rational principles, without clear and fixed ideas
concerning Animal Life -- the great design of the art being to assist Nature,
in order to preserve the lives of Animals.

FOURTH LECTURE -- On Nutrition. -- The design of this Lecture is to inquire
into the mode of Nutrition, as it is performed in animal bodies -- to point out
certain facts, as data, to prove that Nutrition is universally carried on, in
animal bodies, by the glandular system. For an explanation of the word Gland,
see page 19.


FIFTH LECTURE -- The subject of Nutrition continued. -- This doctrine, though
perhaps allowed, in part, by many able practitioners, has never yet been proved
in the whole -- its novelty therefore might induce some to dispute the truth of
it, if the matter of fact rested only on a single person's practical
discoveries; or on a few simple facts, however evident to the senses. -- We
shall therefore confirm this doctrine by physiological researches, and
mathematical reasonings founded on the established data contained in the Fourth
Lecture. I do not wish to be understood, nor do I mean, strict mathematical
demonstration, for that can admit of no doubt; but a close method of reasoning,
in imitation of that used by mathematicians; which, in subjects not strictly
mathematical, never amounts to more than the highest degree of probability.


SIXTH LECTURE -- A continuation of the same subject. -- No proof ought to be
withheld, that can rationally be advanced, in support of principles in
themselves important, but not generally established. -- We shall therefore, by
mechanical reasoning, farther confirm this doctrine of Nutrition being
universally carried on by the glandular system.

SEVENTH LECTURE -- On Diseases. -- Here we mean to prove, agreeable to the
principles beforementioned, from practical experience, that the primary errors
in animal bodies, which may justly be styled the internal, incipient, causes of
diseases, are, universally, seated in the glandular system. -- this, if well
supported, must necessarily establish our doctrine concerning Nutrition beyond
the possibility of doubt. -- It must likewise be productive of new theories in
many cases; and alter the present mode of practice, with regard to the curative
intentions, in various diseases.

EIGHTH LECTURE -- How a Physician differs from a Quack. -- Having in the
former Lecture established fixed principles, as a solid foundation for a
liberal and rational practice of Physic, the present philosophic inquiry seems
properly to take place.

NINTH LECTURE -- Will set forth the superiority of a rational Practice of
Physic over empiricism and quackery.

TENTH LECTURE -- Acute and Chronic Diseases distinguished. -- In this Lecture
we shall take the liberty of drawing the line of distinction, in some measure
different from that already given by medical writers; but perhaps necessary to
establish the Practice of Physic, on liberal and rational principles -- which
regularly leads to --

ELEVENTH LECTURE -- An inquiry into the causes of Quackery.

TWELFTH AND LAST LECTURE -- Contains some rules, that we humbly conceive will
be found useful; especially, to younger practitioners, in their conduct toward
patients, both in acute and chronic diseases; in order to obtain their rational
confidence, and to convince them of the benefits that may be derived from a
Practice of Physic, founded on liberal and rational principles.

DESCRIPTION OF A GLAND.
THAT no confusion may arise in our ideas, and with a view to be clearly
understood by every one into whose hands this Syllabus may fall, it will not be
improper to subjoin an explanation of the word GLAND, as it is applied in the
Lectures.

ALL medical writers agree in this point, that a GLAND serves to separate a
particular humor from the blood. GLANDS are distinguished, by anatomists, into
simple and compound; accurate descriptions have been given of many that are
visible, and new GLANDS are continually discovered. It concerns not our present
purpose to inquire into their structures: Different GLANDS are evidently
appointed for different uses -- Whether, therefore, they be simple or compound;
or whether they be any thing more than the ultimate terminations of single
arteries, convoluted, or not; every part of the animal economy must be allowed
to be a GLAND, whose office it is to separate, percolate, or drain a particular
humor from the blood; which humor, when thus separated, is no longer blood.

In strict conformity to Physiology, this Description establishes a clear and
adequate idea to be conveyed by the word GLAND.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE CONJECTURES ON ANIMAL LIFE, etc.
THROUGHOUT the course of our Lectures, we endeavored from effects to lead to
causes -- and thereby to account for Nutrition -- and the primary causes of
Diseases.

OUR Conjectures concerning the first active material cause of Animal Life, and
the laws of the Animal Economy, for obvious reasons, were totally detached
from the Lectures -- on these points, we endeavored to trace effects from
causes; and, by arguments founded on experimental proofs, we hope at least to
have strengthened some of the opinions delivered in our Lectures; though
perhaps we have not been able fully to establish any point contended for.

IT is necessary, however, to be remarked, that nothing new is meant to be
advanced concerning the properties of air, nor is it intended to enter into its
properties at large -- the application of its properties to Animal Life, is all
we aim at: Some Conjectures are offered, that seem to show the probability of
air, put into motion by heat, being not only the first active material cause of
new life, but the actual support of life, throughout every different stage of
our animated existence.

THESE Conjectures, if admitted, show the Mosaic account of the creation of man
to be philosophically true -- that the Lord God formed man of the dust of the
ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a
living soul," (Genesis chapter ii. v. 7.) -- and that the laws of generation are the
means appointed by our Creator to preserve this active operative cause of life,
so given: For the Conjectures seem to evince what we term VITAL AIR, to be the
first cause of motion, not only in man, but throughout the whole animated
creation.

OUR leading aphorism runs thus --

IN ALL ANIMALS, LIFE, HEAT, AND MOTION, ARE INSEPARABLE.

WE maintained the truth of this aphorism, not only by death and its
consequences, but likewise by life and its effects: It seems also to be farther
illustrated by the following Principles -- from which many other important
conclusions have been drawn.

PRINCIPLES ON WHICH THE CONJECTURES ARE FOUNDED.
Each Night, before the Lecture, a variety of Experiments were exhibited, to
demonstrate the Truth of the following Principles: many of which will not be
denied by scientific Men; and where it seems necessary, the others are
attempted to be explained.
I. AIR is matter.

II. MATTER is of itself inactive, but capable of being put into motion.

III. AIR, as matter, is capable of different arrangements, modifications, and
combinations, in obedience to the general laws of matter.

IV. AIR is a fluid -- but has properties peculiar to itself, and different
from other fluids; -- for,

V. AIR is an elastic fluid, and the force of its spring is proportionable to
its weight.

VI. AIR possesses the property of rarefaction, or expansion.

VII. HEAT -- by which we mean a similar effect to that produced by fire, will
rarefy or expand air.

VIII. AIR possesses the property of compression, or condensation.

IX. EXTERNAL pressure will condense, or compress air.

X. COLD will condense, or compress air.

XI. AIR then is rarefied by heat, and compressed by cold.

XII. AIR exists in all bodies, fluid and solid.

This, perhaps, will not be doubted by such as are acquainted with experiments
on air -- for the satisfaction of others, the truth of the Principle was proved
by experiments on gold, silver, copper, brass, lead, marble, various other
stones, wood, etc. Air visibly issued from them all; more from some, than from
others, in proportion to their porosity -- the porosity of wood, stone and
metals, by help of a microscope, may be curiously displayed to the eye.

XIII. WHEN bodies are deprived of internal heat and motion, the air contained
within them may be said to be at a state of rest; it being then only subject to
the variations of the atmosphere.

This may be proved by the Thermometer. The following curious experiment
farther illustrates the matter of fact, and may lead to other discoveries: Let
the bulb of a Thermometer be put into two ounces of cold water; the air,
apparently at rest in the quicksilver, by the effect of cold being more
compressed, the mercury will quickly descend several degrees; when the
quicksilver is again apparently at rest, let thirty drops of oil of vitriol be
put into the water; this produces heat, and the air contained in the
quicksilver will as quickly be expanded; by the effect of this internal heat
communicated to the fluid, the quicksilver will rise two or three degrees: Let
a little chalk be now added to the fluid, the internal heat will be farther
increased, and the quicksilver will ascend two or three degrees more. -- Does
not this experiment likewise show that heat accompanies internal motion in
fluids? -- This observation, perhaps, may not prove unworthy the attention of
such Gentlemen as entertain themselves with experiments on what is termed fixed
air.

XIV. ON the application of heat to a fluid, the first evident sign of internal
motion is an air-bubble.

This is experimentally shown, by putting any transparent liquor into a spoon,
and placing it over a candle, or a lamp; in different fluids, different
appearances may be observed, not unworthy the attention of the curious.

XV. IN this state of the fluid the air contained in it is more rarefied, and
expanded, than in the cold state of the fluid.

XVI. THE air contained in most fluids becomes so far rarefied as to be put
into motion by a degree of heat below that of the blood; we may then fairly
conclude, from the degree of heat accompanying animal life, that the air
contained in the fluids of an animal body is continually in motion.

This was confirmed by a variety of experiments (oleaginous fluids excepted) by
placing the fluids over a lamp, and regulating the heat by a Thermometer.

XVII. THE tunic, or coat of every distinct air-bubble, is evidently formed of
the surrounding fluid.

XVIII. EACH distinct bubble of air has a distinct and separate motion.

XIX. IN different fluids, different degrees of heat are required to render
these air-bubbles visibly active.

XX. IN the more thin and transparent fluids, air-bubbles are sooner visible;
and the air becomes fugitive below the degree of blood heat.

Water acidulated with spirit of vitriol, or distilled vinegar, becomes more
transparent, and will prove the truth of this Principle; it may likewise be
shown by many of the white wines, and other fluids.

XXI. THESE bubbles of air, being specifically lighter than the surrounding
fluid, naturally tend to the surface; and there, soon bursting, this rarefied
air escapes, and mixes with the common atmosphere, unless it be prevented by
proper recipients.

Since the pressure of the atmosphere is the same on all fluids, how happens it
that in some the air-bubbles are longer detained than in others?

XXII. DIFFERENT fluids possess different degrees of tenacity or cohesion: this
tenacity is weaker in thin transparent fluids. -- Air-bubbles, therefore,
become sooner fugitive in such fluids.

XXIII. GLUE, gum, or sugar, suspended in fluids, render them more tenacious,
or cohesive. -- AIR-BUBBLES THEREFORE ARE LONGER RESTRAINED FROM BECOMING
FUGITIVE IN SUCH FLUIDS.

If our conjectures prove right, this observation may afford a clew to examine
into the laws of life in the vegetable kingdom. -- This idea is thrown out for
the consideration of ingenious men; the subject itself, at present, not being
within our sphere.

XXIV. EXTERNAL heat being removed from a fluid, although the pressure of the
cold atmosphere be freely admitted; it is, nevertheless, a considerable time
before the air, rarefied by heat, returns to a state of rest.

The truth of this principle may be illustrated by a spoon, in the manner
before mentioned; (Principle XIV.) and it is worthy attention.

XXV. EARTHY particles may be suspended in a transparent fluid.

The process for making magnesia alba proves this -- it is no contemptible
experiment, though in familiar practice.

Two transparent liquors being mixed, they instantly lose both their
transparency and fluidity, and become one entire white inspissated substance --
this being repeatedly washed with water, the white earth, when dried, is the
common magnesia alba of the shops.

It is well known this white earth was originally suspended in an aqueous
menstruum, by means of the vitriolic acid; and in this process, it is
precipitated by the fixed alkaline.

XXVI. EARTHY particles may float in air.

If any one doubts the truth of this, let him admit a ray of light into a
darkened room, and he will be convinced of the matter of fact.

XXVII. AIR does exist in the circulating fluids of an animal.

This was proved by the blood vessel of a bullock, being secured by ligatures,
before it was separated from the body of the living animal -- it was farther
confirmed by live crayfish, tench, etc.

XXVIII. AIR does exist in the medullary substance of the brain.

This is one of the most beautiful experiments that can be exhibited by the
air-pump -- if it be well shown, the resistance of the medullary and cortical
substance of the brain is so great, as to produce a kind of perpetual motion.

XXIX. AIR-BUBBLES, though specifically lighter than the surrounding fluid,
cannot escape till the resistance arising from the cohesion of the parts of the
surrounding fluid itself be overcome.

XXX. THIS resistance, arising from the cohesion of the parts of the fluid, is
proportioned to the different degrees of tenacity proper to different fluids;
as before shown.

XXXI. THIS cohesive property in fluids, then, is the bond that restrains the
air from becoming fugitive; or, in other words, it is the bond of union.

XXXII. ANIMAL jelly, or gluten, exposed to the common atmosphere, and
surrounding a globule of air, is sufficiently cohesive to prevent this moving
air escaping in a degree of heat somewhat superior to that of blood heat.

XXXIII. IT being highly necessary to fix some standard to regulate our
inquiries -- Air rarefied, in motion, detained in animal bodies by glandular
secretions, or circulating with the fluids in the vascular system, permit us to
call VITAL AIR.

XXXIV. VITAL Air, Heat, and Motion, then, appear to be inseparable, in animal
life.

ON these principles our arguments are founded, concerning the first active
material cause of animal life; and from these principles our conjectures are
drawn, concerning the laws of generation, and those of the animal economy. For
the satisfaction of the learned, and curious, it will not be improper to add a
few words concerning VITAL AIR, which we presume to be the first material cause
of motion in animal life.

THIS conjecture we have endeavored to support by arguments drawn from
experiments; all tending to show the rational probability of air existing in an
active and circulating state in animal bodies.

IT will be remembered, we proved air did actually exist in the blood of a
living animal; and likewise in the medullary substance of the brain. We also
proved, that in the degree of heat proper to animal life, this air must be in a
rarefied and active state; and we farther endeavored to show, by arguments
drawn from an incubated egg, and other points, the rational probability, that
the propelling force of air, thus rarefied, and confined in a vascular system,
was the first material cause of the circulation of the blood, and other fluids,
in an animal body.

THE reaction of the vascular system we presume to be the secondary cause, in
conjunction with the former, producing what is termed involuntary muscular
motion -- this motion, in the beginning of new life, is first discoverable at
the punctum saliens, or leaping point; which afterward becomes the heart of
the foetus. The heart we have presumed to style the center of motion; by which
the circulation of the blood is regulated and maintained. The blood we consider
to be a passive fluid, the common menstruum from whence nutrition is derived,
by means of the glands. -- We presume that some one order or more of the glands
must be injured, debilitated, or totally obstructed, before the blood of an
animal becomes impure.

BY the propelling force of VITAL AIR we presume all glandular secretions to be
performed, and the lymphatic circulations to be supported by the same power --
and by means of the glands we presume the laws of generation to be maintained.

IN the beginning of new life, the motion of Vital Air seems to be supported by
the natural heat of the parent, or by some adequate external means -- this
appears to be a general law, throughout nature, till involuntary muscular
motion becomes sufficiently powerful to communicate that degree of internal
heat, peculiarly proper to Vital Air: When this period arrives, the act of
incubation ceases, with all oviparous animals; the foetus opening to itself a
passage in order to breathe the common atmosphere; and, in viviparous animals,
the natural birth takes place, by the united efforts of the parent and foetus.

IT may perhaps be expected that something should be said concerning the brain
and nervous system. -- In this summary way I cannot hope to persuade scientific
men to think with me -- however, by mentioning the points contended for,
possibly objections will be started, that eventually may lead to the discovery
of truth.

WE took notice in some of our conjectures, that man having a material body, it
was but reasonable to conclude it should answer the various purposes for which
it was so curiously formed; and that every distinct member should have its
destined office. We endeavored to prove that, in the business of motion and
sensation, the nerves, proceeding from the brain and spinal marrow, though the
chief, were not the only instruments; and from numerous experimental proofs, we
concluded that the reaction of the vascular system, voluntary motion, and the
exercise of the external senses, could not be supported without the aid of the
nervous system.

IT will be recollected we used many arguments to show the proper sense of
feeling seemed to arise from the due resistance of the medullary substance of
the brain, or nervous matter, opposed to the propelling force of Vital Air.

WE took occasion to observe, that all the other senses were obedient to the
proper sense of feeling; and endeavored to show that hearing, seeing,
smelling, and tasting, were nothing more than the effects arising from feeling,
which we considered as their primary cause.

As we have, under certain limitations, acknowledged the nervous system to be
the seat of feeling, we inquired into the effects produced by any considerable
variation in the Vital Air, peculiarly existing in the nervous matter -- and
having before shown the rational probability of pain arising from the
propelling force of too highly rarefied air, we seemed to be warranted in
drawing the following conclusions: -- The sense of feeling is seated in the
nervous system -- the sense of feeling becoming too exquisite produces pain --
the nervous system is then the seat of pain. -- Gouty symptoms, therefore,
whether fixed or wandering, being ever accompanied with that too exquisite
degree of sensibility, that either produces unhappy sensations, or acute pain,
we presume the nervous system to be principally affected in gouty patients.

WE endeavored to strengthen, and support our conjectures concerning gouty,
and what are termed nervous complaints, not only from practical experience; but
likewise by showing that a partial, or total loss of motion and feeling, in
paralytic complaints and nervous apoplexies, probably arises from an opposite
cause -- namely, from the propelling force of Vital Air existing in the nervous
matter, or in the medullary substance of the brain, being too much abated; or
from its becoming a body at rest.

THESE are some of the practical inferences, arising from our conjectures,
concerning the brain and nervous system: happy shall I think myself if they
prove any way instrumental toward alleviating the distresses of mankind.

WITH regard to the sentient principle, or spirit of man, we observed, that
although simple ideas might be stirred up in the mind by the mediation of the
nervous system; yet, our ideas are not matter: something more than a material
system, therefore, seems necessary and requisite to thinking. And if VITAL AIR
be the first material cause of motion, the vascular system can be considered
only as the secondary cause: -- Is it not highly improbable, then, that the
sentient principle should depend on this secondary cause, namely, on a system
of organized matter? -- Be this as it may, it is out of my province to enter
into metaphysical controversies; and, as observed in my Lectures, I am unequal
to the task: However, that the sentient principle is not material, we verily
believe, and endeavored to confirm by many other arguments; -- and if the mind
be not material, experimental researches after this immaterial principle must
ever prove in vain.

WE ventured to add, that if there be a connection between gross material, and
immaterial substances, it is probably effected by some rare medium; and
therefore, that this union was not unlikely to be formed by means of VITAL AIR.
Whether our general arguments on this point were forcible or not, must be left
to the determination of others; we however concluded this subject in the
following manner.

WE have endeavored to show that life depends on VITAL AIR; and that not only
motion, but all the external senses depend on it likewise -- and if so, it
seems a fair conclusion, that the nervous fluid, or animal spirits, is nothing
more than VITAL AIR.

I AM compelled, from my practical experience in the gout, in paralytic
complaints, and other errors in the nervous system, to believe this -- and from
what has been advanced, am I not authorized to conclude, the Mosaic accounts of
the creation of man, and of the laws of generation, are philosophically true?

HAVING thus set forth what may probably be deemed sufficient to enable medical
and other scientific men to judge of the rationality of our system -- I leave
it to their consideration, whether we mean to captivate the credulous, or to
appeal to men of sense in pursuit of truth.

SUCH gentlemen as have honored me by their attention, will be enabled, from
these outlines, to recall many of our conjectures concerning animal life, and
the laws of the animal economy; which, I flatter myself, will afford them some
degree of satisfaction.

I DO not expect this system, even if it should prove to be true, to be
established without opposition; I am prepared to receive all objections that
may be advanced, whether it be in my power to answer them or not -- I am
prepared to receive them, let me repeat, because I wish the principles to pass
through the strictest scrutiny.

IF the principles be admitted, it is presumed the rationality of the
conjectures, on animal life, will add no little degree of weight to the
doctrines contended for in the course of our Lectures; namely, that nutrition
is carried on by means of the glandular system; and that the internal,
incipient causes of diseases are universally seated in the glands.

IT is proper, however, to observe, whether the principles be admitted, and our
conjectures allowed, or not; it does not follow, that our practical inferences,
respecting diseases, originally drawn from matters of fact evident to the
senses, are to be considered as altogether erroneous. -- All that I ask, is, to
be judged with candor; and most cheerfully submit to the determination of
intelligent men.

I AM fully persuaded, those gentlemen who did me the honor of attending my
Lectures, will not hesitate to say, that my opinions were delivered with
diffidence; it was my earnest desire to persuade; but well knowing the scanty
limits of human understanding, I believe no man can challenge me with having
advanced any one conjecture as a positive assertion: Yet, this I did say, at
the conclusion of my Lectures --

"As a duty incumbent on me, I have, in this public manner, communicated my
thoughts to liberal and learned men; that the world at large, however they may
differ in opinion, might not charge me with having reserved my principles as
SECRETS: But having entered into so very wide a field, I am certain, you,
gentlemen, would not wish me too hastily to commit to the press, the present
crude and imperfect ideas, on subjects of such importance. -- If the principles
on which our opinions are founded, can be fairly overturned, by arguments drawn
from experiments -- let them fall. -- If not, I trust more able advocates than
myself will not be wanting, to support the truth of our doctrines; and to
enlarge the bounds of our knowledge, with regard to the theory, and cure of
diseases."

FINIS.
Erratum: p. 35, l. 13, read senses.

Published by the same AUTHOR.
I. A TREATISE on the Use, and Abuse, of MINERAL WATERS; with Rules necessary
to be observed by Invalids, who visit the Chalybeate Springs of the Old or New
TUNBRIDGE WELLS: The Diseases likewise are pointed out, in which these Waters
may prove salutary. Price Sixpence. II. LETTERS TO MARRIED WOMEN on the
Management of Infants; recommending an easy Method of bringing up Children,
agreeable to NATURE, and confirmed by Practical Experience: The peculiar
Advantages of a Milk Diet are set forth, with a View to prevent the Diseases
Infants are liable to; which generally arise from improper Food. Price bound
Three Shillings and Sixpence. III. THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN; being a Companion to
Dr. SMITH'S Family Medicine Chest; for the Use of remote Country-Houses, where
Medical Assistance is not easily to be obtained; and for the Benefit of the
Country Poor. Price One Shilling and Sixpence, or Two Shillings in Boards.

