FEMALE EMPIRE: OR, WINTER Celebrated at LONDON.

FEMALE EMPIRE: OR, WINTER celebrated at LONDON.

Even Spring displeases, when She smiles not here,
But, blessed with Her, it is Spring through all the Year.
LONDON: Printed for M. COOPER, at the Globe in Paternoster Row.

M. DCC. XLVI.

FEMALE EMPIRE: OR, WINTER Celebrated at LONDON.
WHERE proud Augusta, Empire of the Great,
Sees a whole World pay Tribute at her Feet,
Where social Pleasure, with indulgent Sway,
Chears every Breast, and bids even Want be gay,
The Muse begins -- Ye British Fair-Ones, smile;
So shall your Favors recompense my Toil;
So shall Mankind the Ear attentive lend,
Since All the World admires what You commend.
FOR You, kind Nature shifts the restless Year,
And varying Seasons roll, to bless the Fair:
To charm your Footsteps through the winding Maze,
Unfolding Spring a thousand Sweets displays:
For You, with genial Heat the Summer glows,
Smiles in the Fields, and blushes in the Rose:
Autumnal Suns, to gratify your Taste,
With Fruits and Plenty crown the long Repast:
And shivering Winter charms no less than these,
If Change of Joys can boast the Power to please.
Tired with the midday Heat, and Evening Gale,
The wide-stretch'd Prospect, and the flowery Vale,
The bubbling Fountain, and the Linnet's Song,
(For who can bear even Harmony too long?)
Cynthia, the Passion of contending Swains,
Flies to the Town, and leaves the sylvan Scenes.
Unhappy Scenes! the Birds forgot to sing,
And Nature mourned her, till returning Spring.
Ye airy Sylphs, who hover round the Fair,
With Aid invisible, but always near,
Assist your Poet, while his daring Muse
Sings the Diversions that the Nymph pursues,
When frozen Streams in lazy Currents run,
And the big Cloud, portentous, hides the Sun.
See sullen Night with tardy Step retires,
And in the Lamp the glimmering Flame expires.
On Roofs of Snow reflected Sunbeams play,
And early Business fills the strait'ned Way.
With Cries of different Note resounds the Street,
And Coaches roll, and jostling Carmen meet.
On his deep-furrow'd Brow the Broker wears
Schemes yet in Embryo, and unwieldy Cares;
While the grave Doctor, from the Tumult free,
Lolls in his Chariot, and expects the Fee.
The Fair still slept, while Sleep, to Fair-Ones kind,
Bid visionary Scenes divert her Mind;
Where shone the Circles of the Great and Gay,
Who shared the Dance, and passed the Hours at Play;
Where, armed with Gallantry, the well-dress'd Beau,
In Slumber, bid the Cheek with Blushes glow;
Till early Footmen, with untimely Noise,
And opening Lap-Dogs, interrupt her Joys;
Then fled the airy Sweets of calm Repose,
And the unwilling Maid with Sighs arose,
Perused the Morning's Billet-doux with Care,
And, next, to Beauty's Queen preferred her Prayer.
"Oh Thou, whose Power supreme, and gentle Sway,
"Not Mortals only, but the Gods, obey,
"Celestial Venus, Guardian of the Fair,
"Who lives unheeded, if without thy Care;
"Still may Mankind thy sovereign Rule adore,
"And Altars blaze, till Time shall be no more!
"But Oh! with full Success my Wishes crown,
"Long may I reign the Favorite of the Town;
"Long may I boast the unrivaled Power to kill;
"Joy more than Life, beloved beyond Quadrille!
"With every Grace my faultless Form supply,
"Till Prudes in secret racked with Envy die.
"And when I wed (if such the Will of Fate)
"May no learned Pedant be my future Mate;
"No Wretch, who Gold prefers to Joys like thine,
"Nor Sot, enamored with the Fumes of Wine.
"All Cares, but Love, with Pleasure I forego,
"And all my Wishes center in a Beau."
So prayed, nor vainly, the Heart-conqu'ring Fair,
Love's Goddess list'ned, and approved the Prayer:
Then bid, to adorn the Nymph, each smiling Grace
With more than mortal Beauty arm her Face,
Call forth the latent Mischiefs of her Eyes,
And give the Blush that with the Morning vies.
To crown the Whole, inventive Fancy came,
And with the Power of Dress improved the Dame;
From every Clime some gaudy Tribute bore,
And decked her with the Spoils of India's Shore;
While Fashion, as the Ocean unconfined,
Disposed each Charm to captivate the Mind.
And now with warmer Power the Sunbeams glow,
And Kennels widen with dissolving Snow,
In every Street officious Shoe-Boys ply,
And meagre Poverty prefers its Cry.
Touched with the Ills that wait on pining Woe,
With liberal Hand their Alms the Good bestow;
Even Avarice stops, affected with the Sight,
And, ever he cheats the Orphan, gives his Mite.
It Is Noon, and Business dwells in every Face,
Directs the Eye, and animates the Pace:
Big with the Prospect of some future Gain,
The Merchant's Haste, nor Winds, nor Showers detain;
With unloop'd Hat he dares the inclement Day,
Nor heeds the dashing Spout, or miry Way.
So, bent on Riches, on the unfriendly Waves,
Impending Death the bold Advent'rer braves;
Bears India's scorching Suns, and Zembla's Cold,
And mocks all Dangers, for the Charms of Gold.
Now Ludgate Hill with rattling Coaches swarms,
And through the Sash the gaudy Tissue charms.
Here crowd Britannia's Pride, intent to express
The Power of Fancy, by their Skill in Dress.
Versed in the Rhet'rick that supports his Trade,
The smooth-tongu'd Mercer shows the rich Brocade;
Expatiates on the Labors of the Loom,
And sells, for Foreign, Patterns wrought at Home:
Pleased with the Whole, in Hesitation lost,
The Nymph stands doubtful which she fancies most;
Till, struck by something New, she buys at last,
Pays the full Price, and glories in her Taste.
Nor with less Judgment, or inferior Grace,
The artful Milaner harangues on Lace;
Describes each Fashion that allures the Eye,
The Mobb Venetian, Quoif, or airy Fly;
What Ribbands suit the Fresh, and what the Wan,
And dwells upon the Colors of a Fan;
Improves each Hint, and hangs on every Tale,
And keeps Discourse alive, with Lungs that never fail.
Is there a Poet, whose capacious Rhimes
Can range distinct the Fashions of the Times?
Wherever he dwells, ye Muses, round him shine;
A Task so arduous calls for all the Nine.
His let it be, to sing, in lofty Lays,
The Hoop's wide Circle, and the Diamond's Blaze,
Paint the gay Ornaments that deck the Fair,
And praise the wavy Ringlets of her Hair.
But Time rolls on, impatient of Delay,
And Hunger sends the Citizen away:
To Halls well-furnish'd Liv'rymen repair,
And feast, in Fancy, on the Bill of Fare:
Calmly they drown the eternal Feuds of State,
And bid even Business till Tomorrow wait.
Homeward, returning see the blooming Fair,
Pleased with her Bargains, and devoid of Care;
No gloomy Thought her peaceful Mind annoys,
Nor Spleen malevolent disturbs her Joys;
In the gay Chariot raised, she rolls along,
Safe from the Hardships that affect the Throng;
Exults amidst the Rigours of the Day,
And hears the whistling Tempest round her play.
The witless Fop, unheedful of the Storm,
Stands fixed, and wonders at the angelic Form;
Lingering, looks back, in Admiration lost,
Nor gains his Senses, till he meets a Post.
So, on the faithless Waves, the Syren-Train,
With melting Airs the Mariner detain;
Heedless, he sails along the dangerous Seas,
Enchanted with the Music of their Lays,
Till, bulg'd upon some Rock, he mourns too late
His Stay, and yields unwillingly to Fate.
Now Plenty triumphs over the genial Board,
And grateful Wines a generous Warmth afford;
While Mirth, Effect of Innocence, prevails,
And wakes the social Laugh with well-told Tales;
Lively in Years, perhaps, historic Age
With Britain's Glories past their Thoughts engage;
Recounts the Wonders Nassau's Conquests wrought,
" PRIOR.
How Anne commanded, and how Malbro' fought;"
Then paints the Joys that wait on Brunswick's Name,
And dwells in Raptures on the favorite Theme.
Hence shall our Sons, when long in future Days,
Cheerful they sit around the enlivening Blaze,
Roused at the Memory of Rebellion vile,
(Hereditary Vice of Scotia's Soil)
Tell how their Fathers joined War's doubtful Chance,
To conquer Faction, and to humble France!
How William (glorious Name!) the Traitors drove!
His Cause, our Country, and his Guardian Jove.
But softer Things the Female Band amuse,
Than Wars, Ambition, Politics, and News;
To hardier Breasts they trust the Martial Toil;
Kill with a Frown, and conquer with a Smile.
Theirs is the Task over Fashions to preside,
And fix the changing Ornaments of Pride;
Recount the Arts that captivate the Mind,
Subdue the Inconstant, and attract the Blind;
Safe in their Charms, admire the well-form'd Plan,
And join their Sex's Power, to conquer Man.
Subjects so copious ask a longer Day,
And Themes so fruitful wear the Hours away:
But Pleasure calls, and Scenes instructive glow,
With all the mournful Eloquence of Woe;
Monimia, fainting, on Castalio cries,
And sad Arpasia with Moneses dies.
Mad as the Sea, Othello raves, distressed;
And Patriot-Zeal inspires a Cato's Breast:
Here wild Ambition mourns her tottering State,
And Envy sickens at the Tyrant's Fate;
There sorrowing Virtue pains the generous Mind,
And Love, unpitied, bids the Fair be kind.
These were the Arts, that pleased a former Age,
When Booth, majestic, graced Britannia's Stage;
When Oldfield, skilled to paint distressful Woe,
Bid marble Breasts with fond Compassion glow:
And still they flourish, still the Town may boast
Names not inferior even to those it lost;
Garrick, each Passion that he feigns, can move,
And Cibber softens all the Soul to Love:
In these survives what matchless Shakespeare writ,
And still the World admires a Congreve's Wit.
The youthful Hero views the inspiring Scenes,
And martial Ardour kindles in his Veins;
While the fond Virgin, on the Brink of Fate,
Warned by Calista, shuns the dangerous Bait.
Ye modern Wits, who, emulous of Fame,
Build, on the Comic Scene, the deathless Name,
Would ye excel? With strictest Care restrain
The Jest immodest, and the Phrase profane;
So shall the general Shout your Toil repay,
And Britain's Fair attend the Poet's Day;
The moral Tale shall please the virtuous Youth,
And Guilt alone shall redden at the Truth.
Thus, cheerful, Winter-Ev'nings roll away,
And gay Diversions crown the short'ned Day:
Joys, yet unsung, to amuse the Fair remain,
And Skies inclement spend their Rage in vain:
Attentive Whist.
Wisk, and courtly Visits call,
And Pomp and Splendour animate the Ball:
Days, quick-revolving, Change of Pleasures bring,
And glad the Fancy, till returning Spring.
FINIS.

