THE METHOD OF PREVENTING AND REMOVING THE CAUSES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES,
WRITTEN IN PLAIN SIMPLE LANGUAGE, BY GEORGE BORTHWICK, SURGEON TO THE
FOURTEENTH REGIMENT OF LIGHT DRAGOONS, AND HONORARY MEMBER OF THE
PHYSICO-CHIRURGICAL SOCIETY AT EDINBURGH.

CORK: PRINTED BY J. CRONIN, No. 52, GRAND-PARADE.

M.DCC.LXXX.IV.

PREFACE.
THE intention of the following pages, is to point out the most material
causes, that occur in a large Town, to give rise to infectious diseases; to
show the steps necessary to be taken to prevent such sources of contagion; and
to advise some precautions to be used, that are most likely to prevent
infection, during the prevalence of these disorders.

A performance of this nature carried to its full extent, might be made to fill
a volume; but I have industriously studied to make every direction as short,
and concise as possible; for had I entered more largely into the subject, I
must have written a book that would only have been read by a few, whereas this
small pamphlet can readily be obtained by most people. I have given my opinion
in the form of paragraphs, as I imagine that this mode of giving directions is
the easiest to be understood, since by this means the mind is not fatigued with
a chain of reasoning. I have avoided all reasoning on the propriety of any
direction that I have given, as I trust that it will appear self-evident; and
had I entered into a vindication and discussion of the utility of what is
recommended in each paragraph, I should not only have made these pages too
numerous to be generally read, but should have been obliged to have recourse to
scientific reasoning, that could only have been intelligible to those of my own
profession. I have therefore carefully shunned every professional Term; a
circumstance that should always be attended to, by those that write for the
benefit of mankind.

I do not pretend to say, that the following pages contain every direction,
that may on some occasions be necessary, to prevent or remove the causes of
infectious disorders; I will only venture to say, that on all occasions, what I
have given will be essentially requisite; and are proper to constitute the
grand outlines, of any regulations that may be deemed necessary, to prevent and
remove contagious diseases from a City. I have likewise added, by way of
postscript to my plan, some directions that from experience have been sound
serviceable, to such as visit unhealthy climates; which I thought would not be
unacceptable to the inhabitants of a large commercial City.

Small as this performance is, I doubt not but that it may meet with critical
censure from some; but as men of discernment, will I hope always judge for
themselves, and allow their opinions to be swayed only by the cool decision of
an unprejudiced mind, I shall always despise whatever impotent censure may
proceed from motives of ungenerous self-interest.

THE METHOD OF PREVENTING AND REMOVING THE CAUSES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
I. THE health of the Inhabitants of every large Town, depends very much on the
police of the place, and on the due performance of every duty connected
therewith.

II. As the establishment, as well as the execution of every regulation, made
either for the convenience or health of a City, are more immediately connected
with the functions of magistracy, the Magistrates are in some measure
answerable to the Inhabitants, in so far at least, as to enforce a proper
obedience to, and of course a perfect performance of every law, that for these
purposes may have been adopted.

III. The first material consideration for preserving the health of the
Inhabitants in a large Town, is a rigid attention, to every step that can tend
to produce cleanliness; and in the laying out of every additional building, to
secure a free communication of pure air, and a facility of preserving
cleanliness, ought always to be kept in view by those that have the management
of the police.

IV. Nor should a house be built in a place likely to prove unhealthy, since
not only its own inhabitants would suffer, but it would readily become a source
of infection to the most extensive City.

V. In building a Town, the streets ought to be so wide as to insure a free
circulation of air, and the wider the streets are in any Town, the more healthy
will the inhabitants be found; whereas narrow streets, by admitting a less
proportion of pure air, have every chance of creating infectious diseases.

VI. When it can be done, houses ought to be built on the north side of any
marsh, swampy ground, or large rivers, that are apt often to ebb and flow,
rather than on the south side of such places: Because from these, the sun
powerfully exhales such vapors, as by being breathed or otherwise applied to
the body, are capable of producing many contagious diseases. Whereas the
inhabitants on the north side of such places, are in no risque of being exposed
to these ascending vapors. Houses built on the north-west of a large Town,
will always prove the most healthy.

VII. All slaughter-houses, and butcheries, ought to be in the south of every
Town; and the Magistrates ought to enforce the greatest cleanliness in these
places, that the nature of such business can admit of; and the filth produced
in such places ought not to pass through any channel, that goes through the
City. The most certain way of preventing diseases from arising in consequence
of the filth of such places, is by obliging the butchers, etc. to bury all
offal, blood, etc. before they have time to become offensive, or to remove them
to some distant place from the City.

VIII. That of slaughtering animals in the streets, and permitting the blood,
etc, to remain there, ought to be made highly criminal, and punished
accordingly.

IX. All dead horses, dogs, cats, etc. ought to be buried, or carried to some
distant place; nothing gives a stranger a meaner idea of the taste of the
inhabitants of a Town, or produces more certain sources of contagious diseases,
than to see such dead animals laying about the streets We have a well
authenticated account of a very violent infectious fever breaking out at Fgmont
in North Holland, occasioned by the rotting of a Whale, which had been left on
the shore. There is likewise an instance of a contagious fever breaking out in
the cr^w of a French ship, owing to the putrefaction of some cattle that they
had killed on the island of Nevis, in the West Indies.
.

X. Tan-yards, and such factories as produce offensive smells, ought never to
be permitted in the middle of any large Town. They ought only to be in such
parts as have least communication with the inhabitants at large.

XI. All filth should be removed from every street and lane, early every
morning, and carried to a common reservoir at a considerable distance from the
Town; and people should be appointed, so many to each district, whose business
it ought to be during the day, to carry entirely out of the Town, whatever
filth or dirt may be produced on the streets. That of collecting dunghills on
the streets, and allowing them to remain there, during the pleasure of a
Scavenger, is very hurtful to the health of the inhabitants,

XII. Common sewers, or shores, ought to extend through every street, and
should empty themselves entirely out of, or at some distance from the Town; and
great care should be taken to keep them perfectly free, and fit for their duty;
it likewise ought to be a punishable crime, to throw any thing into a shore
that might tend to choke it up.

XIII. The establishing of public Privies, or Necessary-houses, in convenient
parts of a Town, is essential to its cleanliness; as the want of such places of
convenience, is a material cause of the filth so frequently found in lanes, etc.

XIV. Such public Necessary-houses, ought to be carefully attended to, by the
police officers, and so constructed as to be easily cleaned, which ought to be
done very early every morning When large armies have been long encamped on the
same ground, putrid diseases frequently arise, in consequence of the filth
unavoidably produced by a large body of people, for a length of time occupying
the same place; and the only mode of restoring health to the army, has been
found, to be that of removing the camp to new ground; and an army is generally
most healthy, where the nature of the service makes it necessary, for the army
to move frequently. This mode, so well known to the moderns, was sometimes
practiced by the ancient Generals. Vegetius seems to have been well acquainted
with the necessity of cleanliness to remove or prevent contagious diseases, for
in his system de Re Militari, he uses these words, "Si autumnali, aestivoque
tempore diutius in iisdem locis militum multitudo consistat, ex contagione
aquarum, et odoris ipsius foeditate vitiatis haustibus, et aere corrupto,
perriciesissimus nascitur morbus, qui prohiberi non potest aliter, nisi
frequenti mutatione castrorum." VEGET. de Re Militari, lib. iii. cap. 2.
Quintus Curtius likewise tells of Alexander the Great after the battle of
Arbela, being obliged to follow the same method to preserve the health of the
soldiery. "Ingruentibus deinde morbis, ques odor cadaverum totis jacentium
campis vulgaverat, maturius castra movit." lib. v. 32. And in the most ancient
times we find that cleanliness was reckoned essential to the preservation of
health; and the proper injunctions for that purpose, were by no means supposed
incompatible with the dignity of those highest in power. Thus we find the
divine lawgiver Moses, enjoining cleanliness in the camp of the Jews, in a
most particular manner, when he says. "Thou shall have a place also without the
camp, whether thou shall go forth abroad: and thou shall have a paddle on thy
weapon, and it shall be when thou will ease thyself abroad, thou shall dig
therewith, and shall turn back and cover that which comes from thee. For the
Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up
thine enemies before thee: therefore shall thy camp be holy, that he see no
unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee," DEUTERONOMY. chap. xxiii. ver. 12,
13, 14. -- Since then we find how frequently contagious diseases are produced
in a camp, by a great body of people collected together, while at the same
time, the most judicious regulations for preserving cleanliness, are by
military discipline better enforced, than perhaps the best regulated civil
police can ever accomplish; and since it is evident, that the inhabitants of a
Town, cannot avail themselves of changing ground, and thereby leaving behind
them whatever might tend to produce diseases, it is easy to see how essentially
necessary it must be to take every step, that can tend to prevent the direful
consequences arising from putrid substances laying in, and about a Town.
.

XV. A plentiful supply of good water is inseparably connected with the health
of a Town; the houses of opulent individuals being provided with good water by
means of pipes, is of small benefit to those of inferior circumstances, that in
all nations constitute the great body of the people.

XVI. The easy attainment of an ample supply of this necessary article in life
to the people at large, merits the greatest attention of the police. In many
Towns where good water can only be obtained at a distance, public pipes that
conduct the water from the grand reservoir are established in convenient
quarters of the Town, by which means the poor are enabled to partake of this
common bounty of providence, in as great perfection as the rich.

XVII. Jails, Poor-houses, and Hospitals, ought always to be in the most remote
quarters of a Town; but at the same time in such places as are little likely by
situation to become unhealthy, least they should turn out nurseries for
propagating diseases.

XVIII. An officer of the police ought daily to visit every part of the jail,
poorhouse, and other public charity, to enforce a due obedience, to such
orders as the police may think proper to make, for the regulation of such
places; and the visiting officer should be authorized, to inflict such
punishment as may seem necessary (and as may have been fixed by the police) for
any neglect of duty, or disobedience of orders, that the respective officers of
such places may be found guilty of.

XIX. In all jails, poor-houses, etc. the utmost attention should be paid, to
the shirts and shifts of the prisoners in jail, and the inhabitants of a poor
house. Their linen ought to be changed at least twice a week, and the officer
of police should not only enforce this order, but should take care that the
linen has been properly washed, and well aired before it is given to wear.

XX. All jails, poor-houses, etc. ought to be provided with a sufficient
quantity of linen, to supply such as may be sent there without a sufficiency of
this necessary article; and those who have the care of such places, ought to be
answerable, that such linen is kept in good order, and always forth coming. And
every jail should be supplied with a quantity of good blanketting.

XXI. Every room in jail, poor-house, etc. ought to be swept carefully every
morning, the sides and ceiling as well as the floor ought to undergo this
operation; and the straw and other bedding, when the weather is dry, ought to
be carried out, and laid in a yard (that ought always to belong to a jail) for
the benefit of the air, five or six hours every day.

XXII. As soon as the straw, bedding, etc. has been carried out of the
different rooms, the floors ought to be strewed over with sand or saw-dust,
which next morning is to be swept out, and the same process to be repeated
every day.

XXIII. When wet weather renders the carrying into the air of the straw and
other bedding inadmissible, they should be removed into a corner of the room,
to permit it to undergo the directions ordered as above.

XXIV. The straw for a jail, poor-house, etc. ought to be changed at least once
every month, and care should be taken that the old straw is either burnt, or
carried to some distance from the Town.

XXV. If feather-beds, or hair-mattresses, are ever used in a jail, poor-house,
etc. besides being regularly exposed to the free air, on every dry day, they
ought to be sumigated once a week, by being held at a proper distance over the
smoke of burning brimstone, or gunpowder.

XXVI. All sheeting should be changed once a fortnight, and the sheets and
blankets when the weather will permit, ought to be put on ropes fixed in the
yard for the purpose of exposing them to the action of the air.

XXVII. Every boarded floor should be washed with soap and water once every
week, and it ought to be done in the morning of a dry day, that the inhabitants
of the room may be enabled to remain in the yard, till the floor is perfectly
dry and covered over with sand. The sides of the room and ceiling should
undergo the same operation.

XXVIII. All dungeons of a jail should have boarded bottoms, and their sides
plaistered to make cleanliness the more practicable; but when these places
happen to have clay floors, and rough walls for their sides, the floors and
walls ought daily to be swept with a hard broom, and the walls once a week,
ought to be washed by throwing soap and water upon them with a mop, after which
they may be dried by carefully sweeping with a broom, and by burning some fuel
in a chaffing dish; a practice that ought frequently to be used in all
subteraneous apartments, and which ought likewise to be had recourse to in all
rooms in jails, poor-houses, etc.

XXIX. Every room should have its windows so situated, as to admit of a free
current of fresh air at pleasure; and all window sashes, when there is no rain,
should be opened some hours every day.

XXX. Every jail, and poor-house or other charity, ought to have a commodious
yard annexed to it, and a privy should be situated in some part of it, that
will prove least offensive. Into these privies all chamber-pots, etc. should be
emptied, and the regular cleaning of such privies, should be carefully attended
to.

XXXI. Every prisoner in jail, ought to be (unless prevented by sickness) made
to remain in the yard for some hours every day in fair weather, and as a
military guard attends on every jail, a proper number of sentinels being posted
in the yard, would render the walking about of those condemned to die,
perfectly admissible. Every prisoner ought to twig and brush his clothes in the
yard, every day in dry weather.

XXXII. A separate building with convenient rooms ought to belong to every
jail, and public building, for the purpose of an hospital for the sick, and
when this cannot be had, a sufficient number of rooms belonging to the building
itself, should be appropriated to that purpose.

XXXIII. As the regulation of the apartments for the sick will necessarily
belong to the Faculty that attend them, I reckon any directions on that head
unnecessary.

XXXIV. Whenever any person belonging to a jail, or other public building is
taken sick, he ought immediately to be reported to the Surgeon, or Physician,
and the person taken ill, should be removed to the hospital.

XXXV. Men of the first abilities only, in physic and surgery, should be
entrusted with the care of the sick, the consequence of delegating this
important office, to the charge of an apothecary is highly dangerous to the
inhabitants at large. Since in all such places, infectious diseases are more
likely to break out than any where else, it follows, that the practitioners
should be such, as by their abilities are best able, speedily to put a stop to
them.

XXXVI. In every large Town there ought to be commodious hospitals for the
reception of medical, as well as surgical patients, and in such hospitals there
should be a suite of rooms for the accommodation of such servants of the
inhabitants of the Town, as may be taken ill of infectious diseases The happy
effects of such an institution are amply Selt by the inhabitants of Edinburgh.
.

XXXVII. There should likewise be a public Dispensary, where such of the
diseased poor whose cases do not require confinement, may receive medicine and
advice, and the medical attendants of the Dispensary should visit such as are
confined at home, whenever the hospitals happen to be full.

XXXVIII. Whenever any infectious disease appears in a Town, it ought
immediately to be reported to the chief magistrate, who ought to summon a
meeting of the police, to consult with some of the most eminent of the Faculty,
on such steps as by being carried into execution, may be most likely to put a
stop to its progress.

XXXIX. Every person that dies of any infectious disease, ought to be buried in
twenty-four hours after death; and when infectious diseases prevail and great
mortality, the ringing of bells at deaths and funerals should be strictly
prohibited. And the idle, dissipated custom of a number of people assembling at
wakes, ought on all such occasions to be forbidden, as such a practice is
extremely dangerous.

XL. Those who attend funeral ceremonies, should not perform these duties with
an empty stomach, for in this situation they will be more apt to catch
infection, both from the corpse, and the hurtful vapors that arise from a
newly opened grave, than after a meal.

XLI. When infectious diseases are prevalent in a Town, it will be of great
service to burn gunpowder in the streets, and to make fires in different parts
of the Town, of any wood that abounds with resin, such as the different species
of fir.

XLII. In every house where there is any infectious fever, vinegar ought
several times in the day to be boiled, and sprinkled while hot in every room;
and a sauce-pan filled with hot vinegar, should always be kept in the patients
chamber. The burning of frankincense I remember to have checked the progress of
a very contageous fever by this mode, after all others had failed, in a Barrack
situated in the midde of the Bog of Allen. The smoke of the Juniper, or of its
rocts and berries, has long been esteemed an efficacious remedy against
distempers; and Mindererus in his Medicina Militaris, advises to burn fires of
Juniper before the tents, when the Hungarian-disorder, the spotted-fever, or
other pestilential disorders are frequent in an army. -- During the continuance
of infectious diseases, fires ought to be burnt in every house, whenever the
temperature of the the weather permits.
is very pleasant to the smell, and very powerful in purifying putrid air.

XLIII. When infectious diseases prevail, every attention to cleanliness of
person should be doubled, particularly in regard to linen; for during such
times the perspiration sooner becomes hurtful, and more powerful in producing a
contageous matter capable of bringing on a fever, than when such diseases are
not general.

XLIV. All attendants on the sick in such fevers, should be careful in holding
the head as little over the patient as possible, or in speaking very near to
the patient: this caution is to prevent the hurtful essluvia (that are more
powerful in proportion as they are near to the patient) from entering the lungs.

XLV. When the Faculty, Clergy, or others that may for any time be obliged to
stay by the patients bedside, are there, a vessel containing warm vinegar
ought to be placed near them; and it is better to smell to any grateful
substance, than to chew any thing as a preventative, because in doing the
latter there is danger of the infectious matter being entangled with the
spittle, and thereby of producing what it was intended to prevent.

XLVI. Whenever a person dies of any contagious disease, the corpse ought
quickly after death to be put into a close coffin, and the room in which the
person died should be well aired, by having the windows opened, until a
charcoal fire be kindled with some rolls of sulphur upon it; after which both
doors and windows ought to be kept shut, for a considerable time, not less than
eight or ten hours, until the room be thoroughly smoked; after which the
windows ought to be again opened for several hours, and the room should not
only be well scoured with soap and water, but likewise with warm vinegar,
before any one inhabits it. The same steps ought to be taken with every room in
which an infectious disease has been, though the patient may have recovered:
and for this purpose it is proper that whenever a person is so far recovered
from any contagious disease, as to admit of being moved with safety, the
patient should be conveyed to another chamber, to permit the one occupied
during the disease to undergo the necessary purification.

XLVII. It may perhaps be proper to observe, that the blankets, linen, etc. of
such as die of infectious diseases, ought to be steeped for some time in cold
water, before they undergo the usual process of being washed: for if without
this precaution they were to be washed in hot water in the usual manner, the
hurtful steams that would thereby be produced, might prove very dangerous to
the person employed in washing them.

XLVIII. Those whose duty it may be to go amongst the sick, ought never to
perform that duty fasting; even a small quantity of aliment taken into the
stomach, gives great vigor to the whole body; and the body is more or less
likely to be affected with contagion, in proportion to the state of strength or
weakness of the stomach: It is therefore proper for those that are obliged to
have much intercourse with the sick in contagious diseases, to take a dose of
some comfortable stomachic medicine every morning an hour before breakfast; and
I have from much experience found, that an ounce of Huxham's Tincture of Bark,
is as useful a preventative as can be taken Some people labor under diseases
that render the use of bark improper, and in such cases, I would as a
preventative against infection recommend an ounce of Rue, and half an ounce of
Garlic, to be steeped in a quart of Brandy, for two days, and a wine
glass-full of this Tincture to be taken every morning before breaksast.
.

XLIX. Whatever effects the strength of the stomach, has a powerful effect in
producing or preventing contagious diseases; therefore every step ought to be
taken, to keep that organ in the utmost vigor during the prevalence of
infectious diseases: and for this purpose, the utmost circumspection in the way
of living ought to be attended to, and all such food as has been generally
found to disagree with the stomach, ought on such occasions to be carefully
avoided.

L. A due quantity of generous wine, should be used by every one whose
circumstances will admit of it; at the same time, I think it necessary to say
that excess in drinking, by leaving the stomach, and of course the whole body
in a weakened state, would prove hurtful. Excess in eating on all such
occasions should be carefully avoided, as being capable of throwing the stomach
into that state, that may readily invite any infectious disorder; nay some of
the ancient physicians reckoned any excess in eating, more dangerous than that
of drinking, for Celsus says, "Si qua, intemperantia subest, tutior est in
potione, quam in esca." that is, it is safer to exceed in drinking than in
eating. But every kind of intemperance is hurtful.

LI. During the continuance of contagious diseases, it is improper to go abroad
into the streets before breakfast, and it would be proper for those that are
obliged to go abroad before this meal, to take a draught of new milk to which a
little good brandy has been added.

LII. Such as have weak stomachs and are not able to make a hearty breakfast,
ought to take a glass or two of good wine, some time before dinner; the
addition of a little bark to the wine would be of service During the campain in
Hungary, in the year 1717. Count Boneval preserved both himself and family from
disorders, by taking himself, and making all his domestics take, two or three
times a day, a small quantity of Brandy in which Bark had been infused, at a
time when all the rest of the army were infected with malignant disorders. -- A
regiment in Italy continued healthy by the use of the Bark, when the rest of
the Austrian army, that did not pursue the same method were greatly annoyed
with sickness.
.

LIII. A moderate use of ripe fruit, is of great service in preventing putrid
diseases; and vegetable acids such as lemon juice, etc. when they agree with
the bowels are very proper ingredients in drink. The best time for eating fruit
is two or three hours before dinner. Toward the end of the year 1743, Mr.
Tough, then a mate to a regiment, was ordered to go down the Rhine from Germany
to Flanders, with a party of sick, that had the seeds of the Hospital or
Jail-fever among them, and were to go in Bilanders. Having had a cask or two of
Brandy put on board as stores for the sick, he was afraid lest the men should
make too free with the spirits, to prevent which he threw a quantity of Bark
into each cask, and gave the men regularly merning and evening, a glass of this
bitter tincture. At the same time the men were kept extremely clean. By these
means most of the sick mended on the passage, and they had no return of the
malignant fever amongst them; whereas Sir John Pringle, who takes notice of the
other partics that came from the same Hospitals in Germany, tells us, that the
malignant fever broke out in a violent degree, and half the number died by the
way, and several others soon after their arrival.


LIVE. Sitting up late, and laying long in bed, are hurtful at all times, but by
weakening the body become particularly dangerous during the prevalence of
infectious diseases. A moderate degree of exercise in the open air which is at
all times proper for health, is particularly necessary when contagion reigns.
Cold bathing is an useful assistant in the prevention of diseases.

LV. Nothing so much predisposes a person to receive infection, as to entertain
a constant dread of catching any disease. Nothing weakens the whole body so
much as constant anxiety and fear; and as I have already remarked, whatever
tends to diminish the vigor of the body, acts powerfully in laying the
foundation of disease. A fearless disposition is best calculated to enable the
body to resist any contagious disorder We have a striking instance of the
dangerous consequence of fear, in the case of a man at Constantinople, when the
plague happened to rage there with unusual violence. This man from a natural
intrepidity of mind, had been extremely useful in carrying out of the city, and
burying many hundreds that died, at a time when it was very dissicult to find
people hardy enough to perform this necessary duty. It happened however one
morning that he found one of those he was carrying to bury to be one of his
nearest relations and most intimate friends, by which he immediately became so
much shocked, that he was speedily seized with the plague and died.
.

LVI. Nothing is more injurious to health than to walk late in the evening:
dews begin to fall as soon as the sun is set, and walking abroad after this
time, has in all countries been found to be a powerful cause of producing
diseases.

POSTSCRIPT.
AS putrid diseases are very common and violent in hot countries, it is very
necessary for Europeans who visit those climates to be well informed, of the
signs of an unhealthy country, that they may be on their guard as soon as they
enter any foreign region.

By the best judges the following are considered as chiefly demanding notice.

1. A sudden and great alteration in the air at sunset, from intolerable heat
to a chilling cold. This is perceived as soon as the sun is down, and is for
the most part accompanied with a heavy fall of dew; it shows an unhealthy
swampy soil; the nature of which is such, that no sooner the sunbeams are
withdrawn, than the vapors emitted from it, render the air damp, raw, and
chilling in the most sultry climates; so that even under the equator in some
unhealthy places, the night-air is very cold to an European constitution.

2. Thick fogs, chiefly after sunset, arising from the valleys, and
particularly from the mud, slime, and other impurities. In hot countries the
smell of these fogs, may be compared to that of a new cleaned ditch. Diseases
therefore arising from this cause, generally take place in the night, or before
sunrising.

3. Numerous swarms of flies, gnats, and other insects, which attend stagnated
air, and unhealthy places covered with wood.

4. When all butchers meat soon corrupts, and in a few hours becomes full of
maggots; when metals are quickly rusted on being exposed to the air; and when a
corpse becomes intolerably offensive in less than six hours; these are proofs
of a close, hot, and unwholesome country. And in such places during excessive
heats and great calms, it is not uncommon for Europeans, especially such as are
of a gross habit of body, to be seized at once with most alarming, and fatal
symptoms of what is called the yellow-fever, without even any previous
complaint of sickness, or other symptom of the disease, and the patient has
often been carried off in less than forty-eight hours.

5. A sort of sandy soil, commonly a small loose white sand, as that at
Pensacola, Whydah, and the island of Bonavista, which is found by experience to
be injurious to health. The pestiferous vapors arising during the summer
months, and in the heat of the day from such a sandy soil, is best
characterised from its effects in the extensive deserts of Asia and Africa. It
there constitutes what is called the Samiel Wind; a blast which in the parched
desert, proves instantly fatal both to man and beast; but when it passes over a
soil well covered with grass and vegetables has its effects greatly mitigated:
it is however even then always productive of sickness. Thus the southerly
winds, while they blow from the dedesarts of Lybia, in the summer, at Algiers,
Tunis, and Tripoli, produce an unhcalthy season; and at Madrass the winds,
which in the months of April and May, pass over a large tract of sand, are
always hot, disagreeable, and unwholesome.

During these land winds, sudden gusts of a more hot and suffocating nature,
are often observed to come from those sands, once or twice, or even more
frequently in a day, which seem to be this vapor in a purer form. These gusts
pass very quickly, and affect persons who happen to stand with their faces
toward them, in the same manner as the hot air, which issues from a burning
furnace, or from a heated oven, and obliges them immediately to turn away from
it in order to recover breath.

The effect of this hot suffocating blast on the human body, even when
mitigated by passing through a moist atmosphere, is the same as that of intense
cold; it shuts up every pore of the skin, and entirely stops the perspiration
of such as are exposed to it. These blasts come only in the day time and always
from the deserts.

Water is the only known corrector or antidote against them; hence, coarse
thick clothes kept constantly wet, and hung up at the windows, or doors,
greatly mitigate their violence. A house so built as to have no doors, or
windows, toward the deserts, is an excellent protection against their
pernicious effects.

That the heat of these land-winds, as also of the sudden gusts which accompany
them, proceed from large tracts of land, heated by the sun, is evident from the
increased heat, and suffocating quality of those winds, in proportion as the
day advances, and as the heat of the season is increased.

The opposite winds blowing from each side of the Balagate-Mountains, are a
farther proof of this. Those mountains, running from north to south, divide the
hither peninsula of India into two unequal parts, and separate what is called
the Malabar, from the Coromandel coast. To the former they are very near, but
at a great distance from the latter. The winds blowing from these hills, are on
the Malabar coast always remarkably cool; but on the the coast of Coromandel,
in the months of April, May, June, and July, are extremely hot and suffocating
as they pass over a large tract of intermediate sand, heated during these
months by an almost vertical sun.

Hence the Malabar coast is always covered with an agreeable verdure; whereas
the coast of Coromandel, during the continuance of these hots winds, seems a
barren wilderness, nothing appearing green except the trees.

The next considerations for such as visit unhealthy climates, are such
employments as are particularly dangerous to Europeans on their first arrival.
And according to the opinion of Doctor Lind, of Hastar, who served long as a
Surgeon in the Royal Navy, one of such dangerous employments is that of cutting
down of trees, shrubs, etc. or clearing the ground, as it is called. Of the
unhealthiness of this employment there are two remarkable instances. At the
conclusion of the former war, the captain of a ship went on shore at the island
of Dominica, with twelve of his men, to cut down the wood, and clear a piece of
ground, which he intended to have purchased; but in a few days sickness obliged
him to desist from this dangerous work; the captain and eleven of his men being
seized with violent fevers which ended in obstinate agues, and of which several
died; and the survivors, during their lives, had fits of the ague on the return
of an east wind.

The Ludlow-castle, a ship of war, in a voyage to the Coast of Guinea, also
lost twenty-five of her men, at Sierra Leona, who were employed in cutting down
wood for the ship. This is an occupation that has often proved destructive to
Europeans in those climates, and in which they ought never to be employed,
especially during the rainy season; there being many instances of white
persons, when cutting down the woods at that season, who have been taken ill in
the morning, and have died before night.

Another evil not less dangerous, is the sending of Europeans in open boats
after sunset, where the soil is swampy, or where there are great night fogs.
The single duty of fetching fresh killed butchers meat, annually in the East
and West Indies, destroys several thousand seamen. In those parts of the world,
butchers meat must be brought on board at night immediately after it is killed,
otherwise it will not be fit for use next day; but a contract made with the
natives to send it on board, would be the means of preserving many useful lives.

At Batavia, a boat, belonging to the Medway man of war, that attended on shore
every night, was three times successively manned, not one having survived that
service. They were all taken ill in the night when on shore, or when returning
on board; so that at length the officers were obliged to employ none but the
natives on that sereice.

Since then it is so unhealthy for Europeans to be exposed in open boats to the
night fog, it must appear, that sending them unsheltered in open boats, far up
rivers in unhealthy climates, for wood, water, trade, or other purposes, must
be attended with the most fatal consequences.

Burying the dead in swampy countries, is an occupation that has proved fatal
to many, and which ought to be entrusted to to the natives of the country. The
effluvia from the ground when newly opened, whether from graves or ditches, are
far more dangerous than from the same swampy soil, when the surface is
undisturbed; nay, in some places it has been found almost certain death, for an
European to dig a grave, unless long seasoned to the country.

In all cases where it is practicable, ships which visit those unhealthy
countries, should anchor at as great distance as possible from shore; or if
obliged to anchor near marshy grounds, or swamps, especially in summer, or hot
weather, and when the wind blows directly from thence, the gunports in ships of
war, that would admit the hurtful land breeze ought to be kept shut, especially
at night. Or if the ship rides with her head to the wind, a thick sail ought to
be put on the foremast, along which the smoke from the fireplace might be made
to play and ascend; any inconvenience that the smoke might occasion, would be
amply compensated, by its keeping off the direct steam, of the swampy vapor.
The best preventative against the the mischevous impression of a putrid fog, or
of a marshy exhalation, is a close, sheltered, and covered place, such as the
lower apartments of a ship, or a house, in which there are no doors or windows
facing the swamps. If in such places a fire is kept, either at the doors or
other inlets to a house, or in the chambers, as is practiced in some unhealthy
countries during the rainy or foggy season, it will prove an excellent and
effectual protection against the injuries of bad air. On board of ships also,
fires may be made at the hathways; and of the good effects of this, we have the
following example. When the Edgar, a ship of war of sixty guns, was upon the
coast of Guinea, in the year 1768, her men were very sickly and many of them
died; whereas it was observed, that in a sloop of war, that was constantly in
company with her, few were taken ill, and not one died during the whole voyage.
This could be ascribed to no other cause, but that in the sloop the fireplace
for cooking victuals, was on the the same level with the deck where the men
lay; and every morning when the fire was lighted, especially when there was but
little wind, the smoke from the cook-room spread itself all over the ship, and
particularly over those parts where the men lay; but from the construction of
the fireplace of the Edgar, no smoke from it ever came between her decks.
Persons on board any ship whatever are much safer, than those that make inland
excursions in open boats. The intolerable heat at noon often obliges such
persons to be in a manner half-naked; while a violent sweat issues from every
pore on the skin.

An approach to unwholesome swamps, at this time, is apt to produce every
symptom of the most dangerous fever. But if they happen to pass them at night,
or lay near them in an open boat, the air from those swamps is perceived to be
quite chill and cold; in so much that warm thick clothing becomes absolutely
necessary, to guard the body against the impressions of so great an alteration
in the air, and against its hurtful quality, for its effects then on the most
healthy often produce diseases that quickly terminate in death.

But when such exposure becomes unavoidable, the only method is then to defend
the body as much as possible against the pernicious effluvia with which the air
abounds. Those employed in cutting down wood, or in other laborious and
dangerous services in hot climates, during the heat of the day, ought to have
their heads covered with a bladder dipped in vinegar, and to wash their mouths
with the same liquor; and they ought morning and evening to take a dose of
Tincture of Bark.

They should leave off labor before sunset, and not return to work till the
sun has had time to disperse the unwholesome vapors and dews. Those who from
necessity must remain on shore, and sleep in dangerous places, must take care
not to sleep on the ground, exposed to dews, but in hammocks in a close tent,
standing on a dry sand, gravel, or chalk, near the seashore. The door of this
tent should open to the sea, and the back part should be protected from the
land breeze, by being securcured with double canvass, covered with branches of
trees. But in such cases a hut is preferable to a tent, if it is well thatched,
to prove a defense from the heat of the sun by day, and from the dews by night.

When the air is chill, and moist, a fire should be kept in and about the tent
or hut, as the best means of purifying such unwholesome air.

It is the custom with the Negros in Guinea, as also of some Indians, to have a
fire producing a little smoke, constantly burning in their huts where they
sleep. This not only corrects the moisture of the night, but also, by
occasioning more smoke than heat, renders the damp from the earth less hurtful.
Doctor Lind gives us an instance of a Guinea ship being up one of the rivers
for trade, and it was found to be very dangerous to sleep on shore, without
which their trade could not be so conveniently carried on. First the captain,
then the mate, and two or three of the seamen were taken ill; each of them the
morning after they had lain on shore. By these accidents the men were greatly
intimidated from laying on shore, till the surgeon offered to try the
experiment on himself. Next morning, when he awaked, he found himself seized as
the rest, with every symptom of fever. He immediately acquainted one of the
Negroes with his situation, who carried him to his hut, and set him down in the
smoke of it; when all the symptoms of fever soon left him: he then took a dose
of the Tincture of Bark, and found himself very well.

Thus instructed by the Negroe, he ordered a large fire to dry the hut he slept
in; and afterward had every night, a small fire sufficient to raise a gentle
smoke, without occasioning a troublesome heat; and by these means, he and
several others using the same precautions, slept many nights on shore without
any inconvenience.

I should next proceed to give some directions concerning the mode of living
that ought to be followed by Europeans in warm climates; but as the limits
fixed for these pages, prevent my entering fully into the subject, I am obliged
with some reluctance to conclude this performance, by mentioning that together
with the causes produced by an unwholesome climate, the excesses of European
debaucheries carried into those countries, tend greatly to bring on diseases.
Good living is in all countries necessary to health; but excess of drinking in
a warm climate is a matter of serious consequence. In short, the utmost
attention should be paid to cleanliness; to use food as easy of digestion as
can be procured, to avoid fatigue, and all excess in living. I therefore beg
leave to recommend the advice given by Celsus, as well meriting the utmost
attention by those exposed to unhealthy climates.

"Tum calorem, frigus, libidinem, cruditatem, fatigationem vitare opportet."
Celsus, lib. i. cap. 10. ERRATA.
Page 24, line 13. for contageous, read contagious. P. 28, l. 1. for effects,
read affects. P. 29, l. 17. for campain, read campaign P. 40, l. 11. for
sereice, read service. P. 41, l. 23, for mischevous, read mischievous. P. 45,
l. 1. for Negros, read Negroes.

FINIS.

