FOUR ORIGINAL LETTERS, VIZ. Two from a HUSBAND to a GENTLEMAN: AND Two from a
HUSBAND to a WIFE.

In amore haec omnia insunt vitia, --
-- Ut cum ratione insanias.
TERENT. Satis jam satis, spectata erga te amicitia est mea.
Id. It is a kind of Slander to trust to Rumor. B. JOHNSON. The THIRD EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for T. READ, in Dogwell-Court, White-Fryers, MDCCXXXIX. (Price
Sixpence.)

THE PREFACE.
HE, who (in any Station of Life) depends on the Public, cannot pay too great
a Deference or Regard to 'em; it is his Interest and his Duty; from which Motive
alone, the following Letters are submitted to the Perusal of the Humane, the
Sensible, the Candid, and Impartial. The unhappy injured Person who wrote 'em,
hopes, they will be regarded as an opening only, to a Case to be published at a
convenient Opportunity; wherein, it is possible, it will be made appear, --
however great a Man's Injuries, -- however aggravating the Circumstances, -- it
may not always prove the highest Prudence to expect Reparation from Law; since,
however excellent the Laws may be, however worthy and upright the --; however
wise and learned the --; nay though a --, should be wholly unbias'd, or
unprejudiced; -- What Defense can there be against unsuspected Treachery, and a
close laid Conspiracy? A Series of which, can be proved to have been acted, a
long Time (particularly by a Set of the most unworthy, ungrateful People, that
ever any one, by Marriage, was unfortunately allied to) against a Man, whose
grossest Crimes, perhaps, will appear to have been, Credulity, Indiscretion,
and a too forgiving Temper.

It may not be improper to premise the Readers, there is not a single Fact
hinted at, in these Letters, that many living Witnesses do not know to be
Truth: And as to the Marriage Articles mentioned in 'em; on their being
examined by able Lawyers, they appeared to be not worth one Shilling to the
Wife, though they were drawn by a Person, chose by her own Family, whose Trouble
the Husband handsomely rewarded: The Husband has scorned to take any bad
Advantage of 'em, though it is evident, they were never designed in his Favor.

The Verdict, in a past Trial, is not complained of; 'twas all the Money too
much for the Woman, and more than the Husband ever desired to receive, though not
equal, perhaps (as some may think) to the Damages and Injuries the Relations,
the Friends, the Children, and the Creditors of that Husband may have sustained
by the Cause of Trial. Had the Husband's Views been mercenary, there are many
Men of Honor living who know, a private Composition was frequently proposed,
and as constantly rejected, in a proper Manner. The Readers are left to make
their own Remarks on the following Epistles, and only entreated to consider,
the different Times and Seasons they were wrote in; as well as to allow for the
Agitations of the Author's distracted Mind; and then, if possible, to suspend
their final Judgment 'till the whole is impartially stated, and submitted to
'em. And should it appear, creditable Witnesses are living, who, if called,
would have confronted the Guilty, and confuted many false, scandalous and vile
Assertions, made to the Prejudice of the Plaintiff; What can be said? or what
may not be thought? As the Author of these is well known and ready, on
Occasion, to appear (and as they contain Truth alone) it is left to the
Consideration of the impartial Reader what Sort of Countenance, or Belief,
ought to be given to any Libels, published as pretended Answers, should any
such appear, (as has been too frequently, and basely practiced against many)
dispersed by unknown Hands.

Should the Husband, in Time, recover his Senses enough, even to smile at the
romantic Stuff and sublime Nonsense, he, in his Extravagance of frantic Passion
may (when wandering Abroad) have wrote to the Wife at Home; -- nay, should he,
hereafter, endeavor to divert Others with what may have made him too long
serious, it is hoped, 'twill not be imputed to him, as any Breach of good
Manners, or Morality: If there are any such severe, grave Thinkers, he humbly
begs Leave to say to 'em, (with the philosophical Satirist) Ridentem dicere
Verum quis vetat? But to detain the Readers no longer, the following Pages are
left to their Censure or Approbation, with this Intimation alone, -- Nothing
but the last Necessity should have occasioned the printing of what was meant
for a private Perusal only. They were not, when wrote, designed for public
View, etc. but flowed from the Weakness of his blind Infatuation and passionate
wounded Heart, whose cooler Judgment now convinces him, the Persons they are
addressed to, deserved not a single Line from him.

LETTER I.
A Letter from the Husband to the Wife (once thought virtuous) left for her in
her Servant's Hands the Day before the Husband went Abroad, which was on Sunday
April the 16th, 1738, she having confessed her Love for another.

My Dearest Susanna Maria,
NOT Strength of Constitution, Spirits, Resolution, Reason, or all I can call
to my Assistance, will, I find, prevent my having a violent Fit of Illness
which increases daily: If God pleases to dismiss me this Life, it will be an
Act of Mercy. My Heart trembles, my Senses stagger, what a State of Despair! I
own the Hand of Providence, and submit to its eternal Justice; my Condition is
greatly terrible: My own Faults glare upon me, and Self convicted I own; I
ought to suffer much, yet, sure, mine is the heaviest Calamity that ever
oppressed human Nature: How vain, were an Attempt, to express it in Words: It Is
not to be conceived; it is only to be felt, and felt by me alone.

Where is the Religion, where the unspotted Truth, the whitened Innocence, that
once shone out, so brightly, in a certain Mind? All lost! I hope not
irrecoverably lost, in violent Passions and wild Notions, that impose upon the
Understanding, and mislead the Mind benighted, 'till the Day may break and
waken us, from cheating Dreams, to Certainty of Pain.

I have broke off to address the Almighty with a truly penitent, contrite
Heart, with bitter Tears, unfeigned Sorrow: Do you join in the Prayer; humbly
implore that great divine Instructor, to illuminate your Mind, to waken a Sense
of Truth, and convince, that without such Assistance, our own Reason is too
weak to let us know when we err. The Indulgence of strong Passions will never
permit us to judge heartily. How necessary is it to beg Grace of the divine
Power; to do it fervently and unfeignedly, it is the only true Check on our
wrong Thoughts, that otherwise lead us to wrong Actions; one brings on another,
it is impossible to avoid it, if not timely stopped. How dismal are my Nights?
How miserable my Days? Oh, Child, be cautious, lest, too late, you own with me,
it is a bitter aggravating Circumstance of Sorrow, to be conscious, our Follies
may, in some Measure have deserved it. May the just, the all-gracious God,
hear, and be my Witness, since I was married, that I never thought of any one,
with the Ideas of Love, but my own dear Wife; whom now I love with all the
Esteem, Tenderness, cordial Affection, and fond Concern, that ever possessed
the Breast of Man, as a Husband or Lover: No Parent, not even a Mother, can
more fondly dote on her only newborn Child. That I have been heretofore
negligent of my Person, my Fortune, and Character, with Shame and Sorrow, I
own; and God only knows how terrible my Punishment! He farther knows, and may
his gracious unbounded Mercy strengthen my Mind to an honest Resolution: He
also knows, I say, how desirous I am of being just for the Time to come. I Will
not encourage the least contrary Thought, nor omit ought may lead me to that
Happiness. May my Crimes be pardoned, as I pardon all committed toward me.
Would the indulgent Omnipotent recall the dear wandering Heart, whose Loss I
mourn with Agony; be Witness, God, with what a Rapture my Heart would open, to
receive the Blessing; and never, in a single Thought, would dare to reprove, or
chide, the too dear Frail One: Heaven grant this, or I am lost for ever.

My Heart's Fondling, my dearest Molly, you may have the sole Possession, and
full Command, of the Heart of a Husband that beats to you alone; that wishes,
the vital Blood may no longer warm it, than while it flows for you. Take
Example of Heaven, and dash not away the Tears of Penitence: I have been highly
too blame, and I as truly repent, I will err no more, I here give up all Views
of idle Pleasures, all Vanities whatsoever; I will live very near, that I may
recover my Circumstances, I give up every Thing, but your Heart; let me recover
that Treasure, and I shall repine at nothing; my Heart will be delighted in
Ecstasy, while I can see your Countenance smile, and wear the Looks of cordial
Affection.

Return and save me from the last Misery; my Senses will certainly be lost, if
not my Life, unless this happens: Human Nature cannot support it long. Sure you
will, you will return; I must not suppose you could bear to think, you were
unhappily the Cause of my untimely End, and thereby hazard my Soul's eternal
Rest: All Right of Command I change to Entreaty, and fondly implore this of
you. No Indulgence shall equal mine, and think, how glorious the Triumph will
be, when Humanity and Virtue conquers unwarrantable Passions; it is the
greatest Progress we can make toward reaching divine Perfection: Such a
Victory is a nobler Instance of a great Mind than can be given by those who
never had Struggle: On one Side, appears Comfort and everlasting Happiness,
warranted, and protected, by the Laws of God and Man: On the other, I dare not
paint it, the Prospect is too indelicate, for me, to show you, and too terrible
for us both to look at. I must, though with a bleeding Heart, say something, though
very poorly, expressive of the Truth; Is it not for the present Indulgence of
unjustifiable Passions, and deceiving Pleasures; Is it not hoarding up of
perpetual Miseries to come? Minds may change! Resentments may awake! unforeseen
Revolutions may happen, and Shame and Scorn ensue! Truth will conquer all. You
are high in the Esteem of the Best; lose it not for God's Sake: Think of your
Days of Innocence and Delight; awake the Memory of those Joys, those conscious
Joys, we have known; return, return entire, and give a Joy beyond 'em all;
crown the Evening of my Life with this Blessing, and have my eternal Prayers.
Experience will teach us; Bread and Water, with such Reflections, afford
greater Delight than all the nameless Vanities that Luxury, in all its
deceitful Shapes, can give; such cannot last, and Misery must be the
Consequence: Revive the Memory of your own dear Innocence; let not false Names
cheat you to mistake something for it that is not it. Save my Life, save my
Soul, and of a miserable Object of Despair, make me the happiest of Men: My
Heart springs at the Thought: But alas! it sinks again, and swells, with
throbbing Grief, to think it is not so: Yet let me hope it though -- If nothing
but my everlasting Ruin can content you, you may soon enjoy the Sacrifice; but
have more Regard to yourself, your Relations, your Friends, and the aching
Heart of a forgiving, a repentant, and truly affectionate Husband: Think how
you have been delighted to see my Name joined thereto, and by blessing me,
beyond Expression, renew those Delights, such as will give our Hearts more
lasting, real Joy, than all we can propose beside. Had God permitted our tender
Babes to have remained on Earth, those innocent Angels would have pleaded in my
Behalf beyond the Rhetoric of Man, much more beyond all my poor disconcerted
Brain will enable me to say. I would proceed, but big Passions choke me: I have
been torn by many, but my Love and Concern for you conquers all.

Let me not imagine any thing can entirely efface the Memory of a Husband,
whom, you own, you entertained as the first welcome Guest of an innocent Heart:
Let no second Thought, for God's Sake, drive me quite from thence; you know my
Esteem of you is so great, so fond my Opinion of you, my tender Heart has been
more ready to form Excuses for you, than you to make 'em -- My Dear, Affliction
is a just, though severe Monitor, the sincerest Friend; it shows the Truth; I
see, I feel it. To declare I lose my Appetite, that I want Sleep, are but poor
Instances of Pain: I want much more, I want my Peace of Mind; you alone can
restore it. Kneel, kneel, and implore the Assistance of our great Creator; to
trust alone to our fallible Mind, is running on in Error; it leads to
Perdition: Be assured, this is so, and may the Almighty Power waken you to a
right Sense, ever mine is lost in Madness: My Prospects, otherwise, are these,
a lingering Death in a Jail, Madness in Bedlam, a broken Heart, or the terrible
Chance, that in some Frensy of my Passion, I may at once rush into that
Eternity, of which, the wisest Man is but an arrogant Fool, who presumes he can
give a full and certain Notion; and then, where is my Retreat? From all this,
you, and you alone can save me. The Recovery of thee, my inestimable Jewel,
would give a Transport to my Heart, beyond all I ever knew; that were a bridal
Hour indeed! Then my Mind might calm to give me leave to look into my Affairs,
which, if this happens, are not irretrieveable; but one cannot be without the
other. My Horses, and all Superfluities, belonging to me, I shall order to be
sold; I am determined to think nothing necessary but what may merely keep me
clean, and subsist me; and shall employ one, among my Creditors, who shall make
such reasonable Proposals, as I cannot but think will be complied with. If
Riding is necessary for you, as I think it may, I can have your little Mare, or
borrow some other for you, and you cannot have a faithfuller Servant, than
myself, to attend you. Give me my Peace of Mind, give me yourself, give me your
Heart -- your Mind, my Soul's Darling, my only Comfort and remaining Hope; and
what cannot I undertake and accomplish, with his great Assistance, whose Aid I
shall frequently implore; the Repetition of which, you well know, is the only
Way to keep our Mind in a right Habit. Let not false Notions, gloss'd over with
specious Appearances, win you from these Thoughts; I would be delicately tender
of shocking your Mind with rude Images, yet, Duty compels me, gently to inform
you, in the Way you are, you are trying to steal your Heart against a fond,
though erring Husband, but a truly penitent one; it is driving from your Mind all
conjugal Affections, setting at naught the Peace of all Relations, all Friends,
and risquing your own eternal Quiet; it is teaching yourself a strange unhappy
Lesson; it is plunging in Guilt, believe it; oh God! it is fearing your
Conscience, midst all the Calamities and Disappointments you ever met: Examine
your Mind and tell me; Did there not appear great Solace from the Consciousness
of a well disposed and warrantable Inclination, and gave not Religion a
Comfort, which naught else can so effectually do? I have been too well
acquainted with the Volence of some Passions, and know how much they blind our
Reason: But Truth will prevail at last, and when we find that has not been our
Guide, how shocking our Condition! Your truest Friend tells you this, who knows
it, by sad Experience; profit by the Example: The Struggle will over pay
itself. Ah! my Life, I wish not to cure the Wounds of your dear Mind with
Corrosives; I would pour the Balm of Comfort, though I am mentioning what is a
Dagger in my Heart; but thy kind Hand can remove it, and I will draw a Veil
over it, that the Operation may not too strongly affect you: Think this, --
Justice, Honor, Duty, all the Ties of Religion, Virtue, Truth, and Humanity,
plead my unhappy Cause; your not complying, ends in the Ruin of all; it must
end in mine, and, which, to me, appears still worse, I fear your own
Destruction. I here, in express Terms, declare, what is passed I forgive, and
nothing, but the Prevention of my future Ease, shall ever rouse a Thought of it
in me; nor do I desire a better Security, for my Quiet, than your own Word: Be
assured, all unwarrantable Passions are to be got the better of, with much more
Ease, and less Time, than those which Virtue inspires, which Honor warrants,
which Truth demands, and which it is unjust to waver in, but more heinous not to
recover, to cherish and support. Wiser Heads than mine, may dress up other
Sentiments in a more pleasing Garb; but Time alone will convince, there is
nothing so charming (however other Things may be artfully disguised) as simple,
naked Truth. I have begged of God, and I hope he has heard my Prayers, to
enable me to suppress all Passion, but one; that one ought to be indulged, my
Love I mean: Again I repeat it. -- I Will show no Ill Will or Resentment to any;
no Thought, but what terminates in an honest Desire of making my dear Wife
happy: Wife and Husband are the tenderest Names; do not lose all Sense of 'em.
Retrieve me from Perdition, my Heart's Darling, and be, in a true literal
Sense, my Guardian Angel. Read this often, consider it cooly; and, though a
moderate Understanding may make me express myself but indifferently, it speaks
my Mind at least: Drive me not to Despair; insult not my breaking Heart; but,
my dearest Sucky, my dearest Molly, my dearest Teresa, return to Truth, and
bless me; return to

Your repentant, fond, forgiving, affectionate, tender, truly loving, though
unhappy Husband, T.C.

LETTER II.
A Letter from the Husband, in Town, to a Gentleman (once thought a Friend.)
Delivered into his own Hands, in the Country, by a Man Servant, the latter End
of August 1738.

SIR,
THOUGH the Occasion of my writing to you is the most extraordinary that ever
was, I shall come to the Point, without Ceremony. A certain fine Lady [whose
Name I never choose to mention again] will, by that Time you have this, receive
a Letter, to inform her of my determined Resolution as to herself: Something
remains to be said to you, Sir. I must forget I ever looked on you with a
friendly Eye, or, as a Gentleman, whom, perhaps, I once greatly esteemed, and
thought myself honored in Acquaintance: How I ought to think of you, or act
toward you now, Sir, let your own Understanding determine for me, in Spite of
Prejudice to me, or your own Self-Love. I must now change the Style I have
often talked to you in; but I shall be calm, though determinate; and, as I scorn
to speak beneath a Gentleman, you need not apprehend ought unfitting a
Gentleman to hear. Reflect, Sir, how much Ruin I owe to the most deceitful of
Women: And what shall I call you, Sir? the most artful of Men. Can you have so
strong a Sense of Pride and Shame, as you say you have, and not blush, when you
reflect how much you have made me the unhappiest of Men. You know you have; by
my G -- d you do: You have seen me sinking under the most calamitous heartfelt
Anguish and Agony, while I smothered Passions in my Breast, that disordered my
Senses, and were near depriving me of Life: I blush to think I have endured so
much. But nothing less than Extremes could have cured me of that excessive,
that uncommon, I must now add, shameful Love, that I once had for the
unworthiest of Women. -- I cannot say less of her, and scorn to say more, I
own, I have often debated with myself, whether I should not have destroyed you,
her, and myself; I have had it in my Power, could I have reconciled my Mind to
so damned, so execrable an Action. I am not ashamed to avow, Sir, I believe in
a God, and think Self-Murder the most impudent Crime can be committed toward
him; though I have had too many melancholy Debates with myself thereon: Nay, I
think it, indeed, in one Sense, a cowardly Act: My farther Thoughts, on that
Subject, I have no need to explain now. -- As to her, I could not bear the Idea
of hurting, what was once, too dear, too precious to me; I will not say now how
much so: And for you, Sir, let me tell you, while I had the least Interval of
Reason, I could not but scorn a base, malicious Resentment, even to the Man who
has deprived me of all I once thought valuable. I have had my Cure from her own
flagrant Behavior: But I will not be so meanly ungenerous, to say all I think
of her to you; do you think of her Ingratitude (to say the least) toward me,
as a high Merit to you. If the strongest Guilt can deserve a favorable
Thought, you owe it to her. -- Sir, I must tell you plainly, I know now, I
believe, the whole Progress of a detested Affair, even from the Masquerade and
Chapel Meetings you had long since; yes, Sir, and the dear Lady's beginning a
literary Correspondence, at a Time, when, I believe, I may safely call God to
Witness, I had never exchanged three Words with you; nay, barely recollected
your Face, and scarcely remembered your Name; (you must know, and ought to own
this) I thank the delicate Dame for the Commencement of our Acquaintance. I am
lost in Astonishment when I recollect, I have seen that innocent Face of here is,
as it once appeared to me, received (ay, both of us received on a friendly
Footing) in a sober Family of Distinction and Reputation, where there appeared
a general Harmony of Love and Friendship; -- She handsomely treated, by
Gentlemen of Figure and Fortune, invited and caressed by Ladies of deserved
Reputation: Placed by the Side of one, whom I shudder to think of, and will not
be so indelicate to dwell on 'em in my Thought, least my Imagination should
start strange Fancies. I say, I am stunned at the Recollection; with what
innocent Mirth she there appeared; when, my God! how shockingly far gone was
she in Guilt, as her own Confessions have since revealed to me; but from
herself I could not have believed it: My Brain achs with the Thought. By all
that is sacred I then no more imagined her capable of what I have since found,
than I thought Infants, at the Breast, could lay Schemes of Mischief; or, that
Babes, in the Month, could blaspheme: So foolishly was I lost, in a high
Opinion of her, I never had the least Suspicion of her being capable of an
Error, even in Thought; 'till a damned Letter I received, a considerable Time
after the Queen's Death, and even then, struggled to think favorably, 'till
her own Mouth pronounced her Guilty. The Consequence of which, immediately
drove me from England; and what cruel, shocking, artful Advantages were taken
of my distracted Mind, during my Absence, as well as of my Weakness, Credulity
and unhappy Circumstances; -- When at Home, let them say whose Consciences can
best inform 'em -- But I have said too much of you and her, though I may owe it
to myself to say a great deal more, she is not worth it now. Had I any
Obligations to you, Sir, that I did not propose returning in the strongest
Manner? Were they not unexpectedly thrust on me? Did I ever seek for any? If by
any Accident it has not been immediately in my Power to discharge 'em; let me
say, 'twas a cruel artful Manner of deluding me, with what I ought (all Things
considered) to call, the Appearance of Obligations only: It Is plain they were
meant to disarm me of that Resentment you were conscious, I must, some Time or
other, waken to. Yet, she, she, that strange Woman, whom I cannot name, taught
me to call you a Friend, and think you such; were you really one, Sir? Let me
tell you, Sir, those in whom I thought I could place the highest Confidence,
have disappointed and betrayed me; where I centered my Hopes of Happiness, I
have met with Shame, Ingratitude and Ruin. How very early Attempts were made
against my Peace of Mind, and all that is valuable to Man, is best known to
those who took strange Methods, cooly, and deliberately to plan my Destruction:
Though I scorn (as I have told you more than once) a base, low, malicious,
treacherous Revenge; yet, I am compelled to inform you, whatever Man ought to
do, I dare do, Sir, let the Trial come when it will: Though perhaps, it is scarce
Courage to say (after being stabbed through the Heart) you are welcome to a fair
Opportunity of shooting me through the Head, or running me through the Body; if
your own Honor, your own Conscience, your own Understanding dictate to you,
more should be said, or done, by one in my tortured, unhappy Condition, think
it said already, and save me the Pain of repeating Words that bear a harsh
Sound, to one whom Friendship, Respect and good Will, have not permitted me to
look on hatefully; though I am, through your Means, the most undone of Mankind. I
expect, Sir, as you are a Man of Honor, to have all my Letters returned me
that I wrote to her; since, among other modest Treatment of me, she has hinted
to me they were in safe Hands: I may pardon her Breach of Duty in other
Respects, and plead her unhappy Love, forsooth, (which I ought to laugh at now)
but I never will forgive such an injurious, sacrilegious Breach of Trust: I
shall lose all Patience if I say much more on it: I wont meanly imagine you
could desire to have 'em, Sir. What, expose the Letters of an injured,
forgiving Husband; wrote, when, God is Witness, he had not the right Use of his
Senses; Stupendous Impudence! Had an unhappy Man been afflicted with a
Leprosy, and in a delirious Fit of a Fever, danced naked round his Chamber,
should a Wife, a Wife, Sir, dare to throw open the Door to expose him? Damned
Thought! But not parallel to the exposing of Letters, full of the wild Ravings,
and incoherent Starts of an unfortunate Madman. Sir, I must require every Line
of 'em from you: And may I never see her Face again. I am not to direct you,
Sir, how you are to behave to others, or ask you whom you may hurt besides
myself; but I cannot help saying, if she has any Spark of Honor, Conscience,
Honesty, or Modesty remaining, she ought to retire from the World, contented
with a very moderate Allowance, which I shall be willing to contribute to, Sir,
loaded, as I am, with Distresses and Difficulties; and I shall still think
worse of her, than I have done, if she takes any Advantage of her Power over
you (I know she has shown a great deal too much already) to drive you to ought
that may prejudice you, or hurt some Families, that good Manners and Humanity
will not permit me to mention, or dwell one Moment longer on. Sir, as she has
chose her Situation, when I, to the last Moment, would have saved her from the
last Ruin, I never more will exchange a Word with her. If you have ought, after
the Receipt of this, to say to me, Sir, I am to be found in Town, whither you
can better afford to come, than I to take a Journey into the Country; which, as
I have been exceeding ill, is not altogether so easy for me neither, though I
think it highly improper, we should ever more behold each other, unless it were
on an Affair of the last Consequence. Though she had Impudence and Folly enough
to think, I would continue, on any Consideration of Luxury, or Vanity, to play
the ridiculous infamous Part of a feigned Husband; sure, no Man, in his Senses,
thought I would or could: If you know such a one, Sir, tell 'em, I can teach
myself to think as cheaply, as badly of them, as they must of me. Favors, of
any Sort, I neither expect, or want, or would receive; I should detest those
who could proffer 'em, as I should myself to accept 'em: And, without mincing
the Matter, Sir, I must tell you, my Acquaintance, with you, has been the most
expensive of any I ever had, perhaps; I mean so in a literal Sense, for I have
ever been too apt to appear and act above myself, both at Home and Abroad: And
never omitted, in every Respect, entertaining others in the Manner I thought
they deserved. I now will have done, and subscribe myself (as you're a
Gentleman)

Your humble Servant.
P.S. I have been in some Hurry of Business, and, perhaps, my Mind not a little
ruffled; therefore, cannot yet finish my other Letter; but I shall send it to
her as soon as possible. On second Thoughts, I care not whether I have my
Letters or no, provided the Weakness I have shown in 'em, toward a nameless
Woman, is not believed; let her rather think it Artifice, or call it what she
will. I am not to learn your Spirit, and your Sentiments of Pride and Honor,
Sir, therefore will not doubt, but my Name will never be mentioned by you. This
is no Time for either of us to give or receive Compliments: But be assured,
from this Time, your Name, Sir, will never be mentioned more by me for my own
Sake, and I wish my own Name were changed, because she once bore it. Whatever
others may advise me to do, I have determined to act from myself; and I here
tell you, Sir, the only Appearance of an Obligation I will ever owe to you,
shall be your Assistance, (and that at a a Distance) to free me from what I
scorn to be linked to. If it will be any additional Gratification to the Lady
to have her Husband destroyed, don't fail to obey her Commands, Sir; for who
can do too much to please such a Dame? But know, Sir, least you should imagine
I would reap ought from her damned Folly, I here declare, I seek for nothing
but to be free; and so farewell to her for ever. It is incumbent on me, to tell
you, Sir, what Obligations she may be under to you, by G -- d I am an utter
Stranger to, and wish for ever to continue so. My humble Service to her, and I
thank her, and you, for my Ruin, which I shall rise above, when she is repenting
too late. She Will find me a fatal Prophet. When she has received and read my
Letters, I stand prepared for all Events. As I have been her Slave to Extremes,
let her not be surpised that my Resentments rises in Proportion, though the
insolent Fool has often dared to rouse my Anger to my Face; I scorned the
Violence she would have provoked me to, and could not forget I was a Man, though
I had been excusable not to have remembered she was a Woman. I shall say nothing
but Truth in my Letters to her, though exceeding short of what I know, if Men of
Honor are to be depended on, and far, far short of what she has deserved. I
must remind you, Sir, whatever Lie (I cannot use a softer Word) she has taught
herself to tell, or has imposed on any one to believe, I know how to clear
myself, in Spite of all her base Attempts. I insist on her Earrings; I have
been robbed too much by her already.



LETTER III.
The foregoing Letter was enclosed in the following.

SIR,
THE Enclosed has been wrote a considerable Time, and sent after you twice,
when, by Accident, I heard you was in Town. I can but smile to think you could
suppose, I ever wanted to make any Advantages of you to your Prejudice: Had
that ever been my Thought, I might have proceeded very differently -- No, Sir,
I would starve first. A Divorce, a thorough one, I have learnt, is not so
excessively expensive, as some may have imagined: I expect that of their
Honor, who ought to procure it; and it may be done without Prejudice to any,
or using Names that may shock the Innocent; it is all I want in Lieu of a fine
Lady, and her Income, which, by my Means, may yet be 400 l. a Year; but I would
Beg rather than share it with her. I think Money, Dirt, Sir, as much as any
one; and however necessary an Article it is in Life, I scorn to pick it off
Dunghills. Pray, Sir, what Favors do I owe you, except one paltry Debt, for
which you had my Bond, and you know might have had stronger Security? Did I
dream of it ever 'twas proffered, or were any damned Terms proposed? No, by my
G -- d, Sir, you know the contrary. I am, Sir, as before,

Yours.

LETTER IV.
A Letter delivered by a Man Servant into the Wife's own Hands, she being then
in the Country, wrote when the Husband was just recovered from a violent Fit of
Illness, by the kind Care and Assistance of a Friend, at whose House he lodged;
being the last the Husband ever did, or ever will write to the Wife. Delivered
the Beginning of September, 1738.

MADAM,
I Am about to write to you for the last Time, consequently may be drawn into a
long Letter, as I purpose, never more, but once, to set my Hand to ought
concerning you; I mean, by that once, when I may sign an Instrument that may
leave you to all that Liberty your own Licentiousness has made Choice of; --
you know, some Time ago, I bid you prepare for a determined Separation, which
Resolution, no Consequence upon Earth shall shake. Remember it is your own
seeking -- 'Twas your own Choice, at a Time when I was running distracted, and
breaking my Heart Abroad, for what I blush to have ever set so much Value on:
Your Behavior, and my own Reflections, have fixed my Mind irrevocable. Those
who act thoughtlessly may, in some Measure, stand accused -- But he who
continues to act against his Thought, is, I think, unpardonable.

I am greatly at a Loss to proceed, since what can I say to you that will not
be shocking, (though I shall say nothing but Truth) unless I were to demean
myself, if possible, more than I have done, so much have I been lost in Love,
(and a fond, foolish Hope of recovering what I ought not to have sought after)
which Love you have torn from my Heart by the Roots, yes, Madam, entirely; though
I once loved to Folly and Madness: My only Obligation to you is, you have
absolutely cured me, which not long since, I thought could never have happened.
I think a generous good-natured Mind should be slow to suspect, as Humanity
will be ready to forgive; how mine have been deceived, I have been too surely
convinced by undeniable Facts, and the Confessions gained from yourself.
However wildly I may often have appeared in general to have acted, yet, in
Matters of the highest Consequence, you may have had some Proof: I can be
strangely steady, can keep my Mind to myself, can sift to the very Bottom of
Things, am slow in my Determination; and being fixed, no Power, no Force, no
Threat, no Bribe, no Terror, nor any Temptation whatever can alter me, knowing
my Resolves are grounded on Truth, Honor and Justice. But to my Point.

When I made you my Wife, I knew I wedded a beautiful, sensible young Woman;
but what I farther thought an inestimable Treasure was, I imagined I had found
one of a deserved good Character, whose Prudence, whose Religion, whose artless
Innocence, whose careful sober Education, whose sound Principles, and steady
Honesty were such, as nothing could tempt to any Act, or even Thought, that was
in the least repugnant to the strictest Principles of Truth and Virtue. I need
not say, I have been vilely deceived in all; -- but when I reflect how much,
and how early I was deceived -- I am astonished, and Thunderstruck; though I
can, I thank God, speak of it now with Temper.

To say ought that may appear like Praise of one's self, may seem vain: But
there can be no Reason in the World why we should fear to speak a simple Truth,
when so absolutely necessary to remember it; nay, when the Occasion seems,
indeed, to extort it from one -- Being conscious to myself, that I had been too
irresolute in the Conduct of my Affairs, as to Economy, etc. I acted with that
Nicety, that Extravagance of Honor toward you, Madam, that by my own Desire,
Marriage Articles were drawn to make you Mistress of whatever Fortune might
accrue to you from your own Talents, etc. (which Income you have received and
had the free undisputed Disposal of) though by the Way, you did not bring me a
Shilling, and 'twas almost impossible you should ever get one, without my
Conduct, my Care, Assistance, Instruction, and Advice -- what they have been
you know full well; -- what Anxiety I have endured; what Assiduity, what
Diligence I have used, what uncommon Means to support you; I have hazarded
Friendships, made myself even a public Jest, set my own Interest at naught; my
Life and Reputation at Stake, and thought all too little. I am sorry I have
Occasion to mention your poor unfortunate Family; but as Distress is no Crime,
I shall venture to remind you, from an uncommon Regard to you, I thought of
their Interest and Support, even to the Prejudice of my own, (and omitted
enlarging my own Income, at a critical Juncture, to promote their's in a
handsome Manner) as I preferred obliging you, and all that belonged to you, to
all Considerations upon the Face of the Earth. Let me acknowledge they have not
yet appeared ungrateful At the Time this was wrote, their Ingratitude, etc. had
not appeared in the glaring Colors it has since.
whatever you have been -- nor will I say they had any Obligation to me, since
you were the Source of all: -- I acknowledge my Error, and blush at my want of
Conduct, when I say so much I prided in you, that I thought no Expense too much
that supported what I must now call, your Pride and Vanity (I had almost said
your Vices.) Harsh Terms, perhaps, though far short of what you might expect from
me, and very different from any yet ever used by me toward you, though laboring
under the highest Indignities, and Injuries, human Nature ever suffered; -- and
those brought to the highest Pitch, when I was under the greatest Distresses:
-- Thank you, Madam. -- Was I expensive in my Dwelling in Town and Country? Was
my Equipage above me? my Table too open to Friends? Were not your Friends, your
Guests, ever the most welcome? Was I too lavish in many Articles? What were my
Expenses, on myself, at Home or Abroad? moderate; less than they had often
been: Why did e not retrench all? because my Fondness and Pride would not let
me, while you were my Partner, and presided as Mistress of All; -- my
pleasurable Jaunts were all with you; -- who ever shared any with me except
yourself? no Creature on the Face of the Earth; -- I ever chose you should
share my cheerful Moments, and (which I own was a Fault) kept all painful
Thoughts to myself, rather than let 'em disturb you: -- Did I ever want
Good Humor, good Manners, or Goodnature? Love, Fondness, or Tenderness? You
know, I have shown 'em to Excess; ay, felt 'em to Excess, -- a shameful one; --
nor was my Love so sickly to diminish by Fruition, but rather -- Increase of
Appetite did grow by what it fed on: Yes, Madam, I have, on some Occasions,
shown uncommon Instances of a raptured Husband; this you know, your Soul knows
it; -- but I forgot, among other refined Notions, your improved Talents have
gained, your having a Soul seems to be a Doubt with your philosophical
Ladyship, who have learned to make a Jest of all Ties human and divine; --
those Lessons, Madam, I never taught you: -- Oh, but say you, -- You all this
while forget your own Errors; -- no Madam, I have often, in my Confession of
'em, rather enlarged than lessened 'em; been quick to arraign myself, --
reflected strongly, and truly repented; would have amended, would you have
encouraged me; this you know to be Truth, as is every Word I say to you. I
never thought I could do enough by Way of Expiation; -- conscious of my
Follies, I have, in return, hushed my Resentments, struggled with my Pride and
Honor, -- but, what is the Pride of a poor Man, or the Honor of a Husband?
Does not your witty, wanton Ladyship smile at 'em? -- take Care, let me never
more see it though. -- Have I not excused the Frailties of others (convinced of
my own) to an unpardonable Fault? I have soothed, when I should have been
severe; have sighed, when I should have raged; have forced a Smile under the
greatest Affliction; have used Entreaty for Command; have seemed blind, with my
Eyes open; (though they were opened very lately, God knows, and then I wished I
could not see) I have continued the Lover, when I should have asserted the
Husband; and rather chose, by Tenderness, to touch the Heart I valued, than
force myself, contrary to my Nature, to be a Tyrant or a Jailor; -- I ever
scorned to possess, what Generosity, and Confidence, could not preserve; -- and
that you might not blush too much, if you would have repented, I even framed
Excuses for your Errors, and chose to load myself with Blame, rather than not
alleviate your Burden: -- To flatter you to Truth, I have thrown Faults on
myself I have not been guilty of, and allowed you Merits that you never had. --
When I went to France, though 'twas my own unhappy sudden Thought, you know, you
drove me thither; -- I sink with Shame, though no Eye beholds me, when I
recollect, how near I was losing my Senses, nay, let me truly own, I had lost
'em, because I thought I had lost you; the Symptoms were too plain to every
Eye, while my fond Fears for you endeavored to conceal the real Cause. I own,
I wished to be recalled; why? because England held you, -- the only Person in
the World that now makes me wish I had a Fortune Abroad. Don't imagine that by
the Repetition of ought I may have done or endured, I expect, or wish, your
Mind should return to me, and a Wife without it were such Infamy as I scorn to
dwell on. -- My Affluence you were pleased to share, the Narrowness and
hazardous Part of my Circumstances you were above condescending to partake;
though with your Comfort, and that Assistance you ought to have lent me: (Nay,
and which I could command) I had no Affairs but were to be retrieved, and the
Difficulties that have arose have been more owing to my distracted State of
Mind, etc. on your Account, than any other Impediment. I thought my going
Abroad would either wean me, or recall you; I hoped my Return would operate on
you, in such a Manner, as Humanity, and a Consciousness of Error should have
taught: -- But, you force me to say (you tear the Words from me) sure never was
Mind so lost, so abandoned: Amidst all the uncommon Agonies, and Terrors, I
endured, I was resolved to try you to the uttermost, and use various and
uncommon Means to gain the Truth if possible; -- but, by sifting that from you,
how false, how prevaricating, how very base have I proved you, or rather you
proved yourself? Thou thorough Liar. It Is not to be dwelt on. I thought I knew
the World pretty well, your Sex not a little; but you, Madam, have made all
that Knowledge nothing: Nor do I believe any Age or History can readily furnish
one with your Parrallel. I thank Providence that prompted me to return to find
the Bottom of you; without it, I had been lost in Pity, Compassion, and
Delusion. For what? I will not say all I think of you. Your cunning Artifice,
your strange Conduct in having private Meetings (long since, and all
unsuspected by me) at Chapels, Masquerades, and Places that shock me to think
of; and your slow and sly Manner of drawing me into an Intimacy, an
Acquaintance and Friendship; and scheming my being under Obligations, have made
me start, but now I could almost smile at 'em: And all this ere I had the least
Imagination or Suggestion that you either had suffered, or would suffer any one
to whisper a single Accent of Love in your Ear; nay, before I knew a certain
Person had even (in public or private) ever exchanged a Syllable with you.
Thou strange, strange Creature! never had Man greater Confidence, nor was ever
Confidence more ungenerously betrayed than mine has been. Your presuming to lay
a Plan for our living together, on such audacious Terms as you could propose,
makes me shudder to think you could utter 'em; while I smile at your ridiculous
Folly that could suppose I would go through with it. I choose to smile, Madam,
because I scorn to be angry with what is become beneath my Resentment. You have
chose strange Extremes, Madam, and, I thank God, those Extremes have cured me.
Madam, no Consideration upon Earth shall ever make me again eat a Meal with
you, nor sleep under the same Roof; nor dare to think I will ever have the
least Obligation or Friendship from you; your Lip or Hand I never more will
offer to touch, and all I expect of you is good Manners and Distance, if ever
we are compelled by any Accident to meet again; though I own I could wish we were
never more to see each other. I shall talk to you, Madam, by a third Person
only, whom I shall pitch upon with Caution: What Is proper for you to wear,
Madam, you shall have; but I have no Fortune to compliment away, and have
enough to do with that little, that extreme little that belongs to me. I once
thought it an Honor to call you by my Name, -- guess what I think it now;
however slight, or lowly you have taught yourself to think of me, you will find I
have Resolution enough yet to act with strict Justice and Honor, to all who
ought to expect or demand it from me. Wakened from my unhappy Lethargy of Love,
Recollection now awakens to my Memory innumerable Instances, long since past,
of your mercenary Self-love, Deceit, and Baseness of Mind toward me, that had
remained unheeded, but for some shocking Provocations which recall the
Remembrance of 'em, and justify me in a strong Belief (rather let me say
Assurance) you never meant to act justly by me; or ever was what I once fondly
thought you. I now can see through you clearly, Madam; -- when I cast my Eyes
over your Letters, I can point out the Places where a superior Understanding to
your own was the Dictator; and what shocks me to think of is, even the Feeling,
the Humanity, or Tenderness toward me, that may appear in 'em, I am now
convinced was Art; those feigned Sentiments came not from your Heart, I am
certain; I rather owed 'em to another, -- shocking, aggravating Circumstance of
your Guilt and Folly! You artfully kept alive my Love, to take Advantage of my
Weakness; base Wretch! Can I, on Reflection, think otherwise? What signifies
your Words, when your Actions have spoke you too plain to me? How readily you
caught at my Words when I proposed going abroad, to remove a painful Object
from your Eyes? The Ceremony indeed appeared to shock you, -- why? alas! my
fond Credulity then misinterpreted all; but now I Will tell you the true Reasons,
Madam, and God forgive me if I injure you: You were hurt, not from what I was
to suffer, but from the Hazards you ran yourself; your Pride began to be
alarmed, lest you should lose that Reputation your Virtue should have deserved.
'Twas undoubtedly, no pleasant Circumstance (to think of me only in the Light
of a Companion, that had often added to your Entertainment and Mirth) to see a
Man bursting with Agony, yet, endeavoring to support himself with Spirit,
turning his Back on his native Country, with a Thought of never beholding it
more: Nor was it agreeable to see my Furniture thrown in a Heap, designed for
Sale, which it never should have been, but that I knew not otherwise (till I
could fix some Scheme or Resolution) how to support myself abroad, unless I had
been as low in my Mind as your simple Ladyship was pleased to think me, and
would have submitted to have owed my Support where I would sooner have
sacrificed my Life. How dared you, Madam, to have such an audacious insulting
Thought of me? If I dwell on it I shall lose my Temper, and talk beneath
myself. You know my little Support was from myself alone. I will suppose, at
that Juncture too, your Conscience stirred within you, and moved your
Countenance to such expressive Looks as even now I cannot bear the Thought of;
and I must pause ever I can go on -- Curse on the Weakness that stops me. I
ought, while I talk to you, to divest myself of all Feeling and Humanity, of
Memory if possible; yet let me recollect; you let me go, and, Madam, spite of
your Art, spite of all Disguise, I could find, by your Writing, your Mind felt
a Relief the Moment you heard I was landed on another Shore. How unhappy my
Life was there I scorn to tell you now. But how were you alarmed when I thought
of returning, when you pretended (I had like to have said impudently) you would
live with me again, if I pleased; but the Conditions were so pretty, I must
laugh, Madam, lest a just Anger should waken me to Terms I scorn to use; though
all would be far short of your Deservings; you, who could pretend to be in your
Senses, and dare to think so damnably of me. I must break off, for how can I go
on? Is it a Subject to smile at? Monstrous! after all I have endured, should I
revive any soft Ideas in my Memory? 'twere the Extreme of Folly: Shall I be
angry? I owe more to my own Pride than to think you worth it. I find such
Variety of Thoughts pour in upon me, I must determine to hasten to a
Conclusion, or this Subject will be endless; whatever may remain to be said, I
shall think of, and deliver elsewhere.

To the Point -- Had you listened to me as you ought, God, who knows my Heart,
well knows your Usage should have been worthy a better Woman; but as you choose
the Hazard of being called the Mistress of a married Man, rather than to live
the Wife of an honest, though unhappy Husband; take your Choice and be certain, I
should think it more honorable to be the lowest Person in a Jail, than command
in a Palace, on such Terms as your insolent Folly (I cannot say less) has more
than once hinted to me -- I have tried you, Madam, to the uttermost, and you
must surely be astonished at my Temper, as I have at your Behavior: I owed it
to myself to remember you were a Woman, though the most insolent, provoking Wife,
perhaps, that ever tried the Strength of a Husband's Temper, Love, or Reason;
-- my Reason I have often been near being entirely deprived of on your Account,
but it is past, -- and my Love completely cured; -- I was determined to go through
any fiery Trial to accomplish it, or to tear out the Heart that could continue
in the Weakness: -- And so no more on it.

Articles of Separation shall be drawn; consult whom you please on your Part --
Were I a Man of Fortune, they should be more than Articles, -- let the Expense
be what it would; -- not that I want, or wish to throw any Odium, or malicious
Insult on you, or any one; I am above it: -- I have Spirit enough to smile
under Misfortunes, and scorn the Injuries I have not deserved -- those Articles
I mention, Madam, ought to leave each as free as we were once fast, if
possible, -- nor is it reasonable I should be liable to a Jail for the
Indiscretions of others, whom I am compelled to say, may not a little have
contributed toward the Hazard of my being in one. -- I can make it appear you
have spent me infinitely more than your own Income ever amounted to.

While I have been endeavoring to lessen my Expenses, your Ladyship's have
increased. -- Your Wardrobe, etc. since you were my Wife, was much properer for
one of a superior Rank and Fortune; -- yet, let me hint to you, I bought your
Wedding-Suit, Madam. -- To enumerate all Articles, were as endless, as to
endeavor to relate all your monstrous Behavior.

In Answer to a damned Lie, you (I am informed) have taught your horrid Tongue,
(for which God save thee) receive the following Questions:

Could I teach you, pretty Miss, to love a Man I did not know? and whom you
brought me acquainted with? Impudent Stupidity!

Could I give you wrong Inclinations? or was I to be delighted with
Distraction? mad Woman! -- dear precious Madam, say that or any other damned,
foolish, vile thing, rather than suppose I ever loved you -- for I detest the
Remembrance.

My few remaining Goods, etc. I must part with, for I am ashamed to say it to
you, but I am in Danger of being troubled by some few Creditors, whose Folly
has refused my honest Proposals; and my whole Salary, you know, must go to
those Good-natured Creditors who have complied; though they are all yours,
Madam, as much as mine at least; -- I cannot throw away any thing where I am
sure there is no Obligation, -- nor must my Children starve while you riot: --
And give me Leave to tell you, Madam, my Heart can never be easy, or my Spirit
at Rest, while I am conscious I am under an Obligation that I have not at least
a Prospect of returning: -- My Mind was ever above it; for you know, Madam,
even any Bill that was delayed being paid by my casual Extravagance, I have
only looked on the Sum total, and paid to the last Farthing, rather than not
make up for the Time they waited: -- Nay, I have paid you whatever I borrowed
of you by Accident, since my Return, as punctual as if you were a Stranger: --
But I ramble from my Purpose. -- You may, Madam, if you please, have (I
understand) full the same Terms you had the last Year at the Theater, which
will amount to at least 400 l. for the Season: -- I only inform you of it -- I
undertake to give you no Advice or Sentiments of mine thereon, -- but to tell
you, whatever you can gain any where, is entirely your own, for I would sooner
swallow Poison than touch a Shilling of it; -- and I desire it may, without
loss of Time, be out of my Power to expect it: -- You must imagine, Madam, I
could say an infinite deal more on this Subject, -- but I Will not give myself
the Pain; -- only this, and I have done: -- Remember, my Humanity would have
saved you, even when I had conquered my Love. -- And now, -- may you be as true
to another, as you have been false to me; -- and may you find that Pardon of
God that you have from me! But may you deserve it more, or dare not to hope for
it: -- For, in a few Words, toward me, you have been -- vain, proud,
ill-temper'd, and extravagant; -- shocking to my Humanity, -- destructive of my
Peace of Mind, -- ungrateful to my Friendship, which served you and yours in
the greatest Need; (ought I to forgive that?) -- have scandalously betrayed my
Confidence; -- have reproached me with my former Extravagance, when my Fortune
was at the lowest Ebb, -- though at the same Time you drew me into additional
Expenses; -- been shamefully false, and perfidious to my Love; -- have imposed
on my Goodnature; -- unjust to every Trust I reposed in you; -- insulted my
breaking Heart; -- trampled on my Pride and Honor; -- been shamefully
neglectful of your Duty in every Article: -- And when you reflect on your whole
unparalled Behavior since my Return, you may wonder that you live: -- But
you cannot be surpised, that, here I vow to God, never will I more hold
Converse or Commerce with you on any Account whatever.

Fearing your Welfare in my Absence, I wrote Letters in your Praise, to
recommend you to the Care of my Father, and others, when I should have been
justifiable had I abandoned you to Ruin. -- Yet, at the same Time you traduced
me to my Father, thou honest grateful Creature!

One Word more. -- As you have endeavored, when I was under the greatest
Misfortunes, to blacken me to my nearest and dearest Friends and Relations,
(for so I find) pray keep your modest Face out of my Sight: -- Though you have
boasted of the Power you maintained over all that ever loved you, yet I Will give
you one friendly Piece of Advice: -- Should you ever meet with any Man of no
ordinary Sense, Pride, and Spirit, take Care to behave a little better than you
have to me.

The Person who writes the Copy of my Letter is bound, by solemn Oath, to
Secresy and Silence. -- That you might be sure 'twas a true Copy, I have
numbered every Page, and signed it myself; -- and be assured I am my own
Dictator, Madam. -- I never have deceived you, but when the Madness of my
Passion deceived my unhappy Self. -- You know it -- too well you know it. -- I
wrote to another Person with my own Hand -- because I remembered he was a
Gentleman -- 'twas scarce worth my while to you, who are -- Nothing.

On this Subject I shall never write Word more, or open my Lips; I wish I could
lose the Thought. --

After all I know of you, -- be any thing but my Wife, and be luxuriously happy
if you can. -- Hell seize me, if I wish to interrupt you! -- And so thou
weakest, and most worthless of thy Sex, farewell for ever.

Teach yourself no more to be called my Wife, for never, never will I more, if
possible, think myself your Husband. -- I will have no Answer to this; -- there
can be none fit for you to give, or me to receive; -- and I wish you may never
remember there is such a Person in the World as, the unjustly treated, highly
injured,

T.C.

FINIS.
N.B. These Letters had been offered to the Public much sooner, had not some
Booksellers, and Printers, been intimidated from publishing 'em; one in
particular, by some Means, was alarmed even to the breaking of the Press, when
the whole was completely composed and ready to be worked off.


