THE HILLS OF HYBLA; BEING A COLLECTION OF ORIGINAL POEMS.



LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, By W. FRANKLIN, in Bartlet's Buildings,
Holborn; And Sold by J. FLETCHER, at the Oxford Theater, And J. WILKIE, at the
Bible, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCCLXVII.



A LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.
A
MR. -- Arnold, Mr. Ackman.
B
Mr. William Bonnick, Mr. Brooks, Mr. Bowman, Mr. Francis Blyth, Mr. Bourn,
Mr. William Brackstone, Mr. George Bigg, Mr. Beauchamp Mrs. Brown, Mrs.
Bellamy.
C
George Colman, Esquire -- Crawford, Esquire Mr. William Clendon, Mr. William Cook,
Mr. Christie, Mrs. Crawford, Miss Cottell, Mrs. Jane Child, Mrs. Elizabeth
Christie, Mrs. F. Cross, Miss Kitty Carey.
D
Mr. Drummond, Mr. J. Deacon, Mr. Davis.
E
Mr. T. Eglesham, Mr. Evans, sen. Mr. Evans, Mr. Evans, jun. Mrs. Eason.
F
Mr. John Few, Mr. J. Foster. Mr. William Faulkner, Mr. William Franklin.
G
Mr. Mark Graham, Mr. Gibson, Mr. J. Grove, Mr. Gibbs, Miss Gees.
H
Thomas Hopkins, Esquire Samuel Hodson, Esquire The Rev. Robert Houlton, M. A. Mr.
Richard Hawkins, Mr. Thomas Hurst, Mr. Hunter, Mr. Hull, Mr. Robert Hudson, Mr.
Baker Harris, Mr. Hall, Mrs. Hall,
L
Mr. Richard Lidgley, Mr. Samuel Lidgley, Mr. John Leech Mr. Lister, Mrs.
Elizabeth Lovell.
M
Mr. -- Mapleton, Mr. William Morgan Mr. Francis Magnus, Mrs. May.
N
Mr. William Nelson, Mr. Richard Nichols, Mr. Nocks.
O
Mr. John Oliver.
P
Mr. Robert Pudman, Mr. Thomas Pope, Mr. J. Powell, Mrs. Powell.
R
Mr. William Robe, 21 Books, Mr. Robinson, Mr. George Rimmer, Mr. J. Robinson,
Mr. John Randell, Mr. Joseph Rust, Mrs. Robe, Miss M. Robe, Miss Elizabeth
Robe, Mrs. Mary Elizabeth Renoldson.
S
Mr. Christopher Smart, M. A. 21 Books, The Rev. Mr. Scott, Mr. Daniel Sutton,
Mr. Charles Spendelow, Mr. Humphrey Skeleton, Mr. Richard Smith, Mr. Richard
Studley, Mr. John Swan, Mr. Joseph Smith, Mrs. Smith.
T
Mr. William Tetley, Mr. Charles Thomas, Mr. Thorowgood, Mr. George Turner, Mr.
Tringham, Mrs. Elizabeth Tringham, Miss Mary Tringham, Miss Martha Thorley.
V
Thomas Vincent, Esquire
W
James Worsdale, Esquire Mr. J. Warren, Mr. James Walbank, Mr. Whitaker, Mr.
William Whittaker, Mr. Warren.
A LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS, Since the FIRST DELIVERY.
A
MR. Aveline.
B
Mr. Samuel Baker, Mr. Samuel Bird, Mr. Brooksbank,
C
Mr. John Colman, Mrs. Clive.
D
Mr. Dodsley, six Books, Mr. Davies, Mr. Dove, Mr. David Dalton, sen. Mr.
Timothy Deang.
E
Mrs. Ewer.
G
Mr. Gregg, Mrs. Gregg, Mr. Edward Gibson.
H
Mr. Hope, Mr. Harris.
J
Mr. T. Jones, Mr. Evan Jones.
K
Mr. Kingsley, Mr. Thomas Kirwan.
L
Mr. Robert Landall, Mr. Lloyd, Mr. Lockman, Miss Lockman.
M
Miss Macartney.
P
Mr. T. Prior, Mrs. Pritchard, Mrs. Powell.
R
Mr. Redman.
S
Mr. R. Shaw, Mr. Strafford.
T
Bonn^ll Thornton, Esquire Mr. William Tennant, Mrs. Sarah Tringham.
W
Mr. Woodward, Mr. Wayn, Mr. Wotty, Mr. Wood, jun.
TO HER GRACE THE Duchess of BUCCLEUGH.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,
I HAVE presumed to present your Grace with the following Trifle, as a Nuptual
Offering, sensible that you have always shown a tender regard, wherever you
have perceived the least Ray of Genius; and I shall be extremely happy if your
Grace should find the least appearance of it in what I have sent you; as it is
from so obscure a Bard, you will be pleased to accept of it, as one of the
meanest Flowers, among the many that form the wreath upon your Grace's brow,
placed there by Virtue and Humility; if I should be so happy as to have it
prove acceptable, it will confer the highest honor on

Your GRACE's Most Humble And Obedient Servant, GEORGE SAVILLE CAREY.

AN EVENING's WALK.
ONE summer's eve, when every swain was housed,
When Sol had scarce one glimmer left behind,
Each little star, faint glittering, cast a ray,
And spangled over the dusky robe of night.
Fond of the scene, I wandered far from home,
Over leafless lawns, and flower-breeding vales,
Till weary nature slackened in my steps,
And made me halt upon a friendly bank.
Calm through a bridge there ran a peerless stream,
That scarcely moved the ozier's slender wand:
Here I took my stand, and viewed the solemn scene.
The bat had been an hour on the wing,
Chasing the night-fly and the buzzing gnat:
The purblind owl had left the ancient tower,
Prowling with flossy wing along the mead.
Anon, as out of Chaos, shot a ray
Of chearing light, quivering over the hills*
As yet too weak to struggle with the dark;
Or, as the Egyptian queen, far off beheld,
Shot her first beams on the Italian shore,
Her brilliant train reflecting on the waves,
Making the Tybur like a golden sea.
Clouds that o'er-hung the horizon, unseen,
Appeared in view, like silver-skirted troops
Waiting the up-rise of the queen of night.
Slow she approached, and smiled upon the world,
Opening fresh landscapes to my wondering eyes.
Philomel now cheered the embow'ring grove,
The woodlark too, mistaking it for day,
Joined her sweet notes with emulating strains.
Near to my left there stood an ancient pile,
By wasting time, and savage war defaced,
Like a reduced and hoary-headed chief,
Commanding awe even in destruction.
On its slinty sides deep-dy'd ivy clung;
Its roof was capt with velvet-grounded moss,
And round its base, wild weeds and flowers grew,
The stinging nettle with the briars blend,
The secret haunt of adders and of toads.
Through the wide breaches of the rock-built walls
Pale Cynthia beamed her lucid columns down
Upon the verdant slope, in lines direct and clear,
Reflecting on a dimpled brook below.
A solemn silence now overspread the globe,
Save when the minnew wantoned on the stream,
And left a circle spreading to the brink.
Anon, as wind from out some hollow cave,
A deep-felt sigh from out the ruins came,
As from a heart just bursting with its load,
Which straight was answered with a voice of woe,
Like sorrow soothing the more sad despair.
A while I stood, in doubt, to know the cause,
Or to retreat, lest some deluding fiend,
Aping the voice of grief, meant to destroy.
At length resolved, with caution I approached,
O melting sight! my wounded heart ran over
And emptied at my eyes. -- A mournful pair,
The woeful part ners of affliction sat,
On the low basis of a mouldering urn
And opened to my view a tragic scene.
Concealed, I stood, observing their distress;
She, in her lap, an infant cherub held,
A lovely boy, the offspring of their loves.
Her eyes were bent with sorrow on the babe,
While in her face the little dear one smiled,
And then, with tears of misery and love,
She clung him eager to her throbbing breast.
The wretched husband on her neck reclined,
Striving to cheer his melancholy dame,
Feigned a hope, though foreign to his heart:
But when he found despair had seized her soul,
His tears burst forth, and bath d his manly cheeks,
And on his bended knees he trembling fell,
Lifting his eyes with anguish against the sky,
With invocations loud, and agonizing sighs,
Imploring heaven for a ray of peace,
Till his loud accents shook the vaulted roof,
And reft his tortured breast. -- I could no more,
But flying to his aid with heart distressed,
He fixed his eyes with furious glare upon me,
And threatened me with death if I advanced;
Like the fierce tiger, assailed by hunters
In his dreary den, he stood defensive over his young,
Shielding 'em from danger. With humble voice
And friendly tears I moved him to attend,
And listen patient to the voice of pity.
Joy then, with fear and admiration mixed,
Overspread each face, and as I spoke, they blessed;
Hope, like the sun that clouds had long o'erveil'd,
Flushed on their cheeks, extinguishing despair.
Ye woeful pair let your suspicions cease;
If the base world has put ye out of door,
If friends forsake and creditors pursue:
If you once more can trust a thought to hope,
And think it possible to meet a friend,
Tell me your story, and you yet shall find
That fate relents, and ceases to afflict.
Though here to you a stranger I appear,
To mercy I am none; to see another wretched
Makes me wretched too: by serving others
I still myself oblige, and meet reward,
Ample reward, a tranquil happiness!
Seeing others so, by me made happy.
I Would rather wipe the tear of grief away
Than add a ruby to a monarch's crown,
And win a Prince's promise for my pains.
If fate's not given you over to despair,
And you will accept of friendship once again,
Cheer your sad hearts -- let every fear subside,
Nor doubt a stranger yet may prove a friend;
If you would be happy, tell me but in what,
I Will try my every means to make ye so.
Thou gracious being! (if thou art human)
For thou speak with a celestial tongue,
Let me embrace thee; -- O! pardon me, too,
That I assailed thee with the threat of death,
When thou but meant to save me from his shaft;
For O! thy words were welcome to my soul
As mollient dews that fall upon the mead,
When parching Sol has curled each verdant blade;
Thou have preserved to me the dearest rose
That ever scented gale, the sweetest bud
That ever eye beheld, or tempted death to kill,
(This drooping fair one, and her smiling boy,)
For they have suffered more than I dare tell,
And to repeat, is more than I can bear:
She once, alas, was fortune's favorite
And Minerva's pride, the tender fondling
Of a wealthy pair -- O! sad remembrance;
Provoking tears! when will ye cease to flow!
These eyes have long been strangers to a smile;
Excuse me, friend, if they disgust thee.
We sing of others woe, but cry our own;
My heart has gushed at a thousand veins,
To see the sufferings of a matchless wife --
There was a time, when this forsaken held
At such an hour would have given delight,
When solitude and night would give a scope
To thought, and yield a pleasing melancholy
To the jaded mind, o'ercharg'd with pleasure
And variety; but now, how dreary and sorlorn
It seems; and as we tell our mournful tale,
With double horror echoes back each word,
Mocking adversity, in hollow sounds, --
Telling us over what is death to hear. --
Such tale as mine, good friend, I often have read,
Such woeful scenes have often been played;
With sympathizing heart I Have heard and seen,
And dropped a tear for the oppressed and brave;
But ere I Would slept the fiction fled my breast,
And time would leave no traces on the mind.
When we become the objects of distress,
Remembrance stamps it with an iron seal
Upon our hearts, and every thought is death.
But to my story, it is my friend's desire --
I am no stranger to this gloomy pile,
I often have paid a visit to these walls,
And often admired the romantic form,
When the fair morn invited me abroad,
When fertile nature dasy'd every hill,
And every meadow blushed a purple hue:
When thrushes sang, and linnet, charmed the grove;
My heart then drank in pleasure at my eyes,
And felt no interrupter by the way,
No wretched thought to dash it back again. --
My father was a man of wealth and note,
(And held a mansion in a village by)
A better never gave being to a son: --
I having read of mighty things abroad,
Of ancient Rome and grand Cairo's court,
The wealth of India and Egyptian wilds.
With thirst for novelty and desire,
I urged my father, and at length prevailed,
That he would let me venture on a tour,
And prove the truth of history and report. --
It Is six years since I left my native home;
Since when, so many wonders I have seen,
That curiosity at last grew sick.
Returning home, I crossed the mighty Alps;
A deadly sickness seized me on the way,
And made me seek for succor and a friend;
A greater rarity than all I Would met.
An ample dwelling opened to my view,
To which I bent my way, and shelter asked,
And was received at once a welcome guest.
With mild compassion they beheld my state,
And strove to cheer me with a friendly voice.
Dismounting here, I would have entered in,
But that my feet their wonted use denied:
My limbs gave way, and let me to the ground;
When this dear fair came running to my aid;
She raised me up, and led me careful in,
And every day a true attendance paid:
When I was struggling with the pangs of death,
And with consoling hope she would drop a tear,
Imploring heaven to preserve my life.
Her supplications did at length prevail.
No sooner had I* conquered one compeer,
But found my heart was with another taken,
Love, to whom I soon submitted, and embraced.
And made my hostess partner of my life,
But here partaker in affliction too; --
Her father was a Briton, once of wealth,
And held a mansion in that happy isle,
Till revolution and domestic broils
Destroyed his lands and plundered all he had,
(Save a few stores, in secret he had saved,)
Putting himself and family to flight,
To seek for refuge in a foreign land. --
The action robbed the good man of his life,
And in distress the mournful widow left,
With this fair comforter to buffet life,
And shield her from a base ensnaring world.
Here eighteen months I lived in social joy,
And in the desert found the dearest wife.
The kindest mother ever man could boast,
Her better spirits so outworn by grief,
That made her frame, like frozen lillies, fade,
Recline and droop unto the earth again.
Not having heard one tiding from my friends
For many a day, we for England made;
And ere we reached the shore, the wind blew high,
And frowning Neptune on the surface foamed,
Throwing up wat*ry m^untains in our way,
And, in his anger, dashed us on a rock:
Some twenty perished in the yawning deep,
But we escaped, to meet a harder fate.
We saved our lives, but saw our cargo sink:
No sooner had I stepped with pleasure on the shore,
But met the tidings of my father's death.
From one misfortune often comes a crowd,
For some malignant enemy of mine,
Informed the good man I had long been dead.
And ere he died, he chose another heir,
And left him all his fortune and estate.
Here, each glaring circumstance arose,
And filled me with surprise: I asked his name,
"Landore, he cried, a wealthy neighbor here."
Landore! ye mighty Gods, how just!
I am that heir thy worthy father chose,
And for his friendship and his love to me,
I Will give his son his fortune back again.
I had enough before to make me happy,
And but resign that superflux to him
Which fate had chosen me steward to a while,
To quit my claim upon a just demand.
THE PEASANT and ANT. A FABLE.
THE fields were ripened all around,
And Ceres' head with corn was crowned;
Pomona with her fruits arrayed,
And Plenty (coy, much-envied maid)
Her horn of bounty careless held,
And dropped a gift in every field.
A peasant, walking through the grain,
Was heard to murmur and complain:
His face was wan and meagre grown,
And hunger stamped him with a frown.
A laden ant was passing by,
And with her small insectic eye,
She looked upon the abject man,
And, with revilings, thus began:
"Art not ashamed, ungrateful clown,
Amongst such crops thy wants to own,
Whilst smiling plenty round thee stands,
Inviting thy unwilling hands.
Thou poor incorrigible knave,
Thy sloth will bring thee to the grave.
Benevolence is thrown away
On such as thou art, every day.
How can thou ever think to thrive,
Except with industry thou wilt strive
To help thyself, when there is given
Before thine eyes such stores from heaven?
Had I one opportunity
Like this, I Would lay such plenty by,
In such a season I Would provide
Enough for all my days beside.
But I Am obliged each day to roam
Many a furlong from my home,
And cry, good luck, whenever I pick
From off the ground a single stick;
Or, in some long and rutty lane,
I find by chance a single grain.
Had I the art, and strength, like you,
To reap, to thresh, to bake, and brew,
I would not murmur or complain
At winter's snow or summer's rain,
Which heaven in each season sends,
To answer all its wiser ends."
"Thou boasting thing, (the clown replied,)
Thou little crawling piece of pride,
Or stop thy foul reproaching breath,
This moment else shall be thy death;
For all thy counsel's mere pretense,
To show thy mighty share of sense,
Thy industry and insolence.
Thou would not in this manner prate,
Were thou, like me, of human state;
Were what I Have reaped, and what I Have sown,
Like what thou gather'st, all my own,
My barns should every one be stored,
And I, as well as thee, would hoard. --
I own the seasons plenty send,
Were men, like ants, each other's friend;
I would not now come murmuring here,
Were food and raiment not so dear.
Those times you sure must own are bad,
When there is no victuals to be had;
When Nature sends her stores at large,
And Earth does all her gifts discharge. --
It Is not by God, but man denied,
Who feasts in luxury and pride:
For see, yon infant, starving, dies,
With all this bounty before his eyes."
THE APOLOGY.
There is no reason to comment,
The Moral is most evident.
SUNDAY, A POEM.
HAIL holy day, by heavenly laws designed
A consolation to all human kind,
To man and brutes a day of peace and rest,
Would man but own his duty, and be blessed:
As when the harp, in Jesse's golden days,
Tuned every Sabbath to Jehovah's praise,
By holy prophets, and by virgins strung
When truth and faith inspired every tongue;
Or when his son, with eloquence divine,
(The greatest favorite of the sacred Nine)
Made the proud Saul, whenever he touched his strings,
Bow his stiff neck, and own the King of Kings.
Observe the present age, -- how vain, how strange!
How true sang he, who told us, "all things change,"
A puny race of infidels and fools,
True slaves to vice, and fashion's gaudy tools;
Strangers to virtue, enemies to fame,
Except in foreign dress, or foreign name.
My Lord sends forth his hopeful heir to roam
To foreign climes, to bring new fashions home:
Caught with their manners and their taste, he burns,
And after six years travel, he returns
A flimsy fop, a coxcomb and a fool, --
A greater dunce than when he left the school:
Quick at intrigue, to gamble, or to sight,
A debauchee, if not a s -- te.
Britain and France with emulation try
TO outdo each other in absurdity.
For here at home what vast excess we see
In city fops, and city quality:
Is there a folly introduced at court,
But straight on swiftest pinions of report,
It through the city in a trice is fanned,
And introduced, -- for taste, at second hand?
With cards and routs their Sunday is employed,
And every Christian virtue is destroyed.
Mode will bewitch, all eyes may plainly see,
And nothing charms like flimsy gaiety:
In all degrees, at every age, we find,
There Is naught like fashion captivates the mind:
Do but observe the rich Sir Traffick's wife,
Old and deformed, upon the verge of life,
With fulsome art, she rolls her faded eyes,
And thinks to make a conquest ere she dies;
While in their dress there is no distinction seen
'Tween sixty-six, and she of gay sixteen.
But to my theme; my muse at random strays,
And with a tedious prelude, she delays
My better meaning, and perverts my plan,
I Will tack about, and to it, like a man. --
We raise subscriptions and new churches build,
But heaven knows how seldom they are filled.
Should Sunday shine a summer's day, and fair,
Behold what legions round the town repair;
What flocks to Richmond and to Windsor drive,
And buz and sip, like drones about a hive,
At every welcome tavern which they meet,
Affecting bucks, and asses prove complete,
On hackney'd steeds, the giddy blockheads fly,
Who kindly drag 'em home, perhaps, and die:
Of all the slaves dame nature's given us here
There Is none so noble, treated so severe
As the kind steed, that is ever yet been cursed,
To have his last load greater than his first.
When worn with hunger, slavery and age
Finds still a harder journey to engage;
Than when in youth and vigor he would bear
My Lord a mile or two to take the air.
But such is fate, when useless and grown old
To some unfeeling monster he is sold.
Each needy wretch his thirst for taste declares
Whenever he speaks, but more by what he wears;
Often is the fancy of some brainless prig
Couched in the choice of his enormous wig,
And often we learn the tenor of the fair
By the sly glance, or belle-affected air.
Is there a nymph that Fortune will not own,
That beauty might indeed have stamped have shown?
Behold her sailing in the pink of taste,
Trump'd up with powder, frippery and paste,
Resolved against fortune, beauty's force to try,
(The greatest powers now beneath the sky,)
Rather than fate her conquest should impede,
She Will not retreat, though virtue's sure to bleed.
Behold what droves to Bagnigge Wells repair,
Crowding together for the sake of air,
And strictly keeping Sunday's weekly fair.
Sunk in a vale, this fair retreat is placed,
And with two mountains on each side is graced;
That has for ages, there, in loads been thrown,
Receiving all the rubbish of the town.
Smooth through its flat a muddy riv'let streams,
And down its sides a wholesome churchyard teems;
Here, close pent up by thousands, we repair,
And praise the water, liquor and the air:
Here lovesick couples every Sunday run,
They marry next, and find themselves undone:
Soon shifts the scene, the passion next is cloyed,
And all their promised happiness destroyed.
Behold a pair, that but two years ago,
She a coquette, and he a city beau,
Now look with sorrow at their former state,
And curse the burden of their present fate.
Married, they walk indifferent and grave,
Whilst worldly cares their every thought enslave:
He, at a distance, from the crowd retires,
She, at a distance, leaves her gay desires.
See, self-admir'd, Miss, of four feet high,
Display her charms, and with an ogle, try
To captivate some dull unwary spark,
She often shoots, but seldom hits the mark:
For should the rogue some imperfection spy,
Her crooked legs, or bolster'd shape, awry:
If the high shoulder, which she would fain conceal,
Some thoughtless turn should cruelly reveal,
No new device, how well soever it is dressed,
Will win the lover to her strutting breast.
If such a wretch would deal in Hymen's laws,
Let her throw off her frippery and gauze;
Nor vainly try, with self-imagin'd charms,
To win the lover to her stunted arms.
To charm with person, never make pretense,
But try to please with gravity and sense:
Plain be your dress, seem conscious of defect,
Let love subside, and try to win respect.
Should some grave friend of sixty, seek a wife,
A needful helpmate, at the verge of life,
Who Is with your virtues, not your person moved,
Its better far by such to be approved,
Than try with such a form to make a prize,
Or hope in vain to charm a lover's eyes,
Who will but rally, flatter and despise.
Devote no more your Sunday to intrigue,
Nor longer keep your vanity in league;
For where the person and the mind's awry,
We seldom find it catch a lover's eye.
Let not White Conduit, Bagnigge, or the Spaw,
One Sunday more your vain attention draw,
Where swarms of fools, of coxcombs, bucks and beaux,
Adore themselves, and next themselves, their clothes.
Where belles repair to catch, and to be caught,
That never yet gave being to a thought.
You, on whom fortune has been pleased to smile,
Lay by your giddy pleasures for a while;
Regard the cries of nature in distress,
Confine awhile your appetite and dress:
Where fortune's given enough, and some to spare,
Let the remainder be the poor man's share.
EPIGRAM ON LORD G --.
MY Lord has often said, he scorns
The wretch who'd fain conceal his horns,
And, from his heart, quite full of glee,
He wished all cuckolds in the sea.
A merry wag (pleased with the whim)
Replied, my Lord, Pray can you swim?
AN ELEGY On the DEATH of Mr. RICHARD CROSS.
FAREWELL, kind youth! my friend farewell!
Since fate will have it so;
Cease, cease, the solemn passing bell,
Nor aggravate my woe.
In plaintive notes my muse shall sing
Thy merits and thy name,
And on her weak, but grateful wing,
She Will bear thee up to fame.
What though obscure, thou spent thy days
A friend to virtue's cause,
Thy merits still demand my lays,
To whisper thy applause.
The lonely bud that blows obscure
Beneath the spreading thorn,
Often preserves a scent more pure,
Than what the top adorn.
I little thought, my dearest friend,
To see thee dead so soon,
For who could think the day would end
Before it well was noon?
Thy noon of life an evening proved,
Thy sun ran quickly down,
Thy morning was by all beloved,
Thine eve without a frown.
Through life with even pace thou steered,
Without one single foe,
(By friends beloved, by truth revered,)
Lest envy made them so.
But who could be a foe to thee,
A friend to all mankind:
Whose breast was all tranquillity,
With harmony combined.
How often have I at peep of dawn
Thy friendly summons heard,
And with thee trod the verdant lawn,
Before the sun appeared.
From Richmond hill to Twick'nham dale,
How often have we strayed,
Charmed with the thrush and nightingale,
That sang in Dysart's shade.
When cloudy mists from off the brooks
Proclaimed a summer's day,
With glee we talked of men and books,
And argued time away.
Whenever a wild romantic scene
Has struck our wandering eyes,
And where the magic circle's been,
Great Shakespeare would arise.
Where gentle Zephyrs blew serene,
As through the copse we steered,
Or when some garden we have seen,
Great Milton has appeared.
When nature dasy'd over the lawn,
And blossomed every tree,
The humble Thompson's Muse would dawn,
Like pure simplicity.
When over the hill we have chanced to stray,
And viewed some mansion by,
Often with a smile, I Have heard thee say
"Its wealthy Lord must die."
Thou envied not the proud his wealth,
His luxury and pride,
Thy only boon a little health,
But that the fates denied.
Thy honest ear would never attend
The vile detractor's lie,
But with a manly zeal defend
Both friend and enemy.
Often when the lark had closed her wings,
The Moon began her reign,
I Have heard thee touch thy magic strings,
And play thy usual strain.
Scarce had the Thames sent up a breeze,
Or dews fallen on the ground,
But through the gentle waving trees,
I heard the pleasing sound.
Enraptured have I stood alone
Beneath a cooling shade,
With extacy I Have caught each tone,
In soft piano's played.
But now the evening charms no more,
No more the morn delights,
Since morn nor evening can restore
Thee back again to sight.
No more shall I at break of day
Thy friendly summons hear,
Nor with thee over the woodlands stray,
Before the Sun appear.
In sad remembrance over thy tomb,
Thy requiem will I sing,
When night with dull and awful gloom
Shall spread her raven wing.
A POOR MAN's QUERIES. Addressed to his FRIEND.
OUR betters seem to make a rout,
To find the cause of famine out,
Pretend the mystery is too great,
To tell us why we have no meat;
Nor can our ablest St -- s -- n's head,
Find out the cause we have no bread.
The reason's plain, I tell you why,
I don't believe they ever try.
But should they want to lay a tax
Upon our heavy-laden backs,
There is not one but knows the way,
To do it for us any day.
Like dog in the fair they shift about,
Today in place, tomorrow out,
Nor shall you find the best resign,
Without some motive or design
To wriggle into better bread; --
Then can you think he will plague his head
About such things as you or I,
Who were but born to starve and die?
QUERY I.
Were they like you and I to feel
An appetite, without a meal;
Say, would they not soon find the way,
To move this obstacle away?
II.
Would forestallers and regrators
Until now have 'scap'd their betters,
If some great rogue 'tween you and I,
Had not given them authority?
Thieves are seldom hanged for stealing,
Where my Lord's a fellow feeling.
III.
If one knave should chance to swing,
O that would be a happy thing.
In such a case, it is ten to four,
But he would impeach a hundred more;
And then I Would lay you nine to ten,
That half of them were N -- n,
Or such to whom we give the name,
For they by birth assume the claim,
And have not in reality
The smallest claim to quality.
Titles that once were bravely won,
That have through generations run,
May grace at last a worthless fool,
Perhaps some haughty fav'rite's tool,
In some base office exercised,
And by his countrymen despised.
THE FATAL INCIDENT.
IT IS full six months, cried Aladin,
Since Emina I Have seen,
Say, was it not a sorry sin,
To leave my fairy queen?
Say, was it not a sorry sin,
To force me so away,
And make me plod through thick and thin,
"Over hills and far away?"
To make me soldier against my will,
And go the lud knows where,
And what is alas, more cruel still,
To force me from my dear.
It Is fourteen days since last I heard,
Or had one single line,
And she is forsa'en me I Am afraid,
But sure the fault's not mine.
We parted at this very style,
I thought I should have died;
I took my leave, and all the while
The lovely creature cried.
Plague on the man, be who he will,
That first the wars began,
But may he be more plagued still,
That schem'd the Militia plan.
Why should they fix on me forsooth,
That never got drunk and swore,
There Is Ralph and Hal, aye, and in truth,
I could name twenty more.
There Is Thomas now, as great a rake
As ever trod the lea,
He got with barn, at our last wake,
Poor Sally Mapletree.
Our Joe got drunk and beat his wife
Until she scarce could see,
And yet for all, upon my life,
They needs must fix on me.
But I Will no longer time delay,
With thinking what is past*
I Am glad I Have got so safe away,
To see my love at last.
O how my heart with fancy throbs,
To think we soon shall meet;
From her the Rose its color robs,
The Hyacinth its sweet.
I shall be 'sham'd to see her too
In this strange soldier's dress,
But if her heart like mine be true,
She Will not love me the less.
I Will even across the Churchyard now,
And see my Emina,
She lives at foot of yonder brow,
Where yon white lambkins play.
Here stands the Church where she and I
Together often have been,
And hope once more, yet ere I die,
To go with her again.
When she some morning by my side,
O! would it were today!
Shall go a maid, but turn a bride,
Dressed like the queen of May.
Then luck attend! I Will even away
In this same soldier's trim,
Desire will not let me stay,
To make myself more prim.
Ah! me, what name's on yonder stone,
That meets my tortured sight!
It Is Emina's! it is here is alone! --
Then to the world, good night.
For, like the barbed-shafted dart,
It plunges through my breast,
Fast bleeds within, my wounded heart,
But here I Will give 'em rest.
O cruel fate! I cannot bear
To look upon her grave;
Strike me to earth, nor longer spare
A love-destracted slave.
Alas! I feel my blood retire,
My eyes grow dim apace,
The fates have heard my last desire,
We'll in the grave embrace.
A PASTORAL, Written on the DEATH of Mr. C. CHURCHILL and Mr. R. LLOYD, The
latter dying soon after the news of the former's death.
JONNY and ROBIN. JONNY. AH! Robin have thou heard the news?
Our blithest swain is dead,
The greatest favorite of the Muse
Is in the Churchyard laid.

ROBIN. Thou do not sure, my Charley mean,
My true and faithful friend?
If so, alas! my woes again
Will never have an end.

JONNY. I would it were not him indeed,
I Am grieved the news to tell,
I know thy honest heart will bleed,
Thou loved the swain so well.

ROBIN. Ah! woe is me, what shall I do!
I can no more survive,
Thy words have cut my life-string through,
Through him alone I live.

JONNY. Nay, do not go and leave me too,
To wander here alone,
To sit beneath the churchyard Yew,
To weep beside thy stone.

ROBIN. Alas! kind youth, alas I die,
My eyes begin to fade,
I soon shall with my Charley lie,
Beneath the Yew-tree shade.

JONNY. Ah! most distressed and wretched me,
To live to see this day,
I Will set beneath some gloomy tree,
And sigh my soul away.

ROBIN. Nay, pray thee live, thou worthy swain,
And hope a better day,
Let not my lambs die on the plain,
When I am turned to clay.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 20. Line 22. For,

That beauty might indeed have stamped have shown,
Read,

On whom Ma'am Beauty has her charms bestown*

