A COLLECTION OF POEMS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.

By THOMAS ELLWOOD.

LONDON: Printed and sold by LUKE HIND, in George-yard, Lombard Street. [Price
Six-pence]

TO THE READER.
THE following POEMS, wrote by THOMAS ELLWOOD, (which have lain dormant in
Manuscript for many Years) being lately communicated to me by a Friend, I
thereupon gave them a serious Perusal; and observing the pious and religious
Sentiments wherewith they abound, thought they were too good to be lost;
especially as there is room to hope, the uncaptious and sincerely religious
Youth of either Sex, may be benefitted thereby.

The EDITOR.

DIVINE WORSHIP.
In vain do they worship Me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.
Mat. xv. 9.
OF WORSHIP I presume to sing,
Yet from the Nine no Aid implore,
SHILOH's out-vies Castalia's Spring,
Assist blessed Power whom I adore;
Breath on my Muse, and fill her Quill
With sacred Dews from Hermon-hill.
Momus be gone, fly all ye Vain,
Who the Wit of Poems place
In florid Strains, my Muse is plain;
Fine Cloth exceeds fantastic Lace
On Kersey set; I leave those Flights,
To such as Fiction most delights.
Let them also avoid the Place,
Should there be of that scoffing Stock,
Who are so destitute of GRACE,
They at the SPIRIT's Infl'ence mock;
To such my Muse no Pleasure brings,
Who scorn the Power by which she sings.
But come all ye who TRUTH embrace,
Whose Souls do pure Religion love,
Who prize the Gift of sacred GRACE,
Whose Treasure lies in Realms above;
Nay all, that are not Foes, draw near,
And grant my Song a willing Ear.
In early Times, when Man was made,
Before the Priesthood was confined,
While TRUTH in Adam's Household stayed,
And GOD adored by all Mankind;
No Form of Worship, that appears,
Had been prescribed for many Years.
While Men with GOD a Converse kept,
And on Him did devoutly wait,
He gracious, while they waked or slept,
Did so their Minds illuminate,
That they not only knew His Will,
But by His Aid could it fulfill.
Before the Flood, and after long,
The Patriarchs directed were,
Both when to warble out their Song,
And how to open Heavens Gate by Prayer;
Whatever Act the LORD required,
Their Hearts He thereunto inspired.
But after that, Heaven did decree,
In special Love to Abraham,
That his Posterity should be
Sacred to Him, and bear His Name;
A Worship asked at their hand,
Which did in Observations stand.
What must be offered, when and where,
Each Part was carefully expressed;
The various Modes prescribed were
For sacrificing, and the rest;
Set-times were fixed for solemn Feasts,
Difference 'twixt clean, and unclean Beasts,
This legal Worship, as it stood
In Meats and Drinks, and carnal Rites,
Were Types of that eternal Good,
To which the Gospel all invites;
The longest Date that it could claim,
Was but till Heb. ix. 10.
REFORMATION came.
When that auspicious Time drew nigh,
The Morning of that Day was come,
The WORD, descending from on high,
Took sinless Flesh in Virgin's Womb;
At whose blessed Birth, Heaven's Host rejoice,
And pour their Hymns with raptured Voice.
SHILOH, so often foretold, thus come,
His Death the Temple-vail did rend,
And being of those Types the SUM,
That Dispensation had its End;
'Twas meet the Servant should withdraw,
When he the MASTER's Presence saw.
But yet, ever CHRIST would abrogate
A Worship so long Time in Use,
And disannul the legal State,
He did a better introduce;
This LAW was not in Marble cut,
But in the Heart and Conscience put:
For so the Prophets, in GOD's Name,
While yet the LAW in Vigor stood,
Did by Authority proclaim:
He said (who what He says makes good)
Jer. xxxi. 33. Ezekiel. xi. 19, 20.
After those Days, I in the Heart
My FEAR will place, and LAW impart.
Again; Joel ii. 29.
And it shall come to pass,
My SPIRIT on all Flesh I Will pour,
On Young and Old, the Lad and Lass,
Shall feel the Virtue of this Shower;
Not of the Priest shall LAW be sought,
But all thy Sons, of GOD be taught.
Happy they! who such a TEACHER have,
And yield thereto a willing Ear;
From all that is hurtful He will save,
If in His LAW they persevere:
O! that Mankind therein would walk,
Nor some against, some only for, it talk.
The SON of GOD, who from Heaven came,
And fully Man's Redemption wrought,
When met by the Samarian Dame,
The true approved Worship taught:
Not at that Jerusalem
City, or this Mount,
Though revered for Jacob's Fount;
But who the FATHER will adore,
Whether Bond or Free, Aged or Youth,
Must worship not as heretofore
In Types, but in SPIRIT and TRUTH:
God's a Spirit! -- among Jews and Greeks,
Such inward Worshipers He seeks.
Not those who serve in Repititions,
Or in Prescriptions, as the Jews,
Nor yet in oral, vain Traditions,
Such as Samaritans did use:
The Jewish Faith in Symbols stood,
The Samaritan's was never good.
Types, Shadows, Sacraments and Signs,
Did on this Dispensation wait;
Who to the Gospel Worship joins,
Shadows must leave to the shad'wy State:
It Is not the fatted Calf that skips,
Is offered now, but Calves of Lips.
Thanks and Praise, Sacrifices are
To GOD most pleasing, when they spring
From a pure Heart He does prepare,
And then excites His Acts to sing:
True Christ'ans use both Heart and Tongue,
Whenever a Hymn or Psalm is sung.
Not chanting, in a formal Note,
States touched in ancient Song,
Perverting what the Psalmist wrote,
Whose Case cannot to all belong;
It Is who their own Exper'ence bring,
With Spirit and with Judgment sing.
Instead of Incense to perfume
The Altar, from the Soul arise
In Flames (that warm but not consume)
Sighs, Supplications, Groans and Cries,
Which though but weak, do never fail,
At MERCY's Fountain to prevail.
Romans viii. 26.
We know not what to ask -- PAUL taught;
Who then shall Forms appoint?
True Prayer is by the SPIRIT wrought,
With which Heaven does each Child anoint;
He that best knows what we should have,
Inwardly teaches what to crave.
This then of WORSHIP is the Sum,
To wait in SPIRIT on the LORD,
That at what Time He deigns to come,
The Soul may hear His living Word,
And with Alacrity fulfill,
What He makes known to be His Will.
For when the Mind on GOD is stayed,
In Silence waiting to be taught,
The World's Concerns aside are laid,
Nor License gi'n to one vain Thought;
The LORD does to that Soul draw near,
And with Instruction fills its Ear.
Instructed still, the Soul does cleave,
The LORD His Virtue does impart,
Discoveries of His Will He leaves,
Which operate upon the Heart;
A Sacrifice He does prepare,
Whether Thanksgiving, Praise or Prayer.
Great is the Pleasure GOD does take
In such Oblations; in His Sight
That Soul is dear, he will not forsake,
But in His Book his Name will write:
The Joys that the Obedient feel,
Nor Men nor Angels can reveal.
INWARD PEACE.
My PEACE I give unto you. John xiv. 27.
WHO can conceive, much less express,
The inward Peace which they possess,
Who, by the Indwelling of the LIGHT,
Have put satanic Powers to flight;
In whom, renewed and born again,
The LORD of Life does live and reign:
Renewed, restored, purged, purified,
And natural Rovings laid aside;
Cleans'd by the BLOOD, kept by the GRACE,
That Sin in them scarce finds a Place;
The Temple swept, prepared, then blessed
With Presence of an heavenly Guest,
A Guest, not for a Night or twain,
But one that always will remain;
Yea, such a Guest as does impart,
That Joy which overcomes the Heart,
A Joy so great, no Tongue of Man,
Express the Fullness of it can;
And this unutterable Bliss,
Flows from the Love of GOD to His.
O! Love immense, and without Bound,
To all that in the TRUTH are found,
Words are too short to set it forth
In its Extent, and real Worth.
The Wife, that in the Bosom lies,
Is precious in the Husband's Eyes;
The sucking Babe is very near,
The only Son, exceeding dear;
Tender the Apple of the Eye,
Friends and Relations very nigh;
But yet this Love does far transcend
That to Wife, Child, Eye, Parent, Friend.
These Metaphors are all too low,
The Nature of this Love to show;
No Tongue is able to declare,
How dear to GOD His Children are;
Only the Sense of it is felt,
Which breaks the Heart and makes it melt.
FRAUS DIABOLICA.
THE Devil over-reached Men by a Slight,
When first he taught them to oppose the LIGHT,
For he himself in Darkness dwells; and he
That hates the LIGHT, must needs in Darkness be:
Arch-craft indeed! he knows the LIGHT who shun,
Must needs into the thickest Darkness run,
And he so craftily his Plot has laid,
That many simple Ones he has betrayed,
To tread the Path that leads to Death's dark Cell,
'Till by a sad Mistake they come to Hell.
LOYALTY.
I KNOW my Heart is loyal to my Prince,
I never harbored a disloyal Thought,
And If my Pen or Tongue has given Offense,
That Error has through Ignorance been wrought;
For which, when proved, I will for Mercy cry,
And thankful live, or uncomplaining die.
THOUGHTS.
HOW long, alas, shall vain Thoughts in me rest,
And find a lurking Place within my Breast!
How long, how long, ever I a Conqueror be,
And over my ownself get the Victory!
Ah, how disgustful is it when I find,
Some little triv'al Thought possess my Mind!
Often have I set myself to keep the Door,
That no vain Cogitation enter more,
And reckoned too, so strict a Watch to keep,
That nothing unexamin'd in should creep;
But on a sudden, when I least suspected,
An idle Thought has Satan introjected,
Which, like a little Thief, has open set
The Door, for greater Rovers in to get.
I Will trust myself no more; I see it is vain,
Man of himself no Conquest can obtain;
To Him will I betake myself, from whom,
Each good and perfect Gift, I know, does come;
His Succor will I beg, His Aid implore,
Who for the Helpless, still has Help in Store.
Thou Israel's SHEPHERD, Thou alone can keep
My Soul, who neither slumber do nor sleep;
Thou Everywhere, who do all Places fill,
Who art both perfect POWER and perfect WILL,
Thou all-sufficient art; no Thought can fly
The Scrutage of Thy all-discerning EYE;
And Thou, dear FATHER, too commanded have
Thy Children, all their Care on THEE to cast,
Which I most gladly do; but yet not so,
As henceforth careless in myself to grow;
No, I resolve still on the Watch to be,
Not in my own Strength, but empowered by Thee.
Set Thou the Watch, O LORD, appoint the Guard,
Give Thou the Charge; O help me so to ward,
That no vain Thought into my Mind may slip,
But in the Embrio may receive a Nip;
Thou, who for me have great Deliverance wrought
Deliver too from every idle Thought.
To such as stand idle in the Marketplace.
WHY do you trifle thus your Time away?
Why are you of such Treasure so profuse?
Do you expect to have another Day,
Who of the present make so ill a Use?
How can it be?
The Moment that is past, will come no more,
The Hour misspent, can never be recalled,
Old Cronos has but one poor Lock before,
His Head behind is altogether bald;
Take that from me.
Be therefore wise in Time, while yet an Hour
Is lent you, lest when that is vainly spent,
It never should again be in your Power
(Although with Tears ye seek it) to repent;
For GOD is just.
And though He frequently does Man invite,
To cease from Evil, and accept of GRACE,
Yet, if fond Man persists His Love to slight,
MERCY withdraws, Justice steps in her Place,
And die he must.
AGONY.
I FAINT; my dying Breath will not suffice
To midwife forth my Words; my falt'ring Tongue
Resigns its Office to my weeping Eyes;
Speak Eyes, and do my faithful Heart no Wrong.
Ye crystal Fountains set your Sluices wide,
Stream forth your Tears like a full flowing Tide;
Draw up the Floodgates, let the Torrent flow
In its right Current, whether fast or slow.
A STATE.
BLESSED is the Man, whose Heart is found,
When Trials come, upright and sound,
Whom not the Hopes of greatest Gain,
Nor Fear of most tormenting Pain,
Nor yet the most magnetic Pleasure,
Nor Honors heaped up without measure,
Can cause to shrink or start aside,
And leave the strait Way for the wide.
This is the STATE on which my Eye is fixed,
Oh! that no Cloud may ever come betwixt,
But that my Heart may henceforth always dwell,
In that which does all earthly Things excel;
For he alone can stand the dreadful Shock,
Whose House is built on the eternal ROCK.
To a FRIEND in AMERICA.
MY Heart is with thee, but I dare not give
Myself the Pleasure of a wandering Thought,
That I to see the Day may ever live,
When to America I may be brought;
Where I that peaceful Solitude may find,
Which more than Riches would delight my Mind.
But here I Am fixed, my Station here is set,
By Him whose Will is sovereign to mine,
My Work and Service tie me here as yet,
At which I bless my GOD, I don't repine;
O! may my Spirit always take Delight,
In that which is most pleasing in His Sight.
DEUS est qui cuncta gubernat.
EXCEPT the Psalm cxxvii.
LORD the City keep,
The Watchman watches but in vain;
The Adversary in will creep,
And hardly be got out again.
So close his Stratagems are laid,
So deep and many are his Wiles,
The Sentinel's by him betrayed,
And he the Watchman too beguiles.
Sometimes TRUTH's Colors up he sets,
As if indeed a Friend he were,
And by that Practice in he gets,
Before his Falsehood does appear.
And, which is worst, within are some,
That always treacherous have been,
Who when he to the Gate does come,
Too ready are to let him in.
LORD! Thou art He in whom I trust,
On whom my Safety does depend;
Thou only can subdue the Lust,
Thou only can the Place defend.
My Weakness, LORD, I daily find,
It Is Thou alone sufficient art,
To Thee therefore, I have resigned
The Care and keeping of my Heart.
Be Thou Commander there in chief,
Place Thou the Guard, the Watchman set,
At each Assault send Thou Relief,
Let Satan no Advantage get.
Put Thou the Enemy to flight,
Break Thou his Strength, his Works destroy,
Discomfit Thou his Forces quite,
And fill my Soul with lasting Joy.
Take too a Course with those within,
That would the Place to him betray,
Burn up the Ground that brings forth Sin,
And the rebellious Nature slay.
Then shall I praise Thy holy Name,
And Hallelujahs to Thee sing,
My Tongue and Pen extend Thy Fame,
Who art my GOD, and Sion's KING.
FANCY.
WHen LOVE and HATE before my Fancy pass,
They look, methinks, like a prospective Glass;
If on another Person's Failings, I
Do chance at any Time to cast an Eye,
LOVE takes the End that does extenuate;
The opposite is held by squint-eyed HATE.
But if, on 'tother hand, I have a mind,
To view their Actions who to me are kind,
LOVE presently presents unto mine Eye
That Glass, which their good Turns will magnify:
HATE too would be as forward, if she might,
To clap her partial Glass before my Sight:
But I am weary of her; -- for I know,
She to all Goodness is a mortal Foe:
LOVE's the best Glass by far; yet many choose,
To look through that which Sight does most abuse.
LOVE's Original.
LOVE is a Cyon cropped from Virtue's Tree,
And grafted in the Stock of Purity;
Planted at first in Nature's choicest Soil,
Before the Fiend did Nature's Beauty spoil;
But thence transplanted to a richer Ground,
Than can in all Dame Nature's Realm be found,
Where being well manured, it takes deep Root
Downward, and Branches upward forth does shoot:
The Sap, which does this stately Tree maintain,
Is Sympathy; which runs as in a Vein
Through every Branch, causing it first to sprout,
And ever awhile, young tender Buds spring out.
Nor is it barren, but much Fruit does bear,
To Taste most pleasing, and to Sight most fair;
A sound substantial Fruit, that can endure
The sharpest Frost, and yet continue pure:
And that ye may this Fruit the more admire,
Take Notice, that I call it Chaste Desire.
LOVE's Definition.
The Author being pressed to show his Mind,
What is true Love, what not, has here defined.

I CALL not that true Love, which can admit
Of Heats and Colds like to an Ague-fit;
Those Rivers which, their Banks do overflow,
In a few Hours their empty Channels show.
That Is not true Love, that is grounded upon Wealth,
Or has the least Regard to worldly Pelf;
For such an one, might he his End obtain,
Would prostitute his very WIFE for Gain.
Nor can he with true Lovers have a Place,
Who Is Love depends upon some pretty Face,
Which Age or Sickness having once defaced,
The very Groundwork of his Love is razed.
And since that sordid Thing Self-Interest,
Is able to defile the chastest Breast,
If not prevented; therefore I declare,
That it and true Love inconsistent are.
Such Marks as these, I could add many more
Like Watch-tow'rs, tending to forewarn the jolly
But young unskilful Mariners, before
They split their Vessels on the Rocks of Folly.
But for this Theme let this suffice, while I,
Tired with the Subject, borrow Wings and fly
Into an higher Orb, where I may view,
That Love who is choicest Epithet is true.
That I call Love, that only Love I call,
Whose Birth appears to be Caelestial;
That, and that only, I account true Love,
Which in the Sphere of CHASTITY does move.
He Is a true Lover (not who can subdue,
Monsters and Giants for his Mistress Sake,
And sighs perhaps and weep, with much ado,
For fear she should some other happy make;
But) who so far her Happiness prefers
Before his own, that he can be content
To sacrifice his own to purchase hers,
Though with the Price of his own Banishment.
A hearty Lover wholly does devote
Himself, to make her happy whom he loves,
And does with Might and Main her Good promote,
Although destructive to his Hopes it proves.
He that loves truly, loves to that Degree,
Whatever Notions Libertines may spread,
That he would be content, yea, joy to see
His Mistress bless some worthier Person's Bed.
Nor can true Love to Hatred ever turn,
Although it never should Acceptance find,
But like a Lamp, clear to the last would burn,
And thereby manifest a noble Mind.
Such amorous Motions then conclude we must,
How speciously so ever they are decked,
Proceed not from true Love, but filthy Lust,
Which each chaste Breast should study to reject.
LOVE's Caveat.
IF VIRTUE move
A Man to love,
How can he then refuse?
If NATURE move,
Unless he prove,
How knows he what to choose?
For Vice's Look
For VIRTUE's took
By many an honest Heart,
Who think they are safe,
Till felt they have
Her deadly stinging Smart:
And then too late,
Cry O! my Fate!
Was ever Grief like mine?
I thought my Love
Sprung from above,
And that it was divine;
But now I find,
With Grief of Mind,
That from the Earth it came,
And that the Fruit,
Which thence does shoot,
Is naught but Grief and Shame.
Thus honest Men
Are, now and then,
Deceived by Beauty's Bait,
Which makes them choose
Pleasure, and lose
A far more happy State.
Nor can Man be
From Danger free,
But as he does abide,
In that which will
That Nature kill,
And keeps close to his Guide.
Which if he do,
'Twill to him show
Each Motion's Root and Ground,
That in this Day
No Folly may
In ISRAEL be found.
Which is the Cry,
Of one whose Eye
Has been too apt to stray;
Who could not stand,
Did not GOD's Hand
Support him Day by Day.
INTEGRITY.
IT is not Wealth, nor worldly Pelf,
Could my Affection take,
I am not such a Friend to SELF,
To suffer for its Sake.
It Is not the Features of a Face,
Could captivate mine Eye,
I have seen some of the sweetest grace,
Yet kept my Liberty.
What was it then, stout Heart, I pray,
Did thee to Love incline?
Can thou, without Presumption, say
It was a Power divine?
Much I could say, did Need require,
In Favor of my Love,
But I choose rather to retire,
Let it itself approve.
A PROSPECT.
'TWAS toward the Evening of the Day,
When Books lie still, and Scholars play,
That having got an Hour to spare,
I walked out to take the Air;
To which the Heavens did invite,
With Smiles that promised Delight.
My Walk upon a Bank I took,
Which was the Margin to a Brook,
Whose crystal Streams so small did slide,
As if they feared to be descried,
Save that a Pebble, here and there,
Whispered their Flight into mine Ear.
Hence I designed to take a View,
Of NATURE in her richest Hue:
Nor should I think my Labor lost
To see the like at double Cost.
The Birds, in various Notes, did sing
A Penegyrick to the Spring;
Each strove, I think, to do her best,
But Philomel excelled the rest;
The Trees served for a shady Screen,
Hung round with Canopies of green,
And some were here and there imboss'd
With Blossoms, at Dame Nature's Cost,
Which with a gentle Zephyr played,
And pretty whist'ling Murmurs made.
Which Way so ever I turned mine Eye,
I saw well-mix'd Variety;
The fine wrought Tap'stry of the Field,
Did many pretty Landscapes yield:
Here Wheat, there Barley, did appear,
Some in the Blade, some in the Ear;
The Pease in Bloom, and Beans in Flower,
Stood waiting for a gentle Shower;
For fear of which, in Haste home flies
The Be with Honey-laden Thighs.
The Meadows, in their Grass-green Vest,
Methought were very neatly dressed,
Not only neat, but richly fraught,
With checkered Flowers finely wrought,
Cowslips and Violets intermixed,
And tufted Daises cast betwixt;
Each Object did affect my Sight,
With sweetest innocent Delight.
But stayed I there? Oh no, my Heart
Cried still, Give me the better Part,
Let me with Him for ever live,
That to these Things does Being give;
Exterior Things may please each Sense,
And be enjoyed without Offense,
But nothing but a Power divine,
Can make their Virtues truly mine;
Thy Wisdom, therefore so infuse
Into my Heart, that I may use
Thy Creatures as they ought to be,
And still return the Praise to Thee,
To whom the highest Praise is due,
O GOD most holy, just and true.
Upon his dear deceased Friends, ISAAC and MARY PENINGTON,
SINCE first made One, as One they lived together
In Heart and Mind, in Flesh and Spirit One,
'Till Death in part this Unity did sever,
By taking him and leaving her alone,
In silent Grief his Absence to bemoan.
He being gone she could not long survive,
But daily from his Death began to die,
And rather seemed to be, than was alive:
Restless, till by his Side she came to lie,
Her Spirit joined to his again on high.
Thus Death, by whom the parting Blow was given,
Brought them together again, in Earth and Heaven.
In Remembrance of my Friend, MARY PENINGTON.
UPON September's eighteenth Day,
In sixteen hundred eighty two,
Death took a virtuous DAME away,
Who of her Equals left but few;
She Widow was, but now is gone
To SPRINGETT and to PENINGTON.
For personal Endowments held
She justly was, to few behind;
But those wherein she most excelled,
Were the Endowments of the Mind:
My Pen, I fear, would wrong her Worth,
Should I attempt to set them forth.
I therefore purposely abstain,
From seeking Words, to speak her Praise,
I know 'twould Labor be in vain,
Her Fame no Words can higher raise;
Let others sing her Worth, while I
Honor and love her Memory.
EXERCISE.
AH me! how bitter is this Cup to drink!
How do I tremble when on it I think!
Surely, to fight with Tigres, or to rouse
Old hungry Lions, were less hazardous;
Yea, I should think I made a happy Change,
To meet a Bear, whom Hunger makes to range,
Or to encounter with a Dragon fierce,
Whose scaly Hide no Sword did ever pierce.
But what! do I demur; still make Delay!
Seem yet to doubt, whether I should obey,
Or Rebel prove! let no such tainting Thought,
Into my yet untainted Breast be brought.
Why stay I? Why forbear then to proceed?
Success crowns Acts; Delays but Danger breed,
And Strength in Weakness, Faithfulness does find,
When Slothfulness is often left behind.
The bleating Sheep; or the Flock's Complaint of their Shepherds.
Woe to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves -- Ye feed not the
Flock -- but with Force and with Cruelty have ruled them. -- Therefore, thus
faith the LORD, Behold I am against the Shepherds, I will require my Flock at
their hand. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 2, 3, 4, 10.
IN elder Times, ever Shepherds were so great,
So ARCH so LORDLY, so ambitious grown;
Long time before the Pontificial Seat,
Wherewith the World has been so plagued, was known;
Before that Voice was heard, which Stories say,
Was spoke from Heaven by an Angel's Tongue,
[ Poison is poured into the Church this Day]
When Constantine his great Revenues flung
Amongst the gaping Shepherds, ever much Wealth,
Had made them proud and lazy; long ever this,
While they their Conventicles had by Stealth,
And glad were when Informers they could miss.
How honorable was the Shepherd's Trade
In those blessed Times! how much to be desired,
When none unto himself Advantage made
OF the Flock, when none to lordly Rule aspired.
Not seeking theirs but them; content to live
(And living well thereon, 'cause therein blessed)
Upon the Milk the Sheep did freely give;
Thus were the Shepherds fed, Sheep not oppressed.
Nor were, mean while, the fleecy Flock ingrate,
But right regardful of their Pastor's Pains,
With cheerful Hearts they did communicate
Of each good Thing, that human Life sustains.
In sweet Communion thus they walked together,
And mutual Comfort in each other had,
What was a Grief to one, was Grief to either,
And what made one rejoice, made the other glad.
The Shepherds for the Sheep no Pains did spare,
But for their Safety labored, watched and prayed;
The Sheep were conscious of the Shepherds Care,
And unto them a due Observance paid:
And both the Shepherds and the Sheep did aim,
In all they undertook, with Heart and Tongue,
To magnify the supreme SHEPHERD's Name,
To whom both Sheep and Shepherds did belong.
Thus was it in the Morning of that Day,
Which on the Heathen World long since did break,
And thus it held, while simple TRUTH bore Sway,
As Stories sacred and profane do speak.
But ah! how short a Time that Day did last,
How soon eclipsed was that glorious LIGHT!
How quickly was its Brightness overcast,
And buried in the Grave of dusky Night!
Which never to be enough lamented Loss,
The Ruin of so excellent a State,
By what unhappy Means it came to pass,
My Muse will in the following Lines relate.
Blessed with a peaceful Time, the fruitful Flock
Grew numerous, fat, and with fair Fleeces clad,
After they had sustained many a Shock
From Wolves, Bears, Tigres, and from Dogs run mad.
Enriched with Plenty by the bounteous Hand
Of the great SHEPHERD, whose indulgent Care
Over His Flock, His Treasures did expand,
And all good Things did for His Sheep prepare.
The grateful Flock, of Quiet thus possessed,
And having now of worldly Wealth good Store,
Remembered, with a right regardful Breast,
The Sufferings of their Pastors heretofore.
With open Hand, and with enlarged Heart,
(Such is the Nature of a bounteous Mind)
They to their Pastors did their Wealth impart,
Each striving how to leave the Rest behind.
None thought he gave enough, all studied how
They to their Shepherds might their Love express,
Each seemed to vie, which should the Church endow,
Most amply with the Goods he did possess.
Thus they went on a while; but ever 'twas long,
The Glue of Gold to pastoral Fingers stuck,
The attractive Power of Riches was so strong,
It did them from their honest Labors pluck.
The Phrygian Fabler tells us of a Hen,
That one Egg daily added to the Store,
Until her Dame her over-fed, and then
She grew so over-fat, she laid no more.
So did it with these ancient Shepherds fare,
Who while a spare and temperate Life they led,
Upon their Flock, nor Care nor Pains did spare;
What Pity 'twas they ever were over-fed.
For after that, through too indulgent Love,
And injudicious Zeal, the well-fleec'd sheep,
Upon their Shepherds (who had learnt to improve
Their Bounty) did un-needed Riches heap.
The Shepherds who, by that Time were become,
(Not better, but) more greedy than before,
The more they in superfluous Plenty swam,
The more they wanted, and still craved the more.
The Sheep, by blind Devotion led, still give,
In hopes at length the Shepherds Mouths to fill,
Scarce leaving to themselves whereon to live,
And yet the gaping Shepherds craved still.
At length the Shepherds, in some grand Offense,
Some of the chief Bell-weathers having caught,
Wrang from them great Endowments on pretense,
Large Gifts to them, would expiate the Fau't.
By various Arts the wily Shepherds get,
From the unthinking Sheep, still more and more,
And what at first was GIFT, they now call DEBT,
The Sheep must now pay, what they gave before.
Full-fed, the Shepherds quickly idle grew,
Betook themselves to a voluptuous Ease,
Their due Attendance on the Flock withdrew,
And studied chiefly how themselves to please.
Then Discord rose among them, how to part
Their ill-got Wealth; they could not well agree,
Only in this they all were of one Heart,
That by them all the Flock should fleeced be.
Themselves they therefore into Cycles cast,
Some small, some great, some low, some too too high,
And that the Model might the better last,
They gave their Plan the Name of HIERARCHY.
The higher Orbs the sturdier Shepherds take,
And thereof, as their own, themselves possess,
Where fair Provisions for themselves they make,
Leaving the lower Circles to the less.
Those Under-Shepherds, Servants to the rest,
Thus left to scramble for what to others left,
Each carved for himself as he thought best,
So parting, though unequally, their Theft.
To these the Master-Shepherds did commit
The Flock (which was before their common Care)
Who fed them once or twice a Week a-bit,
And that too with but dry and feeble Fare.
The Master-Shepherds having thus devolved,
Upon their Journey-men, the working Part,
Their Genius wholly to indulge resolved,
And with soft Pleasures satiate their Heart.
For Palaces and lofty Seats they build,
Wherein they live in most resplendent State,
Supplied with all things that Delight may yield
To wanton Sense, and Nature captivate.
Ambition now prevails to swilling Pride
And portly Pomp; they now let loose the Rein,
Drawn in their Coach and fix, abroad they ride,
Attended with a great and splendid Train.
Of the Chief-weathers, these Precedence claim,
In State Conventions are above them placed,
Most of them Arch by Nature are; by Name,
Two always with the Style of ARCH are graced.
High Titles they ambitiously affect,
Sure Token of foul Arrogance and Pride,
And to be called, My Lord, Your Grace, expect,
For which judicious Sheep do them deride.
A common Sheep, being by Chance in Place,
Where he an Under-shepherd heard ever while
Saying to one of these, May't please your Grace;
Wished him more Grace in Heart, though less in Style:
Yet the bare Name of Lordship will not do,
They Lordship love, and will Dominion have
Over both the Sheep, and Under-shepherds too,
Who at their Graces Hands for Grace must crave.
To these the Under-shepherds Tribute pay,
Which does them in a poor Condition keep,
And makes them with a sharper Hunger prey,
Upon the harmless and poor helpless Sheep:
Wherein the Master-shepherds them support,
Not only with their Countenance, but Power,
That by the Assistance of their Shepherd's Court,
They may the Sheep, and what they have devour.
And they so many Ways have found to pull,
Lock after Lock from the deluded Sheep,
That they scarce leave the Sheep enough of Wool,
Them from the Blasts of Poverty to keep.
Besides the general Tax they on them lay,
Whereby the Flock they Yearly decimate;
For every little Cheer, they make them pay,
And often too at unconscionable Rate.
A Ram and Ewe may not with nuptial Rite
Together join, but there must present be
Some one of these, who to them must recite
The spousal Words, for which he claims a Fee.
And when the pregnant Ewe her Lamb does yean,
The Shepherd will another Tag-lock get,
By telling them, that now the Ewe is clean,
And may again among the Flock be set.
Some certain Rites too must performed be,
To give the Lamb Admittance to the Fold,
For which the Shepherd claims another Fee;
And thus the Sheep both old and young are poll'd.
When a Sheep dies, the Shepherd DIRGE must say
Over the Corpse, when to the Grave it is brought,
For which he will be sure to have his Fee,
And Mortuary, if the Sheep left ought.
Thus the poor Sheep the Shepherds do oppress,
And with Exactions peel on every hand,
Nor can the Sheep expect to find Redress,
While they must to the Oppressors Judgment stand:
For in the Shepherds Courts these Pleas are tried,
If any hardy Sheep to pay refuse,
Where Shepherds, or their Creatures, still preside,
Who serve such Sheep, as CHRIST was served by Jews.
For having there contemned them, right or wrong,
They over to the sec'lar Power are turned,
To be in Prison cast amongst a Throng
Of Criminals, and in some Countries burned.
These are the Courts, from which the Sheep sustain,
By Shepherds who them cruelly entreat,
Such Hardships as enforce them to complain,
And vent their Sorrows with a mournful Bleat.
Ah! who can without Indignation hear,
How Shepherds do the Sheep in Bondage keep!
Who can from shedding Showers of Tears forbear,
At the Bemoanings of the bleating Sheep!
FLORALIA: Or, an Account of the Rise of MAY-GAMES, and MAY-POLES.
WHEN Rome was wholly Pagan, long before
The VIRGIN's Womb our blessed SAVIOR bore,
There lived in Rome a most lascivious Dame,
A noted Harlot, Flora was her Name,
Who prostituting of herself for Hire,
Great Wealth did, with great Infamy, acquire.
This filthy Strumpet, when she came to die,
Bequeathed her Treasures to Rome's Treasury;
For, she her Heir, the Roman People made,
Of what she got by her venereal Trade;
And that her Memory might still abide
Among them, by her Will she did provide,
That on her Birthday, certain wanton Games
Should celebrated be by Roman Dames,
Which that they might not for the Charge decline,
Part of her Wealth she thereto did assign.
So large a Legacy (however got)
The Roman Senate thought deserved not
To be contemned: Yet, that the filthy Stain,
Of her lewd Life, might not too long remain
A Blemish on them; they a Way contrive,
The Whore to bury, Flora keep alive,
Her they a Goddess feign; whom deify'd,
They make over Fruits and Flowers to preside;
To her they Altars raise, and by Decree
Appoint the Rites of her Solemnity.
The common People, in next Age adore
Her, whom their Fathers knew to be a Whore,
And, drenched in superstitious Darkness, fear
They neither Flowers nor Fruits should have that Year,
If they to keep her Festivals forbear.
Yet 'cause the better Part did still retain
A Sense, how she her Goddeship did gain,
Such as had due Regard unto their Honor,
Would rather venture that, than wait upon her;
But all the Strumpets of the Town, and such
As had of Fame or Modesty not much,
Unto her Altars flocked, and danced the Round,
Some naked, some in party-colours Gown,
Having their Heads with flowery Garlands crowned.
Nor spared they Wine, but in full Bowls did quaff,
And at each others antic Gestures laugh;
The Rein was quite let loose, and they were best
Accounted of, could break the rudest Jest.
Torches were used, to intimate that Night
Had been the Time of Flora's chief Delight;
And to denote how lustful she had been,
The Goat and Hare in these her Games were seen:
Thus did they Yearly celebrate her Day,
Upon the Calends of the Month called May.
Thus 'twas, while heathenish Superstition reigned,
Before the Gospel Light Dominion gained
Over Pagan Darkness; but when once the Day,
The illustrious Day of CHRIST broke forth, away
These filthy Vapors rolled: The Gospel Light,
From Christian Hearts dispelled this Darkness quite;
Nor can the Patrons of these May-games now,
Of such lewd Pastimes any Footsteps show,
Amongst the ancient Christians, even in Rome,
From whence those Pagan Rites at first did come.
But after that, through Satan's Wiles, ill Men
From Truth to Error had relapsed again,
After the Power of Godliness was lost,
And formal Christians of more Form did boast,
When Christian Rome was three times worse become
In some Respects, than had been heathen Rome;
Then to debauch the Nations, up were brought
Some Pagan Rites, condemned of old as naught,
Amongst these the May-games, with such Variation,
As suited best the Humor of each Nation:
How in this Island they were used of old,
Is that which in the next Place shall be told.
On Flora's Birthday, a long Pole they raise
In Marketplaces, or in parting Ways,
A painted Pole, whereon there hang, displayed,
Fine Garlands of the choicest Flowers made,
On Top of which a Weathercock is set,
Emblem of those who do such Sports abet.
Unto this Pole, the looser Class resort,
And spend their Time in time-mispending Sports;
The Fiddle or the Bag-pipe calls them forth,
And they come foremost, who are of least Worth;
Here Old and Young, of either Sex do meet,
And with obscene Discourse each other greet;
About the Tree, they in Disorder dance,
As Children on their Hobby-horses prance;
Confusedly they intermix in Routs,
And drown the Fiddle with their deaf'ning Shouts:
One breaks a bawdy Jest, wherein does follow,
From all the Rabble, an applauding Hollow;
With Scoffs, Derisions, Jeers, they entertain
Each other, and whatever's loose and vain;
And who most archly can the Mimick play,
Is sure, for Praise, to bear the Bell away.
The Liberty, which at such Times they use,
With Scoffs and Jokes the Passers-by to abuse,
Has passed into a Proverb, that it is said,
Of such an one they a mere May Game made;
For in these Revel-routs, they countenance
Whatever tends Profaneness to advance.
Nor are these dry Feasts; Flora does pretend
To guard the Vine, and Store of Barley send,
And therefore sure, her Votaries will not fail,
To steep their Brains that Day in Wine or Ale;
In brimful Bowls, or Glasses, then they bouse,
And Healths on bare and bended Knees carouse;
The Health they drink, perhaps of some great Lord,
Who Is well-grown Woods their May Pole did afford,
Who Is Honor, doubtless, would have risen higher,
Had he bestowed it on the Poor for Fire.
Patrons of May-poles, if they please may see,
The Original of this their Vanity;
Yea all, the Rise of May-games may behold,
Who for them are so strenuous and bold:
It Is Flora's Feast, a Strumpet void of Shame,
The Institution from the Romans came,
But they were Heathen; What is that to we,
Who boast a nobler Birth, a higher Pedigree?
Oh Britons! give your Views a higher Aim,
Nor slur with Pagan Rites the Christian Name.
An EPISTLE to a FRIEND.
Via recta ad vitam beatam.
THOU that a happy Life would lead
Here, and enjoy hereafter Rest,
The Path of VIRTUE do thou tread,
Wherein none ever walked unblest:
Which that thou may not miss, thy Friend
The following Rules does recommend.
Let to the LORD thy earliest Thought,
The first Fruit of thy waking Heart,
Be every Morning duly brought,
And offered as an hallowed Part.
To Him thy Thanks are due, who kept
Thy Soul in Safety whilst thou slept.
That Tribute paid, get up and dress,
And let thy Habit modest be,
Not gay nor costly to Excess,
And from fantastic Fashions free:
That Garb, methinks, is most complete,
That Is without Affectation neat.
When dressed retire, and wait to feel
An holy Breathing in thee rise,
With strong Desires to GOD! that He'ill
Bless thee in that Day's Exercise:
Well is that Course like to be run,
That is with holy Prayer begun.
Divine Assistance thus implored,
Thy proper Business set about,
While GOD does Time and Strength afford,
That thou may finish it throughout.
What Good to do, thy Hand does find,
Perform it with a cheerful Mind.
An idle Life by all means shun,
However great thy Incomes are;
Thousands have thereby been undone,
For it is the Devil's surest Snare:
Fly lustful Sloth, and always find
Work for thy Body or thy Mind.
Feed not too high, nor curious be
In pleasing of thy Appetite;
Plain Things with Nature best agree,
Too rich, and much, destroy her quite:
Let Temperance, without more ado,
Be Butler, Cook, and Carver too.
But Moderation chiefly use
In drinking; of strong Drinks take heed,
Reiterated Cups refuse,
And take no more than thou do need:
Who does himself o'ercharge with Wine,
Makes, what GOD made a Man, a Swine.
A Slave to the Pipe by no means be,
Who but the de'il on Smoke would feed?
Since GOD was pleased to make thee free,
Never come in Bondage to a Weed.
He hit the Mark, who all Excess
Declared to be in Drunkenness.
In all thy Dealings Plainness use;
With honest Gains thyself content;
Another's Weakness don't abuse,
Nor use fair Words to circumvent:
Who heaps up Wealth by Fraud and Guile,
Heaps Wrath unto himself mean while.
Be pitiful unto the Poor,
Compassion of the Needy take;
Relieve the Hungry with thy Store,
Provision for the Orphan make:
Who on the Poor does freely spend,
To GOD, that well repays, does lend.
Of Widows and of Fatherless,
And such as cannot themselves defend,
When Force or Fraud does them oppress,
Plead thou the Cause and stand their Friend:
The Helpless who from Wrong protect,
May Help themselves from GOD expect.
To Justice steadfastly adhere,
Without Respect to Friend or Foe;
Let neither Flattery nor Fear,
Make thee against thy Judgment go:
Impartial stand; let naught prevail,
But Right alone, to turn the Scale.
Of Pride and Stateliness beware,
An haughty Look and scornful Eye;
Vainglory shun, Self-praise forbear,
All vaunting and Ambition fly:
For of all Fools, pronounce I durst,
The self-conceited Fool the worst.
Be hospitable, let thy Door
To Strangers open freely stand;
And if their Need thy Help implore,
Dismiss them with a liberal Hand:
Some have, receiving unknown Guest,
With Angels Company been blessed.
Among thy Neighbors live in Peace,
Occasions of Contention shun;
Use all just Means that Strife may cease,
Wherever thou find'st it is begun:
Rememb'ring who it was that said,
They blessed shall be that PEACE have made.
In Friendship constant be and true,
Thy Friend in Danger stand thou by,
Forsake him not whatever ensue,
But for him even dare to die:
Who in true Friendship are combined,
Have in two Bodies but one Mind.
If thou prefer'st a married Life,
Let not a blind Affection guide,
But in the choosing of a Wife,
Let sound Discretion find the Bride:
Yet like and love before thou take --
What off again thou can not shake.
When having chose, thou now art wed,
Still bear in mind what thou did grant;
Be faithful to thy Marriage Bed,
And keep thy solemn Covenant:
Who violate the Nuptial-ties,
Make GOD and Man their Enemies.
If Children thou obtain'st, their Will
Subdue betimes, ever it grow strong;
Indulge them not in ought that is ill,
Lest both thyself and them thou wrong:
Who let their Children headstrong grow,
Make sure their own and Children's Woe.
Toward thy Servants gentle be,
Not ruling with a rig'rous Hand;
The less imperious Thou they see,
The more thou wilt have 'em at Command:
He best is served throughout the Year,
That Is served more for Love than Fear.
To all be affable and kind,
Not surly and moross, but free;
By courteous Carriage others bind,
To love, regard, and honor thee:
Of all the Ways for rising high,
The safest is HUMILITY.
Thy Anger, though provoked, restrain;
Her perfect Work let Patience have;
By gentle bearing, thou may gain
Him that the Provocation gave:
A soft Reply makes Anger cease,
But hasty Words will Strife increase.
In thy whole Course, still have thine Eye
To GOD; His Aid therein implore;
On Him in all, for all, rely;
Him with an upright Heart adore:
A Blessing thee must needs attend,
Who do with GOD begin and end.
THOMAS ELLWOOD.

These following, by another Hand.
A SOLILOQUY.
I commune with my own Heart. Psalm lxxvii. 6.
GRATEFUL Sensations urge my Voice, O lend
Thy sacred Ear! my FATHER, GOD, and FRIEND,
Assist the Strain, while by Reflection led,
I backward view the Years gone over my Head.
As far as my frail Memory can trace,
I find Vestigia's of Thy Love and Grace;
Through every Period of my Life, I see
Thy saving Providence and Clemency;
There Is scarce a Day, through the revolving Year,
But I remark some Token of Thy Care:
A Sense of which deeply impressed my Mind,
Humbl'd my Heart, and made my Soul resigned;
Engaged me often to cry, on bended Knee,
Cant. i. 4.
Draw me O GOD! and I Will run after Thee.
And should Thou deign a Competence to give,
Thy Laws shall be revered while I live;
And when I die, admitted to Thy Throne,
In endless Praise my Gratitude be shown.
But on Thy Mercy still must I confide,
For though I vowed, yet I have stepped aside,
Infringed Thy Laws, Thy Statutes disrever'd,
And the first Nature has too much appeared;
So that I may this fair Confession make,
Mat. xxvi. 4.
The Spirit's willing, but the Flesh is weak.
Therefore I beg, O! let Thy Grace subdue
Each erring Passion, and my Heart renew,
That to my Friends, I this Account may give,
Like pious PAUL, I Am dead, and yet, I live!
And now the Life, that animates this Clod,
Leans on the Gal. ii. 20.
Faith of the dear SON of GOD,
Who for my Sake Isai. lxiii. 3.
alone the Wine Press trod.
On WORSHIP.
THE Worship, Heaven with Approbation crowns,
Consists not in Cringes, or in Sounds;
In Ceremonies, or in Cut of Coat,
Nor in long Prayers, expressed all by Rote;
It Is not performed with tuned Instrument
In costly Domes, Houses magnificent,
Which strike the Senses, and Affections draw
Into a superstitious lifeless Awe;
But unreforms, and leaves the Soul as poor,
As impotent, and filthy as before.
No! genuine WORSHIP is a nobler Thing,
LOVE's its Original and only Spring;
It is performed in Spirit and in Heart,
By the Ability GOD does Himself impart;
And it consists in a holy living,
In Prayer, in Praise, and true Thanksgiving.
The INTERNAL MONITOR.
THOU need'st not say, with mental Sighs, O Man!
Who will unfold JEHOVAH's mystic Plan?
Who bring the sacred Pandects from the Sky?
That we may hear, and with the Terms comply.
Who perch upon the Morning's early Breeze?
And waft it to us from beyond the Seas.
Or, who descend to the unmeasured Deep,
And fetch it where tremendous Waters sleep?
For in thy Heart the WORD's divinely wrote,
Indelible and fair, without a Blot;
Speaks every Tongue beneath the Cope of Heaven,
Extensive as the LIGHT! to All it is given.
Unto this Oracle Attention give,
Obey its Dictates, and thy Soul shall live.
Nor need'st thou say, Wherewith, alas, shall I
Approach the Great Eternal DEITY?
Or how prostrate myself to gain his Eye?
Shall I before His awful Presence come
With Yearling-calves, in a full Hecatomb?
Will Rams in thousands please from Bashan's Soil?
Or, shall I give ten thousand Rills of Oil?
Shall my Firstborn be offered as a Toll,
The Body's Fruit ransom the guilty Soul?
No! none of these, JEHOVAH will delight;
Thy Heart is Conscious of the Thing that is Right.
The Rule is short -- Be merciful, be just,
And humbly in thy MAKER put thy Trust.
A HYMN.
WHAT Words JEHOVAH! shall I choose
TO express my Thanks to Thee?
What reverential Posture use?
Down on my Face or Knee?
External Forms may seem devout,
Yet no Acceptance find;
Nor all the Pomp of Words, without
A correspondent Mind.
The Heart's an Index; read me, there
See Gratitude and Praise;
For Competence, a Conscience clear,
With Health, and Length of Days;
For one true Friend, an Offspring large;
And what is dearer still,
For LOVE, that did my Debts discharge,
And brought from Heaven Thy Will.
Shall I, O GOD! thus highly blessed,
Ever disobedient prove,
Or make revealed Truths a Jest,
And Sceptick Reasoning love?
Shall I prefer a transient Sin,
Renounce Thy sacred Laws,
And slight Thy holy Checks within,
To gain the World's Applause?
No; rather let my Hand forget
To guide the passive Quill;
My Eyes in total Darkness set,
My laboring Heart stand still.
FINIS.

