An Enquiry into the Disposal of the Equivalent.
IT has been the Subject of Debate for sometime, now whether we should have an
Equivalent in Scotland for such Payments as are to be made on a Coalition of
the Nations? -- but whether what was Proposed, was Equal, was really an
Equivalent or no? And the World has been long hurried with these Enquities.

But now here arises a new Cloud, and though it is not only no bigger than a Man's
Hand, but is never like to be bigger; yet as it is dressed up, it threatens
mighty things: and this is, what you shall do with the Equivalent when you have
it.

It Is a little hard, People that cry up your National Sagacity, in their
Arguments against an Equivalent in general, should question your Sagacity in
knowing what to do with the Money when you have it.

To Answer therefore the Doubts of some, and prevent the Objections of others,
I shall enter a little briefly on an Enquiry into the manner of disposing the
Equivalent you are to have; or, in short, Enquire how you shall employ the
Money when it comes.

And in general, as to this Head, I think the nature of the Payment it self,
and the very words of the Treaty direct Us to the use to which this Money is to
be employed, viz. An Equivalent.

The Property here will have no alteration in its Denomination, it remains an
Equivalent to its last Circulation into the Chaos of the current Cash of
Britain; you receive it as an Equivalent, and you pay it as an Equivalent, it is
an Equivalent paid you for Money, which by your Customs and Excises will of
course be appropriated to the uses of another Nation after the Union, which
Nation therefore advances you the Sum in specie, that you may not be out of
Purse on their Account.

When you have it, you dispose of it.

1. As an Equivalent to the African-Company for the demise and dissolution of
their Society, there being Companies in England already embarked in those
Trades, and double Companies having proved incompatible, as in the two
East-India-Companies, who if they had remained ununited to this time, had been
both ruined: And the Members of this Company having by the Union full leave to
come in to the said English Company, as freely, and on the same Conditions as
Englishmen may, It is agreed the Scots Company shall cease, and for a
Satisfaction, the first part of the Equivalent is appropriated to be an
Equivalent for the said Company, by paying the Subscribers their Principal and
Interest, and so (...) ^ompany expiring, sets them down just where it took them
up, and I think they ought to esteem it a very happy Landing, and what without
the Assistance of England they could not have obtained by Trade in 20 Years.

2. Another Head for the disposing this Money, is as an Equivalent for the
Coin, which by the Treaty is to be reduced to the Standard of the English Money.

I shall say very little to a Gentleman's Paper, who is for having this
Equivalent made good before that to the African Company, as a thing of vast
Moment to the Nation.

If I understand the Dispute, one previous Question well discussed, will
effectually Answer all his Objections; and that is, Whether there is not enough
in the Equivalent, that England is to Pay, to Discharge both, and if that be
true, the mighty Dispute drops of course, and it is not one Farthing matter
which of these two go first.

I cannot but think the Gentleman that wrote that Sheet, went on a Calcul of
the Coin as false, as he has done of the Equivalent it self, where he mistakes
Ninety Thousand Pound atone Clap, and no wonder he is in such concern, since he
has lost such a Sum out of the whole, just at his first setting out, for he
says, it is 309885 l. 10 s. and the several Times, whereas if I think right,
it is just 398085 l. 10 sh.

I shall therefore attempt here two things, 1. Examine what the species of Coin
are that are to be reduced. And 2ly To make a probable conjecture at the
Deficiency.

For the species, I shall observe the words of the Treaty say, not the current
Money in Scotland, but the current Coin of Scotland, and this distinction will
immediately lead me to this Negative.

That you are not to imagine, as some have very grossly done, that the Foreign
Coins, which the Error of Custom, the Disaster of Trade, and the Searcity of
Bullion, have made current here at an extravagant rate, should be brought into
your Mint and be recoin'd; and the Owner of such Money be allowed the
difference from the Rate of their present Valuation to the Price of that new
Standard --, let no Men flatter themselves with such a Notion, if this were
true, it would not only expose Scotland to innumerable Incoveniencies, but
might indeed soon eat up the whole Equivalent; since as there must be a certain
stated time given for bringing in the Money into the Mint, all the Rix Dollars
in Europe might be brought into Scotland, the difference between their real and
imaginary Value, be paid in specie by the Public, and the Owner receive the
new Money for the Remainder, which difference would make it very well worth
while, to bring the Dollars from Abroad, and carry back the British Crowns in
their Room, or may lay out the Money in any part of Britain in Manufactures,
Corn or Lead, and carry them cheaper to Market than any Native of Britain can
do it, his Money costing him less than theirs does.

This was exactly the Case in England, when Guineas rose from 21 s. 6 d. each
to 30. The Merchants in Holland and Hamburgh immediately fall to buying of Gold,
and send it to England by all possible Conveyance, so much as by the very Post,
and such was the hurry, that had it held much longer, all the Gold in Europe
would have flowed into England.

The Consequence of this was, that the English Merchants were struck out of
their own Trade. A Dutch Merchant could buy Bays at Colchester, or Sarges at
Exeter, and send them to Spain, and sell 10 per Cent. cheaper than the English
Merchants that lived at the same Town: The Case was plain, the Gold which in
Holland stood them in 4 l. to 4 l. 7 s. 6 d. and though at last it rise up to 5
l. per Ounce, yet in England went for above 6 Pound, and so their Money cost
them 25 per Cent. less than the English Merchant could buy for.

From this Example I think it is evident, that the Foreign Coin has no concern
in this Reduction.

If it had been answered, that this then will be an immediate Loss to the
Nation, and to private Persons also: I Answer,

To the Nation it can be no Loss, because, when ever such Pieces came into
Scotland, the imaginary Value was an Addition to its real Value; and so raised
its Currency to the Credit of the general Stock: And when ever it goes away
again, the Difference is only an imaginary Diminution, and stands to the Debit
of the public Stock in the same manner; and the general Value of Scotland
receives no real Alteration.

Money is a real intrinsic Species appointed by Custom, as the Medium of Trade
to bring Commerce in all its particular States to a Balance -- So much as its
real Value amounts to, so much real Wealth is in that Nation, and this real
Value is every where the same; But its Received Value differs in the several
Nations, according to the particular Circumstances of those Nations, as to
Coin, Standards, Plenty or Scarcity of Money.

These Differences are again reconciled among Merchants, and all is brought to
PAR in their Negotiating, by adding or diminishing, as the imaginary
Differences in Value require between Nation and Nation, or Port and Port, and
this is called Exchange, a thing full of Nicety, and which I take to be the
best Accomplishment of a complete Merchant.

It Is true the Rates of Exchange differ, rise and fall, according to the
Quantities of Money that lie to Draw or to Remitt: But this is a thing that
depends so much on the Artifice of the Merchant or Exchanger, that it has
little regard to the real Differences of the Species; and therefore it is not
to my purpose.

2. The next Negative relates to the Coin of England, which is now current
here, such as Guineas of Gold and Silver Pieces, of the Crown, Half Crown,
Shilling and Sixpence; These I presume shall find no Alteration here, and being
the same to which the Coin of Britain is to be reduced, there can be no
melting them down, for that would be to do nothing at all, but melt the Half
Crown into Half a Crown, and a Shilling into a Shilling, and so on.

As to the Loss upon this Money, it is impossible to have it Rectified by any
Law, or any just Equivalent given for it; Since, should any time be given for
that, it would make a wild Trade to fetch a Million or two of it from England,
carry it into the Mint, demand 1 d. per Shilling, and immediately carry back
the very same Species again.

I confess I should have thought these Negatives of no Use, had I not seen
abundance of People weak enough to imagine they should receive Satisfaction
here from the Public for all the Deficiency of the imaginary Value of Foreign
Money.

I could spend some time to show Examples, but I think it needless; England
made three Essays about Money, and these are Examples enough; in two of them
they made no Equivalent for Loss, and in the third they did, and they exactly
hit the Case.

First, They reformed the Guineas, and gave no Equivalent for the Loss; they
sunk them from 30 to 22 shil. each at one Blow, and some rich Engrossers of
those pleasant Manufactories lost great Sums of Money by it. -- The Reason was
plain, it was a Distemper in Trade, and wanted a Cure, every Man had a Share in
the Benefit at first, and every Body ought to bear their Share of the Burden,
and take their Chance for their Particulars.

Another time, the Parliament finding Trade oppressed by a Flux of French
Pistoles, reduced them to 17 shil. each, and for this there was no Equivalent
offered, for the Evil was of the same Original.

And here by the way I must Note, That it was not a Mischief to England to have
a Flux of Gold, either Guineas or Pistoles; Nor can it be to Scotland, if SHE
had ten Millions of Dollars among her current Money; But the Evil is, these
several Coins going There or HERE at an Advance in Price, by which Your
Neighbors always have this Advantage, That They draw Your Goods away at the
Price of all that imaginary Value.

At last the Parliament of England fell to work with their own Coin, Reduced it
all to the Standard, and Recoin'd it; And then they allowed an Equivalent to
the Proprietor -- Because now they did not Reduce advanced Value, but took in
the very Species; At which time Clipping, Counterfeiting, and such like Abuses
had made it really Deficient in the Species: This the Government was obliged
to, and so in Scotland it will be of Course.

Now, the Gentleman that Quarrels at this, argues, this is a mighty Concern,
and is angry it is put off to the last, or Excrescence, as he calls it of the
Equivalent, since 'twill Undoubtedly be an Unknown and Insupportable Loss and
Hazard to the Nation.

Now, not to spend time to be merry upon the blunder of the Loss, being
insupportable first, and then unknown; I would be glad this insupportable
Burden might be examined, and I Will go the nearest way to it that I can.

It is plain none but the Coin is to be reduced, and when all the present Coin
is called in, I believe no Man will say it is likely it should amount to 100000
lib. Sterling in Silver.

Of this a great part is in the new Coin, 5 d. 10 d. 20 d. 40 d. Pieces, and of
these there can be no Loss, if the Gentlemen who have carried so great a
Quantity Abroad lately in specie should be pleased to carry away a few more,
there would be so few left as would effectually take off the Loss on that Head.

As to the old 14 sh. Pieces, and 7 d. and 3 d. and 3 d. Half Penny, the
Quantity is very small, and all the rest is Copper-Money, the deficiency of
which cannot be much. And upon the whole, if this Gentleman will please to
procure a Tack or Farm upon this Casuality, I shall at any time bring him
People, that giving unquestionable Security to the Government, shall undertake
all the Loss and Deficiency, and make it good to Scotland, the Coinage
excepted, on the whole Coin of Scotland for 30000 lib. Sterling.

If this be so then, the mighty weight of insupportable Loss is at an end.

I know it is inquired here, Whether on reducing the Coin to the Standard, the
Prices of Goods, Labor, etc. shall not fall in all places, and so Scotland
suffer a Loss here, which may be indeed insupportable, and though I know a long
Answer is expected to this, mine will be very short.

I Answer, This is no Loss at all, for this only Reason.

There is a sinking the imaginary Value indeed, but no sinking the real Value.

The Species is not debased, nor your Standard allayed, and therefore though your
Goods, Manufactories and Labor seem to sink, they really do not sink.

It Is true you shall buy as much for 12 d. then as you do for 13 d. now, but
that you buy for 12 d. now, shall sell for as much Abroad as that you bought
for 13 d. before, and you shall remit Home at the same Price too.

The Poor Man shall Labor as much now for 12 d. as he did before for 13 d. but
then his 12 d. shall now buy as much Provision for his Family as his 13 d.
would do before.

The Landlord shall receive but 12 d. for his Farm, that before paid him 13,
but he shall buy as many Horses or Houses, Lands or Goods for his 12 d. as he
could before for his 13 d. so that every way the Intrinsic remains the same,
and the Nation has no Loss.

In Foreign Exchanges it is the same, your Value is all over the World the
same, from England you shall draw without Gain, but then you remit without
Loss, and which way soever you turn as to Balance of Exchange, it is the same
thing, because the intrinsic Value of the species remains the same.

All the imaginary Inconveniences about the Coin, with respect to the time of
Coinage, may as effectually be Answered as this: And the Practice in England is
a Precedent to go by, if the Currency of the Mint be supported by a small Sum
of new Money before Hand, there can be no inconvenience of time or stop of
species, and therefore the sad Complaint the Author of that Sheet makes of
Foreign Bills being Protested, or Landlords ruining the poor Tennent for want
of species of current Money, is at an end.

Indeed if the old Money was to be called in before the new Money was to be
given out, there might be some stop, and for want of Money Trade might suffer
some Inconvenience, Bills be Protested, and the like.

But it is but keeping the old Money current till the gross of the new Money be
delivered out, it will circulate insensibly, and not the least sensible
hesitation be felt.

FINIS.

