HURLY-BURLY; OR, The FAIRY of the WELL.

ADVERTISEMENT.
HURLY-BURLY; or, The FAIRY of the WELL, being a novel species of
Entertainment, partaking as well of the Italian Comedy as the English
Pantomime, and much of the plot depending on dialogue, some of which might,
from a variety of circumstances at the representation, be lost to many of the
audience, it has been deemed advisable to print such parts of it as have an
immediate relation to the plot.

HURLY-BURLY; OR, The FAIRY of the WELL.
SCENE I. Magic Cavern, etc.
NORDIN the Magician and HARLEQUIN LACK. NORDIN speaks. NOR trembling limbs, my
son, nor sighs avail,
Be bold and vigilant when foes assail.
[Short symphony. These magic leaves a great event portend,
This is the crisis of thy fate -- attend! --
Another Harlequin from foreign shores,
Aloft in air now over our channel soars.
My spells shall make the solid rock give way,
And magic's mirror shall his fate display.
[A small change in the Scenery. Look on that picture! -- to thy wondering
sight,
It will present thy rival's airy flight."
[Thunder. Hark! -- the howling tempest brings
Death and terror on its wings,
Behold, my son, by whirlwinds tossed,
Thy rival cannot reach the coast,

AIR. -- NORDIN.
Flitting Daemon's of the air,
Strike his mind with black despair:
He sinks! -- but ah! again to rise,
For now, once more, he mounts the skies.
Wrapped in the gloomy clouds of night;
But mark that meteor flaming bright!
The work is done! -- Behold from far,
Fire bursting over the airy car!
The flaming ruin quick descends,
And to this isle its course it bends."
[Waves his wand. -- Speaks. Haste, Saddon, quickly seize, and hither bring
The wonder-working sword of Harlequin;
Fly, Saddon, fly -- I Will to my favorite son
Present the glorious prize, thus happ'ly won.
[Flourish. Enter Spirit, with magic sword. Spirit, it is well! -- Accept, my
son, this sword,
Torn from thy rival's side -- thou wilt find it stored
With many a powerful magic charm; and know
It Is the best gift a father can bestow."
[Flourish. But hark! -- I feel the potent fairy's spells!
I yield, thou great enchantress! -- Fate compels. --
Away, my son! may Fortune be thy friend,
And unabated mirth thy steps attend.
[Harlequin Lack trips off. -- Nordin sinks. Scene changes. Enter HARLEQUIN
CLACK, who speaks.

The Fairy rises from the Well to soft Music, and presents a large Crystal
Goblet of Water. FAIRY speaks. Be not dismayed! -- The Fairy of the Well
salutes thee! -- The water which I bring will not only be a present
gratification; for it contains a fortifying quality, and will be no small
assistance in counteracting or resisting the plans and intrigues of your motley
Rival.


HARLEQUIN. Rival! -- What do you mean? -- I thought I had been the only aerial
merry Andrew.


FAIRY. O, you are mistaken. -- But the Rival I mean is no Balloonist; but has
been bred chiefly under ground by a rival of mine, a great Magician.


HARLEQUIN. Oh, ho! I understand you. -- I find, then, we are to be, as the
Scotchman says in the play, Two to two. -- I doubt I shall make but a sorry
second; for, in my last flight, I lost a weapon, with which I could have done
wonders.


FAIRY. What, your magical weapon of wood! -- The Magician Nordin has stolen it
from your side, and presented it to his son, your rival, Mr. Orator Mum.


HARLEQUIN. Mr. Mum?


FAIRY. Yes. -- The tongue of this his favorite offspring is spell bound. -- No
one can free it but Hymen. -- In plain English, he will never be able to speak
till he is married.


HARLEQUIN. If he is wise he will remain dumb all his life. -- But, plague on him
-- tongue or no tongue -- he has my sword.


FAIRY. Fear not! -- We shall be too hard for Master Nimble-heels and his
grim-visag'd Papa. -- To his activity you must oppose your wit; and though he, by
a flourish of his sword, may be able to change places, persons, times, and
seasons, I have a wand here by no means its inferior, and, in the moment of
need, will be always at hand to relieve you.


HARLEQUIN. Always at hand! -- Why cannot you as well give it me, and let me
relieve myself?


FAIRY. It has no virtue in any hand but mine. -- But, in lieu of it, take this
ring. -- Whenever you touch it, you may appear to any beholder whatever, or
whomsoever you shall wish to be thought: nay, to different spectators at once,
as many different beings. -- By removing it from one finger to another, it
shall render your opponents deaf, dumb, or blind, as occasion shall require. --
It will also enable you to imitate any voice, as well as assume whatever
character you please.


HARLEQUIN. Assume whatever character I please! -- I am told London swarms with
people who can do that without a magic ring. -- One part of its virtue I can
easily conceive to be inestimable; for I am not to learn that great things may
be done there by having what they call the command of a few voices.


FAIRY. Yes, yes; -- You will not find liberty of speech the least of my favors.


HARLEQUIN. O! I know the first men in the kingdom are speech-makers, and
practice their trade not only all day, but sometimes all night too. But,
however fond I may be of the speaking Harlequins, my strong attachment is to my
brethren of the sword!


FAIRY. I perceive you have been in London before. -- Then you admire the
English?


HARLEQUIN. Admire them! -- Who does not? -- An Englishman takes to fighting as
a Newfoundland dog takes to the water. -- Your true British Harlequin leaps at
a breach made by a cannon ball as eagerly as a hunter leaps at a hedge. --
Liberty is his Colombine! the goddess of his idolatry! -- For her he dares the
most imminent danger; and Courage is the magic sword with which he is endowed
to conquer every difficulty. -- So, my dear, dear little Fairy, take the other
dip in the well, and follow me -- for, I say -- Hey, for London.

[Exeunt.
Here follows comic Business of the Pantomime. AIR. -- ANGELICA.
Though as a shield against surprise
The cautious tongue may silence prove,
Unable to assume disguise,
The eyes still tell the tale of love.
II.
In foreign climes th'untutor'd mind
The bars of speech may not remove;
But still the eyes a languish find,
In which they tell the tale of love.
CATCH.
Come, let us drink a health to poor old Sue,
Oh, may she live till she is three score and two;
Here Is too her daughter too,
Here Is too her daughter too;
She that was kissed by you know who --
Ah, Sir, 'twas you that kissed the daughter of Sue.
Fill to the brim, Sirs, you and you,
Faith 'twas not I that kissed, so don't look blue.
The Fairy appears in a Tree, and speaks Behold me here. -- Accompanied by some
of my invisible agents, you shall repair to the spot where you first saw me,
which may, perhaps, ere this, by the spells of the wicked Nordin, be rendered a
mere desert. You will, at worst, find some vestiges which may lead to the well
and its neighborhood; there I Will meet you. In the mean time, Mr. Dumb* and his
Intended will find work for their and your pursuers, who shall, for a time, be
as dumb as themselves. -- They approach -- begone.

[Exeunt. More comic Business of the Pantomime. FAIRY appears. As Harlequin
Clack and Angelica descend into the well, she speaks Ye plighted pair be happy.
-- Your faith and constancy deserve it. -- Now to my palace.

[She sees Harlequin Lack and Nannette. Oh! are you there? -- You are, as I
take it, the son of my mortal foe, but, I find, do not inherit his malignity.
-- Come, Nannette, repentance is next in rank to innocence. -- Descend with me,
and be happy.

[They descend into the well.
As Harlequin Lack descends, Nordin appears, and speaks My curses follow thee!
perverted boy! who, spite of admonition and entreaty, can prefer love to
duty, and pleasure to revenge. May thy joys be transient as my spells have been
feeble! May the speech you are about to acquire, be ever employed in reproaches
and revilings; and trebly unpropitious be those revels, which I must neither
partake of nor behold.

LAST CHORUS.
The Fairy invites you, and Mirth's chosen band,
Attend in her palace to welcome each guest;
With Hymen uniting to join hand in hand:
Each pair fondly suing to bless and be blessed.
DANCE. FINIS.

