FONTAINBLEAU; OR, OUR WAY IN FRANCE.

A COMIC OPERA, IN THREE ACTS. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATRES-ROYAL IN
COVENT GARDEN AND SMOCK-ALLEY, WRITTEN BY J. O'KEEFE, ESQUIRE. THE MUSIC SELECTED
AND COMPOSED BY WILLIAM SHIELD.

DUBLIN: Printed for W. WILSON, No. 6, Dame-street*

M, DCC, LXXXV.

TABLE OF THE SONGS.
ACT I.
AIR. I. A Londre, I vas tailor nice, Page. 11 AIR. II. My morning of life, ah,
how tranquil, how bright, Page. 13 AIR. III. The British Lion is my sign, Page.
15 AIR. IV. Oh lingering time, why with us stay, Page. 19 AIR. V. Flowers their
beauties all surrender, Page. 21 AIR. VI. Indeed I Will do the best I can, Page.
22 AIR. VII. The night when passed in golden skies, Page. 24 AIR. VIII. Brooks
to your sources ah swiftly return, Page. 25
ACT II.
AIR. IX. In London my life is a ring of delight, Page. 31 AIR. X. Search all
the wide creation round, Page. 32 AIR. XI. Love does so run in my head, Page.
35 AIR. XII. Through circling swetts I freely rove, Page. 36 AIR. XIII. No
burry I Am in to be married, Page. 37 AIR. XIV. I Am here in France, the more
fool I, Page. 40 AIR. XV. The morning we are married, how funny and jolly, Page.
46
ACT III.
AIR. XVI. Kilkenny is a handsome place, Page. 49 AIR. XVII. Tol lol, de roll,
lol, my Tolly, my Toll, Page. 60 AIR. XVIII. 'Twas you, sir, 'twas you, sir,
Page. 63 AIR. XIX. When dressed in all my finest things, Page. 64 AIR. XX. How
can man such pleasure find, Page. 67 AIR. XXI. Let fame sound the trumpet, and
cry "to the war," Page. 68 AIR. XXII. How sweet, how kind the joyful hours,
Page. 71 AIR. XXIII. Let fashion with her glittering train, Page. 74
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
London. Dublin. Lord Winlove, Mr. Davies, Mr. Waterhouse. Sir John Bull, Mr
Wilson, Mr Moss. Colond Epaulette, Mr. Wewitzer, Signora Sestini. Sir Shenkin
ap Griffin, Mr. Edwin, Mr. O'Reilly. Henry, Mr. Johnstone, Mr Wood. Lackland,
Mr. Lewis, Mr Daly. Lapoche, Mr. Quick, Mr. Ryder. French Inn keepor, Mr.
Gaudrey, Mr Baker. Fobin, Mr. Darley, Mr. Murphy. Jackey, Mr. Kennedy, Mr
Lynch. Fastboy, Mr. Jones, Mr. Barrett. Fust Waiter, Mr. Helm, Mr. Smith.
Second Waiter, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Malone. Lady Bull, Mrs. Webb, Mrs. Hannam
Rosa, Mrs. Bannister, Mrs. Billington. Celia, Miss Wheeler, Miss Romanzini.
Miss Bull, Mrs. T. Kennedy, Miss Hitchcock. Mrs. Casey, Mrs. Kennedy, Mrs.
Sparks. Nannete, Mrs. Martyr, Mrs. Hitchcock.

Servants, Porters, etc.

SCENE, Fontainbleau.

FONTAINBLEAU; OR, OUR WAY IN FRANCE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Street.
Two Hotels. -- The Sign of the Red Lion on one Side of the Stage, underneath
the Name "HOTEL CASEY." -- On the other Side the Fleur de Luce, "HOTEL GARNI."
-- (Ringing of Bells.) Enter Mrs. Casey and 1st Waiter. Mrs. Casey. KEEP a
sharp look out, Bob. The company tumble in upon us like smoke.


Exit Waiter. Lackland (within) You rascal, I Will kick you down stairs. How dare
you behave so to a gentleman?


Casey. Heighday! what is the matter?


2d Waiter entering. Oh, it is very well, sir, it is very well.


Casey. What Is the matter now?


2d waiter. Only Mr. Lackland, madam. You know you ordered me to keep the Globe
for the large company. There he takes possession of it; and though I told him
it was bespoke, he would dine no where else; ordered a bottle of Champagne, and
because I did not fly with it, kicked me down stairs, though I cried, coming
up, sir!


Casey. Champagne without a louis in his pocket! the fellow has not a second
coat to his back, and yet he is as proud as a Galway merchant. But I shall
desire he will quit my house.


2d Waiter. You desire! Ecod, madam, he says he will make you bounce.


Casey. Make me bounce! he would not find that so easy. Because I Am a lone
woman, he thinks to impose upon me. A pretty fellow indeed! Make me bounce,
will he!


Lackland. (within) Where the devil are you all?


Casey. Don't you hear?

(Waiter going)
Lackland (within.) Where Is that infernal --


2d Waiter (stepping short.) Infernal! Oh, madam, It Is you he is calling.


Enter Mr. Lackland. Lack. Where the devil are you all? Where are those
impudent waiter? Mrs. Casey, it is my desire --


Casey Your desire!

(taking snuff)
Lack. Yes, my desire.


Casey A spunging fellow, giving himself airs. My waiters have enough to do, if
they mind those who pay for what they call for.

(He takes snuff from her in a pet.)
Lack. And even your snuff too -- is execrable.


Casey Lookee, Mr. Lackland, every body knows that you're a gentleman -- and
that you have a good estate, only it is all gone; -- and we all know too, that
you're a six bottle man, and a choice companion. Now, during the races, I Will
give you a seat at the table d'Hote, and put money in your pocket to pay your
reckoning, if you will only entertain the company with a funny song and a comical
story. Oh! a good song at the end of a bottle is an excellent thing, and of
great service to a house.


Lack. Live by entertaining company! Mrs. Casey, you're a widow; why don't you
marry? You Would oblige me exceedingly if you would marry again.


Casey. Marry again! for what? -- Why do you wish me married again?


Lack. That I might have the superlative felicity of taking your husband by the
nose.

(turns up.)
Casey. Oh! I wish I had a husband for your sake. I wish I had a husband.


Enter 1st Waiter. Waiter. There Is a Paris chaise just stopped, and the lilly
of France is after them already.


Casey. The devil take that lilly! He Would grasp every thing if he could. -- Who
is there in it?


Waiter. An English family.


Casey. An English family! Do you run and endeavor to bring them here, while I
go and prepare for their reception. (Exit Waiter.) Oh, my lad, I wish I had a
husband.

To Lackland, then exit.
Enter Henry and Postboy. Postboy. Ah monsieur, too petite lousone.


Henry. Never satisfied.


Postboy. Seven posts, de post royal from Paris to Fontainbleau.


Henry. There; seven you say. Now I hope you're satisfied.


Postboy. Ay, dis bon.

Exit Postboy.
Henry. But if we approach the mansion of the grand monarch, we must pay for it.


Lack. By heaven, my college chum, Harry Seymour!


Henry. Pray, friend, can you tell me -- Eh! why -- I heard something of this
before. Can you be Charles Lackland?


Lack. How do you do, Harry?


Henry. Why sure my eyes deceive me! Why you look --


Lack Never mind the outside. In snow or sunshine I Have always a warm heart to
an old friend and a new bottle.


Henry. I Have passed so many happy days with you that I seel for you.
exceedingly. But what is the cause of all this?


Lack Pho! pho! never mind.


Henry. What all gone, Charles?


Lack. All, all, Harry.


Henry. What, at play?


Lack. Ay, play and pleasure -- and wine and women -- and -- But you're come to
sport here at the races, flush, flush, eh!

(tapping his thigh.)
Henry. Why, as to cash, my affairs are little better than your own.


Lack. (aside) Damned unlucky that for both of us.


Henry. No. You see me here an exile forced to fly from my native country. You
remember my sister Rosa --


Lack. What, my little, mad Rosa, that used to steal our fish, and throw the
cards into the fire? Either I dream, or there was a match talked of between her
and lord Winlove.


Henry. There was; but guidde by the weakness of her sex, and the arts of ours,
he prevailed on her to set out for this country. I overtook them at Rochester,
and demanded (perhaps too rashly) reparation of my sister's honor by an
immediate marriage. He refused. Pistols were the umpire. He lost his life; and
the coroner's verdict has made mine doubtful if sound in England.


Lack. Bravo! shot a lord! I wlng'd a marquis the day before yesterday.


Henry. In this dilemma I was forced to assume the habit of a woman to escape
from my native country.


Lack. Where Is Rosa now?


Henry. I brought her to France, and left her at the convent at Villeneuve. But
to say the truth, I Am here at Fontainbleau in quest of a lady I fell in love
with at the Sunday opera at Paris. She would not tell me her name, but talked
something of her brother having horses to run here, whither she was coming.


Lapoche (without). Whether is monsieur Lackland? -- I must and I will see him.

Lack. Oh, this damned French tailor! Now shall I be dunn'd and pestered.


Enter Lapoche. Lapoche. Ah, monsieur Lackland, I am glad I have found you. I
say I will not trust any longer, for dey mon --


Lack. I say (stopping his mouth) Lapoche, do you see that English officer?
He Is full of cash; and I Will recommend him to lodge with you.


Lap. English officer! Oh, de bon new customer.


Lack. Captain! that little, ugly, ill-looking fellow.


Aside to Henry. Lap. Ver much oblige to you --

bowing.
Lap. If you want a tailor and a lodging, here is your man, and there is his
house.


Lap. Tank a you, monsieur Lackland.


Lack. You Will find it convenient, as you're short of cash.


Lap. Ver obliging.


Lack. Because when he asks for his money, you may kick him down stairs.


Lap. Ver much oblige to you indeed.


Lack. 'Twas my way.


Lap. Vastly kind indeed.


Lack. We were very good friends. Lapoche. I was a good customer.


Lap. Oui, monsieur, it does a tradesman's heart good to see a you -- out of
his house

(aside).
Lack. What was it I gave you a week? Eight livres was not it?


Lap. Oui, monsieur, you did inteed -- promise me eight livres.


Lack. Eh! Faith, I see some ladies. I must attend where beauty calls;
afterward I am yours from a beef-steak to a bottle of Burgundy. You must
excuse me, Harry, the ladies -- you know I was always a Philander among the
ladies.


Lap. Oui, you was always great gander indeed.


Henry. So you speak English; you have been in London?


Lap. Yes, I was ver great man in Londre, but now I am anoter man.


Henry. Another man!


Lap. England is de grand field of battle for the soldier of fortune. I vas de
taileur, de cook, de jugler, take off a de shirt, de maitre d'hotel, de
tooth-drawer vid a touch; but at last my lor forget to pay a me, so den I did
imitate my lor, and when I could no longer fight a my way --


Henry. What then?


Lap. Why den, I run away.


Henry. So you have a character for every country. And pray what are you here?


Lap. My true character, a tailleur.


Henry. A tailor!


Lap. Oui, monsieur, at your service.


AIR I.
A Londre, I vas tailor nice,
And work for lor so gay,
He never beat me down my price,
But den he never pay;
From lor I could no money get,
My draper would not stay;
So, like my lor, I run in debt,
And den I run away.
Vid trick on card, I please my lor,
He wonder how I do it,
And ladies, all, my skill adore,
Ven cock in glass I shoot.
De British guinea I command
My pocket to recruit,
I shirt it off by sleight of hand,
Shirt off by sleight of foot.
Now here en France, I have no dread
For lor to move my shear,
For here in France, dey cannot plead
De privilege of peer.
Monsieur, if you employ a me,
And pretty coat vou'd vear,
Your little tailleur here I be,
Tres humble serviteur.
To touch the little ready pelf
I sell the cordial drop,
But none would drink except myself,
So I shut up my shop.
Of chimney-sweep the tooth so white,
In noble mouth I pop,
My lor he grin, and den he bite,
Bon jour, and off he hop.
Henry. A tailor, and come to sport your louis upon the jockies of France?


Lap. No, I am come here to sport de jacket upon de jockey; de blue, de red, de
green, de orange de emperor's eye, upon the jockey of France. Who give de grand
brilliance to de race but de tailleur? Dey may talk of de boot and de spur; but
de beauty of de race is oblige to de shear and de timble.


Henry. This unfortunate duel! to be forced to live here, an exile from my
native England -- I wish, like my unhappy sister, I could find a comforter in
oblivion.


AIR II.
My morning of life, ah, how tranquil, how bright!
No care found a place in my breast;
My noon now is evening, and soon must be night;
A night without comfort or rest.
The floods bow resplendent with clear azure skies!
Though tempting, -- too late, to his cost,
Beneath, for his heaven, who wantonly tries,
In streams of false pleasure is lost.
Henry. Pray which is the hotel?


Lap. Hotel! Why, von't you lodge at my house -- de bon apartment?


Henry. Why, faith, at this time, as I wish to be as private as possible, I
think that will be the best way.


Lap. Von't you look at my logement?


Henry. With all my heart.


Lap. Dis way if you please. But I will not let him see my new lodger, my little
Rosa, because I mean to have her myself. Nannette, show a de apartment to the
gentleman.


Exeunt. Sir John (without) Why how far farther do you mean to jolt us over
these damned stones?


Enter 1st Waiter and Mrs. Casey. 1st Waiter. This way, your honor. -- Madam,
here is Sir John Bull, my Lady Bull, and the whole family.


Casey. Ay, this is the truth of an English family.!


Enter Sir John and Lady Bull, sherved in by the master of the Lilly, with
porters, etc. French Innkeeper. Welcome from Paris!


Sir John. Welcome from Paris! -- Why how sat farther are you taking us over
this damned pavement?


Lady Bull. Fie, Sir John, consider where you are. When gentlemen come to
France, they always leave their damme's at Dover.


Sir John. I wish I had left you or myself there, damme. -- Who the devil are
there?


Lady Bull. Why don't you see the gentlemen are porters.


Sir John. Porters! pickpockets. Paid by the ounce. Why, one of our Thames
street porters would carry ten times as much; and here is a proof of it. What,
Robin, you have got my trunk I see.


Enter Coachman, with a large trunk. Coachman. Yes, your honor, four
mounsheers had it, but they dropped it in the dirt.


Lady Bull. Robin, when you have carried it in, you must find out colonel
Epaulette. Give our compliments, tell him we are come, and desire to know how
he does.


Sir John. Yes, and if Sir Shenkin ap Griffin is at his house, tell him too
that we are come, and that Doll is impatient to see him.


Lady Bull. Dolly! why Dolly Bull!


Enter Dolly Bull. Dolly Here, mamma. -- Pray, mamma, which is the inn?


Lady Bull. Inn! hotel, miss, if you please.


Dolly. Miss! mam'selle if you please.


Sir John. Well said, Doll; there is French upon French for you.


Lady Bull. Pray, monsieur, will you do us the favor to show us to the hotel?


To the master of the Lilly. Sir John. Favor to show us to the hotel! How
polite we are, and to a waiter, only because he is French! -- Ay, come show the
larder, for I Am devilish hungry.


Master. Dis vay, if you please, mademoiselle. I keep a de lilly of France,
where you may have de ragout, de fricassee, de Vermicelli soup, de salad.


Casey. (very loud) Waiter, carry the roast beef up to the Lion.


Sir John. (turning quick about) Ay, and carry me up to the Lion too!


Casey. Oh, to be sure, your honor.


Sir John. So this is your house, eh! And you are English?


Casey. English! that is what I am. I was born in Dublin.


Sir John. And pray what is your name?


Casey. Casey, at your service; and I keep the Lion of England here.


AIR III.
The British Lion is my sign;
A roaring trade I drive on;
Right English usage, -- neat French wine
A landlady may thrive on.
At table d'hote, to eat and drink,
Let French and English mingle,
And while to me they bring the chink,
Faith, let the glasses jingle;
Your rhino rattle, come
Men and cattle, come
All to Mrs. Casey,
Of trouble and money,
My jewel, my honey,
I warrant I Will make you easy,
II.
When dressed and seated in my bar,
Let squire, or beau, or belle come,
Let captains kiss me, if they dare,
It Is, Sir, you're kindly welcome!
On Shuffle, Cog, and Slip, I wink,
Let rooks and pigeons mingle,
And if to me they bring the chink,
Faith, let the glasses jingle.
Rhino rattle, come, etc,
III.
Let love fly here, on silken wings,
His tricks I still connive at;
The lover who would say soft things,
Shall have a room in private.
On pleasure I am pleased to wink,
So lips in kisses mingle,
For while to me they bring the chink,
Faith, let the glasses jingle.
Your rhino rattle, come
Men and cattle, come
All to Mrs. Casey;
Of trouble and money,
My jewel, my honey,
I warrant I Will make you easy.
Sir John. Bravo! Mrs. Casey. Introduce us to your roast beef. Come along.


Exeunt all but Sir John, who drives the French porters before him, then comes
forward on seeing Lackland] Enter Lackland. Lack. Sir John Bull's family. I
hear they are from the city. Voulez vous parlez?


Sir John. Don't parley me. I Am an Englishman.


Lack. I see you are, by that honest face.


Sir John. Honest face! Well, and what have you got to say to my honest sace,
eh?


Lack. The devil take me if I have any thing to say, but how do you do?


Sir John. Pretty well, I thank you, how do you?


(looks suspiciously at him.) Lack. Well, and pray how do all our friends in
Throgmorton-street?


Sir John. Throgmorton-street!


Lack. Sir, I am happy to see you. My heart warms at the sight of an
Englishman, and I Am always happy to do them any service. I am English, sir, but
a little unfortunate, or so.


Sir John. What, you're poor, eh! Yes, faith, you're a little seedy. Have you
no estate?


Lack. I have bad.


Sir John. And what have you done with it?


Lack. Turned it into money.


Sir John. Well, and pray what have you done with that?


Lack. Laid it out to advantage, bought experience.


Sir John. Bought experience! Why then by this time you're a damned witty
fellow.


Lack. Yes, fir, I know the world. I have had mansions, arables, freeholds,
leaseholds, slewards, wastes, leases, releases, pastures, quarter-days, and
such damned encumbrances.


Sir John. And so you have got rid of 'em all. It Is all gone, eh?


Lack. Every acre.


Sir John. Why you're a devilish clever sellow. And why did not you get your
teeth drawn at the same time?


Lack. Very smart and clever.


Sir John. Because by this time I suppose you have no use for them.


Lack. Damned ignorant old dog! (aside) But, sir, you're just come to France,
that is, you're a stranger here. Sir, my heart warms at the sight of my
countryman; and it is my greatest pride and pleasure to warn honesty of the
deceits practiced here. Some of our own countrymen appear very serviceable and
obliging; but their assiduity always ends in borrowing money.


Sir John. Sir. I Am very much obliged to you. -- Sir, will you eat a bit of
mutton with us?


Lack. Whith all my heart; but, sir, as there are ladies, this coat is not
quite the thing to appear before the ladies in. There, do you see that taylor's
over tae way? I have a devilish good suit lies there for a trifle. Will you be
so obliging as to lend me a guirea, just that I may appear like a gentleman?


Sir John. A guinea! suit! eh! -- Oh! what till the arables coat back?
(lawghing). Disstress to be sure in a strong coutry is very hard. What Is your
name?


Lick. Lackland, at your service, sir.


Sir John. Well, Mr. Lackland, there is a guinea for you.


Lack. (puts it into his pocket) I fancy, Sir John, I may pats very well in
these clothes, eh!


Sir John. Pass! Oh, yes, you may -- for a shoplister

(a fide).
Lack. Sir John, if you will give me leave, I Will treat you with a flask of most
excellent Champagne. -- Walter, a bottle of Champagne.


Sir John. Here Is a rascal! Treat me to Champagne! my own money too -- and I
doubt if the rascal has got a shirt to his ruffles.


Lack I say, my old friend (putting his hand on his shoulder above all beware
of strangers -- be sure you mind my advice -- they are cursed assiduous, though
it always ends in borrowing money, and laughing at you afterward -- Ha! ha! ha!


Sir John. Ha! ha! ha! And laughing at me afterward. That Is a good joke -- ha!
ha! ha! -- damned impudent fellow!


Lack Now you know their ways, be sure you keep a tight hand upon your cash.
Ha! ha! ha!


Sir John. I shall, depend on it; especially if they mention Throgmorton-street.


Lack. True, true, ha! ha! -- I Am thinking, ha! ha! -- how surprised you will be
when I pay you this guinea tomorrow.


Sir John. Yes, I shall be surprised indeed.


Lack. You see, ha! ha! l've fold all my arables, and have bought experience
wholesale.


Sir John. Yes; and now you retail it out at a guinea a dose, ha! ha! ha!


Lack. Ha! ha! Bless that jolly face! -- How a laugh becomes you! ha! ha!
(taking hold of it.) I shall for ever acknowledge myself your debtor.


Sir John. I date say you ever will, ha! ha!


Lack. Here, waiter, show a room. A bottle of Champagne, and change for a
guinea.


Exit laughirg, and taking bold of Sir John's arm. SCENE A room at Lapoche's.
Enter Rosa, reading. Can thou forget what tears that moment fell, When warm
in youth, I bade the world farewell? As with cold lips I kissed the sacred veil,
The shrines all trembled, and the lamps grew pale. Poor Eloisa in her cloister
spoke my sense. I begin to repent my elopement. My lady abbess has ere this
discovered it. I wonder if lord Winlove has received my letter. I hope it did
not miss him. I wish he was come.

AIR IV.
Oh, lingering time, why with us stay
When absent love we mourn!
And why so nimbly glide away
At our true love's return!
Ab, gentle time, the youth attend,
Whose absence here I mourn;
The cheerful hours in pity send
That bring my love's return.
I feel my heart with rapture beat;
No longer shall I mourn;
My lover soon with smiles I Will meet,
And hail bis dear return.
Hey! sure my lord Winlove himself!

Enter Lord Winlove. Lord Winlove. My charming Rosa!

(embracing her.)
Rosa My lord!


Lord W. But, my dear Rosa, how could you come to such a public place as
Fontainbleau; and at such a time, when there are so many English families?
Fifty people may know us.


Rosa. If I had remained in the village, the lady abbess would have discovered
me.


Lord W. Your letter says you escaped from the convent in boy's clothes.


Rosa. Yes, and I was obliged to change them before I reached Fontainbleau, to
elude all search from Vi^leneuve.


Lord W. And how unlucky to get into the house of Lapoche! such a busy, talking
tailor!


Rosa I did not know what lodging to get. 'T was better I thought, than being
at a hotel. I with I was any where else.


Lord W. Don't sigh, my Rosa; for though I was not to be threatened into a
marriage by the young Chamont your brother, when he overtook us at rochester;
yet I shall with pride acknowledge you Lady Winlove on my return to England.


AIR V.
Flowers their beauties all surrender,
When the sun withdraws his ray;
Now they shine in borrowed splendour,
Painted by the beam of day.
With each good fair Eden planted,
Every sweet that sense could move;
Passion sighs though all is granted,
No enjoyment without love.
Dearest maid, thy smiles beslowing,
Bright and gay my hours shall be;
By this heart with rapture glowing,
Thou art light and love to me!
The story of your brother's killing me is every where believed; therefore I
mean to leave Fontainbleau, and by a cross route reach Paris.

Rosa. Oh, my lord, I shall never forgive myself for this wicked, impious step.


Lord W. The impiety was mine, my Rosa, to rob heaven of an angel.


Enter Nannette. Nannette. Oh, madam, my master has brought in a new lodger, a
young officer, and our countryman. -- Oh, dear! I did not know this gentleman
was here.


Lord W. An English officer! I Will instantly order a postchaise, for your
removal from this group of jockies, grooms, peets and pickpockets.


Exit Lord W. Nan. (opening the folding doors) Madam, look here, come and have
one.

Kisses her hand to be heard.)
Rosa. Oh fie, Nannette. When that gentleman returns, vou'll call me to him.


Exit Rosa. Nan. Lord! how nice we are! I Have a great mind to win the gloves
myself (going.) Lord! he wakes!


Henry (coming forward.) This traveling by night is very fatiguing. I thought
to have slept in the chaise, but was disappointed by the jolting on the road.


Nan. Did you call, sir?


Henry. Ay. Who are you, my pretty lass?


Nan. My name is Nancy, sir; but my master will call! me Nannette after the
French fashion.


Henry. Oh then, you're fille de chamber to the master of this lodging?


Nan. At your service, sir.


AIR VI.
Indeed I Will do the best I can
To please so kind a gentleman:
To lodge with us, and you shall see
How careful poor Nannette will be;
So nice, so neat, so clean your room,
With bow pots for the sweet perfume:
A'n't please you, sir,
When you get up,
Your coffee brown
Inchina cup,
Dinner, dessert,
And bon souper:
Sur mon honneur, at night you be
With waxen taper lit to bed
By poor Nannette your chambermaid.
Enter Lapoche. Lap. (during the song.) Here Is fine doings in my house! -- Oh,
fie, Nannette, why do you come here singing? Oh, you jade, I Will -- Hope you had
a good fleep, sir. -- Get out! Vat do you come here for? -- I Will knock a his
head -- Hope you refresh ver much after your sleep, sir -- Get out -- go
yonder, dat vay -- I hope you like your lodging -- Get out, Nannette -- (he
pushes her off.) -- Curse a dese red officier; de girls so fond -- you will find
a my house ver convenient. You may have a de von, two course -- de petite
chanson; invite whom you please, your countrymen eat, drink, sing, roar, be so
jolly, swear and knock a your fists against von another's head, a la mode de
Londree.


Enter Nannette. Nan. Sir, monsieur.


Lap. Nannette, vhy do you come dis vay, peeping at de man in de red coat? Get
out

(pusbes her).
Lap. Get a you gone, you jade -- I know ver well vat you want. You come
peeping at de officier. Vhy you come peeping at de men?


Nan. Lord, sir, I had a message. Sir Shenkin ap Griffin has sent for the new
jackets for the jockies; and Colonel Epaulette has sent to know if the English
liveries are made.


Lap. Dese are my grand customer (to Henry). Vill you get out of de vay? (to
Nannette). Sir Shenkin is ver great man. I make a de jacket for de race. -- Get
a you first, Nannette -- Dis vay if you please.


Exeunt. SCENE, another room at Lapoche's.
Enter Rosa. Rosa. I wonder what should keep lord Winlove so long. I Am
surprised he does not return. Should he and my brother meet -- this suspense is
tormenting. Would we were on the road! Yet why do I wish to see England, when
those whom most I love are in this kingdom!


AIR VII.
The night when passed in golden skies,
If whitened cliffs the sailor spies
The sailor spies, completely blessed;
The sight each tender though inspires,
His love's on sbore, and fancy fires,
And fancy fires his faithful breast.
The dancing waves salute his oar,
He pulls, and sings, my love's on shore,
He waves his hat, and cries adieu,
Farewell, good ship and loving crew,
Farewell, good ship, for love I steer,
And as around he turns his face,
To view the happy, well known place,
The happy place that holds his dear,
He pulls and sings, my love's on sbore.
Nannette and Henry. (within) The lady desires not to be seen by any body.


Henry. I will come in. The boy said the lady was impatient to see me.


Enter Henry. Rosa. What do I see? -- My brother!


Rosa. My sister Rosa!


Rosa. My dear brother, though appearances are against me, yet when you're
acquainted with the circumstances, you will forego your resentment.


Henry. Why did you quit the convent where I placed you, that you might find an
asylum for your shame?


Rosa. My dear brother, if you knew some particulars, that prudence sorbids me
to mention --


Henry. Talk not of prudence. Are you not lost to every sense of virtue? And
have you not involved me in a misfortune, that will for ever disturb my peace?


Rosa. (aside) He don't know that my lord is alive; and I dare not inform him,
lest his ill-placed passion should relapse.


Henry. I Will lodge you safe at Villeneuve once more. And yet, as my charmer
said she was coming to the races, if I quit them without finding her, I may
never see her again. But my sister must go to the abbess, and I shall desire
her to strengthen your spiritual claims -- and yet love so sympathizes in my
own breast, that I Will chide no more.


AIR VIII.
Brooks, to your sources ah swiftly return,
Tear drop on tear, and give life to the urn;
Truth and virtue pass away,
Ere I for another my true love betray.
ACT II.
SCENE I. View of Fontainbleau Race Course.
Enter Sir Shenkin ap Griffin and Jockey, several other Stablemen, with cloths,
bottles, rubbing sticks, etc. Sir Shenkin. YOU are a pig plockead. You have
done very pad inteed.


Dick. I won the race; what would you have me do more?


Sir Shenkin. Won the race! You should have tistanced his Plack Prince with my
Merlin.


Dick. Why, if I had pushed so hard, I should have lost the first heat, when I
was so cock-sure of winning.


Sir Shenkin. Cock-sure! Dick, don't tell me of your Yorkshire tricks.


Dick. Why then I say it was quite the policy of the thing.


Sir Shenkin. Policy! follies! His Joan of Arc is to run against my Winney, and
if you had tistanced, I should have had all the long odds in favor of my own
horse.


Dick. I did the best I could: I won the race; and if you arn't satisfied, you
may ride the match yourself tomorrow.


Exit. Sir Shenkin. Tid your pest! Get out, you impertinent -- goot jockies
should know how to tistance, to win, or to lose. Ay goot jockies should know
how to lose as well as to win. -- My Merlin is full brother to Winney; and if
he had tistanced today, I should have taken in the whole field tomorrow, man,
woman and child. -- Oh, here comes Mr. Lackland, the shentleman ragamuflin.


Enter Lackland. Lack. Ay, give you joy, my boy Shenkin

(pats his shoulder).
Sir Shenkin. Shoy is a fery pretty thing, Mr. Lackland, pecause it kives
pleasures; put your kiving me shoy py the name of poy, does not kif me
pleasures: for look you, Mr. Lackland, I am a man and a shentleman; my name is
Shenkin ap Griffin, Paronet; and I am of as high a tescent --


Lack. As ever came from the mountains. Ay, come, Sir Shenkin, you and I are
both of us very good blood.


Sir Shenkin. I know you are tescended from Welsh extraction py the mother's
side; put my family, look you, is as creat and as ancient, look you, as any in
the county of Flint.


Lack. Come, Mr. Welchman, don't strike your flint against me: if you do, I
shall take fire.


Sir Shenkin. Yes, I think you would take fire inteed, for your coat is tinder.
Ha! ha!


Lack. Come, come, though you won the race, don't ride the high horse with me,
but start some other subject for your jokes.


Sir Shenkin. Why yes, as you say, it is rather a threadbare subject.


Lack. Well, sir, I wish you would have done with your jokes; if not, I --

(pulling his hand to his sword.)
Sir Shenkin. Pless my soul! I to always put myself into a goot humor with my
jokes. Put come, kif me your hard. If I tid laugh at your coat, I will get you
a petter. Ha! ha! ha! -- Look you yonder, my eye is your wardrobe. I have a
coat in my eye for you.


Lack. Who is that?


Sir Shenkin. Colonel Epaulette.


Colonel (without, singing.) Rule Britannia, Britannia rule the waves, etc.


Lack. Oh! it is the English Frenchman, that I have heard so much of.


Sir Shenkin. Ay, there he koes as merry after his teseat, as if he was dancing
to parson Morgan's fittle.


Lack. They say he has a most benevolent nature, that he is very sond of the
English, and wishes to learn all out customs and manners, and style of doing
things.


Sir Shenkin. Yes, and he loses his money, and is as happy as if he won. I am
his preceptor, and to teach him all polite accomplishments, the English customs
and language.


Lack. You teach -- I suppose then by this time he can smoke, swear, and play
at cricket.


Sir Shenkin. Perhaps he may; and he has twenty thousand a year pesides.


Lack. Introduce me to him. I like a man that has twenty thousand a year.


Sir Shenkin. Ay, he is your mark. Ha! ha! ha! He Is in spirits, and thinks
himself very clever if he interlards his confersation with a dozen tamme's.


Enter Colonel Epaulette, singing. Of a noble race was Sir Shenkin
In de land of Mr. Tudor.
Your servant, Sir Shenkin, your servant. Your Merlin did peat my Plack Prince
for five tousand, so dear they are, damme -- one tousand bank of Paris, two
tousand bank of England, one Drummond, and one Child.

Lack. Sir Shenkin, as I Have none of my own, if you please I Will adopt that child.


Sir Shenkin. A very good joke! Ha! ha! ha! Sir, with your leave and your
likings, this is Mr. Thingemmy -- Mr. Thingemmy, this is Colonel
what-d'ye-call'em, and now you know one another.


Lack. Colonel What-d'ye-call'em, your most obedient.


Colonel. Mr. Thingemmy, your servant.


Sir Shenkin. Colonel, this is your preceptor, to fight your duels, or carry on
intrigue.


Colonel. Sir, ven my king does not command me to be your enemy, I shall be
very happy to be friends with your English nation.


Sir Shenkin. That Is right; he is a tutor for you. He Is a man of wit I assure
you. Faith! he lives by his wits (aside). He has slats and sharps for the
shentlemen, and smiles for the ladies.


Lack. No, no, sir; you see what I am, an ordinary fellow. To be sure, now and
then I do come out with a little sally.


Colonel. Sir, I shall be ver proud to be introduced to your little Sally.


Lack. Sir, your most obedient, with pleasure. To be sure, now and then the
ladies do squint at me a little. Just now, as I passed along what-dy'e-call them
street, there were five or six peeping out at the windows. There he is, says
one. Ay, that is him, says another. Oh! it is the English ambassador, says the
third. No, no, says a sourth, it is the Emperor incog. That it is, says another.
So they all agree, nem. con. that I Am the Emperor incog.


Sir Shenkin. Mr. Emperor, I will help you to a coat to carry on the war. I
will new robe your imperial majesty. (aside to Lackland.) -- I say, Colonel,
get rid of yoar tinsel, and ket a coat more in out style, ha, Lackland!


Lack. (adjusting his coat.) I own I was always partial to the New Market style.


Colonel. I think his coat is in the old-market style.


Lack. Why it is rather -- Upon my soul, you have a devilish deal of wit. Ha! ha!
ha!


(Sir Shenkin whispers the Colonel) Colonel. Sir, you do me great honor. Will
you eat a bit of dinner with me?


Lack. Sir, I Will breakfast, dine and sup with you. Sir, I Will stay a month in
your house.


Sir Shenkin. Yes, and you will find it tamn'd hard to ket him out of your house.


Colonel. Indeed! Sir, you are de most hospitable fellow.


Lack. Is that your suler Celia? I had not seen her some time. She Is a charming
girl.


Sir Shenkin. Yes, she was a fine girl, but her Paris education has spoiled her.


Lack. I shall dance with her tonight.


Sir Shenkin. Inteed you will not, for Celia has moneys, and you are poor.


Lack. Well, has her money spoiled her dancing?


Sir Shenkin. No, put tancings pring palmings, and palmings pring matrimonies;
and you must not marry into the ap Griffin's. Only suppose now to yourself I am
her guardian. So, Mr. Mogul, don't drop your handkerchief at my sister. I find
you have thrust your nose into Sir John Pull's Family; and I will advise you to
keep out of the field there too.


Colonel. Sir John Bull! dat is de famille dat is recommend to me from his
grace de duke.


Lack. You advise! why so? Oh! I hear you are to marry miss Dolly Bull; but
where is the Welsh pride there? What! mix the blood of Cadwallader with the
puddle of Thames Street?


Sir Shenkin. Look you, Mr. Lackland, I know my pops and sharps as well as you;
so let us have none of your London tricks there.


Colonel. Oh charming London!


Sir Shenkin. Ay, London for ever, colonel! -- I Will kive you my idea of it.
Now, you must fancy me a puck or a plood, look you.


AIR IX.
In London my life is a ring of delight,
In frolicks I keep up the day and the night;
I snooze at the Hummums till twelve, perhaps later,
I rattle the bell, and I roar up the waiter:
Your honor, says be, and then tips me a leg,
He brings me my tea, but I swallow an egg;
For tea in the morning's a slop I renounce,
So I down with a glass of the right cherry bounce.
With swearing, tearing, ranting, jaunting, slashing, smashing, smacking,
cracking, rumbling, tumbling;
Laughing, quaffing, smoking, joking, swaggering, staggering;
So thoughtless, so knowing, so green and so mellow;
This, this is the life of a frolicksome fellow.
My phaet'n I mount, and the plebs they all stare,
I handle my reins and my elbows I square;
My ponies so plump, and as white as a lilly,
Through Pall Mall I spank it, and up Piccadilly;
Till losing a wheel, egad down come I smack,
So at Knightsbridge I throw myself into a back;
At Tattersall's fling a leg over my nag,
Thus visit for dinner, then dress in a bag.
With swearing, etc.
I stroll round the garden, and call at the Rose,
And then at both Playhouses pop in my nose;
I lounge in the lobby, laugh, swear, slide and swagger,
Talk loud, take my money, and out again stagger,
I meet at the Shakespeare a good natured soul,
Then down to our club at St. James's I roll;
The joys of the night are a thousand at play,
And thus at the finish begin the next day.
With swearing, etc.
Enter Celia. Celia. There he goes. A pleasant brother, I must confess. I wish
I had stayed at Paris. No soul to speak to here but the Bull family. Now if
chance would but throw the handsome officer in my way that I saw at the opera.


AIR X.
Search all the wide creation round,
Or earth, or air, or deep profound,
To some great universal end,
Power, sense, instinct, reason, tend;
It Is love, sweet universal love!
Why Phoebus smile upon the morn?
Why lend a ray to Dian's horn?
Why flowers perfume the breath of spring?
Or why do birds on hawthorns sing?
It Is love, sweet universal love!
With honor joined, oh! formed to bless,
Thy power let every heart consess;
If sense and reason but remove,
The bandage from the eyes of love,
Of love, sweet universal love!
Deuce take the man! If his smiles were worth a thought, he would have followed me
to Fontainbleau. -- Oh, temptation! yonder he comes -- I must retire.

Enter Henry and Rosa. Henry. Indeed, Rosa, I Am glad you have not cscaped farther.


Celia. (behind) Ay, hold of that lady's arm. -- I wonder women have no decency
in public.


Exit. Henry. Ha! yonder is the very charmer I saw at the Sunday opera at
Paris. I must follow her.


Exit. Rosa. If lord Winlove should follow, death to him or my brother must
ensue.


Celia sings a few notes, and exit. Enter Lapoche. Lap. Ah! my dear Rofa, I was
afraid I had lose you. I am glad you have escape from that rogue --


Enter Henry. Oh, my friend, I Am glad to meet a you -- I rn so fast, and ask
every body, all de little jockey Boys, and was so whip and kick about as I came
across, dis big horse fiehl


Henry. Well, what do you want? -- If I don't follow her now, I may never see
her again.


Lap. Oh, sir, I only forget to give a you your recept in your hurry.


Henry. I suppose you mean I forgot to pay you your bill. Well, I shall be back
in a moment. Do You hear? take care of that lady, and don't quit her till my
retum.


Exit. Rosa. What is he gone?


Lap. I hope he will never come back again, unless to pay me my bill.


Rosa. Ay, I see that lady has a charm for him. Unkind Henry, to be angry with
me for a passion your own heart is so susceptible of!


Lap. My dear sweetest --


Rosa. Well, Sir, did you see the gentleman?


Lap. What, the pretty gentleman that loves you?


Rosa. Yes.


Lap. Every morning in my looking-glass.


Rosa. Pshaw! have you seen the gentleman that enquired for me at your house?


Lap. Oh, you sly, little devil! You run away from the convent to von
gentleman, in de man's coat, den from de gentleman to de officier; and now you
want to be with the gentleman again.


Rosa. You're not much out there.


Lap. Oh, you be von sly coquin.


Rosa. If lord Winlove and my brother should meet, I dread the consequences.

(a side)
Lap. (who has been looking after Henry) De captain is safe, dear is no
danger (aside) he is making love to another lady. Let a me revenge his slighted
vows -- Oh! her skin is smooth as English broad cloth, soft as Genoa velvet!
and her eyes are as bright as de polish of de Birmingham button. Oh! she is a
pattern for a taileur's wife!


Rosa. It certainly will be the best way to see lord Winlove, notwithstanding
the impertinence of this fellow. -- Well, sir, shall we go to your house?


Lap. My house! -- Yes, I see she loves me; and I adore the dimples of her
pretty chin.


AIR XI.
Love does so run in my head,
Devil a stitch can I do;
From my jump out of my bed
Till my jump in it vid you.
Oh!
Sweet
Pet
Liver once cold as a cucumber.
Heigho!
Go,
Get away, littel Nannette.
Welcome, my bosom, a new comer,
Who like me loves you? oh, not a man!
My handkerchief, was I a great Ottoman,
Drops at your pretty toe.
Sweet Hen, in your beauties, I Will sun me,
Your twinkles and dimples have won me,
Den vink and smile pretty upon me,
Your game cock den vil I crow.
Exeunt. SCENE, a Grove.
Enter Henry and Celia. Henry. Charming woman! From the minute I first saw you
at the opera house to this instant, I have not had a moment's happiness.


Celia. Oh then, you think this a happy moment. I congratulate your good
fortune, and leave you to the enjoyment of it

(going.)
Henry. Don't leave me. Permit me to follow. I Am a captive bound in your chains.


Celia. And so, my captive would make his conqueror a prisoner of war!


Henry. Thus then, I kiss the chains, and thus adore --

(kneeling.)
Celia. Oh, have a care, captain, you will soil your regimentals.


Henry. Charming woman! I Am enchanted! charmed with your vivacity!


Celia. Was you never so enchanted, or charmed before, as you call it?


Henry. Enchanted and charmed, but never loved.


AIR XII.
Through circling sweets I freely rove,
And think my passion true,
But every charm that man can love,
Sweet love, I sind in you.
I will not boast with stoic pride,
That I Have a heart of stone;
That I have often gazed and sighed,
To you I frankly own.
For circling sweets, etc.
That beauty bears a gentle mind,
The source of every joy,
Is now the hope I wish to find,
Then don't that hope destroy.
For circling sweets, etc.
For since that each external grace
Is by my fair possessed,
In pity let ber mind keep pace,
And make her lover blessed.
For circling sweets, etc.
Celia. If you are serious, pray walk it off that way, and I Will walk this. But
if you really mean to meet in the field again, I Will send you a challenge by my
brother.


Henry. Your brother!


Celia. Yes, and then, in respect of what you mentioned, I -- but no; you're
conceited enough already.


AIR XIII.
No hurry I Am in to be married,
But if it is the will of my brother,
I Would much rather stay;
Yet since in the way,
I as well may have you as another.
A strange custom this to be married,
Though followed by father and mother,
The grave and the gay;
But since in the way,
I as well may have you as another,
A prude though she long to be married,
Endeavors her wishes to smother,
I Would give you her nay;
But since in the way,
I as well may have you as another,
Exit. Henry. Charming Celia! -- Oh, here comes Sir Shenkin ap Griffin. As her
brother is one of the turf, I Will just stop and ask if he knows her; and then
for my siter Rosa.


Enter Sir Shenkin and Groom. Sir Shenkin (entering) Give Winney a horn of
milk, and let her here be crowned with misletoe, and let Jones play the harp
before her, that every true Priton may rejoice at Winney's victories.


Exit Groom. Henry. Your servant, Sir Shenkin. You saw that handsome lady that
parted from me just now? Is not she very handsome?


Sir Shenkin. Yes; she is handsome, like me.


Henry. I shall shortly call her mine.


Sir Shenkin. The tevil you shall!


Henry. The chief obstacle to our union is her thick-headed brother. Perhaps
you may know him. He Is one of the turf, and has not an idea in his head beyond
a cock or a horse. But no matter for that; I Will have her.


Sir Shenkin. Perhaps not. How dare you talk of my thick head? For fifty
pounds, I have as many iteas in my head as you.


Henry. Here Is a blunder! her brother!


Sir Shenkin. Yes, she is my sister; and that is your share of her (snapping his
fingers) so my head may be ash, or oak, look you, or elm, or mahogany, or any
wood you please.


Henry. But, Sir Shenkin, hear me.


Sir Shenkin. Hold! -- I Have thought of a way. This may turn to my advantage.
(aside) -- Colonel Epaulette is a shentleman. He Is tescended in a straight line
from king Pippin the creat; but though a prince in politics, in affairs of
jockeyship, he is no more than an ass. Look you, my Winney is to run his Joan of
Arc tomorrow. Do you lay all the bets you can against her; for look you she
shall lose, that is, my jockey shall lame her. I Will pay forfeit, and after the
race we'll meet and share the cash like honest fellows.


Henry. Sir Shenkin, honesty, generosity and pure sincerity of heart have ever
been the characteristics of your country; but I find the pernicious practice of
gaming is a decoy sufficient to seduce the honor even of a Welchman.


Sir Shenkin. It may be so; but it is very good turf honor for all that.


Henry. Then on or off the turf, I must beg leave not to be a scoundrel.


Sir Shenkin. Why then, give over all thoughts of my sister; don't look at her.
I have heard of your fighting a lord for your sister; so take care of me.
Pistol pullets are not cherry-stones, and sharp swords are not green leeks.


Henry. I must seem to comply, or lose all hopes of Celia. I Have thought of it,
and I will punish him (aside). -- Sir Shenkin, upon second thoughts I Will join
you in this roguery.


Sir Shenkin. Will you? then you are a damned honest fellow. So come along; my
sister's your own, and she shall tell you so this minute. I Will leave you with
her; and then for my own affair with miss Pull. -- Pless her soul! how full of
pusiness her is! what with marriage matches and slang matches -- Come along.


Exeunt. Enter Sir John Bull. Sir John. Devilish lucky I happened to meet with
this English hotel: The mounsheers would have poisoned me else. My wife and
daughter are making mademoiselles of themselves to pay a visit to this colonel
Epaulette. -- Oh! here they come.

Enter Lady and Miss Bull. Mademoiselle a la mode de Paris. -- Hollo! George!


Lady B. What Is the meaning of all this noise, Sir John?


Sir John. Here, George, get me a pipe.


Lady B. A pipe! What, do you think you're at Dobney's bowling-green?


Dolly. Papa consider you are now at Fontainbleau, the very seat of elegance
and fashion.


Sir John. Mrs. Casey, get me a ledger, and tankard of porter.


Lady B. Fie, Sir John. -- There now, he is at Gallaway's coffee-house. Sir
John, do behave yourself. You're not now at Margate, raffling for toys.


Dolly. No, nor dancing with your boots on at Dandelion, papa.


Lady B. Do, get a little into the a la mode de Paris, I Have sent for a French
tailor to make you a suit of clothes, that you may appear a little gay. The
colonel may introduce us to the prince; but how would the prince be shocked at
your appearance!


Sir John. I don't think my appearance quite so shocking. No, my lady Bull. I
think a British aldermen may stand before the first potentate in Christendom
without shocking him.


AIR XIV.
I Am here in France; the more fool I
To quit my beef and pudding;
At ton and taste you all will cry,
Oh yes, John Bull's a good' an.
In air or dress no travell^d mac
Of joint shall put my nose out,
At shrug and grin I Have got the knack,
And see I turn my toes out. Toll, lol, lol, etc.
Gadzooks! so fine myself I Will rig,
That nobody shall know me;
My stining pate I Will straight unwig,
In silk mouns^eer shall sow me.
My arm shall squeeze a chapeau bras,
No more I Will block my beaver;
I Will stare and cock my opera glass,
And, (...) so monstrous clever. Toll, lol, lol, etc.
I Will take a lady to the ball,
And lest that I should shock her,
My head I Will puff with Marshall,
And to my back a knocker.
To make my fist appear a hand,
I Will draw on gloves of chicken,
While the cassino plays the band,
And cotillons we are kicking. Toll, lol, lol, etc.
Enter Servant. Servant. Mr. Lackland, sir, desires to be admitted.


Sir John. Ay, show the poor fellow up.


Exit Serve. Lady B. There Is a pretty fellow indeed! And you, Sir John, to come
to France, to get acquainted with your countrymen -- and such shabby --


Enter Lackland. Sir John. Shabby! eh! does that look like shabby? -- What,
you have recovered the arables again, or have you met with another fool from
Throgmorton-street?


Lack. Do, be quiet, Bull. -- Ladies, your most obedient. Don't let my
appearance disconcert any body. I am just come from my friend Colonel
Epaulette. He begged I would give his compliments, and he will wait on you
presently. -- That Is a monstrous fine girl, Bull.


Sir John. Who, Doll? She Is a damned fine girl. Ay, and I shall give fourscore
thousand pounds with Doll.


Lack. Fourscore thousand! -- a good hint. Oh yes, I Will marry Doll; but then
that cursed mechanic --


Lady B. Summons the graces, my dear.


Dolly. Oh dear! the powder's all gone. What shell I do? I wish I could get a
barber to titivate me up a little.


Lack. Pray, Bull, did not you keep a shop once?


Sir John. Ay, fifteen years; the Grasshopper upon Garlick-hill


Lack. Garlick-hill! And perhaps you sold raisins?


Sir John. Raisins! ay, and figs too.


Lack. Pho! -- Figs! -- Yes, I Will marry her, though she is a dowdy, and her
father a seller of figs. -- Do, sit down. Bull.

(Pulling him back.)
Sir Johr. Sit down! No, I will not.


Lack. Miss -- miss -- you're handsome, and --


Dolly. Lord! I like him monstrously.


Lack. No -- I believe I had best speak first of all to the mother. Know --


Sir John. Why, do you know --


Lack. Prithee, be quiet, Bull. -- Madam, you're monstrously well dressed. It
would be cifficult to say, whether the person ornaments the dress, or the dress
the person. -- This lady (to Dolly) is the picture of true English liberty; and
you are from top to toe the madame Ninon of France.


Sir John. Dan-na-non! -- The follow speaks French too.


Lack. (to miss.) Madam, may I hope to have the honor of your hand at the ball?


Dolly. Yes, if you please, sir, with all my heart.


Sir John. Yes! Why, have not you promised Sir Shenkin ap Griffin?


Dolly. Yes; but I did not know this gentleman then.


Lady B. Miss, don't you remember I Have promised you Colonel Epaulette shall
dance with you? You should not be so forward with your yes.


Dolly. But perhaps the Colonel may not like me, or I may not like the Colonel.


Lack. Consider, madam, if you had never said yes, this beautiful creature had
never been the exact resemblance of her accomplished mother.


Lady B. Oh, dear sir! -- Lord! he is vastly well bred.


Sir John. Eh! why, what the devil! -- If Sir Shenkin comes show him up
immediately.


Lady B. Show him up! Show him out of the house.


Enter Sir Shenkin. Sir John. I have been fighting your battles. I am glad you
are come, or faith! you might have lost Doll.


Sir Shenkin. Oh yes, I see if the gray mare is the better horse, I shall lose
the field.


Lack. Madam (to miss) will you do me the honor of your lilly hand?

Sir John takes her away.
Sir Shenkin. Look you, Mr. Lackland, her hand may be lilly, or tulip, or
daffidowndilly, you have no pusiness with it.


Lack. Do you know who you are talking to? -- Come, madam -- If you insult me,
you know I will not take it (feeling in his pocket). Do, Bull, step and fetch my
spust-box out of the parlour -- Sir Shenkin, if you mean to insult, you shall
go out with me.


Exeunt Lackland and Lady Bull. Sir Shenkin. Mr. Lackland, my Lady Bull will go
out with you.


Sir John. An impudent dog, to send me for his snuff box! -- Go out! -- Pray,
is not that one of your fighting phrases?


Sir Shenkin. Yes; he is sery fond of it: And sometimes it is meat and drinks to
him. With a pair of pistols he must be sery pretty company in a little room.


Dolly. Yes, he must be excellent company in a little room.


Sir John. I don't know where you have been; but if you mean to marry Doll, you
must look about you, my boy

(patting Sir Shenkin's back).
Dolly. Ay, that you must, my boy.


Sir John. Sir Shenkin, give me your hand. I Am so pleased at your winning the
race, that if I had fifty daughters, you should have them all, though they had
a plum a piece.


Sir Shenkin. Thank you, Sir John. -- But that is true -- Look you, (taking his
pocket book out) you owe me fifty pounds.


Sir John. Me!


Sir Shenkin. Yes, fifty pounds that you lost.


Sir John. Lost! I had a fifty pound note this morning. I hope I have not lost
it out of my book. -- Oh no; there it is; it is safe.


Sir Shenkin. Then you may as well give it me.


Sir John. Give it you! for what?


Sir Shenkin. Pecause you do owe it me.


Sir John. Me! no; that is too bad. I never borrowed fifty pence of you in my
life.


Sir Shenkin. Pho! pho! You laid me fifty pounds on the race, and did lose.


Sir John. I remember I said I thought the brown horse run the fastest.


Sir Shenkin. You laid me fifty pounds on my Winney, and Joan of Arc did peat
her.


Sir John. Who I!


Sir Shenkin. Yes. When I said she would lose, you said a done; and tone and
tone is pet.


Sir John. Psha! psha! Damn your Winney! I never laid --


Sir Shenkin. I say, cot pless her -- why do you tam my Winney? -- The bishop
of Bangor, look you, durst not tam my Winney.


Sir John. Hold your tongue!


Sir Shenkin. Then why do you tam my Winney? Look you, Sir John, you laid me
fifty pounds that my mare was the winning horse; and I always make it a rule to
pay and receive all my tebts of honor.


Sir John. Honor! fie, fie! -- What, do you think I Will give you fifty pounds,
because one horse thrusts his nose farther than the other?


Dolly. Lord! give him fifty pound, pappa.


Sir John. Doll, that fellow's a rogue.


Sir Shenkin. Rogueries and honesty's are incompataples. And look you, I Will
pung you down, though you were pig pold eagle upon the top of Snowdon.


Sir John. There! he calls your father a bald eagle.


Sir Shenkin. Sir John, you're to be my father; and look you, I will refer it
to the jockey club, and then, if you don't pay me, I Will post you at
Tattersall's.


Sir John. Eh! there is your fifty pound. -- Come here, Doll. That Is a rogue. --
There, Sir Shenkin, by gaining fifty pounds, you have lost my daughter and
forescore thousand. So, your servant, Sir Shenkin. -- Post me at Tattersall's!
-- There now, you may post that at Tattersall's.


Exeunt Sir John and Dolly. Sir Shenkin. The peard of a leek and the peard of a
goat for you! (hums a tune) a pretty commence! -- Pless my soul! how hot it is!


Enter Miss Dolly. Dolly. Sir Shenkin, I have run away from the old fogrum.


Sir Shenkin. Old fogrum! a pretty name that to give a father! I Have a great
mind to run away with mist Toll, to be revenged on old fogrum. It will he
pretty retaliations.


Dolly. Lord then! what signifies talking about him? Why don't you run away
with me at once?


Sir Shenkin. I Am going to colonel Epaulette's. His house is near the castle.
Meet me there, look you, in half an hour; and then his chaplain shall make us
two patchelors one married couple.


Dolly. Indeed. I will not be married here though; for I Have been told that the
parsons are all popes.


Sir Shenkin. You Will find an honest fellow in father Bluebottle, as he calls
himself. Put however, if you toan't like it, I Will run away with you to
Chychwechlyn; and on the morning of our marriage we shall have all our friends
and neighbors under our windows to sing us merry miscellanies and
epithalamiums of music; and there'll be the oboe, the drum, the trumpet, the
marrowpones and cleafers, and pest of all, the harp.


AIR XV.
The morning we are married, how sunny and jolly,
The pridegreom Sir Shenkin, the pride Lady Tolly!
When roused by sweet clamor we open our peepers,
And Phoebus salute in our night-gowns and slippers;
Then under our windows musicians all come,
Play fittle, sweet hautboy, sharp flagelet, drum.
But till the harp's melodious tingle,
All is puff, rattle, squeak and jingle.
The cymbals they grind, and the basses they grumble,
Pianos and fortes, a delicate jumble.
All joy to your bonors. See, see how they flock,
Whilst cleaver and marrowpone go nick y knock,
Tantivy the horn tantara the trumpet
Sound, sound -- while we swallow our coffee and crumpet.
But till, etc.
ACT III.
SCENE I. Enter 1st Waiter from Mrs. Casey 's House, meeting 2d Waiter.
1st Wait. BOB, why do you go about so with your hands in your pocket, when you
know the house is so full of company?


2d Waiter. Why, mistress sent me for captain Huff, to see if he can bully this
Lackland out of the house.


Exit. 1st Waiter. Bully him out! -- Faith! the captain's whole regiment would
not do it.


Exit. Enter Mrs. Casey. Casey. Upon my soul, my friend shall do it. Indeed, an
he will bully this Lackland out of the house. Faith! he shall be ousted.


Enter Lackland. Lackland. You impertiment scoundrels, no attendance! -- Pray,
Mrs. Casey, why don't you turn these fellows off, and get civiler waiters?


Casey. Civiler waiters! Upon my conscience, the lads are civil enough. Why
don't you pay your score, and get out of my house, spunging upon my best
customers, and strutting about in their old clothes like a Bashaw. There you
are fairly copied down seven pages, and not a penny of money.


Lark. I Am the best customer you have. There is not a table in your house, on
which I have not left the mark of a dice box. Is there a morning I don't order
a Sandwich, or a day I don't drink my four bottles after dinner?


Casey. A how many do you pay for?


Lack. Well, that is my affair, not yours.


Casey. Here, Bob, bring Mr. Lackland his bill. It lies in the bar.


Waiter. Bill! what is the tide turned? Here, chamberlain, ostler, waiter!


Exit. Lack. Have you a man comes to your house, that calls about them like me,
except my friends? When I Am gone, yo'll have no more carriages and coronets
calling at your door. If I have you, your house will be ruined.


(The Waiter gives the bill to Mrs. Casey -- Servants enter.) Casey. My house
will be ruined indeed, if I have not money to pay my wine-merchant. Why don't
you take up a brown musket, or the end of a sedan chair! instead of which, you
strut about like a lord, and give yourself airs like a lord, and drink like a
lord, and sweat like a lord, ay and -- here is your bill, and I dare say, you will
pay it like a lord.


Lack Perhaps I may. What do you give me you cursed long pieces of paper for?
Do you think a gentleman has got nothing else to do but to lug about great
lumps of damned heavy gold in his pocket, to pay you such ugly, long, cursed
bills as these (tearing them) when Bob and you think proper to thrust them into
his hands? -- Here, you rascals, get my baggage, and send it to the lilly.


Casey. Do You hear? Carry it upon a china plate, for it is a nice affair.


Waiter. Your honor will remember the waiter.


Cook. The cook, your honor.


Cham. I am de chamberlain.


Boy. And de jack a de boots your honor.


Lack. Get out, you rascal! I Have no boots.


Drives them off, and exit. Casey. See how I Am used, because I Am a lone woman.
Why don't I marry! -- Oh! I wish I had a bit of a man for your sake ( looking
after Lackland.) Ah! it was not always thus.


AIR XVI.
Kilkenny is a handsome place
As any town in Shamrockshire;
There first I saw my Jemmy's face,
There Jemmy first beheld his dear:
My love he was a bashful boy,
And I a simple girl to see;
Yet I was Jemmy's only joy,
And Jemmy was the lad for me.
But Dublin city bore the bell
In streets and squares, and houses fine;
Oh! there young Dick his love could tell,
And there I told young Dickey mine:
For Dick he was a roving blade,
And I was hearty, wild and free;
He loved, and I his love repaid,
Then Dickey was the lad for me!
When Dover strand my happy lot,
And William there my love did crown;
Young Dick and Jemmy I forgot,
Kilkenny fair, and Dublin town:
For William was a gentle youth,
Too bashful, nor too hold was be;
He said be loved, and told me truth,
And William was the lad for me.
Exit. Enter Lackland. Lack. No getting on this way. The road! take a purse --
No, I never thought seriously of that. No, marriage -- Miss Bull is to be had
-- Garlic hill -- Oh! but even that requires a small sum, and I Have nothing to
set about it with. I think Henry would assist me with a trifle, bad as his
finances may be. But where to find him -- He Is skulking about the town,
thinking he has killed lord Winlove, a man, whom not an hour ago I saw alive
and well. Marriage then is my dernier resort.


Lap. (without) Tell Sir John Bull I Will wait on him presently.


Enter Lapoche. Lap. Monsieur Lackland, I am angry -- I am enragec --


Lack. (snappistly) Well! what about?


Lap.. (starting) What about! I am not afraid, sir. De fine lodger that you did
recommend --


Lack. What! he has taken French leave I suppose!


Lap. I would take leave to put him into French prison if I could find him.


Lack. Eh! a thought strikes that may raise the supplies, and put a few guineas
into my pocket. -- Ay, Lapoche, this fine officer, as we thought him, is no
other than an impostor escaped from England in woman's clothes.


Lap. In woman's clothes! Nothing but impostors. The nun I have in my house
escaped from the convent of Villeneuve in boy's clothes. -- In woman's clothes!
Ah den, if de captain is in woman's clothes, it is the nun that is in boots.


Lack. In boots! Why what the devil is he at now! -- No, no, you're -- But why
the devil should I undeceive him? -- You're right, my little Lapoche; they are
both impostors.


Lap. And why did a you not tell me a so before?


Lack. Why, I knew you would find it out, you sagaclous monkey! But what will you
promise me if I put you into the way to get an hundred guineas?


Lap. Oh! I Will promise every thing.


Lack. Why then, you must know -- come here -- this officer (looking round) is
no other than a fellow escaped from England for shooting a lord.


Lap. Shoot a lord! Oh de prosligate!


Lack. And there is a hundred guineas reward on his head, that is all.


Lap. Oh! dis is lucky. De sly coquin! Why you not tell a me dis before?


Lack. Now I have told you, what will you give me for my intelligence?


Lap. I will give a you fifty tanks ven I do get de money.


Lack. Thanks! Is that all? Have you got any cash about you? Come, come, let me
touch five pieces now.


Lap. De diable touch and take me if I do!


Lack. No, then you are a scoundrel!


Lap. Oui. I know I am ver great scoundrel, but I will keep a my money for all
dat. Five Guinea indeed! No, no, monsieur Lackland. I know a you too well for
all that; but I must find out dis officier, and that to me vill be de grand
affair. It vill get a me --


Lack. (aside) Yes, a good beating, and I hope Henry will pay it you. -- Then
marriage is my last card. So Mifs Bull of Garlic hill, have at you and your
four-score thousand pounds.


Exit. Enter Coachman. Coachman. Is your name Lapoche? If it is, you must come
directly to Sir John Bull, or he will send to somebody else.


Lap. Oh! for de suit of clothes. I will come direct -- Bless a me, I have more
business than do grand financier.


Coachman. Well will you come or no!


Lap. Oui. Alons, monsieur.


Coachman. Eh, what?


Lap. Dat is, go along, if you please,


Coachman. Oh! is that it? Come along.


Exeunt. SCENE, inside the HOTEL.
Enter Colonel Epaulette, with Waiter. Colonel. You may tell Sir John Bull, and
my lady Bull, and miss Bull, dat colonel Epaulette is come to vall on them.


Waiter. Yes, sir.


Exit. Colonel. I suppose, from vat I am told, dis famille must be fine solis;
but as dey were recommend from my good friend the duke, and as dey are English,
I will show them every civility in my power. -- Dis dress in de English style
vill please a de young lady. I Am sure I am ver much oblige to monsieur backland.


Enter Sir John and Coachman. Sir John. Well, Robert, is the tailor coming?


Coachman. Yes, sir; he is come.


Sir John. Is he? Then I Will be measured directly, (Exit Robert.) for my lady
will not be easy till I get a suit of clothes a la mode de Paris, as they call it.
-- Oh! this is the tailor I suppose.


Colonel. Sir, your most obedient. I presume, sir, your name is Sir John a de
Bull?


Sir John. At your service, sir Ay, ay, this is the tailor. Mr. Lackland
mentioned you in very high terms.


Colonel. I am ver much oblige to Mr. Lackland; and, sir, I shall be ver happy
to render you any service in my power.


Sir John. Very obliging truly! And I suppose you will expect to be paid for it.


Colonel. Sir, any obligation you do a me in return I shall consider as
repaying; but sir, my good friend de duke --


Sir John. His good friend the duke! -- Oh! he must be a very great tailor
indeec!

(aside)
Colonel. I have de honneur to be ver dear to him.


Sir John. Oh! if you are so dear to your friends, to be sure your terms must
be very high indeed to me. But come, I cannot help it; so, take out your measure.


Colonel. Measure!


Sir John. Ay, and out with your shears. Have you brought your book of patterns?


Colonel. Vat do you mean? Book of pattern.


Sir John. Oh! I suppose he is too great a tailor to carry patterns. (aside)
Yes, just that I may see your colors.


Colonel. Colors! Oh ho, because I be in de army you take a me for an ensign?
Do you suppose I carry de color?


Sir John. Ay, I thought so, too great for that -- pray now how many men may
you employ?


Colonel. About a tousand.


Sir John. A thousand journeymen! a damned great tailor indeed (aside) -- A
thousand men!


Colonel. Yes, dat dear is my regiment.


Sir John. Oh! what you work for a regiment, do you?


Colonel. Vat does he mean? Sir John, I am come to vait upon de lady.


Sir John. Oh! what you do business for the ladies too! Oh! you're a great
rogue!


Colonel. Sir John, I know that you are privilege to joke by the custom of your
country.


Sir John. What you want the custom of my country. I cannot promise you that,
but you shall have mine.


Colonel. And, sir, from de recommendation I have had, I shall be proud to show
you all de civility in my power.


Sir John. Sir, I am very much obliged to you. Proceed.

(Buttoning his coat without looking).
Colonel. I wish to show you every respect, and vill introduce you to de prince
--


Sir John. You introduce! introduced by a tailor! Ha! ha! Damme, that is too
much.


Colonel. Tailor, sir! I don't know vat you mean; but, sir, if you vas not
English, your life -- your life should answer this behavior.


Sir John. My life! you need not be so hot, my little tailor.


Colonel. I don't know, sir, whether you are fool by nature, or clown by habit.
If de former, you are beneath my notice: if de latter, I will have satisfaction
for dis gross behavior to colonel Epaulette. But, sir, I will instantly speak
to my good friend Mr. Lackland; and den, sir, I will be revenged for this
affront.


Exit. Sir John. Colonel Epaulette! Oh, the devil! -- my Lady Bull! my Lady
Bull!

Enter Lady Bull. My dear, here has been the colonel here, and I thought it had
been the French tailor you sent for to take measure of me; and here has been
the damn'dest mistake! --


Lady B. Mistake Colonel Epaulette for a tailor! Oh, Sir John, why will you
ever attempt to speak to persons of distinction? Oh! it is like your blunders,
to take a man of fashion for a tailor!


Sir John. Why, they dress, and scrape, and shrug so much alike, that there is
no knowing a prince from a pickpocket. But I Will order the chaise, and set out
for Garlick-hill tomorrow morning.


Lady B. Then you may go by yourself, Sir John; for my part, it would be
monstrous for a person of my figure and deportment to leave the continental
land without an introduction to the grand monarch. Call the colonel back.


Sir John. Me -- damme, I Would as soon call his regiment as him.


Exit. Lady B. Robin! Robin! -- (Enter Coachman.) -- Desire that gentleman to
walk up stairs.


Coachman. Gentleman! What the tailor, madam?


Lady B. Yes; the tailor, as your master calls him. -- (Exit Coachman.) -- Oh!
what a blundering family! He thinks the colonel a tailor as well as his master.
-- Oh! here the colonel is.

Enter Lapoche. Oh! sir, I blush to see you.


Lap. Madam, I am your most obedient, very humble servant; but I thought Sir
John was here.


Lady B. Oh sir! Sir John is so hurt at his appearance --


Lap Oh! dat does not signify, madam. I will foon equip him to make a better
appearance


Lady B Sir, you're vasily obliging; but, sir, this mistake is all owing to
having contracted such unfashionable habits --


Lap. Never mind, madam. I will give him de habit most fashionable.


Lady B. Very kind indeed, sir. Oh sir, I Am sorry you have had such a loss
today.


Lap. Loss! -- Oh yes, madam, I have lost my lodger.


Lady B. Some friend, I suppose. Ay, he is too genteel to mind his loss of the
race. -- The running I mean -- the match.


Lap. Oh, yes, madam, they are run away to make a de match!


Lady B. Well, sir, I wish you better success with your Joan.


Lap. My Joan!


Lady B. And, sir, we were told in Paris, that you were very much with the
prince.


Lap. Oh yes, madam. I must lie a little.


Lady B. I am told you are a great man in the privy council, committees, and
board of works


Lap. Board of works -- she means my shop-board.


Lady B. Sir, I shall esteem it a particular favor, when it is convenient, if
you will be kind enough to introduce us.


Lap. Why, madam, I don't know that I can introduce you to de head butler.


Lady B. Butler! What does he suppose that we keep company with servants! --
Ay, from Sir John's behavior he thinks we are fit company for nobody else.

Enter Sir John. Sir John, I have been making all the apologies I can for you
to the colonel there.


Sir John. There! -- Where?


Lady B. There.


Sir John. Colonel there! Why damme, this is the real tailor.

(The tailor takes out his book of patterns.)
Lady B. How! the tailor! (turns about) Ay, he is a tailor sure enough. --
Arn't you ashamed, sellow? How dare you have the impudence to pass for a
colonel? Heigh, sellow!


Lap. Miss, your mother would not call me so.


Sir John. Her mother! Get out! --


Lady B. Oh! my dear, don't be angry with the young man.


Sir John. Get out with your patterns (pulls him off) my lady, I wonder you
will under take to speak to persons of distinction. Not know a tailor from a
man of fashion!


Enter Coachman. Coachman. Miss Doll's gone off, Sir John.


Lady B. Where is she gone?


Coachman. Mrs. Casey says, she thinks to be married; for she saw her in close
confab. with Sir Shenkin.


Lady B. There Is your Briton, Sir John.


Sir John. But which way is she she gone?


Coachman. She went down toward Colonel Epaulette's.


Sir John. There Is your Frenchman, my lady! -- Come along with me, Robin. Oh,
for an English constable, or a search warrant.


Exeunt. SCENE, a Room at the Colonel's.
Enter Colonel and Miss Bull. Colonel. Oh miss, I do congratulate myself on de
felicity of meeting you dus at home. -- If I can carry her away, I shall be
even vid her father for calling me a tailleur.


Dolly. But law, colonel, how shocking you're dressed!


Colonel. Do you think so? Mr. Lackland said 'twas ver pretty my dear. -- Oh!
you be von lovely girl! how I do love you! Pray, miss, was you ever in love?


Dolly. Oh yes.


Colonel. Have a you?


Dolly. Only nine times. Let me see. Three times before I was out of my slips;
twice while I was at Hackney boarding-school; once with my guitar master; then
with Frank Frippery; then with Dicky Pettitoes. No, only eight; for I don't
reckon the handsome stay-maker of Duck-lane.


Colonel. Then be in love with me the ninth time; and scamper off with me.


Dolly. Scamper with you! Why don't you ask father's consent.


Colonel. No, it sound a so mean.


Dolly. Why, as you say, it does sound a little of Bow Bell. Well; and then it
w^^l make a pure noise in the papers -- the elopement -- the pursuit -- the
marriage -- the making up -- Besides, I Am in love with your vis a vis. So come
along; I Will scamper off with you.


Colonel. Vel said, my little angel, come along.


Dolly. But hold -- Will you excuse me to Sir Shenkin ap Griffin?


Colonel. Excuse you to Sir Shenkin! for what?


Dolly. Because I promised to run away with him; and I came here to meet him.


Colonel. Indeed! but you know I came a de first.


Dolly. Why that is true. And first come first served, as father says to his
customers in the shop at home -- Come along.


Colonel. (stops) Hold, my dear, I must just step --


Dolly. Why I thought you was going to scamper off with me.


Colonel. I shall soon be back -- but as I don't know what may happen, I will
just order my man to put up de powder, de pomatum, and de dancing pump


Exit. Dolly. Well then, do make haste, colonel.


Enter Sir Shenkin. Sir Shenkin. I have prought the priest. He looks as merry
as a pard and as smart as a truid.


Dolly. But why did you stay so long? I have been crying my eyes out.


Sir Shenkin. Ton't cry, my tear. Wipe a your eye, ton't weep. -- My dear, the
chaise is ready for us, and a sulky for father Domine.


Dolly But must I desert the colonel for you?


Sir Shenkin. To be sure you must. But I will put on a pair of jack boots, and
trive you myself, for the poys here are as sluggish as their horses. They smack
their whips, and they cry gee whu! but they are as slow as snails, though they
gabble like turkey cocks.


Dolly. Well, but come now, don't let us wait for the boots.


Sir Shenkin. I Will be your postpoy, and trive you to Chychwechlyn, and as you
was never married, how telighted you will be with noises, and visits, and
confusions!


AIR XVII.
Tol lol, de roll, lol,
My Tolly, my Toll,
With me when you canter to Wales,
For petticoat white,
Buff breeches so tight,
Away go needles and flails.
Young Taffy throws by hur wheels,
Then Winney kicks up her heels,
With follow
And halloo,
And waddle
And straddle,
So merry to see us come;
With fiddle
And diddle,
In giggle
And wriggle,
They give us a welcome bone.
The joy so great,
So noble we treat,
An oxen is roasted whole!
And though on the lawn
The spiggot is drawn
For punch, you may swim in the bowl!
We give the ladies a ball,
We foot it away in the ball.
With follow, etc.
Miss Howell so nice,
And Lady ap Rice,
And cousin Sir Evan ap Floyd,
Parson Montgomery,
Counselor Flummery,
(...) ap Williams, Ap Floyd.
(...) when the stocking is thrown,
(...) I a^o^e;
Then follow, etc.
Exit. Dolly So, one cannot go without dancing pumps, and the other cannot go
without jack-boots. If any of my old sweethearts were to come in now, I should
be inclined to give them both the double.


Enter Lackland. Lack So, at last I Have found her. -- Madam, your most obedient.
Well, it is settled. I Will marry you.


Dolly. Marry me!


Lack. Yes; but don't let your joy carry you away. I said I would.


Dolly. Said! to who?


Lack. To myself. And if a gentleman breaks his word with himself, who do you
think he will keep it with? -- You're very handsome, my dear, that you are; and I
would not tell a lie for all the women in France.


Dolly. Lord! what a high notion of honor he has! and he is a much handsomer
man than either Sir Shenkin or the Colonel -- But my father says, that you
arn't worth any thing, that you have no estate.


Lack. That Is a good joke in faith! No estate! He might as well have said I
borrowed a guinea of him.


Dolly. In Faith! and now I do think of it, he did say so.


Lack. Did he indeed? that is very diverting truly. Ay, and he might as well
have said I borrowed these clothes.


Dolly. That Is what I thought of your fine clothes, that you must have a great
estate.


Lack. Not an acre. And to be sure I Have no seat in Herefordshire -- no parks --
no orchards --


Dolly. Orchards in Herefordshire! Then I dare say you make twenty Hogsheads of
Cider in a year.


Lack. Cider -- Oh! you accomplished -- Garlic Hill -- Yes; and he might as
well have said that I Have no house in Portman Square. Ha! ha!


Dolly. Portman Square! Oh dear! -- then I shall live in Portman Square!


Lack. Ay, and without a guinea in the funds, or half a crown in my pocket at
this moment. Ha! ha!


Dolly. Ha! ha! that is very true. Now then, will you answer me one question? If
you was to agree to run away with me, would you wait for jack boots or dancing
pumps?


Lack. Jack boots and dancing pumps! Not for the button of king Lewis's hat.
You are frank and free. I love you; and thus I throw myself and all my fortunes
at your feet. Now if we had but a parson and a chaise! --


Dolly. There Is one in the house, and the other at the door.


Lack. Is there? Then my dear -- Garlic Hill -- come along.

Carries her off.
Enter Colonel and Sir Shenkin. Sir Shenkin. Now, madam, now I Am for you; now
I Am pistol'd and booted.


Colonel. Come, Miss a de Bull.


Sir Shenkin. Come, Miss Pull, my tear.


Colonel. Why, where is she gone?

(Seeing each where.)
Sir Shenkin. Where did you put her?


Colonel. Why, vat have you done vid her?


Sir Shenkin. I did leave her here.


Colonel. Vell, and I did find her here.


Enter Sir John and Lady Bull. Sir John. Where Is my child? where is Dolly Bull?


Colonel. Dat fellow in de boots can tell you.


Sir John. Come, come, none of your Welsh tricks upon me. Give me my daughter.


Sir Shenkin. It Is that devilish Gaul has got her.


Sir John. Ay, you would not give your daughter to a Briton, and now you see
she is snapped up by that Frenchman. But I Will Cressy and Agincourt you! Why,
with Doll's fortune, I could build a man of war, and batter your breast-work.
I Will come like the ghost of Hawke, and beat you! I Will be a Black Prince to you!


Colonel. You are much mistaken now, as you vas ven you took me for a tailleur.
I tell you that postillion in boots has stole her.


Sir Shenkin. No, no, I say 'twas you.


Colonel. I say 'twas you.


AIR XVIII.
Sir John. 'Twas you, sir, 'twas you, sir;
I Will thrash you black and blue, sir;
'Twas you that stole my daughter Doll;
'Twas you, sir, you.

Lady B. It Is true, sir, it is true, sir;
But this affront you will rue, sir;
'Twas you that stole my daughter Doll;
'Twas you, sir, you.

Sir Shen. Oh, Ma'am, no, ma'am, no, no, no, no, no, ma'am;
How can you wrong me so, ma'am?
I did not steal your daughter Doll;
But I know who.

Colonel. No, sir, no, sir; no, no, no, no, no, sir;
How can you wrong me so, sir?
I did not steal your daughter Doll;
But I know who.

Colonel. Diable! n'importe -- Damme!


Sir Shenkin. This is frantics and insanities. But by the got of war, if I had
you at home, you should give me satisfaction.


Colonel. Satisfaction! -- I can a fight, or I can a let it alone. "I can fight
and can conquer again and again."


Sir Shenkin. Got pless hur! I wish I had him at Tover, I Would teach him to
conquer. You are now in your own house, and you may stay there. For my part,
I Have got on my boots, and I am resolved -- I am resolved -- to walk down stairs.


Exit. Sir John. Oh! what a bloody resolution! -- stop the boots!


Exeunt Sir John and Lady Bull. Colonel. "I can fight, etc.

(singing.)
Exit. Enter Nannette. Nan. Lord! how I do wish to get back again to England!
-- A girl like me to be a chambermaid, and to a tailor! -- Well, I Am convinced
if I Would as good clothes, I should look as well as Rosa.


AIR XIX.
When dressed in all my finest things,
My gold repeater, bracelets, rings,
In toilet glass,
A lovely lass
I view, so gaily glancing;
I cannot tell how,
But never till now
I felt my heart a dancing.
With a fall, lal, la,
And a ha, ha, ha!
You Have set my heart a dancing.
The coach is come -- down stairs we trip,
The Opera -- Robin plies his whip,
What sparkling eyes!
Sir Fopling cries!
As to our box advancing;
I don't know how,
Yet never till now,
I felt my heart a dancing.
With a fall, lal, la, etc.
Sultana queen at masquerade,
Or nun, or humble village maid,
So fine, so bright
The sparkling night,
Like fairies nimbly prancing;
I don't know how,
Yet never till now,
I felt my heart a dancing.
With a fall, lal, la, etc.
Enter Lapoche. Lap. I have de two imposteurs safe, if I can keep them. -- So,
mam'selle Nannette, you tink ver little of me. Noting vill serve a you but de
English officier. Just now I was taken for Colonel Epaulette. You say I ugly.
Never you tell a man he is ugly in his own house.


Nan. Lord, sir! I don't think you ugly.


Lap. Don't you? Den I will give a you de silk gown.


Nan. No, sir, I never did think you ugly. I always, I always thought you very
pretty.


Lap. Did a you?

(smiling.)
Nan. I did indeed -- as I hope for the silk gown.


Lap. No, not prett -- but very smart, comely -- a very smart, comely, little
fellow.


Non. No, sir, very pretty.


Lap. Vel den, pretty -- a very pretty, little, smart fellow. But know, I have
von grand affair, great business, as good as hundred guinea; such discovery of
my two lodger --


Nan. Indeed, sir!


Lap. Ay, Nannette know nothing of de disguise.

(Bell rings.)
Nan. (going) Miss Rosa rings her bell.


Lap. Stay. Where are you going? You are in a devilish hurry to get to de
fellow.


Nan. Fellow! who do you mean?


Enter Rosa. Rosa. When the bell rung, why did you not send the girl to me?


Lap. Send a de girl? vat an impudent fellow! -- Pray von you did take a my
lodging, vas dat in de bargain?


Rosa. Nannette, will you step into my chamber?


Lap. (stopping her) No, indeed, she von't.


Nan. I was just coming, ma'am.


Lap. Yes, she vas coming. -- Get out of de room! Yes, she vas just coming --
Get out of de room from de fellow.


Rosa. I only want some powder.


Lap. You shall get no powder or ball here. Fighting fellow! -- I vish he vas
out of my house (aside.) If you want such cutthroat tings, vhy don't you go to
your own Hyde Park? Dat's the best place for lord-shooting.


Exit. Rosa. How impertinent the fellow is! And lord Wi^love to forsake me at
such a time! For him I gave up all my peace of mind -- But I Will ask pardon of
heaven and my brother, and return to the convent.

AIR XX.
How can man such pleasure find,
Still in trying each endeavor
Thus to win the virgin's favor,
Softly steal into her mind,
And destroy her peace for ever;
With her heart,
To depart,
I eaving only grief behind.
Thus the boy, a linnet caging,
How engaging!
Now her sweet and warbling song,
Soon neglected,
All rejected;
Poor thing! she may her song give over,
Her sweetest notes can charm no more.
Exit. (Lapoche watches her off, then runs and locks the door.) Dear now I tink
I have de bold captain safe. Now I have got lock up dis desperate fellow I
have got de hundred guinea under my own key; and de diable a penny shall
monsieur Lackland get. But I must go for de archer. -- Here comes de nun in
boots.


Enter Henry. Henry. Well, sir; where is the lady?


Lap. De lady not far off. I fancy she may be found in boots.


Henry. In boots!


Lap. Yes. Don't a you feel yourself uncomfortable in boots?


Henry. In boots! -- Come, come, where is the lady?


Lap. How finely I vas deceived to take you for a gentleman?


Henry. Pray, sir, what have I done to forseit that character?


Lap. But pray a now, don't you find yourself uncomfortable without de
petticoat?


Henry. Ha! ha! ha! will you fetch me one?


Lap. I dare say Nannette will accommodate you.


Henry. Very acommodating truly! -- No, Mr. Frenchman; I have crimes enough
already without adding the ruin of Nannette.


Lap. Ruin! She may give you von you know; von cannot ruin her.


Henry. Very commode indeed! -- Yes, sister Rosa, you're got in a very pretty
sort of a house.


Lap. Pray -- ha! ha! -- pray -- upon my vord, she looks vastly well in her
boots.


Henry. Go, sir, do you banter?


Lap. Ay, and do you go to your chamber, child, and I will send Nannette to
you. Poor thing! I dare say ver fatigue.


Exit. Henry. Oh Rosa! She was my sister. Lord Winlove was a friend; and but
for those uhappy misfortunes, for those fatal circumstances, my prospects with
Celia appeared so pleasing -- how blessed might I have been!


AIR XXI.
Let fame sound the trumpet, and cry "to the war!"
Let glory re-echo the strain;
The full tide of honor may flow from the scar,
And heroes may smile on their pain.
The treasures of autumn let Bacchus display,
And stagger about with his bowl;
On science, let Sol beam the luster of day,
And wisdom give light to the soul.
Let India unfold her rich gems to the view,
Each virtue, each joy to improve;
Oh, give me the friend that I know to be true,
And the fair that I tenderly love!
What Is glory but pride? a vain bubble is fame,
And riot the pleasure of wine;
What Is riches but trouble? and title's a name,
But friendship and love are divine!
Exit. Lapoche watches him off, then locks the door on him. Lap. Vell said,
Rosa -- Dear now I have got yo both safe; and I have de archer ready for dis
captain. -- Oh! here be de gentlemam that came after the lady first.


Enter Lord Winlove. Lord W. Now I shall see Rosa's new flame. -- Well, my
friend, where is the captain that run away with Rosa?


Lap. What the nun in boots?


Lord W. Nun in boots! I mean the officer that went off with the nun that you
told me of.


Lap. I have him safe; but he is the diable of a fellow, and has been asking for
powder; so have a de care.


Lord W. Well, let us see this devil of a fellow.


Lap. Shall I call in de archer? I have him ready.


Lord W. Pho! Let me see the the captain. Open the door.


Lap. Yes, but I Will have de reward (opens the door.) -- Dear -- (runs round to
the other door.) Now I Will see if my nun in boots is safe.


Enter Rosa. Lord W. My dear Rosa!


Rosa. My dear lord!


Celia. (within) I only want to see the gentleman.


Enter Celia. I beg pardon. I want to speak with the gentleman.

Lap. Well, here are three gentleman.


Celia. Yes; but I want to speak with the English officer that lodges here --
that is in custody.


Lap. Oh! de nun in boots -- more disguise. I dare say this is some English
constable come over to take up de captain for killing de lord.


Henry. (within) What do you mean by locking me in? Open the door, or I Will
break it open


Lap. Break open my door! for shame, is dat behaving like a nun?


Enter Henry. Henry. Lord Winlove alive!


Lord W. Yes, Henry. Are you sorry to see me?


Henry. Indeed, my lord, I am doubly happy to find myself guiltless of your
blood, and you alive to do my sister that justice I Am sure you intend.


Lord W. Harry, my intentions were ever honorable; and that my immediate union
with my Rosa shall evince. Your love for your sister hurried you to a rashness
that was near proving fatal; but this cancels every error.


Henry (turning round.) My Celia!


Celia. Indeed I don't know how to apologize for this strange intrusion.
Captain, don't be vain if I say 'twas on your account.


Henry. Sister Rosa, this happiness is unexpected. And now give me leave to
introduce you to a lady, who intends shortly to honor our family with her
alliance.


AIR XXII.
Lord Winlove, Henry, Celia, and Rosa. How sweet, how kind the joyful hours,
With peace and virtue crowned!
They come like soft descending showers,
To cheer the landscape round
Hush, throbbing heart, as truth alone,
Should light the virgin's breast,
Retire, cold freezing doubt, begone,
Retire, it is love's request!

Enter Dolly, Lackland, Sir John and Lady Bull. Dolly. Make haste or they will
catch us.


Lack. Let Us rally and face them.


Sir John. (entering) I know they are here. You're a pretty lady

(to Dolly.)
Lack. Softly, Bull; no abuse.


Sir John. Why damme, may not I speak to my own child?


Lack. Nobody, sir, must abuse my wife.


Sir John. Wife! I shall run mad! My daughter married to a fellow without a
shirt! a fellow that borrowed a guinea of me this morning!


Lady B. Ay, you would have an English husband! She may have married Barrington
for aught you know.


Sir John. I hope he is a rogue.


Lord W. Wish your son a rogue!


Sir John. If he is myself I hope he is a rogue. I Will have no more mercy on him
than the king of Prussia would have upon a Dutch alderman.


Enter Sir Shenkin. Sir Shenkin. So, Miss Toll, I hear you have made matches
and matrimonies.


Dolly. Yes; so now you may canter off to Cychwechlyn as fast as you please.


Sir Shenkin. Give you joy of your tom-tit; for she was never good, egg or bird.


Lady B. Oh Dolly, how could you take up with such a person?


Dolly. Why, the colonel could not go without dancing pumps, nor Sir Shenkin
without jack-boots, so that I was very glad to take up with any body.


Lack. (bowing.) Very much obliged to you, madam.


Enter Colonel. Colonel. How do you all, good peoples? How does my lady
Bull-dog! damme? -- So, miss, you're married?


Dolly. Yes, and without waiting for dancing-pumps.


Lady B. Bull-dog! If you are a Frenchman, behave like one.


Colonel. I never will behave myself, damme!


Lack. Colonel Epaulette, let me entreat you to leave off attempting the blunt
honesty of the English. It only transforms your countrymen into brutes. The
attempt is as ridiculous as for the rough English to ape the customs and
manners of the French, where we ever miss the mark, and polish into puppies.


Sir Shenkin (to Henry.) Well, you made the bets, when shall we share?


Henry. I don't understand you.


Sir Shenkin. No! I paid forfeit. Joan did walk over the course.


Henry. And did you suppose I could behave so contemptible to join in such a
scheme?


Sir Shenkin. It Is fery well; you shall not have my sister. Look you, I do desire
that you will never speak to, look at, or think of Celia again.


Henry. Look you, Sir Shenkin, if you don't immediately pay me the five
thousand you laid me, and give your consent to my marrying your sister, I Will
refer your conduct to the jockey club; and it is so notorious, that you will not
only be excluded the turf here, but at every race in England.


Sir John. Why, my little Welchman, I am afraid you will be posted at
Tattersall's.


Sir Shenkin. I Am nicked, sous'd and slamm'd. Here, take my sister Celia. I Will
back him against the field; for he has tricked me that have nicked hundreds.


Henry. Sir Shenkin, this is the first good I ever knew derived from gaming.
For what sensation must that man be capable of, that builds upon the misery of
others; and raises a fortune on the ruin and bankruptcy of his fellow creatures!


Sir Shenkin. It may be so; but as I set out a young pigeon, I Am resolved to
die an old rook.


Sir John. But how shall I get this rook out of my pigeon-house?


Colonel. Vell, monsieur Lackland, I have procured you a commission in my
regiment; and it is much at your service.


Lack. I thank you, Monsieur; but while I can raise the price of a drumstick,
I Will never pull a trigger or draw a sword against my native country.


Sir John. Bravo! my boy. Give me your hand. And at dinner time you shall never
want a nail in my parlour to hang your hat on. You shall post my ledger, and
drive a gig.


Lack. Gig! Why you shall ride in a vis-a-vis, to the amazement of all Garlic
hill.


Sir John. Oh rare! My dear and I tide side by side in a vis-a-vis!


Sir Shenhin. And look you, for all your underminings and circumventings, if
you whip your tomtit down to Chychwechlyn, I Will give you a haunch of rock
venison, and a pottle to wash it down.


Sir John. Rock venison! -- Oh! he will give you the leg of a goat. -- Well now;
as we seem now to be all tolerable good friends, we'll retire to the inn --
(Lady Bull locks) Hotel I mean, where English hospitality shall receive the
zest of French claret. -- Heigh! what say you to that, my antigallican
sonin-law?


Lack. With all my heart. But, sir, I Will have no illiberal prejudices in my
family. National reflections are unworthy the breast of an Englishman; and
however in war each may vindicate his country's honor. in peace let us not
know a distance but the streights of Dover.


AIR XXIII.
Henry and Celia. Let fashion with her glittering train,
Abroad a while deceive us;
We long to see dear home again,
The love of England must remain,
And that can never leave us.

Lord Winlove, Henry, Rosa, and Celia. This patrist fire within each heart,
For ever let us nourish,
Moy England over flourish!

Sir John. My future range,
The stock-exchange,
It Is there I Will mind my paces;
Nor gig, nor nag,
Jack Bull shall drag
To French or English races.

Lady Bull. At feast or ball,
At Grocers-hall,
It Is there I Will mind my paces;
Yet nothing keep
Me from a peep
At French or English races.

Sir Shen. Our bard still in your favor thrive,
His jokes your fancies tickling,
This boon in laugh and claps then give
To Shenkin of Cychwechlyn.

Chorus of Men. And now of each doubt and perplexity eased,
From Fontainbleau races we'll prance.

Chorus of Women. In hopes that all errors our friends will be pleased
To excuse, as it is "Our Way in France."

Full Grand Chorus. A patriot fire within each heart
For ever let us nourish,
Of glory still the golden mart,
May England ever flourish!

THE END.
This Day is Published,
By order of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, in three volumes large
octavo, illustrated with a volume in quarto of Plates, neatly engraved, Price
One Guinea in boards, or 1l. 6s. bound.

A NEW EDITION of AVOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. undertaken by order of His
Majesty, for making discoveries in the Northern Hemisphere, with a view to
determine the position and extent of the West Side of North America, its
distance from Asia, and the practicability of a Northern Passage to Europe.

Performed under the direction of Captains COOK, CLERK, and GORE, in his
Majesty's ships the Resolution and Discovery, in the years 1776, 1777, 1778,
1779, and 1780.

Written by JAMES COOK, Commander of the Resolution, and, from the time of his
death, By JAMES KING, late Commander of the Discovery. The Maps and Charts are
from original drawings, by Lieutenant H. Roberts, under the inspection of
Captain Cook.

DUBLIN, reprinted for W. WILSON, No. 6, Dame-street. the corner of
Palace-strees.


