THE DIVINE MODEL: OR, CHRISTIAN's EXEMPLAR. TO WHICH IS ADDED, THE DRAM-SHOP.



DUBLIN: SOLD BY WILLIAM WATSON, No. 7, Capel-Street,

Printer to the Cheap Repository for Religious and Moral Tracts*

And by the BOOKSELLERS, CHAPMEN and HAWKERS in Town and Country.

PRICE ONE PENNY

THE DIVINE MODEL, etc.
"ENDEAVOR to imitate your Savior," said Mrs. Bingham, one evening, to her
maid Martha, whom she was carefully instructing in the duties of religion.
"Imitate my Savior!" repeated Martha; "dear Madam! I thought he was so much
raised above us, that it would be quite presumptuous to try to be like him."

"It is true, Martha," replied Mrs. Bingham, "we can never be as perfect as our
divine Master, but the nearer we approach to the example he has set us, the
better we shall be at all ages, and in every situation of life. When you were
learning to write, you know did not object to Miss Julia's giving you good
copies, though you was well convinced it was totally out of your power to equal
them."

"But, Ma'am," again returned Martha, "how can such a one as I imitate my
Savior? Did not he come down from Heaven, on purpose to live and to die for
the sake of mankind? Now you know it is not in my power to do any such thing. I
cannot raise dead persons to life, and heal the sick, and give sight to the
blind, and make the lame walk. Besides, how can I go about to teach others,
when I am so ignorant, and so much in need of instruction myself."

"I well know," said Mrs. Bingham, "that neither you nor any of us can exactly
perform the same actions as our Savior did, I only meant that we should
endeavor to be guided by the same principle. What do you think prompted him to
be so wonderfully condescending, as to leave that glory of happiness he enjoyed
in Heaven, and to take our nature upon him, with all its wants and infirmities?
Certainly nothing but an earnest desire to do the will of his Heavenly Father,
and to prove his love to man. By these dispositions our Savior was actuated
during his whole stay on earth; and these dispositions should be cultivated by
all his disciples."

"Very true, Madam," said Martha.

"From our Savior," continued Mrs. Bingham, "we learn the duty of prayer.
Sometimes he passed the whole night in devotion. He never joined in a meal, but
he first thanked God for the food he had provided; and when he raised Lazarus
from the dead, he piously expressed his gratitude to his Heavenly Father, for
enabling him to perform that wonderful miracle."

"O yes, Ma'am," said Martha, "I remember we often hear of his praying."

"Our Blessed Lord too has taught us," proceeded Mrs. Bingham, "to bear
provocation, and even to forgive the greatest injuries. Should we not be
ashamed of being put out of patience upon every trifling occasion, when we see
with what mildness the Son of God bore with the neglect and dullness of his
disciples? How cordially, upon Peter's repentance, he forgave his denial, and
how earnestly he prayed for his murderers, while hanging on the cross, to which
they had nailed him."

"Dear! I wonder I never thought of this before," said Martha. "Is there any
other way, Ma'am, in which we may imitate our Savior?"

"Yes, Martha, we may imitate his humility. He chose to be born in an humble
station, and aimed at no earthly riches or distinction. By condescending to
wash the feet of his disciples, he proved to us, that we should never be above
stooping to the lowest offices for the good of others. The benevolence of
Jesus, I just now indeed recommended to your imitation. We cannot, it is true,
like him, work a miracle to supply the wants of a multitude: but though we are
placed in a low station, we may sometimes have it in our power, from our own
scanty meal, to supply the hungry with a mouthful of bread. We cannot cure the
sick with speaking a word; but we may by nursing them with tenderness, promote
their recovery, or at least administer to their comfort. In our own troubles,
we learn resignation from our Savior's example. In his agony, just before his
crucifixion, his only prayer to God was, that if he was willing, he would
remove from him the distress he at that moment endured, but that, nevertheless,
God's will might be done. In the cruel treatment he afterward met with, not a
single complaint escaped him. He seemed to be more concerned for his country,
his mother, and his friends, than for his own sufferings. In short, Martha, if
you examine with attention the life of our Savior, you will find that he has
himself set us the example of every virtue which he has commanded us to
practice."

Martha would have been glad that her mistress should have proceeded farther;
but the bell rang, and Mrs. Bingham was obliged to join her family in the
supper parlour.

Martha was a pious, well disposed young woman. She had never before
considered, that one design of our Savior's abode on earth, was "to set us an
example that we should follow his steps;" but the moment it was suggested to
her, she rejoiced to think that it was in any degree in her power to imitate
the Lord of Glory; and she determined to make it her endeavor in whatever she
engaged, to reflect how her Savior would have acted in the same circumstances.

In her prayers the next morning, she did not fail to implore God to assist her
to keep her good resolutions, for she well knew, that she was frail and sinful,
and that nothing but Almighty grace could enable her to make any improvement.

Sally Hague was a girl about thirteen years of age, whom Mrs. Bingham had
taken into her family, partly out of compassion to her parents, and partly from
consideration to Martha, who having a great deal, both of house-work and
needle work, to do, she thought stood in need of some assistance.

Martha was too good a woman to make a slave of Sally, as is unhappily the
practice of some servants who have girls under them, as it is called; but her
natural disposition was hasty, and Sally's extreme dullness often put her
patience to the proof, and she was apt to reprove her in a sharp tone of voice.

It was Sally's business to put the study to rights against her master came
down. Martha had several times shown her how to do it; but on going into the
room the morning after the above mentioned conversation with her mistress, she
found the books piled upon a wrong shelf, her chairs out of their proper
places, the dust left in a corner, and not a spark of fire to be seen.

"Why, you plaguey torment," said she, in an angry manner, "what in the world
have you been doing there two hours? I wish with all my heart my mistress had
never hired you, for I Will be hanged if you do not make more work than you save.
Now my master will be down in a few minutes, and nothing will be ready, and
then a fine noise I shall have in my ears I suppose." -- "I am very sorry,"
said Sally, with tears in her eyes. "But cannot I do any thing now?" "You do
any thing," repeated Martha; "no, nothing but go about your business. You are
always in my way, you awkward hussy!"

Sally walked flowly and sorrowfully to the other end of the room, and Martha,
who was banging about the tongs and poker with the utmost violence, blushed to
think how soon she had broken her resolution. She compared her abusive language
to this poor girl, with the mild rebuke of our Lord to his disciples for their
repeated drowsiness, at a time when he stood in most need of friendly
consolation. Desirous of imitating his example, she determined to conquer her
ill humor, let it cost her what it would; and calling Sally in a milder voice,
she said, "Come and let me show you how to light the fire. You should not cram
the stove with coals, and scatter the wood in separate places; that will never
do. You should put the sticks across one another at the bottom in the front of
the grate, then put the large cinders lightly over them, and a few round coals
on the top, and afterward, with a piece of lighted paper, you must set fire to
the sticks through the bottom bars: then it will burn up presently. Come, do
not cry, there is a good girl! You Will do better tomorrow." Just as she said
these words, her master came into the room much earlier than usual; finding his
books moved from their proper place, and his study in confusion, he flew into a
violent passion, and cursed and abused Martha in the most dreadful manner.

Martha did not attempt to vindicate herself, by laying the blame upon Sally;
for she remembered that her Savior, though loaded with false accusations, held
his peace; yet, when Mr. Bingham had left the room, as she brooded over the
hard names by which he had called her, she felt by no means inclined to forgive
him; and had an opportunity at that moment occurred, she could have liked to
have revenged herself.

To overcome this vindictive frame of mind, which she was conscious was
displeasing to the Almighty, she reflected on the affectionate lamentation of
our Savior over Jerusalem, in which city he had been so often ill treated. She
thought too of his prayer for his murderers: Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do. "Was this the way," said she, "that the blessed Jesus
behaved to his enemies, and shall not I pardon a few passionate words? Shall I
not forgive him, whom upon repentance God will forgive, and for whom Christ
died?" She prayed a moment for a better temper, and she quitted the study,
which she had now finished, in a quiet and composed frame of mind.

After breakfast, as she was wiping away the crumbs, a large piece of bread
fell into the ashes. No matter, said she to herself it is but the bottom of a
loaf, and we may as well begin upon a new one at luncheon. The words of her
Savior, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost! cocurred to
her memory, and she picked up the bread immediately. She remembered that these
words were spoken at a time when Jesus Christ had been proving that he had all
nature at his command, by the wonderful supply he had furnished. Perhaps,
thought she, when the broken pieces of bread and fish were spread over the
grass they did not look of much value, yet we are told they were sufficient to
fill twelve baskets. If all the scraps of this large family were fairly eaten,
how many pounds of victuals would it save in the course of a year. It is
possible my Master and Mistress would then give so much more to the poor; at
least, the money that buys the food is theirs, and we have no right to squander
it.

In the evening as the man and maids were sitting together, the yard bell rung.
John said, it was not his place to answer the back bell. Sally was up stairs,
Betty and Ann, who were at work, accused John of ill nature, and declared they
would not stir if the people rang the bell till they broke it. Martha was
beginning to make the same silly declaration, but the ran to the gate on
recollecting the words of our Savior, that whosoever will be great among you
shall be your minister; and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be
servant of all: For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister.

Martha, like the rest of the world, loved her own ease and convenience; she
was fond of being treated with respect; she could not bear to be thought
lightly of, and was disposed to stand up for her rights with whoever should
oppose them; yet when she considered the Redeemer of mankind condescended to
lay aside his glory for our sakes, and that instead of being born as a great
prince, in which situation he might have had thousands at his command, he took
upon him the form of a poor man, and gave up all his time to the good of
others, she was ashamed of her own pride and selfishness. Not a day passed but
afforded some opportunities of subduing these bad dispositions, by the
imitation of the glorious example she had set herself to follow. The attempt
was for a long time attended with the greatest difficulty, but her own
endeavors, and divine grace, in the end, so far succeeded, that it appeared
natural to her in most instances, generously to prefer others to herself. Did a
small piece of pudding, or a custard or two come out of the parlour, Martha,
instead of insisting upon a right to a part, was willing to give up her share
to the others. Were there any little perquisites respecting which it was
difficult to decide to which of the servants they properly belonged, Martha was
the first to wave her claim.

Perhaps it may be thought, that by thus laying herself open to be imposed upon
by others, she must have led a miserable life. But I will ven^ure to say, that
the disputes she avoided, and the love and good will of her fellow servants,
which she effectually gained, more than compensated for these little sacrifices.

Once Martha de^ected Sally in an atrocious falsehood. T^^^ was a (...) of
which she herself had never been guilty, and of which she had greater horror
than of almost any other.

Mo^^ified on finding the pains she had frequently taken to instruct her in her
duty, had been attended with so little success, she for some time gave herself
no further trouble about her, and even indulged a growing aversion to the girl.
One idea, however, often presented itself, and at last prompted her to redouble
her diligence, to prevent Sally, if possible, from falling into bad courses.

The Savior of the world eat and drank with publicans and sinners. The
wretches, whom all else beheld with scorn, by him were received with kindness,
and directed in the way of everlasting life. And would he, thought Martha, for
one crime, have cast off poor ignorant Sally?

It was about two months from the time we introduced Martha to the acquaintance
of our readers, when Mary Saunders, a young woman with whom she was intimately
acquainted, called to inform her that her Mistress was in want of an upper
servant; and that she was certain, if she would engage to come immediately, she
might procure ^he place; which she said, was well worth having, as the wages
were ten guineas, and the perquisites valuable. Martha hesitated. Mary would
fain have persuaded her to return home with her, and hire herself with Mrs.
Freeman immediately. This, however, she would by no means consent to; but
thanking her friend, promised she should have an answer the next morning.

The moment she was gone, she began to reflect very seriously on the proposal
she had received. She could not think, without regret, of quitting Mrs.
Bingham, with whom she had lived from a child, and who had always treated her
with the utmost kindness. To leave her so suddenly, and for such a reason,
would appear both unhandsome and ungrateful: and at this time in particular, as
her mistress was under the necessity of going for some weeks into the country,
and had several times told her, that she entrusted her aged and infirm mother
to her care during her absence. Yet was the temptation very great to enquire
after a place, where the profits would be considerably greater than at present;
her affections having long been engaged to a worthy young man, to whom she was
to be united, as soon as their mutual savings should be sufficient to enable
them to furnish a couple of rooms, and purchase a few household materials.

To fortify her mind to decline an alluring advantage, she flew to her usual
resource. She perused, in the fourth chapter of St. Matthew, the account of our
Savior's temptation. From our great ignorance of the nature of evil spirits,
it is not easy thoroughly to comprehend the nature of this part of his
ministry; yet we may learn from it sufficient to perceive that our Lord was,
like us, exposed to temptation, and that he nobly resisted it. This example was
not lost upon the worthy Martha. "Whatever it may cost me", said she, "I am
determined to do my duty. Jesus Christ delayed not a moment to answer the
artful tempter. I will therefore step to Mary directly, and tell her how I have
made up my mind. Tomorrow morning I may be weaker."

She accordingly, with her Mistress's leave, went to Mrs. Freeman's
immediately, and not all the persuasions of Mary Saunders, to whom she was
extremely partial, could prevail upon her to alter her determination.

Martha passed but a dull summer. Mrs. Dawson, the old lady of whom she had the
care, was so helpless as to require constant attendance. Her spirits were bad,
and she suffered much pain, so that she wept and complained incessantly.
Martha's youthful vivacity made her desire a more enlivening scene, and her
patience was often on the point of being exhausted; but the thought of the
tenderness with which our Savior heard the complaints of the miserable objects
among whom he past his life, and the readiness with which he relieved them,
taught her to substitute pity for disgust, and to endeavor, by every kind of
attention, to alleviate the poor lady's sufferings.

But it would be endless to recite all the instances in which Martha profited
by seriously contemplating the spotless example of Jesus Christ. Suffice it to
say, that by this means she became one of the best of Christians, and most
amiable of women. Far, however, from priding herself in her improvement, the
practice she had adopted of continually comparing her actions with those of her
Savior, made her more sensible of her deficiencies. Unable, after all her
attempts, to equal her exalted model, she felt that she must be indebted to his
mediation, if her imperfect endeavors were accepted, and gloriously rewarded
by everlasting life.

Though she acted from no worldly view, yet her Heavenly Father graciously
thought fit to reward her even in this life. She had soon reason to rejoice
that she had not followed the advice of Mary Saunders, as Mr. Freeman became a
bankrupt, all his servants were suddenly dismissed, and several received not
the full wages due to them. Mrs. Dawson, at her death, left her a legacy of
twenty pounds, as a reward for her fidelity and attention; and shortly after
she became possessed of this sum, she made the worthy youth happy who had long
loved her, and esteemed her virtues.

A. R.

THE END.
THE DRAM SHOP, OR, A PEEP INTO A PRISON.
LOOK through the land from North to South,
And look from East to West;
And see what is to frishmen,
Of Life the deadliest pest.
It is not Want, though that is bad,
Nor War, though that is worse;
But Ireland's sons endure, alas!
A self-inflicted Curse.
Go where you will throughout the realm,
You Will find that every vice,
In cities, villages, and towns,
From WHISKEY takes its rise.
The Prince of Darkness never sent
To man a deadlier foe,
"My name is Legion." it may say,
The source of every woe.
Nor does the fiend alone deprive
The labourer of his wealth;
That is not all, it murders too
His honest name and health.
We say the times are grievous hard,
And hard they are, it is 'true,
But Drunkards, to your wives and babes,
They Are harder made by you.
The Drunkard's Tax is self-imposed,
And hardest to endure,
Not all the taxes half so much
Oppress the laboring poor.
The State compels no man to drink,
Compels no man to game;
It Is vice and WHISKEY sink him down
To rags, and want and shame.
The kindest husband, changed by these
Is for a tyrant known;
The tenderest heart that Nature made,
Becomes a heart of stone.
In many a house the harmless babes
Are poorly clothed and fed;
Because the craving DRAM-SHOP takes
The children's daily bread.
It often has robbed the heedless youth
Of health and senses too,
And plunged his never-dying soul
In everlasting Woe.
Come, neighbor, take a walk with me,
Through many a Dublin street,
And see the cause of penury
In hundreds we shall meet.
We shall not need to travel far --
Behold that great man's door;
He well discerns that idle crew,
From the deserving poor.
He will relieve with liberal hand
The child of boned Thrift;
But where long scores at DRAM-SHOPS stand
He will withold his gift.
Behold that shivering female there,
Who plies her woeful trade!
It Is WHISKEY, ten to one, you will find,
That hopeless wretch has made.
Lock down those steps, and view below
Yon cellar under ground;
There every want, and every Woe,
And every sin is found.
Those little wretches trembling there,
With hunger and with cold,
Were, by their parents' love of drink,
To Sin and Misery sold.
Blessed be those friends The Philanthropic Society.
to human kind,
Who take those wretches up,
Ere they have drank the bitter dregs
Of their sad parents' cup.
Look through that prison's iron bars,
Look through that dismal grate;
And learn what dire misfortune brought
So terrible a fate.
The Debtor and the Felon too,
Though differing in disgrace,
By WHISKEY you will too often find,
Were brought to that sad place.
Yet Heaven forbid I should confound
Calamity with guilt!
Or name the Debtor's lesser fault,
With blood of brother spilt.
To prison dire misfortunes ost
The guiltless debtor bring;
Yet oft'ner far it will be sound
His Woes from WHISKEY spring.
See the pale Manufacturer there,
How lank and lean he lies!
How haggard is his sickly cheek!
How dim his hollow eyes!
He plied the loom with good success,
His wages (...) were high;
Twice what the village lab'rer gains,
His master did supply.
No book-debts kept from him his cash,
All paid as soon as due;
His wages on the Saturday
To fail he never knew.
How amply had his gains sufficed,
On wise and children spent!
But all must for his pleasure go;
All to the DRAM-SHOP went.
See that Apprentice, young in years,
But hackney'd long in vice,
What made him rob his master's till?
Ah! WHISKEY did entice.
That serving man -- I knew him once,
So jaunty, spruce and smart!
Why did he steal and pawn the plate?
'Twas WHISKEY snared his heart.
Turn now thine eye where Channel-row
Displays yon mansion drear,
And ask each pale and shivering wretch,
What misery drove him there.
O! woeful sight, say what could cause
Such poverty and shame?
Hark! hear his words, he owns the cause --
It all from WHISKEY came.
And when the future Lot is fixed,
Of darkness, fire, and chains,
How can the Drunkard hope to 'scape
Those everlasting pains?
Since all his claim to heaven he sells,
And drink the bestial cause,
Rejects the price his Savior paid,
And disobeys his laws.
For if the Murd'rer's doomed to woe,
As holy writ declares,
The Drunkard with SELF-Murderers
That dreadful portion shares.
Z.

JUST PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM WATSON, No. 7, CAPEL-STREET.
Two Wealthy Farmers, 7 Parts Price 7d Two Shoe-makers, 5 Parts, 5 Shepherd of
Salisbury Plain, 2 Parts 3 History of Tom White the Postilion, 2 Parts 2
History of Poaching Giles, 2 Parts 2 History of Mary Wood the House-maid 1
History of Charles Jones the Footman 1 Beggarly Boy 1 Good Mother's Legacy 1
History of John Doyle 1 Two Soldiers 1 Life of William Baker 1 Gamester, and
story of Sinful Sally 1 Pilgrims, an allegory 1 Pailey the Porter, an allegory
1 Path to Riches and Happiness 1 New Thoughts for the New Year 1 Divine Model 1
Ship wreck, and execution of Wild Robert 1 Wise reformed 1 History of Mr.
Fantom 1 Lancashire Collier Girl 1 Cottage Cook 1 The Sunday School 1 History
of Hester Wilmot 1 Sorrowful Sam 1 Tawney Rachel, and The Bad Bargain 1 It Is
all for the Best 1 The Grand Assizes 1 General Resurrection oh Two Sisters oh
Happy Waterman oh Husbandry Moralized oh Carpenter oh Apprentice's Monitor oh
Horse Race oh Dram Shop oh

