INFORMATION TO PARENTS Respecting the VACCINE INOCULATION; OR, THE INOCULATION
FOR COW-POX.

BY F. SKRIMSHIRE, M. D.

Wisbech: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN WHITE.

PRICE SIXPENCE.

1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE practice of inoculating for the Vaccine Disease has not yet extended to
this town and neighborhood. I have therefore drawn up this statement, as
calculated, in my opinion, to render its introduction less liable to objection,
and its adoption more general.

Were this example to be followed by some respectable medical man before its
introduction into other parts of the country, there would probably be less of
that opposition which every innovation meets with, be its advantages ever so
apparent, and which for a long time baffled the exertions of the first
inoculators for the smallpox.

Wisbech, July 28, 1800.

INFORMATION, etc.
THERE is a disorder often prevailing among Cows, known to the farmers and
peasants of several parts of this country by the name of Cow-pox, and to those
of Ireland by the name of Shinagh. It appears on the nipples of milch cows in
the form of irregular pustules of a bluish or livid hue, with inflamed bases,
which afterward become troublesome ulcers. The persons employed in milking
these cows are frequently attacked with similar pustules on their hands,
appearing at first like small blisters produced by a burn, and then
degenerating into sores. In those parts of the kingdom where there are large
dairies, and where, consequently, this disease more frequently occurs, it has
for a long time been a prevailing opinion, that persons who are accidentally
affected with the cow-pox previously to having the small pox, are no longer
subject to the latter, and that, if inoculated with smallpox matter, or ever
so much exposed to the infection, they will not take that disease. This curious
opinion attracted the attention of Dr. JENNER to the subject, and induced him
to make further enquiries concerning its authenticity. In 1798 he published his
first Dissertation, containing a description of the disease, and a collection
of cases tending to prove the fact, that cow-pox, or, as it is now called, the
Vaccine Disease, destroys all susceptibility to the smallpox, in consequence
of which, he strongly recommended the Vaccine inoculation, instead of
inoculation for the smallpox. Since that period much has been done, not only
by Dr. JENNER, but by various other medical men, toward establishing the
preference for this kind of inoculation, and the practice has now to boast of,
as its advocates, some of the greatest ornaments to the medical profession.

Being myself fully persuaded of the advantages of the vaccine inoculation, I
wish to extend the knowledge of the discovery, and to dispense the benefits of
it, to the inhabitants of this neighborhood. With this view I am induced to
draw up a correct statement of the advantages that are proposed by it, and the
progress that it has already made, so that every parent may be enabled to judge
for himself, whether he ought or ought not to prefer this kind of inoculation
for his children.

The chief advantages arise from its being a much milder disease than the
inoculated smallpox, and from its not being contagious.

The operation is performed in the same manner as for the smallpox, by
inserting the matter under the scarf skin; and, to avoid unnecessary pain from
the sores, it should be performed only on one arm. On the third or fourth day
the part appears inflamed and elevated, in a few days more a pustule is evident
on the incised spot, and sometimes one or more vescicles appear about its edge,
and in a fortnight, more or less, the parts scab over, and become well. In many
cases not the least general indisposition is apparent; in others the patients
complain of sickness, headache, or other uneasines for a few hours, on the
fourth, fifth, or in many cases not till the ninth or tenth day, according as
the affection of the arm proceeds. Such is the usual progress of the disease,
which in general is so mild as to require no confinement, and if any medicine
at all, only a dose of opening physic. Some practitioners have met with several
cases, where an eruption very like to, if not the same with, that of smallpox,
has come out at the time of sickening, but this, it now appears, has generally
arisen from their using matter not altogether pure, but taken from persons
laboring under both, or a mixture of the two diseases, and from this source a
spurious matter has been disseminated in various parts of the country. This at
least is commonly supposed to be the true cause of those variolous-like
eruptions, and Dr. JENNER having been particularly careful to use only genuine
vaccine matter, has never met with a single case of them. Dr. WOODVILLE, who
met with most of these eruptive cases, soon made this important observation,
that by using only the matter taken from patients having no eruption, such an
occurrence became less and less frequent; and Dr. PEARSON, in his last
statement, gives their proportion as not more than one out of every two hundred
cases, observing at the same time, that the disease is then as mild as the
inoculated smallpox. It is the opinion of many, that by carefully avoiding
every source of smallpox contagion, you may also avoid these cases of
eruption. There is another kind of pimples, and rash, that has appeared upon
persons inoculated for the vaccine disease, which is not of the smallest
consequence, disappearing in a day or two, and is probably not at all connected
with the disease. To prove that there is considerably less hazard in
inoculating for this disease than for smallpox, allow me to inform you, that
upon an average one case out of every four or five hundred of inoculated
smallpox terminates fatally. You are aware too, that in some families it is
almost always a very formidable disease. In some seasons too it is much more
severe than in others, and very often it is impossible, by any treatment, to
prevent inoculated patients from being marked. Now, more than six thousand
persons have been inoculated for the vaccine disease, and only one has died,
nor is it fair to state that this child died of this disease, for it was one of
those who had an eruption very like to that of smallpox, and concerning which
there is much reason to doubt, whether there was not also smallpox infection.
In some cases the sore in the arm has proved troublesome, and been a good deal
inflamed, but never dangerous, and a plan of treatment is now adopted to
prevent even that. The disease seems to have been equally mild in all families
and constitutions, and by it all pock-marks are effectually prevented. In
short, its superior mildness alone would insure its preference, but there are
other advantages to be derived from the inoculation for it, which, if it
becomes general, are incalculable. The vaccine disease is not, like the
smallpox, contagious. It cannot be communicated but by inoculation, accidental
or artificial, so that one part of the family may be inoculated, and another
run no risk of taking the disease. For the same reason you need never delay
inoculation till the disease is in the neighborhood, as is often the case in
country towns and villages. In short, you may always choose both time and
place, consulting only the health of the child, and your own convenience.

Moreover, if the practice becomes general, or even tolerably so, the small pox
will become a rare disease, or may be even altogether exterminated; which,
considering its present ravages, must be to the man of humane feelings a most
desirable object. It is a point generally allowed among medical men, that the
introduction of inoculation for smallpox has not by any means diminished its
fatality, but that even more persons have died of it annually since, than
before that period. The reason is obvious; previous to inoculation the
smallpox appeared only now and then, and was in nearly a similar situation
with the plague, whereas it is now a constant disease in every large town, and
very frequently appears in the country, the contagion being kept constantly
afloat by inoculation. The disease taken in the natural way is still very
formidable, and, as inoculation is by no means generally adopted, thousands are
every year carried by it to their graves. How much then ought we to rejoice at
being offered the means of exterminating so dreadful a scourge, and how ready
should we be, to commence and forward so benevolent a plan.

There is one more advantage, which even in this early stage of the practice
seems to be generally admitted. The smallpox in certain constitutions has been
often observed to excite the latent seeds of other disorders, and has in many
cases been the cause of them. We frequently meet with persons afflicted with
scorbutic eruptions, as they are commonly termed, with the king's evil, and
sometimes with sits, who date the origin of their complaints from the time of
their having had the smallpox, and there is reason to believe that it does
frequently excite these disorders in persons that are predisposed to them; and
it is certain that many diseases of the eye, and sometimes deafness, have been
produced by the confluent smallpox. Now it is asserted by those who have had
most experience in the vaccine disease, that no such consequences have been
observed from it, but that in some cases it has wrought beneficial changes in
unhealthy and unthriving children.

To ensure the object of the present statement, I trust I have now nothing more
to do, than to advert to the mass of evidence that has been brought to prove
the sufficiency of the practice to destroy all susceptibility, in the persons
inoculated, to receive the smallpox. I have said before that in many parts of
the kingdom it is a prevailing opinion that the cow-pox prevents a person
taking the smallpox. Dr. JENNER published upwards of twenty well marked cases,
where persons who accidentally took the cow-pox fifteen, twenty, and some
thirty years ago, have never had the smallpox, though inoculated for it, and
in various other ways exposed to the infection. Dr. PEARSON has since published
other cases to the same point, and many are related in the medical periodical
publications of the day. Almost every surgeon has, in the course of inoculation
for the smallpox, met with instances of his patients not taking the disease;
in various cases of this kind, that have occurred lately, the surgeons, on
further enquiry, have ascertained that such persons have been previously
affected with the cow-pox. In opposition to all this evidence not one
unexceptionable case has been found, to prove a person's having the smallpox
after the cow-pox. The only one, that seems to have the least weight, is that
published by Dr. BEDDOES in his "West Country Contributions," and again and
again in various periodical publications. A gentleman at Bristol says he had
the smallpox very severely some years after having the cow-pox, but
considering that no reference is made to the medical gentleman who attended
him, and that even medical men cannot always distinguish between one eruption
and another, we may, without derogating from the discriminating powers of the
Bristol attorney, suppose him, for once, to have mistaken some other disease
for the cow-pox; at any rate a single case can by no means invalidate all the
evidence we possess against it. To the above proof we have now to add those
derived from experiments instituted for the purpose. Out of the six thousand
persons inoculated in different parts of the country for the vaccine disease,
more than one-half have been since inoculated for the smallpox, and in no
individual case has the later disease been induced. What more authority can be
wanted to prove the sufficiency and utility of the practice? We have the avowed
concurrence of some of the most respectable medical characters in the kingdom,
and the tacit concurrence of all; for who that knew but a single valid
objection, would not give it to the world? All those parents then, who have
been advocates for inoculating for the smallpox, must now, by a parity of
reasoning, be advocates for the vaccine disease. For why did they inoculate? to
substitute a mild for a dangerous disease. But here is a disease still safer
than the inoculated smallpox, and equally certain of preventing those
inoculated for it ever after taking the natural smallpox; you have therefore
the same inducements now to prefer the vaccine inoculation, that you had to
adopt inoculation in the first instance.

The rapid progress that the practice has made, which is another argument in
favor of its utility, will appear from what follows: Dr. JENNER, the original
proposer of the plan, has inoculated several hundreds. Dr. WOODVILLE, physician
to the smallpox hospital, has inoculated above two thousand, and Dr. PEARSON,
by his indefatigable exertion, has inoculated and received communications
containing the results of as many more. THOMAS KLATE, Esquire. Surgeon General to
the army, has introduced the practice into his department; and Dr. TROTTER,
Physician to his Majesty's Fleet, has, I have reason to believe, before this
time, introduced it into his. The practice, in short, is so well approved of by
all the faculty, as to be daily becoming more general, both here and abroad;
and an establishment has been for two months past effected in London, called
the Cow-pock Institution, for the sole purpose of inoculating this disease. The
Patron is His Royal Highness the Duke of York, and the Vice Presidents, Right
Honorable Lord PETRE, Sir GEORGE BAKER, Bart. WILLIAM DEVAYNES, Esquire. M. P. Sir
WILLIAM LEE, Bart. H. J. DE SALIS, D. D. F. R. S. WILLIAM ADAM, Esquire. M. P.


I have said that the discovery of Dr. JENNER has afforded us the means of very
greatly diminishing, if not of entirely putting a stop to the havoc of the
smallpox. This is only to be done by making the practice general, and it is
therefore necessary to introduce it into the mansions of the poor. It has been
usual for the overseers of parishes to contract with surgeons for the
inoculation of all the poor willing to undergo the operation; it is for them
now to consider, whether it would not prove a much more beneficial object to
make the same contract for inoculating with vaccine matter. Another plan for
extending the practice would be, to establish an Infirmary or Dispensary for
the purpose of inoculating, and giving the proper advice and medicine to the
poor, which might be supported at a very trifling expense, and that would, no
doubt, be cheerfully defrayed by voluntary subscription. I leave it for others
to determine, which of the two plans it would be preferable to adopt; but hope
it will not be long before one or the other is set on foot, as the object it
embraces is no less than the substituting a mild and manageable disease, for
one that often defies the whole art of medicine, and of thus preserving
annually the lives of thousands of our fellow creatures.

FINIS.
WHITE, PRINTER, WISBECH.


